arXiv:2005.12783v2 [cs.DC] 26 Jun 2020

CoronaSurveys: Using Surveys with Indirect Reporting
to Estimate the Incidence and Evolution of Epidemics
Oluwasegun Ojo1 2
Augusto Garcı́a-Agundez3
Benjamin Girault4
Harold Hernández2
Elisa Cabana1
Amanda Garcı́a-Garcı́a1
5
67
Payman Arabshahi
Carlos Baquero
Paolo Casari8
Ednaldo José Ferreira9
Davide Frey10
Chryssis Georgiou11
12
13
Mathieu Goessens
Anna Ishchenko
Ernesto Jiménez14
Oleksiy Kebkal15
Rosa Lillo2
Raquel Menezes6
Nicolas Nicolaou16
4
17
Antonio Ortega
Paul Patras
Julian C Roberts18
Efstathios Stavrakis16
Yuichi Tanaka19
Antonio Fernández Anta1

Abstract
The world is suffering from a pandemic called COVID-19, caused by
the SARS-CoV-2 virus. National governments have problems evaluating
the reach of the epidemic, due to having limited resources and tests at
their disposal. This problem is especially acute in low and middle-income
countries (LMICs). Hence, any simple, cheap and flexible means of evaluating the incidence and evolution of the epidemic in a given country
with a reasonable level of accuracy is useful. In this paper, we propose
a technique based on (anonymous) surveys in which participants report
on the health status of their contacts. This indirect reporting technique,
known in the literature as network scale-up method, preserves the privacy of the participants and their contacts, and collects information from
1 IMDEA

Networks Institute, Spain
Carlos III de Madrid, Spain
3 TU Darmstadt, Germany
4 U. Southern California, USA
5 U. of Washington, USA
6 U. Minho, Portugal
7 INESC TEC, Portugal
8 U. of Trento, Italy
9 Embrapa Instrumentation, Brazil
10 Inria Rennes, France
11 U. Cyprus, Cyprus
12 Consulting, France
13 National Technical U. of Ukraine “Igor Sikorsky Kyiv Polytechnic Institute”, Ukraine
14 U. Politécnica de Madrid, Spain
15 EvoLogics, Germany
16 Algolysis Ltd, Cyprus
17 U. Edinburgh, UK
18 Skyhaven Media, UK
19 Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology, Japan
2 U.

1

a larger fraction of the population (as compared to individual surveys).
This technique has been deployed in the CoronaSurveys project, which
has been collecting reports for the COVID-19 pandemic for more than
two months. Results obtained by CoronaSurveys show the power and
flexibility of the approach, suggesting that it could be an inexpensive and
powerful tool for LMICs.

Keywords: Epidemics, surveys, network scale-up method, indirect reporting,
crowdsourcing, privacy.

1

Introduction

During the current SARS-CoV-2 virus pandemic, monitoring the evolution of
COVID-19 cases is very important for authorities to make informed policy decisions, and for the general public to be informed of the reach of the problem.
Official numbers of confirmed cases are periodically issued by health authorities
[4]. Unfortunately, at the early stages of a pandemic outbreak there is usually
only limited ability to test, as well as a lack of other resources. Hence, it is
not possible to test all potential cases, and some eligibility criteria is applied to
decide who is tested. Under these circumstances, the official confirmed cases are
unlikely to represent the total number of cases (see [12]). This problem is more
pressing in low and middle-income countries (LMICs), which may be limited in
their ability to deploy massive testing. Not having access to reliable data clearly
prevents authorities from making informed decisions, putting the population at
higher risk.
This motivates the need for other probing techniques, beyond laboratory
testing, that can estimate the number of cases and their evolution. Information obtained using these alternative methods can be more timely, leaving more
accurate estimates of the number of cases for later studies (e.g., massive serological studies [18]). Techniques that allow cheap and massive data collection,
and lead to reasonably accurate estimates, are useful when testing is limited
and can lead to improved data-driven decision making.
Direct surveys are an obvious approach to estimate incidence. A number
of these direct surveys to obtain health data have been deployed in various
countries in recent months [10, 14, 5]. While these surveys can gather useful
data, a large number of participants is needed to achieve reliable estimates.
Additionally, these surveys collect sensitive personal health information, which
prevents the distribution of the raw data collected, and may also discourage
privacy-concerned people from responding.
In this paper, as an alternative to direct surveys, we propose online surveys
with indirect reporting, where the questions a participant answers are not about
herself, but about her contacts. This technique is known in the literature as the
network scale-up method [2, 1], and has been successfully used for public health.
This approach has at least two major advantages with respect to direct surveys.
First, the survey can be designed so that no personal information is collected
from the participant (i.e., it is completely anonymous). Second, indirect report-

2

ing has a multiplicative effect, since it reduces the number of responses required
to achieve a specific population coverage. The loss in accuracy, due to respondents not always having exact information about the health status of others,
may be compensated by the significant increase in coverage (i.e., on average
each respondent informs about the likely status of around 100 other people, and
this number is rather stable across countries).
We have designed and deployed a system that implements the network scaleup method via online anonymous surveys with indirect reporting, as part of the
CoronaSurveys project [15]. This system has surveys in multiple languages
and allows reporting data on the incidence of COVID-19 in all countries. The
project team has promoted the survey via online social networks and personal
contacts. The system has been collecting data for more than 2 months now,
and has collected more than 13, 000 responses, reporting cases in 70 countries.
All the collected data is available to be openly used1 . In parallel with the data
collection, the CoronaSurveys project has been developing statistical techniques
to estimate the incidence of COVID-19 in different countries and geographical
areas.
In the rest of this paper, we present the different elements of the CoronaSurvey project, and compare our resulting estimates with those obtained via other
indirect methods and a wide systematic serology study conducted in Spain [6].
Our estimates are surprisingly close to the values obtained in the serological
study2 . From this, we conclude that anonymous open indirect surveys, in combination with our proposed statistical techniques, provide a cheap and flexible
option for monitoring epidemics, especially in countries with limited infrastructure.

2

Estimates via Anonymous Surveys with Indirect Reporting

This section describes the two main components of the CoronaSurvey project:
collection of survey responses and estimation of COVID-19 incidence from the
collected responses.

2.1

Data Collection: The Survey

Our proposed surveys are carefully designed to avoid querying participants
about their own health status3 , identity, or any personal data. In order to provide data for estimating incidence, participants answer three questions. First,
they select a geographical area, which can be a whole country or a region within
1 https://github.com/GCGImdea/coronasurveys/tree/master/data
2 Taking into account the sensitivity of the tests used in the serology study and that there
are roughly 34% asymptomatic cases.
3 While in general reporting on one’s own health status without any identifying information
would not have privacy implications, it could increase the risk for de-anonimization attacks if
the raw data is publicly shared, or the survey system is compromised.

3

a country. (The participant does not need to be a resident of that area.) Then,
they answer two simple questions about that area:
• How many people do you know in this geographical area? (Please, consider
only people whose current health status you likely know.)
• As far as you know, how many of the above have had symptoms compatible
with COVID-19 (or were diagnosed with the disease)?
We aim at increasing participation by not asking for any personal information (protecting the participant’s privacy), and by having just two questions4 .
However, the lack of detailed information about the participants makes the estimation process more challenging. In particular, we do not control the spread of
the survey and do not have means to ensure that there is an adequate coverage,
in terms of regions, age groups and other demographic factors.
The main novelty of our proposed survey is that a participant does not report on her own health status but on those of others. This typically leads each
participant to report on the health status of a large sample (around one hundred
on average), which significantly increases our coverage of the population. We
believe that this is the reason why, somewhat surprisingly, even with the limitations in the available data and few responses, we can still obtain estimates that
are less than 4% away from the real value (see Section 3.3). We believe that
indirect reporting compensates significantly the biases in the set of participants.
Obvious advantages of this approach are that it is very simple to deploy and
can give very timely results.
We started the project by running discrete surveys in Spain and evolved
the system so that now it collects data continuously. The survey was initially
done via Twitter, but was quickly moved to Google Forms. For privacy reasons,
in May 2020 it has been moved to a dedicated server running the web-based
Limesurvey system. We have been running the survey (starting with a simpler
version) in some countries for more than 3 months (since March 13). The survey
is now available in 57 languages. Participants can report at the regional level
in 149 countries and at the country level in all countries of the world. We have
already collected more than 15, 000 responses for almost 90 countries. This
participation has been obtained by advertising and promoting the survey in
online social networks, and via personal contacts. No incentive (economic or
otherwise) has been used to promote participation. In some countries (e.g.,
Spain, Portugal, Ukraine, Brazil) the project received media attention, which
led to bursts in participation at specific times. These burst do not seem to
influence the results.

2.2

Computing Incidence Estimates

Country-wide and regional estimates We use responses to our survey to
estimate the incidence of COVID-19 in different countries. Respondents can
4 In the new version of the survey we have additional questions to estimate other aspects
of the epidemic, but the total number of questions we include remains very small (10 or less),
compared with most surveys (e.g., [5] has more than 30 questions).

4

report on the number of people they know for a specific region or for the whole
country. Currently, when the data availability allows it, estimates for a given
country are computed based only on the regional responses, because we observed
that country-wide responses tend to introduce a geographical bias.
For instance, our initial estimates for Spain were ignoring regional information, and considering all responses as referring to the whole country. However,
we observed that most of our responses were actually from the region of Madrid
(very likely because the Spanish team members are based in Madrid), which
is the most affected region in Spain, and thus tended to report high incidence
ratios. This was in line with the prevalence in Madrid, but not necessarily a
good reflection of country-wide conditions. We then computed new estimates
by taking regional information into account and confirmed that we were initially
over estimating the number of cases in Spain.
We also decided to use only the responses that specify a region as it is reasonable to assume that country-wide responses will share a similar bias (coming from the most affected region)5 . Note that while we observed this bias in
one specific dataset (Spain), similar problems could arise in other countries.
COVID-19 outbreaks have been fairly localized in most countries, with different
prevalence observed at the region or state level. Thus, answers that provide
information within a region tend to lead to more reliable estimates in general.
We therefore plan to remove the country-wide option in future survey updates.
COVID-19 incidence estimation – Region based approach Assume the
country of interest is divided into k regions. In each region i, we get ni responses,
where each response j contains:
• a reach variable, rij , which is the network size of participant j (i.e., the
number of people whose health she knows; answer to the first survey question) and
• a count variable, cji , which is the number of people (out of the rij reached)
that are known to the respondent to be showing symptoms compatible
with COVID-19 (answer to the second survey question),
for j ∈ {1, . . . , ni }. Then, we obtain an estimate of the ratio of people infected
with symptoms in region i, p̂i , using [1]
Pni j
j=1 ci
p̂i = Pni j .
j=1 ri
From the ratios p̂i of the different regions, we compute an estimate of the
proportion of those infected with symptoms in the country, p̂, using a weighted
sum of these ratios as follows.
p̂ =

k
X

ωi p̂i ,

i=1
5 This probably also results from the fact that we spread our survey through social connections starting from our researchers based in Madrid.

5

where ωi is a proportional weight defined as
Ni
,
N
where Ni and N are the populations of region i and the whole country, respectively. To build a confidence interval for p̂, we need to estimate its variance
V (p̂). To do so, we consider each region as a stratum in a post-stratified
random-sampling setting, and estimate the variance of proportions for poststratified sampling [8] as
ωi =

V (p̂) =
where n =
using

Pk
i

k
k
1−f X
1−f X
ωi Si2 +
(1 − ωi )Si2 ,
n i=1
n2 i=1

ni and f = n/N . The value Si2 for each region can be estimated
Si2 =

where pij =

cji
.
rij

ni
X
(pij − pˆi )2
,
ni − 1
j=1

We can then construct a confidence interval for p̂ as
p
p̂ ± 1.96 V (p̂).

Before generating an estimate for a given country at a given date, we first
clean the survey responses by identifying and removing outliers. We declare a
response to be an outlier if rij , the number of persons that the participant claims
to know, is unusually large (specifically, we remove entries where rij is beyond
1.5 times the interquartile range above the upper quartile). We also consider to
be outliers responses leading to a large ratio pij of symptomatic people reported
(specifically, we remove entries in which the ratio cji /rij is above 0.3). We remove
responses with large ratios because we aim at surveying the general population,
and not individuals (such as doctors or nurses) who may be in contact with a
large number of symptomatic cases.
After outlier removal, for any given day we aggregate data from that day
and from previous days until we have at least Amin responses. For the experiments we report here we set Amin = 300, as we observed empirically that this
provides enough data to make our estimate reliable. Since we usually do not
get Amin responses on a given day for most countries, using data from previous
days also provides a rolling estimate, which has an implicit smoothing effect
on the estimate. From these responses, we exclude country-wide responses (as
discussed earlier) and then compute the value of p̂i for each region i represented
in the responses. Then, the estimate of the proportion of people infected with
symptoms in the country, p̂, for the day is computed as shown above.
The described procedure produces reasonable estimates and works well as
long as we have a sufficiently large number of responses (per day). Hence, we
have only applied this procedure to generate estimates from data gathered in
Spain, Portugal, and Ukraine, countries from which we got the highest number
of responses.
6

COVID-19 incidence estimation – Country based approach For countries where the number of survey responses is smaller (after removing outliers),
we have used a simpler estimation procedure. Denote nd the number of responses collected on day d for the given country (counting both regional and
country-wide responses after removing outliers). If nd ≥ amin , we estimate the
incidence of COVID-19 in the country of interest using
Pnd
cl
,
p̂d = Pnl=1
d
l=1 rl
where rl is the number of people a participant l declares to know in the first
question of the survey, and cl is the number of people (out of rl ) showing symptoms compatible with COVID-19, for l ∈ {1, . . . , nd }. On the other hand, if
nd < amin , we do not compute an estimate for day d. We instead aggregate
the responses for day d to the responses for the subsequent days d + 1, d + 2, . . .
until we have a day d0 = d + m such that nm = nd + nd+1 + . . . + nd+m ≥ amin
responses. In the experiments reported here we empirically chose amin = 30.
We then compute the estimate p̂d0 for day d0 as6
Pnm
cl
.
p̂d0 = Pnl=1
m
l=1 rl
The estimates p̂d and p̂d0 are simple proportions and we construct a 95%
confidence interval for p̂ ∈ {p̂d , p̂dm } using confidence intervals for binomial
proportions as follows
r
p̂(1 − p̂)
,
p̂ ± 1.96
r
P
where r = l rl . A major limitation of this method is that we do not obtain
estimates for every day. However, we are constantly refining these techniques,
and trying new ways to obtain better estimates.

3

Validation

In the previous sections we introduced our strategy for indirect reporting of the
number of cases. Given the nature of an open and anonymous survey, where data
quality is much harder to enforce, we soon identified the need for an independent
estimator to which we could compare the survey results. In most countries we
had access to time series with the number of official, RT-PCR confirmed, cases
and COVID-19 mortality data. Together these series allow the derivation of a
naive case fatality ratio (CFR).
Up to early May 2020 our running option for an independent estimator was
to use the CFR to estimate the current number of cases in each country, as
detailed in the next section. On May 13, 2020, a large-scale serology study was
reported for Spain [6] and this provided a more precise and direct data collection
for calibration.
6 We expect that better results may be achievable if A
min and amin are selected as a function
of country population. We plan to investigate this in future work.

7

3.1

Inferring Cases from Reported Mortality

In an ongoing epidemic, the current CFR should be calculated by taking into
account the number of deaths (d) over the number of current cases with known
outcomes (c), since very recent cases can still evolve as fatalities or recover
[13]. This correction yields a corrected CFR (cCFR), more accurate than the
naive CFR that is often reported. To perform the correction we follow the
same methodology that is described in [16] as well as their code in https:
//github.com/thimotei/CFR_calculation. We keep the same estimates for
the delay from case confirmation to death, i.e., a Lognormal distribution with
a mean delay of 13 days and a standard deviation of 12.7 days. (Our code is
available under https://github.com/GCGImdea/coronasurveys.)
Under the assumption that the disease has similar mortality rates for similar
populations, it is possible to use stable cCFR estimates to obtain a baseline,
cCFRb , for COVID-19 and check how each country’s current cCFR compares to
that baseline, and hence infer the proportion of cases that are being detected.
In [16] the authors keep a frequently updated estimate of the level of underreporting for several countries. As an example if cCFRb = 1% and a country
exhibits a cCFR = 2%, they infer that only 50% of the cases are being detected.
cCFR , we
For our purposes, if we multiply the reported number of cases by cCFR
b
obtain an estimate for the likely true number of cases in that given country. In
the example above we would have multiplied the reported number of cases by
cCFR
cCFRb = 2.
The next step is to select a reference baseline. In [17] the authors report, from a large sample of cases in China, a baseline cCFRb of 1.38% (db =
1, 023; and cb = 74, 130), and we have chosen to use this baseline in our estimators. Still, given that several countries (Korea, New Zealand, and others)
have stabilized the growth of COVID-19 cases, it is possible to use the data in
those countries to also define a baseline. Following the Ln-Method in [9], we
cCFR , at any given date. We
also construct a confidence interval for the ratio cCFR
b
model the number of deaths d using a binomial distribution with parameters
cCFR and c (analogously, we refer
 to d
b , cCFRb , and cb for our fixed baseline).
Then, it can be shown that ln dd/c
is approximately normally distributed
b /cb


cCFR and estimated variance σ̂ 2 = 1/d − 1/c + 1/d − 1/c .
with mean ln cCFR
b
b
b

Finally, a 95% CI for our ratio is given by (r · exp(−1.96 · σ̂), r · exp(1.96 · σ̂)),
where r is the observed value of dd/c
.
b /cb
We observe that one limitation of resorting to reported mortality data is that
some countries might not properly report or classify it as COVID-19 mortality.
However, in countries with adequate reporting, it is a useful source of calibration
and independent estimation.

8

3.2

Serology Study in Spain

On May 13, 2020 the Spanish Government published a first report from a largescale serology study that looked for COVID-19 antibodies in the population [6].
Samples were collected from April 27 to May 11, and results made available from
a group of 60, 897 participants in the study, selected according to demographic
criteria, to obtain a representative sample of the population. Although both
IgM and IgG antibodies were measured, the report focuses on the prevalence of
SARS-Cov2 IgG antibodies. The overall prevalence was reported as 5.0% (95%
CI: 4.7%-5.4%), and regional variations ranged from 1.1% in Ceuta to 11.3% in
the Comunidad de Madrid.
The IgG test was found to have a sensitivity of 79% and specificity of 100%.
Given that, we can correct for false negatives and estimate an overall infection
rate of 6.33% (=0.05/0.79), with approximate 95% CI: 5.95%-6.84%. Assuming an average time span of two weeks since infection to the development of
detectable levels of IgG [11], and with a population in Spain of 46, 934, 628 persons, this leads to an estimate of approximately 2, 970, 546 (95% CI: 2,792,3133,208,190) cumulative cases around the weeks from April 13 to 27 (in the middle
of this period, on April 20, the number of RT-PCR confirmed cases was 200, 210,
almost 15 times lower). Using the cumulative mortality on May 11 (roughly two
weeks after the likely infection dates) of 26, 744, this leads to an estimated infection mortality rate (IFR) of 0.9% (95% CI: 0.83%-0.96%)7 . In Brasil, another
large-scale serology survey (with 25,025 participants) [7] recently provided an
estimated IFR of 1%, a value that is in line with our estimate for Spain.
The Spanish study includes data on the proportions of IgG positives that
had one or more symptoms, or were completely asymptomatic. The proportion
of IgG positives with some kind of symptoms (i.e., at least one symptom) was
reported to be 66.27%. Fixing this percentage, and assuming that most of
the (officially reported) RT-PCR confirmed cases were symptomatic, one can
estimate about 1, 968, 550 persons with symptoms, and a CFR of around 1.36%
(actually, very close to the value calculated for Wuhan at 1.38% [17]).

3.3

Comparing Estimates

Adopting as ground truth the serology-derived value of 6.33% cumulative infections in the period from April 13 to 27 (which lead to 79% IgG positives two
weeks later, i.e. 5%), we compare this ground-truth to our estimates in the same
period. Since our estimates, cCFR-based and survey-based, target symptomatic
cases, we need to scale them to total infections by dividing the estimates by 0.66
(the ratio of symptomatic over total infections as reported in the study [6]). We
also show, for comparison, the number of reported RT-PCR confirmed cases.
As we can see in Figure 1 the official RT-PCR data is about an order of
magnitude less than the likely true rate of infected people that is inferred from
IgG prevalence, 6.33%. Figure 1 also shows that both the cCFR-based estimate
7 The data of confirmed cases and mortality was extracted from [4] on the date of the
submission (May 20, 2020).

9

Estimates of SARS−COV2 infections in Spain

Percentage of infection in total population

10

8

cCFR based estimate
IgG prevalence
RT−PCR based estimate
Survey based estimate

6

4

2

0
Apr 14

Apr 16

Apr 18

Apr 20

Apr 22

Apr 24

Apr 26

Dates

Figure 1: Case estimates with 95% confidence bands for Spain, April 13 to 27,
2020.
and the estimate derived from the open survey closely track the IgG-prevalence
value. Furthermore, the confidence bands intersect throughout the period, with
a clear difference in amplitude due to the sample sizes. The average of the
cCFR estimates in the 15-day period was 6.56%, while that of the survey-based
estimates was 6.2%. This places them, respectively, only 0.24% and 0.13% apart
from the IgG reference value (average relative difference of 3.72% and 2.05%,
respectively). These results show that open surveys can bring relevant data on
the size of a pandemic, which can be be useful when more reliable metrics are
not yet available or better estimates cannot be implemented in some regions.
For further evaluation of our method we compare our estimates to the serology data for each region in Spain as shown in Figure 2. We plot the relative
error in our estimate for a region as a function of the relative coverage of our
surveys for that region (reach divided by population). Although we can see
some variability, we note that the trend is towards lower relative error as the
reach increases.

10

Figure 2: Relative accuracy vs. local coverage: For each region, we plot the
relative error in our estimates as compared to serology data, shown as a function
of the relative reach within the region. Higher reach (better coverage within a
region) tends to lead to lower error.

4

Experience Using Open Surveys in LMI Countries

We have obtained estimates for a number of countries. In particular, we have
received enough responses to estimate symptomatic cases in 3 LMICs, namely
Brazil, Ecuador, and Ukraine (see Tables 1 and 2).
In Brazil we have recent estimates for May 17, when the official number of
cumulative confirmed cases was 233, 142, and the official number of cumulative
fatalities was 15, 633. For that same date, the estimate based on the cCFR
is 2, 139, 681 (CI 95%: 2, 135, 408 - 2, 143, 963), 1.01% of the population, and
the estimate based on 41 survey responses is 2, 120, 134 (CI 95%: 1, 195, 676
- 3, 044, 593), 1% of the population. Not surprisingly, the estimated number
of cases is one order of magnitude larger than the number of confirmed cases.
However, it is remarkable how close the cCFR and survey-based estimates are
to each other, differing in less than 20, 000 cases (0.01% of the population).
In Ecuador we also observe that the number of estimated cases is at least one
order of magnitude larger than the official number of confirmed cases. However,

11

Country

Date

Cases

Fatal.

Brazil

May 17

233, 142

15, 633

Ecuador

April 15

7, 603

355

Ukraine

April 26

8, 617

209

cCFR
(CI 95%)
2, 139, 681
(2, 135, 408-2, 143, 963)
53, 435
(53, 069-53, 804)
32, 078
(31, 734-32, 426)

CoronaSurveys
(CI 95%)
2, 120, 134
(1, 195, 676-3, 044, 593)
274, 668
(190, 236-359, 100)
246, 646
(107, 482-385, 811)

Table 1: Summary of estimates for Brazil, Ecuador and Ukraine. Cases and
Fatalities correspond to the official data on that day, while cCFR and CoronaSurveys are estimates.
Country

Date

Brazil
Ecuador
Ukraine

May 17
April 15
April 26

Cases
% pop.
0.11%
0.04%
0.02%

cCFR
% pop. (CI 95%)
1.01% (1.00 - 1.01)
0.31% (0.31 - 0.31)
0.07% (0.07 - 0.07)

Resp.
41
30
30

CoronaSurveys
% pop. (CI 95%)
1.00% (0.56 - 1.43)
1.61% (1.11 - 2.10)
0.56% (0.25 - 0.88)

Table 2: Summary of estimates for Brazil, Ecuador and Ukraine in percentage
of the country population.
we observe that the estimates from cCFR and from the surveys are also very
different. For instance, we have estimates dated April 15, when the official
number of confirmed cases was 7, 603 and the official number of fatalities was
355. Our case estimate for that date from the cCFR is 53, 435 (CI 53069 53804), 0.31% of the population, and the one from 30 survey responses is 274, 668
(CI 190, 236 - 359, 100), 1.61% of the population. We observe a significant
difference between the two estimates, the one from the surveys being 5 times
larger than the cCFR-based one. This difference does not seem to be the result
of geographical bias, since few survey responses came from the provinces with
the largest number of cases (e.g., Guayas).
We observed a similar behavior in Ukraine where, again, the estimates are
at least one order of magnitude larger than the number of confirmed cases, and
the number of estimated cases from the surveys is one order of magnitude larger
than the estimates from cCFR. For instance, the latest direct estimate from (30)
survey responses was done on April 26, and has a value of 246, 646 (CI 107, 482
- 385, 811), 0.56% of the population, while the cCFR estimate is 32, 078 (CI
31, 734 - 32, 426), 0.07% of the population. The confirmed numbers of cases and
fatalities on that date were 8, 617 and 209, respectively. This result is not due
to a geographical bias, since the region-based estimate for that same day from
300 survey responses is 159, 529 (CI 62, 361 - 256, 696), 0.35% of the population,
which is lower, but still five times higher than the cCFR-based estimate.
The results in Ecuador and Ukraine are puzzling, and we are not able to
explain them yet. Our current hypothesis is that these countries use different
criteria for reporting cases and fatalities than the countries we use as reference.
This may cause the cCFR-based estimate to be unreliable. We have deployed
additional questions in the survey that we believe can be used to track the

12

difference. The good news is that this can be done with very little effort, and
we do not need a lot of responses to have enough information to have solid
conjectures.

5

Discussion

By now it is clear that relying only on confirmed cases and fatalities to measure
the true size of a growing pandemic is not a good idea. It is possible to use
this data to derive estimates, like the one we obtain here based on the cCFR,
that are reasonably reliable in countries with a good reporting system. This has
been shown in the case of Spain using the ground truth provided by a serological
study. The same study indicates that open anonymous surveys with indirect
reporting also provide estimates that are close to the real values. The matching between cCFR-based and survey-based estimates has also been observed in
Brazil. However, we have found countries in which there is no ground truth, and
the cCFR-based and survey-based estimates differ significantly. We are investigating this further by adding new questions to the surveys in these countries,
which will provide additional information on the causes of these discrepancies.
We are aware that having open anonymous surveys prevents a tight control
of the population of participants. Hence, our responses may be suffering from
strong biases: for example, they may be close geographically and socially to the
team members, which are the ones promoting the survey. We are also aware
that the set of people and cases participants report are possibly not disjoint.
Interestingly, until now the only bias that we have observed to be relevant is the
geographical bias. Initial studies done via simulation hint that the intersection
of contacts among participants does not seem to have much influence on the
estimates. However, more experiments are required. In fact, new questions have
been added to the survey to evaluate the level of overlapping, and estimate the
propagation graph of participation.
However, we plan to explore ways to influence and select the population
of participants. One line to follow is the use of targeted campaigns in social
networks and web ads (using Facebook Ads or Google Ads), in which we have
control over who sees a given ad promoting the survey. This will allow targeting
participants from certain geographical areas and certain demographic profiles.
In fact, we have started a exploratory campaign using Facebook Ads in Brazil.
While we only present here techniques for obtaining estimates on the number of people infected with COVID-19, we are designing new surveys that will
hopefully allow us to estimate other important parameters of the pandemic, like
the number of newly infected cases, the reproduction number, or the forecast
needs of health equipment and infrastructures.
We believe that a survey system like the CoronaSurveys project is especially
suited for LMICs, since the cost of preparing and deploying a survey is extremely
small, participants can use very simple devices to fill the survey (since it is web
based), and the number of participants required to have information on the
pandemic is rather low. Having a uniform approach to obtain this information

13

in many countries also makes the process especially interesting, since it avoids
the current problems with different ways of counting and measuring.

6

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank the large group of researchers and collaborators that is
currently involved in the CoronaSurveys project in any form: Annette Bieniusa,
Ignacio Castro, Chus Fernández, Angeliki Gazi, Rodrigo Irarrazaval, Alvaro
Méndez, Esteban Moro, Paul Rimba, Erol Sahin, Andres Schafer, Ghadi Sebaali,
Natalie Soto, Matias Spatz Fernández, Christopher Thraves, Pelayo Vallina,
Lin Wang. Especial thanks to the Crowdfight COVID-19 project [3] and its
volunteers.

References
[1] H Russell Bernard, Tim Hallett, Alexandrina Iovita, Eugene C Johnsen,
Rob Lyerla, Christopher McCarty, Mary Mahy, Matthew J Salganik,
Tetiana Saliuk, Otilia Scutelniciuc, et al. Counting hard-to-count populations: the network scale-up method for public health. Sexually transmitted
infections, 86(Suppl 2):ii11–ii15, 2010.
[2] H Russell Bernard, Eugene C Johnsen, Peter D Killworth, and Scott Robinson. Estimating the size of an average personal network and of an event
subpopulation: Some empirical results. Social science research, 20(2):109–
121, 1991.
[3] Crowdfight COVID-19. An initiative from the scientific community to put
all available resources at the service of the fight against covid-19. https:
//crowdfightcovid19.org/. Accessed: 2020-05-20.
[4] European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Covid-19. https:
//www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/covid-19-pandemic. Accessed: 2020-04-09.
[5] Facebook Data for Good.
COVID-19 symptom survey – request for data access.
https://dataforgood.fb.com/docs/
covid-19-symptom-survey-request-for-data-access/.
Accessed:
2020-05-20.
[6] Consumo y Bienestar Social Gobierno de España, Ministerio de Sanidad.
Estudio nacional de sero-epidemiologı́a de la infección por sars-cov-2 en
españa, informe preliminar tras la primera ronda. Technical report, Gobierno de España, Ministerio de Sanidad, Consumo y Bienestar Social, 5
2020.
[7] Pedro Hallal, Fernando Hartwig, Bernardo Horta, Gabriel D Victora, Mariangela Silveira, Claudio Struchiner, Luis Paulo Vidaletti, Nelson Neumann, Lucia C Pellanda, Odir A Dellagostin, Marcelo N Burattini, Ana M
14

Menezes, Fernando C Barros, Aluisio J Barros, and Cesar G Victora. Remarkable variability in sars-cov-2 antibodies across brazilian regions: nationwide serological household survey in 27 states. 2020.
[8] D. Holt and T. M. F. Smith. Post stratification. Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society, 1979.
[9] P. A. R. Koopman. Confidence intervals for the ratio of two binomial
proportions. Biometrics, 40(2):513–517, 1984.
[10] Manuel Linares, Ignacio Garitano, Laura Santos, and José M Ramos. Estimando el número de casos de covid-19 a tiempo real utilizando un formulario web a través de las redes sociales: Proyecto covid19-trends. Semergen,
4 2020.
[11] Quan-Xin Long, Bai-Zhong Liu, Hai-Jun Deng, Gui-Cheng Wu, Kun Deng,
Yao-Kai Chen, Pu Liao, Jing-Fu Qiu, Yong Lin, Xue-Fei Cai, et al. Antibody responses to sars-cov-2 in patients with covid-19. Nature Medicine,
pages 1–4, 2020.
[12] A Maxmen. How much is coronavirus spreading under the radar? Nature,
2020. https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-020-00760-8.
[13] Hiroshi Nishiura, Don Klinkenberg, Mick Roberts, and Johan AP Heesterbeek. Early epidemiological assessment of the virulence of emerging
infectious diseases: a case study of an influenza pandemic. PLoS
One, 4(8), 2009. https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.
1371/journal.pone.0006852.
[14] Nuria Oliver, Xavier Barber, Kirsten Roomp, and Kristof Roomp. The
covid19impact survey: Assessing the pulse of the COVID-19 pandemic in
spain via 24 questions. CoRR, abs/2004.01014, 2020.
[15] The CoronaSurveys research team. CoronaSurveys: Monitoring the incidence of COVID-19 via open surveys. https://coronasurveys.org/.
Accessed: 2020-05-20.
[16] T Russel, Joel Hellewell, S Abbot, et al. Using a delay-adjusted case fatality
ratio to estimate under-reporting. Available at the Centre for Mathematical
Modelling of Infectious Diseases Repository, here, 2020. https://cmmid.
github.io/topics/covid19/global_cfr_estimates.html.
[17] Robert Verity, Lucy C Okell, Ilaria Dorigatti, Peter Winskill, Charles
Whittaker, Natsuko Imai, Gina Cuomo-Dannenburg, Hayley Thompson,
Patrick G T Walker, Han Fu, Amy Dighe, Jamie T Griffin, Marc Baguelin,
Sangeeta Bhatia, Adhiratha Boonyasiri, Anne Cori, Zulma Cucunubá, Rich
FitzJohn, Katy Gaythorpe, Will Green, Arran Hamlet, Wes Hinsley, Daniel
Laydon, Gemma Nedjati-Gilani, Steven Riley, Sabine van Elsland, Erik
Volz, Haowei Wang, Yuanrong Wang, Xiaoyue Xi, Christl A Donnelly,

15

Azra C Ghani, and Neil M Ferguson. Estimates of the severity of coronavirus disease 2019: a model-based analysis. The Lancet Infectious Diseases, 2020/04/11.
[18] Peng Yang, Chunna Ma, Weixian Shi, Shujuan Cui, Guilan Lu, Xiaomin Peng, Daitao Zhang, Yimeng Liu, Huijie Liang, Yi Zhang, et al.
A serological survey of antibodies to H5, H7 and H9 avian influenza
viruses amongst the duck-related workers in Beijing, China. PLoS
One, 7(11), 2012. https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=
10.1371/journal.pone.0050770.

16

