#Coronavirus or #Chinesevirus?!:
Understanding the negative sentiment reflected in Tweets with racist
hashtags across the development of COVID-19
Xin Pei1
1Nanyang

Deval Mehta2

Technological University

Abstract
Situated in the global outbreak of COVID-19, our study enriches the discussion concerning the emergent racism and
xenophobia on social media. With big data extracted from
Twitter, we focus on the analysis of negative sentiment reflected in tweets marked with racist hashtags, as racism and
xenophobia are more likely to be delivered via the negative
sentiment. Especially, we propose a stage-based approach to
capture how the negative sentiment changes along with the
three development stages of COVID-19, under which it
transformed from a domestic epidemic into an international
public health emergency and later, into the global pandemic.
At each stage, sentiment analysis enables us to recognize the
negative sentiment from tweets with racist hashtags, and
keyword extraction allows for the discovery of themes in
the expression of negative sentiment by these tweets. Under
this public health crisis of human beings, this stage-based
approach enables us to provide policy suggestions for the
enactment of stage-specific intervention strategies to combat
racism and xenophobia on social media in a more effective
way.

Introduction
On 16th March 2020, a post from the official Twitter account of Donald Trump, the current president of the United
States of America, stirred up a tremendous wave of debates
across the globe. In this tweet, he referred to Coronavirus
as Chinese virus. Ironically, this label that embodies a
sense of racism and xenophobia becomes a new popular
hashtag - #Chinesevirus, appearing in numerous posts involved in public discussions over COVID-19 on Twitter.
The popularity of #Chinesevirus is accompanied by the
proliferation of many other racist hashtags that either reflect the conflation of coronavirus with racial cultural identities, such as #Kungflu, or aim at delivering the message
of racial exclusion, such as #sinophobia. This worldwide
emergent phenomenon is calling for scholarly attention to

2IBM

Research Australia

the rising racism and xenophobia expressed in the public
spheres of social media.
This brings us to a classic question - while social media
have been acting as a significant equalizer that endows
people with the fundamental right of free speech regardless
of their class, gender, nationality, and race, whether the
very same platforms are becoming fields where - in the
garb of free speech – bias and hatred are able to flourish
(Jakubowicz 2017; Lara-Cabrera et al. 2017; Thompson
2011)? More than once, history has shown us that when it
comes to race issues, social media could act as the breeding ground of the expression of racism and xenophobia
where rationale information sharing might be marginalized
(Alkiviadou 2019; Ben-David and Matamoros-Fernández
2016; Chinnasamy and Manaf 2018). In the case of 2017
Jakarta Gubernatorial Election, supporters of competing
camps with leaders from different races deployed social
media as the battleground for mutual attacks, subsequently
transforming the freedom of speech into the freedom to
express hate (Lim 2017). In India, every day, countless
statements of racial discrimination against Muslims appear
on different social media platforms (Mirchandani 2018).
Under some circumstances, the social media mediated diffusion of racism and xenophobia has been unfortunately
evolved into physical violence and regional conflicts in the
off-line world (Hubi 2019).
It is within this context that our attention is drawn to the
analysis of tweets marked with racist hashtags under the
topic of COVID-19. Especially, we focus on the tweets
that reflect the negative sentiment. This is due to the reason
that racism and xenophobia are more likely to be expressed
negatively (Redlawsk, Tolbert, and McNeely 2014;
Tulkens et al. 2016). Not limited to recognizing the negative tweets with racist hashtags, this study develops a
stage-based sentiment analysis to map the changing negative sentiment expressed in these tweets across different
development stages of COVID-19, where this disease
evolved from a domestic epidemic to a public health emergency of international concerns and later to the global pan-

demic. Additionally, keywords of the negative tweets at
different stages were extracted to predict the developing
themes of public negative opinions regarding racism and
xenophobia. The stage-based analysis contributes to the
enactment of intervention strategies with an episodespecific focus which will allow for a more effective reduction of the spread of racism and xenophobia on social media under COVID-19.

Literature Review
In recent years, scholars have extended heated debates
around whether the freedom of expression enabled by social media is paving the way for the growth of speech of
racism and xenophobia (Jakubowicz 2017; Lara-Cabrera et
al. 2017; Thompson 2011). Different from traditional
mainstream media, social media empower individuals with
the affordance of anonymous speech, which facilitates their
engagement in the free expression of opinions beyond institutionalized surveillance and control (Shirky 2011).
While prior studies have documented that this affordance
could act as an important force to push forward the civil
engagement in the pursuit of democracy (Kow, Kou,
Semaan, and Cheng 2016; Papacharissi and de Fatima
Oliveira 2012; Yamamoto, Kushin, and Dalisay 2015), it
may also sustain the rise of anonymous racist propaganda
(Ben-David and Matamoros-Fernández 2016; Farkas,
Schou, and Neumayer 2018). Furthermore, the promotion
of boundless interactions on social media enables the connections between users across geographical spans, consequently allowing for the racist propaganda to reach audiences from far corners of the world and clustering users
with a similar mind in large scope and at a high speed
(Klein 2017; Jakubowicz 2017).
An increasing number of scholars have switched attention to the flourish of racism and xenophobia on social media (Alkiviadou 2019; Ben-David and MatamorosFernández 2016; Chinnasamy and Manaf 2018). Matamoros-Fernández (2017) coined the term “platformed racism”
to describe a thriving new form of racism on social media
which is constructed and constantly amplified via users’
appropriation of affordances enabled by social media platforms. This “platformed racism” often contributes to the
reproduction of off-line social inequalities in online public
spheres. In her research context, it led to the mediation and
circulation of an Australian race-based controversy on
Twitter, Facebook, and YouTube. Similarly, Oboler (2016)
used the term “Hate 2.0” to refer to the combination of hate
speech contents and Facebook as a new way of spreading
Islamophobia. Oboler argued that the mode of “Hate 2.0”
allows for a large-scale diffusion of biased and hate
speeches against the Islam community on social media,
which usually makes racist discourse appear as a collective

mood. This further helps justify racism as a normal part of
public opinions in the online environment, which in return
may enable another round of racist thinking diffusion at a
large scale on social media.
Our study switches the attention to the growth of racism
and xenophobia on social media during COVID-19, which
has become one of the most severe public health crises of
human beings since the turn of the new millennium. It is
well documented that crisis can act as the fuse to trigger
the explosion of racism and xenophobia (Coluccello and
Kretsos 2015; Salaita 2006). The unpredictable nature of
crisis is likely to press the “panic buttons” (Gopalkrishnan
2013) of people who are faced with threats to their health,
rights and interests, and even life security. The unstable
emotional status has a higher chance to contribute to the
subsequent irrational decision-making of the public (Jin
and Pang 2010; Sweeny 2008). Especially, the unexpected
development of the crisis (Gordon 2003), wide diffusion of
misleading online information (Khaldarova and Pantti
2016; Jones 2019), and agenda-setting via media coverage
that aims to influence the public opinions for a specific political purpose (Iyengar and Simon 1993), may work together to affect the judgment made by the public during the
crisis.
In previous cases, one of the irrational decisions could
be the massive blame towards the (im)migrants of racial
minorities to negatively view them as the cause of the crisis (Coluccello and Kretsos 2015; Salaita 2006). This bias
can arouse a rapid growth of racism and xenophobia amid
the public. For instance, Salaita (2006) noted the 9/11 crisis was followed by a rapid transformation of covert racism
into overt racism and expressed in actions that impacted
adversely on minority Muslim groups in the society. According to Coluccello and Kretsos (2015), social exclusion
became the response from the Greek polity and society to
irregulated migrants under the stress created by 2008 economic crisis in Greece.
This study examines the racism and xenophobia under
the global outbreak of COVID-19. As a disease that is suspected to be originated from China, COVID-19 has been
witnessing the rise of discrimination and social exclusion
against Chinese, which has been extended to Asians at
large. This worldwide phenomenon has been informally
defined as “sinophobia”. Against this backdrop, social media platforms have become the fields for public expressions
of racism and xenophobia (Depoux et al. 2020) which are
usually marked by racist hashtags that conflate COVID-19
with a specific racial or national identity. It is within this
context that our attention is drawn to the tweets containing
racist hashtags, especially, the ones delivering a negative
sentiment. Prior studies have noted that race-based discrimination and(or) blame on (im)migrant communities
tend to be delivered through the negative sentiment, such
as anger, anxiety, and fear, compared to the positive and

neutral ones (Redlawsk, Tolbert, and McNeely 2014;
Tulkens et al. 2016). Therefore, to understand racism and
xenophobia on social media, it becomes necessary to recognize the negative tweets marked with racist hashtags,
and the opinions embodied in these tweets. This becomes
the focus of this study.
Given the dynamic nature of public sentiments and opinions that tend to change along with the development of crisis (Williamson 1989), this study proposes a stage-based
analysis. To specify, this study divides the development of
COVID-19 into three major stages – (1) domestic epidemic
that was known to the world since the official announcement of Wuhan lockdown by the Chinese government on
23rd Jan, to (2) public health emergency of international
concerns since the declaration made by World Health Organization (WHO) on 31st Jan, and later to (3) global pandemic according to the new definition of this disease from
WHO on 11th March. With the stage-based approach, we
propose the following two research questions:
RQ1: Across the three development stages of COVID19, how does the negative sentiment change in tweets with
racist hashtags?
RQ2: Across the three development stages of COVID19, what are the themes of the expression of negative sentiment in the tweets with racist hashtags?

Methods
Data Collection and Pre-processing
#Chinesevirus and #Chinavirus were selected as the two
most representative racist hashtags for extracting the relevant tweets. Through Twitter API for Python1, we extracted in total 174,488 tweets in English language marked with
either or both of the above two hashtags created between
24th Jan to 31st March in the year of 2020. Repetitive
tweets as well as retweets were excluded as they might fail
in reflecting a new opinion. Additionally, tweets under 15
words were removed as they are too short for an explicit
expression of a viewpoint. After this processing, 69470
tweets constitute the final dataset of this study, with 3,109
tweets falling into the first stage, 6,047 into the second,
and 60,314 into the third. It is worth noting a sudden escalation of the numbers of tweets that contain the above
hashtags since 16th March and afterwards, which explains
the higher number of tweets in the third stage.

approach that deploys a rule-based model to categorize the
sentiments reflected in texts into, negative, neutral, and
positive (Hutto, Clayton, and Gilbert 2014). VADER has
been successfully adopted to detect the sentiment in the
context of social media (Rodríguez, Argueta, and Chen
2019). Especially, the sentiment categorization by VADER
takes consideration of not only the literal meaning of the
words, but also negation, punctuation, slangs, and even
emoticons, which makes it more suitable for sentiment
analysis of the informal content of micro-blogs in comparison with the other popular tools, such as Linguistic Inquiry
and Word Count (LIWC), General Inquirer (GI), and SentiWordNet (Bonta, Kumaresh, and Janardhan 2019; Elbagir
and Yang 2019).
We use the opensource Python package of VADER 2 ,
operating the model on the 69,470 tweets in the dataset.
Each tweet returns four scores as described in the VADER
repository -> {‘neg’, ‘pos’, ‘neu’, ‘compound’}. The neg,
pos, neu scores correspond to the proportion of the text that
falls into each category and sum up to 1.0, whereas the
compound score is the most important metric which can be
used as a unidimensional measure for classifying the sentiment of the tweet. The value of the compound score
ranges between -1 (extremely negative) and +1 (extremely
positive). We select a commonly used threshold of ±0.05
(Karim & Das, 2018) for the classification of the tweet as
negative, positive, or neutral based on the compound score.
So, if the compound score of a tweet is greater than or
equal to +0.05, it is classified as positive; if it’s less than or
equal to -0.05 then it is classified as negative; and if it lies
between -0.05 and +0.05, it is classified as neutral. Note
that before passing a tweet to VADER, we only remove
any URLs (http and https) contained in the tweet. We refrain from removing the punctuation marks and emoticons,
as VADER makes use of these features for analyzing the
sentiment. To check the performance of VADER, we manually classified 1000 randomly selected tweets from our
dataset. The overlapping scores between the manual work
and VADER reached 76.4%. After scoring and categorizing the sentiment of each tweet, we separated them into the
earlier described three stages of COVID-19 according to
their date to demonstrate the sentiment changes reflected
across the timeline. In summary, in the first stage, the
numbers of tweets that classified into negative, neutral and
positive sentiments are respectively 1556, 707, 846; in the
second stage, 3029, 1243, 1775; in the third stage, 31438,
8569, 20307.

Sentiment Analysis
To answer RQ1, we employ VADER for sentiment analysis. With the full name as Valence Aware Dictionary for
Sentiment Reasoning, VADER is a popular lexicon-based
1

https://github.com/tweepy/tweepy

Keyword Extraction
We make use of keyword extraction to answer RQ2. It enables us to capture the thematic words embodied in the ex2

https://github.com/cjhutto/vaderSentiment

pression of negative sentiment in tweets with racist
hashtags. Under the extraction, we first removed punctuations, and stop words via making use of Natural Language
Toolkit (NLTK)3 of Python. In a subsequent step, we deleted hashtags and nonsense words, in order to make sure
the selected keywords can give us clues about the themes
of public discussions with negative sentiment. We eventually extracted the top 50 most frequently used terms for
each stage, and word clouds were created accordingly for
the visualization of these thematic words.

Findings
Dominance and Turbulence of Negative Sentiment
In accordance with Fig. 1, negative sentiment keeps on
dominating the tone of tweets marked with racist hashtags
across the development of COVID-19. In Fig. 1, the proportions of sentiment categories are represented on the yaxis and the three stages of COVID-19 on the x-axis. The
ratios of negative sentiment reached 50%, 50%, and 52%
respectively at the three stages, staying equal to or greater
than the sum of positive and neutral sentiments. In general,
we notice that the transformation of COVID-19 into pandemic might act as a watershed, after which the negative
expressions concerning racism and xenophobia on Twitter
showed a slight rising tendency.

days that had an extremely small number of tweets were
deleted to avoid misleading fluctuating values. From this
chart, we can notice the second stage appeared as the most
turbulent one where the distance between the peak and the
lowest point almost reaches 23%, in comparison with 6%
at the first and 9% in the third stage.
At the second stage, the sudden transformation of
COVID-19 from a domestic epidemic within the national
border of China into an international public health crisis
might be the reason that contributes to the turbulence of
negative expressions regarding racism and xenophobia on
Twitter. To specify, first, the announcement made by
WHO that defined COVID-19 as the public health emergency of international concerns alerted the world with the
highly contagious nature of the disease, which possibly led
to the mood swings of the public. In addition, the emergence of an increasing number of cases in multiple areas
globally also played a part in strengthening the anxieties
and fears of the public regarding the potential threats imposed by COVID-19 on their health and life security. This
is consistent with prior studies that the unpredictable nature
of crisis can easily position people into an unstable emotional state (Gopalkrishnan 2012).

Fig. 2. Distribution of tweets of each sentiment for each day across the
three stages of COVID-19

Fig. 1. Proportion of tweets amongst the three categories of sentiment for
the three stages (time period) of COVID-19

Fig. 2 illustrates the fluctuation of negative sentiment
based on posting dates. In Fig. 2, we plot the proportions of
the sentiment categories – positive, negative and neutral on
the y-axis for each day of all the three stages on the x-axis.
Only the tweets that had posting dates are used and the
3

https://www.nltk.org/

Fig. 2 shows the peak of negative sentiment occurred
around the date of 4th Feb. At the peak, the ratio of negative tweets with racist hashtags reaches approximately
61%. This happened a few days after COVID-19 became
international public health emergency. In these few days,
several countries, such as Singapore, Australia, India, the
United States, issued the policy of restricting the entry of
tourists who had visited China in the past two weeks. This
type of policy was only waived to permanent residents and
citizens, and in a few cases, had exemptions made to foreigners who hold a long-term visit pass. The actions of

blocking the national borders and excluding foreigners
were likely to reinforce xenophobia. Meanwhile, the lockdown policy with a specific country as the target to some
degree justified the behaviors of blaming the global spread
of COVID-19 on it, which might encourage the growth of
racism against people sharing either the racial or national
identity with this country. The above-noted factors might
result in the rise of negative sentiment when people shared
their opinions concerning racism and xenophobia on social
media.
The lowest score of negative sentiment happened around
5th March which is nearly 38%. From the end of February
till 5th March, several countries in succession experienced
the outbreak of COVID-19, such as South Korea, Italy,
Spain, and Iran. The global expansion of COVID-19, on
the one hand, distracted the public attention from one specific country to multiple seriously infected nations. This
might reduce single country-oriented discrimination and
blame, and meanwhile create the necessity of building up a
rapport to combat the disease of all human beings. On the
other hand, outbreak of COVID-19 in multiple countries
led to an increasing body of reports with information regarding this virus from varied sources. The diversity of information might engage people in rethinking about the
source and the possible transmission of this novel disease,
which tended to trigger their reflections upon their previously biased opinions. These two reasons might cause the
declined negative sentiment in tweets when people talked
about the association between the coronavirus disease with
a particular race or nation. It is worth noting that the declination only happened in the initial phase of global largescale occurrence of COVID-19, and when the massive diffusion of coronavirus continued, the negative sentiment
took off again in tweets with racist hashtags, which can be
seen in the third stage of COVID-19.

Developing Themes of Negative Sentiment
Fig. 3 visualizes the word clouds consisting of terms that
were most frequently used for the expression of negative
sentiment in tweets marked with racist hashtags at the three
development stages of COVID-19. The relative frequency
of each term is indicated by its size within the cloud. Table. 1 presents the top 10 terms for each stage. As can be
seen, “china” “coronavirus” “world” “chinese” “people”
are the common keywords shared by the three stages. It is
not difficult to interpret their popularity. COVID-19, a
novel coronavirus, concerns the health of people throughout the world. China is the country where the earliest report of the large-scale outbreak of COVID-19 came from,
and Chinese is the racial and national identity associated
with China. This explains why a number of racist speeches
might target at China and Chinese.

Interestingly, apart from the five shared keywords, the
rest of keywords demonstrate possibly developing themes
across the development of COVID-19. In accordance with
Table. 1, at the first stage, public attention was largely
drawn to the “outbreak” of COVID-19. And “wuhan”, the
first city that experienced the outbreak of this disease, was
accordingly placed in the spotlight. Meanwhile, negative
discussions mainly centered on the (potential) threats arising from COVID-19 to public “health”, which might cause
“death” and “toll”. Therefore, at the first stage when
COVID-19 just started its global diffusion, we predict fear
might be the key emotional state shared by people who left
negative comments with racist hashtags on social media.
At the second stage when multiple countries have experienced the outbreak of COVID-19, we notice new keywords emerged as “infected” and “ccp”. The infection of
this disease became the thriving theme of negative sentiment, as an increasing number of people sensed the highly
contagious nature of COVID-19 along with its global expansion. “ccp”, the abbreviation of Communist Party of
China, as another rising keyword, to some degree, predicts
public discussions around this public health event gradually went political. The arguments of racism and xenophobia
on social media might start to involve attacks on political
systems.
At the third stage where COVID-19 has been defined as
pandemic, there are two major transitions of themes. First,
as shown in Table.1, “realdonaldtrump”, “us”, and “trump”
emerged in the list of top 10 keywords. This indicates that
a U.S. oriented discourse has been brought to the center of
the negative expression of opinions concerning race on social media. This phenomenon might be highly relevant to
the speech made by President Trump on 16th March 2020
that openly referred to coronavirus as Chinese virus. This
finding is consistent with our data that the number of
tweets with hashtags of #Chinavirus and #Chinesevirus
rocketed after Trump’s speech. Second, it is the first time
that “racist” became the keyword. At the same time, the
term - “chinaliedpeopledied” which overtly denoted a
strong suspicion of and blame on a specific country became common. From this, we predict that there might be
an increasing number of users that start to openly deliver
negative messages of race-based discrimination and blames
when COVID-19 became global pandemic.

Policy Suggestions
The stage-based approach proposed by our study will enable more effective intervention strategies with a specific
focus for each stage under the development of COVID-19.
Based on the findings, we provide the following policy
suggestions in terms of combatting the growth of racism
and xenophobia on social media.

Fig. 3. From left to right – Word clouds of the top 50 most frequently occurring keywords across the three stages of COVID-19

Table 1. Table showing the top 10 most frequently occurring words across the three stages of COVID-19

Stage 1: 01-24 to 01-31
Keyword

Stage 2: 02-01 to 03-11
Frequency

Keyword

Stage 3: 03-12 to 03-31
Frequency

Keyword

Frequency

china

1264

coronavirus

2367

china

coronavirus

1262

china

2039

coronavirus

6799

wuhan

830

wuhan

1021

world

5599

people

309

people

429

chinese

5474

health

257

chinese

375

people

5291

outbreak

234

outbreak

346

us

2760

death

211

death

266

chinaliedpeopledied

2497

chinese

207

world

258

realdonaldtrump

2406

toll

187

infected

228

trump

2305

world

173

ccp

185

racist

2105

To specify, in the first stage, when the source and transmission paths of the virus remained to be highly unclear,
fears about the virus might be one crucial source where
people’s race-based bias and blame came from. As noted,
whether the virus might cause death was a major concern.
Therefore, pacifying the public with the target of reducing
their fears can be the focus at the initial stage of public
health crisis. One effective strategy will be providing the
public with detailed reports regarding the death cases
caused by COVID-19 to give them a clearer idea of the lethality of this disease.
At the second stage, first, infectivity of the virus became
a new point that might arouse negative reactions from the
public, which could be presented in the form of alienation
from Chinese and Asians in general. Therefore, it would be
helpful to promote the agenda that calls for distinguishing
the virus from a specific race or nation instead of conflating them together. Second, as noted, negative sentiment
tended to arise from attacks on the political system. Due to
this, it became necessary to take action to prevent public

14033

discussions around this public health event from going political and maintain the public focus on the nature of the
disease.
At the third stage, we can notice the possible negative
effects brought about by the racist label declared by the influential public figure on social media. Also, racism and
xenophobia could come from suspicions and distrust between countries. Within this context, it is urgent to promote cross-nations transparent information sharing and
collaborations to combat fake news.

Discussion and Conclusions
Situated in the global outbreak of COVID-19, our study
enriches the scholarship concerning the emergent racism
and xenophobia on social media. We probe into how the
freedom of speech on social media, during this public
health crisis, might turn into the weapons for the spread of
racial exclusion. Our analysis emphasizes the tweets

marked with racist hashtags, especially those expressing
negative sentiment, as these negative tweets are more likely to deliver the messages containing race relevant bias,
discrimination, and blames. Sentiment analysis enables us
to capture these negative tweets, and keyword extraction
allows for the discovery of themes in their expression of
negative sentiment under racist hashtags.
Especially, such analysis is conducted through a stagebased approach. Rather than building the analysis upon the
whole set of data, our study proposes to separate the analysis into different stages of COVID-19. In so doing, we are
able to map the changing negative sentiment and opinions
in tweets with racist hashtags along with the development
of COVID-19 from a domestic epidemic to an international
public health emergency and later to the global pandemic.
It is important to note that the social meanings of this
stage-based approach can be well generalized beyond
COVID-19. It provides a necessary angle for sentiment
analysis in any context of crisis, as the unpredictable nature
of crisis often involves people into an unstable emotional
state that may lead to their changing opinions regarding
their situated crisis (Gopalkrishnan 2013).
Beyond the focus of this study, there are other interesting angles to explore in further research. First, our study
limits the analysis to the platform of Twitter. Future research can include other social media platforms in analysis,
such as Facebook and Reddit. The expression of racism
and xenophobia may vary due to the different technological affordance allowed by each platform. Second, we suggest future research take the social-cultural context into
consideration. It will be an innovative angle to compare the
expression of racism and xenophobia on social media
across countries. Additionally, rather than restricting the
analysis to English micro-blogs, future research can extend
the analysis of micro-blogs written in other languages. We
believe studies across different contexts will contribute to a
more comprehensive understanding of the emergent racism
and xenophobia on social media platforms in the context of
COVID-19, which will help us come up with better strategies to counteract the growth of bias, discrimination, and
even hatred under this public health crisis of human beings.

References
Alkiviadou, N. 2019. Hate Speech on Social Media Networks:
Towards a Regulatory Framework?. Information & Communications Technology Law 28(1): 19-35.
Ben-David, A., and Matamoros-Fernández, A. 2016. Hate Speech
and Covert Discrimination on Social Media: Monitoring the Facebook Pages of Extreme-right Political Parties in Spain. International Journal of Communication 10: 1167-1193.
Chinnasamy, S., and Manaf, N. A. 2018. Social Media as Political Hatred Mode in Malaysia’s 2018 General Election. In Proceedings of SHS Web of Conferences. Poland: EDP Sciences.

Coluccello, S., and Kretsos, L. 2015. Irregular Migration, Xenophobia and the Economic Crisis in Greece. In Eurafrican Migration: Legal, Economic and Social Responses to Irregular Migration, ed. R. Coluccello, and S. Massey, 88-104. New York:
Springer.
Depoux, A.; Martin, S.; Karafillakis, E.; Preet, R.; Wilder-Smith,
A.; and Larson, H. 2020. The Pandemic of Social Media Panic
Travels Faster than the COVID-19 Outbreak. Journal of Travel
Medicine 1-4. doi: 10.1093/jtm/taaa031
Elbagir, S., and Yang, J. 2019. Twitter Sentiment Analysis Using
Natural Language Toolkit and VADER Sentiment. In Lecture
Notes in Engineering and Computer Science: Proceedings of The
International MultiConference of Engineers and Computer Scientists. Hong Kong: The International Association of Engineers.
Farkas, J.; Schou, J.; and Neumayer, C. 2018. Cloaked Facebook
Pages: Exploring Fake Islamist Propaganda in Social Media. New
Media & Society 20(5): 1850-1867.
Gopalkrishnan, N. 2012. From Covert to Overt: The Role of Crisis in Transforming Racism. In: Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Racisms in the New World Order: Ralities
of Culture, Colour and Identity. Cairns, Australia.
Gordon, K. 2003. The Impermanence of Being: Toward a Psychology of Uncertainty. Journal of Humanistic Psychology 43(2):
96-117.
Hubi, N. H. M. 2019. The Role of Social Media in Influencing
Radicalization (Case Study of Majengo-Nairobi, Kenya). Master
thesis, School of Humanities and Social Sciences, United States
International University, Africa.
Hutto, Clayton J., and Eric Gilbert. 2014. Vader: A Parsimonious
Rule-based Model for Sentiment Analysis of Social Media Text.
In Eighth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social
Media. Michigan: AAAI.
Iyengar, S., and Simon, A. 1993. News Coverage of the Gulf Crisis and Public Opinion: A Study of Agenda-setting, Priming, and
Framing. Communication Research 20(3): 365-383.
Jakubowicz, A. 2017. Alt_Right White Lite: Trolling, Hate
Speech and Cyber Racism on Social Media. Cosmopolitan Civil
Societies: An Interdisciplinary Journal 9(3): 41-60.
Jin, Y., and Pang, A. 2010. Future Directions of Crisis Communication Research: Emotions in Crisis—The Next Frontier. Handbook of Crisis Communication, ed. W. T. Coombs and S. J. Holladay, 677-682. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Jones, M. O. 2019. The Gulf Information War Propaganda, Fake
News, and Fake Trends: The Weaponization of Twitter Bots in
the Gulf Crisis. International Journal of Communication 13:
1389-1415.
Karim, M., and Das, S. 2018. Sentiment Analysis on Textual Reviews. In IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering. Nanjing, China: IOP Publishing.
Khaldarova, I., and Pantti, M. 2016. Fake News: The Narrative
Battle over the Ukrainian Conflict. Journalism Practice 10(7):
891-901.
Klein, A. 2017. Fanaticism, Racism, and Rage Online: Corrupting the Digital Sphere. New York: Springer.
Kow, Y. M.; Kou, Y.; Semaan, B.; and Cheng, W. 2016. Mediating the Undercurrents: Using Social Media to Sustain a Social
Movement. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. San Jose: Association for
Computing Machinery.

Lara-Cabrera, R.; Pardo, A. G.; Benouaret, K.; Faci, N.;
Benslimane, D.; and Camacho, D. 2017. Measuring the Radicalisation Risk in Social Networks. IEEE Access 5: 10892-10900.
Lim, M. 2017. Freedom to Hate: Social Media, Algorithmic Enclaves, and the Rise of Tribal Nationalism in Indonesia. Critical
Asian Studies 49(3): 411-427.
Matamoros-Fernández, A. 2017. Platformed Racism: The Mediation and Circulation of an Australian Race-based Controversy on
Twitter, Facebook and YouTube. Information, Communication &
Society 20(6): 930-946.
Mirchandani, M. 2018. Digital Hatred, Real Violence: Majoritarian Radicalisation and Social Media in India. ORF Occasional
Paper 167: 1-30.
Oboler, Andre. 2016. The Normalisation of Islamophobia
Through Social Media: Facebook. In Islamophobia in Cyberspace: Hate Crimes Go Viral, ed. A. Imran, 41-61. Abingdon:
Routledge.
Papacharissi, Z., and de Fatima Oliveira, M. 2012. Affective
news and Networked Publics: The Rhythms of News Storytelling
on# Egypt. Journal of communication 62(2): 266-282.
Redlawsk, D. P.; Tolbert, C. J.; and McNeely, N. A. 2014. Symbolic Racism and Emotional Responses to the 2012 Presidential
Candidates. Political Research Quarterly 67(3): 680-694.
Rodríguez, A.; Argueta, C.; and Chen, Y. 2019. Automatic Detection of Hate Speech on Facebook Using Sentiment and Emotion
Analysis. In 2019 International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Information and Communication (ICAIIC). Japan: IEEE.
Salaita, S. 2006. Anti-Arab Racism in the USA: Where It Comes
from and What It Means for Politics Today. London: Pluto Press.
Shirky, C. 2011. The Political Power of Social Media: Technology, the Public Sphere, and Political Change. Foreign affairs 90
(1): 28-41.
Sweeny, K. 2008. Crisis Decision Theory: Decisions in the Face
of Negative Events. Psychological bulletin 134(1): 61-76.
Thompson, R. 2011. Radicalization and the Use of Social Media.
Journal of strategic security 4(4): 167-190.
Tulkens, S.; Hilte, L.; Lodewyckx, E.;Verhoeven, B.; and Daelemans, W. 2016. A Dictionary-based Approach to Racism Detection in Dutch Social Media. arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.08738.
Bonta, V.; Kumaresh, N.; and Janardhan, N. 2019. A Comprehensive Study on Lexicon Based Approaches for Sentiment Analysis.
Asian Journal of Computer Science and Technology 8(S2): 1-6.
Williamson, B. 1989. Sentiment and Social Change. The Sociological Review 37(1): 128-141.
Yamamoto, M.; Kushin, M. J.; and Dalisay, F. 2015. Social Media and Mobiles as Political Mobilization Forces for Young
Adults: Examining the Moderating Role of Online Political Expression in Political Participation. New Media & Society 17(6):
880-898.

