Understanding the Effects of Tennessee’s Open Covid-19
Testing Policy: Bounding Policy Effects with Nonrandomly
Missing Data∗†
arXiv:2005.09605v2 [econ.EM] 9 Jun 2020

Brantly Callaway‡

Tong Li§

May 27, 2020

Abstract
Increased testing for Covid-19 is seen as one of the most important steps to re-open the
economy. The current paper considers Tennessee’s “open-testing” policy where the state substantially increased testing while removing symptom requirements for individuals to be tested.
To understand the effect of the policy, we combine standard identifying assumptions with additional weak assumptions to deal with non-random testing that lead to bounds on policy effects of
interest. Our results suggest that Tennessee’s open-testing policy has reduced total cases (which
are not fully observed), confirmed cases, and trips to work among counties with a fast-growing
number of confirmed cases.

1

Introduction
Widespread testing for Covid-19 is seen as one of the requirements for re-opening the econ-

omy.1 For example, in California, “the ability to monitor and protect our communities through
testing, contact tracing, isolating, and supporting those who are positive or exposed” is the
first of six indicators for when the state would potentially modify its stay-at-home order.2 The
idea is that mass testing would include individuals with mild symptoms or even no symptoms.
Individuals that test positive could be isolated for some period of time and their contacts could
be traced, notified of their potential exposure, and potentially also be tested. In principle, this
extra testing would further result in detecting and mitigating localized outbreaks much earlier
than they would be otherwise.
∗

Li dedicates this paper to the memory of his late mother, Mrs. Qing Zheng, who passed away on April 21, 2020.
We thank Lesley Turner, John Weymark, Jun Zhao, Lily Zhao, and seminar participants at Vanderbilt University
for helpful comments.
‡
Department of Economics. University of Georgia. brantly.callaway@uga.edu
§
Department of Economics. Vanderbilt University. tong.li@vanderbilt.edu
1
https://www.nbcnews.com/science/science-news/test-trace-how-u-s-could-emerge-coronavirus-lockdowns-n1182626
2
https://www.gov.ca.gov/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/California-Roadmap-to-Modify-the-Stay-at-Home-Order.
pdf
†

1

In the current paper, we examine a policy implemented by Tennessee that expanded their
testing capacity and made testing available to anyone who wanted to take the test. This policy
was substantially different from neighboring states that all have had fewer tests per capita along
with substantial eligibility requirements for taking the test. The goal of the paper is to examine
whether or not Tennessee’s open-testing policy has affected the number of Covid-19 cases in the
state as well as other economic outcomes (in particular, we focus on number of trips to work).
Our identification strategy is to take counties in Tennessee and compare them to “similar”
counties in nearby states. In particular, we compare outcomes in Tennessee and Alabama among
counties that had similar populations, Covid-19 cases, and had conducted a similar number
of tests prior to Tennessee’s open-testing policy. Under standard assumptions, differences in
outcomes experienced by counties in Tennessee relative to outcomes in counties in Alabama
with similar characteristics can be attributed to the policy differences between the two states.
This would be a relatively straightforward exercise if testing were administered randomly
in each state; but that is not the case. In particular, individuals who are more likely to have
Covid-19 appear to be much more likely to take the test. For most states, including Alabama,
this is by construction: showing certain symptoms is a requirement to be able to be tested for
Covid-19. Even in Tennessee, where the policy allows any individual that would like to get a
test to take it for free, it still seems likely to be the case that there is some selection into taking
the test. In practice, this creates two challenges. First, it is not possible to directly compare
counties that had the same number of total Covid-19 cases before the open-testing policy was
implemented because the total number of Covid-19 cases is not observed. Second, and for the
same reason, it is challenging to evaluate the effect of the policy on the total number of Covid-19
cases.3
We propose several strategies for dealing with nonrandomly missing testing data (discussed
at length below). In particular, we make relatively weak assumptions on the fraction of untested
individuals that have had Covid-19 that lead to bounds on the policy effects of interest.
For observed outcomes such as confirmed cases and trips to work (which are relatively simpler
due to only suffering from the first issue mentioned above), our results indicate that the opentesting policy (i) decreased the number of confirmed cases, and (ii) decreased the amount of
travel to work in counties that experienced relatively large increases in their number of confirmed
cases over time. For the per capita number of total Covid-19 cases (which is the relatively harder
case due to suffering from both issues mentioned above), we obtain non-trivial bounds on the
effect of the policy suggesting that the policy has reduced the number of total cases in Tennessee
relative to what they would have been in the absence of the policy. The most important driver
of these results is that it simultaneously appears that the open-testing policy has increased the
number of tests while decreasing the number of confirmed cases – together, these form a strong
piece of evidence that the policy has reduced total cases even though total cases are unobserved
and it is hard to come up with reasonable assumptions that lead to point identification of
the effect of the policy on total cases. Taken together, these results suggest that Tennessee’s
3

To be clear on the terminology, we use the phrase total cases to refer to the total number of Covid-19 cases – this
is in general not observed. We use the phrase confirmed cases to refer to the number of positive tests for Covid-19.

2

open-testing policy has had a positive effect along several dimensions.
Our paper’s main contribution is two-fold. First, it has been a widely held view that more
testing is important to contain the outbreak and to reopen the economy.4 It is thus of profound importance to quantify the effects of adopting the open-testing policy. To the best of our
knowledge, our paper is the first one to evaluate the effects of an open Covid-19 testing policy
where we study the effect of the policy in Tennessee which is the first state to offer open-testing.
Second, we make a new methodological contribution in providing a method to bound the policy
effects with nonrandomly missing data, which is a serious concern in our case, and cannot be
dealt with employing the standard methods used in the treatment effects literature. Building
on Manski and Molinari (2020), who study bounding the Covid-19 infection rate under weak assumptions, we provide a novel method to bound the policy effects of the open-testing policy. Our
method can also be applied to other policy evaluation applications with nonrandomly missing
data. And, in particular, our methodology is potentially useful for studying the effects of other
policies related to Covid-19 (e.g., evaluating stay-at-home policies as in Friedson, McNichols,
Sabia, and Dave (2020) and Dave, Friedson, Matsuzawa, and Sabia (2020)).
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides more details about Tennessee’s opentesting policy. Section 3 discusses the data that we use to study the effects of the policy.
Section 4 considers our approach to bounding total Covid-19 cases and evaluating policy effects
in the presence of nonrandomly missing data. Section 5 provides our main results on analyzing
the effects of Tennessee’s open-testing policy. Section 6 concludes.

2

Tennessee’s Covid-19 Open-Testing Policy
On Wednesday, April 15, Tennessee’s Republican governor Bill Lee announced free testing

in the state for anyone who wanted a test.5 That Saturday, April 18, more than 6,500 Tennessee
residents were tested at 20 different testing locations across the state. Unlike almost all other
states at that time, obtaining a test did not require an individual to be showing symptoms or
to be in a high risk group. These tests were also available on the weekends of April 25 and
May 2. Over the course of those three weekends, over 23,000 individuals were tested at a total
of 67 different testing sites.6 Following those three weekends, the open-testing policy has been
somewhat modified. Tennessee has increased their emphasis on testing high-risk populations.
That being said, the requirements to be tested for Covid-19 in Tennessee appear to be minimal
even after the policy was modified.7
4

For example, in his tweet on May 14, 2020, U.S. Senator Lamar Alexander (R-Tenn) says that more testing is key
to ensuring people are safe as they go back to work and go back to school; https://twitter.com/SenAlexander/status/
1260957179210653697.
5
See https://www.tennessean.com/videos/news/2020/04/15/gov-lee-expands-covid-19-testing-residents-without-symptoms/
5141345002/ and https://www.tennessean.com/story/news/health/2020/04/18/tennessees-asymptomatic-coronavirus-test-sites-d
5159081002/.
6
See https://www.tn.gov/governor/news/2020/5/4/unified-command-group-s-total-expanded-testing-efforts-exceed-23-000.
html.
7
See
https://www.williamsonhomepage.com/brentwood/state-officials-alter-covid-19-testing-strategy/
article f6650f2e-9143-11ea-a65c-0748e5c7875b.html.

3

Figure 1: Per Capita Tests by State

Notes: Per capita tests for Tennessee and its six neighboring states over time. The vertical black line is set at April
17 which is approximately the start of Tennessee’s open-testing policy.
Sources: Covid Tracking Project (https://covidtracking.com/) and Census Bureau

Compared to its six neighboring states, Tennessee was already a high testing state when the
new policy was implemented (see Figure 1).8 Out of these seven states, Tennessee was roughly
tied with Mississippi for the most tests per capita when the open-testing policy was implemented.
Between April 17 and May 8, the number of test per capita increased in Tennessee by over 2
percentage points – more than any of its neighboring states. And by May 8, Tennessee had
conducted more tests per capita than any of its neighboring states (46% more than Alabama,
68% more than Arkansas, 66% more than Georgia, 96% more than Kentucky, 31% more than
Mississippi, and 109% more than North Carolina).
On the other hand, Tennessee was closer to the middle in terms of number of confirmed cases.
On April 17, Tennessee was essentially tied with Alabama for third out of seven in terms of per
capita confirmed cases (see Figure 2) behind Georgia and Mississippi. By May 8, Tennessee had
moved somewhat ahead of Alabama in terms of per capita number of confirmed cases but was
still behind both Georgia and Mississippi. It is also important to remember that the number
of confirmed cases depends on the number of tests especially in cases like Covid-19 where the
number of tests is relatively low and there may be a large number of asymptomatic cases or cases
with relatively mild symptoms. Thus, for example, the increase in confirmed cases in Tennessee
relative to Alabama could be explained by an increase in actual cases in Tennessee relative to
Alabama or just due to a mechanical increase in the number of confirmed cases arising from
more extensive testing.
8

One main reason for Tennessee’s large number of tests
states,
Tennessee
has
been
directly
paying
private
labs.
tennessees-secret-to-plentiful-coronavirus-testing-picking-up-the-tab/.

4

is

that,
See

unlike most other
https://wpln.org/post/

Figure 2: Per Capita Confirmed Cases by State

Notes: Per capita confirmed Covid-19 cases for Tennessee and its six neighboring states over time. The vertical black
line is set at April 17 which is approximately the start of Tennessee’s open-testing policy.
Sources: Covid Tracking Project (https://covidtracking.com/) and Census Bureau

3

Data
Our analysis uses two main datasets. The first dataset is state-level and includes data

from Tennessee and each of its six bordering states: Alabama, Arkansas, Georgia, Kentucky,
Mississippi, and North Carolina. The state level dataset contains information on the total
number of Covid-19 cases by state over time and total number of tests by state over time. This
data comes from the Covid Tracking Project (https://covidtracking.com/). This state level data
is also merged with state population data from the Census Bureau.
The second dataset consists of county-level data from Tennessee and Alabama. The Covid
Tracking Project provides confirmed case counts by county over time. But, many of our main
results require county-level testing data. Tennessee provides historical county-level data at its
Department of Health website (https://www.tn.gov/content/tn/health/cedep/ncov/data.html).
Of its bordering states, the only state that currently provides county-level testing data is Alabama, but it only provides current (not historical) county-level testing data (https://dph1.
adph.state.al.us/covid-19/). In order to recover historical county-level testing data, we were
able to use the Internet Archive’s Wayback Machine (web.archive.org). The earliest available
county-level data for Alabama using this approach is from April 17. This is after Tennessee’s
open-testing policy was announced but before individuals in Tennessee could actually get a test
under the policy; there is also typically around a 72 hour delay in the test results being available.
Together these suggest that we can treat April 17 as being “pre-treatment” for both Alabama
and Tennessee. We use data from May 8 for the post-treatment period. This is the Friday
following the last weekend when open-testing was available in Tennessee. We use this day as it
should allow for enough time to pass that almost all tests from the previous weekend show up

5

Figure 3: Tests and Confirmed Cases by TN County

(a) Per Capita Tests by County

(b) Per Capita Confirmed Cases by County
Notes: Per capita tests and confirmed cases for all counties in Tennessee except Trousdale and Bledsoe. The highlighted
counties are the most populated counties in Tennessee. Davidson County includes Nashville. Williamson County is
the largest suburban county of Nashville. Shelby County includes Memphis. Knox County includes Knoxville. The
vertical black line is set at April 17 which is approximately the start of Tennessee’s open-testing policy.
Sources:
Tennessee Department of Health Data (https://www.tn.gov/health/cedep/ncov/data/
downloadable-datasets.html) and Census Bureau

in the reported statistics. Figure 3 provides county-level data on per capita tests and per capita
confirmed cases for Tennessee.
We merge the county-level testing and confirmed cases data with (i) data from the Census
Bureau on county-level population, and (ii) data from Google’s Covid-19 Community Mobility
Reports (https://www.google.com/covid19/mobility/). These are aggregated cell phone data
that Google has published to help researchers studying Covid-19. We focus primarily on countylevel trips to work and how this variable evolves over time. It is reported as a percentage change
relative to pre-Covid trips to work.
Finally, it is worth mentioning that Trousdale County and Bledsoe County experienced large
Covid-19 outbreaks in prisons.9 In some of our descriptive analysis, we keep these counties, but
9

See https://www.tennessean.com/story/news/politics/2020/05/01/tennessee-testing-all-inmates-prison-staff-after-multiple-ou
3067388001/ and https://www.tennessean.com/story/news/local/2020/04/23/coronavirus-bledsoe-county-prison-inmates/

6

in our main results, we drop these counties.

4

Methodology
This section discusses our approach to (i) bounding the rate of total Covid-19 cases across

counties, (ii) evaluating the effect of Tennessee’s open-testing policy on other outcomes (in
particular, county-level confirmed cases and county-level number of trips to work), and (iii)
evaluating the effect of Tennessee’s open-testing policy on the total number of Covid-19 cases.
We use the following notation:
• Cilt – a binary variable for whether or not individual i in county l has had Covid-19 by
time period t.
• Rilt – a binary variable for whether or not individual i in county l has tested positive for
Covid-19 by time period t
• Tilt – a binary variable for whether or not individual i in county l has taken a test for
Covid-19 by time period t

4.1

Bounding Rates of Total Covid-19 Cases

Our first goal is descriptive: to see what fraction of the population has had Covid-19 by time
period t in a particular county l (note that the same arguments would apply for another fixed
location such as a state as well). That is, our interest centers on P (Cilt = 1). To be clear about
the notation here, this is the fraction of the population in county l at time period t that has had
Covid-19. That is, we are averaging over all individuals in a particular county l at time period
t. Identifying the fraction of individuals that have ever had Covid-19 is challenging because (i)
not all individuals have been tested and (ii) for individuals that have been tested for Covid19, testing has not been randomly assigned. The goal of this section is to develop non-trivial
bounds on the fraction of total Covid-19 cases in a particular location at a particular time under
plausible identifying assumptions. In particular, following Manski and Molinari (2020),10 notice
that
P (Cilt = 1) = P (Cilt = 1|Tilt = 1)P (Tilt = 1) + P (Cilt = 1|Tilt = 0)P (Tilt = 0)

(1)

which follows immediately by the law of total probability. Next, consider each of these terms
individually:
• P (Cilt = 1|Tilt = 1). This is the fraction of the population in county l at time period t
that has had Covid-19 conditional on being tested. We discuss this term in more detail
below.
3003595001/.
10
Other recent work on estimating the number of cases in the presence of nonrandomly missing data includes
Hortaçsu, Liu, and Schwieg (2020) though their approach is substantially different from the approach taken in this
section.

7

• P (Tilt = 1) is the (observed) fraction of the population in county l at time period t who
have been tested for Covid-19.
• P (Tilt = 0) is the (observed) fraction of the population in county l at time period t who
have not been tested for Covid-19.
• P (Cilt = 1|Tilt = 0) is the (unobserved) fraction of the population that have had Covid-19
but have not been tested in county l by time period t. This term is the hardest to identify,
and we discuss plausible assumptions that lead to bounds on this term below.
Next, consider P (Cilt = 1|Tilt = 1). It can be written as
P (Cilt = 1|Tilt = 1) = P (Cilt = 1|Tilt = 1, Rilt = 1)P (Rilt = 1|Tilt = 1)
+ P (Cilt = 1, |Tilt = 1, Rilt = 0)P (Rilt = 0|Tilt = 1)
= P (Rilt = 1|Tilt = 1) + P (Rilt = 0|Tilt = 1, Cilt = 1)P (Cilt = 1|Tilt = 1)
where the first equality holds by the law of total probability and the second equality holds
because (i) Rilt = 1 =⇒ Tilt = 1 (i.e., in order to test positive, an individual has to be
tested), (ii) we suppose that the false positive rate of the test is equal to 0 which implies
that P (Cilt = 1|Rit = 1) = 1,11 and (iii) repeated application of the definition of conditional
probability for the second term. Then, rearranging implies that
P (Cilt = 1|Tilt = 1) =

P (Rilt = 1|Tilt = 1)
1 − P (Rilt = 0|Tilt=1 = 1, Cilt = 1)

(2)

where
• P (Rilt = 1|Tilt = 1) is the (observed) fraction of tests that have come back positive in
county l at time period t.
• P (Rilt = 0|Tilt = 1, Cilt = 1) is the false negative rate of the test. This is a property of the
test, and we set the false negative rate to be equal to 0.25.12
Equation (2) says that the probability of having Covid-19 conditional on being tested is increasing in the fraction of positive tests and the false negative rate of the test. It also implies that
every term in Equation (1) is identified except P (Cilt = 1|Tilt = 0). Without employing some
11

The false positive rate is given by P (Cilt
= 0|Rilt
= 1), and there is evidence that
the false positive rates are extremely low; see https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2020/03/16/
coronavirus-what-expect-when-you-get-tested-covid-19/5061120002/.
12
Manski and Molinari (2020) put bounds on a closely related term called the Negative Predictive Value of the test;
we could similarly put bounds on the false negative rate of the test. We do not do this in the current paper in order to
mainly focus on the bounds arising from non-random testing. In the results presented below, in general, the bounds
are not very sensitive to different reasonable values of the false negative rate of the test. More specifically, a higher
false negative rate increases both the lower bound and the upper bound, but it increases the upper bound relatively
more under Assumption 1 (see Equation (4) below); thus bounds tend to be somewhat wider (although the actual
difference is small) under larger values of the false negative rate of the test.

8

additional assumption on this term, the bounds on the rate of total cases are given by

1 − P (Rilt

P (Rilt = 1)
P (Rilt = 1)
≤ P (Cilt = 1) ≤
+ P (Tilt = 0)
= 0|Tilt=1 = 1, Cilt = 1)
1 − P (Rilt = 0|Tilt=1 = 1, Cilt = 1)
(3)

In our case, these sorts of bounds would be extremely wide. For example, for the whole
state of Tennessee, P (Rilt = 1) is about 0.2% and P (Tilt = 0) is about 97% (i.e., about 3% of
Tennessee’s population has been tested and about 0.2% have had a positive test). If the only
restriction on P (Cilt = 1|Tilt = 0) is that it is bounded between 0 and 1, then this will lead to
extremely wide bounds on Covid-19 cases (essentially uninformative). Instead (and continuing
to follow Manski and Molinari (2020)), we make the following assumption.
Assumption 1 (Covid-19 Bound for Untested Individuals).
P (Cilt = 1|Tilt = 0) ≤ P (Cilt = 1|Tilt = 1)
Assumption 1 says that the fraction of individuals who have had Covid-19 (in a particular
county) is lower among the group of individuals who have not been tested than among those
who have been tested. This is a fairly weak assumption. This assumption is likely to hold
for two reasons. First, tests have been predominantly given to individuals expressing Covid-19
symptoms. Second, even in Tennessee where testing has been available to anyone who wants
to take a test, (i) individuals expressing symptoms are still among those most likely to take
the test and (ii) it seems likely that there is some self-selection into taking the test among
individuals who think they may have Covid-19 even if they do not have the right combination
of symptoms to otherwise warrant a test. It is also helpful to think about the limiting cases of
the assumption. P (Cilt = 1|Tilt = 0) = 0 in the case when no untested individuals have had
Covid-19. P (Cilt |Tilt = 0) = P (Cilt = 1|Tilt = 1) if the probability of having had Covid-19 is
the same for individuals who have not been tested as for individuals who have been tested. This
condition would hold if testing were randomly assigned. In practice, either of these limiting
conditions would be strong enough to point identify P (Cilt = 1); however, based on the above
discussion, neither of these limiting conditions seems likely to hold. Instead, Assumption 1
imposes the much weaker condition that the probability of having had Covid-19 for the group
of individuals who have not been tested falls in between these two limiting cases.
Assumption 1 does not affect the lower bound on the total number of cases, but it is potentially very useful in lowering the upper bound on the number of Covid-19 cases in a particular
location. In particular, notice that under Assumption 1,
P (Cilt = 1) ≤ P (Cilt = 1|Tilt = 1)

(4)

This can lead to a much tighter bound especially when P (Cilt = 1|Tilt = 1) is substantially less
than one. For example, for the whole state of Tennessee, P (Cilt = 1|Tilt = 1) is roughly equal
to 8%. This immediately leads to a much tighter bound on the total number of cases relative
to not putting any restrictions on P (Cilt = 1|Tilt = 0).

9

4.2

Policy Evaluation with Nonrandomly Missing Data

The previous section discussed how to bound the total number of Covid-19 cases in a particular location. The second goal of the paper is to go beyond these descriptive bounds and
evaluate how Tennessee’s open-testing policy has affected the (unobserved) total number of
Covid-19 cases as well as other outcomes such as confirmed cases and trips to work.
The notation for this section is somewhat different from the previous section. In particular,
define Clt = P (Cilt = 1), Rlt = P (Rilt = 1), Tlt = P (Tilt = 1). These are defined at the countylevel and correspond to the fraction of the population in the county that has had Covid-19,
that have tested positive for Covid-19, and that have been tested for Covid-19, respectively.13
We also suppose that we have access to county-level covariates Xl that do not vary over time;
the main covariate that we use is county population. Some of the results below consider policy
effects on other outcomes; in that case we denote the county-level outcome in time period t by
Ylt .
To think about the effect of Tennessee’s open-testing policy, we define potential outcomes
for county l in time period t. In particular, let Clt (1), Tlt (1), Rlt (1), and Ylt (1) denote the per
capita number of total Covid-19 cases, the per capita number of tests, the per capita number
of positive tests, as well as other county-level outcomes that would occur in county l in time
period t if the open-testing policy were in place. Similarly, if the policy is not in place for county
l in time period t, we denote the potential outcomes that would occur in this case by: Clt (0),
Tlt (0), Rlt (0), and Ylt (0). To conserve on notation, define Zlt (d) = (Ylt (d), Rlt (d), Tlt (d), Xl0 )0
for d ∈ {0, 1}. This collects the covariates and all potential outcomes except for Clt (d). Also,
define Zlt∗ (d) = (Zlt (d)0 , Clt (d))0 .
Next, let Dl be a binary variable indicating treatment participation. For counties that
participate in the open-testing policy (i.e., counties in Tennessee), Dl = 1; otherwise, Dl = 0.
Also suppose that there are two time periods: t∗ and t∗ −1,14 and that the policy is implemented
between time periods t∗ and t∗ − 1. In this setup, we observe
Zlt∗ = Dl Zlt∗ (1) + (1 − Dl )Zlt∗ (0)

and Zlt∗ −1 = Zlt∗ −1 (0)

In other words, in post-treatment time periods we observe “treated” potential outcomes for
counties that participate in the treatment (i.e., counties in Tennessee) and observe “untreated”
potential outcomes for counties that do not participate in the treatment (i.e., counties in Alabama). In pre-treatment time periods, we observe untreated potential outcomes for all counties
– these are the outcomes under the baseline policy of restricting testing to individuals meeting
the symptom requirements.

Evaluating the Effect of Open-Testing on Observed Outcomes
To start with, consider identifying the effect of Tennessee’s open-testing policy on some
observed outcome (e.g., the number of confirmed Covid-19 cases or the number of trips to work)
13
14

Also, notice that we do not need to estimate these quantities; rather each of them is exactly observed.
Our results extend immediately to the case where there are more available time periods.

10

in county l at time period t∗ . We start with this case because it is simpler because Ylt , the
outcome, is fully observed while Clt , the per capita number of total cases in county l, is not.
Our interest in this section is in identifying
AT TY (Zlt∗ −1 ) = E[Ylt∗ (1) − Ylt∗ (0)|Zlt∗ −1 , Dl = 1]

and AT TY = E[Ylt∗ (1) − Ylt∗ (0)|Dl = 1]

AT TY (Zlt∗ −1 ) is the average effect of the open-testing policy on the outcome for counties in
Tennessee with pre-treatment characteristics Zlt∗ −1 . AT TY is the overall average effect of the
open-testing policy on the outcome across all counties in Tennessee.
We make the following assumption
Assumption 2 (Unconfoundedness).
E[Ylt∗ (0)|Zlt∗ ∗ −1 (0), Dl = 1] = E[Ylt∗ (0)|Zlt∗ ∗ −1 (0), Dl = 0]
Assumption 2 is a standard and widely used assumption to identify the affect of some economic policy (see, for example, Imbens and Wooldridge (2009)). It says that, if the policy had
not been enacted, on average outcomes in counties in Tennessee would have been the same
as outcomes in counties in Alabama that had the same pre-treatment characteristics; i.e., the
same outcomes in the previous period, the same per capita number of confirmed cases, the same
number of per capita tests, the same population, as well as the same per capita number of total
cases.
One cannot immediately use Assumption 2 because Zlt∗ ∗ −1 (0) includes Clt∗ −1 (0) – the per
capita number of total Covid-19 cases in a particular county – which is unobserved. But, in
practice, most outcomes in period t∗ are likely to depend heavily on how widespread Covid-19
has been – even if it has gone largely undetected. Therefore, it seems quite important to control
for the (unobserved) number of cases. To address this issue, we make the following assumption
Assumption 3 (Conditional Independence of Pre-Policy Total Covid-19 Cases).
Clt∗ −1 (0) ⊥
⊥ Dl |Zlt∗ −1 (0)
Assumption 3 says that, in the pre-treatment period, the distribution of the per capita
number of total Covid-19 cases was the same for counties in Tennessee and Alabama that
had the same pre-policy characteristics. To be clear here, Assumption 3 does not imply that
the unobserved number of total cases is exactly the same across counties in Tennessee and
Alabama. Rather, it rules out things like systematic differences in unobserved total cases in the
pre-treatment period for counties in Tennessee and Alabama with similar populations and that
had run a similar number of tests and had confirmed a similar number of cases.15 Under these
15

Assumption 3 is likely to be much more plausible when the observed conditioning variables include county-level
number of tests. As noted above, county-level testing data is not widely available, and its availability for Alabama is a
main reason that we focus on comparisons between counties in Tennessee and Alabama that have similar characteristics
(including having run a similar number of tests which is not available at the county-level for any of the other states
surrounding Tennessee).

11

assumptions, we have the following result
Proposition 1. Under Assumptions 2 and 3, AT TY (Zlt∗ −1 ) and AT TY are identified and given
by
AT TY (Zlt∗ −1 ) = E[Ylt∗ |Zlt∗ −1 , Dl = 1] − E[Ylt∗ |Zlt∗ −1 , Dl = 0]
and
AT TY = E[AT TY (Zlt∗ −1 )|Dl = 1]
The proof of Proposition 1 is in Appendix A. The result in Proposition 1 says that the average
effect of Tennessee’s open-testing policy on the outcome can be obtained by the difference in
average outcomes between counties in Tennessee and counties in Alabama that had the same
outcomes, per capita number of confirmed cases, per capita number of tests, and population –
all before Tennessee implemented its open-testing policy.

Evaluating the Effect of Open-Testing on Total Covid-19 Cases
Next, we consider trying to identify the effect of Tennessee’s open-testing policy on the per
capita number of total Covid-19 cases. This is distinctly more challenging than the previous
case because the total number of cases is not observed. To start with, we continue to make
Assumption 3, and we modify Assumption 2 to hold for total Covid-19 cases:
Assumption 4 (Covid Unconfoundedness).
E[Clt∗ (0)|Zlt∗ ∗ −1 (0), Dl = 1] = E[Clt∗ (0)|Zlt∗ ∗ −1 (0), Dl = 0]
Assumption 4 is analogous to Assumption 2 but for total Covid-19 cases. It says that, in
the absence of the policy intervention, on average, the per capita number of total Covid-19
cases would have been the same for counties in Tennessee and Alabama that had the same
pre-treatment characteristics (including the same number of unobserved total Covid-19 cases).
Similarly to the previous section, we focus on identifying
AT TC (Zlt∗ −1 ) = E[Clt∗ (1) − Clt∗ (0)|Zlt∗ −1 , Dl = 1]

and AT TC = E[Clt∗ (1) − Clt∗ (0)|Dl = 1]
(5)

AT TC (Zlt∗ −1 ) is the average effect of the policy on the per capita number of total Covid-19
cases for counties in Tennessee with pre-treatment characteristics Zlt∗ −1 . AT TC is the overall
average effect of the policy on the per capita number of total Covid-19 cases in Tennessee. In
addition, all of the results in the previous section go through suggesting that
AT TC (Zlt∗ −1 ) = E[Clt∗ |Zlt∗ −1 , Dl = 1] − E[Clt∗ |Zlt∗ −1 , Dl = 0]
= P (Cilt∗ = 1|Zlt∗ −1 , Dl = 1) − P (Cilt∗ = 1|Zlt∗ −1 , Dl = 0)

12

(6)

and
h
i
AT TC = E[Clt∗ |Dl = 1] − E E[Clt∗ |Zlt∗ −1 , Dl = 0]|Dl = 1
The problem here is that Clt∗ is not observed. Instead, we only have the bounds given in
Equation (4). The next proposition provides bounds on the policy effects on the total number
of Covid-19 cases under the assumptions that we have made so far. It essentially holds by using
the same bounds as in the previous section, invoking Assumptions 3 and 4, and then taking
differences across counties in Tennessee and Alabama that have the same characteristics. Before
stating this result, we define two more terms to conserve on notation below. First, for d ∈ {0, 1},
define
γd (Zlt∗ −1 ) := P (Cilt∗ = 1, Tilt∗ = 1|Zlt∗ −1 , Dl = d)
This corresponds to the first term in Equation (1) (now conditional on Zlt∗ −1 and Dl = d) and
is point identified. Second, for d ∈ {0, 1}, define
τd (Zlt∗ −1 ) := P (Tilt∗ = 1|Zlt∗ −1 , Dl = d)
which is also an observed quantity.
Proposition 2. Under Assumptions 1, 3 and 4,
B,U
CltB,L
∗ (Zlt∗ −1 ) ≤ AT TC (Zlt∗ −1 ) ≤ Clt∗ (Zlt∗ −1 )

where
1 − τ0 (Zlt∗ −1 )
τ0 (Zlt∗ −1 )
1 − τ1 (Zlt∗ −1 )
CltB,U
∗ (Zlt∗ −1 ) := γ1 (Zlt∗ −1 ) − γ0 (Zlt∗ −1 ) + γ1 (Zlt∗ −1 )
τ1 (Zlt∗ −1 )
CltB,L
∗ (Zlt∗ −1 ) := γ1 (Zlt∗ −1 ) − γ0 (Zlt∗ −1 ) − γ0 (Zlt∗ −1 )

and
h
i
h
i
B,U
E CltB,L
∗ (Zlt∗ −1 )|Dl = 1 ≤ AT TC ≤ E Clt∗ (Zlt∗ −1 )|Dl = 1
The proof of Proposition 2 is provided in Appendix A. These sort of bounds arise under the
combination of (i) standard identifying assumptions for policy effects and (ii) Assumption 1 –
that the probability of having had Covid-19 is lower among untested individuals than among
tested individuals. The term in common for each of the bounds, γ1 (Zlt∗ −1 ) − γ0 (Zlt∗ −1 ), comes
from (i) differences in the number of confirmed cases per test between counties in Tennessee and
Alabama with similar characteristics and (ii) differences in the testing rate between counties in
Tennessee and Alabama with similar characteristics. The extra term for the lower bound comes
from setting the fraction of untested individuals in counties in Tennessee who have had Covid-19
to be equal to zero while setting the fraction of untested individuals in counties in Alabama

13

who have had Covid-19 to be equal to the fraction who have had Covid-19 conditional on being
testing (this comes from the bound in Assumption 1). The upper bound comes from doing the
opposite: setting the fraction of untested individuals who have had Covid-19 to be equal to zero
for counties in Alabama and setting the fraction of untested individuals who have had Covid-19
to be as large as possible (under Assumption 1) for counties in Tennessee.16 The weights on
these terms (the terms involving τ1 and τ0 ) also tend to be very large because the fraction of
untested individuals is much larger than the fraction of tested individuals. This implies that
τd (Zlt∗ −1 )  1 − τd (Zlt∗ −1 ) for d ∈ {0, 1}.
The drawback of these bounds is that they are unlikely to be informative about the sign of
the policy effect. To see this, notice that the terms involving γd (Zlt∗ −1 ) are often quite small.
On the other hand, the extra terms can be orders of magnitude larger. In our case, using these
bounds, the bounds cover 0 for all counties and are not very informative. In order to deliver
tighter bounds, we make some additional assumptions.
Assumption 5 (Joint Unconfoundedness).
P (Cilt∗ (0) = 1, Tilt∗ (0) = 0|Zlt∗ ∗ −1 (0), Dl = 1) = P (Cilt∗ (0) = 1, Tilt∗ (0) = 0|Zlt∗ ∗ −1 (0), Dl = 0)
Assumption 6 (Bound on Total Cases and Untested Individuals).
P (Cilt∗ (1) = 1, Tilt∗ (1) = 0, |Zlt∗ −1 (0), Dl = 1) ≤ P (Cilt∗ (0) = 1, Tilt∗ (0) = 0|Zlt∗ −1 (0), Dl = 1)
Assumption 5 says that, in the absence of the policy, the joint probability that a person has
Covid-19 and that they were not tested for Covid-19 is the same for individuals located in counties with similar pre-policy characteristics regardless of whether or not the county experiences
the policy. This is essentially an unconfoundedness assumption (similar to, e.g., Assumption 4),
but it strengthens that assumption to hold jointly for both the fraction of the population that
have had Covid-19 and the fraction that have not been tested, both in the absence of the policy.
Assumption 6 says that, for individuals in counties that experience the policy, the joint
probability of having Covid-19 and not being tested under the policy is lower than the joint
probability of having Covid-19 and not being tested in the absence of the policy. We provide a set
of more primitive conditions and more detailed discussion of this assumption in Appendix B.1.
At a high level, though, this assumption is plausible under the conditions that (i) the opentesting policy does not make tests less available than they otherwise would have been without
the policy, (ii) the open-testing policy does not increase the number of Covid-19 cases among
the untested relative to what they would have been without the policy, (iii) there is not negative
selection into taking the test among those who would be tested under the policy but would not
be tested in the absence of the policy.
Next, we discuss tighter bounds on the effect of the open-testing policy under these additional
assumptions.
16

In practice, the extreme cases that lead to the lower bound and upper bound seem unlikely to hold. This suggests
that these bounds are likely to be quite conservative.

14

Proposition 3. Under Assumptions 1 and 3 to 6,
C,U
CltC,L
∗ (Zlt∗ −1 ) ≤ AT TC (Zlt∗ −1 ) ≤ Clt∗ (Zlt∗ −1 )

where
B,L
CltC,L
∗ (Zlt∗ −1 ) := Clt∗ (Zlt∗ −1 )

CltC,U
∗ (Zlt∗ −1 ) := γ1 (Zlt∗ −1 ) − γ0 (Zlt∗ −1 )
and
h
i
h
i
C,U
E CltC,L
∗ (Zlt∗ −1 )|Dl = 1 ≤ AT TC ≤ E Clt∗ (Zlt∗ −1 )|Dl = 1
The proof of Proposition 3 is provided in Appendix A. Notice that the lower bound is the
same as it was in the previous case, but that the upper bound can be substantially tighter.
In particular, the upper bound does not contain the same extra term as in Proposition 2; as
discussed earlier, this term is the “dominant” term in the upper bound, and it is removed under
the additional conditions in Assumptions 5 and 6.
Moreover, recall that γ1 (Zlt∗−1 ) − γ0 (Zlt∗ −1 ) comes from the difference between confirmed
cases in counties in Tennessee relative to counties in Alabama with similar characteristics.17 The
number of confirmed cases depends on two things. First, it depends positively on differences in
the fraction of positive cases per test among counties in Tennessee relative to counties in Alabama
with similar characteristics; this term will tend to be negative if the policy is expanding testing
availability to individuals who are less likely to have Covid-19. Second, it depends positively on
differences in the fraction of individuals who take the test among counties in Tennessee relative
to counties in Alabama with similar characteristics. This difference will tend to be positive if
the policy is increasing the number of tests. Although it is hard to reason whether the number
of confirmed cases will go up in response to the policy, our estimates suggest that this term
is somewhat negative; i.e., we find that the number of confirmed cases appears to decrease in
response to the policy.
Before concluding this section, it is worth mentioning that the upper bound in Proposition 3
is still likely to be quite conservative and discussing why this is the case. Omitting covariates
below in order to simplify the expressions, notice that
P (Cilt∗ (1)|Dl = 1) − P (Cilt∗ (0)|Dl = 1)
= P (Cilt∗ (1), Tilt∗ (1) = 1|Dl = 1) − P (Cilt∗ (0) = 1, Tilt∗ (0) = 1|Dl = 1)
+ P (Cilt∗ (1), Tilt∗ (1) = 0|Dl = 1) − P (Cilt∗ (0) = 1, Tilt∗ (0) = 0|Dl = 1)

(A)
(B)

which holds immediately by rewriting the marginal probabilities in terms of joint probabilities
and rearranging. Term (A) is equal to γ1 −γ0 (the upper bound in Proposition 3) and is what we
This difference is also scaled by (1 − false negative rate of the test)−1 , but the scaling does not matter for the sign
of the upper bound.
17

15

just discussed. Next, consider Term (B). This term is, in general, not point identified because it
depends on cases among untested individuals. Assumption 6 says that this term is non-positive,
and the upper bound comes from setting this term equal to 0. In practice, though, it seems
quite likely that this term would be negative (implying that our upper bound is conservative).
To see this, notice that it can be written as


P (C
|

ilt∗

(1) = 1|T

ilt∗

(1) = 0, Dl = 1) − P (C
{z

ilt∗

(0) = 1|T

ilt∗

Term (B.1)



(0) = 0, Dl = 1) P (Tilt∗ (1) = 0|Dl = 1)
}

(7)


+P (Cilt∗ (0) = 1|Tilt∗ (0) = 0, Dl = 1) P (Tilt∗ (1) = 0|Dl = 1) − P (Tilt∗ (0) = 0|Dl = 1)
{z
}
|
Term (B.2)

First, it is likely that Term (B.1) ≤ 0. Term (B.1) holds fixed the group of individuals in a
particular county that are untested (here, it is the group that would be untested under the opentesting policy), and compares the probability of untested individuals having Covid-19 under the
open-testing policy relative to the absence of the policy. The condition will hold as long as long
as the open-testing policy does not increase the probability of having Covid-19 for this group.
The case that Term (B.2) is negative is even stronger. It will be negative if testing increases
under the open-testing policy which seems very likely to be the case.
The above discussion suggests that the bounds that we report on the effect of Tennessee’s
open testing policy on the total number of cases are likely to be conservative. Open-testing may
lead to a fewer number of actual cases, but (holding the number of actual cases fixed) increased
testing mechanically leads to a larger number of confirmed cases. If the number of confirmed
cases is decreasing at the same time as the number of tests are increasing (which is what we
find in the application), this is therefore a strong piece of evidence that Tennessee’s policy is
decreasing the total number of cases – even if we are not able to provide plausible assumptions
that lead to point identification.

4.3

Estimation and Inference

The identification results above are constructive and suggest plug-in estimators of each parameter of interest. There are a number of possibilities here (e.g., regressions or weighting
estimators), but we found it natural to use a matching estimator where, for each county in
Tennessee, we found a “match” in Alabama based on pre-policy county characteristics, Zlt∗ −1 .
Overall, average effects can be calculated by taking the average outcome experienced by counties
in Tennessee and subtracting the overall average outcome experienced by “matched” counties
in Alabama.
In practice to construct the matched dataset, we match on per capita tests and per capita
confirmed cases on April 17 (the pre-treatment date when we observe tests by county in Alabama). We also match on county population. And, finally, we match on pre-treatment declines
in county-level trips to work from pre-Covid baseline.
To actually construct the matches, for county l in Tennessee, we construct its match by

16

choosing the county in Alabama that minimizes the squared standardized Euclidean distance
d(Zlt∗ −1 , Zjt∗ −1 ) = (Zlt∗ −1 − Zjt∗ −1 )0 S −1 (Zlt∗ −1 − Zjt∗ −1 )
where j indexes counties in Alabama and S is a diagonal matrix containing the diagonal elements
of the variance matrix of Zjt−1 . Finally, we drop all counties that do not have a close match.
This results in a matched dataset that includes 77 (out of 95 total) counties in Tennessee.18
Another issue is that, in practice, it is not immediately clear how to conduct inference in
our case. We essentially have no sampling uncertainty because we observe all the exact number
of confirmed cases and tests in each county for all counties in Tennessee and Alabama. In light
of this, to conduct inference, we focus on design-based uncertainty (see, for example, Imbens
and Rubin (2015) and Abadie, Athey, Imbens, and Wooldridge (2020)). For some parameter
of interest, we approximate its distribution under the sharp null hypothesis of no county-level
effect of the policy by repeatedly randomly assigning a variable indicating participation in the
policy among counties in Tennessee and their match in Alabama. Then, we construct a p-value
by calculating the fraction of times that the original estimated parameter of interest is larger
in absolute value than the estimated parameters that arise from repeatedly randomly assigning
participating in the policy. This is similar to the sorts of randomization inference procedures used
in the difference-in-differences, synthetic control, and matching literatures (e.g., Bertrand, Duflo,
and Mullainathan (2004),19 Abadie, Diamond, and Hainmueller (2010) and Ferman (2019)).

5

Results

Challenges to Identification
Before presenting our main results, we briefly discuss the timing of other policy decisions
made by Tennessee and Alabama. We list the timing of implementing major policies by Tennessee and Alabama in Table 1. The timing of other policies is important in this context because
(i) states have been implementing a number of policies in response to the Covid-19 pandemic
and (ii) if the policies themselves or the timing of implementing these policies differs substantially across Tennessee and Alabama, then our results would mix together the effects of the
open-testing policy as well other policy differences between Tennessee and Alabama.
Table 1 shows that the timing of major other policies has been very similar for Tennessee and
Alabama. To give some examples, Alabama closed public schools on March 19 and Tennessee
closed them on March 20. Tennessee had a stay-at-home order from April 2 to April 29; Alabama
had a stay-at-home order from April 4 to April 30. These close similarities in terms of other
policies across states provides one piece of evidence in favor of interpreting our results below as
being due to the open-testing policy.
18

Our matched dataset does not include Davidson County (which contains Nashville) or Shelby County (which
contains Memphis). These are notable exclusions from our dataset, but they occur because it is relatively harder to
find a reasonable match for large urban counties relative to less populated and rural counties.
19
Randomization inference is discussed in more detail in the working paper version (Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan (2002)).

17

Table 1: Timing of Other Policies for Tennessee and Alabama
Policy

TN Start

TN End

AL Start

AL End

Schools Closed

March 20

-

March 19

-

Gathering Restrictions

March 23

-

March 19

-

Stay-at-Home Order

April 2

April 29

April 4

April 30

Non-essential Businesses Closed

April 1

April 27

March 28

April 30

a

Sources: Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IMHE).
https://covid19.healthdata.org/united-states-of-america/tennessee and
https://covid19.healthdata.org/united-states-of-america/alabama

Descriptive Bounds on the Per Capita Number of Total Cases across Counties
Next, we compute bounds on the per capita number of total Covid-19 cases across counties
and separately for Tennessee and Alabama. These results are available in Figure 4 for May 8
and in Figure 7 in Appendix C for April 17. For both states, the bounds are somewhat narrower
by May 8 than they were on April 17 – this should not be surprising as the number of tests
had increased substantially in both states over time. Focusing on the bounds on May 8, it is
immediately clear that the bounds on the per capita number of total cases tend to be noticeably
tighter in Tennessee counties than in Alabama counties. The mean width of the bounds is 0.06
in Tennessee and 0.13 in Alabama.
It is also worth discussing the bounds in some particular cases. The two counties with the
most informative bounds are Trousdale County and Bledsoe County, but these are both rural
counties that have experienced large Covid-19 outbreaks in prisons and that have had extensive
testing in those prisons. Besides those two counties, the county with the next highest upper
bound on total Covid-19 cases is Davidson at 18%. Davidson County is home of Nashville, the
capital and largest city in Tennessee. It is also interesting to consider why the upper bound
for Davidson County is high. Recall that the upper bound mainly depends on the number of
confirmed cases per test (will tend to be high when this is high). Outside of Trousdale and
Bledsoe Counties, Davidson County has the highest number of confirmed cases per test (13%)
which leads to the large upper bound. Out of the top 10 counties in terms of the upper bound
on total Covid-19 cases (excluding Trousdale and Bledsoe), 7 out of 10 are in Davidson County
and surrounding suburban counties or Shelby County (Memphis) and surrounding suburban
counties. The other three are Perry County, Bedford County, and Grundy County which are all
rural.
The lower bound on the rate of total Covid-19 cases is uniformly quite small as it is primarily
driven by the number of confirmed cases. To give an example, Davidson County has the 4th
highest lower bound on total Covid-19 rates, and it is only 0.6%.

Main Results: Policy Effects of Tennessee’s Open-Testing Policy
Next, we consider the effect of Tennessee’s open-testing policy on several different outcomes.
First, we consider the effect of the policy on the number of tests and on the number of confirmed

18

Figure 4: Bounds on Per Capita Number of Total Covid-19 Cases by County

(a) Tennessee

(b) Alabama

Notes: Bounds on the total (unobserved) per capita Covid-19 cases by county in Tennessee and Alabama using the
bounds described in the text. These bounds are for May 8, 2020.

cases. These results are available in Panels (a) and (b) of Figure 5. The results in that figure
come from comparing the actual number of tests or confirmed cases for particular counties in
Tennessee compared to their “match” county in Alabama. On average, the number of tests per
capita increased by 13% in counties in Tennessee relative to what they would have experienced
if they had not enacted the policy.20 As discussed above, since we observe the full population, it
does not seem appropriate to use conventional confidence intervals based on large samples from
an infinite population. Instead, we consider the sharp null hypothesis that the number of tests
in a particular county is exactly the same as it would be if the policy had not been enacted.
Then, we can test if the policy is having an effect on the number of tests by comparing the
estimated average effect of the policy on the number of tests to the distribution of the number
of tests when we randomly assign participation in the policy between each county in Tennessee
and its match in Alabama. Under this null (as well as the maintained assumptions), we compute
a p-value as the fraction of times that the estimated effect of the policy is larger in absolute
20

This is computed by taking the average number of tests per capita across counties in Tennessee (23.4 per 1000
individuals), subtracting the average number of tests per capita in matched counties (20.7 per 1000 individuals), and
dividing by this same term.

19

Figure 5: Effect of Tennessee’s Open-Testing Policy on Tests, Confirmed Cases, and Work Trips

(a) Tests

(b) Confirmed Cases
(c) Work Trips

Notes: The effect of Tennessee’s open testing policy on the per capita number of tests, confirmed cases, and percentage
change in trips to work by county. In Panel (a), the orange dots are the difference in per capita tests for counties in
Tennessee relative to their matched county in Alabama. In Panel (b), the orange dots are the difference in per capita
confirmed cases for counties in Tennessee relative to their matched county in Alabama. In Panel (c), the blue dots
are the percentage change in trips to work for particular counties in Tennessee relative to their matched county in
Alabama. The orange dots are the per capita change in confirmed cases over time for each county in Tennessee.

value than its corresponding estimate when participating in the policy is randomly assigned.
The p-value in this case is 0.359. This is not statistically significant at conventional significance
levels, but it is at least suggestive that the policy is actually increasing the number of tests.
Next, we consider a similar exercise in terms of number of confirmed Covid-19 cases. These
results are available in Panel (b) of Figure 5. Here, we estimate that, on average, the opentesting policy decreased the number of confirmed cases by 50% relative to what they would
have been in the absence of the policy.21 Using the same randomization inference procedure as
above, we get a p-value of 0.006. These results suggest that Tennessee’s open-testing policy is
substantially decreasing the number of confirmed cases.
21

This estimate comes from averaging the per capita number of confirmed cases across counties in Tennessee (0.83
per 1000 individuals), subtracting the average number of confirmed cases in their matched counties from Alabama
(1.68 per 1000 individuals), and dividing by the latter term.

20

Next, we consider how the policy is affecting number of trips to work. It is important to
be careful here. Our strategy is to see how the number of trips to work changes as a function
of the change in the number of confirmed cases over time. Panel (c) of Figure 5 plots the
percentage change in trips to work for counties in Tennessee relative to their matched county in
Alabama along with the observed change in confirmed cases between April 17 and May 8 among
counties in Tennessee. We regress the difference in trips to work among matched counties on the
observed change in confirmed cases for counties in Tennessee and estimate that the number of
trips to work declines by 1.28 percent when the number of confirmed cases per 1000 individuals
increased by 1 between April 17 and May 8; this parameter has a p-value of 0.022.22 This result
suggests that, at least to some extent, individuals in counties where the number of confirmed
cases was increasing the most over time reduced their number of trips to work relative to the
number of trips that they would have taken without the policy.
Finally, we consider the effect of Tennessee’s open-testing policy on the total number of
per-capita Covid-19 cases. These results are provided in Figure 6. The lower bound on the
policy effect is quite low – across counties, the average is a decrease of total cases by 99 per 1000
individuals relative to what they would have been without the policy. This is probably a fairly
unrealistically large effect as it occurs when no untested individuals in Tennessee have had Covid19, but untested individuals in Alabama have the same probability of having Covid-19 as tested
individuals. It is more interesting to consider the upper bound (this is the smallest possible
effect of the policy given the data and identifying assumptions); see Panel (b) of Figure 6.23
The average of the upper bound is a reduction of total cases by 1.12 per 1000 individuals. This
seems quite small, but it is also useful to compare this number to the number of confirmed cases
per 1000 individuals which is only 0.8. This suggests that even the upper bound on the effect of
the policy should be interpreted as a non-trivial reduction in Covid-19 cases. The randomization
p-value is 0.006. These results suggest that Tennessee’s policy is leading to fewer total cases.
At a higher level, that the upper bound is negative is driven by the fact that confirmed cases
appear to have decreased in Tennessee due to the open-testing policy. This decrease in confirmed
cases in the presence of an increase in total tests is a strong piece of evidence that Tennessee’s
open-testing policy is decreasing the total number of cases.
As one final step to help interpret our bounds, we consider a sensitivity analysis. Recall
that our bounds on the effect of the open-testing policy on the per capita number of total cases
primarily come from (i) the probability of having had Covid-19 conditional on not being tested
being unknown and (ii) differences in the probability of having had Covid-19 conditional on not
22

Calculating the p-value here involves a slight modification to our approach for previous parameters of interest. As
before, we repeatedly randomly assign participating in the policy across matches in Tennessee and Alabama, but now,
at each iteration, we run a regression of the difference in number of trips to work between each county and its match
(here, the “treated” county can be the opposite of what it is in the actual data) on the increase in cases over time. We
calculate a p-value as the fraction of times that the original estimate is larger (in absolute value) than the estimated
parameters coming from repeatedly randomly assigning treatment status.
23
Proposition 3, in combination with the expression in Equation (2), implies that the upper bound is a scaled version
of the difference in confirmed cases across counties in Tennessee and counties in Alabama with similar characteristics.
Therefore Panel (b) of Figure 6 is very similar to Panel (b) Figure 5. For the same reason, the p-values reported in
this section are exactly the same as well.

21

Figure 6: Bounds on the Effects of Tennessee’s Open-Testing Policy on Total Covid-19 Cases

(a) Bounds

(b) Upper Bound

Notes: Panel (a) provides estimates of the overall bounds on effect of Tennessee’s open testing policy on the per capita
number of total cases separately by each county in Tennessee. Panel (b) reproduces the estimates of the upper bound
alone with a modified scale.

being tested under the open-testing policy relative to the same probability in the absence of the
policy (see Equation (7)). To perform a sensitivity analysis, we write
P (Cilt∗ (0) = 1|Tilt∗ (0) = 0, Dl = 1) = αP (Cilt∗ (0) = 1|Tilt∗ (0) = 1, Dl = 1)

(8)

P (Cilt∗ (1) = 1|Tilt∗ (1) = 0, Dl = 1) = βP (Cilt∗ (0) = 1|Tilt∗ (0) = 0, Dl = 1)
for α and β between 0 and 1. The assumptions in the paper are consistent with any of these possible values for α and β, but researchers may have some priors on what values these parameters
are more likely to take. Given values for α and β, this is enough to pin down the total number
of Covid-19 cases (both under the policy and in the absence of the policy), and Table 2 reports
the average number of Covid-19 cases per 1000 individuals in the absence of the policy and the
percentage reduction in total Covid-19 cases due to the policy for those particular values of α
and β.24
Notice that the number of total cases strongly depends on α; that is, how likely untested
24

In particular, given values of α and β, (and, for simplicity, ignoring conditioning on covariates), the average effect

22

Table 2: Sensitivity Analysis
α
0

0.01

0.1

0.5

1

0

−0.50

−0.65

−0.91

−0.98

−0.99

0.5

−0.50

−0.50

−0.50

−0.50

−0.50

0.9

−0.50

−0.38

−0.18

−0.12

−0.11

0.99

−0.50

−0.35

−0.10

−0.03

−0.02

1

−0.50

−0.35

−0.09

−0.02

−0.01

2.24

3.21

12.00

51.07

99.90

β

Cases Per 1000
w/o policy
a

Notes: The table provides estimates of the percentage
reduction of total Covid-19 cases due to Tennessee’s
open-testing policy for particular values of the sensitivity
analysis parameters α and β which are defined in
Equation (8). The last row of the table provides the number
of cases per 1000 individuals for particular values of α (and
does not depend on β) in the absence of the open-testing
policy.

individuals are to have had Covid-19 relative to tested individuals. The assumptions we have
made in the paper allow for α to take any value between 0 and 1; it is hard to know precisely
what value this should take, but one would suspect that it is at least somewhat less than one.
Our overall lower bound occurs when α = 1 and β = 0 – as discussed above, this is the case
where, under the policy, no untested individuals have had Covid-19, but, in the absence of the
policy, the probability of having had Covid-19 among the untested is the same as the probability
of having had Covid-19 of tested individuals. This results in a decrease in cases of 99%, but, in
light of the previous discussion, seems like an unlikely case. It is even harder to get a good idea
about what value β should take. The open-testing policy has larger effects for small values of
β. But even for large values of β, our estimates indicate substantial effects of the open-testing
policy in reducing the total number of cases as long as α is not large.

6

Conclusion
In this paper, we have considered the effects of Tennessee’s open Covid-19 testing policy

which increased the number and accessibility of tests in the state. Understanding the effect of
this policy is substantially hampered by nonrandom testing. Our approach has been to combine
of the policy, P (Cilt∗ (1)|Dl = 1) − P (Cilt∗ (0)|Dl = 1), is given by


γ1 − γ0 + P (Cilt∗ = 1|Tilt∗ = 1, Dl = 0) αβP (Tilt∗ = 0|Dl = 1) − αP (Tilt∗ = 0|Dl = 0)
and all terms are identified (this result holds immediately from Equations (7) and (9)).

23

standard policy evaluation identifying assumptions with additional, plausible assumptions that
lead to bounds on the effect of the policy. Overall, we found suggestive evidence that Tennessee’s
policy has decreased the number of total and confirmed cases in Tennessee and was allowing
workers to decrease their trips to work in counties that had experienced greater increases in their
confirmed case count over time. In this sense, it seems that Tennessee’s open-testing policy has
benefited the state.
Conditional on being able to increase the total number of tests, it is less clear if open-testing
is, in some sense, optimal relative to other testing schemes. It seems that there are a number of
tradeoffs here. Clearly, understanding the effects of the policy (as well as understanding things
like the overall spread of Covid-19) would be greatly enhanced by random testing. On the other
hand, more targeted testing could be useful for detecting outbreaks and protecting high risk
groups.

24

References
[1] Abadie, Alberto, Susan Athey, Guido W Imbens, and Jeffrey M Wooldridge. “Samplingbased versus design-based uncertainty in regression analysis”. Econometrica 88.1
(2020), pp. 265–296.
[2] Abadie, Alberto, Alexis Diamond, and Jens Hainmueller. “Synthetic control methods for comparative case studies: Estimating the effect of California’s tobacco control program”. Journal of the American Statistical Association 105.490 (2010),
pp. 493–505.
[3] Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. “How much should
we trust differences-in-differences estimates?” NBER Working Paper. 2002.
[4] Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. “How much should
we trust differences-in-differences estimates?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics
119.1 (2004), pp. 249–275.
[5] Dave, Dhaval M, Andrew I Friedson, Kyutaro Matsuzawa, and Joseph J Sabia.
“When do shelter-in-place orders fight COVID-19 best? Policy heterogeneity across
states and adoption time”. Working Paper. 2020.
[6] Ferman, Bruno. “Matching estimators with few treated and many control observations”. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.05093 (2019).
[7] Friedson, Andrew I, Drew McNichols, Joseph J Sabia, and Dhaval Dave. “Did California’s shelter-in-place order work? Early coronavirus-related public health effects”.
Working Paper. 2020.
[8] Hortaçsu, Ali, Jiarui Liu, and Timothy Schwieg. “Estimating the fraction of unreported infections in epidemics with a known epicenter: An application to Covid-19”.
Working Paper. 2020.
[9] Imbens, Guido W and Donald B Rubin. Causal Inference in Statistics, Social, and
Biomedical Sciences. Cambridge University Press, 2015.
[10] Imbens, Guido and Jeffrey Wooldridge. “Recent developments in the econometrics
of program evaluation”. Journal of Economic Literature 47.1 (2009), pp. 5–86.
[11] Manski, Charles F and Francesca Molinari. “Estimating the COVID-19 infection
rate: Anatomy of an inference problem”. Journal of Econometrics (2020).

25

A

Proofs

Proof of Proposition 1. The result follows because
AT TY (Zlt∗ −1 ) = E[Ylt∗ (1)|Zlt∗ −1 , Dl = 1] − E[Ylt∗ (0)|Zlt∗ −1 , Dl = 1]
h
i
= E[Ylt∗ (1)|Zlt∗ −1 , Dl = 1] − E E[Ylt∗ (0)|Zlt∗ ∗ −1 , Dl = 1] Zlt∗ −1 , Dl = 1
i
h
= E[Ylt∗ (1)|Zlt∗ −1 , Dl = 1] − E E[Ylt∗ (0)|Zlt∗ ∗ −1 , Dl = 0] Zlt∗ −1 , Dl = 1
i
h
= E[Ylt∗ (1)|Zlt∗ −1 , Dl = 1] − E E[Ylt∗ (0)|Zlt∗ ∗ −1 , Dl = 0] Zlt∗ −1 , Dl = 0
= E[Ylt∗ (1)|Zlt∗ −1 , Dl = 1] − E[Ylt∗ (0)|Zlt∗ −1 , Dl = 0]
= E[Ylt∗ |Zlt∗ −1 , Dl = 1] − E[Ylt∗ |Zlt∗ −1 , Dl = 0]
which is the result. The first equality is the definition of AT TY (Zlt∗ −1 ); the second equality
holds by the law of iterated expectations (the outer expectation averages over the distribution
of Clt∗ −1 (0) conditional on Zlt∗ −1 and Dl = 1); the third equality holds by Assumption 2; the
fourth holds by Assumption 3; the fifth equality holds by the law of iterated expectations; and
the sixth equality holds because Ylt∗ (1) is the observed outcome when Dl = 1 and Ylt∗ (0) is
the observed outcome when Dl = 0. The result for AT TY holds immediately by averaging over
AT TY (Zlt∗ −1 ) over the distribution of Zlt∗ −1 conditional on Dl = 1.
Proof of Proposition 2. First, recall that
AT TC (Zlt∗ −1 ) = E[Clt∗ (1) − Clt∗ (0)|Zlt∗ −1 , Dl = 1]
= E[Clt∗ |Zlt∗ −1 , Dl = 1] − E[Clt∗ |Zlt∗ −1 , Dl = 0]
= P (Cilt∗ = 1|Zlt∗ −1 , Dl = 1) − P (Cilt∗ = 1|Zlt∗ −1 , Dl = 0)
where the second equality using the same arguments as in the proof of Proposition 1 and the
third equality holds by the definition of Clt∗ . Omitting the dependence on Zlt∗ −1 for notational
simplicity, and then plugging in Equation (1) and the definition of γd (Zlt∗ −1 ) further implies
that
P (Cilt∗ (1) = 1|Dl = 1) − P (Cilt∗ (0) = 1|Dl = 1) = γ1 − γ0

(9)

+ P (Cilt∗ = 1|Tilt∗ = 0, Dl = 1) P (Tilt∗ = 0|Dl = 1)
|
{z
}
− P (Cilt∗ = 1|Tilt∗ = 0, Dl = 0) P (Tilt∗ = 0|Dl = 0)
|
{z
}
where the two underlined terms are not identified because the number of Covid-19 cases is not
observed for individuals that have not been tested. But bounds on the effect of Tennessee’s
open-testing policy on total Covid-19 cases arise from restrictions on these terms. In particular,
Assumption 1 says that, for d ∈ {0, 1},
P (Cilt∗ = 1|Tilt∗ = 0, Dl = d) ≤ P (Cilt∗ = 1|Tilt∗ = 1, Dl = d)

26

CltB,U
∗ (Zlt∗ −1 ), the upper bound in the proposition, comes from setting P (Cilt∗ = 1|Tilt∗ = 0, Dl =
1) = P (Cilt∗ = 1|Tilt∗ = 1, Dl = 1) (its maximum value under Assumption 1) and from setting
P (Cilt∗ = 1|Tilt∗ = 0, Dl = 0) = 0. CltB,L
∗ (Zlt∗ −1 ), the lower bound in the proposition comes
from setting P (Cilt∗ = 1|Tilt∗ = 0, Dl = 1) = 0 and from setting P (Cilt∗ = 1|Tilt∗ = 0, Dl = 0) =
P (Cilt∗ = 1|Tilt∗ = 1, Dl = 0) (its maximum value under Assumption 1). The bounds on AT TC
arise from averaging over the bounds for AT TC (Zlt∗ −1 ) as discussed in the text.
Next, we provide an auxiliary result that is useful for proving Proposition 3.
Lemma 1. Under Assumptions 1 and 3 to 6,
P (Cilt∗ = 1, Tilt∗ = 0|Zlt∗ −1 , Dl = 1) ≤ P (Cilt∗ = 1, Tilt∗ = 0|Zlt∗ −1 , Dl = 0)

(10)

Proof. To show the result (and omitting conditioning on Zlt∗ −1 ), notice that
P (Cilt∗ = 1, Tilt∗ = 0|Dl = 1) = P (Cilt∗ (1) = 1, Tilt∗ (1) = 0|Dl = 1)
≤ P (Cilt∗ (0) = 1, Tilt∗ (0) = 0|Dl = 1)
= P (Cilt∗ = 1, Tilt∗ = 0|Dl = 0)
where the first equality holds because treated potential outcomes are observed outcomes when
Dl = 1, the second line holds by Assumption 6, and third line holds by Assumptions 3 and 5.
Proof of Proposition 3. Following the same logic as in the proof of Proposition 2 (see Equation (9) in particular) and continuing to omit conditioning on covariates to simplify the notation,
the lower bound arises by making P (Cilt∗ = 1|Tilt∗ = 0, Dl = 1) as small as possible while making P (Cilt∗ = 1|Tilt∗ = 0, Dl = 0) as large as possible. Neither Assumption 5 nor Assumption 6
has any additional effect on these terms though so the lower bound remains unchanged.
For the upper bound, plugging the result of Lemma 1 into Equation (9) implies that
P (Cilt∗ (1) = 1|Dl = 1) − P (Cilt∗ (0) = 1|Dl = 1) ≤ γ1 − γ0
which implies the result for the upper bound of AT TC (Zlt∗ −1 ). The result for AT TC holds by
averaging over the Zlt∗ −1 in AT TC (Zlt∗ −1 ).

B

More Details on Methodology

B.1

Additional Discussion on Assumption 6

This section gives some more primitive Assumption 6 to hold. We consider the following
conditions:
Extra Conditions:
(i) P (Cilt∗ (1) = 1|Tilt∗ (1) = 0, Dl = 1) ≤ P (Cilt∗ (0) = 1|Tilt∗ (1) = 0, Dl = 1)
(ii) P (Cilt∗ (0) = 1|Tilt∗ (0) = 0, Tilt∗ (1) = 1, Dl = 1) ≥ P (Cilt∗ (0) = 1|Tilt∗ (0) = 0, Tilt∗ (1) =
0, Dl = 1)

27

(iii) Tilt∗ (1) = 0 =⇒ Tilt∗ (0) = 0
Extra Condition (i) says that the probability of untested individuals having Covid-19 does
not increase under the policy relative to the absence of the policy holding the group of tested
individuals fixed (here, it is equal to the group that would be tested under the policy).
Extra Condition (ii) says that the probability of having Covid-19 is greater for the group of
individuals that would be tested if the policy is implemented but not tested if the policy is not
implemented than for the group of individuals that would not be tested under either policy.25
Extra Condition (iii) says that all individuals who would have been tested in the absence
of the policy (i.e., individuals meeting the symptoms requirement and who had sought a test)
would continue to be tested under the open-testing policy.
Next, notice that Assumption 6 holds if the following difference is less than or equal to 0.
P (Cilt∗ (1) = 1, Tlit∗ (1) = 0|Dl = 1) − P (Cilt∗ (0) = 1, Tilt∗ (0) = 0|Dl = 1)


= P (Cilt∗ (1) = 1|Tilt∗ (1) = 0, Dl = 1) − P (Cilt∗ (0) = 1|Tilt∗ (1) = 0, Dl = 1) P (Tilt∗ (1) = 0|Dl = 1)
|
{z
}
Term (A)




+ P (Cilt∗ (0) = 1|Tilt∗ (1) = 0, Dl = 1) − P (Cilt∗ (0) = 1|Tilt∗ (0) = 0, Dl = 1) P (Tilt∗ (1) = 0|Dl = 1)
|
{z
}
Term (B)



+ P (Cilt∗ (0) = 1|Tilt∗ (0) = 0, Dl = 1) P (Tilt∗ (1) = 0|Dl = 1) − P (Tilt∗ (0) = 0|Dl = 1)
|
{z
}
Term (C)

where the equality holds by adding and subtracting P (Cilt∗ (0) = 1|Tilt∗ (1) = 0, Dl = 1)P (Tilt∗ (1) =
0|Dl = 1) and P (Cilt∗ (0) = 1|Tilt∗ (0) = 0, Dl = 1)P (Tilt∗ (1) = 0|Dl = 1). Term (A) ≤ 0 holds
immediately by Extra Condition (i). For Term (B), notice that
P (Cilt∗ (0) = 1|Tilt∗ (0) = 0, Dl = 1)
= P (Cilt∗ (0) = 1|Tilt∗ (0) = 0, Tilt∗ (1) = 0, Dl = 1)P (Tilt∗ (1) = 0|Tilt∗ (0) = 0, Dl = 1)
+ P (Cilt∗ (0) = 1|Tilt∗ (0) = 0, Tilt∗ (1) = 1, Dl = 1)P (Tilt∗ (1) = 1|Tilt∗ (0) = 0, Dl = 1)
which holds by the law of total probability. Then, applying Extra Condition (ii) implies that
P (Cilt∗ (0) = 1|Tilt∗ (0) = 0, Dl = 1) ≥ P (Cilt∗ (0) = 1|Tilt∗ (0) = 0, Tilt∗ (1) = 0, Dl = 1)
and Extra Condition (iii) additionally implies that
P (Cilt∗ (0) = 1|Tilt∗ (0) = 0, Dl = 1) ≥ P (Cilt∗ (0) = 1|Tilt∗ (1) = 0, Dl = 1)
which implies that Term (B) ≤ 0. That Term (C) ≤ 0 immediately holds by Extra Condition
(iii). The extra conditions outlined above are stronger than are needed for Assumption 6 to
hold, but they provide one set of plausible, low-level conditions where Assumption 6 would hold.
25

Another way to explain this condition is that there is positive self-selection into taking the test among individuals
that become tested under the open-testing policy but would not have been tested without the open-testing policy.

28

C

Additional Figures

Figure 7: Bounds on Per Capita Number of Pre-Policy Total Covid-19 Cases by County

(a) Tennessee

(b) Alabama

Notes: Bounds on the total (unobserved) per capita Covid-19 cases by county in Tennessee and Alabama using the
bounds described in the text. These bounds are for April 17, 2020.

29

