arXiv:2005.08724v2 [physics.soc-ph] 19 May 2020

Modelling the spread of Covid19 in Italy using a revised
version of the SIR model
Andrea Palladino1,2 , Vincenzo Nardelli1,3 , Luigi Giuseppe Atzeni1 , Nane
Cantatore1,5 , Maddalena Cataldo1,6 , Fabrizio Croccolo1,4 , Nicolas Estrada1,7 , and
Antonio Tombolini1,5
1
CoVstat (Italy)
DESY, Platanenallee 6, Zeuthen (Germany)
3
Universit degli Studi di Milano - Bicocca, Milano (Italy)
4
Universite de Pau et des Pays de lAdour, E2S UPPA, CNRS, TOTAL, LFCR UMR5150, Anglet,
(France)
5
Tombolini & Associati srl, Loreto (Italy)
6
Universit degli Studi dell’Aquila, L’Aquila, (Italy)
7
Universit degli studi di Padova, Viccolo dell’Osservatorio 3, Padova (Italy)
2

May 2020
Abstract
In this paper, we present a model to predict the spread of the Covid-19 epidemic and
apply it to the specific case of Italy. We started from a simple Susceptible, Infected,
Recovered (SIR) model and we added the condition that, after a certain time, the
basic reproduction number R0 exponentially decays in time, as empirically suggested
by world data. Using this model, we were able to reproduce the real behavior of the
epidemic with an average error of 5%. Moreover, we illustrate possible future scenarios,
associated to different intervals of R0 . This model has been used since the beginning
of March 2020, predicting the Italian peak of the epidemic in April 2020 with about
100.000 detected active cases. The real peak of the epidemic happened on the 20th of
April 2020, with 108.000 active cases. This result shows that the model had predictive
power for the italian case.

1

Introduction

At the beginning of 2020, a previously-unknown respiratory tract disease was reported
in China [1]. This event is having a huge negative impact worldwide, not only under
an healthcare perspective, but also under the economic, social and cultural ones. SARSCoV-2 has been identified as the causative agent of the pandemic outbreak. It is a newly
encountered member of the coronavirus family belonging to the RNA-viruses. Its behaviour
1

is comparable to influenza viruses or SARS-CoV the causative agent of the pandemic
outbreak 2002/03 of [1][2]. As soon as virus particles get into a host (human), they start
invading cells (in this case, predominantly the ones in the respiratory tract) and these
replicate the genome of the virus. Virus particles get into the hosts saliva and humans
infect each other by talking to infected individuals, touching hands and close face-to-face
interaction [2][3]. A number that is a good landmark for the transmission rate, or the
infectiousness of any infectious disease, is the basic reproduction number (R0 ): this defines
the average number of people that are infected by a single carrier over a defined period
of time. R0 is an indicator of the transmissibility of the epidemic and it has been defined
as the average number of secondary cases that a single case can generate in a completely
susceptible population. R0 is of course dependent on the characteristics of the epidemic
itself; however, it also depends on the population sample we are considering. The higher
the human interaction in a population is, the higher the value R0 will be. Among the
factors that can influence R0 in a given population there are therefore social habits and
social organization. The basic reproduction number is therefore mutable depending on
these aspects, and the analysis of its variation in time can be crucial to monitor the trend
in the transmissibility among a single population. For our specific case of study, i.e. the
spread of the COVID-19 epidemic in Italy, it is important to study the variation of R0 in
time before and after the implementation of lockdown measures, as well as after its removal.
In our modified SIR model, we let R0 vary in time as a consequence of quarantine. As
we will show later, this will also allows us better reproduce real data, as well as have a
predictive view on the whole trend of the epidemic.
Symptoms of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) are widespread: from asymptomatic patients to patients with flu-like symptoms up to a severe pneumonia leading to a severe
acute respiratory distress symptom (ARDS) [1][2], making the ventilation of patients unavoidable.
Given the lack of reliable and long-term data regarding incubation period, virulence,
contagiousness, and other transmission parameters [1] for the novel coronavirus SARSCoV-2 and the lack of reliable drugs and vaccines [3], containment measurements, the
tracking of infected people and the treatment of patients in the early stage of the illness,
remain the only feasible option to face the ongoing outbreak of the virus that is leading to
a collapsing health system with thousands of deaths, as seen in hotspots.
The impact of Covid-19 in Italy has been and is still very severe, with a death toll
notably high. Up to now, more than 200.000 people have been tested positive in Italy and
more than 30.000 died due to the Coronavirus. In this paper, we present the model used
by the CoVstat group [7] to model the spread of the epidemic. Using this model, we had
been able to predict with good accuracy the peak of the active infected, both related to its
location in time (the date of the peak) and its amplitude (the maximum number of active
infected).

2

2

Methods

In this paragraph we present the SIR model, that is used as base for the development of
further models from the CoVstat group. We point out that the SIR model is not predictive.
In Sec.2.2 we present the ingredients that represent a novelty here and have been included
to improve the performance of the model and to describe the real data in a reasonable
manner.

2.1

The standard SIR model

SIR is one of the simplest models to describe the spread of an epidemic [8]. The SIR model
is based on the assumption of a totally susceptible population at time t0 , i.e. the beginning
of the spreading. In the SIR model, the overall population of N individuals is divided
into 3 categories: susceptibles (S), infected (I) and removed (R). Hence, at a given time
t from the beginning of the spreading of the epidemic, I(t) and S(t) are the number of
infected people present in the population and the number of vulnerable people that have not
contracted the virus yet, respectively, while R(t) is the sum of the ones that have developed
immunity (recovered) or deceased and are therefore removed from the susceptible count.
It is straightforward to notice that, at any time t, S(t) + I(t) + R(t) = N . The SIR model
purpose is to describe the variation in time of S(t), I(t), and R(t) meaning the migration in
time of individuals among these 3 categories. The model consists of 3 categories: S for the
susceptible people, I for the infected people and R for the sum of recovered and deceased
people. The classic SIR model is described by 3 ordinary differential equations:
dS
dt
dI
dt
dR
dt

I S
N
I S
= β
− γI
N

= −β

= γI

where β is related to the velocity of diffusion of the virus and γ is related to the time
required to infected people to become removed (recovered or deaths). Both parameters
have the dimension of time−1 . The three equations written above can be interpreted in the
following manner:
• at the beginning of the epidemic, the entire population is susceptible to the infection
(S(0) = N ). If there is a single infected person, other people can get the infection,
going from the category S to the category I. The strength (speed) of the spread of
the virus is determined by the parameter β;
• the number of infected people increases when susceptible people get infected. After
a typical timescale equal to 1/γ infected people I go in the third category R;
3

Figure 1: Evolution of an epidemic using the SIR model, with γ = 0.1 and β = 0.5 on the
left panel and β = 0.25 on the right panel. In the classical SIR model, R0 is proportional
to the fraction of susceptible people. Particularly it is equal to S/200 in the left panel and
S/400 in the right panel. The condition R0 = 1 occurs when the red curves reach their
maximum.
• the category R includes the sum of people that recovered or died after infection.
Therefore, in the classic SIR model there are only 2 free parameters that can be used to
fit real data: β and γ. Both β and γ have dimension of time−1 . From here on, we will use
days as unit of time.
In this model, the basic reproduction number R0 is a dimensionless number obtained
using a combination of the previous parameters:
R0 (t) =

βS(t)
.
Nγ

R0 (t) provides direct and quantitative information on the spread of the epidemic. If R0 ≤ 1
the epidemic will stop spontaneously, while with R0 > 1 it will continue spreading. In Fig.
1 we show two different evolution patterns of the pandemic, to demonstrate the effect
of different values of β. Both simulations start with the initial condition of 1 infected
person, for a population of N =1000 people in total, and fixing γ = 0.1 (i.e. typical
duration of the illness of 10 days). In both panels the blue line represents the number S
of susceptible people which at time t = 0 days coincides with almost the entire population
(for our simulation: S(0) = 1000−1) and then decreases as both the recovered and infected
numbers (green and red lines, respectively) increase. After an interval of time, in both the
simulations, the infected number I reaches a peak, the value of which is dependent on the
parameter β. After that time, the number of infected decreases as the recovered increase
and ultimately reaches the total number of individuals. In the simulation on the left we set
β = 0.5 while on the right we assume β = 0.25, to simulate the implementation of social
distancing actions. We notice that in the left panel the peak of infected people comes after
4

20 days, with roughly half the population infected. On the right panel the peak is shifted
and comes after 50 days and the number of infected people at the peak is less than the half
of the previous case. This shows the importance of social distancing, since social distancing
and quarantines reduce the parameter β, helping in reducing the number of infected people
at the peak of the epidemic. This is indispensable to avoid the collapse of the healthcare
system, and especially the intensive care units. Although a simulation with the standard
SIR appears to be adequate to describe an epidemic spreading in a sample where all the
initial conditions remain constant throughout the period of time, it is not sufficient when it
comes to a more complex and realistic situation such as the population of a given country,
where the parameters of the model are influenced by other external factors. From this the
necessity to modify the model for our case of study. In the classic SIR model the parameter
β is constant, therefore it cannot account for the effect produced by quarantine actions,
that would have also a dynamical impact on the parameter R0 (t). For this reason, it is
useful to go beyond the classic SIR model, as explained in the next section.

2.2

Beyond the classic SIR model

In the classic SIR model, the parameter β is constant in time. This means that it cannot
account for the slowdown of the spread due to the quarantine. To simulate a more realistic
scenario, it is necessary to go beyond the classic SIR model. We denote this model as SIR
2.0. The open source code is available in the CoVstat repository [11]. Compared to the
classic SIR it contains the following new features:
• the parameter β(t) changes in time, to account for the effects due to quarantine and
social distancing. Particularly β(t) = β0 before a time tth , while it exponentially
decays for t > tth :
β(t) = β0 e−(t−tth )/τ for t ≥ tth ,
where tth and τ are two additional parameters of the model. The time tth represents
the starting time of the quarantine actions, while τ refers to the decaying period
and it has the dimension of time. The previous assumption is driven by empirical
observations, since this behavior of R0 (t) has been observed in several countries
during the Covid19 pandemic;
• we take into consideration the possible presence of asymptomatic patients. The virologist Ilaria Capua has suggested that 2/3 of patients in Italy might be asymptomatic
[9]. The study conducted on the population of Vo’ Euganeo [10] reaches similar
conclusions. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that the total number of infected
people is roughly 3 times higher that the number of people that were tested positive.
Compared to the classic SIR model, in this revised version there are 2 more parameters,
tth and τ . Therefore the SIR 2.0 is characterized by 4 parameters in total: β0 , γ, tth and
τ.
5

Figure 2: Simulation of the Italian case using the SIR 2.0 model. The red points represent
the real number of active cases, while the blue curve represent the best-fit curve of the
model. The magenta vertical line indicates the beginning of the quarantine, while the
orange vertical line indicates the end of it.

3

Results

In this paper we present and discuss varios results obtained using the model described
above. We first focus on the curve of the active infected in Italy. Then we discuss possible
future scenarios and how to compute the parameter R0 for Italy and italian regions. From
here on, we will always use data from the 24th of February to the 17th of May.

3.1

The Italian case

Using the model SIR 2.0 it is possible to reasonably describe the spread of COVID-19
in Italy. We used the data of Protezione Civile [12], starting on February 24th, 2020
(therefore, this date corresponds to time zero of our model). We use N = 60.36×106 people
as population and, as initial conditions, we choose R0 = 0 and I0 = 221, corresponding to
the number of infected people on the 24th of February. In order to find the best model, we
minimize the mean squared error between predictions and true data, allowing the 4 free
parameters to vary. We consider as a last update the 17th of May. The best fit is given by

6

Figure 3: Simulation of future scenarios, fixing a certain value of R0 at the 4th of May.
We identify 3 regions, corresponding to low risk (green), mid risk (orange) and high risk
(red) situations.
the following set of parameters:
β0 = 0.384,

γ = 0.048,

tth = 0,

τ = 26.33 .

The best model has an average error of 4.9% compared to the data and is shown in Fig.2 as
the dashed blue line. On the home page of [7] the best fit model is updated daily. However
it is important to recall that the predictions during the pandemic were stable. Since the
beginning of March the model has predicted the peak of the infected people in April, with
100.000 of infected people (see Palladino’s talk [13]).

3.2

Future predictions

The phase 2 started in Italy on the 4th of May with progressive removal of quarantine. The
conditions are different from phase 1, however, since the lockdown has not been completely
released we cannot assume the initial conditions are fully restored. Even when the country’s
lockdown will formally be over, the local legislation about social distancing and the civic
consciousness of population will be dramatically different than before. On the other side
we still don’t have enough information about the immunity for those who have contracted
7

the virus. Therefore, it is hard, or even impossible, to make accurate predictions without a
reasonable model for the evolution of R0 (t). However, it is interesting to understand which
future scenarios are associated to different intervals of the parameter R0 (t).
In order to do that, we fit the past data with the SIR 2.0, as explained in the previous
section. Then, we use the basic SIR model for new future predictions, fixing a certain ratio
β(t)/γ on the last day of data. Therefore, the value of R̃0 at the td =4th May is given by:
R̃0 =

β(td )S(td )
γN

where S(td ) is the number of susceptible people on td . Then R0 (t) evolves as:
R0 (t) = R̃0

S(t)
N

Since in our model we assume that the total number of infected people is 3 times higher
that the number of tested positives I(t), the previous expressions becomes equal to:


3I(t)
R0 (t) = R̃0 1 −
N
The epidemic starts decreasing when R0 (t) < 1. This condition is always satisfied when
R̃0 < 1. In Fig.3 we report 3 different regions corresponding to 3 different intervals of R̃0 ,
as explained in the legend of the figure.

3.3

The computation of R0(t) for Italy and regions

In this section we focus on the computation of R0 (t) for Italy and Italian regions. In order
to do that, we focus on a subset of data. Particularly we use that last 5 days of data
for Italy and last 7 days of data for Italian regions (due to the smaller statistics). This
is done to avoid fast oscillations of R0 and to better understand the general trend of the
epidemic during the last week. In order to do that, we use the standard version of the SIR
model. We assume an average duration of the illness of 14 days, i.e. γ = 1/14. Then we
minimize the mean squared errors between real data and model, varying R0 (t), with the
usual definition given for the SIR model. Let us notice that, even assuming that the total
number of infected people is 3 times larger than that the tested positive ones, the number
of susceptible people is still very high. Therefore the value of R0 (t) corresponds, in very
good approximation, to:
β(t)
R0 (t) '
γ
With the present numbers, this remains true even if the number of infected people were 10
times larger. Indeed up to now order of 200 K cases were tested positive. So, if the true
number of infected people were 2.2 millions, the ratio S(td )/N = 0.97, very close to 1. The
8

Figure 4: Left panel: computation of R0 (t) in Italy using the last 5 days of data. Right
panel: evolution of R0 (t) in Italy as function of time, using time window of 5 days. Mid
panel: R0 (t) computed for italian regions (updated to the 17th of May).
evolution of R0 (t) in Italy is shown on the right panel of Fig.4. On the left panel of the
same figure, we represent R0 (t) computed on the last 5 days.
In the central panel of the same figure we report the last value of R0 (t) for italian regions,
updated to the 17th of May. In this case we use a time window of 7 days, to compensate

9

the smaller statistics and to reduce the oscillations of R0 (t). Using this procedure, R0 (t)
becomes a good indicator of the behavior of the pandemic during the last week.

4

Conclusion

We have built a model to predict the spread of the Covid-19 epidemic in Italy. We started
from a simple SIR model and we added the condition that, after a threshold time, the basic
reproduction number R0 (t) exponentially decays in time, as empirically suggested by the
spread of the epidemic in different countries. Using this model we were able to predict the
peak of the epidemic 1.5 months before it happened, with an error of 1 week on the period
and an error smaller than 10% on the absolute numbers. We have also presented possible
future scenarios, assuming different intervals of the parameter R0 (t) after the 4th of May,
i.e. when the lockdown in Italy has been released. We conclude explaining our procedure
to compute R0 (t), as a function of time, for Italy and Italian regions. This paper shows
that the model has a good predictive power, when a period of quarantine is observed with
fixed conditions.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS A.Palladino has received funding from the European
Research Council (ERC) under the European Unions Horizon 2020 research and innovation
program (Grant No. 646623).

References
[1] Guo, Y., Cao, Q., Hong, Z. et al. The origin, transmission and clinical therapies on
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak an update on the status. Military
Med Res 7, 11 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1186/s40779-020-00240-0
[2] Singhal, T. A Review of Coronavirus Disease-2019 (COVID-19). Indian J Pediatr 87,
281286 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s12098-020-03263-6
[3] Lai, C. C., Shih, T. P., Ko, W. C., Tang, H. J., & Hsueh, P. R. (2020). Severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) and coronavirus disease2019 (COVID-19): The epidemic and the challenges. Int J Antimicrob Agents, 55(3),
105924. doi:10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2020.105924
[4] Wu, J.T., Leung, K., Bushman, M. et al. Estimating clinical severity of
COVID-19 from the transmission dynamics in Wuhan, China. Nat Med (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-020-0822-7
[5] Velavan, T. P., & Meyer, C. G. (2020). The COVID-19 epidemic. Trop Med Int Health,
25(3), 278-280. https://doi.org/10.1111/tmi.13383

10

[6] Li, Q., et al. Early Transmission Dynamics in Wuhan, China, of Novel CoronavirusInfected Pneumonia. New England Journal of Medicine 382, 1199-1207 (2020).
[7] www.covstat.it
[8] Kermack, W.O., McKendrick, A.G. Contributions to the mathematical theory of epidemics I-II-II. Bltn Mathcal Biology 53, 3355, 5787, 89118 (1991).
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02464423,
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02464424,
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02464425,
[9] https://www.la7.it/aggiornamenti-sul-coronavirus/video/la-virologa-ilaria-capua-23dei-contagi-potrebbero-essere-asintomatici-25-02-2020-309481
[10] Lavezzo, Enrico et al., Suppression of COVID-19 outbreak in the municipality of Vo,
Italy medRxiv,10.1101/2020.04.17.20053157
[11] https://github.com/vincnardelli/covid19-italia
[12] https://github.com/pcm-dpc/COVID-19/raw/master/dati-andamentonazionale/dpc-covid19-ita-andamento-nazionale.csv
[13] Link to the DESY seminar

11

