Remote health diagnosis and monitoring in the time of COVID-19
Joachim A. Behar1, Chengyu Liu2^, Kevin Kotzen1^, Kenta Tsutsui3, Valentina D.A. Corino4,
Janmajay Singh5, Marco A.F. Pimentel6, Philip Warrick7, Sebastian Zaunseder8, Fernando
Andreotti9, David Sebag10, Georgy Kopanitsa11, Patrick E. McSharry12,13,14, Walter Karlen15*,
Chandan Karmakar16,17* and Gari D. Clifford18,19*
^

equal contribution.

*

equal senior authorship.

1

Faculty of Biomedical Engineering, Technion-IIT, Haifa, Israel

2

The State Key Laboratory of Bioelectronics, School of Instrument Science and Engineering,
Southeast University, Nanjing, China
3

Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Saitama International Medical Center, Saitama, Japan

4

Department of Electronics, Information and Bioengineering, Politecnico di Milano, Italy

5

Independent researcher, Japan

6

Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK

7

PeriGen, Cary, NC, and Westmount, QC, Canada

8

Faculty of Information Technology, FH Dortmund, Dortmund, Germany

9

Sensyne Health, Oxford, UK

10

Independent physician, Grenoble, France

11

ITMO University, Saint Petersburg, Russia

12

Carnegie Mellon University Africa, Kigali, Rwanda

13

African Centre of Excellence in Data Science, University of Rwanda, Kigali, Rwanda

14

Oxford Man Institute of Quantitative Finance, Oxford University, Oxford, UK

15

Mobile Health Systems Lab, Department of Health Sciences and Technology, ETH Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland
16

School of Information Technology, Deakin University, Geelong, Australia

17

Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University of Melbourne, Melbourne,
Australia
18

Department of Biomedical Informatics, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA

19

Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology and Emory University,
Atlanta, GA, USA
1

Abstract
Coronavirus disease (COVID-19), caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2), is rapidly spreading across the globe. The clinical spectrum of SARS-CoV-2
pneumonia requires early detection and monitoring, within a clinical environment for critical
cases and remotely for mild cases, with a large spectrum of symptoms. The fear of contamination
in clinical environments has led to a dramatic reduction in on-site referrals for routine care. There
has also been a perceived need to continuously monitor non-severe COVID-19 patients, either
from their quarantine site at home, or dedicated quarantine locations (e.g., hotels). In particular,
facilitating contact tracing with proximity and location tracing apps was adopted in many
countries very rapidly. Thus, the pandemic has driven incentives to innovate and enhance or
create new routes for providing healthcare services at distance. In particular, this has created a
dramatic impetus to find innovative ways to remotely and effectively monitor patient health
status. In this paper, we present a review of remote health monitoring initiatives taken in 20 states
during the time of the pandemic. We emphasize in the discussion particular aspects that are
common ground for the reviewed states, in particular the future impact of the pandemic on
remote health monitoring and consideration on data privacy.

2

Introduction
Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2) that has rapidly spread across the globe. It is a newly recognized illness that initially
surged exponentially in Wuhan, China, and from there, to other provinces in China and then
across the globe (Yang et al 2020, Wang et al 2020b, 2020a, Zhou et al 2020). As of 28 June 2020,
the number of COVID-19 patients around the world surpassed 10 million, with over 500,000
casualties. The clinical spectrum of SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia ranges from mild to critically ill cases
and requires early detection and monitoring, within a clinical environment for critical cases and
remotely for mild cases. The fear of contamination in clinical environments has led to a dramatic
reduction in on-site referrals for routine care. There has also been a perceived need to
continuously monitor non-severe COVID-19 patients, either from their quarantine site at home,
or a dedicated quarantine location (e.g., hotel). There has also been a need to find alternatives
routes to provide regular healthcare services to non-COVID-19 patients while in quarantine. This
has created a dramatic impetus to find innovative ways to remotely and effectively monitor
patient health status.
Remote health diagnosis and monitoring relates to the diagnosis and monitoring of individuals
outside the classical hospital environment, typically in their home but also through mobile clinics.
It enables monitoring of patient well-being (e.g., sleep quality), diagnosis of medical conditions
(e.g., atrial fibrillation) as well as to track over time changes requiring medical attention. In the
context of this review we consider both remote single or repeated measurements for the purpose
of diagnosis and/or monitoring. The diagnosis and monitoring actors that were considered were
medical professionals or a government body (e.g. ministry of health) or individuals self-monitoring
themselves. With the advent of COVID-19, researchers, entrepreneurs, governments and
industries around the world have been engaged in inventing or adapting existing technologies to
support healthcare in dealing with the novel coronavirus. In many ways, the pandemic has
underscored the importance of remote health monitoring in our modern, connected and digital
societies. The current work provides an overview of the innovations that have been springing up
globally within the context of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Experts from different regions were invited to contribute to this review paper and asked to
contribute their opinion on the role, usage and development of remote health monitoring during
the time of the pandemic. They categorized the initiatives that developed technologies which: (1)
facilitate contact tracing and the reconstruction of exposure to potentially infected COVID-19
patients, with the two subcategories of proximity and location tracing; (2) perform
telemonitoring, i.e. use telemedicine tools like video chat and connected medical sensors to
diagnose and manage patients; (3) were used in the creation of mobile clinics, where medical
services can be accessed away from regular contact points, such as hospitals; and (4) enable pointof-contact screening to rapidly measure symptoms to identify potential patients in everyday
locations, such as airports. Furthermore, the experts were asked to review and distinguish
between initiatives from the government, industry and academia and what privacy considerations
went into their implementation. While performing their review, the authors were asked to focus
on the singularity of approaches/initiatives taken in their respective countries, highlight the
challenges faced and reason for the lack of uptake of such systems in certain cases. Finally, each
author was asked to provide their perspective on the consequences of the pandemic on the future
3

of remote health monitoring in these countries. Although this article is written in the context of
COVID-19 the scope is not specific to remote health monitoring for COVID-19 but to the usage of
remote health monitoring during the time of COVID-19 i.e. including patient care for chronic or
any other conditions while they are in quarantine. This is a non-systematic review which aims to
highlight specific initiatives taken in 20 different countries (Figure 1). Whenever possible we
attempted to cite peer-reviewed publications covering the initiatives that were highlighted.
However, because of the timely nature of this topic, not all such initiatives are yet published in
scientific journals or as technical reports.

Figure 1: Map showing the 20 states and their accompanying number in the review.
Review of remote health initiatives
1. China: China, the first country to encounter the disease, was also the first to develop innovative
remote monitoring methods to assist clinical staff and public health experts. Perhaps the most
obvious remote monitoring technology most citizens possess, is the smartphone, allowing
everything from telemedicine consults and symptom checking from apps and websites to
approximate heart rate monitoring through the camera, and location tracking to identify disease
hotspots or contact-tracing. The Chinese government teamed up with Tencent and Alibaba to
develop color-coded health rating systems, which are added to the existing apps of WeChat
developed by Tencent (Shenzhen, China) and AliPay developed by Alibaba Group Holding Limited
(Hangzhou, China). Citizens in hundreds of cities have been asked to download the software that
transmits their location to several authorities, including the local police. The app combines
geotracking with meta-data, such as travel bookings, to designate citizens with color codes
ranging from green (low risk) to red (high risk). High-risk individuals may be banned from certain
locations, such as apartment complexes, grocery stores and their own places of employment.
Some provinces have different presentations for the color-coded health rating systems, such as
the “Sukang” code used in the Jiangsu Province, to facilitate the local government's management
in the early stage. Aiming to help the provinces recognize each other’s health codes and facilitate
travel, as well as to help the flow and sharing of health information, addressing the issue of
personal privacy protection, on 29 April 2020, the Standardization Administration of China and
the State Administration for Market Regulation jointly released a series of National Guidelines for
4

Personal Health Information Codes (PHI-Code Standards) that specify requirements for health
code apps in their collection, processing, and use of personal health information during the
COVID-19 pandemic1. The PHI-Code Standards include standards on a reference model (GB/T
38961-2020)2, the data format (GB/T 38962-2020)3 and an application interface (GB/T 389632020)4 for a unified PHI-Code, which ensure the collection, processing, and utilization of personal
health information complies with the national standard of Information Security Technology
Personal Information Security Specification (GB / T 35273-2020)5. Four types of data will be
collected for the PHI-Code system: (1) personal identification information (including name,
gender, nationality, identity card number, household registration, address, contact number,
medical history, etc.); (2) personal health information (including body temperature, symptoms,
period of stay in high-risk areas, contact with high-risk individuals, etc.); (3) travel history; and (4)
health assessment information (including medical test results, assessment results, risk level, etc.).
According to the new guidelines, health codes must be encrypted and stored using an algorithm
satisfying the requirements for national password management. Personal health information
services and apps must obtain the express consent or authorized consent of users when collecting
data and must keep private content confidential. Both WeChat and AliPay are also being used to
track people’s movements and ascertain whether they have been in contact with an infected
person, in which case, individuals are ordered to self-isolate themselves. China has launched an
online consultation system in commonly used mobile apps, such as WeChat and Alipay, to provide
technical support for remote screening of COVID-19 infection risk. In addition, Universities and
research institutions also contributed to the online consultation systems. An example is that, the
second affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University which has developed a free online health
consultation and COVID-19 risk screening platform. Besides the inspection of travel history,
temperature screening checkpoints have been established at locations with high-density
passenger flows, such as train stations, bus stations, railway stations, airports, supermarkets and
residential area entrances, which is a necessary, easily implemented, and rapid method of
screening large numbers of the population for possible COVID-19 infections (Peng et al 2020).
Anyone entering a public area is temperature-screened using non-contact infrared thermometers
for rapid body temperature measurement. Since core temperature is particularly hard to assess
without an invasive probe, far-infrared (FIR) thermal imaging is a key focus for remote/noncontact monitoring in this context. Guidelines require temperatures within normal range i.e.,
below 37.3 °C (Liu et al 2020). Persons whose body temperature exceeds 37.3 °C are prohibited
from entering the public ranges and report to the local health management department according
Zhang L 2020 China: Recommended National Guidelines for Health Code Apps Issued Libr. Congr. Online:
https://www.loc.gov/law/foreign-news/article/china-recommended-national-guidelines-for-health-code-apps-issued/ Retrieved: 08
July 2020
2 Standardization Administration of China and the State Administration for Market Regulation 2020 Personal health information
code-Reference model (GB/T 38961-2020) Code China Online: https://www.codeofchina.com/standard/GBT38961-2020.html
Retrieved: 08 July 2020
3 Standardization Administration of China and the State Administration for Market Regulation 2020 Personal health information
code-Data format (GB/T 38962-2020) Code China Online: https://codeofchina.com/standard/GBT38962-2020.html Retrieved: 08
July 2020
4 Standardization Administration of China and the State Administration for Market Regulation 2020 Personal health information
code-Application interface (GB/T 38963-2020) Code China Online: https://www.codeofchina.com/standard/GBT38963-2020.html
Retrieved: 08 July 2020
5 Standardization Administration of China and the State Administration for Market Regulation 2020 Information security technology Personal information security specification Online: https://www.chinesestandard.net/PDF/English.aspx/GBT35273-2020 Retrieved:
08 July 2020
1

5

to the procedures (Cai et al 2020). In contrast with the traditional tools such as temperature guns,
Guide Infrared (Wuhan, China) supplied automatic fever screening systems, which estimate the
temperature of passengers at a distance of several meters, avoiding the close contact required by
temperature guns and reducing the risk of infection. Powered by the AI-enabled facial detection
technology, the system can automatically focus on a passenger's face and give an alarm when a
person with a fever is identified, giving inspectors an ideal tool to deal with densely populated
and fast-moving scenarios. Hanwang Technology, also known as “Hanvon” (Beijing, China)
supplied a facial recognition system that can identify people even when they are wearing a
protective mask with a recognition rate of 95% 6. Baidu (Beijing, China) has also developed a
system that can examine up to 200 people per minute and detect out-of-range body
temperatures, without disrupting passenger flow. This system is currently in use at Beijing’s
Qinghe Railway Station. Robots and smart devices help monitor patient vital signs remotely
without person-to-person contact. In the Hongshan Sports Center in Wuhan, the Cloud Ginger
(also known as XR-1) robot and the Smart Transportation Robot, which can carry food and
medicine from healthcare providers to patients, were specifically modified to assist in the COVID19 fight. Robots are also being used to diagnose fever in many hospitals. Patients, doctors and
nurses wear smart bracelets that are synced with CloudMinds’ platform (Shenzhen, China), to
monitor their vital signs, including temperature, heart rate and blood oxygen levels, with the aim
of catching any early signs of infection. The system has not been validated yet, and it is worth
noting that wrist-worn wearables are notoriously noisy and poor at measuring these types of vital
signs. Perhaps more notably, a machine developed by engineers at Tsinghua University in Beijing,
consists of a robotic arm on wheels that can perform ultrasounds and mouth swab tests and listen
to lung sounds7. Lung sounds (such as “crackles and rales”) can be indicators of fluid buildup in
the lungs and be a reason for urgent admission to critical care facilities or administration of
steroids or other medications.
Computed tomography (CT) plays a crucial role in the diagnosis and evaluation of COVID-19.
However, to avoid potential cross-infection and to facilitate the imaging process, portable CT
devices are needed in the bed-wards, and all CT images must be uploaded into picture archiving
and communications systems (PACS) for immediate reporting. Mobile CT devices from the
Shanghai-based Siemens Healthineers were transported to Huanggang City, Hubei Province, the
frontline of the fight against the COVID-19 outbreak. Alibaba (Hangzhou, China) has developed a
COVID-19 diagnosis tool that can analyze CT images and provide a diagnosis in the inpatient
wards. The facility adopted the multiple thermal insulation structure and used a lead composite
layer to protect against X-ray radiation, making it flexible and easy to transport. 5G technology
was also applied to ensure the high-speed transmission of medical images for remote diagnosis.
For example, the radiology department of the West China Hospital of Sichuan University used 5G
for remote CT scanning of COVID-19 patients, which provided strong support for subsequent
diagnosis and treatment. Similarly, ultrasonic equipment and remote diagnosis service also
obtained the support of a 4G/5G technique. Changzheng Hospital in Shanghai has applied the
Clarke L 2020 China’s Hanwang Technology claims it can ID mask-wearing faces NS TECH Online:
https://tech.newstatesman.com/security/hanwang-technology-id-mask-wearing-faces Retrieved: 30 June 2020
7 E&T 2020 Robotic arm could save lives on medical frontline amid coronavirus outbreak E&T Online:
https://eandt.theiet.org/content/articles/2020/03/robotic-arm-could-save-lives-on-medical-frontline-amid-coronavirus-outbreak/
Retrieved: 30 April 2020
6

6

ultrasonic remote consultation with the support of a 4G/5G network. Medical experts from the
remote ultrasound medical center of Zhejiang Provincial People's Hospital used 5G technology to
remotely control the ultrasonic robot in the module hospital of Wuhan Huangbo gymnasium to
conduct ultrasonic examinations. In these situations, ultrasound experts can complete real-time
scanning through remote operation of ultrasonic robot manipulators, thereby effectively relieving
the shortage of ultrasound doctors in isolation wards and reducing infection risks (Jia LT, Zhao JQ,
Zhang SQ 2020).
2. Singapore: Telemedicine offers greater convenience and improved accessibility to medical
support and medication through new digital options. Over the last decade, Singapore has seen a
growth in the telemedicine domain, with public and private players emerging to offer a variety of
services to patients. Mobile medicine provides greater accessibility for patients who, for a variety
of reasons, are unable to attend a hospital or a clinic, by bringing medical practitioners to their
bedside. During COVID-19, mobile medicine services are quickly expanding. Singapore took
relatively rapid action to restrict the spread of COVID-19. Firstly, to minimize the risk of hospitalbased transmission of COVID-19, the Ministry of Health of Singapore has restricted the movement
of patients and staff across hospitals8. Strict social distancing measures have also been put in
place, including advising the public against large social gatherings to mitigate the risk of
community transmission9. Meanwhile, the country’s Integrated Health Information System
agency10 collaborated with KroniKare, to develop iThermo systems, an Android application that
connects with a thermal and laser camera, for temperature and distance measurement. The
system is designed to identify fever for people in motion and at a distance. Compared to handheld infrared temperature devices, this system can significantly reduce the risk of infection due
to exposure for the user. There are vague claims in the media around the use of artificial
intelligence (or more accurately machine learning and computer vision techniques), but beyond
this hardware overview, no details on the system’s technology performance are available.
Perhaps most notably, the country’s TraceTogether (Cho et al 2020), developed in collaboration
with the Government Technology Agency and the Ministry of Health (MOH), provided the first
Bluetooth solution in the country to facilitate tracing of close contact with an infected user11. The
proximity tracing app aims to use Bluetooth signals to determine when two phones are within
two meters, or within five meters for 30 minutes. Both phones exchange anonymized temporary
IDs (generated by encrypting the User ID with a private key that is held by MOH) together with
information about the nearby phone’s model, Bluetooth signal strength, and time. The temporary
ID can only be decrypted by MOH, with MOH’s privately held key. The temporary ID is renewed
frequently, making it difficult for anyone (other than the MOH) to identify or link the temporary
IDs to any given user. All this information is stored locally on the user’s phone, and not sent to
MOH. If MOH needs to share a user’s proximity data for contact tracing, they seek the user’s
Lim J 2020 Coronavirus: Doctors, staff and patients to restrict movements to within one hospital The Straits Times Online:
https://www.straitstimes.com/singapore/health/coronavirus-doctors-staff-and-patients-to-restrict-movements-to-within-onehospital Retrieved: 08 July 2020
9 Sim D 2020 Coronavirus: why did Singapore have more cases than Hong Kong – until now? South China Morning Post Online:
https://www.scmp.com/week-asia/health-environment/article/3050039/coronavirus-why-did-singapore-have-more-cases-hong
Retrieved: 08 July 2020
10 GCT 2020 Innovations in Singapore’s COVID-19 Response. Glob. Cent. Technol. Innov. Sustain. Dev. Online:
https://sgtechcentre.undp.org/content/sgtechcentre/en/home/blogs/covid19response.html Retrieved: 08 July 2020
11 Hui M 2020 Singapore wants all its citizens to download contact tracing apps to fight the coronavirus Online:
https://qz.com/1842200/singapore-wants-everyone-to-download-covid-19-contact-tracing-apps/ Retrieved: 01 May 2020
8

7

consent by directly calling the user and providing the user with a code to match with a
corresponding verification code on the user's TraceTogether app. The app does not track an
individual’s location or contacts and data is stored locally on the phone for only 21 days and is not
accessed unless the user is identified as having been close enough to another user of the app that
was identified as COVID-19 positive at some (unspecified) window around the time of proximity.
There is no way for users to self-report tests, and it is not clear how the MOH identifies who is
COVID-19 positive, or how accurate the test must be, in order to initiate contact tracing.
3. India: India had relied almost completely on manual contact tracing (i.e. door-to-door surveys,
manual record-keeping) and monitoring to tackle earlier outbreaks, e.g., H1N1 influenza. The
Integrated Disease Surveillance Program of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is the
primary body in charge of establishing a decentralized State-laboratory based surveillance system
for early detection and containment of epidemics12. However, realizing the importance of digital
contact tracing to control the COVID-19 outbreak, the National Informatics Centre of the Ministry
of Electronics and Information Technology released a smartphone-based contact tracing “Aarogya
Setu” (Bridge to Health in English) app, which is similar to its international counterparts in that it
uses Bluetooth technology to continuously monitor other devices that come within range to
perform proximity tracing, and saves encrypted information of those device IDs in local memory.
People who test positive for the virus are asked to manually input their test result, after which, all
users who came into close contact with the patient are sent an automated alert and asked to
quarantine. Aarogya Setu also uses GPS for geolocation information thus combining proximity and
location tracking. The rationale given by the Indian Government for using GPS despite privacy
concerns was that it could be used to quickly and more efficiently deploy resources in case of a
public health emergency. Downloading the app and inputting information is mandatory for
government and private sector employees and voluntary for others. Based on algorithmically
defined criteria, high-risk users are identified, and their data is automatically uploaded to
centralized government servers. The primary uses of the app include identification of high-risk
individuals, generation of reports, creation of statistical visualizations and identification of
infection clusters guide quarantine policies and accelerate decision making 13. As of 24 April 2020,
the app had 75 million downloads and while this number is high, it is still a relatively small
proportion of India’s approximately 500 million smartphone users14. A recent study (Ferretti et al
2020) suggested that the efficacy of digital contact tracing depends on the square of the
proportion of the population using the app. This suggests that Aarogya Setu’s user base has to
increase significantly for it to have a meaningful effect on containment efforts. In parallel, Bharat
Electronics Ltd., a public-sector undertaking under the Ministry of Defense, with expertise in
networking and Internet of Things, in collaboration with the All India Institute of Medical Sciences
located in Rishikesh, is developing non-invasive sensor technology for monitoring quarantined

Vaidyanathan G 2020 People power: How India is attempting to slow the coronavirus Nature.com Online:
https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-020-01058-5 Retrieved: 08 July 2020
13 Majumdar R 2020 Coronavirus pandemic: Aarogya Setu app can help in contact tracing but privacy issues need to be addressed
India Today Online: https://www.indiatoday.in/technology/features/story/coronavirus-pandemic-aarogya-setu-app-can-help-incontact-tracing-but-privacy-issues-need-to-be-addressed-1667604-2020-04-16 Retrieved 08 July 2020
14 The Economic Times 2020 Aarogya Setu app crosses 75 million downloads Econ. Times Online:
https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/tech/internet/aarogya-setu-app-crosses-75-million-downloads/articleshow/75359890.cms
Retrieved 08 July 2020
12

8

patients15. Measured parameters include temperature, pulse rate, peripheral oxygen saturation
(SpO2) and respiration rate. These, along with the patient's location will be monitored and
uploaded to cloud servers managed by a centralized command and control center set up to limit
the effects of the pandemic. Sensor kits would be handed out to symptomatic patients upon
assessment by clinical experts. Several HealthTech startups have also joined in efforts to create
innovative solutions for curbing infection rates. Some of these have been selected by a specialized
accelerator program called COVID-19 Innovations Deployment Accelerator (C-CIDA) launched by
the Centre for Cellular and Molecular Platforms (C-CAMP), a bio-innovation program
conceptualized by the Indian Government’s Department of Biotechnology16. MedIoTek Health
Systems (Chennai, India), one of the start-ups chosen by the accelerator program, is working on
enhancing remote monitoring wearables. Their primary solution called “VinCense”, monitors
patients suffering from chronic heart and lung diseases and warns people nominated by the
patient when an alert is triggered by the system. The company adapted its product use-case for
COVID-19, stating that parameters measured by its sensors, i.e., skin temperature, respiratory
rate, oxygen saturation and blood pressure, may be used for cost and time-effective triaging of
at-risk individuals and in pre-screening for the virus. While there are several interesting and
innovative solutions, their usefulness in supporting this pandemic remains undetermined,
primarily due to a lack of government regulations for remote monitoring and lack of clinical
validation. Start-ups centered around imaging technologies like Niramai Health Analytix
(Bengaluru, India) and Qure.ai (Mumbai, India), have showcased the usefulness of integrating
novel automated imaging methods in existing healthcare infrastructures. Niramai has adapted its
patented thermal image processing technology diagnostic platform for contactless fever
screening of COVID-19 patients. Similarly, Qure.ai have adapted their automated chest X-ray
interpretation system (Nash et al 2020) originally meant for pulmonary tuberculosis screening, to
monitor COVID-19 progression in the lungs. Before COVID-19, the delivery of healthcare services
via digital platforms was regulated by a combination of legislative acts for information technology
and medical practice17. Telemedicine saw a substantial rise in user engagement throughout this
pandemic, with popular telemedicine platform Practo (Bengaluru, India) reporting a 5-fold
increase in online consultations from March 2020 to May 2020, with 50 million users accessing
their service17. Of these, 80% were first time users and 44% were from smaller Indian cities. In the
absence of explicit government regulations, companies relied on standards defined by the United
States of America’s Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act and the International
Organization for Standardization for ensuring data protection and instilling trust in customers.
Due to a sudden surge in the number of telemedicine users, the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare released guidelines17 regulating the industry and establishing standards for both medical
practitioners and technology platforms. This has clarified several grey areas and has stimulated
more telemedicine businesses and investments in India. A bill concerning personal data
protection is also currently under discussion at the Indian parliament. India was identified as the
Lalitha S 2020 COVID-19: BEL develops wrist, chest bands for AIIMS to monitor people under quarantine New India Express Online:
https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/karnataka/2020/apr/18/covid-19-bel-develops-wrist-chest-bands-for-aiims-to-monitorpeople-under-quarantine-2131943.html Retrieved 08 July 2020
16 Fernandes S 2020 Govt, industry to support 13 innovations that may help battle Covid-19 Hindustan Times Online:
https://www.hindustantimes.com/mumbai-news/govt-industry-to-support-13-innovations-that-may-help-battle-covid-19/storyWlpzQ4OfpYJ1XCIzMv95gI.html Retrieved 08 July 2020
17 Medical Council of India 2020 Telemedicine Practice Guidelines Indian Med. Counc. (Professional Conduct. Etiquet. Ethics Regul.)
Online: https://www.mohfw.gov.in/pdf/Telemedicine.pdf Retrieved 08 July 2020
15

9

largest market for wearables in 201418. A follow-up survey conducted in 2017, also identified India
as one of the countries most ready for personalized monitoring devices, along with China, the US
and Brazil19. The pandemic led to accelerated government regulations for telemonitoring and also
introduced several Indians to the concept of digital health services. With greater acceptance,
more start-ups are expected to propose novel solutions and methods for integrating technology
with existing clinical workflows.
4. South Korea Applying lessons learned from the Middle East Respiratory Syndrome outbreak in
2015, Korea has been strengthening its infectious disease surveillance and response capacity.
South Korea was also an early adopter of mobile phone-assisted contact-tracing technology
during COVID-19, by rolling out a government app that leverages several sources of data including
cell phone location, processed CCTV footage, and credit-card records, to monitor activities20.
When an individual tests positive, local governments can send out a general alert to all phones,
that reportedly includes the individual’s last name, sex, age, district of residence, and credit-card
history, as well as a minute-to-minute record of their interactions with local businesses, or even
with a list of rooms of a building that the person entered, when they visited a toilet, and whether
they wore a mask. This approach posed severe privacy issues, and even with modifications to
protect identities, the details needed to warn potential contacts of exposure risk has made it easy,
particularly through the sharing of information across social media, to guess who the infectious
individual is, and perhaps more importantly, what activities they had been engaged in and with
whom. This has led to significant criticism of this approach, particularly in Europe and North
America. In parallel, approximately one in 200 people in South Korea has been tested for COVID19, and the country has also quickly expanded testing capacities to narrow down the infected
group as soon as possible through exhaustive searching. Several hospitals have used big data
information, such as GPS tracking data from phones and cars, credit card transactions, travel
histories, CCTV footage, and artificial intelligence to identify high-priority cases and track the
routes of infected individuals, to facilitate to implement remote diagnosis of mildly affected
patients, freeing up staff to focus on diagnosing and treating severe cases. South Korea also
encourages public-private partnerships to use technology to improve health results. For example,
Korea Telecom has developed a global epidemic prevention platform, which has been deployed
to help disinfect areas in Daegu. Hancom Group (Bundang-gu, South Korea) launched its AI
Outbound Calling System to provide checkups on self-isolated citizens, asking individuals whether
they have symptoms such as fever or cough, and then summarizing the statistical data, and
addressing the problem of staff shortages.
5. Japan: Japan has a long history of promoting remote medicine, including telemonitoring and
mobile clinics, with early pilots dating back to the 1970s, in an attempt to address the shortage of
medical resources and regional disparities (e.g., small remote islands in rural areas). Over the past
few decades, telemonitoring has proven common and useful in crucial medical areas such as
Accenture 2014 Racing Toward a Complete Digital Lifestyle: Digital Consumers Crave more Accent. Digit. Consum. Tech Surv. 2014
Online: https://www.accenture.com/us-en/~/media/accenture/conversionassets/dotcom/documents/global/pdf/technology_1/accenture-digital-consumer-tech-survey-2014.pdf Retrieved: 08 July 2020
19 Accenture 2017 Dynamic Digital Consumer Accent. Digit. Consum. Surv. Online: https://www.accenture.com/usen/_acnmedia/pdf-39/accenture-pov-dynamic-consumers.pdf Retrieved: 08 July 2020
20 Thompson D 2020 The Technology That Could Free America From Quarantine Atl. Online:
https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2020/04/contact-tracing-could-free-america-from-its-quarantine-nightmare/609577/
Retrieved 08 July 2020
18

10

hypertension, diabetes, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, heart failure, pregnancy, health
promotion, and others21. For example, around 80% of patients diagnosed with hypertension in
Japan own a home BP monitor and track the longitudinal changes in their blood pressure (BP),
providing crucial information to caregivers (Anon 2014). Before COVID-19, mobile clinics in Japan
were limited in use and were only utilized in rare circumstances for those in medically
underserved areas. In 2018, the Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare published the new
guideline for mobile clinics22 in which mobile clinics were no longer limited to special populations
and the objectives, requirements and restrictions were clarified. The platform can either be
dedicated software (e.g. Clinics23 and Curon24) or common communication platforms. It is up to
healthcare providers and patients to decide if they utilize these services. It is required that all
services used need to be secure and privacy-protecting. The adoption of mobile clinic had been
slow thanks to several restrictions in the 2018 guideline: (1) only limited numbers of diseases were
covered (e.g., hypertension and diabetes); (2) “6 months rule” whereby patients must visit a
doctor regularly for 6 months before they transition into telemedicine, and (3) “30 minutes rule”
whereby an online healthcare provider must be located within 30 minutes from their patients in
case of emergency. Although these rules were intended to promote informed decision making
and prevent misdiagnosis, under treatment, misconduct, and security breaches, they hampered
the rapid spread of mobile clinics. However, in response to COVID-19, these restrictions were
relaxed – more diseases were approved, the leading time was shortened to 3 months (of note,
during the COVID-19 pandemic, it was temporarily exemplified that a new patient could start
telemedicine immediately), and the “30 minutes rule” was scrapped. Thus, these relaxations will
accelerate the spread of online medicine across the country even after COVID-19. For contact
tracing, Japan initially relied on voluntary phone interviews and appeared to demonstrate success
in the early stage of the outbreak (Iwasaki and Grubaugh 2020). However, this approach
subsequently began to lag once the numbers of new cases began to soar. On 19 June 2020, Japan
launched the app COCOA (COVID-19 Contact Confirming Application), a proximity tracing app that
relies on an ephemeral-ID, and thus is classified as a decentralized, privacy-preserving
anonymized approach. It alerts a user if they happened to be in close vicinity (within 1 meter, >15
minutes) of someone who tested positive for COVID-19. To address privacy concerns, the program
solely focuses on reporting retrospective, binary contact history within the last 14 days.
Temperature monitoring is required in hospitals/clinics since Feb 25 2020 by the ministry of health
labor and welfare. The program does not store, use, or report personal-identifiable information
such as the user’s name, phone number, and GPS information. Doctor-to-doctor communication
is another emerging area in telemedicine. Intensive Care Unit (ICU) doctors whose expertise
involves extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) are scarce and are now critically needed.
A team that consists of such experts provides phone consultations nationwide (dubbed as
“ECMOnet”), remotely assisting physicians in deciding initiation of ECMO therapy. In summary,

JTTA 2013 Telemedicine in Japan Japanese Telemed. Telecare Assoc. Online:
http://jtta.umin.jp/pdf/telemedicine/telemedicine_in_japan_20131015-2_en.pdf Retrieved: 08 July 2020
22 Ministry of Health Labor and Welfare 2018 オンライン診療の適切な実施に関する指針 Online:
https://www.mhlw.go.jp/content/000534254.pdf Retrieved: 08 July 2020
23 CLINICS 2020 診療業務の効率化により より良い診療を実現する Online: https://clinics-cloud.com/
24 Curon 2020 Curon Online: https://curon.co/ Retrieved 08 July 2020 (inside Japan only)
21

11

the pandemic has, and will continue to accelerate extensive healthcare reforms that feature
telemonitoring, mobile clinics, tracing apps and point-of-contact screening in Japan.
6. Israel: Over the last 40 years, Israel has made significant investments in many key technologies
relevant to digital health. Within the scope of remote health monitoring for COVID-19, initiatives
include identification of unique vocal properties of virus carriers, by the start-up Vocalis Health,
working in collaboration with the Ministry of Defense and several academic groups. Their
technology aims to enable mass screening and remote monitoring of recovery from COVID-19; a
proof-of-concept remains to be established. The AI MyndYou startup has developed MyEleanor,
which is a voice bot and virtual care manager that can act as a hotline to assess risk. TytoCare is
applying its device that enables remote examination of lung and heart function and temperature,
to support remote examination and monitoring of patients at home and in the hospital
environment. For example, the Sheba Medical Center in Tel Aviv has been using a Tyto Care
(Netanya, Israel Ltd) stethoscope and Datos Health (Ramat Gan, Israel Ltd) thermometer, blood
pressure cap and CO2 device to monitor patients quarantined in a dedicated facility. Many other
remote health innovations including Biobeat (Petah Tikva, Israel Ltd), EarlySense (Ramat Gan,
Israel Inc) and Sweetch (Tel Aviv, Israel Ltd), have also been involved in supporting hospital and
health maintenance organizations. The start-up nation has seen an important number of remote
health system applications during the pandemic although the impact of these in managing the
situation is yet to be assessed. Although some remote health systems (e.g. telemedicine and
mobile health) were already developed in Israel prior to COVID-19, this period has provided an
unprecedented opportunity for start-ups in this space to experiment with their systems and
demonstrate their strength to healthcare providers such as hospitals and the Israeli health
maintenance organizations. Teleconsultation services, although already existing in some form,
have increased significantly during the pandemic. In particular, teleconsultation platforms were
used beyond their original scope and this highlighted their shortcomings: limited functionalities,
no access to patient medical records and no ability to connect to medical sensors for the purpose
of remote physiological measurements. To alleviate some of these limitations many health
providers made use of common teleconferencing tools such as Skype, WhatsApp or Zoom.
Sometimes, patients were asked to communicate some of their medical information via email to
the nurse in preparation for the consultation. The urgency of the situation thus resulted in the
usage of non-secured channels of communications for delivering remote health services. It is
however very much due to the urgency and need to act quickly and it is sensible to expect that
more secured and dedicated platforms will emerge as a result. In the academic arena, the Artificial
Intelligence in Medicine Lab at the Technion has developed a digital oximetry biomarkers toolbox
that can be used both for diagnostic purposes and for monitoring pulmonary function in patients
with pneumonia - a common complication of COVID-19. The toolbox is available in the openaccess software PhysioZoo (Behar et al 2018)25. The Weizmann Institute of Science in Rehovot has
developed a method for monitoring, identifying and predicting the zones of COVID-19 spread
(Rossman et al 2020). To achieve that, volunteers are asked to complete a questionnaire relating
to virus-induced symptoms, once a day, with the aim of identifying clusters of infection. This
initiative has had tens of thousands of volunteers to date and is expected to support policymaking
Behar J, Rosenberg A, Weiser-Bitoun I, Shemla O, Alexandra A, Konyukhov E and Yaniv Y 2020 Heart Rate Variability analysis of
human and animal electrophysiological data Online: https://physiozoo.com/ Retrieved 08 July 2020

25

12

intending at slowing down the spread of the virus. Perhaps most notably, on 22 March 2020, the
Israeli Ministry of Health unveiled a new location tracing app, called “The Shield” (“HaMagen”)26.
The app takes GPS location data from the user’s phone and compares it with the information
available within the Health Ministry servers regarding the history of the location of confirmed
cases in the 14 days prior to their diagnosis. The extracted information informs users if they have
crossed paths with someone who has been infected with COVID-19. The user is then given the
option of reporting their exposure to the Health Ministry by filling out a form. The Health Ministry
has provided public assurances that involvement is strictly voluntary and secured. The crossreferencing of the user GPS history with the ones of COVID-19 positive patients happens on the
user phone and is not sent to any third party. The source code of the application has been made
available to the public for transparency. Before this initiative, the movements of people diagnosed
with COVID-19 were published on the Ministry’s website and its Telegram channel, so identifying
potential interactions with infected individuals involved many hours of manual scrolling through
information. In March 2020 the Israeli government started to use geolocation data routinely
collected from Israeli cellphone providers for location tracing i.e. to find people who came in close
contact with identified virus carriers. Identified individuals were sent a text message directing
them to isolate for 14 days. This program was adapted from a secret counterterrorism program
of the Shin Bet, the Israeli domestic intelligence service, as a public health measure. The program
was stopped in early June 2020 as the outbreak reduced. As of late June 2020, and while facing
the second wave of COVID-19 the government decided to re-opening the program which as
already sent thousands of citizen to quarentine. The attitude of Israel in that respect is “inbetween” the positions of countries like China where total state surveillance is allowed and
countries like France where such a program was not initiated because of the fear of intrusion on
privacy. Israel chose to make use of such a program raising concerns on privacy, but it also
demonstrated it can discontinue it promptly when its necessity is passed. Other initiatives from
the government include the Ministry of Defense development of a monitoring system at the
Laniado hospital for health professionals to remotely monitor medical data from respirator
monitoring devices and the Purple Tag regulation by the Ministry of Health which is to be met by
businesses willing to more fully re-open their workplace. The Purple Tag includes a set of rules
that may include a tracing app where employees are asked to scan the barcode of the place they
enter within the organization, filling of a daily health statement (sometimes implemented as a
Google form or using a phone application) and eventual temperature checking at point-of-contact
through infrared camera or portable non-contact thermometers (e.g. Figure 2). Numerous
restaurants, shops and other point-of-contact places also perform a temperature check before
entering. Many of the main initiatives in Israel have been led by government policy, in particular
the Ministry of Health and Ministry of Defense, and financial support to selected industry (e.g.
Vocalis Health Ltd. supported by the Ministry of Defense) and academic partners (e.g. Israel
Science Foundation fast track COVID-19 grants).

13

Figure 2: Point-of-contact temperature screening at the entrance of (left) a company in Israel and (right) at the entrance
of the Technion Israel Institute of Technology in Haifa. Temperature may be checked using thermal imaging or noncontact infrared thermometers.

7. United Kingdom: In the UK, Nye Health (Oxford, UK), has developed a scalable bidirectional
healthcare communications platform which, in theory, enables any clinician to consult any citizen,
on any device from anywhere, in a privacy-preserving manner. Through its encrypted UK National
Health Service (NHS) -compliant communications infrastructure, Nye Health enables both remote
telephone (>90% of the remote consultation burden) and video consultations, with close to a
100% potential population penetration in any region of the UK. Before the COVID-19 outbreak,
Nye Health was building “a participatory global medical community”, but, by early March 2020, it
redeployed its NHS-compliant infrastructure and NHS medical records integration platform in an
attempt to enhance the COVID-19 response. With help from many international partners, Nye
Health has since been scaling rapidly, by on-boarding clinicians and patients, and new hospitals,
practices and hospices every hour and receiving regular international inquiries. Sensyne Health
(Oxford, UK), developed CVm-Health, a web-based application to support individuals, families and
the community to self-monitor their health during the COVID-19 pandemic. The portal allows the
input of symptoms, vital signs (e.g., temperature, heart rate and blood pressure) and medication
intake. Although the adoption and normalization of telemedicine has been slow in healthcare in
the UK, largely due to political and organizational issues (Williams et al 2017), in recent weeks,
COVID-19 has led the UK NHS to turn to remote consultations in order to minimize the risk of
infection for staff and patients. NHS England, for example, has recruited health technology firms,
such as PushDoctor (Manchester, UK), Babylon (London, UK) and Docly (London, UK), to help
general practitioners set up the equipment needed for a massive expansion of telemedicine27,
either online or by phone, video or messaging services. Over the course of the pandemic,
Campbell D 2020 GPs told to switch to digital consultations to combat Covid-19 Guard. Online:
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/mar/06/gps-told-to-switch-to-remote-consultations-to-combat-covid-19 Retrieved 08
July 2020

27

14

universities have also been contributing to the deployment of remote vital sign monitoring
solutions. A team of the Institute of Biomedical Engineering, University of Oxford, has been testing
the concept of a virtual high-dependency unit, where high-risk patients are monitored in the
general ward using wearable technology28. The system is currently being used on isolation wards
in the main hospital of the Oxford University Hospitals and allows nursing staff to keep track of
the condition of the patients with COVID-19 from outside the isolation rooms. It uses third-party
wearables to measure vital signs (heart rate, respiratory rate, oxygen saturation and skin
temperature), which are transmitted via the hospital’s Wi-Fi to a dashboard. In partnership with
NHS organizations in northwest London, the Imperial College of London is trialing a wearable
sensor for remote monitoring29. Originally aimed at identifying sepsis, the wearable device is
comprised of a chest patch that measures respiratory rate, heart rate and temperature every two
minutes; the collected data is then analyzed by an automated algorithm, which alerts the medical
team in cases of deterioration. NHSX, the technology and research arm of the NHS, developed a
proximity tracing phone app with researchers from the University of Oxford and developers from
tech companies like VMWare30. Like many other solutions, the app uses the phone’s Bluetooth
Low Energy network to detect and inform users about potential contact with other infected users,
without identifying or disclosing personal information to other individuals. The concept is similar
to that of the contact tracing app called TraceTogether, rolled out in Singapore. However, after a
problematic launch on the Isle of Wight, the UK government has chosen to pivot and use a
decentralized contact tracing system using an application programming interface developed for
this purpose by Google (Mountainview CA, USA) and Apple Inc. (Cupertino CA, USA).
8. France: The practice and teaching of medicine in France has always been through physical
contact with patients. For example, all medical consultation is accompanied by a physical
examination and a blood pressure measurement. It is therefore hard to imagine, for French
doctors as well as for patients, medical consultations without a physical examination. In July 2009,
the law “Hôpital patients santé Territoires” regulated a form of remote medical practice that was
made possible by technological advances. However, it remained experimental. It was only in 2016
with the establishment of the 2016 medical convention of national health insurance, that the first
step enabling the reimbursement of telemedicine acts was achieved within the strict framework
of the care pathway (treating doctor/patients). Concomitantly the WHO report on e-health in
Europe in 2016, emphasized the interest of supporting and encouraging the deployment of
telemedicine, through appropriate national health policies. Amendment 6 of this agreement, in
April 2018, reinforced the deployment of telemedicine acts throughout France, by allowing their
reimbursement by the national health insurance. Since 15 September 2018, teleconsultation
became available throughout the French territory, as part of the coordinated care pathway 31.
However, this step forward in telemedicine was confronted with a certain “protectionism” from
Lyons E 2020 John Radcliffe coronavirus patients monitored with wearable tech Oxford Mail Online:
https://www.oxfordmail.co.uk/news/18361997.john-radcliffe-coronavirus-patients-monitored-wearable-tech/ Retrieved 08 July
2020
29 Alford J 2020 Wearable sensor trialled for remote COVID-19 monitoring Imp. Coll. London News Online:
https://www.imperial.ac.uk/news/196973/wearable-sensor-trialled-remote-covid-19-monitoring/ Retrieved 08 July 2020
30 Wright M 2020 Contact tracing app could halt spread of COVID-19 if downloaded by 60 per cent of the population Telegr. Online:
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2020/04/26/contact-tracing-app-could-halt-spread-covid-19-downloaded-60/ Retrieved 08 July
2020
31 Maladie C nationale de l’Assurance 2018 GENERALISATION DE LA TELECONSULTATION LE 15 SEPTEMBRE 2018 Online:
https://www.ameli.fr/fileadmin/user_upload/documents/Dossier-de-presse_Teleconsultation_12092018.pdf Retrieved 08 July 2020
28

15

the medical union. For them, it was out of the question to “uberize” medical consultation. Thus,
one can consider that in 2018 the legal and technological framework for telemedicine is ready but
its recognition remained very fragile and subject to controversy. Its usage thus stayed very limited.
The first cases of COVID-19 appeared in France at the end of January 2020 and the epidemic
spread exponentially day after day, imposing on the country a total containment of the population
starting on 17 March 2020. Faced with this unprecedented health crisis, calls from the “SAMU”,
the French emergency medical services, center 15, which is the emergency medical service in
France, have increased fivefold, and medical offices were saturated. Faced with this crisis, the
government (Ministry of Solidarity and Health) and the High Authority for Health (HAS) decided
that teleconsultation and telecare should be offered as a first resort in order to immediately
respond to the medical demand. The Minister of Solidarity and Health decided to relax the rules
of practice for telemedicine on 9 March 2020, to better respond to the constraints of the
epidemic. (Decree No. 2020-227). This Decree in particular included: (1) full coverage of any
teleconsultation, regardless of the doctor, with a 100% reimbursement outside the treatment
path; (2) the consultation must be carried out via a video exchange, and the doctor must be
equipped with secure and connected equipment, in order to guarantee the security of exchanges
of personal health data and the backup and protection of files; (3) possible telephone consultation
is recognized during the crisis; (4) HAS files and decision tree distributed to all health stakeholders
to highlight the interest and relevance of Teleconsultation. Under government influence, many
start-ups and small and medium-sized enterprises members of CapDigital have mobilized to help
doctors equip themselves with telemedicine and integrate regulated platforms (QARE, Doctolib,
Medaviz, Livi, DocteurSécu). All medical data are protected and framed according to the General
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) of the European Union. Other specialized FrenchTech startups
provide data protection solutions so that no French doctor needs to use non-secure tools like
WhatsApp, FaceTime, Skype, or Zoom. The confinement significantly increased the usage of
telemedicine, with 1 million teleconsultations recorded by Caisse Nationale de l'Assurance
Maladie (CNAM) or the week of 30 March 2020 alone. During a press release from the national
health insurance on the 31 March 2020, teleconsultations were now constituting more than 11%
of all consultations, compared to less than 1% before the crisis. On 7 April 2020, the CNAM listed
30,000 doctors had adopted teleconsultation regularly. More than 44% of general practitioners
having experimented using teleconsultation. The pandemic has, therefore, played the role of an
accelerator, making it possible to overcome within a few days many obstacles that were limiting
the development of remote health monitoring in France. Unlike other countries like Israel and
China, France has not implemented a patient tracking policy using mobile phone geolocation. The
government has said it is in favor of digital tracking of the French, on a voluntary basis, to fight
COVID-19 with the use of the app StopCovid. StopCovid is an application that is part of the
government's deconfinement plan. The stated objectives of StopCovid are for citizens to protect
themselves, protect others, and support the efforts of caregivers and the health system to quickly
stop the chains of contamination of the Covid-19 epidemic. On the 27 May 2020, the National
Assembly and the Senate voted in favor of the deployment of StopCovid. The StopCovid
application has been available on the Apple Store and Google Play since 2 June 2020. The
application has been downloaded over 1.9 million times since its launch, for a total of 1.8 million
activations in June 2020. Teleconsultation, alternating with face-to-face consultation, makes it
possible to simplify the monitoring of chronic pathologies by limiting the movement of patients.
16

This also makes it possible to provide faster care and support in the event of an emergency and
acute seasonal pathology (winter pathology). Finally, in the government's “ma santé 2022” plan32,
telemedicine is cited as an effective means against these geographic inequalities of access to care;
8 million French people live in a medical desert. Overall, the pandemic had a dramatic impact on
the way medical services are delivered in France. Moving from a traditional and very protectionist
stand, medical professionals and patients were pushed to experiment with telemedicine
platforms. In time the benefit that these remote services have on the medical system in France
will be understood, and this will have an impact on the future of the French healthcare system.
Indeed, even with the pandemic, the French centuries-long traditional practice of medicine will
take some time to change.
9. Italy: A European Union (EU) study33 analyzed the market for telemedicine applications and
solutions. The study showed that Italy makes up a large proportion of the EU telehealth market,
with a telehealth market revenue per capita of 3.38 Euros per annum (in comparison, the highest
spent per capita is Denmark with 6.22 Euros). In Italy, electronic prescriptions, considered as an
indicator of the uptake of telemedicine tools, are only issued by 12% of the general practitioners.
While some telemedicine services today are eligible for reimbursement, patients still bear most
of their costs. Telemedicine has been integrated as an option in standard home hospitalization
and integrated home care. However, these efforts have been rather fruitless since the
reimbursement schemes and financing structures have not kept pace with these changes. The
implementation of telemedicine in the field of cardiovascular disease was recently assessed by a
census, supported by the Italian Society of Cardiology (Brunetti et al 2020), which showed that
the principal area of interest in telemedicine for cardiovascular disease is prehospital triage of
acute myocardial infarction. Another cluster of telemedicine activity is dedicated to outpatients
with chronic cardiovascular disease, to enable easy access to cardiology examinations such as
electrocardiograms (ECGs), ambulatory ECG or blood pressure monitoring. Another example of
telemedicine in Italy is the screening of diabetic retinopathy (Vujosevic and Midena 2016), for the
management of elderly complex patients with one or more comorbidities (Scalvini et al 2018).
However, Italy does not include telemedicine in the essential levels of care granted to all citizens
within the Italian National Health Service. The lack of reimbursement has been flagged as the
main barrier toward the implementation of remote health monitoring (Palmisano et al 2020). At
the beginning of the COVID-19 emergency, no formal input on telemedicine was given by health
authorities, despite the high pressure on health services during the first phase of the epidemic.
Later, an open call for telemedicine and monitoring system technologies proposals was jointly
issued on 24 March 2020 by the Ministry for Technological Innovation and Digitalization, the
Ministry of Health, the National Institute of Health and the WHO34. However, currently, the only
outcome of this call was the announced implementation of a smartphone app to be used for
contact tracing. As yet, no large-scale telemedicine services for monitoring acute and chronic
patients and allowing continuity of care have been considered. Omboni (Omboni 2020) has
Ministres des Solidarités et de la Santé. (2018). Ma santé 2022 : un engagement collectif. https://solidaritessante.gouv.fr/IMG/pdf/ma_sante_2022_pages_vdef_.pdf Retrieved 08 July 2020
33 PWC for European COmmission 2018 Market study on telemedicine Third EU Heal. Program. Online:
https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/health/files/ehealth/docs/2018_provision_marketstudy_telemedicine_en.pdf Retrieved 08 July
2020
34 AGID 2020 La tecnologia e l’innovazione per la lotta al Coronavirus. Le fast call Innova per l’Italia Online:
https://innovaperlitalia.agid.gov.it/call2action/index.html Retrieved 08 July 2020
32

17

offered several explanations as to why Italy has missed a unique opportunity to set up an
infrastructure for providing care via telemedicine and to usher in a care system. First, the available
solutions do not allow the integration of the available systems with the electronic health record
of the national health system. Second, in most cases, there is poor interconnection between
telemedicine services operating at higher levels (secondary or tertiary care facilities) and those
deployed in primary care clinics or community pharmacies. Third, many telemedicine services
funded by the local or central governmental institutions lack evidence for clinical and costeffectiveness. Fourth, the implementation of telemedicine solutions is often hampered by heavy
privacy regulations and the lack of practical recommendations. Finally, telemedicine services are
not yet included in the basic public health care packages granted to all Italian citizens. A report
with interim indications for telemedicine assistance services was drawn up by the Istituto
Superiore di Sanità (Gabbrielli et al 2020). The report emphasizes that the recommendations only
apply during the COVID-19 emergency and are not to be continued afterwards. The listed
indications are designed to offer health services and psychological support to people in
quarantine at home, to proactively monitor their health conditions. The aim of a home
telemedicine service is to bring medical services to people in isolation or isolated following the
rules of social distancing, in order to proactively monitor their health conditions, in relation both
to the prevention and treatment of COVID-19 and to ensure the continuity of care that may be
necessary for other pathologies and/or conditions that require it. Video examination calls have
been established, being active tele-control of the health: (1) for people who were in contact with
a confirmed COVID-19 case to detect the possible appearance of signs and symptoms of COVID19 infection; (2) for the necessary treatments against COVID-19 and to arrange for any
hospitalization, when appropriate; and (3) to provide the best possible continuity of at-home care
and assistance, in relation to the patient’s basic condition and any COVID-19 infection. For all
examinations, a list of symptoms to be checked is provided, some requiring specific devices, such
as a digital pulse oximeter or ECG recorder, but there is no mention of alternatives in cases in
which the person does not have such devices at hand. Practically speaking, the implementation
of telemedicine in Italy during the current COVID-19 pandemic has been mainly limited to the
possibility of fully digital prescriptions and some routine examinations. In summary, the adoption
of telehealth in Italy has been very low, likely due to the lack of reimbursement schemes. With
the escalation of the current pandemic, specific remote medical services have become available.
There have been very few technological developments both from start-ups and the government,
in the field of remote sensing technology. On 15 June 2020, the app Immuni35 created by the startup Bendin Spoons S.p.A. but managed by the Government for contact tracing was made available
and active throughout Italy. Privacy issues have been taken into account (as little personal data
as possible is recorded) and it is based on Bluetooth Low Energy and not on GPS location tracing.
The app was made available on 15 June 2020, and after two weeks, only 4 million Italian citizens
had downloaded the app, not enough yet for reliable contact tracing. After lockdown
temperature checks will be performed before entering public places. The post-COVID-19 era will
likely see the healthcare system slip back to where they were before, except, for some remote
services that may hopefully remain.

35

Immuni immuni Home Page Online: https://www.immuni.italia.it/ Retrieved 08 July 2020

18

10. Germany: While Germany has pursued remote health care projects for decades (Stroetmann
and Erkert 1999), current practices barely integrate them (Brauns and Loos 2015). The lack of
reimbursement programs, as well as legal restrictions, e.g., the prohibition of remote treatment,
have posed near-insurmountable barriers when trying to establish innovative solutions for
remote healthcare in Germany. Acknowledging this situation, the German Parliament passed the
digital healthcare act (Digitale Versorgung Gesetz, DVG) in 2019, i.e., just before the COVID-19
outbreak. The DVG established a revised legal framework and has taken actions, e.g., the
mandatory launch of electronic health records, i.e. an electronic collection of personal data, past
and present illness and treatments, the authorization of video consultations and changes in
reimbursement36, to promote remote healthcare. Importantly concerning future remote health
monitoring, the DVG enables so-called digital health applications (Digitale
Gesundheitsanwendungen, DiGA)37, i.e., products that capture data, monitor or treat patients,
which can be used by patients or patients together with healthcare professionals. The experiences
from COVID-19 and its severe country-wide consequences, together with the novel legal situation,
may act as game-changer in the remote health arena in Germany. COVID-19 has immediately
triggered solutions for remote healthcare, e.g. informative apps on COVID-19, apps for personal
risk assessment and an app, which gathers data (e.g. movement pattern, heart rate, sleep
behavior) by a smartphone and a connected wearable to gain a better understanding on the
spread of COVID-19 and provide information on it to the public38. Many of the pursued
approaches bear large potential, but only a few applications managed to reach the broad public
quickly. Maybe the most important success story for telehealth is the use of teleconsultations,
which experienced a sudden increase within the pandemic. According to an estimate of the
National Association of Statutory Health Insurance Physicians, the number of doctors’ practices
that offer video consultation raised from 1700 in February 2020 to 25000 in April 202039. A recent
survey among German doctors revealed that 84 % of doctors who offered video consultations
before the pandemic practically did not practice them until the pandemic. During the pandemic,
however, 95% of them practiced video consultations40. Here, the already modified legal
framework and the urgent need for social distancing had an immediate and strong effect. The
surveyed doctors further assumed video consultations to retain relevance even after the
pandemic, which reflects changes in doctors’ attitudes towards the use of remote technology
because of COVID-19 and a sustainable effect. Short to medium term, it is thus likely that even
other telehealth services will gain importance. Specific funding which was and will be launched
by the government might support this development. However, privacy and data protection area
are of major concern among Germans. A tracing app, i.e. an app commonly used to track
infections and contacts to infected persons, can serve as an illustrative example; although
practical evidence and simulated data (Kucharski et al 2020) confirm the benefit of a tracing app
Federal Ministry of Health 2019 Driving the digital transformation of Germany’s healthcare system for the good of patients. The
Act to Improve Healthcare Provision through Digitalisation and Innovation Fed. Minist. Heal. Online:
https://www.bundesgesundheitsministerium.de/digital-healthcare-act.html Retrieved 08 July 2020
37 Federal Institute for Drugs and Medical Devices 2020 Digital Health Applications (DiGA) Fed. Inst. Drugs Med. Devices Online:
https://www.bfarm.de/EN/MedicalDevices/DiGA/_node.html Retrieved 08 July 2020
38 Corona-Datenspende 2020 Corona-Datenspende Robert Koch Inst. Online: https://corona-datenspende.de/
39 Pritzkow K 2020 Telemedicine: the clinic of the future? Mediterr. Broadcast. Online:
https://www.mdr.de/nachrichten/ratgeber/gesundheit/anstieg-nutzung-telemedizin-chancen-und-huerden-100.html Retrieved 08
July 2020
40 Obermann K 2020 Ärztliche Arbeit und Nutzung von Videosprechstunden während der Covid-19-Pandemie Online:
https://www.stiftung-gesundheit.de/pdf/studien/aerzte-im-zukunftsmarkt-gesundheit_2020.pdf Retrieved 08 July 2020
36

19

as part of a multifactorial strategy to slow down the spread of COVID-19 it has been slow in taking
off in Germany. Indeed, the official app initiated by the German government (intended for
voluntary use) was released mid-June 2020, i.e. more than four months after intense discussions
on it started, most importantly owing to the discussion regarding the pursuit of a solution with
central versus decentralized data processing, finally opting for the latter.
11. Switzerland: Compared to Germany, Switzerland had telemedicine services that were already
well established and promoted by health insurers before the COVID-19 outbreak. With the spread
of the disease, these services have received strong support from the population and
consequently, their use increased by 30% by April 202041. However, these services are largely
based on videoconferencing and do not support remote vital sign measurements. In the wake of
COVID-19, several medtech startups have launched initiatives to bridge this gap. Leitwert GmbH
(Zurich, CH) has partnered with the University Hospital Basel (Basel, CH) to remotely track vital
signs with wearables, which are continuously stored using their internet of medical things device
and database management solution. Third-party wearables can be easily integrated to transmit
health parameters independent from location to a cloud-hosted dashboard (Käch et al 2020). Ava
AG (Zurich, CH) has made available their Ava bracelet, which was originally designed for pregnancy
planning, to monitor patients with COVID-19 symptoms (Goodale et al 2019). The bracelet is
being distributed as a research and early surveillance tool in a large-scale study involving over
2000 subjects in Lichtenstein. CSEM SA, a Neuchâtel based, private, non-profit Swiss research and
technology organization that also specializes in wearable electronics, is partnering with various
hospitals in and outside the country to monitor COVID-19-positive heart rate, temperature,
respiration and oxygen saturation. One of the major initiatives in the remote monitoring domain
evolved at the two engineering universities EPFL (Lausanne, CH) and ETH Zurich (Zurich, CH). They
developed, along with other European partners, the open-source Decentralized PrivacyPreserving Proximity Tracing (DP-3T) Protocol (Troncoso et al 2020). The DP-3T is a Bluetoothbased mobile phone sensing approach to automatically track and inform users about potential
contact with other users who self-reported a SARS-CoV-2 infection. The decentralized approach
stores anonymized proximity patterns locally on the phone which maximizes privacy for the
individual, without disclosing identities or other personal information and connections to other
individuals or governments. The SwissCovid App is a proximity tracing solution based on DP-3T
and the corresponding iOS and Android interfaces. It entered public beta testing on 25 May 2020
and is worldwide the first based on this technology. After approval and legislation change from
the Swiss parliament on 8 June 2020, it was launched by the Swiss Federal Office of Public Health
across Switzerland on 25 June 2020. At the time of writing, the Swiss Association of Research
Ethics Committees (Swissethics, Bern, CH) have reported on four approved research studies
involving telemonitoring or point-of-contact screening, and an additional four were under
evaluation42.
12. Portugal: Portugal can also be considered an early adopter of telemedicine, in pursuit of ways
to overcome its geographic barriers and shortage of professionals (Castela et al 2005, LV et al
Möller V 2020 Videosprechstunden: Was in der Schweiz längst normal ist, boomt in Deutschland durch die Corona-Krise Reue
Burcher
Beitung
Online:
https://www.nzz.ch/wirtschaft/corona-krise-telemedizin-in-deutschland-und-der-schweiz-boomtld.1550704?reduced=true Retrieved: 08 July 2020
42 Schweizer Ethikkommissionen 2020 List of approved clinical trials and research projects on COVID-19 in Switzerland. Swiss Assoc.
Res. Ethics Committees Online: https://swissethics.ch/covid-19/approved-projects Retrieved 25 June 2020
41

20

n.d.). Portugal has been implementing telehealth since the 1990s and has led many initiatives that
have been adopted throughout the country in the last two decades. Examples of these initiatives
include real-time remote consultations between healthcare providers, for instance, between
primary care physicians and hospitals (Maia et al 2019), remote screening, particularly in the area
of dermatology in rural areas (Oliveira et al 2014), and remote monitoring programs for chronic
diseases, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases and chronic heart failure43. These
already standard information and communication technology systems typically support videocalls, including the sharing of clinical images or lab tests during the sessions. The interest of the
country in these technologies is well demonstrated by the newly introduced National Strategic
Telehealth Plan launched by the Portuguese Ministry of Health in November 2019, just before the
new COVID-19 outbreak, to advance telehealth. It includes input from 50 institutional
stakeholders and experts across the health spectrum, and describes strategies that will drive
improvements in infrastructure, interoperability, and serviceability, and will support the required
legislation. The Portuguese National Health Service already provides a whole suite of digital tools
to help people manage their health remotely44. On the online Citizen Area (RSE Área do Cidadão)45
for example, users can access their electronic health record (EHR), book an appointment with
their primary care physician and check their vaccination card. A particularly powerful service is
compulsory within the Portuguese National Health Service (SNS) and used by private healthcare
patients. Additionally, the MySNS mobile app46 is a wallet where users can gather personal
information about their healthcare such as vaccine cards, access data to the service (SNS), allergy
registration and e-prescriptions. The app can also create reminders on smartphone calendars,
reminding patients, for example, when to take their medication. Despite the difficulty in
quantifying the impact of COVID-19 on the usage of these tools for remote monitoring, early
indicators suggest an acceleration on their adoption; e.g., in March 2020, when lockdown
measures were first implemented due to COVID-19, the number of telemedicine consultations
increased by 44% as compared to March 201947. Portuguese startups started to offer telemedicine
services free of charge to help the SNS manage cases of COVID-19. As a summary, there have been
some advances in implementing and deploying telemedicine systems in Portugal in the past
decades, which have been transforming the country’s health care system. During the evolving
pandemic, these systems have been further used and novel telehealth technologies for the
remote monitoring of different conditions may be developed and become available to the
population.
13. Russia: In Russia, the market of telehealth and remote health monitoring is still in early stages.
The regulatory system did not authorize telehealth services until 29 July 2017, when Federal Law
№242 "On introducing changes into selected regulations of Russian Federation on the topic of
using information technologies in healthcare" was passed, allowing for the provision of

SPMS 20016 Comissão de Acompanhamento da Informatização Clínica – Relatório de Atividades, Lisboa Serviços Partilhados do
Ministério da Saúde Online: http://www.cnts.min-saude.pt/2017/03/28/211/ Retrieved 08 July 2020
44 SNS 2017 Citizen’s area – SNS Portal: More than 5000 daily appointments scheduled on the online platform Serviço Nac. Saúde
Online: https://www.sns.gov.pt/noticias/2017/10/06/area-do-cidadao-portal-sns/ Retrieved 08 July 2020
45 SNS 2020a Área do Cidadão do Portal SNS Serviço Nac. Saúde Online: https://servicos.min-saude.pt/utente/
46 SNS 2020c MySNS Carteira Serviço Nac. Saúde Online: https://www.sns.gov.pt/apps/mysns-carteira-eletronica-da-saude/
Retrieved 08 July 2020
47 SNS 2020b Consultas em Telemedicina Serviço Nac. Saúde Online: https://www.sns.gov.pt/monitorizacao-do-sns/consultas-emtelemedicina/ Retrieved 08 July 2020
43

21

teleconsultation (excluding diagnosis) and electronic prescription services, starting 201848. This
change in legislation prompted the arrival of a wave of telehealth startups, mostly focusing on
low-hanging fruits of remote consultations and using a marketplace business model. Following
the initial enthusiasm and rapid technology development, a market analysis by EY from early 2020
found that 81% of private-sector healthcare organizations that invested in telemedicine services
following the legislation change, considered these projects unsuccessful due to low adoption and
resistance of both patients and clinical personnel49. Yet, the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic has reversed
this trend again, with remote consultations and electronic prescriptions becoming state-funded
and provided services, following the recommendations of the Ministry of Health. Electronic
prescriptions have also become the recommended approach for chronic disorders. As state
regulation plays the most significant role in shaping the telehealth market in Russia, where only
10-15% of major city inhabitants use private healthcare, telehealth may become a de-facto
standard of healthcare service due to the change of public perception and rapid introduction of
new technologies during the current pandemic. Several commercial telehealth services like
Doc+50, DocDoc51, OnlineDoctor52, Telemed2453 and Yandex.Health54 were already in operation
when the SARS-CoV-2 pandemics started. All of the services provide a moderate level of personal
data protection. All of them require account registration with a track of patients’ medical records.
At the moment all the services report an increase of telehealth appointments and expect a
doubling of the appointments by the end of 2020. A new general telehealth service Doctor Near
55
(Доктор рядом in Russian) was launched in March 2020 at the beginning of the COVID-19
outbreak in Russia. This is a startup backed by a state-owned bank. The service reports about
60,000 telehealth appointments in 2 months 70% of those for acute respiratory infection56. The
service requires registration and track medical records of the patients to provide a moderate level
of personal data protection. All these services apply telemedicine tools to diagnose and manage
COVID-19 patients as well as the management of other acute and chronic conditions at distance.
Moscow regional department of health has organized a telehealth consultation center for the
ambulatory patients diagnosed with SARS-CoV-2. The patient has the opportunity to make an
individual appointment for a consultation, but the doctor can also plan an online appointment
and invite a patient. The telemedicine center works in 24/7 mode to consult patients around the
clock. The capacity of the Center is 200 specialists, which is enough to conduct up to 4000
consultations per day. One appointment lasts on average 13-15 minutes. By 15 June 2020, the
service has provided over 340,000 remote consultations for 114,000 patients with COVID-19. The
service provides a moderate data protection level. Doctors have two screens: one for the
telehealth service and another shows the electronic health record from the United Medical
Russian Federation 2017 О внесении изменений в отдельные законодательные акты Российской Федерации по вопросам
применения информационных технологий в сфере охраны здоровья, федеральный закон № 242-ФЗ Online:
http://publication.pravo.gov.ru/Document/View/0001201707300032 Retrieved 08 July 2020
49 EY 2020 Исследование рынка коммерческой медицины в России. 2018-2019 годы. Market Report Online:
https://assets.ey.com/content/dam/ey-sites/ey-com/ru_ru/news/2020/03/ey_healthcare_research_2018-2019_24032020.pdf
50 Doc+ Telemedicine in Russia Online: https://docplus.ru/services/telemedetsina/ Retrieved 08 July 2020
51 DocDoc Найдите проверенного врача и запишитесь на приём Online: https://docdoc.ru/ Retrieved 08 July 2020
52 LLC Mobile Medical Techniologies Online Doctors Home Page Online: https://onlinedoctor.ru/doctors/ Retrieved 08 July 2020
53 О ТелеМед О ТелеМед Home Page Online: https://www.telmed24.ru/ Retrieved 08 July 2020
54 Клинике Яндекс.Здоровье Онлайн-консультации с врачами Online: https://health.yandex.ru/ Retrieved 08 July 2020
55 Anon Официальный сайт государственной программы «Доктор рядом» Online: http://www.dr-clinics.ru/# Retrieved 08 July
2020
56 Anon Болезнь попалась в сети Online: https://novayagazeta.ru/articles/2020/05/29/85601-bolezn-popalas-v-seti Retrieved 08
July 2020
48

22

Information and Analytical System of Moscow 57. Symptom checkers are also gaining momentum
during SARS-CoV-2 pandemics in Russia. The first symptom checker to provide SARS-CoV-2
specific dialogue was helzy.ru from Medlinx LLC. This is an industry initiative to provide selfdiagnostics and routing to a relevant doctor. The service is completely anonymous and provides
a strong data protection level. It does not collect or store medical data. The symptom checker was
available since late 2019 and according to the developers gained around an additional 30% of
users with the emergence of COVID-19 in Russia. “Social monitoring” is an initiative of a Moscow
government to track that confirmed COVID-19 patients or their home mates follow the prescribed
quarantine obligations58. The mobile application "Social Monitoring" is obliged to be installed by
all people who have confirmed COVID-19 infection, but they are being treated at home in
mandatory isolation. The service is mandatory for Moscow residents with a confirmed diagnosis
of COVID-19, who are under treatment at home; patients with symptoms of acute respiratory
disease (ARD) and those who live with patients with confirmed COVID-19 or ARD. The Social
Monitor app records the location of the phone and sends a selfie photo request several times a
day to check that the user is nearby. If the selfie photo does not reach the server of the Moscow
Main Control Department within an hour, the person will be issued an administrative fine. By the
end of May 2020, there have been around 67000 active users. The service has a little protection
level that is still in compliance with Russian data protection regulations (FZ 152)59. The personal
data that is provided to the service is defined in the consent to receive medical care at home or
by a decree of the chief medical officer. This includes a surname, first name, patronymic name,
the address at which the patient decided to undergo treatment and a mobile phone number. In
addition, by signing these documents, you give your consent for taking photographs and
presenting an identity document, as well as for processing the personal data. The data that the
user sends to the application are stored on the servers of the Information Technology Department
in a secure form. The service was introduced entirely for the purpose of monitoring of COVID-19
quarantine in Moscow. Other regions of Russia did not report the implementation of COVID-19
specific telemonitoring solutions or specializing existing telemedicine services for COVID-19.
14. Canada: In the face of the COVID-19 pandemic, several Canadian initiatives are underway to
provide innovative, urgently needed technological support for remote health monitoring. Contact
tracing, perinatal surveillance, remote ICU telemonitoring and virtual critical care are just a few
important examples discussed below. AI researchers led by Yoshua Bengio, from the MILA
Institute, a partnership between the Université de Montréal and McGill University, have
partnered with Quebec entrepreneurs to develop a peer-to-peer AI-based platform for COVID-19
tracing60. Rather than identifying individuals (which could lead to stigmatization), the goal is to
provide citizens with information to reduce their risk of viral contamination. The key privacy
element is that all information is kept strictly anonymous, and a subset of the data is used by a
centralized “data trust” to periodically retrain a risk predictor. This proximity-based tracing
intends to “apply social distancing at the right places, around infected people”. As with many of
ЕМИАС Запись к врачу в городские поликлиники Москвы Online: https://emias.info/about Retrieved 08 July 2020
mos.ru Социальный мониторинг Online: https://www.mos.ru/city/projects/monitoring/ Retrieved 08 July 2020
59 ФЕДЕРАЛЬНАЯ СЛУЖБА ПО НАДЗОРУ В СФЕРЕ СВЯЗИ И Т И М К Federal Law of 27 July 2006 N 152-FZ ON PERSONAL DATA
Online: https://pd.rkn.gov.ru/authority/p146/p164/ Retrieved 08 July 2020
60 Yoshua Bengio 2020 Peer-to-peer AI-tracing of COVID-19 Online: https://yoshuabengio.org/2020/03/23/peer-to-peer-ai-tracingof-covid-19/ Retrieved 08 July 2020
57
58

23

the contact tracing apps, the idea is to have a smartphone indicate one’s current probability of
infection conditioned by where they have been and who has been in their proximity, from
information gathered by Bluetooth peer-to-peer communication. That risk is then shared with
those they subsequently encounter. Following a test for infection, medical personnel use
encrypted communication to provide the results to the patient’s smartphone application and to
upload anonymized and delocalized patient information (without using geographical trajectories,
but, rather, sequences of encounters and associated risks) from their smartphone to a nongovernmental data trust that collects data to train the risk predictor application, whose updates
are periodically disseminated to participants who provide data. Rapid deployment of this
application requires the collaboration of the provincial authorities (the Quebec Ministry of Health
in this case) that administer the Canadian public health system; such negotiations are ongoing.
Other contact-tracing initiatives are also in place in several other provincial jurisdictions.
Toronto’s University Health Network has adapted a telemonitoring system for COVID-19 patients,
to enable remote observation by nursing staff. Originally designed to ensure that lung surgery
patients maintain their oxygen masks in position, as the pandemic arose, rapid and cost-effective
solutions to reduce COVID-19 exposure were required for attending nurses, whose PPE was
quickly in short supply. The system, now in operation for hospitalized COVID-19 cases, enables
remote monitoring by the nurse, using one camera to observe the patient and another to monitor
medical devices measuring blood pressure and oxygen saturation. Audio communication allows
the nursing staff to interact with the patient and remind those who are capable to reposition the
oxygen probe when necessary. If oxygen levels fall to critical levels, a sentinel event in
deteriorating COVID-19 patients, physical intervention is initiated. Remote perinatal surveillance
allows obstetrical staff to telemonitor mothers in the delivery ward from a central nursing station
or from other facilities. Networked cardiotocography (CTG) and automated recognition of CTG
signal patterns (fetal heart rate decelerations/accelerations, uterine contractions) (Warrick et al
2005), such as those provided by PeriGen Inc. (Montreal, Quebec and Cary, North Carolina) and
by GE HealthCare (Chicago, IL) allow nurses to care for multiple patients at once and especially
during the pandemic, can reduce exposure of clinical staff to infection over potentially many hours
of labor. It can also provide support for lesser-experienced nurses who have been reassigned
during the crisis from other departments. These CTG resources make better use of obstetrical
expertise that is in short supply, increasing the pool of obstetricians who can observe the
recordings and discuss the degree of concern about the progress of labor and the fetal state. Care
in close proximity to the mother is still required for periodic pelvic exams and at the time of
delivery. As COVID-19 infection spread in Canada, construction of makeshift hospitals began61 and
teleconsultation replaced a significant proportion of the in-person patient-clinician encounters.
But for some time, with Canada’s large geographical expanses, virtual critical care has been an
important tool to provide family medicine in outlying clinics with videoconferencing access to
specialists at tertiary care centers, including critical care (ICU) physicians and nurses, pharmacists
and respiratory therapists. Such a model enables patients who are critically ill to be cared for
locally when possible. The COVID-19 context has amplified the need for these services, which is
expected to continue for some time as the virus continues to spread to more remote regions. One
such health network expanding its remote services in the context of COVID-19 is the Health
The Globe and Mail, Ontario, B.C., Quebec begin building makeshift hospitals in preparation for rise in COVID-19 patients, Online:
https://www.theglobeandmail.com/canada/article-ontario-bc-quebec-begin-building-makeshift-hospitals-in/ Retrieved 08 July 2020

61

24

Sciences North Intensive Care Unit in Sudbury Ontario, which is a hub for remote consultation
services, providing support for numerous Northern Ontario communities, such as the far-north
nursing station at Wayneebayko Health Authority in the Indigenous Cree communities of the
James Bay Lowlands. The McGill Integrated University Health Network (RUIS McGill) is a similar
telemedicine system that have been in place since 2006 to service Quebec communities stretching
from Montreal to Nunavik.
15. United States: In the United States, in response to the demand for flexibility and broadened
access to telemedicine services, changes by the Health and Human Services (HHS) Office for Civil
Rights (OCR) and the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) have led to a relaxation of
some federal privacy regulations and expansion of payment policies62. This has led to a surge in
the supply of tele-consults around the US. However, very few, if any, new devices are being
considered, and traditional FDA-approved devices are still required. Several online symptom
checkers have been published to reduce unnecessary emergency department visits63,64 although
the empirical evidence for these remains unclear. While they vary in logical flow, they tend to
agree on the key risk factors. At the same time, it is important to note that the FDA is fast-tracking
approvals for COVID-19-related diagnostics or screening devices and relaxing restrictions on the
usage of certain devices as well65. For example, Alivecor is currently fast-tracking a QT screening
algorithm for the Kardia 6L remote monitoring electrocardiogram (ECG) device. Multiple
smartwatch/fitness tracker studies have also been initiated across the US. Stanford University and
Scripps Research Translational Institute have partnered to harvest data from Fitbits, Apple
Watches, and other smartwatches/fitness trackers to enable “real-time surveillance of contagious
respiratory illnesses.” These avenues are predicated on the assumption that fever is associated
with a persistent rise in heart rate. However, because heart rate depends on so many factors, it's
not entirely clear that this would work with any reasonable level of specificity. Moreover, sick
people tend not to wear or charge personal tracking devices with any regularity, or (it is probably
safe to assume) when in lockdown. UC San Francisco has provided healthcare workers with Oura
rings, worn on the finger, which track heart rate, peripheral temperature, and nighttime
respiratory rate. However, even though temperature is measured, correlation with core
temperature is likely to be poor. Indeed, core temperature is particularly hard to identify, with
far-infrared (FIR) thermal imaging being a contender for remote/non-contact monitoring. A team
at Emory University and the Georgia Institute of Technology (Hegde et al. 2020) recently
developed the “AutoTriage” COVID-19 triage system for rapid screening at the emergency
department or health posts. The system involves a visible and FIR camera mounted on a Raspberry
Pi mini-computer. Deep learning algorithms running on a dedicated USB tensor processing unit,
identify the forehead and lips (potentially on up to ten people simultaneously) and co-registers
the image from the visible to FIR. Temperature is read from the forehead in the visible domain
and cyanosis is determined from the lips in the visible domain. Heart rate and respiration activity
extraction are currently being added. The entire code stack code and bill of materials was
Robeznieks A 2020 Key changes made to telehealth guidelines to boost COVID-19 care Am. Med. Assoc. Online: https://www.amaassn.org/delivering-care/public-health/key-changes-made-telehealth-guidelines-boost-covid-19-care Retrieved 08 July 2020
63 Emory School of Medicine 2020 Coronovirus Checker. Online: http://c19check.com/ Retrieved 08 July 2020
64 Johns Hopkins Medicine 2020. Coronovirus Checker. Online: https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/coronavirus/covid-19-selfchecker.html Retrieved 08 July 2020
65 Mercy Virtual Care Center FDA 2020 FDA COMBATING COVID-19 WITH MEDICAL DEVICES U.S. Food Drug Adm. Online:
https://www.fda.gov/media/136702/download Retrieved 08 July 2020
62

25

published under an open-source license and is undergoing live trials to determine if and how
ambient light and temperature affect the system. However, significant work is needed before this
system will be ready for remote monitoring. As noted, the most obvious remote sensing system
already in our hands is the modern smartphone. Studies have shown that activity associated with
a smartphone can help detect or predict changes in health, including sleep apnea (Behar et al
2015), Parkinson’s disease (Neto et al 2016) heart failure (Cakmak et al 2018) and several other
conditions (Trifan et al 2019). Many research groups, spanning from the east (safepaths.mit.edu)
to the west (Covid Watch) coast of the USA, have implemented contact tracing apps with a strong
focus on privacy. Safe Paths describes itself as "an MIT-led, free, open-source technology that
enables jurisdictions and individuals to maximize privacy, while also maximizing the effectiveness
of contact tracing in the case of a positive diagnosis”. The Safe Paths platform, currently in beta,
comprises both a smartphone application, PrivateKit, and a web application, Safe Places. The
PrivateKit app will enable users to match the personal diary of location data on their smartphones
with anonymized, redacted, and blurred location history of infected patients. The digital contact
tracing uses overlapping GPS and Bluetooth trails that allow an individual to check if they have
crossed paths with someone who was later diagnosed positive for the virus. Through Safe Places,
public health officials can redact location trails of diagnosed carriers and then broadcast location
information, with privacy protection, for both diagnosed patients and for local businesses."
Stanford's COVID Watch, also uses Bluetooth to determine if a user's phone approaches within
approximately six feet of another smartphone that also has the app installed and running, and
“maintains” that proximity for 15 minutes or more, during which, the two phones share a
temporary contact number that is stored on each device. In this manner, no data ever leave the
phone (unless the user actively sends out information), and the data that are stored locally are
anonymous. If an app user is confirmed positive, they can send their anonymous personal
identifier data to a cloud storage repository. The app will then alert other app users who spent 15
minutes or more near the infected person. In this way, people can choose to follow the local
guidance, such as calling their public health department, without the fear of being tracked or
contacted directly. COVID Watch relies on self-reporting, and the developers assume that no
responsible person, knowing they were COVID-positive, would purposefully risk spreading the
disease through prolonged contact with others. These approaches contrast heavily with the
Israeli, South Korean, Chinese and Australian approaches of a government-managed technology,
and reflect the deep distrust residents of the USA have of their government. There are two
obvious flaws here. First, the apps require a critical mass of users on the same platform, to allow
the app to run constantly. A proliferation of multiple apps that do not communicate with each
other erodes the utility of the app. Second, it requires active compliance, with users having to
initiate installation, and then upload COVID-19 test results. One of the authors installed a related
symptom, called the COVID-19 Symptom Tracker, developed by researchers at Harvard T.H. Chan
School of Public Health, Massachusetts General Hospital, King’s College London, and Stanford
University School of Medicine, in collaboration with Zoe, a health science company. The team
notes that "the app asks contributors to answer a few simple questions about themselves and
their current health, then to check in every day to report how they’re feeling and to list any
symptoms they may be having." The app had to be used for several weeks before the app reached
enough users (several hundred) in his location (a large US city) to begin reporting with any level
of confidence. It is also telling that many institutions are producing multiple apps, initiated by
26

individual groups, with no coherent national-level approach. The US industrial giants Google and
Apple Inc. recently released proximity tracing protocol (Exposure Notification API) for their
Bluetooth interfaces. Similar to approaches in other countries such as Switzerland, this
partnership takes a decentralized approach66. Notably, they point out that “if a user chooses to
report a positive diagnosis of COVID-19 to their contact tracing app, the user’s most recent keys
to their Bluetooth beacons will be added to the positive diagnosis list shared by the public health
authority so that other users who came in contact with those beacons can be alerted. If a user is
notified through their app that they have come into contact with an individual who is positive for
COVID-19 then the system will share the day the contact occurred, how long it lasted and the
Bluetooth signal strength of that contact.” No other information about the contact will be shared
and Apple and Google will not receive identifying information about the user, location data, or
information about any other devices to which the user has been in proximity.
16. Brazil: Brazil's national healthcare system (“Sistema Único de Saúde” or Unified Health System
- SUS), is mainly funded by the federal, state and municipal governments through taxes and social
contributions. SUS originated after the ratification of the 1988 constitution which granted
healthcare as a universal right for all citizens. While public health care is available, it is
underfunded and approximately 25% of the wealthier population relies on private insurance
companies (Marten et al 2014). In April 2020, due to the extraordinary circumstances of COVID19, the federal government approved law 13.989/2020, which allows the practice of remote
consultations with doctors and health care professionals. This measure aimed at reducing the
burden on the healthcare system and unnecessary hospital visits. Yet, the approval is for
emergency purposes and temporary, and moreover, the government has vetoed the usage of
electronic prescriptions over such systems. In parallel, the Brazilian Ministry of Health released a
hotline and the COVID-19-SUS app, which enables triage of patients based on their symptoms.
The government app contains official statistics on COVID-19 cases, news, information about the
disease, its symptoms, and prevention, as well as a feature for searching for nearby health clinics.
The app is available for Android and iOS devices and was downloaded over 1 million times from
Google Play. Bitmec Health Technologies Limited (Guatemala City, Guatemala) is a technology
startup that has developed a digital telemedicine platform that enables cost-effective and scalable
primary healthcare services. Through an interactive web portal, and assisted by health workers
acting as intermediaries, Bitmec connects patients with remote physicians and is currently
undergoing trials of its platform with numerous providers for COVID-19 screening using digital
stethoscopes, cameras and pulse oximeters.
17. Rwanda: Contact tracing through smartphones is impossible in many parts of the world,
particularly in most parts of sub-Saharan Africa, where the average smartphone adoption rate is

Apple 2020 Privacy-Preserving Contact Tracing Apple Online: https://www.apple.com/covid19/contacttracing/ Retrieved 08 July
2020

66

27

around 25% and mobile phone subscription rates are 44%67,68,69. Symptom checkers through USSD
services have potential, but at this point, have not been widely implemented. Remote health
monitoring throughout most of Africa is highly limited and consists primarily of remote doctor
consultations and education campaigns. In Rwanda has nearly universal healthcare for its thirteen
million citizens and implemented a national lockdown after the arrival of the first COVID-19 case.
The approach taken by Rwanda has been heralded as a success, involving collaboration between
government and the private sector to identify vulnerable groups, set up contact tracing and test
29,395 citizens for COVID-19 by the end of April 2020, where prevalence was 0.7% (Condo et al
2020). Rwanda has both a dedicated COVID-19 hotline number (144) and USSD service and the
Rwanda National Police have used drones to deliver messages to local communities about how to
combat the COVID-19 70. A team of state-of-the-art humanoid robots has been deployed to deliver
food and medication and screen the temperatures of 50 to 150 people per minute71 . The Rwanda
Utility Regulatory Authority (RURA) has a department focused on the use of mobile data for
enabling advanced statistical analysis in collaboration with Carnegie Mellon University Africa
(CMU-Africa). Mobile call detail records (CDR) combined with satellite imagery has been used to
successfully predict multidimensional poverty (Njuguna and McSharry 2017). The ability to infer
the movement of people combined with other sources of information has already been of utility
for understanding tourism and trade patterns. Rwanda has deployed a centralized digital contact
tracing approach based at RURA72 . The technology uses mobile phone location tracking enabled
by movement analytics to identify people that have come into close contact with confirmed
infected cases. Collaboration between CMU-Africa, the Ministry of ICT & Innovation, the National
Institute of Statistics Rwanda (NISR), RURA and the Rwanda Biomedical Centre provides potential
for using remote screening and machine learning approaches to predict virus hotspots and
generate forecasts of the propagation of the virus. There are also plans to develop telemedicine
capability to assess suspected cases without the need for these subjects to physically move.
18. South Africa: In South Africa, COVID-19 has led to rapid progress in telemonitoring. In March
2020, the Health Professionals Council of South Africa published updated guidelines lifting
restrictions, originally published in 2014, that limited telemonitoring to very specific cases. The
new guidelines allow doctors to contact patients, with whom they preferably have an existing
relationship, by phone to monitor chronic diseases or follow-up on acute conditions 41. The private
healthcare sector has responded to these new regulations by initiating online COVID-19
consultation services via video chat42. Discovery Health, a large health insurance provider, and
Vodacom, a major Mobile Network Operator, have partnered to develop a platform that connects
Silver L and Johnson C 2018 Majorities in sub-Saharan Africa own mobile phones, but smartphone adoption is modest Pew Res.
Cent. Online: https://www.pewresearch.org/global/2018/10/09/majorities-in-sub-saharan-africa-own-mobile-phones-butsmartphone-adoption-is-modest/ Retrieved 08 July 2020
68 Qelp 2020 Africa smartphone penetration at tipping point Qelp Online: https://www.qelp.com/africa-smartphone-penetration-attipping-point/ Retrieved 08 July 2020
69 Radcliffe D 2018 Mobile in Sub-Saharan Africa: Can world’s fastest-growing mobile region keep it up? ZDNet Online:
https://www.zdnet.com/article/mobile-in-sub-saharan-africa-can-worlds-fastest-growing-mobile-region-keep-it-up/ Retrieved 08
July 2020
70 Ashimwe E Rwanda Deploys Drones to Raise COVID-19 Awareness in Communities New Times Online:
https://allafrica.com/stories/202004120035.html Retrieved 08 July 2020
71 AP 2020 Coronavirus - Rwanda: Robots arrive to screen Rwandan patients africanews.com Online:
https://www.africanews.com/2020/05/20/coronavirus-rwanda-robots-arrive-to-screen-rwandan-patients/ Retrieved 08 July 2020
72 Gbenga A M 2020 RWANDA JOINS OTHERS IN USING PHONE DATA FOR COVID-19 CONTACT TRACING Ventur. Africa Online:
http://venturesafrica.com/rwanda-joins-others-in-using-phone-data-for-covid-19-contact-tracing/ Retrieved 08 July 2020
67

28

patients who have COVID-19-related health questions to a doctor, and have initially made this
service free to the public43. In order to monitor and reduce the spread of COVID-19, the South
African government, through the National Institute for Communicable Diseases, issued
regulations that mandated the establishment of a centralized database to facilitate contact
tracing (Klaaren et al 2020). The centralized contact tracing system termed “COVID-19 Tracing
Database” collects and aggregates information from a large range of sources including mobile
phone operators, electronic communication services, testing laboratories and accommodation
registries (Klaaren et al 2020). The information collected in the COVID-19 Tracing Database may
only be used by authorized persons and exclusively for the purpose of facilitating contact tracing
and monitoring of COVID-1973. Contact tracing efforts are further supported by Covi-ID, a mobile
QR-code based location tracing application that was developed by the University of Cape Town
(UCT) for the South African Government74. Covi-ID is a voluntary application that once installed
allows users to register themselves and then log their location by scanning a QR-code. All
information is stored in a decentralized blockchain and users are in full control of their data.
Should a user discover that they are COVID-19 positive, they need to agree to have their health
information released before it is accessible to the authorities75. COVID-19 has resulted in an
increased use of mobile clinics in South Africa. In April 2020, the National Health Laboratory
Service in partnership with the National Department of Health rolled out 67 specially fitted
vehicles to facilitate COVID-19 swabbing and testing76. These vehicles are staffed by two nurses
and a driver and act as mobile clinics for COVID-19 testing and contact tracing. In addition to these
road vehicles there is also a Railway Clinic called The Phelophepa Train that is now doing COVID19 testing in remote areas 77,78. The Phelophepa Train is managed by Transnet (a railway company
owned by the South African Department of Enterprises) and supported by funding from several
private companies and charities79,80 . While there is an abundance of COVID-19 information online,
it is only available to those who can afford access to data. South Africa has a very high mobile data
rate, significantly restricting access to these services81. To address this problem, the University of

Matlala, L. 2020. SA now has a COVID-19 tracing database. SABC NEWS. https://www.sabcnews.com/sabcnews/sa-now-has-acovid-19-tracing-database/ Retrieved 08 July 2020
74 Krige N 2020 UCT News Online: https://www.news.uct.ac.za/article/-2020-03-27-coviid-new-app-to-avoid-future-lockdowns
Retrieved 08 July 2020
75 Norton Rose Fulbright 2020 Contact tracing apps in South Africa Online: https://www.nortonrosefulbright.com//media/files/nrf/nrfweb/contact-tracing/south-africa-contact-tracing.pdf?revision=6c0f4b04-b793-4399-8037-5c561cfeb2ed&la=enza Retrieved 08 July 2020
76 COVID-19 Online Rescource and News Portal 2020 Inside the COVID-19 Mobile Testing Units Online:
https://sacoronavirus.co.za/2020/04/21/inside-the-covid-19-mobile-testing-units/ Retrieved 08 July 2020
77 Nxumalo S 2020 Transnet’s Phelophepa train arrives to fight coronavirus iol.co.za Online:
https://www.iol.co.za/mercury/news/transnets-phelophepa-train-arrives-to-fight-coronavirus-48205561 Retrieved 08 July 2020
78 Transnet
2020 Phelophepa rolls into Phoenix as Transnet boosts KZN’s COVID-19 testing capacity Online:
https://www.transnet.net/Media/Press%20Release%20Office/TRANSNET%20DEPLOYS%20ITS%20PHELOPHEPA%20TRAINS%20TO%
20SUPPORT%20FIGHT%20AGAINST%20COVID-19.pdf Retrieved 08 July 2020
79 Roche Transnet-Phelophepa healthcare train Roche News Online: https://www.roche.com/sustainability/philanthropy/transnetphelophepa_healthcare_train.htm Retrieved 08 July 2020
80 American Friends of Phelophepa The Phelophepa Train of Hope Online: https://trainofhope.org/ Retrieved 08 July 2020
81 Bottomley, E.-J. (2020). SA has some of Africa’s most expensive data, a new report says – but it is better for the richer. Business
Insider South Africa. https://www.businessinsider.co.za/how-sas-data-prices-compare-with-the-rest-of-the-world-2020-5 Retrieved
08 July 2020
73

29

Cape Town (UCT) developed a free USSD-based COVID-19 health literacy education platform and
program to provide information to underserved members of society82.
19. Australia: Australia is handling the COVID-19 pandemic in a different way to many parts of the
world, especially USA and Europe. The Australian government has enforced social distancing
measures much more stringently. Moreover, Australia is very different from these territories with
respect to population density, with three persons per square kilometer, as compared to 36 in the
USA, and 105 in the European Union 83. More importantly, one third of Australians live in remote
and rural areas. Telemonitoring has been one of the priorities of the Australian government in the
pursuit of improved health services for Australians living in rural and remote areas. To support
telemonitoring, in 2011, the Australian government introduced an important policy on
telemonitoring funding, requiring Medicare to pay specialists for video consultations of remote
patients84. During the COVID-19 pandemic, telemonitoring has turned into a key weapon in
combatting viral spread and in providing continued access to essential primary health services in
Australia 85. The Australian Government expanded the Medicare-subsidized telemonitoring
services for all Australians, which was otherwise limited to Australians living in telemonitoringeligible areas, residents of eligible Residential Aged Care Facilities (RACF) and patients of eligible
Aboriginal Medical Services in all areas of Australia. The expansion is now covering services such
as general practitioner consultations via telemonitoring, which is limiting unnecessary exposure
of patients and health professionals to COVID-19. In addition, this is taking pressure off hospitals
and emergency departments, and supporting self-isolation and quarantine policies. Several
companies in communication and medical software have supported this volume shift, enabling a
seamless transition during this unprecedented time. The National Broadband Network
Corporation, which is a Government Business Enterprise, has recently upgraded Australian GP
clinics to Internet connectivity speeds of 50/20 Mbps (download/upload) at no extra cost, for six
months86. This has increased the capability of clinics to deliver multiple consultations through
telemonitoring simultaneously. MedicalDirector, a Sydney-based medical software provider, has
recently made its fully integrated telemonitoring solution available for free (for at least three
months) to support GP clinics. In the first three weeks of use (up to the 20 April 2020), more than
4.3 million consultations were delivered to over three million patients due to the COVID-19
pandemic-driven telehealth expansion87. Despite many obvious benefits of telemonitoring, the
UCT News 2020. COVID-19 USSD-code health literacy campaign. In UCT News.
https://www.news.uct.ac.za/campus/communications/updates/covid-19/-article/2020-04-20-covid-19-ussd-code-health-literacycampaign Retrieved 08 July 2020
83 The World Bank Population density (people per sq. km of land area) World Bank Online:
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/EN.POP.DNST Retrieved: No Longer Available
84 Australian Government Department of Health Telehealth: Specialist video consultations under Medicare Aust. Gov. Dep. Heal.
Online: http://www.mbsonline.gov.au/internet/mbsonline/publishing.nsf/Content/mbsonline-telehealth-landing.htm Retrieved: 08
July 2020
85 Hunt G 2020a Australians embrace telehealth to save lives during COVID-19 Aust. Gov. Dep. Heal. Online:
https://www.health.gov.au/ministers/the-hon-greg-hunt-mp/media/australians-embrace-telehealth-to-save-lives-during-covid-19
Retrieved 08 July 2020
86 Sarcevic A 2020 GP clinics to get free nbn boost for telehealth Govtech Rev. Online:
https://www.govtechreview.com.au/content/gov-digital/news/gp-clinics-to-get-free-nbn-boost-for-telehealth-1270288655
Retrieved 08 July 2020
87
Hunt G 2020a Australians embrace telehealth to save lives during COVID-19 Aust. Gov. Dep. Heal. Online:
https://www.health.gov.au/ministers/the-hon-greg-hunt-mp/media/australians-embrace-telehealth-to-save-lives-during-covid-19
Retried 08 July 2020
82

30

actual uptake and integration of it into mainstream practice has been slow (Wade et al 2014,
Caffery et al 2018, 2016). This pandemic (COVID-19) has for the first time in Australia provided
nationwide access to telemonitoring. For most Australians, this is the first time they are accessing
GP services without attending a center. This may have a long-term effect on the uptake of
telemonitoring in the post-COVID era, since people can enjoy the same level of services without
driving to the clinic, sitting with a set of patients and taking additional leave for a doctor
appointment. Besides these telemonitoring initiatives, the Australian Government has launched
two mobile applications so far for fighting COVID-19 pandemic. The first mobile application
(Coronavirus) was released, at the early stage of COVID-19 in Australia, to provide a single point
of contact to check symptoms, register isolation, find advice on different government stimulus
packages, access news and media related to COVID-19, identify the current status of COVID-19
across Australia (different states and territories) and essential information (updated regularly).
The second mobile application, COVIDSafe, is designed to reduce community exposure from the
spread of COVID-19. The app uses the strength of Bluetooth signal for determing the proximity at
the mobile phone level (decentralized). The app securely stores (locally) encrypted information of
all other app users who are in close proximity. . Besides storing encrypted data into local storage,
the app uses a rolling 21-day to maintain data recency. Contacts that occurred outside of the 21day window are automatically deleted from the user’s phone. For the remote and rural Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander communities, the Australian Government has taken initiative to
establish mobile clinics for a rapid coronavirus test. This program brings the testing time down to
45 minutes, which currently takes up to 10 days for this area. The Kirby Institute at University of
New South Wales and the International Centre for Point of Care Testing at Flinders University is
managing the program. The program is going to use the existing point-of-care testing technology
that has been used by the same group with widespread success in rapid testing of sexually
transmissible infections in rural communities. A rapid PCR test will be used at the mobile clinics
to detect COVID-19 infections in the early phases of illness. In Australia, a Government-centric
approach is being used to contain the spread of the virus. Government is at the forefront of all
actions and tech industries, universities and all other agencies are playing supporting roles to the
government. This may be different from other countries, where many solutions are coming from
industry or university alone and then adopted by the government to tackle COVID-19.
Telemonitoring played a key role so far in Australia to keep high-quality medical services during
this pandemic and the significance of face-to-face consultations for providing better health
services is sounding more of a taboo rather than reality. Since the urban population received the
most benefit of telemonitoring for the first time, it may encourage integration of telemonitoring
services in mainstream healthcare. The experience of all stakeholders (patient, doctors, clinics,
government) that will be gained from already provided huge numbers of telemonitoring services
are also going to affect the post-COVID-19 telemonitoring structure. In summary, telemonitoring
is going to play a big role in shaping healthcare in Australia in the post-COVID-19 era.
20. New Zealand: New Zealand is perhaps the most famous success story in containing the
pandemic, which like Australia, is geographically isolation and has a low population density. This
is not enough to prevent transmission though. The success is largely credited to its government’s
aggressive lockdown strategy at early stage of the disease spread. The first case of covid-19 in
New Zealand was recorded on 28 February and they implemented partial lockdown on 25th March
with only 205 COVID-19 cases and no deaths. The lockdown was one of the strictest in the world,
31

only permitting people to leave their homes for essential reasons like buying food and going to
the doctor. They also have closed the country’s borders to non-nationals on 19 March. On June 8,
New Zealand lifted all its restrictions except for it border control measures. At the time of writing,
the country does not have a single locally acquired case. This is not the only place in which New
Zealand has been at the forefront of action in this space though. Orion Health (Wellington, New
Zealand) is now offering a free national solution to support scenario modelling, risk prediction,
forecasting and planning throughout New Zealand’s COVID-19 response. It will not be just the
collection of information and point-of-care response that helps reduce disease transmission, but
also the use of data science, predictive modelling and the response to those predictions that will
help guide appropriate responses. Like many other countries, New Zealand also released a contact
tracing app “NZ COVID Tracer” 88. However, in contrast to other contact tracing app, they create
a digital diary of places they visit by scanning QR codes displayed at the entrances to business
premises, other organizations and public buildings. The app securely stores the digital diary in the
mobile phone and delete automatically aftr 31 days. The information will be pass to the contact
tracers only if any person registers their contact information with the National Close Contact
Service through the app. At the point of writing, there is no available statistics about how many
New Zealander have either downloaded the app or registered through the app. As a part of
encouraging telemonitoring during COVID-19, New Zealand government has approved exemption
for signature on prescription. However, there is no evidence on its impact on usage of
telemonitoring, since during the partial lockdown people were allowed to visit doctors. Usage
information of telemonitoring during pre-COVID-19 era is also insufficient to draw any conclusion.
One reason behind this could be the successful control of the spread of the disease at the early
stages of breakthrough.
Discussion
Remote health monitoring: Telemedicine does not pretend to replace the classic consultation, but
rather it responds to a real need. For example, orientation of patients and prioritizing the degree
of urgency of care. This does not mean fewer consultations, but more efficient cooperation, better
patient care, and therefore better efficiency of the healthcare system. In addition, remote
healthcare services make medicine more accessible to everyone, especially relevant in a context
where healthcare is suffering from a sharply declining medical demography and an increase in
medical desertification. Overall, telemonitoring has a number of key strengths to enable quality
care (e.g. patient inhaler adherence (Taylor et al 2018)) and enhanced emergency response.
Despite many obvious benefits of telemonitoring, the actual uptake and integration of it into
mainstream practice has been slow. In many countries, past talks about remote examinations or
consultations with patients were met with suspicion, being considered substandard to in-person
visits, if not completely taboo or legally prohibited. France and Germany are good examples of
such a situation where the technological as well as some legal and reimbursement frameworks
were in place before the pandemic to support teleconsultations. Yet, these were only used
marginally. During the pandemic, this has changed dramatically with countries such as France,
Italy, Japan and the US enabling new health services to be provided through telemonitoring (Table
Anon 2020 NZ COVID Tracer app released to support contact tracing Minist. Heal. Online: https://www.health.govt.nz/newsmedia/media-releases/nz-covid-tracer-app-released-support-contact-tracing

88

32

2) and facilitated reimbursement for these services during the time of the pandemic. This has
resulted in many patients having now personally experienced telemonitoring. This together with
the reported contagion rate of COVID-19 in the clinical environment leading to clusters of
nosocomial infections has provided the opportunity for patients to understand the potential risks
associated with visiting clinics or hospitals. It is thus expected that COVID-19 pandemic will have
a profound impact on the way physicians and healthcare delivery organizations interact with
patients and the general population. In particular, face-to-face patient-doctor contacts will be less
common and remote monitoring is facilitated by the increasing number of clinical-grade portable
medical devices. It is reasonable to imagine the COVID-19 era being a trigger for adopting these
long-existing yet never consecrated technologies. However, this statement needs to be
moderated by the likely gradual and possibly slow evolution in changing very traditional medical
systems in countries such as France and Japan. It also remains unclear how to overcome
challenges intrinsic to telemonitoring, e.g., performance of thorough physical assessments and
diagnostic tests. Thus, healthcare providers will have to decide what and when patients should be
seen remotely versus in person. One other important item that emanated from this review, is that
telemedicine tools often lack integrated digital health sensors that may be used to record vital
signs (e.g. blood pressure, heart rate). Indeed, although we reviewed many start-ups developing
such systems, these are not yet integrated into telemedicine platforms. We made a similar
observation for electronic medical record systems which are often not integrated on the
telemedicine platforms with the exception of some countries such as Portugal. We thus foresee
that an important step forward in telemonitoring will consist of integrating connected biosensors
and patients’ electronic medical records in secure, dedicated telemedicine platforms. Another
interesting observation was that some countries, such as China and Singapore, also created
mobile clinics i.e. medical services away from medical centers (Table 3) as another way to provide
remote health services in the form of medical services outside the classical clinical environment.
Finally, a number of countries such as Israel, the UK and parts of the US, for example, used pointof-contact screening (Table 4) through measurement of symptoms in everyday locations such as
at the entry of workplaces (e.g. Figure 2).
It is important to note, that this is not the first time telemonitoring has been used during a
pandemic or other extreme situations. For example, China explored the use of telemonitoring in
2003 during the outbreak of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) (Jia LT, Zhao JQ, Zhang
SQ 2020). Teleconsultations were also used in Taiwan for patients with SARS (Keshvardoost et al
2020). During the Ebola crisis in 2014-2016, an approach to combat the disease was using a mobile
app named Ebola Contact Tracing that supported remote monitoring and contact tracing of
confirmed cases of Ebola (Keshvardoost et al 2020). In 2017, private telemedicine companies
provided services to victims of hurricane Harvey and primary care providers89. Given the
precedents for the usage of telemonitoring it is important to highlight what are the unique
features of the present COVID-19 pandemic that may result in long term adoption of telemedicine
tools. In that respect, this review highlighted: (1) the modern legal frameworks that are more
inclusive of telemonitoring; (2) modern technological advances for data recording and

Wicklund E 2020 Harvey’s Aftermath Brings mHealth, Telehealth to the Forefront mhealthintelligence Online:
https://mhealthintelligence.com/news/harveys-aftermath-brings-mhealth-telehealth-to-the-forefront

89

33

transmission; (3) the unique global singularity of the pandemic. It is indeed the first time in
modern history that the majority of the whole population from so many countries were forced
to stay confined at home. This will likely leave a unique psychological mark as well as resulted in
many individuals and doctors to experiment with telemedicine services. This is unpreceded.
Data protection and privacy concerns: The introduction of novel technologies in the age of
digitalization and big dataraises a number of ethical and privacy concerns, notably in the domain
of public health (Vayena and Madoff 2019). Notably, automated face recognition, dystopian
tracking of individual’s behaviors and identity-theft are major concerns, but the increased
potential for being tracked, hacked or zoom-bombed during a telemedicine consult, are equally
present fears in remote monitoring these days. Even in times of urgent need, important questions
on how to deal with personal health data, whether to share this private data for the the public
good, and whether this task should be in the responsibility of government or non-government
actors are subject to discussion and, at least in democratic countries, needed to be re-negotiated
or temporarily installed. Large disparities in privacy-preserving approaches for digital contact
tracing can be seen across countries (Table 1). While many early adopters implemented a location
tracing with centralized data flows and lower data protection standards, the decentralized
approach driven by academia, was adopted in the the Google/Apple Exposure Notification API
and gained rapidly more followers, especially in Europe. These interfaces are the only ones that
enable effective decentralized Bluetooth proximity tracing on the respective smartphone devices
and this dependency lead for example Germany and the UK (also Austria, not discussed in this
manuscript) changing tack to switch from a centralized to a decentralized approach. It remains to
be seen what effect the industry driven decentralized proximity tracing will have on public
perception in various countries. Resistance against the smartphone OS duopoly has clearly
manifested in France where, as a consequence, the centralized contact tracing app is not
compatible with solutions of neighboring countries such as Germany and Switzerland. Despite the
higher privacy protection standards, many countries required legal changes and parliament
approval, before introduction to the public, partially explaining why countries with high privacy
expectation had a relatively late introduction of digital contact tracing solutions. Because of these
political and technical challenges, decentralized native phone OS software is probably the best
solution for implementing a robust infrastructure for digital contact tracing. With the absence of
government leadership in this domain in many countries, as seen in the US with many
incompatible approaches circulating in various states, an industry dominated decentralized
proximity tracing may be the only hope of providing transnational, privacy-preserving large-scale
contact tracing, but also illustrates the dependence on these industrial players.
All organizations that are collecting, processing and storing medical data must comply with
international and local regulations. For the USA, the data protection law that is required is the
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). The European Union’s General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR) is a regulation in the European Union (EU) on data protection and
privacy within the EU. It also regulates aspect of personal data exportation outside the European
Economic Area (EEA). These regulations have important implications within the context of medical
data processing. GDPR specifies actions to be taken such as: data holders must notify the
authorities in case of breach, subjects have a right to access their data, the right to be forgotten
that gives the individuals the possibility to request the removal of their personal data, privacy
34

must be designed in and included by default (Vitabile et al 2019). In the case of noncompliance
severe fine may be imposed. Within the scope of the pandemic there has been debates about
how GDPR will influence data sharing and analysis of digital health data collected in Europe for
research purposes (McLennan et al 2020). This includes health data collected remotely. It has
been put forward that the research exemption clause of the GDPR during COVID-19 should be
used in order to facilitate research efforts using these data. This highlights important
considerations relating to data protection laws and some of their implications within the area of
remote health monitoring and how these laws may have exemption clauses that enable special
usage of data under GDPR in certain extraordinary circumstances. Whether this will include the
current pandemic is yet to be determined but we agree with the general call (McLennan et al
2020) for making these regulations more flexible within the context of the COVID-19 pandemic as
far as it may benefit research and human health while preserving privacy.
Main innitiators: Most of the countries had pandemic handling strategies in place before COVID19 pandemic. As a result, government is as expected the main initiator in the surveillance and
tackling of any pandemic. However, use of the state-of-art technologies and technological
innovation to help or improve the process brings the opportunity for industry and academia to
contribute on top of the government agencies. In most of the studied regions, government is the
initiator (either sole or with the industry) to introduce contact tracing app except for Switzerland
and the United States (Table 1). In Switzerland, the app is introduced by the academia and in
United States it is both by academia and the industry. Irrespective of the region, users are
concerned about privacy and data protection features of contact tracing apps, which hindered
the wide acceptance of such apps. At the time of writing this part, no solid evidence is reported
on how these apps have helped so far in tracking or tackling the pandemic. Usage of
telemonitoring mostly increased across all studied regions (Table 2). It is interesting that in only a
few regions, including Japan, Italy, Russia, Canada, Brazil and Australia, the government is the
main initiator to encourage usage of telemonitoring. For regions where industry is the main
initiator, it can be assumed that the penetration of telemonitoring in non-pandemic conditions is
also higher, which resulted in a stable business model, where industry can play a significant role.
Reduced industry participations in some countries can also be contributed to strong public health
systems or government centric health care systems. An interesting distribution in initiating mobile
clinics is seen in the studied regions (Table 3). Approximately one third of the regions have not
introduced mobile clinics, one third were initiated by the government and the other one third is
by the industry. Most of the European countries are found to be the one which had not introduced
any mobile clinic, it may be attributed to the already existing adequate healthcare facilities with
respect to demand. Another reason for not having any mobile clinics can be attributed to the lack
of reserve resources to run such additional facilities on top of existing ones. It is also interesting
to see that industry initiated mobile clinics are mostly in Asia and Africa The point-of-contact
screening for COVID-19 symptom is initiated by the government in half of the studied region.
Among the rest, in four regions it was initiated by the industry sector. Only Singapore among the
industry initiated point-of-care screening regions has shown high usage, otherwise mostly low. In
contrast, in government initiated regions, most of them have shown high usage except South
Africa, Canada and France.

35

Lack of evidence: Perhaps the most pressing issue in remote monitoring in this time of crisis, is
the almost total lack of evidence of the benefit for much of the existing and newly developed
technology that were used during the pandemic. Much of it is promising, but by definition, it has
largely remained untested in the current paradigm. With companies driving the technology
(because they are most prepared to scale), secrecy and the need to protect proprietary
information often impedes knowledge discovery, and marketing hype replaces hard science.
Regulatory bodies have been fast-tracking COVID-19-relevant applications, in the hope of
addressing this issue. Outside the purview of the regularity bodies, repurposed technology
presents different issues, particularly through the heterogeneity of sensors and software.
Bluetooth technology for contact tracing is a case in point. Currently, there is very little evidence
to support the guidelines for the exposure estimate of less than 2 meters for 15 minutes as a
trigger for initiating a contact trace. For instance, Google and Apple have left it to the manager
of the system to decide based on state-wide policies in the US, although they have set a default,
which most people will likely use. Perhaps more worryingly, there is little evidence to suggest that
we can accurately estimate the distance between two Bluetooth sensors in an unknown
environment, where ambient radiofrequency conditions, and physical objects such as walls, could
create substantial numbers of false positives and false negatives. It is too early to judge whether
or not contact tracing apps were effective, in particular because the launch of these apps also
coincided with lockdowns and other special policies taken to counter the virus. It is also
challenging to estimate how telemedicine approaches compares to conventional care in the
COVID-19 era, given that no such telemedicine alternatives were used at such a scale beforehand.
However, it was sometimes the only alternative due to the perceived fear of hospital infection
discouraging patients from going to the hospital even though they suffered from severe illnesses.
Yet, outside of the COVID-19 era telemedicine approaches had already shown some successes
when compared to their conventional counterpart such as for heart failure management in
reducing all cause hospitalization and a number of other clinical endpoints (Zhu et al 2020) and
stroke management (Guzik and Switzer 2020).
Conclusions: In summary, the need for testing, symptom triage, contact tracing, remote
monitoring of mild COVID-19 patients, together with targeted movement restriction at early
stages is driving most of the innovation in remote monitoring in the time of a pandemic. It is
difficult to innovate beyond this paradigm without creating extra burden or running head-long
into privacy issues that may ultimately defeat the original positive intentions. Moreover, the
quality, accuracy and utility of heart rate, respiration rate and oxygen saturation levels from video
cameras has yet to be proven but certainly has real potential, with many telemedicine providers
seriously considering this technology as an adjunct to video review. More advanced techniques,
such as detection of pain from facial imagery, and abnormal behaviors from movement via video
or cellphone usage may provide utility in the future as additional covariates to increase specificity.
However, despite the best efforts of entities like Babylon Health and the Human Diagnosis Project,
we are still a long way from the automated “artificially intelligent” consult or even a COVID-19
specific screening and triage system based on standard machine learning. Indeed, relatively
simple self-report symptom checkers may be one of the most useful remote health technologies.
Never-the-less, this current pandemic appears to be ushering in a new era for remote monitoring,
which will take months or even years to play out against a landscape of shifting perceptions,
regulatory pressures, financial constraints, and medical needs.
36

37

Table 1: Contact tracing including proximinty and location tracing across countries.
Country
China (1)
Singapore (2)
India (3)
South Korea (4)
Japan (5)
Israel (6)
United Kingdom (7)
France (8)
Italy (9)
Germany (10)
Switzerland (11)
Portugal (12)
Russia (13)
Canada (14)
United States (15)
Brazil (16)
Rwanda (17)
South Africa (18)
Australia (19)
New Zealand (20)

Increased usage of
remote health
monitoring
High
High
High
High

Main initiator
Government
Government
Government
Government

Personal
Protection

High
High
High
High

Government
Government
Government & Industry
Government & Industry

Low
Moderate
Low
Low
Strong
Low
Moderate
Strong

High
High
High
n/a
No effect
High

Government & Industry
Government
Academia
n/a
n/a
Government & Industry

Strong
Strong
Strong
n/a
n/a
Moderate

High
No effect
High
High
High
No effect

Industry & Academia
n/a
Government
Government
Government
n/a

Strong
n/a
Low
Low
Moderate
n/a

Data

1

Table 2: Telemonitoring (usage of telemedicine tools) across countries.
Country
China (1)
Singapore (2)
India (3)
South Korea (4)
Japan (5)
Israel (6)
United Kingdom (7)
France (8)
Italy (9)
Germany (10)
Switzerland (11)
Portugal (12)
Russia (13)
Canada (14)
United States (15)
Brazil (16)
Rwanda (17)
South Africa (18)
Australia (19)
New Zealand (20)

Increased usage of remote
health monitoring
High
Moderate
Moderate
High
High
High
High
High
High
High
Moderate
Moderate
High
High
High
High
n/a
High
High
n/a

Main initiator
Industry
Industry
Industry
Industry
Government
Industry
Industry
Industry
Government
Industry
Industry
Government & industry
Government
Government
Industry
Government
n/a
Government & Industry
Government
n/a

Personal Data
Protection
Moderate
Strong
Moderate
Moderate
Strong
Moderate
Moderate
Strong
Moderate
Strong
Moderate
n/a
Unknown
Strong
Unknown
Unknown
n/a
Moderate
Strong
n/a

2

Table 3: Creation of mobile clinics i.e. medical services away from medical centers.
Country
China (1)
Singapore (2)
India (3)
South Korea (4)
Japan (5)
Israel (6)
United Kingdom (7)
France (8)
Italy (9)
Germany (10)
Switzerland (11)
Portugal (12)
Russia (13)
Canada (14)
United States (15)
Brazil (16)
Rwanda (17)
South Africa (18)
Australia (19)
New Zealand (20)

Increased usage of remote health
Main initiator
monitoring
High
Industry
High
Industry
Low
Low

Industry
Industry

High
Low
No effect
No effect

Government
Industry
n/a
n/a

Low
No effect
No effect
n/a
High
Low
Low
n/a

Government
n/a
n/a
n/a
Government
Government
Industry
n/a

High
High
High
No effect

Government
Government
Government & Industry
n/a

3

Table 4: Point-of-contact screening through measurement of symptoms in everyday locations.
Country
China (1)
Singapore (2)
India (3)
South Korea (4)
Japan (5)
Israel (6)
United Kingdom (7)
France (8)
Italy (9)
Germany (10)
Switzerland (11)
Portugal (12)
Russia (13)
Canada (14)
United States (15)
Brazil (16)
Rwanda (17)
South Africa (18)
Australia (19)
New Zealand (20)

Usage of remote health monitoring
High
High

Main initiator
Government
Industry

High
Low
Moderate

Government
Industry
Government

High
High
Low

Government
Government
Government

High
No effect
No effect
n/a
Moderate
Low
Low

Government
n/a
n/a
n/a
Industry
Government
Industry

High
n/a

Government
n/a

Low
Low
No effect

Government
Industry
n/a

Conflicts of interest
GC has financial interest in Alivecor Inc and receives unrestricted funding from the company. GC
also is the CTO of Mindchild Medical and has ownership interests in Mindchild Medical. WK
declares no conflict of interest. WK and Leitwert GmbH collaborate in an unrelated research
project. MO is an employee of Babylon Health. FA is employed by Sensyne Health. PAW is an
employee of PeriGen, a developer and provider of decision-support systems for obstetrical car

4

Anon 2014 The Japanese Society of Hypertension Guidelines for the Management of
Hypertension (JSH 2014) Hypertens. Res. 37 253–253
Behar J A, Rosenberg A A, Weiser-Bitoun I, Shemla O, Alexandrovich A, Konyukhov E and Yaniv Y
2018 PhysioZoo: A novel open access platform for heart rate variability analysis of
mammalian electrocardiographic data Front. Physiol. 9 1–14
Behar J, Roebuck A, Shahid M, Daly J, Hallack A, Palmius N, Stradling J and Clifford G D 2015
SleepAp: An Automated Obstructive Sleep Apnoea Screening Application for Smartphones
IEEE J. Biomed. Heal. Informatics 19 325–31
Brauns H-J and Loos W 2015 Telemedizin in Deutschland Bundesgesundheitsblatt Gesundheitsforsch. - Gesundheitsschutz 58 1068–73
Brunetti N D, Molinari G, Acquistapace F, Zimotti T, Parati G, Indolfi C, Fedele F and Carugo S 2020
2019 Italian Society of Cardiology Census on telemedicine in cardiovascular disease: a report
from the working group on telecardiology and informatics Open Hear. 7 e001157
Caffery L J, Bradford N K and Smith A C 2016 Telehealth services in rural and remote Australia: a
systematic review of models of care and factors influencing success and sustainability. Rural
Remote Heal. 16(4)
Caffery L J, Bradford N K, Smith A C and Langbecker D 2018 How telehealth facilitates the provision
of culturally appropriate healthcare for Indigenous Australians J. Telemed. Telecare 24 676–
82
Cai S, Men X L, Wang S, Wang J, Zou Y, Feng C C, He Q, Jia D, Hu X K, Zeng Z Y, Guo Y, Yang L, Yang
X R, Gou Y, Xue M, Shi X D, Zhao S Z and He X L 2020 Rapid and accurate measurement of
body temperature in dense population during coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic West
China Med. J. 35 1–6
Cakmak A S, Reinertsen E, Taylor H A, Shah A J and Clifford G D 2018 Personalized heart failure
severity estimates using passive smartphone data 2018 IEEE International Conference on Big
Data (Big Data) (IEEE) pp 1569–74
Castela E, Ramalheiro G, Pires A, Carreira L M, Santos I, Costa H, Mota A and Ribeiro L 2005 Cinco
Anos de Teleconsulta Experiência do Serviço de Cardiologia do Hospital Pediátrico de
Coimbra Serviço Cardiol. Pediátrica, Hosp. Pediátrico Coimbra, Coimbra, Port. 24 835–40
Cho H, Ippolito D and Yu Y W 2020 Contact Tracing Mobile Apps for COVID-19: Privacy
Considerations and Related Trade-offs
Condo J, Uwizihiwe J P and Nsanzimana S 2020 Learn from Rwanda’s success in tackling COVID19 Nature 581 384–384
Ferretti L, Wymant C, Kendall M, Zhao L, Nurtay A, Abeler-Dörner L, Parker M, Bonsall D and Fraser
C 2020 Quantifying SARS-CoV-2 transmission suggests epidemic control with digital contact
tracing Science (80-. ). eabb6936
Gabbrielli F, Bertinato L, Filippis G De, Bonomini M and Cipolla M 2020 Indicazioni ad interim per
servizi assistenziali di telemedicina durante l’emergenza sanitaria COVID-19. Versione del 13
Aprile 2020. ISS COVID-19 n. 12/2020

1

Goodale B M, Shilaih M, Falco L, Dammeier F, Hamvas G and Leeners B 2019 Wearable Sensors
Reveal Menses-Driven Changes in Physiology and Enable Prediction of the Fertile Window:
Observational Study J. Med. Internet Res. 21 e13404
Guzik A K and Switzer J A 2020 Teleneurology is neurology Neurology 94
Iwasaki A and Grubaugh N D 2020 Why does Japan have so few cases of COVID-19? EMBO Mol.
Med. 12
Jia LT, Zhao JQ, Zhang SQ Y X 2020 Application of ultrasound in diagnosis and treatment of
coronavirus disease 2019 Acad. J. Second Mil. Med. Univ. 41 1–7
Käch M, Laube S, Geissmann L and Karlen W 2020 Reliable data collection in clinical trials with
remote settings infrastructure for data capture from wearables and mobile sensors ETH
Zurich Research Collection
Keshvardoost S, Bahaadinbeigy K and Fatehi F 2020 Role of Telehealth in the Management of
COVID-19: Lessons Learned from Previous SARS, MERS, and Ebola Outbreaks Telemed. eHealth tmj.2020.0105
Klaaren J, Breckenridge K, Cachalia F, Fonn S and Veller M 2020 South Africa’s COVID-19 Tracing
Database: Risks and rewards of which doctors should be aware South African Med. J. 0
Kucharski A J, Klepac P, Conlan A J K, Kissler S M, Tang M L, Fry H, Gog J R, Edmunds W J, Emery J
C, Medley G, Munday J D, Russell T W, Leclerc Q J, Diamond C, Procter S R, Gimma A, Sun F
Y, Gibbs H P, Rosello A, van Zandvoort K, Hué S, Meakin S R, Deol A K, Knight G, Jombart T,
Foss A M, Bosse N I, Atkins K E, Quilty B J, Lowe R, Prem K, Flasche S, Pearson C A B, Houben
R M G J, Nightingale E S, Endo A, Tully D C, Liu Y, Villabona-Arenas J, O’Reilly K, Funk S, Eggo
R M, Jit M, Rees E M, Hellewell J, Clifford S, Jarvis C I, Abbott S, Auzenbergs M, Davies N G
and Simons D 2020 Effectiveness of isolation, testing, contact tracing, and physical
distancing on reducing transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in different settings: a mathematical
modelling study Lancet Infect. Dis.
Liu W, Tao Z-W, Wang L, Yuan M-L, Liu K, Zhou L, Wei S, Deng Y, Liu J, Liu H-G, Yang M and Hu Y
2020 Analysis of factors associated with disease outcomes in hospitalized patients with 2019
novel coronavirus disease Chin. Med. J. (Engl). 133 1032–8
LV L, LV T, JB M and E C HPC Telemedicine’s service improves access to pediatric cardiology in
Central Portugal: leadership, organization and training as critical success factors--people
really matter Radiology 524 149
Maia M R, Castela E, Pires A and Lapão L V 2019 How to develop a sustainable telemedicine
service? A Pediatric Telecardiology Service 20 years on - an exploratory study BMC Health
Serv. Res. 19 681
McLennan S, Celi L A and Buyx A 2020 COVID-19: Putting the General Data Protection Regulation
to the Test JMIR Public Heal. Surveill. 6 e19279
Nash M, Kadavigere R, Andrade J, Sukumar C A, Chawla K, Shenoy V P, Pande T, Huddart S, Pai M
and Saravu K 2020 Deep learning, computer-aided radiography reading for tuberculosis: a
diagnostic accuracy study from a tertiary hospital in India Sci. Rep. 10 210
Neto E C, Bot B M, Perumal T, Omberg L, Guinney J, Kellen M, Klein A, Friend S H and Trister A D
2

2016 Personalized hypothesis tests for detecting medication response in Parkinson disease
patients using iphone sensor data Pacific Symp. Biocomput. 21 273–84
Njuguna C and McSharry P 2017 Constructing spatiotemporal poverty indices from big data J. Bus.
Res. 70 318–27
Oliveira T C, Bayer S, Gonçalves L and Barlow J 2014 Telemedicine in Alentejo Telemed. e-Health
20 90–3
Omboni S 2020 Telemedicine During The COVID-19 in Italy: A Missed Opportunity? Telemed. eHealth tmj.2020.0106
Palmisano P, Melissano D, Zanotto G, Perego G B, Toselli T, Landolina M and Ricci R Pietro 2020
Change in the use of remote monitoring of cardiac implantable electronic devices in Italian
clinical practice over a 5-year period J. Cardiovasc. Med. 21 305–14
Peng F, Tu L, Yang Y, Hu P, Wang R, Hu Q, Cao F, Jiang T, Sun J, Xu G and Chang C 2020 Management
and Treatment of COVID-19: The Chinese Experience Can. J. Cardiol.
Rossman H, Keshet A, Shilo S, Gavrieli A, Bauman T, Cohen O, Shelly E, Balicer R, Geiger B, Dor Y
and Segal E 2020 A framework for identifying regional outbreak and spread of COVID-19
from one-minute population-wide surveys Nat. Med.
Scalvini S, Bernocchi P, Zanelli E, Comini L and Vitacca M 2018 Maugeri Centre for Telehealth and
Telecare: A real-life integrated experience in chronic patients J. Telemed. Telecare 24 500–7
Stroetmann K A and Erkert T 1999 “ HausTeleDienst”--a CATV-based interactive video service for
elderly people. Stud. Health Technol. Inform. 64 245–52
Taylor T E, Zigel Y, De Looze C, Sulaiman I, Costello R W and Reilly R B 2018 Advances in audiobased systems to monitor patient adherence and inhaler drug delivery Chest 153 710–22
Trifan A, Oliveira M and Oliveira J L 2019 Passive Sensing of Health Outcomes Through
Smartphones: Systematic Review of Current Solutions and Possible Limitations JMIR
mHealth uHealth 7 e12649
Troncoso C, Payer M, Hubaux J-P, Salathé M, Larus J, Bugnion E, Lueks W, Stadler T, Pyrgelis A,
Antonioli D, Barman L, Chatel S, Paterson K, Čapkun S, Basin D, Beutel J, Jackson D, Preneel
B, Smart N, Singelee D, Aysajan A, Seda G, Veale M, Cremers C, Binns R and Cattuto C 2020
Decentralized Privacy-Preserving Proximity Tracing
Vayena E and Madoff L 2019 Navigating the Ethics of Big Data in Public Health The Oxford
Handbook of Public Health Ethics ed A C Mastroianni, J P Kahn and N E Kass (Oxford
University Press) pp 353–67
Vitabile S, Marks M, Stojanovic D, Pllana S, Molina J M, Krzyszton M, Sikora A, Jarynowski A,
Hosseinpour F, Jakobik A, Stojnev Ilic A, Respicio A, Moldovan D, Pop C and Salomie I 2019
Medical Data Processing and Analysis for Remote Health and Activities Monitoring pp 186–
220
Vujosevic S and Midena E 2016 Diabetic Retinopathy in Italy: Epidemiology Data and Telemedicine
Screening Programs J. Diabetes Res. 2016 1–6
Wade V, Soar J and Gray L 2014 Uptake of telehealth services funded by Medicare in Australia
3

Aust. Heal. Rev. 38 528
Wang D, Hu B, Hu C, Zhu F, Liu X, Zhang J, Wang B, Xiang H, Cheng Z, Xiong Y, Zhao Y, Li Y, Wang X
and Peng Z 2020a Clinical Characteristics of 138 Hospitalized Patients With 2019 Novel
Coronavirus–Infected Pneumonia in Wuhan, China JAMA 323 1061
Wang Z, Yang B, Li Q, Wen L and Zhang R 2020b Clinical Features of 69 Cases with Coronavirus
Disease 2019 in Wuhan, China Clin. Infect. Dis.
Warrick P, Hamilton E and Macieszczak M 2005 Neural network based detection of fetal heart
rate patterns Proceedings. 2005 IEEE International Joint Conference on Neural Networks,
2005. vol 4 (IEEE) pp 2400–5
Williams O E, Elghenzai S, Subbe C, Wyatt J C and Williams J 2017 The use of telemedicine to
enhance secondary care: some lessons from the front line Futur. Hosp. J. 4 109–14
Yang X, Yu Y, Xu J, Shu H, Xia J, Liu H, Wu Y, Zhang L, Yu Z, Fang M, Yu T, Wang Y, Pan S, Zou X,
Yuan S and Shang Y 2020 Clinical course and outcomes of critically ill patients with SARSCoV-2 pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a single-centered, retrospective, observational study
Lancet Respir. Med.
Zhou F, Yu T, Du R, Fan G, Liu Y, Liu Z, Xiang J, Wang Y, Song B, Gu X, Guan L, Wei Y, Li H, Wu X, Xu
J, Tu S, Zhang Y, Chen H and Cao B 2020 Clinical course and risk factors for mortality of adult
inpatients with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China: a retrospective cohort study Lancet 395 1054–
62
Zhu Y, Gu X and Xu C 2020 Effectiveness of telemedicine systems for adults with heart failure: a
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials Heart Fail. Rev. 25 231–43

4

