Analytical and numerical investigation of the airflow in face
masks used for protection against COVID-19 virus – implications
for mask design and usage
R. Perić1† and M. Perić2

arXiv:2005.08800v1 [physics.med-ph] 11 May 2020

1

Institute for Fluid Dynamics and Ship Theory, Hamburg University of Technology, Am Schwarzenberg-Campus 4 (C),
21073 Hamburg, Germany
2 Institute of Ship Technology, Ocean Engineering and Transport Systems, Faculty of Engineering, University of
Duisburg-Essen, Bismarckstraße 69, 47057, Duisburg

† Corresponding Author Email: robinson.peric@tuhh.de
(Received ——; accepted ——)

A BSTRACT
The use of face masks for the general public has been suggested in literature as a means to decrease virus
transmission during the global COVID-19 pandemic. However, literature findings indicate that most mask
designs do not provide reliable protection. This paper investigates the hypothesis that the impaired protection
is mainly due to imperfect fitting of the masks, so that airflow, which contains virus-transporting droplets, can
leak through gaps into or out of the mask. The fluid dynamics of face masks are investigated via analytical
and numerical computations. The results demonstrate that the flow can be satisfactorily predicted by simplified
analytical 1D-flow models, by efficient 2D-flow simulations and by 3D-flow simulations. The present results
show that already gap heights larger than 0.1 mm can result in the mask not fulfilling FFP2 or FFP3 standards,
and for gap heights of ca. 1 mm most of the airflow and droplets may pass through the gap. The implications of
these findings are discussed and improvements to existing mask designs are suggested.
Keywords: Computational Fluid Dynamics, airflow, Filtering Face Piece (FFP) masks, respirators, self-made
masks, surgical masks, virus transmission, COVID-19 virus.
1

I NTRODUCTION

During the virus pandemic COVID-19 in 2020, several countries have either enforced or discussed
whether wearing face masks should be compulsory in
public places (Howard, 2020). Opposing arguments
include that masks should be reserved for healthcare
workers and that the use of medical masks in the community may create a false sense of security (World
Health Organization, 2020). However, the global
shortage of masks may not persist indefinitely so that
protective masks may become available to the public in future. Arguments in favor of using face masks
for the general public include indications by several
studies that face masks can reduce viral exposure and
infection risks (e.g. van der Sande et al., 2008). Protective effects of masks were demonstrated for various severe infections such as SARS, tuberculosis and
pandemic influenza (e.g. Andersen, 2019; Jung et al.,
2014, and references therein) and also for dust, oil, or
combustion-exhaust particles (Penconek et al., 2012;
Ntlailane and Wichmann, 2019).
Virus transmission can occur via direct contact with
secretions and via exhaled water droplets (Tellier,
2006). The former risk can be reduced by hygiene

practices, such as hand washing and not touching
one’s face; furthermore, the virus was found to survive at most several days on surfaces (Kampf et al.,
2020). However, reducing the risk of virus transmission via droplets is complicated by the different particle sizes, which roughly range from larger droplets in
the order of 100 µm to smaller aerosol-size droplets
in the order of < 1 µm (Tellier, 2006; Fabian et al.,
2008). Larger particles (> 20 µm) have shorter settling times, i.e. they fall to the ground within seconds
up to a few minutes. Smaller particles, however, may
float in the air for hours and particles with a diameter < 3 µm essentially do not settle (Tellier, 2006).
Thus virus-contaminated droplets may accumulate in
closed rooms such as workplaces or public transportation. Although at present it is not known how long the
virus remains infectious, results by van Doremalen
et al. (2020) indicate that the virus could survive
several hours in aerosols-size droplets, and Asadi et
al. (2020) conclude from their literature review that
even the smallest aerosol-size droplets might be able
to transmit the virus during face-to-face conversation
with an asymptomatic infected individual.
Fabian et al. (2008) found that humans exhale > 500
droplets per liter of air, of which 99.9% had diameters

that the total inward leakage varied between 0% ≤
TIL ≤ 84.4%. Cherrie et al. (2018), Lee et al. (2016)
and Jung (2014) reported similar values and argued
that, regardless of the quality of the filter materials,
FFP-type masks may not provide reliable protection
if the mask does not fit tightly. Lee et al. (2017) reported face-seal leakage surrounding the chin and the
cheeks for FFP-masks, because the masks did not fit
all wearers. Furthermore, they observed that the percentage of particles that penetrated through face-seal
leaks increased for low air intake and for particle diameters below 0.1 µm. Children were found to be less
protected by FFP-type masks, which was attributed to
inferior fitting of the masks on smaller faces (van der
Sande et al., 2008).

between 0.3 µm and 5 µm, and 87% were smaller than
1 µm. That most exhaled particles have diameters below 1 µm has been confirmed by other authors (e.g.
Fairchild and Stampfer, 1987; Papineni and Rosenthal, 1997; Edwards et al., 2004). Thus this work focuses on particles smaller than 5 µm.
To reduce the risk of inhaling such droplets, selfmade-masks, surgical masks and so-called respirators, such as Filtering Face Piece (FFP) masks, are
under discussion (cf. Steinle et al., 2018).
The performance of face masks is typically assessed
via experiments that determine the filtration efficiency
(FE) and the total inward leakage (TIL). The filtration efficiency is the percentage of particles that do not
pass through the filter if the mask is tightly fitted. For
example, Mueller et al. (2018) reported average filtration efficiencies of handkerchiefs (FE = 22.7%), Tshirts (FE = 42.5%), surgical masks (66.2% ≤ FE ≤
88.7%) and FFP3-masks (FE = 99.3%, corresponding to the mask in Fig. 20). Thus, whereas typical
household fabrics may not provide sufficient protection, industrial materials from which FFP3-masks are
made typically have satisfactory filtering qualities.

Moreover, filtration efficiencies for masks may be different depending on the particles used. Penconek et
al. (2013) found that commercially available FFP2and FFP3-masks did not provide sufficient protection
against diesel exhaust fumes. Filtration efficiency is
typically tested with NaCl particles or paraffin oil
droplets (Penconek et al., 2013), but water droplets
appear to be rarely used.
Performing activities such as exercising, nodding or
shaking was found to affect total inward leakage, although the total inward leakage varied mostly by factor 2 or less (van der Sande et al., 2008).

However, the filtration efficiency of the filter material
is not sufficient to assess the protection offered by a
mask; rather, the protection can be measured by the
total inward leakage, which is the percentage of particles that enter the mask through both the filter and the
face-seal leakage. Alternatively, the protection factor
(PF) can be used, for which holds PF = 1/TIL (van
der Sande et al., 2008).

However, how tightly does a mask have to fit and how
large may gaps between mask and face be before the
mask ceases to provide the promised protection? The
aim of the present work is to answer these questions
via analytical and numerical flow computations for a
generic mask. From these findings, recommendations
for the design of more effective industrial and selfmade masks are derived, with focus on re-usability of
the masks.

Milton et al. (2013) found that surgical masks reduced the number of influenza virus droplet that were
emitted by ca. 75% compared to test persons not
wearing masks if the droplets were larger than 5 µm,
but for smaller droplets the surgical masks provided
no substantial protection.

2

Therefore, in the following the focus will be only on
FFP-masks, which are typically more effective than
surgical or home-made masks (van der Sande et al.,
2008). FFP-masks can be subdivided in classes FFP1
to FFP3 with filtration efficiencies of 80% (FFP1),
94% (FFP2) and 99% (FFP3), respectively, and leakage rates of less than 22% (FFP1), 8% (FFP2) and 2%
(FFP3) (cf. Seidler et al., 2004; Lee et al., 2016; European norm EN 149:2001+A1:2009). Thus technically it would appear that FFP3-masks provide satisfactory protection, and indeed they are widely used in
hospitals. As outlined in the following, though, literature suggests that many FFP3-masks do not provide
reliable protection, especially if not properly fitted.

T HEORY

To investigate the airflow through face masks, the
problem can be reduced to one-dimensional (1D) flow
for a simplified geometry (cf. Fig. 1) by the following
assumptions. The fluid is considered as incompressible because the Mach number Ma is well below 0.3
(cf. Ferziger et al., 2020). The pressure within the
mask is assumed to be uniform, so ∂p/∂xi ≈ 0 for
all directions xi ; thus the surface area Sm of the mask
filter-piece influences the flow through the filter, but
the geometrical shape of the mask has a negligible
influence. Therefore, the mask geometry can be simplified to a half-sphere e.g. with radius r ≈ 0.0502 m
and surface area Sm ≈ 0.015833 m2 . The mask has
a uniform gap along a width Bg of its perimeter and
otherwise fits tightly to the face. The mask rim has
length Lg with constant gap height Hg . Face and nose
are approximated as a plane pierced by a channel with

Steinle et al. (2018) investigated FFP2-masks with
median filtration efficiency of FE ≥ 98% and found
2

cross-sectional area St (cf. Fig. 1). No flow occurs
through the face, the nose or the boundaries of the
gap.

piece. The combined pressure loss at gap inlet and
gap outlet can be expressed as

When inhaling or exhaling, the total (volumetric) flow
rate through the nose is Ft = ut St with average velocity ut and cross-sectional area St . From mass conservation follows

∆pg,io =

Ft = Fg + Fm

,

ut ρ 2
ζ u
|ut | 2 g

,

(3)

with loss coefficient ζ = ζin + ζout , density of air
ρ ≈ 1.2 kg/m3 , average gap velocity ug , average flow
velocity
p ut through the nose and its absolute value
|ut | = u2t ; the term ut /|ut | is included to obtain the
correct sign for both inhaling and exhaling.

(1)

with flow rate through the gap Fg = ug Sg , average
flow velocity ug within the gap, gap cross-sectional
area Sg , flow rate through the mask filter Fm = um Sm ,
average flow velocity um through the surface Sm of
the masks filter-piece.

The loss coefficients ζin and ζout were taken from
Idelchik (1986, p. 92 and p. 128) as ζin = 0.5 and
ζout = 1.0.
Assuming a fully-developed laminar flow in a planechannel, the pressure loss within the gap is
∆pg,2 =

12µLg
ug
Hg2

,

(4)

with dynamic viscosity of air µ ≈ 1.8 · 10−5 Pas, gap
length Lg , gap height Hg and average gap velocity ug .
The pressure loss due to the flow through the mask
surface Sm is approximately
Fig.

∆p = pm − pa ≈ Cm ρum

1. Simplified geometry for airflow through a

generic face mask, which has a gap with height Hg
and length Lg over a width Bg along its perimeter and
is otherwise tightly fitted to the face; average velocities ut , um and ug denote airflow through nose crosssectional area St , mask filter surface Sm and gap crosssectional area Sg ; pm and pa denote the pressure inside and outside of the mask

νRecrit
Dh

,

(5)

with viscous porous resistance Cm , which is a property of the mask filter material, density ρ of air and
velocity um of the airflow through the mask, which
can be computed from the flow rate Fm through the
mask.
It is expected that the assumption, that the pressure
loss depends linearly on the velocity, can be made
with good approximation for these flow rates. Unfortunately, only qualitative curves were available to the
authors to validate this statement. However, Jung et
al. (2014) present experimental data for pressure drop
∆p for flow rate Ft = 30 L/min and Ft = 85 L/min
for FFP-type masks, and even when linearly scaling
the pressure drop ∆p(30 L/min) for Ft = 30 L/min
85 L/min
via ∆p(85 L/min) ≈ ∆p(30 L/min) 30
L/min gives only
differences to the actually measured value of 15% to
40%. This is acceptable for the present purposes, because the results in Sect. 4 show that changing ∆p by
even 300% changed the ratio Fg /Ft , i.e. gap flow rate
divided by total flow rate, by ca. 10% or less, i.e. the
flow did not change qualitatively.

Within the gap, the flow is assumed to be fullydeveloped laminar Pouseuille flow, which is justified because the average gap velocities ug within the
framework of this analysis were below the critical velocity
ucrit ≈

,

(2)

with hydraulic diameter Dh = 2Hg , gap heights
Hg ∈ [0.1 mm, 1 mm], kinematic viscosity ν ≈ 1.5 ·
10−5 m2 /s for air at 20 C◦ room temperature and critical Reynolds number for plane channel flow Recrit ≈
3000 (cf. Schlichting and Gersten, 2017, p. 104).
Gap Reynolds numbers in this work were within Re ∈
[5, 1800].

The pressure drop ∆p through the gap must be equal
to the pressure drop through the mask filter-piece
ut ρ 2 12µLg
ζ u +
ug = Cm ρum
|ut | 2 g
Hg2

Pressure losses occur in the flow at the gap inlet,
within the gap, at the gap outlet, and at the mask filter3

,

(6)

and because the total flow rate Ft = ut St must equal
the sum of the flow rates through mask Fm and gap Fg
(cf. Eq. (1))
Fm = Ft − Fg = Ft − ug Hg Bg

,

3

Except for the largest particles, most droplets exhaled
during breathing are in the range of typical tracer particles used in optical flow measurement techniques.
For example, typical droplet diameters used in gas
flows lie within 0.5 µm to 5 µm (cf. Tropea and Yarin,
2007). Thus, the droplets of interest in this work can
be assumed to follow the airflow and need not be resolved in the simulations.

(7)

and thus the flow velocity through the filter can be
expressed as
um =

Ft − ug Hg Bg
Fm
=
Sm
Sm

.

In order to validate the analytical model from Sect. 2,
simulations are performed for using a 2D-geometry
and a commercial computational fluid dynamics
(CFD) software. The governing equations for the
single-phase flow simulations are the equation for
mass conservation and the three equations for momentum conservation, collectively called the NavierStokes equations:

(8)

Inserting Eq. (8) into Eq. (6) gives
ut ρ 2
ζ u +
|ut | 2 g

12µLg Cm ρHg Bg
+
Hg2
Sm

!

Cm ρFt
=0
−
Sm

S IMULATION S ETUP

ug
(9)
.

∂
∂t

Z

Z

V

a=

ut ζρ
|ut | 2

b=

12µLg Cm ρHg Bg
+
Hg2
Sm

c=−

Cm ρFt
Sm

∂
∂t
Z

(10)
S

,

,

√
−b + b2 − 4ac
ug =
2a

(12)

(13)

.

,

(14)

(15)

∆p = Cm ρum

,

(16)

Fg = ug Hg Bg

.

(17)

Z
V

Z

ρui dV +

(τi j i j − pii ) · n dS +

ZS

ρui u · n dS =

V

ρg · ii dV

,

(19)

The computational domain is box-shaped with dimensions 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.4 m, −0.2 m ≤ y ≤ 0.2 m, 0 ≤ z ≤
0.1 m, with an extended channel that represents the
nose as illustrated in Fig. 2. The coordinate system
has its origin in the center of the nose opening at the
same level as the face, as shown in Fig. 2, which is
represented as a flat wall. As Fig. 2 demonstrates,
the pressure within the mask is approximately uniform, therefore only the surface area Sm , not the geometrical shape of the mask, influences the results, so
the mask was represented by a simplified polygonal
shape. The mask surface is the same as in Sect. 2,
Sm = 0.015833 m2 , and it is modeled as a porous interface with pressure drop ∆p according to Eq. (5),
with viscous porous resistance Cm = 2000 m/s unless stated otherwise. The top boundary (y = 0.2 m)
is set up as pressure outlet, with atmospheric pressure p∞ prescribed. Symmetry boundary conditions
are prescribed at boundaries x = 0.4 m, y = −0.2 m,

The average flow velocity through the mask um , the
pressure drop ∆p and the flow rates through the mask
filter and through the gap can then be computed as
Fm = um Sm

(18)

with volume V of control volume (CV) bounded by
the closed surface S, fluid velocity vector u with the
Cartesian components ui , unit vector n normal to S
and pointing outwards, time t, pressure p, fluid density ρ, components τi j of the viscous stress tensor and
unit vector i j in direction x j . The fluid, gaseous air,
is considered incompressible. Selected flow simulations were repeated with compressible air following
the ideal gas law and it was verified that compressibility effects were negligible for the investigated cases.

(11)

,

,

S

The solution for gap velocity ug can be determined as
follows:
au2g + bug + c = 0 ,

ρu · n dS = 0

ρ dV +

This 1D-model allows the computation of the gap
flow rate Fg as a function of gap width Bg , gap height
Hg and gap length Lg .
4

z = 0 m and z = 0.1 m. At the outward end surface St
of the nose-channel, the velocity ut is prescribed so
that ut St = Ft . All other boundaries are impermeable,
no-slip wall boundaries.

ut and thus also um are doubled. To avoid that Eq.
(5) leads to twice the desired pressure drop along the
mask, the larger mask filter is modeled by halving
Cm . Thus the same flow rate and pressure loss occur
through the mask as previously. So if the reference
gap width is as in the present case Bg,ref = 10 cm, then
selecting Cm = Cm,ref Bg /Bg,ref provides the desired
solution for simulations with different gap widths.
The solution domain was discretized with a rectilinear
grid with local mesh refinement as shown in Fig. 3,
so that the gap was resolved with at least 10 cells per
gap height Hg . For the grid dependence study, the
grids were refined uniformly by halving the cells in
x- and y-directions. Depending on the gap size, the
grids consisted of ca. 10 000 to 160 000 cells.

Fig. 2. Computational domain for 2D-flow simulations through a generic mask showing the pressure
distribution, with close-up of nose, mask and gap;
note that throughout this work, the pressure p is given
relative to atmospheric pressure p∞ ; after the simulation is finished, the pressure for inhaling with flow
rate Ft = 30 L/min is nearly uniform inside the mask

The simulations were performed quasi-twodimensional (2D), i.e. the grid is only 1 cell
thick in z-direction with symmetry conditions applied
at front and back planes. With correctly prescribed
total flow rate Ft , nose cross-section area St , mask
filter surface Sm and gap cross-section area Sg ,
equivalent results to the theoretical formulation
from Sect. 2 can be expected. As all gradients in
z-direction are zero, the width ∆z of the domain can
be chosen arbitrarily and the results can be scaled to
the desired gap width Bg and mask filter surface Sm .
The basic configuration corresponds to a mask which
fits tightly except over a width Bg = 10 cm along the
perimeter.

Fig. 3. Computational grid with local refinement,
especially in the vicinity of the gap; full domain (top
left) and close-up of nose and mask (top right), gap
(bottom left) and gap entry (bottom right)

All simulations were performed using the commercial flow solver Simcenter STAR-CCM+ (version
15.02.007-R8) by Siemens. The solver is based on
the finite volume method (FVM) and the implicit unsteady segregated solver was used. All approximations were of second order. The under-relaxation
factors were 0.8 for velocities and 0.2 for pressure.
The initial conditions were pressure p = p∞ , velocity
u = 0 and density ρair = 1.2 kg/m3 . The time step was
∆t = 0.004 s and 6 outer iterations were performed
per time step. The total simulated time was selected
tend = 0.5 s, at which point a converged, quasi-steady
solution was obtained in all simulations. Detailed
information on finite-volume-based flow simulations
can be found e.g. in Ferziger et al. (2020).

To simulate the flow in a geometry with a shorter
gap width, e.g. Bg = 5 cm, the simulation could be
performed in three dimensions (3D) with a partially
closed gap, which would increase the number of cells
and the computational effort. In the following, a more
efficient approach was selected so that the flow problem remains two-dimensional and the computational
effort remains low. Consider that, if the gap were
closed (Hg = 0), the flow rate through the mask filter Fm = Ft , so the average velocity through the mask
filter is um = ut St /Sm . If the gap width Bg is halved,
the domain size in z-direction and thus St and Sm are
halved as well. To maintain the same flow rate Ft ,

Simulations were performed for inhaling of air and
compared to theoretical predictions from Sect. 2
for different gap height Hg ∈ [0.1 mm, 1 mm], gap
5

−0.146 m ≤ z ≤ 0.43 m. The 3D-grid consisted of
polyhedral cells with prism cells near the wall boundaries, so that there were more than 10 cells per gap
height. The boundary opposite to the mask was the
pressure outlet and all other boundaries except the
mask surface and the nostrils were impermeable noslip walls. The computational grid consisted of ca.
0.9 million cells.

width Bg ∈ [2.5 cm, 10 cm] and total flow rate Ft ∈
[30 L/min, 95 L/min].
To verify that the conclusions drawn from the 2Dflow simulations are applicable to realistic 3D-flow
through face masks, also 3D-flow simulations were
performed for a few representative configurations.
The simulation setup was the same as in the 2D-flow
simulations, with the following exceptions: Head and
mask had realistic geometries as shown in Fig. 4,
and the air flows through the nostrils. The human
head1 had a vertical distance between top of head
and chin of ≈ 23 cm. The face mask had a spherical
shape with radius r = 0.052 m and filter surface area
Sm = 0.02012 m2 . The mask had a seal with length
Lg ≈ 1.2 cm and there was a gap between seal and
face of average height Hg ≈ 0.26 mm, which extended
along a width of Bg ≈ 2.5 cm below the left eye (cf.
Fig. 4).

Fig.

Two further cases were investigated with a slightly
modified setup, i.e. under-relaxation factors 0.9 (velocities) and 0.5 (pressure), time step ∆t = 0.0002 s
and a finer grid with ca. 3 · 106 cells (cf. Fig. 5).

Fig. 5. Top: Computational grid for 3D-flow simulations with realistic head and mask geometries (top
left) and close-up views of mask (top right) and gap
(bottom)

4. Top: Head (grey) with generic FFP3-type

mask with filter surface (white) and seal (blue); bottom: located between nose and left eye, there is a gap
with width Bg ≈ 2.5 cm and height Hg between face
and seal, through which air can leak

In one set of simulations, air was allowed to enter the mask through two gaps below the eyes, each
with width Bg = 1.08 cm and average height Hg =
0.66 mm. The total gap length was Lg = 0.71 cm,
which corresponds more closely to a typical mask
seal. Both inhaling and exhaling were simulated with
total flow rates Ft = 30 L/min and Ft = 95 L/min.

The solution domain was a box with dimensions
−0.246 m ≤ x ≤ 0.246 m, −0.35 m ≤ y ≤ 0.178 m,
1 Human Head 1/6 Scale by TheNewBlood, Creative Commons - Attribution - Non-Commercial license, Link: http://
www.thingiverse.com/thing:2859425, license link: http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/

In another set of simulations, below both eyes there
6

Figure 7 shows that gap heights of Hg ≈ 0.1 mm or
less are required so that less than 1% of the air flows
through the gap. Figure 7 also shows that even a
gap of height Hg = 0.2 mm (which corresponds to the
height of a beard a few hours after a close shave)
causes that 2% to 8% of the inhaled air flows unfiltered through the gap, depending on the width of the
gap (here: between 2.5 cm and 10 cm).

was a gap with a circular-segment cross-section, with
total gap width Bg = 2.32 cm and average gap height
Hg = 1.45 mm as shown in Fig. 17. Air was exhaled with total flow rates Ft = 30 L/min and Ft =
95 L/min.
4

R ESULTS

Figures 6-8 show results from 2D-flow simulations
based on the setup from Sect. 3 for inhaling.
The mask has a viscous porous resistance of Cm =
2000 m/s, corresponding to a mask that, when tightly
fitted, produces a pressure drop ∆p close to the upper
limit for a FFP3 mask according to the EN149 norm,
i.e. ∆p < 100 Pa (for total flow rate Ft = 30 L/min)
and ∆p < 300 Pa (for Ft = 95 L/min). Typical pressure drops measured in experiments for FFP2- and
FFP3-masks were e.g. 97 Pa < ∆p < 244 Pa (Jung et
al., 2014) and 150 Pa < ∆p < 230 Pa (Serfozo et al.,
2017), indicating that the choice of Cm is feasible.

The results also show that the gap height Hg has the
largest influence: increasing gap height Hg by a factor
of 2 can increase the flow rate Fg through the gap by a
factor of up to 10. The gap width had a comparatively
small influence: increasing gap width Bg by a factor
of 2 increased the flow rate Fg through the gap by a
factor of up to ca. 2.

Flow rate Ft = 30 L/min
Flow rate Ft = 30 L/min

Flow rate Ft = 95 L/min
Flow rate Ft = 95 L/min

Fig. 7. As Fig. 6, except for logarithmic vertical axis
Fig.

6. Analytical predictions and simulation re-

sults for the flow rate Fg through the gap as percentage of the total flow rate Ft , as a function of gap
height Hg , for a mask with viscous porous resistance
Cm = 2000 m/s, gap length Lg = 1 cm and different
gap widths Bg ; lines represent analytical predictions
and points represent simulation results

Figure 8 shows that the pressure drop across the mask
filter can decrease by more than 75% when the gap
height is increased to Hg = 1 mm. This makes breathing easier, which could tempt mask wearers not to
tighten the mask to the face, with the consequence
that up to ca. 70% of the air flows unfiltered through
the gap into the mask. Figure 9 shows pressure and
velocities within the gap for a representative configuration.

Figure 6 shows that the flow rate through the gap between mask seal and face depends non-linearly on the
gap height Hg . The predictions from the simple analytical model from Sect. 2 agree well with the more
sophisticated 2D-flow simulation results.
7

Flow rate Ft = 30 L/min

Figures 10-12 show results for a mask with viscous
porous resistance Cm = 1000 m/s. When tightly fitted, the mask produces a pressure drop close to the
lowest values that FFP3-masks on the market may
provide.
The results show similar trends as those for Cm =
2000 m/s, and although the filter resistance is halved,
the flow rate through the gap reduces only by 10 −
20% in most cases. Thus, the choice of filter material has a comparatively small influence concerning
how large the gap height Hg may be before the mask
ceases to fulfill FFP3 requirements.

Flow rate Ft = 95 L/min

Figures 6-12 show the results obtained for the fine
grid. Results for medium and coarse grids are not depicted because they show no noticeable differences.
Average differences between simulation results for
the flow rates on coarse, medium and fine grids are
less than 0.8%. The differences between analytical
predictions and simulation results for the flow rates
was < 3% for all simulated cases.
Fig. 8. Analytical predictions and simulation results
for pressure drop ∆p as a function of gap height Hg ,
for different gap widths Bg ; lines represent analytical
predictions and points represent simulation results

Flow rate Ft = 30 L/min

Flow rate Ft = 95 L/min

Fig. 9. Top: Pressure contours within the gap;
middle: velocity magnitude inside the gap; bottom: close-up of center-part of the gap with velocity vectors; for simulation from Fig. 6 with flow
rate Ft = 95 L/min, viscous porous filter resistance
Cm = 2000 m/s, gap height Hg = 0.4 mm, gap length
Lg = 1 cm and gap width Bg = 5 cm

Fig. 10. As Fig. 6, except for a mask with viscous
porous resistance Cm = 1000 m/s

8

Flow rate Ft = 30 L/min

out backup from simulation data. The figure shows
that when the gap height is small (a few multiples of
0.1 mm), then changing the seal thickness (i.e. the gap
length) from a thin seal (Lg = 0.1 cm) to a wide seal
(Lg = 2 cm) can change the gap flow rate Fg by factor
10 or more. This demonstrates that the thickness of
the mask seal can have a substantial influence whether
or not a mask fulfills FFP2- or FFP3-requirements.
Gap width Bg = 2 cm

Flow rate Ft = 95 L/min

Gap width Bg = 10 cm

Fig. 11. As Fig. 10, except for logarithmic vertical

axis

Flow rate Ft = 30 L/min

Gap width Bg = 30 cm

Flow rate Ft = 95 L/min

Fig. 13. Analytical predictions for the flow rate Fg
through the gap as percentage of the total flow rate
Ft = 30 L/min, as a function of gap height Hg , for a
mask with viscous porous resistance Cm = 2000 m/s
and different gap widths Bg and gap lengths Lg

Fig. 12. As Fig. 8, except for a mask with viscous
porous resistance Cm = 1000 m/s

To validate that the assumptions which were made in
the analytical approach from Sect. 2 and in the 2Dflow simulations from Sect. 3 are valid, 3D-flow simulations were performed with a realistic human head
and mask geometry (cf. Fig. 4) for three cases denoted setups A, B, and C. These differ mainly with
regard to the gap shape, flow rate and flow direction,

From Figs. 6-12, the analytical approach from Sect.
2 can be considered sufficiently validated. Therefore, Fig. 13 presents analytical predictions with9

as summarized in Table 1.

well with 3D-flow simulation results, demonstrating
that previous assumptions were justified. The results
show that the pressure (not shown) can indeed be approximated as constant within the mask. The largest
flow velocities occur within the gap, as expected. Although the gap is very small, 1.84% of the flow enters
the mask through the gap, which just fulfills FFP3requirements that leakage must be below 2%. Thus if
there would be another such gap below the other eye,
or if the seal would be slightly thinner (i.e. smaller
gap length Lg ), FFP3-requirements would not be fulfilled.

Table 1. Parameters of the 3D-flow simulations in

Figs. 14-18 with realistic head and mask geometries:
Average gap height Hg , gap width Bg , gap length Lg ,
total flow rate Ft , gap location, shape of the gap crosssection (rectangular or circular segment), and flow direction during breathing
Hg
Bg
Lg
Ft
gap below
gap section
breath

setup A
0.26 mm
2.5 cm
1.2 cm
L
30 min
left eye
rectangular
inhaling

setup B
0.66 mm
2.16 cm
0.71 cm
L
L
30 min
, 95 min
both eyes
rectangular
both

setup C
1.45 mm
2.32 cm
0.71 cm
L
L
30 min
, 95 min
both eyes
circular segment
exhaling

The first 3D-flow simulation results (setup A from Table 1) correspond to inhaling during normal breathing
with a mask that fits tightly over the whole perimeter, except for a very small gap (average gap height
Hg = 0.26 mm and gap width Bg = 2.5 cm, cf. Figs. 4
and 14).

Fig. 15. Analytical predictions and 3D-flow simulation results for the flow rate Fg through the gap as
percentage of the total flow rate Ft = 30 L/min (top)
and pressure drop ∆p across the filter (bottom), as a
function of gap height Hg ; for the human head and realistic mask geometry from Fig. 4 with setup A from
Table 1

The second 3D-flow simulation results (setup B from
Table 1) correspond to inhaling and exhaling during
either normal breathing or deep breathing with a mask
that fits tightly over the whole perimeter, except for
two small gaps (average gap height Hg = 0.66 mm and
total gap width Bg = 2.16 cm).

Fig. 14. Velocity magnitude in the plane through the
mask’s gap when inhaling (top) and pressure with velocity vectors for a close-up view of the gap (bottom),
for 3D-flow with geometry from Fig. 4 and setup A
from Table 1

Figure 16 shows that, although the gaps are still comparatively small, between 8.9% (inhaling with total
flow rate Ft = 95 L/min) and 15% (exhaling with total flow rate Ft = 30 L/min) of the flow enters or
leaves the mask through the gap unfiltered, i.e. neither FFP3- nor FFP2-requirements (i.e. less than 8%
leakage) are fulfilled. As before, the percentage flow

Figures 14-15 show that the analytical predictions for
gap flow rate and pressure within the mask agree
10

vided by the mask is to airflow leakage through comparatively small gaps.

through the gap is larger for lower flow rates. The
gap flow rates Fg were ca. 10% larger for exhaling
than for inhaling, which was attributed to the different edge angles at gap inlet and outlet for this specific geometry (i.e. different resistance for entering
the gap). The agreement with analytical results from
the 1D model is again remarkably good.

Finally, Figs. 17-18 present results for exhaling of
air with a total flow rate of Ft = 95 L/min, where
18.5% of the flow leaves the mask through the gap
unfiltered with a pressure drop of ∆p = 152.4 Pa. Figure 17 shows that the gap directs the airflow towards
the eyes with comparatively large velocities (locally
more than 8 m/s, i.e. up to Beaufort number 5 ‘fresh
breeze’). Figure 18 shows how the exhaled breath
from the nostrils hits the mask, is diverted sideways,
partially passes through the mask with low velocities
and partially is accelerated through the narrow gap
and blows against the eyes and the forehead. If the
mask is worn in combination with glasses, such a flow
can be visualized by the fogging of the glasses.

Fig. 16. Analytical predictions (lines) and 3D-flow
simulation results (points) for the flow rate Fg through
the gap as percentage of the total flow rate Ft (top) and
absolute pressure drop |∆p| across the filter (bottom),
as a function of gap height Hg ; for the human head
and realistic mask geometry setup B from Table 1,
both for inhaling and exhaling

The third 3D-flow simulation results (setup C from
Table 1) correspond to exhaling during either normal
or deep breathing with a mask that fits tightly over
the whole perimeter, except for two medium-sized
gaps (average gap height Hg = 1.45 mm and total gap
width Bg = 1.45 cm). The gaps are located at both
sides of the nose, as is typical for many self-made or
surgical masks. However, the selected gap size is still
small compared to the range of typical gap sizes for
such masks.
For exhaling with a total flow rate Ft = 30 L/min,
ca. 29.5% of the flow leaves the mask through the
gap unfiltered, i.e. neither FFP3-, FFP2 nor FFP1requirements (i.e. less than 22% leakage) are fulfilled. The pressure drop was ∆p = 42.1 Pa. A grid
study was performed on two grids with 8.7 · 105 cells
and 2.9 · 106 cells, and the results for flow rates and
pressure drop differed by less than 0.25%, indicating that the discretization was sufficiently fine. The
results demonstrate how sensitive the protection pro-

Fig. 17. Isosurface where velocity magnitude |u| =
3 m/s (blue) for exhaling with total flow rate Ft =
95 L/min and mask with small gaps beneath each eye
(top), and side-view including velocity magnitude at
center-plane (bottom); for setup C from Table 1

11

The gap height Hg had the largest influence on the
flow rate: It was found that increasing gap height Hg
by a factor of 2 can increase the flow rate Fg through
the gap by a factor of up to 10. The seal thickness (i.e. gap length Lg ) also influenced the filtering performance substantially: For small gap heights
(. 0.3 mm), changing the seal thickness from a thin
seal (Lg = 0.1 cm) to a wide seal (Lg = 2 cm) can
change the gap flow rate Fg by factor 10 or more. In
contrast, changing the gap width Bg had a comparatively small influence, and changing the filter material
had an even smaller effect.
For the design of FFP-type masks it is therefore critical to ensure that the masks fit tightly without a gap,
even if put on in a hurry by a layperson. Further, the
seal thickness should be made as large as possible, to
reduce the negative effects in case that there is a gap
between face and mask.
The present results confirm the experimental observation by Lee et al. (2017) that for lower flow rates
the percentage of leaked airflow increases. Moreover,
the present findings indicate that the large variation in
protection observed for FFP2- and FFP3-type masks
in literature (with total inward leakage of 80% or
more for some test participants) resulted from imperfect fitting of the masks. Already for gaps which can
hardly be distinguished by the naked eye, the mask
may loose most of its protection. Therefore, it appears that the design of many typical FFP-type masks
does not adequately consider the importance of tight
fitting of the mask and may not provide reliable protection. Thus, fit-testing with suitable instruction can
be recommended (cf. Lepelletier et al., 2019).

Fig. 18. Streamlines colored by velocity magnitude
|u| (top) and pressure in center-plane (bottom) corresponding to Fig. 17; where the exhaled jet hits the
mask, the pressure increases locally: within the rest
of the mask the pressure is roughly uniform, whereas
it is almost perfectly uniform for the inhaling case

5

From the above discussion follows that most designs
for self-made masks and surgical masks are not suitable for filtering out the majority of exhaled droplets,
i.e. droplets smaller than 5 µm, because they do not fit
tightly and thus most air will enter and leave the mask
through the gaps instead of through the filter. Only
large droplets that do not follow the flow of air may
be filtered more effectively. Future work could model
larger droplets as Lagrangian particles, to determine
via flow simulations the amount of larger droplets that
pass through the gap as a function of the particle size
and gap location.

D ISCUSSION

The present results demonstrate that tight fitting of
face masks is of paramount importance. If the mask
does not fit to the face perfectly, i.e. without a
gap, airflow containing virus-carrying droplets leaks
into or out of the mask unfiltered. The results in
Sect. 4 demonstrate that already for gap heights
Hg > 0.2 mm, the total inward leakage will typically
be larger than 2%, so that FFP3-requirements are not
fulfilled anymore. For gap heights Hg ≈ 0.4 mm,
ca. 5% to 30% of the air can enter the mask unfiltered through the gap, so that mostly FFP2- or even
FFP1-requirements are not fulfilled, while for gaps of
height Hg = 1 mm more than 70% of the air may pass
through the gap unfiltered.

From the present findings, it can be expected that the
design of most self-made masks as well as industrial
masks can be improved by attaching an impermeable, sufficiently thick sealing material to the mask
rim. This material should be flexible enough to allow tight fitting for different face geometries, which
can be achieved by selecting a deformable material
and pressing it tightly against the face by adjustable
bands. Furthermore, the material should be com12

For pandemic viruses such as COVID19, which survives at most several days on surfaces (Kampf et
al., 2020), ordinary citizens may only require a few
masks, which can be stored in a dry, warm place and
after a few days can be reused, and thus would remain
reusable for years. With suitable material choice, the
mask can even be disinfected more quickly, for example by placing it in an oven at temperatures in the
order of 80 ◦ C for ca. half an hour (Mackenzie, 2020).
In this manner, production and distribution of FFP3masks for the general public can be realized comparatively cost-effectively, so that social and economic
consequences of a pandemic might be reduced by this
measure.

fortable enough to allow wearing durations of several hours. An example for such a material are the
ear-pieces of typical passive noise-cancelling headphones. The mask filter can be made of the same
materials used so far. The shape of the filter is not
important because the present results show that the
pressure within the mask is basically uniform. The
suggested improved design is illustrated in Fig. 19.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are grateful to Prof. Moustafa AbdelMaksoud, Institute for Fluiddynamics and Ship Theory, Hamburg University of Technology, Hamburg,
Germany for support and valuable discussions. The
availability of the CFD software Simcenter STARCCM+ for this study, provided by Siemens Industry
Software, is highly appreciated.

Fig. 19. Design suggestion for a tight-fitting FFPtype mask: a flexible headphone earpiece (white)
with cushion cross-sectional diameter of ca. 2 cm is
pressed onto the face by two adjustable bands (red)
with sufficient pressure so that no gap occurs; to the
other side of the earpiece, a suitable filter material
of arbitrary shape is fitted tightly; in this manner a
reusable mask can be constructed which provides satisfactory protection and can be comfortably worn for
several hours

R EFERENCES
Andersen, B. M. (2019). Protection of Upper Respiratory Tract, Mouth and Eyes. In Prevention and
Control of Infections in Hospitals (pp. 129-146).
Springer, Cham.
Asadi, S., Bouvier, N., Wexler, A. S., and Ristenpart, W. (2020).
The coronavirus pandemic and aerosols: Does COVID-19 transmit via expiratory particles?, Aerosol Science and Technology, 54:6, 635-638, DOI:
10.1080/02786826.2020.1749229

The present results have implications also for masks
with one-way valves as shown in Fig. 20. One-way
valves can reduce the breathing effort and humidity
inside the mask: When exhaling, the valve opens a
gap of height Hg ≈ 1 − 4 mm and width Bg ≈ 2 cm.
Thus from the present results it can be expected that
for these masks most air leaves the mask through the
valve unfiltered. Therefore, such a mask does not provide adequate protection for others when worn by an
infected person. Especially, such masks should not
be worn by healthcare workers or other professions
where the risk of being infected is increased.

Cherrie, J. W., Apsley, A., Cowie, H., Steinle, S.,
Mueller, W., Lin, C., Horwell, C. J., Sleeuwenhoek, A., and Loh, M. (2018). Effectiveness
of face masks used to protect Beijing residents
against particulate air pollution. Occupational
and environmental medicine, 75(6), 446-452.
Edwards, D. A., Man, J. C., Brand, P., Katstra, J. P.,
Sommerer, K., Stone, H. A., Nardell, E., and
Scheuch, G. (2004). Inhaling to mitigate exhaled bioaerosols. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 101(50), 17383-17388.
Fabian, P., McDevitt, J. J., DeHaan, W. H., Fung,
R. O., Cowling, B. J., Chan, K. H., Leung, G.
M., and Milton, D. K. (2008). Influenza virus in
human exhaled breath: an observational study.
PloS one, 3(7).

Fig. 20. Left: FFP3-mask with one-way valve; right:
during exhaling, the one-way-valve (yellow) opens
and humid air leaves the mask unfiltered

Fairchild, C. I., and Stampfer, J. F. (1987). Particle concentration in exhaled breath. American
13

Industrial Hygiene Association Journal, 48(11),
948-949.

Mackenzie, D. (2020). Reuse of N95 Masks. Engineering (Beijing, China).

Ferziger, J. H., Perić, M., and Street, R. L. (2020).
Computational methods for fluid dynamics.
Berlin: Springer.

Milton, D. K., Fabian, M. P., Cowling, B. J.,
Grantham, M. L., and McDevitt, J. J. (2013). Influenza virus aerosols in human exhaled breath:
particle size, culturability, and effect of surgical
masks. PLoS pathogens, 9(3).

Idelchik, I. E. (1986). Handbook of hydraulic resistance. Washington, DC, Hemisphere Publishing
Corp., 1986, 662 p. Translation.

Mueller, W., Horwell, C. J., Apsley, A., Steinle, S.,
McPherson, S., Cherrie, J. W., and Galea, K. S.
(2018). The effectiveness of respiratory protection worn by communities to protect from volcanic ash inhalation. Part I: filtration efficiency
tests. International journal of hygiene and environmental health, 221(6), 967-976.

Howard, J. (2020). Should you wear a mask?
US health officials re-examine guidance
amid coronavirus crisis, CNN online article, March 31, 2020, link:
https:
//edition.cnn.com/2020/03/31/health/
coronavirus-masks-experts-debate/
index.html

Ntlailane, M. G. L., and Wichmann, J. (2019). Effectiveness of N95 respirators for nanoparticle
exposure control (2000–2016): a systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of Nanoparticle Research, 21(8), 170.

Jung, H. (2014). Performance of Filtration Efficiency, Pressure Drop and Total Inward Leakage
in Anti-yellow Sand Masks, Quarantine Masks,
Medical Masks, General Masks and Handkerchiefs (Doctoral dissertation, Seoul National
University).

Papineni, R. S., and Rosenthal, F. S. (1997). The
size distribution of droplets in the exhaled breath
of healthy human subjects. Journal of Aerosol
Medicine, 10(2), 105-116.

Jung, H., Kim, J., Lee, S., Lee, J., Kim, J., Tsai, P.,
and Yoon, C. (2014). Comparison of filtration
efficiency and pressure drop in anti-yellow sand
masks, quarantine masks, medical masks, general masks, and handkerchiefs. Aerosol Air Qual
Res, 14(14), 991-1002.

Penconek, A., Dra˛żyk, P., and Moskal, A. (2013).
Penetration of diesel exhaust particles through
commercially available dust half masks. Annals
of occupational hygiene, 57(3), 360-373.

Kampf, G., Todt, D., Pfaender, S., and Steinmann, E.
(2020). Persistence of coronaviruses on inanimate surfaces and its inactivation with biocidal
agents. Journal of Hospital Infection.

Schlichting, H., and Gersten, K. (2017). Boundarylayer theory. 9th edition, Springer-Verlag Berlin
Heidelberg, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-662-52919-5.
Serfozo, N., Ondráček, J., Zíková, N., Lazaridis, M.,
and Ždímal, V. (2017). Size-resolved penetration of filtering materials from CE-marked filtering facepiece respirators. Aerosol Air Qual. Res,
17, 1305-1315.

Lee, S. A., Hwang, D. C., Li, H. Y., Tsai, C. F.,
Chen, C. W., and Chen, J. K. (2016). Particle size-selective assessment of protection of
European standard FFP respirators and surgical
masks against particles-tested with human subjects. Journal of healthcare engineering.

Steinle, S., Sleeuwenhoek, A., Mueller, W., Horwell,
C. J., Apsley, A., Davis, A., Cherrie, J. W., and
Galea, K. S. (2018). The effectiveness of respiratory protection worn by communities to protect from volcanic ash inhalation. Part II: Total inward leakage tests. International journal of
hygiene and environmental health, 221(6), 977984.

Lee, S. A., Chen, Y. L., Hwang, D. C., Wu, C. C.,
and Chen, J. K. (2017). Performance evaluation of full facepiece respirators with cartridges.
Aerosol and Air Quality Research, 17(5), 13161328.
Lepelletier, D., Keita-Perse, O., Parneix, P., Baron,
R., Glélé, L. S. A., Grandbastien, B., and
French Society for Hospital Hygiene working
group. (2019). Respiratory protective equipment at work: good practices for filtering facepiece (FFP) mask. European Journal of Clinical
Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, 38(11),
2193-2195.

Tellier, R. (2006). Review of aerosol transmission of
influenza A virus. Emerging infectious diseases,
12(11), 1657.
Tropea, C., and Yarin, A. L. (2007). Springer handbook of experimental fluid mechanics. Springer
Science & Business Media.
van der Sande, M., Teunis, P., and Sabel, R. (2008).
Professional and home-made face masks reduce
14

exposure to respiratory infections among the
general population. PLoS One, 3(7).
van Doremalen, N., Bushmaker, T., Morris, D. H.,
Holbrook, M. G., Gamble, A., Williamson, B.
N., Tamin, A., Harcourt, J. L., Thornburg, N. J.,
Gerber, S. I., de Wit, E., and Lloyd-Smith, J. O.
(2020). Aerosol and surface stability of SARSCoV-2 as compared with SARS-CoV-1. New
England Journal of Medicine, 382(16), 15641567.
World Health Organization. (2020). Advice on the
use of masks in the context of COVID-19: interim guidance, 6 April 2020 (No. WHO/2019Cov/IPC_Masks/2020.3). World Health Organization.

15

