Sustainable and resilient strategies for touristic cities against COVID-19: an agent-based approach –
Marco D’Orazio, Gabriele Bernardini, Enrico Quagliarini (preprint version - Submitted to Safety Science)

Sustainable and resilient strategies for touristic cities
against COVID-19: an agent-based approach
Marco D’Orazio1, Gabriele Bernardini1, Enrico Quagliarini1,*
1

Department of Construction, Civil Engineering and Architecture, Università Politecnica delle Marche, via di Brecce
Bianche 60131 Ancona
CORRESPONDING AUTHOR: Enrico Quagliarini, mail: e.quagliarini@staff.univpm.it - phone: +39 071 220 4248, fax:
+39 071 220 4582
Abstract.
Touristic cities will suffer from COVID-19 emergency because of its economic impact on their communities. The first
emergency phases involved a wide closure of such areas to support “social distancing” measures (i.e. travels limitation;
lockdown of (over)crowd-prone activities). In the second phase, individual’s risk-mitigation strategies (facial masks)
could be properly linked to “social distancing” to ensure re-opening touristic cities to visitors. Simulation tools could
support the effectiveness evaluation of risk-mitigation measures to look for an economic and social optimum for activities
restarting. This work modifies an existing Agent-Based Model to estimate the virus spreading in touristic areas, including
tourists and residents’ behaviours, movement and virus effects on them according to a probabilistic approach.
Consolidated proximity-based and exposure-time-based contagion spreading rules are included according to international
health organizations and previous calibration through experimental data. Effects of tourists’ capacity (as “social
distancing”-based measure) and other strategies (i.e. facial mask implementation) are evaluated depending on virusrelated conditions (i.e. initial infector percentages). An idealized scenario representing a significant case study has been
analysed to demonstrate the tool capabilities and compare the effectiveness of those solutions. Results show that “social
distancing” seems to be more effective at the highest infectors’ rates, although represents an extreme measure with
important economic effects. This measure loses its full effectiveness (on the community) as the infectors’ rate decreases
and individuals’ protection measures become predominant (facial masks). The model could be integrated to consider other
recurring issues on tourist-related fruition and schedule of urban spaces and facilities (e.g. cultural/leisure buildings).
Keywords. COVID-19; infectious disease; airborne disease transmission; simulation model; agent-based
modelling
1.

Introduction

The smart adaptation of cities against different risks is one of the key challenges for their sustainability and the
resilience of the hosted communities (C. Chen et al., 2020; Ribeiro and Pena Jardim Gonçalves, 2019). Urban areas
involved by tourists’ flows represent a particular application context for such resilience issues, because of the complexity
between economic, social (including relationships between tourists’ and residents’ needs) and organizational tasks,
especially in those scenarios in which seasonal tourism is a training element for the community (Feleki et al., 2018; Qie
and Rong, 2016; Stanganelli et al., 2020). Due to such aspects, touristic areas are generally more susceptible to disaster
effects than the other urban contexts (Aznar-Crespo et al., 2020; Rosselló et al., 2020).
One of the fundamental short-terms challenges for such touristic urban areas is surely represented by the COVID-19
emergency (Gössling et al., 2020; Iacus et al., 2020; Jamal and Budke, 2020; Nicola et al., 2020). In fact, they represent
a significant scenario for the contagion spreading, essentially because the possibility of interactions among the individuals
(in a direct or indirect way) is boosted by possible significant conditions in (Chakraborty and Maity, 2020; Yang et al.,
2020): 1) interactions between visitors and residents (mainly, in public areas, accommodation, other tourist facilities and
leisure buildings) with the possibility to “import” positive cases into the touristic areas (towards local outbreaks) or
“export” them; 2) crowd levels, which cannot be always managed by the stakeholders (e.g. crowd in outdoor public
spaces), thus amplifying the transmission probabilities. The same risks can be connected to international, national and
local tourists’ flows.
Such areas suffered (and are still suffering) the immediate counteract pandemics measures concerning “lockdown”
solutions (i.e. restricted mobility and travels, “social distancing”), adopted by most of the Countries, thus proposing a
blockage of touristic flows in the “first phase” of the emergency (Anderson et al., 2020; Bruinen de Bruin et al., 2020;
Gössling et al., 2020; Hellewell et al., 2020; Iacus et al., 2020; Jamal and Budke, 2020; Prem et al., 2020; Yang et al.,
2020). Figure 1 shows how such strategies have been generally and gradually reduced the number of active cases1.
1

e.g. for international statistics, see https://shiny.rstudio.com/gallery/covid19-tracker.html (in Italian - last access:
12/05/2020)

Sustainable and resilient strategies for touristic cities against COVID-19: an agent-based approach –
Marco D’Orazio, Gabriele Bernardini, Enrico Quagliarini (preprint version - Submitted to Safety Science)

The return to “business as usual” should consider how differences among different Countries still exist (as well as
among areas in the same Country) because of the initial conditions of the contagion. To the date this paper is written
(early May 2020), considering Italy, which was one of the most COVID-19 affected Countries in the “first” emergency
phase2, the overall percentage of active cases over the population for the whole National territory is equal to about 0.16%,
while the Lombardia Region (where many initial outbreaks happened (De Natale et al., 2020)) is still experiencing values
over 0.30% (average values from the 28th of April to the 12th of May 2020). Local conditions can raise the current
percentage up to values over 1% (e.g. compare to the data from Republic of San Marino, which is placed inside the
mainland Italy and near to areas with a significant contagion spreading in the first outbreaks)1. Hence, mitigation measures
should be balanced with respect to the number of active cases as well as to the benefits for the overall society ((Bin et al.,
2020; Ferguson et al., 2020), to ensure that local areas characterized by higher active percentage cases and consistent
asymptomatic ratio within the population could not lead to severe second peaks in the contagion (Anderson et al., 2020;
Feng et al., 2020; Mizumoto et al., 2020; Prem et al., 2020; Roda et al., 2020).

Figure 1. Trend of the COVID-19 active cases (percentages on the population) per Country and over the time, according
to international databases1, starting from the 4h of February to 12 th of May 2020, by distinguishing countries in which
the percentage of the active cases is decreasing (green dotted curves), stable (yellow dashed curve) or still increasing
(red continuous curves). The final blue area evidences the trend in the last 14 days before the simulation are performed
to trace the main current conditions of the contagion spreading.
Since current consolidated rules for contagion spreading are based on a coupled proximity-based and exposure timebased mode of transmission (Bourouiba, 2020; Ferguson et al., 2020; Hamid et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2020) 3, quick-toapply non-pharmaceutical interventions are mainly aimed at (Barbieri and Darnis, 2020; Bruinen de Bruin et al., 2020;
Carlos Rubio-Romero et al., 2020; Feng et al., 2020; Howard et al., 2020; Pradhan et al., 2020; Prem et al., 2020; Servick,
2020; Yang et al., 2020): 1) increasing social distancing solutions, utilizing restricted access especially in closed
environments and limitations to travels (for both residents and visitors); 2) use of respiratory protective devices (facial
masks) to mitigate the effects of not respected distances between the individuals. Besides, the control and tracking of
COVID-19 cases could be implemented to “isolate” them or limiting possible contact with susceptible people (Kumar et
al., 2020; Madurai Elavarasan and Pugazhendhi, 2020), by improving the effectiveness of the quick-to-apply measures.
Nevertheless, such kind of strategies could imply a higher level of complexity for the whole urban (or even territorial)
scale (e.g. monitoring the cases over time and space by means of individual tracking solutions and health checks also for
asymptomatic individuals) and building scale (i.e. access control strategies by localized and rapid health checks, e.g. fever
detection at the building entrance, which need widespread trained staff and specific equipment).
As for other kinds of resilience-related issues in the urban areas (C. Chen et al., 2020; Miller, 2015; Ribeiro and Pena
Jardim Gonçalves, 2019), decision-makers will can select acceptable solutions according to a holistic approach which
should consider: 1) final users (including tourists), to restore “normal” fruition conditions as well as possible, and their
reciprocal interactions within the Built Environment of our cities (e.g. movement, activities); 2) specific stakeholders to
bring together economic aspects (e.g. maximization of tourist capacity in safe conditions) and operational tasks (towards
quick-to-apply and “cheaper” solutions); 3) the interactions among them, by using their representation in the considered
scenarios.
2

for Italian statistics, see
http://opendatadpc.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/b0c68bce2cce478eaac82fe38d4138b1 (last
access: 12/05/2020)
3
e.g.: http://www.salute.gov.it/portale/nuovocoronavirus/dettaglioFaqNuovoCoronavirus.jsp?lingua=italiano&id=228
; https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/case-definition-and-european-surveillance-human-infection-novel-coronavirus2019-ncov (last access: 8/4/2020)

Sustainable and resilient strategies for touristic cities against COVID-19: an agent-based approach –
Marco D’Orazio, Gabriele Bernardini, Enrico Quagliarini (preprint version - Submitted to Safety Science)

In this view, it is necessary to provide support tools for the decision-makers, to evaluate the effective impact of each
measure and their combination, with regard to the complex interaction system regulating the pandemic dynamics in the
considered scenario (D’Orazio et al., 2020; Ronchi and Lovreglio, 2020).
Simulation tools can increase the awareness of decision-makers in understanding the impact of mitigation solutions
on the virus spreading depending on possible scenario conditions (Bin et al., 2020; Ronchi and Lovreglio, 2020; Zhang
et al., 2018). The contribute of simulation models in developing and testing strategies for risk reduction has been widely
evidenced in many different cases concerning individuals’ safety at the different scales of the Built Environment (both
involving single buildings and urban scale), and especially in all the cases in which individuals’ behaviours (including
motion issue) can affect the safety levels for the individuals and the whole community (i.e. emergency evacuation
modelling) (Bernardini et al., 2017; Y. Chen et al., 2020; D’Orazio et al., 2014; Lovreglio et al., 2020).
In a pandemic-risk related context, decision-makers can be supported by macroscopic Susceptible-InfectiousRecovered/Removed (SIR) and Susceptible-Exposed-Infectious-Recovered/Removed (SEIR) models (Banos et al., 2015;
Hethcote, 1989), which can include general rules for moving individuals within the overall population to take into account
the dynamics due to mobility issues (Boccara and Cheong, 1992). SIR/SEIR-based models have been developed also for
the COVID-19 emergency, e.g. (Feng et al., 2020; Lopez and Rodo, 2020; Prem et al., 2020; Roda et al., 2020). These
epidemiological models can supply decision-makers with prediction data at large scales (territorial/national) which
include the effects of different levels of non-pharmaceutical interventions. Nevertheless, one of their main limits is related
to the scarce level of representation of specific patterns in individuals’ mobility behaviours and interactions within the
Built Environment, especially while investigating smaller areas (e.g. parts of a city; single building or group of buildings;
complex facilities and environment, including transportations) (Boccara and Cheong, 1992; Goscé et al., 2015; Ronchi
and Lovreglio, 2020; Zhang et al., 2018). Efforts in creating microscopic models for the COVID-19 spreading within the
users in the Built Environment have been performed, to take into account behavioural dynamics in spaces use (D’Orazio
et al., 2020; Fang et al., 2020; Ronchi and Lovreglio, 2020), thus leading towards better awareness-based support tools
for decision-makers in urban areas or single buildings. In general terms, they adopted the consolidated proximity-based
and exposure-time-based rules for the transmission probability, to estimate the impact of all direct and indirect contagion
effects between individuals placed at a close distance (Fang et al., 2020), but different transmission modes have been
included by some approaches (Ronchi and Lovreglio, 2020). In particular, this research group recently developed and
tested a proximity-based and exposure-time-based simulator according to an Agent-Based Modelling (ABM) approach,
to estimate the contagion spreading in public buildings (D’Orazio et al., 2020). It includes the possibility to consider both
the movement of people and the implementation of different risk-mitigation strategies (i.e. facial masks, social distancing,
and access control strategies), according to a probabilistic approach. The model has been calibrated according to
experimental data to provide reliable outcomes for the considered conditions. Meanwhile, the ABM approach ensures the
possibility to modify the behaviours of the simulated individuals to easily adapt the simulator to other contexts in which
the individuals’ motion is relevant for the contagion spreading, such as the touristic cities (Banos et al., 2015).
This study adopts this simulation approach to estimate the virus spreading in tourist urban areas, depending on
different surrounding input scenarios such as density conditions (including the tourist-residents ratio), tourists’
characterization (e.g. holiday permanence, activities and movements in the urban areas), pandemic conditions (i.e. the
initial percentage of active cases) and the implementation of risk-mitigation strategies (i.e. social distancing, facial mask
use by the simulated population). To this end, modifications to the original model have been provided to ensure the
application to touristic urban areas, while sensitivity analysis (Sobol′, 2001) is adopted to estimate the impact of each
input variable on the final results. According to a conservative approach in the quantification of infected people during
the time, the epidemiological model has been extended to the whole simulation environment, thus not considering the
possibility that outdoor conditions could mitigate the contagion probability. The model has been applied to a significant
case study (a part of a touristic coastal city in Italy) to demonstrate its capabilities in evaluating the impact of different
mitigation strategies on the infected people’s number.
2.

Phases, model description and methods
This work is divided into the following phases:
1) selection of modelling approach by modifying an existing calibrated simulation tool (D’Orazio et al., 2020) (see
Section 2.1);
2) selection of a significant application case study to perform the simulation according to a sensitivity-based
approach which allows refining the adopted variables within the model (see Section 2.2);
3) analysis of the results for the case study application, to evidence the effects of the main considered variables in
the view of the sensitivity-based model refining (i.e.: tourists’ capacity, facial masks implementation by the
population, initial infector percentages) (see Section 2.3).
2.1. Modelling approach

The ABM model adopted in this work is based on the one proposed by (D’Orazio et al., 2020) and jointly represents
the contagion spreading and the movement of simulated individuals in the considered touristic urban area. The model

Sustainable and resilient strategies for touristic cities against COVID-19: an agent-based approach –
Marco D’Orazio, Gabriele Bernardini, Enrico Quagliarini (preprint version - Submitted to Safety Science)

adopts a probabilistic approach for simulating both the aspects and has been implemented in a simulation software through
the NetLogo platform (Wilensky, 1999). An R script (R version 3.6.34) is implemented to perform an adequate number
of simulation according to previous research approaches on epidemiologic researches (Banos et al., 2015).
Concerning the epidemic rules, the proximity-based contagion spreading approach is implemented according to
previous works on consolidated COVID-19 epidemic rules3 (Banos et al., 2015; Fang et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2020). In
the model, the probability that a susceptible individual i can be infected by an infector j when they are placed at a distance
equal or lower than 2m within the simulated environment at the current time depends on the linear combination between:
1. the current incubation time of j. The contagion probability will be maximized when the maximum incubation
time is reached (according to a conservative approach, 5.1 days, which refers to the median incubation time,
and the lower bound of the confidence interval, given by previous work(Lauer et al., 2020));
2. the exposure time, which is the time spent in contact by two individuals (maximized for a contact of 15
minutes);
3. the mask filter protection respectively adopted by i and j (from 0, which implies “No mask” conditions to
1, which corresponds to maximum protection level, e.g. FFP3 according to EN 149:2009).
These epidemic rules can represent all the direct and indirect contacts that can happen between the simulated agents.
At the start of the simulation, a certain initial infector % is defined by the user. In the next steps, the contagion probability
is calculated according to the aforementioned criterion. As in the original model, once a susceptible individual is infected,
he/she will become an infector after a “delay” period, which is considered to be equal to 1 day (Lauer et al., 2020). The
infected agents who are not-asymptomatic can exit the simulation (can “die”) when the fever onset time (from the
contagion) is reached. This time is considered as a variable between one day and the considered incubation time (5.1
days) (Lauer et al., 2020).
The touristic urban area (called “world”) that hosts the agents is modelled as “a unique layer whose total area depends
on the gross one of the space to be simulated”, according to the original model. Hence, the world gross area can be
calculated as the sum between the accommodation areas and the other areas where people can spend time during the
holidays (e.g. beaches, parks, city centre avenues, shopping centres, restaurants and so on). The world is divided into
patches according to a 1:1 scaled representation of the urban areas (1 patch = 1 m).
The original model has been modified to take into account the possibility to represent two main agents’ typologies:
tourist and residents. At the start of the simulation, the tourists and the residents are generated within specific areas of
the world (which are expressed in terms of percentage of the overall world, by respectively defining the ktourist and
kresident percentage values5). An initial-distance of generation has been introduced to consider “social distancing”
behaviours between the individuals from the beginning of the simulation. However, when the agents’ density does not
allow the observance of the imposed initial-distance, the considered initial-distance is equal to the maximum achievable
one. By this way, the agents are uniformly generated as well as possible within the world.
During the simulation, the tourists remain within the world for the holiday period (mean-permanence variable), and
will be generated again when the holiday period will be completed, to simulate the departures/arrivals of visitors. On the
contrary, there are no new births and travel into or out of the simulated population for the residents. In this sense, residents
can only “die”, that means exiting from the simulation (people who spontaneously leave/not enter the urban space due to
their health conditions), while infected tourists can be “re-generated” because of the above. According to the average
duration of holidays in Italy from recent national statistics6, the overall simulated time is set to 3 days (288 steps according
to the adopted time discretization, see later). This can allow a rapid tourist “renovation”, thus leading towards more critical
contagion conditions within the overall population.
Movements rules for tourists and residents depend on the specific time of the day in which they are performed, by
considering a time discretization of 15 minutes (1 simulation step), according to the exposure time. Depending on the
moment of the day, each agent can be involved in:
• morning/afternoon/evening activities: randomly moving in the city areas by the movement-at-breaks value,
to evidence an equal probability of interacting with any other person within the world;
• lunch/dinner: moving near the initial generation position by trying to maintain the initial-distance;
• night sleep: remaining at the initial generation position.
The whole day time is represented by considering about 8 hours for night-time for sleeping. Every 96 steps
(corresponding to 1 day), the activities restart again.

4

https://cran.r-project.org/bin/windows/base/; last access: 17/4/2020
E.g. kresident=ktourist=0.5 means that the residents and tourists will be generated in the two separated halves of the
world; kresident=ktourist=0.75 means that the 25% of the world will see a generation overlapping between residents
and tourists.
6
https://www.istat.it/it/files//2019/11/Movimento-turistico-in-Italia-2018.pdf (last access: 10/05/2020)
5

Sustainable and resilient strategies for touristic cities against COVID-19: an agent-based approach –
Marco D’Orazio, Gabriele Bernardini, Enrico Quagliarini (preprint version - Submitted to Safety Science)

2.2. Case study definition and sensitivity analysis criteria
The considered case study involves a typical coastal touristic city characterized by a high density of tourists during
the summer holiday. In this sense, Italian cities of the Adriatic Coast (the so-called “Riviera Romagnola”, placed in the
Emilia Romagna region) represent a significant application scenario. In a typical city of this context, most of the tourist
accommodations are generally represented by hotels placed in the city centre areas, close to the beaches, with an overall
building density which can reach over 6000 persons per square kilometre and a ratio between tourists and residents that
can be about over 10 to 17. According to the criteria for dimensioning rooms and collective spaces (e.g. spaces used as
restaurants, halls and so on) in hotels for the Italian national standards8, a typical hotel density can range from 0.1 to 0.2
pp/m2, by considering an average number of about 160 tourists hosted in each hotel7. According to the criteria for beach
resorts organization in the application context9, an overall density of 0.2 can be considered for the spaces used by the
tourist along the beaches.
Table 1 resumes the other variables adopted in this study, while Table 2 traces the values of the constant parameters.
In view of the above, the considered case study involves about 10 hotels by considering a part of the touristic city
centre scenario described above, by hosting a maximum number of individuals N equal to 1600 persons over an overall
area of about 20000m2 (represented by a square world with a side of 145 patches). In each simulation, a minimum tourist
capacity of 20% is defined for the minimum N value.
The maximum value for the initial infector % is arbitrarily chosen to recreate a possible critical scenario for a “second
phase” in the COVID-19 emergency basing on current national2 and international1 data on the contagion spreading (i.e.
about 10 times the maximum number of active cases from 28th of April to 11th of May 2020, to include possible significant
differences between undetected and detected CODIV-19 cases). The initial-distance is set up to take into account the
possibility of implementation of “social distancing” strategies, by allowing a general maximum distance between
individuals over the proximity distance limit for the contagion probability calculation, equal to 2m. The maximum meanpermanence value refers to the maximum incubation time according to consolidated international organization sources 3.
ktourist and kresident are considered variables between 0 and 1 to simulate different levels of interactions between the
two agents’ typologies also in respect to the accommodation type (i.e. different levels of contacts among the
accommodation staff and the hosts), and the tourist-fraction is considered as variable between 0 and 100% so as to
consider differences in the “die” behaviours considered in the model. Finally, constant parameters in Table 2 are chosen
according to the model calibration process (D’Orazio et al., 2020) according to consolidated sources of the COVID-19
contagion, to have a consistent scaling of the contagion phenomenon in view of a 24-hours-extended simulation of the
considered scenario.
The considered scenario is involved in sensitivity analysis thanking the R script which implements the NLRX package
of “R statistics” programming language (Salecker et al., 2019). Variance-based decomposition methodology by Sobol
(Sobol′, 2001) is used to this end according to the adoption of the sobol2007 function of “R statistics” (Saltelli et al.,
2010, 2007). For any considered stochastic input in the simulation, two indexes are calculated (Saltelli et al., 2010, 2007):
1. the total index (Sobol Total index - STi) represents the effects to the output variance (including those related
to interactions with other inputs). The higher the STi, the most influential the considered input on the result;
2. the first-order index (Sobol First-order index- SFi) measures the main contribution of the considered input
to the variance of the output.
We performed two sets of 27000 runs. The first set considers all the variables defined in Table 1, which also describes
the selected Probability Density Functions (PDFs). Then, the variables with a STi<0.05 are reasonably considered as not
influential on the model output variance (Saltelli et al., 2007). Hence, in the second simulation set, they were considered
as constant parameters (equal to the mean of the uniform distribution). Such simulations are analyzed to define the impact
of different parameters and risk-mitigation strategies in the considered scenario, according to the criteria exposed in
Section 2.3.
Parameter (unit of measure)
N (pp)
Initial infectors % (%)
Mask wearing % (-)
Mask filter (-)
Movement at breaks (m, equal to patches)
Initial-distance (m, equal to patches)
7

Min
320
0
0
0
1
1

Max
1600
10
1
1
100
3

PDFs
Uniform
Uniform
Uniform
Uniform
Uniform
Uniform

e.g. compare to the data from Cattolica (RN, Italy): for general data
https://ugeo.urbistat.com/AdminStat/it/it/demografia/dati-sintesi/cattolica/99002/4 ; for tourist information
https://bit.ly/3dDE4Vy (in Italian - last access: 10/05/2020)
8
https://www.gazzettaufficiale.it/eli/id/2009/02/11/09A01326/sg (in Italian - last access: 10/05/2020)
9
https://imprese.regione.emilia-romagna.it/turismo/temi/demanio-marittimo-turistico-ricreativo-eportuale/ordinanza-balneare-1-2018 (in Italian - last access: 10/05/2020)

Sustainable and resilient strategies for touristic cities against COVID-19: an agent-based approach –
Marco D’Orazio, Gabriele Bernardini, Enrico Quagliarini (preprint version - Submitted to Safety Science)

Mean-permanence (days)
1
14
Uniform
Tourist-fraction (%)
0
100
Uniform
kresident (-)
0
1
Uniform
ktourist (-)
0
1
Uniform
Table 1. Variables characterization for the simulations (first simulation set in the sensitivity analysis)
Parameter
pimm
asymptomatic ratio

Value
0%
20%

Source
no evidence that immune people can exist
as for the original model and the calibration tests, chosen as
the upper bound for the confidence interval of estimated
asymptomatic proportion (among all infected cases) in
previous experimental conditions (Mizumoto et al., 2020)
delay
96
equal to 1 day (96 steps of 15 minutes within 24 hours of
simulation) to be shorter than the time to fever onset by the
2.5% of infected persons (Lauer et al., 2020). The value is
scaled from the original model calibration setup.
Iinc
512
according to a conservative approach, corresponding to the
median incubation time, which is about 5.1 days as in
previous consolidated data (Lauer et al., 2020). The value is
scaled from the original model calibration setup.
Ifev
256
the average value corresponds to the minimum time to fever
onset by the 2.5% of infected persons (Lauer et al., 2020).
A standard deviation is associated with range the
individual’s value from 0 to 512 steps. The value is scaled
from the original model calibration setup.
Table 2. Constant parameters characterization for all the simulations. References to values from the original model setup
are wider discussed in (D’Orazio et al., 2020).
2.3. Criteria for results analysis
The results concerning the second simulations set used in the sensitivity analysis are used to compare the effects of
the main independent variables affecting the contagion spreading.
According to previous simulation studies on COVID-19 spreading in the Built Environment (D’Orazio et al., 2020),
the final infected people percentage dI (%) is considered to trace the contagion spreading at the end of the simulation and
evaluate the variables conditions affecting the final result. dI depends on the ratio between the final number of susceptible
people (not infected) Sf (pp) and the initial number of susceptible people (not initially infected) Si (pp), as shown by
Equation 1:
𝑑𝐼 = [1 −

𝑆𝑓
𝑆𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡

] % (2)

dI allows comparing different conditions in terms of initial infector % as well as of N (including the possibility of a
reduction during the time because of “die” behaviours). Higher dI, higher the contagion spreading among the simulated
population. According to the adopted probabilistic approach, different dI will be produced for the same combinations of
the variables. Hence, dI distributions (by using distribution percentiles and boxplot representation, by excluding the
outliers) are assessed in respect to the input variables combinations. Furthermore, dI acceptability limits for the solution
effectiveness are provided according to dI=5% and dI=25%, according to a percentile-based analysis of the output values.
The application of these limits allows filtering the specific input combinations that ensure the possibility to have the
related dI values respected, thus evidencing the impact of the considered variables.
From this point of view, dI outputs are discussed according to the current solutions in contagion spreading reduction
(D’Orazio et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2020; Zhai, 2020) as well as the current contagion spreading conditions (e.g. the
number of active cases in reference to experimental data 1,2).
Facial masks effects are assessed with respect to the combination between the mask filter and mask wearing %. To
have a first synthetic and quick evaluation on such strategy, the dI distribution is assessed by coupling mask filter and
mask wearing % (mask wearing %*mask filter), according to homogeneous classes with steps of 10%. Furthermore, 3
mask filter classes with similar dimension in terms of uniform input distribution (see Table 1) have been considered to
assess the impact of different kind of implemented masks:
•
respiratory protective devices, representing FFP1, FFP2 and FFP3 masks according to the EN 149:2009 (Carlos
Rubio-Romero et al., 2020), are considered in the mask filter range from 0.80 to 1.00;

Sustainable and resilient strategies for touristic cities against COVID-19: an agent-based approach –
Marco D’Orazio, Gabriele Bernardini, Enrico Quagliarini (preprint version - Submitted to Safety Science)

•

surgical masks are considered within the mask filter range 0.58 to 0.83, which is placed inside the limits for
classifying surgical mask efficiency according to the NIOSH NaCl method proposed by (Rengasamy et al.,
2017);
•
non-standard protection solutions (e.g. home-made and non-certified protections) (Carlos Rubio-Romero et al.,
2020) can reasonably consider the first quartile in mask filters values, thus ranging from 0.00 to 0.25 as for the
application of the reference model.
N conditions are organized with respect to the urban population density, and so the tourist capacity (i.e. for touristfraction equal to 100%). For each simulation, the normalized occupants’ density Docc (-) for the overall simulated urban
environment (the whole world) is calculated as the ratio between the current N value and the maximum one. Hence,
according to the N distribution limits in Table 1, Docc varies from 0.2 (for N=320 people) to 1 (maximum occupancy of
the urban areas for N=1600 people).
Finally, different classes of initial infector % are considered to take into account different input conditions about the
current situation of the contagion within the population 2. Data on active COVID-19 cases for the international and national
scenario from the 28th of April to the 12th of May 2020 have been considered (time period which corresponds to the
maximum incubation time before the simulations) to create the following limit conditions:
•
current average active cases conditions in Italy: initial infector %=0.15%;
•
current average active cases conditions in the worst Italian region: initial infector %=0.30% (referred to the
Lombardia region);
•
current maximum active cases conditions: initial infector %=1.40%, for all the monitored Countries. This data
corresponds to the situation of San Marino Republic on 7 th of May 2020 (it is worth to notice that San Marino
is an interesting maximum reference data in respect to the closeness with the considered application context).
Additional limits for 3% and 5% are also proposed to evidence the possibility of critical contagion spreading
conditions, also according to the previous simulation models application. The initial infector % values are then organized
and discussed by referring to classes according to such limits.
Since the initial infector % highly affect the possibility to reach widespread contagion conditions within the Built
Environment during the simulation time (Bin et al., 2020; D’Orazio et al., 2020; Hellewell et al., 2020; Prem et al., 2020),
the difference in infectors percentage dINF (-) is additionally evaluated to evidence if particular additional conditions
could suggest that the contagion conditions will not make worse at the end of the simulation (dINF>0), according to
equation 2:
𝑑𝐼𝑁𝐹 = 𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑖𝑛𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟 % − 𝑑𝐼 (%) (2)
In fact, lower the initial number of infectors (e.g. because of severe active cases control strategies), higher the
possibility to maintain dI under the acceptability threshold (especially for low occupants’ densities conditions), lower the
absolute dINF value.
Finally, results are organized in the view of defining simple rules to estimate the impact of measures combination.
According to previous simulation works suggestions (D’Orazio et al., 2020), mask filter-Docc pairs are correlated by
filtering the values which allow maintaining dI≤5%, by additionally investigating the impact mask wearing % and initial
infector % variations. In particular, the assessment is performed to evidence how the initial contagion conditions could
alter the efficiency of the predicted measures.
3.

Results
3.1. Sensitivity analysis and robustness check

Figure 2 displays the total order sensitivity indices (STi) and the first-order sensitivity indices (SFi) for the first
simulation set. The first-order index represents the main effect contribution of each input factor to the variance of the
output. The total order index accounts for the total contribution to the output variation due to factor Xi, i.e. its first-order
effect plus all higher-order effects due to interactions.
The Total order sensitivity indices (STi) suggests how the main source of results’ uncertainty is N. The secondary
source of results’ uncertainty is represented by Initial infectors % while the importance of individual protection measures
is confirmed by the STi value assigned to mask filter and mask wearing %, thus confirming the previous model application
(D’Orazio et al., 2020). The characterization of tourists’ conditions is another significant source of uncertainty, as
demonstrated by the STi value of the tourist-fraction, as well as by the ktourist-related STi. This result evidences how the
combination of general “social distancing” effects (i.e. expressed by N-related uncertainty) can be amplified by the
specific tourist’ occupancy and densities, since ktourist describes the effective part of the scenario in which the tourists
are generated. Finally, the effect of initial-distance mean-permanence, kresident and movement at breaks appears
negligible (STi<0.05).
Figure 3 shows the STi and the SFi results for the second simulation set, that considers initial-distance, meanpermanence, kresident and movement at breaks as constant parameters (STi<0.05). Considering a simplified input of
variables, the trend of Figure 2 does not substantially change.

Sustainable and resilient strategies for touristic cities against COVID-19: an agent-based approach –
Marco D’Orazio, Gabriele Bernardini, Enrico Quagliarini (preprint version - Submitted to Safety Science)

Finally, in both the simulation sets, the sum of SFi is less than 1, thus confirming that limited interactions between
input factors exist (Saltelli et al., 2007).

Figure 2. First simulation set: first-order sensitivity indices (STi - left) and total order sensitivity indices (SFi - right) for
the considered parameters.

Figure 3. Second simulation set: first-order sensitivity indices (STi - left) and total order sensitivity indices (SFi - right)
for the considered parameters.
3.2. Simulation scenario results
3.2.1. Analysis of the whole simulation sample
Regardless of simulated population and of the initial infector %, the use of facial masks by the simulated agents can
sensibly reduce the virus spreading, especially in case of the higher mask filter values and for widespread adoption of this
risk-mitigation measure (higher mask wearing %). Previous works suggested a similar impact (D’Orazio et al., 2020;
Zhai, 2020). Figure 10Figure 4 shows the distribution of dI values for the different mask wearing %*mask filter classes,
by tracing the dI acceptability thresholds of 5% and 25%. The acceptability thresholds are guaranteed in the 75% of the
simulations by involving mask wearing %*mask filter ≥0.50 (e.g. adoption of surgical masks by the whole population)
for dI=25% and ≥0.80 (e.g. adoption of FFP1 by the whole population) for dI=5%. Such a result is remarked in Figure 5,
which considers the mask filter classes and traces mask wearing % in percentage terms.

Sustainable and resilient strategies for touristic cities against COVID-19: an agent-based approach –
Marco D’Orazio, Gabriele Bernardini, Enrico Quagliarini (preprint version - Submitted to Safety Science)

Figure 4. Boxplot dI values distribution at the last simulation step for the whole sample, concerning the effects related to
mask (mask wearing %*mask filter). dI acceptable thresholds are defined at dI=5% (dashed green line) and 25%
(continuous red line).

Figure 5. Boxplot dI values distribution at the last simulation step for the whole sample, concerning the effects related to
mask wearing % (expressed in %) by considering Section 2.3 classification: a) FFPk masks; b) surgical mask; c) nonstandard protection (0 to 0.25). dI acceptable thresholds are defined at dI=5% (dashed green line) and 25% (continuous
red line).
Figure 6 suggests that the limitation of the hosted population capacity for the considered urban area limitedly
guarantee acceptable solutions in terms of dI value, regardless of the adopted additional measures, by confirming results
for closed environment application of the model (D’Orazio et al., 2020). In particular, the limitation to 30% of the
maximum population (Docc=0.3) could support the limitation of dI≤25% for the 75% of simulated cases. The combination
between such “social distancing”-related measure and the use of facial masks can boost the positive effects, as shown by
Figure 7. It is worthy of notice that:
• for Docc≤0.25, no additional facial masks-related strategies are essentially needed in the 75% of cases if
considering dI=25%, while surgical masks seem to be enough if considering dI=5% (Figure 7-A).
Nevertheless, such a solution can strongly affect economic aspects in the urban areas, since the limitation to
the number of tourists is extremely severe;
• the implementation of surgical masks by the whole population can lead to acceptable solutions in 75% of
cases if considering dI=25% also for the higher Docc values (up to the maximum capacity - Figure 7-D);

Sustainable and resilient strategies for touristic cities against COVID-19: an agent-based approach –
Marco D’Orazio, Gabriele Bernardini, Enrico Quagliarini (preprint version - Submitted to Safety Science)

•
•

the application of FFPk masks by the population is necessary if considering the acceptability threshold at
dI=5% for Docc>0.25 (Figure 7-B, Figure 7-C, Figure 7-D);
the variation of dI distribution (e.g. distance between the maximum and minimum values) is reduced for
lower Docc values because the possibility to maintain “social distancing” strategies is higher, as well as the
possibility to stochastically have additional contacts with infectors, due to the wide urban area.

Figure 6. Boxplot dI values distribution at the last simulation step for the whole sample, with respect to the effect of Docc
values discretized by 0.1. dI acceptable thresholds are defined at dI=5% (dashed green line) and 25% (continuous red
line).

Sustainable and resilient strategies for touristic cities against COVID-19: an agent-based approach –
Marco D’Orazio, Gabriele Bernardini, Enrico Quagliarini (preprint version - Submitted to Safety Science)

Figure 7. Boxplot dI values distribution at the last simulation step for the whole sample, with respect to the effects of
different density classes: a) Docc≤0.25; b) 0.25<Docc≤0.5; c) 0.5<Docc≤0.75; d) 0.75<Docc≤1.00 . Values are traced
according to the overall mask effect. dI acceptable thresholds are defined at dI=5% (dashed green line) and 25%
(continuous red line).
Finally, Figure 8 traces the probability of maintaining dI under the acceptability thresholds in respect of the initial
infector %, regardless of the implemented risk-mitigation strategies. In general terms, current lower common values in
the initial infector % (0.14 and 0.30) generally have a significant probability level, especially for dI=5%. Meanwhile,
Figure 9 traces the probability distribution of the dINF values depending on different thresholds in the initial infector %
(compare to Section 2.3). The probability that the contagion could not worsen at the end of the simulation time is higher
if considering the current lower common values in the initial infector % (0.14 and 0.30), as displayed by Figure 9-B (the
probability values are significantly higher for dINF≥0 in respect to negative values), regardless of the implementation of
risk-mitigation strategies. This simulation outcome can be essentially related to the lower probability to have close
contacts with an infector within the urban environment during the simulation time.

Figure 8. Probability estimation of initial infector % values that can lead to dI values under the two acceptability
thresholds: dI≤5% (dashed green line) and dI≤25% (continuous red line). Significant limits for initial infector % are
evidenced according to Section 2.3.

Figure 9. Probability estimation of dINF according to the significant initial infector % values according to Section 2.3,
by distinguishing: a) critical conditions for the “second phase”; b) common infectors’ percentages according to the data
from the early May 2020.

Sustainable and resilient strategies for touristic cities against COVID-19: an agent-based approach –
Marco D’Orazio, Gabriele Bernardini, Enrico Quagliarini (preprint version - Submitted to Safety Science)

3.2.2. Analysis considering the maximum population capacity
This section focuses on the maximum capacity conditions for the touristic area (0.75<Docc≤1.00). Figure 10 shows
the distribution of dI values depending on the specific mask filter classes and depending on the implementation level in
terms of mask wearing %, regardless of the initial infector %. The contagion spreading could be limited by implementing
FFPk masks by the whole population (Figure 10-A), thus leading to dI<5%. The application of surgical masks for a wide
number of the population seems to bring mitigation effects only if considering dI=25% (Figure 10-B). Less than the 25%
of the cases involving non-standard protection solutions leads to dI< 25%, essentially because of the possibility that wide
urban spaces can still guarantee the adoption of limited “social distancing” behaviours. On the contrary, previous
simulations relating to single buildings/closed environment underlines that no cases under this threshold could exist,
essentially because of the higher effective density inside the building rooms (D’Orazio et al., 2020). These results
substantiate the general considerations of Figure 5-A.

Figure 10. Boxplot dI values distribution at the last simulation step for Docc between 0.75 and 1.00, with respect to the
effects related to mask wearing % (expressed in %) and by considering the Section 2.3 classification: a) FFPk masks; b)
surgical mask; c) non-standard protection (0 to 0.25). dI acceptable thresholds are defined at dI=5% (dashed green line)
and 25% (continuous red line).
Figure 11 traces the relation between the initial infector % (different panels), the adopted mask filter class and dI
distribution, regardless of the mask wearing %. The current main conditions in the initial infector % (Figure 11-A, Figure
11-B and Figure 11-C) can generally lead to the possibility to control the contagion spreading by using surgical masks.
Nevertheless, the acceptability threshold of dI=25% is generally satisfied in the 75% of the cases up to an initial infector
% equal to 5% (Figure 11-D and Figure 11-E), while FFPk masks generally have a similar impact for all the current main
conditions in the initial infector %. Values of initial infector % over the limit of 5% generally implies critical conditions
for the contagion spreading (Figure 11-F). This result confirms the importance of possible “infection-by-chance” for the
lowest initial infector %, as additionally remarked by the probability estimation for the dINF values shown by Figure 12.
In view of the above, in case of surgical of FFPk masks implementations, the median of dI distributions for initial
infectors % ≤0.14% is under the 5% acceptability threshold of dI, while the median values up to initial infectors % ≤3%
are under the 25% (see Figure 11). Nevertheless, since this analysis does not consider the impact of mask wearing %,
further insights are needed. Hence, data are analysed to provide a quick and simple approach to support decision-makers
in the evaluation of the effectiveness of facial mask implementation levels by the mask wearing % of the population,
considering the initial infectors %. Data on the mask wearing % are simply aggregated by considering the hosted
population quartiles to have a look at a glance. Results allow to better stress the general effects of the (coarsely
approximated) minimum mask wearing % on dI, in a rapid application perspective to the case study.
Figure 13 and Figure 14 respectively trace dI values for surgical masks and FFPk masks, depending on the initial
infector % (increasing limits in each panel from A to F) as a function of the mask wearing %. Such results confirm the
general trends of Figure 11. In particular, current minimum initial infectors % values could be managed by implementing
surgical masks or FFPk masks for at least the 75% of the population to limit dI at 5% (Figure 13-A and Figure 14-A). No
significant difference between these two conditions for initial infectors %≤0.14% seems to confirm the aforementioned
“infection-by-chance” scenario, which gives minor importance to the use of different mask filter. If the initial infectors

Sustainable and resilient strategies for touristic cities against COVID-19: an agent-based approach –
Marco D’Orazio, Gabriele Bernardini, Enrico Quagliarini (preprint version - Submitted to Safety Science)

% increases the minimum mask wearing % has to increase, too, to guarantee a sustainable dI. For initial infectors
%≤0.30%, surgical masks could guarantee at most dI up to 25% for mask wearing %≥50% (Figure 13-B), while FFPk
could gain dI=5% for mask wearing %≥75% (Figure 14-B). The use of surgical masks for mask wearing %≥75% could
guarantee dI=25% for initial infectors % up to 1.40% (compare Figure 13-C to Figure 13-D and Figure 13-E), while the
same mask wearing %≥75% could lead to the same result up to 5% if implementing FFPk mask (Figure 14-C, Figure 14D and Figure 14-E). Although both surgical and FFPk masks can reduce dI by increasing the mask wearing % up to 75100%, scenarios related to initial infectors % up to 5% are critical for both these protection solutions (Figure 13-F and
Figure 14-F).
As a consequence, the implementation of acceptable solutions (from the users’ perspective) about facial mask use
(e.g. surgical masks) could have significant impacts to limit the contagion in touristic areas during the “second phase” of
the COVID-19 emergency by considering the current statistics on active cases. The rule of such protective solution is also
in line with previous works suggestions (Howard et al., 2020; Zhai, 2020). Meanwhile, results suggest that the tourists’
capacity could be increased towards upper-limit conditions, by ensuring proper economic effects on the communities of
these urban areas.

Figure 11. Boxplot dI values distribution at the last simulation step for Docc between 0.75 and 1.00, with respect to the
mask filter classes defined in Section 2.3 for different initial infector % limits: a) up to 0.14%; b) up to 0.30%; c) up to
1.40%; d) up to 3.00%; e) up to 5.00%; f) over 5.00%. Mask filter classes are identified by: “no” for non-standard
protection (0 to 0.25); “S” for surgical masks; “F” for FFPk masks. dI acceptable thresholds are defined at dI=5%
(dashed green line) and 25% (continuous red line).

Sustainable and resilient strategies for touristic cities against COVID-19: an agent-based approach –
Marco D’Orazio, Gabriele Bernardini, Enrico Quagliarini (preprint version - Submitted to Safety Science)

Figure 12. Probability estimation of dINF according to the significant initial infector % values according to Section 2.3,
by distinguishing the common infectors’ percentages according to the data from early May 2020.

Figure 13. Boxplot dI values distribution at the last simulation step for Docc between 0.75 and 1.00, with respect to the
implementation of surgical masks and to the mask wearing % classes (expressed in %), for different initial infector %
limits: a) up to 0.14%; b) up to 0.30%; c) up to 1.40%; d) up to 3.00%; e) up to 5.00%; f) over 5.00%.

Sustainable and resilient strategies for touristic cities against COVID-19: an agent-based approach –
Marco D’Orazio, Gabriele Bernardini, Enrico Quagliarini (preprint version - Submitted to Safety Science)

Figure 14. Boxplot dI values distribution at the last simulation step for Docc between 0.75 and 1.00, with respect to the
implementation of FFPk masks and to the mask wearing % classes (expressed in %), for different initial infector % limits:
a) up to 0.14%; b) up to 0.30%; c) up to 1.40%; d) up to 3.00%; e) up to 5.00%; f) over 5.00%.

3.3. Discussion about the return to “business as usual” in touristic cities and of model application
Results show how the selection of risk-mitigation strategies in the context of the return to “business as usual” in
touristic cities should take into account the current conditions of the virus spreading within the population, so as to make
them more effective and acceptable. On one side, combined scenarios in which facial masks are used by the population
and a limitation of the occupants’ capacity (towards “social distancing”-related strategies) seem to have the highest impact
on the possibility to limit the virus spreading, thus confirming previous researches (D’Orazio et al., 2020; Feng et al.,
2020; Ferguson et al., 2020; Howard et al., 2020; Zhai, 2020). Nevertheless, their impact is not the same for all the initial
infector % conditions, as additional remarked by Figure 15 and Figure 16.
Figure 15 and Figure 16 respectively trace the simulation mask filter-Docc pairs which can lead to dI conditions
under the lower acceptability threshold (5%), divided by the initial infector % classes defined in Section 2.3, and by
additionally tracking the mask wearing % values. The proposed overview on the initial infector % classes of Figure 15
and Figure 16 could be also viewed as a set of imaginable future scenarios due to the possibility to contain or not the
infection risk at the starting of the “second phase”. Furthermore, since these representations are based on mask filter-Docc
pairs and do not directly include the mask wearing % as main prediction input for dI-related limit conditions, the trends
of Figure 15 and Figure 16 could be also adopted when the users wear facial masks with different mask filter values. In
this case, the reference mask filter can be conservatively considered equal to the lower implemented one.
Figure 15 refers to the main current conditions in terms of initial infector % limits (up to 1.40%), while Figure 16
traces the results for critical conditions (over 1.40%). Figure 15 generally evidences a poor level of correlations between
the mask filter-Docc pairs in case of initial infector % values lower than the current national maximum one (1.40%,
compare to Section 2.3). These scattered pairs seem to suggest that current conditions are essentially affected by
“infection-by-chance” while moving in the urban scenario. The limitation of the tourists’ capacity could not guarantee by
itself the acceptability threshold, while the significant economic impact will appear because of the reduction in the number
of users within the built environment and its facilities (Gössling et al., 2020).

Sustainable and resilient strategies for touristic cities against COVID-19: an agent-based approach –
Marco D’Orazio, Gabriele Bernardini, Enrico Quagliarini (preprint version - Submitted to Safety Science)

Additional comparisons between these results and Section 3.2.2 outcomes for the maximum capability conditions
follow. According to Figure 12 data on dINF statistics provide additional suggestions, the cumulative probability that the
contagion will not increase in such an “infection-by-chance” scenario is equal to about 0.5 for initial infector %≤0.14%
(average national data for Italy at the early May 2020). This percentage seems not to be affected by the Docc conditions
(compare to Figure 9-B), thus confirming the scattered mask filter-Docc pairs in Figure 15 (e.g. Figure 15-A for initial
infector %≤0.14%).
Nevertheless, the implementation of facial masks solution could guarantee the access to the urban areas while having
a higher impact on the dI values (also compare to Figure 11-A for initial infector %≤0.14%) (D’Orazio et al., 2020; Fang
et al., 2020; Howard et al., 2020). Hence, the current conditions in the number of initial infector % seem to underline the
importance of such a non-pharmaceutical intervention in view of the return to “business as usual” in touristic cities:
surgical masks could be an adequate protection measure also at the maximum Docc values, according to Section 3.2.2
results, while having higher comfort levels on the users in respect to FFPk masks. Meanwhile, other strategies aimed at
limiting indirect contagion spreading (e.g. indoor spaces/surface disinfection; use of disposable gloves) should be
performed to ensure a higher protection level for the visitors and the workers (Hamid et al., 2020; Pradhan et al., 2020)10.
On the contrary, Figure 16 shows how critical conditions in the initial infector % implies a more significant impact
of the combination between mask filter and Docc measures, thus confirming previous simulation outcomes for the closed
environment (D’Orazio et al., 2020). For initial infector %>1.40%, the possibility to have close contacts with an infector
is significantly higher in respect to inferior limit conditions, as for high-density indoor scenarios. Figure 16-A and Figure
16-B qualitatively underline how the occupants’ capacity for the urban areas in case of poor facial masks-based solutions
should be reduced to the 20 to 40% of the maximum one, while the implementation of surgical could be not enough for
initial infector % >5%.
These results are confirmed by considering the interpolations of maximum increasing mask filter-Docc pairs in
Figure 16 for each considered initial infector % range. The interpolations are provided according to a power-based
regression approach (axb+c), as shown by Table 3. According to Figure 16, the higher the initial infector %, the more
restrictive the limit for minimum mask filter-Docc combination. It is worth notice that such regressions are limited to the
considered ideal case study and are not generalizable to other contexts as an operative tool for decision-makers.
Nevertheless, they offer an estimation of the upper boundary limit in mask filter-Docc combination that should not be
overcome (no admitted solution seems to exist over the curve). This methodology could be applied to other case studies
to obtain the obtained curves on a “case-by-case” approach, and to finally compare the general trends towards common
and simplified rules for decision-makers.
Given the above, decision-makers should be aware of the following main key factors for the sustainability of nonpharmaceutical interventions against COVID-19 spreading in this “second phase”:
1. assessing the effective local conditions in terms of infection spreading among the population (i.e. monitoring
campaign on active cases), to avoid as far as possible the adoption of limitation to tourists’ capacity which: a) could
not have the desired effect on the contagion for current main lower percentages of active cases; b) will can depress
the tourist-related economic and social issues at the urban scale;
2. promoting the implementation of facial masks for both residents and tourists, by starting from the adoption of
comfortable solutions (such as surgical masks);
3. organizing activities over urban spaces and holiday time towards the creation of “widespread” fruition models of the
tourists’ attractions, to reduce local effects of overcrowding conditions (also by implementing, e.g., reservation-based
access to areas and activities). Such choices should be discussed with tourist services stakeholders for tracing general
scheduling based on acceptable economic limits.

10

https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/publications-data/disinfection-environments-covid-19 (last access: 15/05/2020)

Sustainable and resilient strategies for touristic cities against COVID-19: an agent-based approach –
Marco D’Orazio, Gabriele Bernardini, Enrico Quagliarini (preprint version - Submitted to Safety Science)

Figure 15. Mask filter-Docc correlation for all the pairs related to dI≤5% depending on the initial infector percentages
classes: a) up to 0.14%; b) from 0.14% to 0.30%; c) from 0.30% to 1.40%. The pairs’ colour is related to the mask
wearing % (colour bar on the top), while the dot size depends on the initial infector % value (circles inside the legend on
the bottom).

Figure 16. Mask filter-Docc correlation for all the pairs related to dI≤5% depending on the initial infector percentages
classes: a) from 1.40% to 3.00%; b) from 3.00% to 5.00%; c) over 5.00% to maximum value (10.00%). Regression curves
for each correlation are shown by the red lines (form: axb+c; regression data in Table 3). The pairs’ colour is related to
the mask wearing % (colour bar on the top) while the dot size depends on the initial infector % value (circles inside the
legend on the bottom).
initial infector %
from 1.40% to 3.00
from 3.00% to 5.00% over 5.00% to maximum value (10.00%)
Equation: y=axb+c
y=1.29x2.09+0.35
y=0.87x2.36+0.24
y=0.93x2.76+0.17
x domain limits
0.00 to 1.00
0.00 to 1.00
0.27 to 1.00
R2
0.93
0.94
0.86
Table 3. Equation (form: axb+c) for Mask filter-Docc correlation curves in limit conditions as drawn by Figure 16. In
the equations, x is mask filter, while y is Docc. The limit of the mask filter values domain in which the equation could be
applied, as well as the R2 are evidenced.
In this sense, this work underlines how simulation tools could be a significant support to increase decision markers
awareness towards ones of the most significant variables affecting the man-man and man-environment interaction in a
pandemic. Future activities on the model could involve further calibration task according to future available experimental
data in significant urban contexts, to additionally evidence how the differences about modes of transmission and built
environment layout/use (e.g. indoor/outdoor; specific activities carried out by the tourist; specific building systems;
scheduling of the activities to trace the dependencies from differences in the exposure timing) could affect the overall
results (Prussin et al., 2020; Ronchi and Lovreglio, 2020; Zhang et al., 2018).

Sustainable and resilient strategies for touristic cities against COVID-19: an agent-based approach –
Marco D’Orazio, Gabriele Bernardini, Enrico Quagliarini (preprint version - Submitted to Safety Science)

4.

Conclusions

After the lockdown phase for the COVID-19 emergency, the return to “business as usual” in touristic urban areas is
seriously affected by the possibility to the control contagion spreading due to the flows. The limitation of travels towards
touristic area will not be acceptable in a “second phase” of the contagion, essentially because of the necessity to avoid an
economic and social crisis for the sector and the involved communities. On the contrary, support tools for decision-makers
should be developed to define the effective impact of different sustainable and combined non-pharmaceutical
interventions in view of the tourist activities restarting. This kind of assessment should involve at least the scale of
homogeneous urban areas, to take into account the general behaviours of the users in the built environment.
This paper modifies an existing agent-based model approach to estimate the Coronavirus spreading in a touristic
urban context, by including the simulation of people’s movements in the urban areas and the effects of non-pharmaceutical
strategies (i.e. facial masks use by agents; occupants’ capacity control as the main driver to promote “social-distancing”).
The model could be both used to evaluate, over time, how many infectors can appear within the urban area and how many
visitors can return home being infected. In this study, the attention is focused on the first point, to focus on the
effectiveness and sustainability of strategies on the selected area.
The simulator is applied to a significant case study (an idealized part of a touristic coastal city in Italy) to evidence
the general impact of input conditions on the infections over time. Results show the model capabilities in predicting the
contagion spreading depending on input variables (including the initial percentage of active COVID-19 cases), thus being
a tool to improve the decision-makers’ awareness about the impact of contagion-mitigation strategies. In particular, results
underline how the adoption of social distancing strategies could not have a leading effect on the contagion spreading
when the percentage of initial active cases is close to 0, while becomes an effective strategy in case of critical infectors
percentages. At lowest occupants’ capacity values, for the current percentage conditions in terms of active cases (e.g.
0.3% of the population or lower), the possibility to be infected in the urban area seems to be more connected to stochastic
effects of man-man interaction rather than to a systematic spreading of the contagion. On the opposite, facial masks have
a prominent effect on the contagion limitation, especially at lower percentages of active cases. The correlation between
the facial mask characterization (i.e. filtering) and the “social distancing”-related strategies (i.e. using tourists’ capacity
limitation) evidence a clear frontier in the possible combination of these solutions, according to the results for the
considered case study. For active cases percentage conditions over 1.40%, the higher the percentage of the active cases
in the urban area, the more restrictive the minimum acceptable combination between these two non-pharmaceutical
solutions.
From this point of view, decision-makers should then evaluate which maximum tourists’ capacity could be applied,
by including facial masks-based solutions, to allow the restarting of tourism-related economic activities from a
sustainability perspective. According to the results for the case study application, wearing surgical masks could be enough
to face main current active cases conditions (at early May 2020; active cases of about 0.14 to 0.30% of the overall
population) in touristic urban spaces. The application to further case studies could validate such suggestions. Furthermore,
correlations on the minimum acceptable combination between facial masks-based and “social distancing”-related
strategies could be assessed to define “case-by-case” decision rules, as well as common criteria for touristic urban areas.
Finally, the agent-based modelling approach will allow the introduction of modifications to integrate epidemiological
data (i.e. additional modes of virus transmission), built environment configurations (e.g. indoor/outdoor; including layout
characterization), visitors’ schedule and activities in the urban spaces (e.g. including the fruition of buildings with specific
tourist-related intended uses, e.g. cultural buildings and so on).
5.

References

Anderson, R.M., Heesterbeek, H., Klinkenberg, D., Hollingsworth, T.D., 2020. How will country-based mitigation
measures influence the course of the COVID-19 epidemic? The Lancet 395, 931–934. doi:10.1016/S01406736(20)30567-5
Aznar-Crespo, P., Aledo, A., Melgarejo-Moreno, J., 2020. Social vulnerability to natural hazards in tourist destinations
of developed regions. Science of The Total Environment 709, 135870. doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.135870
Banos, A., Lang, C., Marilleau, N., 2015. Agent-Based Spatial Simulation with NetLogo, Agent-Based Spatial
Simulation with NetLogo. doi:10.1016/c2015-0-01299-0
Barbieri, C., Darnis, J.-P., 2020. Technology: An Exit Strategy for COVID-19? IAI COMMENTARIES 20, 1–6.
Bernardini, G., Postacchini, M., Quagliarini, E., Brocchini, M., Cianca, C., D’Orazio, M., 2017. A preliminary
combined simulation tool for the risk assessment of pedestrians’ flood-induced evacuation. Environmental
Modelling & Software 96, 14–29. doi:10.1016/j.envsoft.2017.06.007
Bin, M., Cheung, P., Crisostomi, E., Ferraro, P., Lhachemi, H., Murray-Smith, R., Myant, C., Parisini, T., Shorten, R.,
Stein, S., Stone, L., 2020. On Fast Multi-Shot COVID-19 Interventions for Post Lock-Down Mitigation. arXiv

Sustainable and resilient strategies for touristic cities against COVID-19: an agent-based approach –
Marco D’Orazio, Gabriele Bernardini, Enrico Quagliarini (preprint version - Submitted to Safety Science)

preprint arXiv:2003.09930.
Boccara, N., Cheong, K., 1992. Automata network SIR models for the spread of infectious diseases in populations of
moving individuals. Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and General. doi:10.1088/0305-4470/25/9/018
Bourouiba, L., 2020. Turbulent Gas Clouds and Respiratory Pathogen Emissions. JAMA. doi:10.1001/jama.2020.4756
Bruinen de Bruin, Y., Lequarre, A.-S., McCourt, J., Clevestig, P., Pigazzani, F., Zare Jeddi, M., Colosio, C., Goulart,
M., 2020. Initial impacts of global risk mitigation measures taken during the combatting of the COVID-19
pandemic. Safety Science 128, 104773. doi:10.1016/j.ssci.2020.104773
Carlos Rubio-Romero, J., del Carmen Pardo-Ferreira, M., Antonio Torrecilla García, J., Calero-Castro, S., 2020.
Disposable masks: Disinfection and sterilization for reuse, and non-certified manufacturing, in the face of
shortages during the COVID-19 pandemic. Safety Science 104830. doi:10.1016/j.ssci.2020.104830
Chakraborty, I., Maity, P., 2020. COVID-19 outbreak: Migration, effects on society, global environment and
prevention. Science of The Total Environment 728, 138882. doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.138882
Chen, C., Xu, L., Zhao, D., Xu, T., Lei, P., 2020. A new model for describing the urban resilience considering
adaptability, resistance and recovery. Safety Science 128, 104756. doi:10.1016/j.ssci.2020.104756
Chen, Y., Wang, C., Li, H., Yap, J.B.H., Tang, R., Xu, B., 2020. Cellular automaton model for social forces interaction
in building evacuation for sustainable society. Sustainable Cities and Society 53, 101913.
doi:10.1016/j.scs.2019.101913
D’Orazio, M., Bernardini, G., Quagliarini, E., 2020. How to restart? An agent-based simulation model towards the
definition of strategies for COVID-19 “second phase” in public buildings. submitted to Building and Environment
(under review).
D’Orazio, M., Quagliarini, E., Bernardini, G., Spalazzi, L., 2014. EPES - Earthquake pedestrians’ evacuation simulator:
A tool for predicting earthquake pedestrians’ evacuation in urban outdoor scenarios. International Journal of
Disaster Risk Reduction 10, 153–177. doi:10.1016/j.ijdrr.2014.08.002
De Natale, G., Ricciardi, V., De Luca, G., De Natale, D., Di Meglio, G., Ferragamo, A., Marchitelli, V., Piccolo, A.,
Scala, A., Somma, R., Spina, E., Troise, C., 2020. The Covid-19 Infection in Italy: A Statistical Study of an
Abnormally Severe Disease. Preprints 2020040049. doi:10.20944/preprints202004.0049.v1
Fang, Z., Huang, Z., Li, X., Zhang, J., Lv, W., Zhuang, L., Xu, X., Huang, N., 2020. How many infections of COVID19 there will be in the “Diamond Princess”-Predicted by a virus transmission model based on the simulation of
crowd flow.
Feleki, E., Vlachokostas, C., Moussiopoulos, N., 2018. Characterisation of sustainability in urban areas: An analysis of
assessment tools with emphasis on European cities. Sustainable Cities and Society 43, 563–577.
doi:10.1016/j.scs.2018.08.025
Feng, Z., Damon-Feng, H., Zhao, H., 2020. Sustaining Social Distancing Policies to Prevent a Dangerous Second Peak
of COVID-19 Outbreak. medRxiv prepints 2020.04.17.20069351. doi:10.1101/2020.04.17.20069351
Ferguson, N., Laydon, D., Nedjati Gilani, G., Imai, N., Ainslie, K., Baguelin, M., Bhatia, S., Boonyasiri, A., Cucunuba
Perez, Z., Cuomo-Dannenburg, G., Dighe, A., Dorigatti, I., Fu, H., Gaythorpe, K., Green, W., Hamlet, A.,
Hinsley, W., Okell, L., Van Elsland, S., Thompson, H., Verity, R., Volz, E., Wang, H., Wang, Y., Walker, P.,
Walters, C., Winskill, P., Whittaker, C., Donnelly, C., Riley, S., Ghani, A., 2020. Report 9: Impact of nonpharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) to reduce COVID19 mortality and healthcare demand. doi:10.25561/77482
Goscé, L., Barton, D.A.W., Johansson, A., 2015. Analytical Modelling of the Spread of Disease in Confined and
Crowded Spaces. Scientific Reports 4, 4856. doi:10.1038/srep04856
Gössling, S., Scott, D., Hall, C.M., 2020. Pandemics, tourism and global change: a rapid assessment of COVID-19.
Journal of Sustainable Tourism 1–20. doi:10.1080/09669582.2020.1758708
Hamid, S., Mir, M.Y., Rohela, G.K., 2020. Novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19): a pandemic (epidemiology,
pathogenesis and potential therapeutics). New Microbes and New Infections 35, 100679.
doi:10.1016/j.nmni.2020.100679
Hellewell, J., Abbott, S., Gimma, A., Bosse, N.I., Jarvis, C.I., Russell, T.W., Munday, J.D., Kucharski, A.J., Edmunds,
W.J., Funk, S., Eggo, R.M., Sun, F., Flasche, S., Quilty, B.J., Davies, N., Liu, Y., Clifford, S., Klepac, P., Jit, M.,
Diamond, C., Gibbs, H., van Zandvoort, K., 2020. Feasibility of controlling COVID-19 outbreaks by isolation of

Sustainable and resilient strategies for touristic cities against COVID-19: an agent-based approach –
Marco D’Orazio, Gabriele Bernardini, Enrico Quagliarini (preprint version - Submitted to Safety Science)

cases and contacts. The Lancet Global Health 8, e488–e496. doi:10.1016/S2214-109X(20)30074-7
Hethcote, H.W., 1989. Three Basic Epidemiological Models. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-61317-3_5
Howard, J., Huang, A., Li, Z., Tufekci, Z., Zdimal, V., van der Westhuizen, H., von Delft, A., Price, A., Fridman, L.,
Tang, L., Tang, V., Watson, G.L., Bax, C.E., Shaikh, R., Questier, F., Hernandez, D., Chu, L.F., Ramirez, C.M.,
Rimoin, A.W., 2020. Face Masks Against COVID-19: An Evidence Review. Preprints 2020040203.
doi:10.20944/preprints202004.0203.v1
Iacus, S.M., Natale, F., Santamaria, C., Spyratos, S., Vespe, M., 2020. Estimating and projecting air passenger traffic
during the COVID-19 coronavirus outbreak and its socio-economic impact. Safety Science 129, 104791.
doi:10.1016/j.ssci.2020.104791
Jamal, T., Budke, C., 2020. Tourism in a world with pandemics: local-global responsibility and action. Journal of
Tourism Futures ahead-of-p. doi:10.1108/JTF-02-2020-0014
Kumar, A., Gupta, P.K., Srivastava, A., 2020. A review of modern technologies for tackling COVID-19 pandemic.
Diabetes & Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research & Reviews 14, 569–573. doi:10.1016/j.dsx.2020.05.008
Lauer, S.A., Grantz, K.H., Bi, Q., Jones, F.K., Zheng, Q., Meredith, H.R., Azman, A.S., Reich, N.G., Lessler, J., 2020.
The Incubation Period of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) From Publicly Reported Confirmed Cases:
Estimation and Application. Annals of Internal Medicine. doi:10.7326/M20-0504
Lopez, L.R., Rodo, X., 2020. A modified SEIR model to predict the COVID-19 outbreak in Spain and Italy: simulating
control scenarios and multi-scale epidemics. (preprint on www.medrxiv.org). doi:10.1101/2020.03.27.20045005
Lovreglio, R., Ronchi, E., Kinsey, M.J., 2020. An Online Survey of Pedestrian Evacuation Model Usage and Users. Fire
Technology 56, 1133–1153. doi:10.1007/s10694-019-00923-8
Madurai Elavarasan, R., Pugazhendhi, R., 2020. Restructured society and environment: A review on potential
technological strategies to control the COVID-19 pandemic. Science of The Total Environment 138858.
doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.138858
Miller, W., 2015. What does built environment research have to do with risk mitigation, resilience and disaster
recovery? Sustainable Cities and Society 19, 91–97. doi:10.1016/j.scs.2015.07.004
Mizumoto, K., Kagaya, K., Zarebski, A., Chowell, G., 2020. Estimating the asymptomatic proportion of coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19) cases on board the Diamond Princess cruise ship, Yokohama, Japan, 2020.
Eurosurveillance 25. doi:10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2020.25.10.2000180
Nicola, M., Alsafi, Z., Sohrabi, C., Kerwan, A., Al-Jabir, A., Iosifidis, C., Agha, M., Agha, R., 2020. The SocioEconomic Implications of the Coronavirus and COVID-19 Pandemic: A Review. International Journal of
Surgery. doi:10.1016/j.ijsu.2020.04.018
Pradhan, D., Biswasroy, P., Kumar naik, P., Ghosh, G., Rath, G., 2020. A Review of Current Interventions for COVID19 Prevention. Archives of Medical Research. doi:10.1016/j.arcmed.2020.04.020
Prem, K., Liu, Y., Russell, T.W., Kucharski, A.J., Eggo, R.M., Davies, N., Jit, M., Klepac, P., Flasche, S., Clifford, S.,
Pearson, C.A.B., Munday, J.D., Abbott, S., Gibbs, H., Rosello, A., Quilty, B.J., Jombart, T., Sun, F., Diamond,
C., Gimma, A., van Zandvoort, K., Funk, S., Jarvis, C.I., Edmunds, W.J., Bosse, N.I., Hellewell, J., 2020. The
effect of control strategies to reduce social mixing on outcomes of the COVID-19 epidemic in Wuhan, China: a
modelling study. The Lancet Public Health. doi:10.1016/S2468-2667(20)30073-6
Prussin, A.J., Belser, J.A., Bischoff, W., Kelley, S.T., Lin, K., Lindsley, W.G., Nshimyimana, J.P., Schuit, M., Wu, Z.,
Bibby, K., Marr, L.C., 2020. Viruses in the Built Environment (VIBE) meeting report. Microbiome 8, 1.
doi:10.1186/s40168-019-0777-4
Qie, Z., Rong, L., 2016. Spatial–temporal human exposure modeling based on land-use at a regional scale in China.
Safety Science 87, 243–255. doi:10.1016/j.ssci.2016.04.016
Rengasamy, S., Shaffer, R., Williams, B., Smit, S., 2017. A comparison of facemask and respirator filtration test
methods. Journal of Occupational and Environmental Hygiene 14, 92–103. doi:10.1080/15459624.2016.1225157
Ribeiro, P.J.G., Pena Jardim Gonçalves, L.A., 2019. Urban resilience: A conceptual framework. Sustainable Cities and
Society 50, 101625. doi:10.1016/j.scs.2019.101625
Roda, W.C., Varughese, M.B., Han, D., Li, M.Y., 2020. Why is it difficult to accurately predict the COVID-19

Sustainable and resilient strategies for touristic cities against COVID-19: an agent-based approach –
Marco D’Orazio, Gabriele Bernardini, Enrico Quagliarini (preprint version - Submitted to Safety Science)

epidemic? Infectious Disease Modelling 5, 271–281. doi:10.1016/j.idm.2020.03.001
Ronchi, E., Lovreglio, R., 2020. EXPOSED: An occupant exposure model for confined spaces to retrofit crowd models
during a pandemic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.04007. doi:2005.04007
Rosselló, J., Becken, S., Santana-Gallego, M., 2020. The effects of natural disasters on international tourism: A global
analysis. Tourism Management 79, 104080. doi:10.1016/j.tourman.2020.104080
Salecker, J., Sciaini, M., Meyer, K.M., Wiegand, K., 2019. The nlrx r package: A next‐generation framework for
reproducible NetLogo model analyses. Methods in Ecology and Evolution 10, 1854–1863. doi:10.1111/2041210X.13286
Saltelli, A., Annoni, P., Azzini, I., Campolongo, F., Ratto, M., Tarantola, S., 2010. Variance based sensitivity analysis
of model output. Design and estimator for the total sensitivity index. Computer Physics Communications 181,
259–270. doi:10.1016/j.cpc.2009.09.018
Saltelli, A., Ratto, M., Andres, T., Campolongo, F., Cariboni, J., Gatelli, D., Saisana, M., Tarantola, S., 2007. Global
Sensitivity Analysis. The Primer, Global Sensitivity Analysis. The Primer. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chichester,
UK. doi:10.1002/9780470725184
Servick, K., 2020. Cellphone tracking could help stem the spread of coronavirus. Is privacy the price? Science.
doi:10.1126/science.abb8296
Sobol′, I.., 2001. Global sensitivity indices for nonlinear mathematical models and their Monte Carlo estimates.
Mathematics and Computers in Simulation 55, 271–280. doi:10.1016/S0378-4754(00)00270-6
Stanganelli, M., Torrieri, F., Gerundo, C., Rossitti, M., 2020. An integrated strategic-performative planning
methodology towards enhancing the sustainable decisional regeneration of fragile territories. Sustainable Cities
and Society 53, 101920. doi:10.1016/j.scs.2019.101920
Wilensky, U., 1999. NetLogo. http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/ [WWW Document]. Center for Connected Learning
and Computer-Based Modeling, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL.
Yang, Y., Peng, F., Wang, R., Guan, K., Jiang, T., Xu, G., Sun, J., Chang, C., 2020. The deadly coronaviruses: The
2003 SARS pandemic and the 2020 novel coronavirus epidemic in China. Journal of Autoimmunity 102434.
doi:10.1016/j.jaut.2020.102434
Zhai, Z., 2020. Facial mask: A necessity to beat COVID-19. Building and Environment 175, 106827.
doi:10.1016/j.buildenv.2020.106827
Zhang, N., Huang, H., Su, B., Ma, X., Li, Y., 2018. A human behavior integrated hierarchical model of airborne disease
transmission in a large city. Building and Environment 127, 211–220. doi:10.1016/j.buildenv.2017.11.011

