Observing Responses to the COVID-19 Pandemic
using Worldwide Network Cameras
Isha Ghodgaonkar, Abhinav Goel, Fischer Bordwell, Caleb Tung, Sara Aghajanzadeh,
Noah Curran, Ryan Chen, Kaiwen Yu, Sneha Mahapatra, Vishnu Banna, Gore Kao,
Kate Lee, Xiao Hu, Nick Eliopolous, Akhil Chinnakotla, Damini Rijhwani, Ashley Kim,
Aditya Chakraborty, Mark Daniel Ward, Yung-Hsiang Lu, George K. Thiruvathukal†

arXiv:2005.09091v1 [cs.CY] 18 May 2020

Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA
† Loyola University Chicago, IL, USA

Fig. 1: Times Square, New York. Left: 2019/08/07 (before social distancing). Right: 2020/03/01 (during social distancing).
Source: Earthcam.com

Fig. 2: Another View of the Times Square. Left: 2019/06/23. Right: 2020/03/01. Source: Earthcam.com

Abstract—COVID-19 has resulted in a worldwide pandemic,
leading to “lockdown” policies and social distancing. The
pandemic has profoundly changed the world. Traditional methods for observing these historical events are difficult because
sending reporters to areas with many infected people can put
the reporters’ lives in danger. New technologies are needed for
safely observing responses to these policies. This paper reports
using thousands of network cameras deployed worldwide for
the purpose of witnessing activities in response to the policies.
The network cameras can continuously provide real-time visual
data (image and video) without human efforts. Thus, network
cameras can be utilized to observe activities without risking
the lives of reporters. This paper describes a project that uses
network cameras to observe responses to governments’ policies
during the COVID-19 pandemic (March to April in 2020). The
project discovers over 30,000 network cameras deployed in 110
countries. A set of computer tools are created to collect visual

data from network cameras continuously during the pandemic.
This paper describes the methods to discover network cameras
on the Internet, the methods to collect and manage data, and
preliminary results of data analysis. This project can be the
foundation for observing the possible “second wave” in fall
2020. The data may be used for post-pandemic analysis by
sociologists, public health experts, and meteorologists.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Figures 1 and 2 show the Times Square in New York
City before and after the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Such a dramatic change is a result of social distancing, the
response to this deadly pandemic. However, this change did
not occur overnight. On 2019/11/17, the first known case
of COVID-19 was reported in China [1]. In January 2020,
the World Health Organization (WHO) warned that the fast-

spreading virus could reach other parts of the globe [2].
News media soon began to compare the coronavirus with the
H1N1 influenza pandemic of 1918 [3], [4], [5]. The 1918
influenza infected 500 million people, about a third of the
world’s population at the time, and cause tens of millions of
deaths. By March 2020, COVID-19 cases had spread around
the world and had been officially labeled as a pandemic [6].
With China racing to contain the outbreak [7], and with
no vaccine available, other governments took drastic action
to slow the spread of the virus. Countries near China, like
South Korea [8] and Taiwan [9], restricted travel to the Chinese mainland, tracked and flagged citizens via healthcare
records, and enforced quarantines as deemed necessary. Italy
instituted a nationwide lockdown [10]. Public travel was
severely limited. Non-essential businesses were closed, and
the remaining businesses ran on restricted business hours.
The United States published nationwide social distancing
recommendations [11]; many states [12], [13] and local governments [14] imposed stricter regulations. As a result, many
businesses closed down; layoffs rocked the economy [15],
and travel dwindled away as many Americans quarantined
themselves in their homes.
Due to social distancing, the world has changed dramatically. With over three million confirmed cases worldwide
at the end of April 2020 [16], the COVID-19 pandemic is
already a significant entry in the annals of world history.
However, documenting and observing the effects of social
distancing is difficult by traditional methods of journalism
and observation. Dispatching photographers to a location
could impose health risks. Moreover, some countries have
strict travel restrictions and sending photographers is simply
not possible. It is extremely difficult for a person to take
photographs at the same locations everyday for comparison
during the month-long lockdown. Therefore, it is necessary
to develop methods of observation that do not require
physical human presence.
Thousands of network cameras have already been deployed worldwide monitoring traffic, observing national
parks, or for other purposes [17]. These cameras can be used
for observing responses of the lockdown policies. Unfortunately, network cameras are scattered over many websites
on the Internet. Each website is somewhat different and uses
unique methods of camera data storage and retrieval. This
heterogeneity makes it difficult to find network cameras and
to use them for observing responses to COVID-19.
We have developed a solution to discover network cameras and retrieve data from them [18]. The process of
automatic camera discovery is composed of a web crawler
and a module for identifying network cameras. This module
distinguishes live data from unchanged images posted on
websites. The team has discovered over 30,000 cameras
in 110 countries across 6 continents. An image archiver is
created in order to retrieve the most recent snapshot from
each camera. This archiver can collect images at specified
intervals. The archiver can run in parallel and capture images
from multiple cameras simultaneously. A different set of

computer tools is created to handle streaming video. The
project started recording data in early March at the rate of
0.5TB per week.
This paper has the following major contributions: (1)
This paper reports methods to discover network cameras
on the Internet. (2) The team creates computer tools that
can collect visual data (image and video) periodically from
the thousands of network cameras. (3) This paper reports
preliminary analysis showing how people respond to the
policies of social distancing.
II. C AMERA D ISCOVERY
Network cameras are connected to the Internet and can
provide live visual data (image and video) without human
efforts. In order to observe the worldwide responses to
COVID-19, thousands of network cameras are needed. Even
though governments, universities, tourist attractions have
deployed network cameras and made the data available to the
public, the data is organized in different styles and retrieval
needs different protocols.
This research team has created solutions for discovering
network cameras automatically. The process is composed
of two modules as shown in Figure 3. The first module
discovers websites that may contain live visual data. This
is achieved by a web crawler that receives a set of seed
URLs (Uniform Resource Locators) and tabulates a list of
the links found from crawling the seed URLs. The module
identifies the links that may contain live data and sends the
those URLs to the second module. This module determines
whether visual data is live or not by checking whether the
data changes over time. Different methods are needed for
handling images and videos as explained below.
A. Discovery of Image Data

Fig. 3: Automatic Network Camera Discovery System [18].
The system has 2 main parts: (1) Web Crawler module and
(2) Network Camera Identification module.
After the web crawler discovers a URL (by following
links from a seed URL), the crawler parses the website
for image formats, such as JPEG and PNG. For any visual
data link found on a web page, the web crawler module
downloads and parses the HTML. The pages are displayed in
a web browser environment [18] to ensure all web assets are
properly loaded to avoid any potential losses of information.
The crawler parses the HTML response and searches for data
links common to network cameras such as image-specific
visual links (e.g. baseURL /camera id.jpg) and video stream
links (e.g. starting with rtmp::// and rtsp::// or ending with
.mjpg).

Fig. 4: Map of automatically discovered live image cameras.
After the web crawler aggregates potential links for image
data, the next step involves the network camera identification
module to determine whether such data links connect to
network cameras that update the data frequently. The identification distinguishes between active camera data (frequently
changing) and web assets (rarely changing). The module
retrieves several images from the data links at different
times, and after each retrieval, compares the images to
determine the change or lack thereof. The module uses three
different comparison methods: (1) checksum: compare the
file checksum of the images, (2) percent difference: compare
the percentage of pixels changed between images, and (3)
luminance difference: compare the mean pixel luminance
change between images. If the images change over time, the
link is considered as connected to a live network camera.
B. Discovery of Video Data
Video data has different formats from image data. Thus,
different methods are needed. This section further distinguishes two methods for discovery of video data: using web
crawler or using search engines.
The first approach is based on the same method for discovering image data by replacing the identification module
for recognizing live video streams. Instead of considering
image formats (JPG or PNG), the crawler considers video
formats: HLS, RTMP, RTSP, and MPEG. The identification
module uses Selenium (a web browser that can simulate user
interactions) to load the video stream into a Selenium Web
Driver instance. Using the Selenium API, a screenshot of the
video stream is taken to obtain an image. Following the same
procedure as before, several screenshots are taken and compared to determine whether the stream’s content changes and
is likely to be a live video stream. Another method of finding
live video streams uses an Internet search engine. More
specifically, some websites, such as skylinewebcams.com,
earthcam.com, and youtube.com, provide multiple live video
streams discoverable by search engines, observing beaches,
tourist attractions, or city streets. Approximately 400 video
cameras were discovered this way. Figures 4 and 5 show the
locations of the discovered cameras.
III. DATA C OLLECTION
In order to compare people’s responses to policy changes,
it is necessary to record the data from the network cameras.

Fig. 5: Map of discovered live video cameras.

Fig. 6: Flowchart of the process of extracting a frame from
a camera using the Image Archiver.

This section explains how to retrieve and save the image or
video data from network cameras. Figure 6 shows the flow
of saving data.
After the network cameras are discovered, a computer
program saves image data from each camera at defined
time intervals (such as every 10 minutes). The program is
capable of handling several data formats, including JPEG,
or snapshots from MJPEG or H.264 video data.
Video data is downloaded at regular intervals using one
of several APIs for developers to access video live stream
data. These APIs are built upon a video plugin system. The
compatible plugin link for each video link was obtained
before the relevant API methods were invoked to download
data.
IV. DATA M ANAGEMENT AT S CALE
Capturing visual data from over 30,000 cameras poses two
distinct challenges. The first challenge is obtaining enough
computational power to collect visual data. The second
challenge is running the retrieving program in parallel so that
data from multiple cameras can be obtained simultaneously.
This is particularly important for video because capturing
streaming video requires dedicated CPU cores. Being able
to overcome these two challenges is crucial to capturing
visual data at scale and will become even more important
as we are continuously adding cameras to our list of known
cameras.
We address scalability in this work by using Cooley, a
mid-sized and powerful computational cluster at Argonne
Leadership Computing Facility. Through the Director’s Discretionary program at Argonne, we have a renewable sixmonth allocation of 20,000 node-hours and 300TB of
persistent storage. Cooley is primarily targeted to high-

(a) Canada. 7:21 AM on 2020/04/22

(b) Thailand. 3:20 PM on 2020/04/21

(d) Las Vegas, USA. 11:09 AM on 2020/04/24

(c) Netherlands. 3:29 PM on 2020/04/24

(e) Netherlands. 3:48 PM on 2020/04/24

Fig. 7: Snapshots from selected network cameras around the world. All times are local time. Sources: (a) DELATECH Calgary,
(b) Teleport.camera, (c) Strandweer.nu, (d) AE Signage, (e) Gran Canaria Live.

(a) 2019/05/27

(b) 2020/04/07

Fig. 8: Barry, Wales, United Kingdom. Source: EarthCam.com

performance data visualization workloads, which also makes
it ideal for capturing video capture and performing analysis.
Cooley has a total of 126 compute nodes. Each node
has two 2.4 GHz Intel Haswell E5-2620 v3 processors
(6 cores per CPU, 12 cores total), with 384GB RAM.
This system uses FDR Infiniband interconnect. Each of the
compute nodes also has an NVIDIA Tesla K80 dual-GPU
card. A notable feature of our high-performance computing
environment is the enormous amount of networked storage
available to store data sets. At the time of writing, over 2
PB of storage is available to cluster users. Based on our
current data collection rates, we will be able to collect still
and video image data for more than one year.
The current focus is on using the image archiver to
retrieve data from well over 30,000 cameras via a set of
short jobs that run on Cooley. The image archiver itself is
designed to use all available cores to fetch still image data

simultaneously. As more cameras are discovered, this will
allow us to take advantage of addtional nodes without having
to make any changes to how the jobs are actually submitted.
V. R ESULTS
We show selected results from many popular locations
around the world. We select the images shown in Figures
1, 2, and 8-11 based on two factors: (1) These locations are
popular tourist attractions. (2) It is possible to obtain visual
data before COVID-19 for comparison (this project started
recording data in early March 2020). Figure 7 shows the
diversity of the data among the discovered network cameras,
including karaoke bars and beaches.
Among the data captured by more than 30,000 cameras,
we choose these images as samples based on a set of criteria.
All selected images observe locations where large crowds
are expected because they are popular tourist attractions

(a) 2019/12/29

(b) 2020/05/09

Fig. 9: Oxford, England, United Kingdom. Source: Oxford Martin School

(a) 2015/03/17

(b) 2020/03/17

Fig. 10: Dublin, Ireland on Saint Patrick’s Day. Source: EarthCam.com

(a) 2019

(b) 2020/04/24

Fig. 11: Milan, Italy. Source: shutterstock.com.

(such as beaches) or places where gathering is expected
(such as restaurants). Also, the large number of network
cameras suggests that some may be disconnected occasionally. For comparison in March and April 2020, we select
the network cameras which reliably obtain data every day
because they can provide insight for conducting analysis of
social distancing. The criteria narrow down the number of
network cameras to around 100 cameras. Then, we select
cameras in different geographical locations and types of
location (such as beaches and restaurants).
Figure 1(a) and 2(a) show images of the Times Square
in New York City, USA in 2019. It can be seen that the
sidewalks were filled with people. Figure 1(b) and 2(b) taken

in 2020 show empty streets and sidewalks because of the
enforced social distancing guidelines. A similar observation
can be made outside the Milan Cathedral in Milan, Italy, in
figure 11. An image from 2019 shows that the cathedral attracted large crowds of people. In 2020, due to the lockdown
in Italy, there are no people visible.
Figure 8 shows a network camera overlooking a cafe
in Barry, Wales. The beach in Barry is a popular tourist
attraction in the months of April and May. Figure 8(a)
is an image taken in April 2019 and shows a crowded
beach. Figure 8(b) is taken in April 2020: all activity on the
beach has been disallowed because of the enforced social
distancing guidelines in Wales. A similar observation can

be made in Figure 9 in Oxford, England. Here, a camera
overlooking a popular city center shows the difference in
the activities between April 2019 and 2020.
Saint Patrick’s Day is a holiday in Ireland which is widely
celebrated in the city of Dublin. Figure 10(a) shows an
image from a network camera taken on Saint Patrick’s Day
2015. The streets were crowded and bustling with activity.
On Saint Patrick’s Day in 2020, social distancing measures
were enforced and significantly fewer people celebrated the
holiday. Additional results are shown in figure 7. Figure 7(a)
shows a beach in Calgary, where on the sand, there can
be seen a few people at varying distances from the camera
and from each other. In Figure 7(b), there appears to be
a family walking past a beach goer in a hammock. In
Figure 7(c), there are quite a few people walking along the
beach. In Figure 7(d) and (e) there are no people, although
the images show a Shake Shack, which is a popular burger
joint, and a Karaoke Bar, both during the day. In each of
the snapshots, there are no visible crowds. These are some
of the comparisons that are made possible with the use of
network cameras. These examples are representative of our
data set. We observe a dramatic decrease in the number of
people on the streets in most countries around the world.

VI. D ISCUSSION
These image comparisons are made possible with the use
of network cameras. We observe a dramatic decrease in the
number of people on the streets in most countries around
the world from Spring 2019 and earlier, to Spring 2020. We
continue observing what may happen in these locations over
time after social distancing policies are lifted.
Network cameras can be useful to analyze changes of
behavior due to COVID-19, or provide valuable data for
sociologists and health experts for post-pandemic analysis.
For example, do people keep longer distances in crowds?
Moreover, a study cross-referencing social media and public
surveillance camera data can be used in emergencies [19].
The data set collected for this paper can be useful for
researchers for a variety of analyses. The data may also be
used to evaluate whether existing technologies of computer
vision are ready to analyze the vast amounts of data for
future pandemics. In the near future, we wish to answer
the following question: Is computer vision ready to analyze
crowd behavior such as walking speeds, crowd density, and
mask usage? Data from network cameras is significantly
different from commonly used data sets due to ambient
lighting; the data usually contains many objects, each with
a few pixels [20].
This research project follows the guidelines set by Purdue
University for protecting privacy, approved by Purdue’s
Institutional Review Board Protocol 2020-460. This study
analyzes only the aggregate information about crowd density
and does not identify any individuals.

VII. C ONCLUSION
This paper presents the collection of live visual data
from worldwide network cameras for monitoring responses
to social distancing policies. By comparing the crowds
before and during COVID-19, the data reveals how people
around the world respond. This research team continuously
accumulates data and plans to observe the responses when
the policies are lifted. Readers interested obtaining the data
may contact the project’s principal investigator, Dr. YungHsiang Lu (yunglu@purdue.edu).
VIII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The snapshots shown in this paper are attributed to the
following sources: Earthcam.com, YouTube.com, Skyline
Webcams, O’Shea’s Cafe at Barry Island, Shuttershock.com,
AE Signage, Gran Canaria Live, Strandweer.nu, DELTATECH Calgary, Umbria Webcam, Teleport.camera, and Oxford Martin School.
This research uses resources of the Argonne Leadership
Computing Facility, which is a DOE Office of Science User
Facility supported under Contract DE-AC02-06CH11357.
We thank the Argonne Leadership Computing Facility for
access to the Cooley supercomputer that was used in this
study.
This project is supported in part by the National Science
Foundation OAC-1535108. Any opinions, findings, conclusions or recommendations presented in this material are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Science Foundation.
R EFERENCES
[1] Josephine Ma. China’s first confirmed Covid-19 case traced back to
November 17. South China Morning Post, March 13, 2020.
[2] Stephanie Nebehay. WHO says new China coronavirus could spread,
warns hospitals worldwide. Reuters, January 14, 2020.
[3] Rebecca Grant. Rebecca Grant: Coronavirus lessons from 1918
Spanish flu – here’s what worked to save lives. Fox News, March
22, 2020.
[4] Berkeley Lovelace Jr. The coronavirus may be deadlier than the 1918
flu: Here’s how it stacks up to other pandemics. CNBC, March 26,
2020.
[5] John M. Barry. Opinion: The Single Most Important Lesson From
the 1918 Influenza. The New York Times, March 17, 2020.
[6] Ryan Saavedra. Global Emergency Declared Over Coronavirus; First
Transmission Confirmed In U.S. The Daily Wire, January 30, 2020.
[7] Emily Feng. With Thousands Sick, China Tries To Contain Coronavirus. NPR, January 28, 2020.
[8] Fred Lucas. 5 Things to Know About South Korea’s Response to
Coronavirus. The Daily Signal, March 27, 2020.
[9] James Griffiths. Taiwan’s coronavirus response is among the best
globally. CNN, April 5, 2020.
[10] Danielle Wallace. Italy faces first day of nationwide coronavirus
lockdown, Europe to discuss spread of epidemic. Fox News, March
10, 2020.
[11] Rochard Harris. White House Announces New Social Distancing
Guidelines Around Coronavirus. NPR, March 16, 2020.
[12] Ryan Saavedra. Virginia Governor Ralph Northam Announces StayAt-Home Order Till June 10. The Daily Wire, March 30, 2020.
[13] Paul Bois. Illinois Issues Stay-At-Home Order Following California
And New York. The Daily Wire, March 20, 2020.
[14] Brad Johnson. Joint Shelter Order Issued by the City of Austin, Travis
County, Williamson County. The Texan, March 24, 2020.
[15] Eric Guilford. A Second Round of Coronavirus Layoffs Has Begun.
Few Are Safe. The Wall Street Journal, April 14, 2020.

[16] Jez Azner. Worldwide Confirmed Coronavirus Cases Top 2 Million.
The New York Times, April 14, 2020.
[17] Yung-Hsiang Lu, George K. Thiruvathukal, Ahmed S. Kaseb, Kent
Gauen, Damini Rijhwani, Ryan Dailey, Deeptanshu Malik, Yutong
Huang, Sarah Aghajanzadeh, and Minghao Guo. See the world
through network cameras. IEEE Computer pages 30-40, Volume 52,
Issue 10, October 2019.
[18] Ryan Dailey, Aniesh Chawla, Andrew Liu, Sripath Mishra, Ling
Zhang, Josh Majors, Yung-Hsiang Lu, and George Thiruvathukal.
Automated discovery of network cameras in heterogeneous web
pages. Submitted for Review, March 2020.
[19] Chittayong Surakitbanharn, Calvin Yau, Guizhen Wang, Aniesh
Chawla, Yinuo Pan, Zhaoya Sun, Sam Yellin, David Ebert, YungHsiang Lu, and George K. Thiruvathukal. Cross-referencing social
media and public surveillance camera data for disaster response. IEEE
Symposium on Technologies for Homeland Security, 2018.
[20] Caleb Tung, Matthew R. Kelleher, Ryan J. Schlueter, Binhan Xu,
Yung-Hsiang Lu, George K. Thiruvathukal, Yen-Kuang Chen, and
Yang Lu. Large-scale object detection of images from network
cameras in variable ambient lighting conditions. IEEE International
Conference on Multimedia Information Processing and Retrieval,
April 2019.

