TITLE
Massive viral replication and cytopathic effects in early COVID-19 pneumonia
AUTHORS
L. Schifanella1*†, J.L. Anderson2†, M. Galli3,4, M. Corbellino3, A. Lai4, G. Wieking2, B.
Grzywacz5, N.R. Klatt1, A.T. Haase6* and T.W. Schacker2*
AFFILIATIONS
1

Division of Surgical Outcomes and Precision Medicine Research, Department of Surgery,
Medical School, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.
2

Department of Medicine, Medical School, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455,
USA.
3

III Division of Infectious Diseases, ASST Fatebenefratelli Sacco, Milan, Italy

4

Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences Luigi Sacco, University of Milan, Milan, Italy

5

Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Medical School, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.
6

Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical School, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.
†These authors contributed equally to this work.
*Corresponding authors
FULL SUMMARY PARAGRAPH
SARS-CoV-2 is the cause of COVID-19 acute respiratory illness that like its predecessors,
MERS and SARS, can be severe and fatal 1-4. By April of 2020, COVID-19 infections had
become a worldwide pandemic with nearly 3 million infections and over 200,000 deaths. The
relative contributions of virus replication and cytopathic effects or immunopathological host
responses to the severe and fatal outcomes of COVID-19 lung infections have as yet to be
determined. Here we show that SARS-CoV-2 replication and cytopathic effects in type II
alveolar pneumocytes causes focal lung injury in an individual with no history of pulmonary

symptoms. These findings point to the potential benefit of early effective antiviral treatment to
prevent progression to severe and fatal COVID-19 pneumonia.

MAIN TEXT
Understanding the mechanisms responsible for the COVID-19 fatal lung infections is important
to design potentially life-saving treatments. The virus itself, an immunopathological response to
infection or a combination of these direct and indirect mechanisms could be responsible for lung
injury. The distinction is important, because antiviral drugs and antibodies would be appropriate
to treat lung injury largely due to virus replication and cytopathic effects if direct virus insult is
the major driver of lung pathology. Clinical trials underway to test antiviral drugs are designed to
determine if the inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 replication can prevent or mitigate the pathological
consequences of lung infection and thus far these trials are aimed at people with symptomatic
and often advanced disease. On the other hand, if severe pneumonia is due to an
immunopathological response to the virus, then moderating that response, e.g., by inhibiting IL-6
with the monoclonal antibody tocilizumab or other immunomodulatory approach, would be
appropriate, but with the risk, as in any immunosuppressive treatment, of impairing the immune
response to infection.
Ground glass opacities or patchy infiltrates in the lungs in CT images of asymptomatic
SARS-CoV-2 infected individuals5-7 suggest that lung infection and associated tissue injury may
be detectable in individuals who did not have severe pneumonia or respiratory failure7. Studies
of tissues at this stage might therefore provide a glimpse of the relationship between viral
replication and cytopathic effects to lung injury before that relationship becomes blurred by
progression to end stage pneumonia. We had an opportunity to test this hypothesis in analysis of

lung specimens obtained postmortem from an 88 year-old Italian woman who succumbed to a
heart attack while quarantined in a hotel after testing positive for SARS-CoV-2. She is described
as afebrile and in good health without cough, shortness of breath or any other symptoms of
clinically manifest SARS-CoV-2 infection. We describe findings in the lung of this individual at
a stage of infection without manifest pneumonia or respiratory failure that support direct virusmediated tissue destruction in the pathogenesis of COVID-19 pneumonia.
Focal COVID-19 pneumonia
We received paraffin embedded lung specimens from the SARS-CoV-2 infected subject
of this report from the Department of Pathology of Fatebenefratelli Sacco Hospital, Lombardy,
Milan, Italy. H&E stained lung tissue showed heterogeneous organ damage (Extended Data
Fig.1). Alveolar structure was partially conserved, although emphysematous changes were
clearly recognizable in the region defined by the blue box and arrow (Extended Data Fig.1). In
the region defined by the red box and arrow, there is a very well delimited area of striking
consolidation. At higher magnification there is evidence of diffuse alveolar damage with
exudative characteristics that include hyaline membranes, inflammatory cell infiltrates (mainly
lymphocytes), desquamated type II pneumocytes, microvascular thrombosis, and vascular
endothelial cell damage with red blood cells in the alveolar spaces. We focused our analysis on
this region of lung injury. We used RNAscope in situ hybridization (ISH) with anti-sense SN
probes to detect SARS-CoV-2-specific Spike (S) region genomic sequences, and nucleocapsid
(N) region genomic sequences shared with SARS- and MERS-CoV, to detect viral genomic
RNA+ (vRNA+) in infected cells. We first show images consistent with spread of infection into
the lung by infection of the bronchial epithelium (Fig. 1). Degenerating vRNA+ cells line a small
and larger bronchiole (Fig. 1A,B, short arrows) and a grape-like cluster of vRNA+ hyperplastic

epithelium we later show to be type II pneumocytes is adjacent to infected bronchiolar
epithelium, consistent with this mode of spread into alveoli. There are also vRNA+ clusters
adjacent to the alveolar space (Fig. 1A, long arrows), vRNA released from lysed type II
pneumocytes (Fig. 1C, red arrow) and CD68+ macrophages that appear to have phagocytosed
vRNA+ cells and debris (Fig. 1C brown and red arrows). Detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA was
specific because 1) there was no signal when the SN probe was hybridized to normal lung tissue
(Extended Data Fig.2A); 2) a negative control probe did not detect SARS-CoV-2 RNA
(Extended Data Fig.2B) in the lung tissues from the same positive focal area shown in Fig. 1;
3); and the SARS-CoV-2-Spike specific probe alone (Extended Data Fig.2C) detected vRNA at
similar levels to the SN probe mix, which would also hybridize to SARS-CoV and MERS RNA
(Extended Data Fig.2D).
Massive virus production, spread and cytopathic effects of SARS-CoV-2 infection in
type II pneumocytes
We identified type II pneumocytes as the principal cells in which SARS-CoV-2 replicates
and produces virus. To do so, we combined ISH with Napsin A staining to detect vRNA in
Napsin A+ type II pneumocytes and ISH with TSA/ELF amplification8 to render RNA in virions
visible for light microscopy to score for virus producing cells. With these two methods, we could
then examine the spread of infection and cytopathic effects in the lung. In the numbered regions
in the overview of infection and spread (Fig. 2), there are foci or collections of vRNA+/Napsin
A+ type II pneumocytes in close spatial proximity to one another and to vRNA negative Napsin
A+ type II pneumocytes (Fig. 2, regions 1-5). These images suggest a chain of transmission
events from an infected cell to adjacent susceptible cells. We will return to the role of
macrophages in phagocytosis of infected cells and virus released from dying cells but note here

that a RNA+/Napsin A- non epithelial cell overlies extracellular viral RNA+ derived from lysis
of infected cells (Fig.2 region 6) and a conjugate of viral RNA+/Napsin A+ and RNA+/Napsin
A- non epithelial cell (Fig.2. region 7). Both images are consistent with subsequent
documentation of macrophage acquisition of viral RNA by phagocytosis.
The visualization of virus production, spread and cytopathic effects in the lung
confirmed the predominant focal nature of spread (Fig. 3A) in clusters or chains of susceptible
cells in close spatial proximity (Fig. 3B). The image at higher magnification (Fig. 3C) of
individual virions, virus aggregates and inclusion bodies in and around dying cells captures the
massive production of virus and associated cytopathic effects. This extraordinary level of virus
production, fusion and cell lysis leaves a visible record in the lung of vast swaths of lysed virus +
cells surrounding airways, which are themselves lined by fused virus + cells, and around rare still
recognizable virus producing cells (Fig. 3D) as well as mats of virions from necrotic type II
pneumocytes (Fig. 3E). These images thus support the mode of spread into and within the lung
and underscore the extent of tissue injury directly attributable to SARS-CoV-2 replication and
cytopathic effects.
Macrophages acquire vRNA+ by phagocytosis
With these images of the massive cytopathic effects and cell lysis in mind, we return to
the question of whether vRNA+ macrophages represent cells in which SARS-CoV-2 is
replicating or macrophages that acquire vRNA by phagocytosis. We have already shown images
that suggested that vRNA+ macrophages could acquire vRNA by phagocytosis of infected type
II pneumocytes or vRNA released from lysed cells (Fig. 1, 2), and now show further evidence in
support of that conclusion. In the region enclosed by a rectangle adjacent to vRNA+ lysed
epithelium (Fig. 4A) shown at higher magnification (Fig. 4B), a CD68+ vRNA+ contacts lysed

vRNA+ lysed epithelium. The white line outlines the RNA+ positive area of the macrophage that
is in contact with the viral RNA in the necrotic cells, suggesting phagocytic acquisition of
vRNA. Small CD68+vRNA-negative cells are also in cell-to-cell contact with CD68-negative
vRNA+ type II pneumocytes, consistent with a sequence in which macrophages will acquire
RNA from dying infected cells. Moreover, macrophages with little vRNA also overly sheets of
lysed vRNA+ cells consistent with acquisition of vRNA from infected pneumocytes at an
advanced stage of infection in these cells (Fig. 4C, D). This conclusion is further supported by
the co-localization of vRNA inclusions in LAMP1+ lysosomes in CD68+ cells in some cases
within CD68+ extensions of a macrophage (Fig. 4E, F).
IL-6 production by type II pneumocytes
We investigated what local production of IL-6 might contribute to the inflammatory
component of lung injury by staining tissues for IL-6. The morphology and geographical
distribution of the IL-6 + cells suggested that the IL-6+ cells were hyperplastic infected type II
pneumocytes (Extended Data Fig.3A), and we confirmed their identity by showing that the IL6+ cells were vRNA+ and Napsin A+ (Extended Data Fig.3B). While IL-6 production by
infected cells could contribute to immunopathology, local production could also be involved in
macrophage recruitment and epithelial reparative processes9-13.
Conclusion
We show in a SARS-CoV-2 infected individual with ostensibly early infection, who had no
known history of pulmonary symptoms, that there was a region of the lung with focal pneumonia
in which massive SARS-CoV-2 replication and cytopathic effects in type II alveolar
pneumocytes directly contributes to lung pathology. The extent of diffuse alveolar damage from
the lytic effects of infection of type II pneumocytes could explain the current observation that

many people testing positive for SARS-CoV-2 have significant hypoxia often in the absence of
overt symptoms of pneumonia. It might therefore be prudent in this stealth phase of SARS-CoV2 lung infection to use pulse oximetry to measure blood oxygen levels as a guide to early
supplemental oxygen. Our findings further point to the potential therapeutic benefit of early
treatment to inhibit viral replication to prevent progression to severe and fatal pneumonia.

MAIN REFERENCES
1.

Weiss, S.R., Forty years with coronaviruses. J Exp Med, 2020. 217(5).

2.

Drosten, C., et al., Identification of a novel coronavirus in patients with severe acute
respiratory syndrome. N Engl J Med, 2003. 348(20): p. 1967-1976.

3.

Zaki, A.M., et al., Isolation of a novel coronavirus from a man with pneumonia in Saudi
Arabia. N Engl J Med, 2012. 367(19): p. 1814-1820.

4.

Zhou, P., et al., A pneumonia outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of probable bat
origin. Nature, 2020. 579(7798): p. 270-273.

5.

Kimball, A., et al., Asymptomatic and Presymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 Infections in
Residents of a Long-Term Care Skilled Nursing Facility - King County, Washington,
March 2020. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep, 2020. 69(13): p. 377-381.

6.

Mizumoto, K., et al., Estimating the asymptomatic proportion of coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19) cases on board the Diamond Princess cruise ship, Yokohama, Japan,
2020. Euro Surveill, 2020. 25(10) p. 1-5.

7.

Hu, Z., et al., Clinical characteristics of 24 asymptomatic infections with COVID-19
screened among close contacts in Nanjing, China. Sci China Life Sci, 2020 p. 706-711.

8.

Zhang, Z.Q., et al., Roles of substrate availability and infection of resting and activated
CD4+ T cells in transmission and acute simian immunodeficiency virus infection. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A, 2004. 101(15): p. 5640-5645.

9.

Jones, M.R., et al., Roles of interleukin-6 in activation of STAT proteins and recruitment
of neutrophils during Escherichia coli pneumonia. J Infect Dis, 2006. 193(3): p. 360-369.

10.

O'Malley, K. and L.L. Moldawer, Interleukin-6: Still crazy after all these years. Crit Care
Med, 2006. 34(10): p. 2690-2691.

11.

Ward, N.S., et al., Interleukin-6-induced protection in hyperoxic acute lung injury. Am J
Respir Cell Mol Biol, 2000. 22(5): p. 535-452.

12.

Xing, Z., et al., IL-6 is an antiinflammatory cytokine required for controlling local or
systemic acute inflammatory responses. J Clin Invest, 1998. 101(2): p. 311-320.

13.

Voiriot, G., et al., Interleukin-6 displays lung anti-inflammatory properties and exerts
protective hemodynamic effects in a double-hit murine acute lung injury. Respir Res,
2017. 18(1): p. 64.

METHODS
RNAscope in situ hybridization/ Immunohistochemistry1
SARS CoV2 RNA was visualized by RNAscope in situ hybridization with anti-sense probes and
reagents from Advanced Cell Diagnostics. Briefly, slides were boiled in RNAscope Pretreat
citrate buffer for 15 minutes. Pretreat 3 reagent 3 (protease solution) was added at a 1:15
diution, and the slides were incubated for 20 minutes at 40 F in the hybridization oven. SARSCoV-2 antisense probes VnCoV2019S 21631-23303 of NC 045512.2, which hybridizes

specifically to the 5’ end of SARS-CoV-2-Spike RNA, and VnCoV-N 28275-29204 of
MN908947.3, which cross-hybridizes to SAR-CoV and MERS N-RNA, were added for 2 hours
before continuing with AMPs 1-6 from the RNAscope 2.5 Red detection kit. Warp red
chromogen (Biocare Medical) was added to visualize the RNA for 5 minutes. Sections were then
blocked with Peroxidizer 1 and Background Sniper before adding CD68 (diluted 1:300, Dako)
overnight. Polink-2 Plus HRP Mouse (GBI Labs) was added according to the manufacturer's
directions. ImmPact DAB was added to visualize macrophages before counterstaining with CAT
Hematoxylin and bluing in TBST. A thin layer of Clear mount diluted 1:5 in DI water (Thermo
Scientific) was added to the sections, allowed to dry, dipped in xylenes before mounting in
permount.
RNAscope TSA ELF2
Intracellular viral RNA and virions were visualized following the same protocol for the
RNAscope 2.5 Red detection kit, but replacing Warp red staining with staining for 10 minutes
using a 1:20 dilution of the ELF 97 Endogenous Phosphatase substrate from Invitrogen. Nuclei
were stained with DAPI before mounting in Aqua polymount (Polysciences, Inc).
RNAscope/ Immunofluorescence
The RNAscope 2.5 Brown detection kit used the same method as above, except the addition of
the Pretreat 1 (H2O2) step. Following the amp 6 step, Opal 570 (Perkin Elmer) was added
following company instructions. IL6/CD68 and Napsin A (Biocare Medical) were added
overnight. The following day, Donkey anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 488 and Donkey anti-mouse
Alexa Fluor 647 was added for 45 minutes before adding DAPI and mounting in Aqua
polymount.

IL-6 Immunohistochemistry
Antigen retrieval was performed using 0.05% citraconic anhydride for 30 sec at 122 degrees
using a declocker (Biocare Medical). Slides with 5 micron sections were cooled, and sections
were circled with a hydrophobic pen (vector laboratories). Peroxidizer 1 was added for 5
minutes before washing in 3x in TBST and blocking in Background sniper (Biocare Medical) for
30 minutes. Rabbit anti-Human IL-6 antibody (Proteintech) was added diluted 1:1500 in DiVinci
green (Biocare Medical) for 1 hour. A rabbit IgG monoclonal isotype control (Abcam) was
used for the negative control on the patient tissue. Sections were washed 3x in TBST before
adding the Polink-2 Plus HRP Rabbit (GBI Labs) according to the manufacturer's directions.
ImmPact DAB (Vector Laboratories) was added before counterstaining with CAT Hematoxlyin
(Biocare Medical) and bluing in TBST. Sides were dehydrated and mounted in permount.
Data availability statement
Limited samples were provided to the University of Minnesota by the Department of
Biomedical and Clinical Sciences Luigi Sacco, University of Milan. All data are available in the
main text or the supplementary materials.
METHODS REFERENCES
1.

Deleage C., et al., Defining HIV and SIV Reservoirs in Lymphoid Tissues. Pathog and

Immun. 2016;1(1):68-106.
2.

Zhang, Z.Q., et al., Roles of substrate availability and infection of resting and activated

CD4+ T cells in transmission and acute simian immunodeficiency virus infection. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A, 2004. 101(15): p. 5640-5645.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Dr. Carlo Parravicini for the scientific discussion and the insights, Bianca Ghisi for
organizing the communication of the Italian collaborators and Steve Wietgrefe for technical
discussion.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTION
T.W.S, A.T.H. N.R.K and L.S. conceived the study. A.T.H and L.S. wrote the paper. A.T.H.
designed the in situ hybridization and image analysis of the tissues. J.L.A performed all the
experiments and acquired the images with the support of G.W. and B.G. M.G., M.C. and A.L.
provided the laboratory samples, clinical information and provided expertise and feedback.
N.R.K. provided expertise and feedback.
COMPETING INTERESTS DECLARATION
The authors declare no competing interests.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Material and Correspondence should be addressed to:
Luca Schifanella: schif184@umn.edu
Ashley Haase: haase001@umn.edu
Timothy Schacker: schac008@umn.edu

FIGURES
Figure 1.

Figure 1. SARS-CoV-2 replication and cytopathic effects in bronchial epithelium and type
II pneumocytes. A, B. Red viral RNA+ bronchial epithelium (short arrows) and clusters of viral
RNA+ cells that by morphology appear to be hyperplastic type II pneumocytes (long arrows). C.
Cluster of hyperplastic viral RNA+ epithelium. Red arrow points to viral RNA released from
lysed cells. Single brown arrow points to a CD68+ macrophage. Red and brown arrows point to
macrophages that appear to have phagocytosed degenerating infected epithelium.

Figure 2.

Figure 2. Transmission chains in type II pneumocytes and interactions with other viral
RNA+ cells. Red cells are viral RNA+; green cells are Napsin+ type II pneumocytes; red-green
cells are infected type II pneumocytes. The viral RNA+ type II cells in numbered regions 1-5 are
spatially contiguous, consistent with spread of infection to susceptible type II cells in close
spatial proximity. Region 6 shows a Napsin negative viral RNA+ cell overlying extracellular
viral RNA+ derived from lysis of infected cells. Region 7 shows a viral RNA+ Napsin + and
Napsin negative cell conjugate. These images are consistent with images in Figures 2 of
acquisition of viral RNA in macrophages by phagocytosis.

Figure 3.

Figure 3. Spread of infection in the lung by SARS-CoV-2 virus-producing cells and record
of spread and cytopathic effects. A. Green intracellular viral RNA, virions and aggregated
virions are evident in individual cells, but also clusters and foci consistent with spread from cellto-cell and to nearby susceptible cells. B. Cluster of virus-producing cells and three virusproducing cells in close spatial proximity. C. Individual virions, virus aggregates and inclusion
bodies in and around dying cells. D. Overview of regions dominated by mats of lysed virus +
cells in and adjacent to airways and around intact virus+ cells. E. Mat of virions in lysed type II
pneumocytes

Figure 4.

Figure 4. Co-localization of macrophages with v+RNA+ cells and vRNA+ associated with
lysed cells. A, B. Arrows point to viral RNA+ in necrotic epithelium, a portion of which has
been desquamated into alveolar space. Boxed region in A shown at higher magnification in B.
Brown CD68+ viral RNA negative macrophages indicated by brown arrows; viral RNA+ cells
indicated by red arrows. Conjugates of macrophages and viral RNA+ cells indicated by the letter
c. The area enclosed by a white line and red arrow, delineate the viral RNA portion of a

macrophage in contact with viral RNA from necrotic epithelium. C, D. Sheets of viral RNA+
epithelium. Region enclosed by a rectangle in C is shown at higher magnification in D. Brown
arrows point to macrophages with particulate viral RNA+ signal. E. CD68+ (white)
macrophages with viral RNA (red) associated with LAMP1+ (green) lysosomes. Extension of
the macrophage, viral RNA and lysosomes co-localize with a viral RNA+ cell. Image taken at
40x magnification F. Macrophage contacting extracellular viral RNA. Viral RNA in the
macrophage.

EXTENDED DATA FIGURES
Extended Data Figure 1.

Extended Data Figure 1. COVID-19 focal pneumonia. Upper panel shows a thumbnail sketch
and scan of lung tissue. Pathological findings in the brown-colored area enclosed by the red box.
The red arrow points to the histopathology in H&E stained sections of diffuse alveolar damage
with hyaline membranes, inflammatory cells, mainly lymphocytes, desquamated type II
pneumocytes and red blood cells in the alveolar spaces. There were fewer pathological changes

in the region enclosed by the blue box. The blue arrow points to relative preservation of alveoli,
although emphysematous changes were also noted.

Extended Data Figure 2.

Extended Data Figure 2. RNAscope in situ hybridization controls. A. Normal lung
hybridized with SN probes. B. Patient lung hybridized with a negative control probe (DapB,
ACD). C, D. Comparable detection of genomic vRNA with only the SARS-CoV-2-specific S
probe (C) and with only the N probe, which would also detect SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV
genomic RNA (D).

Extended Data Figure 3.

Extended Data Figure 3. IL-6 production by type II pneumocytes. A. Arrows point to brown
IL-6 + hyperplastic infected type II cells. B. Green IL-6 + (green) Napsin + (white) type II
pneumocytes with viral RNA (red).

