Particle modeling of the spreading of Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19)
Hilla De-Leon1, 2, a) and Francesco Pederiva1, 3, b)
1) INFN-TIFPA

Trento Institute of Fundamental Physics and Applications, Via Sommarive, 14, 38123 Povo TN,
Italy
2) European Centre for Theoretical Studies in Nuclear Physics and Related Areas (ECT*), Strada delle Tabarelle 286,
I-38123 Villazzano (TN), Italy
3) Dipartimento di Fisica, University of Trento, via Sommarive 14, I–38123, Povo, Trento,
Italy

arXiv:2005.10357v2 [physics.soc-ph] 3 Aug 2020

(Dated: 4 August 2020)

By the end of July 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic had infected more than seventeen million people and had spread to
almost all countries worldwide. In response, many countries all over the world have used different methods to reduce
the infection rate, such as including case isolation, the closure of schools and universities, banning public events, and
mostly forcing social distancing, including local and national lockdowns. We use a Monte-Carlo (MC) based algorithm
to predict the virus infection rate for different population densities using the most recent epidemic data in our work. We
test the spread of the Coronavirus using three different lockdown models, and eight various combinations of constraints,
which allow us to examine the efficiency of each model and constraint. In this paper, we have tested three different
time-cyclic patterns of no-restrictions/lockdown patterns. This model’s main prediction is that a cyclic schedule of norestrictions/lockdown that contains at least ten days of lockdown for each time cycle can help control the virus infection.
In particular, this model reduces the infection rate when accompanied by social distancing and complete isolation of
symptomatic patients.
I.

INTRODUCTION

Statistical mechanics provides a set of very powerful tools
to model various biological and medical problems (see, for
example, Refs.1–3 and many more). One of the most studied these days is pandemics’ diffusion, prompted by the current COVID-19 emergency (see, for example, Ref.4 ). In addition, many current researches study the physical aspects of
the spreading of the virus (see, for example, Refs.5–8 ). Many
techniques currently employed are based on the solution of
differential equations (see, for example, Refs.9–11 and many
more) or fitting formulae (see, for example, Refs.12,13 ). Both
techniques are based upon varied parameters to obtain several
scenarios that are then treated as parts of a statistical ensemble
to analyze. For example, in many countries (e.g., Germany,
Italy), there is an ample discussion about the role of the socalled R0 parameter, i.e., the average number of individuals
that a single actively infectious person can pass the virus to.
The procedures to estimate R0 are all based on a-posteriori
analyses, but are usually part of the parameters that governments use to decide on measures to be taken.
In this paper, we propose a method that is essentially based
on modeling a population as a set of interacting classical particles, each one with three states relative to the health status
(susceptible of infection, infected and contagious, and recovered/died), in which standard thermodynamical parameters
(temperature, density) are used to describe the characteristics
of the population. This method allows us to apply the model
to very different situations, ranging from a city suburb population to a single university classroom. The algorithm is based
on standard Monte-Carlo procedures of sampling the transi-

a) E-mail:
b) E-mail:

hdeleon@ectstar.eu
francesco.pederiva@unitn.it

tion among subsequent states, which are essentially sampled
from a statistical distribution, in the spirit of transport MC algorithms.

In our model, a healthy person (i) can become sick with a
daily probability, Pi = ∑ j Pi j , where Pi j is a function of the
distance between each infected person ( j) in the area and the
healthy person (i). We are treating the Coronvirus spread as
a "one-way" Ising-model Monte-Carlo as the following: A
healthy person becomes sick as a result of an interaction with
a sick person (or people), but a sick person stops being sick
(i.e., recovered or died) within an average time of ∼ 14 up to
40 days for the severs cases (see Ref.14 for the epidemiology
data). After that time, the recovered person can no longer
infect another person and cannot be sick again.

In contrast to other infection models, such as SIR9–11 in this
approach, the parameter R0 , is a direct outcome of the simulation and not pre-assumed. This is achieved by the relation between R0 and the doubling time Td , which is a direct result of
the infection probability chosen, which is, in turn, a function
of observable epidemiological data and features of the studied
population (e.g., average density on a given area or mobility).
In the following, we will present the results of several simulations, meant to reproduce the spread of the Coronavirus in
the presence of different lockdown constraints. The model’s
high flexibility enables us to control many parameters such
as social distancing, infection from an unknown sourced, etc.
In Section II, we will describe some details of the model. In
Section III, the different models of lockdown considered will
be discussed. Section IV is devoted to the presentation and
discussion of the results, and Sec. V to the Conclusions.

2
II. THE PARAMETERS AND PRELIMINARY
ASSUMPTIONS

Given the scarce information available, we had to make
some assumptions based on current data, which may be more
stringent than it might be required by the real nature of the
virus. In particular, we based on Ref.14 for the Coronavirus
epidemiology data and on Refs.5,6 for the physical properties
of the virus. We are aware that this model cannot take into
account every single spreading event, but since such events
affect the initial Td , (which is a function of the population
density), and since the infection process is random, we expect that the existence of such events will be reflected in the
numerical results. Also, in contrast to the real-life, here, there
is no time gap between the infection and being tested positive
for Coronavirus. Therefore, an immediate decrease in the rate
of infection resulting from lockdown is expected in the model
in contrast to the real data.15 .
All simulations are performed, assuming a surface area unit
of 1 km2 . Periodic boundary conditions are used, allowing to
get rid of broad confinement effects (e.g., the lockdown of
an entire province or city) and look at the local dynamics of
the infections within that area. In this work, we modeled the
spread of the COVID-19 virus as a function of the population density in a specific surface. The application of periodic
boundary conditions means that we have an infinite number of
identical systems; each system is a replica of the others. I.e.,
if a person leaves the simulation surface on one side, an identical person will enter to the surface from the other side. The
population density is a function of the number of households
in a certain area since it is crucial to distinguish between the
infection among household and non-household contacts16 .
A.

Parameterization of the model

We have identified a list of parameters and corresponding
values that describe the population and the infection’s kinetics. This list is obviously partial, but it could be quite easily
extended.
1. The probability of developing symptoms over time t.
This is described by a Gaussian peaked at t¯ = 5 days
and with standard deviation σt = 1 day.
2. The number of effective households, denoted by N.
3. The fraction of "silent carriers," which have no symptoms (AKA asymptomatic) but can infect other people. Their fraction in the population is denoted by:
asilent , and the probability of transmitting the infection
has been set to 0.5.

infection has not been detected yet, and the population walks
freely without any restrictions. In some of the simulations, we
"force" sick people with symptoms to keep 8 meters (i.e., stay
at home) after day 14. This restriction reduces the probability
of the non-household infection.
B.

Population dynamics

Our model is based on the principles of Brownian motion,
such that for each day the population position (R) and displacement (∆R) are given by:
R → R + ∆R ,
p
where ∆R = ∆x2 + ∆y2 is distributed normally:


1
∆x2 + ∆y2
P[∆R] = 2 2 exp −
,
2π σR
2σR2

where ∆x (∆y) is displacement in the x-(y-) direction and σR2 ,
the variance, is a function of the diffusion constant, D:
σR2 = 2Dt ,

(2)

where t=1 day. For a Brownian motion the diffusion coefficient, D, would be related to the temperature, T , using the
Einstein relation:
D = µkB T ,

(3)

where µ is defined as the mobility, kB is Boltzmann’s constant and T is the absolute temperature. By fixing T = 1, the
diffusion coefficient would be directly related to the mobility. Still, it is interesting to notice that the mobility could, in
principle, be directly interpreted as a sort of thermal parameter. In our model, the time period when the population is allowed to move without restrictions is characterized by a large
value of σR , (namely σhigh = 500 meter), i.e. high temperature, while a lockdown is characterized by a lower σR , (here
σlow =.5 × 100.5 meter, i.e., low temperature. Thus, one can
consider the infection rate problem in terms of heating/cooling
of the system.
C.

The infection probability

The core of the model, which contains most of the epidemiological data, is the probability for the ith healthy person to become sick. We assume that for each contact with
another infected person, this process can be described by
a Gaussian function of the distance, weighted with a factor that parametrizes the sick person’s conditions and social
interaction.17

4. Each sick person is considered contagious between the
3rd and the 7th day.
Simulations are started with a single infected person (the zero
patient). In some runs, infections from an unknown source
(a healthy person becomes sick without interaction with a
known sick person) are allowed. For the first 14 days, the

(1)

!

nsick

Pi =int

∑ Pi j + ξ

=

j=1

(
int

"

#
)
(ri − r j )2
∑ exp 2σr2 × f (asilent , nout ) + ξ
j=1

nsick

(4)

3
A very recent HKU hamster research shows that by
wearing a proper mask, the infection probability can be
reduced by a factor of 319 . Therefore, given that not
all the population wears a mask properly, and the findings of Ref.20 , we estimated the probability of infection when wearing masks 1.4 times lower than without
masks.

where:
• ri (xi , yi ) is the location of the ith healthy person and
r j (x j , y j ) is the location of the jth sick person, so
|ri − r j | is the distance between them.
• nsick is the total number of sick people in the area.
• σr is the standard deviation (here σr = 2.4 meters) since
recent studies show that even a slight breeze can drive
droplets arising from a human cough over more than 6
meters 6 .
• f (asilent , nout ) is a function that considers the social activity of the sick person and whether he has symptoms,
which affects the spread of the virus outside the house.
In our model, we estimate that infection by asymptomatic people is approximately 50% lower than patients with symptoms.
• ξ is a random number between 0 and 1, which allows
us to consider some violation of the lockdown and the
fact that even during a full lockdown, people continue
going out of their homes to buy groceries, take a walk,
etc.

Days 1-14 are the heating phase of the system. Thus, we expect the fastest increase in the number of patients these days.
For days 15-50, we predict a phase transition from a hot system to a colder system (almost solid-like), which will reduce
the infection rate. The system phase on days 51-200 is a result
of the different models such that:
1. Model 1: Days 51-200: no restrictions.
2. Model 2: Days 51-200: cycles of one week with no
restrictions and one week of full lockdown.
3. Model 3: Days 51-200: cycles of one week with no
restrictions and two weeks of full lockdown.
Each model was tested with the following constraints:
• with and without moderate social distancing (SD) on
days 51-200;

Also, we are assuming that each sick person will infect some
of his household members. Since the latest estimates are that
household infections are ∼ 15% from the known cases (without lockdown,18 ), we estimated that the number of household
infections is are of uniformly distributed between 0 and 3.
This number is constant for all the simulations and does not
depend on the population density, or the lockdown constrain.
III.

LOCKDOWN STRATEGIES

To date, lockdown is still being imposed in many countries
to reduce R0 and, as a result, to increase Td , the doubling contagion time. It still remains an option if the disease starts
spreading again without control, or if new local outbreaks
should appear. In our work, we tested three different types
of lockdown strategies. This choice is just representative of
a potentially much broader set of options that could be analyzed using this method simply varying the corresponding
parameters, and with a minimal computational cost. For all
the models presented in this paper we assumed the following
conditions:
• Days 1-14: no restrictions.
• Days 15-50: full lockdown with moderate social distancing (SD), i.e., people are forced to keep 3 meters
from each other.
• Days 51-200: people must wear face-masks so that the
daily infection probability (for the non-household members) is reduced to:
(
"
#
)
nsick
(ri − r j )2
int ∑ 0.7 × exp
× f (asilent , nout ) + ξ
(5)
2σr2
j=1

• with and without infection from unknown sources (infected people not traceable to any known infection
chain);
• with and without strict SD for symptomatic patients after the 14th day (sick people with symptoms are forced
to keep 8 meters from healthy people, equivalent to
strict home isolation).
Hence, for each population density, N, we have 24 different
simulations that will use later to assess both SD and lockdown
on the number of cases as a function of time.
IV.

RESULTS

For COVID-19 epidemics, the observed values of R0 ,
suggest that each infection directly generates 2 − 4 more
infections in the absence of countermeasures like social
distancing9,21 . The doubling time, Td , is a function of R0 22 ,
such that the higher R0 , the lower Td . In particular, Td = 2.5
days corresponds to R0 =4.
In our model, both R0 and Td are directly obtained from
the simulation and not pre-assumed. Figure 1 presents the
doubling time, Td as a function of the effective density, N. We
have calculated the percentage of active cases from the total
population in the first 14 days for each N. The calculation
was performed in the heating phase only, since there are no
restrictions. This allows for a sort of calibration of the model
to encompass the intrinsic features of the disease.
Figure 1 shows that Td is a decreasing function of the density. It was shown in Ref.22 that for low R0 (1 < R0 < 1.5),
the doubling time spans between 12 < Td < 20 days, in contrast to high R0 (3.5 < R0 < 4), where Td is≈ 2.5 days, where

4
lim Td ≈ 1.5 days. The significant difference between high

N→∞

FIG. 1. The doubling time, Td of the percentage of active cases from
the total population in the first 14 days as the function of the population density, N (dotes). The solid line marks the Td = 2.5 days value,
corresponding to R0 = 4.

The various probability densities are sampled by means of
standard techniques, in the spirit of a kinetic Monte-Carlo
simulation, for predicting the number of Coronavirus cases
as a function of time for different lockdown models and external constraints. Each case has been run 100 times (Note that
each run starts with the same initial condition, only one sick
person. Since the Monte Carlo algorithm is based on random
numbers, we expect that every run will yield slightly different results. Repeating the simulation for 100 separated runs
evaluates the algorithm’s robustness). Results have been averaged and analyzed to determine the statistical error. Figure 2
shows our numerical results for the different simulations for
the case of R0 = 4 in the first 14 days. The upper (lower)
panels of Figure 2 are the numerical result without (with) unknown sources. In panels (b) and (d), the numerical results
are for the case that sick people with symptoms must keep 8
meters from healthy people (strict SD).
As previously pointed out, the numerical results, presented
in Figure 2, do not make any assumption on the doubling time,
Td , but only on some observed features of the disease. Even
though it is challenging to model each Coronavirus infected
area’s specific characters, some characteristics are common to
all simulations. The first 50 days have the same constraintsno restriction from the first day up to day 14 and a full lockdown from day 15 until day 50. Our numerical results show
that even for R0 = 4, forcing a lockdown after 14 days from
the first case, controls the spread of the Coronavirus in a way
that the peak number of cases occurs on day 24, while the rate
of increase in the number of cases starts decreasing as of the
15th day. Also, since the average time for recovery is 14 day
(though up 40 days for very severe cases), and the typical in-

and low R0 is reflected in our calculations by a high error for
high doubling times, which are compatible with low population densities.
The relation between Td and R0 as shown in Fig. 1 means
that attempting to describe a wide area’s current situation by
means of some average value of R0 might be highly unappropriated. On the other hand, the spread of the disease over
smaller, more homogeneous areas in which the population
shares a certain degree of mobility and social behavior would
be quite well described by this parameter.
To give an example, a value of Td ≈ 2.5, corresponding to
R0 = 4, in the current model would correspond to N = 1.1·104
households per squared kilometer. While this might appear
an unreasonably high density for an average urban context,
it is still much lower than the average density in kindergartens, university classrooms, crowded social, religious or
sports events, etc. Hence, for the next subsection, we will consider the value of N = 1.1 · 104 as representative of potentially
dangerous situations present daily before the beginning of the
pandemics. This will also show how different constraints affect the initial R0 = 4, which is the highest estimation for R0
without restrictions.

fection period ranges from the 3rd day until the 7th day, the
decreasing rate of the number of active cases during the lockdown is much slower than the increasing rate of the number of
active cases without restrictions (as seen in various countries
around the world15 ). Hence, we find that for an initial heating period of 14 days, the necessary lockdown period (i.e., the
cooling time) required to reduce the number of active cases is
much longer than 14 days.
As of today, many countries examine different exit strategies due to the decreased number of active cases. In our simulations, we have tested several a few such exit strategies using
different constraints. All of our numerical results indicate that
the isolation of symptomatic patients (strict social distancing,
panels (b) and (d) of Figure 2) is effective and can reduce the
peak number of active cases by about a factor two without further restrictions, and up to a factor of 10 for model 3. Also,
from Figure 2, we find that moderate social distancing can reduce the number of active cases, but never as effectively as
home isolation of symptomatic patients.

Figure 3 is an inset of Figure 2 (c). From Figure 3 is it easy
to see the effect of the cyclic no-restrictions/lockdown pattern.
In principle, since the no-restriction/lockdown pattern is periodic in time, we would expect that the number of active cases
as a function of time will have the same periodicity. For all the
three models, there are no restrictions from day 51 until day
57 (green area, A). From day 58 until day 64 (red area, B),
we impose lockdown in models 2 and 3, which is reflected in
a more moderate increase in the number of active cases than
that of days 51 until 57. From day 65 until day 72 (yellow

5

FIG. 2. Numerical results for the percentage of active cases from the total population for the case of infection. The upper panels (a) and (b)
present the numerical result for infection without unknown sources, while the lower panels (c) and (d) show the numerical result for infection
with unknown sources. For both cases, in the left panels (b and d), the numerical results are for the case that sick people with symptoms
must keep 8 meters from healthy people (strict SD). For all panels, the solid (dotted) line is model 1 with (without) moderate social distancing
(SD). The long (short) dashed line is model 2 with (without) moderate SD, while the long (short) dotted-dashed line is model 3 with (without)
moderate SD. The dashed vertical line is located on day 15, the first day of the lockdown. Errorbars in panel (a) originate from the simulation’s
rmsd, computed from the 100 different samples generated to compute each curve. On the other curves, the uncertainty is similar and is omitted
for improving the readability of the figures.

area, C), there is still full lockdown in model 3, while there are
no restrictions in models 1 and 2. From Figure 3 it is easy to
see that the increased effectiveness of model 3 in reducing the
number of active cases originates from the fact that, since it
takes more than a week to cool the system (which is a result of
the infection period) , a week-week strategy cannot cause significant cooling of the system. An effective exit strategy might
be based on time cycles, must include at least ten days of lock-

down (see, for example, Ref .9 ). Also, one can use different
(no time based) no-restorations/lockdown patterns such that
presented in Refs.23,24 . The lockdown strategies presented in
Refs.23,24 are not time-dependent, in contract, they are based
on optimization of a fixed number of infected/expired people
over time. In general, our model can also be used for building these kinds of no-restrictions/lockdown pattern, for each
population density.

In Figure 4 we present our numerical results for a 4/10 days
cyclic exit strategy for different σlow . Similar to Figure 2, also
here, the upper (lower) panels of Figure 2 are the numerical
result without (with) unknown sources. For both cases, in the
left panels (b and d), the numerical results are for the case that
sick people with symptoms must keep 8 meters from healthy
people (strict SD).
Figure 4 shows that, as predicted, for instance, in Ref.9 , a
4/10 days cyclic exit strategy is useful for controlling the in-

fection rate accompanied by home isolation of symptomatic
patients. The compression between Figure 2 and Figure 4
indicates that although the maximal percentage of the active
case is similar for both the week/two-weeks pattern and the
4/10 pattern, there are differences between the two patterns.
For the 4/10 pattern, this cyclic pattern induces a moderate
increase in the percentage of active cases but without a local
decrease in the number of patients until the peak on the 130th
day. In contrast, for the case of the week/two-weeks pattern,

6

FIG. 3. Inset of Figure 2 (c) for the case of infection with additional
unknown sources. The solid (dotted) line is model 1 with (without)
social distancing (SD). The long (short) dashed line is model 2 with
(without) SD, while the long (short) dotted-dashed line is model 3
with (without) SD.

the two-weeks lockdown will cause a local decrease in the
percentage of active cases and a more steep increase in the
percentage of active cases during the no-restrictions week accomplished by a peak in the percentage of active cases on the
110th days. Hence, the compression between the two patterns
implies that a cyclic no-restrictions/lockdown pattern can control the spread of the epidemic along with daily life, even for
an initial doubling time of 2.5 days.
V.

COMPARISON WITH REAL DATA (SWEDEN)

From the beginning of March 2020, Sweden takes a different approach from the rest of the world by not imposing
a policy of lockdown on its citizens. Therefore, it is of interest to examine the rate of an increase in the total number
of active cases in Sweden from the beginning of March till
today15 , compared to our model under the assumption of no
restrictions. In Figure 5, we show the total number of active
cases in Sweden (normalized) from the 100th case until today, in comparison to our predictions for a population density
of N = 3500 households. Note that this population density is
much more diluted than the population density that was used
for the previous simulations, which may explain the slow rate
of increase of virus spread, even when there are no limits. Figure 5 shows that our model can predict the spread of the virus
for different societies, reflected with varying densities of population.
VI.

CONCLUSIONS

This paper presented a kinetic Monte-Carlo algorithm for
modeling different scenarios of the infection rate of the novel
Coronavirus disease. This model’s main feature lies in its extreme flexibility and in the fact that the parameter R0 is obtained from the simulation and not pre-assumed. It can rather

be used, in principle, as a way to better tune up the other parameters based on the post-processing of clinical and epidemiological data.
Although it is challenging to model the specific characters
of each Coronavirus infected area, our results show that strict
social distancing and a cyclic time pattern might help to keep
the infection rate under control over a long period, even for
an intrinsic doubling time of 2.5 days and in the presence of
infection from unknown sources. Our ability to model and
stand for differences between the different lockdown patterns
sharpens the need for physical and mathematical models that
allow examining different ways to reduce the spread of the
epidemic. From the physical point of view, effective strategies for controlling the infection rate of a specific area should
lower its effective temperature as much as possible by keeping
social distancing and avoiding creating hot spots such as those
related to high concentrations of people on a daily basis.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank R. Milo and his group at Weizmann Institute of
Science for sharing their epidemiological data and for fruitful
discussions.
The data that support the findings of this study are available
from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
1 R.

Blossey, Computational biology: A statistical mechanics perspective
(CRC Press, 2019).
2 S. Buldyrev, N. Dokholyan, A. Goldberger, S. Havlin, C.-K. Peng, H. Stanley, and G. Viswanathan, “Analysis of dna sequences using methods of
statistical physics,” Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications
249, 430–438 (1998).
3 H. Stanley, S. Buldyrev, A. Goldberger, Z. Goldberger, S. Havlin, R. N.
Mantegna, S. Ossadnik, C.-K. Peng, and M. Simons, “Statistical mechanics in biology: how ubiquitous are long-range correlations?” Physica A:
Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 205, 214–253 (1994).
4 C. Sohrabi, Z. Alsafi, N. O’Neill, M. Khan, A. Kerwan, A. Al-Jabir, C. Iosifidis, and R. Agha, “World health organization declares global emergency:
A review of the 2019 novel coronavirus (covid-19),” International Journal
of Surgery 76, 71 – 76 (2020).
5 R. Bhardwaj and A. Agrawal, “Likelihood of survival of coronavirus in
a respiratory droplet deposited on a solid surface,” Physics of Fluids 32,
061704 (2020), https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0012009.
6 T. Dbouk and D. Drikakis, “On coughing and airborne droplet
transmission to humans,” Physics of Fluids 32, 053310 (2020),
https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0011960.
7 N. van Doremalen, T. Bushmaker, D. H. Morris, M. G. Holbrook,
A. Gamble, B. N. Williamson, A. Tamin, J. L. Harcourt, N. J. Thornburg, S. I. Gerber, J. O. Lloyd-Smith, E. de Wit, and V. J. Munster, “Aerosol and surface stability of sars-cov-2 as compared with
sars-cov-1,” New England Journal of Medicine 382, 1564–1567 (2020),
https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMc2004973.
8 S. Chaudhuri, S. Basu, P. Kabi, V. R. Unni, and A. Saha, “Modeling the
role of respiratory droplets in covid-19 type pandemics,” Physics of Fluids
32, 063309 (2020), https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0015984.
9 O. Karin, Y. M. Bar-On, T. Milo, I. Katzir, A. Mayo, Y. Korem, B. Dudovich, E. Yashiv, A. J. Zehavi, N. Davidovich, et al., “Adaptive cyclic exit
strategies from lockdown to suppress covid-19 and allow economic activity,” medRxiv (2020).
10 K. Prem, Y. Liu, T. W. Russell, A. J. Kucharski, R. M. Eggo, N. Davies,
S. Flasche, S. Clifford, C. A. Pearson, J. D. Munday, et al., “The effect
of control strategies to reduce social mixing on outcomes of the covid-19
epidemic in wuhan, china: a modelling study,” The Lancet Public Health
(2020).

7

FIG. 4. Numerical results for the percentage of active cases from the total population for the case of infection. The upper panels (a) and (b)
present the numerical result for infection without unknown sources, while the lower panels (c) and (d) present the numerical result for infection
with unknown sources. For both cases, in panels (b) and (d), the numerical results are for the case that sick people with symptoms must keep
8 meters from healthy people (strict SD). For all panels the solid (dotted) line is for σlow = 0.5 × 100.1 meters with (without) moderate social
distancing (SD). The long (short) dashed line is for σlow = 0.5 × 100.3 meters with (without) moderate SD, while the long (short) dotted-dashed
line is for σlow = 0.5 × 100.4 with (without) moderate SD.

12 S. Bliznashki, “A bayesian logistic growth model for the spread of covid-19

in new york,” medRxiv (2020).
Olsson, “The ongoing covid-19 epidemic curves indicate initial point
spread in china with log-normal distribution of new cases per day with a
predictable last date of the outbreak,” (2020).
14 Y. M. Bar-On, A. Flamholz, R. Phillips, and R. Milo, “Sars-cov-2 (covid19) by the numbers,” eLife 9, e57309 (2020).
15 https://www.endcoronavirus.org/countries.
16 W. Li, B. Zhang, J. Lu, S. Liu, Z. Chang, P. Cao, X. Liu, P. Zhang,
Y. Ling, K. Tao, and J. Chen, “The characteristics of household
transmission of COVID-19,” Clinical Infectious Diseases
(2020),
10.1093/cid/ciaa450, ciaa450, https://academic.oup.com/cid/advancearticle-pdf/doi/10.1093/cid/ciaa450/33097408/ciaa450.pdf.
17 Since the infection probability is a function of the absolute value of the
distance between two people, and the standard deviation, several distributions such as a Gaussian distribution and a Lorentzian distribution could
serve for modeling the infection probability under the assumption that the
simulation’s dynamics dependents on σr and not on the distribution’s tail.
The choice of Gaussian distribution was since this is the typical distribution
for thermal systems approaches for equilibrium, e.g., Maxwell Boltzmann
distribution.
18 Q.-L. Jing, M.-J. Liu, J. Yuan, Z.-B. Zhang, A.-R. Zhang, N. E. Dean,
L. Luo, M.-M. Ma, I. Longini, E. Kenah, et al., “Household secondary
attack rate of covid-19 and associated determinants,” medRxiv (2020).
19 “Hku hamster research shows masks effective in preventing covid-19 transmission - fight covid,” (2020).
20 T. Dbouk and D. Drikakis, “On respiratory droplets and face masks,”
Physics of Fluids 32, 063303 (2020), https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0015044.
21 S. Flaxman, S. Mishra, A. Gandy, H. Unwin, H. Coupland, T. Mellan,
13 S.

FIG. 5. The total number of active cases in Sweden (normalized)
from the 100th case until today (dotes). The solid line is our prediction for the spreading of the Coronavirus for a population density of
N = 3500 households.

11 S.

Zhao and H. Chen, “Modeling the epidemic dynamics and control of
covid-19 outbreak in china,” Quantitative Biology , 1–9 (2020).

8
H. Zhu, T. Berah, J. Eaton, P. Perez Guzman, et al., “Report 13: Estimating
the number of infections and the impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions on covid-19 in 11 european countries,” (2020).
22 A. D. Visscher, “A covid-19 epidemiological model for community and
policy maker use,” arXiv 2003.08824 (2020).
23 A. Chandak, D. Dey, B. Mukhoty, and P. Kar, “Epidemiologically and

socio-economically optimal policies via bayesian optimization,” Trans Indian Natl. Acad. Eng (2020).
24 H. Khadilkar, T. Ganu, and D. P. Seetharam, “Optimising lockdown policies for epidemic control using reinforcement learning,” Trans Indian Natl.
Acad. Eng (2020).

