1

arXiv:2005.12446v1 [q-bio.PE] 26 May 2020

COVID-19 and the Social Distancing Paradox:
dangers and solutions
Massimo Marchiori1,2
1
University of Padua
Via Trieste 63, 35121 Padova, Italy
2
European Institute for Science, Media and Democracy
Boulevard Louis Schmidt 24, 1040 Brussels, Belgium
Email: massimo.marchiori@unipd.it

ABSTRACT
Background
Without proven effect treatments and vaccines, Social Distancing is the key protection factor against COVID-19.
Social distancing alone should have been enough to protect again the virus, yet things have gone very differently,
with a big mismatch between theory and practice. What are the reasons? A big problem is that there is no actual
social distancing data, and the corresponding people behavior in a pandemic is unknown. We collect the world-first
dataset on social distancing during the COVID-19 outbreak, so to see for the first time how people really implement
social distancing, identify dangers of the current situation, and find solutions against this and future pandemics.
Methods
Using a sensor-based “social distancing belt” we collected social distance data from people in Italy for over two
months during the most critical COVID-19 outbreak. Additionally, we investigated if and how wearing various
Personal Protection Equipment, like masks, influences social distancing.
Results
Without masks, people adopt a counter-intuitively dangerous strategy, a paradox that could explain the relative lack
of effectiveness of social distancing. Using masks radically changes the situation, breaking the paradoxical behavior
and leading to a safe social distance behavior. In shortage of masks, DIY (Do It Yourself) masks can also be used:
even without filtering protection, they provide social distancing protection. Goggles should be recommended for
general use, as they give an extra powerful safety boost. Generic Public Health policies and media campaigns do
not work well on social distancing: explicit focus on the behavioral problems of necessary mobility are needed.

2

INTRODUCTION
The recent COVID-19 pandemic has caught many
governments off-guard, not only for the rapid initial
spread of the virus, but more importantly for the unexpected growth of the contagion, even in presence of
safety protocols. One might wonder what are in fact
the main reasons for such situation. On the one hand,
we have various recommendations issued by the World
Health Organization (WHO) and by local authorities to
limit the spreading of the virus: such measures have
grown tighter with the diffusion of the contagion. On the
other hand, we have the companion power of prediction
models that should have also given precise indications in
this battle against the virus. Both of these actions, theory
and practice combined, should have provided for a rapid
containment of the virus and a quick return to a normal
life.
In reality, things have gone in a very different way.
The strict recommendations progressively enforced by
authorities to limit sociality, most notably lock-down
and social distancing, have in fact proved surprisingly
ineffective when compared to their theoretical impact.
A sufficiently large social distancing should alone be a
formidable protection measure 1;2;3 , but this has not been
the case, as shown by the contagion growth data in many
countries.
Alongside, the mathematical models that should have
offered guidance against the virus have faced big difficulties to provide precise predictions and consequent
fine insights on how to shape the best containment
strategy 4;5 .
Why is it so? Regarding public health measures,
obviously there has been some mismatch between theory
and practice, between the dictated recommendations and
the actual behavior of the people. This mismatch can also
explain the difficulties encountered in designing models,
given that precise data are essential to understand the
logic governing the spreading of the virus, whereas so far
we have been dealing with very limited datasets collected
a posteriori. For instance, COVID-19 data collected and
used in Italy both by government and local authorities
to make decisions, and by researchers to build predictive
models, are accessible in a GitHub repository 6 containing classic a posteriori data like for example the number
of people infected, hospitalized or dead in regions and
provinces. These kinds of data are certainly essential
and helpful, but they do not provide direct insights on
the actual causes of the development. What we miss is
precise data on the key behavior of people during the
infection, so to understand the underlying mechanics,

build causal models with very low error margins, and
guide effective public health policies.
In this research we tackle this problem by addressing
the key component of social distancing. For the first time,
we collect real data on social distancing in a pandemic
situation, analyze the actual shape of social distancing
as performed by people, identify a paradoxical default
behavior of social distancing that can explain the dangerous spread of COVID-19, and provide corresponding
functional actions that can be taken to help against this
and future pandemics.
METHODS
Starting from extensive experience in sensor-based
equipment and smart city solutions (for instance in
city environments 7;8;9;10 , shopping malls 11;12 , garbage
collection 13;14 and more 15 ), we have designed and built
a sensor-equipped Social Distancing belt, a special belt
augmented with hidden sensor boxes allowing to measure social distances. The sensor boxes are concealed so
to appear as normal belt pouches, therefore allowing for
discrete and unnoticed operation. A social distancing box
relies on a hardware core composed by an ATMEGA
328P compatible micro-controller, custom wired and
endowed with Real Time Clock (RTC) capabilities via a
DS1338 chip, MicroSD card module for storage, and
an ultrasonic distance sensor HY-SRF05 operating at
40KhZ. Main power is provided by 20000mAh rechargeable power banks, whereas a common 3V CR2032 coin
cell battery powers the RTC component. In order to avoid
spurious readings, and rule out cases like for instance
couples, parents with children, people with dogs and so
on (all cases that obviously alter the social distancing
behavior and available room) the system is in standby
and social distancing measures can be activated and
deactivated via an on/off switch. Temporal reasoning
programmed in the micro-controller deals with cases of
people quickly passing one by another (local minima in
the social distance curve are extracted, using threshold
values), so freeing the operator from dealing with continuous on/off cycles: during normal operation the switch is
used only to rule out the unwanted cases (or optionally to
save energy when no person is nearby). As said before,
the whole assembly is concealed so no wiring or other
electronic material actually shows up, so externally the
apparatus looks like a normal belt with some pouches.
Using the belt, we have proceeded to collect social
distance information in the Venice metropolitan area
(Italy) during the most critical period of the COVID-19
pandemic: data collection has taken place uninterruptedly for a period of over 2 months, from February 24 to

3

Fig. 1: Paradoxical Social Distancing behavior without a mask during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Distribution histogram of social distancing in 163cm sidewalks. µ is the average social distance, Max is the
maximum distance obtainable when staying within the sidewalk.

gles
5) Goggles DIY-masked case: like the third (DIYmasked) case, again with the operator additionally
wearing goggles.

April 29, 2020.
Even during the lock-down periods, people are still
allowed to go out for essential purposes and consequent
necessary mobility, like going shopping for food. In
Italy for instance using public transportation has been
actively discouraged, asking people to walk instead. So,
we have targeted focus points where social distancing is
crucially important, and where data can be continuously
collected even during the worst periods of a pandemic,
like pedestrian sidewalks and food shops.
In this first preprint we present the result collected by
monitoring sidewalks. In order to see what happens in
various situations we have selected sidewalks of different
widths: 163cm, 175cm and 222cm. The belt operator
always stays on one side of the sidewalk, maximizing the
distance from another person. All the selected sidewalks
also allow to temporarily step out (being parallel to a
green area or to a bicycle path): this way we can measure
if the pressure of social distancing in the pandemic
makes people gain further distance when approaching
someone. In fact, in 167cm and 175cm sidewalks the
only way to get the recommended minimum distance of 1
meter is to step out (or alternatively to slide sideways 16 ).
For every chosen sidewalk we study social distancing
in five different cases:

The first case allows to determine the default behavior
of people in a pandemic. The second and third case
allows to check whether visual factors (wearing a mask)
affect social distancing. Given the shortage of protective
masks experienced in many countries, we also test DIY
(Do It Yourself) masks, stressing their visual component:
the mask has practically no protection value but it is
purposely rough (made up by a piece of baking paper),
so to be visually very noticeable as a bad home-made
patch. The last two cases allow to verify whether goggles
for eye protection (equipment not actually included in
recommended public guidelines) further changes common social distancing behavior during a pandemic.
For the sake of readability, in this preprint we include
graphics for the 163cm case, granted that the 175cm and
222cm cases exhibit the same behaviour.

1) Unmasked case: the operator does not wear a mask
2) Masked case: the operator wears a surgical mask
3) DIY-masked case: the operator wears a DIY (Do
It Yourself) mask
4) Goggles masked case: like the second (masked)
case, with the operator additionally wearing gog-

Figure 1 shows the histogram distribution of social
distances, helping to identify what kind of pattern people
follow. The plot shows also the average social distance
µ (in this case, 29.4cm) and the available Max space
(maximum social distance available while staying on the
sidewalk). We can see that in this case all people spatially

RESULTS
The Unmasked Case

4

distribute within the maximum width (so, not stepping
out of the sidewalk).
The first important fact to notice is that the average
social distance behavior does not work as we would
expect during such a threatening pandemic. A safe social
distance strategy would dictate people to use all the
space at their disposal, therefore maximizing distance
and having a distribution strongly skewed towards the
Max. Instead, what happens is a completely paradoxical
situation: not only people do not use this strategy, but
actually follow an anomalous normal-like distribution
which is skewed more towards the other person in the
sidewalk (or in fact, towards the central area of the
sidewalk). So, surprisingly, people tend to stay closer
to another passing person rather than stay far away.
This highly dangerous behavior is also consistent among
different widths (175cm and 222cm).
This paradoxical behavior implies that requiring social
distancing alone not only does not work well for sidewalks but actually maintains very dangerous proximity
situations. Favoring walks instead of public transportation therefore does not automatically produce a safer
social environment.
The Masked Case
The results of the second scenario (operator wearing a
mask) are shown in the left panel of Figure 2 for 163cm
sidewalks. The introduction of a mask provokes a radical
change of social distancing, making it grow (the average
passes from 29.4cm to 58.42cm) and also modifying the
overall distribution. Whereas in the unmasked case we
had a distribution skewed towards the operator, in this
scenario the paradox disappears, and the peak is instead
farther away. Last but not least, we can observe an
interesting phenomenon: the distribution actually extends
beyond the Max limit, passing from 58.8cm of the
unmasked case to 119.5cm. This behavior is consistent
in all the other sidewalks (175cm and 222cm).
The DIY-Masked Case
Figure 2 (right panel) shows what happens when
wearing a DIY mask (163cm sidewalks). The situation
is in all similar to the masked case: the distribution is
again skewed in the same asymmetrical way, with people
distancing beyond the sidewalk max width. The only
notable difference is the average distance and overall
width of the distribution, which grows even more than
in the Masked case: average grows to 69.02cm and
the whole distribution extends up to over 150cm of
social distance. Again, this behavior is consistent among
differently sized sidewalks (175cm and 222cm).

The Goggles Masked Case
Figure 3 (left panel) shows what happens in 163cm
sidewalks when we add goggles to masks. We can see
that the effect is similar to what happened with DIY
masks: the distribution skews further to bigger social
distances. In fact, this extra distance boost is bigger than
what obtained with a DIY mask, as the average social
distance grows to 79.79cm. Again, the effect is consistent
along all sidewalks (175cm and 222cm).
The Goggles DIY-Masked Case
The last case is the combination of goggles and
DIY masks, shown in Figure 3 (right panel) for 163cm
sidewalks. The effect is similar to the goggles masked
case: adding goggles provides an extra social distance
boost. Interestingly, this boost is cumulatively added on
top of that coming from the DIY mask. In the 163cm
case the average social distance grows to 92.39cm and
similar boosts are obtained for all the other sidewalks
(175cm and 222cm).
Temporal Evolution during the COVID-19 Pandemic
Alongside the spread of the virus, the Italian government issued a series of law decrees progressively setting
more and more restrictions.
On the 30th of January 2020 WHO declared COVID19 an international health emergency. The situation in
Italy apparently remained good until late February when,
given the outbreak of the virus, the Italian government
reacted with some law decrees stating safety rules for
the population. In parallel with the subsequent growth of
the infection, the government (in a paradigmatic strategy
of incremental national interventions followed by many
other states) reacted with further decrees, progressively
restricting social movements, aggregation places and
workplaces. Among the various national decrees issued
to prevent COVID-19, we can mark three main dates
(dubbed N1, N2, N3 for later reference):
• N1 (March 1): First social distancing enforcement 17 (dividing Italy into “red”, “yellow” and
“red” zones). This measure implemented for the
Veneto region a partial lockdown (schools closed,
1-meter social distancing in restaurants and bars)
• N2 (March 8): Partial lockdown extended to all
Italy, 1-meter social distancing recommended also
outdoors 18
• N3 (March 11): Full lockdown 19 , only essential
movements allowed.
Additionally, on March 9 the government also
launched a continuative massive media campaign dubbed

5

Fig. 2: Social Distancing difference when wearing masks during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Left panel compares wearing a mask to the unmasked case, right panel wearing a DIY mask (163cm sidewalks).

Fig. 3: Social Distancing difference when wearing goggles and masks during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Left panel compares wearing goggles and mask to the unmasked case, right panel wearing goggles and a DIY
mask (163cm sidewalks).

#Iorestoacasa (“#Istayathome”), using celebrities from
various fields to promote the public health recommendations by asking people to stay at home 20 .
The Veneto region has been an even more interesting
case given that, besides national laws, the regional government has introduced unique additional safety measures. The most notable regional ordinances are three,
setting additional public health rules in the following
dates (dubbed R1, R2, R3):
• R1 (March 21): Closing all shops on Sundays and
enforcing a strict rule about the max distance (200
meters from home) allowed for walking without a
compelling reason 21

R2 (April 4): Compulsory masks in all shops 22
• R3 (April 14): Compulsory masks outdoor, end of
the 200 meters distance restriction 23
The outcome of all these laws has been relatively disappointing: government restrictions and media outreach
did not substantially change the situation, leading to a
pandemic that has kept the whole Italian country stalled
for months.
We now analyze how all these various health policies impacted social distancing. Figure 4 shows the
temporal evolution of social distancing during the pandemic, allowing to see the effects of national decrees
(N1, N2, N3), the media campaign (M) and regional
•

6

ordinances (R1, R2, R3). As we can see, there has
been no noticeable difference: social distancing behavior over time has shown remarkable consistency. For
instance, checking on the effect of the media campaign we find that in the unmasked case the average
social distancing changed only by -1.8cm from the
week before to the next week. Similar small differences
also occurred in the masked (+3.6cm), DIY-masked
(+1.6cm), goggles masked (+0.9cm) and goggles DIYmasked (+0.7cm) cases. All these small differences are
compatible with normal data fluctuations, as substantiated by the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test: social distancing
continues to follow the same distributions even after the
campaign (the p-values for the five cases are 0.59, 0.82,
0.70, 0.93, 0.85 respectively).
The same situation occurs for all the other (national
and regional) public health enforcements in all the other
sidewalk cases (175cm and 222cm).
DISCUSSION
The common behavior of Social Distancing exhibits a
paradoxical and very dangerous behavior, which could
explain the relative inefficiency of Social Distancing
alone to disable the virus spreading. The essence of this
paradox probably lies in the intrinsic social nature of our
human collective, that social component that makes us
aggregate and live in communities, so favoring social
versus anti-social behavior. This built-in behavior is
likely hard to alter, especially in everyday situations like
walking: consequently, this counter-intuitive behavior of
social distancing in the unmasked case is very dangerous
and it should be subject of special attention, being a
critical risk factor even in quarantine, due to necessary
mobility (people have to go out at least to grab food).
Limiting transportation mobility, like done in Italy, can
in fact aggravate this problem. Even worst, this risky
social behavior has been resilient to enforcement and
media campaigns, thus also explaining the inefficiency
of many public health measures against COVID-19.
A key strategy to get rid of the paradox and its danger
is to try to de-activate the built-in social rules of people,
by triggering an explicit counter-effect mechanism and
so turning unconscious social behavior into conscious
anti-social behavior. This safety trigger can be activated
via visual stimuli that remind of the danger of social
proximity, making people change their common dangerous behavior and implement a safer social distancing
strategy.
Wearing a mask instead triggers this sort of repulsive
effect, “pushing farther” people and the skew of the
distribution, changing their common behavior so to gain

social distance (even by stepping out of sidewalks). The
distance increases with patched DIY masks, confirming
the effect of a visual stimulus. Goggles act as “social
distance boosters”, again consistently with the hypothesis
that a visual stimulus signaling danger makes people
more sensible to safety and increases social distancing
protection. The good news is that the effectiveness of
this booster seems also consistent with time.
Consequently, a number of actions can be suggested
to help against the virus:
Wearing Masks. In the initial onset of the contagion,
masks were not recommended in Italy but only
to infected persons. Similar recommendations have
been given by many other countries 24;25;26;27 . Given
that masks lead people to implement social distancing in a safe way and also provide an overall
distance boost, usage of masks should be in fact be
always recommended to everyone in spite of their
protection effectiveness 28 and fitting troubles 29 .
Mask shortage and DIY. One of the biggest problems
many infected nations have been facing is availability of masks for all the population 30;31;32 , given
also their disposable nature. Lacking proper masks,
DIY ones can profitably be used: even with no
filtering protection, they provide social distancing
protection. So, DIY masks can help a lot in all those
situations where proper filtering masks are lacking
or in shortage. And even when masks are available,
adding a DIY mask on top still gives some extra
protection.
Goggles. Goggles are currently not recommended protection equipment for the population, but they
should, given they provide a significant additional
boost to social distance.
Social Distancing, Media and Education. Suggesting
or imposing Social Distancing, via media
campaigns or laws, does not work so well on
Social Distancing itself and leads to paradoxically
dangerous situations. Therefore, Public Health
campaigns should not focus only on limiting
mobility, asking people to stay at home and
providing generic social distancing rules, but
also explicitly focus on the key aspects and
behavioral problems of necessary mobility and
of the dangerous paradox lying within our social
nature.
The analyzed social distancing behavior can be also
used to obtain more precise prediction models (and
so, better countermeasures): social distancing cannot be
assumed as given, dictated by law or media, it’s much
more complex and also depends heavily on a so far

7

Fig. 4: Temporal evolution of Social Distancing during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Comparison of the daily average social distancing among all the five scenarios from February 24 to April 29, 2020
(163cm sidewalks). N1, N2 N3 mark the national decrees, R1, R2, R3 the regional ordinances and M the start of
the national media campaign. The unmasked case stops with R3 because of the obligation to wear masks outside.

neglected human factor, thus deserving specific attention
leading to a real social distancing science.
Last but not least, the findings are not only local to
the ongoing COVID-19 pandemics but are of general
interest in future pandemic situations, given the general
nature of the social distancing paradox, and the visual
nature of social distancing boosters.

[4]

[5]

REFERENCES
[1] J. K. Kelso, G. J. Milne, and H. Kelly, “Simulation
suggests that rapid activation of social distancing
can arrest epidemic development due to a novel
strain of influenza,” BMC public health, vol. 9, p.
117, Apr. 2009.
[2] F. Ahmed, N. Zviedrite, and A. Uzicanin, “Effectiveness of workplace social distancing measures
in reducing influenza transmission: A systematic
review,” BMC public health, vol. 18, no. 1, p. 518,
Apr. 2018.
[3] C. N. Ngonghala, E. Iboi, S. Eikenberry, M. Scotch,
C. R. MacIntyre, M. H. Bonds, and A. B. Gumel,
“Mathematical assessment of the impact of nonpharmaceutical interventions on curtailing the 2019

[6]

[7]

[8]

novel Coronavirus,” Mathematical Biosciences, p.
108364, Apr. 2020.
D. Adam, “Special report: The simulations driving
the world’s response to COVID-19,” Nature, vol.
580, no. 7803, pp. 316–318, Apr. 2020, https:
//www.nature.com/articles/d41586-020-01003-6.
N. P. Jewell, J. A. Lewnard, and B. L. Jewell,
“Caution Warranted: Using the Institute for Health
Metrics and Evaluation Model for Predicting
the Course of the COVID-19 Pandemic,”
Annals of Internal Medicine, Apr. 2020,
https://annals.org/aim/fullarticle/2764774/cautionwarranted-using-institute-health-metricsevaluation-model-predicting-course.
“COVID-19 Italy - Situation Monitoring,” Prime
Minister, Deparment of Civil Protection, May 2020,
https://github.com/pcm-dpc/COVID-19.
M. Marchiori, “Fix me up: Smart pathways status
detection,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on Networks, Computers and
Communications (ISNCC 2018). IEEE, 2018.
——, “Mind your step: Monitoring pedestrian sidewalks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Cyber, Physical and Social Computing (CPSCom 2018). IEEE, 2018.

8

[9] ——, “Safe cycle: Infrastructural control for bikers,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Intelligence and Computing
(PICom 2018). IEEE, 2018.
[10] ——, “Health zone monitoring: a passive approach,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Smart City Innovations (SCI 2019).
IEEE, 2019.
[11] ——, “The paradox of the shopping mall: Costumers flows and market efficiency,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE International Conference on Data
Science and Systems (DSS 2017). IEEE, 2017.
[12] ——, “Back to the bazaar: destructuring the data
mall,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Big Data Computing Service and
Applications (BigDataService 2018). IEEE, 2018.
[13] ——, “The smart cheap city: efficient waste management on a budget,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Smart City (SmartCity
2017). IEEE, 2017.
[14] ——, “Bins with eyes: towards a more efficient
urban ecosystem,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Green Computing and
Communications (GreenCom 2018). IEEE, 2018.
[15] ——, “Happy cows, happy milk: smart cows and
quality factors,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Smart
World Congress (SmartWorld 2019). IEEE, 2019.
[16] J. J. Fruin, Pedestrian Planning and Design. Elevator World, 1987.
[17] “Italian Prime Minister Decree Law, 1 March
2020,” https://www.gazzettaufficiale.it/eli/id/2020/
03/01/20A01381/sg, Mar. 2020.
[18] “Italian Prime Minister Decree Law, 8 March
2020,” https://www.gazzettaufficiale.it/eli/id/2020/
03/08/20A01522/sg, Mar. 2020.
[19] “Italian Prime Minister Decree Law, 11 March
2020,” https://www.gazzettaufficiale.it/eli/id/2020/
03/11/20A01605/sg, Mar. 2020.
[20] “Italian Ministry of Health, #Iorestoacasa: fallo
anche tu! (#Istayathome: you do it too!),”
http://www.salute.gov.it/portale/nuovocoronavirus/
dettaglioVideoNuovoCoronavirus.jsp?lingua=
italiano&menu=multimedia&p=video&id=2070,
Mar. 2020.
[21] “Veneto Region Ordinance n. 37, 20 March 2020,”
https://bur.regione.veneto.it/BurvServices/pubblica/
DettaglioOrdinanzaPGR.aspx?id=417294,
Mar.
2020.
[22] “Veneto Region Ordinance n. 45, 3 April 2020,”
https://bur.regione.veneto.it/BurvServices/pubblica/
DettaglioOrdinanzaPGR.aspx?id=417894,
Apr.
2020.

[23] “Veneto Region Ordinance n. 50, 13 April 2020,”
https://bur.regione.veneto.it/BurvServices/pubblica/
DettaglioOrdinanzaPGR.aspx?id=418285,
Apr.
2020.
[24] W. H. Organization, “Advice on the use of masks in
the community, during home care and in healthcare
settings in the context of the novel coronavirus
(2019-nCov) outbreak: Interim guidance, 29 January 2020,” World Health Organization, Technical
Document, 2020, https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/
10665/330987.
[25] C. C. Leung, T. H. Lam, and K. K. Cheng, “Mass
masking in the COVID-19 epidemic: People need
guidance,” The Lancet, vol. 395, no. 10228, p. 945,
Mar. 2020, https://www.thelancet.com/journals/
lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(20)30520-1/abstract.
[26] CDC, “Personal Protective Equipment: Questions
and Answers,” https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/
2019-ncov/hcp/respirator-use-faq.html, Feb. 2020.
[27] S. Feng, C. Shen, N. Xia, W. Song, M. Fan, and
B. J. Cowling, “Rational use of face masks in the
COVID-19 pandemic,” The Lancet Respiratory
Medicine, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 434–436, May 2020,
https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanres/article/
PIIS2213-2600(20)30134-X/abstract.
[28] T. Greenhalgh, M. B. Schmid, T. Czypionka,
D. Bassler, and L. Gruer, “Face masks for the
public during the covid-19 crisis,” BMJ, vol. 369,
Apr. 2020, https://www.bmj.com/content/369/bmj.
m1435.
[29] U. Pauli, S. Karlen, and K. Summermatter, “The
Importance of Fit-Testing Particulate Filtering
Facepiece Respirators!” Applied Biosafety, vol. 19,
no. 4, pp. 184–192, Dec. 2014, https://doi.org/10.
1177/153567601401900402.
[30] W. H. Organization, “Shortage of personal
protective
equipment
endangering
health
workers worldwide,” https://www.who.int/newsroom/detail/03-03-2020-shortage-of-personalprotective-equipment-endangering-health-workersworldwide.
[31] A. Sayburn, “Are UK doctors getting sufficient
protective equipment against covid-19?” BMJ, vol.
369, Apr. 2020, https://www.bmj.com/content/369/
bmj.m1297.
[32] U.S. Food and Drug Administration and Health,
“FAQs on Shortages of Surgical Masks and
Gowns During the COVID-19 Pandemic,” Thu,
05/07/2020 - 12:05, https://www.fda.gov/medicaldevices/personal-protective-equipment-infectioncontrol/faqs-shortages-surgical-masks-and-gownsduring-covid-19-pandemic.

