1

Critical Impact of Social Networks Infodemic on
Defeating Coronavirus COVID-19 Pandemic:
Twitter-Based Study and Research Directions
A. Mourad∗ , A. Srour∗ , H. Harmanani ∗ , C. Jenainati† , M. Arafeh∗
∗ Department

arXiv:2005.08820v1 [cs.SI] 18 May 2020

of Computer Science & Mathematics
† Department of English
Lebanese American University, Lebanon

Abstract—News creation and consumption has been changing
since the advent of social media. An estimated 2.95 billion
people in 2019 used social media worldwide. The widespread
of the Coronavirus COVID-19 resulted with a tsunami of
social media. Most platforms were used to transmit relevant
news, guidelines and precautions to people. According WHO,
uncontrolled conspiracy theories and propaganda are spreading
faster than the COVID-19 pandemic itself, creating an infodemic
and thus causing psychological panic, misleading medical advises, and economic disruption. Accordingly, discussions have
been initiated with the objective of moderating all COVID-19’s
communications, except those initiated from trusted sources such
as the WHO and authorized governmental entities. This paper
presents a large-scale study based on data mined from Twitter.
Extensive analysis has been performed on approximately 1
million COVID-19 related tweets collected over a period of two
months. Furthermore, the profiles of 288, 000 users were analyzed
including unique users’ profiles, meta-data and tweets’ context.
The study noted various interesting conclusions including the
critical impact of the (1) exploitation of the COVID-19 crisis
to redirect readers to irrelevant topics and (2) widespread of
unauthentic medical precautions and information. Further data
analysis revealed the importance of using social networks in
a global pandemic crisis by relying on credible users with
variety of occupations, content developers and influencers in
specific fields. In this context, several insights and findings have
been provided while elaborating computing and non-computing
implications and research directions for potential solutions and
social networks management strategies during crisis periods.
Index Terms—Coronavirus, COVID-19, Pandemic, Infodemic,
Misinformation, Misleading Information, Social Networks, Social
Networks Management, Defeating Coronavirus, Data Analytics.

I. I NTRODUCTION

T

He worldwide spread of the COVID-19 infectious disease
resulted with a pandemic that has threatened millions of
lives. Social media has been playing a major role in fighting
the virus and its impact through a multitude of measures
including the continuous transmission of local and global
updates about the pandemic as well as issuing warnings
and and guidelines for dealing with the pandemic and its
c 2020 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from
IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media,
including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional
purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers
or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.

aftermath. According to Statista [1], an estimated 2.95 billion
people in 2019 used social media worldwide. The number is
projected to increase to 3.43 billion in 2023. One remarkable
statistic is around the continually changing demographic of
new consumers and the increase in social media penetration
reach. For example, while in 2018 the Pew Research Centre [2]
reported that most Americans continue to get news on social
media, even though they may have concerns about its accuracy.
Numerous surveys have been undertaken to capture the online
behavior of news consumers worldwide, and the trend seems
to be that social media platforms are highly influential when
it comes to acquiring news stories, for the majority of people.
In a large-scale study conducted in 2019 by Ofcom [3], the
UK governments regular for the communications services
that are used by the public, it was shown that Half of the
adults in the UK now use social media to keep up with
the latest news”. Furthermore, governments and major centers
for disease control, including the World Health Organization
(WHO) and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC), are relying on social networks as a mean for managing
the evolving pandemic by regularly disseminating guidance
and updates and by providing emergency responses.
The dark side of social media was exhibited in a tsunami of
fake and unreliable news that ranged from selling fake cures
to using the social media as a platform to launch cyberattacks
on critical information systems. This led the United Nations
to warn against a proliferation of false information about the
virus and the emergence of the COVID-19 infodemic, according to WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus
at the Munich Security Conference on Feb 15, 2020 [4]. Moreover, various researchers and news outlets [5]–[12] tackled
the rising infodemic issue and presented real-life case studies
detailing actual examples that impeded people from acting
appropriately during the infodemic. For example, malicious
users have used social media platforms such as Facebook,
Twitter, Instagram, Youtube and WhatsApp in order to spread
panic and confusion through deliberate overabundance of
misleading information and rumors. A notable false claim that
5G damages the immune system and consequently causes the
COVID-19 outbreak went viral and resulted with various burning of cell towers in Europe [13]. Other conspiracy theories
spread rumors regarding the source and cure for COVID-19

2

at a time when people needed to focus during the outbreak
on how to do the right thing in order to control the disease
and mitigate its impact (e.g. virus does not infect children,
virus dies in temperature above 27 degrees, combination of
diet offering cures and immunity for the virus, cure discovery).
Cyberattacks also flourished during the outbreak [9]. Videos,
photos and posts in different languages exploited the COVID19 context in order to redirect the general public to shady
websites and inadvertently install spyware. Some cybersecurity
firms claimed that 3-8% of the newly registered COVID-19
related sites are suspicious, while others phishing messages
about potential cures lead to the installation of malware.
The infodemic resulted with organizations, governments and
business leaders exercising excessive pressure on the social
media platforms in order to curtail the flood of fake news
and viral misinformation. This became a priority in order to
ensure that people who are in lockdown would receive the
appropriate information in order to do the appropriate thing,
control the disease and mitigate its impact. Although social
networks platforms have plans for mitigating and banning
harmful content, it is apparent that they themselves were not
well prepared and needed an emergency plan in order to
respond to COVID-19 infodemic. In fact, most platforms are
now filtering and banning users who are identified as sources
of verified misinformation. However, this has led at times to
more misinformation and at other times to accounts being
unfairly removed as social media platforms do not have the
capability of dealing with a huge amount of misleading and
unverified data. The main focus was on advertisement and
offering personalized services to both industries and people
while analyzing human behavior and preference. Moreover,
in most cases they used machine learning and artificial intelligence tools resulting in a lot of false positives. Although
there are many various intelligent approaches in the literature
tackling the identification of credible content in social media,
the topic was not of high priority for the research and industrial
communities. In fact, there was no justification for investing
in this research direction.
This paper aims to address the aforementioned problems
while tackling the evolving challenges using a large dataset
that was extracted from twitter targeting COVID-19. The study
uses a data analytics approach based on tweets meta-data, text
and context, as well as users meta-data and profiles. The paper
explores extensively one million COVID-19-related tweets that
were collected over a period of two months and belonging to
288K users. The analysis of the unique users’ profiles, metadata and context of the tweets allowed us to deduce various
important findings and insights while providing guidance for
potential solutions. To the best of our knowledge, except Li
et al. [14] who characterized the propagation of situational
information in social media during COVID-19, no computingrelated work has yet empirically addressed the positive or negative impact of social networks infodemic during the COVID19 crisis. Accordingly, this paper contributes to the field by
highlighting based on empirical analysis several findings and
directions to a research field to become of great importance
in the near future.
In what follows, we provide a summary of our findings.

Please note the following terms usage in the paper: a Tweet
refers to a unique tweet excluding the retweets, Interactions
refer to the total number of retweets and favorites per unique
tweet, and Reach refers to total number of followers of the
user who initiated the unique tweet and reflects the number
of tweeters that may potentially see and interact with it.
The initial results indicate that around 16.1% of the tweets
(i.e. 160K Tweets, 2.1M Interactions and 5.6B Reach) are
exploiting COVID-19 contexts for advertisement, redirecting
users to out of scope topics or even maliciously misleading the
community. A further ontology-based analysis on the context
and users’ meta-data confirms that only 3.5% of the unique
users initiating the tweets have medical profile while 2.8%
are virus specialists. Accordingly, at least of 93.7% of the
COVID-related tweets (i.e. 800K Tweets, 17M Interactions
and 30B reach) may be transmitting misleading or unverified
medical information. On the other hand and in order to
highlight the importance of non-medical users in spreading
important information in such situation, a deeper analysis
was performed to identify unique users with key specialties.
Results reaffirmed our initial findings and show that users with
context-relevant occupations such as doctor, writer, reporter,
journalist, editor and governor do not even constitute 1% of the
total reach count (i.e. 300M out of 37B). Accordingly, these
insights illustrated the need to identify relevant influencers in
specific contexts and seek their help in order to disseminate
verified and reliable information. Finally, it is important to note
that the infodemic that is impacting social media including
Facebook, Instagram, Snapchat, etc. is by order of magnitude
bigger [15].
The contributions of this work are three folds:
•

•

•

Empirical study providing quantitative measurement of
the critical impact of social networks infodemic during
COVID-19 pandemic. To the best of our knowledge, no
computing-related work has yet addressed and studied
through experiments either the positive or the negative
impact of social networks on defeating COVID-19.
Mixed ontology-based data analytics methodology and
real-life experiments with inferred insights targeting both
user profiles and tweet contexts for (1) detecting tweets
exploiting COVID-19 for spreading misleading information and (2) identifying the source of tweets per user
speciality and occupation for measuring the credibility
and reliability of the disseminated COVID-19-related
information.
Elaboration of both computing and non-computing findings, implications, social networks management strategies
and research directions supported with thorough literature
review for a field to become of great importance in the
near future.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section II, we illustrate the study’s research methodology
while in Section III we provide an analysis of the impact
of misleading twitter contexts. Section IV provides empirical
analysis of the impact of COVID-19 related posts per user specialty and occupation. Section V details our research findings
and directions while Section VII concludes with comments.

3

•
Tweets and Users Datasets
(Collection and Preparation)

Occupation Ontology
Corona
Ontology
List
of Influencers
Medical Ontology
Virus Speciallist Ontology

Building Ontologies
(Tweet & User Profile Analysis)

Ontology-Based Analysis using NLP
Credibility Measurment
Tweets

User Profiles

isCorona?

Occupation
Detection

•

Enriched
ListCombined
of Influencers
Datasets
isMedical?

Occupation Classification
(Tweets, Interactions, Reach)

...

isSpecialist?

Relational Analysis

•

Fig. 1: Methodology Overview

II. M ETHODOLOGY AND DATA P ROCESSING
The adopted methodology, illustrated in Figure 1, starts
by choosing the pertinent topic and selecting the top used
hashtags. A search query that forms the basis of the data collection scripts was next built and the keywords were selected.
The system systematically fetched approximately a million
tweets from Twitter along with their corresponding users’
profiles. A descriptive analysis report was then generated by
aggregating the collected records. In order to gain deeper
insight into the collected data, we developed five different
ontology relationships. The ontology rules allowed the system
to analyze the content and consequently build the targeted
aggregations. Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques
were used in order to classify the tweets and the users based
on the above analysis. Finally, the results were aggregated and
inferences were made based on users’ occupations.
In the sequel, we provide an ordered and detailed description of the methodology presented in Figure 1 including the
proposed approaches and elaborated solutions within each of
the system modules:
• A crawler Python script was implemented using a
tweepy [16] for collecting one million public tweets
that include the corona or covid terms. The keywords
were selected based on the the top used hashtag strings
in the event from the result of Twitter Advanced
Search Query output. Once the data is fetched, a list
of unique users who initiated the tweets was extracted
and Twitter REST API [17] access tokens were used
in order to fetch the public profiles and perform the
aggregations and analysis.

•

•

A set of ontologies and lexicons was built based on
special keyword list to classify tweets into corona or noncorona related ones and infer insights from tweets and
user profile datasets. In this regard, the ontologies were
used as a base for the NLP entity extractor to classify
each tweet based on its content regardless of the hashtags.
Similarly, they were also used to classify users that have
medical and speciality backgrounds. The following are
the five built ontologies: Corona Top Used Hashtags
Ontology, Corona Social Media Context Ontology for
Tweets, Occupation Ontology for Grouping Users Based
on their Biographic Information, Medical Occupation
Ontology for Users and Virus Specialty Occupation Ontology for Users.
The ontology-based processing scripts were next built in
order to extract entities from tweets as well as from the
user biography fields. Accordingly, we inferred credibility
measurement using NLP analysis. The distributed scripts
simultaneously processed tweets and user records in order
to tag record with a final value (i.e. isCorona, isMedicalProfile, isSpecialtyProfile, isCoronaHashtag, and the list
of detected occupations).
The dataset was next decorated for advanced filtering
and analysis queries by merging the aggregated data
into one enriched dataset, which was augmented with
the following attributes: Unique Tweet ID, Hashtag
Counts per Tweet, Favorite Counts per Tweet, Retweet
Counts per Tweet, Mention Counts per Tweet, Interactions (favorite and retweet) Counts per Tweet, Total
Reach Count (number of followers per user per unique
tweet), Unique User ID, Claimed Locations per User,
Occupations per User (extracted from the user profile
biography field), isCorona-Related (a boolean expression), isMedicalProfile-Related (a Boolean expression)
and isSpecialtyProfile-Related (a boolean expression).
An occupation classification was next performed in order
to better understand the effect of the tweets that were
initiated by users with different roles and specialities.
Within this context, we counted each user’s unique tweets
per occupation group (e.g. journalists), calculated the total
Interactions per tweet, and calculated the total Reach
counts caused by the mentioned group of users.
An Analysis of the correlation across users/groups that
have medical profiles as well as a specialization in the
study of viruses or infectious diseases was performed.
Both profile types share similar entities and keywords,
and thus we attempted to highlight and studied the
impact of users with a virus specialization profiles rather
than those with a general medical background by subcategorizing users with medical profiles.
III. I MPACT A NALYSIS OF T WEETS E XPLOITING
COVID-19 C ONTEXT

In this section, we present the main findings and discuss
the insights and the results of the analysis based on the
predefined framework approach and KPIs. As we processed
around 109.3K hashtags from the one million random unique

4

Fig. 2: CORONA vs NON-CORONA Related Hashtags
Fig. 3: Top Used Hashtags in Different Dialogs

tweets, it was important to classify each hashtag according
to it is direct relationship to the COVID family of hashtags.
For instance, regardless of the context of the tweet, a hashtag
that matches or partially contains #COVID or #CORONA is
classified as CORONA since it is explicitly related to the
Corona virus, while other hashtags like #China, #US or #Italy
are classified as NON-CORONA since they are not directly
related to the Corona virus. Figure 2 shows the comparison
between the occurrences of the two classes (CORONA and
NON-CORONA) in the tweets. It can be noted that 53.5% of
the tweets (582.9K Tweets) represent tweets that are explicitly
related to the Corona virus based on the hashtag, while
46.5% (506.2K Tweets) represent tweets that are not explicitly
related to the Corona virus and belong to the NON-CORONA
classification based on the hashtags. It should be noted that
since some tweets contain hashtags from both classes, the total
number of the classified classes does not reflect the number
of unique tweets but rather the count of tweets. This explains
the fact that the number of tweets per each class does not add
up to one million (same applies to Figure 4).
Figure 3 displays the top used hashtags from the 109.3K
ones sorted by the total count of occurrences in all tweets.
The TreeMap visualization chart has three dimensions to
display. The position (from left to right), the box size (bigger to
smaller), and the color opacity(100% to 1%). All dimensions
are displayed based on the number of total occurrences of
each hashtag in the entire tweets dataset. It should be also
mentioned that the displayed hashtags have different dialogs
and formats. For example, Covid19, COVID19, and covid19
were counted as separate hashtags in order to measure the
different usage for later text analysis searches.
Figure 4 shows the total Interactions and Reach counts
of each class of hashtags (CORONA and NON-CORONA)
using a stacked column chart. It is interesting to notice that
the number of Interactions and Reach level covered by the
COVID hashtags on just a small set of users compared to
the actual twitter size. The number of Interactions reflects the
total Interactions (i.e. retweets and favorites) of all the unique
tweets where the classified hashtags were used. The total
Reach displays the possible Reach counts of the mentioned
unique tweets based on their users’ followers count. Again,
both Reach and Interactions summations of the two classes do

Fig. 4: Tweets, Interactions & Reach Counts of COVID Related &
Non-Related Hashtags

not sum up to the total Reach and Interactions specified in the
header. We notice that the total number of Reach counts of the
two classes is 36.6B out of 36.7B (a difference of 86,000,000
possible Reach), which indicates that more than 80% of the
users performed the discovered Unique Tweets.
Furthermore, an ontology-based classification of the contexts was performed in order to understand the meaning
of the tweets. The ontology is built from COVID related
dictionary for identifying the tweets diverting from the context
to different topics. Figure 5 shows that 16.1% of the tweets
(i.e. 160.1K Unique Tweets) were not related to the COVID
situation at all, while 83.9% (839.2K Unique Tweets) were
related based on their content. Some of the non-related ones
were using the trend hashtags to advertise for products and
other topics, and others were malicious intended to mislead
the trend into different subjects. Figure 6 shows the total
Interaction and Reach counts of each tweet in each classified
category. In addition to the details mentioned in the description
of Figure 5, it is important to highlight the large effect of
the 16.1% tweets in terms of Interactions and Reach counts,

5

Fig. 5: Tweets Within and Diverting Out of COVID Context

Fig. 7: Interactions and Reach Counts of the 3.5% COVID Tweets
Initiated by Medical Experts

Fig. 6: Tweets, Interactions and Reach Counts Within and Diverting
Out of COVID Context

which recorded around 2M and 5B respectively. It is very
important to mention that those counts are subject to increase
with time, hence enlarging the misleading ratios. Moreover, the
misleading negative effect is much worse in real life context
where billions of Reach counts may occur and vary from
a community to another. In this context, additional research
need to take place in order to identify the final destination of
these tweets in order to take the needed actions for immediate
remediation.
IV. I MPACT A NALYSIS OF COVID-19 R ELATED T WEETS
I NITIATED P ER U SER O CCUPATION /S PECIALTY
Additional experiments were performed by considering the
83% COVID related tweets in order to distinguish the identity
of the tweeters initiating the unique tweets with COVID-19
context. We built an ontology of experts based on several
dictionaries. The results of the ontology-based classification
allowed us to study the profile of the 288K tweeters and
identify 510 occupations belonging to the COVID tweet initiators. In this regard, we extracted very important insights about
the credibility of tweets’ initiators who might be eligible for
broadcasting relevant messages in such a critical period.

Fig. 8: Interactions and Reach Counts of the 2.8% COVID Tweets
Initiated by Virus Specialists

Among the 83.9% of tweets, we first filtered the 839.2K
Unique Tweets into Medical Profile and Non-Medical Profile
categories based on the biographic information of each tweeter
having at least one COVID context related tweet. Figure 7
aims at showing the participation of users that have medical
backgrounds in the overall conversations in order to measure
their effect based on their corresponding Interactions and
Reach counts. It is clear that only 29.1K Tweets (i.e. 3.5%
of the COVID related tweets) were initiated by tweeters that
have medical profiles, while the other 96.4% of the tweets
were initiated by tweeters that do not have medical profiles or
expertise. Likewise, Figure 8 measures the different Interaction
and Reach counts for the tweeters having virus specialty
backgrounds. It also shows that only 2.8% of the COVID
related tweets were initiated by specialists, while the remaining
97.2% were initiated by other tweeters’ profiles. Usually, a
specialty profile could be inherited from a medical profile,

6

but not the opposite. We can depict from both Figures 7
and 8 that the total Interactions and Reach counts of tweets
initiated by non-specialists tweeters are around 18M and 31B
respectively, which reflect 38.6 and 303 times more than
the tweets initiated by specialists in the field respectively.
This might be very critical since it reflects the extent of
the unintentional or intentional mislead ratios who may lead
to potentially spreading unverified and non-credible medical
information and guidelines for defeating COVID-19.
The above implications should neither overshadow nor
dominate the need for credible professional tweeters who
should to contribute information that will raise awareness
and defeat the virus. Governors, mayors, editors, writers and
journalists are obvious examples of tweeters who should be
on the list of occupations other than medically related who
should be encouraged to interact and engage in such critical
times. Indeed, the results of the COVID tweeters occupational
analysis and classification based on their Tweet, Reach and
Interactions counts support our hypothesis and findings. The
list of credible tweeters could be expanded to include public
figures such as actors and artists. Figure 9 presents three
wordles that rearrange these occupations into a visual pattern
broken down per Tweet, Reach and Interactions counts. The
font size per occupation reflects its frequency while Figure
10 shows the top 18 occupations for the COVID tweeters’
occupations initiating related unique tweets broken down per
Tweet, Interactions and Reach. The main objective is to
assess the impact of each group of tweeters and study their
impact and influence rate in terms of Interactions and Reach.
Clearly, both figures illustrate visually and numerically that
the correlation between the number of Tweet, Interactions
and Reach counts is not linear. In other words, the total
Reach count of tweets initiated by the group of tweeters
having Arts profiles and backgrounds are much higher than the
total Reach of tweets initiated by the group of users having
Doctor profiles and backgrounds, regardless of the number
of uniquely initiated tweets by both groups. Furthermore,
the correlation between the Tweet and Interactions counts is
also not linear but logical. For instance, relevant occupations
such as writers and journalists achieve high Interactions level,
while non-related ones such as engineers and retired are
getting low counts. Moreover, numerical results illustrate that
context-related occupations such as doctors, writers, reporters,
journalists, editors and governors do not even constitute 1%
of the total Reach counts, i.e. a total of around 300M out of
30B Reach counts. To further highlight the problem, these 1%
tweeters are supposed to be the only ones allowed to interact
with people during such a critical situation. In this regard, two
main implications can be reached from the presented results.
First, accurate techniques are needed in order to verify the
authenticity of the reported occupations based on historical
and real-time means. Second, detection approaches need to be
elaborated for identifying influencers relevant within specific
contexts and situations.
V. I MPLICATIONS & R ESEARCH D IRECTIONS
In this section, we provide various computing and noncomputing implications, recommendation, and future research

directions in relation to the aforementioned raised problems
as inferred empirically and quantitatively:
•

•

•

•

An immediate ban should be placed on all the users,
posts and tweets exploiting the COVID-19 context in
order to mislead users and disseminate fake news. In this
regard, various researchers tackled approached for detecting spams and misleading information in social networks
based on users’ meta-data, texts and contexts [18]–[33].
However, these approaches did not consider critical and
crisis times where high accuracy and time efficiency factors have major impact on overall solutions. Even major
social network platforms have confirmed that applying
current AI techniques without human interventions may
lead to unfairness by wrongly banning valid accounts
and interactions. Accordingly, additional research efforts
have to investigate efficient and accurate human-less techniques and methodologies for better understanding the
origin of misinformation while identifying both disruptive
contexts and users.
Although information broadcasts are not initiated by medical experts or officials, they may be at times essential and
useful. Accordingly, allowing only communications by
specific categories may be counterproductive as it could
block legitimate and helpful information. In this regard,
several approaches have addressed reputation and credibility based on user-centered and content-based analysis
[34]–[46]. However, to the best of our knowledge, none
of these approaches have classified and managed posts
and accounts based on their verified roles, occupations
and specialities. Consequently, mechanisms should be
proposed in order to efficiently and accurately allow postings based on the aforementioned criteria, while at the
same time considering credibility, historical engagement,
insights and influence rate in related contexts and events.
Moreover, there is a need at this time to develop systems
that have efficient and highly accurate trust and credibility
preserving models to be opportunistically adopted during
crisis periods. Approaches relying on Blockchain and
operating in highly distributed environments may be good
options for potential efficient solutions regardless of their
high cost.
Results show that the Reach level of professional COVID19 context-relevant roles and occupations (e.g. doctors,
editors, governors) is very low (i.e. only 1% of total
Reach). Accordingly, extensive effort should be put to
elaborate methodologies and recommendation systems
for efficiently recognizing credible and convincing influencers in specific events/locations/communities (e.g.
based on profile, insights, historical engagement) for
spreading the relevant and cited information provided by
trusted scientists and experts at large scale, in the right
place and to the right people. In this context, researchers
may benefit from the rich literature that targets identifying
influencers based on selected events in order to build
relevant approaches [47]–[54].
Current raised infodemic shed the light on the urgent
need to elaborate methodologies and techniques to be

7

(a) By Tweet Counts

(b) By Reach Counts

(c) By Interactions Counts

Fig. 9: COVID Tweeters’ Occupations/Specialities (Font Size Reflects the Count Value)

•

Fig. 10: COVID Tweet, Interactions and Reach Counts by Different
Occupations/Specialities

•

embedded in the social network platforms for systematically adopting emergency and crisis mode management
strategies and responding to the situation dangers. This
also includes developing code of conduct, standards and
regulations to abide by during crisis periods, which may
differ from the policies applied within regular terms.
Although few approaches studied the role and reaction of
social network platforms in response to previous natural
disasters [55], [56], the research field still lacks solid
and sustainable methodologies to deal with epidemic and
pandemic contexts, and prior, during and post crisis.
Infodemic made it difficult for people to find reliable
resources for information. Accordingly, the UN is step-

ping up their communications efforts through global cooperation and viral acts of humanity. Although some are
promoting the Chinese model of censored contagion, the
solution is for health authorities, governments and social
network stakeholders to formulate regular responses to
the infodemic using a strategy of active engagement and
communication with those who are spreading inaccurate
stories in order to gain a deeper understanding of how
infodemic spread. Governments should set-up official
units mandated to combat the spread of inaccurate and
unsubstantiated news. For example, the UK established a
rapid response unit within the Cabinet Office. The Unit
will work with social media firms in order to filter fake
news and harmful content.
The most powerful solution to tackle this, or any future
infodemic, lies with the consumers themselves. Taking
personal responsibility of the role that each person plays
when they receive, read, edit, comment and then forward
a piece of information that originates on a social media
platform is, arguably, the most impactful intervention to
debunk the myths and falsehoods that are generated on
an hourly basis. Targeted campaigns must be launched
to educate anyone whose date of birth precedes the year
2000 to educate them on the social responsibility that
they bear whenever they partake in perpetuating stories
on Twitter or any other platform.
VI. L ITERATURE R EVIEW

In this section, we provide a literature review in relation
to the aforementioned implications and proposed research
directions, and which may form a solid ground for potential
solutions.
A. Spam and Misleading Posts Detection
Detecting spammers on social networks most often relies
on analyzing the content of messages [9], [29], [31]–[33],
[57]. However, most of the approaches extend their techniques
by exploiting users profile and their relations [30]. Sedhai
et al. [18] proposed a semi-supervised technique for spam

8

detection, in which they proposed multiple detectors that investigate tweets’ contents to classify maliciousness. Similarly,
Alghamdi et al. [19] exploited a set of OSNs object and URL
features for the same purpose. Such features include information related to users profile, and URL related features including
hosts and domains. Similarly to the previous approach, Lee
at al. [26] deployed a real-time malicious URL detector by
exploiting URL redundancy driven by the limitation posed on
the attackers’ resources. Guille et al. [25] proposed another
approach that takes advantage of the URL used by the users in
their tweets to spot malicious intents. A multi-feature analysis
like unique mentions, trends, hyperlinks, and tweets ratio has
been employed by Amleshwaram et al. [20] to distinguish
spam accounts in a supervised manner. Moreover, Benevenuto
et al. in [21] aimed to classify users between promoters,
spammer and legitimated from their videos. By manually
selecting different users and learning their behaviors, authors
were able to employ a supervised machine learning technique
capable of classifying malicious users with a relatively small
margin error. Kuhn et al. [22] described spamming strategies
techniques of more than 570 million tweets. SHEN et al.
[28] deployed another approach that depends on the tweets
contents to extract users behaviors and supply them to a supervised classifier. However, supervised and semi-supervised
techniques cannot classify data by discovering features on their
own, which requires manual classification in the initial stages.
Such involvement requires the intervention of human in which
by its nature prone to errors, thus reducing the accuracy of
the results. In case of online social networks, classification of
diverse and large amount of data has been proven difficult.
B. User-Centered & Content-Based Reputation & Credibility
Analysis
Despite the work on detecting spammers in social networks,
other approaches took advantage of the abundance number of
information for ranking users based on their influence rate.
Such techniques stem from the need to rank the relevance
of the users and their tweets, and thus two main categories
of solutions exist to address the issue in dispute. The first
set of approaches focused on the content to assign reputation
using machine learning techniques [47], [58], [59], while the
second set relied on the user and its relation described as
nodes in a graph model [35], [48], [58]. Moreover, there are
other solutions that depend on both methods to achieve better
accuracy. In the following, we overview the main approaches
belonging to these categories.
Jain et al. [34] took advantage of the capabilities of graph
theories and related algorithms to calculate a score for each
user based on their centralities. Such scores are later used
to identify universal leaders’ opinions. Riyantoa et al. [35]
provided an in-depth analysis on how social distancing and
environment can affect trust and trustworthiness between
users. Mohammadinejad et al. [38] presented a framework
that takes advantage of the consensus opinion within social
network relations to infer scores such as users personality to
derive the most influential users in the network. Zhang et
al. [41] benefited from the relations through social network

messages and contact frequency to learn the users behavior,
thus providing a credibility score that describes the risk levels
of users’ interactive messages. Wang et al. [39] provided an
empirical analysis on the information credibility and provided
a credibility assessment framework. They also emphasized the
value of users’ credibility in relation to the credibility of the
information. Tsikerdekis et al. [40] drew the attention towards
recent adversaries related to social network including identity
deception and multiple account creation, and employed a
behavioral framework to detect such actions.
Ahmad et al. [46] presented a survey on different approaches used for the detection of rumors on social networks.
Curiskis et al [42] provided a comparison of different document clustering techniques that are mostly used on OSNs and
supplied by multiple features. Moreover, they also provided
several evaluation measures to assess their accuracy. Buzz
et al. [42] focused on the content in different languages
such case Arabic in order to produce a framework that is
able to distinguish fake news by allotting a score for each
content through sentiment analysis with the help of different
classification algorithms. Alrubaian et al. [44] proposed a
system with multiple components that work in conjunction
to deduce the credibility of users and their related tweets to
restrain the spread of fake and malicious news.
C. Influence Ranking in Social Networks
Users’ influence rating and ranking have become one of
the most important topics when analyzing social networks,
especially in microblogs like Twitter. Authors in [52],
[53], [59]–[62] explored that user meta data like follower
count, tweets count, following count and tweets meta data
like retweet count and favorite count are enough to calculate
the user influence ratio. On the other hand, authors in [63]
analyzed the relationships between users in order to rank them
by their influence relationships. [64] analyzed the user’s social
activity during a specific event. Anger, Isabel &amp and Kittl,
Christian [65] determined a grounded approach to measure
the individual’s influence or potential social networking ratio
(SNP) using users and tweets metadata to find the top 10
Twitter users in Austria. Bakshy, Eytan et. al [66] calculated the user influence rate per event using diffusion trees and
cascading methods by selecting only events that have URLs.
Then, they applied diffusion algorithms on the shared URLs
to measure the reach of the initial tweets. M. Anjaria and
R. M. R. Guddeti [67] used NLTK sentiment analysis and
Incremental Learning algorithms to predict the presidential
elections in the US. Moreover, C. B. Schenk and D. C. Sicker
[68] categorized influencers into four influence groups using
a bagging classification algorithm by studying users static and
dynamic influence features and comparing them over time.
In [69], Y. Mei, Y. Zhong and J. Yang approached an
entropy weighting algorithm based on eight data points per
each user to find their influence ratios. They added the
features of new followers and new mentions to measure users’
popularity ratios in order to sort a list of the top hundred
users in Australia by their influence rates. Riquelmea et al.
[47] proposed two linear threshold centrality based approaches

9

to measure the rank of the users and the propagation rate
of their contents in the network. Similarly, Li et al. [48]
presented an eigenvector centrality based approach to measure
the influence rate. Lahuerta-Otero et al. [49] presented a brief
analysis of the behavior of special kind of tweeter users, and
evaluated their influence ratio through different data mining
techniques. Through their analysis, they were able to spot
different techniques to increase users influence. Sharma et al.
[50] proposed a novel approach to elect influential users by
calculating the influence rate through their tweet and trend
scores. Huynh et al. [54] focused on the relation between the
tag used in the tweets to calculate the influence rate and the
speed of their propagation.
VII. C ONCLUSION
This paper investigated the COVID-19 infodemic negative
impact on the major efforts to defeat the pandemic through
a novel large-scale Twitter-based study, which provided quantitative assessment using real-life experiments reflecting the
actual environments. The empirical analysis of 1 million
COVID-19-related tweets belonging to 288K unique users
illustrated the severe impact of misleading people and spreading unreliable information. Inferred insights showed that (1)
the potential reachability of the 16.1% tweets that misled
users by redirecting them to out of scope and/or malicious
content is 5.6 billion, and (2) a minimum of 93.7% of the
remaining within-context 83.9% tweets (i.e. with around 17M
Interactions and 30B Reach counts) were initiated by users
with non-reliable medical and/or relevant speciality profiles,
and consequently might be disseminating misleading noncredible medical information. Moreover, different insights
highlighted the low reachability (i.e. 1% of the total Reach
counts, which is equivalent 300M out of 30B) of the unique
users with key context-relevant specialties and occupations
such as doctor, writer, reporter, journalist, editor and governor.
The results shed the light on the importance of identifying nonmedical key influencers for assisting in spreading legitimate
information relevant in such situations. Finally, the paper
elaborated on few computing and non-computing implications
as well as future research directions to highlight the potential
solutions and future work in such a promising field.
R EFERENCES
[1] J. Clement. Number of social network users worldwide from 2010
to 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.statista.com/statistics/278414/
number-of-worldwide-social-network-users/
[2] K. M. Elisa Shearer. (2018) News use across social media
platforms. [Online]. Available: https://www.journalism.org/2018/09/10/
news-use-across-social-media-platforms-2018/
[3] (2019) News consumption in the uk: 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://www.ofcom.org.uk/
[4] E. Lederer. U.n. chief antonio guterres: Misinformation about covid-19
is the new enemy. [Online]. Available: https://time.com/5811939/
un-chief-coronavirus-misinformation/
[5] D. A. Wemer. (2020) Addressing the coronavirus infodemic.
[Online]. Available: https://atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/new-atlanticist/
addressing-the-coronavirus-infodemic/
[6] M. Schaake. (2020) Coronavirus shows big tech can fight
infodemic of fake news. [Online]. Available: https://www.ft.com/
content/b2e2010e-6cf8-11ea-89df-41bea055720b

[7] C.
Skopeliti.
(2020)
Coronavirus:
How
are
the
social
media
platforms
responding
to
the
infodemic?
[Online].
Available:
https://firstdraftnews.org/latest/
how-social-media-platforms-are-responding-to-the-coronavirus-infodemic/
[8] N. L. Raina M. Merchant. (2020) Social media and emergency
preparedness in response to novel coronavirus. [Online]. Available:
https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2763596
[9] T. Macaulay. (2020) Social media firms will use more ai to
combat coronavirus misinformation, even if it makes more mistakes.
[Online].
Available:
https://thenextweb.com/neural/2020/03/17/
social-media-firms-will-use-more-ai-to-combat-coronavirus-misinformation-even-if-it[10] D. A. Sheera Frenkel and R. Zhong. (2020) Surge
of
virus
misinformation
stumps
facebook
and
twitter.
[Online]. Available: https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/08/technology/
coronavirus-misinformation-social-media.html
[11] V. Savov. (2020) Covid-19: Twitter escalates moderation
of
misleading
content
around
virus.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.thestar.com.my/tech/tech-news/2020/03/19/
covid-19-twitter-escalates-moderation-of-misleading-content-around-virus
[12] T. Hatmaker. (2020) Twitter broadly bans any covid19 tweets that could
help the virus spread. [Online]. Available: https://techcrunch.com/2020/
03/18/twitter-coronavirus-covid-19-misinformation-policy/
[13] Z. Budryk. (2020) Conspiracy theorists who claim 5g
linked to coronavirus believed to burn cell towers in
europe. [Online]. Available: https://thehill.com/policy/technology/
493927-arsonists-falsely-linking-5g-to-coronavirus-burn-cell-towers-in-europe
[14] L. Li, Q. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Zhang, T. Wang, T.-L. Gao, W. Duan,
K. Tsoi, and F.-Y. Wang, “Characterizing the propagation of situational
information in social media during covid-19 epidemic: A case study on
weibo,” IEEE Transactions on Computational Social Systems, vol. PP,
pp. 1–7, 03 2020.
[15] D.
Kucher.
(2020)
Number
of
active
users
reached
on
twitter
in
the
last
quarter
of
2019
announced.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.somagnews.com/
number-active-users-reached-twitter-last-quarter-2019-announced/
[16] tweepy, “tweepy api reference,” http://docs.tweepy.org/en/latest/api.html.
[17] twitter, “twitter api reference,” https://developer.twitter.com/en/docs/
api-reference-index.
[18] S. Sedhai and A. Sun, “Semi-supervised spam detection in twitter
stream,” IEEE Transactions on Computational Social Systems, vol. 5,
no. 1, pp. 169–175, 2018.
[19] B. Alghamdi, J. Watson, and Y. Xu, “Toward detecting malicious
links in online social networks through user behavior,” in Proceeding
of the IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on Web Intelligence
Workshops (WIW), 2016, pp. 5–8.
[20] A. A. Amleshwaram, N. Reddy, S. Yadav, G. Gu, and C. Yang, “Cats:
Characterizing automation of twitter spammers,” in Proceeding of the
Fifth International Conference on Communication Systems and Networks
(COMSNETS), 2013, pp. 1–10.
[21] F. Benevenuto, T. Rodrigues, J. Almeida, M. Goncalves, and V. Almeida,
“Detecting spammers and content promoters in online video social
networks,” in Proceeding of the IEEE INFOCOM Workshops 2009,
2009, pp. 1–2.
[22] C. Chen, J. Zhang, Y. Xiang, W. Zhou, and J. Oliver, “Spammers are
becoming ”smarter” on twitter,” IT Professional, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 66–
70, 2016.
[23] C. Chew and G. Eysenbach, “Pandemics in the age of twitter: Content
analysis of tweets during the 2009 h1n1 outbreak,” in PloS one, 2009.
[24] M. Fazil and M. Abulaish, “Why a socialbot is effective in twitter? a
statistical insight,” in Proceeding of the 9th International Conference on
Communication Systems and Networks (COMSNETS), 2017, pp. 564–
569.
[25] A. Guille and C. Favre, “Mention-anomaly-based event detection and
tracking in twitter,” in Proceeding of the IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining (ASONAM
2014), 2014, pp. 375–382.
[26] S. Lee and J. Kim, “Warningbird: A near real-time detection system for
suspicious urls in twitter stream,” IEEE Transactions on Dependable
and Secure Computing, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 183–195, 2013.
[27] J. Martinez-Romo and L. Araujo, “Detecting malicious tweets in trending topics using a statistical analysis of language,” Expert Systems with
Applications, vol. 40, no. 8, pp. 2992 – 3000, 2013.
[28] H. Shen and X. Liu, “Detecting spammers on twitter based on content
and social interaction,” in Proceeding of the International Conference on
Network and Information Systems for Computers, 2015, pp. 413–417.
[29] M. Shirakawa, K. Nakayama, T. Hara, and S. Nishio, “Wikipedia-based
semantic similarity measurements for noisy short texts using extended

10

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46]

[47]

[48]

[49]

[50]

naive bayes,” IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing,
vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 205–219, 2015.
M. Shoaib and M. Farooq, “Uspam – a user centric ontology driven
spam detection system,” in Proceeding of the 48th Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences, 2015, pp. 3661–3669.
C. Sumner, A. Byers, R. Boochever, and G. J. Park, “Predicting dark
triad personality traits from twitter usage and a linguistic analysis of
tweets,” in Proceeding of the 11th International Conference on Machine
Learning and Applications, vol. 2, 2012, pp. 386–393.
C. Chen, Y. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Xiang, W. Zhou, and G. Min, “Statistical features-based real-time detection of drifted twitter spam,” IEEE
Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 12, no. 4, pp.
914–925, 2017.
P. Meel, H. Agrawal, M. Agrawal, and A. Goyal, Analysing Tweets for
Text and Image Features to Detect Fake News Using Ensemble Learning.
Springer Singapore, Dec 2019, p. 479488.
L. Jain, R. Katarya, and S. Sachdeva, “Opinion leader detection using
whale optimization algorithm in online social network,” Expert Systems
with Applications, vol. 142, p. 113016, 2020.
Y. E. Riyanto and Y. X. Jonathan, “Directed trust and trustworthiness in
a social network: An experimental investigation,” Journal of Economic
Behavior & Organization, vol. 151, pp. 234 – 253, 2018.
S. M. Shariff, X. Zhang, and M. Sanderson, “On the credibility perception of news on twitter: Readers, topics and features,” Computers in
Human Behavior, vol. 75, pp. 785 – 796, 2017.
P. D. Meo], L. Fotia, F. Messina, D. Rosaci, and G. M. Sarn, “Providing
recommendations in social networks by integrating local and global
reputation,” Information Systems, vol. 78, pp. 58 – 67, 2018.
A. Mohammadinejad, R. Farahbakhsh, and N. Crespi, “Consensus
opinion model in online social networks based on influential users,”
IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 28 436–28 451, 2019.
D. Wang and Y. Chen, “A neural computing approach to the construction
of information credibility assessments for online social networks,”
Neural Computing and Applications, vol. 31, no. S1, p. 259275, Sep
2018.
M. Tsikerdekis and S. Zeadally, “Multiple account identity deception
detection in social media using nonverbal behavior,” IEEE Transactions
on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1311–1321,
2014.
S. Zhang, Y. Cai, and H. Xia, “A privacy-preserving interactive messaging scheme based on users credibility over online social networks,” in
Proceeding of the IEEE/CIC International Conference on Communications in China (ICCC), 2017, pp. 1–6.
S. A. Curiskis, B. Drake, T. R. Osborn, and P. J. Kennedy, “An evaluation of document clustering and topic modelling in two online social
networks: Twitter and reddit,” Information Processing & Management,
vol. 57, no. 2, p. 102034, 2020.
G. Jardaneh, H. Abdelhaq, M. Buzz, and D. Johnson, “Classifying
arabic tweets based on credibility using content and user features,”
in Proceeding of the IEEE Jordan International Joint Conference on
Electrical Engineering and Information Technology (JEEIT), 2019, pp.
596–601.
M. Alrubaian, M. Al-Qurishi, M. M. Hassan, and A. Alamri, “A
credibility analysis system for assessing information on twitter,” IEEE
Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing, vol. 15, no. 4, pp.
661–674, 2018.
S. M. Shariff, “A review on credibility perception of online information,”
in Proceeding of the 14th International Conference on Ubiquitous
Information Management and Communication (IMCOM), 2020, pp. 1–7.
F. Ahmad and S. A. M. Rizvi, Identification of Credibility Content
Measures for Twitter and Sina-Weibo Social Networks.
Springer
International Publishing, Sep 2019, p. 372384.
F. Riquelme, P. Gonzalez-Cantergiani, X. Molinero, and M. Serna,
“Centrality measure in social networks based on linear threshold model,”
Knowledge-Based Systems, vol. 140, p. 92102, Jan 2018.
X. Li, Y. Liu, Y. Jiang, and X. Liu, “Identifying social influence in
complex networks: A novel conductance eigenvector centrality model,”
Neurocomputing, vol. 210, p. 141154, Oct 2016.
E. Lahuerta-Otero and R. Cordero-Gutirrez, “Looking for the perfect
tweet. the use of data mining techniques to find influencers on twitter,”
Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 64, p. 575583, Nov 2016.
P. Sharma, A. Agarwal, and N. Sardana, “Extraction of influencers
across twitter using credibility and trend analysis,” in Proceeding of
the Eleventh International Conference on Contemporary Computing
(IC3). IEEE, Aug 2018. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
IC3.2018.8530462

[51] R. Effing, J. van Hillegersberg, and T. Huibers, Social Media Indicator
and Local Elections in the Netherlands: Towards a Framework for
Evaluating the Influence of Twitter, YouTube, and Facebook. Springer
US, 2016, p. 281298.
[52] S. A. Ros, F. Aguilera, J. D. Nuez-Gonzalez, and M. Graa, “Semantically
enhanced network analysis for influencer identification in online social
networks,” Neurocomputing, vol. 326327, p. 7181, Jan 2019.
[53] Y. Liu and J. Cao, “Iirank: A novel algorithm for identifying influencers
in micro-blog social networks,” in Proceeding of the International
Conference on Data Mining Workshops (ICDMW). IEEE, Nov 2019.
[54] T. Huynh, I. Zelinka, X. H. Pham, and H. D. Nguyen, “Some measures
to detect the influencer on social network based on information propagation,” in Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Web
Intelligence, Mining and Semantics - WIMS2019. ACM Press, 2019.
[55] M.-A. Abbasi and H. Liu, Measuring User Credibility in Social Media.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, p. 441448.
[56] R. Pandey, H. Purohit, J. L. Chan, and A. Johri, “AI for trustworthiness!
credible user identification on social web for disaster response agencies,”
CoRR, vol. abs/1810.01013, 2018.
[57] B. Halawi, A. Mourad, H. Otrok, and E. Damiani, “Few are as good as
many: An ontology-based tweet spam detection approach,” IEEE Access,
vol. 6, pp. 63 890–63 904, 2018.
[58] A. Gn and P. Karagz, A Hybrid Approach for Credibility Detection in
Twitter. Springer International Publishing, 2014, p. 515526.
[59] H. Kwak, C. Lee, H. Park, and S. Moon, “What is twitter, a social
network or a news media?” in Proceedings of the 19th International
Conference on World Wide Web, WWW ’10, vol. 19, 01 2010.
[60] M. Cha, H. Haddadi, F. Benevenuto, and K. P. Gummadi, “Measuring
user influence in twitter: The million follower fallacy,” in Proceedings
of ICWSM, 2010.
[61] M. Luiten, W. A. Kosters, and F. W. Takes, “Topical influence on twitter
: A feature construction approach,” in Semanticscholar, 2012.
[62] J. Weng, E.-P. Lim, J. Jiang, and Z. qi, “Twitterrank: Finding topicsensitive influential twitterers,” in Proceedings of the Third ACM International Conference on Web Search & Data Mining, 01 2010, pp.
261–270.
[63] B. Huberman, D. Romero, and F. Wu, “Social networks that matter:
Twitter under the microscope,” First Monday, vol. 14, 01 2009.
[64] R. Cappelletti and N. R. Sastry, “Iarank: Ranking users on twitter
in near real-time, based on their information amplification potential,”
in Proceedings of the International Conference on Social Informatics,
2012, pp. 70–77.
[65] I. Anger and C. Kittl, “Measuring influence on twitter,” in I-KNOW, 09
2011, p. 31.
[66] E. Bakshy, J. Hofman, W. Mason, and D. Watts, “Everyone’s an
influencer: Quantifying influence on twitter,” in Proceedings of the 4th
ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, WSDM
2011, 01 2011, pp. 65–74.
[67] M. Anjaria and R. R. Guddeti, “Influence factor based opinion mining
of twitter data using supervised learning,” in Proceeding of the 6th
International Conference on Communication Systems and Networks,
COMSNETS 2014, 01 2014, pp. 1–8.
[68] C. Schenk and D. Sicker, “Finding event-specific influencers in dynamic social networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Third International
Conference on Privacy, Security, Risk and Trust and 2011 IEEE Third
International Conference on Social Computing, 10 2011, pp. 501–504.
[69] Y. Mei, Y. Zhong, and J. Yang, “Finding and analyzing principal features
for measuring user influence on twitter,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
First International Conference on Big Data Computing Service and
Applications, 03 2015, pp. 478–486.

Biographies
Azzam Mourad is currently an Associate Professor of Computer
Science at the Lebanese American University and also an Affiliate
Associate Professor at the Software Engineering and IT Department,
Ecole de Technologie Superieure (ETS), Montreal, Canada. He
has served/serves as Associate Editor for the IEEE Transaction
on Network and Service Management, IEEE Network, IEEE
Open Journal of the Communications Society, IET Quantum
Communication, and IEEE Communications Letter. He has also
served/serves as General Chair of IWCMC2020, General Co-Chair
of WiMob2016, and Track Chair, TPC member, and Reviewer of
several prestigious journals and conferences. He is an IEEE senior
member.

11

Ali Srour is currently pursuing his Masters in Computer Science at
the Lebanese American University. He is a Data Scientist and an AI
consultant. His research interests are Social Network Analysis, Data
Science and Artificial Intelligence Innovations.
Haidar Harmanai received his BS, M.S, and Ph.D. in Computer
Engineering from the Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science at Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland,
Ohio, in 1989, 1991, and 1994 respectively. He is currently
a Professor of Computer Science at the Lebanese American
University. He serves on the steering committee of the IEEE
NEWCAS conference and the IEEE ICECS conference. He has
also served on the program committees of various international
conferences. His research interests include electronic design
automation, high-level synthesis, design for testability, and parallel
programming. He is a senior member of IEEE and a senior member
of ACM.
Cathia Jenainati is currently a Professor of English Literature
and the Dean of the School of Arts and Sciences at the Lebanese
American University. Dr. Jenainati has previously served as the
founding head of the School for Cross-Faculty Studies at Warwick
University, UK. She serves as the Associate Editor for the Journal
of Coaching Practice, Chair of the International Advisory Board of
Amsterdam University College, Educational Coach of the Growth
Coaching International (Australia UK USA), and Founding Fellow
of the Warwick Higher Education Academy (UK). Her research
focuses on womens activism, oral history, the global sustainable
development agenda, and the history of education missions in the
Middle East. In addition, she has been recognized as a leader in
innovative pedagogies especially around Liberal Education, and
received several research grants in the field.
Mohamad Arafeh is currently a research assistant at the
Lebanese American University. He holds an M.Sc. in Business
computer and information systems from the Lebanese University.
His research interests are crowdsensing, social network analysis and
blockchain technology.

