A systems biology approach to COVID-19 progression in a population
Magdalena Djordjevic1, Andjela Rodic2, Igor Salom1, Dusan Zigic1, Ognjen Milicevic3, Bojana
Ilic1, Marko Djordjevic,2,*
1

Institute of Physics Belgrade, University of Belgrade, Serbia.

2

Computational Systems Biology Group, Faculty of Biology, University of Belgrade, Serbia.

3

Department for Medical Statistics and Informatics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade,

Serbia.
*

Correspondence: dmarko@bio.bg.ac.rs

Keywords: compartmental models, mass action law, regulation modeling, infection dynamics,
quantitative biology, SARS-CoV-2

Abstract:
A number of models in mathematical epidemiology have been developed to account for control
measures such as vaccination or quarantine. However, COVID-19 has brought unprecedented
social distancing measures, with a challenge on how to include these in a manner that can explain
the data but avoid overfitting in parameter inference. We here develop a simple time-dependent
model, where social distancing effects are introduced analogous to coarse-grained models of gene
expression control in systems biology. We apply our approach to understand drastic differences in
COVID-19 infection and fatality counts, observed between Hubei (Wuhan) and other Mainland
China provinces. We find that these unintuitive data may be explained through an interplay of
differences in transmissibility, effective protection, and detection efficiencies between Hubei and
other provinces. More generally, our results demonstrate that regional differences may drastically
shape infection outbursts. The obtained results demonstrate the applicability of our developed
method to extract key infection parameters directly from publically available data so that it can be
globally applied to outbreaks of COVID-19 in a number of countries. Overall, we show that
applications of uncommon strategies, such as methods and approaches from molecular systems
biology research to mathematical epidemiology, may significantly advance our understanding of
COVID-19 and other infectious diseases.

1. Introduction
As the novel COVID-19 disease caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus took the world by a storm, the
new pandemic quickly gained priority in scientific research in a wide range of biological and
medical science disciplines. Despite that their prior expertise was in unrelated research fields, many
researchers have successfully adapted their approaches and methods to examine various aspects of
this viral infection and, thus, contributed to finding the necessary solutions. The systems biology
community is not an exception (Alon, Mino, & Yashiv, 2020; Bar-On, Flamholz, Phillips, & Milo,
2020; Magdalena Djordjevic, Djordjevic, Ilic, Stojku, & Salom, 2021; Eilersen & Sneppen, 2020;
Karin et al., 2020; Saad-Roy et al., 2021; Vilar & Saiz, 2020; Wong et al., 2020): those involved
in modeling the dynamics of biological systems at the molecular and cellular level can directly
apply the similar methodology in epidemiological studying of the virus spread – and this exactly
is the central point of the present paper. In particular, dynamic models of biochemical reaction
networks, in which the reaction kinetics follow the law of mass action, are analogous to
compartmental epidemiological models which, instead of concentrations of chemical species, track
the prevalence of individuals in defined population classes over time (Voit, Martens, & Omholt,
(2015)). Moreover, gene expression dynamics is usually a result of the interplay between the
changing rate of cell growth, on which the global physiological rates of molecule synthesis and
degradation depend, and complex transcription regulation (Marko Djordjevic, Rodic, & Graovac,
2019). Therefore, modeling dynamics of gene circuits implies combining kinetic models, often
relying on the law of mass action, with appropriate nonlinear functions describing the regulation
part. In the case of the COVID-19 epidemic, one can note that the virus transmission in a
population, driven by the biological capacity of the particular virus in the given environment, is
coupled with strong, time-dependent regulation, represented by the epidemic mitigation measures
imposed by governments. These similarities between the modeled systems may facilitate the
application of the systems biology techniques to the epidemiology field of research. In this paper,
we will show how such an approach can be used to assess the basic parameters of the COVID-19
epidemic progression in a given population. In particular, we will use the analogy outlined above
to study the COVID-19 spread in Mainland China and test the hypothesis about possible reasons
for the uneven disease spread in China provinces.

Our interest in Mainland China infection progression comes from Figure 1. The progression seems
highly intriguing, as Hubei (with only 4% of China population) shows an order of magnitude larger
number of detected infection cases (Fig. 1A) and two orders of magnitude higher fatalities (Fig.
1B) compared to the total sum in all other Mainland China provinces. The epidemic was unfolding
well before the Wuhan closure (with the reported symptom onset of the first patient on December
1st, 2019) and within the period of huge population movement, which started two weeks before
January 25th (the Chinese Lunar New Year) (Chen, Yang, Yang, Wang, & Bärnighausen, 2020).
As a rough baseline, a modeling study of the infection spread from Wuhan (Wu, Leung, & Leung,
2020) estimated more than 105 new cases per day in Chongqing alone – instead, the actual
(reported) peak number for all Mainland China provinces outside Hubei was just 831.

Fig. 1. Infection and fatality counts for Hubei vs. all other provinces. The number of (A) Detected infections, (B)
Fatality cases. Zero on the horizontal axis corresponds to the time from which the data (Hu et al., 2020) are taken
(January 23rd), which also coincides with the Wuhan closure. Red circles correspond to the observed Hubei counts.
Blue squares correspond to the sum of the number of counts for all other provinces. The figure illustrates a puzzling
difference in the number of counts between Hubei alone and the sum of all other Mainland China provinces.

Consequently, it is a notable challenge for computational modeling to understand drastic
differences in COVID-19 infection and fatality counts observed between Hubei (Wuhan) and other
Mainland China provinces. These drastic differences may be a consequence of an interplay between
the virus transmissibility (influenced by environmental and demographic factors) and the
effectiveness of the protection measures. Both can significantly change between different provinces
(more generally different countries/regions), and the model has to infer this from available data
(commonly the number of confirmed cases, publicly available for a large number of
countries/regions).

The study presented here will therefore demonstrate the usefulness of the systems biology approach
to the analysis of non-trivial COVID-19 data from China. In particular, the developed method will
allow us to analyze the puzzling differences in dynamics trajectories in Mainland China provinces,
and it will also turn out to be more generally applicable for understanding regional differences in
outburst dynamics. The surprising differences in COVID-19 progression in different provinces
may put strong constraints on the underlying infection progression parameters and allow us to
understand:
i.

What interplay between the inherent disease transmissibility and the effects of social distancing
is responsible for the large difference in the count numbers between Hubei and the rest of
Mainland China? Addressing this question in a proper way would make easier to comprehend
how regional differences may shape the infection outbursts, which is important both locally
(for explaining this puzzle), and more generally in the context of global COVID-19 pandemics
progression.

ii.

What is the Infected Fatality Rate (IFR, the number of fatalities per total number of infected
cases) in China? Case Fatality Rate (CFR, the number of fatalities per confirmed/detected
cases) can be obtained directly from the data but is highly sensitive to the testing coverage. IFR
is a more fundamental mortality parameter, as it does not depend on the testing coverage, but
is however much harder to determine, due to the unknown number of infected cases.
Addressing these questions allows understanding both the different response policies, and the
inherent risks posed by the pandemics and will enable future cross-country comparisons. The
developed methodology i) demonstrates the usefulness of applying transdisciplinary expertise to
efficiently analyze problems of nationwide importance, ii) allows to readily analyze future
outbreaks of COVID-19 and other infectious diseases, as it depends only on inference from
straightforward and publically available data.
2. An overview of epidemics progression compartmental models
In epidemiology, for practical and ethical reasons, it is fairly impossible to conduct scientific
experiments in controlled conditions in order to investigate the spread of the disease in the human
population (Brauer, 2008). Therefore, epidemiologists usually resort to collecting data from clinical
reports on the observed situation in the field and, then, using mathematical models to interpret these
data, i.e., to infer the principles underlying the process of disease spreading. These principles may
point to potentially successful control strategies, as well as to the probable future status of the

disease in the population. Epidemiological data can often be incomplete or inaccurate due to poorly
controlled or non-standardized collection methods, which significantly complicates modeling.
However, even a qualitative agreement of the model with the data can provide useful information
of great practical importance. Hence, model predictions are widely used for making various
estimates and answering important questions about the seriousness of the epidemic consequences.
For example, how many people will be infected, require treatment, or die, or how many patients
should the public health facilities expect at any given time? Also, how long will the epidemic last?
To what extent could quarantine and self-isolation of the infected contribute to mitigating the
effects of the epidemic? Model predictions guide the development of strategies to control the
epidemic spread, including vaccination programs.
When the goal is to discover the general principles of epidemic progression, simple mathematical
models, which can be solved and analyzed with a "pencil on paper", are a logical choice as they
give insight into the properties of the examined process despite failing to reproduce it in detail. In
1927, Kermak and McKendrick formulated a simple model that predicted behavior similar to that
observed in numerous epidemics (Kermack & McKendrick, 1927). It was a type of compartmental
model describing the infection spread in a population by analogy with a system of vessels
connected by pipes through which a fluid flows. Namely, the population is divided into
compartments, and assumptions are made about the nature and the rate of the flow between them.
The structure of the compartmental model - which sections and how many of them it will contain
and how they will be connected - depends on the characteristics of transmission of a given
infectious disease and whether the past disease provides immunity to re-infections or not. The
model set by these two scientists is known as SIR (from Susceptible - Infected - Recovered). It
divides the population into three classes which correspond to compartments (Fig. 2): Susceptible
(S) class includes healthy individuals susceptible to infection, which have never been exposed to
the virus; Those who are infected and can infect others belong to the Infected (I) class; Removed
(R) class encompasses those who are excluded from the population, either by quarantining the
infected, or by acquiring immunity through recovery from disease or immunization, or by the death
of the infected (Brauer, 2008).

Fig. 2. Schematic representation of the SIR model. Rectangles denote model compartments containing susceptible
(S), infected (I), and recovered (R) individuals in the population of size N. Permitted directions of flow between
compartments are denoted by arrows, with the rates of flow indicated above them. The rates are expressed according
to the law of mass action, where  and  are the rate constants. The dashed curve corresponds to bimolecular reaction,
where newly infected are generated through interactions (contacts) between susceptible and already infected
individuals.

Mathematically, this model is represented by a system of ordinary differential equations. The time
derivative of the number of individuals in a compartment, i.e., the rate of their change, is given by
the difference between the rates at which the compartment is filled and emptied. Analogous to the
processes in which chemical species (e.g. proteins) are degraded or converted into others within a
biochemical reaction network (Ingalls, 2013), the rate of transition of individuals from one
compartment to another follows the law of mass action. For example, a person moves from
compartment S to compartment I at the rate which is proportional to the product of the S and I, as
the encounter with an infected person enables virus transmission to the susceptible one (Voit et al.,
(2015)).
By formulating such (or similar) models, one assumes that the epidemic is a deterministic process.
Namely, the state of the population at all times is completely determined by its previous state and
the rules described by the model. This is a reasonable approximation in cases where the numbers
of individuals in the compartments are large, i.e., in a commonly considered deterministic range
(>10). Such approximation (i.e., deterministic modeling) is well suited for the spread of COVID19, which is up to now known for a large number of individuals in all compartments.
3. Systems biology approach to a compartmental model of the COVID-19 epidemic
The above-introduced SIR model is likely the simplest compartmental model in mathematical
epidemiology and many subsequent models are derivatives of this basic form. Among others, these
extensions have also been developed towards including control measures such as vaccination or
quarantine (Diekmann, Heesterbeek, & Britton, 2012; Keeling & Rohani, 2011; Martcheva, 2015).
However, COVID-19 brought a challenge to account for previously unprecedented social
distancing measures, taken by most countries. When included, these effects have been, up to now,
accounted for by the direct changes in the transmissibility term (Chowell, Sattenspiel, Bansal, &
Viboud, 2016; Tian et al., 2020), which, however, corresponds to introducing a phenomenological
dependence in otherwise mechanistic models. That is, to be included consistently in the model,

social distancing should move individuals from one compartment to the other, just as vaccination
and quarantine are usually implemented. On the other hand, it is necessary to construct a minimal
mechanistic model in terms of the ability to explain the data with the smallest number of
parameters, so that relevant infection progression properties can be inferred without overfitting.
With this goal in mind, we used our systems biology background to develop a minimal model that
accounts for all the main qualitative features of the SARS-CoV-2 infection spread under epidemic
mitigation measures. As outlined above, we opt for a deterministic model due to the robust and
computationally less demanding parameter inference (Wilkinson, 2018).

Fig. 3. Schematic representation of the SPEIRD model. Compartments and the transition rates are as indicated in
the text, where transitions between different compartments are marked by arrows. The time-dependent transition rate
from susceptible to protected category tis indicated by the solid arrow The infected can transition to the recovered
category either without being diagnosed (transition to R), or being diagnosed and then transitioning to confirmed healed
or fatality cases. The dashed rectangle indicates that A, H, and F categories in the starting model are substituted for the
cumulative case counts (D), which removes h and m from the analysis, where D is fitted to the observed data.

To describe the COVID-19 epidemic, we developed SPEIRD model depicted schematically in
Figure 3. It assumes that healthy persons susceptible to infection (S), can be infected, but in the
case of this (and many other) viruses they do not immediately become contagious to other people,
but first spend some time in the compartment E (Exposed to the virus) and then develop symptoms
and pass to the compartment I. Infected persons can either recover at home, moving to the
compartment R, or they can be diagnosed with SARS-CoV-2 virus infection (Active detected
cases). A (Active) cases can, further, either become healed or die from the disease. To consistently
implement the social distancing within this model structure, we included a compartment P
(Protected) in the model, which contains susceptible persons who are protected from exposure to

the virus as a result of the epidemic mitigation measures, such as self-imposed isolation, social
distancing, and advised changes in individual behavior.
The following differential equations describe how different categories change with time:
dS / dt     I  S / N    t   S

(1)

dE / dt    I  S / N    E

(2)

dI / dt    E    I      I

(3)

dA / dt      I  h  A  m  A

(4)

dH / dt  h  A

(5)

dF / dt  m  A

(6)

where β is the infection rate in a fully susceptible population; α(t) - the time-dependent protection
rate, i.e., the rate at which the population moves from susceptible to the protected category,
quantifying the impact of the social protection measures. σ – the inverse of the exposed period; γ –
the inverse of the infectious period; δ – the inverse of the period of the infection diagnosis; ε - the
detection efficiency; h - the healing rate of diagnosed cases; m - the mortality rate.
The probability that an infected person will meet a susceptible person is proportional to S/N, where
N is the total number of individuals in the population. The rate at which individuals move from S
to E is obtained when the product of I and S/N is multiplied by the infection rate, β, which quantifies
the efficiency of transmission of a particular virus in the population with certain demographic
characteristics and meteorological conditions, and it does not depend on epidemic suppression
measures. Thus, β is a characteristic of the virus, the population, and the external conditions in
which the virus is transmitted. Since the compartment S is being emptied, the corresponding rate
in the first equation is specified with the minus sign.
S also decays by moving the individuals to P with a protection rate that may vary with time. While
mitigation measures are commonly accounted for by models with time-independent terms
(Martcheva, 2015), we note that the social distancing term should depend on time, as this measure
is introduced at a certain point in epidemics and may also evolve gradually. We denote the time
point (more specifically, the date) of the onset of the social distancing measures in the examined
population with t0. The protection rate α(t) is then taken as 0 before t0 and a constant value α
afterwards.

One may notice a direct parallel between the model outlined above, and e.g., modeling gene
expression regulation in systems biology with a step function that approximates the activity of a
promoter to which repressor proteins are highly cooperatively bound: the promoter is initially
silenced and upon receiving a signal which leads to the abrupt removal of repression, promoter
activity rises sharply to its maximum value. We notice that the step function is a satisfactory
approximation of the dynamics of social distancing, i.e., it may not be necessary to further increase
the number of parameters by applying the Hill function (which describes a more gradual
activation), since governments quickly introduced these measures, together with their effective
implementation. Note however that in (Magdalena Djordjevic, Djordjevic, Ilic, Stojku, & Salom,
2021) we introduced a more complex model with Hill function, and provided analytical results for
key properties of this model.
Compartment E is filled by infecting the susceptibles and emptied by moving the individuals to I,
with the rate σ representing the inverse value of the latent period during which the person is not
contagious. While compartment I is filled with individuals from E, it is depleted through two
channels. Individuals move to R with the rate γ, which is the inverse of the period of
contagiousness, and to A with the rate δ, which is the inverse of the time required for diagnosis,
multiplied by ε, reflecting that only a fraction (likely small due to many asymptomatic infections)
of the total infected are detected. Note that case detection reduces the number of individuals in I
that can infect susceptibles: the model assumes that the detected cases are quarantined and thus
isolated from the general population. The numbers in compartments A, H, and F change following
the same logic described for the other compartments.
We can further simplify the analysis by looking at the total number of detected cases (D), which is
the sum of A, H, and F. By adding the Eqs. (4)-(6), we obtain:
dD dt      I ,

(7)

and thus lose two parameters, h and m. The total number of detected cases in time is a measurable
quantity from which we can determine the dynamics of other model compartments since this is the
data that is available for various different regions and countries. Thereby, we assume that before t0
social distancing does not take effect, and the measures introduced at t0 will take effect on D~10
days later, as this is about the time that elapses between infection and detection/diagnosis (Feng et
al., 2020). Consequently, for the first t0+10 days, the D curve reflects disease transmission without
epidemic suppression measures.

3.1.Virus transmission in the early stages of epidemics
We will now focus on the dynamics of the infection spread at the very beginning of the epidemic,
i.e., on the period before the introduction and practice of any control measures (Salom et al., 2021).
Regarding the model, we assume that there is no social distancing (no transition from S to P), there
is no quarantine, and almost the entire population consists of people susceptible to infection, so
S/N = 1. This gives us an even simpler mathematical model which appears to be very useful because
it allows analytical derivation of the expressions we need. Our system of Eqs. (1)-(3) and (7) is
reduced to two linear differential equations that we can write in matrix form
d  E   
 
dt  I   

  E 
E
    A  ,
   I 
I

(8)

determine the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the matrix and, subsequently, the solutions of the
system, E(t) and I(t). Specifically, the cumulative number of infected in time, I(t), is obtained
according to the following equation:
I (t )  C1 exp(t )  C2 exp(t ) ,

(9)

where λs are eigenvalues of the matrix. Since one of the eigenvalues, here denoted by λ-, is
negative, the corresponding term of the Eq. (9) will decrease over time, and I(t) will be effectively
described by the first term, already after few days from the epidemic outbreak (Salom et al., 2021).
We can further derive this equation for the dependence of the logarithm of the number of detected
cases in time:

log  D (t )   log      I (0)      t .

(10)

This is the straight line equation whose slope is given by the value of λ+ (the dominant, positive
eigenvalue of the matrix in Eq. (8)).
Once we know λ+, we can calculate the value of the so-called basic reproduction number, R0,free,
by fixing mean values of the latency period and the infectivity period (γ = 0.4 days-1, σ = 0.2 days1

), which are known from the literature and characterize the fundamental infection processes

(Kucharski et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020):
R0, free 

 (   )  2

.
 1 



(11)

R0,free is an important epidemiological parameter that characterizes the inherent biological
transmission of the virus in a completely unprotected population. In particular, it is the mean

number of secondarily infected by one infected person introduced in a completely susceptible
population. It depends on the biology of the specific virus, as well as the demographic
characteristics of the population and the environmental conditions, while it does not depend on the
applied infection control measures (Brauer, 2008). In (Salom et al., 2021) we utilized a
bioinformatics analysis, akin to those often used to understand complex data in systems biology,
to pinpoint demographic and meteorological factors that affect R0,free (i.e., inherent virus
transmissibility in population). This furthermore underlines that a rich array of techniques
developed and/or widely used within systems biology can be successfully employed within
infectious disease modeling.
4. Parameter analysis and inference
R0,free, α, t0, two initial conditions (I0 and E0), and the detection efficiency ε, are unknown and may
differ between the provinces. Is it possible to determine these unknown parameters from different
properties of the D curve? Early in the infection, almost the entire population is susceptible (S≈N),
so Eqs. (2) and (3) become linear, and decoupled from the rest of the system, as discussed in the
previous section. This sets the ratio of I0 to E0, through the eigenvector components with the
dominant (positive) eigenvalue of the Jacobian for this subsystem. This eigenvalue, corresponding
to the initial slope of the log(D) curve, sets the value of λ+ and subsequently, of R0,free (see Eq.
(11)). From Eq. (7) one can see that the product of I0 and ε·δ is set by dD/dt at the initial time (t=0).
Later dynamics of the D curve is determined solely by the combination tα = t0 + 1/α (which we
denote as protection time), setting the time at which ~1/2 of the population moves to the protected
category. We also numerically checked this, and confirmed that t0 can be lowered at the expense
of increasing 1/α, without affecting the fit quality. We allowed for t0 to vary in reasonable proximity
of January 23rd, as the social distancing was generally introduced close to Wuhan closure (e.g., on
that date, all major events in Beijing were canceled) (Chen et al., 2020; Du et al., 2020), but we
cannot be sure when the measures effectively took place. Our inferred t0 values are within a week
from Wuhan closure, appearing as reasonable. The remaining independent parameter (I0) is then
left to be determined from D curve properties at the late infection stage, such as its saturation time.
The number of characteristic dynamics features is thus at least equal to the number of fit
parameters, leading to constrained numerical analysis, so that over-fitting is not expected. For few
provinces, we however observed that I0 can be decreased compared to the best fit value, without
noticeably affecting the fit quality. For these provinces, we chose the lowest I0 value that still leads

to a comparably good fit. This allows obtaining the most conservative (i.e., as high as possible
while still consistent with data) IFR estimate, as the reported fatality counts for provinces other
than Hubei is surprisingly low.
Parameter inference and uncertainties are estimated separately for each province. However, within
a given province, demographic, special, or population activity (network effects) heterogeneities
(Britton, Ball, & Trapman, 2020; Diekmann et al., 2012), or seasonality effects (Wong et al., 2020),
are not taken into account. These are potentially important, particularly for projections (longerterm predictions of infection dynamics under different scenarios), and can be readily included in
our model. Such extensions would however complicate parameter inference, due to an increase in
parameter number, as this may either lead to overfitting or require special/additional data that may
be available only for a limited number of countries/regions (which would limit the generality of
our proposed method). A more complex model structure may also obscure a straightforward
relationship between the model parameters and distinct dynamical features of the confirmed case
count curve analyzed above. While the inclusion of additional effects is left for future work, we
here employ the model structure and parameter inference introduced above on widely available
case count data, as proof of the principle for the generality of our proposed approach. Moreover, a
major advantage of our approach is that it allows consistent analysis for all provinces with the same
model, numerical procedure, and parameter set, allowing an objective comparison of the obtained
results.
Our model was numerically solved by the Runge-Kutta method (Dormand & Prince, 1980) for each
parameter combination. Parameter values were inferred by exhaustive search over a wide
parameter range, to avoid reaching a local minimum of the objective function (R2). To infer the
unknown parameters, we fit (by minimizing R2) the model to the observed total number of detected
D for each province. As an alternative to exhaustive search, some of many optimization techniques
used in epidemics modeling, such as the Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) approach, can be
used instead (Keeling & Rohani, 2011; Wong et al., 2020) – exhaustive search is however
straightforward, guarantees that the global minimum is reached, and is in this case not
computationally demanding. Errors were estimated through Monte-Carlo simulations (Press,
Flannery, Teukolsky, & Vetterling, 1986), individually for each province with the assumption that
count numbers follow the Poisson distribution. Monte-Carlo simulations were found as the most
reliable estimate of the fit parameter uncertainties for a non-linear fit (Cunningham, 1993). This

also serves as an independent check for overfitting, as in that case, data point perturbations would
lead to large parameter uncertainties. We find no indication of this in the results reported below, as
the inferred uncertainties (consistently indicated with all results) are reasonably small. In particular,
the differences in the inferred parameter values, which are relevant for the reported
results/conclusions, are statistically highly significant. P values for extracted parameter differences
between provinces are estimated by the t-test.
5. Analysis of COVID-19 transmission in China
We used the SPEIRD with the parameter inference described above, to analyze all Mainland China
provinces, except Tibet, where only one COVID-19 case was reported. Parameters were estimated
separately for each of the 30 provinces by the same model and parameter set, which enables an
impartial comparison of the results presented below. To allow for a straightforward comparison of
the infection progression between different provinces, the starting date (i.e., t=0) in our analysis is
the same for all the provinces and corresponds to January 23rd (when the data for all the provinces
became publically available and continuously tracked (Hu et al., 2020)).
In Fig. 4A and B, we show that our model can robustly explain the observed D, in the cases of large
outburst (Hubei on Fig. 4A), as well as for all other provinces, where D is in the range from
intermediate (e.g., Guangdong) to low (e.g., Inner Mongolia). Provinces in Fig. 2B were selected
to cover the entire range of observed D (from lower to higher counts), while comparably good fits
were obtained for other provinces, which were all included in the further analysis. Our method is
also robust to data perturbations (which might be frequent), e.g. in the case of Hubei (Wuhan), a
large number of counts was added on Feb. 12th, based on clinical diagnosis (CT scan) (Feng et al.,
2020), which is apparent as a discontinuity in observed D in Fig. 4A. The model however
interpolates this discontinuity, finding a reasonable description of the overall data.

Fig. 4. Model predictions: comparison with data and key parameter estimates. Predictions (compared to data) of
detected infection counts for (A) Hubei, (B) other Mainland China provinces. Zeros on the horizontal axis correspond
to January 23rd, which is the initial time in our numerical analysis for all the provinces. The observed counts are shown
by dots and our model predictions by dashed curves. Names of the provinces are indicated in the legend, with provinces
selected to cover the full range of the observed total detected counts. The distribution with respect to provinces of (C)
the basic reproduction number in the absence of social distancing, R0,free, (D) the protection time tα. (E) Case Fatality
Rate, calculated directly from the reported data. (F) Infected Fatality Rate. The values for Hubei are indicated by the
red bars.

We backpropagated the dynamics inferred for Hubei, to estimate that January 5th (±4 days) was the
onset of the infection's exponential growth in the population (not to be confused with the
appearance of first infections, which likely happened in December (Feng et al., 2020)). This agrees
well with (Feng et al., 2020) (cf. Fig. 3A), which tracked cases according to their symptom onset
(shifted for ~12 days with respect to detection/diagnosis, cf. Fig. 3B), and coincides with WHO
reports on social media that there is a cluster of pneumonia cases – with no deaths – in Wuhan
(WHO, 2020). Since our analysis does not directly use any information before January 23rd, this
agreement provides confidence in our I0 estimate. Note that we infer I0 separately for each province
of interest, through which we also take into account different times of the infection onset in
different provinces (so that earlier onset time would generally lead to a larger number of infected
on January 23rd).

province

tdays)

R0

E0

I0

IFR (%)

CFR (%)

detected %

Anhui
Beijing
Chongqing
Fujian
Gansu
Guangdong
Guangxi
Guizhou
Hainan
Hebei
Heilongjiang
Henan
Hubei
Hunan
I. Mongolia
Jiangsu
Jiangxi
Jilin
Liaoning
Ningxia
Qinghai
Shaanxi
Shandong
Shanghai
Shanxi
Sichuan
Tianjin
Xinjiang
Yunnan
Zhejiang

6.6±0.5
7.9±0.5
7.0±0.2
3.7±0.4
5±1
5.0±0.1
7±1
8.1±0.6
7.6±0.8
6.0±0.6
7±1
7.0±0.3
8.3±0.2
5.1±0.1
10.0±0.8
5.5±0.5
7.0±0.2
10.0±0.7
7±1
5.3±0.9
6.1±0.6
5.2±0.5
9±1
5.0±0.4
5.2±0.5
7.7±0.8
7±2
7.3±0.9
4.0±0.2
5.0±0.1

5.5±0.8
3.5±0.4
3.5±0.2
7±2
6±3
7±1
3.8±0.8
7±1
3.3±0.7
7±2
6±2
4.5±0.5
8.2±0.4
6.8±0.8
2.8±0.4
7±2
5.6±0.9
4.0±0.8
2.9±0.7
7±3
4.0±0.5
6±1
3.5±0.5
6±1
6±2
3.7±0.5
4±2
6±1
7±2
7.2±0.8

920±30
610±20
1900±40
1660±40
630±20
1360±40
1000±30
53±7
300±20
240±20
260±20
1780±40
31900±400
1430±40
940±30
500±20
890±30
270±20
1240±40
72±9
2260±50
380±20
900±30
1570±40
1600±40
990±30
170±10
42±7
360±20
1340±40

220±20
180±10
560±20
360±20
150±10
290±20
290±20
11±3
90±10
52±7
59±7
460±20
6600±200
310±20
300±20
110±10
210±10
76±9
390±20
15±4
640±30
90±10
260±20
370±20
370±20
280±20
46±7
10±3
76±9
290±20

0.04±0.02
0.12±0.05
0.04±0.03
0.007±0.003
0.03±0.04
0.04±0.01
0.02±0.02
0.06±0.03
0.21±0.09
0.11±0.03
0.15±0.07
0.09±0.04
0.15±0.09
0.02±0.01
0.01±0.03
0±0
0.005±0.002
0.02±0.02
0.02±0.04
0±0
0±0
0.07±0.03
0.06±0.01
0.02±0.02
0±0
0.03±0.02
0.14±0.06
0.25±0.09
0.06±0.03
0.005±0.002

0.6±0.3
1.7±0.7
1.0±0.5
0.3±0.4
1±1
0.6±0.2
0.8±0.6
1±1
4±2
1.8±0.8
2.9±0.9
1.7±0.4
6.5±0.1
0.4±0.2
1±1
0±0
0.1±0.1
1±1
2±2
0±0
0±0
1.3±0.8
1.0±0.4
0.8±0.5
0±0
0.6±0.3
2±1
3±2
1.2±0.9
0.1±0.1

6±3
7±3
4±2
2±1
2±3
7±2
3±3
4±2
6±3
6±2
5±3
5±2
2±2
5±2
1±3
6±2
5±2
1±2
1±2
6±23
0±2
6±2
6±1
2±3
1±2
5±3
7±3
8±2
5±2
7±3

Table 1: tα – protection time, R0,free – basic reproduction number,

E0 – initial exposed, I0 – initial infected, IFR –

Infection Fatality Rate, CFR – Case Fatality Rate, detected % - fraction of the infected population that has been
detected. Error of the quantities correspond to one standard deviation.

Key parameters inferred from our analysis are summarized in Fig. 4C-F, with individual results
and errors for all the provinces shown in the Table 1. Fig. 4C shows the distribution of R0,free. Note
that R0,free might depend on demographic (population density, etc.) and climate factors
(temperature, humidity…), which are not controllable, but are unrelated to the applied social
distancing measures (see above). It is known that the R0 value can strongly depend on the model,
e.g. the number of introduced compartments (Keeling & Rohani, 2011); accordingly, a wide range

of R0 values were reported for China in the literature (Sanche et al., 2020; Wu, Leung, Bushman,
et al., 2020). Consequently, a clear advantage of our study is that parameters for all China provinces
were determined from the same model and data set, which allows direct comparisons. Our obtained
average R0,free for provinces outside of Hubei is 5.3±0.3, in a reasonable agreement with a recent
estimate (≈5.7) (Sanche et al., 2020). Furthermore, we observe that R0,free for Hubei is a far outlier
with a value of 8.2±0.4, which is notably larger than for other provinces with p~10-11. This then
strongly suggests that demographic and climate factors that determine R0,free, played a decisive role
in a large outburst in Hubei vs. other provinces, which we further address below.
The distribution of protection time tα for the provinces is shown in Fig. 4D, with the value for Hubei
indicated in red. The mean for the other provinces is 6.6±0.2 days. That is, we observe that the
suppression measures were efficiently implemented, with ~½ of the population moving to the
protected category within a week from Wuhan closure. The protection time for Hubei of 8.3±0.2
days was longer, which is statistically significant at the p~10-11 level. The estimated less efficient
protection in the case of Hubei may also be an important contributing factor in the surprising
difference in Hubei vs. other provinces, which we further investigate below.
CFR distribution, based on the fatality numbers reported for Hubei and other provinces is shown
in Fig. 4E. These numbers are not based on the model predictions, i.e., can be straightforwardly
obtained by dividing the total number of fatalities by the total number of detected cases. CFR for
other provinces with a mean of 1.2±0.4% is significantly smaller compared to CFR for Hubei,
which was 4.6% before the correction on April 17th, and 6.5% after the correction (with 1290
fatalities added to Wuhan). This large difference in CFR between Hubei and other provinces further
accentuates the differences noted in Fig. 1.
IFR is harder to determine than CFR, as a majority of COVID-19 infections correspond to
asymptomatic or mild cases that are by large not diagnosed (Day, 2020). We consequently calculate
IFR as the total number of fatalities divided by the total number of infections (cumulative
incidence) for the entire outburst, where cumulative incidence is estimated from our model. As the
infections precede fatalities, both the total number of fatalities and the cumulative incidence in our
estimate correspond to the entire outburst, so that all the infections had a sufficient time to recover
or lead to fatalities – this is directly feasible for the provinces in China, where all detected case
counts reached saturation. Note that IFR calculated in this way corresponds to an averaged quantity

so that it does not capture possible time-dependent change over the outburst interval (in fact, for
Wuhan it is known that the fatality rate was larger at the very beginning of the outburst).
Nevertheless, the estimated IFR’s present a reasonable measure of COVID-19 mortality across
China provinces.

Fig. 5. The interplay of transmissibility and effective social distancing. (A) The correlation plot of tα vs. R0,free for
all provinces, where the point corresponding to Hubei is marked in red. (B) The effect (on the Hubei dynamics of
infected and latent cases) of reducing R0,free and tα to the mean values of other Mainland China provinces. Both the
unperturbed Hubei dynamics and the sum of infected and latent cases for all other provinces are included as references.

IFR distribution, which provides a much less biased measure of the infection mortality, is shown
in Fig. 4F. In distinction to CFR, estimated IFR shows a much smaller difference between Hubei
(0.15%±0.09%) and other provinces (0.056±0.007%). Therefore, while Hubei is a clear outlier with
respect to CFR, we observe similar IFR values for all Mainland China provinces, where few
provinces have even higher IFR than Hubei. The ratio of IFR to CFR equals the fraction of all
infected that got detected (detection coverage). We estimate that the mean detection coverage for
all provinces except Hubei is higher than detection coverage for Hubei (4.5±0.9% vs. 2±2%). This
difference is responsible for a decrease by a factor of two from CFR to IFR for Hubei, compared
to the other provinces, and consequently for more uniform mortality estimates at the IFR level.
Xinjiang has the highest IFR of 0.25±0.09% so that Hubei is not an outlier anymore. Estimated
IFR’s of up to 0.3% in China provinces are in general agreement with the estimates reported

elsewhere (see e.g. (Bar-On et al., 2020; Magdalena Djordjevic et al., 2021; Mizumoto, Kagaya, &
Chowell, 2020).
In Fig. 5A, two key infection progression parameters are plotted against each other: protection time
tα vs. basic reproduction number R0,free. Unexpectedly, there is a high negative correlation, with
Pearson correlation coefficient R =  0.70, which is statistically highly significant p~10-5, where
these two are a priori unrelated (see above). Actually, stronger social distancing measures - which
by definition are not included in R0,free - would lead to a decrease in effective transmissibility. This
would then lead to a tendency of transmissibility to positively correlate with tα, oppositely from the
strong negative correlation observed in Fig. 5A. Therefore, higher basic reproduction number is
genuinely related to a shorter protection time (larger effect of the suppression measures).
Intuitively, this could be understood as a negative feedback loop, commonly observed in systems
biology (Alon, 2019; Phillips, Kondev, Theriot, & Garcia, 2012), where larger R0,free leads to
steeper initial growth in the infected numbers, which may elicit stronger measures and better
observing of these measures by the population faced with a more serious outbreak. Interestingly,
similar negative feedback was also obtained in the context in the context of epidemics research
other than COVID-19 (Wang, Andrews, Wu, Wang, & Bauch, 2015).
The two main properties of the Hubei outburst are therefore higher R0,free and tα compared to other
provinces. In Fig. 5B, we investigate how these two properties separately affect the Wuhan outburst
for latent and infected cases, where unperturbed Hubei dynamics is shown by the red full curve.
We first reduce only R0,free from the Hubei value, to the mean value for all other provinces (the
dash-dotted green curve). We see that this reduction substantially lowers the peak of the curve,
though it still remains wide. Next, instead of decreasing R0,free, we decrease the protection time tα
to the mean value for all other provinces (dashed orange curve). While reducing tα also significantly
lowers the peak of the curve, its main effect is in narrowing the curve, i.e., reducing the outburst
time. Finally, when R0.free and tα are jointly reduced, we obtain the (dotted purple) curve that is both
significantly lower and narrower than the original Hubei progression. This curve comes quite close
to the curve that presents the sum of all other provinces (full blue curve) - the dotted curve remains
somewhat above this sum, mainly because the initial number of latent and infected cases is
somewhat higher for Hubei compared to the sum of all other provinces. This synergy between the
transmissibility and the control measures will be further discussed below.

6. Conclusions
In this study, we applied a systems biology approach to develop a novel method of COVID-19
transmission dynamics. The model includes (time-dependent) social distancing measures in a
simple manner, consistent with the compartmental mechanistic nature of the underlying process.
The model has a major advantage that it is independent of the specific transmission process
considered, and requires only commonly available count data as an input. The model allows
extracting key infection parameters from the data that are readily available and publicly accessible
(both for China and other countries), so that, in a nutshell, our approach is of wide applicability.
To our best knowledge, such parameters (necessary to assess any future COVID-19 risks), were
not extracted by other computational approaches.
The developed method is subsequently applied to the problem that appears highly non-trivial, i.e.,
to understand the puzzle created by the drastic differences in the infection and fatality counts
between Hubei and the rest of Mainland China. The goal was to determine if it is possible to
consistently explain such drastic differences by the same model, and what are the resulting
numerical estimates and conclusions. We found that Hubei was a suitable ground for infection
transmission, being an outlier with respect to two key infection progression parameters: having
significantly larger R0,free, and a longer time needed to move a sizable fraction of the population
from susceptible to a protected category. While stricter measures were formally introduced in
Hubei, the initial phase of the outburst put a large strain on the system, arguably leading to less
effective measures compared to other provinces.
The fact that the initial epidemic in Hubei was not followed by similar outbursts in the rest of
Mainland China may be understood as a serendipitous interplay of the two factors noted above.
While both smaller R0,free and lower half-protection time (more efficient measures) significantly
suppress the infection curve, their effect is also qualitatively different. While lowering R0,free more
significantly suppresses the peak, decreasing the half-protection time significantly reduces the
outburst duration. Consequently, the synergy of these two effects appears to lead to drastically
suppressed infection dynamics in other Mainland China provinces compared to Hubei. The number
of detected (diagnosed) cases in the entire Mainland China is, therefore, though unintuitive, well
consistent with the model, and is explainable by a seemingly reasonable combination of
circumstances. Our obtained negative feedback between transmissibility and effects of social

distancing may be understood in terms of larger transmissibility triggering more stringent social
distancing measures, where a similar conclusion was also obtained through entirely different means
(a combination of real-time human mobility data and regression analysis) (Kraemer et al., 2020).
In summary, we showed that unintuitive dissimilarity in the infection progression for Hubei vs.
other Mainland China provinces is consistent with our model, and can be attributed to the interplay
of transmissibility and effective protection, demonstrating that regional differences may drastically
shape the infection outbursts. This also shows that comparisons in terms of the confirmed cases, or
fatality counts (even when normalized for population size), between COVID-19 and other
infectious diseases, or between different regions for COVID-19, are not feasible, and that parameter
inference from quantitative models (individually for different affected regions) is necessary.
Consequently, this paper illustrates that utilization of uncommon strategies, such as systems
biology application to mathematical epidemiology, may significantly advance our understanding
of COVID-19 and other infectious diseases.
Acknowledgements: This work was supported by the Ministry of Education, Science and
Technological Development of the Republic of Serbia.
References
Alon, U. (2019). An introduction to systems biology: design principles of biological circuits: CRC
press.
Alon, U., Mino, R., & Yashiv, E. (2020). 10-4: How to Reopen the Economy by Exploiting the
Coronavirus’s Weak Spot. The New York Times.
Bar-On, Y. M., Flamholz, A., Phillips, R., & Milo, R. (2020). Science Forum: SARS-CoV-2
(COVID-19) by the numbers. Elife, 9, e57309.
Brauer, F. (2008). Compartmental models in epidemiology Mathematical epidemiology (pp. 1979): Springer.
Britton, T., Ball, F., & Trapman, P. (2020). A mathematical model reveals the influence of
population heterogeneity on herd immunity to SARS-CoV-2. Science, 369(6505), 846-849.
Chen, S., Yang, J., Yang, W., Wang, C., & Bärnighausen, T. (2020). COVID-19 control in China
during mass population movements at New Year. The Lancet, 395(10226), 764-766.
Chowell, G., Sattenspiel, L., Bansal, S., & Viboud, C. (2016). Mathematical models to characterize
early epidemic growth: A review. Physics of life reviews, 18, 66-97.

Cunningham, R. W. (1993). Comparison of three methods for determining fit parameter
uncertainties for the Marquardt Compromise. Computers in Physics, 7(5), 570-576.
Day, M. (2020). Covid-19: identifying and isolating asymptomatic people helped eliminate virus
in Italian village. BMJ: British Medical Journal (Online), 368.
Diekmann, O., Heesterbeek, H., & Britton, T. (2012). Mathematical tools for understanding
infectious disease dynamics (Vol. 7): Princeton University Press.
Djordjevic, M., Djordjevic, M., Ilic, B., Stojku, S., & Salom, I. (2021). Understanding Infection
Progression under Strong Control Measures through Universal COVID-19 Growth
Strategies. Global Challenges, 5, 2000101.
Djordjevic, M., Rodic, A., & Graovac, S. (2019). From biophysics to ‘omics and systems biology.
European Biophysics Journal, 48(5), 413-424.
Dormand, J. R., & Prince, P. J. (1980). A family of embedded Runge-Kutta formulae. Journal of
computational and applied mathematics, 6(1), 19-26.
Du, Z., Xu, X., Wang, L., Fox, S. J., Cowling, B. J., Galvani, A. P., & Meyers, L. A. (2020). Effects
of proactive social distancing on COVID-19 outbreaks in 58 cities, China. Emerging
infectious diseases, 26(9), 2267.
Eilersen, A., & Sneppen, K. (2020). Cost–benefit of limited isolation and testing in COVID-19
mitigation. Scientific reports, 10(1), 1-7.
Feng et al., Z. (2020). The epidemiological characteristics of an outbreak of 2019 novel coronavirus
diseases (COVID-19)—China, 2020. China CDC Weekly, 2(8), 113-122.
Hu, T., Guan, W., Zhu, X., Shao, Y., Liu, L., Du, J., . . . She, B. (2020). Building an Open Resources
Repository for COVID-19 Research. Social Science Research Network, 3587704.
Ingalls, B. P. (2013). Mathematical modeling in systems biology: an introduction: MIT press.
Karin, O., Bar-On, Y. M., Milo, T., Katzir, I., Mayo, A., Korem, Y., . . . Davidovich, N. (2020).
Adaptive cyclic exit strategies from lockdown to suppress COVID-19 and allow economic
activity. medRxiv.
Keeling, M. J., & Rohani, P. (2011). Modeling infectious diseases in humans and animals:
Princeton University Press.
Kermack, W. O., & McKendrick, A. G. (1927). A contribution to the mathematical theory of
epidemics. Proceedings of the royal society of london. Series A, Containing papers of a
mathematical and physical character, 115(772), 700-721.

Kraemer, M. U., Yang, C.-H., Gutierrez, B., Wu, C.-H., Klein, B., Pigott, D. M., . . . Hanage, W.
P. (2020). The effect of human mobility and control measures on the COVID-19 epidemic
in China. Science, 368(6490), 493-497.
Kucharski, A. J., Russell, T. W., Diamond, C., Liu, Y., Edmunds, J., Funk, S., . . . Munday, J. D.
(2020). Early dynamics of transmission and control of COVID-19: a mathematical
modelling study. The Lancet Infectious Diseases, 20(5), 553-558.
Li, Q., Guan, X., Wu, P., Wang, X., Zhou, L., Tong, Y., . . . Wong, J. Y. (2020). Early transmission
dynamics in Wuhan, China, of novel coronavirus–infected pneumonia. New England
Journal of Medicine.
Martcheva, M. (2015). An introduction to mathematical epidemiology (Vol. 61): Springer.
Mizumoto, K., Kagaya, K., & Chowell, G. (2020). Early epidemiological assessment of the
transmission potential and virulence of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Wuhan
City, China, January–February, 2020. BMC medicine, 18(1), 1-9.
Phillips, R., Kondev, J., Theriot, J., & Garcia, H. (2012). Physical biology of the cell: Garland
Science.
Press, W. H., Flannery, B. P., Teukolsky, S. A., & Vetterling, W. T. (1986). Numerical recipes:
The art of scientific computing. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Saad-Roy, C. M., Grenfell, B. T., Levin, S. A., Pellis, L., Stage, H. B., van den Driessche, P., &
Wingreen, N. S. (2021). Superinfection and the evolution of an initial asymptomatic stage.
Royal Society open science, 8(1), 202212.
Salom, I., Rodic, A., Milicevic, O., Zigic, D., Djordjevic, M., & Djordjevic, M. (2021). Effects of
demographic and weather parameters on COVID-19 basic reproduction number. Frontiers
in Ecology and Evolution, 8, 617841.
Sanche, S., Lin, Y. T., Xu, C., Romero-Severson, E., Hengartner, N., & Ke, R. (2020). High
Contagiousness and Rapid Spread of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2.
Emerging infectious diseases, 26(7).
Tian, H., Liu, Y., Li, Y., Wu, C.-H., Chen, B., Kraemer, M. U., . . . Yang, Q. (2020). An
investigation of transmission control measures during the first 50 days of the COVID-19
epidemic in China. Science, 368(6491), 638-642.
Vilar, J. M., & Saiz, L. (2020). The evolving worldwide dynamic state of the COVID-19 outbreak.
medRxiv.

Voit, E., Martens, H., & Omholt, S. ((2015)). 150 Years of the Mass Action Law. PLoS Comput
Biol 11(1), 11(1), e1004012.
Wang, Z., Andrews, M. A., Wu, Z.-X., Wang, L., & Bauch, C. T. (2015). Coupled disease–
behavior dynamics on complex networks: A review. Physics of life reviews, 15, 1-29.
WHO. (2020). WHO Timeline - COVID-19. https://www.who.int/news-room/detail/27-04-2020who-timeline---covid-19: World Health Organization.
Wilkinson, D. J. (2018). Stochastic modelling for systems biology (3 ed.). London: Chapman and
Hall/CRC.
Wong, G. N., Weiner, Z. J., Tkachenko, A. V., Elbanna, A., Maslov, S., & Goldenfeld, N. (2020).
Modeling COVID-19 dynamics in Illinois under nonpharmaceutical interventions. Physical
Review X, 10(4), 041033.
Wu, J. T., Leung, K., Bushman, M., Kishore, N., Niehus, R., de Salazar, P. M., . . . Leung, G. M.
(2020). Estimating clinical severity of COVID-19 from the transmission dynamics in
Wuhan, China. Nature Medicine, 26(4), 506-510.
Wu, J. T., Leung, K., & Leung, G. M. (2020). Nowcasting and forecasting the potential domestic
and international spread of the 2019-nCoV outbreak originating in Wuhan, China: a
modelling study. The Lancet, 395(10225), 689-697.

