Hemogram Data as a Tool for
Decision-making in COVID-19 Management:
Applications to Resource Scarcity
Scenarios

arXiv:2005.10227v1 [q-bio.OT] 10 May 2020

∗

∗

Eduardo Avila1,2,3, , Márcio Dorn3,4, , Clarice Sampaio Alho1,3 , and
∗
Alessandro Kahmann3,5,
1 Forensic

Genetics Laboratory, School of Health and Life Sciences, Pontifical Catholic
University of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil
2 Technical Scientific Section, Federal Police Department in Rio Grande do Sul, Porto
Alegre, RS, Brazil
3 National Institute of Science and Technology - Forensic Science, Porto Alegre, RS,
Brazil
4 Laboratory of Structural Bioinformatics and Computational Biology,Institute of
Informatics, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil
5 Institute of Mathematics, Statistics and Physics, Federal University of Rio Grande, Rio
Grande, RS, Brazil

Corresponding author:
Eduardo Avila. These authors contributed equally to this work.∗
Email address: e.avila@edu.pucrs.br; mdorn@inf.ufrgs.br; csalho@pucrs.br;
alessandrokahmann@furg.br

ABSTRACT
Background: COVID-19 pandemics has challenged emergency response systems worldwide,
with widespread reports of essential services breakdown and collapse of health care structure.
A critical element involves essential workforce management since current protocols recommend
release from duty for symptomatic individuals, including essential personnel. Testing capacity
is also problematic in several countries, where diagnosis demand outnumbers available local
testing capacity.
Purpose: This work describes a machine learning model derived from hemogram exam data
performed in symptomatic patients and how they can be used to predict qRT-PCR test results.
Methods: A Naı̈ve-Bayes model for machine learning is proposed for handling different scarcity
scenarios, including managing symptomatic essential workforce and absence of diagnostic
tests. Hemogram result data was used to predict qRT-PCR results in situations where the latter
was not performed, or results are not yet available. Adjusts in assumed prior probabilities allow
fine-tuning of the model, according to actual prediction context.
Results: Proposed models can predict COVID-19 qRT-PCR results in symptomatic individuals
with high accuracy, sensitivity and specificity. Data assessment can be performed in an
individual or simultaneous basis, according to desired outcome. Based on hemogram data and
background scarcity context, resource distribution is significantly optimized when model-based
patient selection is observed, compared to random choice. The model can help manage testing
deficiency and other critical circumstances.
Conclusions: Machine learning models can be derived from widely available, quick, and
inexpensive exam data in order to predict qRT-PCR results used in COVID-19 diagnosis.
These models can be used to assist strategic decision-making in resource scarcity scenarios,
including personnel shortage, lack of medical resources, and testing insufficiency.

INTRODUCTION
Since its first detection and description [13], COVID-19 expansion has brought worldwide
concerns to governmental agents, public and private institutions, and health care specialists.
Declared as a pandemic, this disease has deeply impacted many aspects of life in affected
communities. Relative lack of knowledge about the disease particularities has led to significant
efforts devoted to alleviating its effects [17].
Alternatives to mitigate the disease spread include social distancing [2]. Such a course of
action has shown some success in limiting contagion rates [29]. However, isolation policies
manifest drawbacks as economic impact, with significant effects on macroeconomic indicators
and unemployment rates [20]. To address this, governments worldwide have proposed guidelines
to manage the essential workforce, considered pivotal for maintaining strategic services and
provide an appropriate response to the pandemics expansion [3].
Widespread reports of threats to critical national infrastructure have been presented, with
significant impact associated with medical attention [14]. Significant pressure is being faced
by emergency response workers, with some countries on the brink of collapse of their national
health systems [27]. The main concern associated with COVID-19 is the lack of extensive testing
capacity. Shortage of diagnostic material and other medical supplies pose as a major restraining
factor in pandemics control [22].
The most common COVID-19 symptoms are similar to other viral infectious diseases,
making the prompt clinical diagnostic impractical [1]. Official guidelines emphasize the use
of quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) assays for detection of viral RNA in diagnosis as the
primary reference standard [26]. In Brazil, test results are hardly available within at least a week,
forcing physicians and health care providers to take strategic decisions regarding patient care
without quality information.
Previous reports have described alterations in laboratory findings in COVID-19 patients.
Hematological effects include leukopenia, lymphocytopenia and thrombocytopenia, while biochemical results show variation on alanine and aspartate aminotransferases, creatine kinase and
D-dimer levels, among other parameters [9, 13]. Some efforts have been applied to evaluate clinical and epidemiological aspects of this disease using computational methods, such as diagnosis,
prognosis, symptoms severity, mortality, and response to different treatments. A useful review of
some of these methods is presented by Wynants and collaborators [30].
The main objective of this article is to provide insights to healthcare decision-makers facing
scarcity situations, as a shortage of test capacity or limitations in the essential workforce. A
useful method of doing so is using hemogram test results. This clinical exam is widely available,
inexpensive, and fast, applying automation to maximize throughput. To do so, we have analyzed
hemogram data from Brazilian symptomatic patients with available test results for COVID-19.
We propose a framework using a Naı̈ve-Bayes model for machine learning, where test conditions
can be adjusted to respond to actual lack of resources problems. Finally, four distinct scarcity
scenarios examples are presented, including handling of the essential workforce and shortage of
testing and treatment resources.

MATERIAL AND METHODS
Data Collection
5644 patients admitted to the emergency department of Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein (HIAE
- São Paulo, Brazil) presenting COVID-19-like symptoms were tested via qRT-PCR. A total
number of 599 patients (10.61%) presented positive results for COVID-19. The full dataset
contains patients anonymized ID, age, qRT-PCR results, data on clinical evolution, and a total of
105 clinical tests. Not all data was available for all patients, therefore the number of missing
2/14

information is significant. All variables were normalized to maintain anonymity and remove
scale effects. No missing data imputation was performed during model generation to avoid bias.
Considering the significant ammount of missing data, only 510 patients presented values for all 15
parameters evaluated in hemogram results (comprising the following cell counts or hematological
measures: hematocrit, hemoglobin, platelets, mean platelet volume, red blood cells, lymphocytes,
leukocytes, basophils, eosinophils, monocytes, neutrophils, mean corpuscular volume (MCV),
mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH), mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC),
and red blood cell distribution width (RDW). Data for the above parameters were used in
model construction, along with qRT-PCR COVID-19 test results. The full dataset is available in
https://www.kaggle.com/einsteindata4u/covid19.
Machine Learning Analysis - Naı̈ve Bayes Classifier
Machine learning (ML) is a field of study in computer science and statistics dedicated to the
execution of computational tasks through algorithms that do not require explicit instructions
but instead rely on learning patterns from data samples to automate inferences [19]. These
algorithms can infer input-output relationships without explicitly assuming a pre-determined
model [10, 11]. There are two learning paradigms: supervised and unsupervised. Supervised
learning is a process in which the predictive models are constructed through a set of observations,
each of those associated with a known outcome (label). In opposition, in unsupervised learning,
one does not have access to the labels, it can be viewed as the task of ”spontaneously” finding
patterns and structures in the input data.
Our objective with this study is to predict in advance the results of the qRT-PCR test with
machine learning models using data from hemogram tests performed on symptomatic patients.
The main process can be divided into four steps: (1) pre-processing of the data (2) selection of an
appropriate classification algorithm, (3) model development and validation, i.e., the process of
using the selected characteristics to separate the two groups of subjects (positive for COVID-19
vs. negative for COVID-19 in qRT-PCR test), and (4) test generated model with additional data.
Steps are detailed as follows:
Data Pre-processing: Samples presenting a missing value in any of the 15 evaluated features
were removed. A total of 510 patients (73 positives for COVID-19 and 437 negatives) presented
complete data and were considered for the model construction.
Classification Algorithm: In this work, we use the Naı̈ve Bayes (NB) classifier, which is a
probabilistic machine learning model used for classification tasks. The main reasons for choosing
this classifier are due to their low computational cost and clear interpretation. In medicine, the
first computer-learn attempts in decision support were based mainly on the Bayes theorem, in
order to aggregate data information to physicians’ previous knowledge [18]. The Naı̈ve Bayes
(NB) method combines the previous probability of an event (also called prior probability, or
simply prior) with additional evidence (as, for example, a set of clinical data from a patient) to
calculate a combined, conditional probability that includes the prior probability given the extra
information. The result is the posterior probability of an outcome, or simply posterior. This
classifier is called ”naı̈ve” because it considers that each exam result (variables) is independent
of each other. Once this situation is not realistic in medicine, the model should not be interpreted
[23]. Besides this drawback, it can outperform more robust alternatives in classification tasks,
and once it reflects the uncertainty involved in the diagnosis, Bayesian approaches are more
suitable than deterministic techniques [8, 11].
Model Development and Validation: A classifier is an estimator with a predict method that
takes an input array (test) and makes predictions for each sample in it. In supervised learning
estimators (our case), this method returns the predicted labels or values computed from the
estimated model (positive or negative for COVID-19). Cross-validation is a model evaluation
3/14

method that allows one to evaluate an estimator on a given dataset reliably. It consists of
iteratively fitting the estimator on a fraction of the data, called training set, and testing it on
the left-out unseen data, called test set. Several strategies exist to partition the data. In this
work, we used the Leave-one-out (LOO) cross-validation model, as in Chang et al. [4]. The
number of data points was split N times (number samples). The method was trained on all the
data except for one point, and a prediction was made for that point. The proposed approach was
implemented in Python v.3 (https://www.python.org) code using Scikit-Learn v. 0.22.2
[21] as a backend.
Model Test: In order to evaluate the adequacy and generalization power of the proposed model, a
set of 92 samples (10 positives for COVID-19 and 82 negatives) was extracted from the patient
database. Those samples were not initially employed in model delineation, considering they
present a single missing value among all 15 employed hemogram parameters. Missing data
for this training set was imputed using the average value of the missing parameter within the
resulting group (positive or negative). The test set was submitted to the previously generated
model in order to evaluate classification performance.

RESULTS
Descriptive Analysis
For data description, probability density function (PDF) of all 15 hemogram parameters were
estimated through the original sample by kernel density estimator. Some hemogram parameters
present notable differences between the distributions of positive and negative results, mainly
regarding its modal value (distribution peak value) and variance (distribution width). Differences
are summarized in Table 1. Regarding basophiles, eosinophils, leukocytes and platelets counts,
qRT-PCR positive group distribution shows lower modal value and lower variance. On the
other hand, monocyte count displays opposite behavior, once lower modal value and variance
are observed for the qRT-PCR positive group. Lower variance may depict a condition pattern,
therefore it is expected that negative cases present higher variance once it may contain a higher
variety of conditions (reasons for symptom presence). The remaining nine hemogram parameters
did not show a notable difference between negative and positive groups. PDF analysis results are
presented in Supplementary Material Figure S1.
Table 1. Descriptive analysis of hemogram parameters used in present study.
Parameter
Modal value
Variance
Basophiles
Reduced in positive cases
Reduced in positive cases
Eosinophiles
Reduced in positive cases
Reduced in positive cases
Leukocytes
Reduced in positive cases
Reduced in positive cases
Monocytes
Augmented in positive cases Augmented in positive cases
Platelets
Reduced in positive cases
Reduced in positive cases
Parameters not shown displayed no difference between groups

Naı̈ve Bayes Model Results
A NB classifier based on training set hemogram data was developed. Under the model, the
complete range of prior probabilities (from 0.0001 to 0.9999 by 0.0001 increments) was scrutinized, and posterior probability of each class was computed for different prior conditions. A
posterior probability value of 0.5 was defined as the classification threshold in one of the positive
or negative predicted groups. Resulting model showed a good predictive power of the qRT-PCR
4/14

test result based on hemogram data. Figure 1 shows the accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity
curves derived from the model for different prior probabilities of each class (positive or negative
for COVID-19). Reported prior probabilities refer to positive COVID-19 condition.

Figure 1. Performance metrics of proposed Naive-Bayes model. prior probabilities are
presented in reference to positive qRT-PCR prediction. Confusion matrices (left to right) are
presented for 0.9999, 0.2933 and 0.0001 prior probabilities, respectively. Sensitivity=True
Positive Ratio; Specificity=True Negative Ratio
When setting the prior probability to the maximum defined value (0.9999), the NB classifier
correctly diagnosed all PCR positive cases. On the other hand, such configuration improperly
predicted 77.3% of negative PCR results as positive. Regarding the lower possible prior
probability setting, it does not classify a single observation as positive. This result can be
explained by the unbalanced number of observations for each class, tending to over classify
samples as the class with more observation, i.e. negative results. Such characteristics can also
be noticed in the general accuracy, since the decrease in the prior ponce the classifier tends to
diagnose all observations as belonging to the dominant class (negative) and consequently raising
the total of correctly classified samples. The break-even point is met when prior probability is
set to 0.2933. Under this condition, all metrics are approximately 76.6%.
Regarding the model sensitivity, the rate of positive samples correctly classified is over 85%
within 0.999 to 0.5276 range, with small decrease of it when the prior probability of positive
result is diminished within this range. When prior is set to under 0.0606, the number of positive
predicted samples decrease rapidly, yielding lower sensitivity. As for specificity, it presents
linear growth as tested priors decrease. Ultimately, the accuracy results profile are similar to
specificity, due to the negative patients dominance.
As mentioned above, prior probability choice has a critical relevance in proposed model
5/14

use. It is clear that, when extreme values of positive probability are applied (close to 0 or 1),
specific classes (positive or negative qRT-PCR test results predictions) are favoured, increasing
its ability of correct detection. As an example, when a value of 0.9999 is set for prior probability
of positive result is set, an increase in misclassification in negative class results is observed. At
the same time, it is possible to properly identify samples where hemogram evidence strongly
indicates a negative result, according to the model. This is based on the fact that evidence used in
the model construction (in present case, hemogram data) must strongly support the reduction of
posterior probability of disease to values under 0.5, therefore leading to a negative result. This
logic can be applied to fine tune the prior probability used in the model, in order to improve
correct classification of positive or negative groups prediction. Examples of how to use this
feature is provided in the “Discussion” section. Test samples (n=92, including 10 qRT-PCR
positives) were used to test the proposed model. Figure 2 presents results obtained from the
model application to test dataset.

Figure 2. Classification performance for training (LOO) and test datasets. Results
presented for the complete prior probability range. Results are presented as the percentage of
correctly predicted qRT-PCR exams. Informed prior probability refers to positive outcome. TN:
true negative; TP: true positive.

DISCUSSION
Laboratory findings can provide vital information for pandemics surveillance and management
[16]. Hemogram data have been previously proposed as useful parameters in diagnosis and
management of viral pandemics [25]. In the present work, an analysis concerning hemogram
data from symptomatic patients suspected of COVID-19 infection was executed. A machine
6/14

learning model based on Naı̈ve Bayes method is proposed in order to predict actual qRT-PCR
from such patients. The presented model can be applied to different situations, aiming to assist
medical practitioners and management staff in key decisions regarding this pandemic. Figure
3 summarizes model construction and application. Predictions are not intended to be used as
a diagnostic method since this technique was designed to anticipate qRT-PCR results only. As
such, it is highly dependable on factors affecting qRT-PCR efficiency, and its prediction capacity
is dependent on the sensitivity, accuracy, and specificity of the original laboratory exam [24].

Figure 3. NB Model construction and application diagram.
Descriptive analysis of hemogram clinical findings shows differences in blood cell counts
and other hematological parameters among COVID-19 positive and negative patient results.
Differences are conspicuous among three measures (leukocytes, monocytes and platelets) and
more discrete to additional two (basophiles and eosinophiles). It is possible that differences
are also present across the complete data spectrum, even though they are not clearly visualized
with PDF data. These results are in accordance to previous reports of changes in laboratory
findings in COVID-19 infected patients, where conditions as leukopenia, lymphocytopenia
and thrombopenia were reported [6]. It is important to highlight that data analysis is not
sufficient to characterize clinical hematological alterations in evaluated patients (when compared
to demographic hematologic parameters data), once data was normalized for the evaluated
sample set only. However, even within this particular quota of population (individuals presenting
COVID-19-like symptoms), differences were found between individuals presenting negative or
positive qRT-PCR COVID test results. The proposed NB-ML model can be helpful in accessing
different levels of information from hemogram results, through inferring non-evident patterns
and parameter relationships from this data.
Bayesian techniques are based on the choice of a prior probability of an event (in present
case, positive result for qRT-PCR test). The method considers actual evidence (hemogram data)
to result in a posterior probability of the outcome (prediction of a positive result). By changing
the selected prior probability, we can derive an uncertainty analysis of the model to understand
its distribution. Uncertainty can be then applied to adequately adapt the classifier to a particular
ongoing context. This option allows the evaluation of different decision-making scenarios
concerning diverse aspects of pandemics management. During a crisis situation, measures should
be taken seeking to maximize benefits and achieve a fair resource allocation [5]. To illustrate
the model flexibility and how it can be used to help on this matter, a general framework of
application is proposed, followed by a simulation of four scenarios where resource scarcity is
7/14

assumed.
Application Framework

The proposed NB model can be applied in two distinct situations. When clinical data is available
for a particular patient, it is highly recommended that medical staff determine the prior probability
on a case-by-case basis. When no clinical or medical data is available, or when decisions
regarding resource management involving multiple symptomatic patients are necessary, the
model can be used in multiple individuals simultaneously, aiming to identify those with higher
probabilities of presenting positive qRT-PCR results.
Individual Assessment

Individual risk management and personal evaluation is essential for COVID-19 response [7].
Individuals presenting COVID-19 symptoms are medically evaluated where no COVID-19
test is available for appropriate diagnosis confirmation. Medical practitioners can determine a
probability of disease based on anamnesis, symptoms, clinical exams, laboratory findings and
other available data. This probability of infection, as determined by the physician or medical
team, can be considered as the prior probability. Using hemogram data as input, and informing
the prior probability of COVID-19 based on medical findings, the model will consider hemogram
data to inform a posterior probability, which can be higher or lower than the original, and based
on the hemogram alterations caused by the virus infection. It is important that hemogram data
would not be included in original medical assessment and prior determination, in order to avoid
bias and reduce model overfit.
Multiple Patients Evaluation

It can be used in situations where decisions are necessary for resource management including
multiple individuals. Choice of a target group (positive or negative qRT-PCR result prediction)
should be defined. The model can be applied to multiple individuals simultaneously, with
the choice of prior probability carefully adjusted to result in a specific number of predicted
individuals from the target group, according to the desired outcome. This method increases
the correct selection of candidates belonging to the target group, when compared to random
selection. When additional clinical data is available, or become available later, patients selected
during bulk evaluation should be reassessed individually as proposed in the general framework,
in order to reduce misclassifications.
Applications to Scarcity Scenarios:

Examples of proposed model use are presented for some specific scarcity scenarios in Table 2.
As can be seen, the model sensitivity can be adjusted by selecting prior probability employed,
according to desired outcome or interest group. prior selection should be carefully decided,
based on current context or situation proposed, and must consider the classification group where
higher accuracy is intended.
High accuracy in qRT-PCR result prediction is achieved based on hemogram information
only. Further analysis performed on the original data (not shown) suggest that additional clinical
results can improve prediction efficiency. This conclusion is in accordance with previous findings
suggesting biochemical and immunological abnormalities, in addition to hematologic alterations,
can be caused by COVID-19 disease [12]. In this context, the relevance of data employed to
generate ML models is emphasized. The use of large and comprehensive datasets, containing
as much information as possible regarding clinical and laboratory findings, symptoms, disease
evolution, and other relevant aspects, is crucial in devising useful and adequate models. The
development of nationwide or regional databases based on local data is essential, in order to
capture epidemiological idiosyncrasies associated with such populations [28]. Also, natural
differences in hemogram results from distinct demographic groups (as seen in reference values
8/14

9/14

Context example

Objective

Testing
shortage

Testing capacity
Maximize
is limited to
number
a third of
of infected
candidates only
patients tested
Professionals with
Keep symptomatic,
Lack of
high risk of nocosomial
non-infected
essential
or work-related
essential
workforce
transmission
workers in duty
Professionals with
Keep symptomatic,
Lack of
medium to
non-infected
essential
low risk of
essential
workforce
transmission
workers in duty
Medical assistance
Avoid contagion
Limited
limited to
exposure of non-infected
medical
20% of symptomatic
patients in ER during
access
individuals only
medical assistance
TP: True Positive; TN: True Negative

Condition

Search for evident
non-infected
workers (TN
identification)
Find ideal balance
to simultaneously,
maximize both
TN and TP
Eliminate non-infected
from candidates for
medical assistance
(TN identification)

Prioritize
TP
identification

Strategy
Fine-tune prior
until positive
reach testing
capacity
All workers are
considered as
infected, unless
model says otherwise
Use intersection of
sensitivity and
specificity curves
from training set
Fine-tune prior to select
most likely negative results.
Select remanining set
for medical assistance

Action

50% of total
workforce
cleared (6.5%)
81.5% of total
workforce
cleared (6.6%)
18.8% decrease in
non-infected
patients exposure
(prior=0.4652)

69.0% of total
workforce
cleared (5%)
35.6% decrease in
non-infected
patients exposure
(prior=0.0954)

0.2933

0.5

Results in test set
(positive
misclassified
among cleared)
100% increase in
actual infected
patients tested
(prior=0.9607)
19.4% of total
workforce
cleared (0%)

Results in training
set (positive
misclassified
among cleared)
130% increase
in actual infected
patients tested
(prior=0.3482)
0.9999

0.5

Starting /
fixed
prior

Table 2. Strategies for NB-ML model applications and symptomatic patient selection in scarcity conditions. Hemogram test results are available for all
symptomatic patients. Scenarios proposed for situations where test results are not available (no testing or waiting qRT-PCR test results). Prediction results
were appraised in a binary form, with positive or negative classification based on posterior probability threshold of 0.5. Results are presented in reference
to random patient selection.

according to age, sex, or other physiological factors) can aggregate noise to the model, which
can be reduced when large database are employed in model construction, and results can be
devised for each ethnographic strata.
Despite having high overall accuracy, performance metrics obtained with proposed model
show unequal ability to predict positive or negative results. This situation is caused by a
significant imbalance in number of samples belonging to each of this qRT-PCR result groups in
original data. The use of balanced data in machine learning model design is important to assure
high prediction quality [15]. The option of maintaining original data in model construction was
adopted, since it better represents actual COVID-19 prevalence among symptomatic patients,
and therefore seems to represent a more realistic situation. Additional simulations applying
a balanced model (data not shown) using positive group oversampling (to compensate its
insufficiency in original data) have devised alternative models with superior prediction power.
Alternative balanced model results are presented in Supplementary Material Figure S2.Therefore,
additional positive samples will be added to the data and used in future model versions.
As a perspective, collection of hemogram results from asymptomatic patients (in addition to
symptomatic individuals) can be used to evaluate the utility of this approach on the detection
of asymptomatic infections, in order to provide alternatives in diagnostics, especially in a
context of testing deficiency. A web-based application was developed by the authors, in which
hemogram data can be introduced for a single individual, along with prior probability of infection,
based on data used to generate the present model. The online tool is available at http:
//sbcb.inf.ufrgs.br/covid. Future implementation will allow the upload of multiple
patients simultaneously, and construction or testing of user data-derived models. This service
will allow easy access and practical application of the proposed model.

REFERENCES
[1]

Adhikari, S. P., Meng, S., Wu, Y.-J., Mao, Y.-P., Ye, R.-X., Wang, Q.-Z., Sun, C., Sylvia, S.,
Rozelle, S., Raat, H., and Zhou, H. (2020). Epidemiology, causes, clinical manifestation and
diagnosis, prevention and control of coronavirus disease (covid-19) during the early outbreak
period: a scoping review. Infectious Diseases of Poverty, 9(1-12):29.
[2] Anderson, R. M., Heesterbeek, H., Klinkenberg, D., and Hollingsworth, T. D. (2020). How
will country-based mitigation measures influence the course of the covid-19 epidemic? The
Lancet, 395(10228):931–934.
[3] Black, J. R. M., Bailey, C., Przewrocka, J., Dijkstra, K. K., and Swanton, C. (2020). Covid19: the case for health-care worker screening to prevent hospital transmission. The Lancet,
n/a(n/a):1–2. ahead of print.
[4] Chang, J. C., Wooten, E. C., Tsimelzon, A., Hilsenbeck, S. G., Gutierrez, M. C., Elledge, R.,
Mohsin, S., Osborne, C. K., Chamness, G. C., Allred, D. C., and O’Connell, P. (2003). Gene
expression profiling for the prediction of therapeutic response to docetaxel in patients with
breast cancer. The Lancet, 362(9381):362–369.
[5] Emanuel, E. J., Persad, G., Upshur, R., Thome, B., Parker, M., Glickman, A., Zhang, C.,
Boyle, C., Smith, M., and Phillips, J. P. (2020). Fair allocation of scarce medical resources in
the time of covid-19. New England Journal of Medicine, n/a(n/a):1–7. Sounding Board.
[6] Fan, B. E., Ong, K. H., Chan, S. S. W., Young, B. E., Chong, V. C. L., Chen, S. P. C., Lim,
S. P., Lim, G. P., and Kuperan, P. (2020). Blood and blood product use during covid-19
infection. American Journal of Hematology, n/a(n/a):1–3. corresponde.
[7] Gasmi, A., Noor, S., Tippairote, T., Dadar, M., Menzel, A., and Bjorklund, G. (2020). Individual risk management strategy and potential therapeutic options for the covid-19 pandemic.
Clinical Immunology, n/a(n/a):1–37. ahead of print.
10/14

[8]

Gorry, G. and Barnett, G. (1968). Experience with a model of sequential diagnosis. Computers
and Biomedical Research, 1(5):490 – 507.
[9] Guan, W.-j., Ni, Z.-y., Hu, Y., Liang, W.-h., Ou, C.-q., He, J.-x., Liu, L., Shan, H., Lei, C.-l.,
Hui, D. S., Du, B., Li, L.-j., Zeng, G., Yuen, K.-Y., Chen, R.-c., Tang, C.-l., Wang, T., Chen,
P.-y., Xiang, J., Li, S.-y., Wang, J.-l., Liang, Z.-j., Peng, Y.-x., Wei, L., Liu, Y., Hu, Y.-h., Peng,
P., Wang, J.-m., Liu, J.-y., Chen, Z., Li, G., Zheng, Z.-j., Qiu, S.-q., Luo, J., Ye, C.-j., Zhu,
S.-y., and Zhong, N.-s. (2020). Clinical characteristics of coronavirus disease 2019 in china.
New England Journal of Medicine, n/a(n/a):1–13. ahead of print.
[10] Géron, A. (2017). Hands-on machine learning with Scikit-Learn and TensorFlow : concepts,
tools, and techniques to build intelligent systems. O’Reilly, 1 edition.
[11] Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., and Friedman, J. (2009). The elements of statistical learning: data
mining, inference and prediction. 2 edition.
[12] Henry, B. M., de Oliveira, M. H. S., Benoit, S., Plebani, M., and Lippi, G. (2013). Hematologic, biochemical and immune biomarker abnormalities associated with severe illness and
mortality in coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19): a meta-analysis. Clinical Chemistry and
Laboratory Medicine (CCLM), n/a(n/a):20200369. ahead of print.
[13] Huang, C., Wang, Y., Li, X., Ren, L., Zhao, J., Hu, Y., Zhang, L., Fan, G., Xu, J., Gu, X.,
Cheng, Z., Yu, T., Xia, J., Wei, Y., Wu, W., Xie, X., Yin, W., Li, H., Liu, M., Xiao, Y., Gao,
H., Guo, L., Xie, J., Wang, G., Jiang, R., Gao, Z., Jin, Q., Wang, J., and Cao, B. (2020).
Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in wuhan, china. The Lancet,
395(10223):497–506.
[14] Kandel, N., Chungong, S., Omaar, A., and Xing, J. (2020). Health security capacities in
the context of covid-19 outbreak: an analysis of international health regulations annual report
data from 182 countries. The Lancet, 395(10229):1047–1053.
[15] Krawczyk, B. (2016). Learning from imbalanced data: open challenges and future directions.
Progress in Artificial Intelligence, 5(4):221–232.
[16] Lippi, G. and Plebani, M. (2020). The critical role of laboratory medicine during coronavirus
disease 2019 (covid-19) and other viral outbreaks. Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory
Medicine, n/a(n/a):1–7. ahead of print.
[17] Lipsitch, M., Swerdlow, D. L., and Finelli, L. (2020). Defining the epidemiology of covid-19
- studies needed. New England Journal of Medicine, 382(13):1194–1196.
[18] Martin, W., Apostolakos, P., and Roazen, H. (1960). Clinical versus acturial prediction in
the differential diagnosis of jaundice. a stdy of the relative accuracy of predictions made by
physicians and by a statistically derived formula in differentiating parenchymal and obstructive
jaundice. The American Journal of the Medical Sciences, 240:571–578.
[19] Mitchell, T. M. (1997). Machine Learning. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1 edition.
[20] Nicola, M., Alsafi, Z., Sohrabi, C., Kerwan, A., Al-Jabir, A., Iosifidis, C., Agha, M., and
Agha, R. (2020). The socio-economic implications of the coronavirus and covid-19 pandemic:
A review. International Journal of Surgery, n/a(n/a):1–31. ahead of print.
[21] Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., Michel, V., Thirion, B., Grisel, O., Blondel, M.,
Prettenhofer, P., Weiss, R., Dubourg, V., Vanderplas, J., Passos, A., Cournapeau, D., Brucher,
M., Perrot, M., and Duchesnay, E. (2011). Scikit-learn: Machine learning in python. Journal
of Machine Learning Research, 12:2825–2830.
[22] Ranney, M. L., Griffeth, V., and Jha, A. K. (2020). Critical supply shortages - the need for
ventilators and personal protective equipment during the covid-19 pandemic. New England
Journal of Medicine, Perspective(n/a):1–3.
[23] Schurink, C., Lucas, P., Hoepelman, I., and Bonten, M. (2005). Computer-assisted decision
support for the diagnosis and treatment of infectious diseases in intensive care units. The
Lancet Infectious Diseases, 5(5):305–312.
11/14

[24]

Sethuraman, N., Jeremiah, S. S., and Ryo, A. (2020). Interpreting Diagnostic Tests for
SARS-CoV-2. JAMA, n/a(n/a):200101. ahead of print.
[25] Shimoni, Z., Glick, J., and Froom, P. (2013). Clinical utility fo the full blood count in
identifying patients with pandemic influenza a (h1n1). Journal of Infection, 66(6):545–547.
[26] Tahamtan, A. and Ardebili, A. (2020). Real-time rt-pcr in covid-19 detection: issues
affecting the results. Expert Review of Molecular Diagnostics, Editorial(n/a):1–2.
[27] Tanne, J. H., Hayasaki, E., Zastrow, M., Pulla, P., Smith, P., and Rada, A. G. (2020).
Covid-19: how doctors and healthcare systems are tackling coronavirus worldwide. BMJ,
368:1–5.
[28] Terpos, E., Ntanasis-Stathopoulos, I., Elalamy, I., Kastritis, E., Sergentanis, T. N., Politou,
M., Psaltopoulou, T., Gerotziafas, G., and Dimopoulos, M. A. (2020). Hematological findings
and complications of covid-19. American Journal of Hematology, n/a(n/a):1–32. ahead of
print.
[29] Tu, H., Tu, S., Gao, S., Shao, A., and Sheng, J. (2020). The epidemiological and clinical
features of covid-19 and lessons from this global infectious public health event. The Journal
of Infection, n/a(n/a):1–20. ahead of print.
[30] Wynants, L., Van Calster, B., Bonten, M. M. J., Collins, G. S., Debray, T. P. A., De Vos, M.,
Haller, M. C., Heinze, G., Moons, K. G. M., Riley, R. D., Schuit, E., Smits, L. J. M., Snell,
K. I. E., Steyerberg, E. W., Wallisch, C., and van Smeden, M. (2020). Prediction models for
diagnosis and prognosis of covid-19 infection: systematic review and critical appraisal. BMJ,
369:1–11.

Supplementary Material

12/14

(a) Basophils

(b) Eosinophils

(c) Hematocrit

(d) Hemoglobin

(e) Leukocytes

(f) Lymphocytes

(g) MCH

(h) MCHC

(i) MCV

(j) Mean Platelet Volume

(k) Monocytes

(l) Neutrophils

(m) Platelets

(n) RDW

(o) Red Blood Cells

Figure S1. Probability density function (PDF) of all 15 hemogram parameters.

13/14

Figure S2. Performance metrics of alternative balanced Naive-Bayes model. In this case,
random oversampling of positive results was employed, until sample number in each class is
identical. Prior probabilities are presented in reference to positive qRT-PCR prediction.
Confusion matrices (left to right) are presented for 0.9999, 0.2237 and 0.0001 prior
probabilities, respectively. Sensitivity=True Positive Ratio; Sensitivity=True Negative Ratio.
Random seed was set to 0 for replication purposes.

14/14

