Do we need a Contact Tracing App?
Leonardo Maccaria , Valeria Cagnob
a Department

of Environmental Science, Informatics and Statistics
Universiy of Venice
b Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine,
University of Geneva Medical School

arXiv:2005.10187v2 [cs.CY] 29 Jul 2020

Abstract
The goal of this paper is to shed some light on the usefulness of a contact tracing smartphone app for the containment
of the COVID-19 pandemic. We review the basics of contact tracing during the spread of a virus, we contextualize
the numbers to the case of COVID-19 and we analyse the state of the art for proximity detection using Bluetooth Low
Energy. Our contribution is to assess if there is scientific evidence of the benefit of a contact tracing app in slowing
down the spread of the virus using present technologies. Our conclusion is that such evidence is lacking, and we should
re-think the introduction of such a privacy-invasive measure.
Keywords: COVID-19, Contact Tracing, Proximity Tracing, privacy, pandemic

1. Introduction
During the recent pandemic of the coronavirus infectious disease 2019 (COVID-19) national governments imposed various flavors of “lockdown” forcing people in their
houses and preventing many of them to work, with the goal
of slowing down the pandemic and make it more manageable by national health systems. Such measures are unprecedented as they limit personal freedom and strongly
impact national economies and need to be maintained only
for the shortest time required to stop the emergency. When
the emergency is tamed, governments introduce a so-called
“phase 2” which imposes milder limitations that can progressively help economies recover. Yet, being the first time
in modern history that our society faces such a threat, we
don’t have a clear path to follow for phase 2. On the one
hand, there is a widespread interest in removing personal
limitations, on the other, the risk of provoking a second
wave of spread of the virus will be present until a vaccine
or a cure are found and made available to everybody.
One of the measures considered by many governments,
and implemented by some, is the introduction of a mobile
phone application that performs contact tracing, e.g., it
provides a list of contacts that took place between couples
of people in a certain time span. The app enables a person that was tested positive to Sars-CoV2 (the aetiological
agent of COVID-19) to send a warning to all the contacts.
Those who receive the warning will presumably act accordingly (isolating themselves, or asking to be tested) and this
is imagined to contribute to keep the diffusion of the virus
under control.
In a few weeks the interest for this application skyrocketed, Google and Apple produced a dedicated API
to support contact tracing, the European Union provided
Preprint submitted to Computer Communications

guidelines to specify the privacy implication of such applications and a consortium of companies started to elaborate
proposals. The public debate rightly focused on the privacy aspects, which are of paramount importance because
this is, in essence, the first ever mass-scale contact tracing
action promoted by democratic states. The privacy fallout
caused by the extensive use of such an app may be huge
and the analysis of the correlated risks was the subject of
several works [1, 2, 3]. If our society takes such risks, we
must expect a greater collective payoff.
Unfortunately, little importance has been given to the
effectiveness of this application in limiting the diffusion of
the virus. Here we take a first principle approach, and
review the research literature to understand if the current
technical means may correctly perform contact tracing as
needed to stop the pandemic. If this is not true, then the
whole debate about the privacy implications may simply
lose ground. Our approach does not rely on the analysis of
each single application, as there are other ongoing works
that cover their details [4, 5]. Instead, we use an interdisciplinary approach: we analyze some real world constraints
on what a contact tracing app may be allowed to do, we interpret the data coming from the medical literature about
the dynamics of viral spread, and we review the technical
literature to understand what technology provides.
In our analysis we were not able to find any strong evidence that a privacy preserving app based on current technologies can achieve the stated goal. We observe that with
current technologies a similar app could be used to perform a mild risk assessment, but this approach needs more
technical discussion and social acceptance. Therefore, the
adoption of contact tracing apps has to be rethought.
In the rest of the paper we discuss what is needed to
July 30, 2020

slow down the spread of COVID-19 (Section 2), and what
are the privacy and technical constraints we have to respect for the app to be effective in a short time (Sections 3
and 4). We then review the experiments carried out in the
literature in similar realistic conditions (Section 5). All
these elements constitute the basis for a grounded discussion on the use of a contact tracing app (Sections 6 and 7).

[13] with individuals possibly infecting up to 10 other people in a single event or in extreme cases up to 32. Yet, this
kind of event is likely at the early stage of the epidemic
but can be controlled with contention measures that have
a limited impact on personal freedom: maintaining interpersonal distance, using face masks and hygiene measures,
and forbidding large in-person meetings or taking additional measures such as lists of participants in those cases.
In the phase 2, these measures must be already in place.

2. Monitoring the Contagion
The transmission of Sars-CoV2 primarily happens due
to respiratory droplets [6, 7], therefore reducing the number of contacts of an infected person is a key factor to
slow down the contagion. This is achieved with social distancing, hygiene measures and isolation of infected people. It is intuitive that the earliest an infected person is
isolated, the lowest are the chances to have contacts and
spread the virus. Therefore, the rationale for contact tracing is straightforward, when a person is tested positive,
we need to quickly identify those that were potentially infected by this person so that we can isolate them as well.
For COVID-19 there are evidences that the transmission
could occur also from asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic
people [8], these people may not even known to be infected, which makes it even more urgent to quickly isolate
the close contacts of a person that was tested positive.
The key parameter to monitor the speed of the diffusion of contagion is the reproduction number R, which
expresses the expected number of people infected by one
single individual at a certain stage of the epidemic. R depends on a number of factors, including the way the virus
is transmitted but also the contention measures that are
enforced. The higher is the value of R, the faster the virus
spreads. The goal of contention measures is to lower R
below 1, so that the total number of infected people decreases with time. The base reproduction number R0 is
the value of R at the beginning of the contagion, when
all the population is susceptible of being infected and no
contention measures are in place, thus, it generally holds
that R ≤ R0 .
There are estimates of the value of R0 using data that
refer to initial phases of the outbreak when no contention
measures where in place and all the population was susceptible. One of the first attempts to estimate R0 was performed observing the passengers of the Diamond Princess
cruise ship [9] and reports a median value of R0 = 2.28. A
recent modeling analysis of the initial phases of the outbreak in China estimates a R0 = 3.54 [10]. When contention measures are put in place R is expected to decrease, for instance at the time of writing the value of R
in Germany is estimated to be lower than 1 [11], as well
as in Italy in the period between April 19th and May 7th,
and in Wuhan (where the contagion started) the number
estimated after the lockdown measures was 0.28 [12].
Of course the average or median estimated value of R
may not be representative of some extreme cases, the presence of super-spreaders has been reported for COVID-19

2.1. The Secondary Attack Rate and the Contact Type
Another element that is relevant for our analysis is the
so-called secondary attack rate (SAR), that is, the percentage of people that is actually infected among the contacts
of a person that has been tested positive to Sars-CoV2.
In the early stages of the outbreak of the virus in China
(Jan 14th - Feb 15th, 2020) a group of people that tested
positively were observed together with 1286 people among
their contacts [14]1 . The estimated value of SAR was 6.6%
(81 over the 1286), while in more recent works that analyze the evolution of th Pandemic in Taiwan, SAR was
estimated to be 0.8% (32 out of 3795 [15]).
The secondary attack rate can be further specified for
different contacts types (family, workplace etc. . . . ). Among
the contacts in the Chinese study, the large majority of
those that tested positive (77 over a total of 81 positives)
were households of the infected person. A similar statistics related to the advanced phases of the contagion comes
from the Istituto Superiore per la Sanit (ISS, the main
center for research, control and technical scientific advice
on public health in Italy) which provides weekly updates
on the evolution of the Italian situation. The report referring to April 7th - May 7th [12] includes the distribution
of the contact places for more than 9,360 cases2 . Table 1
summarises the data and shows several interesting facts,
the first is that in Italy 58% of the new infections in the
observed period happened in retirement homes. This is
due to the management of the emergency in Italy, which
made retirement homes a focus of infection. Albeit this
happened in other nations, it can not be fully generalized. For this reason in the last two columns of the table
we report the distribution of cases excluding the first line.
We can see that about 87% (70% excluding retirement
houses) of the cases happen in extremely predictable locations: 18% (44%) in the family, 8% (21%) in hospitals,
and 2.4% (5.9%) in workplaces. Only 12% (29%) of the
cases happen somewhere else.
1 Contacts were identified as “those who lived in the same apartment, shared a meal, travelled, or socially interacted with an index
case” and excluded “contacts (eg, other clinic patients) and some
close contacts (eg, nurses) who wore a mask during exposure”.
2 In Italy the contention measures have been adopted with three
steps of increasing intensity in March 1st, 9th and 22nd, were reduced
starting May 4th and were still in place in the considered period.

2

Location

Number of infected

Percent

Cumulative

Percent w/o RH

Cumulative w/o RH

Retirement home (RH)
Family
Hospital/clinic
Workplace

5,468
1,712
816
228

58.4
18.3
8.7
2.4

58.4
76.7
85.4
87.9

44
21
5.9

44
65
70.8

Boat/Cruise
Religious Community
Other

83
64
989

0.9
0.7
10.6

88.8
89.4
100

2.1
1.6
25.4

72.9
74.6
100

Table 1: The location of contagions in Italy, April 7th - May 7th. Column 5 and 6 report the same data excluding the numbers related to
Retirement homes.

2.2. The Needle in the Haystack
Previous sections exposed data generally overlooked
when discussing about contact tracing applications: i) every infected person infects in average 3 people in the early
stage of the epidemic, a number that decreases when contention measures are applied; ii) the large majority of the
infections involves extremely predictable groups of people,
family members and work mates which can be identified
with basic means, i.e. with manual contact tracing among
households and colleagues. If we consider a pessimistic
value R = 2 for the phase 2, and we assume that 29% of
the infected people can not be traced with manual contact
tracing (we derive this figure from the data in Table 1),
then we have an average rounded value of approximately
2 non-identified infected contact per 3 infected people.
Moreover, we observed that SAR for COVID-19 is low:
only a small percentage of the close contacts monitored by
medical authorities were tested positive, which means that
the definition of close contact is already coarse enough to
produce a large number of false positives. Figure 1 summarizes the situation, with the numbers discussed so far:
from a group of three infected people we expect 6 more
infected people (R = 2), since the SAR is between 1% and
6%, then the close contact group is in the orders of hundreds of people. Among them only two out of six will not
be easily traced with analog contact tracing. The set of
close contacts is included in the set of people that were in
the proximity of the infected people (which we discuss in
the next section).
The requirements that emerge from the medical literature suggest that digital contact tracing, to be useful must
be extremely precise: we need to identify a small number
of people that are not easily tracked with analog contact
tracing (two every three infected people) and we can not
arbitrarily enlarge the amount of identified close contacts,
because the percentage of infected people among them is
very small.

Close Contacts

Proximity Events

Figure 1: A schema of contact tracing, every three infected people,
with R = 2 we are looking for 6 infected more people, among which
two of them are expected not to be in the group of close contacts. The
close contacts are part of the group of those considered in proximity
of the infected people.

COVID-19 the World Health Organization defines a “close
contact” as “Any person who had contact (within 1 metre)
with a confirmed case during their symptomatic period, including 4 days before symptom onset”3 . This definition
leaves room for interpretation because the duration of the
period is uncertain and does not take into consideration
prevention measures that could be adopted (such as face
masks). Several national health systems provide a more
specific version, the ones we were able to review generally consider close contact as being at short distance (less
than 2 meters) with an infected person for more than 15
minutes (see Appendix A.1). One of the key challenges of
analog contact tracing is that the person that is positive to
tests needs to be interviewed by an expert that is able to
identify the close contacts, based on the kind of exposure.
This is a time-consuming task, and people can not always
remember all their contacts. The rationale of a contact
tracing app is that we can identify new contacts that for

3. Contact Tracing with Mobile Phones: Motivations and Privacy Guidelines

3 See
https://www.who.int/publications-detail/the-firstfew-x-(ffx)-cases-and-contact-investigation-protocol-for2019-novel-coronavirus-(2019-ncov)-infection

Contact tracing refers to identifying “close contacts”,
a term that is specifically defined for a certain virus. For
3

some reason did not emerge from the interview, and that
we could speed up the notification to the close contacts
with notifications on the smartphone.
Mobile phones can not be used for contact tracing but
can be used for “proximity detection”, which means, in a
nutshell, identifying couples of devices that have been in
communication range with each other for a specific time.
At the base of the use of mobile apps lies the assumption
that the set of people for which a proximity event was
recorded is a good approximation of close contacts.
One of the works that is often mentioned in support of
a contact tracing application is from Ferretti et al. [16].
Ferretti et. al model the outbreak of COVID-19 using the
state of the art data on its diffusion and show that considering the specific characteristics of COVID-19, a fast
contact tracing can be beneficial to lower the value of R
below 1. The authors assume that a contact tracing app
can help speeding up this task, but they do not enter into
the details of the performance of the application. They
just consider the app as a factor that can speed up the
detection of new infected people. In this sense, it is quite
straightforward that any factor that can make detection
faster will reduce R, and the paper provides a quantitative analysis of this reduction using the efficacy of contact
tracing as one of the parameters of the model.
On this basis, several governments started to express
interest on the adoption of such an app, which of course
initiated a debate on its privacy implications. It is clear
that collecting data on contact tracing introduces a privacy
risk, which must be mitigated using a proper app design.
This sparkled an intense public discussion on several key
themes such as the app model (centralized/distributed),
on the adoption (opt-out/opt-in), and on the data to be
collected (only proximity or any other relevant data, such
as position using GPS). A deep analysis of the privacy and
security implications of contact tracing apps is out of the
scope of this paper, and can be found in other works that
were published in the months following the outbreak of the
pandemic [2, 1, 3, 4]. In the context of our paper we are
interested in the outcome of this debate, which can be summarized in two landmark events. The first was the publication from the European Union of guidelines for PrivacyPreserving contact tracing apps. These guidelines must
be respected for apps to be acceptable under a privacy
point of view in Europe. The second was the publication
by Apple and Google of an API for Exposure Notification
(EN), the building block required to perform proximity
detection on their mobile operating systems. Such API is
compatible with the European guidelines. These events
set the stage for the development of any contact tracing
app, because having the support from vendors covering
almost 100% of the mobile phone market is essential to
reach a large adoption, and respect of privacy guidelines
(at least in the European panorama) is essential. In fact,
recent works analysing some of the available contact tracing apps show that in the continental Europe among the 8
monitored apps 5 use the broadcast model (essentially the

EN model we describe later on), while 3 use the broadcast
model and rely to a connection-based model when the first
is not available [5]. Therefore, without entering into the
privacy debate, the goal of this paper is to address the following question: do we have enough evidences suggesting
that the proposed proximity detection solution can achieve
the necessary accuracy in contact tracing while respecting
the privacy guidelines?
To answer this question we need to briefly review the
technical guidelines provided by the EU, and the technology proposed by Apple and Google.
3.1. Contact Tracing: the EU Privacy Technical Guidelines
The people we meet every day and the duration of the
encounters are extremely sensitive information. For this
reason, the European Union published guidelines on the
use of contact tracing in the context of the COVID-19
pandemic [17] which we take as functional requirements
for contact tracing apps. Among them, some of the points
that are relevant for our analysis can be summarized as
follows (Appendix A.2 reports excepts from the mentioned
document that expand the bullet points):
• Contact tracing must be based on voluntary adoption, there should be no consequences for those that
opt-out
• Phone location should not be used, only proximity
data should be used
• It should not be possible to track back the identity
of a person using the data from the app. This is
a crucial point, when Alice receives the notification
that she was in contact with an infected person, she
should not be able to say if this person is Bob4 .
• Information should not exit the user phone if not
absolutely necessary.
These guidelines go in the direction of retaining the
least possible information and maintaining it as much as
possible in the user device, and not in some centralized
server.
Another extremely important guideline states the importance of false positives. People that are diagnosed with
COVID-19 will be subject to isolation and thus decisions
can not be taken with an automated mechanism [1]. Beyond personal consequences, false positives may have two
side effects that can make the app useless, or even detrimental. If the rate of false positives is too high, people
receiving alerts will simply start to ignore them, thus defeating the goal of the app itself. If instead people do not
underestimate the alerts and receive many false positives,
4 We use the widespread cryptography jargon describing two users
of the app as Alice and Bob and the server that is their intermediary
as Eve.

4

huge testing capacity, large enough medical staff to perform the tests, and efficient logistic to avoid risk of transmission in the hospital setting will be required. All these
resources are scarce during the upsurge of an epidemic and
can not be wasted due to the inaccuracy of contact tracing.

When using EN, a phone acts both as a broadcaster
and as an observer. The Advertising Interval is set between 200 and 270 ms (corresponding to approximately
4 Hz), while the Scan Interval is not specified, it should
“have sufficient coverage to discover nearby EN Service
advertisements within 5 minutes [. . . ] with minimum periodic sampling every 5 minutes”. In the API specification
it is mentioned that scanning happens typically every five
minutes, with a Scan Window of 4 seconds8 . EN defines
for each device a Temporary Exposure Key (TEK), which
changes once per day. This key is kept in Alice’s phone
and never leaves it if Alice does not get infected. Every ten
minutes this key is used together with a counter ranging
from 0 to 144 to generate another key, the Rolling Proximity Identifier (RPI). The RPI is included in the beacon
(together with some meta information that are not relevant for this discussion). Alice’s phone is thus identified
by the same RPI for 10 minutes, which will give Bob the
chance of being an observer for two Scan Windows. Without packet loss Bob will receive in average 32 beacons to
estimate the distance with Alice’s identifier before it rotates. Bob stores all the RPI he receives in his device.
If Alice at some point becomes infected she uploads all
the TEK for the last 14 days (or any other value decided
by the application) to a Diagnosis Server (Eve), that is
run by the app provider (not Apple or Google necessarily
but the developer of the app). Eve periodically aggregates
the keys “from all users who have tested positive, and distributes them to all the user clients that are participating
in EN ”. Bob then periodically receives sets of TEK keys
coming from many people tested positive to COVID-19,
he re-generates all the RPIs and checks if some of them
are present in his own local storage. If some of the keys
are present in his storage, he was in the proximity of an
infected person.
The rationale of EN seems to be following:

4. Proximity Detection with Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE)
BLE is a natural candidate to perform proximity detection between pairs of mobile phones. It is a well established technology, introduced in 2010 and currently part
of the core Bluetooth specification5 . There are no publicly
available statistics for the market uptake of BLE in active
devices at the time of writing. According to Katevas et
al. [18] BLE is present in almost all the existing iPhones,
and the Bluetooth SIG estimates that in 2024 100% of new
devices will be equipped with BLE6 . Support for BLE is
available in Android since version 4.3 (2013) and in iOS
since version 5 (2011), so it is reasonable to assume that
a very large portion of the mobile phones on the market
support BLE.
Proximity detection can be performed with BLE with
a simple mechanism. Each BLE-equipped device can be
in two states, the broadcaster or the observer. The broadcaster sends a broadcast beacon message on three default
channels every “Advertising Interval”, the observer instead
every “Scan Interval” wakes up and listens to beacons for a
“Scan Window” time. When the observer receives the beacon it estimates the distance from the broadcaster using
the Received Signal Strength Indication (RSSI). We focus
only on the description of the solution that Google and
Apple provided to perform Contact Tracing using BLE,
while generic descriptions of BLE can be easily found in
the literature [19].
4.1. Google/Apple Privacy-Preserving Contact Tracing
In April 2020 Apple and Google released a joint document with the technical specifications of a Privacy-Preserving
Contact Tracing API supported by their operating systems7 based on BLE. The specification is called Exposure
Notification and offers a trade-off between energy consumption, user privacy, and efficacy. It is supposed to
become the layer on which every contact tracing application may be based on. Nothing prevents developers to use
other technologies, but considering the large diversity of
devices and OS versions in the market it is unlikely that
any custom solution may reach the needed uptake to be
effective.

• minimize the energy consumption. Since users are
expected to constantly run this system, it should not
severely impact battery use.
• minimize the amount of exchanged information between Alice and Bob. There is no unicast communication happening or packet handshake. This also
makes power consumption predictable as it does not
depend on the number of devices nearby.
• minimize the amount of information transmitted to
Eve. Eve does not store the contacts of Alice and
Bob.
• provide to Bob a sufficient amount of information to
estimate his exposure to some infected person without revealing who these people were.

5 See

https://www.bluetooth.com/blog/bluetooth-low-energyit-starts-with-advertising/.
6 See https://www.bluetooth.com/bluetooth-resources/2020bmu/.
7 Privacy-Preserving Contact Tracing, see https://www.apple.
com/covid19/contacttracing/.

8 See
https://developers.google.com/android/exposurenotifications/ble-attenuation-overview#aggregation_over_a_
scan_scaninstance_min_and_average

5

Note that Apple and Google do not take responsibility
for deciding when to notify Bob, the task of passing from
Proximity Detection to the definition of Close Contact is
completely delegated to the app.

1. The work must present a real implementation.
2. The experimentation must involve commercial off
the shelf mobile devices, and not only custom devices.
3. Proximity detection should be performed without external aids if not for results validation. This excludes
fixed BLE beacons or implicit constraints due to the
set-up of the experiment (e.g., the experiment takes
place in a single room only).
4. The proposal must be compatible with EN: it must
use BLE, it should not require post-processing of
data by a centralized entity and should not require
handshakes between devices.

4.2. Privacy of EN
EN seems to be aligned with the privacy guidelines
from the EU. In this regard it is worth mentioning the notable work done by the DP-3T consortium, a group of international experts that are devising distributed, privacyaware solutions for contact tracing. In a white paper they
describe three solutions, two distributed ones and a centralized one, and analyze their privacy characteristics [3].
One of the distributed solution is very close to the EN proposal and their analysis basically confirms that EN can be
used minimizing the risk of privacy breach.
Yet, minimizing risk does not mean removing it. A
deep discussion on the privacy risks related to contact tracing are out of the scope of this paper, we just mention two
issues, as concrete examples. First is that when Alice is
tested positive, if Bob and Alice spent time in proximity, Bob should receive enough information to know that
there was a close contact with an infected person, but not
enough to understand who this person was. Alice has the
right of not letting others (beyond medical staff) know
she is infected. In practice this is impossible to guarantee with a decentralized solution. Bob will receive all the
RPIs Alice generated and he can associate to each RPI a
short time-interval in which he was in proximity of an infected person. If the contact lasted for a long enough time
there are chances that Bob may infer that Alice was, for
instance, the person that was sitting next to him in the office for all the covered period. Second, is that even in the
decentralized model, there is a server that receives from
the apps the notification that the app owner was tested
positive. The server does not need to store the association
between the app owner (from which the message is coming) and his/her health state, but there is still one point in
which this information could potentially be collected. This
opens the way to attacks to the servers from criminals that
may be interested in collecting such information.
As risks exists and their impact can be amplified by
the massive scale of the adoption of contact tracing applications, we need to properly assess the benefit we expect
this application could produce.

Unfortunately, none of the works in the literature satisfied these criteria. We decided then to analyze two sets of
works, the first one provides an overview of the challenges
in the distance estimation using BLE, which is itself a nontrivial task. The second set describes experiments that are
as close as possible to the use case of contact tracing for
COVID-19, in order to assess what are the main challenges
for a real contact tracing app.
5.1. Estimating Distance with BLE
Indoor positioning is a hot research topic and there are
many works in the literature that deal with it (see Gu et al.
for a recent literature review [20]). In most cases indoor
positioning is obtained with static beacons (i.e. dedicated
devices that behave as BLE broadcasters). The mobile devices receive the messages from the beacons, measure the
RSSI and use this information to estimate their position.
Even if this approach is not usable for contact tracing, the
works in the literature can provide insights on the performance of distance estimation. EN uses RSSI with BLE
and thus it is important to shed some light on its accuracy,
even only in controlled environments.
Given the RSSI from a transmitting device, distance
can be computed as:
D = 10

C0 −RSSI
10n

(1)

where D is the estimated distance, RSSI is the received signal strength, C0 is the average RSSI value at a reference
distance from the transmitting device (typically 1m), and
n is the decay exponent. The values of n and C0 are not
universally given, they depend on the transmitter and on
the environment, and they need to be estimated for each
device and for each environment. As an example, Mackey
et. al [21] make an estimation of C0 for three beacon devices whose specification stated the same value of C0 , and
measure a difference up to 10dBs. The EN documentation
does not enter into the details of distance estimation. EN
provides only an estimation of the attenuation of the signal
over its path, and leaves to the implementer the choice for
the thresholds to identify a close contact. EN provides a
list of transmission power and correction factors for a number of devices that were tested, but still, the parameters
of Eq. (1) are in general uncertain.

5. Proximity Detection with BLE: State of the Art
In this section we review the works in the literature
that deal with proximity detection using BLE on mobile
phones. Indoor localization has been a hot research topic
in the last few years and the estimation of the distance
between devices is the building block of any localization
system. Our intention was to restrict the analysis to those
works that provide insights on the applicability of BLE
contact tracing for the COVID-19 use case, i.e. those that
respect the following criteria:
6

Even assuming that the parameters of Eq. (1) are fixed,
the second source of error is the estimation of the RSSI.
If we set C0 = −82.42, n = 1.96 (extracted from [21]) we
see that an error of 1 dB at a distance of roughly 1.5m9
produces an error of roughly 20cm. Which are the possible
causes of error? First of all, the value of RSSI provided
by the devices is not a standard measure. As noted in the
literature [22] the value received by an application is the
result of the elaboration made by hardware, drivers and
software, and there is no standard expectation on its accuracy. Second is multipath fading: the RSSI is the sum
of the signal that is directly received in the line of sight
and/or the reflections from the objects in the surrounding environment, which changes constantly. Third, BLE
broadcasts beacons on three different Bluetooth channels
and the response of the smartphone radio in the three
channels is different, which provides a very noisy figure
when the levels are summed into a single value. Finally,
even the orientation of the phone influences the RSSI, so
that the same couple of devices, at the same distance may
measure a different RSSI due to phone orientation. Considered altogether, these factors make the the parameters
of Eq. (1) extremely variable depending on the environment, the devices, the position of the phones, and thus
distance estimation using RSSI is simply noisy in generic
conditions.
If we look at the results in the literature we can try
to quantify the expected error10 . Katevas et al. [18] performed detailed experiments to estimate the accuracy of
distance estimation with BLE in a very controlled environment, including an anechoic chamber. The results show
that distance estimation on commercial devices (iPhone
5S and 6S) are very noisy, with en error around 0.75m at
the 1.5m distance, and 1.5m on an 3m distance. Neburka
et al. [23] provide another interesting insight on the behaviour of BLE, showing that the same device (an RN4020
BLE module, not a mobile phone) when using different
channels (again, in an anechoic chamber) can show up to
15 dB variation in RSSI measurement, depending on the
channel.
Several papers [24, 25] perform an analysis of the accuracy of a BLE-based positioning system when using mobile
phones as receivers and fixed, dedicated devices as broadcaster. Again, they measure RSSI variations of tens of
dBs, for instance, when people walk there can be drops
in the measured RSSI up to 30 dB [24]. Similar measures
are performed also by Montanari [19], and the interesting
observation that the author does is that the RSSI value
is different from the ones measured in other works [24],

as a confirmation that even in controlled environments,
the measured values differ largely. Naghdi and O’Keefe
quantify the effect of human bodies that shadow the propagation of BLE signals [26] and show they can produce a
drop of tens of dBs in the RSSI values, with a large variability due to distance from the source and the channel
used.
Finally, the EN library documentation provides a procedure to calibrate distance estimation. The documentation reports that RSSI measured using two phones in an
anechoic chamber varies up to 10 dBs just for a change in
the orientation of the phone, without changing any other
environmental parameter11 .
Summing up, the literature provides enough evidence
for the fact that even in favorable conditions (anechoic
chamber, controlled scenario, known hardware for the transmitter) several sources of noise will affect the received RSSI
up to tens of dBs, which translates in distance estimations
error up to several meters. While this can be tolerable in
certain applications (for instance the location of a person
inside a room) it completely defeats the goals of contact
tracing that should identify contacts in the range of 1-2
meters.
5.1.1. Improving the Estimation
Mackey et al. [21] introduce several filtering techniques
and test them to estimate the distance of a phone from a
beacon. They achieve encouraging results, with a mean
absolute error for distance estimation (below 3m) given
by 0.27m and 0.412m (in large or small room) for the best
chosen filtering technique. Unfortunately, these results are
far from reproducible in the contact tracing environment:
they use static beacons as transmitters, in line of sight with
the phone, they require training (4 out of 5 filtering techniques use internal parameters that were calibrated on the
scenario, with fixed thresholds), the scenario is completely
controlled (empty room, no people), and before beginning
the experiment, 1000 data points for each distance are collected to estimate n and C0 , with 1200 more data points
used to make the estimation (against the 32 we expect to
have with EN).
To improve the distance estimation is possible to use
BLE together with data coming from other sensors on the
mobile phone. Liu et al. [27] use the phone accelerator
and gyroscope to improve localization, inferring the walking direction of the user. Alas, also phone sensors are
imprecise and they are sensitive to the way the user holds
the phone therefore this approach requires calibration for
each specific device. Multi-modal positioning has been
proposed using a mix of BLE, Wi-Fi, and visual landmark
recognition [28], which requires the user to periodically

9 The error is non linear, we use 1.5m as a reference as it falls
between 1m and 2m, which are the cut-off distance for contact tracing
adopted by WHO and several countries.
10 Unfortunately, the absence of open data does not enable us to
extract exact figures from the works in the literature. We need to
rely on visual inspection of graphs and therefore, our observation are
quantitative but can not be easily systematized. Still, the inaccuracy
we outline is so macroscopic that justifies our reasoning.

11 This value is reported by Google in the description
of the procedure necessary to calibrate the parameters of
EN,
see
https://developers.google.com/android/exposurenotifications/ble-attenuation-procedure#device-orientation

7

re-calibrate the app in known positions. These recent papers show once more that distance estimation based only
on BLE is extremely noisy in real world settings, and describe promising research direction that will be explored
in the future. For the time being, due to their complexity
and their requirements, they have been shown to work in a
controlled environment, but they are far from being usable
for the COVID-19 contact tracing.

again the testing conditions were not comparable to the
COVID-19 use case. Interactions were not spontaneous,
the participants were asked to perform specific actions,
and these actions were happening in certain places, not
“in the wild”. The whole data-set was collected and postprocessed, the reported accuracy was obtained with the
best combination of tracking parameters and considering
received beacons on both mobiles involved in the contact.
A key contribution to this discussion from Girolami’s work
is contained in this sentence: Firstly, we investigate the
possibility of using commercial smartphones to advertise
and to collect BLE beacons demonstrating that, currently,
such approach is not feasible due to the heterogeneous implementation of BLE firmware in different versions of mobile OS (both Android and iOS). The authors initially tried
to use the devices of the students but found out that in
the batch of Android devices owned by the participants
(which matched 15 different models), 42% of them were
not usable for contact tracing. Even if the hardware and
the software were supposed to be compatible with BLE,
the device simply did not allow BLE to be used for active
beaconing. In the end, the authors used mobile phones as
observers but had to equip participants with a BLE watch
acting as the broadcaster. Even once the broadcaster was
set to be a “standard” watch with fixed hardware and
software features, and the receiver phone was kept in a
pre-defined position (front pocket or back pocket in participant’s pants), the measured RSSI changed substantially
depending on the mobile phone receiving the data and its
position. Furthermore, the median number of lost beacons
per session was larger than 50%, which suggests that in a
real world scenario the loss of beacons is an extremely important factor, which can be mitigated only with a large
Scan Window, which is known to be the highest source of
power consumption. The trade-off between battery consumption and accuracy is completely unexplored in a noisy
use-case, in which people may find themselves in crowded
places with tens of other mobiles in the range of a few
meters (a bus, a shopping center, or even only the queue
to get into a shopping center). In those cases the loss of
packets due to noise and collisions could introduce false
negatives, i.e., contacts that are not traced.
Katevas et al. in a recent paper [31] use iPhones to detect interactions between couples and groups of people. 22
people were involved in a 45 minutes experiment in which
they were left in an open space and were free to socialize.
The ground truth was obtained with post-processing of
video recording. A total of 99 one-to-one encounters and
22 group encounters were detected. Again, the accuracy of
encounter detection was satisfactory (about 89%) but the
experiment set-up does not generalize to the COVID-19
use case, for similar reasons to the previous works. The
experiment was in a controlled environment, the participants had a dedicated beaconing device in one pocket and
an iPhone in the other, all data were stored and postprocessed with machine learning techniques. Furthermore
the iPhone had access to the data produced by other sen-

5.2. “Contact Tracing” with BLE
Montanari et al. [29, 19] use BLE to perform contact
tracing in an office environment, with a set-up that is the
most similar to a real world situation. The goal of the
experiment was to track interactions among 25 co-workers
in an office for 4 weeks, data were validated by human observers in the office and stationary beacons. The ground
truth consisted in 401 observed interactions, meaning two
or more people standing at less than 3 meters from each
other and having a conversation. On average the interactions lasted for 1 minute and 13 seconds and 70% of the
interactions were shorter than 1 minute, while only 5%
were longer than 5 minutes. The authors use a custom device in order to achieve a high precision in data collection,
but they then re-sample data in order to match the configuration that is achievable on commercial devices. Some
of the results are encouraging, with realistic configurations
that could achieve between 81% and 96% true positive detection rate.
Unfortunately the experiment set-up is far from the
COVID-19 use case as it breaks all the criteria we defined. Devices were smart watches and not smartphones,
this makes a big difference because watches are always at
people’s wrist and can not simply be left on a desk. With
smart watches there are higher chances that the two devices are in line of sight, while a smartphone usually stays
in a pocket or bag, and RSSI strongly depends on shadowing. The choice of the parameters allowed a much more
fine-grained sensing than EN, as Scan Interval and Scan
Window were set to be below 5 seconds, orders of magnitude lower than with EN. The testing environment was a
firm office and only that office, participants were asked to
remove watches when going out of the office. Each contact was tracked using the RSSI measured on both watches
in order to mitigate the effects of multipath fading. To
achieve this, all data were stored in a server and later on
post-processed. Post processing used machine learning to
identify contacts, with a supervised learning approach. All
these issues make the set-up not at all comparable with the
COVID-19 use case, and make it impossible to generalize
the results.
Girolami et. al. [30] investigate the possibility of using
smartphones for contact tracing. In this case the experiment included students from a high-school that were asked
to perform certain interactions (such as standing or sitting
in front of each other for 3 minutes) while their mobile
was recording BLE messages. The reported accuracy of
encounter detection reached almost 82%. Unfortunately,
8

sors: acceleration, gravity, and rotation time.
It is important to note that as of today all the experiments involving iPhones used a second dedicated device
playing the role of the broadcaster. This is due to the
fact that iOS does not allow an app to act as a broadcaster if the app is not in the foreground. This was noted
in the literature [18] and was brought to the attention of
the media recently12 . This is a privacy-preserving feature
that Apple introduced to prevent the exact goal of contact
tracing apps: constantly tracking the user position. Even
if it is likely that Apple could remove this limitation for
the COVID-19 use case, there are currently no scientific
works estimating the efficacy of proximity detection using
an iPhone as a broadcaster for prolonged periods.
Palaghias et al. [32] present an accurate technique to
perform proximity detection using smartphones only. The
authors start from the observation that proximity detection using RSSI only is not precise enough and elaborate a
new strategy that needs 6 Bluetooth packets to correctly
estimate user proximity. Results show an accuracy close
to 82% in a realistic scenario but again the technique can
not be generalized to the COVID-19 use case. Even if
detection is done on-line by each phone (all other experiments performed off-line centralized detection) it uses a
machine learning approach which requires training. Furthermore, proximity detection is improved by estimating
the direction the user is facing, based on a previously introduced technique [33] which requires access to various
sensors on the phone. This technique also includes an interaction between the two phones using Bluetooth in ad
hoc mode, which is different than BLE. The experimental
set-up is limited to 8 people performing partly controlled
operations in an indoor setting. It is also not clear what
version of Bluetooth is used in the experiment, and thus,
what is the effective power consumption of the proposed
technique.

is of a few units, and the majority of the contacts are
extremely predictable (family, workplace, hospital). Proximity detection should provide an estimate of, in average,
less than one contact per infected person. The third important consideration is that a high rate of false positives
could defeat the goal of the app itself (with people ignoring
the messages they receive) or even be detrimental (diverting precious resources to manage false positives).
Proximity detection, to be useful, should provide a very
short list of people that had long-lasting contacts with Alice. Yet we know that Bob’s phone should make a precise
estimate of proximity with a very small number of samples. The literature analysis we performed shows that at
the time of writing, there is no scientific evidence to support that under these conditions, a proximity detection application running on smartphones with a distributed design
can provide such high precision.
All the works we reviewed provide reasonable accuracy
for proximity detection (between 80%-90%) but use a setup that is far from being applicable to the COVID-19 use
case, combining at least two of the following requirements:
• They require a centralized system to store all the
raw data. The database is needed in order to detect contacts and contain the RSSI for all received
packets.
• They require training. Calibration of the system
needs ground truth provided by the experimenters,
and a controlled environment.
• They used dedicated devices. They were not able to
perform the experiments only with smartphones and
used custom devices worn by participants.
• They required direct communications between the
two phones, or access to other sources of data.
This makes impossible to forecast the accuracy of proximity detection when used “in the wild”.

6. Discussion

6.1. False Positives and Sensitivity
Consider a person that goes to work every day with
public transportation (bus), it is reasonable that he/she
will stay in the bus for more than 10 minutes, and repeat
this routine twice a day. If a distance of 2 m is maintained between people in the bus, and we consider only
the closest 4 persons to be in communication range, we
may estimate 8 contacts per day. We set the observation
period to three days, that is, one day that passes from the
emergence of the symptoms to when the person is tested
positive (a very optimistic estimation) and two days in advance (again, a very conservative choice). This yields the
number of contacts N = 24. The numbers we introduced
in Section 2.2 (R = 2, 2 out or 6 contacts not traceable
with analog contact tracing) tell that we are looking in
average for 2 people every 3 infected people. If the app
has full penetration in the whole society and works perfectly, then we have that every 3 ∗ 24 = 72 traced contacts,

The first important consideration emerging from our
analysis is that, albeit called with the same name, the
“contact tracing” needed to limit the spread of a virus
is not what a mobile application can provide. A “close
contact”, according to international guidelines, is a person
at a distance of less than 1-2 meters without proper protections. A smartphone app can only estimate when two
devices are in communication range, regardless of where
their owners are and what is in between (a thin wall, a
glass. . . ), which is generally referred to as proximity detection. The second fundamental consideration is that improving contact tracing requires high precision. The reproductive number when containment measures are in place
12 See
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-0420/france-says-apple-s-bluetooth-policy-is-blocking-virustracker.

9

there are only two people that are likely positive and untracked. That is, the task of contact tracing itself, under
the assumptions of a perfect application produces 35 false
positives every true positive. Note that here we call a
false positive someone that was in proximity of some infected person, detected by an app that has 100% accuracy.
These figures clearly state that physical closeness is not a
good proxy to detect “close contacts” as defined in medical terms. Moreover, this figure does not consider several
other causes of contacts (people that work in contact with
the general public, social gatherings, shopping malls etc.)
yet, it already shows that using an app for contact tracing
may produce an unbearable amount of people to test, or
people ignoring the messages they receive.
In order to make a rough estimation of the sensitivity
of such an app, we rely on statistics available at the time
of writing. We call C the fraction of people that is successfully using the contact tracing app in a certain moment,
the fraction of contacts that can be successfully detected
is S = C 2 ∗ P where C 2 is the probability that both people
in close contact run the app and P is the accuracy of the
app. We estimate C using the following expression:
C =M ∗A∗W

enable beaconing on all devices we call Wa the fraction
of BLE-equipped Android devices that support beaconing, then if Wa = 1 − 0.42 = 0.58 is still a valid estimation, we have that M = (0.14 + 0.86 ∗ Wa ) ' 0.63
(in Switzerland, the ratio between app downloads and active apps is 0.57 so close to our figure [35]). This yields
C = 0.76 ∗ 0.748 ∗ 0.63 ' 0.36. Let us assume that the
app never introduces false positives (here false positive
refers to the fact that the app never considers a close contact someone that is far from the subject, an extremely
strong assumption given the imprecision of proximity detection) and that it is able to detect a fraction P = 0.81
of the proximity events, the lower bound of the results reported by the literature in non realistic conditions. Then
the sensitivity of the contact tracing application (i.e. the
fraction of contacts that are correctly traced) is given by
S = C 2 ∗ P = 0.362 ∗ 0.81 ' 0.10. That is, assuming
that: i) phones are always on and carried by their owners;
ii) the app is always working; iii) all the people declaring
they want to use the application actually do it; iv) the
precision of the app is the one observed in non-realistic
controlled conditions and does not create false positives;
then still the application will be able to provide around
10% of the real contacts.
In conclusion, in the short term, with current technologies, we argue that the high number of potential false
positives and the low sensitivity does not justify the introduction of a contact tracing application with an high
potential privacy risk.

(2)

Where M is the fraction of people owning a smartphone, A is the fraction of people willing to install the
app, W is the fraction of phones that supports contact
tracing with BLE.
According to the Pew Research Center13 in advanced
economies 76% of the adult population owned a smartphone in 2018, we then set M = 0.76. A recent survey
on the acceptability of the use of a contact tracing app
in several advanced economies reveals that about 74.8%
of the people would agree on installing the app, so we
set A = 0.748 [34]. We note that this number is disproportionate compared to the penetration of real apps,
for which numbers are extremely lower14 . Recent statistics15 report that Android and iOS cover almost 100% of
the market of new devices with Android alone covering
86% of the market. We know that at the time of writing,
Apple iOS does not allow active beaconing for applications that run in the background, and one of the work
observed that 42% of the Android smartphones did not
allow beaconing even if the phone specifications theoretically allowed it [30]. Assuming at some point iOS will

7. The Way Ahead
In this section we build on the previous discussion to
provide some pragmatic considerations on how to make
the best use of digital contact tracing.
As a first point, we stress the importance of a rigorous
monitoring of the ongoing efforts to produce contact tracing applications. It is essential that not only the source
code of the apps, but also the results on their experimentation and their daily use is made available for public
scrutiny. Since we outlined important technical unsolved
challenges it is paramount that the way these challenges
are addressed is made public, so that experts can evaluate
the efficacy of the app, and validate the whole approach.
It is also fundamental that the results obtained with the
app will be constantly monitored during its use, to periodically asses its overall social utility. So far we have only
anecdotal evidences saying that in some countries the results of digital contact tracing are not encouraging. For
instance, in Australia it was reported that even with 6 millions download, the app did not report any contact that
was not already known16 , in the UK the app was sus-

13 See Spring 2018 Global Attitude Survey. We restrict our analysis to advanced economies, as we focus on the European panorama:
https://www.pewresearch.org/global/2019/02/05/smartphoneownership-is-growing-rapidly-around-the-world-but-notalways-equally/.
14 According to the news available a the time of writing the number of downloaded apps per inhabitant is '0.23 in Switzerland [35],
'0.19 in Germany [11], '0.7 in Italy [36]. Note that not every downloads corresponds to a running app.
15 See the data from IDC.com including the current and past
market shares of new smartphones https://www.idc.com/promo/
smartphone-market-share/os.

16 See
https://www.smh.com.au/politics/federal/muchhyped-contact-tracing-app-a-terrible-failure-20200628p5570h.html

10

pended due to difficulties in making it working properly 17
and even in Singapore, one of the earliest adopters of digital contact tracing, where 35% of the population appears
to have downloaded the application, the government is going to provide physical tokens to citizens, to have reliable
measures that are not possible with smartphones18 .
If the apps will prove to be inefficient, there are still
other ways we could reshape their goals to provide some
social benefit.

Unfortunately this is not achievable with the distributed,
privacy-preserving solution.
Instead, a centralized solution would bring a number
of advantages, among which:
• Proximity tracing will improve, as it could be performed with data coming from both smartphones;
• Big data would enable the use of advanced data analysis to filter out false positives and improve the estimation;

7.1. From Contact Tracing to Risk Profiles

• A contact graph could be produced, which would
help complex analysis and identify potential superspreaders;

Protection measures like safety distance, face masks
and avoiding gatherings are a limitation to freedom, and
certain categories of people that are less exposed to the
risk may not be motivated enough to enforce them. One
way to encourge them is by creating empathy towards the
others, which has been shown to be be effective [37]. To
reach this goal, gamification has proven useful in several
domains, including health [38] and may be adopted also
in this specific situation. Gamification means introducing
game elements in non-gaming activities and can be used
for the creation of social awareness of the consequences
or one’s own actions towards the more vulnerable ones,
which is an effective way of motivating people to respect
contention measures against COVID-19 [39].
Contact tracing apps could be reshaped to match this
new purpose: Instead of trying to capture the exact number of proximity events, they could provide users with
an estimation of their cumulative exposure to risk, and
thus, the potential danger they represent for the others.
Through gamification they could nudge users to take a
better behaviour. The amount of information required for
this task could be lower than what required for contact
tracing and can be performed with anonyimzed data-sets,
thus lowering the privacy risk. For instance, re-use or RPIs
could make it harder to de-anonymize the identity of infected contacts, while still providing a reasonable measure
of the exposure risk. Extending this concept, distributed
contact tracing may support k-anonymity (as proposed recently [40]).

• If a person that tests positive is presented with a list
of people (not IDs) of possible contacts, he/she may
provide details on the kind of contact to reconstruct
its associated risk.
Indeed, almost all the works we reviewed use a centralized
approach for proximity detection, which helps overcoming
several technical limitations. For instance, a centralized
system that collects data for every single received BLE
packet can estimate the distance from both endpoints, thus
reducing the error due to multipath fading and shadowing.
Yet this approach is even more privacy intrusive than what
is normally described as a “centralized system” for contact
tracing for COVID-19 [3], which generally refers to a system that collects all the proximity events after they were
detected in the phones. Such a centralized system instead
owns enough information to de-anonymise the position of
the users and their loose interactions, and in general it
would be an unprecedented privacy nightmare. As scientists however, we have to ask ourselves if it makes more
sense to insist on the adoption of a solution that may never
work properly, or to accept the challenge of imagining technical means that may reduce the risks associated with a
solution that may actually work.
8. Conclusions
The risk assessment of a proximity tracing app, considering its privacy issues is very hard to perform, since the
fallout of data leakage can be simply impossible to predict
with current information. For this reason, a first principle
approach would call to ask what is the estimated benefit of
an application that introduces a potential privacy risk. We
analyzed the available literature to answer this question,
matching the data of the pandemic with the available data
from experiments in proximity tracing, and our conclusion
is that there is not enough evidence to support that such
an app would help slow down the running contagion.
A contact tracing app, adopting the highest standards
of privacy could be indeed useful to spread awareness and
encourage modifications in people behavior, a goal that
appears to be less daunting and more practical to achieve
in the short term.

7.2. Assisted Analog Contact Tracing and the Centralized
Solution
As we mentioned, analog contact tracing requires expertise, time and can be error prone. On the other hand
we know that digital contact tracing can not be used automatically, as it only identifies proximity. Merging the two
forms of tracing would instead definitely improve contact
identification. If the expert can access a list of contacts
which can be reviewed together with the infected person,
the whole process would be made faster and more robust.
17 See https://www.technologyreview.com/2020/06/19/1004190/
uk-covid-contact-tracing-app-fiasco/.
18 See https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-53146360.

11

Acknowledgments
[15]

The authors want to thank Gianrocco Lazzari for the
useful feedback he provided to the realization of the paper.

[16]

References
[1] K. Bock, C. R. Khne, R. Mhlhoff, M. R. Ost, J. Pohle, R. Rehak,
Data protection impact assessment for the corona app, 2020.
URL: https://www.fiff.de/dsfa-corona.
[2] H. Cho, D. Ippolito, Y. W. Yu, Contact tracing mobile apps
for COVID-19: Privacy considerations and related trade-offs,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.11511 (2020).
[3] C. Troncoso, M. Payer, J.-P. Hubaux, M. Salathé, J. Larus,
E. Bugnion, W. Lueks, T. Stadler, A. Pyrgelis, D. Antonioli, et al., Decentralized privacy-preserving proximity tracing, 2020. URL: https://github.com/DP-3T/documents/blob/
master/DP3T%20White%20Paper.pdf.
[4] N. Ahmed, R. A. Michelin, W. Xue, S. Ruj, R. Malaney, S. S.
Kanhere, A. Seneviratne, W. Hu, H. Janicke, S. Jha, A survey of
covid-19 contact tracing apps, arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.10306
(2020).
[5] M. Cunche, A. Boutet, C. Castelluccia, C. Lauradoux,
D. Le Métayer, V. Roca, On using Bluetooth-Low-Energy for
contact tracing, Technical Report, Inria Grenoble Rhône-Alpes
; INSA de Lyon, 2020.
[6] W. H. Organization, Report of the who-china joint mission on coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19), 2020. URL:
https://www.who.int/publications-detail/report-of-thewho-china-joint-mission-on-coronavirus-disease-2019(covid-19).
[7] J. Liu, X. Liao, S. Qian, J. Yuan, F. Wang, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, F.S. Wang, L. Liu, Z. Zhang, Community transmission of severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2, Shenzhen, China,
2020, Emerging infectious diseases 26 (2020).
[8] X. He, E. H. Y. Lau, P. Wu, X. Deng, J. Wang, X. Hao,
Y. C. Lau, J. Y. Wong, Y. Guan, X. Tan, X. Mo, Y. Chen,
B. Liao, W. Chen, F. Hu, Q. Zhang, M. Zhong, Y. Wu, L. Zhao,
F. Zhang, B. J. Cowling, F. Li, G. M. Leung, Temporal dynamics in viral shedding and transmissibility of COVID-19, Nature
Medicine 26 (2020). URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591020-0869-5. doi:10.1038/s41591-020-0869-5.
[9] S. Zhang, M. Diao, W. Yu, L. Pei, Z. Lin, D. Chen, Estimation
of the reproductive number of novel coronavirus (COVID-19)
and the probable outbreak size on the Diamond Princess cruise
ship: A data-driven analysis, International Journal of Infectious
Diseases 93 (2020).
[10] S. Zhao, Q. Lin, J. Ran, S. Musa, G. Yang, W. Wang, Y. Lou,
D. Gao, L. Yang, D. He, M. Wang, Preliminary estimation
of the basic reproduction number of novel coronavirus (2019nCoV) in China, from 2019 to 2020: A data-driven analysis
in the early phase of the outbreak, International Journal of
Infectious Diseases 92 (2020).
[11] Robert
Koch
Institute,
Coronavirus
disease
2019
(covid-19) daily situation report,
29/04/2020. URL:
https://www.rki.de/DE/Content/InfAZ/N/Neuartiges_
Coronavirus/Situationsberichte/2020-04-29-en.pdf?__
blob=publicationFile.
[12] Istituto Superiore Sanit (ISS), Epidemia COVID-19 Aggiornamento nazionale 7 maggio 2020 - ore 16:00, 2020. URL:
https://www.epicentro.iss.it/coronavirus/bollettino/
Bollettino-sorveglianza-integrata-COVID-19_7-maggio2020.pdf.
[13] Y. Liu, R. M. Eggo, A. J. Kucharski, Secondary attack rate
and superspreading events for SARS-CoV-2, The Lancet 395
(2020).
[14] Q. Bi, Y. Wu, S. Mei, C. Ye, X. Zou, Z. Zhang, X. Liu, L. Wei,
S. A. Truelove, T. Zhang, W. Gao, C. Cheng, X. Tang, X. Wu,
Y. Wu, B. Sun, S. Huang, Y. Sun, J. Zhang, T. Ma, J. Lessler,
T. Feng, Epidemiology and transmission of COVID-19 in 391

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

12

cases and 1286 of their close contacts in shenzhen, china: a retrospective cohort study, The Lancet Infectious Diseases (2020).
H. Yen-Ta, T. Yu-Kang, L. Pei-Chun, Estimation of the secondary attack rate of covid-19 using proportional meta-analysis
of nationwide contact tracing data in taiwan, Journal of Microbiology, Immunology and Infection (2020, in press).
L. Ferretti, C. Wymant, M. Kendall, L. Zhao, A. Nurtay,
L. Abeler-Drner, M. Parker, D. Bonsall, C. Fraser, Quantifying SARS-CoV-2 transmission suggests epidemic control with
digital contact tracing, Science 368 (2020).
European Data Protection Board, Guidelines 04/2020 on the
use of location data and contact tracing tools in the context of
the covid-19 outbreak, 2020.
K. Katevas, H. Haddadi, L. Tokarchuk, R. G. Clegg, Detecting
group formations using iBeacon technology, in: ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing
(UbiComp), 2016.
A. Montanari, Devising and evaluating wearable technology
for social dynamics monitoring, 2019. URL: https://www.
repository.cam.ac.uk/handle/1810/292527.
F. Gu, X. Hu, M. Ramezani, D. Acharya, K. Khoshelham,
S. Valaee, J. Shang, Indoor localization improved by spatial
contexta survey, ACM Comput. Surv. 52 (2019).
A. Mackey, P. Spachos, L. Song, K. N. Plataniotis, Improving
BLE Beacon Proximity Estimation Accuracy Through Bayesian
Filtering, IEEE Internet of Things Journal 7 (2020).
M. Kaczmarek, J. Ruminski, A. Bujnowski, Accuracy analysis
of the RSSI BLE SensorTag signal for indoor localization purposes, in: 2016 Federated Conference on Computer Science and
Information Systems (FedCSIS), 2016.
J. Neburka, Z. Tlamsa, V. Benes, L. Polak, O. Kaller, L. Bolecek, J. Sebesta, T. Kratochvil, Study of the performance of
RSSI based Bluetooth Smart indoor positioning, in: 26th International Conference Radioelektronika (RADIOELEKTRONIKA), 2016.
R. Faragher, R. Harle, Location Fingerprinting With Bluetooth
Low Energy Beacons, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications 33 (2015).
Y. Zhuang, J. Yang, Y. Li, L. Qi, N. El-Sheimy, SmartphoneBased Indoor Localization with Bluetooth Low Energy Beacons,
Sensors 16 (2016).
S. Naghdi, K. OKeefe, Detecting and Correcting for Human Obstacles in BLE Trilateration Using Artificial Intelligence, Sensors 20 (2020).
L. Liu, B. Li, L. Yang, T. Liu, Real-time indoor positioning
approach using ibeacons and smartphone sensors, Applied Sciences 10 (2020).
F. Dmbgen, C. Oeschger, M. Kolundija, A. Scholefield, E. Girardin, J. Leuenberger, S. Ayer, Multi-modal probabilistic indoor localization on a smartphone, in: 2019 International Conference on Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation (IPIN),
2019, pp. 1–8.
A. Montanari, S. Nawaz, C. Mascolo, K. Sailer, A study of bluetooth low energy performance for human proximity detection in
the workplace, in: IEEE International Conference on Pervasive
Computing and Communications (PerCom), 2017.
M. Girolami, F. Mavilia, F. Delmastro, E. Distefano, Detecting
Social Interactions through Commercial Mobile Devices, in:
IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and
Communications Workshops (PerCom Workshops), 2018.
K. Katevas, K. Hnsel, R. Clegg, I. Leontiadis, H. Haddadi,
L. Tokarchuk, Finding Dory in the Crowd: Detecting Social
Interactions using Multi-Modal Mobile Sensing, in: ACM Workshop on Machine Learning on Edge in Sensor Systems, 2019.
N. Palaghias, S. A. Hoseinitabatabaei, M. Nati, A. Gluhak,
K. Moessner, Accurate detection of real-world social interactions with smartphones, in: IEEE International Conference on
Communications (ICC), 2015.
S. A. Hoseinitabatabaei, A. Gluhak, R. Tafazolli, W. Headley,
Design, Realization, and Evaluation of uDirect-An Approach
for Pervasive Observation of User Facing Direction on Mobile

minutes or more to 30 minutes or more. [. . . ] Brief interactions are less likely to result in transmission; however,
symptoms and the type of interaction (e.g., did the person cough directly into the face of the individual) remain
important.
According to the Australian guidelines a close contact
is a “face-to-face contact in any setting with a confirmed
or probable case, for greater than 15 minutes cumulative
over the course of a week [. . . ] sharing of a closed space
with a confirmed or probable case for a prolonged period
(e.g. more than 2 hours) in the period extending from
48 hours before onset of symptoms in the confirmed or
probable case” 20 .
For the Irish Health institution a close contact is defined as Any individual who has had greater than 15 minutes face-to-face (<2 meters distance) contact with a case,
in any setting.21
The state of Alberta (CA) provides the following definition: individuals that lived with or otherwise had close
prolonged contact (i.e., for more than 15 min and within
two metres) with a case without consistent and appropriate use of PPE [Personal Protection Equipment] and not
isolating 22

Phones, IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing 13 (2014).
[34] S. Altmann, L. Milsom, H. Zillessen, R. Blasone, F. Gerdon,
R. Bach, F. Kreuter, D. Nosenzo, S. Toussaert, J. Abeler, Acceptability of app-based contact tracing for COVID-19: Crosscountry survey evidence (2020). URL: https://www.medrxiv.
org/content/10.1101/2020.05.05.20091587v1.
[35] SwissCovid App Monitoring, data coming from the Swiss
Federal Office of Information Technology, Systems and
Telecommunication (FOITT), Visited on 24/7/2020. URL:
https://www.experimental.bfs.admin.ch/expstat/en/home/
innovative-methods/swisscovid-app-monitoring.html.
[36] Declaration of the Italian Minister for Innovation on
the Immuni app downloads, Retrived 24/7/2020. URL:
https://www.ansa.it/sito/notizie/tecnologia/software_
app/2020/07/22/app-immuni-scaricata-da-42-mlncittadini_72092ab5-c78f-480c-b299-7395cd122fbd.html.
[37] S. Pfattheicher, L. Nockur, R. Bhm, C. Sassenrath, M. Petersen, The emotional path to action: Empathy promotes physical distancing during the COVID-19 pandemic, 2020. doi:https:
//doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/y2cg5.
[38] K. Seaborn, D. I. Fels, Gamification in theory and action: A
survey, International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 74
(2015).
[39] P. Lunn, S. Timmons, C. Belton, M. Barjakov, H. Julienne,
C. Lavin, Motivating social distancing during the COVID19 pandemic: An online experiment, Technical Report, Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI), 2020. URL: https:
//ideas.repec.org/p/esr/wpaper/wp658.html.
[40] J. Ali, V. Dyo, Cross hashing: Anonymizing encounters
in decentralised contact tracing protocols, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.12884 (2020). URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.
12884.

Appendix A.2. EU Privacy Guidelines
The the mentioned EU Privacy Guidelines [17] contain
the following guidelines:
The systematic and large scale monitoring of location
and/or contacts between natural persons is a grave intrusion into their privacy. It can only be legitimised by relying
on a voluntary adoption by the users for each of the respective purposes. This would imply, in particular, that individuals who decide not to or cannot use such applications
should not suffer from any disadvantage at all.
[. . . ] contact tracing apps do not require tracking the
location of individual users. Instead, proximity data should
be used; as contact tracing applications can function without direct identification of individuals,appropriate measures
should be put in place to prevent re-identification; the collected information should reside on the terminal equipment
of the user and only the relevant information should be collected when absolutely necessary.
[. . . ] procedures and processes including respective algorithms implemented by the contact tracing apps should
work under the strict supervision of qualified personnel in
order to limit the occurrence of any false positives and negatives. In particular, the task of providing advice on next
steps should not be based solely on automated processing.
False positives will always occur to a certain degree. As
the identification of an infection risk probably can have a

Appendix A. Excerpts from Relevant Documents
Appendix A.1. Definition of Close Contacts from National
Health Institutes
Here we report a number of definitions of “close contact” from the official documents of several English speaking national health institutions. Note that most of these
document extend the definition with specific provisions for,
i.e., households or partners, which we don’t report here as
they are easy to detect without the need of a mobile phone
app. The definitions may also change with time, as more
evidence is accumulated on the way the virus spreads.
The US Center for Desease and Control Prevention
identifies a close contact as Individual who has had close
contact (< 6 feet) for a prolonged period of time and specifies in notes that19 :
Factors to consider when defining close contact include
proximity, the duration of exposure (e.g., longer exposure
time likely increases exposure risk), whether the individual has symptoms (e.g., coughing likely increases exposure
risk) and whether the individual was wearing a facemask
(which can efficiently block respiratory secretions from contaminating others and the environment).
Data are insufficient to precisely define the duration
of time that constitutes a prolonged exposure. Recommendations vary on the length of time of exposure from 10

20 See https://www1.health.gov.au/internet/main/publishing.
nsf/Content/cdna-song-novel-coronavirus.htm
21 https://www.hpsc.ie/a-z/respiratory/coronavirus/
novelcoronavirus/guidance/contacttracingguidance/National%
20Interim%20Guidance%20for%20contact%20tracing.pdf
22 See
https://open.alberta.ca/publications/coronaviruscovid-19

19 See
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/php/
public-health-recommendations.html

13

high impact on individuals, such as remaining in self isolation until tested negative, the ability to correct data and/or
subsequent analysis results is a necessity. This, of course,
should only apply to scenarios and implementations where
data is processed and/or stored in a way where such correction is technically feasible and where the adverse effects
mentioned above are likely to happen.
Any server involved in the contact tracing system must
only collect the contact history or the pseudonymous identifiers of a user diagnosed as infected as the result of a
proper assessment made by health authorities and of a voluntary action of the user. Alternately, the server must
keep a list of pseudonymous identifiers of infected users
or their contact history only for the time to inform potentially infected users of their exposure, and should not try
to identify potentially infected users.

14

