NOT ALL INTERVENTIONS ARE EQUAL FOR THE HEIGHT OF THE
SECOND PEAK

arXiv:2005.06880v1 [physics.soc-ph] 14 May 2020

TIM HULSHOF? , JOOST JORRITSMA† , AND JÚLIA KOMJÁTHY†
Abstract. In this paper we conduct a simulation study of the spread of an epidemic like COVID19 with temporary immunity on finite spatial and non-spatial network models. In particular, we
assume that an epidemic spreads stochastically on a scale-free network and that each infected
individual in the network gains a temporary immunity after its infectious period is over. After
the temporary immunity period is over, the individual becomes susceptible to the virus again.
When the underlying contact network is embedded in Euclidean geometry, we model three
different intervention strategies that aim to control the spread of the epidemic: social distancing,
restrictions on travel, and restrictions on maximal number of social contacts per node.
Our first finding is that on a finite network, a long enough average immunity period leads to
extinction of the pandemic after the first peak, analogous to the concept of “herd immunity”.
For each model, there is a critical average immunity length Lc above which this happens.
Our second finding is that all three interventions manage to flatten the first peak (the travel
restrictions most efficiently), as well as decrease the critical immunity length Lc , but elongate
the epidemic. However, when the average immunity length L is shorter than Lc , the price for
the flattened first peak is often a high second peak: for limiting the maximal number of contacts,
the second peak can be as high as 1/3 of the first peak, and twice as high as it would be without
intervention. Thirdly, interventions introduce oscillations into the system and the time to reach
equilibrium is, for almost all scenarios, much longer. We conclude that network-based epidemic
models can show a variety of behaviors that are not captured by the continuous compartmental
models.

1. Introduction
When recovering from a disease grants temporary immunity against it, it can happen that an
epidemic dies out locally, but survives elsewhere, returning at a later point in time. We observe a
“second peak”. A second peak can also happen when interventions are effectively applied to slow
down the spread of a disease locally, but are then lifted. This phenomenon has a clear geometric
component. Standard compartmental models for epidemic curves are inherently a-geometric, because they assume a perfectly mixed population. Agent-based epidemiological models allow for an
embedding of the population in a geometric space to capture this effect more clearly.
In this paper we study this geometric effect empirically. We conduct a simulation study about
the effect of temporary immunity on spreading processes on different agent-based models. We also
model the effect of three different interventions:
A) social distancing,
B) traveling restrictions, and
C) limiting the number of social contacts.
Our simulation results may serve as a qualitative indication of possible outcomes of epidemic spread
and intervention strategies for highly infectious diseases, such as the current COVID-19 pandemic.
It also gives qualitative predictions about the ways an epidemic might (or might not) return,
depending on the average duration and level of temporary immunity. The focus is twofold: first,
on understanding how the underlying space affects the outcome of the simulations, and second, to
see and compare the effect of the three intervention strategies on the pandemic. For the first goal,
we compare four scenarios with underlying geometries:
?Bureau WO, Eindhoven
† Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Eindhoven University of Technology, P.O. Box
513, 5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands.
E-mail addresses: timhulshof@bureauwo.nl, j.jorritsma@tue.nl, j.komjathy@tue.nl.
Acknowledgements. The work of JJ and JK is partly supported by the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific
Research (NWO) through grant NWO 613.009.122.
1

2

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

(a) No intervention

(b) Social dist.

(c) Less travel (w)

(d) Less travel (s) (e) Limiting degree

Figure 1. Visualization of the change in the underlying contact network under
interventions for Scenario 3 (see Figure 26 below). By (w) and (s) we denote the
weak and strong travel restrictions, respectively.

• Scenario 1: The underlying network is “purely geometric”, ignoring long-range connections. For this scenario we use the square nearest-neighbor torus Z2n as the base graph.
• Scenario 2: The underlying network is a “mean-field network”, ignoring the spatial component. For this scenario we use the configuration model, which can mimic the local
statistical properties of real human contact networks, such as degree distributions.
• Scenario 3: The underlying network is a mixture between a geometric and mean-field network. For this we use Geometric Inhomogeneous Random Graphs, which possess geometric
features and can match the statistical properties of real human contact networks.
• Scenario 4: The epidemic is modeled in a “mean-field continuous space”, ignoring the
spatial component and approximating the discrete population by a continuum. For this
we use systems of ordinary differential equations (also called: a compartmental model),
which are currently the most popular tool for epidemic curve modeling.
Our aim is to compare these models, and see what the effect is of considering more realistic
representations of the underlying space and spreading mechanisms. We, however, emphasize that
our paper provides qualitative estimates, not quantitative ones. As a result, the study here might
underpin or support certain intervention strategies more than others, but we refrain from (and see
no justification for) using these simplified models to make numerical predictions with respect to
the current COVID-19 outbreak.

1.1. Epidemic spread with temporary immunity on a network. We choose the simplest
possible model that shows, qualitatively, the behavior that we would like to observe, namely, the
effect of temporary immunity. This model can, however, be easily modified to accommodate other
compartments, such as an incubation period (exposed state) (as e.g. in [39]), deaths, asymptomatic
cases, etc. For simplicity, we describe the dynamics in discrete time. A continuous time version
is analogous and shows the same qualitative behavior. The model is similar to the one studied
in [18], where the focus is on the critical regime.
The spreading process changes at discrete time steps, t = {0, 1, 2, . . . }, each time step corresponds to, say, a day. We fix the network G in advance. We think of nodes in the network as
individuals. Each node within the network can be in three possible states: susceptible (S), infected
(I) or temporarily immune (T). The neighbors of a node u are nodes with a direct connection
(also called link, or edge) to u. A connection may correspond to a friendship or an acquaintance,
or simply a contact event. The discrete time dynamics between the three states are described as
follows (see also Figure 2):
• Infecting: Each infected node, while being infectious, infects each of its neighbors within
the network with probability β at every time-step. Infections to different neighbors happen
independently.
• Healing: When infectious, each node heals with probability γ at every time-step, independently of other nodes, and independently of infecting other nodes. The average infectious
period of an infected node is 1/γ time-steps. Upon healing, the node becomes temporarily
immune.

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

3

• Losing immunity: Each temporarily immune node loses its immunity with probability
η at every time-step, independently of other nodes. The average immune period of a node
is thus 1/η time-steps. After losing immunity, the node becomes susceptible again.
We run these dynamics on three different types of networks, covering the above mentioned scenarios: the purely geometric square grid, the pure network configuration model, and the mixture
Geometric Inhomogeneous Random Graph (GIRG) (see Definitions 2.1, 2.2, and 2.3) below.
We adapt these dynamics to obtain a continuous S-I-T-S compartmental model (Scenario 4) in
Section 2.4. We choose the parameters of the underlying network models in Scenarios 1–3 so that
the models have comparable average degree (and when possible, also comparable variance), and
then vary the parameters β, γ and η. In the remainder of this section we give a quick summary of
our findings, then in Sections 2 and 3 we define the four scenarios and three intervention methods
in more detail, and in Section 4 we present our detailed simulation results.
1.2. Phases of S-I-T-S on continuous compartmental models. For Scenario 4, we observe
three (commonly known) phases of the epidemic, that we briefly describe here for comparison. For
the model description, see Section 2.4.
1) Subcritical and critical phase: Immediate extinction. Whenever the basic reproduction
number, R0 = β/γ ≤ 1, the epidemic dies out without producing a peak. For β/γ < 1, it
dies out quickly (logarithmic in the initial number of infected), while for β/γ = 1 it dies
out slowly (polynomial in the initial number of infected). See Figure 14b.
2) Supercritical phase: Peaks of decreasing magnitude towards a limiting stationary pro
η
1− βγ .
portion. Whenever β/γ > 1, the proportion of infected population stabilizes at η+γ
There are several larger peaks before the equilibrium is reached, see Figures 14a–14b. The
incline and decline of peaks are exponential. See more in Section 2.4.
η

Susceptible

β, from each
infected neighbor
independently

Infected

γ

Temporarily
Immune

Figure 2. Schematic diagram of node states and their transition probabilities.
A susceptible node u may only become infected when it has at least one infected
neighbor. Each of the infected neighbors infects u with probability β, independently, in each step.
1.3. New supercritical phases in S-I-T-S epidemics on network models. The presence of
the network structure, as well as the underlying space, combined with temporary immunity has a
surprising effect on the qualitative behavior of the epidemic. More specifically, new phases arise in
the phase diagram compared to those in Section 1.2. The duration of the immune period plays a
more profound role than in the continuous compartmental model of Section 2.4, where the single
supercritical phase is entirely determined by the ratio β/γ of the infection rate and the healing
rate. For finite spatial network models, there is no well-defined definition of R0 : the average nodedegree as well as the topology of the network influences the probability of entering each phase.
See [18, Figure 1] for a phase diagram for Scenario 1. For the S-I-T-S epidemic spread on all three
network models (Scenarios 1, 2, and 3) we observe the following three phases, with 2S below being
new compared to Scenario 4:
1) Subcritical and critical phase: Immediate extinction. The epidemic goes extinct almost
immediately (for all runs), and the number of infected decays exponentially in this case.
When R0 ≈ 1, the epidemic may die out more slowly. We emphasize though, that the
critical and subcritical phase do not separate so clearly on the stochastic S-I-T-S model
on networks: due to the stochastic nature, the epidemic might die out quickly even when

4

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

Graph
CM (2.5)
CM (3.3)
GIRG (2.5, 2.3)
GIRG (3.3, 1.3)
GIRG (3.3, 2.3)
Grid (infinity norm)

0.8

Fraction survived

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0.002

0.004

0.006

0.008

0.01

0.012

Deimmunization rate

Figure 3. A comparison of the probability of phase 2M on eight different networks with the same average degree 8 and number of nodes N = 160000, as a
function of the η. Probabilities were computed using a 100 runs for all parameter
values (η) and models, with β = 0.225, γ = 0.2. Legend: CM, GIRG: Scenarios
2 and 3, with different parameters and Grid: Scenario 1. For all networks we see
a sharp transition at a critical value of η where the system moves from phase 2P
(single peak followed by extinction) to 2M (survival with multiple peaks) with
overwhelming probability.
.

R0 > 1. For the extinction time (logarithmic vs polynomial of the network size), the initial
number of infected individuals plays a more important role. This is, however, out of the
scope of our current study and we do not pursue this direction further.
2) Supercritical phases: Possible large outbreak. With positive probability, there is a large
outbreak. For network-based S-I-T-S, the supercritical phase separates into two sub-phases:
2S) Extinction after a Single peak: When the duration of the immune period is long,
the epidemic has a single peak, after which it immediately goes extinct. Heuristically,
the reason for the existence of this new phase is that after the first epidemic peak,
earlier infected nodes become immune and maintain their immunity long-enough to
provide barriers in the network that the infection cannot pass through. See Figure
12a.
2M) Long-time survival, Many peaks: When the duration of the immunity period
is relatively short, the epidemic follows a (qualitatively) similar curve to the one
observed in the ODE in Section 2.4. There is a first major outbreak, followed by
smaller second, third, etc., peaks, decreasing in magnitude, and eventually settling on
a (meta-stable) stationary proportion of infected and immune population. See Figure
12b. We mention that this equilibrium is a meta-stable state, since the all-susceptible
configuration is an absorbing state. The time to reach that, however, is exponentially
long in the network size, see [15].
Stochastic transition between phases with a sharp threshold: Due to the stochastic
nature of the model, the phases 1, 2S, 2M are, (at least on a finite but large network) intertwined.
This means that for a given fixed set of parameter β, γ, η, a single run of the S-I-T-S epidemic may
enter any of the three phases, with different probabilities. However, the probability of entering a
given phase undergoes a sharp transition in the parameter values: for fixed β, γ, a small change
in η results in a shift from almost always seeing phase 2S to almost always seeing phase 2M. This
is called a sharp threshold phenomenon, see [25, 26]. The sharp threshold is defined as the value
of ηt (N ) where the survival probability crosses 1/2. The same theory suggests that the threshold
ηt (N ) converges in the large network limit. The probability of long survival (phase 2M) can be
seen in Figure 3 for eight different models as a function of η, all with the same average degree
E[deg(u)] = 8. We conjecture that the long survival probabilities are monotone in η, see Figure
20, where the experiment is carried out with more runs for each value of η.

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

5

Height of the first peak: The height of the first peak, in all models, is insensitive to η, just
like for Scenario 4, see Figure 1.4 A possible explanation for this insensitivity is that during the
initial spread, the S-I-T-S process is closely approximated by an S-I-R process, where temporarily
immune nodes are simply removed.
Shape and location of the first peak: For Scenario 2 (mean-field network), the shape of
the first and later peaks are similar to that of Scenario 4, i.e., exponential incline followed by
exponential decline. Scenario 1, the grid, however, has a linear incline followed by linear decline,
if there is a first peak, which is not true, when η is large. See Section 4.2. The shape of the curve
for Scenario 3 depends on the parameter values: as long as there are many long-range connections,
and hubs in the network (nodes with very high degree), the curve resembles that of Scenario 2.
When this is not the case, Scenario 3 starts to gradually resemble the epidemic curve of the grid
(Scenario 1): linear incline followed by linear decline, see Figure 12. This is in accordance with
theoretical results (5) related to the average distance in the network being short (poly-logarithmic)
when there are many long-connections but long (polynomial) when these are scarce. See [39] and
references therein for the role of long-connections.
Topology-dependent fluctuations after the first peak: The fluctuations after the first
peak are highly dependent on the network topology. For power-law networks with infinite asymptotic variance, there is no second peak and the system reaches equilibrium very quickly after the
first peak. For finite variance networks, several further peaks occur, see e.g. Figures 23, 25. The
transition is most profound when interventions change the topology, see Section 1.4 below.
We mention that for Scenario 3 the way the second peak happens is entirely different from the
first peak: the initial spread is local, emanating from the source, (with some long connections
causing non-local new infection centers), while the second peak is spread out, infections occur
everywhere in space. This is quite natural, since during the initial wave, the epidemic fills the
space, and thus the second peak happens roughly when the immunity arising from the first wave
starts to wear off, and at that moment it does not have a well-defined source anymore. This is why
we never see the epidemic to die out after a second peak. It either dies out after the first peak, or
many peaks occur and the system reaches equilibrium.
We conclude that the continuous ODE approximations often fail to capture the later behavior
of the epidemic, which depends highly on the network topology.
1.4. Comparison of intervention methods A) B) C) on Scenario 3. We carry out the
intervention methods on Scenario 3, the geometric scale-free network model. We model intervention
(A), keeping physical distance by randomly removing connections from the network.
Intervention (B), allowing for less travel, is modeled in two different ways. Once, it is modeled
by drawing for each present edge a random exponential threshold with a common mean L, and
cutting the edge if it exceeds its threshold value, resulting in a connection-length distribution
that decays exponentially above the threshold L. Secondly, it is also modeled by increasing the
long-range parameter α to αnew .
Intervention (C), limiting the maximal number of contact per person, is modeled by prescribing
a maximal node degree M and then for each node u with degree higher than M , randomly chosen
connections of u are cut until at most M connections remain, see more details in Section 3.
We choose the parameters M, L, αnew so that the average degree is the same after all interventions. See Figure 1 for a visualization of the intervention methods.
We summarize our most important, qualitative findings. For quantitative values see Section 3.
The height of the first peak drops. In all interventions, the height of the first peak is
dropping, by at least as much as the shrinkage in average node degree (intervention A) and even
more with other interventions. The most effective intervention in this respect is the hard no-travel
rule. See left on Figure 1.4.
Elongated first peak. The time and duration of the first peak is later/longer than without
intervention. For keeping physical distance, the time-shift is the least apparent (a few days), while
for intervention B it is the most profound, a factor of 10, see bottom of Figure 24, as well as Table
1.
Long-survival probabilities drop. Each intervention pushes the probability of the system
entering phase (2M) lower for a fixed parameter setting β, γ, η. When increasing η (thus decreasing
the immunity length), at a critical ηt the system abruptly goes from dominantly phase 2S from

6

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

Graph
GIRG (3.3, 1.9)
GIRG(3.3, 1.3)
GIRG(3.3, 1.3) hub
GIRG(3.3, 1.3) long
GIRG(3.3, 1.3) perc

80k
70k

First peak

60k
50k
40k
30k
20k
10k
0.002

0.004

0.006

0.008

0.01

0.012

Deimmunization rate

(a) First peak under interventions

Graph
GIRG (3.3, 1.9)
GIRG(3.3, 1.3)
GIRG(3.3, 1.3) hub
GIRG(3.3, 1.3) long
GIRG(3.3, 1.3) perc

14k

Second peak

12k
10k
8k
6k
4k
2k
0
0.002

0.004

0.006

0.008

0.01

0.012

Deimmunization rate

(b) Second peak under interventions

Figure 4. The effect of interventions on the first and second peak, as a function
of η (the inverse of the average immunity period). Abbreviations in the legend:
‘hub’: limiting maximal node degree, ‘long’: strong restriction on travel, ‘perc’:
social distancing. The first entry is increasing α, a weak restriction on travel.
GIRG(3.3, 1.3) is the original network. We see that the height of the first peak is
insensitive to the immunity length, and that cutting long edges is most effective
in reducing the first peak. For the second peak, limiting node degree pushes the
critical η for appearance of the second peak from 0.002 to 0.006, however, above
that the second peak is twice as high as for other interventions. See also Figures
21, 22.
dominantly phase 2M, (a sharp threshold). The sharp threshold ηt of long-survival is increased
under all interventions, see Figure 19. In this respect, interventions B and C perform best.
Higher second peak. Intervention B and C result in a higher second peak, or even make a
second peak appear where originally it was not present. The worst intervention in this respect is
intervention C (limiting the maximum degree), where the second peak can be as high as 1/3 of the
first peak. See Figure 1.4 and 21. For infinite variance degree GIRG, on Fig. 21) the strong travel
restriction also causes a second peak, while social distancing and increasing α does not.
A possible explanation for a higher second peak is the following. Under intervention C (limiting
node degree) and Intervention B (cutting long-edges), there are no more hubs in the network: nodes

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

7

with very high degree. Once infected, hubs infect a large proportion of their neighbors roughly at
the same time. Moreover, hubs are much closer to each other (in terms of graph distance) than the
average distance in the graph, thus the infection can travel quickly between hubs. To summarize,
hubs synchronize the system. Once the hubs are removed, this synchronization is also removed
from the system and oscillations similar to the grid appear. Limiting node degree without travel
restrictions has the strongest effect on the removal of hubs. Limiting travel reduces the degree of
hubs, but do not remove them completely, since nodes that were hubs before the intervention, have
typically many local connections as well, see Figure 16.
More oscillations to reach equilibrium. Interventions C and B, while they are most effective
regarding the first peak, introduce high oscillations in the system, and the time to reach equilibrium
can be much longer than in the original model (from a few days to more than a thousand days).
Again, these oscillations are explained by the lack of synchronization. See Figures 25 and 26 for
these later effects.
To summarize, we conclude that the effect of interventions vary to a high extent and depend on
the precise way the intervention changes the network topology. Again, ODE-approximations fail
to capture these various effects.
2. Network models
2.1. Scenario 1: Lattice network models. Arguably the simplest geometric network model
is the nearest neighbor lattice. To avoid boundary effects, and make the network completely
homogeneous, we shall study epidemics on the torus Z2n instead of a square that we define here:
Definition 2.1 (Nearest neighbor tori). Arrange nodes on a square grid, and label them with two
coordinates u = (x, y), for x, y ∈ {1, 2 . . . , n}. To obtain Z2n , connect u = (x1 , y1 ) to v = (x2 , y2 )
when either x1 = x2 and |y1 − y2 | = 1 mod n or y1 = y2 and |x1 − x2 | = 1 mod n. To obtain
Zen2 , connect u = (x1 , y1 ) to v = (x2 , y2 ) when |x1 − x2 | ≤ 1 mod n and |y1 − y2 | ≤ 1 mod n. The
networks have N = n2 nodes, see Figure 6.
Lattice models are homogeneous and the average distance within the network is large, it grows
polynomially with the number of nodes. Writing dG (u, v) for the number of connections on the
shortest path between nodes u and v, (also called: graph distance), the average distance becomes
√
1 X
dG (u, v) = Θ( N ).
Dist(N ) := N 
(1)
2

u,v

2.2. Scenario 2: The configuration model and other a-geometric network models. Ageometric random network models are often used as null-models to compare network data to
purely random networks. Here we describe a commonly used model, the configuration model, and
mention similar alternatives. The configuration model is a well-studied object in mathematical
network science, dating back to Bollobás [10] and Molloy and Reed [42, 43]. The main advantage
of this simple model is that it can mimic the degree distribution of real-life networks.
Definition 2.2 (Configuration model). Fix N ≥ 1 the number of nodes. Prescribe
to each node
P
u ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n} its node-degree deg(u) ≥ 0, so that the total degree hN := u≤N deg(u) is even.
To form a graph, to each node u we assign deg(u) number of half-edges and the half-edges are then
paired uniformly at random to form edges. The resulting random multi-graph is the configuration
model. The erased configuration model can be obtained by erasing all self-loops and multiple edges
between nodes.
See Figure 7 for an illustration of the algorithm, and Figure 8 for two realizations. Observe that
we pair half-edges randomly, hence, even though the prescribed degrees might be deterministic,
the configuration model is a random (multi)graph. It is a multi-graph since multiple connections
between nodes and even connections to the same node may occur, however, these become proportionally insignificant when the size of the graph is sufficiently large. An easy way to obtain
a simple graph from the configuration model is to erase second, third, etc edges between nodes,
as well as self-connections. It is shown that the erasure does not affect the empirical distribution
of the model in any significant way [32]. For a mathematical overview on the properties of the
configuration model and erased configuration model, see [32].

8

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

In real-life networks, an extreme variability of node degree is often observed, see [1, 24, 46].
Extreme node degree variability results in the presence of a few individuals with extreme influence
on spreading processes, the hubs or superspreaders [46]. Mathematically, this extreme degree
variability can be expressed using the empirical distribution of node degrees, that follows a powerlaw :
1
Prob(deg(u) ≥ x)  τ −1 .
(2)
x
with exponent τ > 2. In our simulations we study the case when the empirical degree distribution
follows such a power law, i.e., the node-degrees satisfy (2), for some parameter τ > 2. In this case,
the node-degrees in the erased configuration model version also follow (2), with the same exponent
τ.
Other popular a-geometric models include the Chung-Lu and the similar Norros-Reittu model
[16, 17, 47], and preferential attachment models (also known as the Barabási-Albert model) [3]. In
the Chung-Lu and the Norros-Reittu model, only the expected degrees of nodes are prescribed,
rather than their exact degree. It is shown that these models, with similar parameter settings,
behave qualitatively similarly to the configuration model, see [32] for references. The preferential
attachment model is a growing network model, that is best suitable to study the evolution of
networks on a longer time-scale. For a relatively short time-frame typical to epidemic spread, a
time snapshot of the preferential model could be used. Mathematical results suggest that snapshots of this model behave, again, qualitative similarly to the configuration model with similar
degree structure, although numerical values might differ [5, 21, 22, 24]. As a result, we choose the
configuration model for baseline comparison.
An important feature of the configuration model is the small-world property. Heuristically, this
means that two arbitrary nodes in the network can be connected via very short paths, using only
a few connections. P
Mathematically, the
 small world phenomenon means that the average graph
distance Dist(N ) = u,v dG (u, v)/ N2 in the network is small, at most logarithmic in the network
size. For the configuration model, when τ > 3, the network is proven to be a small world [33, 56],
while, when τ ∈ (2, 3), the average graph distance is ultra small, meaning a double-logarithm of
the network size:
(
Θ(log N )
when τ > 3
(3)
Dist(N ) =
Θ(log log N ) when τ ∈ (2, 3).

In the former case, when τ > 3, the shape of the epidemic curve is shown to converge in the large
network limit, see [4, 6, 36].
While the configuration model easily accommodates power-law node degrees, and has the smallworld property, it neither contains communities nor clustering [24, 55]. Empirically, clustering
quantifies the effect commonly known as “a friend of a friend is also likely to be my friend”.
Mathematically, clustering means the presence of triangles in the network. Communities are parts
of the network that have significantly more connections than the same number of randomly selected
nodes. One could argue that clustering and communities in human contact networks often arise
due to spatial effects: people living nearby tend to know each other with higher probability. To
accommodate clustering and communities, as well as keep node degree variability high, we introduce
our last model of investigation.
2.3. Scenario 3: Geometric Inhomogeneous Random Graphs. The last network class we
run the S-I-T-S epidemic on is a mixture of pure geometric and purely random network models. For
this we use a general Geometric Inhomogeneous Random Graph (GIRG) model, that is a state-ofthe-art model for real-world social and technological networks, embedded in geometric space. The
presence of underlying geometry underpins the model: individuals are embedded in space, just like
in real life, allowing for local community structures to be present in the contact network, leading
to strong clustering [13, 55]. The GIRG incorporates edges bridging spatial distance on all scales,
ranging from short to long-range edges, as well as a high variability of node degree: in fact, the
model is scale-free in two respects: both in spatial distance that edges cover, and in node-degree
variability [13].
Contact- or activity networks of humans have been found to show similar behavior, including
heavy-tailed degree distributions, strong clustering, and community structures [1, 8, 44–46], as well
as heavy-tailed distance-distribution for edges, see references in [34].

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

9

Recently, several spatial random graph models were developed to incorporate these features:
hyperbolic random graphs [9, 31, 49], scale-free percolation [19], and GIRGs [11–13]. These models
can be unified into a general model containing all these three models as special cases. The qualitative behavior of the three models is the same. The following definition is general, and in its
last sentence we specify it for GIRG. The underlying space can be the earth’s surface, or R2 , the
two-dimensional Euclidean space. We denote by x ∧ y the minimum of two numbers x, y.
Definition 2.3 (Geometric Inhomogeneous Random Graph (GIRG)). Fix N ≥ 1 the number of
nodes. Assign to each node u ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n} a fitness wu > 0, and a spatial location Φ(u). Fix
α > 0. For any pair of nodes u, v with fixed wu , wv , Φ(u), Φ(v), connect them by an edge with
probability
α

wu wv
∧ 1,
(4)
Prob(u is connected to v) 
dist(Φ(u), Φ(v))2
where dist is a distance function1, i.e., it measures the distance between the locations Φ(u), Φ(v).
When Φ(u) is chosen uniformly in a box of volume N , we obtain the GIRG.
Any or all of the vertex set, fitnesses, and spatial locations can be random (see Figure 9). GIRGs
have a natural interpretation: the fitnesses express the ability of nodes to have many connections,
Φ embeds them in space, and α is the long-range parameter: the smaller α is, the more the model
favors longer connections. The parameter space of GIRG is rich enough to model many desired
features observed in real networks:
(a) extreme variability of the number of neighbors (degrees),
(b) connections present on all length-scales,
(c) small and ultra-small distances,
(d) strong clustering,
(e) local communities.
In real-life networks, (a) corresponds to the presence of a few individuals with extreme influence on
spreading processes, the hubs or superspreaders. Mathematically, (a) corresponds to the empirical
distribution of node degrees following a power-law, as in (2) above, for some τ > 2. Setting a powerlaw fitness distribution for wu in GIRG yields that the degrees satisfy (2), while setting wu ≡ 1
results in a (fairly) homogeneous network with some longer edges, that is known in the literature
as (continuum) long-range percolation [7]. The abundance of long-range connections is tuned by
α in (4): the smaller α, the more likely are long-range connections (b). The power-law exponent
τ and the long-range parameter α tune the average graph distance Dist(N ), see [7, 11, 19, 20]:


Θ(log log N) when τ ∈ (2, 3), α > 1
Dist(N ) = Θ (log N )ζ
(5)
when τ > 3, α ∈ (1, 2)

 √
Θ( N )
when τ > 3, α > 2.
Comparing this to the average distance in the configuration model in (3) and to the lattice models
in (1), one sees that geometry and long-range connections play a role when τ > 3, and the model
interpolates between the small-world configuration model and the lattice.
Empirically, clustering quantifies the effect commonly known as “a friend of a friend is also
likely to be my friend”. Mathematically, clustering means the presence of triangles in the network.
Communities and clustering are naturally present in SCLM, because the model favors connections
between nodes that are close to each other in space (see Fig. 9). Thus, GIRG incorporates all five
desired features.
For the spread of information or infections in such networks, it is known that large-degree nodes
and many triangles have opposing effects. On the one hand, nodes of large degree (also called hubs,
super-spreaders, or influencers) contribute to fast dissemination, and foster explosive propagation
of information or infections [23,30,50,51]. On the other hand, clustering and community structures
provide natural barriers that slow down the process, while long-range edges accelerate the spread [2,
35, 37, 38, 41].
1Mathematically, dist is a metric on the underlying space, (e.g. k · k ). Here, the formula is given for a two2
dimensional model. In higher dimension, the exponent 2α in the denominator should change to dim ·α, with dim
the dimension of the model.

10

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

η

Susceptible

β ·S ·I/N

Infected

γ

Temporarily
Immune

Figure 5. Schematic diagram of states and their transition rates in the continuous compartmental model. Infected individuals make contact at rate β to
randomly chosen individuals, as a result, the number of susceptibles increases at
rate β ·S ·I/N . This is a mean-field approximation of the graph model in Section
1.1, see Figure 2.
.
2.4. Scenario 4: S-I-T-S compartmental model. For baseline comparison to continuous epidemic models, we use a continuous S-I-T-S model, where there are only three possible states,
susceptible (S), infected (I) or temporarily immune (T), in a total population of N individuals.
Susceptible individuals may become infected via a contact to infectious individuals, while infectious
individuals heal and thus become temporarily immune. The assumption is that individuals make
contact with a random other individual at rate β. Immune individuals loose their immunity at a
certain rate and become susceptible again. The deterministic ordinary differential equation (ODE)
model is governed by the three main parameters:
• β: rate of infecting a susceptible individual when being infected,
• γ: rate of healing, and becoming temporarily immune,
• η: rate of losing temporal immunity and becoming susceptible again.

See Figure 5 for a schematic diagram. We assume the population size is N , denote by S(t), I(t), T (t)
the number of susceptible, infected and temporarily immune individuals at time t, then the corresponding ordinary differential equation becomes:
βIS
dS
=−
+ ηT
dt
N
dI
βIS
=+
− γI
dt
N
dT
= +γI − ηT
dt
For the infection to survive, β > γ is necessary, otherwise limt→∞ I(t) = 0. When β > γ holds,
this ODE has a stationary state, which is explicitly computable:
γ
η 
γ
γ 
γ
1−
, T∞ = N
1−
.
S∞ = N , I∞ = N
β
η+γ
β
η+γ
β
Observe that the equilibrium proportion of infected is roughly linear in η, as long as η  γ. One
can also compute the basic reproduction number, R0 = β/γ, and observe that T∞ = I∞ γ/η.
Qualitatively, the ODE exhibits either (sub)critical behavior, implying extinction, or supercritical
behavior, as described in Section 1.2 and depicted in Figures 14a–14b. On these figures, for the
supercritical case one can observe that
a) the height of the first peak does not depend on the length of the immune period; only on
β, γ.
b) for fixed β, γ, increasing the length of the immune period results in deepening the valley
between the first and the second peak. The minimum between the first and second peak
is always strictly positive, however, it approaches 0 as 1/η tends to infinity. For somewhat
realistic values (β = 0.38, γ = 0.14, the minimum gets near 0 around 1/η ≈ 210). Since
this is a continuous system, the second peak is always present, explaining the absence of
phase 2S in this compartmental model.

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

11

3. Modeling intervention methods on GIRGs
A) Social distancing measures: percolation. In the current Covid-19 outbreak, many governments issued a collection of social distancing measures: keeping 1.5 meter distance from each
other, wearing face masks, hand-gloves, washing hands frequently, and so on. Such measures result
in reducing the number of contact moments between individuals and thus resulting the chance for
the virus to spread. When the social distancing measures are not combined with travel restrictions,
this results in the underlying contact network to lose its connections randomly.
Hence, we model the effect of social distancing by randomly removing a certain proportion of
edges in the network. This method is called percolation in the literature [29]. The same method
is used to model social distancing in e.g. [48], where percolation is applied to the configuration
model. We denote the resulting network by Gperc .
B) Travel restrictions. In the current Covid-19 outbreak, many governments issued everybody
to stay at home and only travel when necessary. Outside country travel is not allowed for some
countries, e.g. Spain, Italy, Germany, Hungary. This results in the underlying contact network to
lose many of its long connections.
We model the removal of long-connections in the network in two different ways: a (seemingly)
milder and a stronger intervention measure.
B(w): Weak travel restriction. One way to reduce the number of long-range connection in
the network is by increasing the parameter α in GIRG. This intervention does not cause a ‘hard
cutoff’ for the length of connections: some long-range connections might remain, but the intervention is strong enough to push the distances in the network from poly-logarithmic to polynomial,
see (5).
Increasing α, when τ > 3, decreases the probabilities of long edges: indeed, in (4), for two nodes
u, v with locations Φ(u), Φ(v), the ratio
wu wv
Ru,v :=
dist(Φ(u), Φ(v))2
is raised to the power α, so as long Ru,v < 1, increasing α reduces the chance of a long connection
being present.
When τ > 3, the node fitnesses are, typically, not high enough2 so that, typically, Ru,v < 1,
hence the intervention of increasing α is very effective. The average distance increases from polylogarithmic to polynomial in the network size. On the other hand, when τ ∈ (2, 3), node
√ pairs
with ratio Ru,v > 1 happen frequently enough (even on global scale, nodes with fitness > n are
present), hence, increasing α turns out to be ineffective in reducing the average distance in the
network, since many long-range edges remain. This is in good correspondence with (5), where the
average distance is doubly-logarithmic regardless of the value of α when τ ∈ (2, 3). We denote the
resulting network by Gα .
B(s): Strong travel restriction. Another way to reduce the number of long-range connection
in the network is by removing long-edges in the network. Mathematically, we set a threshold length
L, and for each edge e = (u, v) present in the original network we draw an independent Exponential
variable X(u,v) with mean L; and remove the edge e when
dist(Φ(u), Φ(v)) > X(u,v)
This intervention does cause a ‘hard cutoff’ for the length of connections at the threshold L. The
intervention is also strong enough to push the distances in the network from poly-logarithmic to
polynomial. We denote the resulting network by Glong .
C) Limiting the maximal number of contacts. Another intervention measure that one can
imagine is to limit the maximal number of contact a person can have. On the contact level, this
rule barely affects individuals with low number of contacts, but it aims to decrease the number of
contact of ‘superspreaders’ in the network: nodes that have a relatively high degree.
We model this effect by choosing a node-degree threshold M , and for each node u that has, in
the original network, more than M connections, we remove deg(u) − M many randomly chosen
connections from node u. The removal of these connections, in turn, also reduces the number of
2Node fitnesses are less than √n for all nodes, with high probability

12

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

connections of other vertices. Thus, the resulting network has maximal node degree at most M .
Since we removed connections randomly, some long connections still remain in the network if they
were originally present. We denote the resulting network by Ghub .
4. Simulation results
In this section we present our results for the network based S-I-T-S epidemic model. We first
comment on the general description of the types of phases that may occur that are mentioned in
Section 1.2, then we compare our findings for each Scenario (the purely geometric lattice models,
the mean field network configuration model, and their mixture geometric inhomogeneous random
graphs) with respect to the various intervention strategies.
Throughout this section, these underlying networks for the different scenarios (and interventions)
are sampled once per parameter setting and kept constant over the simulation runs. On every
graph, for every described parameter setting of the S-I-T-S model, the results are based on 100
simulations of the epidemic spreading starting from a single node. This node is sampled uniformly
at random at the beginning of every simulation, and differs per run.
Recall from Section 1.3 that the epidemic on networks can have two supercritical phases, one
with a single peak, and one with many peaks, where the system survives for longer. The transition
between these phases is stochastic, but undergoing a sharp threshold.
Long-time survival probabilities. The probability of long survival (phase 2M) can be
seen in Figure 10 for eight different models as a function of η, all with the same average degree E[deg(u)] = 8: two configuration models with τ = 2.5 and τ = 3.3, respectively, three
geometric inhomogeneous random graphs (GIRG) with (τ, α) = (2.5, 2.3), (3.3, 1.3) and (3.3, 2.3)
e 2 (called ‘grid’ on the figure). All networks have the same
respectively, and the modified lattice Z
number of N = 160000 nodes. We see that the configuration model with the smallest τ has the
e2 and long
smallest threshold ηt , followed closely by GIRG with (τ, α) = (2.5, 1.3). The grid Z
N
range percolation (LRP) with α = 2.3 have the highest ηt (≈ 0.085 and ≈ 0.01), these are networks
where the average distance is linear. Theory [25, 26] suggest that the threshold ηc (N ) converges in
the large network limit.
The effect of geometry: long-range edges matter Comparing the S-I-T-S epidemic curves
on the configuration model and on GIRGs, with matching parameters (degree distribution and
average degree) can be seen in Figure 11. When we run the epidemic with the same parameters
β, γ, η on configuration models and on GIRGs, with the same degree power-law exponent τ = 2.5
and τ = 3.3, and same mean degree, we find that the epidemic curves are in good match, as long
as the long range parameter α of GIRG is in the interval (1, 2) when τ > 3. For τ ∈ (2, 3), hubs
dominate the network (see left picture on Figure 9), and the role of the parameter α is insignificant.
This is in accordance with theoretical results (5), where distances are doubly-logarithmic regardless
of the value α as long as τ ∈ (2, 3).
In Figure 12, we see that there is only a good match between the a-geometric configuration
model and GIRG when τ < 3 or when τ > 3 and α ∈ (1, 2). When τ > 3, the effect of the long
range parameter α plays a crucial role. When α > 2, even when keeping the average degree and
the degree distribution the same, the curve flattens by roughly 40%. The explanation for this is
that in this parameter range, even though hubs are present in the network, they mostly connect to
nearby nodes, and thus average distance is significantly larger (see (5)), thus the infection needs
more time to spread, see right on Figure 9.
We explain more about this effect under Intervention B(w), the weak travel restrictions in
Section 4.1 below. For the first two scenarios, the height of the first peak is 80 · 103 while in the
second scenario, α = 2.3, the first peak only has magnitude 50 · 103 nodes, an almost 40% decrease.
The paper [40] studies the effect of the exponent α in more detail on an S-I-R epidemic (corresponding to the first peak here) on a related model, when (4) is replaced by
 max(w , w ) α
u
v
∧ 1.
Prob(u is connected to v) 
dist(Φ(u), Φ(v))2
This is called the max-kernel in the literature, while (4) corresponds to the product-kernel. We
mention, however, that the topology of networks generated by the max-kernel is significantly
different from that of the product kernel, and the model in [40] falls under a different universality
class, see [27, Theorem 1.1].

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

13

4.1. Intervention strategies. In this section we study the effect of four different intervention
strategies: social distancing, a weak and a strong travel restriction, and limiting the maximal
number of contacts per node. We apply each intervention to two initial graphs on N = 160000
nodes: G1 , an GIRG with (τ, α) = (2.5, 1.3) and average degree 9.7, and G2 , an GIRG with
(τ, α) = (3.3, 1.3) and average degree 8.7. To be able to compare the effect of the different
intervention strategies, we choose the parameters of each intervention so the intervention removes
about 40% of all connections, resulting in four sub-networks of G1 and G2 , respectively.
After obtaining the sub networks, we run S-I-T-S on each of them with parameters µ =
0.225, β = 0.2 and varying the values of η from 0.001 to 0.013 at step-size 0.001, corresponding to average immunity period 1/η decreased from 1000 days down to 77 days.
We visualize and study below the effect of each intervention on the S-I-T-S epidemic in five
aspects:
i)
ii)
iii)
iv)
v)

the change in the underlying contact network,
a visualization of the spread of the initial infection,
the probability of long-survival as a function of the immunity parameter η,
the height and location of the first and second peak,
the full epidemic curve.

Without intervention. For a baseline comparison, we carry out the above listed four points on
the initial networks:
i) On the top left picture of Figures 15 and 16, we see similar networks than G1 and G2 :
GIRGs with (τ, α) = (2.5, 1.3) and (3.3, 1.3), respectively. The size is smaller, N = 1000
nodes. Both graphs have approximately the same average degree 4.8.
ii) On the top left picture of Figures 17 and Figures 18, the visualization of the first 19 days
of the epidemic are shown: the epidemic spreads very quickly on G1 , and also quite fast
on G2 : (almost) the whole network is infected in both cases. This is explained by the next
point, the time of the first peak is about 8 and 14 days, respectively.
iii) The probability of long-survival (phase 2M) as a function of the immunity parameter η
can be seen in Figure 19: the top curves on the top/bottom picture show the curves for G1
and G2 , respectively. Probabilities are calculated based on a hundred runs for each model
and value of η. Observe that the survival curves drop for all intervention types, and stay
below 0.7 even after the sharp increase.
iv) Table 1 shows the height and location of the first and second peak for G1 , G2 (column O,
original graph), while Figures 21, 22 plots these heights as a function of η.
We see that the location and height of the first peak is insensitive to the change in η, it
is ≈ 84 ∗ 103 on day 8 for G1 , while ≈ 79 ∗ 103 on day 14 on G2 .
There is no second peak on G1 , the ‘star’ shaped dots on the curve indicate the height
of the equilibrium. Observe that this grows linearly with η, in accordance with the ODEsolution in (6).
On G2 there is a second peak, and its height is increasing with η, and its location is
decreasing with η. However, there is no clear relation between the location and 1/η, the
average immunity length, see Table 1.
v) On Figure 23, the full epidemic curve (η = 0.009) can be seen, on top, the first 60 days
while on the bottom picture the first 500 days. We indeed see that for G1 , when τ < 3,
the system reaches equilibrium without a well-defined second peak.
A) Social distancing measures: percolation. Before we start with details, a short summary:
social distancing seems to be the least effective intervention in terms of reducing peaks, but at
least it does not influence the presence or the height of the second peak.
i) On the top right picture of Figures 15 and 16, we see the change in the network after percolation: even though the edge density and the average degree drops, long-range edges still
remain present, and the graph looks qualitatively the same as the ones without intervention
(top left). The long edges will carry the majority of the infections.
ii) On the top right picture of Figures 17 and Figures 18, the visualization of the first 19
days of the epidemic are shown under social distancing: the epidemic spreads somewhat
slower, but it still manages to spread to fill the space and infect a large part of the network.

14

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

iii)

iii)

iv)

v)

Observe that both top-right pictures are qualitatively similar to the top left pictures, where
the same spread is shown without intervention.
On Figures 24, 25, 26 and 27 we see the comparison of the epidemic curves: the first
peak appears later on the percolated graphs, and their height is roughly 40% less than the
height of the original peak. On Gperc
, there is no second peak, (just like on the original G1 ),
1
while the second peak on G2 only drops by 10%, though it appears later. The equilibrium
number of infected also drops, roughly by 33%.
On Figure 19, the long-survival probabilities of epidemics are shown as a function of η.
Social distancing (called “perc” in the legend) has its sharp threshold ηt = 0.004 for G1
and 0.007 for G2 , in this respect it is one of the less effective measures even with respect
to survival probability.
Table 1 shows the height and location of the first and second peak under social distancing
(column A), while Figures 21, 22 plots these heights as a function of η.
We see again that the location and height of the first peak is insensitive to the change
in η, it is ≈ 52 ∗ 103 on day 11 ± 1 for G1 , while ≈ 45 ∗ 103 on day 22 ± 1 on G2 . Thus
the first peak appears later on the percolated graphs, and their height is roughly 40% less
than the height of the original peak.
There is no second peak under social distancing on G1 (the large data are due to
fluctuations in the equilibrium system), while on G2 its height is increasing with η, and
roughly 75 − −80% of the original graph’s second peak.
On Figures 24, 25, 26 and 27 we see the comparison of the epidemic curves, just like on the
original graph, there is no second peak on Gperc
either, while the second peak on G2 only
1
drops by 10%, though it appears later. The equilibrium number of infected also drops,
roughly by 33%.

B) Travel restrictions. Before we start with details, a short summary: strong travel restriction
is the most effective interventions in terms of reducing the first peak, but it elongates the epidemic
enormously and causes later oscillations and often a higher second peak. The effectiveness of
increasing α depends on the node-degree power-law exponent: when τ > 3, its effect is comparable
to the strong travel restriction, but when τ ∈ (2, 3), it is not effective or rather, it does not model
travel restrictions well.
B(w): Weak travel restriction.
i) On the middle left picture of Figures 15 and 16, we see the change in the network after
increasing α to a value that results in the average degree to drop to 2.6: for G1 (when
τ = 2.5, Figure 15), this intervention only effect node-pairs with Ru,v > 1 and most longrange edges remain present, while many short and medium-scale edges are deleted. For
τ < 3, increasing α is not a good model for the no-travel rule. However, for τ > 3 (τ = 3.3
on Figure 16), most node-pairs have Ru,v < 1 and thus increasing α does have a similar
effect than cutting long-range edges (compare to middle right picture). Observe that both
pictures have the same average degree 2.6, yet the middle left picture on Figure 16) looks
more sparse: this is because edges are much more localized in space.
ii) On the middle left pictures of Figures 17 and Figures 18, the visualization of the first 19
days of the epidemic are shown under the weak no-travel rule: for G1 (Figures 17), the
remaining edges are mostly long, and thus the picture looks qualitatively similar to the top
left, without intervention. However, for G2 (Figure 18), the intervention is very effective,
and the epidemic spreads much slower. Within the first 19 days, it only reaches a small
fraction of the network localized in various patches.
iii On Figure 19, the long-survival probabilities of epidemics are shown as a function of η. The
weak no-travel rule, increasing α (last row in the legend) has its sharp threshold ηt = 0.003
for G1 and 0.007 for G2 , in this respect it is also among the less effective measures for both
values of τ .
iv) Table 1 shows the height and location of the first and second peak under the weak no-travel
rule (column Bw), while Figures 21, 22 plots these heights as a function of η.
We see again that the location and height of the first peak is insensitive to the change
in η, it is ≈ 50 ∗ 103 on day 10 ± 1 for G1 , while ≈ 33 ∗ 103 on day 29 ± 2 on G2 . We
conclude that increasing α only model travel restrictions well when τ > 3. In this case,

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

15

its effective, the only more effective measure is the strong travel restriction. On G2 , the
height of the first peak is 44% of the original peak, while on G1 , its 60%.
We conclude that this intervention is very effective in terms of reducing the first peak
on G2 .
On Gα
1 , there is no second peak, (just like on the original G1 ), while the second peak
on Gα
is
about 80% of the height of the second peak on G2 , though it appears later.
2
v) On Figures 24, 25, 26 and 27, we see the comparison of the epidemic curves, On Gα
1 , there
is no second peak, just like on the original G1 .
We mention that increasing α already has an effect on the epidemic curve when the average degree
is kept constant, see Figure 12 that shows the effect of increasing α on the epidemic curve: for the
configuration model (τ = 3.3) and for GIRG with τ = 3.3 and α = 1.3, herd immunity is reached
first when 80000 nodes are infected, while in the second scenario, α = 2.3, the first peak only has
magnitude 50000 nodes, an almost 40% decrease.
For short average immunity length, (large η), later peaks can be seen at the bottom picture
of Figure 12, where we observe that the intervention is effective in the sense that the stationary
proportion of infected nodes is lower (roughly, 15% decrease: 4.1k vs 4.8k nodes). However, the
amplitude of the oscillations do increase when α = 2.3 (vs α = 1.3) and thus the second peak is
higher by ≈ 15% (7.3k vs 6.3k). This is in accordance with intuition: flattening the curve results
in an elongated first peak of the epidemic and a higher second peak.
B(s): Strong travel restriction
i) On the middle right picture of Figures 15 and 16, we see the change in the network after
applying the no-travel rule with a parameter L so that the average degree drops by 40%:
for G1 (when τ = 2.5, Figure 15), already L = 7 resulted in a 40% drop, while for G2 ,
L = 5 was needed. (when τ = 2.5, Figure 16). Again, observe that both pictures have the
same average degree 2.6, yet the middle left picture on Figure 16) looks more sparse: this
is because edges are much more localized in space.
ii) On the middle right pictures of Figures 17 and Figures 18, the visualization of the first 19
days of the epidemic are shown under the hard no-travel rule: for both networks, the effect
of cutting long-range edges is drastic: during the course of the first 19 days, the epidemic
barely manages to leave a small area near its source (for G2 ) and only infects a smaller
part of the network (for G1 ).
iii) On Figure 19, the long-survival probabilities of epidemics are shown as a function of η. The
hard no-travel rule, (denoted by “long” in the legend) has its sharp threshold ηt = 0.005
for G1 and 0.01 for G2 , in this respect it is one of the most effective measures in containing
the epidemic: even with average immunity length 111 days, we only observe a single peak
for half of the runs.
iv) Table 1 shows the height and location of the first and second peak under the weak no-travel
rule (column B), while Figures 21, 22 plots these heights as a function of η. We see again
that the location and height of the first peak is insensitive to the change in η, it is ≈ 39∗103
on day 25 ± 1 for Glong
, while ≈ 13 ∗ 103 on day 80 ± 2 on Glong
, and so the height of the
1
2
long
first peak is only 45% of the original peak, while on G2 , its only 15%.
However, the first peak appears much later, by a factor 3 later on G1 , and a factor ≈ 5
later on G2 .
We conclude that this intervention is the most effective in terms of reducing the first
peak on G2 , but it elongates the epidemic.
This intervention does cause a second peak to appear also G1 . The height of second
peak increases only slightly with η, and thus, for low values of η, the second peak is higher
than on G2 , while for high values of η it is lower. On Gα
on Glong
1 , the height of the second
2
peak is above the equilibrium proportion on G1 for lower values of η, but not for higher
values.
So, the intervention causes the second peak to be rather insensitive to the value of η. It
would be interesting to investigate this further.
v) On Figures 24, 25, 26 and 27, we see the comparison of the epidemic curves: this intervention is the most effective on both G1 and G2 , the peak is much lower and appears
later.

16

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

Thus, the price for a (much) lower peak in case of the strong travel restriction is a very
elongated epidemic curve.
C) Limiting the maximal number of contacts. Before we start with details, a short summary:
even though this intervention has comparable effects to social distancing in reducing the first peak,
it is causing very high second peak. We gave a plausible explanation for this: removing hubs
removes the synchronization from the system, causing high oscillations and a long time to reach
equilibrium.
i) On the bottom picture of Figures 15 and 16, we see the change in the network after applying
the rule of limiting the maximal node-degree. The maximal degree M is chosen so that
the average degree drops by 40%: on the bottom picture of Figures 15, M = 5, while
M = 4 on the bottom picture of Figures 15. Observe that limiting the maximal degree,
but removing edges randomly to achieve that, results in a network where there are a still
many long-range edges, but no hubs remain. Due to the presence of the remaining long
edges, the network looks more densely connected compared to the hard and weak no-travel
rules.
ii) On the bottom pictures of Figures 17 and Figures 18, the visualization of the first 19 days
of the epidemic are shown when the maximal node-degree is limited: for both networks,
the effect is apparent, but more drastic on G2 , when τ > 3 During the course of the first 19
days, the epidemic grows in a scattered way, mostly using the remaining long edges. The
effect is somewhere between the weak and the hard no-travel rule in terms of its capability
to restrain the spread.
iii) On Figure 19, the long-survival probabilities of epidemics are shown as a function of η.
Limiting the maximal degree, meaning no hubs, (denoted by “hub” in the legend) has its
sharp threshold ηt = 0.008 for G1 and 0.01 for G2 , so in terms of long survival it is the most
effective measure in containing the epidemic (together with the strong travel restriction
for G2 ).
iv) Table 1 shows the height and location of the first and second peak under the weak notravel rule (column B), while Figures 21, 1.4 plots these heights as a function of η. We see
again that the location and height of the first peak is insensitive to the change in η, it is
3
hub
≈ 49 ∗ 103 on day 25 ± 1 for Ghub
1 , while ≈ 37 ∗ 10 on day 41 ± 2 on G2 . Interestingly,
this intervention has roughly the same effect as social distancing in terms of reducing the
first peak, especially on G1 , the difference is a few percentages only: On Ghub
1 , the height
of the first peak is roughly 60% of the original peak, while on Ghub
2 , its only 50%.
This intervention, unlike social distancing, causes a second peak to appear on Ghub
1 ,
that again increases very slowly with η and is roughly 1/5 of the height of the first peak on
hub
Ghub
is surprisingly high: roughly a factor 2 higher
1 . The height of second peak on G2
than that on G2 . Its height, compared to the first peak on Ghub
2 , is also significant: as big
as 1/3 of the first peak.
So, the intervention causes the second peak to be rather insensitive to the value of η.
It would be interesting to investigate this asynchronization, the surprisingly high second
peak, and its insensitivity to η further.
v) On Figures 24, 25, 26 and 27, we see the comparison of the epidemic curves: also further
peak are quite high, and the system takes a very long time to equilibriate.
Thus, the price for a lower first peak is a very high second peak, followed by quite high
later peaks and a long time for the system to equilibriate.
Monotonicity of survival probabilities. On Figures 10 and 19, some curves do not appear to be
monotone increasing, but rather, after the sharp increase they seemingly develop a small peak of
survival probabilities. We believe that this is only due to the increased fluctuations around the
critical value ηt . For one model, namely, G2 under weak no-travel rule (which is an instance of a
GIRG with (τ, α) = (3.3, 1.9)), we have tested this on a larger scale simulation. We have run 500
runs for each value of η, and plotted the survival probabilities as a function of η on Figure 20.
On this larger scale, the curve appears to be monotone, and we believe that this is indeed the
case.

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

17

4.2. S-I-T-S on lattice network models. Epidemic models on lattice networks have been under
investigation for decades, see e.g. the book [53], or the survey [54]. There are close relations to
percolation cluster growth models see e.g. [14, 28], and stochastic lattice gas models [18]. In the
more applied sciences, similar epidemic models have been developed under the name agent based
modeling, see e.g. [52] and references therein, or the survey [54]. The paper [18] conducts a
simulation study of a similar model3 to the S-I-T-S model studied here, but focusing on the critical
regime (and critical exponents) rather than the supercritical regime investigated here.
Arguable, due to their homogeneous nature, lattice models do not represent realistic epidemics
well. Nevertheless, they provide an interesting comparison, especially, when we apply homogenization methods to GIRG, such as the strong no travel rule or limiting the maximal node degree.
The S-I-T-S on lattice networks has again subcritical, critical and supercritical phases. Here we
briefly summarize our findings for supercritical S-I-T-S on lattice networks. Within the supercritical phase, we distinguish the two sub-phases 2S and 2M as before, see Figure 13. Between these
phases, there is a sharp transition between the two phases.
However, the shape of the peak is different from the mean-field configuration model and that
of GIRGs: the number of infected grows linearly, not exponentially, followed by a linear decline
and extinction. The linear growth corresponds to the linear circumference of graph distance balls
in two dimensions. The epidemic proceeds like a wave. The number of nodes ever infected grows
quadratically at the beginning, corresponding to quadratic volume growth in the model.
5. Conclusion and outlook
We have studied the first and second peak in an epidemic spreading model with temporary
immunity on three different underlying networks. These results are compared to the classical
compartmental model that is based on ordinary differential equations (ODE). In the networks a
supercritical epidemic either survives, or it dies out after a single peak. The latter case is not
possible in ODE-based models. Moreover, as the variability of the node degrees in the underlying network increases, the amplitude of the oscillations after the first peak become smaller for
supercritical epidemics.
The geometric inhomogeneous random graph is the network that matches reality best, since
the nodes are embedded in a geometric space, and its node-degree distribution has a heavy tail.
These networks allow for intuitive modeling of several intervention methods: social distancing,
travel restrictions, and meeting a limited number of people. Classical compartmental models do
not offer this intuitive modeling. We compare the effect of these interventions by ‘permanently’
modifying the underlying contact network, while maintaining the same average node-degree across
interventions. We find that the strong travel restrictions are most effective in elongating and
diminishing the first peak. Travel restrictions and meeting a limited number of people result in a
higher second peak, where the latter restriction yields the highest second peak.
To make the model more realistic, several adjustments can be made: other compartments could
be added, such as an exposed or quarantined state. Moreover, one could study a scenario where
interventions are only applied once certain thresholds in the number of infected nodes are exceeded.
Lastly, we mention that our framework could also be used to investigate the effect of geometry for
other intervention methods, such as a mobile app.
References
[1] R. Albert and A.-L. Barabási. Statistical mechanics of complex networks. Reviews of modern physics, 74(1):47,
2002.
[2] P. Bajardi, A. Barrat, F. Natale, L. Savini, and V. Colizza. Dynamical patterns of cattle trade movements.
Public Library of Science PLoS One, 6(5):e19869, 2011.
[3] A. Barabási and R. Albert. Emergence of scaling in random networks. Science (New York, N.Y.), 286(5439),
October 1999.
[4] A. Barbour and G. Reinert. Approximating the epidemic curve. Electronic Journal Of Probability, 18:1–30,
May 2013.
3The parameters there can be translated as follows: a = η, b/4 = β, c = γ. The only difference between the

S-I-R-S model studied in [18] and the S-I-T-S model we study is in the infection probability of a node u when it has
more than one infected neighbor: there, the probability of infection is additive, here, we draw the infections from
each infected neighbor independently with probability β.

18

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

[5] N. Berger, C. Borgs, J. T. Chayes, and A. Saberi. On the spread of viruses on the internet. In Proceedings of
the sixteenth annual ACM-SIAM symposium on Discrete algorithms, pages 301–310. Society for Industrial and
Applied Mathematics, 2005.
[6] S. Bhamidi, R. van Der Hofstad, and J. Komjáthy. The front of the epidemic spread and first passage percolation.
Journal Of Applied Probability, 51(A):101–121, December 2014.
[7] M. Biskup. On the scaling of the chemical distance in long-range percolation models. The Annals of Probability,
32(4):2938–2977, 10 2004.
[8] S. Boccaletti, V. Latora, Y. Moreno, M. Chavez, and D.-U. Hwang. Complex networks: Structure and dynamics.
Physics Reports, 424(4-5):175–308, 2006.
[9] M. Bode, N. Fountoulakis, and T. Müller. On the largest component of a hyperbolic model of complex networks.
The Electronic Journal of Combinatorics, 22:1–43, 2015.
[10] B. Bollobás. A probabilistic proof of an asymptotic formula for the number of labelled regular graphs. European
Journal of Combinatorics, 1(4):311–316, December 1980.
[11] K. Bringmann, R. Keusch, and J. Lengler. Average distance in a general class of scale-free networks with
underlying geometry. arXiv:1602.05712, 2016.
[12] K. Bringmann, R. Keusch, and J. Lengler. Sampling Geometric Inhomogeneous Random Graphs in Linear
Time. In 25th Annual European Symposium on Algorithms (ESA 2017), volume 87 of Leibniz International
Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 20:1–20:15, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2017.
[13] K. Bringmann, R. Keusch, and J. Lengler. Geometric inhomogeneous random graphs. Theoretical Computer
Science, 760:35–54, 2019.
[14] J. L. Cardy and P. Grassberger. Epidemic models and percolation. Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and
General, 18(6):L267–L271, apr 1985.
[15] S. Chatterjee and R. Durrett. Contact processes on random graphs with power law degree distributions have
critical value 0. Ann. Probab., 37(6):2332–2356, 11 2009.
[16] F. Chung and L. Lu. The average distances in random graphs with given expected degrees. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 99(25), December 2002.
[17] F. Chung and L. Lu. Connected components in random graphs with given expected degree sequences. Annals
of Combinatorics, 6(2):125–145, November 2002.
[18] D. R. de Souza and T. Tomé. Stochastic lattice gas model describing the dynamics of the SIRS epidemic process.
Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 389(5):1142 – 1150, 2010.
[19] M. Deijfen, R. van der Hofstad, and G. Hooghiemstra. Scale-free percolation. Annales de l’Institut Henri
Poincaré, Probabilités et Statistiques, 49(3):817–838, 2013.
[20] P. Deprez, R. S. Hazra, and M. V. Wüthrich. Inhomogeneous long-range percolation for real-life network
modeling. Risks, 3(1):1–23, January 2015.
[21] S. Dereich, P. Mörters, et al. Random networks with sublinear preferential attachment: degree evolutions.
Electron. J. Probab, 14(43):1222–1267, 2009.
[22] S. Dommers, R. Hofstad, and G. Hooghiemstra. Diameters in preferential attachment models. Journal of
Statistical Physics, 139(1):72–107, April 2010.
[23] S. N. Dorogovtsev, A. V. Goltsev, and J. F. Mendes. Critical phenomena in complex networks. Reviews of
Modern Physics, 80(4):1275, 2008.
[24] S. N. Dorogovtsev and J. F. F. Mendes. Evolution of networks. Advances in Physics, 51(4):1079–1187, 2002.
[25] H. Duminil-Copin. Sharp threshold phenomena in statistical physics. Japanese Journal of Mathematics, 14:1–
25, 2019.
[26] E. Friedgut and G. Kalai. Every monotone graph property has a sharp threshold. Proceedings of the American
Mathematical Society, 124(10):2993–3002, 1996.
[27] P. Gracar, M. Heydenreich, C. Mönch, and P. Mörters. Recurrence versus transience for weight-dependent
random connection models. arXiv:1911.04350, 2019.
[28] P. Grassberger. On the critical behavior of the general epidemic process and dynamical percolation. Mathematical Biosciences, 63(2):157 – 172, 1983.
[29] G. Grimmett. Percolation. Grundlehren der Mathematischen Wissenschaften, Springer, 1999.
[30] D. Gruhl, R. Guha, D. Liben-Nowell, and A. Tomkins. Information diffusion through blogspace. In Proceedings
of the 13th international conference on World Wide Web, pages 491–501. ACM, 2004.
[31] L. Gugelmann, K. Panagiotou, and U. Peter. Random hyperbolic graphs: degree sequence and clustering. In
39th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP), pages 573–585, 2012.
[32] R. v. d. Hofstad. Random graphs and complex networks. Vol. 1. Cambridge Series in Statistical and Probabilistic
Mathematics, [43]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2017.
[33] R. v. d. Hofstad, G. Hooghiemstra, and D. Znamenski. Distances in random graphs with finite mean and infinite
variance degrees. Electronic Journal Of Probability, 12:703–766, May 2007.
[34] J. Illenberger, K. Nagel, and G. Flötteröd. The role of spatial interaction in social networks. Networks and
Spatial Economics, pages 255–282, 08 2013.
[35] V. Isham, J. Kaczmarska, and M. Nekovee. Spread of information and infection on finite random networks.
Physical Review E, 83(4):046128, 2011.
[36] S. Janson, M. Luczak, and P. Windridge. Law of large numbers for the sir epidemic on a random graph with
given degrees. Random Structures & Algorithms, 45(4):726–763, 2014.
[37] J. Janssen and A. Mehrabian. Rumors spread slowly in a small-world spatial network. SIAM Journal on Discrete
Mathematics, 31(4):2414–2428, 2017.

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

19

[38] M. Karsai, M. Kivelä, R. K. Pan, K. Kaski, J. Kertész, A.-L. Barabási, and J. Saramäki. Small but slow world:
How network topology and burstiness slow down spreading. Physical Review E, 83(2):025102, 2011.
[39] T. Kuchler, D. Russel, and J. Stroebel. The geographic spread of covid-19 correlates with structure of social
networks as measured by facebook. arXiv:2004.03055, 2020.
[40] M. Medo. Contact network models matching the dynamics of the covid-19 spreading. arXiv:2003.13160, 2020.
[41] S. Merler, M. Ajelli, L. Fumanelli, M. F. Gomes, A. P. y Piontti, L. Rossi, D. L. Chao, I. M. Longini Jr,
M. E. Halloran, and A. Vespignani. Spatiotemporal spread of the 2014 outbreak of ebola virus disease in liberia
and the effectiveness of non-pharmaceutical interventions: a computational modelling analysis. The Lancet
Infectious Diseases, 15(2):204–211, 2015.
[42] M. Molloy and B. Reed. The size of the giant component of a random graph with a given degree sequence.
Combinatorics, Probability and Computing, 7(3):295–305, 1998.
[43] M. Molloy and B. Reed. A critical point for random graphs with a given degree sequence. In The Structure and
Dynamics of Networks, pages 240–258. Princeton University Press, October 2011.
[44] L. Muchnik, S. Pei, L. C. Parra, S. D. S. Reis, J. S. J. Andrade, S. Havlin, and H. A. Makse. Origins of powerlaw degree distribution in the heterogeneity of human activity in social networks. Scientific Reports, 3(1783),
2013.
[45] M. Newman. Networks. Oxford university press, 2018.
[46] M. Newman, A.-L. Barabasi, and D. J. Watts. The structure and dynamics of networks, volume 19. Princeton
University Press, 2011.
[47] I. Norros and H. Reittu. On a conditionally Poissonian graph process. Advances in Applied Probability, 38(1):59–
75, March 2006.
[48] P. K. Pandey and B. Adhikari. Why lockdown : On the spread of sars-cov-2 in india, a network approach.
arXiv:2004.11973, 2020.
[49] F. Papadopoulos, D. Krioukov, M. Boguñá, and A. Vahdat. Greedy forwarding in dynamic scale-free networks
embedded in hyperbolic metric spaces. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Communications (INFOCOM 2010), pages 1–9. IEEE, 2010.
[50] R. Pastor-Satorras, C. Castellano, P. Van Mieghem, and A. Vespignani. Epidemic processes in complex networks. Reviews of modern physics, 87(3):925, 2015.
[51] R. Pastor-Satorras and A. Vespignani. Evolution and structure of the Internet: A statistical physics approach.
Cambridge University Press, 2007.
[52] L. Pérez and S. Dragicevic. An agent-based approach for modeling dynamics of contagious disease spread.
International Journal of Health Geographics, 8:50 – 50, 2009.
[53] E. Renshaw. Modelling Biological Populations in Space and Time. Cambridge Studies in Mathematical Biology.
Cambridge University Press, 1991.
[54] S. Riley. Large-scale spatial-transmission models of infectious disease. Science, 316(5829):1298–1301, 2007.
[55] C. Stegehuis, R. van der Hofstad, and J. S. H. van Leeuwaarden. Scale-free network clustering in hyperbolic
and other random graphs. Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical, 52(29):295101, jun 2019.
[56] R. van Der Hofstad and G. Hooghiemstra. Universality for distances in power-law random graphs. Journal of
Mathematical Physics, 49(12), December 2008.

20

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

A. The underlying network models.

Figure 6. Left: The two dimensional torus Z27 on N = 49 nodes. Each node has
e 2 on N = 49 nodes.
four neighbors. Right: The modified two dimensional torus Z
7
Each node has 8 neighbors. The nodes in the bottom row are also connected to
the nodes in the top row, and the nodes in the very left column are also connected
to the nodes in the very right column.

v7

v7

v6

v8

v1

v2

v4

v3

v6

v8

v5

v7

v1

v5

v2

v4

v3

v6

v8

v1

v5

v2

v4

v3

Figure 7. The algorithm producing the configuration model. Left: First, for each node
in the network we prescribe its degree and draw it as half-edges. Middle: Then, we match
half-edges randomly to form edges (connections). This may be done in a sequential way,
by always choosing a uniform pair from the remaining half-edges. Here, an intermediate
stage is shown when there are five edges formed. Right: All half-edges are matched. The
output is a random graph called the configuration model.

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

Figure 8. Two examples of the configuration model. The N = 200 nodes have average
degree 4, with power-law degree distribution, with exponent τ = 2.9 (left) and τ = 3.3
(right).

Figure 9. Two examples of Geometric Inhomogeneous Random Graphs (GIRGs). The
N = 1000 nodes are placed randomly into a square of area N . Each node draws a random
fitness from a power law distribution with exponent τ = 2.95 (left) and τ = 3.3 (right).
We used the same location for nodes and the same underlying uniform variables to
simulate fitnesses in both cases: for a uniform variable Uv ∈ [0, 1], we set the fitness of
(2.95)
−1/1.95
(3.3)
−1/2.3
node v to Wv
:= Uv
on the left, while Wv
:= Uv
on the right. Each
pair of nodes with positions x1 , x2 and weights w1 , w2 , respectively, is connected with
(τ ) (τ )
probability p(τ ) = 0.5(1 ∧ 0.2(w1 w2 |x1 − x2 |−d )α ), where α = 2.5. Connections are
again generated in a coupled way, using the same set of uniform variables for the two
pictures, thresholded at p(2.95) and p(3.3) , respectively.

21

22

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

B. The effect of geometry and interventions

Graph
CM (2.5)
CM (3.3)
GIRG (2.5, 2.3)
GIRG (3.3, 1.3)
GIRG (3.3, 2.3)
Grid (infinity norm)

0.8

Fraction survived

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0.002

0.004

0.006

0.008

0.01

0.012

Deimmunization rate
Figure 10. A comparison of survival probability of S-I-T-S on eight different
networks with the same average degree, as a function of the η, the rate of losing
immunisation. Survival probabilities were computed using a 100 runs for all parameter values (η) and models. The infection and healing rates β = 0.225, γ = 0.2
for all cases. CM: the configuration model with τ = 2.5, 3.3, GIRG: GIRG powerlaw fitnesses with (τ, α) = (2.5, 2.3), (3.3, 1.3), (3.3, 2.3), and Grid: the modified
e 2 . All networks have the same number of N = 160000 nodes, and the
lattice Z
same average degree E[deg(u)] = 8. For all networks we see a sharp transition at a
critical value of η where the system moves from phase 2P (single peak followed by
extinction) to 2M (survival with multiple peaks) with overwhelming probability.
.

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

23

Deimmunization rate 0.002
Graph
GIRG (3.3, 1.3)
GIRG (2.5, 2.3)
CM (3.3)
CM (2.5)

80k
70k

Infected

60k
50k
40k
30k
20k
10k
0
0

10

20

30

40

Time

Deimmunization rate 0.009
Graph
GIRG (3.3, 1.3)
GIRG (2.5, 2.3)
CM (3.3)
CM (2.5)

80k
70k

Infected

60k
50k
40k
30k
20k
10k
0
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

Time
Figure 11. No intervention. Mean field network vs spatial scale-free networks
with many long-range edges. A comparison of the number of infected on the configuration model versus GIRG with matching parameters. The continuous line shows
the median of infected individuals, the shaded area is covers 95% of all runs for
which the number of infected nodes was positive. Each model has average degree
8. Observe that the epidemic curve of configuration model with τ = 2.5 (CM(2.5),
orange) matches that of GIRG with (τ, α) = (2.5, 2.3) (GIRG(2.5,2.3), purple),
while the epidemic curve of the configuration model with τ = 3.3 (CM(3.3), yellow) matches that of that of GIRG with (τ, α) = (3.3, 1.3) (GIRG(3.3,1.3), blue)
Top: η = 0.002 (500 days immunity), a single peak can be observed. Bottom:
η = 0.009 (111 days immunity), many peaks can be observed.
.

24

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

Deimmunization rate 0.002
Graph
GIRG (3.3, 2.3)
GIRG (3.3, 1.3)
CM (3.3)

80k
70k

Infected

60k
50k
40k
30k
20k
10k
0
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

Time
(a)

Deimmunization rate 0.009
Graph
GIRG (3.3, 2.3)
GIRG (3.3, 1.3)
CM (3.3)

Infected

8000

6000

4000

2000

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

Time
(b)

Figure 12. No intervention: The effect of geometry. Each model has average degree 8, and power-law exponent τ = 3.3. We see that there is only a
match between the mean field network configuration model (CM) when α < 2,
hence, there are many long-range connections in the network. The epidemic curve
of configuration model with τ = 3.3 (CM(3.3), orange) matches that of GIRG
with (τ, α) = (3.3, 1.3) (GIRG(3.3,1.3), dark blue). When α is increased to 2.3
(GIRG(3.3,2.3), light blue). This effects the first peak of epidemic curve to flatten,
its magnitude is shrunk by almost 40%, even though the average degree is tuned
to remain the same. Top: η = 0.002 (500 days immunity) On all three models, a single peak can be observed, and all runs die out within 70 days. Bottom:
η = 0.009, the first peak has the same height as on to the top picture and is not
shown. Without intervention (GIRG(3.3,1.3)), the second and further peaks of
the epidemic behave similarly to the mean-field network (CM(3.3)). With intervention, (GIRG(3.3,2.3)), both the oscillation period as well as its amplitude are
higher, but the average stationary proportion of infected nodes is lower.
.

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

Deimmunization rate 0.003

Deimmunization rate 0.014

4000

6000
5000

Infected

3000

Infected

25

2000

4000
3000
2000

1000

1000
0
0

0
100

200

300

400

500

0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

Time

Time

(a) Extinction after single peak (2S), η = 0.003

(b) Survival, many peaks (2M), η = 0.014

e2 with n = 400,
Figure 13. A comparison of the number of infected on the torus Z
n
in total N = 160000 nodes, γ = 0.2, β = 0.225 for two values of η, see in subfigure
captions. The continuous curve shows the median, the shaded area 95% of all runs
of all runs for which the number of infected nodes was positive.

Deimmunization rate
0.01
0.001

40k

100

30k

60

20k

40
20

10k

0

0
0

Deimmunization rate
0.005

80

200

400

600

800

1000

Time

(a) Supercritical behavior for β = 0.38.

0

200

400

600

800

1000

Time

(b) Subcritical behavior for β = 0.13, η = 0.005.

.

Figure 14. Solutions of the ODE when N = 160000, γ = 0.14 with 100 initially
infected nodes. The infection almost seemingly disappears from the system before
the second peak appears when η = 0.001. The infection does not turn into a
pandemic when β < γ.

26

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

(a) No intervention.

(b) Social distancing.

(c) Weak no-travel rule.

(d) Truncating long edges.

(e) Limiting maximal node degree.

Figure 15. Visualization of the change in the underlying contact network under
interventions. The network on the top left is similar to G1 : a GIRG with (τ, α) =
(2.5, 1.3), average degree 4.8 on N = 1000 nodes. All interventions result in an
average degree ≈ 2.6.

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

(a) No intervention.

(b) Social distancing.

(c) Weak no-travel rule.

(d) Truncating long edges.

(e) Limiting maximal node degree.

Figure 16. Visualization of the change in the underlying contact network under
interventions. The network on the top left is similar to G2 : a GIRG with (τ, α) =
(3.3, 1.3), average degree 4.8 on N = 1000 nodes. All interventions result in an
average degree ≈ 2.6, just like on Figure 15, even though the pictures here look
much more sparse.

27

28

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

(a) No intervention.

(b) Social distancing.

(c) Weak no-travel rule.

(d) Truncating long edges.

(e) Limiting maximal node degree.

Figure 17. Visualization of the initial 19 days on G1 under interventions. The
network on the top left is G1 , a GIRG with (τ, α) = (2.5, 1.3) and average degree
9.6 on N = 160000 nodes. All interventions result in an average degree 5.7. The
darker the color, the earlier the infection. We chose typical runs to illustrate the
effect of interventions.

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

(a) No intervention.

(b) Social distancing.

(c) Weak no-travel rule.

(d) Truncating long edges.

(e) Limiting maximal node degree.

Figure 18. Visualization of the initial 19 days on G2 under several intervention
measures. The network on the left is G2 , a GIRG with (τ, α) = (3.3, 1.3) and
average degree 8.7 on N = 160000 nodes. All interventions result in an average
degree 4.9. The darker the color, the earlier the infection. Color scaling is the
same as on Figure 17.

29

30

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

Graph
GIRG (2.5, 1.3)
GIRG (2.5, 2.37)
GIRG(2.5, 1.3) hub
GIRG(2.5, 1.3) long
GIRG(2.5, 1.3) perc

0.8

Fraction survived

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0.002

0.004

0.006

0.008

0.01

0.012

Deimmunization rate
(a) Survival probabilities under interventions on G1 , a GIRG with (τ, α) = (2.5, 1.3).

Graph
GIRG (3.3, 1.9)
GIRG(3.3, 1.3)
GIRG(3.3, 1.3) hub
GIRG(3.3, 1.3) long
GIRG(3.3, 1.3) perc

0.8

Fraction survived

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0.002

0.004

0.006

0.008

0.01

0.012

Deimmunization rate
(b) Survival probabilities under interventions on G2 , a GIRG with (τ, α) = (3.3, 1.3).

Figure 19. The effect of interventions: the long-survival probabilities (phase
2M) are decreasing significantly under each intervention strategy. The four interventions are: (A) social distancing, denoted as ”perc”, (B) limiting maximal
degree, denoted as ”hub”, (Ch) a hard no-travel rule, denoted as ”long” on the
legend, and (Cw) a weak no-travel rule: increasing α. We see that in all interventions, the long-survival probabilities are below the original curve. The threshold
η is lowest for percolation and highest for limiting the maximal degree, while
truncating long-edges and increasing α in the network both show an interesting
non-monotonous survival probability curve. Top: The initial network is G1 , a
GIRG with (τ, α) = (2.5, 1.3), and E[deg(u)] = 9.6. Bottom: The initial network
is G2 , a GIRG with (τ, α) = (3.3, 1.3), and E[deg(u)] = 8.7.
.

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

Figure 20. Monotonicity of survival probabilities as a function of η. For the
graph Gα
2 , a GIRG(3.3, 1.9) (weak no-travel rule), we have tested the monotonicity
of the survival probability curve, by increasing the number of runs to 500 for each
value of η. The curve appears to be monotonous, with a sharp threshold near
ηt ≈ 0.007.
.

31

32

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

Graph
GIRG (2.5, 1.3)
GIRG (2.5, 2.37)
GIRG(2.5, 1.3) hub
GIRG(2.5, 1.3) long
GIRG(2.5, 1.3) perc

First peak

80k

70k

60k

50k

40k
0.002

0.004

0.006

0.008

0.01

0.012

Deimmunization rate
(a) First peak: interventions

Graph
GIRG (2.5, 1.3)
GIRG (2.5, 2.37)
GIRG(2.5, 1.3) hub
GIRG(2.5, 1.3) long
GIRG(2.5, 1.3) perc

10k

Second peak

8k
6k
4k
2k
0
0.002

0.004

0.006

0.008

0.01

0.012

Deimmunization rate
(b) Second peak: interventions

Figure 21. The effect of interventions on the first and second peak on G1 , as a
function of η (the inverse of the average immunity period). Abbreviations in the
legend: ‘hub’: limiting maximal node degree, ‘long’: cutting long edges, ‘perc’:
social distancing. The first entry is increasing α. GIRG(2.3, 1.3) is the original
network. We see that the height of the first peak is insensitive to the immunity
length, and that cutting long edges is most effective in reducing the first peak.
For the second peak, limiting node degree pushes the critical η for appearance of
the second peak from basically 0 to 0.005, however, above that the second peak
is twice as high as for other interventions. Cutting long-edges also has a similar
effect, although to a lesser extent. See also Figure 1.4. Star indicates that there
is no second peak, and the height we see is the height of the equilibrium, see the
top figure on Figure 25.

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

Graph
GIRG (3.3, 1.9)
GIRG(3.3, 1.3)
GIRG(3.3, 1.3) hub
GIRG(3.3, 1.3) long
GIRG(3.3, 1.3) perc

80k
70k
60k

First peak

33

50k
40k
30k
20k
10k
0.002

0.004

0.006

0.008

0.01

0.012

Deimmunization rate
(a) First peak under interventions

Graph
GIRG (3.3, 1.9)
GIRG(3.3, 1.3)
GIRG(3.3, 1.3) hub
GIRG(3.3, 1.3) long
GIRG(3.3, 1.3) perc

14k

Second peak

12k
10k
8k
6k
4k
2k
0
0.002

0.004

0.006

0.008

0.01

0.012

Deimmunization rate
(b) Second peak under interventions

Figure 22. The effect of interventions on the first and second peak on G2 , as a
function of η (the inverse of the average immunity period). Abbreviations in the
legend: ‘hub’: limiting maximal node degree, ‘long’: cutting long edges, ‘perc’:
social distancing. The first entry is increasing α. GIRG(3.3, 1.3) is the original
network. We see that the height of the first peak is insensitive to the immunity
length, and that cutting long edges is most effective in reducing the first peak.
For the second peak, limiting node degree pushes the critical η for appearance of
the second peak from 0.002 to 0.006, however, above that the second peak is twice
as high as for other interventions. See also Figure 21.

34

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

Deimmunization rate 0.009
Graph
GIRG(3.3, 1.3)
GIRG (2.5, 1.3)

80k

Infected

60k

40k

20k

0
0

10

20

30

40

50

Time

Deimmunization rate 0.009
Graph
GIRG(3.3, 1.3)
GIRG (2.5, 1.3)

Infected

8000

6000

4000

2000

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

Time

Figure 23. No intervention: the epidemic curves for the networks G1 , G2 on
which we apply the intervention methods. G1 is a GIRG with (τ, α) = (2.5, 1.3)
and average degree 9.6, while G2 is a GIRG with (τ, α) = (2.5, 1.3) and average
degree 8.7. Top: The first peak of the epidemic. Bottom: The second peak and
stabilization of the number of infected. The average height and location of the
first peak is H 1 (G1 ) = 82785 on day 8 for G1 , while it is H 1 (G2 ) = 78263 on
day 14 for GIRG with (τ, α) = (3.3, 1.3). On G2 , we see a second peak at day
79 of average height H 2 (G2 ) = 6538, and the equilibrium number of infected
E(G2 ) ≈ 5000 ± 100. The equilibrium number of infected E(G1 ) ≈ 4700 ± 100 is
reached without a second peak on G1 .
.

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

35

Deimmunization rate 0.009
Graph
GIRG(2.5, 1.3) perc
GIRG(2.5, 1.3) long
GIRG(2.5, 1.3) hub
GIRG (2.5, 2.37)
GIRG (2.5, 1.3)

80k

Infected

60k

40k

20k

0
0

10

20

30

40

50

Time

Deimmunization rate 0.009
Graph
GIRG(3.3, 1.3) perc
GIRG(3.3, 1.3) long
GIRG(3.3, 1.3) hub
GIRG(3.3, 1.3)
GIRG (3.3, 1.9)

80k
70k

Infected

60k
50k
40k
30k
20k
10k
0
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

Time

Figure 24. The first peak under interventions. Top: The effect of interventions on G1 : Social distancing (“GIRG(2.5, 1.3) perc”), the hard no travel rule
(“GIRG(2.5, 1.3) long”), limiting the maximal number of contact (“GIRG(2.5, 1.3)
hub”), and the weak no-travel rule (“GIRG(2.5, 2.37)”). The first peak disappears before day 60 in all cases. The curves for the weak no-travel rule and social
distancing are almost identical. Bottom: The effect of interventions on G1 : Social distancing (“GIRG(3.3, 1.3) perc”), the hard no travel rule (“GIRG(3.3, 1.3)
long”), limiting the maximal number of contact (“GIRG(3.3, 1.3) hub”), and the
weak no-travel rule (“GIRG(3.3, 1.9)”). The hard no travel rule is most effective
in flattening the curve: both in its height as well as the day of the peak.
.

36

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

Deimmunization rate 0.009
6000

Graph
GIRG(2.5, 1.3) perc
GIRG (2.5, 2.37)
GIRG (2.5, 1.3)

Infected

5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0

50

100

150

200

250

Time

Deimmunization rate 0.009
Graph
GIRG(2.5, 1.3) long
GIRG(2.5, 1.3) hub
GIRG (2.5, 1.3)

12k

Infected

10k
8k
6k
4k
2k
0

100

200

300

400

500

Time

Figure 25. Later effects of interventions on G1 : Top: Social distancing
(“GIRG(2.5, 1.3) perc”), as well as the weak no-travel rule (“GIRG(2.5, 2.37)”).
No second peak can be observed, just like on the original network. Bottom: Limiting the maximal number of contact (“GIRG(2.5, 1.3) hub”), and the hard no travel
rule (“GIRG(2.5, 1.3) long’”): second and further peaks are periodically present,
with decreasing magnitude and period roughly the average immunity length. G1
is a GIRG with (τ, α) = (2.5, 1.3) and average degree 9.6 on N = 160000 nodes.
All networks after intervention have average degree ≈ 4.9.
.

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

37

Deimmunization rate 0.009
Graph
GIRG(3.3, 1.3) perc
GIRG(3.3, 1.3)
GIRG (3.3, 1.9)

Infected

8k

6k

4k

2k

0

100

200

300

400

500

Time

Deimmunization rate 0.009
Graph
GIRG(3.3, 1.3) long
GIRG(3.3, 1.3) hub
GIRG(3.3, 1.3)

Infected

15k

10k

5k

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

Time

Figure 26. Later effects of interventions on G2 : Top: Social distancing
(“GIRG(3.3, 1.3) perc”), as well as the weak no-travel rule (“GIRG(3.3, 1.9)”)
compared to the original network (“GIRG(3.3, 1.3)”). Second and further peaks
are present, equilibrium is reached within 600 days. Bottom: Limiting the maximal number of contact (“GIRG(3.3, 1.3) hub”), and the hard no travel rule
(“GIRG(3.3, 1.3) long’”): second and further peaks are more profound, equilibrium is only reached around 1200 days. G2 is a GIRG with (τ, α) = (3.3, 1.3) and
average degree 8.7 on N = 160000 nodes. All networks after intervention have
average degree ≈ 4.7. The first peak can be seen on Figure 24. The first peak
of the red curve (corresponding to truncating long edges) is the first peak of the
epidemic.
.

38

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

Deimmunization rate 0.013
Graph
GIRG(2.5, 1.3) perc
GIRG(2.5, 1.3) long
GIRG(2.5, 1.3) hub
GIRG (2.5, 2.37)
GIRG (2.5, 1.3)

12k

Infected

10k
8k
6k
4k
2k
0

100

200

300

400

500

600

Time

Deimmunization rate 0.013
Graph
GIRG(3.3, 1.3) perc
GIRG(3.3, 1.3) long
GIRG(3.3, 1.3) hub
GIRG(3.3, 1.3)
GIRG (3.3, 1.9)

Infected

15k

10k

5k

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

Time

Figure 27. Later effects of interventions on G1 , G2 , for η = 0.013: Top: G1 and
all interventions. Bottom G2 and all interventions. The curves are qualitatively
similar to η = 0.009, the period between second and further peaks differ from
those on Figures 25 and 25. The first peak is not affected by the change of η
(below 2% change in height, that could be also due to statistical error margins, so
we omit to plot it. The first peak of the red curve (corresponding to truncating
long edges) is the first peak of the epidemic.
.

EPIDEMICS ON SPATIAL NETWORKS

G1

G2

First peak (×103 )

Time of first peak

39

Second peak (×103 )

η

O

A

Bw

B

C

O

A

Bw

B

C

O

A

Bw

0.001
0.002
0.003
0.004
0.005
0.006
0.007
0.008
0.009
0.010
0.011
0.012
0.013

85
84
84
84
83
85
83
84
83
86
83
85
86

51
53
50
53
51
53
53
55
49
52
51
53
53

52
52
51
51
52
51
50
50
49
51
52
52
52

38
39
39
39
39
39
39
39
40
39
40
39
39

49
49
48
49
49
49
49
49
50
49
48
48
50

8
8
8
8
9
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8

11
10
11
11
11
11
12
10
12
11
11
11
11

10
10
10
11
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10

25
25
24
25
25
25
25
25
24
25
24
24
25

25
25
26
26
25
26
25
25
25
25
25
25
25

1.2
1.7
2.2
2.8
3.3
3.9
4.4
4.9
5.4
6.0
6.5
7.0

1.5
1.3
1.6
2.0
2.4
2.7
3.1
3.5
3.9
4.2
4.6
5.0

1.7
1.2
1.6
2.0
2.3
2.6
3.1
3.4
3.8
4.1
4.5
5.0

0.001
0.002
0.003
0.004
0.005
0.006
0.007
0.008
0.009
0.010
0.011
0.012
0.013

78
79
80
78
79
80
79
80
78
78
80
77
80

46
45
45
43
47
44
46
46
45
47
47
44
45

32
33
33
33
33
33
33
34
34
33
34
34
35

12
13
13
12
12
13
13
13
13
13
13
13
14

37
37
37
38
38
37
37
38
38
38
38
38
39

14
14
14
14
14
14
13
14
14
14
13
14
14

21
21
21
21
21
22
21
22
21
21
23
21
22

30
31
27
26
31
29
28
29
29
29
29
28
26

81
80
79
79
78
79
81
82
80
79
80
81
81

40
40
42
40
40
41
40
41
39
40
41
40
40

3.3
4.2
5.1
5.3
5.7
6.1
6.5
7.0
7.4
7.9
8.4

3.1
5.0
4.8
5.2
5.5
5.9
6.0
6.5
6.4
6.8

4.0
5.4
5.4
6.0
6.4
6.2
6.6
6.5
7.0

B

4.0
5.0
5.1
5.4
5.7
5.5
5.8
5.9
6.0
6.3

6.2
6.1
6.7
6.9
7.0
7.0
7.1
7.2

Time of second peak

C

O

A

Bw

B

C

9.9
10.1
10.5
10.4
10.6
10.5
10.6
10.9

1103
1023
609
1177
772
436
1184
308
439
972
1071
727

630
1027
920
790
680
705
1196
895
321
352
225
237

636
1126
634
697
726
708
460
868
286
244
552
246

193
170
151
136
126
117
110
105
102
98

184
163
150
140
130
123
116
111

13.5
12.5
13.0
13.8
14.2
14.7
14.7

154
130
110
101
97
89
86
81
78
77
77

182
171
152
143
129
121
112
112
107
102

228
209
183
175
161
147
142
136
131

332
344
314
284
265
236
219
205

242
233
208
198
188
174
162

Table 1. Time and location of the first and second peak under interventions, for
all values of η. O: original graph, A: social distancing, Bw: weak no-travel rule
(increasing α, B: hard no-travel rule (cutting long edges), C: limiting maximal
node degree. Where the data is missing, the system produces a single peak only.
The large numbers for the time of the second peak on G1 are coming from random
oscillations of the equilibriated system when there is no clear second peak.

