Article

COVID-19 Public Sentiment Insights and Machine
Learning for Tweets Classification
Jim Samuel1 ∗ , G. G. Md. Nawaz Ali1 ∗ , Md. Mokhlesur Rahman2,3 , Ek Esawi1 , and Yana
Samuel4
1
2
3

arXiv:2005.10898v1 [cs.IR] 21 May 2020

4

*

University of Charleston, Charleston, WV
University of North Carolina at Charlotte, Charlotte, NC
Khulna University of Engineering & Technology (KUET), Khulna, Bangladesh
Northeastern University, Boston, MA
Correspondence: jim@aiknowledgecenter.com; ggmdnawazali@ucwv.edu

Version May 25, 2020 submitted to Journal Not Specified

15

Abstract: Along with the Coronavirus pandemic, another crisis has manifested itself in the form of mass
fear and panic phenomena, fueled by incomplete and often inaccurate information. There is therefore a
tremendous need to address and better understand COVID-19’s informational crisis and gauge public
sentiment, so that appropriate messaging and policy decisions can be implemented. In this research
article, we identify public sentiment associated with the pandemic using Coronavirus specific Tweets
and R statistical software, along with its sentiment analysis packages. We demonstrate insights into the
progress of fear-sentiment over time as COVID-19 approached peak levels in the United States, using
descriptive textual analytics supported by necessary textual data visualizations. Furthermore, we provide
a methodological overview of two essential machine learning (ML) classification methods, in the context
of textual analytics, and compare their effectiveness in classifying Coronavirus Tweets of varying lengths.
We observe a strong classification accuracy of 91% for short Tweets, with the Naïve Bayes method. We
also observe that the logistic regression classification method provides a reasonable accuracy of 74%
with shorter Tweets, and both methods showed relatively weaker performance for longer Tweets. This
research provides insights into Coronavirus fear sentiment progression, and outlines associated methods,
implications, limitations and opportunities.

16

Keywords: COVID-19; Coronavirus; machine learning; sentiment analysis; textual analytics; Twitter.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14

1. Introduction
In this research article, we cover four critical issues: 1) public sentiment associated with the progress of
Coronavirus and COVID-19, 2) the use of Twitter data, namely Tweets, for sentiment analysis, 3) descriptive
textual analytics and textual data visualization, and 4) comparison of textual classification mechanisms
used in artificial intelligence (AI). The rapid spread of Coronavirus and COVID-19 infections have created
a strong need for discovering rapid analytics methods for understanding the flow of information and the
development of mass sentiment in pandemic scenarios. While there are numerous initiatives analyzing
healthcare, preventative, care and recovery, economic and network data, there has been relatively little
emphasis on the analysis of aggregate personal level and social media communications. McKinsey [1]
recently identified critical aspects for COVID-19 management and economic recovery scenarios. In their
industry-oriented report, they emphasized data management, tracking and informational dashboards as
critical components of managing a wide range of COVID-19 scenarios.
There has been an exponential growth in the use of textual analytics, natural language processing
(NLP) and other artificial intelligence techniques in research and in the development of applications. In

Submitted to Journal Not Specified, pages 1 – 23

www.mdpi.com/journal/notspecified

Version May 25, 2020 submitted to Journal Not Specified

2 of 23

spite of rapid advances in NLP, issues surrounding the limitations of these methods in deciphering intrinsic
meaning in text remain. Researchers at CSAIL, MIT 1 , have demonstrated how even the most recent NLP
mechanisms can fall short and thus remain "vulnerable to adversarial text" [2]. It is therefore important to
understand inherent limitations of text classification techniques and relevant machine learning algorithms.
Furthermore, it is important to explore if multiple exploratory, descriptive and classification techniques
contain complimentary synergies which will allow us to leverage the "whole is greater than the sum
of its parts" principle in our pursuit for artificial intelligence driven insights generation from human
communications. Studies in electronic markets have demonstrated the effectiveness of machine learning
in modeling human behavior under complex informational conditions, highlighting the role of the nature
of information in affecting human behavior [3].

400
300
200
0

100

Fear Sentiment Tweets Count

500

600

COVID−19's Sentiment Curve: The Fear Pandemic

20−02−20

Fear Sentiment in Public Tweets

29−02−20

Figure 1. Fear curve.

The rise in emphasis on AI methods for textual analytics and NLP have followed the tremendous
increase in public reliance on social media (e.g., Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, blogging, and LinkedIn)
for information, rather than on the traditional news agencies [4–6]. People express their opinions, moods,
and activities on social media about diverse social phenomena (e.g., health, natural hazards, cultural
dynamics, and social trends) due to personal connectivity, network effects, limited costs and easy access.
Many companies are using social media to promote their product and service to the end-users [7].
Correspondingly, users share their experiences and reviews, creating a rich reservoir of information
stored as text. Consequently, social media and open communication platforms are becoming important
sources of information for conducting research, in the contexts of rapid development of information and
communication technology [8]. Researchers and practitioners mine massive textual and unstructured
datasets to generate insights about mass behavior, thoughts and emotions on a wide variety of issues such
as product reviews, political opinions and trends, motivational principles and stock market sentiment
[4,9–13]. Textual data visualization is also used to identify the critical trend of change in fear-sentiment,
using the "Fear Curve" in Fig. 1, with the dotted Lowess line demonstrating the trend, and the bars
indicating the day to day increase in fear Tweets count. The source data for all Tweets data analysis, tables

1

Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Version May 25, 2020 submitted to Journal Not Specified

3 of 23

and every figure, including Fig. 1, in this research consists of publicly available Tweets data, specifically
downloaded for the purposes of this research and further described in the Data acquisition and preparation
section 3.1.1 of this study. Tweets were first classified using sentiment analysis, and then the progression
of the fear-sentiment was studied, as it was the most dominant emotion across the entire Tweets data. This
exploratory analysis revealed the significant daily increase in fear-sentiment towards the end of March
2020, as shown in Fig. 1.
In this research article, we present textual analyses of Twitter data to identify public sentiment,
specifically, tracking the progress of fear, which has been associated with the rapid spread of Coronavirus
and COVID-19 infections. This research outlines a methodological approach to analyzing Twitter data
specifically for identification of sentiment, key words associations and trends for crisis scenarios akin to
the current COVID-19 phenomena. We initiate the discussion and search for insights with descriptive
textual analytics and data visualization, such as exploratory Word Clouds in Figs. 2 and 4.
democrats

chinese
vaccine

beer

since

time
hope money

stock
economy

even

need

worry

virus

little

people

corona

making

cnn

america

7abuvs12304

else

the

country

person

cold

pandemic

don
stop

state

many

lol

drinking

really

died

mask

gets

man

heard

realdonaldtrump

president
disease amp last public
infected
bad next
big
everyone
getting
probably
health
says
things
already
this
charge
flu
made
got
come
please
today
enough
anyone
can
due
may
long
case
control
cure must
actually
thought
make
con stay
better
help buy
told americans
masks
want panic
catch
way
name
kill government
someone
great best
coming
new hands
drink
f602
isn potus maybe response
thing
travel
tell
days
love
didn wouldn
yet wall good
now
mike said
let
die think
feel
pence
deaths
media
you
spread
well
week
usa joke won
real
f9a0 worse
how started
doesn know
going
viruses care
keep serious
look
year trump
news
away
give
election
mexico
cause
job
anything believe que
rate put worried also
sure
there
work
home
talking first
coronavirus another
cases
world might
sick
god
nothing back blame use
spreading
never
damn
lime
outbreak
saying
china
american
something market cdc
everything day
what
trying
around open ever
find

Figure 2. An instance of word cloud in twitter data.

Early stage exploratory analytics of Tweets revealed interesting aspects, such as the relatively higher
number of Coronavirus Tweets coming from iPhone users, as compared to Android users, along with a
proportionally higher use of word-associations with politics (mention of Republican and Democratic party
leaders), URLs and humour, depicted by the word-association of beer with Coronavirus, as summarized in
Table 1 below. We observed that such references to humour and beer was overtaken by "Fear Sentiment" as
COVID-19 progressed and its seriousness became evident (Fig. 1). Tweets insights with textual analytics
and NLP thus serve as a good reflector of shifts in public sentiment.
Table 1. Tweet features summarized by source category.
Source
iPhone
Android
iPad
Cities

Total
3281
1180
75
30

Hashtags
495
149
6
0

Mentions
2305
1397
96
0

Urls
77
37
4
0

Pols
218
125
12
0

Corona
4238
1050
85
0

Flu
171
67
4
0

Beer
336
140
8
0

AbuseW
111
41
2
0

One of the key contributions of this research is our discussion, demonstration and comparison
of Naïve Bayes and Logistic methods based textual classification mechanisms commonly used in AI

Version May 25, 2020 submitted to Journal Not Specified

4 of 23

applications for NLP, and specifically contextualized in this research using machine learning for Tweets
classifications. Accuracy is measured by the ratio of correct classifications to the total number of test items.
We observed that Naïve Bayes is better for small to medium size tweets and can be used for classifying
short Coronavirus Tweets sentiments with an accuracy of 91%, as compared to logistic regression with
an accuracy of 74%. For longer Tweets, Naïve Bayes provided an accuracy of 57% and logistic regression
provided an accuracy of 52%, as summarized in Tables 6 & 7.
2. Literature Review
This study was informed by research articles from multiple disciplines and therefore, in this section,
we cover literature review on textual analytics, sentiment analysis, Twitter and NLP, and machine learning
methods. Machine learning and the need for strategic structuring of information characteristics is necessary
to address evolving big data challenges [14]. Textual analytics deals with the analysis and evocation of
characters, syntactics, semantics, sentiment and visual representations of text, its characteristics, and
associated endogenous and exogenous features. Endogenous features refer to aspects of the text itself,
such as the length of characters in a social media post, use of keywords, use of special characters and the
presence or absence of URL links and hashtags, as illustrated for this study in Tables 2a and 2b. These
tables summarize the appearances of "mentions" and "hashtags" in descending order, indicating the use of
screen names and "#" symbol within the text of the Tweet, respectively. Exogenous variables, in contrast,
Table 2. Summary of endogenous features.
(a) Mentions count.
Tagged
realDonaldTrump
CNN
ImtiazMadmood
corona
AOC
coronaextrausa
POTUS
CNN MSNBC

Frequency
74
21
16
13
12
12
12
11

(b) Hashtag count.
Hashtag
coronavirus
DemDebate
corona
CoronavirusOutbreak
CoronaVirusUpdates
coronavirususa
Corona
COVID19

Frequency
23
16
8
8
7
7
6
5

are those aspects which are external but related to the text, such as the source device used for making a
post on social media, location of Twitter user and source types, as illustrated for this study in Tables 3a
and 3b (Table 3 summarizes "source device" and "screen names", indicating variables representing type of
device used post the Tweet, and the screen name of the Twitter user, respectively, both external to the text
of the Tweet). Such exploratory summaries describe the data succinctly, provide a better understanding
of the data, and helps generate insights which inform subsequent classification analysis. Past studies
have explored custom approaches to identifying constructs such as dominance behavior in electronic chat,
indicating the tremendous potential for extending such analyses by using machine learning techniques to
accelerate automated sentiment classification and the subsections that follow present key insights gained
from literature review to support and inform the Textual Analytics processes used in this study [15–19].
2.1. Textual Analytics
A diverse array of methods and tools have been used for textual analytics, subject to the nature of
the textual data, research objectives, size of dataset and context. Twitter data has been used widely for
textual and emotions analysis [20–22]. In another instance, a study analyzing customer feedback for a
French Energy Company using more than 70000 tweets published over a year [23], used a Latent Dirichlet

Version May 25, 2020 submitted to Journal Not Specified

5 of 23

Table 3. Summary of exogenous features.
(a) Source device count.
Source
Twitter for iPhone
Twitter for Android
Twitter for iPad
Cities
Tweetbot for i<U+039F>S
CareerArc2.0
Twitter Web Client
511NY-Tweets

Frequency
3281
1180
75
30
29
14
16
3

(b) Screen name count.
Screen Name
_CoronaCA
MBilalY
joanna_corona
eads_john
_jvm2222
AlAboutNothing
dallasreese
CpaCarter

Frequency
30
25
17
13
11
11
9
8

Allocation algorithm to retrieve interesting insights about the energy company, hidden due to data volume,
by frequency-based filtering techniques. Poisson and negative binomial models have been used to explore
Tweet popularity as well [24]. The same study also evaluated the relationship between topics using seven
dissimilarity measures and found that Kullback-Leibler and the Euclidean distances performed better in
identifying related topics useful for user-based interactive approach. Similarly, extant research applying
Time Aware Knowledge Extraction (TAKE) methodology [25] demonstrated methods to discover valuable
information from huge amounts of information posted on Facebook and Twitter. The study used topic
based summarization of Twitter data to explore content of research interest. Similarly, they applied a
framework which uses less detailed summary to produce good quality information. Past research has also
investigated the usefulness of twitter data to assess personality of users, using DISC (Dominance, Influence,
Compliance and Steadiness) assessment techniques [26]. Similar research has been used in information
systems using textual analytics to develop designs for identification of human traits, including dominance
in electronic communication [19]. DISC assessment is useful for information retrieval, content selection,
product positioning and psychological assessment of users. So also, a combination of psychological and
linguistic analysis was used in past research to extract emotions from multilingual text posted on social
media [27].
2.2. Twitter Analytics
Extant research has evaluated the usefulness of social media data in revealing situational awareness
during crisis scenarios, such as by analyzing wildfire-related Twitter activities in San Diego County,
modeling with about 41,545 wildfire related tweets, from May of 2014, [11]. Analysis of such data
showed that six of the nine wildfires occurred on May 14, associated with a sudden increase of wildfire
tweets on May 14. Kernel density estimation showed the largest hotspots of tweets containing "fire" and
"wildfire" were in the downtown area of San Diego, despite being far away from the fire locations. This
shows a geographical disassociation between fact and Tweet. Analysis of Twitter data in the current
research also showed some disassociation between Coronavirus Tweets sentiment and actual Coronavirus
hotspots, as evidenced in Fig. 3. Such disassociation can be explained to some extent by the fact that
people in urban areas have better access to information and communication technologies, resulting in
a higher number of tweets from urban areas. The same study on San Diego wildfires also found that
a large number of people tweeted "evacuation", which presented a useful cue about the impact of the
wildfire. Tweets also demonstrated emphasis on wildfire damage (e.g., containment percentage and burnt
acres) and appreciation for firefighters. Tweets, in the wildfire scenario, enhanced situational awareness
and accelerated disaster response activities. Social network analysis demonstrated that elite users (e.g.,

Version May 25, 2020 submitted to Journal Not Specified

6 of 23

local authorities, traditional media reporters) play an important role in information dissemination and
dominated the wildfire retweet network.

Negative Sentiment in Tweets by State, USA

Washington

North Dakota

Montana

Oregon

Wisconsin

Wyoming

Utah

Colorado

Illinois
Kansas

California
Arizona

New York

Missouri

Oklahoma

New Mexico

Arkansas

North Carolina

Wisconsin

Wyoming

Utah

Colorado

Arizona

South Carolina

New York

Illinois
Kansas

California

Missouri

Oklahoma

New Mexico

West Virginia

North Carolina
South Carolina
Georgia

Louisiana

Florida

Florida

²

Proportion

1.00000000 - 1.24000000
1.24000001 - 1.52149945
1.52149946 - 1.74074074
1.74074075 - 2.11111111

0

2.11111112 - 2.75000000

175

350

700

²

Proportion

0.250000000 - 0.428571429
0.428571430 - 0.536934950
0.536934951 - 0.703703704

1,050

Maryland
Delaware

Virginia

Tennessee

Mississippi Alabama
Texas

Ohio

Indiana

Vermont
New Hampshire

Massachusetts
Connecticut
Rhode Island
Pennsylvania
New Jersey

Kentucky

Arkansas

Georgia

Louisiana

Maine

Michigan

Iowa

Nebraska
Nevada

Maryland
Delaware

Virginia

Tennessee

Mississippi Alabama
Texas

West Virginia

Kentucky

Minnesota

South Dakota

Idaho

Oregon

Massachusetts
Connecticut
Rhode Island
Pennsylvania
New Jersey

Ohio

Indiana

Vermont
New Hampshire

North Dakota

Montana

Maine

Michigan

Iowa

Nebraska
Nevada

Washington

Minnesota

South Dakota

Idaho

Fear Sentiment in Tweets by State, USA

Miles
1,400

0.703703705 - 0.916666667
0.916666668 - 1.37500000

(a) Negative sentiment.

0

175

350

700

1,050

Miles
1,400

(b) Fear sentiment.
Figure 3. Sentiment map.

Twitter data has also been extensively used for crisis situations analysis and tracking, including
the analysis of pandemics [28–31]. Nagar et al. [32] validated the temporal predictive strength of daily
Twitter data for influenza-like illness for emergency department (ILI-ED) visits during the New York City
2012-2013 influenza season. Widener and Li (2014) [8] performed sentiment analysis to understand how
geographically located tweets on healthy and unhealthy food are geographically distributed across the
US. The spatial distribution of the tweets analyzed showed that people living in urban and suburban
areas tweet more than people living in rural areas. Similarly, per capita food tweets were higher in large
urban areas than in small urban areas. Logistic regression revealed that tweets in low-income areas were
associated with unhealthy food related Tweet content. Twitter data has also been used in the context
of healthcare sentiment analytics. De Choudhury et al. (2013) [10] investigated behavioral changes and
moods of new mothers in the postnatal situation. Using Twitter posts this study evaluated postnatal
changes (e.g., social engagement, emotion, social network, and linguistic style) to show that Twitter data
can be very effective in identifying mothers at risk of postnatal depression. Novel analytical frameworks
have also been used to analyze supply chain management (SCM) related twitter data about, providing
important insights to improve SCM practices and research [33]. They conducted descriptive analytics,
content analysis integrating text mining and sentiment analysis, and network analytics on 22,399 SCM
tweets. Carvaho et al. [34] presented an efficient platform named MISNIS (intelligent Mining of Public
Social Networks’ Influence in Society) to collect, store, manage, mine and visualize Twitter and Twitter
user data. This platform allows non-technical users to mine data easily and has one of the highest success
rates in capturing flowing Portuguese language tweets.
2.3. Classification Methods
Extant research has used diverse textual classification methods to evaluate social media sentiment.
These classifiers are grouped into numerous categories based on their similarities. The section that follows
discusses details about four essential classifiers we reviewed, including linear regression and K-nearest
neighbor, and focuses on the two classifiers we chose to compare, namely Naïve Bayes and logistic
regression, their main concepts, strengths and weaknesses. The focus of this research is to present a

Version May 25, 2020 submitted to Journal Not Specified

7 of 23

machine learning based perspective on the effectiveness of the commonly used Naïve Bayes and logistic
regression methods.
Linear regression model:
Although linear regression is primarily used to predict relationships between continuous variables,
linear classifiers can also used to classify texts and documents [35]. The most common estimation method
using linear classifiers is the least squares algorithm which minimizes an objective function (i.e. squared
difference between the predicted outcomes and true classes). The least squares algorithm is similar to
maximum likelihood estimation when outcome variables are influenced by Gaussian noise [36]. Linear
ridge regression classifier optimizes the objective function by adding a penalizer to it. Ridge classifier
converts binary outcomes to -1, 1 and treats the problem as a regression (multi-class regression for a
multi-class problem) [37].
Naïve Bayes classifier:
Naïve Bayes classifier (NBC) is a proven, simple and effective method for text classification [38]. It
has been used widely for document classification since the 1950s [39]. This classifier is theoretically based
on the Bayes theorem [35,37,40]. A discussion on the mathematical formulation of NBC from a textual
analytics perspective is provided under the methods section. NBC uses maximum a posteriori estimation
to find out the class (i.e., features are assigned to a class based on the highest conditional probability).
There are mainly two models of NBC: Multinomial Naïve Bayes (i.e., binary representation of the features)
and Bernoulli Naïve Bayes (i.e., features are represented with frequency) [35]. Many studies have used
NBCs for text, documents and products classification. A comparative study showed that NBC has higher
accuracy to classify documents than other common classifiers, such as decision trees, neural networks,
and support vector machines [41]. Collecting 7000 status updates (e.g. positive or negative) from 90
Facebook users, researchers found that NBC has a higher rate (77%) of accuracy to predict the sentimental
status of users compared to the Rocchio Classifier (75%) [40]. Previous studies investigating different
techniques of sentiment analysis [42] found that symbolic techniques (i.e., based on the force and direction
of words) have accuracy lower than 80%. In contrast, machine learning techniques (SVM, NBC, and
maximum Entropy) have a higher level of accuracy (above 80%) in classifying sentiment. NBCs can be
used with limited size training data to estimate necessary parameters and are quite efficient to implement,
as compared to other sophisticated methods with comparable accuracy [37]. However, NBCs are based on
over-simplified assumptions of conditional probability and shape of data distribution [37,39].
Logistic regression:
Logistics regression (LR) is one of the popular and earlier methods for classification. LR was first
developed by David Cox in 1958 [39]. In the LR model, the probabilities describing the possible outcomes
of a single trial are modeled using a logistic function [37]. Using a logistic function, the probability of
the outcomes are transformed into binary values (0 and 1). Maximum likelihood estimation methods are
commonly used to minimize error in the model. A comparative study classifying product reviews reported
that logistic regression multi-class classification method has the highest (min 32.43%, max 58.50%) accuracy
compared to Naïve Bayes, Random Forest, Decision Tree, and Support Vector Machines classification
methods [43]. Using multinomial logistic regression [44] observed that this method can accurately predict
the sentiment of Twitter users up to 74%. Past research using stepwise logistic discriminant analysis [45]
correctly classified 96.2% cases. LR classifier is suitable for predicting categorical outcomes. However,
this prediction needs each data point to be independent to each other [39]. Moreover, the stability of the
logistic regression classifier is lower than the other classifiers due to the widespread distribution of the

Version May 25, 2020 submitted to Journal Not Specified

8 of 23

values of average classification accuracy [43]. LR classifiers have a fairly expensive training phase which
includes parameter modeling with optimization techniques [35].
Table 4. Summary of classifiers for machine learning.
Classifier
Linear regression

Logistic regression

Naïve Bayes classifier

K-Nearest Neighbor

Characteristic
Minimize sum of
squared differences
between predicted and
true values
Probability of an
outcome is based on a
logistic function
Based on assumption of
independence between
predictor variables
Computes classification
based on weights of
the nearest neighbors,
instance based

Strength
Intuitive, useful
and stable, easy to
understand

Weakness
Sensitive to outliers;
Ineffective with
non-linearity

Transparent and easy to
understand; Regularized
to avoid over-fitting
Effective with real-world
data; Efficient and can
deal with dimensionality
KNN can be very easy to
implement, efficient with
small data, applicable for
multi-class problems

Expensive training
phase; Assumption of
linearity
Over-simplified
assumptions; Limited
by data scarcity
Inefficient with big data;
Sensitive to data quality;
Noisy features degrade
the performance

K-Nearest Neighbor:
K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN) is a popular non-parametric text classifier which uses instance-based
learning (i.e., does not construct a general internal model but just stores an instance of the data) [37,39].
KNN method classifies texts or documents based on similarity measurement [35]. The similarity between
two data points is measured by estimating distance, proximity or closeness function [46]. KNN classifier
computes classification based on a simple majority vote of the nearest neighbors of each data point
[37,47]. The number of nearest neighbors (K) is determined by specification or by estimating the number
of neighbors within a fixed radius of each point. KNN classifiers are simple, easy to implement and
applicable for multi-class problems [39,47,48].
Summary:
Table 4 represents main features of different classifiers with their respective strengths and weaknesses.
This table provides a good overview of all the classifiers mentioned in the above section. Based on a
review of multiple machine learning methods, we decided to apply Naïve Bayes and logistic regression
classification methods to train and test binary sentiment categories associated with the Coronavirus Tweets
data. Naïve Bayes and logistic regression classification methods were selected based on their parsimony,
and their proven performance with textual classification provides for interesting comparative evaluations.
3. Methods and Textual Data Analytics
The Methods section has two broad parts, the first deals with exploratory textual analytics, summaries
by features endogenous and exogenous to the text of the Tweets, data visualizations, and describes key
characteristics of the Coronavirus Tweets data. It goes beyond traditional statistical summaries for
quantitative and even ordinal and categorical data, because of the unique properties of textual data, and
exploits the potential to fragment and synthesize textual data (such as by considering parts of the Tweets,
"#" tags, assign sentiment scores, and evaluation of use of characters) into useful features which can provide
valuable insights. This part of the analysis also develops textual analytics specific data visualizations to
gain and present quick insights into the use of key words associated with Coronavirus and COVID-19.
The second part deals with machine learning techniques for classification of textual data into positive

Version May 25, 2020 submitted to Journal Not Specified

(a) Word Cloud 1.

(b) Word Cloud 2.

9 of 23

(c) Word Cloud 3.

Figure 4. A couple of word cloud instances.

and negative sentiment categories. Implicit therefore, is that the first part of the analytics also includes
sentiment analysis of the textual component of Twitter data. Tweets are assigned sentiment scores using R
and R packages. The Tweets with their sentiment scores, are then split into train and test data, to apply
machine learning classification methods using two prominent methods described below, and their results
are discussed.
3.1. Exploratory Textual Analytics
Exploratory textual analytics deals with the generation of descriptors for textual features in data with
textual variables, and the potential associations of such textual features with other non-textual variables
in the data. For example, a simple feature that is often used in the analysis of Tweets is the number of
characters in the Tweet, and this feature can also be substituted or augmented by measures such as the
number of words per Tweet [9]. A "Word Cloud" is a common and visually appealing early stage textual
data visualization, consisting of the size and visual emphasis of words being weighted by their frequency
of occurrence in the textual corpus, and is used to portray prominent words in a textual corpus graphically
[49]. Early stage World Clouds used plain vanilla black and white graphics, such as in Fig. 2, and current
representations use diverse word configurations (such as all word being set to horizontal orientation),
colors and outline shapes, such as in Fig. 4, for increased aesthetic impact. This research used R along
with Wordcloud and Wordcloud2 packages, while other packages in R and Python are also available with
unique Wordcloud plotting capabilities.
3.1.1. Data acquisition and preparation
The research was initiated with standard and commonly used Tweets collection, cleaning and data
preparation process, which we outline briefly below. We downloaded Tweets using a Twitter API, the
rTweet package in R, which was used to gather over nine hundred thousand tweets from February to
March of 2020, applying the keyword "Corona" (case ignored). This ensured a textual corpus focused on
the Coronavirus, COVID-19 and associated phenomena, and reflects an established process for topical
data acquisition [23,50]. The raw data with ninety variables was processed and prepared for analysis
using the R programming language and related packages. The data was subset to focus on Tweets tagged
by country as belonging to the United States. Multiple R packages were used in the cleaning process, to
create a clean dataset for further analysis. Since the intent was to use the data for academic research, we
replaced all identifiable abusive words with a unique alphanumeric tag word, which contained the text
"abuvs", but was mixed with numbers to avoid using a set of characters that could have preexisted in the
Tweets. Deleting abusive words completely would deprive the data of potential analyses opportunities,
and hence a specifically coded algorithm was used to make a customized replacement. This customized
replacement was in addition to the standard use of "Stopwords" and cleaning processes [51,52]. The dataset

Version May 25, 2020 submitted to Journal Not Specified

10 of 23

was further evaluated to identify the most useful variables, and sixty two variables with incomplete, blank
and irrelevant values were deleted to create a cleaned dataset with twenty eight variables. The dataset was
also further processed based on the needs of each analytical segment of analysis, using "tokenization" which converts text to analysis relevant word tokens, "part-of-speech" tagging - which tags textual artifacts
by grammatical category such as noun or verb, "parsing" - which identifies underlying structure between
textual elements, "stemming" - which discards prefixes and suffixes using rules to create simple forms of
base words and "lemmatization" - which like stemming, aims to transform words to simpler forms and
uses dictionaries and more complex rules and processes than in stemming.
3.1.2. Word and phrase associations
An important and distinct aspect of textual analytics involves the identification of not only the
most frequently used words, but also of word pairs and word chains. This aspect, known as N-grams
identification in a text corpus, has been developed and studied in computational linguistics and NLP.
We transformed the "Tweets" variable, containing the text of the Tweets in the data, into a text corpus
and identified the most frequent words, the most frequent Bigrams (two word sequences), the most
frequent Trigrams (three word sequences) and the most frequent "Quadgrams" (four word sequences,
also called Four-grams). Our research also explored longer sequences but the text corpus did not contain
longer sequences with sufficient frequency threshold and relevance. While identification of N-grams is a
straightforward process with the availability of numerous packages in R and Python, and other NLP tools,
it is more nuanced to identify the most useful n-grams in a text corpus, and interpret the implications.
In reference to Fig. 5, it is seen that in some scenarios, such as with the popular use of words "beer",
"Trump" and "abuvs" (the tag used to replace identifiable abusive words), and Bigrams and Trigrams
such as "corona beer", "stock market", "drink corona", "corona virus outbreak" and "confirmed cases (of)
corona virus" (Quadgram) indicate a mixed mass response to the Coronavirus in its early stages. Humor,
politics, and concerns about the stock market and health risks words were all mixed in early Tweets
based public discussions on Coronavirus. Additional key word and sentiment analysis factoring the
timeline, showed an increase in seriousness, and fear in particular as shown in Fig. 1, indicating that public
sentiment changed as the consequences of the rapid spread of Coronavirus, and the damaging impact
upon COVID-19 patients became more evident.
3.1.3. Geo-tagged analytics
Data often contain information about geographic locations, such as city, county, state and country
level data or by holding zip code and longitude and latitude coordinates, or geographical metadata. Such
data are said to be "geotagged", and "Geo-tagged Analytics" represents the analysis of data inclusive of
geographical location variables or metadata. Twitter data contains two distinct location data types for
each tweet: one is a location for the tweet, indicating where the Tweet was posted from, and the other is
the general location of the user, and may refer to the place of stay for the user when the Twitter account
was created, as shown in Table 5. For the Cornonavirus Tweets, we examined both fear-sentiment and
negative sentiment and found some counter-intuitive insights, showing relatively lower levels of fear in
states which were significantly affected by a high number of COVID-19 cases, as demonstrated in Fig. 3.
3.1.4. Association with non-textual variables
This research also analyzed Coronavirus Tweets texts for potential association with other variables, in
addition to endogenous analytics, and the time and dates variable. Using a market segmentation logic,
we grouped Tweets by the top three source devices in the data, namely: iPhone, Android and iPad, as
shown in Fig. 6, which is normalized to each device count. This means that Fig. 6 reflects comparison

Version May 25, 2020 submitted to Journal Not Specified

11 of 23

Top Unigrams

Top Bigrams

2500

Word Frequencies

Word Frequencies

4000

3000

2000

1000

2000

1500

1000

500

drinking corona

virus outbreak

got corona

drink corona

stock market

corona beer

corona virus

now

beer

abuvs

people

corona

trump

0

virus

0

Top Quadgrams

Top Trigrams
Word Frequencies

14

50

40

30

20

12
10
8
6
4
2

Figure 5. N-Grams.

Table 5. Location variables.
(a) Tagged locations.
Tagged
Los Angeles, CA
Manhattan, NY
Florida, USA
Chicago, IL
Houston, TX
Texas, USA
Brooklyn, NY
San Antonio, TX

Frequency
183
130
84
71
65
57
51
51

(b) Stated locations.
Stated
Los Angeles, CA
United States
Washington, DC
New York, NY
California, USA
Chicago, IL
Houston, TX
Corona, CA

Frequency
78
75
60
54
49
40
39
33

dying worldwide use tool

corona virus people dying

first case corona virus

corona beer corona virus

corona virus task force

current weather corona clear

corona virus abuvs

cure corona virus

got corona virus

due corona virus

corona virus uf

corona virus ufa

corona virus outbreak

0

corona clear sky âf

0

10

Version May 25, 2020 submitted to Journal Not Specified

12 of 23

of the relative ratio of device property count to total device count for each source category, and is not a
direct device-totals comparison. Our research analyzed direct totals comparison as well, and the reason
for presenting the source device comparison by relative ratio is because the comparison by totals simply
follows the distribution of source device totals provided in Table 1. We observed that, higher ratio of:
iPhone users made the most use of hashtags and mentions of "Corona", iPad users made the most mention
of URLs and "Trump", Android users made the most mention of "Flu" and "Beer" words. Both iPhone and
Android users has similar ratios for usage of abusive words.

Twitter for iPhone

Twitter for Android
Twitter for iPad

Twitter for Android

Twitter for Android

Twitter for iPhone

Twitter for iPhone

Text Width

Twitter for iPad

Twitter for iPhone
Twitter for iPad

I

Twitter for iPhone

Twitter for Android

Twitter for iPhone

Twitter for iPad

Twitter for iPhone

Twitter for Android
Twitter for iPad

Twitter for Android

Twitter for iPhone

F `Corona` Mentions

H Abusive Words

Twitter for iPad

G `Beer` Mentions

Twitter for Android

C Total URLs

E `Flu` Mentions

Twitter for Android

Twitter for iPad

D `Trump` Mentions

Twitter for iPad

Twitter for iPad

B Total Tweets

Twitter for Android

Twitter for iPhone

A Total Hashtags

Figure 6. Source device comparison by relative ratio.

3.1.5. Sentiment analytics
One of the key insights that can be gained from textual analytics is the identification of sentiment
associated with the text being analyzed. Extant research has used custom methods to identify temporal
sentiment as well as sentiment expressions of character traits such as dominance [19], and standardized
methods to assign positive and negative sentiment scores [7,17,53]. Sentiment analysis is broadly described
as the assignment of sentiment scores and categories, based on keyword and phrase match with sentiment
score dictionaries, and customized lexicons. Prominent analytics software including R, and open-source
option, have standardized sentiment scoring mechanisms. We used two R packages, Syuzhet and
sentimentr, to classify and score the Tweets for sentiment classes such as fear, sadness and anger, and
sentiment scores ranging from negative (around -1) to positive (around 1) with sentiR [54,55]. We used two
methods to assign sentiment scores and classifications: the first method assigned a positive to negative
score as continuous value between 1 (maximum positive) and -1 (minimum positive).

Version May 25, 2020 submitted to Journal Not Specified

13 of 23

3.2. Machine Learning with Classification Methods
Extant research has examined linguistic challenges and has demonstrated the effectiveness of ML
methods such as SVM (Support Vector Machine) in identifying extreme sentiment [56]. The focus of this
study is on demonstrating how commonly used ML methods can be applied, and used to contribute to
classification of sentiment by varying Tweets characteristics, and not the development of contributions to
new ML theory or algorithms. Unlike linear regression, which is mainly used for estimating the probability
of quantitative parameters, classification can be effectively used for estimating the probability of qualitative
parameters for binary or multi-class variables - that is when the prediction variable of interest is binary,
categorical or ordinal in nature. There are many classification methods (classifiers) for qualitative data;
among the most well-known are Naïve Bayes, logistic regression, linear and KNN. The first two are
elaborated upon below in the context of textual analytics. The most general form of classifiers is as follows:
How can we predict responses Y given a set of predictors { X }? For general linear regression, the
b for Y
mathematical model is Y = β 0 + β 1 x1 + β 2 x2 +, · · · , + β n xn . The aim is to find an estimated Y
by modeling values of βˆ0 , βˆ1 , · · · , βˆn for β 0 , β 1 , · · · , β n . These estimates are determined from training
data sets. If either the predictors and/or responses are not continuous quantitative variables, then the
structure of this model is inappropriate and needs modifications. X and Y become proxy variables and
their meaning depends on the context in which they are used; in the context of the present study, X
represents a document or features of a document and Y is the class to be evaluated, for which the model is
being trained.
Below is a brief mathematical-statistical formulation of two of the most important classifiers for textual
analytics, and sentiment classification in particular: Naïve Bayes which is considered as a generative
classifier, and Logistic Regression which is considered as a discriminative classifier. Extant research
has demonstrated the viability of the using Naïve Bayes and Logistic Regression for generative and
discriminative classification respectively [57].
3.3. Naïve Bayes Classifier
Naïve Bayes Classifier is based on Bayes conditional probability rule [58]. According to Bayes theorem,
the conditional probability of P( x |y) is,
P( x |y) =

P(y| x ) P( x )
P(y)

(1)

The naive Bayes classifier identifies the estimated class ĉ among all the classes c ∈ C for a given document
d. Hence the estimated class is,
ĉ = argmaxc∈C P(c|d)
(2)
After applying Bayes conditional probability from (1) in (2) we get:
ĉ = argmaxc∈C P(c|d) = argmaxc∈C

P(d|c) P(c)
P(d)

(3)

Simplifying (3) (as P(d) is the same for all classes, we can drop P(d) from the denominator) and using the
likelihood of P(d|c), we get
ŷ = argmaxc∈C P(y1 , y2 , · · · , yn |c) P(c)
(4)
where y1 , y2 , · · · , yn are the representative features of document d.

Version May 25, 2020 submitted to Journal Not Specified

14 of 23

However, (4) is difficult to evaluate and needs more simplification. We assume that word position
does not have any effect on the classification and the probabilities P(yi |c) are independent given a class c,
hence we can write,
P(y1 , y2 , · · · , yn |c) = P(y1 |c).P(y2 |c). · · · .P(yn )
(5)
Hence, from (4) & (5) we get the final equation of the naive Bayes classifier as,
CNB = argmaxc∈C P(c)

∏

P ( yi | c )

(6)

y i ∈Y

To apply the classifier in the textual analytics, we consider the index position of words (wi ) in the
documents, namely, replace yi by wi . Now considering features in log space, (6) becomes,
CNB = argmaxc∈C logP(c) +

∑

logP(wi |c)

(7)

i ∈ positions

3.3.1. Classifier training
In (7), we need to find the values of P(c) and P(wi |c). Assume Nc and Ndoc denote the number of
documents in the training data belong in class c and the total number of documents, respectively. Then,
P̂(c) =

Nc
Ndoc

(8)

The probability of word wi in class c is,
P̂(wi |c) =

count(wi , c)
∑w∈V count(w, c)

(9)

where count(wi , c) is the number of occurrences of wi in class c, and V is the entire word vocabulary.
Now since naive Bayes multiplies all the features likelihood together (refer to (6)), the zero probabilities
in the likelihood term for any class will turn the whole probability to zero, to avoid such situation, we use
the Laplace add-one smoothing method, hence (9) becomes,
count(wi , c) + 1
∑w∈V (count(w, c) + 1)
count(wi , c) + 1
=
∑w∈V (count(w, c) + |V |)

P̂(wi |c) =

(10)

From an applied perspective, the text needs to be cleaned and prepared to contain clear, distinct and
legitimate words (wi ) for effective classification. Custom abbreviations, spelling errors, emoticons,
extensive use of punctuation, and such other stylistic issues in the text can impact the accuracy of
classification in both the Naïve Bayes and logistic classification methods, as text cleaning processes may
not be 100% successful.
3.4. Application of Naïve Bayes for Coronavirus Tweet Classification
This research aims to explore the viability of applying exploratory sentiment classification in the
context of Coronavirus Tweets. The goal therefore was directional, and set to classifying positive sentiment
and negative sentiment in Coronavirus Tweets. Tweets with positive sentiment were assigned a value of 1,
and Tweets with a negative sentiment were assigned a value of 0. We created subsets of data based on
the length of Tweets to examine classification accuracy based on length of Tweets, where the lengths of

Version May 25, 2020 submitted to Journal Not Specified

15 of 23

Table 6. Naïve Bayes classification by varying tweet lengths.
(a) Tweets (nchar <77).

(b) Tweets (nchar <120).

Negative Positive
Negative 34
1
Positive
5
30
Accuracy: 0.9143

Negative Positive
Negative 34
1
Positive
29
6
Accuracy: 0.5714

Tweets were calculated by a simple character count for each Tweet. We created two groups, where the
first group consisted of Coronavirus Tweets which were less than 77 characters in length, consisting of
about a quarter of all Tweets data, and the group consisted of Coronavirus Tweets which were less than
120 characters in length, consisting of about half of all Tweets data. These groups of data were further
subset to ensure that the number of positive Tweets and Negative Tweets were balanced when being
classified. We used R [59] and associated packages to run the analysis, train using a subset of the data,
and test the accuracy of the classification method using about 70 randomized test values. The results of
using Naïve Bayes for Coronavirus Tweet Classification are presented in Table 6. Interestingly, though we
found strong classification accuracy for shorter Tweets with around nine out of every ten Tweets being
classified correctly (91.43% accuracy). We observed an inverse relationship between the length of Tweets
and classification accuracy, as the classification accuracy decreased to 57% with increase in the length of
Tweets to below 120 characters.We calculated the Sensitivity of the classification test, which is given by
the ratio of the number of correct positive predictions (30) in the output, to the total number of positives
(35), to be 0.86 for the short Tweets and 0.17 for the longer Tweets. We calculated the Specificity of the
classification test, which is given by the ratio of the number of correct negative predictions (34) in the
output, to the total number of negatives (35), to be 0.97 for both the short and long Tweets classification.
Naïve Bayes thus had better performance with classifying negative Tweets.
3.5. Logistic Regression
Logistic regression is a probabilistic classification method that can be used for supervised machine
learning. For classification, a machine learning model usually consists of the following components [57]:
1. A feature representation of the input: For each input observation ( x (i) ), this will be represented by
a vector of features, [ x1 , x2 , · · · , xn ].
2. A classification function: It computes the estimated class ŷ. The sigmoid function is used in
classification.
3. An objective function: The job of objective function is to minimize the error of training examples.
The cross-entropy loss function is often used for this purpose.
4. An optimizing algorithm: This algorithm will be used for optimizing the objective function. The
stochastic gradient descent algorithm is popularly used for this task.
3.5.1. The classification function
Here we use logistic regression and sigmoid function to build a binary classifier.
Consider an input observation x which is denoted by a vector of features [ x1 , x2 , · · · , xn ]. The output
of classifier will be either y = 1 or y = 0. The objective of the classifier is to know P(y = 1| x ), which
denotes the probability of positive sentiment in this classification of Coronavirus Tweets, and P(y = 0| x ),
which correspondingly denotes the probability of negative sentiment. wi denotes the weight of input

Version May 25, 2020 submitted to Journal Not Specified

16 of 23

feature xi from a training set and b denotes the bias term (intercept), we get the resulting weighted sum for
a class,
n

z=

∑ wi .xi + b

(11)

i =1

representing w.x as the element-wise dot product of vectors of w and x, we can simplify (11) as,
z = w.x + b

(12)

We use the following sigmoid function to map the real-valued number into the range [0, 1],
y = σ(z) =

1
1 + e−z

(13)

After applying sigmoid function in (12) and making sure that P(y = 1| x ) + P(y = 0| x ) = 1, we get
the following two probabilities,
P(y = 1| x ) = σ (w.x + b)

=

1

(14)

1 + e−(w.x+b)

P ( y = 0| x ) = 1 − P ( y = 1| x )

=

e−(w.x+b)
1 + e−(w.x+b)

(15)

considering 0.5 as the decision boundary, the estimated class ŷ will be
(
ŷ =

1

if P(y = 1| x ) > 0.5

0

otherwise

(16)

3.5.2. Objective function
For an observation x, the loss function computes how close the estimated output ŷ is from the actual
output y, which is represented by L(ŷ, y). Since there are only two discrete outcomes (y = 1 or y = 0),
using Bernoulli distribution, P(y| x ) can be expressed as,
P(y| x ) = ŷy (1 − ŷ)1−y

(17)

taking log both sides in (17),
h
i
log P(y| x ) = log ŷy (1 − ŷ)1−y

(18)

= y log ŷ + (1 − y) log(1 − ŷ)
To turn (18) into a minimizing function (loss function), we take the negation of (18), which yields,
L(ŷ, y) = − [y log ŷ + (1 − y) log(1 − ŷ)]

(19)

Version May 25, 2020 submitted to Journal Not Specified

17 of 23

substituting ŷ = σ (w.x + b), from (19), we get,
L(ŷ, y) = − [y log σ (w.x + b) + (1 − y) log(1 − σ (w.x + b))]
"
!#


e−(w.x+b)
1
+ (1 − y) log
= − y log
1 + e−(w.x+b)
1 + e−(w.x+b)

(20)

3.5.3. Optimization algorithm
To minimize the loss function stated in (20), we use gradient descent method. The objective is to find
the minimum weight of the loss function. Using gradient descent, the weight of the next iteration can be
stated as,
w k +1 = w k − η

d
f ( x; w)
dw

(21)

d
f ( x; w) is the slope and η is the learning rate.
where dw
Considering θ as vector of weights and f ( x; θ ) representing ŷ, the updating equation using gradient
descent is,

θ k+1 = θ k − η ∇θ L ( f ( x; θ ), y)

(22)

where

L ( f ( x; θ ), y) = L(w, b)

= L(ŷ, y) = − [y log σ(w.x + b) + (1 − y) log(1 − σ(w.x + b))]

(23)

∂
and the partial derivative ( ∂w
) for this function for one observation vector x is,
j

∂L(w, b)
= [σ(w.x + b) − y] x j
∂w j

(24)

where the gradient in (24) represents the difference between ŷ and y multiplied by the corresponding
input x j . Note that in (22), we need to do the partial derivatives for all the values of x j where 1 ≤ j ≤ n.
3.6. Application of Logistic Regression for Coronavirus Tweet Classification
Table 7. Logistic classification by varying tweet lengths.
(a) Tweets (nchar < 77).

(b) Tweets (nchar < 120).

Negative Positive
Negative 30
5
Positive
13
22
Accuracy: 0.7429

Negative Positive
Negative 21
14
Positive
19
16
Accuracy: 0.52

As described in section 3.4, the purpose is to demonstrate application of exploratory sentiment
classification, to compare the effectiveness of Naïve Bayes and logistic regression, and to examine accuracy
under varying lengths of Coronavirus Tweets. As with classification of Tweets using Naïve Bayes, positive
sentiment Tweets were assigned a value of 1, and negative sentiment Tweets were denoted by 0, allowing
for a simple binary classification using logistic regression methodology. Subsets of data were created,

Version May 25, 2020 submitted to Journal Not Specified

18 of 23

based on the length of Tweets, in a similar process as for Naïve Bayes classification and the same two
groups of data containing Tweets with less than 77 characters (approximately 25% of the Tweets), and
Tweets with less than 125 characters (approximately 50% of the data) respectively, were used. We used R
[59] and associated packages for logistic regression modeling, and to train and test the data. The results of
using logistic regression for Coronavirus Tweet Classification are presented in Table 7. We observed on the
test data with 70 items that, akin to the Naïve Bayes classification accuracy, shorter Tweets were classified
using logistic regression with a greater degree of accuracy of just above 74%, and the classification accuracy
decreased to 52% with longer Tweets. We calculated the Sensitivity of the classification test, which is given
by the ratio of the number of correct positive predictions (22) in the output, to the total number of positives
(35), to be 0.63 for the short Tweets, and 0.46 for the longer Tweets. We calculated the Specificity of the
classification test, which is given by the ratio of the number of correct negative predictions (30) in the
output, to the total number of negatives (35), to be 0.86 for the short Tweets, and 0.60 for the longer Tweets
classification. Logistic regression thus had better performance with a balanced classification of Tweets.
4. Discussion
The classification results obtained in this study are interesting and indicate a need for additional
validation and empirical model development with more Coronavirus data, and additional methods.
Models thus developed with additional data and methods, and using Naïve Bayes and logistic regression
Tweet Classification methods can then be used as independent mechanisms for automated classification
of Coronavirus sentiment. The model and the findings can also be further extended to similar local
and global pandemic insights generation in the future. Textual analytics has gained significant attention
over the past few years with the advent of big data analytics, unstructured data analysis and increased
computational capabilities at decreasing costs, which enables the analysis of large textual datasets. Our
research demonstrates the use of the NRC sentiment lexicon, using the Syuzhet and sentimentr packages
in R ([54,55]), and it will be a useful exercise to evaluate comparatively with other sentiment lexicons such
as Bing and Afinn lexicons [54]. Furthermore, each type of text corpus will have its own features and
peculiarities, such as Twitter data will tend to be different from LinkedIn data in syntatics and semantics.
Past research has also indicated the usefulness of applying multiple lexicons, to generate either a manually
weighted model or a statistically derived model based on a combination of multiple sentiment scores
applied to the same text, and hybrid approaches [60,61], and a need to apply strategic modeling to address
big data challenges [14]. We have demonstrated a structured approach which is necessary for successful
generation of insights from textual data. When analyzing crisis situations, it is important to map sentiment
against time, such as in the fear curve plot (Fig. 1), and where relevant geographically, such as in Figs. 3a
and 3b. Associating text and textual features with carefully selected and relevant non-textual features is
another critical aspect of insights generation through textual analytics as has been demonstrated through
Tables 1∼7.
4.1. Limitations
The current study has focused on a textual corpus consisting of Tweets filtered by "Coronavirus" as
the keyword. Therefore the analysis and the methods are specifically applied to data about a particular
pandemic as a crisis situation, and hence it could be argued that the analytical structure outlined in
this paper can only be weakly generalized. Future research could address this and explore "alternative
dimensionalities and perform sensitivity analysis" to improve the validity of the insights gained [62].
Furthermore, the analysis used one sentiment lexicon to identify positive and negative sentiments, and one
sentiment lexicon to classify the tweets into categories such as fear, sadness, anger and disgust [7,54,55].
Varying information categories have the potential to influence human beliefs and decision making [63], and

Version May 25, 2020 submitted to Journal Not Specified

19 of 23

hence it is important to consider multiple social media platforms with differing information formats (such
as short text, blogs, images and comments) to gain a holistic perspective. The present study intended to
generate rapid insights for COVID-19 related public sentiment using Twitter data, which was successfully
accomplished. This study also intended to explore the viability of machine learning classification methods,
and we found sufficient directional support for the use of Naïve Bayes and Logistic classification for short
to medium length Tweets, but the accuracy decreased with the increase in the length of Tweets. We have
not stated a formal model for Tweets sentiment classification, as that is not a goal of this research. While
the absence of such a formal model may also be perceived as a limitation which we acknowledge, it must
be noted that our research goal of evaluating the viability of using machine learning classification for
Tweets of varying lengths was accomplished. Finally, we also acknowledge that Twitter data alone is
not a reflection of general mass sentiment in a nation or even in a state or local area [8,11,32]. However,
the current research provides a clear direction for more comprehensive analysis of multiple textual data
sources including other social media platforms, news articles and personal communications data. The
mismatch between Coronavirus negative sentiment map, fear sentiment map, and the factually known
hotspots in New York, New Jersey and California, as shown in Fig. 3 could have been driven by the timing
of tweets posted just before the magnitude of the problem was recognized, and could also be reflective
of cultural attitudes. The sentiment map presents a fair degree of acceptable association with states such
as West Virginia and North Dakota. Overall, though these limitations are acknowledged from a general
perspective, they do not diminish the contributions made by this study, as the generic weaknesses are not
associated with the primary goals of this study.
4.2. Implications and Ethics
There have been some ethical concerns about the way in Twitter data has been used for research and
by practitioners - numerous potential issues have been identified, including the use of Tweets made by
vulnerable persons in crisis situations [64]. It is also important to recognize the deviation from researcher
obligations to human subjects, to researcher obligations to "data subjects" [65], and this approach does
not compromise on ethics, but rather acknowledges the value of publicly available data as voluntary
contributions to public space by Twitter users. Past research has also identified the use of Twitter data
analytics for pandemics, including the 2009 Swine Flu [64], indicating a mature stream of thought towards
using social media data to help understand and manage contagions and crisis scenarios.
As a global pandemic COVID-19 is adversely affecting people and countries. Besides necessary
healthcare and medical treatments, it is critical to protect people and societies from psychological shocks
(e.g., distress, anxiety, fear, mental illness). In this context, automated machine learning driven sentiment
analysis could help health professionals, policymakers, and state and federal governments to understand
and identify rapidly changing psychological risks in the population. Consequently, timely responses and
initiatives (e.g., counseling, internet-based psychological support mechanisms) taken by the agencies to
mitigate and prevent adverse emotional and psychological consequences will significantly improve public
health and well being during crisis phenomena. Sentiment analysis using social media data will thus
provide valuable insights on attitudes, perceptions, and behaviors for critical decision making for business
and political leaders, and societal representatives.
5. Conclusion and Future Work
We have addressed issues surrounding public sentiment reflecting deep concerns about Coronavirus
and COVID-19, leading to the identification of growth in fear sentiment and negative sentiment. We
also demonstrated the use of exploratory and descriptive textual analytics and textual data visualization
methods, to discover early stage insights, such as by grouping of words by levels of a specific non-text

Version May 25, 2020 submitted to Journal Not Specified

20 of 23

variable. Finally, we provided a comparison of textual classification mechanisms used in artificial
intelligence applications, and demonstrated their usefulness for varying lengths of Tweets. Thus, the
present study has presented methods with valuable informational and public sentiment insights generation
potential, which can be used to develop much needed motivational solutions and strategies to counter the
rapid spread of "the trio of fear-panic-despair" associated with Coronavirus and COVID-19 [13]. Given
the easy availability of COVID-19 related big data, an extensive array of analytics and machine learning
driven solutions needs to be developed to address the pandemic’s global information complexities. While
the current research stream contributes to the strategic process, a lot more needs to be done across multiple
social media, news and public and personal communication platforms. Such solutions will also be critical
in identifying a sustainable pathway to recovery post-COVID-19: for example, understanding public
perspectives and sentiment using textual analytics and machine learning will enable policy makers to
cater to public needs more specifically and also design sentiment specific communication strategies.
Corporations and small businesses can also benefit through such analyses and machine learning models to
better understand consumer sentiment and expectations. Our research is ongoing, and we are building on
the foundations laid in this paper to analyze large new data which are expected to help build models to
support the socioeconomic recovery process in the time ahead.
Author Contributions: This work was completed with contributions from all the authors. conceptualization, J.S.,
G.G.M.N.A, Y.S and M.M.R; methodology, J.S and M.M.R; software, J.S.; validation, J.S., M.M.R, E.K. and Y.S.; formal
analysis, J.S. and M.M.R.; data curation, J.S.; writing–original draft preparation, J.S., G.G.M.N.A., M.M.R., E.K., and
Y.S.; writing–review and editing, J.S., G.G.M.N.A., M.M.R., E.K., and Y.S.; visualization, J.S., and M.M.R.; funding
acquisition, G.G.M.N.A. All authors did edit, review and improve the manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:
COVID-19
ML
NLP

Coronavirus Disease 2019
Machine Learning
Natural Language Processing

References
1.
2.
3.

4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Company, M.. COVID-19: Global Briefing Report – Global Health and Crisis Response, 2020.
Jin, D.; Jin, Z.; Zhou, J.T.; Szolovits, P. Is bert really robust? natural language attack on text classification and
entailment. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11932 2019.
Samuel, J. Information Token Driven Machine Learning for Electronic Markets: Performance Effects in
Behavioral Financial Big Data Analytics. JISTEM-Journal of Information Systems and Technology Management 2017,
14, 371–383.
Shu, K.; Sliva, A.; Wang, S.; Tang, J.; Liu, H. Fake news detection on social media: A data mining perspective.
ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter 2017, 19, 22–36.
Makris, C.; Pispirigos, G.; Rizos, I.O. A Distributed Bagging Ensemble Methodology for Community Prediction
in Social Networks. Information 2020, 11, 199.
Heist, N.; Hertling, S.; Paulheim, H. Language-agnostic relation extraction from abstracts in Wikis. Information
2018, 9, 75.
He, W.; Wu, H.; Yan, G.; Akula, V.; Shen, J. A novel social media competitive analytics framework with
sentiment benchmarks. Information & Management 2015, 52, 801–812.
Widener, M.J.; Li, W. Using geolocated Twitter data to monitor the prevalence of healthy and unhealthy food
references across the US. Applied Geography 2014, 54, 189–197.

Version May 25, 2020 submitted to Journal Not Specified

9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

14.

15.
16.

17.
18.
19.

20.
21.
22.
23.

24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.

21 of 23

Kretinin, A.; Samuel, J.; Kashyap, R. When the Going Gets Tough, The Tweets Get Going! An Exploratory
Analysis of Tweets Sentiments in the Stock Market. American Journal of Management 2018, 18.
De Choudhury, M.; Counts, S.; Horvitz, E. Predicting postpartum changes in emotion and behavior via social
media. Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems, 2013, pp. 3267–3276.
Wang, Z.; Ye, X.; Tsou, M.H. Spatial, temporal, and content analysis of Twitter for wildfire hazards. Natural
Hazards 2016, 83, 523–540.
Skoric, M.M.; Liu, J.; Jaidka, K. Electoral and Public Opinion Forecasts with Social Media Data: A Meta-Analysis.
Information 2020, 11, 187.
Samuel, J.
Eagles & Lions Winning Against Coronavirus! 8 Principles from Winston Churchill
for Overcoming COVID-19 & Fear.
Researchgate preprint, DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.2.10791.29601
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/340610688 2020.
Samuel, J.; Kashyap, R.; Betts, S. Strategic Directions for Big Data Analytics in E-Commerce with Machine
Learning and Tactical Synopses: Propositions for Intelligence Based Strategic Information Modeling (SIM).
Journal of Strategic Innovation and Sustainability 2018, 13.
Chen, X.; Xie, H.; Cheng, G.; Poon, L.K.; Leng, M.; Wang, F.L. Trends and Features of the Applications of
Natural Language Processing Techniques for Clinical Trials Text Analysis. Applied Sciences 2020, 10, 2157.
Reyes-Menendez, A.; Saura, J.R.; Alvarez-Alonso, C. Understanding# WorldEnvironmentDay user opinions in
Twitter: A topic-based sentiment analysis approach. International journal of environmental research and public
health 2018, 15, 2537.
Samuel, J.; Kashyap, R.; Kretinin, A. Going Where the Tweets Get Moving! An Explorative Analysis of Tweets
Sentiments in the Stock Market. Proceedings of the Northeast Business & Economics Association 2018.
Saura, J.R.; Palos-Sanchez, P.; Grilo, A. Detecting indicators for startup business success: Sentiment analysis
using text data mining. Sustainability 2019, 11, 917.
Samuel, J.; Holowczak, R.; Benbunan-Fich, R.; Levine, I. Automating Discovery of Dominance in Synchronous
Computer-Mediated Communication. 2014 47th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. IEEE,
2014, pp. 1804–1812.
Rocha, G.; Lopes Cardoso, H. Recognizing textual entailment: challenges in the Portuguese language.
Information 2018, 9, 76.
Carducci, G.; Rizzo, G.; Monti, D.; Palumbo, E.; Morisio, M. Twitpersonality: Computing personality traits
from tweets using word embeddings and supervised learning. Information 2018, 9, 127.
Ahmad, T.; Ramsay, A.; Ahmed, H. Detecting Emotions in English and Arabic Tweets. Information 2019, 10, 98.
Pépin, L.; Kuntz, P.; Blanchard, J.; Guillet, F.; Suignard, P. Visual analytics for exploring topic long-term
evolution and detecting weak signals in company targeted tweets. Computers & Industrial Engineering 2017,
112, 450–458.
Samuel, J.; Garvey, M.; Kashyap, R. That Message Went Viral?! Exploratory Analytics and Sentiment Analysis
into the Propagation of Tweets. Annual Proceedings of Northeast Decision Sciences Institute (NEDSI), 2019.
De Maio, C.; Fenza, G.; Loia, V.; Parente, M. Time aware knowledge extraction for microblog summarization
on twitter. Information Fusion 2016, 28, 60–74.
Ahmad, N.; Siddique, J. Personality assessment using Twitter tweets. Procedia computer science 2017,
112, 1964–1973.
Jain, V.K.; Kumar, S.; Fernandes, S.L. Extraction of emotions from multilingual text using intelligent text
processing and computational linguistics. Journal of computational science 2017, 21, 316–326.
Ye, X.; Li, S.; Yang, X.; Qin, C. Use of social media for the detection and analysis of infectious diseases in China.
ISPRS International Journal of Geo-Information 2016, 5, 156.
Fung, I.C.H.; Yin, J.; Pressley, K.D.; Duke, C.H.; Mo, C.; Liang, H.; Fu, K.W.; Tse, Z.T.H.; Hou, S.I. Pedagogical
Demonstration of Twitter Data Analysis: A Case Study of World AIDS Day, 2014. Data 2019, 4, 84.
Kim, E.H.J.; Jeong, Y.K.; Kim, Y.; Kang, K.Y.; Song, M. Topic-based content and sentiment analysis of Ebola
virus on Twitter and in the news. Journal of Information Science 2016, 42, 763–781.

Version May 25, 2020 submitted to Journal Not Specified

31.

32.

33.
34.
35.

36.

37.

38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.

44.

45.

46.
47.
48.

49.

22 of 23

Samuel, J.; Ali, N.; Rahman, M.; Samuel, Y.; Pelaez, A. Feeling Like it is Time to Reopen Now? COVID-19 New
Normal Scenarios based on Reopening Sentiment Analytics. ResearchGate researchgate.net/publication/341478625
2020.
Nagar, R.; Yuan, Q.; Freifeld, C.C.; Santillana, M.; Nojima, A.; Chunara, R.; Brownstein, J.S. A case study of the
New York City 2012-2013 influenza season with daily geocoded Twitter data from temporal and spatiotemporal
perspectives. Journal of medical Internet research 2014, 16, e236.
Chae, B.K. Insights from hashtag# supplychain and Twitter Analytics: Considering Twitter and Twitter data
for supply chain practice and research. International Journal of Production Economics 2015, 165, 247–259.
Carvalho, J.P.; Rosa, H.; Brogueira, G.; Batista, F. MISNIS: An intelligent platform for twitter topic mining.
Expert Systems with Applications 2017, 89, 374–388.
Vijayan, V.K.; Bindu, K.; Parameswaran, L. A comprehensive study of text classification algorithms. 2017
International Conference on Advances in Computing, Communications and Informatics (ICACCI). IEEE, 2017,
pp. 1109–1113.
Zhang, J.; Yang, Y. Robustness of regularized linear classification methods in text categorization. Proceedings
of the 26th annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in informaion retrieval,
2003, pp. 190–197.
Pedregosa, F.; Varoquaux, G.; Gramfort, A.; Michel, V.; Thirion, B.; Grisel, O.; Blondel, M.; Prettenhofer, P.;
Weiss, R.; Dubourg, V.; Vanderplas, J.; Passos, A.; Cournapeau, D.; Brucher, M.; Perrot, M.; Duchesnay, E.
Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research 2011, 12, 2825–2830.
Liu, B.; Blasch, E.; Chen, Y.; Shen, D.; Chen, G. Scalable sentiment classification for big data analysis using
naive bayes classifier. 2013 IEEE international conference on big data. IEEE, 2013, pp. 99–104.
Kowsari, K.; Jafari Meimandi, K.; Heidarysafa, M.; Mendu, S.; Barnes, L.; Brown, D. Text classification
algorithms: A survey. Information 2019, 10, 150.
Troussas, C.; Virvou, M.; Espinosa, K.J.; Llaguno, K.; Caro, J. Sentiment analysis of Facebook statuses using
Naive Bayes classifier for language learning. IISA 2013. IEEE, 2013, pp. 1–6.
Ting, S.; Ip, W.; Tsang, A.H. Is Naive Bayes a good classifier for document classification. International Journal of
Software Engineering and Its Applications 2011, 5, 37–46.
Boiy, E.; Hens, P.; Deschacht, K.; Moens, M.F. Automatic Sentiment Analysis in On-line Text. ELPUB, 2007, pp.
349–360.
Pranckevičius, T.; Marcinkevičius, V. Comparison of naive bayes, random forest, decision tree, support vector
machines, and logistic regression classifiers for text reviews classification. Baltic Journal of Modern Computing
2017, 5, 221.
Ramadhan, W.; Novianty, S.A.; Setianingsih, S.C. Sentiment analysis using multinomial logistic regression.
2017 International Conference on Control, Electronics, Renewable Energy and Communications (ICCREC).
IEEE, 2017, pp. 46–49.
Rubegni, P.; Cevenini, G.; Burroni, M.; Dell’Eva, G.; Sbano, P.; Cuccia, A.; Andreassi, L. Digital dermoscopy
analysis of atypical pigmented skin lesions: a stepwise logistic discriminant analysis approach. Skin Research
and Technology 2002, 8, 276–281.
Silva, I.; Eugenio Naranjo, J. A Systematic Methodology to Evaluate Prediction Models for Driving Style
Classification. Sensors 2020, 20, 1692.
Buldin, I.D.; Ivanov, N.S. Text Classification of Illegal Activities on Onion Sites. 2020 IEEE Conference of
Russian Young Researchers in Electrical and Electronic Engineering (EIConRus). IEEE, 2020, pp. 245–247.
Tan, Y. An improved KNN text classification algorithm based on K-medoids and rough set. 2018 10th
International Conference on Intelligent Human-Machine Systems and Cybernetics (IHMSC). IEEE, 2018, Vol. 1,
pp. 109–113.
Conner, C.; Samuel, J.; Kretinin, A.; Samuel, Y.; Nadeau, L. A Picture for The Words! Textual Visualization in
Big Data Analytics,. Northeast Business and Economics Association (NBEA) Annual Proceedings (46), 2019,
pp. 37–43.

Version May 25, 2020 submitted to Journal Not Specified

50.

51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.

61.
62.
63.
64.
65.

23 of 23

Samuel, Y.; George, J.; Samuel, J. Beyond STEM, How Can Women Engage Big Data, Analytics, Robotics
and Artificial Intelligence? An Exploratory Analysis of Confidence and Educational Factors in the Emerging
Technology Waves Influencing the Role of, and Impact Upon, Women. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.11746 2020.
Svetlov, K.; Platonov, K. Sentiment Analysis of Posts and Comments in the Accounts of Russian Politicians on
the Social Network. 2019 25th Conference of Open Innovations Association (FRUCT). IEEE, 2019, pp. 299–305.
Saif, H.; Fernández, M.; He, Y.; Alani, H. On stopwords, filtering and data sparsity for sentiment analysis of
twitter, 2014.
Ravi, K.; Ravi, V. A survey on opinion mining and sentiment analysis: tasks, approaches and applications.
Knowledge-Based Systems 2015, 89, 14–46.
Jockers, M.L. Syuzhet: Extract Sentiment and Plot Arcs from Text, 2015.
Rinker, T.W. sentimentr: Calculate Text Polarity Sentiment. Buffalo, New York, 2019. version 2.7.1.
Almatarneh, S.; Gamallo, P. Comparing supervised machine learning strategies and linguistic features to search
for very negative opinions. Information 2019, 10, 16.
Jurafsky, D.; Martin, J. Speech and Language Processing (3rd (draft) ed.), 2019.
Bayes, T. An Essay Toward Solving a Problem in the Doctrine of Chances; Hafner Publishing, 1763.
R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing,
Vienna, Austria, 2020.
Samuel, J.; Garvey, M.; Kashyap, R. That Message Went Viral?! Exploratory Analytics and Sentiment Analysis
into the Propagation of Tweets. Annual Proceedings of Northeast Decision Sciences Institute (NEDSI) Conference,
USA. 2019.
Sharma, S.; Jain, A. Hybrid Ensemble Learning With Feature Selection for Sentiment Classification in Social
Media. International Journal of Information Retrieval Research (IJIRR) 2020, 10, 40–58.
Evangelopoulos, N.; Zhang, X.; Prybutok, V.R. Latent semantic analysis: five methodological recommendations.
European Journal of Information Systems 2012, 21, 70–86.
Samuel, J.; Holowczak, R.; Pelaez, A. The Effects of Technology Driven Information Categories on Performance
in Electronic Trading Markets. Journal of Information Technology Management 2017.
Ahmed, W.; Bath, P.; Demartini, G. Using Twitter as a data source: An overview of ethical, legal, and
methodological challenges. Advances in Research Ethics and Integrity 2017, 2, 79–107.
Buchanan, E. Considering the ethics of big data research: A case of Twitter and ISIS/ISIL. PloS one 2017, 12.

c 2020 by the authors. Submitted to Journal Not Specified for possible open access publication under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

