arXiv:2006.01284v3 [cs.LG] 30 Jun 2020

I NDEPENDENT C OMPONENT A NALYSIS FOR T RUSTWORTHY
C YBERSPACE DURING H IGH I MPACT E VENTS : A N
A PPLICATION TO C OVID -19

Zois Boukouvalas
American University
Washington, DC 20016, USA

Christine Mallinson
University of Maryland Baltimore County
Baltimore, MD 21250, USA

Evan Crothers
University of Ottawa
Ottawa, ON, Canada

Nathalie Japkowicz
American University
Washington, DC 20016, USA

Aritran Piplai
University of Maryland Baltimore County
Baltimore, MD 21250, USA

Sudip Mittal
University of North Carolina Wilmington
Wilmington, NC 28403, USA

Anupam Joshi
University of Maryland Baltimore County
Baltimore, MD 21250, USA

Tülay Adalı
University of Maryland Baltimore County
Baltimore, MD 21250, USA

July 2, 2020

A BSTRACT
Social media has become an important communication channel during high impact events, such as
the COVID-19 pandemic. As misinformation in social media can rapidly spread, creating social
unrest, curtailing the spread of misinformation during such events is a significant data challenge.
While recent solutions that are based on machine learning have shown promise for the detection
of misinformation, most widely used methods include approaches that rely on either handcrafted
features that cannot be optimal for all scenarios, or those that are based on deep learning where
the interpretation of the prediction results is not directly accessible. In this work, we propose a
data-driven solution that is based on the ICA model, such that knowledge discovery and detection of
misinformation are achieved jointly. To demonstrate the effectiveness of our method and compare its
performance with deep learning methods, we developed a labeled COVID-19 Twitter dataset based
on socio-linguistic criteria.
Keywords
Detection of Misinformation, Knowledge Discovery, Independent Component Analysis, COVID-19, Twitter.

1 Introduction
With the evolution of social media technologies, there has been a fundamental change in how the information is
accessed, shared, and propagated. Propagation of information, and in particular that of misinformation, becomes
especially important during high impact events like natural disasters, terrorist attacks, periods of political transition
or unrest, and financial instability. A recent example of a high impact event is the novel Coronavirus Disease 2019

- J ULY 2, 2020

(COVID-19) where misinformation is dangerously spreading and includes harmful health advises, wild conspiracy
theories, as well as misinformation related to racism.
Recent machine learning advances have shown significant promise for the detection of misinformation. Examples
include approaches that define high level features and use those to describe the distribution of misinformation in a high
dimensional space and then train a separating hyperplane in a supervised manner [1, 2, 3], as well as approaches that are
based on deep neural networks [4, 5]. The first set of solutions rely on the extraction of handcrafted features that cannot
be optimal for all scenarios. The automatic extraction of features that best explain the underlying misinformation in
data presents a significant challenge. On the other hand, solutions that use low-level features such as those based
on deep learning have demonstrated superior performance in a wide variety of machine learning tasks, however the
interpretation of the prediction results, i.e., identification of the key elements that characterize misinformation, is not
direct and easily accessible. Even with the use of additional steps such as heat maps [6], they do not lend themselves
to easy interpretation. Both of these challenges become more pronounced in high impact events as interpretability of
the prediction result is key for an analyst to explain how true and false information correlate with each other and how
they propagate on the complex network of social media [7].
Data driven methods based on latent variable analysis provide the ideal starting point for developing an effective
solution that can reliably respond to these complex set of requirements. They have demonstrated great potential for
text analysis where interpretable linguistic features are extracted through latent variables [8, 9, 10]. In this work, we
propose a simple yet effective data-driven solution that is based on independent component analysis (ICA) to generate
low dimensional representations of tweets with respect to their spatial context. These features are then used to train
a classifier to distinguish between reliable and unreliable tweets. It is important to note that the proposed approach is
completely data driven and is easily interpretable due to the simplicity of the generative model, and does not require
a large amount of training samples in order to achieve a desirable classification error. Another important contribution
is the generation of a novel labeled COVID-19 Twitter dataset that has been constructed by subject matter experts
and where the labeling generation is based on socio-linguistic criteria. This is an important aspect we would like to
emphasize for datasets used for misinformation detection, and needless to say, in the scenario for COVID-19 as well.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we show how we cast our problem using the ICA
method and present the classification procedure. Moreover, we show how we collected and constructed the labeled
COVID-19 dataset. Section 3 provides the results of the classification procedure, knowledge discovery, and associated
discussions. The conclusions and future research directions are presented in Section 4.

2 Materials and Methods
2.1 Independent Component Analysis
We formulate the problem of detection of unreliable tweets as a blind source separation problem in the following way.
Let X ∈ Rd×V be the observation matrix where d denotes the number of initial feature vectors and V denotes the total
number of tweets. For the purpose of this work, we select d to denote the count of the words that appear in the corpus.
The noiseless blind source separation model is given by

X = AS,

(1)

where A ∈ Rd×N is the mixing matrix, and S ∈ RN ×V correspond to the source estimates, which in our setting,
correspond to the feature vectors. One of the most widely used methods for solving (1) is ICA and its basic assumption
is that the source signals are statistically independent [11, 12].
Using the random vector notation, the ICA model is given by x(v) = As(v), v = 1, . . . , V, where v is the sample
index, s(v) ∈ RN are the unknown sources that need to be estimated, and x(v) ∈ Rd are the mixtures. In most
practical applications, we have an over-determined system where d > N . This can be reduced to the case where
d = N using a dimensionality reduction technique, typically with principal component analysis (PCA) and an order
estimate to determine the signal subspace [13, 14]. Under the assumption that the sources sn (v), 1 ≤ n ≤ N in
s(v) = [s1 (v), . . . , sN (v)]⊤ are statistically independent, the goal in ICA is to estimate a demixing matrix W ∈
RN ×N to yield maximally independent source estimates y(v) = Wx(v). For the rest of the paper, we assume that the
samples of each unknown source are independent and identically distributed ,and therefore, to simplify the notation
we drop the sample index v. A natural cost function to achieve such a separation is mutual information (MI), which
is defined as the Kullback-Leibler (KL)-distance between the joint source density and the product of the marginal
2

- J ULY 2, 2020

estimated source densities. Therefore, the MI cost function is given by
JICA (W) =

N
X

H(yn ) − log | det(W)| − C,

(2)

n=1

where yn = wn⊤ x and the terms H(yn ) and H(x) are the (differential) entropy of the source estimates and the
mixtures, respectively. Though there are many ICA algorithms, in this work, we used the entropy bound minimization
(ICA-EBM) algorithm [15], due to the fact that it has shown superior performance in a wide range of applications.
2.2 Feature Extraction and Classification Procedure
The classification process consists of three stages. In the first stage, N tweets are randomly sub-sampled in order to
generate training and testing datasets, XTrain and XTest respectively.
In the second stage, the mean from the initial d feature vectors is removed so all features are centered and PCA is
applied to XTrain using order N such that the data is projected onto an N −dimensional sub-space. Then we generate
X̂Train ∈ RN ×VTrain and perform ICA on it. This results a demixing matrix, WTrain ∈ RN ×N that will be used
to generate YTrain = WTrain X̂Train . Note here that YTrain ∈ RN ×VTrain contains the extracted low dimensional
features for each training tweet and will be used to train the classification model.
The testing dataset is generated by removing the mean from each testing feature vector resulting in XTest ∈ RN ×VTest .
In order to project the testing data onto a low dimensional feature space, remember that before ICA is performed,
PCA is applied to XTrain using an estimated order N . This provides the data reduction matrix FTrain where FTrain
is formed by the eigenvectors with the first N highest eigenvalues of the corresponding XTrain . An estimate of the
mixing matrix ATrain is computed as ÂTrain = (FTrain )† (WTrain )−1 , where (·)† denotes the pseudo-inverse of a
−1 ⊤
matrix. Then the testing dataset, YTest , is formed as YTest = (Â⊤
ÂTrain XTest . It is worth mentioning
Train ÂTrain )
here that for the generation of YTrain and YTest we do not take into account the class labels of the training and testing
samples.
In the third stage, we train the classification model using (YTrain )⊤ . Here, the specific form of the classification model
is unimportant. But to demonstrate a concrete example, we use Support Vector Machines (SVMs), which have shown
reliable performance in a variety of settings, especially with smaller size datasets [16]. Once the classification model
has been trained we evaluate its performance by using the unseen data (YTest )⊤ . For all of the experiments associated
to SVM, hyper-parameter optimization and model training and testing is done using a nested cross validation scheme.
In addition, the order N is estimated through the same cross validation procedure. In the inner loop, parameters are
optimized using grid search selection using 80% of the data to train the model and another 10% for validation. The
remaining 10% is held out as a test set to estimate performance after hyperparameter optimization. The outer loop is
done five times, corresponding to five folds.
2.3 Development of Labeled Twitter COVID-19 Dataset
In constructing our labeled Twitter dataset we initially randomly collected a sample of 282, 201 Twitter users from
Canada by using the Conditional Independence Coupling (CIC) method [17]. CIC matches the prior distribution of
the population, in this case the Canadian general population, ensuring that the sample is balanced for gender, race and
age. All tweets posted by these 282,201 people from January 1, 2020 to March 13, 2020 were collected and further
analyzed.
By starting with this large poll of 282,201 tweets we randomly down-sampled 1,600 tweets in order to create a balanced dataset with reliable and unreliable tweets. To eliminate data bias two subject matter experts from our group
independently reviewed each tweet to determine whether or not each tweet should be labeled as reliable or unreliable.
Tweets are labeled as unreliable if they included content that promotes political bias, conspiracy, propaganda, anger,
or racism and thus such tweets could affect decision making and create social and political unrest during COVID-19.
Due to the complexity of this task, tweets that were not labeled as unreliable by both experts were kept for a second
review and finally marked as unreliable if both experts agreed on their decision. This resulted in 280 unreliable tweets.
Since the number of reliable tweets is greater than the number of unreliable tweets and thus the final dataset would be
highly imbalanced, we randomly down-sampled the reliable class to obtain a balanced dataset. It is worth mentioning
that after we down-sampled the reliable class, we also manually checked this class for consistency and validity with
respect to reliability. The final dataset consists of 280 reliable and 280 unreliable tweets.
After the dataset of 560 tweets was compiled, each unreliable tweet was also reviewed for the presence of linguistic
attributes that might indicate unreliability, following a two-part process. This process would provide a set of linguistic
3

- J ULY 2, 2020

Table 1: 17 linguistic characteristics identified on the 560 Twitter dataset
Linguistic Feature
Hyperbolic, intensified, superlative, or emphatic language [18, 19]
Greater use of punctuation and/or special
characters [18, 20]
Strongly emotional or subjective language
[18, 7, 21, 19, 22]
Greater use of verbs of perception and/or
opinion [20]
Language related to death and/or war [23]
Greater use of proper nouns [24]
Shorter and/or simpler, language [24]
Hate speech [23] and/or use of racist or
stereotypical language
First and second person pronouns [19, 20]
Direct falsity claim and/or a truth claim
[18]
Direct health claim
Repetitive words or phrases [24]
Mild or strong expletives, curses, slurs, or
other offensive terms
Language related to religion
Politically biased terms
Language related to financial or economic
impact, money/costs, or the stock market
Language related to the Trump presidential
election, campaign, impeachment, base,
and rallies

Example from Dataset
e.g., ‘blame’, ‘accuse’, ‘refuse’, ‘catastrophe’, ‘chaos’, ‘evil’
e.g., ‘YA THINK!!?!!?!’, ‘Can we PLEASE stop spreading the lie that Coronavirus is super super super contagious? It’s not. It has a contagious rating of
TWO’
e.g., ‘fight’, ‘danger’, ‘hysteria’, ‘panic’, ‘paranoia’, ‘laugh’, ‘stupidity’ or other
words indicating fear, surprise, alarm, anger, and so forth
e.g., ‘hear’, ‘see’, ‘feel’, ‘suppose’, ‘perceive’, ‘look’, ‘appear’, ‘suggest’, ‘believe’, ‘pretend’
e.g., ‘martial law’, ‘kill’, ‘die’, ‘weapon’, ‘weaponizing’
e.g., ‘USSR lied about Chernobyl. Japan lied about Fukushima. China has lied
about Coronavirus. Countries lie. Ego, global’
e.g., ‘#Iran just killed 57 of our citizens. The #coronavirus is spreading for
Canadians Our economy needs support.’
e.g., ‘foreigners’, ‘Wuhan virus’, reference to Chinese people eating cats and
dogs
e.g., ‘I’, ‘me’, ‘my’, ‘mine’, ‘you’, ‘your’, ‘we’, ‘our’
e.g., ‘propaganda’, ‘fake news’, ‘conspiracy’, ‘claim’, ‘misleading’, ‘hoax’
e.g., ‘cure’, ‘breakthrough’, posting infection statistics
e.g., ‘Communist China is lying about true extent of Coronavirus outbreak - If
Communist China doesn’t come clean’
e.g., ‘bitch’, ‘WTF’, ‘dogbreath’, ‘Zombie homeless junkies’, ‘hell’, ‘screwed’
e.g., ‘secular’, ‘Bible’
e.g., ‘MAGA’, ‘MAGAt’, ‘genetic engineer Hillary’, ‘Chinese regime’, ‘deep
state’, ‘Free Market Fundamentalists’, ‘Communist China’, ‘Nazi’
e.g., ‘THE STOCK MARKET ISN’T REAL THE ECONOMY
ISN’T REAL THE CORONAVIRUS ISN’T REAL FAKE NEWS
REEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEE’
e.g., ‘What you are watching with the CoronaVirus has been planned and orchestrated. We are 8 months from the next Presidential elections’

rules that might be of independent scientific interest but more importantly they can be used to assess the interpretation
ability of our classification model. First, each tweet was reviewed for the presence of linguistic characteristics that
have been identified in the literature as being indicative of or associated with misinformation, bias, and/or less reliable
sources in news media. Second, each tweet was reviewed for the presence of any additional distinguishing linguistic
characteristics that appeared to be indicative of unreliability. From the two-part deductive and inductive labeling
process, a list of 17 linguistic characteristics was developed. Each tweet was then labeled by hand, indicating any of
the 17 characteristics that may have been present.
Table 1, presents the list of the 17 linguistic characteristics, including citations to relevant literature where available,
and provides examples of characteristics collected from actual tweets in the dataset.

3 Experimental Results
The study examines (Sections 3.1 and 3.2) classification performance as well as interpretability properties of ICA
(Section 3.3) using our new labeled Twitter dataset. The relatively small size of the dataset is in line with one of the
aspects of our work. To construct the data matrix X we pre-process the content of each tweet from out labeled dataset
using tokenization. Besides, stop-words and punctuation were removed as well as all words are converted to lower
case characters. After pre-processing, each entry in X ∈ R2569×560 , initially represents the frequency of a word from
the corpus in tweet v and we further process the raw frequencies with tf-idf weighting. The order N has been selected
through cross-validation as described in (2.2) and the optimal value is N = 50.
4

- J ULY 2, 2020

Table 2: Classification performance for different methods.
Method
DNN
LSTM
BiLSTM
BERTBASE
ICA
SVM/Gaussian
SVM/RBF
SVM/Polynomial
Sparse ICA
λ = 100
λ = 1000

Accuracy

Sensitivity

Precision

F-1

0.515
0.574
0.875

0.516
0.579
0.900

0.516
0.575
0.847

0.515
0.574
0.873

0.812
0.796
0.794

0.763
0.768
0.762

0.859
0.824
0.8267

0.803
0.791
0.784

0.691
0.687

0.679
0.613

0.744
0.834

0.644
0.672

3.1 Classification Analysis
We demonstrate the performance of our ICA based classification model in terms of accuracy (percentage of correctly
classified tweets), sensitivity (percentage of all unreliable tweets that are correctly predicted as unreliable), precision
(percentage of tweets predicted as unreliable out of all tweets predicted as unreliable), and F-1 score (harmonic mean
of precision and sensitivity). Due to the superior performance in many natural language processing techniques we
compare our method with three commonly used "deep" classification algorithms: Long Short Term Memory (LSTM)
[25]; its derivative, Bidirectional Long Short Term Memory (BiLSTM) [26]; and Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) [27]. All three methods are based on neural models and have proved to be effective
in sequence classification tasks. LSTM models, which are an improvement over Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs),
are more effective than the latter for classification of text which multiple sentences. This is due to the presence of a
learn-able ‘forget’ parameter which helps the model to forget/discard non-critical information. BiLSTMs, as opposed
to regular LSTMs, unroll in two directions, which helps them to retain crucial information of the ‘past’ (preceding a
particular word) as well as the ‘future’ (succeeding a particular word). BERT classification models are pre-trained on
unsupervised language modeling tasks before being fine-tuned for a downstream classification task. We ran an experiment using basic LSTM, basic BiLSTM, and BERTBASE , and tracked the performance of those models in our dataset.
We made a 70:30 (train: validation) split on the dataset. Both the LSTM and BiLSTM models had an embedding layer
of 64 dimensions. The ‘maxlength’ parameter of all three models was chosen to be 30 (meaning it will discard any
word post the 30th word of the sequence). Our experiments showed that this parameter did not have much effect for
our dataset, since the data is twitter feeds which have a character limit in itself. For LSTM and BiLSTM, the ‘dropout’
parameter had a value of 0.5. We used 64 LSTM cells, and 64 BiLSTM cells for our models. Both the LSTM and
BiLSTM models had a near-perfect score, when evaluated on the training set (0.995 F-1 for both LSTM and BiLSTM).
However, the performance dipped drastically when evaluated on the unseen test set. This proves that these two models
have the problem of ‘over-fitting’. BERT also scored well during training (0.990 F-1), but demonstrated much lower
generalization error. In addition we show how our proposed classification method is affected by the choice of different
kernels in SVM. From Table 2, we see that the proposed ICA based classification model with Gaussian kernel performs
the best in terms of the accuracy, sensitivity, and F1 score. We note that our method is able to achieve this performance
under the scenario of a small dataset due to its model simplicity and thus demonstrating the fact that latent variable
based approaches do not require a large amount of training samples in order to achieve a desirable performance. On
the other hand, LSTM and BiLSTM, had to train 188,833 and 198,017 parameters respectively and due to the small
training dataset they model the training data too well and thus the perform poorly with unseen data. While BERT generalized well to unseen data, the model requires fine-tuning of 110M parameters, and was the most computationally
expensive to train (2 min 6 seconds on a NVIDIA Tesla K80 GPU). On the other hand, the proposed method requires
18.58 seconds where 2.96 seconds correspond to a single ICA run and 15.61 seconds correspond to the training time
for the SVM classifier. For the proposed method we performed our experiments on a 4 Core Intel i7 1.9 GHz.
3.2 Sparsity-aware ICA Classification
Due to the nature of the data (word counts/tf-idf), sparsity, is a type of property of the data that could be taken into
account during the feature generation as described in (2.2). However, the main question that arises in our application
is whether or not taking this type of diversity into account will yield better classification performance. In many practical applications, it has been shown that if sparsity is incorporated into the ICA model it can relax the independence
assumption, resulting in an improvement in the overall separation performance [28, 29]. Although this may be true
in terms of the separation power of the model, it is not true in terms of the classification accuracy. We investigate
5

- J ULY 2, 2020

Table 3: The 15 most representative words for five extracted features that are related to reliable tweets.
Feature 1
#coronavirus
cases
#covid
th
iran
confirmed
virus
canada
ontario
olympic
#tokyo
man
road
cancellation
#ioc

Feature 2
positive
covid
tested
tests
#coronavirus
jazz
player
patient
season
nba
utah
test
transit
toronto
amp

Feature 3
time
#covid
social
distancing
systems
emergency
get
new
down
#coronavirus
wuhan
shut
trump
give
amp

Feature 4
conference
community
weeks
few
best
bioinformatics
#bcc
postpone
registration
post
decided
full
figure
news
covid

Feature 5
new
state
york
cases
emergency
declares
death
cuomo
washington
number
times
reported
reports
first
deaths

this by replacing ICA-EBM with SparseICA-EBM [28, 29] during the feature extraction and classification procedure
as described in (2.2) and by using a Gaussian kernel for SVM. SparseICA-EBM is based on a unified mathematical
framework that enables direct control over the influence of statistical independence and sparsity. This is implemented
by penalizing (2) by an ℓ1 regularization term, thus, enabling a direct exploitation of sparsity for each source individually through a single sparsity parameter λ. We should note that if λ = 0 then SparseICA-EBM is equivalent to
ICA-EBM and as λ increases model favors more sparsity than statistical independence during the decomposition.
Table 2 shows the performance of the proposed model when ICA-EBM is replaced by SparseICA-EBM using a
Gaussian kernel and for different values of the parameter λ. We observe that as λ increases the classification accuracy
significantly decreases revealing that imposing sparsity to the underlying features does not benefit the classification
accuracy. The main reason for this behavior is due to the fact that SparseICA-EBM produces highly correlated features
and as expected it negatively affects the discriminating power of the classification model.

3.3 Knowledge Discovery
An important property of ICA is that it can also provide linguistic interpretations through the estimated mixing matrix
Â. Each row of Â represents the weights for the estimated sources of the initial features. The values of the weights
can reveal relationships between certain characteristics of a given set of tweets. To demonstrate this further we sort
the magnitudes of the weights on each estimated column of mixing matrix Â and the corresponding features used in
the analysis. Note that in our application the initial features are the word counts from the corpus that we created using
the proposed Twitter dataset.
From Table 3, we see the most representative words that belong to each extracted feature that is associated with the
reliable tweets. From Table 3, it can be seen that each latent concept contains words with different conceptual meaning.
For instance, Feature 1, contains words that are related to the cancellation of the Olympic games that are happening in
Tokyo due to the COVID-19. Feature 5, is populated by words with similar contextual characteristics to “New York"
and are related to the number of cases in this state as well as the declaration of New York as an emergency state.
On the other hand, Table (4), contains extracted features that are related to unreliable tweets. For instance, Feature
2, contains the word Pirbright Institute as well as all the words that are associated with the “rumor" that coronavirus
is designed in Pirbright Institute, that Bill Gates patent COVID-19, and that there is vaccine. Feature 5, contains
politically biased and offensive terms, while feature 4, contains subjective/emotional language that is related to the
stock market. Feature 3, is a direct reference to falsity and contains words that link to dangerous health advises
regarding the virus. Finally, feature 1 links hyperbolic, intensified, or emphatic language with direct reference to
falsity terms and political terms as presented in Table 1. This reveals that extracted features that are associated with
unreliable tweets are in agreement with most of the 17 linguistic characteristics that are presented in Table 1.
To conclude, we note that each feature obtained through the exploitation of statistical independence carries semantic
linguistic information providing a basis for knowledge discovery during COVID-19.
6

- J ULY 2, 2020

Table 4: The 15 most representative words for five extracted features that are related to unreliable tweets.
Feature 1
trump
spreading
response
people
#coronavirus
face
trying
conspiracy
rank
pernicious
dodge
accountability
theories
flooding
chaos

Feature 2
pirbright
institute
owns
gates
funded
patent
bill
cdc
blocking
limits
drugmakers
charge
gop
outbreak
covid

Feature 3
inside
water
ayatollahs
solutions
viruses
dip
anus
bottle
cleric
spit
blessings
joke
oil
sleep
drinking

Feature 4
choose
fear
real
market
stock
abuse
deserves
life
appearing
coaching
elections
rise
everything
false
help

Feature 5
bannon
steve
turdball
sowing
dissension
ranks
casting
fictitious
net
michelle
churchill
moment
democratic
#kag
#maga

4 Discussion
In this work, we present a data-driven solution that is based on ICA such that detection of misinformation and knowledge discovery can be achieved jointly. In addition, we present a novel labeled COVID-19 Twitter dataset that will
enable the research community to study the phenomenon of misinformation during the COVID-19 high impact event.
The success of the proposed method raises several interesting questions both in terms of the use of a latent variable
method for the task as well as a computational socio-linguistic perspective that can be explored in future work. In
terms of latent variable methods, it would be of high interest to investigate which types of properties, such as, nonlinearity, non-negativeness, sample-to-sample correlation, could affect the classification performance. Moreover, for
this work, we considered a single featurization method which is based on the bag of word model in order to generate X.
Since choosing which featurization method is the most appropriate for a particular machine learning task is highly nontrivial, an interesting direction is to simultaneously use sophisticated featurization methods. This can be achieved by
considering a more advanced model such as Independent Vector Analysis [30, 11, 31], that will enable us to quantify
the importance of each featurization method during a high impact event with respect to the quality of the decomposition
as well as the affect on the classification performance. Finally, in terms of a computational socio-linguistic perspective,
the development of validation techniques for the extracted features and how they can be used to answer questions that
record the behavior and interactions of individuals in virtual worlds is a significant research direction and deserves
further investigation.
Data Availability
The labeled COVID-19 Twitter dataset can be found at https://zoisboukouvalas.github.io/Code.html
Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Kenton White, Chief Scientist at Advanced Symbolics Inc, for providing the initial Twitter dataset.

References
[1] Carlos Castillo, Marcelo Mendoza, and Barbara Poblete. Information credibility on twitter. In Proceedings of
the 20th international conference on World wide web, pages 675–684. ACM, 2011.
[2] Sejeong Kwon, Meeyoung Cha, Kyomin Jung, Wei Chen, and Yajun Wang. Prominent features of rumor propagation in online social media. In 2013 IEEE 13th International Conference on Data Mining, pages 1103–1108.
IEEE, 2013.
[3] Fan Yang, Yang Liu, Xiaohui Yu, and Min Yang. Automatic detection of rumor on sina weibo. In Proceedings
of the ACM SIGKDD Workshop on Mining Data Semantics, page 13. ACM, 2012.
7

- J ULY 2, 2020

[4] Natali Ruchansky, Sungyong Seo, and Yan Liu. Csi: A hybrid deep model for fake news detection. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, pages 797–806. ACM,
2017.
[5] Tu Ngoc Nguyen, Cheng Li, and Claudia Niederée. On early-stage debunking rumors on twitter: Leveraging the
wisdom of weak learners. In International Conference on Social Informatics, pages 141–158. Springer, 2017.
[6] Grégoire Montavon, Wojciech Samek, and Klaus-Robert Müller. Methods for interpreting and understanding
deep neural networks. Digital Signal Processing, 73:1–15, 2018.
[7] Soroush Vosoughi, Deb Roy, and Sinan Aral. The spread of true and false news online. Science, 359(6380):1146–
1151, 2018.
[8] Timo Honkela, Aapo Hyvärinen, and Jaakko J Väyrynen. WordICA—emergence of linguistic representations
for words by independent component analysis. Natural Language Engineering, 16(3):277–308, 2010.
[9] Thomas Kolenda, Lars Kai Hansen, and Sigurdur Sigurdsson. Independent components in text. In Advances in
Independent Component Analysis, pages 235–256. Springer, 2000.
[10] Gisel Bastidas Guacho, Sara Abdali, Neil Shah, and Evangelos E Papalexakis. Semi-supervised content-based
detection of misinformation via tensor embeddings. In 2018 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances
in Social Networks Analysis and Mining (ASONAM), pages 322–325. IEEE, 2018.
[11] T. Adalı, M. Anderson, and Geng-Shen Fu. Diversity in independent component and vector analyses: Identifiability, algorithms, and applications in medical imaging. Signal Processing Magazine, IEEE, 31(3):18–33, May
2014.
[12] Aapo Hyvärinen and Erkki Oja. Independent component analysis: algorithms and applications. Neural networks,
13(4):411–430, 2000.
[13] Mati Wax and Thomas Kailath. Detection of signals by information theoretic criteria. IEEE Transactions on
Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, 33(2):387–392, 1985.
[14] G.-S. Fu, H. Li, M. Anderson, X.-L. Li, and T. Adalı. Order selection for dependent samples using entropy rate.
In Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech, Signal Processing (ICASSP), pages 2161–2164, Kyoto, Japan, March
2012.
[15] X. Li and T. Adali. Independent component analysis by entropy bound minimization. IEEE Transactions on
Signal Processing, 58(10):5151–5164, Oct 2010.
[16] Corinna Cortes and Vladimir Vapnik. Support-vector networks. Machine learning, 20(3):273–297, 1995.
[17] Kenton White, Guichong Li, and Nathalie Japkowicz. Sampling online social networks using coupling from the
past. In 2012 IEEE 12th International Conference on Data Mining Workshops, pages 266–272. IEEE, 2012.
[18] Ramy Baly, Georgi Karadzhov, Dimitar Alexandrov, James Glass, and Preslav Nakov. Predicting factuality of
reporting and bias of news media sources. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.01765, 2018.
[19] Hannah Rashkin, Eunsol Choi, Jin Yea Jang, Svitlana Volkova, and Yejin Choi. Truth of varying shades: Analyzing language in fake news and political fact-checking. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 2931–2937, 2017.
[20] Vernica Perez-Rosas, Bennett Kleinberg, Alexandra Lefevre, and Rada Mihalcea. Automatic detection of fake
news. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.07104, 2017.
[21] Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoffmann. Recognizing contextual polarity in phrase-level sentiment
analysis. In Proceedings of human language technology conference and conference on empirical methods in
natural language processing, pages 347–354, 2005.
[22] James W Pennebaker, Martha E Francis, and Roger J Booth. Linguistic inquiry and word count: Liwc 2001.
Mahway: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 71(2001):2001, 2001.

[23] The language gives it away:
How an algorithm can help us detect fake news.
https://theconversation.com/the-language-gives-it-away-how-an-algorithm-can-help-us-detect-fake-ne
2019.
8

- J ULY 2, 2020

[24] Benjamin D Horne and Sibel Adali. This just in: fake news packs a lot in title, uses simpler, repetitive content in
text body, more similar to satire than real news. In Eleventh International AAAI Conference on Web and Social
Media, 2017.
[25] Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation, 9(8):1735–1780,
1997.
[26] Zhiheng Huang, Wei Xu, and Kai Yu. Bidirectional lstm-crf models for sequence tagging. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1508.01991, 2015.
[27] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: pre-training of deep bidirectional
transformers for language understanding. CoRR, abs/1810.04805, 2018.
[28] Zois Boukouvalas, Yuri Levin-Schwartz, Vince D Calhoun, and Tülay Adalı. Sparsity and independence: Balancing two objectives in optimization for source separation with application to fmri analysis. Journal of the
Franklin Institute, 355(4):1873–1887, 2018.
[29] Zois Boukouvalas, Yuri Levin-Schwartz, and Tülay Adalı. Enhancing ica performance by exploiting sparsity:
Application to fmri analysis. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), pages 2532–2536. IEEE, 2017.
[30] Taesu Kim, Torbjørn Eltoft, and Te-Won Lee. Independent vector analysis: An extension of ica to multivariate
components. In International conference on independent component analysis and signal separation, pages 165–
172. Springer, 2006.
[31] Zois Boukouvalas, Geng-Shen Fu, and Tülay Adalı. An efficient multivariate generalized gaussian distribution
estimator: Application to iva. In 2015 49th Annual Conference on Information Sciences and Systems (CISS),
pages 1–4. IEEE, 2015.

9

