SEIRD model to study the asymptomatic growth during COVID-19 pandemic in India
Saptarshi Chatterjee,1, ∗ Apurba Sarkar,1, † Mintu Karmakar,1, ‡ Swarnajit Chatterjee,1, § and Raja Paul1, ¶

arXiv:2006.03034v2 [q-bio.PE] 11 Sep 2020

1

Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, Kolkata-700032, India

According to the current perception, symptomatic, presymptomatic, and asymptomatic infectious
persons can infect the healthy population susceptible to the SARS-Cov-2. More importantly, various
reports indicate that the number of asymptomatic cases can be several-fold higher than the reported
symptomatic cases. In this article, we take the reported cases in India and various states within the
country till September 1, as the specimen to understand the progression of the COVID-19. Employing a modified SEIRD model, we predict the spread of COVID-19 by the symptomatic as well as
asymptomatic infectious population. Considering reported infection primarily due to symptomatic
we compare the model predicted results with the available data to estimate the dynamics of the
asymptomatically infected population. Our data indicate that in the absence of the asymptomatic
infectious population, the number of symptomatic cases would have been much less. Therefore, the
current progress of the symptomatic infection can be reduced by quarantining the asymptomatically
infectious population via extensive or random testing. This study is motivated strictly towards academic pursuit; this theoretical investigation is not meant for influencing policy decisions or public
health practices.

INTRODUCTION

At the beginning of the outbreak of COVID-19, the
general perception was that the transmission of the disease occurred mostly through the infectious persons having influenza-like symptoms. One reason behind this
view was the similarities between the SARS pandemic
in 2003 caused by SARS-CoV-1 and the current threat
COVID-19 caused by SARS-CoV-2. Both SARS and
COVID-19 patients show similar influenza-like symptoms, propagate infections through person-to-person contact via respiratory droplets generated when an infected
person breathes, coughs, and sneezes. Measures taken
to successfully control the SARS in 2003 were majorly
based on testing those having symptoms and isolating
the positive cases. Nevertheless, a similar guideline has
not been very effective in controlling the COVID-19 as
the number of infected individuals has gone past 4 million
in India and 27 million worldwide. Despite severe containment measures, these numbers are several orders of
magnitude higher than SARS in 2003 that reported 8,422
cases worldwide with a case fatality rate of 11%. In India, even when the nation was under lockdown over the
past few months, a noticeable surge in the new COVID19 positive cases was observed (Fig. 1A). Initially, when
the nation-wide lockdown was enforced on March 23, the
infection growth showed a gradual slowdown for a few
weeks. However, as days passed, the number of daily new
confirmed cases increased significantly which prompted
us to revisit our earlier work [1] on the COVID-19 outspread in India using the well-known SIRD model [2–
9]. Normally, an individual exposed to the disease suffi-

∗
†
‡
§
¶

sspsc6@iacs.res.in
sspas2@iacs.res.in
mcsmk2057@iacs.res.in
sspsc5@iacs.res.in
raja.paul@iacs.res.in

cient to catch the infection goes through an incubation
period of several days (∼ 5 days [10]) before showing
symptoms, i.e. presymptomatic. However, many reports
[11–16] suggested that a large fraction of those who catch
the disease do not show any symptoms at all, i.e. they
remain asymptomatic (tested positive for SARS-CoV-2
RNA but show no signs of illness). The presence of
the virus in presymptomatic or asymptomatic persons
means that they can transmit the disease to others. In
this study, we investigate whether the trajectory of the
continuous upsurge of infections (Fig. 1A) can be attributed to the following characteristics of this disease
spread: (a) in addition to the symptomatic cases, the
abundance of the infected individuals who do not develop
any symptoms at all or remain mildly symptomatic, before recovery (asymptomatic) and (b) human-to-human
transmission via those asymptomatic carriers. We use a
modified version of the well known SEIRD model in epidemiology [17, 18] as a working handle to account for the
asymptomatic infections (Fig. 1B-1C). The model analysis as per the current data for India and few Indian states
shows that the dynamics of the infection spreading is
highly influenced by the asymptomatic population. The
real data for India and various states within the country are acquired from the repository with an interactive
handle hosted at https://www.covid19india.org. The
purpose of this article is neither to influence policy decisions nor to put forward any quantitative projections
that should be used to design public health guidelines.

MODEL

In the standard SEIRD model, the population N is
divided into sub-population of susceptible (S), exposed
(E), infected (I), recovered (R) and dead (D) for all
times t. Thus, N = S + E + I + R + D. In our case,
in order to account for the asymptomatic population, we
introduced several new ‘sub-population’ compartments

2
population Ia (Fig.1B). As per the WHO and the ICMR,
India reports, the COVID-19 infected individuals can
be divided into two sub-groups: (a) symptomatic carriers and (b) asymptomatic carriers, infected individuals
without any symptoms. The asymptomatic population
is reported to be several times larger in number compared to the symptomatic population (Fig. 1C). Similarly, the population of recovered R in the SEIRD model
is also classified into two new compartments: (a) population recovered from symptomatic infection Rs and (b)
population recovered from asymptomatic infection Ra
(Fig.1B). The population of dead (D) has inflow from
Is only (Fig.1B); we assumed no death for the asymptomatic individuals due to the disease.
The following set of mean-field differential equations
dictates the time-dependent dynamics of the population of susceptible (S), exposed (E), symptomatically
infected (Is ), asymptomatically infected (Ia ), recovered
from symptomatic infection (Rs ), recovered from asymptomatic infection (Ra ) and dead (D), comprehensively
capturing the time evolution of the outspread across the
total population.

FIG. 1.
COVID-19 progression in India and the modified SEIRD model used for mapping the current COVID-19
trajectory in India’s context. (A) Increment in the cumulative number of confirmed cases in India. The bars boxed
in black highlight the surge of infections in the early stages
of COVID-19 pandemic in India. (B) Schematic representation of modified SEIRD model. The arrows denote the flux
direction between the compartmentalized sub-populations of
susceptible (S), exposed (E), symptomatically infected (Is ),
asymptomatically infected (Ia ), recovered from symptomatic
infection (Rs ), recovered from asymptomatic infection (Ra )
and dead (D). (C) The COVID-19 infected individuals can
either develop symptoms or remain asymptomatic throughout before recovery. According to the reports by the WHO
and the ICMR, India, the asymptomatic infections can be as
large as 4-5 times of the total symptomatic infections.

and modified the corresponding flows between these compartments. The infected population I in SEIRD model is
sub-divided into two compartments: (a) infected symptomatic population Is and (b) infected asymptomatic

dS(t)
= −βs SIs /N − βa SIa /N
dt

(1)

dE(t)
= βs SIs /N + βa SIa /N − λE
dt

(2)

dIs (t)
= φλE − (γs + δ)Is
dt

(3)

dIa (t)
= (1 − φ)λE − γa Ia
dt

(4)

dRs (t)
= γs Is
dt

(5)

dRa (t)
= γa Ia
dt

(6)

dD(t)
= δIs
dt

(7)

The parameters βs , βa , λ, φ, γs , γa and δ regulate
the temporal flow between different sub-populations of
infected, recovered and dead (Fig. 1B). Note that, in the
above set of equations, the susceptible population (S),
upon interactions with symptomatic and asymptomatic
population, becomes exposed (E) to the disease with contact rates βs and βa , respectively. The model construction alludes that the individuals belonging to the exposed
population are not contagious; hence, they do not transmit the disease by infecting others. The disease transmission from one individual to another occurs when an

3
exposed individual transforms into either a symptomatic
or an asymptomatic carrier of the disease (Fig. 1B-1C).
The time-dependent out-flux from the exposed compartment (E) into symptomatic and asymptomatic compartments (Is and Ia ) is governed by the rate λ. The out-flux
from the exposed compartment with the rate λ, develops
symptomatic infections with a probability φ and asymptomatic infection with a probability (1−φ). The recovery
of a symptomatic infected person and an asymptomatic
infected are determined by the rates γs and γa , respectively. An infected individual ceases to transmit the disease once s/he is recovered. Previous reports [10, 19, 20]
indicate that, on the average, contagiousness begins to
pronounce from 2-3 days before the appearance of symptoms. The contagiousness (disease spreading capability)
of a symptomatically infected individual mounts to its
peak before the symptoms develop and stays for about
7-9 days after the peak infection is passed. Therefore, a
symptomatic individual bears the ability to transmit the
disease for nearly about 12 days on average before recovery. However, how long it takes for an asymptomatic
individual to recover is hard to ascertain, as a large number of asymptomatic infections remain undetected due
to the sheer lack of symptoms. For symptomatic recovery, the time scale of ∼ 12 days provides an estimate
of the magnitude of the symptomatic recovery rate γs .
In the preliminary model analysis, the magnitude of the
asymptomatic recovery rate γa is chosen to be close to the
magnitude of symptomatic recovery rate γs . Deaths (D)
within the symptomatic population occur with a rate δ.
We assume that infected, yet asymptomatic individuals
do not die due to this disease. Nevertheless, it is imperative to mention that all the relevant rate parameters are
varied within a reasonably feasible range to obtain the
best fit of the theoretical curves with the real data.

Estimating the spread of the disease, the reproduction
number

The basic reproduction number denoted by R0 is a
crucial parameter in epidemiology that can indicate the
pandemic situation of an infectious disease. It is defined
as the average number of secondary infections produced
by a primary infection seeded into a sea of the susceptible population and its value is suggestive to implement
a control intervention for containing the disease. However, in most of the practical situations, it is difficult to
realize the single primary infection that has caused the
outbreak; besides all contacts may not be susceptible to
the infection. Therefore, in the present circumstances,
instead of using the term basic reproduction number, we
denote this by an effective reproductive number Re . The
effective reproductive number is determined by various
rates presented in Equations (1) to (7). In general, an
epidemic will begin when Re > 1, so the number of infections increases. Pandemic will become an endemic when
Re becomes 1 and Re < 1 will eventually diminish the

number of infections. The effective reproduction number
Re can be computed from the Equations (1) to (7) using
the next generation matrix NGM [21]. An expression for
Re in the pre-lockdown situation is given by:
Re =

φβs
(1 − φ)βa
+
δ + γs
γa

(8)

The mathematical treatment for obtaining the closedform expression of Re using NGM is similar to that given
in [17].

Accounting for the effects of enforced containment measures

Before discussing the effect of containment measures
on the infection dynamics, we need to highlight the subtle differences in the connotations of the following terms:
(a) lockdown, (b) containment measures, and (c) social
distancing. We stress that a lockdown in the model indicates the containment measures enforced across the country. But, even without a countrywide lockdown, containment can be imposed locally in the hotspots of infections
(as being implemented during the current unlock phase)
to prevent further spread of the disease into a larger region. In a sense, the word ‘lockdown’ bears an essence of
universality whereas the implementation of containment
can be both local and universal. However, social distancing is not an external norm to be enforced. It is rather
a choice of lifestyle where one maintains a ‘good’ habit
of physical distancing with other individuals in a public
place/crowded environment. Ideally, even if there is no
lockdown and/or containment measures in place, strict
maintenance of social distancing can significantly reduce
the chances of new infections. In the manuscript, in a
general sense, where we mention the term ‘lockdown’, we
imply that containment measures and/or social distancing are in effect.
Under normal circumstances, the implementation of
the containment measures would reduce the interaction
of the susceptible population (S) with the infected population (Is and Ia ). As gleaned from the Equation (1), the
susceptible population, while interacting with the symptomatically and asymptomatically infected population,
becomes exposed to the disease with rates βs and βa , respectively. We can consider that the direct impact of the
enforced containment measures (lockdown in a nationwide sense) and social distancing would be reflected on
βs and βa in Equations (1) and (2). The susceptible-toexposed transition rates βs and βa should diminish with
time as the lockdown is enforced and continued. Hence,
as a simple choice, we set the susceptible-to-exposed transition rates β¯s (t) and β¯a (t) in such a way that these rates
gradually decline with time as the containment measures
are put in place [6, 7]. Prior to the lockdown, βs and βa
are constant. During the lockdown, the time-dependent
β¯s (t) and β¯a (t) are assumed to decrease exponentially as
depicted in the following [6]. During the mixing between

4
susceptible population (S) and symptomatically infected
population (Is ),
β¯s (t) = βs (1 − ξs )e−[(t−τ )/T ] + ξs βs for t > τ
β¯s (t) = βs for t ≤ τ

(9)
(10)

Similarly, During the mixing between susceptible population (S) and asymptomatically infected population
(Is ),
β¯a (t) = βa (1 − ξa )e−[(t−τ )/T ] + ξa βa for t > τ
β¯a (t) = βa for t ≤ τ

(11)
(12)

Here, the lockdown (enforcement of the containment
measures) begins on the day τ which is calculated from
the day 0 (start date or initial time t = 0) set in the simulation. The parameters ξs and ξa ∈ [0,1] are measures
of interaction between the susceptible and infected population (symptomatic and asymptomatic respectively); T
denotes the timescale that determines how fast the effect
of lockdown on infection transmission becomes prominent. ξs = ξa = 1 means that there is no lockdown; the
infected population is freely interacting with the susceptible population and exposing the susceptible individuals to the disease at rates βs and βa . ξs = ξa = 0 is
the idealized scenario of lockdown where all the infected
individuals (both symptomatic and asymptomatic) are
isolated/quarantined. Hence, any sort of interaction of
the infected individuals with the susceptible population
is ruled out. The factors 1 − ξs and 1 − ξa characterize the asymptotic reduction of β¯s (t) and β¯a (t) due to
intervention/containment measures.
The time-dependent form of β¯s (t) and β¯a (t) is a nonunique choice consistent with the overall trend of the
disease progression and tuned reasonably to arrive at the
best fit with the available data. In the current form
of β¯s (t) and β¯a (t), when T is considerably large compared to t − τ (and φ = 0 ), we revert to the classic SEIRD model for symptomatic growth with a constant S → E transition rate βs . Smaller values of T
mark faster mitigation of β¯s (t) and β¯a (t). Although the
choice of exponential decay is arbitrary, it has been exploited in prior COVID-19 modeling studies [1, 6, 7] and
HIV/AIDS models [22, 23]. We also tested other predetermined, time-dependent functional forms of β¯s (t) and
β¯a (t) such as compressed exponential and linearly decaying functions. The model outcomes/features qualitatively remain unchanged subjected to these choices. To
determine β¯s (t) (and β¯a (t)), a more effective choice would
be to compute/extract a dynamic β¯s (t) (and β¯a (t)) from
the reported infection data instead of regulating the time
evolution via any predetermined functional form. A recent study on COVID-19 pandemic using SIRD model
proposes a novel algorithm of dynamically evaluating the
transmission rate from reported deaths [7]. Adopting a
similar protocol in our SEIRD model and exploring the

disease progression in the Indian context would be an
interesting future endeavour.
During the lockdown, βs and βa are modified as depicted in Equations (9) and (11). Hence, the mathematical form of Re during the lockdown period stands as
Re =

φβ¯s
(1 − φ)β¯a
+
δ + γs
γa

(13)

In longer time limit, Re becomes,
Re =

ξs φβs
ξa (1 − φ)βa
+
γs + δ
γa

(14)

It is evident from Equation (14) that, the first term
in the expression of Re concerns about the disease transmission via the symptomatic carriers whereas the second
term deals with the transmission through asymptomatic
carriers. In a population under lockdown, it is plausible
to mitigate Re through the gradual decrease in ξs and ξa ,
the interaction parameters. In essence, this is consistent
with the default definition of Re ; diminishing the interaction between the susceptible and the infected reduces
Re and vice-versa.
Since the constituting compartments of the model are
S, E, Is , Ia , Rs , Ra and D (Fig. 1B-1C), from now on,
we can call the model adopted here, with the acronym of
SEIs Ia Rs Ra D model.
All the relevant parameter values are listed in Table
S1-S2.
RESULTS

We investigated the role of asymptomatic population propagating COVID-19 infection in India and various states within the country using the SEIs Ia Rs Ra D
model. The results are elucidated in the following and
represented in Fig. 2-6. To begin with, we varied the initial susceptible population S0 within a range of 100-300
million for India (Fig. 2) and explored how the infected
population is getting subdivided into two categories: (a)
symptomatic population and (b) asymptomatic population; moreover how the asymptomatic population is contributing to the recent surge of infections in India (Fig. 1,
Fig. 2-3). Next, we explored how the symptomatic and
asymptomatic infection peaks are correlated and whether
detecting and quarantining the symptomatic population
is sufficient enough to contain the disease spread or the
‘hidden’ carriers without any symptoms make the disease transmission difficult to contain (Fig. 3A-3B). Furthermore, we briefly demonstrate how the effective reproduction number Re computed from the current model
behaves under the effect of lockdown/containment measures (Fig. 4). Next, we explore the symptomatic and
asymptomatic infection growth curves for a few Indian
states using the SEIs Ia Rs Ra D model (Fig. 5). Lastly,
we conclude by examining the COVID-19 data for cumulative infections and deaths in Indian context in the light
of Benford’s law [24–27] projections (Fig. 6).

5
heights. The symptomatic and asymptomatic infection
growth curves appear to reach the respective peaks in the
middle of November 2020 (Fig. 2). With the increase in
S0 , the peaks shift to a later time point (Fig. 2). Note
that, both the infection peaks may occur at the same time
point as depicted in Fig. 2. The cumulative infection
curves (inset, Fig. 2) show a flattening signature from
the end of December.
The question that intrigues next, is how robustly do
the model predictions zero in on the relative numbers of
symptomatic and asymptomatic infections?

Sensitivity of the model projections on the relative sizes of
symptomatic and asymptomatic populations

FIG. 2. Time evolution of the population of symptomatically infected (solid curve), asymptomatically infected (dotted curve) and dead (dashed curve) in India. The initial susceptible population is varied within a range 100-300 million.
The color shades encasing the curves indicate the variation
in the initial susceptible population S0 . (inset) Time evolution of the cumulative population of symptomatic and asymptomatic infections. The cumulative population of symptomatically infected is given by Is + Rs + D. Similarly, cumulative
asymptomatic population is given by Ia + Ra . The real data
(plotted with points) are considered from March 2, 2020 up
to September 1, 2020.

Asymptomatic population and the recent surge of
infections: a worrisome affair for India

We first investigated how the infection growth curves
would look like in India’s context if we consider asymptomatic infections. We start with an effective reproduction number Re ∼ 4 at the onset of the simulation (Fig.
2). As the lockdown is enforced during the initial stages
of the outbreak, Re reduces to value ∼ 1.32. The initial
susceptible population is varied within a range of 100300 million. During the lockdown period, the interaction
parameters are chosen as ξs ∼ 0.27 and ξa ∼ 0.36 for
best fit. ξs ∼ 0.27 and ξa ∼ 0.36 imply that the interaction between the susceptible and the symptomatically
infected population is reduced to ∼ 27 % during the lockdown; similarly, the interaction between the susceptible
and the asymptomatically infected population is reduced
to ∼ 36 %. The model analysis shows that the total number of asymptomatic infections is several-fold higher than
the symptomatic infections (which is of course subjected
to the choice of fitting parameters). In the following section, we discuss the relative fraction of symptomatic and
asymptomatic population from the model perspective.
As expected, with an increase in the initial susceptible
population S0 , the infection peaks also rise to greater

From various public health bulletins and media reports, we gather that number of asymptomatic infections
is possibly much higher than the symptomatic. Since
the asymptomatic individuals do not develop symptoms
(or have mild symptoms), they are harder to detect. In
the Indian context, even though the testing capacity has
been significantly increased during the past few months,
the testing strategy is largely concentrated on individuals showing typical symptoms. To that effect, attempting to find asymptomatic cases by contact tracing and
random testing raises the possibility that many of the
asymptomatic carriers will go undetected. Hence, there
exists a significant paucity of data about the exact number of asymptomatic cases compared to the symptomatic
ones. This uncertainty leaves us with a finite window of
variability in the parameter space concerning the model
analysis.
If we inspect Equations (1) to (4) and Fig. 1B closely,
we find that the exposed population is ‘fed’ into the compartments of the symptomatic and asymptomatic population with probability rates φλ and (1−φ)λ respectively.
The choices for the numerical value of φ (φ ∈ [0,1]) regulates the relative size of the symptomatic and asymptomatic populations (since γs ∼ γa , the recovery time for
symptomatic and asymptomatic populations are similar).
If φ ∼ 0.5, the peaks for the symptomatic and asymptomatic infections are likely to have the same height, as
per the default model construction (Fig. 3A). The fact
that the number of asymptomatic infections likely to be
several folds higher than the symptomatic infections [16]
prompted us to make the current choice of the numerical
value of φ. The greater size of the asymptomatic population, as suggested in various reports, alludes that it is
reasonable to restrict φ in the range 0.2-0.4. The best
fit with real data shows that, as φ increases, the peak
of the symptomatic infections consistently climbs up to
a certain value determined by the current trend (Fig.
3A). In Indian context, we have chosen φ = 0.25, unless
otherwise mentioned (Table S1, S2). Note that in the
default model construction, what fraction of the net outflux from the ‘exposed’ compartment (E), would go into
the symptomatic (Is ) and asymptomatic (Ia ) compart-

6
2, 3A.
The next question is, whether one can attribute the
recent surge in the number of symptomatic infections to
the largely undetected asymptomatic population.

The recent surge in symptomatic infections: Does the onus
fall on the asymptomatic carriers?

FIG. 3. Additional parameter dependence of symptomatic
and asymptomatic infection peaks. (A) Symptomatic and
asymptomatic infection peak heights (and tentative time window around which the peaks occur) depend upon the choices
of probability φ and rate parameter λ. (B) Non-unique choices
of symptomatic and asymptomatic interaction parameters ξs
and ξa may yield identical infection curves (not shown) and
identical peak heights at the same time. The peak heights of
the infection curves are obtained from the best fit with the
real data for different values of ξs and ξa , keeping other parameters fixed at base values. The last set of bars shaded in
grey indicates that the infection peaks would be much lower
than the projected trend if the asymptomatic patients are detected and quarantined (manifested through the lower value
of ξa ). For all cases, the initial susceptible population S0 is
chosen to be about 200 million. The real data for fitting is
considered from March 2.

ments depends on the factors φ and 1 − φ respectively.
Therefore, when φ = 0.25, we expect that the peak of
the asymptomatic growth would be ∼ 3-fold higher than
that of symptomatic growth. This is evident from Fig.

To address this question from the current model perspective, we visit the Equations (1) and (2) and Fig. 1B1C. Imagine that all the active cases with symptoms are
detected and quarantined. Then, the interaction among
the susceptible and the symptomatic population becomes
almost null as β¯s effectively falls close to zero. But, even
in that scenario, the ‘exposed’ (E) compartment can still
be ‘fed’ through the interaction between susceptible and
the asymptomatic individuals at a rate β¯a . This exposed population, in turn, fluxes into symptomatic and
asymptomatic compartments with probability rates φλ
and (1 − φ)λ. Thus, it is clear that merely quarantining the symptomatic solely cannot prevent the surge in
both symptomatic and asymptomatic infections. The
mixing of asymptomatic individuals with the susceptible may lead to new infections which are both symptomatic and asymptomatic. In the Indian context, to
date, the testing capacity is mostly dedicated to the detection of symptomatic candidates. Once a positive case
with symptoms is detected, the infected person is isolated and quarantined along with others who are traced
to come in contact with the infected person. But the
cases that show no symptoms are largely undetected. In
most of the asymptomatic cases, the person her/himself
is unaware of the fact that s/he is transmitting the disease. Thus, even during the lockdown, the mixing of
an asymptomatic person with the susceptible cannot be
fully filtered and prevented. From the model perspective, this may be reflected in the numerical values of
symptomatic and asymptomatic interaction parameters
ξs and ξa , during the lockdown. Extensive detection and
quarantining of the cases with symptoms may reduce ξs
significantly. However, since the asymptomatic population remains largely untapped, ξa may not decrease that
much compared to ξs during the lockdown. In brief, the
infection curves will continue to surge if only the symptomatic population is put into quarantine (reflected in
significantly suppressed ξs ) but asymptomatic individuals roam freely (gleaned from the relatively marginal reduction in ξa ) during the lockdown. Interestingly, we notice that non-unique choices of ξs and ξa (while other relevant parameters are kept fixed at base values) may lead
to identical best fits with the real data. If ξs is decreased
and simultaneously ξa is increased, the combinatorial effect of these two interaction parameters results in identical best-fit curves with precisely the same infection peak
height and peak location (Fig. 3B). From a physical perspective, we can argue that even if all the symptomatic
carriers are detected and quarantined, it is not sufficient

7
to suppress the infection growth. A reasonably higher
value of ξa (asymptomatic carriers mixing with susceptible) can compensate for the isolated symptomatic population (lower ξs , symptomatic infections barred to mix
with susceptible) and single-handedly keep on fuelling the
infection growth at a significant rate (see the first four
set of bars, Fig. 3B). It is also evident that if ξa is significantly reduced by extensive and/or randomized testing
and quarantining patients without symptoms, the infections may be contained at a much lower number (see the
last set of bars shaded in grey, Fig. 3B).
During the initial stages of the pandemic (April-May,
2020), once the lockdown was enforced, India had observed a surge of reverse migration of migrant workers
from one part of the country to another. Preliminary
thermal screening at the destination of their journey, e.g
at rail/bus stations, could diagnose symptomatic patients
only. However, a large number of these people were possibly asymptomatically infected. Due to a lack of social
distancing during their plighted journey, the chance of
infection propagation increased manifold. The rapid increase of infections visible in Fig. 1A (bars enclosed in
dashed box) might be linked with the reverse migration.
Several recent studies highlight the effect of human mobility on the COVID-19 progression in detail [28–30].

How does the lockdown affect the effective reproduction
number Re ?

During the lockdown, the interaction parameters ξs
and ξa are suppressed because the enforcement of containment measures and social distancing reduces the mixing of infected and susceptible. It is evident from Equation (14) that, as ξs and ξa decrease, the pre-lockdown
Re should also plummet down to a lower value indicating
a relatively slower speed of infection.
In Fig. 4, we observe that the pre-lockdown Re decreases significantly during the lockdown. Also, in consonance with the definition of Re [1], we find that the
higher the value of Re , the greater the number of infections as gleaned from the peak heights (Fig. 4). However, in order to convincingly flatten the infection curve,
Re needs to be taken down to a value below 1. This is
a challenge that we have to tackle with utmost priority
and sincere policy-making.
Next, we explore the COVID-19 progression in a few
Indian states and the influence of the ‘hidden’ asymptomatic population on the infection growth using this
SEIs Ia Rs Ra D model.

Asymptomatic carriers and COVID-19 propagation in few
Indian States

FIG. 4. Best fit of the symptomatic infection and death curves
along with the projected asymptomatic infection curve when
the pre-lockdown value of the effective reproduction number
Re is tuned within a range 3.8-4.2. The color shades encasing
the curves indicate the variation in the effective reproduction
number Re . The initial susceptible population is chosen to be
about 200 million. The real data (represented as points) are
plotted from March 2.

Next, we discuss how the effective reproduction number Re computed from the current SEIs Ia Rs Ra D model
evolves during the lockdown.

What we observe from the best fit of the infection
curves for Indian states Maharashtra, Delhi, West Bengal, and Tamil Nadu is that in most of the states (except Maharashtra), the infections curves have already
attained the respective peaks 5A-5D. For Maharashtra,
the active infection continues to surge. The infection
peak is expected towards the end of October/beginning
of November 2020, if the current trend (mapped from
the real data) continues (Fig. 5A). In the case of Delhi,
towards the end of July 2020, the number of active infections was significantly reduced due to strict intervening
measures (Fig. 5B). However, gradual ‘unlock’ and resuming the social and economic activities, interventions
effectively relaxed over time. To that effect, the active infections have started to increase again, lately (Fig. 5B).
To account for the resurgence as visible from the real
data into the theoretical infection curve, we resorted to
the following: (a) after the lockdown is enforced, β̄s and
β̄a follow the exponential decline as noted in eqs. (9)
and (11); (b) β̄s and β̄a are governed by eqs. (9) and (11),
till ∼ 1 month after the peak infection is attained. The
∼ 1-month time window is set by the fact that after attaining the peak, the number of active infections was still
on the decline. However, 5-6 weeks after the peak infection, active infections started to rise again gradually. To
match the trend evident from the real data, we relaxed
β̄s and β̄a in the model, mimicking the effective lifting of
intervening measures during the ‘Unlock’ phases. Once
the active infections began to re-surge, β̄s and β̄a were
exponentially increased as opposed to the pattern set by

8

FIG. 5. Best fit of the symptomatic infection and death curves along with the projected asymptomatic infection curves for
Indian states Maharashtra (A), Delhi (B), West Bengal (C) and Tamil Nadu (D).

eqs. (9) and (11). Upon these considerations, we observe
that the theoretical curve is in reasonable agreement with
the available real data (Fig. 5B, inset).
Notably, another consistent feature is that the predominantly ‘hidden’ asymptomatic infections may be several
folds higher than the symptomatic infections in all the
cases. This, of course, in the model, depends on the fraction determined by φ as discussed previously (Fig. 3A,
1B-1C).

SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION

The spread of COVID-19 via presymptomatic and
asymptomatic cases has been a big concern in recent
times as the mobility of people is increasing while lockdown is being relaxed across the country. Since presymptomatic and asymptomatic persons, having no influenzalike symptoms, are not aware of their potential of infecting others, a relaxing lockdown gives ample opportunity
to expose a contained population to the virus that effectively increases the number of susceptible. Therefore,
the projected trajectories of infections (particularly the

infection peaks) largely depend upon the number of susceptible (S0 ) in the model. The choice of the initial size
of the susceptible population S0 is a tricky business. Theoretically, in the absence of immunity (acquired or otherwise), an entire population may become susceptible to
the COVID-19 outspread. However, in reality, all people
will rarely be susceptible to the disease no matter how
rapidly it spreads. Various factors like geography, socioeconomic characteristics, the demographic landscape can
significantly regulate S0 . The estimation of a ‘ball-park
number’ for S0 is crucial to initiate the modeling analysis. To estimate a plausible value of S0 , first, we look
at the infection curves for the countries where the cumulative positive cases have already moved past the peak
infection and attained a plateau. Dividing the number of
infections at the plateau by the total population of the
country under consideration yields a fraction that reflects
the average percentage of the population infected by the
virus. This fraction turns out to be ∼ 10−3 for large
countries like Germany, USA, Spain, Italy [1]. Thus,
an estimate of susceptible can be computed by multiplying this fraction with the total population of a country. For India, the total population is in the order of

9
∼ 109 . Hence, a rough ‘ball-park’ number for the initial susceptible population S0 would be in the range of
109 × 10−3 ∼ 106 , i.e in the order of millions. This estimation for S0 gives us a lower bound. The reason is, in
a hugely populated and large country like India, even if
the testing capacity is increased, due to limited resources
the testing strategy probes individuals having symptoms
in the first place. Thus, many mildly symptomatic and
asymptomatic cases remain undetected. Therefore, the
numbers gauged from the cumulative infection plateau
allude to an underestimation up to a certain degree. An
alternative approach finding an approximate S0 would be
to compute the ratio between the total number of positive cases (i.e the number of cumulative infections) and
overall tests carried out. The ratio essentially is the test
positivity rate. Multiplying this ratio with the total population of a country gives another ‘ball-park’ estimation
of S0 or approximately the order of magnitude for S0 [1].
For example, in the case of India, the estimation from test
positivity rate yields an order of magnitude ∼ 108 for S0 .
Normally, in these kinds of compartmentalized epidemiological models, S0 ∼ N . To attain the best fit with the
reported data, we varied S0 within a range gleaned from
the above estimations in a context-dependent manner for
India and a few Indian states.
In the context of COVID-19 infection propagation, a
few interesting aspects to ponder over are: (a) whether
there is any bias in people getting infected from asymptomatic patients to be asymptomatic and (b) whether the
rates of infection from symptomatic and asymptomatic
patients are the same. About (a), it may seem intuitive
that a person getting infected from an asymptomatic
would turn out to be asymptomatic as well. But, in
reality, the immune response of an infected individual
can be very different. Presently, to our knowledge, there
is no conclusive data to assess this point. About (b),
we discuss a few key features of infection propagation
through asymptomatic and symptomatic carriers in the
following. An asymptomatic individual is likely to carry
less viral loads compared to a symptomatic individual.
Since the droplet transmission (via coughing, sneezing)
is a dominant mode of infection propagation, the chance
of infection via an asymptomatic individual is less likely
than a symptomatically infected person since an asymptomatic carrier hardly develops conspicuous symptoms
like coughing, sneezing, etc.. On the contrary, asymptomatic individuals lead ‘normal’ social life of human
interactions without being aware that they are ‘silent’
carriers whereas symptomatic individuals are more likely
to be under restriction mixing with people. Therefore,
within a population, chances of disease spread via asymptomatic carriers may be higher.
In the model analysis, for simplicity, we have chosen
the values of S → E transition rates β̄s and β̄a to be
the same (Table S1-S2). But what fraction of E emerges
out as symptomatic or asymptomatic is regulated by φ.
Note that, in the model construction, there is no bias in
people getting infected from a/symptomatic patients to

be a/symptomatic. In the ‘exposed’ compartment E, the
population is a mixed due to (a) S−Is interaction and (b)
S − Ia interaction. But no information about the mode
of infection via (a) and (b) are book-kept in the total
exposed population E. Therefore, individually, neither
(a) nor (b) can influence the division in the outflux from
E into Is and Ia (Fig. 1B, eqs. (1) to (4)).
We have varied S0 for India within a range 100-300
million (Table S1, Fig. 1B). Note here, that this estimation is a simplistic approximation. After all, it is difficult
to comment on the percentage of the population infected
by the virus until the pandemic is over. Further details
regarding the estimation of S0 is described in our earlier
study ([1]).
In brief, as per the current trend of the symptomatic
cases, India is expected to see a peak in the active infection in November 2020 (Fig. 2), tentatively. The number
of active infections at the peak may lie somewhere between 1.5- 2.5 million. The total infection (cumulative)
would then reach around 10 20 million (mid-November)
as shown in Fig. 2, inset. Note that the COVID-19 pandemic is an ongoing phenomenon with its time evolution
depending upon various local and global factors. Therefore, quantitative predictions from a simplistic model investigated in this article, is expected to change as the
pandemic progresses.
The quality of the COVID-19 data (e.g numbers representing cumulative infection, death, etc.) for various
countries, provinces and local regions made available in
the public domain is a crucial determinant for the study
of the pandemic progression. A frequently used tool for
testing the reliability of an empirical data set is Benford’s
law (also known as Newcomb-Benford law) [24–26, 31].
The phenomenological Benford’s law (BL) states that in
diverse sets of ‘real world’/‘naturally occurring’ numerical data, the first significant digit n appears with probability P (n) = log10 (1 + n1 ) [24–26, 31]. In this study, we
compared the data of cumulative infections and deaths
for India and few Indian provinces (e.g Delhi, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal) in the light of BL and
tested the compliance (Fig. 6A-6B). It is important to
note that while many numerical data sets comply with
BL, several collections of numbers do not. Therefore,
only checking the compliance (or deviation) of a distribution of the first significant digit with P (n) is not a
sufficient condition to ascertain the reliability of a data
set. Furthermore, it is also discussed that in case of a
certain number of individual distributions that do not
have significant digit frequencies close to those determined by BL, random sampling from those distributions
may result in a combined collection of numbers with significant digit frequencies obeying BL [26]. Recent studies on the quality of COVID-19 data suggest that better
compliance with BL occurs when the cases are steadily
on the rise during the infection progression in a region
[27, 32]. At later stages, when the implementation of
containment/intervening measures flattens the infection
curves, the data sets are unlikely to follow BL.

10

FIG. 6. Data for cumulative infection and death due to
COVID-19 pandemic in few Indian states and India as a whole
in the light of Benford’s law (BL) projections. (A-B) The
probability distributions of first significant digits n (n ∈ [1,
2,...,9]) appearing in the data chart of cumulative infection
(A) and death (B) are plotted as histograms. The probability
of n, according to BL is given by P (n) = log10 (1 + n1 ). The
overall trend as observed from the reported data for India
reasonably follows the projections from BL.

In this current study, we have included the gradual relaxation of lockdown measures (‘unlock 1.0’ plan starting
from June 1, laid out by Govt. of India and at present
it is unlock 4.0), only in the case of Delhi, where the
active infection data shows a resurgence after the attainment of the peak. In the Indian context as a whole, as
the ‘Unlock’ phases are initiated, we expect a considerable surge in the active cases in the upcoming days. We
assessed the COVID-19 progression in the presence of
‘one-time enforcement of containment measures’ where
the lockdown and other social distancing norms remain
in place for an indefinite time. However, a more realistic reconstruction of the pandemic situation would be to
impose ‘intermittent lockdown’ in specific regions where
the containment and other social distancing measures
are enforced once the number of active infections crosses
a threshold determined by the capacity of the regional
healthcare system. Afterward, the lockdown measures
are relaxed/lifted as the active infections fall below a certain threshold (‘unlocking’ the lockdown). This shuttling
between the phases of ‘lockdown’ and ‘unlock’ continues
until the contagion comes totally under ‘control’ or the
threat of an ‘out-of-bound’ infection is eliminated. The

nature of intermittent intervention depends on various
controlling factors like acquiring ‘herd immunity’, availability of proper vaccines, the capacity of public health
facilities where all the patients can be accommodated
and treated, etc. A previous study ([16]) in the context
of the USA, has discussed these aspects. In the Indian
context, it would be interesting to explore further along
this avenue as a future venture.
Like the SIRD model used in our previous study [1],
this SEIs Ia Rs Ra D model does not accommodate any
spatial information about the infection spread. In other
words, there is no spatial degree of freedom in the governing equations of SEIs Ia Rs Ra D model. The spatial
dependence of the disease progression can be executed
via simulating this model on a lattice or connected network. The network may feature the following attributes:
(a) every node on the network virtually carries the territorial/regional information collected from the map of
India; (b) the network connectivity bears the details of
human mobility, transmission spread from one region to
another. The network nodes also can account for the
topology/geography of India in a coarse-grained manner. For example, the nodes representing Himalayan
highlands would likely to be attributed to lesser human
mobility and transmission spread compared to the nodes
representing Indian metro cities. This proposed model
would enable us to study how the infection spreads from
a few initial local pockets to a larger region, thereby rendering a broader picture of the dynamics of the pandemic. A previous study investigating the COVID-19
progression in Italy describes a novel approach using a
spatially explicit SEIR model [18]. Future investigation
with similar spatial/topological detailing in India’s context would be useful to delve into. Also, note that the
current SEIs Ia Rs Ra D model is a generalized model. It
does not contain any specific biological/clinical features
of the COVID-19 disease. In this model, COVID-19 enters through the rates and governing parameters in Equations (1) to (12) that are tuned to obtain the best fit of
the theoretical curves with the available COVID-19 data.
In the currently explored model parameter regime,
we observed that the number of asymptomatic cases is
several-fold higher than the symptomatic cases. In reality, even though the number of tests has been increased
significantly, individuals showing symptoms are given
priority to undergo tests. In a hugely populated country like India, this leaves a large fraction of the asymptomatic population untraceable. Therefore, to determine
the exact ratio of symptomatic and asymptomatic population, in reality, we need extensive data curation across
the country and further research in that direction. The
infectiousness of an asymptomatic individual may be similar to a person having symptoms. The asymptomatically
infectious population, mixing freely with the healthy susceptible population, keeps spreading the infection causing a surge in the number of symptomatic as well as
asymptomatic cases. To reduce the infection, it is important to trace the source of infection and isolate it from

11
the healthy susceptible population. Currently, there is
merely any data available to validate our prediction of
the asymptomatically infected population. To assess the
community spreading and prevalence of asymptomatic
cases, India conducts a serology-based (antibody test)
survey in select districts. The test aims to find the presence of a specific antibody developed by the immune system of the infected person in response to the viral infection. If the data from the survey is made available in
the public domain, the model prediction can be assessed.
Irrespective of the testing policy, maintaining social distancing in tandem with prolonged or intermittent containment measures would be crucial. Besides, it is also
necessary to use cloth face coverings or mask across the
population.
To conclude, ‘indefinite lockdown’ is not a solution to
put an end to the COVID-19 outspread. The broader
purpose, the lockdown in India served, is the opportunity to buy ‘time’. In a nutshell, the lockdown slows

down the infection and the lockdown time window provides us the chance to ramp up the health care facilities, testing capacity, etc. so that when the lockdown is
lifted, the COVID-19 does not catch us off-guard. During the gradual ‘Unlock’ phases, the effect of lockdown
can still prevail if social distancing, sanitation protocols,
and proper mask-wearing in public places are adopted by
every individual as the ‘new normal’ of lifestyle.

[1] S. Chatterjee, A. Sarkar, S. Chatterjee, M. Karmakar,
and R. Paul, Indian J. Phys, DOI:10.1007/s12648020-01766-8 , (medRxiv, 10.1101/2020.05.11.20098681)
(2020).
[2] W. O. Kermack and A. G. McKendrick, Proceedings of
the Royal Society of London. Series A 115, 700 (1927).
[3] W. O. Kermack and A. G. McKendrick, Proceedings of
the Royal Society of London. Series A 138, 55 (1932).
[4] B. Fred, C.-C. Carlos, and F. Zhilan, Mathematical Models in Epidemiology (Springer, 2019).
[5] D. J. Daley and J. Gani, Epidemic Modelling: An Introduction (Cambridge University Press, 2009).
[6] D. Fanelli and F. Piazza, Chaos, Solitons and Fractals
134 (2020).
[7] J. Fernández-Villaverde and C. I. Jones, (2020).
[8] K. Biswas, A. Khaleque, and P. Sen, arXiv:2003.07063
(2020).
[9] S. Mukherjee, S. Mondal,
and B. Bagchi,
arXiv:2004.14787v (2020).
[10] Y. M. Bar-On, A. Flamholz, R. Phillips, and R. Milo,
eLife (2020).
[11] L. Ferretti, C. Wymant, M. Kendall, L. Zhao, A. Nurtay,
L. Abeler-Dörner, M. Parker, D. Bonsall, and C. Fraser,
Science 368-6491 (2020).
[12] N. G. Davies, P. Klepac, Y. Liu, K. Prem, M. Jit, C. C.-.
working group, and R. M. Eggo, medRxiv (2020).
[13] N. W. Furukawa, J. T. Brooks, and J. Sobel, Emerging
Infectious Diseases 26(7) (2020).
[14] K. Mizumoto, K. Kagaya, A. Zarebski, and G. Chowell,
Euro Surveill. 25(10) (2020).
[15] F. Ye, S. Xu, Z. Rong, R. Xu, X. Liu, P. Deng, H. Liu,
and X. Xu, Int J Infect Dis. 94, 133 (2020).
[16] S. M. Kissler, C. Tedijanto, E. Goldstein, Y. H. Grad,
and M. Lipsitch, Science 368(6493), 860 (2020).
[17] U. A.-P. de León, Á. G. C. Pérez, and E. Avila-Vales,
arXiv:2004.08288 (2020).

[18] M. Gatto, E. Bertuzzo, L. Mari, S. Miccoli, L. Carraro,
R. Casagrandi, and A. Rinaldo, PNAS (2020).
[19] X. He, E. H. Y. Lau, P. Wu, X. Deng, J. Wang, X. Hao,
Y. C. Lau, J. Y. Wong, Y. Guan, X. Tan, X. Mo, Y. Chen,
B. Liao, W. Chen, F. Hu, Q. Zhang, M. Zhong, Y. Wu,
L. Zhao, F. Zhang, B. J. Cowling, F. Li, and G. M.
Leung, Nature Medicine 26, 672 (2020).
[20] R. Li, S. Pei, B. Chen, Y. Song, T. Zhang, W. Yang, and
J. Shaman, Science 368-6490, 489 (2020).
[21] O. Diekmann, J. A. P. Heesterbeek, and M. G. Roberts,
J. R. Soc. Interface 7, 873 (2010).
[22] G. Chowell, C. Viboud, L. Simonsen, and S. M.
Moghadas, J. R. Soc. Interface 13, 20160659 (2016).
[23] R. M. Granich, C. F. Gilks, C. Dye, K. M. D. Cock, and
B. G. Williams, Lancet 373, 48 (2009).
[24] F. Benford, Proc. Amer. Phil. Soc. 78, 551 (1938).
[25] S. Newcomb, Amer. J. Math. 4, 39 (1881).
[26] T. P. Hill, Amer. Sci. 86, 358 (1998).
[27] M. Sambridge and A. Jackson, Nature 581, 384 (2020).
[28] M. U. G. Kraemer, C.-H. Yang, B. Gutierrez, C.-H. Wu,
B. Klein, D. M. Pigott, L. du Plessis, N. R. Faria, R. Li,
W. P. Hanage, J. S. Brownstein, M. Layan, A. Vespignani, H. Tian, C. Dye, O. G. Pybus, and S. V. Scarpino,
Science 368 (6490), 493 (2020).
[29] A. Galeazzi, M. Cinelli, G. Bonaccorsi, F. Pierri, A. L.
Schmidt, A. Scala, F. Pammolli, and W. Quattrociocchi,
arXiv:2005.06341 (2020).
[30] S. Biswas and A. K. Mandal, arXiv:2005.08684 (2020).
[31] T. P. Hill, The American Mathematical Monthly 102
(4), 322 (1995).
[32] K.-B. Lee, S. Han, and Y. Jeong, Physica A 559, 125090
(2020).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Sa.C. and A.S. were supported by a fellowship from
the University Grants Commission (UGC), India. M.K.
was supported by a fellowship from CSIR, India. Sw.C.
thanks the Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, Kolkata for financial support. R.P. thanks IACS
for support and Grant No. EMR/2017/001346 of SERB,
DST, India for the computational facility.

12
Abbreviation
βs
βa
λ
φ
γs
γa
δ
ξs
ξa
τ
T
S0

Meaning
Parameters for India
rate at which susceptible becomes exposed
upon interaction with symptomatic population
rate at which susceptible (S) becomes exposed (E)
upon interaction with asymptomatic population
rate at which exposed (E) becomes
infectious (both symptomatic and asymptomatic)
probability of being symptomatically infected
rate of recovery for symptomatic individuals
rate of recovery for asymptomatic individuals
rate of death
interaction parameter for symptomatic
population mixing with susceptible during lockdown
interaction parameter for asymptomatic
population mixing with susceptible during lockdown
the day from which lockdown begins (counted from day 0,
start date of simulation or initial time t=0)
delay in number of days before the effect of containment
measures on infection propagation becomes visible
initial susceptible population

Value
0.352 day−1
0.352 day−1
0.85 day−1
0.25
0.083 day−1
0.09 day−1
0.0018 day−1
0.265
0.357
36 days
10 days
1-3 × 108

TABLE S1. List of parameters chosen for the best fit with the real data in Indian context.

Abbreviation
βs
βa
λ
φ
γs
γa
δ
ξs
ξa
τ
T

Meaning
Value
Parameters for few Indian states
rate at which susceptible becomes exposed
0.31-0.37 day−1
upon interaction with symptomatic population
rate at which susceptible (S) becomes exposed (E)
0.31-0.37 day−1
upon interaction with asymptomatic population
rate at which exposed (E) becomes
0.74-85 day−1
infectious (both symptomatic and asymptomatic)
probability of being symptomatically infected
0.25
rate of recovery for symptomatic individuals
0.07-0.085 day−1
rate of recovery for asymptomatic individuals
0.074-0.091 day−1
rate of death
0.0018-0.003 day−1
interaction parameter for symptomatic
0.25-0.382
population mixing with susceptible during lockdown
interaction parameter for asymptomatic
0.3325-0.47
population mixing with susceptible during lockdown
the day from which lockdown begins (counted from day 0,
17-30 days
start date of simulation or initial time t=0)
delay in number of days before the effect of containment
5-18 days
measures on infection propagation becomes visible

TABLE S2. List of parameters chosen for the best fit with the real data in few states within India.

