Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

Computational model on COVID-19 Pandemic using
Probabilistic Cellular Automata

arXiv:2006.11270v1 [physics.soc-ph] 19 Jun 2020

Sayantari Ghosh · Saumik Bhattacharya∗

Received: date / Accepted: date

Abstract Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) which is caused by SARS-COV2
has become a pandemic. This disease is highly infectious and potentially fatal,
causing a global public health concern. To contain the spread of COVID-19,
governments are adopting nationwide interventions, like lockdown, containment and quarantine, restrictions on travel, cancelling social events and extensive testing. To understand the effects of these measures on the control of
the epidemic in a data-driven manner, we propose a probabilistic cellular automata (PCA) based modified SEIQR model. The transitions associated with
the model is driven by data available on chronology, symptoms, pathogenesis and transmissivity of the virus. By arguing that the lattice-based model
captures the features of the dynamics along with the existing fluctuations, we
perform rigorous computational analyses of the model to take into account
of the spatial dynamics of social distancing measures imposed on the people.
Considering the probabilistic behavioral aspects associated with mitigation
strategies, we study the model considering factors like population density and
testing efficiency. Using the model, we focus on the variability of epidemic
dynamics data for different countries, and point out the reasons behind these
contrasting observations. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt
to model COVID-19 spread using PCA that gives us both spatial and temporal variations of the infection spread with the insight about the contributions
of different infection parameters.
Keywords Mathematical model of epidemiology · Lattice epidemic ·
Probabilistic cellular automata
Sayantari Ghosh
Department of Physics, National Institute of Technology Durgapur
E-mail: sayantari.ghosh@phy.nitdgp.ac.in
Saumik Bhattacharya (∗ corresponding author)
Department of Electronics and Electrical Communication Engineering, Indian Institute of
Technology Kharagpur
E-mail: saumik@ece.iitkgp.ac.in

2

Sayantari Ghosh, Saumik Bhattacharya∗

1 Introduction
COVID-19 is emerging as one of the biggest pandemics in current times. Affecting 213 countries and territories around the world with a death toll surpassing 400,000 worldwide, COVID-19 is causing a global panic and turmoil
[6]. SARS-COV2, the causative agent of this disease causes respiratory infection including pneumonia, cold, sneezing and coughing [12, 21]. It is also found
to cause diarrhea, upper respiratory maladies, kidney dysfunction and heart
damage in cases of severe infection [4, 11, 32]. The disease is highly infectious
and it transmits from person-to-person through close contacts, via respiratory
droplets produced by infected person while coughing or sneezing [29]. Fomites
are also being considered as a significant source of transmission, as the virus
has been found to persist on different surfaces up to 72 hours [10].
Mathematical models have long been associated with the study of infectious
diseases and diffusion dynamics [3, 9]. However, choosing the appropriate model
and proper physically relatable parameters have always been a challenge for
understanding and predicting the course of a disease. In case of modeling
an infectious disease through compartmentalized social structure, the most
popular approach is following Kermack and McKendrick [13] with an ordinary
differential-equation (ODE) based SIR (susceptible-infected-recovered) model.
The model assumes that when an infectious disease attacks a community, the
disease often partitions the population into three subpopulations: individuals
who can be infected (susceptible people, denoted by S) ; people who are already infected (and thus, infectious, denoted by I); and those who recovered
and possess immunity to or got killed by (thus removed, denoted by R) this
disease. Each infected individual transmits the disease with some probability
to each susceptible individual they encounter. The infected people recover at
a constant rate. In case of COVID-19, some studies have already attempted to
gauge the true potential of the disease through SIR model [16, 25]. However,
this simple three compartment model might not be sufficient to appropriately
understand the actual nature of this particular infection spread.
There are two major divergences of the SIR picture from the case of COVID19. Firstly, in the case of SARS-COV2, asymptomatic transmission of the virus
remained a controversial topic for some time [2, 20]. Asymptomatic proportion
is broadly defined as the fraction of people, who came in contact with the
infected, but they do not show any symptoms for some time. For COVID-19,
there have been reports of exposure to asymptomatic people resulting into
transmission during the incubation period [31]. Thus, it can be appreciated
that reliable estimate of the asymptomatic proportion can play a notable role
to control the intensity and range of the disease. This is critically desired to
direct public health policy and social distancing strategies to fight COVID19. Several studies [2, 20, 22] reported that the proportion of people, who after remaining asymptomatic for an incubation period have shown prominent
symptoms of the infection, lies between 18% to 41%. This is a quite significant proportion which cannot be ignored for a highly infectious disease. Thus,
while modeling the dynamics, the asymptomatic proportion has to be consid-

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

3

ered indeed to measure the severity of the problem and better evaluate the
transmission potential.
Another important factor that cannot be considered in an SIR model structure, is the effect (or lack) of efficient healthcare. The governments of most of
the countries are allocating huge funds and manpower for scaling up the hospital facilities to provide nasal oxygen, mechanical ventilation and, for patients
with complications, dialysis, as per the clinical guideline suggestions [1, 18].
However, for several countries, where healthcare systems were already overwhelmed by the demand prior to the pandemic, providing quick and proper
testing facility to every infected person is not realistically possible [26]. Even
in countries with outstanding health infrastructure (e.g., Italy, Spain etc.) at
the peak of the pandemic, the testing laboratories, hospitals and quarantine
facilities were absolutely outnumbered by the number of new infections arising every day [19]. Moreover, in several countries, a social denial and stigma
against testing have been observed [14, 28] which make identification of patients even more difficult. Thus, it is evident that even with the full healthcare
efficiency, promptly detecting and quarantining all the patients is not feasible. In such a condition, the people who have been detected and quarantined,
and the people outside quarantine facility, will not only have different contact
rates with the susceptible class, they might also have have different recovery
rates. While those admitted to hospitals and quarantine facilities will have less
opportunity meeting the susceptible, they will be recovering faster from the
disease. On the other hand, the infected people who are tested false negative,
not yet tested, or awaiting testing results are generally being requested to stay
home and self-quarantine themselves. These people might recover slowly and
meeting more susceptible people during their recovery period.
Beyond these two major divergences, we must also consider the stochastic
nature of the real-world dynamics. Starting from exposure to the virus to
the detection of the disease, everything is not deterministic, but probabilistic. Moreover, in ODE models, the homogeneous mixing assumption dilutes
all spatial information which is essential for modeling a disease which spreads
from close-contacts only. While compartmentalised mean-field modeling approaches have their own benefits, to take into account of heterogeneity and
spatial infection spread, cellular automata based lattice models provide a powerful tool [27, 30]. Despite the ability to show extremely complex macroscopic
outcomes, this modeling tool based on local interactions trusts on the interaction of a multitude of single individuals, giving a direct correspondence to the
physical system [5, 24]. In PCA, the transitions can be considered based on
certain pre-defined probabilities [17] which also suits the current dynamics of
this global pandemic. Thus, PCA based modeling will have rich information
about the stochastic spatiotemporal spread of the infection in a population.
With these understanding of COVID-19, we proceed to model the spread of
this infectious disease using a spatially explicit epidemiological lattice model
using PCA. Here the spatial distribution of population is characterized by a
set of discrete lattice points. Specific probabilistic rules are made to define
how every lattice point will change its state through the possible interactions

4

Sayantari Ghosh, Saumik Bhattacharya∗

between the individuals and movement. We use rigorous simulations using
PCA to understand the effects of lockdown implementation, regulatory compliance, testing efficiency and availability of healthcare facilities. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to model COVID-19 using cellular
automata keeping spatial population distribution in mind. We exhibit that we
are able to produce the temporal information about the infection, along with
the visualization of the space that is absent in ODE based modeling. The article is organized as follows. In Section 2, we will define and discuss the PCA
model of COVID-19 spread. Next, in Section 3, we will present and analyse the
simulation results, considering probabilistic dynamics in each step of disease
progression, i.e., exposure, proliferation and quarantining. Finally, in Section
4 major conclusions relating model results with the real epidemic data from
different countries and future scopes will be discussed.

2 Model Description
In this section, we define a spatially explicit epidemiological model through
PCA on a square lattice with SEIQR structure. We consider that, instead of
having three subpopulations, COVID-19 has partitioned our society in five
different subpopulations. While S and R have the same implications as before
(S: susceptible, R: recovered and removed), the I subpopulation is divided
into three segments: those who are exposed and asymptomatically infected,
denoted by E; those who have shown symptoms, but are not detected/tested
positive/quarantined yet, denoted by I; and those who are quarantined or
hospitalized, Q.
Consider a community which has been infected by the virus. Let us consider a
two-dimensional lattice of dimension L × L, where an SEIQR epidemic process
is going on. Each small box or ‘patch’ in this lattice can be occupied by a person
(this however can be generalised into a house or residential area) or can remain
empty (black in Fig. 4). The occupied patches have to belong to any one of
the states, S (blue), E (green), I (red), Q (cyan) or R (yellow). In all the
simulations, the neighborhood condition chosen as per the standard rules of
Moore neighborhood [7], in general, if not precisely mentioned otherwise. Let
us setup the following probabilistic rules for PCA to establish the logic behind
transmission of the disease:
– Rule 1. Every person is surrounded by at most eight neighbors. If any one
of these neighbors are exposed or infected (belongs to E or I class), then
the person has a finite probability to get exposed
– Rule 2. Exposed person is capable of infecting susceptible people.
– Rule 3. Exposed people (E ) have a finite probability to show the symptoms of the disease and become infected (I ). Infected people can also spread
the infection to a susceptible person.
– Rule 4. Once a person gets infected, depending on the efficiency of the
testing process in a certain period of time and with a certain probability

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

5

Fig. 1 The transitions related to the subevents in the epidemic spreading model.

the person gets detected, and thus quarantined, depending upon the available health infrastructures. A quarantined person is restricted to come in
contact with susceptible further.
– Rule 5. No birth or immigration is considered, keeping the total number
of people in the population constant.
– Rule 6. We do not consider death due to the disease separately in our
model; death is incorporated inside the recovered class and considered to
be removed from the population.
– Rule 7. The movement of each of these people is implemented by considering a sphere of influence which establishes a boundary in which the
person can meet any other person and come in direct contact, which can
finally result in transmission of the disease. A susceptible person cannot get
infected or exposed, if his sphere of influence does not contain any exposed
or infected person.
With this rules setup, the framework can be considered as a combination of
transition probability model [23] and discrete event model [8] where the disease
transmission can set in through several subevents:
– Getting exposed: S −→ E, with effective rate pe [nE (i) + nI (i)] where
pe is the exposure probability; this transition rate is also proportional to
the total number of exposed and infected neighbors nE (i) and nI (i) of the
ith susceptible site, as a susceptible person will meet its exposed/infected
neighbors independently.
– Getting infected, with symptoms: E −→ I, with transition probability pi , which estimates the probability that the infection will grow and
show substantial symptoms. A threshold time of ti is associated with this
subevent to account for the incubation period, which is a very prominent
problem in case of COVID-19.
– Getting quarantined: I −→ Q, takes place after a threshold time of tq
and with a probability pq which measures the promptness of testing and
efficiency of testing methods respectively.
– Recovery or removal: I −→ R and Q −→ R takes place after an average
time of tr with a probability pr which takes into account the effectiveness
of health infrastructure and medical facilities.
Fig. 1 compiles all these events together in the form of a disease spread model.
The total population N is fixed while the simulation is carried out, but its
variations estimate the population density of the zone of interest.

6

Sayantari Ghosh, Saumik Bhattacharya∗

Fig. 2 Simulation landscape and interaction neighbourhood: (a) A zone of interest with
400×400 patches. Density of small blue boxes represent population density. (b) A small subzone, denoting the distribution of susceptible and empty patches. (c) Interaction conventions:
staying home, d = 0; sphere of influence includes only first nearest neighbours denoted by
d = 1; sphere of influence includes first as well as next nearest neighbours denoted by d = 2,
and so on.

3 Simulation and Analysis
We perform simulations on a homogeneous two-dimensional landscape with
400 × 400 patches with 100000 randomly selected patches as residences of
people in a society. Fig. 2 (a) shows a zone of interest at initial condition, where
blue patches denote susceptible individuals. Considering Moore neighborhood
(8 neighborhoods) a synchronous updating for all sites is carried out. However,
the neighbourhood conditions are modified accordingly to estimate the allowed
interactions for a person. Parameter d estimates the distance up to which
the interactions are allowed during the implementation of simulation. The
interaction convention (shown in Fig. 2 (c)) has been set as follows: if a person
is staying home, then d = 0; if the sphere of influence includes only the first
nearest neighbours, then d = 1; if the sphere of influence includes first as
well as next nearest neighbours, d = 2, and so on. For better visualization
of the dynamics, we normalize any subpopulation with the total number of
people in the entire population. We have used lowercase symbols to represent
normalized subpopulation, e.g. the normalized fraction of people infected in
the entire population is represented with ‘i’, whereas the normalized fraction
of people quarantined in the population is represented with ‘q’ and so on. As
incubation period for COVID-19 [15], ti is associated with the infection itself,
so we keep it constant for all our experiments with default value of ti = 8. The
simulations are run until a saturation is reached.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

7

Fig. 3 Dynamics of the infection spread: (a) time evolution of five subpopulations for d = 2,
pe = 0.5, pi = 0.5, pq = 0.1 and pr = 0.12 and population density D = 0.46; (b) Effect of
population density in infection spread. Here population density D = 1 indicates that all the
lattice locations are occupied by people. Other parameters are kept same as before.

3.1 Effects of population density and movement restriction
The density of a particular place may play a key role in the spreading dynamics as it is difficult to implement strict social distancing measures in densely
populated areas. It can be observed that cities with large number of residences
have often become the hot-spot of infection spread. To understand the effect
of density, we simulate our model with different population densities, and examine how the maximum fraction of infected people in the population depends
on it. As shown in Fig. 3, the population density has a severe impact on the
fraction of maximum infection (imax ). As the population density increases,
the imax increases exponentially. This happens as the person-to-person transmission probability increases drastically, and even a very restrictedmovement
(d = 1) helps to spread the infection in the community. It can be observed
that for d = 2, the imax increases much more rapidly as population density
increases. Thus, to stop the maximum reach of the infection, it is necessary to
administer strict movement control, or lockdown.
In our simulations, lockdown imposes a restriction on movement of every person on the lattice. In Fig. 4, we have shown time evolution of two different
communities to demonstrate the effect of lockdown implementation with the
help of parameter d. We assume that for a given d, a person may meet someone to the dth neighbourhood but comes back at his original place at the end
of each step. Thus, the demography does not change in each step and the
neighbourhood information remains constant. In Fig. 4(a), a strict lockdown
is imposed (0 ≤ d ≤ 1), where staying at home or occasional movement within
d = 1 neighbourhood in urgency is allowed. Here we observe that, after saturation, most of the people remain in the susceptible state showing a very limited
spread of the infection. On the other hand, In Fig. 4(b), the movement in the
community was not restricted, and every individual was allowed to move as
per their habit/choice (0 ≤ d ≤ 3). In this case, it can be observed that almost all the people come in the contact of the pandemic. Thus, restricting the

8

Sayantari Ghosh, Saumik Bhattacharya∗

Fig. 4 Spread of the infection in a population with different parameters as mentioned in
Sec. 3 for (a) 0 ≤ d ≤ 1 and (b) 0 ≤ d ≤ 3. The colors of the subpopulations are same as
shown in Fig. 1. All the transition probabilities are same as mentioned in Sec. 3.2.

movement emerges as a highly impactful strategy for controlling the infection
spread.

3.2 Promptness in implementing lockdown:
As discussed in Sec. 3.1, lockdown is necessary to restrict the spread of the
infection in a community. However, implementation of a total lockdown is a
big challenge for a country because of several socioeconomic issues. An abrupt
lockdown may create panic and associated complications as well. However,
in our studies, by introducing a delay time parameter tL , we found that an
early implementation of lockdown is extremely useful to control the spread
of the disease. To observe this, members of the populations were allowed to
interact with 0 ≤ d ≤ 2 initially. If at t0 time the infection first enters the
community with Eint and Iint number of initially exposed and infected people,
then we assume that a lockdown gets implemented at t0 + tL time step. For
this experiment, we considered Iint = 6, Eint = 200, pe = 0.5, pi = 0.5,
pq = 0.1 and pr = 0.12. For a probable infected person, quarantining and
recovery threshold times are taken as tq = 2 and tr = 18. As shown in Fig.
5(a), as tL increases, i.e., as the delay in implementing the lockdown increases,
the fraction of people getting infected increases drastically. Thus, even with
the difficulties of immediate implementation, it is necessary to plan for an
early lockdown to restrict movements in case of a pandemic.

3.3 Effect of initial infection level:
The number and location of the infected and exposed people in the population
just before the start of the lockdown greatly influence the maximum spread

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

9

Fig. 5 Dynamics of the infection spread in lockdown: (a) Effect of delay in implementing
lockdown; (b) Effect of different states (initial conditions) just before lockdown is implemented; (c) Effect of exposure probability pe ; (d) Effect of infection probability pi .

of the infection in the community. As shown in Fig. 5(b), as Eint and Iint
increase, the maximum spread of infection increases keeping the duration of
the infection almost constant. For Fig. 5(b), we considered that tL = 0, i.e., the
strict lockdown is enforced immediately in the population with pe , pi , pq , pr ,
tq and tr as mentioned in Sec. 3.2. This experiment depicts that it is strongly
needed to control the initial infection to make the lockdown effective. Any act,
e.g. migrant movement, social gathering, unhygienic practices in public places
etc., should be handled carefully to restrict the initial infection level until the
lockdown can be implemented in the society.

3.4 Effect of exposure probability:
An effective way to fight a pandemic like COVID-19 is to reduce the exposure
probability pe as reduction of the exposure probability reduces the chance of
getting infected at the first place. Our experiment also depicts that pe is an
important factor in controlling the spread. As shown in Fig. 5(c), when pe
reduces from 0.8 to 0.2, the maximum spread of infection imax reduces almost
linearly. In this experiment, we considered all the parameters, except pe , same
as mentioned in Sec. 3.2 with tL = 0. It shows that while an infected person
may meet a healthy person even in a lockdown condition, social distancing
and other protective measures like usage of facemask, sanitizer etc. reduce the

10

Sayantari Ghosh, Saumik Bhattacharya∗

Fig. 6 Dynamics of the infection spread in lockdown: Effect of testing probability pq on
(a) the fraction of people infected and (b) the fraction of people quarantined; (c) Effect of
delay in individual quarantine process; (d) Effect of recovery probability pr .

possibility of contamination. Thus, social distancing and other precautions
may act as social vaccine to prevent the disease spread.

3.5 Effect of infection probability:
Depending on the nature of the infectious disease and the immunity strength of
the members of a community, infection probability pi plays a major role in the
infection spreading. In a pandemic scenario, pi may vary for various reasons
like mutation of the virus, acquired immunity or simply because of the low
infection probability of the disease. As shown in Fig. 5(d), as pi reduces, imax
reduces significantly. However, the reduction of imax is not linear with pi . To
understand the effect of pi , we define another parameter called the ‘infection
lifetime (τ )’ which is defined by the time difference between the instances when
the first person gets infected in the population and the last person recovers
from the infection. Fig. 5(d) thus suggests that τ increases as pi decreases.
This happens as a person once exposed to the infection remains in the exposed
state. A lower value of pi reduces someone’s chances to get quarantined and
also indicates possibility of a delayed symptomatic transition from E to I class
which increases τ . In Fig. 5(d), we considered all the parameters, except pi ,
same as mentioned in Sec. 3.2 with tL = 0.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

11

3.6 Effect of testing efficiency:
In a pandemic like COVID-19, SARS etc., detecting the infected individuals
plays a crucial role in controlling the infection spread. Detection of infected
people has two major factors− governmental initiatives, and the efficiency as
well as supply of the test kits. Moreover, awareness and cooperation of the
community also plays a significant role; though, often aware and cooperative
infected people are detected in a population, but it is always challenging to
detect the infected individuals with denial and resistance, which increases the
risk of an outbreak. These three factors are combined in the probability term
pq . We note that this testing efficiency parameter plays a major role in the
spreading dynamics. As shown in Fig. 6(a), as pq increases both imax and τ
decreases which helps to limit the infection.
It is important to mention that it is the fraction of quarantined population ‘q’
which we can observe as the active cases in a pandemic scenario as the other
subpopulations (e and i) are yet undetected, thus not directly observable. As
shown in Fig. 6(b), the fraction of people quarantined remains quite less if pq
is small. This signifies that less testing efficiency can be mistaken as a smaller
spread of the infection. Thus, to get a clear picture about the spread of the
infection in a community, it is recommended to keep pq high, which in turn
also helps to limit the infection spread. In both these figures (6(a) and (b)),
we considered all the parameters, except pq , same as mentioned in Sec. 3.2
with tL = 0.

3.7 Effect of testing time tq and recovery probability pr :
Testing time also plays a decisive role in epidemic dynamics. The testing time
might be dependent on the available facilities and cooperation of individuals
to report to the medical centers as soon as they get any symptom of the infection. As shown in Fig. 6(c), as tq increases, both imax and τ increase as
the infected people get more scope to spread the infection in the community.
Thus, early reporting of any viral symptom and test kits that can produce test
results fast are essential to limit a pandemic. In Fig. 6(c), we considered all
the parameters, except tq , same as mentioned in Sec. 3.2 with tL = 0.
Though recovery probability largely depends on the disease itself, but depending on the medical support and other available health services, recovery
probability might vary in a population. We found that recovery probability pr
does not have much impact on imax as the spread of an infection is usually
faster than the recovery time, but, as shown in Fig. 6(d), it limits the infection lifetime τ . Thus, good health facilities and medical supports are required
throughout the pandemic period to speed up the recovery process if possible.
In Fig. 6(d), we considered all the parameters, except pr , same as mentioned
in Sec. 3.2 with tL = 0.

12

Sayantari Ghosh, Saumik Bhattacharya∗

4 Discussions
In this prevalence of pandemic COVID-19, ODE based kinetic models are being
trusted extensively for the purpose of predicting time dependent profiles and
steady state behaviour of the epidemic dynamics. In this paper, we argue that
cellular automata based simulations can provide a more realistic and insightful platform for modeling this dynamics. It is undeniable that a substantial
variability has been observed in the nature of the course of the disease in countries and provinces all around the world. While a fully operational clinically
trialed vaccine can only be expected after a year or so for everyone, several
countries are struggling hard to find a proper mitigation strategy for the disease. It is interesting to see that publicly available data of confirmed daily
cases for different countries are quite different from each other. While in some
countries the disease has completed its course in around 60 days (like, Germany, Switzerland, Singapore etc.), in some other countries it is taking more
than 80 days to reach the peak (like, Italy, India, Brazil etc.). In countries like
Spain, Portugal and Turkey, a distinct departure from symmetric bell-shaped
behaviour of active cases can be observed, which is heading towards a saturation, indicating a substantial persistence of the disease. For Iran, emergence
of a second peak is imminent, which cannot be accounted for using ordinary
differential equation based SIR models. Many countries have shown equivalent
rise of the epidemic in initial stages are showing drastic divergence in the later
stages. The applicability of strategies like aggressive testing, which found their
success in countries like Singapore, Hong Kong and South Korea, are doubted
for the high population countries like, India, USA etc.
To analyse and interpret this data, it must be considered that along with the
parameters associated with infection itself, the dynamics reflects the human
interventions and reactions as well, which are highly probabilistic. In this paper, we have used a lattice-based PCA epidemiological modeling to efficiently
mimic a pandemic environment and find out the contributions of each major
parameter associated with the pandemic spread. We identified the role of different factors like probability of exposure, testing probability, promptness of
implementing lockdown etc. which can not only be used to design better strategies to control a pandemic like COVID-19, but also can be used as analyzing
tools to understand and explain proposed initiatives like social distancing, usage of facial mask, importance of sanitizers etc. Our exhaustive analysis shows
that countries with high population density should handle lockdown and migration carefully as they have higher risk of getting infected. Using quantities
like imax and τ , we have also characterised and quantified the independence
of rise and fall of the distribution, showing the clear influence of human intervention strategies. Our model individually associates tunable parameters
with several practical factors like population density, testing efficiency, public
awareness, health-care facility, general immunity etc. which are implicit to a
country, and can contribute significantly in the country-wise data variations.
By demonstrating the flexibility of the model, we conclude that this is not only
capable of explaining the reasons behind divergence of epidemic dynamics in

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

13

different countries, but also has the potential to explain unforeseen nature
of a new data that might depend strongly on space information, behavioural
probabilities or underlying fluctuations. Our study establishes a prescription
about how the resultant distribution changes its properties (e.g., peak position,
sharpness of rise, lifetime of epidemic, asymmetric long-tailed fall etc.) driven
by each of these parameters. As this simulation-based study explicitly includes
the spatial factors into the dynamics, incorporating realistic behavioural and
demographic features is achievable through this model. Thus, our methodology
proposes a more accurate and flexible platform to understand the country-wise
diversity of the observed data than the mean-field models.
Conflict of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
References
1. Alhazzani, W., Møller, M.H., Arabi, Y.M., Loeb, M., Gong, M.N., Fan, E., Oczkowski,
S., Levy, M.M., Derde, L., Dzierba, A., et al.: Surviving Sepsis Campaign: guidelines
on the management of critically ill adults with Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Intensive care medicine pp. 1–34 (2020)
2. Bai, Y., Yao, L., Wei, T., Tian, F., Jin, D.Y., Chen, L., Wang, M.: Presumed asymptomatic carrier transmission of COVID-19. Jama 323(14), 1406–1407 (2020)
3. Bhattacharya, S., Gaurav, K., Ghosh, S.: Viral marketing on social networks: An epidemiological perspective. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 525,
478–490 (2019)
4. Cheng, Y., Luo, R., Wang, K., Zhang, M., Wang, Z., Dong, L., Li, J., Yao, Y., Ge, S.,
Xu, G.: Kidney disease is associated with in-hospital death of patients with COVID-19.
Kidney International (2020)
5. Chopard, B., Droz, M.: Cellular automata, vol. 1. Springer (1998)
6. Cucinotta, D., Vanelli, M.: WHO declares COVID-19 a pandemic. Acta bio-medica:
Atenei Parmensis 91(1), 157–160 (2020)
7. Davies, C.: The effect of neighbourhood on the kinetics of a cellular automaton recrystallisation model. Scripta metallurgica et materialia 33(7), 1139–1143 (1995)
8. Dean, D.O., Bauer, D.J., Shanahan, M.J.: A discrete-time Multiple Event Process Survival mixture (MEPSUM) model. Psychological methods 19(2), 251 (2014)
9. Diekmann, O., Heesterbeek, J.A.P.: Mathematical epidemiology of infectious diseases:
model building, analysis and interpretation, vol. 5. John Wiley & Sons (2000)
10. van Doremalen, N., Bushmaker, T., Morris, D.H., Holbrook, M.G., Gamble, A.,
Williamson, B.N., Tamin, A., Harcourt, J.L., Thornburg, N.J., Gerber, S.I., et al.:
Aerosol and surface stability of SARS-CoV-2 as compared with SARS-CoV-1. New
England Journal of Medicine 382(16), 1564–1567 (2020)
11. Han, C., Duan, C., Zhang, S., Spiegel, B., Shi, H., Wang, W., Zhang, L., Lin, R., Liu, J.,
Ding, Z., et al.: Digestive symptoms in COVID-19 patients with mild disease severity:
clinical presentation, stool viral RNA testing, and outcomes. The American journal of
gastroenterology (2020)
12. Jin, X., Lian, J.S., Hu, J.H., Gao, J., Zheng, L., Zhang, Y.M., Hao, S.R., Jia, H.Y., Cai,
H., Zhang, X.L., et al.: Epidemiological, clinical and virological characteristics of 74
cases of coronavirus-infected disease 2019 (COVID-19) with gastrointestinal symptoms.
Gut 69(6), 1002–1009 (2020)
13. Kermack, W.O., McKendrick, A.G.: A contribution to the mathematical theory of epidemics. Proceedings of the royal society of london. Series A, Containing papers of a
mathematical and physical character 115(772), 700–721 (1927)

14

Sayantari Ghosh, Saumik Bhattacharya∗

14. Kumar, A., Nayar, K.R.: COVID 19 and its mental health consequences. J Ment Heal
8237, 1–2 (2020)
15. Lauer, S.A., Grantz, K.H., Bi, Q., Jones, F.K., Zheng, Q., Meredith, H.R., Azman, A.S.,
Reich, N.G., Lessler, J.: The incubation period of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19)
from publicly reported confirmed cases: estimation and application. Annals of internal
medicine 172(9), 577–582 (2020)
16. Liu, Y., Gayle, A.A., Wilder-Smith, A., Rocklöv, J.: The reproductive number of
COVID-19 is higher compared to SARS coronavirus. Journal of travel medicine (2020)
17. Mairesse, J., Marcovici, I.: Around probabilistic cellular automata. Theoretical Computer Science 559, 42–72 (2014)
18. Murthy, S., Gomersall, C.D., Fowler, R.A.: Care for critically ill patients with COVID19. Jama 323(15), 1499–1500 (2020)
19. Nacoti, M., Ciocca, A., Giupponi, A., Brambillasca, P., Lussana, F., Pisano, M., Goisis, G., Bonacina, D., Fazzi, F., Naspro, R., et al.: At the epicenter of the COVID-19
pandemic and humanitarian crises in Italy: changing perspectives on preparation and
mitigation. NEJM Catalyst Innovations in Care Delivery 1(2) (2020)
20. Nishiura, H., Kobayashi, T., Miyama, T., Suzuki, A., Jung, S., Hayashi, K., Kinoshita,
R., Yang, Y., Yuan, B., Akhmetzhanov, A.R., et al.: Estimation of the asymptomatic
ratio of novel coronavirus infections (COVID-19). medRxiv (2020)
21. Pan, L., Mu, M., Yang, P., Sun, Y., Wang, R., Yan, J., Li, P., Hu, B., Wang, J., Hu,
C., et al.: Clinical characteristics of COVID-19 patients with digestive symptoms in
Hubei, China: a descriptive, cross-sectional, multicenter study. The American journal
of gastroenterology 115 (2020)
22. Rocklöv, J., Sjödin, H., Wilder-Smith, A.: COVID-19 outbreak on the Diamond Princess
cruise ship: estimating the epidemic potential and effectiveness of public health countermeasures. Journal of travel medicine 27(3), taaa030 (2020)
23. Sacks, S.T., Chiang, C.L.: A transition-probability model for the study of chronic diseases. Mathematical Biosciences 34(3-4), 325–346 (1977)
24. Santé, I., Garcı́a, A.M., Miranda, D., Crecente, R.: Cellular automata models for the
simulation of real-world urban processes: A review and analysis. Landscape and Urban
Planning 96(2), 108–122 (2010)
25. Shim, E., Tariq, A., Choi, W., Lee, Y., Chowell, G.: Transmission potential and severity
of COVID-19 in South Korea. International Journal of Infectious Diseases (2020)
26. Spinelli, A., Pellino, G.: COVID-19 pandemic: perspectives on an unfolding crisis. The
British Journal of Surgery (2020)
27. Toffoli, T., Margolus, N.: Cellular automata machines: a new environment for modeling.
MIT press (1987)
28. Torales, J., OHiggins, M., Castaldelli-Maia, J.M., Ventriglio, A.: The outbreak of
COVID-19 coronavirus and its impact on global mental health. International Journal
of Social Psychiatry p. 0020764020915212 (2020)
29. Wang, C., Pan, R., Wan, X., Tan, Y., Xu, L., Ho, C.S., Ho, R.C.: Immediate psychological responses and associated factors during the initial stage of the 2019 coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) epidemic among the general population in China. International
journal of environmental research and public health 17(5), 1729 (2020)
30. Wolfram, S.: Cellular automata and complexity: collected papers. CRC Press (2018)
31. Yu, P., Zhu, J., Zhang, Z., Han, Y.: A familial cluster of infection associated with the
2019 novel coronavirus indicating possible person-to-person transmission during the
incubation period. The Journal of infectious diseases 221(11), 1757–1761 (2020)
32. Zheng, Y.Y., Ma, Y.T., Zhang, J.Y., Xie, X.: COVID-19 and the cardiovascular system.
Nature Reviews Cardiology 17(5), 259–260 (2020)

