1

COVID-19 Epidemic Study II:
Phased Emergence From the Lockdown in
Mumbai
IISc-TIFR Covid-19 City-Scale Simulation Team
∗

Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru

arXiv:2006.03375v1 [q-bio.PE] 5 Jun 2020

†

TIFR, Mumbai
04 June 2020
I. S UMMARY

The nation-wide lockdown starting 25 March 2020, aimed at suppressing the spread of
the COVID-19 disease, was extended until 31 May 2020 in three subsequent orders by
the Government of India. The extended lockdown has had significant social and economic
consequences and ‘lockdown fatigue’ has likely set in. Phased reopening began from 01 June
2020 onwards; however, containment zones will continue to be in lockdown1 . Mumbai, one
of the most crowded cities in the world, has witnessed both the largest number of cases and
deaths among all the cities in India (41986 positive cases and 1368 deaths as of 02 June
2020 [2]). Many tough decisions are going to be made on re-opening in the next few days.
In [3], we presented an agent-based city-scale simulator2 (ABCS) to model the progression
and spread of the infection in large metropolises like Mumbai and Bengaluru. As discussed
in [3], ABCS is a useful tool to model interactions of city residents at an individual level
and to capture the impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions on the infection spread.
Authors in alphabetical order of last names: Prahladh Harsha† , Sandeep Juneja† , Preetam Patil∗ , Nihesh Rathod∗ ,
Ramprasad Saptharishi† , A. Y. Sarath∗ , Sharad Sriram∗ , Piyush Srivastava† , Rajesh Sundaresan∗ , Nidhin Koshy Vaidhiyan∗
Corresponding author: Sandeep Juneja, juneja@tifr.res.in
PP, NR, AYS, SS, NKV from IISc were supported by the IISc-Cisco Centre for Networked Intelligence, Indian Institute
of Science. RSun was supported by the IISc-Cisco Centre for Networked Intelligence, the Robert Bosch Centre for CyberPhysical Systems, and the Department of Electrical Communication Engineering, Indian Institute of Science.
TIFR authors acknowledge support of the Department of Atomic Energy, Government of India, under project no. 12R&D-TFR-5.01-0500.
1

See the Ministry of Home Affairs Order dated 30 May 2020 on re-opening [1]

2

Source code available at https://github.com/cni-iisc/epidemic-simulator.

2

In this report we focus on Mumbai. Using our simulator, we consider some plausible
scenarios for phased emergence of Mumbai from the lockdown, 01 June 2020 onwards. These
include phased and gradual opening of the industry, partial opening of public transportation
(modelling of infection spread in suburban trains), impact of containment zones on controlling
infections, and the role of compliance with respect to various intervention measures including
use of masks, case isolation, home quarantine, etc.
The main takeaway of our simulation results is that a phased opening of workplaces, say at
a conservative attendance level of 20 to 33%, is a good way to restart economic activity while
ensuring that the city’s medical care capacity remains adequate to handle the possible rise in
the number of COVID-19 patients in June and July. In arriving at this level of activity, we
assumed that the city has 8,000 beds for COVID-19 patients with severe symptoms requiring
hospitalization in addition to 1,500 ICU beds for COVID-19 patients.
The above suggestions are based on indirect estimates of the impact of suburban trains,
since these trains have not been in operation since 23 March 2020. A key benefit of restricting
workplaces to start operation at a low level is that it keeps the occupancy on the suburban
trains and buses at a similar low level, thereby reducing infection spread in crowded public
transit systems. (See [4] for some speculation on the impact of the New York City (NYC)
subway system on COVID-19 spread in NYC.) Furthermore, by starting slowly, the city gets
a chance to assess the impact of infection spread in trains and respond appropriately in terms
of future relaxations or restrictions on train occupancy.
Our specific recommendation for trains is that occupancy be restricted to about 20% for the
first few weeks with enforcement of strict physical distancing and compulsory wearing of face
covers. Further relaxations could be based on the observed disease trends. Standard operating
procedures for long-distance trains such as monitoring the temperature of all commuters at
entry points of suburban trains and regular disinfection routines should be followed.
We re-emphasize that our simulator is intended primarily as a tool for comparing the
effectiveness of different non-medical interventions to assist decision making. In particular,
the simulator is not intended as a tool for predicting absolute numerical values of COVID-19
cases. We also recognize that many of the non-pharmaceutical interventions considered in our
study, especially when they remain implemented over a long duration, may lead to important
social and economic concerns and consequences, beyond their effect on the evolution of the
epidemic. The modelling of such effects still remains beyond the scope of our simulator.
Similar to our previous report, we emphasize that this report has been prepared to help
researchers and public health officials understand the effectiveness of social distancing in-

3

terventions related to COVID-19. The report should not be used for medical diagnostic,
prognostic or treatment purposes or for guidance on personal travel plans.
II. A N E XPLORATION OF S PECIFIC U NLOCKING S TRATEGIES
India’s national lockdown, which began on 25 March 2020 and was originally scheduled to
end on 14 April 2020, was extended in three subsequent orders to 31 May 2020 (Lockdown
phase 2: 14 April – 3 May 2020, Lockdown phase 3: 3 May – 18 May 2020 and Lockdown
phase 4: 18 May – 31 May 2020). To mitigate hardship to the public during this extended
lockdown period, the Ministry of Home Affairs, in its orders dated 15 April 2020 [5],
1 May 2020 [6], and 17 May 2020 [7], allowed certain activities to take place subject
to operationalization by states, union territories and district administrations. These local
administrations, if they deem appropriate, may impose stricter measures by not allowing
these activities to take place. Phased reopening began from 01 June 2020 onwards; however,
containment zones will continue to be in lockdown3 . Mumbai has witnessed both the largest
number of cases and deaths among all the cities in India (41986 positive cases and 1368 deaths
as of 02 June 2020 [2]). Consequently, Mumbai is likely to be operating with containment
zone restrictions, and many tough decisions will be made on re-opening in the next few days.
In this work, we use our agent-based simulator, described in detail in [3], to model these
relaxations, restrictions and interventions and perform comparative analyses across these
measures. We use the synthetic model of the city of Mumbai developed in the first part
of the work as a test-bed for our study.
Greater Mumbai (consisting of Mumbai and Suburban Mumbai) has a population of about
1.24 crores (12.4 million) and a population density of roughly 21,000 per km2 [8], [9]
making it one of the densest cities in the world. Further, about 53% [10] of Mumbai lives
in cramped dwellings with shared sanitation facilities where the population density may be
5 to 10 times larger than other parts of the city. In addition, crowded suburban trains are the
lifeline of the city where the suburban railway system serves more than 78 lakh (7.8 million)
passenger trips daily, in normal times. It is generally believed that the infection spreads faster
in denser areas, due to increased contacts in these areas. Given these factors, the public health
threat in Mumbai is particularly acute. The importance of modelling the effect of infection
3

See the Ministry of Home Affairs Order dated 30 May 2020 on re-opening [1].

4

spread arising from the gradual opening and relaxation of lockdown measures, for a city like
Mumbai, cannot then be over-emphasized.
Agent-based city simulator (ABCS): As described in detail in [3], our agent-based simulator
creates a synthetic model of about 1.24 crore (12.4 million) residents of Mumbai that
matches the city population ward-wise, and matches the numbers employed, numbers in
schools, commute distances, etc. This is done by suitably populating households, schools, and
workplaces with people. Several interaction spaces including households, local communities,
schools, workplaces, trains, etc. are then modelled to realistically capture the spread of
infection. The synthetic city is then seeded with infections to match the observed fatalities till
April 10. The infective individuals expose the susceptible individuals to the disease through
their interactions in the various interaction spaces. The disease then incrementally evolves
in time. The tool helps keep track of the number infected in the city as well as the disease
progression within an infected individual. A person infected by the disease may remain
asymptomatic and recover, or may develop symptoms. A symptomatic person may recover
or may develop severe symptoms and be hospitalized. A patient hospitalized may recover or
may become critical. A critical patient may recover or may become deceased. The disease
progression parameters are based on [11].
Strengths and weaknesses of ABCS: The advantage of the agent-based city simulator is first
and foremost the ability to take into account individuals’ features (age, medical conditions,
socio-economic factors, etc.) and study their impact on disease epidemiology. A second and
perhaps equally important advantage is the capability to model the impact of complex nonmedical interventions on the evolution of the disease, e.g., full or partial lockdowns at the
required geospatial granularity, closures of school and workplaces, restrictions in containment
zones, etc., and inform decision making during the course of the epidemic. These interventions
reduce the opportunities for infection-spreading contacts between the infective individuals and
the susceptible individuals in the city. Our simulator has been programmed for various timevarying interventions in the synthetically created city. We can then compare the effectiveness
of these interventions in terms of their resulting hospitalizations and fatalities.
The accuracy of our model naturally relies on the goodness of our various modelling
assumptions and the validity of the underlying parameters. As discussed in [3], the key
underlying parameters are set to match the deaths from infections that arose in the nointervention pre-lockdown scenario.
One drawback of ABCS is the many other parameters that need to be tuned. Also, the

5

disease progression statistics that we use are not based upon data observed from India (since a
scientific study that considers Indian data is surprisingly not yet available). This increases the
model uncertainty and questions the numerical values produced by our model. Perhaps, it is
reasonable to assume that the modelling uncertainty is similar across different interventions,
and hence we believe our model is much better suited at comparing different interventions
in terms of their future trends in epidemic evolution.
Scenarios considered: In this work, we perform a variety of simulations of these allowed
relaxations and restrictions to enable local administrators to evaluate the public health impact
of these measures. To this end, we include features such as adaptive modelling of containment
zones, trains, case isolation, home quarantine, etc.
We begin with a brief summary of these new features added to our simulator.
1) Phased opening of industries: While several restrictions remained in force until 18
May 2020 (e.g., domestic and international air travel4 , passenger movement by trains5 ,
buses for public transport, suburban and metro rail services, inter-district and interstate movement of individuals, closure of educational, training and coaching institutions, closure of industrial and commercial activities, hospitality services, entertainment,
shopping, religious places of worship, and restrictions on religious congregations)
relaxations were allowable for other activities. In particular, all essential services were
operational while Government services have been running at 5% since 18 May 2020
in Mumbai. We provide a comparative study of the public health impact across the
following different scenarios of the phased opening of industries from 1 June onwards.
•

Workplaces function at 5% during the period of May 18–31, at 20% for the month
of June, 33% for the month of July and 50% from August onwards.

•

Workplaces function at 5% during the period of May 18–31, at 33% for the month
of June, 50% for the month of July and 66.7% from August onwards.

2) Modeling of hotspots and containment zones: The MHA Order of 15 April 2020
[5] also indicated operational guidelines in hot-spots and containment zones. Hot-spots
are areas of large COVID-19 outbreaks, or clusters with significant spread of COVID19. These are to be determined as per the Ministry of Health and GoI guidelines.
In these hot-spots (red and orange zones in the MHA Order of 17 May 2020 [7]),
4

Limited domestic air travel has been resumed since 25 May 2020.

5

A limited number of long-distance trains have begun to allow for people working in the informal sector to travel and

return to their homes.

6

containment zones may be demarcated. Within these containment zones, there will
be strict perimeter control to ensure that no unchecked inward or outward movement
of population is permitted, except for maintaining essential services and government
activity.
We generalize and adopt a soft modeling of the containment zones at the level of a
ward based on the fraction of hospitalizations observed in that ward. As the fraction of
hospitalizations in the ward increases, the ward is more strictly closed with maximum
containment being observed when the hospitalized fraction (of the ward population) in
the ward exceeds a configurable parameter; this parameter is currently set to 0.1%.
3) Phased opening of trains: Suburban trains were not under operation in Mumbai till 31
May 2020. In a large metropolis like Mumbai, trains are a key mode of daily commute
to work and even a partial opening of workplaces is infeasible without a corresponding
partial opening of the trains. In fact, opening industries without the opening of trains
might lead to overcrowding in buses. We simulate the opening of trains in a phased
manner, similar to the opening of workplaces.
We would like to add the caveat that the train transmission parameter, unlike the other
parameters of our model, is not calibrated with respect to the initial data prior to the
lockdown. We pre-suppose that initial spread of the disease was primarily not via people
traveling by trains in Mumbai. Furthermore, trains had been running below capacity a
week prior to the lockdown and have stopped running entirely since then. Our choice
of the contact rates on trains is based on, on the face of it, reasonable assumptions
but, admittedly, not on data. This needs to be fine-tuned over a few weeks, to arrive
at better projections and at better strategies for opening up further. A cautious start
with restricted occupancies may provide us with more data on the adverse impact of
infection spread on trains.
4) Case Isolation and Home Quarantine: We model case isolation and home quarantining of individuals displaying symptoms as follows. After 24 hours of a person
showing symptoms, the person is case-isolated and the members of his household are
quarantined, if the household is compliant. This implies the person no longer goes
to work, the household members remains at home, and the visits to the community
centers are lowered significantly. Quarantining of other close contacts arising from
contact tracing, e.g., close contacts at work or in the immediate neighbourhood, is not
modelled in this work, but will be done in a subsequent work.
5) Role of Masks: The MHA order of 15 April [5, Annexure 1] made the wearing of

7

masks in public places compulsory. This has been re-emphasized in the MHA order of
30 May 2020 [1]. Various studies suggest that the use of masks considerably reduces
the transmission of respiratory virus diseases in workplaces, community and transport
spaces [12]–[15]. Face masks may help in three significant ways. They may directly
reduce the spread of the respiratory pathogen. They may help reduce the inhalation of
the respiratory pathogen. They may also reduce hand-to-face contact. We model the
effectiveness of masks by reducing the ability of an infectious individual to transmit the
infection by 20%, and by reducing the chances of a susceptible individual contracting
the infection by 20%, if a mask is worn.
6) Compliance levels: It is upfront unclear as to the extent to which orders on case
isolation, home quarantines and masks are complied with by the population. In fact
mobility results [16] suggest that there is still significant movement of people. To this
end, we bring a compliance factor into our simulation. Even under the strictest of
lockdowns, compliance is lower in high-density areas where individuals do not have
the luxury of many individual facilities, e.g., toilets, and are forced to access shared
facilities. We assume 40% compliance to lockdown restrictions in such high-density
areas and 60% in other areas. We also compare these results with increased levels of
compliance.
III. S IMULATION R ESULTS
As alluded to above, we consider two different scenarios of phased opening of workplaces
in the post lockdown phase from 1 June 2020 onwards.
•

The workplaces function at 5% for the period of May 18 – 31, at 20% for the month
of June, 33% for the month of July and 50% for August onwards.

•

The workplaces function at 5% for the period of May 18 – 31, at 33% for the month
of June, 50% for the month of July and 66.7% for August onwards.

These two scenarios are considered under 40% compliance in high-density areas and 60%
compliance in low-density areas. This level of compliance, with additional measures such
as containment zones and active mask usage, matches the observed data on fatalities. We
also consider these scenarios under increased compliance after the lockdown to highlight
the improvements that may be achieved with better enforcement. As mentioned above, we
assume strict case-isolation and home-quarantine post lockdown, containment zones, use of
masks, and restrictions on those above 65 to stay at home. We present results both when the
trains are operational, and when they are not. The latter is unrealistic in Mumbai at higher

8

levels of workplace functioning. It is added to illustrate the impact of trains on the spread
of infections.
We first present the plots representing our simulation results, draw some observations
based on these results and then state the modeling assumptions behind these simulations.
As in Report [3], in our current simulations, two synthetic cities are created that match the
aggregate Mumbai demographic data. For each synthetic city, five independent simulation
runs are conducted. The results reported are the average of these ten runs.
In Figure 1a, we show the number of hospitalized patients as a function of the date as per
the simulations while Figure 1b shows the cumulative number of hospitalized patients over
the same period. These suggest that the city may need of the order of 6,000–7,000 beds from
mid-June onwards. The requirement becomes critical if the trains are started after 31 May
as they lead to a significant increase in infections.
It is noteworthy that the India hospitalization case definition includes hospitalization for
case isolation. This number heavily depends on the testing protocol (positive cases and their
contacts). This will, therefore, be different from the actual number of cases or the actual
number of seriously ill cases requiring essential hospitalization. In Figures 1a–1b, we attempt
to capture only those requiring medical intervention associated with essential hospitalization.
Figure 1c shows critical cases as predicted by the simulation. The numbers suggest that
critical care units of order 1,500 would be adequate for Mumbai during the months of June,
July and August. In Figure 1d, we plot the cumulative number of people infected by the
disease. This includes all people infected with the disease (asymptomatic, symptomatic,
hospitalized, critical). Figures 1e–1f show the cumulative fatality numbers and daily fatality
numbers as a function of date under various scenarios.
Another point to highlight is the oscillating behaviour in the number of daily hospitalized
and critical cases in Figures 1a and 1c. This comes from our specific modelling of containment zones. As the number of hospitalized cases in a ward increases, a partial lockdown
in proportion to the number of hospitalized cases comes into play. When the number of
hospitalizations exceeds a threshold a full lockdown is enforced. Conversely, as the number
hospitalized cases reduces and is below the aforementioned threshold, the partial lockdown
is appropriately eased.
To compare between various levels of strictness in this modelling, we now consider a
particular phased opening scenario, namely: 5% for the rest of May, 20% for June, 33%
for July and 50% for August onwards and vary the containment leakage to see how this
affects the numbers. We plot results for containment leakage of 10%, 25%, 50% and 100%

9

(a) Simulated number of daily hospitalized patients in linear and log scale.

Figure 1: Varying attendance profiles, with trains on and off

10

(b) Simulated number of cumulative hospitalized patients in linear and log scale along with the confirmed
number of positive cases in Mumbai.

Figure 1: Varying attendance profiles, with trains on and off

11

(c) Number of daily critical cases in linear and log scales.

Figure 1: Varying attendance profiles, with trains on and off

12

(d) Cumulative number of people infected by the disease on a linear and log scale.

Figure 1: Varying attendance profiles, with trains on and off

13

(e) Cumulative fatality numbers on a linear and log scale along with the observed number of fatalities in
Mumbai.

Figure 1: Varying attendance profiles, with trains on and off

14

(f) Simulated number of daily fatalities along with the actual daily statistics

Figure 1: Varying attendance profiles, with trains on and off

(100% containment leakage corresponds to the case when there is no adaptive containment
enforced in the sense that there are no additional measures enforced as a function of higher
hospitalization cases).
Figures 2a–2f represent the (simulated) number of daily hospitalized, cumulative hospitalized, daily critical, cumulative fatalities and daily fatalities respectively for the varying
containment leakages, alongside the same with increased compliance of 70% and 50% in
low density and high-density areas respectively from 01 June 2020. These plots demonstrate
how an effective containment policy (even as low as 50%) can significantly reduce the number
of hospitalized, critical and fatalities.
Finally, we draw stackplots of the number of infected people for the particular scenario
of 5% for the rest of May, 20% for June, 33% for July and 50% for August onwards,
containment leakage of 0.25% and trains operational in Figure 3. The first figure in Figure 3
plots the cumulative number of active cases, recovered cases and fatalities as a function
of time, the second figure plots a finer daily sub-division of those exposed to the disease
(exposed, asymptomatic, mildly symptomatic, severe symptomatic, hospitalized, critical and

15

(a) Simulated number of daily hospitalized patients in linear and log scale.

Figure 2: Varying containment leakages, and compliance (from 1 June).

16

(b) Simulated number of cumulative hospitalized patients in linear and log scale along with the confirmed
number of positive cases in Mumbai.

Figure 2: Varying containment leakages, and compliance (from 1 June).

17

(c) Number of daily critical cases in linear and log scales.

Figure 2: Varying containment leakages, and compliance (from 1 June).

18

(d) Cumulative number of people infected by the disease on a linear and log scale.

Figure 2: Varying containment leakages, and compliance (from 1 June).

19

(e) Cumulative fatality numbers on a linear and log scale along with the observed number of fatalities in
Mumbai.

Figure 2: Varying containment leakages, and compliance (from 1 June).

20

(f) Simulated number of daily fatalities along with the actual daily statistics

Figure 2: Varying containment leakages, and compliance (from 1 June).

deceased) while the third figure plots the cumulative sub-division among the recovered cases.
A. Some observations
1) As noted earlier, the simulation results, conservatively interpreted to account for model
uncertainty, suggest that about 8,000 beds for COVID-19 patients with severe symptoms
requiring hospitalization, and around 1,500 ICU’s, can manage the medical needs
arising from COVID-19 infections in the month of June to August even with partial
opening up of workplaces and transportation. Thereafter, continuing stringent controls
may keep the numbers at similar levels.
2) We have assumed asymptomatic infections to be 33%. Literature suggests that this
lies between 20–60% [17]–[19]. A lower percentage of asymptomatic infections would
imply a higher daily requirement of hospital beds, and a higher percentage would imply
a lower daily requirement of hospital beds. Again, it is important to keep in mind that
trains may lead to more infections than suggested by our model.

21

3) We have used Wuhan based disease progression analysis [11], [18]. Availability of
Indian data would greatly help the accuracy of the generated scenarios.
4) Finally, we end with a caveat that simulation numbers are sensitive to how well the
containment zones are managed as well as the compliance levels. Managing these as
well as other measures such as social distancing, masks, aggressive contact tracing are
critical to keeping the health degradation numbers low.

22

Figure 3: Stackplot of division of simulated number infected patients

23

IV. M ODELING A SSUMPTIONS
The assumptions of our model are similar to those in the first report. We refer the reader to
the first report [3] for details on the agent-based model, how the synthetic city is constructed,
the assumptions therein. We state below the additional assumptions to incorporate the new
interventions in this report.
1) Case Isolation and Home Quarantine: After 24 hours of a person showing symptoms,
the person and the family is set to be quarantined. This implies the person no longer
goes to work, the family remains at home, household interactions reduce by 25%, and
the visits to the community centers are lowered significantly to 10% of the usual.
2) Masks: Assumed to reduce transmission rates at workplaces, community and transport
by 20% . This is active from April 9th onwards. If an infected person interacts with the
uninfected person and both are wearing masks, the transmission rate reduces to 64%.
On the other hand, if any one of them is not wearing mask, the transmission rate only
reduces to 80%.
3) Containment zones: We model containment zones at a ward level. We base the level of
containment as an adaptive function of the active hospitalizations observed in the ward.
Number of hospitalizations is taken as the decision variable as it is easily observable
as compared to the tracking the number of positive cases in a ward, which may be
harder to estimate accurately without extensive testing. The ward is incrementally closed
as more number of hospitalizations are observed in the ward. When the number of
hospitalizations in the ward exceeds 0.1%, we move to maximum containment – only
25% of the population is allowed to leave or enter this ward compared to the usual.
This 25% includes residents travelling for essential needs, as well as workers involved
in essential activities.
Specifically, this percentage of activity (entering and leaving the ward), or containment
leakage, is our control and we set the ward accessibility to
max (1 − 7.5 · H, 0.25)
where H (in percentage) denotes the fraction of people in the ward that are hospitalized6
(described pictorially in Figure 4 with varying levels of leakage parameters). The simulator incorporates the ward accessibility by dampening all interactions in community
6

In our current implementation, the number of hospitalized cases excludes those who are currently in critical care facilities.

24

spaces, and fraction of people who go to work from this ward, by the above accessibility
factor.

Figure 4: Adaptive ward containment

4) Age restrictions: We assume that people sixty five years and older are restricted to
stay at home.
5) Trains: For Mumbai, suburban trains are a key mode of daily transportation with
approximately 78 lakh (or 7.8 million) passenger trips daily in normal times. However,
trains were stopped in Mumbai prior to the national lockdown and were running below
capacity for at least a week before that. Moreover, it is assumed that the initial infections
were seeded by travellers that came from abroad. The primary mode of travel for this
group is unlikely to be suburban rail transport. Therefore, we do not calibrate the train
transmission parameter to the data prior to the lockdown.
However, as mentioned earlier, all other transmission parameters are calibrated to data
prior to the lockdown. To estimate the transmission parameter for trains, we instead
use a heuristic argument to compare it to the household transmission rate. This is done

25

using assumptions on the relative rates of close contacts per unit time that an individual
might observe at home, as compared to what she might observe during a commute. In
particular, we assume that the rate of close contacts that an individual observes in a
household is roughly 50/day, while the same figure during a train commute is roughly
1/minute. The details of this heuristic calculation follow.
Interaction parameters for trains:
In this section, we spell out our methodology for modeling the suburban train network
in Mumbai. At time t, let G(t) be the set of individuals who are taking the train
(an individual’s membership in this set is determined by factors such as whether the
individual is quarantined, whether her office is closed, etc.). Let I(t) ⊆ G(t) be the
subset of these individuals who are infectious at time t. We let di represent the (oneway) commute distance of individual i. Let N denote the number of individuals who
would take the train during normal circumstances (e.g, before the epidemic). Define
|G(t)|
,
N
X
Dinfectious (t) :=
di ,
ftravel (t) :=

i∈I(t)

Dtotal (t) :=

X

di , and

i∈G(t)

finfectious (t) :=

Dinfectious
.
Dtotal

We parameterize the spread of the infection during a suburban rail commute by a
parameter βT with dimensions of (length)−1 ·(time)−1 . Then, for a susceptible individual
a ∈ G(t), we take the contribution of her rail commute to her instantaneous infection
rate λa (t) (as defined in the companion report [3]) to be
βT · da · finfectious (t) · ftravel (t),

(1)

when t represents a time-step in the simulation corresponding to “morning” or “evening”,
and 0 otherwise (we recall from [3] that each day is divided into four simulations steps,
so that “morning” and “evening” can be taken to be the second and the fourth of these
four steps). This is done to model the fact that peak commute hours are in the mornings
and evenings. The fraction ftravel represents an attenuation resulting from occupancy in
trains being lower as a result of the intervention being simulated, while the fraction
finfectious is a heuristic estimate of the chance that a given close interaction during the
commute is with an individual who is currently infectious. Here, a close interaction

26

is defined as a contact that occurs at sufficient proximity and for a length of time
sufficient for the diseases to be potentially transmitted.
Ideally, one would like to estimate the value of the parameter βT by a calibration
similar to that used for estimating the other model parameters (such as βH ). However,
as outlined in Section IV, we do not have sufficient data for doing so. We therefore
try to estimate it heuristically using the calibrated estimates for βH .
Let c represent the probability of a close interaction with an infectious individual
leading to a transmission of the infection. Suppose that the probability law of the close
interactions that an individual has in a day with other members in a household is a
Poisson process with rate rH . Then, the interpretation of the household interaction
parameter βH is as the rate of a process obtained by thinning this process by a factor
c:
βH = crH .

(2)

(For further discussion on βH , we refer to the accompanying report [3].)
Now, we model infection spread in trains as follows. We assume that during normal
operation of the trains (i.e., before the epidemic) during peak commute hours, an
individual would have close interactions at the rate rT during a train commute, where
in a train commute we include last-mile means of transport such as buses or shared
auto-rickshaws/taxis. The rate parameter governing an individual getting an infection
during commute, if all her close interactions were with infectious individuals, is then
ρT := c · rT =

rT
rH

· βH . (To estimate the actual rate of infection, ρT will need to be

attenuated by the factors finfectious and ftravel defined above, in order to account for the
fact that not all close interactions will be with infectious individuals.)
Let s be the average speed of commute (including, as above, last-mile means of
transport), so that τa := da /s is an estimate of the time of the (one-way) commute of
individual a. Thus, during a time step t of the simulation which includes one direction
of the individual’s commute, the contribution of the commute to the instantaneous
infection rate λa (t) of the individual (amortized over the length ∆t = 1/4 day of the
time-step) can be taken to be
da · rT
τa
· ρT · finfectious · ftravel =
· βH · finfectious · ftravel .
∆t
∆t · s · rH
Equating the right hand side of this equation with the form for this contribution posited
in (1), we therefore get:
βT =

rT
· βH .
s · rH · ∆t

(3)

27

a) Heuristic assumptions: We now make the following heuristic assumptions on the
values of the parameters. We assume, first, that the rate rH of close interactions in an
household for an individual is roughly 50 day−1 . (Assuming an average household size
of roughly 5, this corresponds to 12.5 close interactions per day with each of the other
four members of this average household).
We further assume that during a commute, the rate rT of close interactions is roughly
1 min−1 = 60 hr−1 . Note that (3) shows that for estimating βT from βH , it is only
the ratio rT /rH that is relevant; the actual values of rT and rH do not matter for this
calculation so long as this ratio can be estimated well.
b) Numerical estimates: With the above assumptions, we can now make a numerical
estimate for βT in terms of βH , using (3). We take the average speed of commute
(recalling that a commute may include, in addition to trains, such last-mile means of
transport as buses and shared auto-rickshaws/taxis) as s = 25 km hr−1 . With the above
assumptions on the values of rH and rT , and using ∆t = 1/4 day, this gives
1
60 hr−1
= 0.192 βH km−1 ≈ βH km−1 .
βT =
−1
−1
5
25 km hr · 50 day · (1/4) day

(4)

We note here that we represent βT in units of km−1 day−1 , βH in units of day−1 , da
in km, and ∆t in units of days.
The above calculation depends upon several heuristic assumptions, eg. on the values
of rH and rT . While we expect these to have the right order of magnitudes, we have
not, unfortunately, been able to calibrate them against any directly observed data. As
a caution, we therefore also run our simulations with the multiplier

1
5

in (4) replaced

by 1/4 and 1/6 respectively. Some of these results are presented in Figure 5 (with
higher, base and lower estimates referring to the multipliers set to 1/4, 1/5 and 1/6
respectively).
A caveat is in order: if the ratio between the rate of close contacts during a commute,
and the rate of close contacts in a household is higher than the value obtained using the
above assumptions, then the effect from infections arising from train commutes would
be higher than what our simulations show.

28

(a) Simulated number of daily hospitalised patients in linear and log scale.

Figure 5: Effect of changing the values of βT

29

(b) Simulated number of cumulative hospitalised patients in linear and log scale along with the confirmed
number of positive cases in Mumbai.

Figure 5: Effect of changing the values of βT

30

(c) Number of daily critical cases in linear and log scales.

Figure 5: Effect of changing the values of βT

31

(d) Cumulative number of people infected by the disease on a linear and log scale.

Figure 5: Effect of changing the values of βT

32

(e) Cumulative fatality numbers on a linear and log scale along with the observed number of fatalities in
Mumbai.

Figure 5: Effect of changing the values of βT

33

(f) Simulated number of daily fatalities along with the actual daily statistics in Mumbai

Figure 5: Effect of changing the values of βT

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We sincerely thank Shubhada Agarwal, Siddharth Bhandari, Anirban Bhattacharjee, Anand
Deo, and Poonam Kesarwani for their valuable comments and help.
R EFERENCES
[1] “MHA order dt. 30.5.2020 on phased re-opening (unlock 1),” 30 May 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.mha.gov.in/sites/default/files/MHAOrderDt 30052020.pdf
[2] Municipal Corporation Greater Mumbai, “COVID-19 daily update, Greater Mumbai Area,” 02 June 2020. [Online].
Available: https://twitter.com/mybmc/status/1267860230966112258
[3] IISc-TIFR Covid-19 City-Scale Simulation Team, “COVID-19 epidemic I: Unlocking the lockdown in India,” Indian
Institute of Science and Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Tech. Rep., April 2020.
[4] J. E. Harris, “The subways seeded the massive coronavirus epidemic in new york city,” NBER Working Paper, no.
w27021, 2020.
[5] “Consolidated Revised Guidelines on the measures to be taken by Ministries/Departments of Government of
India, State/ UT Governments and State / UT authorities for containment of COVID-19 in the country,” 15
Apr 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.mha.gov.in/sites/default/files/MHA%20order%20dt%2015.04.2020%2C%
20with%20Revised%20Consolidated%20Guidelines compressed%20%283%29.pdf

34

[6] “MHA order dt. 1.5.2020 to extend lockdown period for 2 weeks w.e.f. 4.5.2020 with new guidelines,”
1 May 2020. [Online]. Available: https://mha.gov.in/sites/default/files/MHA%20Order%20Dt.%201.5.2020%20to%
20extend%20Lockdown%20period%20for%202%20weeks%20w.e.f.%204.5.2020%20with%20new%20guidelines.pdf
[7] “MHA order dt. 17.5.2020 on extension of lockdown till 31.5.2020 with guidelines on lockdown measures,” 17 May
2020. [Online]. Available: https://mha.gov.in/sites/default/files/MHAOrderextension 1752020 0.pdf
[8] “District Census Handbook 2011 - Mumbai,” https://censusindia.gov.in/2011census/dchb/DCHB A/27/2723 PART
A DCHB MUMBAI.pdf, 2014.
[9] “District Census Handbook 2011 - Suburban Mumbai,” https://censusindia.gov.in/2011census/dchb/DCHB A/27/2722
PART A DCHB MUMBAI%20SUBURBAN.pdf, 2014.
[10] P. H. D. Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai, “Census 2011, FAQ Answers,” https://portal.mcgm.gov.in/irj/go/
km/docs/documents/MCGM%20Department%20List/Public%20Health%20Department/Docs/Census%20FAQ%20%
26%20Answer.pdf.
[11] R. Verity, L. C. Okell, I. Dorigatti, P. Winskill, C. Whittaker, N. Imai, G. Cuomo-Dannenburg, H. Thompson, P. G.
Walker, H. Fu et al., “Estimates of the severity of coronavirus disease 2019: a model-based analysis,” The Lancet
Infectious Diseases, 2020.
[12] C. R. MacIntyre, S. Cauchemez, D. E. Dwyer, H. Seale, P. Cheung, G. Browne, M. Fasher, J. Wood, Z. Gao,
R. Booy, and N. Ferguson, “Face mask use and control of respiratory virus transmission in households,” Emerging
infectious diseases, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 233–241, 2009. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.3201/eid1502.081167
[13] A. E. Aiello, G. F. Murray, V. Perez, R. M. Coulborn, B. M. Davis, M. Uddin, D. K. Shay, S. H. Waterman, and
A. S. Monto, “Mask use, hand hygiene, and seasonal influenza-like illness among young adults: A randomized
intervention trial,” The Journal of Infectious Diseases, vol. 201, no. 4, pp. 491–498, 02 2010. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1086/650396
[14] N. Leung, D. Chu, and E. e. a. Shiu, “Respiratory virus shedding in exhaled breath and efficacy of face masks,”
Nature Medicine, vol. 26, pp. 676–680, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-020-0843-2
[15] D. Chu, E. Akl, A. El-Harakeh, A. Bognanni, T. Lotf, M. Loeb, A. Hajizadeh, A. Bak, A. Izcovich,
C. A. Cuello-Garcia et al., “Physical distancing, face masks, and eye protection to prevent person-person
covid-19 transmission: A systematic review and meta-analysis,” The Lancet, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)31142-9
[16] Google, “Covid-19 community mobility report,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.google.com/covid19/mobility/
[17] K. Mizumoto, K. Kagaya, A. Zarebski, and G. Chowell, “Estimating the asymptomatic ratio of 2019 novel coronavirus
onboard the princess cruises ship, 2020,” MedRxiv, 2020.
[18] N. Ferguson, D. Laydon, G. Nedjati Gilani, N. Imai, K. Ainslie, M. Baguelin, S. Bhatia, A. Boonyasiri, Z. Cucunuba Perez, G. Cuomo-Dannenburg et al., “Report 9: Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) to reduce
COVID19 mortality and healthcare demand,” Tech. Report, 2020.
[19] C. Wang, L. Liu, X. Hao, H. Guo, Q. Wang, J. Huang, N. He, H. Yu, X. Lin, A. Pan et al., “Evolving epidemiology and
impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions on the outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 in wuhan, china,” medRxiv,
2020.

