arXiv:2006.08356v1 [q-bio.PE] 11 Jun 2020

The hidden side of COVID-19 spread in Italy
Luigi Brugnano ∗

Felice Iavernaro †

Paolo Zanzottera ‡

June 16, 2020

Abstract
Background. The paper concerns the SARS-CoV2 (COVID-19) pandemic that, starting from the end of February 2020, began spreading
along the Italian peninsula, by first attacking small communities in north
regions, and then extending to the center and south of Italy, including the
two main islands.
Objective. The creation of a forecast model that manages to alert the
decision-making bodies and, in particular, the healthcare system, to hinder the emergence of any other pandemic outbreaks, or the arrival of
subsequent pandemic waves.
Methods. A new mathematical model to describe the pandemic is given.
The model includes the class of undiagnosed infected people, and has a
multi-region extension, to cope with the in-time and in-space heterogeneity of the epidemic.
Results. We obtain a robust and reliable tool for the forecast of the total
and active cases, which can be also used to simulate different scenarios.
Conclusions. We are able to address a number of issues, such as assessing
the adoption of the lockdown in Italy, started from 11 March 2020, and how
to employ a rapid screening test campaign for containing the epidemic.
Keywords: SARS-CoV2, COVID-19, pandemic, mathematical model for
epidemic, SI2 R2 model, multi-region SI2 R2 model.
MSC: 92C60, 92D30.

∗ Dipartimento di Matematica e Informatica “U. Dini”, Università di Firenze, 50134 Firenze,
Italy. Tel.: +39 055 2751421, e-mail: luigi.brugnano@unifi.it
† Dipartimento di Matematica,
Università di Bari, 70125 Bari, Italy.
Email: felice.iavernaro@uniba.it
‡ Dipartimento di Economia e Management, Università di Brescia, 25122 Brescia, Italy.
E-mail: paolo.zanzottera@unibs.it

1

1

Introduction

Virus SARS-CoV2 hit Italy at the end of February 2020: after the first patient
diagnosed in Codogno (Lodi, Lombardy) on the 21st of February, the virus
spread very quickly in the Italian peninsula, particularly in Lombardy and in
the northern Italy. The syndrome of acute respiratory disease and the consequences of COVID-19 put the national healthcare system under stress. The
first epidemic phase was characterized by a huge number of patients with severe or critical conditions that congested Lombardy hospitals, particularly in
the provinces of Lodi, Bergamo, and Brescia. Also neighboring provinces of
the Emilia Romagna region were affected: hospitals of provinces of Piacenza
and Parma had great difficulties to manage COVID-19 patients. Disease spread
in the regions around the epicenter of Lodi, but Italian government closed the
country progressively: at the beginning a red zone around Lodi was created;
then, all the Lombardy was declared red zone; finally, on 11 March 2020 every
region was locked down.1 In Italy, the COVID-19 spread has been inhomogeneous: in fact, in the North the virus spread out before the lockdown and a huge
number of people contracted the virus, whereas the Centre, South and Italian
islands regions (Sicily and Sardinia) had fewer cases, so that these regions were
able to manage the disease. This regional differences were amplified by the
lockdown in the country.
An inhomogeneous spread of COVID-19 happened also in other countries
and, where it coincides with a high-density residential area and with high mobility, the results are dramatic, as it happened in Lombardy and in the metropolitan area of big cities, such as Madrid, London, and New York. In those cases
it is fundamental the capacity of resilience and resistance of the health sanitary system in the region where the spread exploded as a big pandemic wave.
For these reasons mrSI2 R2 , the model given here, is a multi-regional model that
takes into account the inhomogeneous spread of the disease. Figure 1 shows how
there is a huge regional difference in the SARS-CoV2 spread along the country.
The incubation period of COVID-19 is quite long: for this reason when
the first patient, not imported from China, was diagnosed in Lombardy on the
21st of February, SARS-CoV2 was already spread in the most populated Italian
region. The virus was circulating since the beginning of February in Italy, as
is demonstrated by the onset data released by the Health National Institute.
Once people are diagnosed positive to COVID-19 from tests, they are asked
when they felt first symptoms and the onset data are drawn on the graph (see
Figure 2 ). In fact, we never talked in Italy about the patient-zero, but it was
always considered at least the patient-one.
For this reason the Italian healthcare system, as other European national
health systems in Spain, France, UK, and Belgium, were not prepared to manage
the first epidemic wave in Europe. The course of the COVID-19 disease is quite
long: it takes several days from the virus contact to the first symptoms to
1 In more details, starting from 10 March it was forbidden to move from one region to
another one, and every non essential activity was suspended on the 11th of March.

2

Figure 1: COVID-19 cases in the different regions of Italy on 4 May 2020 (source
Italian Istituto Superiore di Sanità).
hospitalization to death or recovery. Fastest cases take more than one week and
many other cases have a disease course of several weeks of hospitalization.
It is impossible to test the entire population of a country in a short time,
to verify the presence of SARS-CoV2 virus. Above all, at the beginning of
the epidemic, tests were scarce. A big part of the population has contracted
the virus, but it is not included in the “positive cases” statistics: both for the
presence of asymptomatic people, and for the difficulty of testing people with
clear COVID-19 symptoms. A healthcare system has to be prepared in the
future to test hundreds of thousands people each day. Tests are really important
to fight the virus as they are able to seek positive people, to isolate them, and
to contain the virus spread.
The lack of ICU beds, medical devices such as lung fans and even oxygen,
have amplified the impact of COVID-19 in the most affected areas. To this
must be added the lack of an adequate number of doctors, nurses and health
workers and, in some cases, even that of personal protective equipment. All
this, combined with the fact that COVID-19 is a new disease, little known even
in the medical field, has increased the apparent lethality rate, particularly in the
areas most affected by the spread of the virus. The preparation of the national
healthcare system is therefore decisive both for the containment of the disease
and for its ability to limit its most harmful effects on people. The creation
of a forecast model that manages to alert the decision-making bodies and, in
particular, the healthcare system, is therefore decisive to hinder the emergence
of any other pandemic outbreaks, or the arrival of subsequent pandemic waves.
The mathematical model mrSI2 R2 has been introduced for this reason, and
has proved to be able to predict the trend of the positives cases with an accuracy

3

Figure 2: diagnoses and onset of symptoms for patients in Italy (source Italian
Istituto Superiore di Sanità) [18].
greater than 90%, 3 weeks in advance. Having more than 20 days to prepare
for the management of a further pandemic outbreak, even on a regional and
local basis, is essential to set up suitable containment measures in due time.
Based on an extension of the classical SIR equations (see, e.g., [11]), the new
model takes the form of a delay differential system which incorporates the class
of undiagnosed infected individuals: these are the actual responsible for virus
shedding during their infectivity period, unless they are detected for some reason
and, therefore, quarantined. Within this class are asymptomatic and paucisymptomatic people, as well as infectious pre-symptomatic people, considering
that a significant portion of transmission is expected to occur before infected
persons have developed symptoms [8]. To take account for the time lag between
infectiousness onset, appearance of symptoms, and infection detection, a delay
time τ is introduced in the equations, making the resulting system very well
suited to fit the observed data. Furthermore, to account for the in-space and
in-time heterogeneity of the epidemic diffusion, the Italian peninsula has been
subdivided into four macro-areas and a new term has been introduced in the
equations to consider the effect of a possible migration from one area to another,
given that even a small uncontrolled flow of infected people may cause the
appearance of a new source of infection in a clean zone.
The mathematical modeling of the COVID-19 spread has been the subject of
many investigations (see, e.g. [4, 5, 6, 14]). The model here considered, though
quite refined in the description of the underlying infection mechanisms, tries
to keep at minimum the number of the involved variables and parameters to
4

be estimated, in order to reduce the risk of redundancy (existence of multiple
solutions) and, at the same time, to provide a reliable and computationally
affordable forecast tool. Among the other features, this model is able to predict
the actual portion of infected people (attack rate), to outline the benefits of the
lockdown, and to assess the extent to which rapid screening tests may help in
mitigating the risk of a future escalation of the infection.
With these premises, the structure of the paper is as follows: in Section 2 we
present the SI2 R2 model and its multi-region extension (mrSI2 R2 ); in Section 3
we study a number of application of the model to the spread of the epidemic in
Italy; finally, a few concluding remarks are reported in Section 4.

2

Methods

In case of a single region, we divide the population into the following 5 classes:
S: Susceptive individuals, circulating healthy people who come in contact
with infected persons and, thus, can catch the virus;
I1 : Infected undiagnosed individuals, the subclass of infected people who can
spread the disease (carriers);
I2 : Infected diagnosed individuals, the subclass of infected people who tested
positive for COVID-19 and, thus, quarantined;
R1 : Removed undiagnosed individuals, spontaneously recovered people coming
from class I1 ;
R2 : Removed diagnosed individuals, either recovered or died people coming
from class I2 .
Recovering from the illness seems to give some immunity [3, 9], so that recovered
people are assumed to be not susceptive anymore. The diagram in Figure 3
elucidates the interactions between the above classes defining the basic SI2 R2
model.2
Concerning our definition of susceptive people (class S) a remark is in order.
In contrast with what is usually done in the literature, we leave the initial value
of S as an unknown parameter. Its value has to be determined during the
optimization procedure, which estimates the set of the involved parameters in
order to fit the observed data as close as possible. We made this choice for two
main reasons:
• on one hand, the assumption underlying general epidemic models that the
population is subject to a form of homogeneous mixing (see, e.g. [11]), evidently does not apply in our context: as was outlined in the introduction,
local sources of infection have spread the disease in neighboring areas first,
so that the number of healthy people coming in contact with the virus was
2 The

acronym SI2 R2 derives from the initials of the 5 classes.

5

Figure 3: interactions among the classes of the SI2 R2 model.
far from being equal to all the population during the first stages of the
epidemic diffusion;
• on the other hand, our choice reflects the final goal of social-distancing
measures, such as the lockdown, where people are isolated to prevent
possible contacts with the virus. In this regard, it should be noted that in
some regions the spread has been confined to small areas and, thus, did
not affect the whole population that much.
Hereafter, in order to keep the notation as simple as possible, we shall make
the following formal correspondences between compartments and variables describing their numerosity:
Susceptive individuals S
Infected undiagnosed individuals I1
Infected diagnosed individuals I2
Removed undiagnosed people R1
Removed diagnosed people R2

→
→
→
→
→

x
y1
y2
z1
z2

The SI2 R2 model is then described by the following equations,

β

 ẋ(t) = − N x(t)y1 (t),


β

 ẏ1 (t) = N
x(t)y1 (t) − σy1 (t − τ )s+ (y1 (t)) − γ1 y1 (t),

ẏ2 (t) = σy1 (t − τ )s+ (y1 (t)) − γ2 y2 (t),




ż1 (t) = γ1 y1 (t),



ż2 (t) = γ2 y2 (t),
6

(1)

where:
• β is the coefficient of infection rate;
• γ1 and γ2 are the removal coefficients of the two classes y1 and y2 , respectively;
• σ is the probability of detection of infected people by means of the Covid
tests campaign;
• τ is a delay time, and accounts for the time elapsing between the onset
of infectiousness and the detection of the disease, for example after the
appearance of symptoms or a contact-tracing procedure;
(
1,
if y1 (t) > 1,
• s+ (y1 (t)) =
0,
otherwise,
is a switch factor which prevents the corresponding solution component
to became negative.
Considering that the sum of the right-hand sides in (1) identically vanishes,
we get the conservation property
x(t) + y1 (t) + y2 (t) + z1 (t) + z2 (t) ≡ N,

(2)

the total number of people entering the model, which remains constant over
time.
All the parameters listed above were left free, with the exception of the removal coefficient γ1 and the delay time τ , which have instead been inferred from
the literature. The remaining parameters have been tuned in order to assure a
good fitting with the observed data by employing a global optimization procedure. The reason for fixing γ1 a priori is that, otherwise, a certain parameter
redundancy was experienced and, consequently, the model appeared not locally
identifiable. This means that different but close configurations of the parameters could be selected leading to essentially the same accuracy in fitting the
observed data. Based on the results reported in [12], we have set
γ1 = 4.3 · 10−2 d−1 ≈ (23 d)−1 ,

(3)

where d stands for days. As for the choice of the delay time τ , we have confined
the analysis to symptomatic individuals only, and considered two additive contributions: the period of infectiveness before the development of symptoms plus
the the time duration from the onset of symptoms and diagnosis. Their mean
values have been inferred from [8] and the data available at [17] respectively,
resulting in the choice τ = 10 d. Figure 2 better clarifies this aspect. It shows
bar diagrams on the dates of onset of symptoms (dark blue bars) and dates of
diagnosis (light blue bars). We have noted that the peak of onset date was on
the 10th of March, the last day before Italy tightened the lockdown. Positives
on diagnoses tests continued to rise for 10 days before reversing the trend.3 In
3 This

time shift is also consistent with the Italian regional data [19].

7

principle, a couple of days should be added to this delay time, due to the period
of infectiveness before the development of symptoms [8]. However, we have kept
the value τ = 10 d considering that: a) a certain percentage of infected people
is diagnosed before symptoms occur; b) the results obtained by using nearby
values of τ were pretty similar.
To cope with the heterogeneous nature of the spread of COVID-19 disease
across the Italian peninsula (see, e.g., the data in Figure 1 or the web-pages
[16, 17, 20]), we have introduced a multi-region extension of the basic model
(1). In more details, assuming that we have divided the country into r regions,
the multi-region version of (1) reads:

Pr
βi
xi (t)yi1 (t) + j=1 ρij xj (t),
ẋi (t) = − N


i

Pr

βi


 ẏi1 (t) = Ni x(t)yi1 (t) − σi yi1 (t − τ )s+ (yi1 (t)) − γi1 yi1 (t) + j=1 ρij yj1 (t),
ẏi2 (t) = σi yi1 (t − τ )s+ (yi1 (t)) − γi2 yi2 (t),

Pr



żi1 (t) = γi1 yi1 (t) + j=1 ρij zj1 (t),



żi2 (t) = γi2 yi2 (t),
i = 1, . . . , r,
(4)
where xi , yi1 , yi2 , zi1 , zi2 , βi , σi , γi1 , γi2 are related to the i-th region, and are
defined as for (1). As before, we set γi1 = γ1 as in (3). We see that
Ni := Ni (t) = xi (t) + yi1 (t) + yi2 (t) + zi1 (t) + zi2 (t),

i = 1, . . . , r,

is the (time dependent) number of individuals in the ith region, whereas the
migration coefficients ρij satisfy
ρij ≥ 0,

i 6= j,

r
X

ρij = 0,

(5)

i=1

due to the fact that ρij , i 6= j is the coefficient of migration from region j to
region i. We observe that, because of (5), the sum of all right-hand sides in (4)
vanishes. As a result, one has that
N :=

r
X

Ni (t) ≡ const,

(6)

i=1

which is the analogue of (2) for the multi-region extension of the model.
For our purposes, we have divided Italy into the following r = 4 macroregions, depending on the onset of the epidemic and the geography (see Figure 1),
• Lombardy;
• North, including: Emilia Romagna, Friuli-Venezia Giulia, Liguria, Piemonte,
Trentino-Alto Adige, Valle d’Aosta, Veneto;
• Center, including: Abruzzo, Lazio, Marche, Toscana, Umbria;
• South (and islands), including: Basilicata, Calabria, Campania, Molise,
Puglia, Sardegna, Sicilia.
8

3

Results

Starting from 24 February 2020 (initial day t0 = 0), the number of diagnosed
active cases yi2 (tn ) and the removed = recovered+deceased individuals zi2 (tn )
at day tn , published on a daily basis by the Italian Civil Protection Department
[16], have been exploited to tune the parameters of the model (4) in order to fit
the data in the ith macro-region. The fitting procedure, carried out with the
aid of the Matlab ® optimization toolbox,4 has been split into three phases:
(a) at first, in each macro-region we fit the corresponding total cases, yi2 (tn )+
zi2 (tn ), given by the diagnosed active cases and removed people. Adding
the third and the last equations in (4), we see that the removal coefficient
γi2 are not explicitly involved at this stage. Moreover, in this fase we set
the migration coefficients to 0, i.e., we at first neglect the inter-regions
movements;
(b) the second optimization phase adapts the solution components yi2 (tn )
(positive active cases) and removed (recovered or deceased) individuals
zi2 (tn ) in the ith macro-region, to the observed data by suitably tuning
the removal coefficient γi2 ;
(c) finally, a further improvement is gained by making the migration coefficients ρij in (4) come into play.
The rationale behind this approach is to better exploit the degree of regularity
of data and make the resulting minimization algorithm more efficient. In fact, in
each macro-region, the total cases exhibit a more regular temporal distribution
and thus, in performing phase (a), they play a more important role in tuning
all the free parameters except γi2 .
The task of splitting the total cases into the two classes of positive active
cases, yi2 (tn ), and removed cases, zi2 (tn ), is assigned to phase (b). Here, the
data display a much more irregular behavior especially in Lombardy, probably
due to the human interference in deciding when an infected individual is to be
considered completely recovered. As a matter of fact, a huge amount of positive
cases moving from active to recovered may be observed in some specific days.
This is mainly due to the criteria of discharge of COVID-19 patients adopted
in Italy and, in particular, to the “negativization tests” for home quarantined
people (hospitalized discharges are less affected by this phenomenon). For this
reason, the coefficients γi2 have been assumed piecewise-constant on time intervals of length of (at least) 30 d.
Lastly, phase (c) refines the fitting of the solution to the data: it has played
a significant role during the days approaching the lockdown which saw a considerable number of workers and students, native to South Italy, to leave the
4 It is also worth mentioning that the numerical integration of the delay equations (4)
has been done by using a high-order Gauss-Legendre Runge-Kutta method used as spectral
method in time [1], which has allowed to greatly reduce the computational cost of the procedure, w.r.t. the use of the Matlab® function dde23.

9

Figure 4: forecast for the total cases (left pictures) and diagnosed active cases
(right pictures) on 1 and 22 April 2020, respectively.
northern regions in order to avoid the quarantine restrictions imposed by the
Italian government.
The results for the whole country are obtained by summing those in each
macro-region. To this end, hereafter we set:
x(t) =

4
X
i=1

xi (t),

yj (t) =

4
X

yij (t),

i=1

zj (t) =

4
X

zij (t),

j = 1, 2,

(7)

i=1

representing the 5 classes of the model related to Italy.

3.1

Reliability of the model

Forecasts of the total and active confirmed positive cases, in the above four
macro-regions and Italy, are generated every day and collected at the web-site
[15] starting from 1 April 2020. Here we report a few of them, in order to show
the reliability of the model.
Detection of the pick of confirmed active cases. On April 19, the curve
of the Italian active (diagnosed) cases y2 (tn ) attained its maximum of 108257
individuals, and exhibited a flat slope in the neighbouring days before slowing
10

down. To check the accuracy of the model in predicting the peak day and the
number of total confirmed cases y2 (tn ) + z2 (tn ), we have solved the model by
fitting its solutions to the observed data available on April 1 and 22. The results
for these two datasets are displayed in the top and bottom pairs of pictures in
Figure 4, respectively. The solid lines are predicted by the model, whereas the
circles correspond to the observed data. The dashed vertical lines locate the
days around the predicted peak where the number of active cases differ at most
of 0.4% from the maximum. We see that both the total cases and the peak day
in Italy (corresponding to day 55) are quite well-predicted on a time range of
more than twenty days.
Estimation of the actual attack rate. It is widely believed that the number
of infected people who remain hidden to COVID-19 testing programs is likely
far grater than the number of confirmed cases worldwide. The importance
of practicing social distancing and safety measures not only reflects the risks
associated with the pre-symptomatic stage of the disease, but also suggests
that an important role in the transmission of the virus might be played by
asymptomatic and pauci-symptomatic people. In absence of a population-wide
testing, it is difficult to estimate how many people get infected without showing
significant symptoms. As for now, there are isolated studies which cannot be
extended to general contexts, even though a percentage of asymptomatic carriers
reaching the 80% among all infected people has been considered a possible
outcome in areas with high prevalence of circulating infection [7].
While waiting for an extensive screening program, one route for investigating
the number of hidden infections is to rely on a suitable compartmental epidemiological model, able to explain the dynamics of virus shedding in observed data
and to yield possible scenarios of those classes of population that may not be
directly traced (see, for example, [4, 5, 6]). By considering the class y1 (t) of
untested infected people, our model offers a tool to to get an estimation of the
portion of population who actually got the virus (actual attack rate). We emphasize that, strictly speaking, our model does not consider a separate class for
asymptomatic people, but we can get some insight into this additional question under suitable assumptions which depend on the context (see below for a
discussion).
As a reference dataset to tune the parameters of the model, we used the
observed data updated to 24 May 2020 (day 90).5 The aim of the two upper
pictures in Figure 5 is to assess the accuracy of the model in fitting the data.
In particular:
• the upper-left picture shows the total confirmed cases (circles) and the
corresponding solutions yi2 (tn ) + zi2 (tn ), i = 1, . . . , 4, for the four macroregions and y2 (tn ) + z2 (tn ) for the whole Italy obtained in output by the
model (solid lines). We see that the yielded accuracy is quite good, and is
fostered by the regular course, from the appearance of the symptoms to
5 This

dataset will be also considered for later use.

11

Figure 5: Top: simulated and actual data on 24 May 2020 (day 90) for the total
cases (left plot) and diagnosed active cases (right plot). Bottom: estimated
global total cases and carriers using the parameters of 24 May 2020 (day 90).
the disease detection, ruling the transition from the class yi1 of infected
untested people to the class yi2 of confirmed patients;
• the upper-right picture shows the active confirmed cases (circles) and the
corresponding solutions yi2 (tn ), i = 1, . . . , 4, for the four macro-regions
and y2 (tn ) for the whole Italy. In this case, the data display a certain
irregularity especially in Lombardy and in the rest of Northern Italy. As
was discussed above in the description of the optimization algorithm, here
the transition from illness (class yi2 ) to healing (class zi2 ) heavily depends
on human decision-making. In any event, the regular shape of the model
solution curves describe the overall behavior of the data with good enough
accuracy.
After selecting the parameters, we can look at the other components of
the solution which reveal the hidden side of virus diffusion in Italy. They are
displayed in the two bottom pictures of Figure 5:
• the bottom-left picture shows the number of the overall infected individuals, namely the total cases including both diagnosed and untested people.
These are easily computed as the sums yi1 (t) + zi1 (t) + yi2 (t) + zi2 (t) in
12

Table 1: diagnosed and global total cases after the end of the lockdown.

Lombardy
North
Center
South
Italy

day
level

diagnosed
measured simulated
78105
78910
91600
89544
27205
26948
15028
14853
211938
210256

global
simulated
2841561
1792530
426153
92027
5152270

global/
diagnosed ratio
36
20
16
6
25

Table 2: peak of the carriers.
Lombardy
North
Center
South
19
23
20
21
1.4 · 106
9.0 · 105 2.4 · 105 5.3 · 104

immunity
rate
28.2%
10.1%
3.20%
0.48%
8.53%

Italy
21
2.5 · 106

each macro-region, and their sum for the whole Italy. The model reveals a
very dramatic scenario with an actual attack rate far greater than the one
corresponding to the confirmed cases. Table 1 summarizes the number of
these global cases right after the end of lockdown on May 3, 2020, and
compare them with the confirmed ones;
• the bottom-right picture shows the evolution in time of carriers, namely
the undiagnosed active cases forming the classes yi1 (t) for each macroregion and, according to (7), y1 (t) for Italy. They exhibit a behavior quite
different from that of the diagnosed active cases (upper-right plot in Figure 5). The most evident difference concerns the peak day which occurs
about one month earlier than the corresponding one in the diagnosed active cases. As is expected, it falls in proximity of the nation lockdown on
March 11 (day 16). Interestingly, our simulation reveals how the forced
distancing-measures, imposed by the government to all the nation, impacted on the infection growth curve which, after a few days, reached its
maximal level and rapidly decreased during the subsequent days. Table 2
reports the day and the level of the peak in each macro-region and in Italy.
The extent to which these percentages may reflect the real epidemic diffusion
in Italy will be revealed once a screening of a wide random sample of population
will be carried out. In any event, Table 1 discloses very different scenarios for
the four analyzed macro-areas, depending on the onset of the infection.
In the north of Italy, where the infection growth rate reached dramatic levels,
the local healthcare system became overwhelmed. Consequently, a relevant
number of infected people, even those experiencing symptoms, were supposed
to escape any test detection. In support of this commonly shared hypothesis,
one may observe that, from late February through all of March, there was a
huge amount of not-counted deaths which may indirectly be related to SARSCov2. In Table 3, we summarize some results coming from a study performed
by ISTAT (Italian Institute of Statistics) and ISS, dated 4th of May, which
13

Table 3: increase of mortality from 20 February to 31 March 2020.

Lombardy
North
Center
South
Italy

total deaths
2020
27279
29123
13985
20559
90946

average
total deaths
2015-19
11195
21296
13120
19981
65592

deaths
COVID-19
2020
8362
4195
749
404
13710

additional
increase of
deaths 2020
7722
3632
116
174
11644

compares the total deaths from 20 February to 31 March 2020 (excluding 29
February 2020) with the yearly average deaths of the past 5 years. From the last
column in Table 3, we see that a huge excess of morality, not ascribed to the virus
lethality, has been experienced in this period by the northern regions. Among
these are certainly deaths due by poor health conditions that might normally
have been treated, if hospitals had not collapsed by a surge of patients needing
intensive care. However, considering that deaths for and with COVID-19 were
counted only for those people who tested positive before passing away, it is not
unfounded to argue that a considerable amount of such a discrepancy might be
related to virus infection which, in turn, suggests a certain level of correlation
between this excess of deaths and the actual proportion of population who has
been infected without being diagnosed. In this respect, Table 1, shows that
the estimated cumulative number of infected are about 25 times the confirmed
ones in the whole Italy, and even more in Lombardy, where an immunity rate
of about 30% seems to be achieved at the end of lockdown.
On the contrary, in the Center and South of Italy the virus had a minor
impact and the public emergency measures were introduced in time, so that the
spread was successfully contained. In particular, in the South of Italy, where the
healthcare system did not go out of control, we can speculate that a great deal of
untested infected people might actually be asymptomatic or pauci-symptomatic.
Under this simplifying assumption, from Table 1 we can guess that more than
80% of the simulated 92027 individuals in the South of Italy could be mildly
symptomatic. This percentage can make sense, also considering that a certain
number of asymptomatic individuals is anyway detected by means of contacttracing policies, thus entering the class y42 of confirmed cases.
Finally, we stress that the results illustrated above apply for the specific
choice of the two static parameters γ1 and τ in the model. A sensitivity analysis
shows that, while increasing or decreasing τ of a couple of days does not produce
considerable changes in the results, a variation of γ1 seems to affect the solution
more directly. In particular, diminishing the value of this parameter would
result in an increase of the estimated values of the total cases so that, in this
event, our results would underestimate the actual situation.

14

Figure 6: scenario with and without lockdown in North Italy (including Lombardy).

3.2

The lockdown effect

An interesting use of the model is to ascertain the benefits of lockdown, which
was imposed by the authorities starting from 11 March 2020 (day 16 starting
from February 24). At that time, the spread of the disease in the regions of
Center and South Italy was contained, and the data were scarce. Consequently,
in our analysis of the pre-lockdown period (actually, before day 24), we have
discarded the data from regions in the Center and South plus islands.
As was outlined above, the model (4) derives an estimate for the initial
values of the susceptives, xi (0), i = 1, . . . , 4 (and thus for x(0), according to
(7)), during the fitting phase (a). As one would expect, this number increases
during the initial part of the spread of an epidemic, reflecting the space diffusion
of the disease in new uninfected populated areas, until it eventually saturates
the whole population of a given region.
In Figure 6 the circles are the number of susceptives in North Italy (including
Lombardy) estimated by the model (4), normalized by the whole population
(about 2.7 · 107 people), with the solid line being its logistic approximation.
Because of the lockdown, which is marked by the vertical dotted line at day 16,
one infers that about 20% of the whole population becomes eventually exposed
to the virus. We see that, after the lockdown, the estimated susceptives continue

15

Figure 7: simulated total cases (left plot) and diagnosed active cases (right plot)
for the whole Italy with and without lockdown using the parameters of 24 May
2020 (day 90).
to increase for about 10-12 days, which is consistent with the maximum period
of incubation of the virus. After that, the number of susceptives stabilizes.
To figure out how the scenario would have played out in absence of lockdown,
we use the pre-lockdown data to define a new logistic approximation which
coincides with the previous one until day 16 (i.e., the day of lockdown), and
eventually saturate the whole population. It is the dashed curve in Figure 6,
showing that almost all population becomes susceptible after about 90 days (24
May 2020). This reasoning allows us to virtually compare the real situation at
day 90, with a hypothetical one where all the parameters of the model remain
fixed, but the susceptives, which are set equal to the whole population. The
results are summarized in Figures 5, 7, and 8:
• in Figure 5, we displayed the simulated curves (solid lines) and observed
data (circles) for the total diagnosed cases and the active diagnosed cases
on 24 May 2020 (i.e., day 90). As one may see, the free parameters may
be finely tuned in order to force the solution of (4) to lie very close to
the observed data in each macro-region and, therefore, in the whole Italy.
Excluding the initial values xi (0) of susceptible individuals in each macroregion, the set of parameters obtained by this simulation has then been
used to infer the scenario in absence of lockdown;
• in Figure 7, we report again the total cases and active diagnosed cases for
the whole Italy (solid line) in semilogarithmic scale, corresponding to the
situation with lockdown, and compare them with the simulation obtained
by using all the parameters as in the previous case, but the susceptives,
which are set to the whole population in each macro-region (dashed lines).
As one may see, at day 100 the forecast for the total cases passes from
less than 2.5 · 105 , with the lockdown, to about 5 · 106 in the no-lockdown
scenario. Correspondingly, the infectious individuals have a peak of about
105 cases, with lockdown, whereas it is more than 2·106 in the no-lockdown
case. Assuming the same lethality for the disease in the two scenarios, this
16

Figure 8: simulated susceptives (left plot) and undiagnosed recovered (right
plot) for the whole Italy with and without lockdown using the parameters of 24
May 2020 (day 90).
would mean passing from about 3.4 · 104 deaths to about 7 · 105 . It should
be emphasized that the no-lockdown scenario assumes that no new kind
of emergency measure is introduced during the simulated period by the
government or by the population itself, and does not take into account a
number of critical variables that would likely affect the obtained results
such as, for example, the effects of overloading healthcare structures;
• in Figure 8, it is depicted the simulation of the total susceptives and of
undiagnosed infected people spontaneously recovered, i.e. (see (7)), the
classes x(t) and z1 (t), with and without lockdown. As one may infer
from the left plot, in the no-lockdown case, one reaches a so-called herd
immunity [13], with most of the population infected by the virus, even
though many spontaneously recover, as is shown in the right plot of the
figure.

3.3

Anticipating the lockdown

As was outlined above, the lockdown was able to stop the epidemic spread in
the regions of the Center and South Italy where the contagious arrived later,
whereas in the North of Italy the situation has been much more critical, as is
testified by the huge number of deaths with respect to the rest of the country.
The question then arises as to when the North Italy should have been locked
down in order to share a development of the disease similar to that observed in
the other regions.
To this end, in Figure 9 we plot the normalized susceptives estimated by the
model in the North Italy (including Lombardy, as we did in Figure 6), with the
circles starting from day 8, and in the Center and South Italy summed together,
given by the squares starting at day 24, since in the preceding days the cases
where too few to have a sufficient statistical accuracy. Also in this case, the
number of the susceptives is normalized by the population in Center and South

17

Figure 9: Effect of an anticipated lockdown at day 4, instead of day 16.
Italy (about 3.3 · 107 people).
As one may see, now the level of the susceptives exposed to the virus is
much smaller (less than 2%) and this has been the main reason for the better
situation in the Center and South of Italy. Consequently, one infers that a
similar outcome would have emerged in North Italy, too, provided that the
lockdown had started when the level of susceptives was similar. Form the logistic
approximation obtained before (solid line in Figure 9), one deduces that this
would have been the case with the lockdown starting at day 4, instead of day
16 (see the circle at the intersection of the two estimates). This means that
imposing a lockdown in North of Italy two weeks in advance would probably
have guaranteed a much less dangerous spread of the epidemic.

3.4

Introducing rapid tests for screening

A way to reduce the impact of the epidemic after the end of the lockdown, could
be that of removing infective undiagnosed people by using rapid tests for detecting whether one is infective. Confining the analysis, for sake of simplicity, to
the model (1), we then introduce an extra-removal term in the second equation,
thus getting:

18

Figure 10: simulated susceptives, using data on 24 May 2020 (day 90) with the
specified level of rapid tests.


β
ẋ(t) = − N
x(t)y1 (t),




β


x(t)y
ẏ
(t)
=
1 (t) − σy1 (t − τ )s+ (y1 (t)) − (γ1 +
 1
N
ν
ẏ2 (t) = σy1 (t − τ )s+ (y1 (t)) + N
y1 (t) − γ2 y2 (t),




ż1 (t) = γ1 y1 (t),



ż2 (t) = γ2 y2 (t),

ν
N )y1 (t),

(8)

ν
where we have used the same notations as in (1), with N
the fraction of individuals that undergoes the test. Also in this case, one verifies that the conservation
property (2) holds true, with N the total number of individuals. The multiregion variant of (8) is analogously derived.
In Figure 10 we show the simulation of Italy in case the lockdown is released,
by using the parameters estimated at day 90 (as we did before) but neglecting,
for sake of simplicity, the migration terms. Consequently, we now allow all the
people to become susceptive, though introducing a level of tests of 5%, 10%,
15%, and 20% in the population.
As one may see, in order to get a scenario at day 90 similar to the one
yielded by the lockdown (about 15% of the population exposed to the virus), an
amount of rapid tests equal to 20% of the whole Italian population should be

19

administered on daily basis (ν/N = 0.2). The exposed population (susceptives
estimated by the model at time t = 0) would rise to more than 40%, 70% and
90% if the tested people drop to 15%, 10% and 5% ,respectively. Even though
it is not shown in the figure, a level test of 25% seems to be sufficient to make
almost all population not exposed to the virus.
In conclusion, if rapid tests are administrated randomly to the population,
only a high percentage amount would produce benefits comparable (or even better) to that of imposing a lockdown. Nonetheless, we could expect a significant
improvement of their effectiveness, if addressing the rapid test campaign to people subject to a major risk of spreading the epidemic, such as people working
in public offices, markets, etc.

4

Conclusions

In this paper we have shown that the SI2 R2 model and, in particular, its multiregion variant mrSI2 R2 , can be reliably used for predicting the evolution of
the COVID-19 epidemic in Italy. It can, therefore, represent a viable tool for
optimizing the usage of a healthcare system. We have used it to asses the
impact of lockdown on the management of this emergence, as well as to infer
that bringing it forward by a couple of weeks would have presumably resulted
into a much better outcome of the spread of the epidemic. We have also derived
an estimate for the actual total infected people, i.e., both the diagnosed and
the undiagnosed ones, guessing that the former are about 4% of the total. Last,
but not least, the model can be also extended to include the extensive usage of
rapid tests to manage the epidemic when the lockdown is released.
Declarations of interest:

none.

Acknowledgements: the authors are very indebted to the wonderful team
actively contributing the mrSIR project, including the “Associazione Italia Digitale”, as well as to the generous supporters [22].

References
[1] P. Amodio et alii. Analysis of Spectral Hamiltonian Boundary Value
Methods (SHBVMs) for the numerical solution of ODE problems. Numerical Algorithms 83 (2020) 1489–1508, https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11075-019-00733-7
[2] Simon JB. Aylwin et alii. COVID-19 diagnoses in South East London
peaked before the UK suggesting early measures reduced transmission.
Journal of Infection (2020), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jinf.2020.
04.043

20

[3] Linlin Bao et alii. Lack of Reinfection in Rhesus Macaques Infected with
SARS-CoV-2. bioRxiv preprint: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.
13.990226
[4] D. Fanelli and F. Piazza. Analysis and forecast of COVID-19 spreading in
China, Italy and France. Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 134 (2020) 109761,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chaos.2020.109761.
[5] Xinmiao Fu et alii. Simulating and forecasting the cumulative confirmed
cases of SARS-CoV-2 in China by Boltzmann function-based regression
analyses. Letters to the Editor/Journal of Infection 80 (2020) 578–606,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jinf.2020.02.019
[6] G. Giordano et alii. Modelling the COVID-19 epidemic and implementation
of population-wide interventions in Italy. Nature Medicine Letters (2020),
https://doi.org/10.1038/S41591-020-0883-7
[7] A.J. Ing et alii. COVID-19: in the footsteps of Ernest Shackleton. Thorax
(2020), https://doi.org/10.1136/thoraxjnl-2020-215091
[8] Xi He et alii. Temporal dynamics in viral shedding and transmissibility of
COVID-19. Nature Medicine Brief Communication (2020), https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41591-020-0869-5
[9] Lan Lan et alii. Positive RT-PCR Test Results in Patients Recovered From
COVID-19. JAMA 323(15) (2020) 1502–1503, https://doi.org/10.1001/
jama.2020.2783
[10] E. Lavezzo et alii. Suppression of COVID-19 outbreak in the municipality
of Vo’, Italy. medRxiv preprint: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.17.
20053157.
[11] D.G. Luenberger. Introduction to Dynamic Systems: Theory, Models and
Applications. John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1979, pp. 376–378.
[12] Ji Yun Noh et alii. Asymptomatic infection and atypical manifestations
of COVID-19: comparison of viral shedding duration. Journal of Infection
(2020), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jinf.2020.05.035
[13] H.E. Randolph and L.B. Barreiro. Herd Immunity: Understanding COVID19. Immunity 52 (2020) 737–641, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.
2020.04.012
[14] A. Remuzzi and G. Remuzzi. COVID-19 and Italy: what next? The Lancet
395 (2020) 1225–1228, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)
30627-9
[15] https://www.mrsir.it/en/projections/
[16] http://www.protezionecivile.gov.it (daily accessed).
21

[17] https://www.epicentro.iss.it
2020)

(accessed on 12 April 2020 and 4 May

[18] https://www.epicentro.iss.it/en/coronavirus/bollettino/
Infografica_3giugno%20ENG.pdf (accessed on 6 June 2020).
[19] https://www.epicentro.iss.it/coronavirus/bollettino/
Bolletino-sorveglianza-integrata-COVID-19_26-maggio-2020_
appendix.pdf (accessed on 6 June 2020).
[20] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/COVID-19_pandemic_in_Italy
[21] https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/
[22] https://www.mrsir.it/en/about-us/

22

