SN Computer Science manuscript No.

(will be inserted by the editor)

Examination of Community Sentiment Dynamics due
to COVID-19 Pandemic: A Case Study from A State in
Australia
Jianlong Zhou∗ · Shuiqiao Yang ·
Chun Xiao · Fang Chen

arXiv:2006.12185v2 [cs.SI] 17 Apr 2021

Received: date / Accepted: date

Abstract The outbreak of the novel Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) has

caused unprecedented impacts to people’s daily life around the world. Various
measures and policies such as lockdown and social-distancing are implemented by
governments to combat the disease during the pandemic period. These measures
and policies as well as virus itself may cause different mental health issues to people
such as depression, anxiety, sadness, etc. In this paper, we exploit the massive text
data posted by Twitter users to analyse the sentiment dynamics of people living
in the state of New South Wales (NSW) in Australia during the pandemic period.
Different from the existing work that mostly focuses the country-level and static
sentiment analysis, we analyse the sentiment dynamics at the fine-grained local
government areas (LGAs). Based on the analysis of around 94 million tweets that
posted by around 183 thousand users located at different LGAs in NSW in five
months, we found that people in NSW showed an overall positive sentimental
polarity and the COVID-19 pandemic decreased the overall positive sentimental
polarity during the pandemic period. The fine-grained analysis of sentiment in
LGAs found that despite the dominant positive sentiment most of days during the
study period, some LGAs experienced significant sentiment changes from positive
∗ Corresponding

author
J. Zhou
Data Science Institute
University of Technology Sydney, Australia
E-mail: jianlong.zhou@uts.edu.au
S. Yang
Data Science Institute
University of Technology Sydney, Australia
E-mail: shuiqiao.yang@uts.edu.au
C. Xiao
Faculty of Transdisciplinary Innovation
University of Technology Sydney, Australia
E-mail: chun.xiao@uts.edu.au
F. Chen
Data Science Institute
University of Technology Sydney, Australia
E-mail: fang.chen@uts.edu.au

2

Jianlong Zhou∗ et al.

to negative. This study also analysed the sentimental dynamics delivered by the
hot topics in Twitter such as government policies (e.g. the Australia’s JobKeeper
program, lockdown, social-distancing) as well as the focused social events (e.g. the
Ruby Princess Cruise). The results showed that the policies and events did affect
people’s overall sentiment, and they affected people’s overall sentiment differently
at different stages.
Keywords Community sentiment · Twitter · COVID-19 · Visual analytics

1 Introduction

The World Health Organization (WHO) declared novel Coronavirus Disease 2019
(COVID-19) as a pandemic in March 2020 [16]. It has now spread across the world
and there have been more than 6.29 million confirmed cases and more than 380,000
people died because of the virus until 4 June 2020. Almost all countries in the world
are battling against COVID-19 to prevent it from the spread as much as possible.
The impact of the COVID-19 outbreak has been so huge that it is said to be the
most serious epidemic in the past hundred years comparable to pandemics of the
past like Spanish flu of 1918, or the Black Death in the mid-1300s. The outbreak
has caused scares across the globe affecting millions of people either through infection or through increased mental health issues, such as disruption, stress, worry,
fear, disgust, sadness, anxiety (a fear for one’s own health,and a fear of infecting
others), and perceived stigmatisation [13, 3]. These mental health issues can even
occur in people not at high risk of getting infected, in the face of a virus with which
the common people may be unfamiliar [13]. These mental health issues can cause
severe emotional, behavioral and physical health problems. Complications linked
to mental health include: unhappiness and decreased enjoyment of life, family conflicts, relationship difficulties, social isolation, problems with tobacco, alcohol and
other drugs, self-harm and harm to others (such as suicide or homicide), weakened
immune system, and heart disease as well as other medical conditions.
Furthermore, lockdown is a commonly completed measure to stop the spread
of virus in the community. For example, countries like China, Italy, Spain, and
Australia were fighting with the COVID-19 pandemic by taking strict measures of
national-wide lockdown or by cordoning off the areas that were suspected of having risks of community spread throughout the period of the pandemic, expecting
to “flatten the curve”. Therefore, it is critical to learn the status of the community mental health especially during the pandemic period so that corresponding
measures can be taken in time.
On the other hand, social media such as Twitter represent a relatively real-time
large-scale snapshot of messages reflecting people’s thoughts and feelings. Every
tweet is a signal of the social media users’ state of mind and state of being at that
moment [5]. Aggregation of such digital traces may make it possible to monitor
health behaviours at a large-scale [9]. While during the lockdown of COVID-19,
people have taken social media to express their feelings and find a way to calm
themselves down. Therefore, social media have created possibilities of analysing
people’s sentiment and its dynamics during the pandemic period. The most recent
work have used Twitter to analyse public sentiment during the pandemic [2, 3].
These work largely focus on the public sentiment in country-level or even multiple

Examination of Community Sentiment Dynamics

3

countries for a specific period. However, a granular analysis of sentiment of a single
city or even a suburb is more operable for related parties such as governmental
departments to take corresponding actions. Furthermore, the sentiment dynamics over time instead of sentiment of a specific period will help related parties
understand the effectiveness of any measures implemented.
This paper aims to examine community sentiment dynamics due to COVID19 pandemic in Australia. Twitter data are collected and analysed to extract
sentiment scores which may be affected by COVID-19 and related events during
the COVID-19 period. Instead of the sentiment examination of the whole country,
this paper investigates a fine-grained analysis of sentiment in local government
areas of a state in Australia, which can help government to take corresponding
measures more objectively if necessary. Furthermore, through analysing topic key
words labelled by hashtag in Twitter, this paper examines community dynamics
because of different events, government policies and programs or others with visual
analytics.

2 Related Work

2.1 Social media sentiment analysis
Sentiment analysis is a research topic that analyzes people’s sentiments, opinions,
mental states, and emotions from data resources like texts, images and videos
that generated by human beings [11]. With the rapidly development of social media platforms such as Twitter and Facebook [17], it becomes possible to collect
large-scale of text data from millions of users for the social medial sentiment analysis [1]. Most of the methods take the concept of supervised machine learning for
social media sentimental analysis [6, 12, 10, 7]. In those methods, the supervised
machine learning models classify a tweet into predefined sentimental categories
such as positive and negative. Specifically, the supervised machine learning models
firstly need to be trained with data that contain the labels for different sentiments.
Then, the trained models can be used for sentiment prediction. For instance, Go
et al. [6] adopted the distant supervision strategy to create a labeled tweet dataset
for training supervised machine learning models such as Naive Bayes, Maximum
Entropy, and support vector machine. The emoticons such as :), :( are served as
noise labels to indicate the sentiment of the tweet publisher as positive or negative. With the superior advantages of automatically feature selection from raw
data, deep learning techniques have also been adopted for sentiment analysis. Jiang
et al. [10] adopted the the latest techniques of deep neural network as the sentimental classifier for more accurate sentiment classification. Except the machine
learning based methods for sentiment analysis, there some lexicon-based methods
that exploiting the word polarity to compute the sentimental score for a given
text [8, 15, 14]. For example, Ortega et al. [14] proposed to exploit multiple steps
of different techniques for Twitter sentimental analysis. Firstly, the pre-processing
for tweets was performed to clean the raw texts. Then, an existing polarity detection method were adopted to compute the sentimental score of each word. Finally,
they adopted a rule-based classification to classify the sentiments for tweets. The
adopted polarity detection and rule-based classification methods were based on
existing knowledge bases: WordNet and SentiWordNet.

Jianlong Zhou∗ et al.

4

2.2 Sentiment analysis for COVID-19 based on Twitter
More recently, with the pandemic of COVID-19 spreading in the world, there are
some work that exploiting sentiment analysis as a tool to investigate the people’s
reactions. For instance, Barkur et al. [2] analysed public sentiment of Indians
after the lockdown announcements were made. The social media platform Twitter
was used for the sentiment analysis. The analysis showed that Indians have taken
the fight against COVID-19 positively and majority are in agreement with the
government for announcing the lockdown to flatten the curve. However, this work
focused on the overall public sentiment of a specific period but did not show the
dynamics of sentiment during the study period. Bhat et al. [3] analysed sentiments
expressed globally through Twitter and found that the perception of Twitter users
was mostly positive or neutral during the COVID-19 pandemic period. It indicated
that even though Twitter users were quarantined or staying at home, yet they
were hopeful and experiencing a different unique socialization opportunity with
family. Dubey [4] analysed tweets from twelve countries during a selected period
of the pandemic, aiming to understand how the citizens of different countries are
dealing with the situation. The results showed that while majority of people were
taking a positive and hopeful approach, there were instances of fear, sadness and
disgust exhibited worldwide. Furthermore, four countries, France, Switzerland, the
Netherland and USA have shown signs of distrust and anger on a bigger scale as
compared to the remaining eight countries.
However, these previous work on COVID-19 sentiment analysis largely focuses
on the public sentiment in country-level or globally for a specific period. However,
little work is found to analyse dynamics of community sentiment over time for
different regions especially when government policies are applied or significant
events are occurred during the pandemic period.

3 Data and Methods

3.1 Study Location
For this study, we focus on the state New South Wales (NSW) in Australia. NSW
has a large population of around 8.1 million based on the census in September 2019
from Australian Bureau of Statistics1 . The state’s capital city Sydney is Australia’s
most populated city with a population of over 5.3 million people. The Local Government Areas (LGAs) of New South Wales are the third tier of government in the
Australian state (the three tiers are federal, state, and local government). There
are 128 LGAs in NSW. In this study, the Twitter data were collected for each
LGA separately so that the sentiment dynamics can be analysed and compared
among LGAs.

3.2 Measuring Community Sentiment
Sentiment analysis, also known as opinion mining or emotion AI, is a sub-field
of Natural Language Processing (NLP) that tries to identify, extract, quantify,
1

https://www.abs.gov.au/

Examination of Community Sentiment Dynamics

5

and study affective states and subjective information within a given text. We
utilize the VADER (Valence Aware Dictionary for sEntiment Reasoning) [8] to
analyse sentiments implied in tweets. VADER is a lexicon and rule-based sentiment
analysis tool that is specifically attuned to sentiments expressed in social media.
In this study, VADER is used to compute the sentiment value of each tweet.
The sentiment of all tweets in an LGA is then aggregated for each LGA. In this
study, sentiment of each LGA is aggregated with the Eq. 1 - 3 to get the dominant
mean sentiment of LGA, which is also called community sentiment:
Pnp
Sp =
Sg =

i

N
Png
i

sip

(1)

sig

(2)

N
Sp , if |Sp | >= |Sg |
Sg , if |Sp | < |Sg |


Sf =

(3)

where sip is the sentiment value of tweet i which has positive sentiment, np is the
number of tweets which have positive sentiment, where sig is the sentiment value
of tweet i which has negative sentiment, ng is the number of tweets which have
negative sentiment, N is the number of all tweets in an LGA, and Sf is the final
sentiment of an LGA.
Table 1 and Table 2 show examples of tweets with positive and negative sentiment values computed with VADER.
Table 1: Examples of tweets with positive sentiment.
Tweets
Thank you all for hanging out in stream tonight. It was a lot of fun! ...
for the amazing support you are all amazing.
this interesting piece by the team at Macrobusiness suggests that it
mainly benefits the wealthy, and the working classes ...
Harold is my best friend, and he’s got a personality unlike any other cat ...
I hope the other cats of the litter have gone on to brighten the lives of ...
Congratulations! He’s adorable. I hope you’re all safe and well and
getting some sleep
Good evening my dear Bianca, another beautiful day here. Hope you are
enjoying the sunshine too. Stay safe ...
you are literally the best person! who would ever thing of making a zoom
release party with fans? oh yeah, YOU! you are the most kind and caring ...
So great to see the quality care happening at MHOC Vacation Care.
Happy kids, fun activities, safe environment

Sentiment
0.9628
0.9606
0.967
0.9652
0.9869
0.9768
0.9896

3.3 Analytical Approach
In this study, various analytical approaches are applied to examine community sentiment dynamics before the outbreak of COVID-19, during the COVID-19 period,
and post period of the COVID-19. The community sentiment may be affected by

Jianlong Zhou∗ et al.

6

Table 2: Examples of tweets with negative sentiment.
Tweets
So between this and CO repeating it’s just a flu and the rest is a dem hoax,
WHY THE BLOODY HELL BLAME CHINA?? HAD THEY BLOODY ...
So sad it’s painful to see #CoronaVirusinKenya has become a weapon to
hurt our people. God be our shield
The most overweight liar? Tells the biggest lies? The most dangerous lies?
The most lies per word spoken? Or all four?
SARS-2+A NEW AGE; SARS-2 (COVID19) is an opportunity to stop
all the lies from publicly paid servants and fraudulent statement...
Guns at Protests, Looks More like a Threat of Violence... These are the
Crazy Bastards Dangerous Bastards... #MichiganProtest #Michigan
Yea, criminals usually don’t like anyone telling them that they can’t be
criminals. Fired Up? Well we’re fucking fired up too. So fuck those ...
Find them, charge them for assault and braking social distancing laws.
There is no excuse for this! Shameful, disgusting, ... behaviour!

Sentiment
-0.9741
-0.9604
-0.9623
-0.9661
-0.9655
-0.9762
-0.9702

various significant events or policies implemented by the government during the
COVID-19 period such as the state lockdown or restrictions to movement.
The community sentiment of overall NSW state is firstly aggregated and analysed. We then split the community sentiment analysis for each LGA of NSW to
see the sentiment difference among LGAs. The daily and weekly dynamics of these
community sentiment are examined to find how various factors affect community
sentiment.

3.4 Datasets
In order to analyse the dynamics of sentiment during the COVID-19 pandemic
period in a fine-grained level, we collected tweets from Twitter users that live in
the different LGAs of NSW in Australia. The time span of the collected tweets is
from 1 January 2020 to 22 May 200 which covers dates that the first confirmed case
of coronavirus was reported in NSW (22 January 2020) and the first time that the
NSW premier announced the relaxing for the lockdown policy (10 Mary 2020).
Table 3 shows the statistics of the collected tweet dataset. We totally collected
94,707,264 tweets with averagely 739,901 tweets for each LGA during the study
period. Datasets of COVID-19 tests and confirmed cases in NSW were collected
from DATA.NSW 2 .
Table 3: Statistics of the collected Twitter dataset.
Description
Total Twitter users
Average Twitter user per LGA
Average tweets per LGA
Total tweets

2

https://data.nsw.gov.au/

Numbers
183,104
1,430.5
739,900.5
94,707,264

Examination of Community Sentiment Dynamics

7

(a) The tests and confirmed cases of COVID-19 in NSW.

(b) The overall community sentiment dynamics in NSW during the study period.

Fig. 1: The COVID-19 spread and community sentiment in NSW.

4 Results

Fig. 1a shows the overview of the number of tests and confirmed cases of COVID19 in NSW over the COVID-19 period. It was found that there usually had test
peaks at the beginning of each week and had less numbers at the weekend, which
well aligns with the people’s living habits in Australia. It shows that the outbreak
peak of COVID-19 in NSW was on 26 March 2020 and tests were significantly
increased after 13 April 2020. It also shows that most of confirmed cases were
originally related to overseas.

8

Jianlong Zhou∗ et al.

4.1 Sentiment Dynamics in NSW
Fig. 1b presents the overall community sentiment dynamics in NSW during the
study period. It shows that the public had a highly positive sentiment on the new
year day. There was a significant decrease until 5 January. This was maybe because
of the continued bushfire in NSW at that period. After that, the sentiment of the
public was increased and then kept relatively stable until 8 March. From 8 March,
the overall sentiment was decreased significantly and kept in low level continuously.
This is well aligned with the overall trend of COVID-19 spreading in NSW as shown
in Fig. 1a, which shows that the number of confirmed cases of COVID-19 was
increased significantly from 8 March. Overall, the community showed a dominant
positive sentiment during the study period despite the COVID-19 spread. This
observation is also aligned with findings from other researchers who got the similar
conclusions from one country or several countries [2, 3]. Furthermore, it shows
that the COVID-19 spread did affect community sentiment and decreased the
community sentiment during the COVID-19 pandemic, which can be clearly seen
from Fig. 1a.

4.2 Sentiment Dynamics in LGAs
This subsection further analyses community sentiment dynamics in LGAs in NSW.
Fig. 2 shows an example of community sentiment dynamics in LGAs in NSW on
different two days: 10 March 2020 and 16 March 2020. It shows that the community sentiment were different across different LGAs on each day. Furthermore, the
community sentiment of each LGA was changed on different days. When we zoom
in the sentiment map to LGAs around Sydney City areas as shown in Fig. 3, we
can see more details of sentiment changes of LGAs around Sydney City areas on
these two days. For example, Ryde is an LGA close to Sydney City. In an aged
care centre in this LGA, a nurse and an 82-year-old elderly resident were tested
positive for coronavirus at the beginning of March3 . After that, a number of elderly residents in this aged care centre were tested positive for COVID-19 or even
died. At the same time, a childcare centre and a hospital in this LGA have been
reported positive COVID-19 cases in March. Many staff from the childcare centre
and the hospital were asked to test virus and conduct home isolation for 14 days.
All these maybe resulted in public sentiment changes significantly as shown in
Fig. 3. For example, the sentiment in Ryde LGA was changed from high positive
to high negative on 10 March 2020 and 16 March 2020.
Fig. 4 presents the community sentiment dynamics in Ryde LGA over the study
period. It shows that the community experienced frequent negative sentiment in
March, and recovered to positive dominantly in April. This is maybe because the
COVID-19 spread situation in March as mentioned previously in this LGA and
the spread was controlled in April, which helped people boost positive sentiment.
3 https://www.smh.com.au/national/woman-catches-coronavirus-in-australia-40sydney-hospital-staff-quarantined-20200304-p546lf.html

Examination of Community Sentiment Dynamics

9

Fig. 2: The community sentiment map in LGAs in NSW on 10 March 2020 (top)
and 16 March 2020 (bottom).

Jianlong Zhou∗ et al.

10

Fig. 3: The community sentiment dynamics in selected LGAs around Sydney City
areas on 10 March 2020 (left) and 16 March 2020 (right).

Fig. 4: The community sentiment dynamics in Ryde LGA.

4.3 Dynamics of Twitter Topics
We analysed hot topics in tweets labelled with hashtag. The sentiment of each
tweet is got using the VADER tool as described previously. If the sentiment of a
tweet is positive, the topic key words labelled with hashtag in this tweet are then
labelled as positive sentiment. The topic key words with the negative sentiment
are got with the similar approach. Different topic key words are then analysed
statistically to understand the sentiment dynamics. Fig. 5 shows the dynamics of
top 20 Twitter topics during the study period in NSW. Y-axis represents the count
of different topic key words occurred in tweets. Positive numbers represent count
of topic key words with positive sentiment, and negative numbers represent count
of topic key words with negative sentiment. This is same for other figures from
Fig. 6 to Fig. 9.
4.3.1 Topic of COVID-19

Fig. 5 shows that COVID is the dominant topic in the study period from the week
of 2 March. When we drill down into details of this figure, we can see that the

Examination of Community Sentiment Dynamics

11

Fig. 5: The dynamics of top 20 Twitter topics during the research period.

occurrence of the topic of COVID appeared from the week of 20 January, and
began to increase significantly from the week of 2 March. It reached the peak in
the week of 23 March. After that, the occurrence of the topic of COVID decreased
gradually and kept stable from the week of 20 April. This trend is well aligned
with the trend of COVID-19 situation in NSW as shown in Fig. 1a. Furthermore,
Fig. 5 shows that the dominant sentiment around the topic of COVID was positive.
This conclusion is aligned with findings in previous research [2, 3]. This is maybe
because that people had a positive belief to the combat against COVID-19 by the
government and the society.
4.3.2 Topic of lockdown

Fig. 6 shows the dynamics of Twitter topic of lockdown. From this figure, we can
see that the topic of lockdown was started from the week of 9 March and reached to
the peak point at the week of 23 March. On that week, NSW government officially
announced the state lockdown on 30 March and the restrictions were begun from
31 March4 . After that, this topic was kept stable until the week of 27 April. From
the week of 4 May, there was a small peak of the topic occurrences. Maybe this
was because that the NSW government announced the ease of restrictions on 10
May5 . Overall, the community kept a positive sentiment dominantly to lockdown
despite negative sentiment existing. This was maybe because that some people
were not accustomed to the restrictions which caused negative sentiment.
4.3.3 Topic of Social-Distancing

Fig. 7 presents the dynamics of Twitter topic of social-distancing. It shows that
the topic of social-distancing appeared from the week of 9 March and significantly
4 https://gazette.legislation.nsw.gov.au/so/download.w3p?id=Gazette_2020_202065.pdf
5 https://www.nsw.gov.au/media-releases/nsw-to-ease-restrictions-week-0

Jianlong Zhou∗ et al.

12

Fig. 6: The dynamics of Twitter topic of “lockdown”.

increased to a peak after a week. This is maybe because that the confirmed cases
of COVID-19 were increased significantly and the government encouraged people
to increase social-distancing, which caused a significant increase of public conversation on social-distancing on Twitter. After that week, the occurrence of the
topic of social-distancing was gradually decreased until the week of 6 April and
then kept stable relatively. Overall, the community showed the positive sentiment
dominantly from the beginning of social-distancing until the week of 11 May. This
is maybe because that the NSW government announced the ease of restrictions on
10 May as mentioned previously, which resulted in the negative sentiment to the
social-distancing from the community.
4.3.4 Topic of Jobkeeper

The Australian Government introduced the Jobkeeper wage subsidy program at
the end of March, allowing businesses to claim a fortnightly payment of $1,500
per eligible employee from 30 March 2020, for a maximum of 6 months6 . The
starting time of jobkeeper topic was also clearly demonstrated in the dynamics of
Twitter topic of jobkeeper as shown in Fig. 8. This figure shows that the public
kept a positive sentiment dominantly to jobkeeper program from the beginning of
its introduction until the week of 27 April. From the week of 4 May, people showed
a negative sentiment dominantly. This is maybe because that people had received
negative news on operations of jobkeeper program. For example, it was reported
that the number of people on jobkeeper was revised down by 3 million due to the
errors at the beginning of the program7 .
6 https://treasury.gov.au/sites/default/files/2020-04/Fact_sheet_supporting_
businesses_0.pdf
7 https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-05-22/jobkeeper-numbers-cut-by-3-millionbusinesses-accounting-bungle/12277488

Examination of Community Sentiment Dynamics

13

Fig. 7: The dynamics of Twitter topic of “Social-distancing”.

Fig. 8: The dynamics of Twitter topic of “Jobkeeper”.

4.4 Sentiment Dynamics Affected by Events
Community sentiment may also be affected by big events during the COVID-19
period. For example, the Ruby Princess Cruise docked in Sydney Harbour on 18
March 2020. Despite having passengers with COVID-19 symptoms, about 2700
passengers were allowed to disembark on 19 March without isolation or other
measures, which was considered to create a coronavirus hotbed in Australia. The

Jianlong Zhou∗ et al.

14

Ruby Princess Cruise has been linked to at least 662 confirmed cases and 22 deaths
of COVID-198 .
Fig. 9 presents the community sentiment dynamics related to the Ruby Princess.
It shows that the topic of the Ruby Princess appeared from the week of 16 March
and was increased significantly after that. It reached a peak at the week of 30
March and kept high occurrences until the beginning of May. This trend is well
aligned with the actual timeline of the public reporting of confirmed cases and
deaths as well as other events (e.g. police in NSW announced a criminal investigation into the Ruby Princess cruise ship debacle on 5 April) related to the Ruby
Princess 8 . Overall, the community showed a dominant negative sentiment to Ruby
Princess throughout the event period.

Fig. 9: The dynamics of Twitter topic of “Rubyprincess”.

5 Conclusions and Future Work

This study conducted a comprehensive analysis of the sentiment dynamics in the
state of New South Wales (NSW) in Australia due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Instead of the country-level study, the sentiment in this work was analysed at local
government areas (LGAs) level based on more than 94 million tweets collected
from Twitter for a 5-month period started from 1 January 2020. The results of
the dynamical sentiment analysis showed that the overall sentimental polarity was
positive in NSW and the positive sentiment was decreased from the beginning of
March to May 2020 due to the significant increase of COVID-19 confirmed cases
from 8 March and the further carried out lockdown policies. When we drilled down
into LGAs, it was found that different LGAs showed different sentiment polarity
8 https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/may/02/australias-coronaviruslockdown-the-first-50-days

Examination of Community Sentiment Dynamics

15

scores during the study time, and each LGA may have different sentiment polarity
scores on different days. Despite the dominant positive sentiment most of days
during the study period, some LGAs experienced significant sentiment dynamics
maybe because of the serious COVID-19 infections in those LGAs. This study also
analysed the sentimental dynamics delivered by the hot topics such as government
policies (e.g. the Australia JobKeeper program) and the focused social events (e.g.
the Ruby Princess Cruise). The results showed that the implemented policies or
occurred events affected people’s overall sentiment differently, and at the different
stage, people showed different sentiment.
This paper presented a case study of the sentiment dynamics due to COVID19. More interesting topics can be explored based on the current study in the
future. For example, the topic modelling techniques can be applied to conduct
more comprehensive analysis to get people’s topic level sentiments. The individual level sentiment dynamics can also be analysed to help government and local
communities to locate the people that may suffer from the negative sentiments.
Besides the sentiment polarity, other mental health issues due to COVID-19 such
as depression and anxiety will also be analysed in Twitter in our future work.
Acknowledgements Authors would like to thank Zhangwei Chen for his help in the collection of Twitter data.

Conflict of Interest: No conflict of interest exists for all participating authors.

References
1. Anuprathibha, T., Selvib, C.S.: A survey of twitter sentiment analysis. IIOAB Journal
7(9Special Issue), 374–378 (2016)
2. Barkur, G., Vibha, Kamath, G.B.: Sentiment analysis of nationwide lockdown due to
COVID 19 outbreak: Evidence from india. Asian Journal of Psychiatry (2020)
3. Bhat, M., Qadri, M., Beg, N.u.A., Kundroo, M., Ahanger, N., Agarwal, B.: Sentiment
analysis of social media response on the covid19 outbreak. Brain, Behavior, and Immunity
(2020)
4. Dubey, A.D.: Twitter sentiment analysis during COVID-19 outbreak. SSRN Scholarly
Paper ID 3572023, Social Science Research Network (2020)
5. Gibbons, J., Malouf, R., Spitzberg, B., Martinez, L., Appleyard, B., Thompson, C., Nara,
A., Tsou, M.H.: Twitter-based measures of neighborhood sentiment as predictors of residential population health. PLoS ONE 14(7) (2019)
6. Go, A., Bhayani, R., Huang, L.: Twitter Sentiment Classification using Distant Supervision. Processing -, 1–6 (2009)
7. Hassan, A., Abbasi, A., Zeng, D.: Twitter sentiment analysis: A bootstrap ensemble framework. Proceedings - SocialCom/PASSAT/BigData/EconCom/BioMedCom 2013 pp. 357–
364 (2013). DOI 10.1109/SocialCom.2013.56
8. Hutto, C.J., Gilbert, E.: Vader: A parsimonious rule-based model for sentiment analysis
of social media text. In: ICWSM (2014)
9. Jaidka, K., Giorgi, S., Schwartz, H.A., Kern, M.L., Ungar, L.H., Eichstaedt, J.C.: Estimating geographic subjective well-being from twitter: A comparison of dictionary and
data-driven language methods. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117(19),
10165–10171 (2020)
10. Jianqiang, Z., Xiaolin, G., Xuejun, Z.: Deep Convolution Neural Networks for Twitter
Sentiment Analysis. IEEE Access 6, 23253–23260 (2018). DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2017.
2776930
11. Liu, B.: Sentiment analysis and opinion mining. Synthesis lectures on human language
technologies 5(1), 1–167 (2012)

16

Jianlong Zhou∗ et al.

12. Mittal, A., Goel, A.: Stock prediction using twitter sentiment analysis.
Standford University, CS229 (2011 http://cs229. stanford. edu/proj2011/GoelMittalStockMarketPredictionUsingTwitterSentimentAnalysis. pdf) 15 (2012)
13. Montemurro, N.: The emotional impact of COVID-19: From medical staff to common
people. Brain, Behavior, and Immunity (2020)
14. Ortega, R., Fonseca, A., Montoyo, A.: Ssa-uo: unsupervised twitter sentiment analysis.
In: Second joint conference on lexical and computational semantics (* SEM), vol. 2, pp.
501–507 (2013)
15. Thelwall, M., Buckley, K., Paltoglou, G., Cai, D., Kappas, A.: Sentiment strength detection in short informal text. Journal of the American society for information science and
technology 61(12), 2544–2558 (2010)
16. World Health Organization: Coronavirus disease (covid-19) pandemic (2020). URL
https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019.
[Online; accessed 2020-05-15]
17. Yang, S., Huang, G., Ofoghi, B., Yearwood, J.: Short text similarity measurement using
context-aware weighted biterms. In: Concurrency Computation. John Wiley and Sons Ltd
(2020). DOI 10.1002/cpe.5765

