COVID-19 amplifies gender disparities in research
Goran Murića , Kristina Lermana,b , and Emilio Ferraraa,b,c
a

USC Information Sciences Institute; a USC Department of Computer Science; a USC Annenberg School of Communication

arXiv:2006.06142v1 [cs.DL] 11 Jun 2020

This manuscript was compiled on June 12, 2020

Early evidence suggests that women, including female researchers,
are disproportionately affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, with negative consequences to their productivity. Here, we test this hypothesis by analyzing the proportion of male and female researchers that
publish scientific papers during the pandemic. We use data from
biomedical preprint servers and Springer-Nature journals to show
that the fraction of women publishing during the pandemic drops significantly across disciplines and research topics, after controlling for
temporal trends. The impact is particularly pronounced for biomedical papers related to COVID-19 research. Further, by geocoding author’s affiliations, we show that gender disparities are exacerbated in
poorer countries, even though these countries had less of a gender
gap in research prior to the pandemic. Our results illustrate how exceptional events like a global pandemic can further amplify gender
inequalities in research. Our work could inform fairer scientific evaluation practices, especially for early-career female researchers who
may be disproportionately affected by the pandemic.
science of science | gender disparities | research evaluation

A

s of the date of this writing, the COVID-19 pandemic
has claimed over 400,000 lives worldwide and disrupted
almost all aspects of human society. Stay-at-home orders, lock
downs and school closures have affected scientists as well, and
especially those caring for children or elder family members (1,
2). As a result, the productivity of female scientists appears
to have decreased (3–5). Early evidence suggests that the
proportion of publications with female authors is lower during
the pandemic (6, 7); furthermore, the proportion of female
scientists publishing specifically about COVID-19 is dropping
much lower than expected, by almost 23% (8, 9).
To investigate whether COVID-19 exacerbates the gender
gap in scientific publishing, we collect data about 80,875 papers from biorXiv (43,459 papers), medrXiv (5,080 papers)
and selected high-impact Springer-Nature journals (32,348
papers). By using state-of-the art gender inference techniques,
we identify the most likely gender of the 445,633 authors. For
those publications that do not provide the location of the
author’s affiliated institution, we infer it by using an ad hoc
localization method. We build a set of statistical models to
estimate the expected prevalence of female authors publishing
during the COVID-19 pandemic and compare it to observed
data.
Our analysis focuses on 361,234 authors (228,449 male
and 132,789 female) whose gender could be inferred with high
accuracy. Even after correcting for temporal trends, we observe
an average drop of 5% in the proportion of female authors
during the COVID-19 pandemic. For research topics related
directly to COVID-19, the proportion of female scientists in
first author positions drops by 44%. Male authors are more
likely to publish papers about COVID-19 as the first authors
on preprint servers. Overall, during the pandemic, scientists
published at increasing rate on preprint servers. On average,

we observe 22% more publications than expected and 28.7%
increase in number of authors (26% increase of females and
29% increase for males). Although the relative increased
productivity applies to both genders, male are experiencing
it at higher rates than female scientists, further widening the
gender gap.
When data is disaggregated by country, gender disparities
become even more apparent, as high as 40% in some cases.
Furthermore, the gender gap widening during the pandemic is
inversely correlated with the country’s GDP per capita: large
developing countries like India and Brazil exhibit the largest
gap widening.

Results
The gender gap in research during the COVID-19 pandemic.

First, we establish the baselines, that are the expected proportions of women that appear either as the first author and as
the author regardless of the authorship order. The expected
proportions are calculated using the OLS model and the historical data from the year 2019 (see Materials and Methods).
We then calculate the true observed proportions of female
authors that publish during the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020
and compare it to the baselines.
The aggregate results suggest that the proportion of female
authors publishing on all topics as the first author has decreased by 4.9%, as illustrated in Fig.1A (expected arithmetic
mean: 0.37; observed arithmetic mean: 0.35). The percentage
drop becomes much more prominent when we analyze the
papers about COVID-19. The proportion of women that write
on COVID-19 related topics as the first authors has decreased
by 44.5% (expected arithmetic mean: 0.37; observed arithmetic mean: 0.2). When looking at the authors regardless of
the order, the proportion of women writing about COVID-19
decreased by 15.4% (expected arithmetic mean: 0.34; observed
arithmetic mean: 0.29). The standard errors of the aggregate
analysis are relatively small and can be seen as the vertical
lines on top of the bars.
We observe an overall increase in number of papers published on preprint servers (Fig. 1B) during the pandemic
(26% for biorXiv and 363% for medrXiv), and the drop of
publications on Springer-Nature journals (84%). Such a trend
suggests that during the pandemic the researchers are trying to
make their results available as quickly and widely as possible,
often circumventing lengthy peer-review process. Despite the
absolute increase in numbers, the fraction of women publishing
on preprint servers drops significantly. That is particularly
All authors conceived and designed the study. GM collected and analyzed the data. All authors
wrote and revised the manuscript.
All the code and data necessary to replicate the results are available on GitHub at:
https://github.com/gmuric/GenderGapCovid
2

To whom correspondence should be addressed: Emilio Ferrara. E-mail: emiliofe@usc.edu

1–3

A

Expected proportion of female authors
Observed proportion of female authors

First author

40%

Any author

20%
10%

KR
JP
CN
CH
US
DE
GB
NL
FR
CA
IN
ES
SE
IT
BR
AU

All papers

50 25 0

25 50

JP
CH
US
CN
NL
DE
FR
GB
AU
IT
SE
KR
IN
ES
CA
BR

All papers

COVID-19

50

25

0

25

50

All

COVID-19 Non COVID-19

KR
JP
CN
DE
GB
NL
US
CH
FR
CA
IN
ES
IT
SE
BR
AU

Non COVID-19

medrXiv

biorXiv

All

D
f

50

25

0

25

50

Springer

Authors

80K
60K
40K
20K

Female

Male

Pandemic

% of female authors

C

COVID-19 Non COVID-19

Papers

12K
10K
8K
6K
4K
2K

30%

All papers

Expected number
Observed number

B

f Exp
f Obs d

t
Time

Fig. 1. A. The comparison of the expected and observed proportion of female authors that publish during the COVID-19 pandemic. Green bars represent the
expected proportion of female authors, estimated by the OLS model from the historical data from 2019. Orange bars are the observed proportion of female authors that
publish during the COVID-19 pandemic. The papers are divided by the topic in three groups: 1) all papers from the dataset, 2) the papers that deal directly with the COVID-19
and related topics, 3) the papers that are not about COVID-19 or related topics. B. Number of papers and authors during the COVID-19 pandemic. Green bars are the
expected numbers and the orange bars are the actual numbers. We observe high influx of papers on preprint servers and drop of submissions to peer-reviewed journals. That
translates to the increased number of authors C. Percentage drop in proportion of female authors during the pandemic across the countries. Orange points mark the
percentage decrease in fraction of female authors. Green points mark the increase. D. Statitical model. Illustration of the OLS model used to calculate the expected numbers
and proportions.

evident for COVID-19 related papers where the relative drop
in proportion of females is 35% and 21% for medrXiv and
biorXiv respectively. The trend for Springer-Nature journals
is slightly different. We still observe the drop in proportion
of female authors as the first authors across the disciplines.
However, the fraction of women authors regardless of the
authorship order is increasing from 0.33 to 0.38, that is the
relative increase of 14%. Note that only 0.3% of all papers
from Springer-Nature journals deals with COVID-19 related
topics. That is much smaller than 2.3% in biorXiv and 48%
in medrXiv.
We see the evidences that women are getting underrepresented in COVID-19 research, especially in papers published
on preprint servers. That confirms some earlier suggestions
that female first authors contribute less to COVID-19 studies
than research in other areas (9). Women remain underrepresented even though we observe the increased publishing rate
for both genders during the pandemic (Fig. 1B).
Country-level Analysis. The global pandemic has touched al-

most every nation on the planet. Countries, however, responded differently to contain the spread of the disease. The
variability of the measures and their timing, combined with
differences in cultural norms and outbreak severity, have had

a variable impact on scientific communities across the world.
Country-level analysis better reveals global trends, as the
aggregate data can be skewed by the countries with disproportionately large number of publications such as the US with
almost 29% of all authors in the data set. Additionally, it can
reveal regional, political and cultural differences between the
nations.
We identify the most likely country of the author based on
their affiliation (see Materials and Methods) and measure the
difference between the expected and observed proportion of
female authors during the pandemic. Figure 1C shows the pandemic gender gap across countries. The values represent percentage difference between the expected and observed fraction
of female authors publishing in biorXiv, medrXiv and selected
Springer-Nature journals between February and April 2020.
Points to the left (orange) of the mid-line represent countries
with less than expected fraction of female authors, and points
to the right of the mid-line (in green) represent an increase
in the fraction of female authors. Papers dealing explicitly
with the topic of COVID-19 (middle panel) show a greater
gender gap than papers on other research topics (right panel).
In Italy, for example, the relative drop in the proportion of
female authors is 40% (expected arithmetic mean: 0.43; observed arithmetic mean: 0.26), indicating that male scientists

% of female authors

50%
40%
30%

India

20%

China

10%

40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
-10%

Percentage drop

Brazil

Italy

Sweden
US

S.Korea
Japan

Europe and Americas S.Korea
Asia

Japan
India

China
Brazil

Italy

US
Sweden

10K 20K 30K 40K 50K 60K

GDP per capita

Fig. 2. Gender disparity in research and the GDP. (Upper) Proportion of women
active in research is higher in countries with lower per capita GDP. (Lower) The
proportion of female authors of research articles decreased more than expected in
countries with lower per capita GDP.

(ii) medrXiv (5K papers and 35K authors), scraped directly from
medrxiv.org; (iii) Springer-Nature (32K papers and 210K authors),
data from 70 journals that have H-index larger than 12, collected
using the Springer-Nature OpenAccess API. For each source, we
collect the meta-data of all the papers published between January
1st 2019 and May 3rd 2020. The earliest publication on medrXiv is
from Jun 25th 2019. For each paper in biorXiv and medrXiv, we
keep the date of publishing. For Springer-Nature journals, we keep
the date of manuscript submission. We additionally store the title
and the abstract of the papers. For each author, we preserve the
name, affiliation and the authorship order. Additionally, we use
socio-economic data on countries, including their respective GDP
per capita provided by Our World in Data (ourworldindata.org).
As a heuristic to identify locations of authors’ institutions, we use
data provided by GRID (grid.ac).
Model. To measure the discrepancy between expected and observed

proportion of female authors, we first establish a baseline model.
Using historical data before January 31st 2020, we calculate the
proportion of female authors publishing each week. We train a linear
model f = bt + c, where f , the proportion of female authors, serves
as a dependent variable, t is time measured in weeks, b and c are
the slope and the intercept. We train the separate model depending
on the level of disaggregation (country, publisher...). The model
is illustrated in Fig.
P ˆ1D. From the model, we derive the expected
f /n, that is the mean fraction
fraction f Exp =
of all predicted
P
values for the observed period and f Obs =
ftrue /n. The error
for the predicted value is the mean standard error of the prediction.
The error of the observed
√ value is calculated as the standard error
of the mean SE = σ/ n. The errors for the percentage drops in
Fig. 1C are calculated as the total sum of the errors of predicted
and observed values.
Identifying author’s gender and location. To infer the author’s gen-

affiliated with Italian institutions are publishing disproportionately more than their female colleagues about COVID-19.
Similar result applies to Australia, United Kingdom, France
and Germany. The opposite is true for Switzerland and Japan,
where the proportion of women publishing about COVID-19 increases by 5.6% and 15% respectively. Missing points indicate
that there was not enough data points during the pandemic
to calculate the observed mean.
The gender gap for non COVID-19 related research (right
panel) exists during the pandemic, but it is smaller than for
COVID-19 research. Again, we observe a stark contrasts
between the countries, with proportion of female authors (regardless of author order) publishing during the pandemic
decreasing in Australia, Brazil and Sweden, and gender gap
shrinking in South Korea and Japan.
Gender disparities in research are strongly associated with a
country’s wealth (10). Figure 2 shows that wealthier countries—
with higher per capita gross domestic product (GDP)—have
proportionally fewer women in research, with Asian countries
having consistently fewer women researchers. In addition,
wealthier countries show smaller pandemic-related drop in
women’s participation in research than poorer countries, with
wealthier Asian countries experiencing an increase in the proportion of active women researchers. This suggests that women
experience bigger life disruptions in poorer countries, which
affect their productivity.
Materials and Methods

Data. The data on published papers is collected from three separate

sources: (i) biorXiv (43K papers and 232K authors), provided
by the Rxivist, the API provider for biorXiv publications (11);

der from their name we use a state-of-the-art tool, namely the
genderizer.io API (12). Given an input name, the model returns a
gender and a confidence score between 0.5 and 1. The uncertainty
is greater for Asian names that often are not gender-specific (13).
We filter out all authors for which the confidence score is lower
than 0.8. Overall, 19% of names yields scores below such threshold,
with Chinese and Korean topping the ranking with 54% and 41%
respectively. To identify authors’ location, we first locate a toponym
in the author’s affiliation. If there is no toponym, we query the
GRID.ac database and find the institution with the most similar
name and assign the institution’s location to the author.
Identifying COVID-19 papers. The papers that deal specifically with

COVID-19 and similar topics are identified by the set of keywords
that appear in their title or the abstract.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.

DARPA support via W911NF1920271.

1. KR Myers, et al., Quantifying the immediate effects of the covid-19 pandemic on scientists.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.11358 (2020).
2. M Kowal, et al., Who Is the Most Stressed During COVID-19 Isolation? Data From 27 Countries. PsyArXiv (2020).
3. A Minello, The pandemic and the female academic. Nature (2020).
4. G Viglione, Are women publishing less during the pandemic? Nature 581, 365–366 (2020).
5. N Amano Patino, F Elisa, C Giannitsarou, Z Hasna, The Unequal Effects of Covid-19 on
Economists’ Research Productivity. Camb. Work. Pap. Econ. (2020).
6. N Fuchs-Schundeln, Gender structure of paper submissions at the Review of Economic Studies during COVID-19: First evidence. (2020).
7. A Fazackerley, Women’s research plummets during lockdown - but articles from men increase
(2020).
8. JP Andersen, MW Nielsen, NL Simone, RE Lewiss, R Jagsi, Meta-research: Is covid-19
amplifying the authorship gender gap in the medical literature? (2020).
9. P Vincent-Lamarre, CR Sugimoto, V Larivière, The decline of women’s research production
during the coronavirus pandemic (2020).
10. L Holman, D Stuart-Fox, CE Hauser, The gender gap in science: How long until women are
equally represented? PLOS Biol. 16, e2004956 (2018).
11. RJ Abdill, R Blekhman, Tracking the popularity and outcomes of all bioRxiv preprints. eLife 8
(2019).
12. L Santamaría, H Mihaljević, Comparison and benchmark of name-to-gender inference services. PeerJ Comput. Sci. 4, e156 (2018).
13. J Huang, AJ Gates, R Sinatra, AL Barabási, Historical comparison of gender inequality in
scientific careers across countries and disciplines. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 117 (2020).

3–3

