Spring 2020

Discussing Privacy and Surveillance on Twitter: A Case Study of COVID-19
Jayati Dev
Introduction
Technology is uniquely positioned to help us analyze large amounts of information to provide
valuable insight during widespread public health concerns, like the ongoing COVID-19
pandemic. In fact, information technology companies like Apple and Google have recently
launched tools for contact tracing - the ability to process location data to determine the people
who have been in contact with a possible patient, in order to contain the spread of the virus [1].
While China and Singapore have successfully led the effort [2], more and more countries are
now implementing such surveillance systems, raising potential privacy concerns about this long
term surveillance. For example, it is not clear what happens to the information post-pandemic
because people are more likely to share their information during a global crisis without
governments having to elaborate their data policies [3]. Digital Ethnography on Twitter, which
has over 330 million users worldwide, with a majority in the United States where the pandemic
has the worst effects [4] provides a unique opportunity to learn about real-time opinions of the
general public about current affairs in a rather naturalistic setting. Consequently, it might be
useful to highlight privacy concerns of users [6], should they exist, through analysis of Twitter
data and information sharing policies during unprecedented public health outbreaks. This will
allow governments to protect its citizens both during and after health emergencies.
The specific research questions in this study would be to see how the discussion around privacy
and surveillance has evolved over the duration of the Covid-19 pandemic. They are as follows:
1. What are the various discussion topics involving Covid-19 surveillance and how
frequently do they occur?
2. What are users’ sentiments about surveillance during the Covid-19 outbreak?
Using Python libraries for topic modelling using Latent Dirichlet Analysis (LDA) and sentiment
analysis using Natural Language Toolkit (NLTK), I report the discussions around privacy and
people’s sentiments towards surveillance at large. I also observe the discussion over time and
user engagement on Twitter in these topics, which reveal that users engage in privacy
discussions around COVID-19 possibly propelled by popular media articles with a rising
negative sentiment for government surveillance (and other privacy concerns). The findings
indicate a need for better planning in data collection and analysis by governments and companies
that are privacy-preserving while providing an important information source for governments in
containing public health emergencies like COVID-19.

1

Spring 2020

Related Work
The current COVID-19 pandemic has raised important questions about the way we deal with
privacy and security concerns of personal information in the wake of a public health emergency.
A number of countries have implemented widespread surveillance of its citizens by using
location information for contact-tracing. This helps them understand if people with COVID-19
symptoms have been in contact with other people who in turn might get infected. While articles
claim that [3] surveillance has not been particularly effective in controlling the outbreak, many
countries argue otherwise [11]. This has raised concerns among privacy think- tanks about what
would be done with user information, which users readily provide in efforts to contain the
pandemic, after the outbreak [3]. With Google and Apple combining efforts for contact-based
tracing using granular location information [1], people who are vulnerable during the outbreak,
must not be affected by the consequences of Big Data collection after the same.
Furthermore, the extent of remote work and school during the novel coronavirus outbreak has
also enabled people to connect with their workplace and academic work from home via the
Internet while maintaining social distancing norms. Video conferencing software such as Zoom
have been found to collect user information and have multiple security bugs that lead to
‘Zoom-bombing’ [12], with several efforts being made by Zoom to fix such bugs. This also
creates a need to study the privacy concerns and sentiment around technological problems (or
misuse) of products that are instrumental for enabling people to be connected during extended
periods of social isolation and government lockdowns.
Though Twitter is often studied for user sentiment in socio-political contexts like the spread of
false information [9], it is rarely used for evaluating privacy concerns among people. Privacy
concerns are usually studied through traditional mixed method research tools like surveys and
interviews. To the best of my knowledge, there is limited research on privacy concerns during
such a large scale emergency like never before. However, despite its limitations, Twitter
provides a naturalistic setting to understand popular conversation about privacy and security that
emerge as an indirect effect of the novel coronavirus outbreak. The variety of discussion on
Twitter provides a starting point for a more nuanced analysis of privacy concerns and has been
the focus of this study.
Method
While Twitter users tend to be younger, more educated, and more liberal than the general
population [5], it nevertheless provides an opportunity to provide insight into privacy concerns of
individuals. The data was collected using Get Old Tweets API1 that maintains an archive of old
1

​https://github.com/Jefferson-Henrique/GetOldTweets-python
2

Spring 2020

tweets. Newer tweets (the last 100 tweets in the dataset) have been collected using the Tweepy
Twitter API2. I conducted a time-series analysis from March 1, 2020 (first week of government
lockdown [7]) to April 20, 2020 (current date of data collection) to measure the number of tweets
by users over time. This was followed by a measure of occurrences of retweets and favorites for
the specific tweets collected to study how users engaged with privacy-specific content regarding
COVID-19 on Twitter. I used a predetermined set of keywords that include “coronavirus” and
“privacy”.
The first research question required an in-depth analysis of tweets since this is a novel
phenomenon with limited previous research theories. I used Latent Dirichlet Analysis for topic
modelling in order to highlight the different privacy themes and opinions that emerge. This was
done using the LDA model available through the ​gensim ​package in Python and the Natural
Language Toolkit (NLTK). NLTK was used to tokenize words from tweets, remove existing stop
words (like prepositions), and reduce the words to its stem form. The number of topics in LDA
was set to 10 for the dataset (tweets from March and those from April respectively). The
resulting topics were then tagged with a description to address the emerging topic.
In order to answer the second research question, I performed a sentiment analysis of tweets using
Python’s using a naive Bayes classification approach (previously known as automatic indexing
[8]). I used ​pandas ​for string handling and converting the dataset from ​csv ​into a ​pandas
dataframe for easy manipulation. I also used ​sklearn ​to access the Bayes classification
algorithm and NLTK packages for data pre-processing. ​Sklearn ​was also used to create
datasets for both training and testing the sentiment analysis model (I used the same dataset for
both). The results from the analysis are described below. Please refer to the appendix for code
and datasets.
Ethics:​ I chose not to collect Twitter user information in order to make the dataset de-identified
and protect user privacy. The collection of publicly available tweets does not require an
Institutional Review Board (IRB) application.
Findings
The resulting dataset from mining Twitter for March-April 2020 generated a total of 22208
tweets (​April - 10567; March - 11641). I used time-series analysis for tweets, retweets, and
favorites, to see the number of discussions over time and the impact per discussion (tweet)
during the pandemic. This is followed by topic modelling for the 10 topics that people talk about

h​ ttps://www.tweepy.org/​ For simplicity, I have uploaded the dataset from Get Old Tweets to
have everything in a single dataset.
2

3

Spring 2020

regarding privacy specific to surveillance during Covid-19, and a sentiment analysis of such
tweets (positive, negative, or neutral). The findings are explained in detail below.
Privacy-Related Tweets Decrease over Time
Figure 1 shows the number of tweets over time since March 1, 2020 that express surveillance
concerns. The graph peaks on March 23, 2020, which is the date of publication of the first
Electronic Frontier Foundation article on government surveillance during COVID-19 and the
resulting privacy concerns. The graph first sees a spike during the first week of lockdown (which
started on March 13, 2020 in the United States). A polynomial trendline (R​2​=0.583) shows that
tweets expressing privacy concerns peaked during the first week of April and then subsequently
started to decrease in frequency.

Figure 1: Tweets per day during March 1 - April 20, 2020 with the keywords “privacy” and “COVID-19” or related.

User Engagement is Disproportionate
Analysis of the retweets and favorites for each tweet presented an interesting result. As can be
seen in Figure 2 and Figure 3, There is a disproportionate amount of engagement with specific
tweets while most tweets usually have a number of retweets and favorites under the numeric 10
baseline. Table 1 shows the mean, median, maximum value, and minimum value of retweets and
favorites respectively for all the 22208 tweets. As mentioned in the table, I had to remove an
outlier tweet (with retweets = 7743 and favorites = 16943 as of April 20, 2020) to adjust the
scatter plots in Figure 2 and 3. The average number of retweets was 3.14 and favorites was
10.20, with median for both being zero. This shows that most tweets had very less engagement

4

Spring 2020

with users, and certain tweets received a lot of attention (given by the maximum value of the
outlier tweet in Table 1.
Table 1: Descriptive statistics for retweets and favorites per tweet

Description

Retweets

Favorites

Mean

3.142327552

10.20406902

Median

0

0

Max

7743*

16943*

Min

0

0

* Outlier tweet removed (only for figures): “ZDNet write "Researchers propose method to track coronavirus through
smartphones while protecting privacy". See full original article:
https://www.zdnet.com/article/researchers-invent-method-to-track-coronavirus-through-smartphones-while-protectin
g-our-privacy/#ftag=RSSbaffb68​ All our feeds: ​https://secnews.physaphae.fr​”

Figure 2: Retweets per tweet over time

Figure 3: Favorites per tweet over time

Users Discussed Mostly Surveillance-Related Topics When It Comes to Privacy
Users seem to discuss both positive and negative aspects of surveillance and loss of privacy
during COVID-19. While some users are concerned about the government and private
companies tracking individuals, others note the possible benefits of contact-tracing through
smartphones in containing the spread. The use of devices like smartphones to collect health
information and long-term surveillance in the face of European privacy laws was discussed.
Similarly, users also discussed the need for surveillance to protect people. A third category of
topics just inform about the situation without taking any sides like cross-country efforts in
surveillance. Another common theme that emerged through topic modelling was privacy
concerns about technology in use (Topic 5, 6, and 8). There seemed to be concerns regarding
data security about information gathered on mobile applications. There was also discussion
around the impact of data collection by companies like Google, whose products are being

5

Spring 2020

increasingly used for long-distance connectivity for both personal and professional reasons.
Table 2 shows the ten topics modelled using LDA for both March and April along with their
description.
Table 2: Latent Dirichlet Analysis of topics and matching them across March and April to find specific description​.

Topi
c

Description

March keywords

1

Privacy concerns of
Track, warn, covid19, the,
tracking while staying at 2020, concern, lockdown,
home during lockdown spread, will

Privacy, news, say, time,
cybersecurity, name, home,
i, we

2

Public’s health
information tracking
through smartphones

Http, news health fight, per,
right, public, bluff

Health, track can, via,
world, right, smartphone,
issue, article, business

3

Surveillance issues of
various available
technology likes phones

Data, chief, start, phone,
need, offer, issue

Garant, surveil, tech, get,
work, privacy, individual

4

Need for surveillance to
protect people in future

Pandemic, new, via, amid,
people, protect, say, is, bit,
us

Coronavirus, how, the,
concern,
covid, future, need

5

App privacy concerns in Privacy, app, freedom, want,
the presence of
european, en, take, apr, give
European laws like
GDPR in encrypting
information

Encrypt, respect, bit, law,
twitter, gdpr, inform,
position

6

Security of data
collected (data
protection) during
COVID-19

Coronavirus, surveil,
security, code, How, risk,
contact, digit, dataprotect,
covid-19

Covid, public, fight,
contact, app, just, all

7

Worldwide surveillance
at work, school to
protect

Use, world, can, nation,
expert, work, corona, test,
what, we

Http, data, use, test, protect,
person, live, school

8

Impact of and threats
from technology
companies like Google
for privacy

Www, com, threat, covid,
technology, tech, google, i

Delete, people, impact,
new, want, companies,
infect, go

9

Postoperative

Here, china, law, check, user, Com, virus, case, security,

6

April keywords

Spring 2020

10

surveillance of people
affected by the
pandemic especially in
China

twitter, operation, go

pandemic, history, possess

Contact-tracing of
people in quarantine by
government

Amp, lie, government, trace,
first, org, now, quarantine

Will, per, state, human,
response, they, talk, guest

Rising Negative Sentiment, but with Less People Having a Hard Opinion
Sentiment analysis of the tweets using NLTK’s Naive Bayesian classification method revealed
that there were not significant changes in public sentiment over the two-month period of the
novel coronavirus privacy discussions. Negative opinions about privacy concerns during
COVID-19 increased from 29% to 33% from March to April 2020, with “very negative”
sentiment showing a hike. Consequently, positive sentiment expressed in support of surveillance
decreased over the months, going from 37% in March to 28% in April, mostly the “very
positive” going down. A possible explanation of the rising negative sentiment could be due to the
increasing number of news articles about security bugs in video-conferencing software like
Zoom which might have led to popular frustration about privacy and security concerns about
such software, which have specifically seen a hike in use due to work from home during
COVID-19.

Figure 4: Higher positive sentiment about privacy and surveillance during the initial lockdown period in March

7

Spring 2020

Figure 5: Higher negative sentiment about privacy and surveillance during the later lockdown period in April

However, the majority of the tweets were neutral in emotion (34% in March to 38% in April).
This indicates that tweets were mostly used to report facts and information rather than expression
of an opinion on privacy concerns. This is also supported by the fact that the tweet with the
maximum engagement (retweets, favorites) is a short description of an article about widespread
surveillance and not an expression of sentiment. Figure 4 and Figure 5 show the results of
sentiment analysis for the month of March and April respectively (expressed as percentages).
Conclusion
This study provides insight into privacy expectations of users on Twitter during pandemic
situations when technology is used to control outbreaks. Lower privacy concerns expressed in
the initial lockdown period are replaced with a more negative sentiment towards governmental
and organizational efforts to maintain privacy in health information disclosure over time. More
positive views towards surveillance in controlling the spread of Covid-19 with country-specific
discussion topics on public and private sector efforts for technological intervention in monitoring
spread of the virus is replaced by post-pandemic privacy concerns. Topic modelling indicates
that the discussions about privacy is usually geared more towards surveillance, probably driven
by the discussion around surveillance started by the Electronic Frontier Foundation with a
COVID-19 surveillance article [3], followed by a New York Times opinion article [10]. This is
supported by the hike in the number of tweets around March 23, 2020, which is the date of the
published article [3]. Further research on privacy concerns of contact-tracing in order to address
a public health emergency like the novel coronavirus outbreak would help form policy around
long-term continuous location tracking post the pandemic in order to delete such information
after use, while being instrumental in protecting public safety during the outbreak.

8

Spring 2020

Appendix
The data and code is available here (source acknowledgement inline):
https://iu.box.com/s/tzn4ak4ymyuna827cvgh5w3pyo42e7pr​ . Python scripts may require
interpreter debugging due to the various libraries. Please use pip install to install the required
libraries (especially for NLTK).
References
[1] Brandom, R. 2020. The Biggest Questions about Apple and Google’s New Coronavirus
Tracker. ​The Verge​.
https://www.theverge.com/2020/4/11/21216803/apple-google-coronavirus-tracking-app-covid-bl
uetooth-secure​ (Accessed on 04/11/2020)
[2] Roy Choudhury. S. 2020. Singapore says it will make its contact tracing tech freely available
to developers. ​CNBC.​
https://www.cnbc.com/2020/03/25/coronavirus-singapore-to-make-contact-tracing-tech-open-so
urce.html​ (Accessed on 04/11/2020)
[3] Schwartz, A. and Crocker, A. 2020. Governments Haven’t Shown Location Surveillance
Would Help Contain COVID-19. ​Electronic Frontier Foundation.
https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2020/03/governments-havent-shown-location-surveillance-wouldhelp-contain-covid-19​ (Accessed on 04/11/2020)
[4] Lin, Y. 2019. 10 Twitter Statistics Every Marketer Should Know in 2020. ​Oberlo.
https://www.oberlo.com/blog/twitter-statistics​ (Accessed on 04/11/2020)
[5] Wojcik, S. and Hughes, A. 2019. Sizing Up Twitter Users. ​PEW Research Center.
https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/2019/04/24/sizing-up-twitter-users/​ (Accessed on
04/11/2020)
[6] Moorosi, N. and Marivate, V. 2015. Privacy in mining crime data from social media: A South
African perspective. ​Second International Conference on Information Security and Cyber
Forensics (InfoSec),​ Cape Town, 2015, pp. 171-175.
[7] Secon, H., Woodward, A., and Mosher, D. 2020. A comprehensive timeline of the new
coronavirus pandemic, from China's first COVID-19 case to the present.
https://www.businessinsider.com/coronavirus-pandemic-timeline-history-major-events-2020-3
(Accessed on 04/11/2020)
[8] Maron, M. E. 1961. Automatic Indexing: An Experimental Inquiry. ​Journal of ACM 8, 3
(July 1961), 404–417. DOI:​https://doi.org/10.1145/321075.321084
[9] Vosoughi, S., Roy, D., & Aral, S. (2018). The spread of true and false news online. Science,
359(6380), 1146-1151.
[10] ​Board, E. l. (2020, April 7). Privacy Cannot Be a Casualty of the Coronavirus. Retrieved
April 24, 2020, from
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/07/opinion/digital-privacy-coronavirus.html

9

Spring 2020

[11] Ng Y, Li Z, Chua YX, et al. Evaluation of the Effectiveness of Surveillance and
Containment Measures for the First 100 Patients with COVID-19 in Singapore — January
2–February 29, 2020. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2020;69:307-311. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6911e1
[12] Paul, K. (2020, April 23). Zoom releases security updates in response to 'Zoom-bombings'.
Retrieved April 24, 2020, from
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2020/apr/23/zoom-update-security-encryption-bombin
g

10

