Not even the air of empty spaces is coronavirus free
(Two meters is not a safe distance)
Edilson Crema1
Nuclear Physics Department, University of São Paulo, Brazil

Abstract
At the moment, several countries are coming out of social confinement while others are
still in the midst of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2)
outbreak. In both cases, a key safety measure encouraged by health authorities is the
distance of one to two meters between people. This recommendation created in the
population the false idea that, by staying two meters from each other, it is not necessary
to use a mask or other protections. Even the highest leaders of the World Health
Organization conduct daily interviews without a mask. This recommended two-meters
distance is mainly based on short-distance contagion, when infected drops are exhaled
during a speech, coughing, or sneezing and directly hit another person. The dangerous
form of airway contamination caused by droplets that remain suspended in the air for
several hours has been almost ignored. However, the theoretical calculations performed
in this work, recent experiments, and the accumulated knowledge in this and other
epidemics reveal that, because of the airborne transmission, there is no safe distance to
the coronavirus, either indoors or in open places. Recent investigations have confirmed
not only the presence of the coronavirus in droplets suspended in the air but that these
viruses remain active for several hours. Furthermore, significant indirect evidence of this
means of transmission is the great difference in contagion between Brazilian regions in
the current outbreak. While the Amazonian states have a contamination rate greater than
20%, in the southern states of the country this rate is less than 1%, despite high
temperatures in the Northern region. Notwithstanding the social and economic
differences between these regions, it seems that the extremely high humidity of the forest
air prolongs the survival of the viruses in the drops in the external environment. Our
theoretical calculations explain empirical observations from recent epidemiological
studies and strengthen the need to use, not only a mask but also protective glasses
throughout the population in the same way that they are mandatory for health
professionals. Besides, our calculations show how air conditioning and heating systems
can increase contagion. Finally, we suggest measures that could reduce the spread of the
pandemic.
Introduction
The ray of light that runs through a dark room reveals the existence of numerous
small grains of dust that can float in the air for a long time. Since antiquity, this
phenomenon was already known. A famous observation of this effect is documented in
Lucretius's poem De Rerum Natura, written around 50 BC. In addition to the empirical
description of the phenomenon, and following the tradition of Democritus and Epicurus,
1

crema@if.usp.br

1

Lucretius also proposed an atomistic explanation for the support of particles in the air,
according to which their weight would be compensated by the collisions of air atoms [1].
However, the behavior of tiny bodies immersed in fluids was only understood from the
19th century on owing to the works of Robert Brown [2], George Gabriel Stokes, and
finally with Einstein's famous work of 1905, On the movement of small particles in
suspension within liquids at rest. Currently, this phenomenon has gained tragic relevance
due to the uncontrolled dispersion of the Covid-19 throughout the planet, since airborne
transmission is one of the forms of viral contamination, as well as the direct reception of
drops exhaled by a contaminated person and contact with infected surfaces. There is still
no consensus among researchers as to which of these forms of contagion is the most
important in the case of the coronavirus. Even so, at the end of March 2020, the World
Health Organization released a bulletin stating that there was insufficient scientific
evidence that SARS-COV-2 was significantly airborne transmitted. This interpretation,
which minimized the importance of this form of contamination, has prevailed since the
beginning of the pandemic, leading the World Health Organization and several
governments to insist that the use of masks was unnecessary throughout the population.
However, with the rapid spread of the virus in countries and in the world, the deadly
reality has imposed itself and forced the planetary health authorities to reverse this
directive, saving thousands of lives by requiring the use of masks in several countries.
From a scientific point of view, this late change in positioning was the authorities’
recognition of that air transmission of SARS-COV-2 is an unquestionable fact.
Nevertheless, it remains to be understood how this process takes place. In this article we
will try to help clarify the physical processes involved in this means of contamination and
we will show that there are still some important recommendations that health authorities
should indicate to reduce viral transmissibility.
Despite being the third outbreak of a coronavirus in less than two decades, existing
research had not yet fully understood the transmission mechanisms of this virus. A similar
situation occurred with the Influenza virus. While some important books and works drew
attention to the relevance of its transmission by aerosols (droplets) [3-6], other authors
argued that short-distance transmission by drops would be the main means of infection
[7,8], and this latter position prevailed for a long time among health authorities [9,10]
who practically ignored airborne transmission. Perhaps this is why, at the beginning of
the current COVID-19 pandemic, the most important health authorities on the planet

2

recommended that only hand washing and a distance of two meters would be safe
protection procedures. Neither was the widespread use of masks recommended.
However, the transmission of the coronavirus proved to be much more complex
and dangerous, and the airway may have had played a decisive role in this process. One
of the hypotheses raised to explain its rapid spread is the fact that this virus strongly
attacks the deep respiratory system and lungs causing the drops expelled by coughing and
sneezing to carry higher viral doses. Important work was published recently, where a
video unequivocally demonstrates that, even during a person's normal speech, hundreds
of drops of saliva and/or secretions are produced and projected into the air, and large
drops can remain in suspension for several minutes [11,12]. On the other hand, sneezing
and coughing expel thousands of drops, which are of various sizes and are composed of
saliva and/or mucous secretions from the respiratory system, constituting an important
means of transporting viruses to the external environment [13]. Analysis of the most
important focus of coronavirus transmission in the 2002-2003 epidemic in Hong Kong,
the Amoy Gardens residential complex, demonstrated that a single infected person
contaminated, through the ventilation system, more than 300 people living above him in
the same building. In addition, there are also strong indications that, in the same Amoy
Gardens, contaminant droplets could have been carried by the wind for several tens of
meters and infected people in another building, far from patient zero [14]. Also, during
the coronavirus (MERS-COV) epidemic in South Korea in 2015, research conducted in
two hospitals that were sources of contamination revealed that transmission through
ambient air may have been one of the main means of contagion [15].
Concerning the current outbreak, recent simulation demonstrated that the likely
onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in Guangzhou, China, occurred by air in a restaurant,
where the air conditioning system played a decisive role in the spread of viruses exuded
by an infected man who had just arrived from Wuhan [16]. Another important
experimental finding of the possible relevance of micro drops (aerosols) in aerial
transmission has just been disclosed by Kyoto University, in which the movement of
drops expelled during coughing or speech were also filmed with laser beams, revealing
that while larger drops fall rapidly and settle on the ground and furniture, there are
hundreds of micro drops that remain suspended in the air several hours after being
expelled. And, most seriously, these small drops disperse rapidly and, a few minutes after
their production, occupy the entire environment, covering distances greater than 8 meters
[17]. These experimental results call into question one of the main recommendations of
3

health authorities to contain the outbreak: the distance of 1m to 2m between people would
be a safe method of prevention. This indication is based only on transmission by larger
drops, dangerously ignoring the airway. With this, the false idea was created in the
population that, by staying two meters away from other people, it is not necessary to wear
a mask. And even more serious, that open spaces or empty environments do not present
risk of contagion. We watch daily the highest health authorities conducting interviews in
public without a mask, just keeping a distance of two meters between themselves. As we
have seen, potentially contaminating droplets remain suspended in the air for several
hours, and even days after the environment has been visited by an infected person.
Of course, just the existence of droplets suspended in the air is not proof that this
is a means of effective contamination, as they may not contain active viruses. However,
as if the dramatic empirical evidence from the Amoy Gardens and South Korea (2015)
cases were not enough, in addition to the current mass contamination in choral and
religious cults, unequivocal experimental demonstrations of the effective transport of
SARS-COV-2 by air have been published recently. A relevant study issued in the journal
Nature showed the results of the air investigation in several environments of two hospitals
in Wuhan dedicated only to patients infected with Covid-19. The analysis of aerosols
collected from the air showed unequivocally the existence of the RNA of the SARSCOV-2 in several closed environments and, also, in two open places where there was a
great movement of contaminated people [18]. Another paper published this year analyzed
the air at Nebraska Hospital Center and also found the SARS-COV-2 in most
environments occupied by patients with mild and moderate infections [19]. In these two
studies it was not possible to confirm the existence of an active viruses. However, this
doubt was finally resolved by a study published last March in the New England Journal
of Medicine, where the presence of active SARS-COV-2 in droplets was observed more
than three hours after they were artificially produced in the laboratory [20]. Actually, they
can survive longer, because 3 hours was the maximum measurement time of that
experiment. Viral stability was studied in aerosols with a diameter of less than 5 µm, kept
in an environment of 65% relative humidity and temperatures between 21-23ºC,
containing SARS-COV-2 in the initial concentration of 105.25 TCID50/mL (Median
Tissue Culture Infectious Dose/mL). During the 3 hours studied, the experiment found an
exponential reduction in infectious titer from 103.5 TCID50/mL to 102.7 TCID50/mL per
liter of air, resulting in an average life of 1.1 hours. Since the chemical composition of
the studied droplets was not exactly the composition of the droplets expired by an infected
4

person, these times may be slightly longer or shorter in a real environment. In addition,
atmospheric conditions can also change these values. But, in any case, it is certain that
under normal day-to-day conditions SARS-COV-2 remains active for several hours in the
droplets suspended in the air.
Therefore, from an epidemiological point of view, there is also an essential
physical question to be answered: how long can these infected drops remain suspended
in the air? In principle, they have weight and should be deposited on the soil after some
time. However, as demonstrated by the videos cited above, and differently from what
important health institutions believe [21], small drops exhaled by people during
breathing, speech, sneezing, coughing and sports activities can remain for several hours
in the air and occupy large environments in minutes. Thus, understanding the physical
processes involved in these phenomena is essential, both for making crucial decisions by
those responsible for health policies, as well as for alerting people about the hidden risks
in the environments in which they live. This work will try to provide safe elements,
through theoretical calculations, about some physical processes responsible for the
transmission of the virus.
Production and dispersion of droplets in the air
The dynamic process involved in coughing, sneezing, or speech that exhale and
disperse drops from the mouth and respiratory system is very complex. An exact physical
calculation of this process is practically impossible, since it involves atmospheric science,
aerosol physics, mechanics, thermodynamics, fluid mechanics, biochemistry, etc. The
process can be summarized as follows. Approximately two liters of air, abruptly expelled
from the mouth with speed 42 km/h in cough (14 km/h in speech) [22], create a turbulent
flow of great penetration into the ambient air. Experiments have shown that its flow lines
can infiltrate more than 2 meters into ambient air before they enter dynamic equilibrium.
The ejected air is supersaturated with water vapor, has the temperature of the human body,
and carries thousands of drops of saliva and/or secretions from the pulmonary tract.
According to the recent measures mentioned above, these drops have diameters between
fractions of micrometers up to fractions of centimeters and are composed of water,
glycoproteins, salts, several other organic compounds, and, eventually, tens or thousands
of viruses [23-25]. Once expelled, numerous and complex interactions between the hot
air jet and ambient air begin, seeking thermodynamic equilibrium [26].

5

The droplets, depending on their compositions and air humidity, can evaporate or
absorb water from the environment, and this process is fundamental to the survival of the
virus in the environment. Unfortunately, there are no studies on the evaporation process
of these drops of secretions taking into account their complete composition, and, in
particular, how a colony of viruses carried by them affects their evaporation process. The
few studies in this regard generally consider only the process of evaporation of drops of
pure water mixed with salts, which is very far from the drops and actual mucous
secretions that are expelled by the respiratory system. These studies showed that, in
general, in environments with relative humidity above 60%, approximately, the drops
absorb more than evaporate water into the air [27,28]. Therefore, in regions with high air
humidity, it is expected that the survival of the virus in the drops is greater. In fact, in the
current COVID-19 pandemic in Brazil, the Amazonian states that house the forest have
presented transmission rates higher than 20%, while in southern states this rate has been
less than 1%. During the first two months of the outbreak, in the regions surrounding the
forest, the average temperatures were always above 30ºC and the average relative
humidity, well above 70%. In southern states, average temperatures and average relative
humidity were not higher than 22ºC and 40%, respectively. Therefore, apparently, there
is no direct relationship between high ambient temperature and decreased
transmissibility. On the other hand, air humidity seems to be a primary factor in the
development of the epidemic. To better understand this relationship, it is interesting to
know the amount of water vapor that actually exists in the atmosphere, that is, its absolute
humidity. One kilo of air with relative humidity 70%, at 30ºC, contains approximately
19g of water in the form of vapor, while at relative humidity of 40%, at 22ºC, the amount
of water is only 6g. That is, the process of water evaporation is very difficult in the
Amazonian weather conditions, and, in fact, the drops expelled by an infected person will
absorb water from the atmosphere, allowing the viruses to survive much longer in
suspension or deposited on surfaces. This physical process may be important in
explaining the difference observed in the transmissibility rates observed in Brazil.
However, a detailed epidemiologic study, which takes into account the social and
economic differences between these states, needs to be carried out to confirm this
indication. In any case, it is unlikely that only the socioeconomic factors explain such a
difference in transmissibility between these regions.
Finally, after these processes of production and evaporation of the drop, its
equilibrium size will define its dynamics and, of course, the progression of the epidemic
6

according to three scenarios of contagion: 1) the drop can be transmitted directly to
another person and infect their mucous membranes and/or conjunctivae, in the so-called
drop transmission mode; 2) it can succumb to the force of gravity and deposit itself
dangerously on the ground, on furniture and objects, in the transmission mode by hand
contact; and/or 3) in the case of smaller droplets that evaporate, reduce in size and form
the so-called droplet nuclei, which are extremely small and can remain suspended for
hours or days in the air, still containing water, salts, organic compounds and the colony
of viruses. These smaller droplets and/or the droplet cores are responsible for the socalled airborne transmission. Although the relative importance of these three forms of
contagion has been debated for years during the epidemics of the Influenza and corona
viruses, definitive conclusions have not yet been reached due to the lack of detailed
studies on airborne transmission. In an attempt to help to understand this process, we will
calculate the dynamics of these drops in two situations: first, supposing that they fall into
the air at rest; and then the droplets moving in an environment with a constant and vertical
airflow upwards which can be produced by an air conditioning system and/or air renewal.
From an epidemiological point of view, the most relevant physical variable is the time of
permanence of the droplets in the air.
Theoretical calculations
Let us consider the vertical movement of a small spherical drop, with radius R and
mass M, immersed in the air, supposed to be homogeneous and
f

in thermal equilibrium at temperature T. The diagram on the

E

side represents the vertical forces acting on the drop: its weight
V(t)

(P); the buoyancy (E) caused by the air it displaces; the viscous
frictional force (f) of the air; and, finally, the vertical component

L(t)

of a time-dependent force, L(t), extremely complex, caused by

P

the random fluctuation of the collisions of air molecules with

the drop, called Langevin force. This last force is significant only for very small particles
when statistical variations in air density can cause macroscopic displacements of the drop,
the so-called Brownian motion. This stochastic force varies very quickly over time and
has a mean value of zero if it is calculated over a large time interval. The differential
equation that governs the velocity of the drop's fall will be:
𝑀

𝑑𝑉
= 𝐿(𝑡) + 𝑓 − (𝑃 − 𝐸)
𝑑𝑡
7

(1)

As we are interested in low speeds, the viscous frictional force can be approximated by
𝑓 = −𝜇𝑉, where µ is the viscous friction coefficient of air, given by Stokes' law, which,
in the case of a sphere of radius R, will be µ = 6phR. The air viscosity coefficient, h,
depends on the ambient temperature, atmospheric pressure and drop radius. The exact
solution of Eq. 1 is very complex due to the random characteristics of the Langevin force.
However, for our evaluation, at first approximation we can disregard its effect and discuss
it later. In this case, the solution is very simple, and the drop that starts from rest will fall
with the velocity:
𝑉(𝑡) =
where 𝜏 =

!
"

=

#r$ !
%h

(𝑃 − 𝐸)
𝑡
11 − exp 5− 78
𝜇
𝜏

(2)

is the constant that governs the temporal behavior of the velocity of

the drops, and r is the density of the substance that constitutes them. Equation 2 shows
that their movement is extremely dependent on their sizes. To analyze the
epidemiological implications of this expression, we will calculate the fall of drops of
human saliva in the air at a pressure of 700 mmHg and a temperature of 25º C. Table 1
shows the values of the time constant τ calculated for drops of radius ranging from 0.1µm
to 50 µm.
Table 1. Fall of saliva droplets with radius R, where t are their time constants,
Vlim are their final velocities and Ttot are the total time they take to travel
the height of 1.80 meters.

On the other hand, Figure 1 shows the dynamics of two drops, of radii 0.5 µm and
1.0 µm, where are shown the variations of their velocities with time. We observed that
the drops start to fall from rest, increase their velocities, and very soon acquire constant
velocities, Vlim. What is surprising about these results is the order of magnitude of the
times and speeds: in a few microseconds, the smallest drops start to fall with constant and
extremely small speeds. For example, in this ideal situation, with stationary air, a drop of

8

radius 0.1 µm falls with speed 2.2 µm/s, and a drop of radius 0.5 µm falls with speed 35
µm/s, approximately. Evidently, these values are negligible when compared to the speeds
of the random air currents that exist in real environments, which are in the order of cm/s.

Figure 1. Velocities of two droplets of saliva, radius 0.5 µm and 1.0 µm, which
fall into the air from rest.

The last column of Table 1 shows the time, Ttot, that the drops take to reach the
ground starting from a height of 1.80 meters, remembering that these values were
evaluated disregarding the Langevin force. Let us now evaluate, separately, the effect of
Brownian motion in one direction. Since it is produced by a random force, which has the
same probability of acting in any direction, the particle has the same probability of
moving up and down. Therefore, the average displacement, calculated over a large time,
will always be zero. However, Einstein showed that this is not the case for the mean
square displacement, whose value can be calculated by 𝑦&'( = √2 𝐷𝑡, where D is the
diffusion coefficient given by the Einstein relation, D= kT/µ, where k is the Boltzmann
constant. When applied to our 0.1 µm radius drops, these equations provide dispersions
in the position of only 0.1 mm per hour. That is, we can disregard the Brownian effect in
our evaluation. In fact, the complete solution of the Eq. 1 was obtained by Saka et al. [29]
using the Fokker-Planck equation for the probability density of the vertical position of
small spheres. The theoretical solution found was compared with experimental
measurements of the temporal evolution of the spatial distribution of small latex spheres
of a diameter of 1 μm suspended in water. The agreement was excellent. However, when
we perform our calculations for this same system disregarding the Langevin force, we
find a good approximation for the temporal evolution of the mean value of the positions

9

of the latex spheres. This is an experimental confirmation that we can ignore the
stochastic force in our evaluations.
Effect of air conditioners and heating systems
Even considering the air at rest, the last column of Table 1 shows that drops of
diameters 0.2 µm, 1.0 µm, and 2.0 µm would remain suspended for several hours in the
air. However, in real situations, the air is never at rest, there are internal currents produced
by differences in temperature and pressure [19], by the movement of objects or people
around the environment and, mainly, by air conditioning and heating systems. These
currents are much larger than those calculated above and drag small suspended particles,
being the main responsible for the movement of dust grains observed by Lucretius, and
also for the fluctuation and movement of microdrops filmed in the experiments described
above. These currents are even more important when the environment has an air renewal
and/or conditioning system that creates a continuous flow of air in a more or less fixed
direction. We will evaluate this phenomenon in the case of an aspiration system placed
on the ceiling of the environment, producing an airflow in the vertically upward direction,
with speed V. In this case, the viscous friction force of the air passing through the droplet
can compensate for and/or overcome the weight force, causing it to remain stopped and/or
f
E

V

be aspirated towards the ceiling. Let's consider the equilibrium
limit case, when friction exactly compensates for the weight
of the droplet and it stays at rest at a certain height of the
ground. The diagram on the side shows the forces acting on it.
Disregarding Langevin's force, the speed of air that holds a

L(t
)

drop at rest can be easily calculated for its different sizes.
P

Figure 2 shows the air velocity necessary to balance drops of

different radii, where we observe that they are very small velocities, of a few mm/s, even
for the largest drops considered. That is, if the air conditioning system is not well
dimensioned, it eliminates the smallest drops, but it can keep larger drops in suspension
and/or drastically decrease its fall times, precisely the drops that have a greater potential
for infection because they can carry a greater amount of viruses.

10

Figure 2. Vertical airflow velocity required to keep drops of saliva suspended
in the air at rest.

For example, a continuous vertical flow of air with a speed of only 3 mm/s,
approximately, keeps drops of diameter 10 µm suspended at rest for an unlimited time.
Besides, larger droplets would have very slow fall speeds. It is important to remember
that the coronavirus has a more or less spherical shape with a diameter of the order of
nanometers, that is, the drops we dealt with in this work can carry from hundreds to
millions of viruses. The crucial question from an epidemiological point of view is whether
these small drops carry active viruses after the evaporation processes and how long this
virus survives in these droplets. As mentioned earlier, recent experience has found the
significant presence of SARS-COV-2 active in drops that have been suspended in the air
for more than three hours. This same study measured the survival time of the coronavirus
on various surfaces, finding that the they can remain active for many hours and even days
outside the human body.
Finally, we must discuss the effect of heating systems placed on the ground, as
they also create an upward airflow since this is the natural direction of the heated air. Our
calculations have demonstrated that these airflows can avoid contaminated droplets from
settling on the floor, which can stay floating in the air for a long time, increasing the risk
of contamination in the environment. Perhaps, this may be one of the factors that increase
the spread of viral epidemics during the winter.

11

Summary, conclusions and warnings
There is still much debate about the main forms of contamination by the
coronavirus. The speed and extent of the current outbreak called into question the
dominant conception in official health entities that believed in the preponderance of direct
transmission. As we have seen, recent experiences have filmed the movement of drops
produced by speech, coughing and sneezing, revealing the potential for viral
contamination by air. In addition, studies that analyzed the air of Nebraska and Wuhan
hospitals confirmed the presence of SARS-COV-2 in air-suspended droplets and micro
droplets in various environments, without however ensuring that such viruses were active.
But another recent experiment completed that study by confirming the presence of SARSCOV-2 active in droplets in the air, even several hours after they were released into the
atmosphere. Therefore, this set of works has shown that airborne contagion by SARSCOV-2 can occur long after an infected person has spoken, coughed or sneezed in an
environment. These experiments also showed that this contamination can occur several
meters away from the original virus source. All this knowledge now accumulated could
explain the rapid and widespread of the current outbreak of coronavirus, since contagion
by air was ignored by health authorities in the first months of the pandemic. The general
use of a mask by the population was only recommended late. This experimental data also
strengthens the hypotheses about the importance of airborne infection in the coronavirus
epidemics of 2002 in Hong Kong and 2015 in South Korea.
From a theoretical point of view, the results of the calculations that we present in
this work explained the dynamic behavior of the drops observed in the videos mentioned
before and are extremely important from an epidemiological point of view, as they proved
that the smallest drops can remain in the air for several hours after they have been
produced by some contaminated person. That is, long after that person has left the
environment, or passed through a public place, the air remains dangerously
contaminating. Of course, the probability of contamination depends on both the
concentration of droplets in the air and the concentration of people in the place. The
argument that the wind disperses the drops has made people feel more protected in open
places. However, the same wind that can disperse the drops can also carry them and
project them on passersby. It should be remembered that a single of these drops inhaled
or deposited in the mouth or eyes can contaminate another person, whether on the beach,
on the street, in the elevator, at home or on public transport. Today, to avoid such
12

contagions, continuous use of the mask by the population is recommended. However, it
is surprising that the use of eye protection remains mandatory only for health
professionals. Extensive study published on June 1, 2020 in The Lancet journal, analyzing
empirical data from 16 countries on 6 continents, concluded that the probability of
infection by SARS-CoV-2 decreases by 10.6% when using a protection for the eyes [20].
That is, the risk of contagion through the eyes is very high and continues to be minimized
by health authorities, including the World Health Organization, as had happened in the
case of masks. This may be a new mistake in combating the pandemic.
Another important result of our calculations and the videos mentioned above
refers to the safety distance recommended by all health authorities. Once again, the
recommendation of two meters of distance is based only on direct virus transmission,
minimizing the airway mode, although there are no studies to prove this hypothesis. As
we have seen, a few minutes after being expelled, the contaminated droplets spread
quickly and occupy environments over 8 meters long, remaining for several hours floating
in the air. Therefore, important warnings must be made: the distance of 2 meters is not
safe for those who do not wear a mask and, if we consider the infection by the eyes, the
distance of 2 meters is not safe even for those wearing a mask. This may explain the large
number of infected people who wore masks frequently. An interesting study that could
be done concerns the frequency of contamination in patients who wear corrective glasses
compared to those who do not, because, although these glasses are not ideal to protect
against the virus, they do offer a little protection to the eyes. In addition, it should not be
forgotten that drops in suspension can also be deposited on our face, hair and clothes.
This explains that one of the highest concentrations of infected droplets in the air of
Wuhan hospitals was measured precisely in the area where health workers removed their
protective clothing. Where, moreover, there may have been a great contamination of these
professionals.
The SARS-CoV-2 pandemic in Brazil will provide much information for
epidemiological studies. For example, apparently, there is no direct relationship between
high ambient temperature and decreased transmissibility, which refutes the hope that the
outbreak could be reduced during the summer in the northern hemisphere. In the first
three months of the current COVID-19 pandemic in Brazil, Amazonian states, with
average temperatures above 30ºC, had virus transmission rates higher than 20%, while in
southern states this rate was lower than 1%, although their average temperatures did not
exceed 22ºC. Another relevant conclusion that can be obtained from the SARS-CoV-2
13

outbreak in Brazil concerns the apparently relevant role of air humidity. In the regions
surrounding the Amazon rainforest, the average relative humidity was well above 70%,
while in southern states the average relative humidity was not higher than 40%.
Therefore, air humidity seems to be a major climatic factor in the development of the
epidemic. A possible explanation for this phenomenon would be the fact that the drops
expelled by an infected patient do not evaporate in relative humidity greater than 60%,
but instead absorb water from the air, which allows viruses to survive much longer in
suspension or deposited on surfaces. However, only a detailed epidemiologic study, also
considering the socioeconomic differences between the North and South regions of
Brazil, can confirm these hypotheses.
Finally, another important alert that our calculations recommend concerns about
air conditioning and heating systems. As we have demonstrated, if poorly positioned
and/or sized, they can keep larger droplets in suspension for much longer than they would
naturally be, as they create air flows that support the weight of these drops and keep them
in equilibrium. Ideally, from this point of view, the air would be aspirated near the ground
or at least laterally, with enough flow to clean the environment. In addition, it is essential
that the air is renewed with fresh outside air. Otherwise, if the device only circulates
ambient air, and if its filter is not able to block microparticles, it will work as a dangerous
virus spreader, as was the case with the restaurant that started the new coronavirus
epidemic in Guangzhou, in 2020. On the other hand, in the absence of air renewal
systems, two windows must be opened at the same time to create a flow out of the
residence. Otherwise, droplets are only transported from one environment to another. In
all countries, health authorities recommend that slightly contaminated patients stay at
home. In such cases, special care should be taken with the ventilation of the environments
to prevent contaminated air from the patient's room from being transported to the others.
In addition, it is recommended to wear a mask and goggles for the other inhabitants of
these residences.
REFERENCES
[1] Lucrèce, La Nature des choses, Éditions Gallimard, Essais Folio, Paris, 2010.
[2] Brown, Robert, Edinburgh new Philosophical Journal, pp. 358-371, 1828.
[3] Treanor J.J., Influenza virus. In: Mandell, Douglas and Bennett's principles and
practice of infectious diseases. New York: Elsevier Churchill Livingstone; 2005. p.
2060–85.

14

[4] Tellier, R., Review of Aerosol Transmission of Influenza A Virus, Emerg Infect Dis.,
2006, 12(11): 165701662 and references therein.
[5] K. A. Prather et al., Science 10.1126/science.abc6197 (2020).
[6] L. Morawska and Junji Cao, Airborne transmission of SARS-CoV-2: The world
should face the reality, Environment International 139 (2020) 105730.
[7] Bell, DM; WHO Writing Group Nonpharmaceutical interventions for pandemic
influenza, international measures. Emerg Infect Dis. 12:81–7, 2006;
[8] Brankston, G. et al., Transmission of influenza A in human beings, The Lancet, 7, pp.
257-265, 2007.
[9] Public Health Agency of Canada Canadian Pandemic Influenza Plan (Appendix F).
2004. http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/cpip-pclcpi/pdf-cpip-03/cpip-appendix-f.pdf
[10] U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Pandemic Influenza Plan,
2006 http://www.hhs.gov/pandemicflu/plan/
[11] Anfinrud, P., Bax, C. E. and Bax, A., New England Journal of Medicine,
https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMc2007800
[12] Stadnytskyi, V., Bax, C. E., Bax, A. and Anfinrud, P., The airborne lifetime of small
speech droplets and their potential importance in SARS-CoV-2 transmission, PNAS,
2020. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2006874117
[13] Nicas, M. et al., Toward Understanding the Risk of Secondary Airborne Infection:
Emission of Respirable Pathogens, J. Occup. Env. Hyg., 2: 143–154 (2005)
https://doi.org/10.1080/15459620590918466
[14] McKinney, Kelly R. et al, Environmental Transmission of SARS at Amoy Gardens,
J. Envir. Health, 68, 26-30, (2006)
[15] Kim, S.-H. et al., Extensive Viable Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS)
Coronavirus Contamination in Air and Surrounding Environment in MERS Isolation
Wards, Clinical Infectious Diseases 2016;63(3):363–9 (DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciw239)
[16] Lu, J. et al., COVID-19 Outbreak Associated with Air Conditioning in Restaurant,
Guangzhou, China, 2020, Emerg. Infect. Dis. 26, July 2020.
[17] Yamakawa, M. et al, Kyoto University, https://vimeo.com/402577241
[18] Liu, Y. et al., Aerodynamic analysis of SARS-CoV-2 in two Wuhan hospitals,
Nature, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2271-3 (2020).
[19] Joshua L. Santarpia, J.L. et al., medRxiv, March 2020,
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.23.20039446

15

[20] van Doremalen N, Bushmaker T, Morris DH, et al. Aerosol and surface stability of
SARS-CoV-2 as compared with SARS-CoV-1. N Engl J Med 2020; 382:1564-7. DOI:
10.1056/NEJMc2004973
[21] Clinical Educators Guide for the prevention and control of infection in healthcare,
Australian National Health and Medical Research Council, 2010.
[22] Chao, C.Y.H et al., Aerosol Science 40, 122-133 (2009)
[23] Gould JM, Weiser JN., (2001) Expression of C-reactive protein in the human
respiratory tract., Infect. Immun. 69, 1747–1754. (doi:10.1128/IAI.69.3.1747-1754.2001)
[24] Effros RM, et al., (2002) Dilution of respiratory solutes in exhaled condensates.
Resp. Crit. Care Med. 165, 663–669. (doi:10.1164/ajrccm.165.5.2101018)
[25] Nicas, M. et al., Toward Understanding the Risk of Secondary Airborne Infection:
Emission of Respirable Pathogens, J. Occup. Env. Hyg., 2: 143–154 (2005) DOI:
10.1080/15459620590918466
[26] Wallace J.M. and Hobbs P.V., Atmospheric Science, An Introductory Survey,
Academic, New York, 2006
[27] Marr, L.C. et al., Mechanistic insights into the effect of humidity on airborne
influenza virus survival, transmission and incidence. J. R. Soc. Interface 16:20180298,
2019. (http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2018.0298)
[28] Shaman, J. and Kohn, M., Absolute humidity modulates influenza survival,
transmission, and seasonality, PNAS, March 3, 2009, vol. 106, 3243–3
(doi/10.1073/pnas.0806852106)
[29] Saka, H., Am. J. Phys. 77, 3, March 2009, DOI: 10.1119/1.3039029
[30] Chu, D. K. et al., Physical distancing, face masks, and eye protection to prevent
person-to-person transmission of SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19: a systematic review and
meta-analysis., The Lancet, June 01, 2020,
https://doi.org/10.1016/S01406736(20)31142-9

16

