Geospatial Spread of the COVID-19 Pandemic in Mexico
Dagoberto Pulido1 , Daniela Basurto1 , Mayra Cándido1 , and Joaquı́n Salas∗1,2

arXiv:2006.07784v1 [physics.soc-ph] 14 Jun 2020

1

Instituto Politécnico Nacional, México

Abstract
COVID-19 is an infectious respiratory disease that the World Health Organization has declared a
pandemic. Although a global phenomenon, there is the need to react locally with swift and informed
actions, as some of the essential plans are highly dependent on factors such as culture, geography, laws,
and customs. This paper presents our approach to mapping the geospatial spread of COVID-19 in
Mexico at the state and municipal level, the highest allowed possible resolution in the publicly available
dataset provided by the Health Ministry. To visualize the magnitude of the infection, we offer a map for
the confirmed positive, pending, and deceases cases, while to support mobility, we provide a geospatial
visualization of Rt , the basic reproduction number. This document describes the structure of the dataset,
the software tools employed, and a description of the functionality of the maps, which definition we make
publicly available.

Keywords:

1

COVID-19 Geospatial Spread, Basic Reproduction Number, COVID-19 in Mexico.

Introduction

COVID-19 in an infectious respiratory disease that has been declared a pandemic by the United Nations
(UN) World Health Organization (WHO) [1]. Affecting the lungs, it makes them stiff, thus difficulting
breathing. Usually, the air we pull through the trachea branches into each lung. Then, it keeps splitting
subsequently into smaller pipes, eventually reaching the bronchioles and afterward the alveoli, which are
microscopic sacs of air [2]. SARS-CoV-2 (the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus-2), the virus
causing COVID-19, promotes the creation of an exudate that fills the alveoli impeding gas exchange [3]. In
terms of the COVID-19 infection, it is still too early to assess the portion of the population that is immune,
is asymptomatic, requires hospitalization, needs a ventilator, and eventually perish [4]. For the sake of
discussion, consider the case of symptomatic people. The most frequent symptoms at the beginning are
fever, cough, and fatigue. Other signs that appear afterward include sputum production, myalgia, headache,
hemoptysis, diarrhea, dyspnea, and lymphopenia [5]. Nonetheless, it is still unclear what circumstances cause
a particular person to show symptoms, and significant statistics are overdue to provide some light. Consider,
for instance, that while a study suggests that up to 50% of the population of Iceland is asymptomatic [6],
in India, a survey showed that 47.1% of the infected population is asymptomatic and 35.3% showed mild
symptoms [7]. In the meantime, in a Boston shelter out of 408 people, 147 tested positive, and 361 reported
no symptoms [8]. Thus, to reign over confusion, we need to generate and spread trustable information
quickly, reliably, and efficiently.
Maps are a suitable solution as one may obtain a vast amount of information quickly [9]. There have been
numerous attempts to develop visualizations of the spread of the COVID-19. For instance, Dong et al. [10],
at John Hopkins University, created a worldwide map of cases, including every country where there was at
least one case. To understand the complexity of such a task, one may want to consider that it includes
the problems associated with gathering a vast amount of information from several centers of production,
each with its data format and produced at different speeds [11]. Across the visualizations of the spread of
∗ Corresponding Author: Joaquı́n Salas. CICATA Querétaro, Instituto Politécnico Nacional. Cerro Blanco 141, Colinas del
Cimatario, Querétaro, CP 76090, México. jsalasr@ipn.mx

1

(a) Full observation range

(b) Last 20 days

Figure 1: Delays in Acquiring the Data. Due to delays in diagnosis, testing, and information processing
flow, there is a delay of a considerable number of days between the date of first symptoms and availability
for analysis.
COVID-19, one finds tradeoffs between the scope of the coverage and the level of detail provided. Although
a milestone achievement, until recently, Mexico was represented in this and other worldwide maps as a single
point. Thus, there is a clear need to develop local and updated versions of maps to support the availability
of reliable information using efficient and comprehensive coverage means.
In this document, we describe maps to assess the magnitude of the epidemy and to guide the process of
returning to normality. In the former case, we emphasize that keeping up with the spread of COVID-19 is a
complex problem by itself. Just consider that Mexico has a population of 130 million people, which extends
over 1.973 million km2 . Its geography includes 32 states, first-level administrative divisions in the country.
In turn, each state is divided politically into more than 2450 municipalities, second-level administrative
divisions. As the pandemic progress, governments have implemented lockdown actions to augment social
distancing. In consequence, the economic factors start increasing its relative importance. Just a result of the
pandemic, the European Commission has projected a shrink in the EU GDP of 7.4% [12], the US economy
is in its way to reaching a 20% of unemployment [13], and the Chinese economy shrank 6.8% in the first
quarter of 2020, ending a 50 years long run of growth [14]. With these three engines of the global economy
turned off, others will falter. So, there is an apparent need to open as soon as possible the economy while
making sure that the health aspects are kept at bay. Thus, this work contributes to addressing the urgent
need for rapid, updated, and reliable information at the municipality and state level.

2

Confirmed Positive, Pending and Deceased

In this map, we show, at Municipio and State levels of granularity, the number of confirmed positive, pending,
and deceased cases of COVID-19 and associate them with their place of residence (see Figure 2).

2.1

Preprocessing the Data

The Mexican government, through its Health Ministry, releases every day, since April 12, 2020, a dataset
containing the registers of individual cases [15]. The dataset, which fields we describe in detail in Appendix A,
is the source of information we employ in our maps. For our purposes, we extract patients’ data, including
their State of residence, their Municipio of residence, the result of their tests (confirmed, positive or negative,
or pending) and date of death (when appropriated). Please note that, in the case of COVID-19, the generation
of maps is a dynamic process that includes a large number of stages. Consider, for instance, the example
of a patient that starts feeling COVID-19 symptoms. Once the patient decides to visit the care provider, a
physician may determine a need for a test. Depending on the available infrastructure, the test may have to
travel to a nearby location. After a few days, the results come back to the physician, who fills out a local

2

(a)

(b)
Figure 2: Confirmed, deceased and pending cases of COVID-19 in Mexico at state (a) and municipal(b)
level.
agency report. The national network of health care providers collects these results and finally makes them
public. In Figure 1, we illustrate the daily update of positive confirmed cases occurring in the country. Note
that there may be a delay of more than 20 days between a self-reported start of symptoms until the data is
finally officially registered. These delays may make it harder to assess the magnitude of the epidemy and to
develop plans of action.
To efficiently organize the information int the dataset, we create data tables employing FileMaker [16],
a database management system that facilitates the incorporation of a Graphical User Interface (GUI). The
database consists of six tables: current, previous, municipalities, states, statistics.municipalities
and statistics.states. The current and previous tables have a structure corresponding to the fields in
the data file published by the government (see Appendix A). The municipalities and states tables contain
the name, the latitude, and the longitude of the place to locate it on the map. The tables statistics.municipalities and statistics.states hold the number of positively confirmed, deaths, pending results,
difference of each of the indicators to the previous day, and boolean fields with indicators changing depending
on whether the current value is greater or smaller to the day before. We calculate summaries by State and
Municipio searching on the statistics.states and statistics.municipalities tables.
3

2.2

Data Visualization

We display the data as circles which size is proportional to the population they represent, locating the
geographic coordinates from ubicated points on the interactive maps in unities of latitude and longitude (see
Figure 2). We also include timeline graphs alongside the state-level map (see Figure 2(a)). These graphs
show chronologically the new and accumulated confirmed cases, daily and accumulated deaths, and cases
with pending results since the Health Ministry released the public database. The user can select a state to
filter its corresponding data within the map view, and this shows a state-specific graph. When there is no
selection, the data for every state is added, showing a nation-wide timeline graph. It is important to note
that the graphs for confirmed cases show the data on the dates reported by the Health Ministry. This date
may or may not be the date when the care provider registered the test result, as the dataset does not include
that information. In the case of deaths, the official dataset usually reports them days after the passing
occurred, but provide the date of death; thus, we generate a timeline graph by the actual date. Given this
delay in reporting, the graphs for deaths are prone to changes with each daily update, and numbers for
recent dates are most likely to increase.
During the updating process, we compare our results with the official report as an initial quality check.
Afterward, we use the following policies: a) When a record does not have a Municipio of residence, we
assign it to the State capital; b) if there is a missing State of residence information, the record is marked
as unidentified and assigned to the country capital. We calculate daily the difference between the confirmed
positives, pending, and deaths with the previous day. To improve the visualization impact, we include an
arrow upward ⇑ whenever there is an increase; on the contrary, we show a downward arrow ⇓ to signal a
decrement in the indicator. After processing the data, we export the corresponding data file and upload it
to overwrite the data layer in the map project. We register the date and hour of the update. The map shows
the municipalities with at least one case of COVID-19. As well as an ordered list, from high to low, of the
incidence of the disease.
We separately process the data we use for the State-level graphs. Even when the public dataset is updated
daily, the records within it lack the date when the Health Minister first included them. Therefore, we collect
all the uploaded datasets to compare each with the previous one and determine which records are new.
We do this to obtain the daily new and total positive cases and cases awaiting the state’s results. In the
case of deaths, we only use the last updated public dataset as the date of death is included in each record.
We process this information in R (the computer language) and output the collected data as CSV (comma
separated variables) files that specify the date and state for each statistic. We then upload these CSV files
to the map project to generate the graphs.

3

Basic Number of Reproduction

In the previous section, we addressed the problems of increasing awareness on the magnitude of the epidemy
in terms of the number of people confirmed positive, suspected, and deceased at the municipal and state
level. Rapid access to that information supports the mobilization of sanitary and psychological resources.
A complementary piece of information to guide the public on the magnitude of the epidemic is the basic
reproduction number, Rt , which represents the indicator that should govern society on whether the contagious
increase, Rt > 1, or decrease, Rt < 1.

3.1

Interpretation of Rt in the SIR Model

Back in 1927, Kermack and McKendrick [17] proposed the SIR model to interpret infectious diseases. They
assumed that the whole number of individuals N in a population could be divided disjointly in suspected
S, infected I, and recovered R. Another assumption in the model is that susceptibles may become infected,
infected may become recovered, and recovered do not become infected again (see Figure 3).
This setting leads to a dynamic system where the number of susceptibles decreases over time as a fraction
a of the number of interactions between susceptibles and infected, where we are dropping the dependency
on t for clarity, as
IS
(1)
∂S/∂t = −a .
N

4

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 3: SIR Model. In SIR, one divides the population into susceptibles, infected and recovered, and may
move those categories subsequently (a). The variation in the population among the groups obey differential
equations (b), commanded by the value of Rt (c).
Meanwhile, the number of infected increases by the interaction between infected and susceptibles but decreases by the fraction of infected people recovering as
∂I/∂t = a

IS
− bI.
N

(2)

Finally, the number of recoveries increases as a proportion of the infected as
∂R/∂t = bI.

(3)

Here a and b are proportionality constants reflecting the inverse of the number of interactions in units of
time. Their units are people−1 · time−1 .
One may express (2), the equation expressing the rate at which the number of infected changes, as


S
(4)
∂S/∂t = I a − b ,
N
which has a solution

I = I0 e(a N −b)t ,
S

(5)

where I0 is the initial number of infected, that grows indefinitely if the exponent is positive and fades if it is
negative. One may express the stability condition as
S
aN
−b=0

ó

aS
bN

= 1.

(6)

Thus, one may express the basic reproduction number or average number of secondary cases caused by an
infected person, as
aS
Rt =
,
(7)
bN
which indicates that the number of infected will increase, when Rt > 1, or decrease, when Rt < 1.

3.2

Bayesian Solution for Rt

To estimate the most likely value for a random variable Rt , one would have to have some kind of tracking
capability to solve among other factors who is infected, when the infection started, what people contacted
the infectee, and who among these people contracted the infection. In addition, there would be the need
follow this process during the evolution of the epidemy, something that may be harder as the infection
spread. Thus, one should make some general assumptions to model the phenomenon in practice due to these

5

Figure 4: Infectious stages. Once contagious occurs, our interest centers on the duration of the incubation
period, the infectious period, and the latent period.
difficulties. One of them is that the rate at which an infected person spread the disease to others follow a
Poisson process described as [18]
P (It | I0 , . . . , It , w, Rt ) =

(Rt Λt )It e−Rt Λt
,
It !

(8)

where Ik corresponds to the number of infections at time k, w defines the serial interval for the spread, in
the form of a mass probability density, and one defines the expected number of infectious as [18]
E[It ] = Rt

t
X

It−s ws = Rt Λs .

(9)

s=1

There are several approaches to estimate the parameters that maximize the probability distribution, including
maximum likelihood, maximum a posteriori probability, and a general Bayesian approach [19]. The latter is
interesting as it permits us to present the results as a general probability distribution without committing
to a point estimate. To that end, one needs to propose a prior, which form one has to assume known. Cori
et al. [18] propose to use a Gamma distribution for P (Rt,τ ) as
P (Rt,τ ) =

a−1
Rt,τ
e−Rt,τ /b ,
Γ(a)ba

(10)

where a and b correspond respectively to the shape and scale. This arrangement is fortunate as the Poisson
distribution along with a Gamma distribution as its conjugate results in a Gamma distribution expressed
as [18]
t
Y
ΛIss
1
α−1 Rt,τ /β
P (It−τ +1 , . . . , It , Rt,τ | I0 , . . . , It−τ , w) = Rt,τ
e
.
(11)
I ! Γ(a)ba
s=t−τ +1 s
From where one may obtain the shape and scale parameters, which transformed into the mean and standard
deviation results in
X
1
.
(12)
α=a+
Is y β =
t
X
1
s=t−τ +1
Λs +
b
s=t−τ +1

6

As a consequence of the Bayesian process, the posterior,P (It−τ +1 , . . . , It , Rt,τ ), has a mean value and
standard deviation for the Gamma distribution given by
Pt
Pt
a + s=t−τ +1 Is
a+
Is
(13)
µ = 1 Pts=t−τ +1 , and σ = 
2 .
Pt
1
s=t−τ +1 Λs
b +
s=t−τ +1 Λs
b +
Once exposed, a person infected passes through a series of stages of interest for our modeling (see
Figure 4). Practitioners call incubation period to the time between the acquisition of the virus and the onset
of symptoms. Also, they call latent period to the time between the acquisition of the infectious and the
beginning of the infectious period. Please note that if the latent period is less than the incubation period,
the person infected may start infecting others without showing symptoms. Still, there seem to be people
passing through the infectious period without showing symptoms [20]. Indeed it may be the case that people
may start recovering before or after the infectious period, but that does not affect Cori et al. [18] model.

4

Results

We implemented Cori et al. [18] model using the R (the language) library EpiEstim. Cori et al. assumed
that the rate at which a person infects others follows a Poisson process. They then use a Bayesian inference
process where they assume a prior in the form of a Gamma distribution, resulting in a posterior that also
follows a Gamma distribution. We provide the resulting mean and standard deviation in our maps as the
most plausible element of the estimate’s behavior and uncertainty. Following the recommendation of Cori et
al., we calculate Rt only when the number of cases is greater than 12. Also, using the research by Aghaali et
al. [21], we assign a mean of 4.55 and a standard deviation of 3.3 to the Gamma prior. We are noting that
the characterization of the serial interval varies widely and possibly requires values that reflect the dynamics
of the country [22].
The model requires the definition of parameters, including the incubation, the latent, and the infectious
periods. Once infected, people seem to have an incubation period with means that range from 5.1 to 5.84
days, with 95% of the population covered after a means ranging from 11.5 to 12.5 days [23–25]. Still, there
are reports of ultralong incubation periods of 38 days [26], giving rise to the need for more studies [27]. There
is still some debate on whether infected people start spreading COVID-19 before showing symptoms [28,29],
although there may be some evidence tilting toward that conjecture with ranges between one and four days.
Byrne et al. [30] compiled 48 articles to define the period of infectious. Interestingly, they found that for
asymptomatic people, the median ranges from 6.5 to 9.5 days; for not hospitalized, the median is 13.4 days,
and for hospitalized people, it is 18.1 days. Thus, in our model, we use τ equal to 13.4 days.
One also needs to provide the parameters for the Gamma prior. There is a significant problem with
obtaining these values, as one needs to be able to trace contacts for many people carrying an infectious.
Nishiura et al.
[31], Zhao et al. [32], and Aghaali et al. [21] calculated a mean value µ between 4.4 and
4.8 and standard deviation σ between 2.7 and 3.3, with a number of cases studied n varying between 18 and
318 (see Figure 6). Still, Griffin et al. [22] found a variation for µ between 3.1 and 7.5 in 22 estimates.
We display Rt as choropleth maps at municipal and state levels of granularity using a red shading pattern
for polygons whose value is equal to or greater than one and a yellow to white shading pattern whose value
is below one (see Figure 5). To construct the charts, for each entity under analysis, we compared the records
between the most current data set and the previous day. Then, we found the most remote date when there
was a change from one day to the next in the number of confirmed cases. Finally, we show both a vertical
dashed line on that date, and from that day on, we continue the estimation of Rt with a dashed line for the
rest of the timeline. The estimate of Rt has an uncertainty range that we shadow around the mean (see
Figure 7).
One can access our maps to visualize the number of confirmed, suspected, and deceases cases at https:
//tinyurl.com/mexico-covid19-count, while one access the map to visualize the estimation of Rt at
https://tinyurl.com/mexico-Rt. In both cases, we used ArcGIS as the software platform.

7

(a)

(b)
Figure 5: Basic Reproduction Number R − t of COVID-19 in Mexico at state (a) and municipal (b) level.
8

Figure 6: Gamma Prior. Illustration for the Gamma distribution for some parameters in the literature.

Conclusion
There is an identified need to learn locally about the spread of COVID-19 to make informed decisions.
Using official data publicly sourced by the Mexican Health Ministry, we introduced two visualizations: In
one, we map the magnitude of positively confirmed, pending, and deceased cases and in another where we
mapped the basic reproduction number Rt , both at state and municipal level. Combined, they provide
complete information about the magnitude and direction of the epidemy. Daily, we update the maps as new
information becomes available.
As our understanding of COVID-19 increases, there is the opportunity to incorporate that knowledge into
visualization tools. Researchers and practitioners in areas as diverse as epidemiology, sociology, economy,
and computing may bring new ideas to tackle the pandemic’s consequences. As further information becomes
available, dynamic visualization tools may provide a form of rapid form of communication to gain insight.
This is especially true in the local information case as it may provide critical insights about the dynamics,
culture, and phenomena impacting the spread of COVID-19.

Acknowledges
Thanks to the Mexican Health Ministry for making publicly available the dataset on top of which we construct
this work.

A

Data Dictionary

The features used in our analysis are the result of the collection of the samples reported to the National
Network of Epidemiological Surveillance Laboratories. The data include the following fields [15]:

9

Figure 7: Daily Estimate of Rt . Here, we plot Rt mean value and the 95% CI under a shaded area around
it. We plot a horizontal blue line for Rt = 1, and a vertical red dashed line at the furthest date in the past
where there was a change between the current report the one presented one day before. From that day on,
we plot with a dashed line the estimate of the mean value of Rt .
ID
1
2

Name
update.date
record.number

3

origin

4
5
6
7
8
9
10

sector
state.med.unit
sex
state.res
municipio.res
patient.type
symptoms.date

11

decease.date

12
13
14
15
16
17

pneumonia
age
pregnant
diabetes
COPD
asthma

18

immunosuppression

19
20

hypertension
other.diseases

21

cardiovascular

22

obesity

23

chronic.kidney

24

smoking

25

contact

26

result

Concept
Date of release of the dataset.
Unique identifier of a person’s record.
Whether the medical record was captured through the Respiratory
Disease Monitoring Health Unit System (USMER) or not.
Institution of the National Health System providing care.
State code location for the medical unit.
Genre of the patient.
Patient’s residence State name.
Patient’s Municipio of residence.
Whether the patient is outpatient or inpatient.
Date when the patient experienced the first symptoms.
Indicates the date of patient decease, if it applies. Otherwise, it
remains empty if the patient is alive.
Whether a physician diagnosed the patient with pneumonia.
Age of the patient in years.
Whether the patient is pregnant.
Identifies whether a physician diagnosed the patient with diabetes.
Does the patient has Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease?
Whether a physician diagnosed the patient with asthma.
Whether a physician diagnosed the patient with immunosuppression.
Whether a physician diagnosed the patient with hypertension.
Whether a physician diagnosed the patient with other diseases.
Whether a physician diagnosed the patient with a cardiovascular
disease.
Identifies whether a physician diagnosed the patient with a probem
of obesity.
Whether a physician diagnosed the patient with chronic kidney
failure.
Whether a physician diagnosed the patient with a smoking habit.
Whether the patient made contact with another case diagnosed
with SARS CoV-2.
Whether the patient has a positive, negative or pending test for
SARS-CoV-2.
10

References
[1] D Cucinotta and M Vanelli. WHO declares COVID-19 a pandemic. Acta Bio-Medica: Atenei Parmensis,
91(1):157–160, 2020.
[2] Diego Aguiar, Johannes Alexander Lobrinus, Manuel Schibler, Tony Fracasso, and Christelle Lardi.
Inside the Lungs of COVID-19 Disease. International Journal of Legal Medicine, page 1, 2020.
[3] Sufang Tian, Yong Xiong, Huan Liu, Li Niu, Jianchun Guo, Meiyan Liao, and Shu-Yuan Xiao. Pathological Study of the 2019 Novel Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) through Postmortem Core Biopsies.
Modern Pathology, pages 1–8, 2020.
[4] José Javier Elizalde González. SARS-CoV-2 y COVID-19. Una Revisión de la Pandemia. Medicina
Crı́tica, 33(1):53–67, 2020.
[5] Hussin Rothan and Siddappa Byrareddy. The Epidemiology and Pathogenesis of Coronavirus Disease
(COVID-19) Outbreak. Journal of Autoimmunity, page 102433, 2020.
[6] Daniel Gudbjartsson, Agnar Helgason, Hakon Jonsson, Olafur Magnusson, Pall Melsted, Gudmundur
Norddahl, Jona Saemundsdottir, Asgeir Sigurdsson, Patrick Sulem, and Arna Agustsdottir. Spread of
SARS-CoV-2 in the Icelandic Population. New England Journal of Medicine, 2020.
[7] Jeromie Wesley Vivian Thangaraj, Manoj Murhekar, Yatin Mehta, Sushila Kataria, Megha Brijwal,
Nitesh Gupta, Aashish Choudhary, Bharati Malhotra, Madhavi Vyas, Himanshu Sharma, et al. A
cluster of SARS-CoV-2 infection among Italian tourists visiting India, March 2020. 2020.
[8] Travis Baggett, Harrison Keyes, Nora Sporn, and Jessie Gaeta. Prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 Infection in
Residents of a Large Homeless Shelter in Boston. Jama, 2020.
[9] Eric Knudsen. Evolution of Neural Processing for Visual Perception in Vertebrates. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 2020.
[10] Ensheng Dong, Hongru Du, and Lauren Gardner. An Interactive Web-based Dashboard to Track
COVID-19 in Real Time. The Lancet Infectious Diseases, 20(5):533–534, 2020.
[11] Esteban Ortiz-Ospina Max Roser, Hannah Ritchie and Joe Hasell. Coronavirus Pandemic (COVID-19).
Our World in Data, 2020.
[12] Pete Kinross, Carl Suetens, Joana Gomes Dias, Leonidas Alexakis, Ariana Wijermans, Edoardo Colzani,
Dominique Monnet, et al. Rapidly Increasing Cumulative Incidence of Coronavirus Disease (COVID19) in the European Union/European Economic Area and the United Kingdom, 1 January to 15 March
2020. Eurosurveillance, 25(11):2000285, 2020.
[13] Andrew Atkeson. What will be the Economic Impact of COVID-19 in the US? Rough Estimates of
Disease Scenarios. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2020.
[14] Yousaf Khan, Muneeb Ahmad, Mohammad Islam, Weiying Ping, and Chonghui Jiang. China Economic
Growth Rate and its Forecast after COVID-19 Eruption. Global Journal of Management And Business
Research, 2020.
[15] Datos Abiertos: Información Reference a Casos COVID-19 en México.
mexico-covid. Accessed: 2020-04-20.

https://tinyurl.com/

[16] Apple Inc. Filemaker pro. https://www.claris.com/filemaker/, 1984–2020.
[17] William Ogilvy Kermack and Anderson McKendrick. A Contribution to the Mathematical Theory of
Epidemics. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, 115(772):700–721, 1927.
[18] Anne Cori, Neil Ferguson, Christophe Fraser, and Simon Cauchemez. A New Framework and Software to
Estimate Time-Varying Reproduction Numbers during Epidemics. American Journal of Epidemiology,
178(9):1505–1512, 2013.
11

[19] Simon Prince. Computer Vision: Models, Learning, and Inference. Cambridge University Press, 2012.
[20] Hiroshi Nishiura, Tetsuro Kobayashi, Takeshi Miyama, Ayako Suzuki, Sung-mok Jung, Katsuma
Hayashi, Ryo Kinoshita, Yichi Yang, Baoyin Yuan, Andrei R Akhmetzhanov, et al. Estimation of the
Asymptomatic Ratio of Novel Coronavirus Infections (COVID-19). International journal of infectious
diseases, 94:154, 2020.
[21] Mohammad Aghaali, Goodarz Kolifarhood, Roya Nikbakht, Hossein Mozafar Saadati, and Seyed Saeed
Hashemi Nazari. Estimation of the Serial Interval and Basic Reproduction Number of COVID-19 in
Qom, Iran, and Three Other Countries: A Data-Driven Analysis in the Early Phase of the Outbreak.
Transboundary and Emerging Diseases, 2020.
[22] John Griffin, Aine Collins, Kevin Hunt, David McEvoy, Miriam Casey, Andrew Byrne, Conor McAloon,
Ann Barber, Elizabeth Ann Lane, and Simon More. A Rapid Review of Available Evidence on the
Serial Interval and Generation Time of COVID-19. medRxiv, 2020.
[23] Stephen Lauer, Kyra Grantz, Qifang Bi, Forrest Jones, Qulu Zheng, Hannah Meredith, Andrew Azman,
Nicholas Reich, and Justin Lessler. The Incubation Period of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)
from Publicly Reported Confirmed Cases: Estimation and Application. Annals of Internal Medicine,
172(9):577–582, 2020.
[24] Henry Han. Estimate the Incubation Period of Coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19). medRxiv, 2020.
[25] Qun Li, Xuhua Guan, Peng Wu, Xiaoye Wang, Lei Zhou, Yeqing Tong, Ruiqi Ren, Kathy Leung, Eric
Lau, and Jessica Wong. Early Transmission Dynamics in Wuhan, China, of Novel Coronavirus: Infected
Pneumonia. New England Journal of Medicine, 2020.
[26] Yujin Wang, Qingwen Wang, Kai Wang, Congkuan Song, ZiXin Guo, and Weidong Hu. A Case of
COVID-19 with Ultra-Long Incubation Period. Infection Control & Hospital Epidemiology, pages 1–7,
2020.
[27] Nevio Cimolai. More Data are Required for Incubation Period, Infectivity, and Quarantine duration for
COVID-19. Travel Medicine and Infectious Disease, 2020.
[28] Jong-Myon Bae. A Chinese Case of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) did not Show Infectivity
during the Incubation Period: Based on an Epidemiological Survey. Journal of Preventive Medicine
and Public Health, 53(2):67, 2020.
[29] Ping Yu, Jiang Zhu, Zhengdong Zhang, and Yingjun Han. A Familial Cluster of Infection Associated with the 2019 Novel Coronavirus Indicating Possible Person-to-Person Transmission during the
Incubation Period. The Journal of Infectious Diseases, 221(11):1757–1761, 2020.
[30] Andrew W Byrne, David McEvoy, Aine Collins, Kevin Hunt, Miriam Casey, Ann Barber, Francis Butler,
John Griffin, Elizabeth Lane, Conor McAloon, et al. Inferred Duration of Infectious Period of SARSCoV-2: Rapid Scoping Review and Analysis of Available Evidence for Asymptomatic and Symptomatic
COVID-19 Cases. medRxiv, 2020.
[31] Hiroshi Nishiura, Natalie Linton, and Andrei Akhmetzhanov. Serial Interval of Novel Coronavirus
(COVID-19) Infections. International Journal of Infectious Diseases, 93, 03 2020.
[32] Shi Zhao, Peihua Cao, Daozhou Gao, Zian Zhuang, Yongli Cai, Jinjun Ran, Marc KC Chong, Kai
Wang, Yijun Lou, Weiming Wang, et al. Serial Interval in Determining the Estimation of Reproduction
Number of the Novel Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) during the Early Outbreak. Journal of Travel
Medicine, 27(3):taaa033, 2020.

12

