Artificial Intelligence-based Clinical Decision Support
for COVID-19 – Where Art Thou?
Mathias Unberath* Kimia Ghobadi Scott Levin Jeremiah Hinson Gregory D Hager
To all front line health workers.
The Malone Center for Engineering in Healthcare
Johns Hopkins University
3400 N Charles Street, Malone Hall Suite 340
{mathias, kimia, slevin33, hinson, hager}@jhu.edu
All authors have contributed equally to this manuscript.

arXiv:2006.03434v1 [cs.CY] 5 Jun 2020

Keywords: COVID-19, Artificial Intelligence, Computer Assisted Diagnosis, Prognosis, Data Science,
Healthcare
The COVID-19 crisis has brought about new clinical questions, new workflows, and accelerated distributed healthcare needs. While
artificial intelligence (AI)-based clinical decision support seemed to have matured, the application of AI-based tools for COVID-19
has been limited to date. In this perspective piece, we identify opportunities and requirements for AI-based clinical decision support
systems and highlight challenges that impact “AI readiness” for rapidly emergent healthcare challenges.

1

Background

Prior to January 2020, the artificial intelligence and machine learning (AI/ML) for healthcare community had many reasons to be pleased with the recent progress of their field. Learning-based algorithms
had been shown to accurately forecast the onset of septic shock [1], ML-based pattern recognition methods classified skin lesions with dermatologist level accuracy [2], diagnostic AI systems successfully identified diabetic retinopathy during routine primary care visits [3], AI-based breast cancer screening outperformed radiologists by a fairly large margin [4], ML-driven triaging tools improved outcome differentiation beyond the emergency severity index [5], AI-enabled assistance systems simplified interventional
workflows [6], and algorithm-driven organizational studies enabled redesign of infusion centers [7]. Many
would have argued that, after nearly 60 years on the test bench [8], AI in healthcare had finally reached
a level of maturity, performance, and reliability that was compatible with the unforgiving requirements
imposed by clinical practice.
Today, only a few months later, this rather sunny outlook has become overcast. The worlds healthcare
systems are facing the outbreak of a novel respiratory disease, COVID-19. As of May 29, 2020 more than
5,800,000 cases of COVID-19 – caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV2) infection – have been reported across 210 countries, leading to more than 360,000 deaths [9]. Although
a rapidly emerging infectious disease escalating to a global pandemic represents a rare worst-case scenario, it provides an opportunity to observe the resilience of each and every link in the healthcare chain.
And, though heavily stressed, most links of this chain withstood the stress test of this first wave of the
pandemic , while the highly acclaimed AI/ML link appeared to have given in. This breakdown, however,
cannot be attributed to a lack of opportunity – on the contrary: Several articles in popular and scientific
press describe immediate opportunities for AI-assisted tools to have a positive impact on patient outcomes. These applications range from improved diagnosis, triaging and prognostication [10, 11] to personalized treatment decision support [12] to automated monitoring tools [13]. These AI-based clinical
decision support (CDS) are the central focus of this perspective piece.
Why, then, are AI-assisted CDS tools seemingly limited in contributing to the fight against COVID-19?

2

Identifying Opportunities

While the COVID-19 crisis has brought about new clinical questions, new workflows, and accelerated
distributed healthcare needs, the core principles of successful CDS are unwavering [14] – indeed they
1

are arguably more important than ever. Foremost, an AI-based CDS must address a clinical decision
where variability and uncertainty exists, since achieving reproducibility constitutes a core challenge in
the course of the diagnosis or treatment continuum [15]. Many opportunities and unknowns exist in both
identifying patients with SARS-CoV-2 and performing optimal treatment while containing transmission.
Clinical needs and opportunities for AI-driven CDS are evolving with the pandemic. Since early on, especially in areas with limited diagnostic testing capacity (including most of the United States), rapid
identification of patients with COVID-19 has been a major challenge. New signs and symptoms of the
illness are still being described, and guidance on which patients should be considered persons under investigation (PUIs) for COVID-19 or tested for SARS-CoV-2 infection is continuously evolving [16]. Failure to rapidly identify and isolate patients with COVID-19 in the hospital setting creates opportunity
for nosocomial infection spread, placing patients and healthcare workers at excess risk. Screening and
isolation procedures that lack specificity drive over-use of limited personal protective equipment (PPE)
and delays to care for non-COVID-related illness. To date, our approach to screening for COVID-19 has
been largely reactive. AI-driven algorithms with capacity to identify aberrant clinical presentations or
to quickly identify non-obvious patterns in patients with the disease could shift this approach to a more
proactive one. Beyond screening, identification of individual patient factors (e. g., age and comorbidities), symptoms and clinical findings or measures (e. g., vital signs, laboratory and imaging results) that
are predictive of clinical deterioration is needed. AI-driven CDS could be used to target earlier intervention or guide disposition (e. g., discharge versus hospitalization) decision-making based on these predictions. As the pandemic continues to unfold, clinical needs will also change. For example, AI-driven CDS
to support optimal resource allocation, load balancing, or treatment selection may become the predominant need.
While the application of AI-based CDS for COVID-19 has been limited to date, this is somewhat understandable. AI is highly dependent on sufficiently diverse, representative data; AI/ML algorithms cannot
be trained and adequately validated without creating large data sets that reflect the clinical use case,
and such data will always be limited in the early phases of an emerging infectious disease. Nonetheless,
the need and opportunity for improvement of clinical care through AI will continue to increase over the
coming months – and those who are well-positioned to accrue and capitalize on data will be able to seize
this opportunity.
In addition to capturing data, it is equally important to understand the clinical use case – effective development and deployment of any CDS, including that driven by AI, requires a deep understanding of
both the problems of focus and the environment in which it is encountered. For instance, an AI-driven
prediction model is effective only when its prediction can be linked to a clear action (e. g. altered clinical decision-making that prevents or better prepares for the predicted outcome) an is embedded seamlessly in the relevant clinical workflow. Rapid identification of the most pressing clinical needs, and understanding which of the many targets for AI that will yield improvements in clinical care and effective
development of CDS requires multi-disciplinary (clinician-engineer) collaboration. Teams with existing
collaborations of this nature, such as in our own Malone Center for Engineering in Healthcare and Center for Data Science in Emergency Medicine, will be best positioned to rapidly respond to and address
needs as they emerge [15].

3

Capitalizing on Data

As already noted, AI algorithms cannot be trained and validated without sufficiently large quantities of
data, but at the same time not all data that may be available is necessarily useful. AI-based CDS tools
must be designed with a target population in mind that is determined by the clinical question to be answered. To obtain unbiased estimates of the CDS systems performance in deployment, careful study design is an essential pre-requisite. When curating datasets for model development and validation, the inand exclusion criteria for any sample must be well-defined and precisely aligned with the patient cohort
who would later be subject to algorithmic analysis. Collecting data in this manner is time consuming
and requires care and effort, which is especially challenging during a rapidly evolving pandemic situa-

tion. It is not surprising that many of the recent manuscripts that describe AI-based CDS tools rely on
convenience sampling of data, i. e. dataset curation strategies that prioritize easily available data, e. g.,
public repositories such as challenges or The Cancer Imaging Archive [17], without considering the ultimate target population. From an engineering perspective, such studies can confirm the validity of the
technical approach, but they cannot provide evidence to support immediate clinical deployment.
Consequently, while there are early reports on the use of AI-based prediction models for detection and
prognosis of COVID-19, the reported results have a high risk of bias and are probably overly optimistic [18].
It is paramount that these promising technical feasibility studies are followed up with carefully designed
validation studies to demonstrate the models usefulness in the target population. The challenges that
this creates are not new. They have already been recognized more than two decades ago by Jerome Kassirer [19] who concludes: “Typically, new models were tested, found to exhibit interesting characteristics,
and then abandoned when their developers found that the next steps were far harder than designing the
first model ”. As highlighted in Section 2, CDS tools are urgently needed and careful reporting of the
study and dataset design, e. g. following TRIPOD [20], is critical to interpret the clinical implications of
the proposed CDS tool.
Irrespective of the sampling strategy, data collection for AI-based CDS development involves the aggregation and pre-conditioning of large amounts of medical records. Information in patient medical records
is considered highly sensitive and private information that must be protected – these standards are governed by the well-known HIPAA privacy act. Because research using identifiable protected health information qualifies as human subjects research, any such study must be approved by the respective Institutional Review Board (IRB), which are established to protect the welfare, rights, and privacy of human
subjects. While research on fully anonymized patient data does not qualify as human subjects research
and is thus exempt, this determination cannot usually be made by the study team but is reserved for the
IRB.
A major challenge for all data-driven investigations is the growing evidence that the technical feasibility
of fully automated anonymization [21, 22] is questionable. This in turn complicates a straight-forward
“exempt” declaration, suggesting that new study protocols will have to undergo full IRB consideration.
If the IRB is operating at capacity, it can take multiple weeks before a final decision is rendered, and
if positive, data collection can begin. Further, in light of the COVID-19 state of emergency, many new
studies are being submitted for review and IRBs must prioritize protocols that promise direct and immediate benefits to participants, such as controlled trials of emerging treatments [23, 24]. This circumstance may further delay the approval of studies that have low immediate benefit to the subjects, which
is the case for most AI algorithm development. Consequently, even if predictor and outcome variables
are known immediately after onset, thus enabling multi-disciplinary teams to define value-creating AI
use cases, the hands-on work towards this goal will likely be delayed substantially due to IRB and data
trust related processes. This circumstance seems to be supported by observing the delay between the onset of the epidemic in late December 2019 and the number of publications describing ML algorithms for
the automated interpretation of imaging data that only surged in late April 2020.
While the authors unanimously advocate for the importance of IRB and data trust review of studies to
protect human subjects, it is becoming increasingly clear that current practices and processes do not
easily support the rapid development and deployment of AI technology. To promote AI readiness, we
should consider the implementation of IRB sub-committees dedicated to AI algorithm development with
specialized study protocol templates that allow for rapid turnaround review of data science-related projects.
If indeed the implementation of AI and evidence-based, personalized medicine in routine clinical care is
an institutional priority, then clear guidelines and pre-approved mechanisms should be created that empower teams to move quickly and have impact whilst, by design, complying with all ethical standards.

4

Infrastructure

Combating COVID-19 has been challenging both due to the large number of asymptomatic patients who
can spread the virus and the highly variable impact of SARS-CoV-2 on different patients. The ques-

tions that need answering range from identifying and testing patients, therapeutic treatments, to protecting healthcare workers, and, perhaps more challenging, predicting and responding to the healthcare
need which triggered the ”flatten the curve” response and the widespread shutdowns to keep the healthcare systems afloat. While reducing physical distance is an effective way to curb the sudden impact on
healthcare systems, it comes at a large economical and societal cost. Alternative approaches, however,
require a thorough understanding of the impacts of COVID-19 on healthcare systems operations, diagnoses, and treatments, as well as devising smart testing and tracing responses. This approach requires
proactive actions that are informed through a robust data infrastructure. It is overly simplistic to assume that a global pandemic could be controlled without proper use of the growing amount of data and
knowledge that is generated by the minute. At the same time, large and fast-paced data and knowledge
aggregations cannot be processed without the help of AI, which in return, is empowered by a reliable
data infrastructure that is accessible to researchers in a timely manner. This access should be significantly expedited by establishing robust pathways for data sharing and usage, including the standardization of data formats.
To enable such an infrastructure, multiple data components are needed. Consider for instance, a dataset
on hospital operations that summarizes basic information such as employees shift work or the number of
utilized resources, including PPEs – As trivial as this data sounds, it has proven a challenge to gather
this data in a reliable manner, and lack of such data is ever more felt when a crisis like the current pandemic hits and the need for fast load-balancing and resource allocation rise seemingly overnight. Another important component of any data infrastructure is the availability of clinical data in a standard
form that can be shared in an anonymized manner across healthcare systems. This data is particularly
important in informing diagnosis and response to therapy – one of the early challenges that clinicians
faced during the COVID-19 pandemic. While some systems exist that capture similar data, they are often incomplete and silo-ed to the particular organization that generated the data, with accompanying
challenges including IRB approvals. Rarely can such datasets be shared on a large scale across multiple
systems, although there are noteworthy exceptions [25]. An important differential characteristic of an
ideal data infrastructure and a key point that enables healthcare systems to respond quickly and proactively, is that such data infrastructure should be devised with data sciences and AI in mind, as opposed
to considering it as an afterthought to what organically happens in healthcare environments. An infrastructure that is multi-disciplinary and is informed by not only the clinicians and medical researchers, but
also data scientists, engineers, managerial sciences, and public health experts is the one that has a better
chance to stand the test of time.

5

Looking Ahead

As the pandemic progresses and as more data is acquired, becomes available for research, and is shared,
it is likely that AIs contribution to combating the COVID-19 crisis will grow. In non-human subjects research tasks, such as language processing or computational biology, AI has already started to make an
impact by extracting key findings from the ever increasing body of literature on COVID-19 [26] or by
trying to understand the protein structure of SARS-CoV-2 to drive drug discovery [27].
When considering AI/ML for healthcare, we note a number of recent developments that seek to address
some of the roadblocks identified herein. Commendable examples include FDA’s request for feedback on
their proposed regulatory framework for AI/ML-based software as medical device [28], and the Office for
Human Research Protections’ Exploratory Workshop Series on privacy and health research, which discusses potential operational solutions to the challenges IRBs face when reviewing ”big data research” [29].
Specifically for CDS, AIs notable absence in the early phases of this initial surge will likely not be the
whole story. There are pockets of examples [30, 31] where AI is being used to support COVID-19 related
patient care right now, and many more examples will follow.
Once the dust of this first wave of the pandemic has settled, we, as a community, should spend some
time to identify and analyze the organizational, institutional, or regulatory hurdles that this healthcare
crisis has highlighted, as well as the solution paths that emerged to bring AI-based CDS systems for COVID-

REFERENCES

19 to the bedside. These insights should contribute to an open discussion of how we can improve on the
AI readiness of current practices and protocols. After all, who knows when the next severe test comes
forth and what it will look like. Let’s be prepared!
Acknowledgements
This article was supported by institutional funds provided by the Malone Center for Engineering in Healthcare.
References

References
[1] K. E. Henry, D. N. Hager, P. J. Pronovost, S. Saria, Science translational medicine 2015, 7, 299
299ra122.
[2] A. Esteva, B. Kuprel, R. A. Novoa, J. Ko, S. M. Swetter, H. M. Blau, S. Thrun, Nature 2017, 542,
7639 115.
[3] M. D. Abràmoff, P. T. Lavin, M. Birch, N. Shah, J. C. Folk, NPJ digital medicine 2018, 1, 1 1.
[4] S. M. McKinney, M. Sieniek, V. Godbole, J. Godwin, N. Antropova, H. Ashrafian, T. Back,
M. Chesus, G. C. Corrado, A. Darzi, et al., Nature 2020, 577, 7788 89.
[5] S. Levin, M. Toerper, E. Hamrock, J. S. Hinson, S. Barnes, H. Gardner, A. Dugas, B. Linton,
T. Kirsch, G. Kelen, Annals of emergency medicine 2018, 71, 5 565.
[6] T. Vercauteren, M. Unberath, N. Padoy, N. Navab, Proceedings of the IEEE 2019, 108, 1 198.
[7] K. Ghobadi, A. C. Zenteno, A. R. Marshall, P. F. Dunn, R. Levi, J. H. Stone, NEJM Catalyst
2017, 3, 1.
[8] K.-H. Yu, A. L. Beam, I. S. Kohane, Nature biomedical engineering 2018, 2, 10 719.
[9] Johns Hopkins University - Center for Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE) COVID-19 Dashboard, https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html, Accessed: 2020-05-29.
[10] X. Jiang, M. Coffee, A. Bari, J. Wang, X. Jiang, J. Huang, J. Shi, J. Dai, J. Cai, T. Zhang, et al.,
CMC-Computers, Materials & Continua 2020, 63, 1 537.
[11] F. Jiang, L. Deng, L. Zhang, Y. Cai, C. W. Cheung, Z. Xia, Journal of General Internal Medicine
2020, 1–5.
[12] M. van der Schaar, A. Alaa 2020.
[13] IEEE Spectrum – AI Can Help Hospitals Triage COVID-19 Patients,
https:
//spectrum.ieee.org/the-human-os/artificial-intelligence/medical-ai/
ai-can-help-hospitals-triage-covid19-patients, Accessed: 2020-04-30.
[14] K. Kawamoto, C. A. Houlihan, E. A. Balas, D. F. Lobach, Bmj 2005, 330, 7494 765.
[15] C. J. Lindsell, W. W. Stead, K. B. Johnson, JAMA 2020.
[16] C. for Disease Control, Prevention, et al., Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Updated
2020.
[17] K. Clark, B. Vendt, K. Smith, J. Freymann, J. Kirby, P. Koppel, S. Moore, S. Phillips, D. Maffitt,
M. Pringle, et al., Journal of digital imaging 2013, 26, 6 1045.
[18] L. Wynants, B. Van Calster, M. M. Bonten, G. S. Collins, T. P. Debray, M. De Vos, M. C. Haller,
G. Heinze, K. G. Moons, R. D. Riley, et al., bmj 2020, 369.

REFERENCES

The mission of The Malone Center for Engineering in Healthcare at Johns Hopkins University is to catalyze and accelerate
the development of research-based innovations that advance the effectiveness and efficiency of health care.

[19] J. P. Kassirer, A report card on computer-assisted diagnosis–the grade: C, 1994.
[20] G. S. Collins, J. B. Reitsma, D. G. Altman, K. G. Moons, British Journal of Surgery 2015, 102, 3
148.
[21] K. Benitez, B. Malin, Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 2010, 17, 2 169.
[22] K. El Emam, E. Jonker, B. M. Luk Arbuckle, PloS one 2011, 6, 12.
[23] Y. Wang, D. Zhang, G. Du, R. Du, J. Zhao, Y. Jin, S. Fu, L. Gao, Z. Cheng, Q. Lu, et al., The
Lancet 2020.
[24] A. Casadevall, L.-a. Pirofski, et al., The Journal of clinical investigation 2020, 130, 4 1545.
[25] COVID-19 Research Database, https://covid19researchdatabase.org/, Accessed: 2020-05-14.
[26] Kaggle - COVID-19 Kaggle community contributions,
covid-19-contributions, Accessed: 2020-05-14.

https://www.kaggle.com/

[27] A. W. Senior, R. Evans, J. Jumper, J. Kirkpatrick, L. Sifre, T. Green, C. Qin, A. Žı́dek, A. W. Nelson, A. Bridgland, et al., Nature 2020, 1–5.
[28] US Food and Drug Administration, et al., Proposed regulatory framework for modifications to artificial intelligence/machine learning (ai/ml)-based software as a medical device (samd)discussion
paper and request for feedback. 2019, 2019.
[29] US Department of Health & Human Services: 2019 Office for Human Research Protection Exploratory Workshop – Privacy and Health Research in a Data-Driven World, https://www.hhs.
gov/ohrp/education-and-outreach/exploratory-workshop/2019-workshop/index.html, Accessed: 2020-05-29.
[30] Thirona - Artificial intelligence to Screen for COVID-19 on CT- and X-ray images, https://
thirona.eu/cad4covid/, Accessed: 2020-05-14.

[31] Business Insider - OSF HealthCare Partners with StoCastic to Use New AI System to Move
Coronavirus Triage Out of the Hospital, https://markets.businessinsider.com/news/stocks/
osf-healthcare-partners-with-stocastic-to-use-new-ai-system-to-move-coronavirus-triage-ou
Accessed: 2020-05-14.

