Assessing the Impact of COVID-19 on the Objective and Analysis of
Oncology Clinical Trials – Application of the Estimand Framework
Evgeny Degtyareva*# and Kaspar Rufibachb# and Yue Shentuc# and Godwin
Yungd# and Michelle Caseye and Stefan Englertf and Feng Liug and Yi Liuh
and Oliver Saileri and Jonathan Siegelj and Steven Sunk and Rui Tangl and
Jiangxiu Zhoum
on behalf of the industry working group on estimands in oncologyz
a
c

Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland; bF. Hoffmann-La Roche, Basel, Switzerland;

Merck & Co., Inc, Rahway, New Jersey, United States; dTakeda Pharmaceuticals,

Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States; ePfizer, Collegeville, Pennsylvania, United
States; fAbbVie Deutschland GmbH & Co KG, Ludwigshafen, Germany; gAstraZeneca,
Gaithersburg, Maryland, United States; hNektar Therapeutics, San Francisco,
California, United States; iBoehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Biberach,
Germany; jBayer US Inc., Whippany, New Jersey, United States; kJanssen R&D,
Raritan, New Jersey, United States; lServier Pharmaceuticals, Boston, Massachusetts,
United States; mGlaxoSmithKline, Collegeville, Pennsylvania, United States

z

Which is both, a European special interest group ‘Estimands in oncology’, sponsored

by PSI and EFSPI, and a scientific working group ‘Estimands in oncology’ of the ASA
Biopharmaceutical Section. http://www.oncoestimand.org
*corresponding author: evgeny.degtyarev@novartis.com
#

these authors all contributed equally

Assessing the Impact of COVID-19 on the Clinical Trial Objective and
Analysis of Oncology Clinical Trials – Application of the Estimand
Framework
COVID-19 outbreak has rapidly evolved into a global pandemic. The impact of
COVID-19 on patient journeys in oncology represents a new risk to interpretation
of trial results and its broad applicability for future clinical practice. We identify
key intercurrent events that may occur due to COVID-19 in oncology clinical
trials with a focus on time-to-event endpoints and discuss considerations
pertaining to the other estimand attributes introduced in the ICH E9 addendum.
We propose strategies to handle COVID-19 related intercurrent events,
depending on their relationship with malignancy and treatment and the
interpretability of data after them. We argue that the clinical trial objective from a
world without COVID-19 pandemic remains valid. The estimand framework
provides a common language to discuss the impact of COVID-19 in a structured
and transparent manner. This demonstrates that the applicability of the
framework may even go beyond what it was initially intended for.
Keywords: COVID-19; oncology clinical trial; estimand; time-to-event

1. INTRODUCTION
Since its initial outbreak in late 2019, Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) has
rapidly evolved into a devastating, global pandemic (Huang et al. 2020; Gates 2020). As
of 31 May 2020, the disease has reached over 200 countries and territories, causing
more than 5.9 million infections and 360,000 deaths (WHO 2020). COVID-19 is also
having a detrimental impact on patients with underlying diseases (such as cancer) and
ongoing clinical trials. Some of its impacts are direct, e.g. infections and deaths (Dai et
al. 2020). Others are indirect but still deeply concerning, e.g. increased demands on the
health service, travel restrictions and measures of social distancing, leading to clinical
site closures, treatment interruptions/discontinuations and delayed/missed trial visits
(Singh and Chaturvedi 2020). In March 2020, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration

and the European Medicines Agency issued separate guidance on the conduct of clinical
trials during COVID-19 (FDA 2020; EMA 2020a). The call to action was clear: 1)
Ensure the safety of trial participants; 2) To minimize the risks to trial integrity and
maintain compliance with good clinical practice, trial sponsors should document
changes in trial conduct due to COVID-19, duration of those changes, and how trial
conduct and results were impacted.
While subject safety is of greatest importance, this article is concerned with the risks
COVID-19 poses to interpretability of trial results with regard to the clinical trial
objective and measures to curb those risks. We argue that the clinical trial objective
should relate to a world without ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, specifically defined
through two criteria:
1) (a) Patients do not experience severe complications due to the virus (e.g.
hospitalization and death), (b) transmission and spread of the virus are limited,
and (c) effective therapy for the virus is available;
2) No major disruption of healthcare systems, patients have access to medications,
routine standard of care, and proper disease follow-up.
Our interest in this context is motivated by two assumptions. First, that although not
explicitly stated in protocols, clinical trials started before COVID-19 were designed
with the intention to inform clinical practice in a world absent of the pandemic as
defined above. Second, that this pandemic will eventually come to end, so that the
clinical trial objective most relevant to patients in a post-pandemic world is the same as
the clinical trial objective conceived prior to the pandemic.
To assess the impact of COVID-19 on ongoing clinical trials, the ICH E9 (R1)
addendum on estimands and sensitivity analysis provides a helpful framework for

discussion (EMA 2020b). Under this framework, clinical trials provide a precise
description (a.k.a. the estimand or “target of estimation”) of the treatment effect
reflecting the clinical question posed by a given trial objective. Each estimand is made
up of five attributes (Figure 1). Together, the attributes determine how different patient
journeys in a clinical trial are accounted for, what data to collect, and what statistical
method to use to estimate the treatment effect. Sensitivity analyses may be pre-specified
to explore the estimator’s robustness of inference to model assumptions (Degtyarev et
al. 2019).
VARIABLE
The variable (or endpoint) to be
obtained for each patient.
Q: Does the current endpoint
reflect the treatment effect in the
original scientific objective?

INTERCURRENT EVENTS
(ICEs)

POPULATION

Other ICEs not already addressed by
treatment, population and variable,
and how they are handled.
Q: Can the original clinical trial
objective be addressed without
defining new strategies for ICEs
related to COVID-19? (e.g. apply prespecified rules for discontinuations to
discontinuations due to COVID-19)

The population of patients
targeted by the clinical question.
Q: Are the enrolled patients
representative of the target
population?

TREATMENT

SUMMARY

The treatment condition of interest.
Q: Are the treatment conditions (e.g.
non-compliance, drug
discontinuation, subsequent therapy)
representative of what would have
been administered pre-COVID-19?

A population-level summary for
the variable which provides a
basis for treatment comparison.
Q: Is the summary measure still
interpretable?

Figure 1. Covid-19 Impact Assessment. An estimand or “target of estimation” consists
of five attributes: treatment, population, variable, (other) intercurrent events, and
summary. We pose a key question for each attribute to facilitate COVID-19 impact
assessment on whether the planned analysis of an ongoing clinical trial can still address
the original clinical trial objective (in italics).
The primary intention of the ICH E9 addendum is to promote alignment between
clinical trial objectives and treatment effect estimation prior to the start of a trial.
However, it is also specific on how to handle intercurrent events (ICEs) that were
unforeseen and, more generally, any changes to the estimand:

Addressing intercurrent events that were not foreseen at the design stage, and
are identified during the conduct of the trial, should discuss not only the choices
made for the analysis, but the effect on the estimand, i.e. on the description of
the treatment effect that is being estimated, and the interpretation of the trial
results. A change to the estimand should usually be reflected through
amendment to the protocol.

This makes the estimand framework particularly useful during the COVID-19
pandemic—an unusual, unforeseen event that has the potential to introduce ICEs and
other challenges at a large scale. By having a precise definition of the initial target of
estimation, sponsors of ongoing clinical trials can better identify potential sources of
bias due to the pandemic. They can then answer the following questions with clarity and
objectivity: “Can the estimate from my initially planned analysis still provide an answer
to my clinical trial objective?” and “Will the data collected and trial results be useful for
informing clinical practice in a world without COVID-19 pandemic?” If the answer to
at least one of these questions is no, mitigative measures may need to be taken, e.g. by
clarifying the primary estimand, modifying the estimator, adding sensitivity analyses, or
introducing supplementary estimands. Ratitch et al. (2019) discuss further exploratory
analyses before unblinding that may help to provide supplementary evidence for
interpretation of trial results.
Recognizing the useful role that estimands may play in analysing clinical trial data
affected by COVID-19, the industry working group on estimands in oncology convened
in March 2020 to share experiences in dealing with emerging challenges to ongoing
clinical trials (Degtyarev and Rufibach 2020). This article provides a summary of our
month-long discussion and represents a consensus opinion of the working group. Given
the novelty and evolving nature of the COVID-19 pandemic, we acknowledge that our
opinion may need refining and enhancement in positioning over time.
Our intention in this article is to support discussions between various stakeholders
(sponsors, investigators, Institutional Review Boards/Independent Ethics Committees,

and health authorities) regarding the impact of COVID-19 on individual clinical trials.
We assume throughout that the reader is familiar with the estimand framework as
described in the ICH E9 addendum. While our focus will be on the impact of COVID19 on randomized superiority clinical trials (RCT) in oncology, we comment on other
settings and hope that this discussion will be informative for future public health crises,
should there be more that cause similar disruptions to health care systems. We also refer
the reader to Meyer et al. (2020) for a comprehensive treatment of other statistical and
operational considerations for trials during COVID-19 in addition to their independent
interpretations on estimands. While many of their advice are applicable in general, this
article provides a deeper dive into oncology-specific issues from the perspective of the
estimand framework.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. In Section 2, we assess the
potential impact of COVID-19 on interpretation of randomized superiority clinical trials
with a focus on time-to-event endpoints. In Section 3, we discuss options for either
updating the initially intended analysis or adding a supplementary estimand.
Considerations for other types of endpoints, missing data, and trials with interim
analyses are provided in Section 4. We conclude with a discussion in Section 5.

2. ASSESSING THE POTENTIAL IMPACT OF COVID-19 ON TRIALS
WITH TIME-TO-EVENT ENDPOINTS USING THE ESTIMAND
FRAMEWORK
2.1 Clinical Trial Objective

The estimand framework helps to structure the assessment of COVID-19 impact on the
interpretability of trial results. We provide in Figure 1 five key questions (one for each
of the five estimand attributes) that can guide trial team discussions to assess whether

the estimate from the initially planned analysis can still provide an informative answer
to the original clinical trial objective. If the answers to these questions indicate that
interpretation of the trial may be affected by COVID-19, then depending on the
anticipated magnitude of the impact, the primary estimand may need to be clarified or a
supplementary estimand may need to be added. Note that changes to the primary
estimand may have implications for the assumed underlying effect size, the sample size,
and how missing data are handled during estimation.
Subsequently, we will describe various aspects to consider when answering the five
questions in Figure 1. Prior to that, it may be useful to categorize intercurrent events as
follows (EMA 2020c):
● Direct impact: caused primarily by COVID-19 infection, possibly resulting in
treatment interruption or discontinuation from treatment due to infection, use
of additional therapies to treat COVID-19, or death.
● Indirect impact: caused primarily by overwhelmed healthcare systems or
public health measures such as regional lock-downs, possibly resulting in
treatment interruption or discontinuation from treatment due to logistic
reasons, patient or physician decision.
These impacts will certainly vary by regions. A non-exhaustive list of various ICEs is
summarized in Table 1. In practice, distinguishing between ICEs due to direct or
indirect impact of COVID-19 will require detailed data collection beyond what was
planned before the pandemic. As in the ICH E9 addendum, we do not consider
discontinuation from trial to be an ICE, though it may lead to missing data (for more
details, see Section 4).

Table 1. Impact of COVID-19 on patient’s journeys in the trial
Type of
impact

What could happen?

When more likely to happen?

Direct

COVID-19 infection

Risk of infection generally
assumed to be equal for all
enrolled patients (although it may
depend on recruiting countries),
however risk of severe illness as
consequence of COVID-19
infection likely to be higher in
patients with blood cancersa,
comorbidities or those receiving
treatment associated with
immunosuppression.

Intercurrent event due
to COVID-19
Death attributed to
COVID-19
Treatment
discontinuation due to
adverse event (COVID19 infection)
Use of concomitant
medication to treat
COVID-19

Considerations for the choice of
estimand strategy

Careful assessment of potential
association of COVID-19 deaths
and discontinuations with
prognosis and trial treatment
required. Treatment policy may
be reasonable if association with
disease progression or effect of
treatment cannot be excluded.
Concomitant medications that are
usually necessitated by
worsening COVID-19 symptoms,
which in turn may be associated
with comorbidity and cancer
prognosis. Furthermore, the
possible impact of such
concomitant medications on the
disease and potential drug-drug
interaction need to be considered
as some anticancer therapies are
currently studied as potential
treatment for COVID-19 in
clinical trials (U.S. National
Library of Medicine 2020a,b).

Treatment interruption
due to adverse event
(COVID-19 infection)

Direct

Increased risk of
immunosupression with trial
treatment

Case by case assessment of
benefit-risk required as many
cancer treatments are
immunosuppressive

Treatment
discontinuation due to
physician decision

Indirect

Oral medication available in
the target indicationb

In trials with IV treatment
requiring hospital visits

Indirect

Patient can receive SoC
closer to their home

In open-label trials after
randomization to SoC, in
particular with reimbursed SoC

Indirect

Patients who achieved
complete or partial response
on treatment not willing to
travel to receive additional
treatment

Trials with treatment sequences
conditional on early outcomes
(e.g. trials with inductionconsolidation-maintenance
phasesc); possibly adjuvant trials

Treatment
discontinuation due to
patient or physician
decision
Treatment
discontinuation due to
patient or physician
decision
Treatment
discontinuation due to
patient or physician
decision
Treatment
interruption/delay due
to patient or physician
decision

Assessment of association with
prognosis and trial treatment
required. Data after such
interruptions may still be
informative of the treatment
effect without pandemic and
treatment policy may be
reasonable to reflect it.
Trial treatment may put a patient
at higher risk of severe
consequences of the infection and
treatment policy may be
reasonable to reflect it.
Increased number of such
treatment discontinuations due to
desire to minimize travelling
during the pandemic. Data after
such discontinuations unlikely to
reflect patient journeys in the
post-pandemic world –
hypothetical strategy could be
considered.

While increased number of such
interruptions is unlikely to
happen in the post-pandemic
world, data after such
interruptions may still be

Indirect

Logistic (e.g. hospital
capacity) or drug
supply/manufacturing
constraints

More likely for treatments
requiring ICU bed availability
(e.g. CAR-T), scheduled surgeries
(e.g. neo-adjuvant trials) or
products with complex
manufacturing

Treatment
interruption/delay

informative of the treatment
effect without pandemic
dependent on the length of
interruption and its impact on
treatment exposure/dose
intensity. If interruption/delay is
short, treatment policy could be
considered. Hypothetical strategy
may be reasonable for
interruptions/delays with
significant impact on patient’s
exposure, dose intensity or
planned treatment sequence.
Increased number of such
interruptions/delays only
expected in the acute phase of the
pandemic and unlikely to reflect
the situation in the post-pandemic
world, however data after such
interruptions/delays may still be
informative of the treatment
effect without pandemic
dependent on the length of
interruption/delay. If
interruption/delay is short,
treatment policy could be
considered. Hypothetical strategy
may be reasonable for long
interruptions/delays with

Indirect

Unforeseen changes in
competitive landscape (e.g.
approvals of new drugs
while enrolment is on hold
for an extended time due to
COVID-19)

In open-label trials after
randomization to SoC

Treatment
discontinuation due to
patient or physician
decision

significant impact on intended
treatment sequence.
New therapies not anticipated to
be approved during the trial at
trial start may impact patient’s or
physician’s behavior and may
impact trial interpretability
dependent on how data after start
of new therapy is used in primary
analysis.

NOTE: “Blood cancers often directly compromise the immune system, so those patients are probably most at risk, whereas cancers such as colon
cancer, breast cancer, and lung cancer do not typically cause immune suppression that is not treatment-related.” R. Schilsky, chief medical officer of the
American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) (Burki 2020)
b NOTE: “Some patients may be able to switch chemotherapy from IV to oral therapies, which would decrease the frequency of clinic visits but would
require greater vigilance by the health care team to be sure that patients are taking their medicine correctly.” (ASCO 2020)
c NOTE: “For patients in deep remission who are receiving maintenance therapy, stopping chemotherapy may be an option.” (ASCO 2020)
a

Following the intention-to-treat principle, the treatment policy strategy is often applied
in superiority RCTs to address ICEs such as treatment discontinuations, interruptions, or
the use of concomitant or rescue medication. This is because these events reflect what
can happen in clinical practice when the treatment is used post-approval; the underlying
assumption is that these events are related to the effect of the treatment or disease or
that they are likely to be observed in practice (e.g. patients forgetting to take
medication). However, the widespread, systematic disruption of the global healthcare
system during the pandemic is an extreme event that is hopefully temporary.
Consequently, the treatment policy strategy may not match the clinical trial objective
when considering discontinuations or interruptions attributed to the disruption of
clinical trial operations. Additionally, patients may discontinue or pause treatment as a
result of COVID-19 infection or the use of concomitant medication to treat it.
Disentangling the COVID-19 effect from underlying treatment and disease may be
difficult. A careful assessment is required to determine if a change in the primary
estimand or additions of supplementary estimands are warranted and if so, to select the
appropriate methodology. These aspects will be discussed now.

2.2 Population
Consistent with the original clinical trial objective, the target population should remain
as originally defined by the protocol prior to COVID-19 pandemic. However, it is
important to assess whether COVID-19 will impact the actual enrolled patients in the
trial, and if so, whether the enrolled patients can still be considered representative of the
target population. More specifically, characteristics of patients enrolled before, during
and after the pandemic may be systematically different (EMA 2020c). Bias with respect
to the pre-pandemic estimand may be introduced, for example, if enrolment continues
only in some regions with non-severe disruption of the healthcare system. Current

clinical guidance on the management of cancer patients during COVID-19 also suggest
prioritization strategies based on patients' conditions, e.g. patients with compromised
immune systems, elderly patients at high risk (ASCO 2020; Burki 2020; ESMO 2020).
A third example is the concern that delayed diagnosis during the pandemic due to
limited healthcare access may result in worse prognosis of cancer patients enrolled after
the pandemic. All these complications may pose challenges to interpretation and
external validity of trial results with regard to the target population.

2.3 Treatment
Consistent with the original clinical trial objective, the treatment conditions to be
compared should remain as originally defined by the protocol prior to COVID-19
pandemic. The risk assessment of the pandemic’s impact on the treatment conditions of
interest will mainly focus on whether frequency and/or duration of non-compliance or
drug discontinuations is above what one would have expected in pre-pandemic clinical
practice. Various reasons for possible treatment delay, interruption, or discontinuation
during the pandemic are summarized in Table 1 and will be discussed further below
under ICEs. Furthermore, careful assessment is required in light of new anticancer
therapies after discontinuation, as many oncology trials assess the treatment effect of the
investigational treatment followed by any subsequent therapies (i.e. counting events
observed after start of a new therapy based on the treatment policy strategy) or consider
start of new therapy itself informative for the treatment effect (i.e. counting start of a
new therapy as an event for the variable based on the composite variable strategy).
Apart from higher number of subsequent therapies, different type of therapies compared
to the pre-pandemic world may be expected during the pandemic. Therefore, the
treatment sequence observed during the pandemic for some patients in the trial may not
be representative of clinical practice pre- and post-pandemic.

2.4 Variable
Overall survival (OS) is the gold standard in oncology trials as a measure of therapeutic
benefit. Other endpoints such as progression-free survival (PFS), recurrence- or eventfree survival (EFS) and objective response are typically associated with tumour kinetics
or disease-free status. The impact of COVID-19 related ICEs and missing data on the
variable definition will be discussed in subsequent sections.

2.5 Intercurrent Events
Identifying ICEs and specifying strategies to handle each event are crucial components
of the estimand definition in the ICH E9 addendum. Different ICEs in the same trial
may require different strategies in order to address the clinical trial objective. For the
remainder of this section, we will discuss in detail three potential ICEs: “death due to
COVID-19”, “discontinuation from treatment due to COVID-19 infection” and
“discontinuation from treatment due to the pandemic but not related to COVID-19
infection”. Additional considerations related to other ICEs, such as “treatment
interruption”, “delay of scheduled intervention” (e.g. in settings with sequences of
interventions including surgery or transplant and leading to deviation from intended
treatment strategy) and “use of concomitant medication to treat COVID-19”, are
summarized in Table 1. Considerations related to missing data (e.g. caused by
withdrawal from trial) are discussed in Section 3.
Death due to COVID-19 (Direct impact). In oncology trials, all-causality deaths
are often counted as events for death-related endpoints, e.g. OS, PFS, and EFS.
Counting a COVID-19 related fatality as an event implies that the composite strategy is
used for this ICE. If we do not expect COVID-19 related deaths in a post-pandemic
world, then the hypothetical strategy would be more appropriately aligned with our

original clinical trial objective and would require a change in endpoint definition.
Intuitively, this strategy answers the question, “What would the benefit be if patients do
not die from COVID-19?” However, it may be difficult to determine whether a death is
entirely attributable to COVID-19, particularly given that classifying deaths into related
and not related to COVID-19 is handled heterogeneously globally (Shet et al. 2020).
Even if COVID-19 is the main cause of death, a composite strategy may still be
reasonable if the underlying cancer contributed to the death to some extent.
Furthermore, if the number of deaths due to COVID-19 is low, then addressing these
deaths using a composite strategy may approximate a hypothetical strategy with
sufficient precision.
Careful assessment of the potential association of COVID-19 deaths with underlying
disease prognosis and trial treatment is required before choosing the strategy and the
corresponding analysis method, see Section 3.
Discontinuation from treatment due to COVID-19 infection (Direct impact).
Treatment discontinuations due to COVID-19 medical reasons may be associated with
underlying conditions or comorbidities (including cancer) or related to
immunosuppressive effect of the treatment. Careful clinical assessment as well as
external evidence are needed to understand whether these ICEs are associated with
worse outcomes that would have been observed even had the COVID-19 pandemic not
occurred. Like other discontinuations due to adverse events, it may be difficult to
exclude its potential relationship to disease or effect of the treatment. Moreover,
COVID-19 infection may remain a public risk for a longer time period compared to
healthcare system disruption. Therefore, if treatment policy strategy is used for other
adverse event related treatment discontinuations, the same strategy may be reasonable

for discontinuations due to COVID-19 infection. Endpoint assessments after such
discontinuations would then need to be collected for use in the analysis.
If treatment discontinuations due to COVID-19 infections are not expected in a postpandemic world and are deemed unrelated to disease or treatment, then the hypothetical
strategy may be more appropriate. However, as with deaths, the analysis corresponding
to treatment policy strategy may still address the question related to hypothetical
strategy with sufficient precision, if the number of such discontinuations is low.
Ideally, in the case where the number of COVID-19 infection within the clinical trial
participants warrants further exploration, one could be interested to explore the
difference in the effect of treatment in those infected by COVID-19 vs. those not
infected (EMA 2020c). A question of potential clinical interest could be “What is the
treatment effect in patients who would never experience severe complications from
COVID-19 infection, regardless of what treatment they receive?” The answer to this
question could provide additional insight into treatment efficacy in a post-pandemic
world where effective therapy is available, in particular if the proportions of patients
with such complications differ between the two arms. Such an approach defining a
question of interest based on the potential of having (or in this case, not having) certain
ICEs under both interventions is called principal stratum in the estimand framework,
and in contrary to Meyer et al. (2020) we see potential usefulness of this strategy in our
context. Patients in a stratum represent a subgroup of the target population which is
fixed at baseline. Although in general it is not possible to identify which patients belong
to each stratum, it is still possible to estimate the treatment effect of interest (more
details in Section 3).

Discontinuation from treatment for reasons not related to COVID-19 infection
(Indirect impact). Treatment discontinuations by patients’ or physicians’ decision
during a pandemic may increase due to disruption of the healthcare system.
Additionally, patients’ behaviours may be impacted by the desire to reduce travelling in
light of the risk of COVID-19 infection, resulting in discontinuation of trial treatment.
Several potential scenarios are described in Table 1. These discontinuations are not
expected to occur in a post-pandemic world but are likely to occur during the pandemic
regardless of the disease status or treatment compared to discontinuations related due to
COVID-19 infection.
Oncology trial protocols often apply treatment policy strategy for discontinuations
irrespective of the underlying reason, and consider data after discontinuation as
informative and relevant for the treatment effect of interest. However, an implicit
assumption of the original clinical trial objective is that there is no systematic disruption
of healthcare system. Hence, this approach may not accurately address the original
clinical trial objective if data after discontinuation is unlikely to reflect patient’s journey
in a world without COVID-19 pandemic. Moreover, the interpretation is further
complicated by the start of new anticancer therapy after discontinuation, since start of
new anticancer therapy constitutes an event in many settings (e.g. EFS definition in
hematology).
Therefore, in line with the original clinical trial objective, the hypothetical strategy
appears to be more appropriate for these ICEs and would require a change in analysis.
Analysis considerations for hypothetical strategy will be discussed in the Section 3.
However, if the number of such discontinuations is low, then addressing the ICEs using
the treatment policy strategy may provide an approximate answer to the original clinical
trial objective.

2.6 Population-level Summary
Typical population-level summaries for time-to-event endpoints in oncology clinical
trials are the hazard ratio and survival probability. The interpretability of these summary
measures and assumptions of the corresponding estimation methods need to be assessed
in light of the pandemic. This will be discussed further in Section 3.

3. ANALYSIS CONSIDERATIONS

3.1 Estimation Based on the Chosen Strategy for ICEs
In Section 2, we discussed use of the treatment policy, hypothetical, composite or
principal stratum strategy for ICEs introduced by the pandemic. Analysis considerations
for these strategies are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2. Analysis considerations for different strategies to handle ICEs

Chosen
intercurrent
event strategy
Treatment
policy

Composite
strategy
Hypothetical

Analysis considerations for time-to-event endpoints

Events observed after the ICE (e.g. after discontinuation or
interruption) are considered in the analysis, i.e. data collection of
progression or death dates or the corresponding censoring dates
required even after a patient experiences such an ICE
The ICE (e.g. COVID-19 related death) is considered as event in
the definition of time-to-event endpoint
For hazard-based quantities, e.g. the hazard ratio, assuming
absence of informative censoring the relative effect can be
estimated through simple censoring at the ICE. If informative
censoring cannot be excluded (e.g. patient is censored at the start
of new therapy after discontinuation that could be attributed to
disease), methods such as inverse probability of censoring weights
(IPCW) accounting for that may be indicated (Robins and
Finkelstein 2000; Lipkovich et al. 2016). These also allow to
provide estimates of a hypothetical estimand for survival
probabilities.

Principal stratum
Estimation of the treatment effect in the principal stratum such as
“patients who would never experience severe impact of COVID19 infection under either treatment” could be done within the
potential outcomes framework. To estimate this effect
assumptions will be necessary. A potential assumption that allows
for estimation of principal stratum effects is principal ignorability
(PI), an assumption similar to the ignorability assumption in
propensity score analysis of observational data (Jo and Stuart
2009). PI assumes that, conditional on baseline confounders, the
potential outcome (e.g. PFS or OS) for the treated (untreated) is
independent of the potential outcome of the COVID-19 status for
untreated (treated). Stated differently, once baseline covariates
that may confound the relationship between COVID-19 status and
the outcome variable are known, knowing the COVID-19 status of
the treated (untreated) provides no further information on the
outcome for the untreated (treated) and vice versa. Alternatively,
Frangakis and Rubin (2002) use a joint model for estimation. This
requires specifying two models, one for the outcome given the
principal stratum and one for the principal stratum membership.
We emphasize that these assumptions are unverifiable from the
collected data. Jo and Stuart (2009) and Stuart and Jo (2015)
describe sensitivity analyses for principal ignorability when
making the exclusion restriction assumption. As a reviewer
pointed out, tipping point analyses can also be used to explore the
extent to which inestimable quantities would need to vary in order
to change the conclusion of the analysis. This would be an
extension of, e.g., the methods proposed in Lou (2019) to
superiority trials with time-to-event endpoints.

For a hypothetical estimand asking “What is the treatment effect in a world where no
patient would die due to COVID-19?”, potential measures of interest include the ratio of
hazards of the endpoint of interest (for a relative effect) and the cumulative incidence
function in a competing risk framework (for an absolute effect). Although censoring of
competing event “Death due to COVID-19” is potentially informative, the former can
still be estimated by simple censoring, see e.g. the discussion in Unkel et al. (2019). For
the latter, estimation should be based on Aalen-Johansen estimator. However, as Meyer
et al. (2020) nicely discuss, the cumulative incidence function can still be difficult to
interpret because patients are only at risk of COVID-19 death during the pandemic.

Hence, patients enrolled pre-, during-, and post-pandemic have different competing risk
profiles over time from randomization. Meyer et al. (2020) conclude that this prevents
interpretation of such analyses to be generalized to the population.
If one is interested in estimating the effect in patients infected by COVID-19 versus
patients not infected by COVID-19, we caution against simple subsetting by this postbaseline variable as it will “break” randomization, i.e. validity of causal statements for
these subgroups will be unclear. An alternative option allowing for a causal
interpretation within the potential outcomes framework would be to estimate the
treatment effect in the principal stratum of interest. As discussed in Section 2, one such
potential stratum of interest could be “patients who would never experience severe
complications of COVID-19 infection, regardless of what treatment they receive”.
Further considerations on the use of this methodology is discussed in Table 2.

3.2 Additional Considerations
As discussed in Section 2, it is important to carefully assess whether the enrolled
patients remain representative of the target population. But while conceptually ideal,
actually defining pre-, during, and post-pandemic periods may be challenging given that
the timing of the pandemic’s impact varies across regions. Potential approaches to
defining pre-pandemic include date (1) of first reported case in Wuhan, (2) WHO
declared COVID-19 a pandemic, (3) first reported case on country level or (4) regionspecific social distancing measures were introduced. Post-pandemic could be defined as
date (1) vaccination is released, (2) WHO declares COVID-19 pandemic over, (3)
region-specific calls are made to end social distancing measures with no relevant rise in
cases thereafter, or (4) our definition of a world without COVID-19 pandemic
introduced in Section 1 applies again. Such dates would likely need to be specified on a

country- or even site-level. Furthermore, there would likely be time effects in the sense
that treatment for COVID-19 infection would improve over time, and these
improvements would reach different regions at different stages of the pandemic.
Additional complexity may arise because periods for each patient need to be defined per
endpoint. For instance, PFS may not be affected by COVID-19 for a patient if disease
progression was observed pre-pandemic. However, death may happen after the start of
the pandemic meaning that his OS evaluation may still be affected by COVID-19.
For tumour endpoints that rely on imaging technology, potential complications can arise
from the pandemic mitigation measures such as alternative modality for imaging
procedures, reduced frequency or delay of imaging. These issues should be examined as
part of the overall assessment of trial integrity. They potentially induce alternative data
structures that might require different statistical approaches than initially specified. An
example would be delay of imaging assessments, meaning that the interval between
tumour assessments could become (much) larger than specified in the protocol
assessment schedule. Although in theory indicated even pre-pandemic but rarely used
for such type of data, methods that appropriately deal with interval-censoring may
become more appropriate (Sun 2006).
Typically, treatment effects on time-to-event endpoints are quantified using the hazard
ratio. However, the data structure induced through the pandemic might imply that the
proportional hazards assumption, even if it was plausible prior to the pandemic, is no
longer plausible. Reasons can be that non-proportionality of hazards (NPH) is
introduced due to unforeseen subgroups with similar survival in both arms (e.g. patients
discontinue investigational IV treatment and switch to oral medication with similar
efficacy as control arm), or competing risks with different hazard ratios (Kay 1986)
(e.g. death in both arms due to COVID-19 but unrelated to treatment). As has been

argued elsewhere, in the case of NPH no single summary measure can adequately
capture the treatment effect entirely and alternative measures might need to be
considered (Royston and Parmar 2020). Examples are difference of survival functions at
a milestone or restricted-mean survival time. However, it is recognized that these
alternative measures of efficacy pose their own challenges (Freidlin and Korn 2019). A
comparison to the HR in superiority trials with a time-to-event end point is provided in
Huang and Kuan (2018) and Yung and Liu (2019).
Whether the hypothesis test that decides a trial’s success needs to be directly connected
to a measure that quantifies the treatment effect remains a matter of debate (Rufibach
2019). Alternative tests that optimize power under specific scenarios for the underlying
survival functions have been proposed, see e.g. Lin et al. (2020) or Royston and Parmar
(2020). On the other hand, the logrank test remains valid under NPH at the cost of
reduced power. As Freidlin and Korn (2019) argue, the logrank test is quite robust over
a broad range of NPH scenarios, so that power loss may be compensated through a
modest increase in necessary number of events (~10%) which may require increased
follow-up. So, whether to change the primary hypothesis test specified pre-pandemic
also requires careful consideration. Simulations might help in this assessment. During
the pandemic, missing data may be induced due to travel restrictions and disruptions of
the healthcare system. Specific to oncology, multiple tumour imaging scans may be
missing before death/cancer progression. The importance of capturing details explaining
the basis of the missing data and reporting it in the clinical trial report was highlighted
in regulatory guidelines on COVID-19 impact (FDA 2020). Accurate collection of
reasons for missing data, although challenging in practice, would further facilitate the
exploration of the mechanism of missing data.

All the above considerations are primarily conceptual and can be done by looking at
blinded data. For trials with a planned interim analysis (within a group-sequential or
adaptive design), we recommend sponsors to carefully consider whether their targeted
estimand and analysis strategy need to be updated. This might imply an update to the
planned sample size or the targeted number of events (in the case of a time-to-event
primary endpoint), e.g. because additional ICEs due to the pandemic may be reducing
the targeted effect size. This also applies to priors specified in a pre-pandemic world in
designs using Bayesian methods, e.g. dynamic borrowing (Viele et al. 2014).
Some of the aspects discussed above might become even more pronounced for interim
analysis decisions. For example, computation of conditional power to inform a futility
interim analysis depends on the observed effect size at the interim analysis together with
an assumption on the effect size after the interim. For the latter, it is typically
recommended to use the initially assumed effect size (Bauer and Koenig 2006).
However, the initial assumption on the targeted effect size might need to be
reconsidered in light of the pandemic, implying an update to the conditional power
setup as well. Similarly, as discussed in Section 2, characteristics of patients enrolled
before, during and after the pandemic may be systematically different, i.e. the overall
trial population may be more heterogeneous compared to a world without COVID-19
pandemic. Generally speaking, for trials in which a recommendation is made at an
interim analysis to the sponsor by an independent data monitoring committee (iDMC), it
is paramount that the sponsor transparently informs the iDMC about the potential
implications of the pandemic, changes to the estimand and analysis strategies that have
been implemented. The primary purpose of an iDMC, namely to issue recommendations
on safety of patients and interim analyses for trials, remains unchanged by the
pandemic.

4. FURTHER CONSIDERATIONS FOR OTHER ENDPOINTS AND
TRIAL TYPES
We discussed in previous sections the impact of COVID-19 on time-to-event endpoints.
Objective response rate (ORR) is another important radiological endpoint in oncology
trials. Response is usually observed at one of the first assessments in the trial, in which
case ICEs due to COVID-19 or missing data at later timepoints are less likely to affect
ORR evaluation. Generally, less missing data may be expected at first assessment
considering its importance to determine the course of treatment and disease status for
the patient. Moreover, if responses are durable, then it could still be observed at future
assessments even if the first assessment is missing. More careful assessment of missing
data mechanisms may be required for trials requiring confirmation of response, as it
may not be captured if scans are missing before later progression. Deaths due to
COVID-19 prior to an observed response would be typically considered non-responder
(composite strategy as for all other early deaths) but similar considerations as described
in Section 2 apply. No ideal approach for estimation of a hypothetical estimand for
ORR seems to be available, but it could be done e.g. by imputing response / nonresponse for patients who died due to COVID-19 with a probability estimated from the
proportion of responders among appropriately defined “similar patients” who had
evaluable data. Alternatively, if the number of early deaths due to COVID-19 is low, an
approximate estimate of a hypothetical estimand could be obtained by excluding such
patients or just counting them as non-responders.
Duration of response (DOR) is more likely to be affected than ORR due to lower
exposure caused by interruptions and discontinuations for various reasons (see Table 1),
though responses may last far beyond treatment discontinuations with innovative

therapies. Missing data may be more likely for patients in deep remission due to patient
or physician decision to avoid travelling and risk of COVID-19 infection.
Careful discussion of direct and indirect impact of COVID-19 on the evaluation of DOR
is needed and similar considerations for the choice of estimand strategy and the analysis
as previously described could be used for this time-to-event endpoint.
In general, endpoints like ORR and DOR are often assessed in single-arm trials, for
which the primary goal is not estimation of a relative treatment effect as in an RCT, but
rather an absolute estimate of the quantity of interest. This estimate is then compared to
historical control data that was typically collected pre-pandemic. A hypothetical
strategy for intercurrent events may therefore be considered to achieve a comparison of
treatment and control in a world without COVID-19 pandemic.
We agree with others who have argued that the estimand of a clinical trial does not
change whether it targets superiority or non-inferiority (Akacha et al. 2017). However,
while use of a treatment policy strategy in a superiority trial may reduce power (i.e. it
may be conservative since efficacy is harder to establish), the same strategy used in a
non-inferiority setting may inflate type I error. We recommend a careful assessment
whether and how the considerations above for superiority trials apply in this setting.
Trial teams should also consider potential implications on other endpoints. Careful
assessment of COVID-19 impact on safety analyses is required to ensure that trial
results reflect the true safety profile of the study drug and, for example, the proportion
of patients experiencing infection on trial treatment is not overestimated due to COVID19 events. Such events might be declared as competing and estimators other than the
simple incidence proportion, e.g. the Aalen-Johansen estimator, may potentially give
more accurate estimates of the absolute AE risk of the actual treatment (Aalen and
Johansen 1978; Stegherr et al. 2019), with the same limitation of patients potentially

only being at risk during the pandemic, see Section 3.2. In particular, in the absence of
randomization in single-arm trials or, if there is an overlap between known risks of the
treatment and COVID-19 related AEs, the assessment of trial treatment’s or COVID-19
contribution may be challenging.

5. DISCUSSION
In this paper, we have illustrated how the estimand framework can help to structure
discussions about the impact of COVID-19 on the interpretation of results from ongoing
oncology clinical trials, with a focus on time-to-event endpoints in randomized
superiority trials. Other considerations that were not described in this paper can be
found in a slide deck compiled by the authors at the website of the working group
(Degtyarev and Rufibach 2020).
We argue that clinical trial objectives should relate to a world without COVID-19
pandemic, which implicitly assumes no major disruption of healthcare systems and
absence of a highly infectious disease with severe complications and for which no
effective therapy is available. Careful evaluation is required to understand whether the
estimate from an initially planned analysis will accurately address this objective. If the
estimate is likely to be biased in light of unforeseen COVID-19 impact, the researcher
should consider clarifying the estimand, modifying the estimator, or introducing a new
supplementary estimand or sensitivity analysis.
We used the estimand framework to identify several sources of potential bias.
Considering various scenarios described in Section 2.2, it seems rather important to
assess whether enrolled patients represent the target population. Summaries of key
baseline and disease characteristics by pre-, during- and post-pandemic could be used to
assess the risk of this bias, although the definition of such periods is challenging and
careful interpretation of potential differences is needed, particularly in smaller trials.

We recommend that trial teams carefully assess the likelihood of treatment
discontinuations and interruptions and its impact on observed treatment (or treatment
sequence) in the trial. Some considerations for this assessment are provided in Section
2.5 and in Table 1. Bias may be introduced if the administered treatment regimen
(including interruptions, delays, concomitant medications) in a trial is no longer
representative of the intended treatment regimen. Two aspects appear to be particularly
important when determining whether using treatment policy strategy to handle these
ICEs is still meaningful: the potential relationship with disease progression and any
effect of the treatment (e.g. immunosuppression), and interpretability of the data after
the COVID-19 related ICEs, including if a patient starts new therapy or delays an
intervention (e.g. surgery, transplant). For ICEs primarily caused by the disruption of
healthcare systems or patients’ desire to minimize travelling independently of disease or
treatment, we suggest that the hypothetical strategy may be reasonable to address the
clinical trial objective. Treatment policy strategy may be more appropriate for
discontinuations, interruptions or delays related to COVID-19 infection. Principal
stratification assessing the treatment effect in e.g. patients who would not experience
severe complications of COVID-19 on either treatment arm may be considered as
another alternative to provide insight on expected treatment benefit. The potential use of
different strategies for treatment discontinuations further emphasizes the importance of
appropriate data collection as highlighted in regulatory guidelines.
Trial-specific discussions between sponsors and regulators would be required prior to
implementing clarifications to the primary estimand in a protocol amendment. In
general, the impact of all these potential changes to the primary estimand may need to
be explored in simulations, requiring assumptions on anticipated effects of COVID-19
on estimand attributes. In addition to clarification of the estimand, changes in the

sample size and/or trial duration to allow for the observation of additional events may
need to be considered. For example, longer follow-up time to observe the planned
number of events may be expected in studies with censoring of new anticancer therapies
due to higher number of discontinuations due to COVID-19 followed by the initiation of
subsequent therapies.
In practice, dependent on the stage of the trial and the impact of COVID-19, the initially
planned analysis may still provide a sufficiently precise answer. Hence, we foresee no
change in primary analysis for most trials due to pragmatic considerations.
Supplementary analyses accounting for ICEs due to COVID-19 in different ways or
sensitivity analyses exploring different assumptions for missing data could be described
in an amendment to the statistical analysis plan.
In conclusion, the impact of COVID-19 on patient journeys in oncology represents a
new risk to interpretation of trial results and its usefulness for future clinical practice.
Further discussions and proper data collection are needed to be able to fully assess and
mitigate its impact. However, it is already fair to say that the estimand framework
provides various stakeholders a common language to discuss the impact of COVID-19
in a structured and transparent manner.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank numerous colleagues in our companies who influenced our thinking on the
presented topics. We are grateful to the editors for inviting us to contribute a paper to
this special issue.

REFERENCES
Aalen, O. O., and Johansen, S. (1978), "An Empirical Transition Matrix for NonHomogeneous Markov Chains Based on Censored Observations,” Scandinavian
Journal of Statistics, 5, 141-150.
Akacha, M., Bretz, F., and Ruberg, S. (2017), "Estimands in Clinical Trials –
Broadening the Perspective,” Statistics in Medicine, 36, 5-19.
American Society of Clinical Oncology. (2020, May 29), “COVID-19 Patient Care
Information,” ASCO Coronavirus Resources [online]. Retrieved May 31, 2020,
from https://www.asco.org/asco-coronavirus-information/care-individualscancer-during-covid-19.
Bauer, P., and Koenig, F. (2006), "The Reassessment of Trial Perspectives From
Interim Data - A Critical View,” Statistics in Medicine, 25, 23-36.
Burki, T. K. (2020), "Cancer Guidelines During the COVID-19 Pandemic,” The Lancet
Oncology, 21, 629-630.
Dai, M., Liu, D., Liu, M., Zhou, F., Li, G., Chen, Z., Zhang, Z., You, H., Wu, M.,
Zheng, Q., Xiong, Y., Xiong, H., Wang, C., Chen, C., Xiong, F., Zhang, Y.,
Peng, Y., Ge, S., Zhen, B., Yu, T., Wang, L., Wang, H., Liu, Y., Chen, Y., Mei,
J., Gao, X., Li, Z., Gan, L., He, C., Li, Z., Shi, Y., Qi, Y., Yang, J., Tennen, D.
G., Chai, L., Mucci, L. A., Santillana, M., and Cai, H. (2020), "Patients With
Cancer Appear More Vulnerable to SARS-COV-2: A Multi-Center Study

During the COVID-19 Outbreak,” Cancer Discovery [online], DOI:
10.1158/2159-8290.CD-20-0422. Available at
https://cancerdiscovery.aacrjournals.org/.
Degtyarev, E., Zhang, Y., Sen, K., Lebwohl, D., Akacha, M., Hampson, L. V.,
Bornkamp, B., Maniero, A., Bretz, F., and Zuber, E. (2019), "Estimands and the
Patient Journey: Addressing the Right Question in Oncology Clinical Trials,”
Journal of Clinical Oncology Precision Oncology, 3, 1-10.
Degtyarev, E., and Rufibach, K. (2020, January), Oncology Estimand Working Group
[online]. Retrieved May 31, 2020, from http://www.oncoestimand.org.
European Medicines Agency. (2020a, April 28), “Guidance on the Management of
Clinical Trials During the COVID-19 (Coronavirus) Pandemic,” Scientific
Guideline [online]. Retrieved May 31, 2020, from
https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/health/files/files/eudralex/vol10/guidanceclinicaltrials_covid19_en.pdf.
— (2020b, February 17), “ICH E9 (R1) Addendum on Estimands and Sensitivity
Analysis in Clinical Trials to the Guideline on Statistical Principles for Clinical
Trials,” Scientific Guideline [online]. Retrieved May 31, 2020, from
https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-guideline/ich-e9-r1addendum-estimands-sensitivity-analysis-clinical-trials-guideline-statisticalprinciples_en.pdf.
— (2020c, March 25), “Points to Consider on Implications of Coronavirus Disease on
Methodological Aspects of Ongoing Clinical Trials,” Scientific Guideline
[online], Retrieved May 31, 2020, from
https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-guideline/points-consider-

implications-coronavirus-disease-covid-19-methodological-aspects-ongoingclinical_en.pdf.
European Society for Medical Oncology. (2020), “Cancer Patient Management During
the COVID-19 Pandemic,” Guidelines [online]. Retrieved May 31, 2020, from
https://www.esmo.org/guidelines/cancer-patient-management-during-the-covid19-pandemic.
Food and Drug Administration. (2020, March), “FDA Guidance on Conduct of Clinical
Trials of Medical Products During COVID-19 Pandemic,” Regulatory
Information [online]. Retrieved May 31, 2020, from
https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidancedocuments/fda-guidance-conduct-clinical-trials-medical-products-during-covid19-public-health-emergency.
Frangakis, C. E., and Rubin, D. B. (2002), "Principal Stratification in Causal Inference,”
Biometrics, 58, 21-29.
Freidlin, B., and Korn, E. L. (2019), "Methods for Accommodating Nonproportional
Hazards in Clinical Trials: Ready for the Primary Analysis?,” Journal of
Clinical Oncology, 37, 3455-3459.
Gates, B. (2020), "Responding to COVID-19-A Once-in-a-Century Pandemic?,” New
England Journal of Medicine, 382, 1677-1679.
Huang, C., Wang, Y., Li, X., Ren, L., Zhao, J., Hu, Y., Zhang, L., Fan, G., Xu, J., Gu,
X., Cheng, Z., Yu, T., Xia, J., Wei, Y., Wu, W., Xie, X., Yin, W., Li, H., Liu,
M., Xiao, Y., Gao, H., Guo, L., Xie, J., Wang, G., Jiang, R., Gao, Z., Jin, Q.,
Wang, J., and Cao, B. (2020), "Clinical Features of Patients Infected With 2019
Novel Coronavirus in Wuhan, China,” Lancet, 395, 497-506.

Huang, B., and Kuan, P. F. (2018), "Comparison of the Restricted Mean Survival Time
With the Hazard Ratio in Superiority Trials With a Time-to-Event Endpoint,”
Pharmaceutical Statistics, 17, 202-213.
Jo, B., and Stuart, E. A. (2009), "On the Use of Propensity Scores in Principal Causal
Effect Estimation,” Statistics in Medicine, 28, 2857-2875.
Kay, R. (1986), "Treatment Effects in Competing-Risks Analysis of Prostrate Cancer
Data,” Biometrics, 42, 203-211.
Lin, R. S., Lin, J., Roychoudhury, S., Anderson, K. M., Hu, T., Huang, B., Leon, L. F.,
Liao, J. J. Z., Liu, R., Luo, X., Mukhopadhyay, P., Qin, R., Tatsuoka, K., Wang,
X., Wang, Y., Zhu, J., Chen, T., Iacona, R., and Cross-Pharma Non-proportional
Hazards Working Group. (2020), "Alternative Analysis Methods for Time to
Event Endpoints Under Nonproportional Hazards: A Comparative Analysis,”
Statistics in Biopharmaceutical Research, 12, 187-198.
Lipkovich, I., Ratitch, B., and O’Kelly, M. (2016), "Sensitivity to Censored-at-Random
Assumption in the Analysis of Time-to-Event Endpoints,” Pharmaceutical
Statistics, 15, 216-229.
Lou, Y., Jones, M. P., and Sun, W. (2019), "Assessing the Ratio of Means as a Causal
Estimand in Clinical Endpoint Bioequivalence Studies in the Presence of
Intercurrent Events," Statistics in Medicine, 38, 5214-5235.
Meyer, R. D., Ratitch, B., Wolbers, M., Marchenko, O., Quan, H., Li, D., Fletcher, C.,
Li, X., Wright, D., Shentu, Y., Englert, S., Shen, W., Dey, J., Liu, T., Zhou, M.,
Bohidar, N., Zhao, P., and Hale, M. (in press), "Statistical Issues and
Recommendations for Clinical Trials Conducted During the COVID-19
Pandemic,” Statistics in Biopharmaceutical Research.

Ratitch, B., Bell, J., Mallinckrodt, C., Bartlett, J. W., Goel, N., Molenberghs, G.,
O’Kelly, M., Singh, P., and Lipkovich, I. (2020), "Choosing Estimands in
Clinical Trials: Putting the ICH E9(R1) Into Practice,” Therapeutic Innovation
and Regulatory Science, 54, 324-341.
Robins, J. M., and Finkelstein, D. M. (2000), "Correcting for Noncompliance and
Dependent Censoring in an AIDS Clinical Trial With Inverse Probability of
Censoring Weighted (IPCW) Log-Rank Tests,” Biometrics, 56, 779-788.
Royston, P., and Parmar, M. K. (2020), "A Simulation Study Comparing the Power of
Nine Tests of the Treatment Effect in Randomized Controlled Trials With a
Time-to-Event Outcome,” Trials, 21, DOI: 10.1186/s13063-020-4153-2.
Available at https://trialsjournal.biomedcentral.com/.
Rufibach, K. (2019), "Treatment Effect Quantification for Time-to-Event Endpoints –
Estimands, Analysis Strategies, and Beyond,” Pharmaceutical Statistics, 18,
145-165.
Shet, A., Ray, D., Malavige, N., Santosham, M. and Bar-Zeev, N. (2020), "Differential
COVID-19-Attributable Mortality and BCG Vaccine Use in Countries,”
unpublished manuscript [online], DOI: 10.1101/2020.04.01.20049478.
Available at https://www.medrxiv.org.
Singh, A. G., and Chaturvedi, P. (2020), "Clinical Trials During COVID-19,” Head &
Neck [online], DOI: 10.1002/hed.26223. Available at
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com.
Stegherr, R., Beyersmann, J., Jehl, V., Rufibach, K., Leverkus, F., Schmoor, C., and
Friede, T. (2019), "Survival Analysis for AdVerse Events With VarYing
Follow-Up Times (SAVVY): Rationale and Statistical Concept of a Meta-

Analytic Study,” unpublished manuscript [online], Available at
https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.00263.
Stuart, E. A., and Jo, B. (2015), “Assessing the Sensitivity of Methods for Estimating
Principal Causal Effects,” Statistical Methods in Medical Research, 24, 657-674.
Sun, J. (2006), The Statistical Analysis of Interval-Censored Failure Time Data. New
York, NY: Springer-Verlag.
U.S. National Library of Medicine. (2020a, June 1), “A Study to Evaluate the Safety
and Efficacy of Tocilizumab in Patients With Severe COVID-19 Pneumonia
(COVACTA),” ClinicalTrials.gov [online]. Retrieved May 31, 2020, from
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04320615.
— (2020b, May 26), “Phase 3 Randomized, Double-blind, Placebo-controlled Multicenter Study to Assess the Efficacy and Safety of Ruxolitinib in Patients With
COVID-19 Associated Cytokine Storm (RUXCOVID),” ClinicalTrials.gov
[online]. Retrieved May 31, 2020, from
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04362137.
Unkel, S., Amiri, M., Benda, N., Beyersmann, J., Knoerzer, D., Kupas, K., Langer, F.,
Leverkus, F., Loos, A., Ose, C., Proctor, T., Schmoor, C., Schwenke, C., Skipka,
G., Unnebrink, K., Voss, F., and Friede, T. (2019), "On Estimands and the
Analysis of Adverse Events in the Presence of Varying Follow-Up Times
Within the Benefit Assessment of Therapies,” Pharmaceutical Statistics, 18,
166-183.
Viele, K., Berry, S., Neuenschwander, B., Amzal, B., Chen, F., Enas, N., Hobbs, B.,
Ibrahim, J. G., Kinnersley, N., Lindborg, S., Micallef, S., Roychoudhury, S., and
Thompson, L. (2014), "Use of Historical Control Data for Assessing Treatment
Effects in Clinical Trials,” Pharmaceutical Statistics, 13, 41-54.

World Health Organization. (2020, May 31), “Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19)
Situation Report – 132,” Coronavirus Disease (COVID-2019) Situation Reports
[online]. Available at https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novelcoronavirus-2019/situation-reports.
Yung, G., and Liu, Y. (2019), "Sample Size and Power for the Unweighted Log-Rank
Test and Kaplan-Meier Based Tests With Allowance for Nonproportional
Hazards,” Biometrics [online], DOI: 10.1111/biom.13196. Available at
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/.

