A reductive analysis of a compartmental model for COVID-19: data assimilation and
forecasting for the United Kingdom
G. Ananthakrishna1,∗ and Jagadish Kumar2,∗
1

Materials Research Centre, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru 560012, India
2

Department of Physics, Utkal University, Bhubaneswar 751004, India

We introduce a deterministic model that partitions the total population into the susceptible,
infected, quarantined, and those traced after exposure, the recovered and the deceased. We hypothesize ’accessible population for transmission of the disease’ to be a small fraction of the total

arXiv:2006.00659v2 [q-bio.PE] 6 Jun 2020

population, for instance when interventions are in force. This hypothesis, together with the structure of the set of coupled nonlinear ordinary differential equations for the populations, allows us to
decouple the equations into just two equations. This further reduces to a logistic type of equation
for the total infected population. The equation can be solved analytically and therefore allows for a
clear interpretation of the growth and inhibiting factors in terms of the parameters in the full model.
The validity of the ’accessible population’ hypothesis and the efficacy of the reduced logistic model
is demonstrated by the ease of fitting the United Kingdom data for the cumulative infected and
daily new infected cases. The model can also be used to forecast further progression of the disease.
In an effort to find optimized parameter values compatible with the United Kingdom coronavirus
data, we first determine the relative importance of the various transition rates participating in the
original model. Using this we show that the original model equations provide a very good fit with
the United Kingdom data for the cumulative number of infections and the daily new cases. The
fact that the model calculated daily new cases exhibits a turning point, suggests the beginning of a
slow-down in the spread of infections. However, since the rate of slowing down beyond the turning
point is small, the cumulative number of infections is likely to saturate to about 3.52 × 105 around
late July, provided the lock-down conditions continue to prevail. Noting that the fit obtained from
the reduced logistic equation is comparable to that with the full model equations, the underlying
causes for the limited forecasting ability of the reduced logistic equation are elucidated. The model
and the procedure adopted here are expected to be useful in fitting the data for other countries and
in forecasting the progression of the disease.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The highly contagious SARS-CoV-2 has infected more
than six million people worldwide since its first detection
in China on December 31 [1]. The novel coronavirus is
the fourth wave in the class of coronaviruses. In less than
two months, the virus has spread all over the world, posing serious threats to healthcare systems and economies.
The alarming speed of transmission, the virulence of the
disease, and the unprecedented high proportion of fatalities even in countries with high healthcare indices have
raised questions about what kind of interventions are ap-

∗

Corresponding authors
garani@iisc.ac.in
jagadish.physics@utkaluniversity.ac.in

propriate for a given setting. The wide variability in
infected numbers and fatalities in different countries and
settings has also brought into sharp focus a debate about
the underlying causes of the variability. In the absence
of any treatment for the disease and non-availability of
vaccines in the near future, policy makers have resorted
to standard epidemiological interventions, such as social
distancing, isolation, contact tracing, and quarantining,
and more recently a complete lock-down.
At a basic level, the purpose of all non-pharmacological
interventions is to control disease transmission by limiting the proportion of the population exposed to the virus
as much as possible. Furthermore, inherent in the process of implementation of these interventions are delays
at each stage. The delay time-scales are specific to the
particular intervention.

2
The importance of mathematical models describing the
spreading dynamics of infectious diseases has been recognized since early days [2]. In particular, the fact that
timely models that include realistic features have often
been helpful in decision making on healthcare issues is
well recognized [2–4]. In the short period since the emergence of the coronavirus, there have been several mathematical models [5–17], to name a few. Some of these
models attempt to evaluate the contribution from different transmission routes, such as contact tracing and isolation [10, 11, 18], travel restrictions [16, 17] social distancing [19, 20], lock-down measures [16, 21, 22], and a combination of these interventions [12, 23–26]. These models
broadly fall into three categories, deterministic, stochastic, and simulations. Several new mathematical techniques used in different disciplines have been employed to
gain insights, which would not be possible with the traditional approaches in the field. These include the human
mobility model [16], differential evolution[19], heuristic
optimization technique [19], stochastic agent-based discrete time simulation [27], supply chain risk simulations
[28], etc.
One class of epidemiological models attempts to describe the transmission dynamics by partitioning the
population into smaller subsets based on the disease status such as the susceptible, exposed, infected, quarantined, recovered, etc [5–9]. Most models of this kind ignore age-dependent infection and fatality rates, and the
heterogeneous spatial distribution of the population. In
a sense, these models describe the evolution of the mean
response of each type of population. Despite these limitations, these models have the ability to include several
realistic features.
In the compartment type of models, the disease status
of individuals changes with the development of the disease, i.e., transitions occur between two compartments
either due to interaction of the infected with the susceptible or due to interventional actions. These models include delay time-scales inherent in the dynamics of transmission, for instance, the period spent in quarantine and
the time required for tracing individuals exposed to the
infected. These models have the ability to include several
realistic features, such as the response of the population
to interventional measures. However, generally, inclusion
of more and more realistic features requires a larger num-

ber of partitions. Then, the number of differential equations increases and so does the number of parameters,
making calibration of the parameters difficult [5–9, 13].
Motivated by the complexity of such models, we have
devised a compartment-based model having the susceptible, infected, quarantined, traced, recovered, and the
deceased populations. The susceptible and the infected
form the core populations in the sense that it is through
these two populations that inward/outward transitions
occur with other populations. However, even this simple model contains several parameters, leaving numerical
solutions as the only option for further analysis. Considering the fact that the model equations form a coupled set
of nonlinear differential equations, we adopt mathematical methods drawn from nonlinear dynamical systems
most appropriate for analyzing such equations [29]. We
hypothesize ’accessible population for infection’ to be a
small fraction of the total population. The validity of this
hypothesis can be appreciated by noting that the purpose
of interventions is to minimize the exposure of the population to virus transmission, thereby limiting the spread
of infection. We further assume that the order of magnitude of the accessible population is similar to that of the
infected population. This assumption is made more quantitative. This, together with the structure of the model
equations, allows us to decouple them into two equations.
These two equations further reduce to a logistic type of
equation for the total infected population with well defined parameters namely, the ’testing rate’ and ’contact
transmission rate’ parameters [30, 31]. The equation can
be solved analytically, thereby allowing for a clear interpretation of the parameters controlling the growth and
inhibiting factors. The validity of the ’accessible population’ hypothesis and the efficacy of the reduced logistic
model is demonstrated by the ease of fitting the cumulative number of infections and daily new cases for the
United Kingdom (UK). The procedure further allows us
to forecast the progression of the disease. Using this information and calibrating the relative importance of the
various transition rates (equivalently the associated parameters), we optimize the parameter values specific to
the UK. This procedure allows us to delineate the various time scales contributing to the various regions in the
time development of the disease. Using this, we numerically solve the full model equations. The calculated total

3
infected population fits very well with the available data
for the UK [32]. (UK does not publish data on the recovered and the active populations.) The model exhibits
a turning point in the active infected population around
May 15. However, since the rate of slowing down beyond the turning point is poor, the projected end time
of the epidemic would be around late July with the predicted saturation level of the total number of infections
∼ 3.52 × 105 assuming lock-down conditions continue.

II.

THE MODEL

The total population N is partitioned into the susceptible S, active infected I, quarantined Q, those traced T
after being exposed to the infected, recovered R, and the
deceased D. The respective populations are denoted by
Ns , Ni , Nq , Ntr , Nr and Nd .
Testing is one of the standard protocols used for identifying the infected. If αs is the rate of testing per day
per million and ps is the probability of testing positive,
then αs ps Ns is the transition rate from S to I. Infected
individuals coming into contact with the susceptible class
can transmit the virus. If βi is the transmission rate per
contact, pi is the probability of transmission of the disease and F (di ) is a distance-dependent interaction, then,
pi βi F (di )Ni Ns is the transition rate from S to I. Considering the fact that one of the primary routes of transmission is through airborne aerosols generated by the infected, larger separation is known to reduce the risk of
transmission [19, 20, 33]. This distance-dependence of
F (di ) is generally expressed as F (di ) ∝ 1/d2 or 1/d3i .
However, in the present context where we will be dealing
with a lock-down situation for most part of the progression of the disease, we set F (di ) = 1.
During testing, some individuals would always exhibit
mild or ambiguous symptoms. These are identified as
pre-symptomatic. If the probability of finding the presymptomatic is pq , then, αs pq Ns transition out of S to
Q. Subsequently, when tested again, say after a quarantine duration [5, 34, 35], some of them may either test
positive with a probability q1 or negative with a probability (1 − q1 ). If positive, the transition out of Q (to I)
is q1 λq Nq . Here, 1/λq is the quarantine duration, usually
of the order of the incubation period [34, 35]. Similarly,

if tested negative, the transition rate out of Q into S is
(1 − q1 )λq Nq . The total loss rate to Ṅq is λq Nq .
Tracing those exposed to the infected, and testing to
find if they are infected, are important steps in controlling the spread of the disease. Inherent in tracing such
individuals are delays in tracing. Such delays cause increased transmission of the disease. If pt is the probability of tracing such individuals, then, αt pt Ns is the
transition rate from S to T . Subsequently, individuals
testing positive will move to the infected compartment
I with a probability q2 and the rest with a probability
(1 − q2 ) move to S. The total transition out of T is equal
to λt Ntr , where 1/λt is the time taken to trace the individuals. (There is also another possibility, namely, some
individuals may show mild symptoms. Then, there would
be a transition into Q. For the sake of simplicity, we have
ignored this route.) Finally, the outward transitions from
I are the recovery and death rates respectively, γr Ni and
κd Ni .
Collecting these terms, we have the following set of
coupled nonlinear ordinary differential equations
Ṅs = −(αs ps + αs pq + αt pt )Ns − pi βi Ni Ns
+ (1 − q1 )λq Nq + (1 − q2 )λt Ntr ,

(1)

Ṅi = αs ps Ns + pi βi Ni Ns
+ q1 λq Nq + q2 λt Ntr − (γr + κd )Ni ,

(2)

Ṅq = αs pq Ns − λq Nq ,

(3)

Ṅtr = αt pt Ns − λt Ntr ,

(4)

Ṅr = γr Ni ,

(5)

Ṅd = κd Ni .

(6)

(Here, we have suppressed F (di ) factor since it has been
set equal to unity. Definitions of the notations are given
in Table I). Note that the total infected population is
given by Nt = Ni + Nr + Nd .
To begin with, we highlight a few features of the model
equations. Our model, much as other compartment-type
models, has several parameters. However, several of these
are directly measurable and therefore can be obtained
from the literature. A few others are related to testing protocols and again can be obtained from the literature or from relevant open sources [32]. For instance,
αs ps , αs pq and αt pt are directly related to testing rates
and therefore, these are known for a given situation. A

4
few other rate parameters such as λq , λt , γr and κd , are
inversely related to measurable time-scales, such as the
duration of quarantine τq , time required for tracing τt ,
time for recovery starting from illness τr and the time
from illness to death τd , respectively [35, 36].
TABLE I. Definitions of the notations for our calculation.

Notation

Definition

Na (0)

Accessible population

αs

Testing rate per day per million

ps

Probability of testing positive

pi

Probability of transmission of the disease

βi ∼ 1/Na (0)

Transmission rate per contact

pq

Probability of finding the
pre-symptomatic

αt

Tracing rate per day per million

pt

Probability of tracing

λq

Rate of quarantined individuals
testing positive

λt

Rate of tracing individuals exposed
infected

q1

Probability of quarantined
individuals
testing positive

q2

Probability of traced individuals
testing positive

III.

Recovery rate of infected individuals

κd

Death rate of infected individuals

The present model includes two delay loops defined by
Eqs. (3) and (4). These delays are natural to the implementation of the protocols. For instance, once quarantined, subsequent tests are conducted after quarantine
duration to identify if quarantined individuals test positive or negative. Similarly, delays in tracing individuals
are common. A more transparent way to describe these
delay loops is through the integral representation of Eqs.
(3) and (4), which forms the definitions of the two populations Nq and Ntr , respectively. For instance,
Nq (t) = αs ps

t

dt0 Ns (t0 )K(t − t0 ).

CONCEPT OF ACCESSIBLE

POPULATION: THE REDUCED MODEL

γr

Z

can easily verify that differentiating Eq. (7) (using the
Leibniz rule) leads to Eqs. (3). The convoluted nature
of the integral physically implies that those quarantined
earlier will leave the quarantine sooner than those quarantined later.
Equations (1-6) constitute a set of coupled nonlinear
differential equations. A standard procedure for further
analysis of such equations is through numerical integration. While this is a necessary step, here we adopt a
reductive analysis of the model equations by exploiting
the fact that there are two main populations, namely, the
susceptible (Eqs. 1) and the infected (Eq. 2). Furthermore, Eqs. (5,6) are essentially decoupled from the rest
(transitions to R and D are from I). These two features
suggest that Eqs. (1,2) can be decoupled from the rest of
the equations. We refer to the decoupled equations as the
reduced model equations. Since the two equations can be
further reduced to a logistic-type equation (referred to
as the reduced logistic equation), it can be analytically
solved. As we shall see, analysis of this equation provides
insights that prove to be useful for the analysis of the full
model Eqs. (1-6). (We shall often refer to Eqs. (1-6) as
”full model equations” to avoid confusion.)

(7)

0

When the kernel K(t) is modeled using an exponential
form with a single time scale 1/λq , i.e., K(t) = e−λq t , one

We now introduce the concept of ’accessible population for transmission of the disease’. To appreciate this
concept, consider the spreading dynamics of a contagious
disease in the absence of any interventions. Then, in principle, the entire population is exposed to the disease, and
it may spread to the entire population (barring the possibility of the population acquiring herd immunity). In
this case, the entire population is the accessible population. However, since no Government would like to see
the entire population infected, interventional measures
are enforced precisely to mitigate the risk of transmission and limit the population exposed to the disease to
a minimum. In this case, the accessible population is
expected to be a small fraction of the total population.
These two limiting cases can be accommodated by hypothesizing the accessible population to be a fraction of
the total population, where the fraction is determined by
whether interventional measures are imposed or not.

5
Consider dropping all terms except αs ps Ns and
pi βi Ni Ns in Eqs. (1,2). Then, these two equations get
decoupled from the rest of the equations. Further, because all other inward/ outward transitions are removed,
the character of the compartment I changes from the
active infected to the cumulative infected It with Nt denoting the corresponding population. Then, we have
Ṅs = −αs ps Ns − pi βi Nt Ns ,

(8)

Ṅt = αs ps Ns + pi βi Nt Ns .

(9)

Noting that
d
(Ns + Nt ) = 0,
dt

(10)

we have Nt + Ns = constant. Without loss of generality,
we set Nt + Ns = Ns (0), the total population. Then, we
get a single equation governing the cumulative infected
population, given by
Ṅt = c + bNt − aNi2 ,

(11)

a = pi βi ,

(12)

b = pi βi Ns (0) − αs ps ,

(13)

c = αs ps Ns (0).

(14)

Equation (11) has the well known form of logistic equation, extensively studied in the context of population dynamics [37], with a notable difference, namely, the parameters a, b and c have a well defined interpretation as
discussed above. We refer to Eq. (11) as the reduced
logistic equation. (For brevity we often refer to αs ps and
pi βi as testing and contact transmission rates, respectively.)
We begin with a few observations on the relative magnitudes of the model parameters in the absence and the
presence of interventions. Consider a situation when
there are no constraints. Then, one should expect that
the testing rate (αs ps ) to be low (compared to the lockdown period) due to absence of any guidelines from policy makers. Similarly, since infected individuals carry on
with their routine activity, the number of contact transmissions is high and hence, the contact transmission rate
(pi βi ) is expected to be high (compared to when interventions are in place). Then, the total accessible population
denoted by Na (0) is the entire population of the region

or the country, i.e., Na (0) = Ns (0). In contrast, when
interventions are in place, testing rates are high to ensure identification of the infected, therefore, αs ps is high.
In this situation, since the mobility of individuals is restricted, the number of contacts is severely limited, i.e.,
pi βi will be small. Therefore, the accessible population
Na (0) is expected to be small compared to the total population Ns (0). These two limiting cases can be written
as Na (0) ≈ FNs (0). These qualitative statements about
the accessible population will be made quantitative by
carrying out a detailed analysis of Eq. (11).
Consider the initial growth of Eq. (11) by dropping
the quadratic term. Then, we have
d
Nt = c + bNt .
dt

(15)

The solution is given by
Nt =


c bt
e − 1 + Nt (0)ebt ,
b

(16)

where Nt (0) is the initial number of infections. As can be
seen, the growth rate given by b ≈ pi βi Ns (0) depends on
Ns (0), the total population. Therefore, the growth rate
can be high. In addition, the pre-factor for the exponential growth term (in Eq. 16) depends not only on Nt (0)
but also on c/b = αs ps /pi βi . Thus, the initial growth
depends on relative magnitudes of Nt (0) and αs ps /pi βi .
It is straightforward to obtain the solution of Eq. (11).
(See Appendix for details.) Here, it is adequate to consider the solution in terms of the parameters a, b, and c,
given by
Nt =

b
a Ni (0)

(Nt (0) +

+

c
a


ac
b



e bt +

c
a

+

ac
b

e bt − Nt (0) +

b
a

.

(17)

We now examine two limiting cases. For short times, Nt
tends to (Nt (0) + cb )e bt (since the denominator is dominated by b/a = Ns (0)), consistent with the short time
solution given by Eq. (16). For long times however, Nt
tends to b/a = Ns (0), the total population.
The self-limiting nature of Eq. (17), a characteristic
feature of logistic equations, is evident from the fact that
Nt tends to Ns (0). In other words, the entire population becomes accessible for transmission of the disease.
Clearly, the situation can only represent the growth of
infection in the absence of any kind of interventions.

6
On the other hand, the effect of all interventions is to
limit the contact transmission rate, thereby limiting the
proportion of the exposed population to the disease to
a small fraction. It is this that we call the accessible
population. In other words, the accessible population
Na (0) is of the same order as the infected population.
This can be written as Nt ∼ Na (0) ≈ FNs (0), where F
is a small fraction. It must be noted here that the value
of the fraction F depends on the nature of interventions
in force.
However, within the scope of the reduced logistic
model, the evolution of Nt is independent of the values of
the parameters αs ps and pi βi during the absence or presence of interventions. As a consequence, the asymptotic
value of the cumulative infected population is always
Nt = Ns (0), the entire population. Therefore, demonstrating the accessible population is a small fraction of
the total population is outside the scope of Eq. (11)
and the full model Eqs. (1- 6). An independent way of
demonstrating Na (0) ≈ FNs (0) is desirable.

A.

Quantitative estimate of the accessible
population

Since the factor F is not well determined, there is a
necessity to get a better estimate of this parameter or
the accessible population Na (0). Assuming that the accessible population is of the order of Nt , we assume that
Na (0) ≈ FNs (0). This is equivalent to using Na (0) in
place of Ns (0) in Eq. (17). Then we numerically evaluate
the dependence of Nt on the parameters on Na (0), αs ps ,
and pi βi . Given the fact that the disease evolves, we
expect that the accessible population Na (0) also evolves
with time and in the early stages of evolution, Na (0) will
be small, even in the absence of interventions.
Consider the dependence of Nt on Na (0), keeping αs ps
and pi βi fixed. We find that even for relatively large values Na (0), Nt grows exponentially; for intermediate values, a near saturation value is reached in a relatively short
duration of 10-15 days; and for small values, the saturation value is not reached even after 100 days. These
features are illustrated in Fig. 1(a) in plots (i-iii) for
Na (0) = 8 × 105 , 2.8 × 105 and Na (0) = 1.45 × 105 respectively, keeping pi βi = 3.3913 × 10−7 and αs ps =
1.0 × 10−4 . We have also examined the influence of pi βi ,

FIG. 1. (Color online) (a) Plots of Nt for decreasing values of
Na (0) as a function of time : (i) Na (0) = 8×105 , (ii) 2.8×105 ,
and (iii) 1.45 × 105 respectively, keeping pi βi = 3.3913 × 10−7
and αs ps = 1.0 × 10−4 fixed. (ii) shows decreasing Na (0)
by a factor of 5.51 leads to slow increase in Nt . (iv) Plot
of Nt for pi βi = 4.752 × 10−7 , keeping Na (0) = 2.8 × 105
and αs ps = 1.0 × 10−4 . Smaller values of pi βi take longer
time for Nt to grow as is clear (see (ii) and (iv)). (v) Plot
of Nt for αs ps = 1.1 × 10−3 , keeping Na (0) = 2.8 × 105
and pi βi = 3.3913 × 10−7 fixed. Increase in αs ps leads to
a faster initial growth seen in (v) and (iii). Also shown is the
cumulative number of infections (•) for the UK. (b) Figure
shows the two-phase evolution of the disease. The inset shows
the good fit using Eq. (17) with the cumulative infected cases
for the UK (•) prior to March 23, 2020. Parameter used are
Na (0) = 3.27 × 105 , Nt (0) = 13, αs ps = 1.0 × 10−5 , pi βi =
6.4622 × 10−6 . Post lock-down period: The four curves (i-iv)
correspond to the four iterations of Na (0) values. (i) Na (0) =
5.0×105 , αs ps = 0.0, (ii) Na (0) = 4.0×105 , αs ps = 1.8×10−3 ,
(iii) Na (0) = 3.0×105 , and (iv) Na (0) = 2.8×105 , with αs ps =
4.83 × 10−3 for latter two. The initial value of Nt (0) = 5687
on March 23, 2020. (c) Plots of daily new cases for the UK
and the calculated daily new cases using the reduced logistic
model predicted.

7
keeping Na (0) = 2.8×105 and αs ps = 1.1×10−3 . Smaller
values of pi βi , Ni take longer time for the infection (Nt )
to grow. This feature can be seen from the curves (iv)
and (iii) for pi βi = 4.7522 × 10−7 and 3.3913 × 10−7
respectively. We have also examined the growth dependence of Nt on αs ps , keeping the other two parameters
fixed. The dependence of Nt on this parameter is similar to that on pi βi . The curve (v) taken together with
(ii) shows that increasing αs ps also leads to faster initial
growth of Nt . In the same plot, we have also plotted the
total number of infected cases (•) for the UK.
A careful scrutiny of the total coronavirus cases (•)
in the UK shows that it is similar- both in magnitude
and shape -to the plot of Nt corresponding to Na (0) =
0.28×106 marked (ii) shown in Fig. (1a). This similarity
suggests two important points. First, noting that the
UK is under lock-down, one expects that the accessible
population is a small fraction of the total population,
and therefore we see that the order of magnitude of the
accessible population Na (0) used is comparable to that of
the infected population Nt shown in curve (ii). The figure
also shows that as much as all populations dynamically
evolve during the development of the pandemic, Na (0)
also keeps evolving with time. Second, the similarity in
shape of the UK data (•) with the sigmoidal shape of the
logistic solution raises a question whether the similarity
is accidental. If not, can this be used to fit the UK data?

B.

Data Assimilation and fitting

However, considering the complex dynamics of the
highly contagious virus and the fact that logistic equation
can at best represent simple situations, any attempt to
fit the data appears ambitious. Even so, it is tempting to
examine if Eq. (17) could be used to fit the coronavirus
data for some country/region. To do this, we first note
that the reduced model equation contains just three parameters and the dependence of Nt on these parameters
has already been examined [see Fig. 1(a)].
In most countries, the development of the disease falls
into two phases, namely, the initial period when Governmental constraints are absent, referred to as phase one
and the period beyond the lock-down date, called phase
two. In the case of the UK, the first case was reported

on January 31, 2020. Subsequently, the lock-down was
imposed on March 23. Thus, we need to fit the data for
the period January 31 to March 23 and then the rest.
Consider the period between January 31 and March
23, 2020. Briefly, the fitting procedure adopted here is
to equate the initial growth rate of infections obtained
from the coronavirus data with the model growth rate
given by Eq. (16) (or Eq. 17). Using the fact that the
accessible population is of the order of the total number
of infections, we use a trial value of Na (0) (assumed to
be a few times larger than the infected population) to fix
the parameter βi . Then, the correct value of Na (0) that
provides the best fit for the entire data is found iteratively
by decreasing Na (0) so as to fit an increasing number of
data points. The procedure is illustrated below.
Here, we use the analytical solution given by Eq. (17)
(or solving Eqs. 8-9) with parameters and initial conditions appropriate for the unconstrained growth. Recall
that the testing rate parameter αs ps is low during the initial period and the contact transmission rate parameter
pi βi would be high. The values of these two parameters
in the lock-down period are just the opposite.
Consider the first phase where virus transmission is
unconstrained. A careful perusal of the UK data shows
that a smooth increase in the infected numbers starts
on Feb. 26, 2020, when the number infected stood at
Nt = 13. The local growth rate obtained from the data
over 8 days was found to be 0.25849/day. Equating this
with the model growth rate given by pi βi Na (0) (in Eq.
16), with a trial value of Na (0) = 4.0 × 105 fixes a value
of βi = 6.4622 × 10−6 . The solution of Eq. (17) (or Eqs.
8-9) obtained using the initial condition Nt = 13 keeping
αs ps = 0, passes through several more data points than 8.
In the next iterations, we reduce Na (0), keeping in mind
that the solution should pass through a larger number
of data points. In addition, since the initial growth rate
(Eq. 16) depends also on c/b = αs ps /pi βi , a proper value
of αs ps is required for a good fit. We find that just one
iteration of reducing Na (0) to Na (0) = 3.27 × 105 with
αs ps = 1 × 10−5 fits the data well for the period from
Feb. 27 to March 23, 2020, as shown in the inset of Fig.
1(b).
Fitting the data for the second phase follows the same
iterative procedure except that the number of iterations
is greater for the second phase due to the large number

8
of data points. The number of infections as on March 23
stood at Nt = 5687. This number matches with the predicted value of Nt as on March 23, 2020, obtained from
Eq. (17) for the first phase. (See the inset in Fig. 1(b)).
Since the effect of lock-down is expected to take some
time to manifest, we have taken the local slope over 17
points from the lock-down day is 0.13/day. This slope
is equated with model growth rate using a trial value of
Na (0) = 5.0×105 (αs ps = 0) to obtain βi = 2.602×10−6 .
Using the initial condition Nt = 5687 in Eq. (17) (or
solving Eqs. 8-9), we find that the solution (i) (with
αs ps = 0) passes through a few more than 17 points.
In the next iterations, we reduce Na (0) = 4.0 × 105 and
compute the solution taking into account the contribution from αs ps = 1.8 × 10−3 . The solution (ii) passes
through several more data points. Two further iterations for successively smaller values of Na (0) = 3.00×105
and Na (0) = 2.9 × 105 are used to obtain the solution
marked (iii) and (iv), respectively. (αs ps = 4.83 × 10−3
is used in both cases.) This is shown in Fig. 1(b).
As is clear from the Fig. 1(b), solutions (ii) and (iii)
are seen to pass through successively larger number of
points. Surprisingly, the solution curve labeled (iv) with
Na (0) = 2.9 × 105 fits the entire data fairly well. Note
the increasing trend of the values of αs ps for successive
iterations. This feature is consistent with the steadily increasing testing rates routinely used for proper enforcement of lock-down. This feature is easily incorporated
by parameterizing αs ps with time.
Now consider the estimation of the end time of the epidemic, usually defined as the time when no new infected
cases are reported. Noting the close fit of the model predicted cumulative infected population Nt with the UK
t
data seen in Fig. 1(a), dN
dt gives the model calculated
new infected cases. This can be compared with the UK
data for the daily new cases. This is shown in Fig. 1(c).
As can be seen from the figure the general profile of the
model predicted daily new infected cases matches well
with the published data for the UK. The estimated end
time of the epidemic to be last week of June.
Apart from providing a close fit for the entire data, the
method appears to have predictive power, as is clear from
the curve (iv), which shows that the rate of slowing of the
total number of infections is decreasing. The predicted
saturation value is ∼ 2.9 × 105 . A near-saturation value

is likely to be seen by the second week of June. These
results suggest that the reduced logistic model can be
used for obtaining fit for the COVID-19 data for other
countries as well. The close fit in itself is attributable
to the fact that the dominant contribution to the growth
of the total infected population Nt comes from the two
direct transitions. On the other hand, Eq. (17) does
not include outward transitions (the recovered and the
dead), and also the inward quarantine and tracing transitions. Therefore, the estimated saturation value and
the projected future development should be taken with
some reservations. This will be clear once the full model
equations are analyzed and a fit with COVID-19 data for
the UK is accomplished. Despite these limitations, because the reduced logistic equation retains basic growth
contributions to the cumulative infected Nt , the fit with
the data appears reasonable.
There are attempts to use logistic equations to get
insights into the dynamics of COVID-19 transmission
[30, 31]. For instance, a five-parameter hierarchical logistic model has been used to fit the observed data to project
the cumulative number of cases for several countries [31].
The parameters entering in the model are determined by
the fitting procedure.

IV.

THE FULL MODEL

One of the challenges of compartmental models is
the difficulty associated in making accurate predictions,
mainly attributable to the uncertainties in obtaining
proper estimates of the parameters [13–15, 35, 36]. For
the same reason, forecasting is even more challenging.
Often, several factors may also contribute to the same
parameter, making it difficult for proper interpretation.
In our model, however, several parameters in Eqs. (16) are related to measurable quantities. For instance,
the parameters αs ps , αs pq and αt pt respectively represent rates of testing positive, rates identified as presymptomatic, and tracing rate of those exposed to the
infected. Similarly, parameters λq , λt , γr and κd are inversely related to quarantine duration τq = 1/λq and
time required for tracing τt = 1/λt , time from illness
to recovery τr = 1/γr , and time from illness to death
τd = 1/κd . Though these quantities are country/region-

9
A.

Calibration of relative strengths of the

parameters: insights into disease evolution

FIG. 2. (Color online) Calibration of parameters for identifying the relative importance of transitions contributing to
Ni by varying one parameter, keeping all others parameters
fixed at reference values listed in Table II. The dotted curve
is the reference plot for the active infected population Ni corresponding to the values in the Table II. (i) Plot of Ni for
a 50% increase in pi βi showing a substantial increase in the
peak height (38%) and a shift by 25 days. (ii) Similar effects are seen when αs ps is increased by a factor 8. (iii) The
plot shows a substantial decrease in the peak height with a
marginal shift in its position when αs pq is increased by a factor of 2. (iv) The plot shows a decrease in the peak height
as κd is increased by 60%. (v) Similar effect is seen when the
recovery rate γr is increased by 60%.

specific, their values have been estimated in the literature
[5, 6, 8, 35, 36, 38–42]. Some values are also available in
the public domain [32, 43]. One parameter that is hard
to estimate is the contact transmission rate βi , which is
already estimated in the context of the reduced logistic
equation.

TABLE II. Post lock-down period: Select set of parameter
values serving as a reference set. q1 = q2 = 0.08 and pi = 0.1.

αs ps

αs pq

αt pt

pi βi

9.0 × 10−4 3.64 × 10−2 3.6 × 10−3 3.4693 × 10−7
λq

λt

γr

κd

1/14

1/3

1/42

1/70

However, the dynamical evolution of a nonlinear coupled set of equations such as Eqs. (1- 6) is necessarily
complex. Therefore, in the absence of appropriate values
relevant for the country/region, a systematic method of
finding optimized values of parameters that fit the data
under consideration requires calibration of all parameters
in the model. This will also help us to delineate the different time-scales participating in Eqs. (1- 6). For instance,
several of these parameters represent the growth or decay rates of these populations. Our model contains eight
time-scales which are inversely related to the transition
rates. These are βi , αs ps , αs pq , αt pt , λq , λt , γr and κd .
These time scales control how these populations evolve
with time. From the structure of Eqs. (1-6), it is clear
that Ni , Nq and Ntr exhibit peaks as a function of time
(days) whereas Nr and Nd grow monotonically. However, at what point of time do the peaks appear in these
populations with the progression of the disease cannot be
easily determined since these are coupled nonlinear differential equations where the evolution of any population
depends on the evolution of all other populations [29].
More importantly, if one is interested in fitting the model
predicted growth of populations, which convey the disease status (such as the total infected, active, recovered
and dead), estimating the relative proportion of the populations as the disease evolves is necessary. Further, the
total infected population commonly used to convey the
disease status in daily briefings has contributions from all
populations. Therefore, delineating and determining at
what points of time each of these populations contribute
to the total populations would provide required insight
into further analysis.
Following the recently developed method in the area of
plasticity [44–46], we investigate the influence of the parameters to identify the relative importance of the transition rates. Since it is a multi-parameter space, we vary
each parameter, keeping all other parameters fixed at the
reference set of values listed in Table II. The results are illustrated using plots of the active infected population Ni .
The dotted curve shown in Fig. 2 is the reference curve
corresponding to the reference set of parameters given in
Table II. As in the case of the reduced logistic model, the

10
growth of Ni depends sensitively on the contact transmission parameter pi βi . (Note that in our model, this is
the only parameter that directly contributes to growth
of infections.) A 50% increase in the parameter induces
a substantial increase (38%) in the peak height with the
position shifting towards earlier time (by 25 days) as is
clear from the curve (i). Noting that the position of the
peak, i.e., the turning point of Ni is indicative of slowing
down of the rate of infection, increasing peak height of Ni
suggests slowing down of infections occurs at higher values of infections, where as a shift towards shorter times
implies that slowing down occurs earlier. A similar effect
but of lesser magnitude (20%) is seen when testing rate
αs ps is increased by a factor 8 as is clear from (ii).
In contrast, an increase in the quarantining rate αs pq
by a factor 2 decreases the peak height comparable in
magnitude to that induced by βi with a shift in the peak
position away from the origin by 20 days (see iii). A similar effect, but of lesser magnitude, is seen when αt pt is
increased (not shown). The reduction in the peak height
of Ni is understandable because the total inward transition is αs ps + αs pq + αt pt , and therefore increasing one
of these changes the relative weights. Physically, the decrease in the peak height (commonly referred to as ’flattening the curve’ ) accompanied by a shift in the peak
position for longer times implies that as more individuals
are quarantined, the disease control is facilitated.
We have also investigated the dependence of the recovery (γr ) and death rate (κd ) parameters on Ni . An
increase in γr by 60% decreases the peak height substantially as is clear from (iv). Similarly, increase in the death
rate κd leads to a decrease in the peak heights of Ni as
is clear from (v). Clearly, increased recovery rate, a desirable feature, also leads to a decrease in the number
of active infections. This feature is also intuitively obvious. On the other hand, increased death rate, though not
desirable, also leads to decrease in Ni . We have also investigated the influence of other parameters and find that
Ni is relatively insensitive to these parameters. Noting
that any change in the parameter values relative to those
corresponding to the reference curve changes the peak position and height, we conclude that the parameters listed
in Table II are close to the optimized values.
The above analysis on the relative importance of the
transition rates (equivalently the corresponding param-

eters), and the accompanying discussions, can now be
used to delineate the contributions from different time
scales participating in the transmission dynamics of the
virus. As discussed above, the direct transitions from S
to I, namely, pi βi , to a lesser extent αs ps , control the
initial growth of Ni . The same also to the initial growth
of the total infected population Nt . Similarly, the delayed routes, namely, the quarantine S and tracing T
contribute to the mid region of the evolution of Ni and
to therefore to the total population Nt also. Recall that
the turning point of Ni is controlled by the balance between all inward transitions (from S to I, and Q and T
to I) and outward transitions (I to R and D compartments). Then, the peak position of Ni can be identified
with the inflection point of Nt . Therefore, the time development beyond the point of inflection of Nt is controlled
by a balance of all inward and outward transitions. The
insights from the above analysis identify three distinct
stages in the evolutionary period of the disease, namely,
the initial growth period, the mid developmental period
and the final approach to saturation. As we shall see,
this identification will be helpful in obtaining a good fit
to the UK data.

B.

Data assimilation and forecast

Having demonstrated that the two direct transition
rates pi βi and αs ps are the dominant contributions to
the growth of Ni and having assessed the relative importance of other transitions, we now consider the solution
of the full model Eqs. (1- 6) with a view to obtaining
the best possible fit with the COVID-19 United Kingdom data. Attempt will also be made to forecast the
future progression of the disease.
Recall that the spread of coronavirus in the UK falls
into two phases of development. During the first phase
prior to March 23, 2020, there were no constraints and
the disease transmission was free. After the lock-down
date, the transmission is restricted. Therefore, the model
parameters and the initial conditions relevant for the two
phases are different. As in the reduced model, we assume
that the dynamics of the disease transmission is limited
by the accessible population Na (0) and not by the total
population Ns (0), i.e., Ni ∼ Na (0) ≈ FNs (0). Note that

11
both Ni and therefore Na (0) depend on whether there
are any interventions or not, and also on the type of
interventions.
Consider the period between January 31 and March
23 corresponding to the initial phase. Here, we note that
prior to the lock-down date, there would be no quarantining and tracing procedures and therefore, it is adequate
to solve Eqs. (1,2,5,6), More specifically, we ignore the
delayed inward transitions into I. Furthermore, in the
first few days of the development of the disease, we may
assume that the total number of the infected cases Nt is
equal to the active infections Ni . Finally, since, we plan
to fit the model solution with the UK data [32], publicly
available coronavirus data for the total number infected,
active infected, recovered and the dead are useful in further optimizing the parameters. Unfortunately however,
only the total numbers of the infected and the dead are
made available in the UK.

FIG. 3. (a) Inset: Plot of the total infected population (continuous curve), along with the UK data (•) from February
27, 2020 till March 31. Also shown is the active infected Ni
(dotted curve). Post Lock-down period: Plots of the total
infected population (curve marked i) along with the corresponding data for the UK (•) from March 23, 2020. Curve
marked (ii) shows the active infected population. (b) Plots
of the reported daily new cases for the UK along with the
model predicted daily new cases. (c) Plots of the infected (i),
quarantined (ii), traced (iii), recovered (iv) and deceased (v),
starting from March 23, 2020. The values of the parameters
used are given in Table II.

Now we are in a position to solve the relevant equations
for the first phase. As discussed in Section III B, we use
February 27, 2020 as the starting day for the first phase
evolution of Eqs. (1,2,5,6). The local growth rate of
0.25849/day (on the starting day) over 8 days obtained
from the log-linear plot of the cumulative infected cases
for the UK is equated with the model growth rate given
by pi βi Na (0) to fix βi = 6.4622 × 10−6 by using the
initial value of Na (0) = 4.0 × 105 . Further, using the
initial conditions for Nt (0) = Ni (0) = 13, Nr (0) = 0 and
Nd (0) = 0, we solve Eqs. (1,2,5,6) from February 27 to
March 23 by choosing a value for αs ps that gives the best
fit to the data for the period. (Here, αs ps = 3.6 × 10−6
and the values of other relevant parameters are those
listed in Table II.) The model-predicted total infected
population Nt (continuous curve) along with the data
points (•) is shown in the inset of Fig. 3(a). Clearly, the
match is seen to be very good. Also shown is a plot of
active infections Ni (dotted curve). Equations (1,2,5,6)
also provide the values of Ni , Nr and Nd on March 23,
2020. These are Ni = 5407, Nr = 400, Nd = 285.
Now we consider the solution of Eqs. (1- 6) with a
view to obtaining the best fit for the UK data for the period starting from March 23, 2020. Here again, we first
find the growth rate from the data and equate it with
the model growth rate. Here, we note that the effect of
lock-down is expected to manifest after some time. For

12
this reason, we use a 17-point slope in the log-linear plot.
Equating 0.13/day with pi βi Na (0) and using Na (0) =
3.75 × 105 we get βi = 3.4693 × 10−6 . The initial values
used for evolving Eqs. (1- 6) are Ni (0) = 5407, Nq (0) =
0, Ntr (0) = 0, Nr (0) = 0, Nd (0) = 0. (The reason for
using zero initial conditions for Nq (0), Ntr (0), Nr (0) and
Nd (0) is that the values of these populations would not
be recorded during the first phase. However, using the
values obtained from the first phase for Nr and Nd makes
little difference. Note that Ni (0) = 5407 is smaller
than the total number of infected cases. Again, using
Ni (0) = 5687 does not alter the results.) The parameters values used are those listed in Table II. Figure 3(a)
shows plots of the calculated total infected population Nt
and the total infected cases in the UK (•). Clearly, the
fit is very good. The asymptotic saturation value of the
total number of infections Nt turns out to be 3.52 × 105 .
Also shown is the active infected Ni labeled (ii). Further,
the plot of the model predicted active infected population Ni (ii) exhibits a turning point (peak) around May
15. Subsequent decrease in Ni is seen to be slow. At
this rate of slowing-down, the model predicts that a near
saturation value of 3.52 × 105 .
Now consider the estimation of the end time of the
epidemic. A natural candidate for estimating this is the
daily new infections. Considering the close fit of the
model predicted cumulative infected population Nt with
the UK data (see Fig. 3a), the model calculated daily
t
new infections dN
dt can be compared with the UK data
for the daily new cases. This is shown in Fig. 3(b). As
can be seen the general profile of the model predicted
daily new infected cases matches well with the published
data. Recall that the end time of the epidemic is defined
as the time at which no new cases are reported. This
definition is clearly impractical for forecasting since the
state of saturation is always reached asymptotically. For
this reason, we use an arbitrarily small value, say 300
new cases as the end date of the epidemic. Then, the
estimated end time is late July.
To the best of our knowledge, we are not aware of any
model that fits the COVID-19 data for any country as
has been done here, particularly over such long periods
with the ability to forecast the future progression of the
disease. However, there have been some efforts to fit data
for the initial periods [8, 21, 22, 24, 26, 38, 47]. In view

of the good fit for the UK data, the model can be used
to fit the COVID-19 data for other countries and also to
forecast the progression of the disease.

V.

SUMMARY, DISCUSSION AND
CONCLUSIONS

Recent literature has focused on abstracting the effect
of various types of interventions through epidemiological
models to make projections of how the disease progresses
under different conditions. Recall that one limitation
particularly applicable to the deterministic compartmental models is the difficulty in getting proper estimates of
the parameters, particularly when the number of compartments is large. In this respect, simpler models with
fewer compartments have an advantage. However, several factors may contribute to a single parameter. This
is also a model-dependent feature. Therefore the ability
of such parameters to represent the mitigating efficacy of
interventions appears limited (see below). Furthermore,
the number of parameters in such models is not necessarily small, making numerical solutions often the only
choice. Therefore, any method - whether mathematical
or conceptual - which simplifies analysis and easy interpretation is welcome.
Motivated by this, we hypothesize accessible population for transmission of the disease that can be the total
or a small fraction of the total population depending on
whether the transmission dynamics evolves in the absence or presence of interventions. Indeed, the effect of
lock-down is evident in all counties where the disease has
been controlled or nearly eliminated. At the mathematical level, we introduce a decoupling scheme to aid mathematical analysis that also helps easy interpretation. The
model equations have been devised in such a way that
the susceptible and active infected populations form the
main populations. The decoupling is affected by dropping all inward and outward transitions excepting the
direct transitions (pi βi Na (0) and αs ps Na (0)). Because,
all outward transitions from I are ignored under this decoupling, the active infected population Ni takes the role
of the cumulative infected population Nt . The simplicity
of the reduced logistic equation (Eq. 11) allows easy identification of the growth and inhibiting factors in terms of
the dominant growth factors (direct inwards transitions

13
or parameters). Surprisingly, this simple equation provides a good fit to the reported cumulative number of
infections for the United Kingdom, as is clear in Fig.
1(b).
The full model Eqs. (1- 6) contain several parameters whose range has been estimated in a number of
studies[8, 21, 22, 24, 38, 40–42, 47]. However, when it
comes to explaining or capturing the growth characteristics for a specific country, optimized parameters suitable for the situation are required. Following [44–46], we
have determined the relative importance of the various
transition rates (equivalently the associated parameters)
subject to the constraint that the parameter values provide the best fit for the given data. In this work, we have
made use of publicly available data on the total infected
and daily new infected cases for the United Kingdom [32].
Figure 3(a) shows the fit obtained for the period till
March 23, 2020 (shown in the inset) and for the period
beyond. Clearly, the fit is seen to be very good for both
the period till the lock-down date and the period thereafter. Comparing Fig. 3(a) with Fig. 1(b) for the reduced logistic map, we see that while the fits in both
cases are comparable, the projections of the future progressions are significantly different. The saturation value
predicted by the full model (shown in Fig. 3(a) is close to
3.52×105 , whereas that predicted by the reduced logistic
equation in Fig. 1(b) is ∼ 2.9 × 105 . Conventionally, the
end time of epidemic is defined as the day on which no
new infections are reported. However, since the approach
to the end point is generally slow, a better variable to
predict the end point of the epidemic is by comparing
the model computed daily new case with the reported
data on the daily new cases for the UK. Then, the end
time of the epidemic predicted by the full model turns
out be late July (see Fig. 3b). In contrast, the end time
for the epidemic predicted by the reduced logistic model
is late June. Clearly, the results obtained from the full
model emphasize the limitations of the reduced model.
A natural question is: what are the underlying causes?
The fact that the reduced logistic model provides a
good fit also means that the major contributing factors
for the growth of infection are included in Eq. (2). To
see this, consider Eqs. (1-6). The growth of Ni (t) or
i
more appropriately the daily new infected cases dN
dt has
two types of inward transitions, namely, direct and de-

layed. However, the dominant direct transition from S to
I given by pi βi controls the growth rate of Ni . The other
direct transition αs ps into I also contributes to a lesser
extent. Now, consider the delayed inward transitions to
I coming from Q and T . These transitions are smaller
in magnitude and contribute to sub-exponential growth
of Ni in time. More importantly, the turning point in Ni
i
or dN
dt is due to a competition between the growth factors (all inward transitions) and the outward transitions
(recovery and fatality terms). Further, since the time
i
evolution beyond the turning point of dN
dt is controlled
by a balance between all inward and all outward transitions, the approach towards the state of no infections
or the saturation value of Nt is slow in our case. These
features are clear from Fig. 3(a,b). Note that the fit, till
i
June 1, is just two weeks beyond the turn point of dN
dt
and it has a long way to evolve to the end point of the
epidemic.
These arguments clarify two features of the data fit
obtained using the reduced logistic equation. Because
the total number of infected cases Nt has the dominant
growth contributions, the good fit is not surprising. On
the other hand, growth dynamics beyond the turning
i
point in the daily new infected cases (i.e., dN
dt ) is controlled by a balance between growth factors (all inward
transitions) and inhibiting factors (the rate of recovery
and dead). However, these competing time scales are
absent in the logistic equation. This clarifies why the
projected saturation value of Nt and the end time of the
epidemic is not well captured.
A few comments above model are in order. As stated
in the introduction, the standard compartmental models
ignore both age dependence and the heterogeneous spatial distribution of the population, and therefore cannot
abstract the aspects that depend fundamentally on these
two features. For the same reason, the populations in
these models represent only the mean response of each
of these populations. From this point of view, the good
fit obtained by the full model, to lesser extent by the reduced logistic model, may come as a surprise. However,
the success story of the mean field approaches has been
established in physics literature [29, 44–46] and the limitations of the approach has also been well established. To
this extent, the success of the present model can be attributed to the way the model equations are structured

14
and the underlying nonlinear dynamical methods used
for analysis.
Here, we mention that the parameter values used for
fitting have been obtained using an optimization procedure subject to the constraint that the optimized values should fit the data for the cumulative infected cases
for the UK. Although, each parameter is varied within
the range of values estimated in the literature (and open
sources), since the optimization has been carried out subject to only one constraint, the values may not be unique.
From this point of view, more number of constraints such
as the data for the active infected, recovered, quarantines
etc., would be helpful in removing the non-uniqueness of
the optimized values, at least partially.
As stated in the text, the contact transmission rate parameter βi is one of the crucial parameter in the model
because this parameter largely controls the time development of the disease. In our approach, this parameter
has been estimated by using the local initial slope in the
log-linear plot of the UK data. The slope itself, however,
depends on whether the disease development occurs in
the absence or presence of interventions, which in turn
depends on the accessible population Na (0). Since the
model growth rate depends on pi βi Na (0), the value of
βi depends inversely on Na (0) corresponding to the absence or presence of interventions. However, the value
reported by Tang et al. [6] is two orders smaller than
that estimated in our paper. However, in both cases, the
value of βi is inversely proportional to the relevant population used for modeling. In this context, we mention
that there is only independent estimate both under free
evolution [5]. Such an independent estimates are desirable.
One point that needs some discussion is about the values of the recovery γr and the death κd rates obtained
from the optimization procedure used that fit the UK
data very well (see Table II). These rates are inversely
related to the time duration between detection of illness
till recovery and death respectively. While these values
are within the published range of values [40–42], they appear to be on the lower side of the mean. However, in
principle, the parameter values depend on the structure
of model equations. In our model, the recovery and fatality are outward transitions from a single compartment,
namely, I to R and D. This feature is clearly because

our model equations were structured to have only two
core populations. However, the recoveries can occur if
other kinds of compartments (populations) are included
[5]. Thus, the best fit for lower values may be the result
of simplicity of the model.
In conclusion, the simple compartmental model not
only provides a good fit to the United Kingdom coronavirus data but also makes concrete long term predictions
for the future. We believe that these results have been
made possible due to the reductive approach adopted
here.

Appendix

Recall the equation governing the cumulative infected
population Ns (t) from Eqs. (8-9) is given by
Ṅt = c + bNt − aNt2 ,

(A.1)

a = pi βi ,

(A.2)

b = pi βi Ns (0) − αs ps ,

(A.3)

c = αs ps Ns (0).

(A.4)

Equation (A.1) has the well known form of the logistic
equation extensively studied in the context of population
dynamics. However, the parameters a, b, and c have a
well defined interpretation.
Now consider the solution of Eq. (A.1). Let α1,2 =
be the roots of the quadratic equation. Then,
in terms of a, b and c, the two roots can be written as
α1 ∼ ab = Ns (0) and α2 ∼ −ac/b < 0, which is small
compared to b. Then the solution is given by
√
b± b2 +4ac
2a

Nt =

Aα1 ea(α1 −α2 )t − α2
Aα1 ebt − α2
.
=
a(α
−α
)t
Aebt − 1
Ae 1 2 − 1

(A.5)

The constant A is given by
A=

Nt (0) − α2
.
Nt (0) − α1

(A.6)

Then, we have
Nt =

b
a Ni t0)

 bt c
c
+ a + ac
a e
b

.
ac
Nt (0) + b e bt − Nt (0) + ab
+

For short times, Nt tends to (Nt (0) +

c
b



(A.7)

e bt (since the

15
denominator is dominated by b/a = Ns (0)), consistent
with Eq. (16), the short time solution. For long times

[1] Lescure F-X et al., Clinical and virological data of the

however, Nt tends to b/a = Ns (0), the total population.

doi:https://doi.org/10.25561/77482.

first cases of COVID-19 in Europe: a case series, Lancet

[13] Dehning J. et al., Inferring change points in the spread

Infect Dis 2020; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-

of COVID-19 reveals the effectiveness of interventions,

3099 (20) 30200-0.

Science 2020; 10.1126/science.abb9789.

[2] Murray D, Mathematical Biology, 2nd ed., Biomathe-

[14] Salje H. et al., Estimating the burden of SARS-CoV-2 in
France, Science 2020; 10.1126/science.abc3517.

matics Texts (Springer) 1993; Vol. 19.
[3] Kermack W O and McKendrick A G, A contribution to

[15] Friston K. J. et al., Tracking and tracing in the UK: a

the mathematical theory of epidemics. Proc. Royal Soc.

dynamic causal modelling study, arXiv preprint 2020;
arXiv:2005.07994, https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.07994.

A 1927; 115: 700-721.
[4] Egger M, Johnson L, Althaus C, Schöni A, Salanti G,

[16] Muller S A, Balmer M, Neumann A, Nagel, Mobility

Low N, Norris S L, Developing WHO guidelines: Time to

traces and spreading of COVID-19, medRxiv 2020; doi:

formally include evidence from mathematical modelling

https://doi.org 10.1101/2020.03.27.20045302.
[17] Chinazzi M, Davis J T, Ajelli M, Gioannini C, Litvinova

studies, F1000Research 2018; 6: 1584.
[5] Tang S, Xiao Y, Yang Y, Zhou Y, Wu J, Ma Z,

M, Merler S, Piontti A P y, Mu K, Rossi L, Sun K, Vi-

Community-based measures for mitigating the 2009

boud C, Xiong X, Yu H, M. Halloran E,. Longini Jr. I

H1N1 pandemic in China, PLoS ONE 2010; 5(6):

M, Vespignani A, The effect of travel restrictions on the

e10911.

spread of the 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19) out-

[6] Tang B, Wang X, Li Q, Bragazzi N L, Tang S, Xiao Y

break, Science 2020; 368: 395-400.

and Wu J, Estimation of the Transmission Risk of the

[18] Castillo-Chavez C, Castillo-Garsow C W, Yakubu A,

2019-nCoV and Its Implication for Public Health Inter-

Mathematical models of isolation and quarantine, JAMA
2003; 290 (21): 2876-2877.

ventions, J. Clin. Med. 2020; 9: 462.
[7] Lin Q, Shi Zhao S, Gao D, et al., A conceptual model

[19] De Falco I, Della Cioppa, Scafuri A. U, and Tarantino

for the coronavirus disease 2019(COVID-19)outbreak in

E, Coronavirus Covid-19 spreading in Italy: optimizing

Wuhan,China with individual reaction and governmental

an epidemiological model with dynamic social distanc-

action, Int. J. Infectious Diseases 2020; 93: 211-216.

ing through Differential Evolution, arXiv preprint 2020;

[8] Zhao S, Chen H, Modeling the epidemic dynamics and
control of COVID-19 outbreak in China, Quantitative
Biology 2020; 8: 11-19.

https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.00553v3.
[20] Marsland III R, and Mehta P, Data-driven modeling
reveals a universal dynamic underlying the COVID-19

[9] Chen T-M, Rui J, Wang Q-P, Zhao1 Z-Y, Cui J-A and
Yin L, A mathematical model for simulating the phasebased transmissibility of a novel coronavirus, Infectious
Disease and Poverty 2020; 9: 24.

pandemic under social distancing, arXiv preprint 2020;
https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.10666.
[21] Chintalapudi N, Battineni G, Amenta F, COVID19

virus

outbreak

forecasting

of

registered

and

[10] Ferretti L, Wymant C, Kendall M, Zhao L, Nur-

recovered cases after sixty day lockdown in Italy:

tay A, Abeler-Dörner L, Parker M, Bonsall D, Fraser

A data driven model approach. Journal of Mi-

C, Quantifying SARS-CoV-2 transmission suggests epi-

crobiology,

demic control with digital contact tracing, Science 2020;
10.1126/science.abb6936.
controlling COVID-19 outbreaks by isolation of cases and
contacts, Lancet Global Health 2020; 8: e488-e496.
[12] Ferguson N M, Laydon D, Nedjati-Gilaniet G et
Impact

of

non-pharmaceutical

and

Infection

2020;

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmii.2020.04.004.
[22] Tobı́as A, Evaluation of the lockdowns for the SARS-

[11] Hellewell J, Abbott S, Gimma A, et al.; Feasibility of

al.;

Immunology

CoV-2 epidemic in Italy and Spain after one month follow
up, Science of the Total Environment 2020; 725: 138539.
[23] Eubank S. Eckstrand I, Lewis B, Venkatramanan S,
Marathe M, Barrett C. L, Commentary on Ferguson, et

interventions

al., Impact of Non-pharmaceutical Interventions (NPIs)

(NPIs) to reduce COVID-19 mortality and health-

to Reduce COVID-19 Mortality and Healthcare Demand,

care demand, Imperial College London (16-03-2020);

Bulletin of Mathematical Biology, 2020; 82 :52.

16
[24] Tuite A R, Fisman D N, Greer A L, Mathematical mod-

2020; https://doi.org/10.1016/ S1473-3099(20)30243-7.

elling of COVID-19 transmission and mitigation strate-

[37] Kingsland S, The refractory model: the logistic curve

gies in the population of Ontario, Canada, CMAJ 2020.

and the history of population ecology, Q Rev Biol. 1982;

doi: 10.1503/cmaj.200476;

57(1):29-52. doi:10.1086/412574

[25] Chowdhury R, Heng K, Shawon M S R et al., Dynamic

[38] Gatto M, Bertuzzo E, Mari L, Miccoli S, Carraroe

interventions to control COVID-19 pandemic: a multi-

L, Casagrandi R, and Rinaldog A, Spread and dy-

variate prediction modelling study comparing 16 world-

namics of the COVID-19 epidemic in Italy:

wide countries. Eur. J. Epidemiol. 2020; 35: 389399.

fects of emergency containment measures, PNAS 2020;

[26] Sebasiani G, Massa M and Riboli E, Covid-19 epidemic
in Italy: evolution, projections and impact of government

Ef-

doi/10.1073/pnas.2004978117
[39] Jung Sung-mok, et al., Real-Time Estimation of the
Risk of Death from Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) In-

measures, Eur. J. Epidemiol. 2020; 35: 341345.
[27] Chang S L, Harding N, Zachreson C, Cliff O M, and
Prokopenko M, Modelling transmission and control of the
COVID-19 pandemic in Australia, arXiv preprint 2020;

fection: Inference Using Exported Cases, Journal of Clinical Medicine 2020; 9: 523
[40] Dorigatt I, Okell L, Cori A et al., Report 4: Severity of
2019-novel coronavirus (nCoV), Imperial College London

https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.10218.
[28] Ivanov D., Predicting the impacts of epidemic outbreaks

(10-02-2020); doi: https://doi.org/10.25561/77154.

on global supply chains: A simulation-based analysis

[41] Anastassopoulou C, Russo L, Tsakris A, Siettos C,

on the coronavirus outbreak (COVID-19/SARS-CoV-2)

Data-Based Analysis, Modelling and Forecasting of

case, Transportation Research Part E 2020; 136: 101922.

the COVID-19 outbreak, medRxiv preprint 2020; doi:

[29] Strogatz S. H. Nonlinear dynamics and chaos, Westview

https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.11.20022186.
[42] Wang L, Wang Y, Ye D, Liu Q, Review of the 2019 novel

Press, Boulder, CO, ed. 2, 2015.
[30] Thyagaraja A, A phenomenological approach to COVID-

coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) based on current evidence,

19 spread in a population, arXiv preprint 2020;

International Journal of Antimicrobial Agents 2020;

arXiv:2003.12781, https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.12781.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2020.105948.

[31] Kriston L, Projection of Cumulative Coronavirus
Disease

2019

Hierarchical

(COVID-19)

Logistic

Case

Model,

World Health Organ. E-pub:

Growth

[Submitted]

with

a

to

Bull

7 April 2020;

doi:

disease

Health

Organization,

(COVID-2019)

trol,

https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/publications-

data/download-todays-data-geographic-distributioncovid-19-cases-worldwide.
[44] Srikanth K and Ananthakrishna G, Dynamical approach

http://dx.doi.org/10.2471/BLT.20.257386
[32] World

[43] European Centre for Disease Prevention and Con-

Coronavirus

situation

reports;

https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novelcoronavirus-2019/situation-reports.
[33] Liu Y, Ning Z, Chen Y, et al., Aerodynamic analysis
of SARS-CoV-2 in two Wuhan hospitals, Nature 2020;
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2271-3.

to displacement jumps nanonindentation, Phys. Rev. B.
2017; 98: 014107.
[45] Ananthakrishna G and Srikanth K, An alternate framework for indentation size effect based on residual plastic
depth: A dislocation dynamical approach, G. Ananthakrishna and Srikanth K, Phys. Rev. B. 2018; 97: 104103.
[46] Ananthakrishna G and Srikanth K, Dislocation mecha-

[34] Backer J A, Klinkenberg D, Wallinga J, The incubation

nisms based model for Portevin-Le Chatelier like insta-

period of 2019-nCoV infections among travellers from

bility in microindentation of dilute alloys, Phys. Rev. B.

Wuhan, China, Euro Surveill. 2020; 25(5): pii=2000062.

2020; 100: 064102.

[35] Linton N M, Kobayashi T, Yang Y, Hayashi K, Akhmet-

[47] Guzzetta G, Poletti P, Ajelli M, Trentini F, Marziano

zhanov A R, Jung S-m, Yuan B, Kinoshita R, Nishiura

V, Cereda D, Tirani M, Diurno G, Bodina A, Barone

H, Incubation Period and Other Epidemiological Charac-

A, Crottogini L, Gramegna M, Melegaro A, Merler

teristics of 2019 Novel Coronavirus Infections with Right

S, Potential short-term outcome of an uncontrolled

Truncation: A Statistical Analysis of Publicly Available

COVID-19 epidemic in Lombardy, Italy, February to

Case Data, J. Clinical Medicine 2020; 9: 538.

March 2020, Euro Surveill. Rapid communication 2020;

[36] Verity R. et al., Estimates of the severity of coronavirus
disease 2019: a model-based analysis, Lancet Infect Dis

25(12):pii=2000293.

