arXiv:2006.07855v2 [cs.SI] 17 Jun 2020

Exploratory Analysis of a Social Media Network in
Sri Lanka during the COVID-19 Virus Outbreak
Damitha Lenadora

Gihan Gamage

Dilantha Haputhanthri

Computer Science and Engineering
University of Moratuwa
Katubedda, Sri Lanka
damitha.15@cse.mrt.ac.lk

Computer Science and Engineering
University of Moratuwa
Katubedda, Sri Lanka
gihangamage.15@cse.mrt.ac.lk

Computer Science and Engineering
University of Moratuwa
Katubedda, Sri Lanka
dilantha.15@cse.mrt.ac.lk

Dulani Meedeniya

Indika Perera

Computer Science and Engineering
University of Moratuwa
Katubedda, Sri Lanka
dulanim@cse.mrt.ac.lk

Computer Science and Engineering
University of Moratuwa
Katubedda, Sri Lanka
indika@cse.mrt.ac.lk

Abstract—During the COVID-19 pandemic, multiple aspects of
human life were subjected to unprecedented changes, globally.
In Sri Lanka, a developing country located in South Asia, it
was possible to observe a range of events that arose due to the
influence of the COVID-19 virus outbreak. Thus, the people of
Sri Lanka used Social Media to voice their opinions regarding
such events and those involved in them, enabling the ideal
avenue to explore the social perception. However, the outcome
of such actions was at certain times detrimental. This study was
conducted as an attempt to identify the reasons for such instances
as well as to identify the behaviours of the Sri Lankan populace
during such a crisis event. To support this study, observations, as
well as data of related posts from a sample of 50 sources, were
manually collected from the most popular social media platform
in Sri Lanka, Facebook. The posts considered spanned until
approximately a month after the initial major virus outbreak
in the country and contained content that even vaguely related
to the virus. Utilising such data, various forms of analyses such as
topic significance and topic co-occurrences were conducted. The
findings highlight, while there can be social detrimental ideas
shared, the majority of the posts point constructive and positive
thoughts suggesting the successful influence from the cultural
and social values Sri Lanka society promotes throughout.
Index Terms—covid-19, categorisation, behaviour, significance,
co-occurrence, topic support

I. I NTRODUCTION
The World Health Organisation (WHO) defined the COVID19 outbreak as a global pandemic and a severe global threat.
Its effects spanned to nearly every aspect of human life
around the globe, including health, economy, environment as
well as society. In the attempts of managing such outbreaks,
information plays a vital role, because of its ability to enhance
or even hinder the countermeasures deployed by authorities
[1]. For example, in Sri Lanka, a developing country with
a population of approximately 21 million [2], social media
anticipated a possible country-wide lock-down before it was
officially declared by the government. As a result, people
overcrowded shops and markets to buy essential goods without
following any health precautions. This also led to a shortage

of certain resources, especially for those who got through
life by a daily wage and could not stockpile any essential
goods. These actions hindered the government which was
attempting to control and mitigate the effects of the COVID-19
virus, and potentially increased the vulnerability of the society
against the pandemic. In addition, another notable incident that
occurred was, the spreading severe misinformation on social
media during the outbreak. As a response to such actions,
the government took measures to incarcerate the individuals
involved. When facing an pandemic like COVID-19 for which
there were no cures nor vaccines during the first few months,
the only tools that humans held were social distancing and
quarantine. Thus, the value of researching and subsequently
harnessing social media to improve countermeasures against
the virus in the prevailing information era is apparent.
Social media platforms such as Facebook provide direct
access to an immense amount of information, which also
includes fact-based news as well as rumours. At the same time,
these platforms encourage various perceptions based on information provided by the society. In addition, the conception of
related narratives also occur. This sparks and influences public
debates, especially when the topics discussed are controversial.
Furthermore, it is observed that users of social media tend to
acquire or ignore information based on such perceptions [3].
Thus, with the objective to understand the behaviours of the
Sri Lankan people during a pandemic, this research provides
an analysis based on observations as well as content posted
by a sample set of the Sri Lankan Facebook user-base. The
sample set includes data from posts of 50 randomly selected
profiles and pages that span across approximately 60 days. A
notable point regarding this data collection process was that it
was manually done only considering publicly shared content,
which was subsequently anonymised. Despite its severe inefficiencies, this manual process was chosen due to it being one of
the few non-restrictive forms of data collection on Facebook.
Although this method imposed limitations on the number of

sources that could practically be extracted, this allowed for
a much more thorough analysis which considered not only
image based posts, but also posts that indirectly related the
pandemic. The results of the research present behavioural
patterns observed in three major topic areas as well as analyses
aggregating the collected data. Utilising the results of this
study, the possibility of using social media as a means of
mitigating the spread of the pandemic by governments and
relevant authorities is also present. In addition, it should
be noted that the scenario chosen for this research may be
generalisable to any developing country as well as any crisis
event.
II. R ELATED WORK
The impact that social media has on society is growing
day by day. The field of research is also no exception [4].
The analysis of how the general populace reacted in social
media during significant events is nothing new as well. MoodyRamirez and Church [5] discusses how citizens of the United
States of America (USA) have used memes in Facebook
to convey their political opinions the during the 2016 USA
presidential elections. The research by Sandoval-Almazan and
Valle-Cruz [6] presents the behaviour of Facebook users during
a local government campaign of the Central State of Mexico
in 2017. Here, authors have used more than 4000 Facebook
posts to examine the people’s sentiments to the campaign.
The study by ztrk and Ayvaz [7] can be taken as a prime
example where the significant event is a crisis. In this research,
the authors have collected Tweets related to the Syrian refugee
crisis and performed a sentiment analysis on them. Here a
noteworthy point would be that the authors analysed English
and Turkish Tweets separately. Whereupon doing as such, they
have discovered a significant difference in terms of sentiments.
This sheds insight into how peoples’ reactions would differ
based on their ethnicity. Additionally, several researches [8]–
[11] present methods to utilise messages in social media to
aid in the situation at hand.
Falling under a subsection of crisis events, infectious diseases also possess a significant threat to humanity as they
possess the capability to hamper our everyday lives in more
ways than one. Thus, social media content relating to such
events are quite common during outbreaks of such diseases.
This was especially the case during the Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) [12] virus outbreak in South Korea.
The research by Kim et al. [13] utilises such content where
the authors have analysed social media messages, especially
considering their spatiotemporal attributes. Here the authors
have proposed that the local governments must play an active
role to supply official information as the excessive spread of
rumours and misinformation was a significant issue during the
crisis. Similarly, the study by Choi et al. [14] which focuses on
the outbreak in South Korea as well, also signifies the impact
of social media on risk perceptions. Although not limited
Social Media alone, Jang and Baek [15] presented yet another
research related to the MERS outbreak in South Korea. Here,
the authors stressed the importance of the credibility of Public

Health Officials in order to avoid the spread of misinformation.
In addition, the reaction of the Chinese populace on social
media due to the MERS-CoV and Avian Influenza A(H7N9)
outbreaks has been analysed by Fung et al. [16], where they
have concluded that the distance to a particular outbreak of
the disease plays a key role on how strongly the people would
react.
COVID-19 which is yet another infectious disease that
has had a considerable impact worldwide. With the outbreak
starting from Wuhan, China, within the span of less than a
year, it has spread across the globe and effectively shutdown
most countries. However, it could be observed that numerous
researchers have conducted various studies related to this topic
in a short period of time. Particularly, focusing the country
the virus outbreak began, China. The analysis of social media
related to this outbreak was one such way the behaviour of
people during this crisis was analysed. The study by Zhu et
al. [17] presents one such example where randomly sampled
Weibo users from China, were analysed to identify the level
of the attention the users had towards the COVID-19 virus.
The work by Gao et al. [18] discusses about the mental health
issues which were highlighted in social media during COVID19 pandemic in China. In addition, they have described how
exposure to social media caused the development of mental
health problems during the crisis period. Furthermore, the
research by Negin Karisani and Payam Karisani [19] analysed
the impact of the outbreak in China based on data from Twitter.
In this research, authors have used state-of-the-art machine
learning models to determine the disease spread based on
insights gained from social media.
In addition, representing the spread of social media messages similar to a disease, Cinelli et al. [3] analysed messages
related to the COVID-19 outbreak and presented patterns as
to which they spread in a variety of social media platforms.
Furthermore, the research by Boberg et al. [20] analysed
Facebook pages of alternative news media and presents yet
another example for studies conducted on social media that
relates to the COVID-19 outbreak. The research by Murray et
al. [21] analysed the COVID-19 outbreak from the perspective
of personal experiences utilising data from the social media
platform, Reddit. In this study, the authors used social media
data to generate important insights on symptoms of the disease
as well as sentiments felt during the outbreak. Kadam and Atre
[22] discussed the panic that ensured in social media during
COVID-19 outbreak in India. The authors analysed social
media content and their corresponding societal responses to
identify their negative impact to the measures taken to curtail
the virus outbreak in the country. The study by Depoux et
al. [23] stands out in the aspect on how it portrays social
media as a pandemic that spreads misinformation and rumours
greater than the speed of transmission of COVID-19. Ziems et
al. [24] presents a research on how racism was developed on
social media during the COVID-19 outbreak. Here, they have
specifically focused on how racial hate towards Chinese and
other Asian countries spread, and role of counter-hate speech
on mitigating the spread. Major social and behavioural changes

of people because of the massive global health crisis were
analysed by Bavel et al. [25]. In addition, the authors have
evaluated how psychological and behavioural science concepts
could be used to mitigate the negative impact of the health
crisis.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
A. Data collection and Categorisation
The research conducted focused on using Facebook as its
primary source of data. This specific selection of Facebook
was due to it being the most popular medium of social media
used in Sri Lanka. The extent of the popularity was such
that the user-base of Facebook was multiples of times larger
than other social media platforms combined [26]. Thus, it was
the belief that data collected from Facebook would lead to a
sample that would better represent the Sri Lankan populace.
Following the decision regarding the social media platform
to collect the data, data of posts from 50 sources were manually collected and categorised. These sources were comprised
of both profiles as well as pages that were selected at random.
However, the persons in charge of such sources spanned across
a wide array of ideals as well as professions. In addition, it
was assumed that for profiles, an individual was in charge, and
for pages, a group of like-minded people were in change. A
notable limitation regarding this method would be that it would
only capture the behaviour of the individuals or groups that
are in charge of these 50 sources and not the entire populace
as a whole. The reason for employing such small limits and
manual collection mechanisms was due to the restrictions
placed in the Facebook platform to extract data. However, as
the collective number of posts amounted to 2398, we believe
that the sample size would be sufficient for this exploratory
study. Nonetheless, there were certain added benefits of this
method in comparison to a standard data collection method
via a query. Such benefits were that this method would also
take image posts such as memes as well as posts that do not
directly refer to the COVID-19 virus but were posted due to
an event related to it into account as well.
In the data collection process itself, public posts along with
data regarding its significance were manually collected that
related to the COVID-19 virus or originated due to the result
of the outbreak. To elaborate, taking a source at a time, the
wall of the source was scanned for related posts. Once found,
each post was then counted for one out of 57 categories along
with its the number of the reactions, number of comments as
well as the number of shares. It is these numerical data that
will be used to measure the significance of posts. In addition,
an attribute was stored to track if a source posted the content
that either supported or criticised a particular topic. However,
if multiple posts contradicted one another, it was taken as that
source neither supported nor criticised the topic in question.
A profile that first criticised the actions of the government
and then later praised them would be an example of such a
situation. Furthermore, it should be noted that the initial 57
categories were created empirically during the categorisation
process itself if a post found did not fit into any of the existing

Fig. 1. Flowchart of the data collection process of a single source

categories. To give an example, a post detailing the negative
effects of panic buying was found in one of the sources. The
list of topics would then be checked, and if a suitable topic
such as Panic buying was present, details of the post would
be added under that topic section for that particular source. If
such a topic did not exist till that point, then it was created and
added to the list of topics. Following such action, the details
of the post would then be marked under this new topic section.
Fig. 1 depicts the aforementioned process for a single source.
Following the completion of the data collection, the initial
categories were reduced to 38 by combining related topic areas. The reason for this action was to eliminate the redundancy
that was introduced when collecting data as certain topics
areas were more specific instances of another more general
topic area. The final set of topics utilised in the categorisation
process as well as the cluster they belong to are mentioned
presented in Table I.
Furthermore, the data collection process only considered
Facebook posts content created on or before the 15th of April
2020. This date, in particular, was kept to ensure that the
data extracted from each source spanned through a consistent
period of time. As this research primarily focuses on the
initial reactions to the COVID-19 outbreak, we deemed that
the aforementioned date would be sufficient as it was roughly
a month after the virus outbreak in Sri Lanka.
The aforementioned collection process was carried out by
a team of individuals who were significantly knowledgeable
in data analysis. Although the data collection process was
cross-validated among the team members, validation of the
data itself was not attempted due to the challenges from the
dynamic nature of posts in Facebook. However, to mitigate
the impact of fluctuations in the data, the collection process
was initiated approximately a week after the cutoff date for

TABLE I
T OPIC CLUSTERS AND TOPIC CATEGORIES
Topic Cluster
Start of the outbreak
Quarantine by Govt
Lock-down
Supplies
Economy
Politics
Advice
Services / People
Humour
Donations
Global Situation
Other

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Topics
Situation in China
• Other things to worry about / Other diseases
Early cases in Sri Lanka
• Bringing people back / Support for those in other countries
Curing 1st case in Sri Lanka
• Early measures to stop the virus
Irresponsible behaviour
• People coming back by themselves from other countries
Quarantine by the Government
#LockdownSL
• Government decisions for social distancing
Panic buying
• Discipline after curfew release
Shortage of supplies / services
• Deficient / Overpriced products
Delivery
• Local production / inventions
Economy
• Government’s economic decisions
President / Government
• Other political parties / Politicians
Postponing election
• Media / Social Media
Scientific / Valid advice
• Cultural and Religious beliefs / activities
Rumours
• Information about Sri Lanka
Armed forces
• Religious / Famous figures / Top companies
International organisations
• Other essential services / All services
Medical / Government Medical Officers’ Association (GMOA)
Humour / Entertainment / Online activities / Boredom relief
Donations / Helping others / Needy
Situation in other countries / World
Benefits of the COVID-19 outbreak
• Explain via Maths / Curves
Dire situation / Sorrow

considering posts. In addition, due to any privacy issues that
could arise, the collected data was kept secured and was not
included in a public domain.

number of likes for the Panic buying topic would be 20 for
that profile.
IV. O BSERVED PATTERNS OF BEHAVIOUR

B. Normalisation
An observed point of imbalance in the data is the vastly
varying number of followers of each source. Due to this variance, a significant difference could be observed considering
the number of reactions, comments and shares from once
source to another. When considering the total significance per
topic, this factor would skew the data in the same pattern
or behaviour of the more popular sources than considering all
the sources generally as a whole. Thus, the attributes related to
significance, such as the topic-wise number of posts, reactions,
comments as well as shares were subjected to normalisation
considering each person.
100 × si
ŝik = P38 k
i
n=1 sn

(1)

The task of normalisation was accomplished by dividing
a significance attribute of a topic by the sum of the said
attribute’s value for all the topics of the person considered.
The result was then multiplied by 100 to get a more significant
figure to avoid small fractions. The equation relating to this
process is given by (1). Here, sik denotes some significance
attribute such as the number of posts, reactions, comments or
shares pertaining to some topic for the ith source, while ŝik
denotes its normalised value. Furthermore, k denotes the topic
that is taken into consideration while n iterates over all the
topics. To give an example, assume that a profile has gathered
400 likes for posts in the Panic buying topic category. If the
said profile had gathered 2000 likes in total, the normalised

Based on the collected data as well as key events observed
throughout the relevant time period, various patterns were
identified in regards to the behaviour of the Sri Lankan
populace. In addition to the data collected specifically for this
research, certain observations were also taken into account
from screenings which were randomly timed to support the
patterns identified.
Furthermore, this analysis of behaviours was conducted
focusing on generalised key topics that were prevailing at the
time. This was done in order to conduct a more in-depth
analysis, where each key topic contains subtopics that are
related to one another. Although there is an overlap between
such subtopics, the underlying intention behind them is in
relation to the main topic. For example, posts related to key
topic areas such as returnees from foreign countries as well
as resource acquisition may both include posts that fall under
the President / Government category.
The behaviours patterns observed for each sub-topic are
illustrated in Fig. 2, Fig. 3 and Fig. 4. Here, the solid arrows
represent the majority pattern observed in public, while the
dashed arrow represents the minority. It should be noted
that the public observations were taken from the random
scans, and do not necessarily follow the same patterns as the
collected data. The topics, along with the reactions observed
to the topics, are represented by the rectangular boxes. These
reactions were either support or against. The darkly shaded
boxes with solid outlines represent that the reaction to that
topic is the majority reaction in the data. The opposite of
this is represented by the lightly shaded boxes with dashed

outlines. The white boxes represent that the reaction for the
topic that it contains is neutral in the data. In addition, the
boxes that connect to an arrow present a plausible reason for
the flow pattern represented by that arrow.
A. #LockdownSL

Fig. 2. Flow diagram showing patterns related to the lock-down

This can be considered as one of the first major movements
that provoked the majority of the Facebook audience in Sri
Lanka to post content related to the COVID-19 pandemic. The
pattern regarding the flow of post categories related to this
topic is presented in Fig. 2.
Well after the recovery of the first COVID-19 patient who
was a foreign nationalist, the identification of the second
case in Sri Lanka sparked panic among the people. At this
point, the government was constantly requested to lock-down
the country to prevent outsiders who have contracted the
virus from coming in. The public did so on Facebook by
changing their profile pictures and posting with the hashtag
#LockdownSL, demanding the government to go into lockdown. As the second patient contracted the disease due to
being in a profession that regularly associated with foreigners,
the call to lock-down the country could be somewhat justified.
In addition, due to the fact that this was the first case of
COVID-19 being contracted to a Sri Lankan nationalist within
Sri Lanka, may have led the public to overreact.
Although the majority of the population supported the Lockdown campaign, some stated that it was not required with the
at that time circumstances. An argument presented by such
people was that it was too early to take such strict action. In
addition, due to Sri Lanka being a country where international
tourism plays a great role in its’ economy, another argument
that could be seen against the lock-down was that such action
would not be bearable for the country.
With such observations, a deeper analysis was done on the
behaviour the people who both supported and rejected the
lock-down campaign via their Facebook profiles. From the
people who stood with imposing the lock-down, the majority
seemed to be discussing the initial cases found in the country.
Additionally, some people were talking about the lockdown to indirectly support their political preferences. This
was especially highlighted during the heated discussion that
occurred on the decision to postpone the general election.

To give some insight into this matter, due to the Presidential
election in 2019, the government that existed before it lost
power as the prevailing president was primarily supported by
the opposing party. Thus, the prevailing government is that
of the said opposing party. In order to create a parliament
that supports the prevailing president, the holding of the
general election is pivotal. Thus, the goal of the prevailing
government was to hold it at the earliest. Out of the people who
discussed about the lock-down, the majority made their next
few posts supporting or apposing various political decisions.
This polarised behaviour was expected as these series of
incidents had a clear influence on the populace based on their
political preferences.
Additionally, the government also took immediate action
after the initial COVID-19 cases were discovered. These
actions taken had the foreboding signs that a curfew would
be placed and the country would be truly locked-down. Thus,
it came to no surprise when an island-wide curfew was later
announced by the government. However, this curfew lasted
for an unprecedented amount of time. Low-risk areas were
given intermittent relaxing of restriction, while the capital and
nearby areas experienced a complete lock-down surpassing
70 days due to the high risk of community spreading. To
make things intense this kind of civil liberty restrictions were
not experienced even during the intense times of the 30year war witnessed by the Sri Lankans. When considering
the posts after imposing the curfew, the majority of the
people who participated in the #LockdownSL movement, again
supported curfew. This again was no surprise as this was the
practical implementation of their wish. However, there were
also some who supported the lock-down but were against the
curfew. This may have been due to the intense restrictions
that came about due to the curfew, which were not apparent
initially. Nonetheless, some of these individuals also appeared
to have found fault no matter what action the government
took. However, the people who stood against the lock-down
appeared to have supported the curfew.
Thus, considering the patterns and behaviours, it is possible
to hypothesise that certain individuals who posted content
relating to the lock-down of the country did so following
a trend. Such people had no proper idea about the major
concerns or requirement of the lock-down. However, it could
also be possible that some of these individuals had second
opinions regarding their initial decisions.
B. The return of those from foreign countries
This topic focused on patterns from Facebook posts of the
Sri Lankan populace that related to the return of those from
foreign countries. Observed flows of sub-topics related to this
topic are presented in Fig. 3. Content related to this topic
can be seen across two main phases. The first phase began
with the news of the students who were stranded in Wuhan,
the birthplace and epicentre of the COVID-19 outbreak. With
this discovery, many people, especially the relatives of the
students requested the government to bring the students back.
In Facebook, it was observed that the majority of the public

Fig. 3. Flow diagram showing patterns of foreign returnees of Sri Lanka
Fig. 4. Flow diagram showing patterns of resources and their acquisition

supported this request and the cause of bringing the students
back. However, a minority stood against it by highlighting
the fact that there is a possibility the students could carry the
virus and spread it in Sri Lanka. Nonetheless, the government
sent an aircraft to fetch the students. After the returning
to Sri Lanka, the students were directed to a quarantine
facility which was coordinated and run by the armed forces. It
could be observed that the majority supported and praised the
government as well as those who were involved in this action.
However, there was a minority that stood against this decision.
Furthermore, there were minor reports that the airline staff and
their family members were discriminated.
The second phase initiated with the arrival of returnees
from countries that were severely hit by the COVID-19 virus.
During this time, it was observed that the general public was
more aware of the severity of the virus and they were more
hesitant to support the people coming back from foreign countries. This was regardless of the fact that the government had
decided to maintain the quarantine process for such arrivals.
In addition, during this time period, an incident occurred
where returnees from a country where the COVID-19 virus
was rampant protested against the quarantine process at the
airport. The neglection of health advice by these individuals
was a key point of that incident. With this, the aforementioned
public hesitance turned into outright resistance. Thus, the
majority of the Sri Lankan populace turned against such
returnees. However, as time progressed, all arriving from
foreign countries were subjected to the quarantine process
regardless of the county they arrived from.
It was observed that this quarantine process and the armed
forces who carried it out were heavily praised and supported
by the majority of the public. Although there was also a
minority that undervalued and criticised such efforts.
Thus, considering these observations, it is possible to conclude that the public was initially supporting those stranded
in other countries. However, due to the detrimental actions of
those who arrived later spreading on Facebook, this support
turned into opposition. Nonetheless, the majority of the public
continued to support those were in essential services throughout the entire period.
C. Resources and their acquisition
The topic flow patterns which were related to this topic are
presented by Fig. 4. Initial posts that fell under this section

were focused on the various decisions by the government of
Sri Lanka that related to its economy. One such decision, in
particular, was not lowering the oil prices in the country even
though the price of crude oil was reduced significantly. Though
it is to be expected for people to lash out against this matter,
certain individuals defended this decision. These individuals
later supported their standpoint when it was revealed by the
government that the extra monetary resources collected by
not lowering oil prices, were used to lower the price of
certain food items. Specifically, these food items were canned
salmon and dhal. It was clear that this decision was taken
to reduce the burden of low-income families in the country
if the country went into lock-down. However, the presence
of political influence regarding posts that either supported or
criticised such government decisions could not be denied based
on the older posts of the sources.
Starting from initial stages of the outbreak, posts admonishing the act of panic buying were regularly observed. This
was especially true after the curfew was announced. However,
such posts did not portray the severity as in certain other
countries where shelves were barren and devoid of goods.
Instead, most of these posts focused on the act of crowding
in large queues when shopping. The argument was that this
was counter-intuitive as it would help spread the virus more
rapidly.
Following the island-wide curfew by the government, posts
relating to helping the needy could be commonly seen. Such
posts pointed out that groups such as the destitute, elderly and
orphans would be severely affected by their lack of means to
get food for their daily lives. As if a response to these, multiple
posts showing food donations to such vulnerable groups and
even stray animals could also be observed.
Following the lifting of the curfew in districts without a
major spread of the virus, the appearance of posts praising
the discipline of Sri Lankans for properly following the
necessary protocol began to emerge. This was due to such
people properly maintaining a distance of 1 metre when in
queues. However, when the curfew was lifted in more densely
populated districts the following day, crowding at stores could
be witnessed. This caused posts criticising panic buying and
crowding to reemerge. Nonetheless, such crowding may have
been inevitable as the people in such dense areas would have

been starved for essential resources with only a limited number
of outlets to acquire them. In addition, posts could be found
showing those whose professions were essential to combat the
virus such as nurses getting into long queues at stores. These
posts also requested that such individuals be given preference
when in queues as they were the vanguard in combating the
virus.
However, as the government came to realise that the avoidance of such crowding was implausible, the country was put
into indefinite lock-down. Following this course of action,
the promotion of delivery mechanisms to distribute essential
goods was looked into. Due to this, posts relating to such
deliveries began to circulate in social media. A type of post,
in particular, that could be observed was where people would
request for contact numbers of essential goods deliveries as
well as services. This indicated the lack of a proper mechanism
to obtain methods of contacting crucial services. However, due
to the apparent unethical practices by certain companies when
making deliveries, posts denouncing such companies emerged.
In addition, a surge of posts promoting local productions as
well as innovations also sprang forth sporadically. Such posts
heavily promoted nationalism stating that Sri Lanka should
stop relying on imports and focus on producing required goods
on its own.
Thus, the majority of the posts found relating to this topic
area seemed to focus on advising on how to properly acquire
resources. The method of doing so took on many forms such
as pointing out facts which were oblivious or otherwise and
even direct criticism.
V. R ESULT ANALYSIS
Following the categorisation of the posts from the sources
considered, various forms of analyses were conducted in order
to identify key points relating to the behaviour of the selected
set of sources.
A. Topic-significance
Based on the data collected from 50 profiles and pages, an
analysis was performed to identify the topics that were highly
discussed on Facebook throughout the period of study. As
Facebook appeared to have more than 70 percent of the total
social media user-base in Sri Lanka [26], it could represent
the majority of the general public better than any other social
media platform. Thus, this analysis portrays the significance
of the various discussions that occurred in society during the
pandemic situation in Sri Lanka.
As described in the methodology section, following the
generation of the 38 topic categories the results were subjected
to normalisation based on each profile. From these normalised
values, (2) was derived to calculate the total significance per
topic.

Tk =

50
X
i=1

[ŝik,p + ŝik,r + ŝik,c + ŝik,s ]

(2)

In (2), Tk denotes the total topic significance for kth topic. In
addition, ŝik,p , ŝik,r , ŝik,c , as well as ŝik,s corresponds to the ith
person’s normalised post, reaction, comment, and share counts.
The bar graph in Fig. 5 illustrates the significance of the
major topics that were discussed during the period of the
research. Here, the 38 different topics were ordered based
on the topic significance. A significance score ranging from
2929.74 to 16.17 could also be observed.
According to the bar graph in Fig. 5, the topic cluster of
Humour / Entertainment / Online activities / Boredom relief
had the highest topic significance score of 2929.74, surpassing
all other topics by a considerable margin. This behaviour
could be justified as there were plenty of sarcasm based posts
encountered throughout the study. It seemed that the majority
of the people appeared to have used various incidents that
happened during the period to be making posts on humour and
entertainment. With the policies to ensure social distancing in
place, the sensation of solitude that arose because of it may
have led the people to use Facebook as a boredom releasing
mechanism.
Apart from humour, another prominent area was politics,
where several topics with high significance scores could be
observed. This situation was also expected as there was a
parliamentary election which originally happened to be held
on 25th of April. Thus, most of the populace were discussing
political related topic groups such as President / Government
(1684.30), Other political parties / Politicians (1258.26),
Government Decisions for social distancing (840.93), and
Postponing election(419.36). However, those who discussed
such topics interpreted political matter in a very polarised
manner that either supported or opposed the government.
The topic Scientific / Valid advice which held a score of
1663.64, indicated that Facebook was also being used as a
medium to exchange valid and scientific advice to mitigate the
spread of the virus. The influence of famous personalities may
have been the cause of this behaviour. This was due to such
influential figures posting videos on how to properly behave
during the COVID-19 outbreak, and included individuals such
as cricket players, entrepreneurs, journalists as well as politicians. This, in particular, can be highlighted as a promising
use of social media during a crisis.
During this disastrous period, there were several entities
and authorities that played a splendid role in controlling the
virus from spreading in the country. Thus, Members of the
Government Medical Officers’ Association (GMOA), other
medical officers, as well as armed forces were held in high
regard by the people. This made posts related to such topics
become especially highlighted.
When moving down the graph, a cluster of topics with
medium impact where the significance varies from 641.30 to
319.35 could be seen. These topics mainly covered the acquisition of essential resources as well as the various behaviours
of the people.
Topics such as Early cases in Sri Lanka, Situation in China,
Early measures to stop the virus and Explain via Maths /
Curves had a lower significance when considering topic scores.

Fig. 5. Total significance of each topic

Most of these topics were discussed in the initial period of the
pandemic, especially before the government took strict actions.
Thus, it indicates that people appeared to be less interested in
the virus during the early stages. Generally speaking, when
comparing the topics against time, it was observed that most
of the topics came into the discussion after the lock-down of
the country. Additionally, significant incidents such as panic
buying as well as returnees from foreign countries, bolstered
the attention people had towards COVID-19.
B. Heat-map
In order to get a holistic idea on the relations between topics,
profiles and significance, a heat map was derived. In addition,
the topics were clustered further to give a more compact
representation.
The heat map in Fig. 6 presents 12 topic clusters that were
made from the 38 initial topics. The columns represent the
different sources used to make the data sample. Each cell had
been coloured based on its significance, where the higher the
significance, the darker the colour. The significance has been
calculated per profile utilising (3), which was based on the
normalised number of posts, reactions, comments and shares.
Tki = ŝik,p + ŝik,r + ŝik,c + ŝik,s

(3)

Here, Tik denotes the kth topic’s significance of the ith
source. Similarly, ŝik,p , ŝik,r , ŝik,c , and ŝik,s corresponds to the
ith person’s normalised number of posts, reactions, comments,
and shares.
C. Topic Co-Occurrence
In addition to the heat-map, as a means of analysing the
interrelation of the topics, their co-occurrences were also calculated. This was accomplished by first taking any two topics,
and then counting of the number of profiles or pages from the
sources that contained both of the topics. The equation used
when considering two sources was (4), where the value of ci,j
k,l
denotes if the topics k and l co-occurred between the i and j
sources.
(
ci,j
k,l

=

1
0

i and j posted content on topics k and l.
i or j did not post content on k and l.

(4)

These calculations between each unique pair of sources
were then summed to get the final co-occurrence scores
between topics as in (5). Here, Ck,l denotes the total cooccurrence score between the topics k and l. Although unsurprising, the pair of topics with the highest co-occurrence
count of 31 was the Humour / Entertainment / Online activities

Fig. 6. Heat-map showing profile-topic-significance

/ Boredom relief and President / Government topic groups,
which also boasted the highest normalised significance values.
Ck,l =

50 X
50
X

ci,j
k,l

(5)

i=1 j=i+1

As a means of analysing the co-occurrence of topics, the
co-occurrence graph in Fig. 7 was created. In this graph, the
38 topic categories were represented as nodes. Furthermore, to
associate co-occurrence with the topic frequency, a score was
created using the normalised sum of posts and then represented
in the graph via the size of the nodes. The nodes were then
ordered in a circle using this attribute which was calculated
by using (6). Here, fk denotes the score for topic k, with
the remaining symbols defined by the notations mentioned
previously.
fk =

50
X

ŝik,p

(6)

i=1

In Fig. 7 the node with the highest popularity is located at
the top with the sizes of nodes decreasing counter-clockwise.
In addition, the edge weights of the graph, which are also
represented by the thickness of the edges, utilise the cooccurrence values calculated previously.
Upon analysis of Fig. 7, it can be observed almost every
topic has a co-occurrence with one-another. This is presented
by the existence of interconnecting edges between almost each
and every node. There were only 6 pairs where a co-occurrence
could not be observed. Out of these 6, 5 had one of the two
least significant topics as one of the topics in the pair. These
topics were Other things to worry about / Other diseases and
Curing 1st case in Sri Lanka. Furthermore, in general, the less
frequent topics had a reduced level of co-occurrence compared
to their more popular counterparts, in terms of the number of
sources the co-occurrence occurred. The rationale behind this
deduction is that due to the upper right section of the graph
showing a fairly lighter colour while the upper left section
showing a fairly darker colour. This was due to the cumulative
colours of the weighted edges. Through such observations,
another possible deduction would be that the more frequent
topics were common among the majority of the sources, which

is a predictable outcome. However, the interconnections of
least frequent topics with nearly all other topics would imply
that certain sources posted content on a wide array of topics. It
may be possible to infer further that these sources in question
were in the control of individuals who were more active on
social media.
Another interesting point that could be observed as shown
in Fig. 8, was that when the edges were filtered to contain only
weights of 23 and above, i.e. having a co-occurrence between
23 sources and above, it can be observed that topics such as
Other political parties / Politicians and Donations / Helping
others / Needy which have a higher normalised post count,
seem to have a lesser co-occurrence than certain topics such
as Irresponsible behaviour that have a lower normalised post
count. This would imply that certain individuals or groups are
more focused on posting content related to politics compared
to the majority of the sources considered. Thus, this brings to
light that certain individuals would even use a world-pandemic
situation to further their own political agenda.
D. Support shown for Topics
To get an understanding of how the overall populace reacted
to the various topics, an analysis was done on sources that
that either supported or criticised in posts relevant to the
said topics. This was done by selecting a topic and then
counting the number of negative or positive reactions among
the sources. Afterwards, a score was devised for each topic,
where if a source supported the topics the score rose by 1, if
a source criticised a topic the score fell by 1, or else the score
remained the same. This is presented by (6), where aik depicts
the score of the ith person for topic k and Ak depicts the total
score for the kth topic. The overall results of this analysis can
be seen in Fig. 9 where the topics were arranged based on the
score they received.


50
+1 Supported.
X
i
Ak =
ak = −1 Criticised.
(7)


i=1
0
Neither / Both.
It could be observed that the most support in Facebook was
for local productions as well as those professions that played

Fig. 7. Co-occurrence graph of the topic categories based on data sources

Fig. 8. Co-occurrence graph of the topic categories based on data sources considering co-occurrences with more than 23 sources

Fig. 9. The overall support for each topic category

an active role to mitigate the effects of the COVID-19 virus
outbreak in Sri Lanka. Namely, these professions were that
of the medical staff as well as the armed forces. Although
showing support to professions that were the vanguard against
COVID-19 outbreak was a common trend even in countries
other than Sri Lanka, this usually referred to the medical staff
and other essential service providers. Sri Lanka stood out due
to the fact that mobilised its armed forces to play an active
role in this crisis. Furthermore, coupled with the other most
supported topic which was local production, this brings to light
the nationalistic views of the people.
Following such topics were posts related to Donations /
Helping others / Needy. The support for such actions comes
at no surprise. However, following even that in relevance to
the support score, were certain topics related to politics such
as postponing the election and government actions to curb
the COVID-19 outbreak. However, these two topics were in
opposition to one another. Due to the power shift after the
2019 presidential election in Sri Lanka, it could be said that the
current government was against Postponing election. However,
it was supported publicly. As the other decisions by the
Government to control the spread of the virus are supported as
well, the reason for the statement regarding the contradiction
would be lucid if taking all the actions of the government as a
whole. However, there were only 5 sources that truly supported
all posts relating to both of these topics. Thus, these sources

may have seen the efforts of the government in a positive light
while also having a mindset of stopping any situations that
were counterproductive to the actions taken thus far to curb
the virus. However, the remaining sources may have posted
content related to such topics while being under some political
influence.
Looking at the opposite end of the spectrum, the most
criticised topic out of the sources considered was Irresponsible
behaviour. Such a negative response was likely due to certain
actions by certain subsets of the population that completely
undid all efforts of the country such as evading quarantine
as well as crowding. Following this topic was Deficient /
Overpriced products, which sparked such a negative response
due to the apparent unethical behaviour of certain companies
utilising this crisis to rake in a large profit. The remaining
topics either had a mixture of reactions or the content posted
were primarily informative rather than showing any support
or criticism.
VI. D ISCUSSION
Although the manual data collection process severely limited the number of sources that were considered for the
research, a notable advantage was that image posts as well
as posts that indirectly related to the COVID-19 outbreak
could also be identified. Assuming the standard automated data
collection process is by a search via a query, such posts would

be missed, especially when there are no clearly discernible
keywords to identify them. The importance of this point is
clearly observable when considering the results of the analysis
regarding topic significance. To elaborate, the topic Humour /
Entertainment / Online activities / Boredom relief possessed
the greatest significance out of all the topics. However, a
considerable number of posts related to this topic such as
memes or those having no specific keywords to identify them
would have otherwise been missed if not for the manual
collection process. Thus, the value of the methodology that
was used to collect data is clear, as if such posts were missed,
the actual topic with the greatest significance would not have
earned its true rank.
From the derived results, it was possible to observe a variety
of behaviours in the sources considered. These behaviours
were not only positive but also negative. Examples for negative
behaviours were political polarisation, as well as unnecessary outrage and overreactions to certain incidents. However,
curtailing such detrimental behaviours as well as imposing
proper regulations should be the task of the government and
other relevant authorities. It would also be possible to utilise
the general public opinions regarding government policies
and preparations to overcome the COVID-19 threat that were
observed in this analysis to support such regulatory measures
as well. To a certain extent, numerous issues and difficulties
that people faced during the disaster situation were also
identified during the analysis. This also gives some opinions on
general circumstances that could occur in an any given disaster
situation in a developing country. In addition, observations
have shown that Facebook has also been used as a method of
sharing valuable information as well as advice to raise public
awareness and mitigate the pandemic.
A notable limitation of this research would be its limited
amount of sources. Although it could be called sufficient
for an exploratory study, the fact that it would not truly
capture the actual behaviour of the total user-base in Facebook
cannot be denied. As this method was employed due to the
limitations of extracting data from Facebook, other social
media platforms where it would possible to extract data by
queries may offer means to perform a more rigorous study.
In addition, it should also be possible to combine multiple of
such sources to create a composite data-set which could be
used to properly represent the Sri Lankan populace. Although
granted that utilising such methods would lead to ignoring
image-based social media messages, which is an advantage
of the current study. However, a sufficiently large data-set
possessing text-based content would also allow the usage of
Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques to perform a
much more informative analysis. In addition, another major
limitation of this research would be the constant fluctuation of
Facebook content as the number of reactions, comments and
shares could change by the second. Although to mitigate such
issues the data extraction process was initiated approximately a
week after the latter-most date considered for creating content,
it does not grantee that the data sources would not change at
a later date. Furthermore, it is also possible to delete or hide

posts. This could potentially lead to considerably more severe
conflicts between what was recorded and what is currently
observable.
VII. C ONCLUSION
This article discusses the reaction of the Sri Lankan Facebook user-base to the COVID 19 outbreak. Sri Lanka, which
is a developing country in South-Asia, has approximately
70% Facebook users out of its social media users. Thus, it
can be claimed that this study could represent the majority
of the general populace on the island. The study was conducted using over 2300 posts from 50 sources on Facebook,
to observe the behaviours that were highlighted during the
disaster situation. The data collected was then categorised and
subsequently normalised to be subjected to analysis. Areas
such as behavioural patterns, significant topics, as well as
the co-occurrence of topics were such analysis performed to
generate notable insights. Ultimately the insights presented
by this study could be utilised for reinforcing effective and
pragmatic decision making by governments and other relevant
authorities. Furthermore, it can also be used to foster regulations and recommendations in information sharing in the
context of social media.
R EFERENCES
[1] L. Kim, S. M. Fast, and N. Markuzon, “Incorporating media
data into a model of infectious disease transmission,” PLOS ONE,
vol. 14, no. 2, p. e0197646, Feb. 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0197646
[2] (2020) Sri Lanka Population (2020) - Worldmeter. [Online]. Available:
https://www.worldometers.info/world-population/sri-lanka-population/
[3] M. Cinelli, W. Quattrociocchi, A. Galeazzi, C. M. Valensise, E. Brugnoli,
A. L. Schmidt, P. Zola, F. Zollo, and A. Scala, “The covid-19 social
media infodemic,” 2020.
[4] K. K. Kapoor, K. Tamilmani, N. P. Rana, P. Patil, Y. K. Dwivedi, and
S. Nerur, “Advances in social media research: Past, present and future,”
Information Systems Frontiers, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 531–558, Jun 2018.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10796-017-9810-y
[5] M. Moody-Ramirez and A. B. Church, “Analysis of facebook meme
groups used during the 2016 US presidential election,” Social Media
+ Society, vol. 5, no. 1, p. 205630511880879, Jan. 2019. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1177/2056305118808799
[6] R. Sandoval-Almazan and D. Valle-Cruz, “Facebook impact and
sentiment analysis on political campaigns,” in Proceedings of the
19th Annual International Conference on Digital Government Research
Governance in the Data Age - dgo '18. ACM Press, 2018. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3209281.3209328
[7] N. ztrk and S. Ayvaz, “Sentiment analysis on twitter: A text
mining approach to the syrian refugee crisis,” Telematics and
Informatics, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 136 – 147, 2018. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0736585317304999
[8] T. Spielhofer, R. Greenlaw, D. Markham, and A. Hahne, “Data mining
twitter during the uk floods: Investigating the potential use of social media in emergency management,” in 2016 3rd International Conference on
Information and Communication Technologies for Disaster Management
(ICT-DM), 2016, pp. 1–6.
[9] H. Li, N. Guevara, N. Herndon, D. Caragea, K. Neppalli, C. Caragea,
A. C. Squicciarini, and A. H. Tapia, “Twitter mining for disaster
response: A domain adaptation approach,” in ISCRAM, 2015.
[10] H. Purohit, A. Hampton, V. L. Shalin, A. P. Sheth, J. Flach, and S. Bhatt,
“What kind of #conversation is twitter? mining #psycholinguistic
cues for emergency coordination,” Computers in Human Behavior,
vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 2438 – 2447, 2013. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0747563213001581

[11] K. M. Carley, M. Malik, P. M. Landwehr, J. Pfeffer, and
M. Kowalchuck, “Crowd sourcing disaster management: The complex
nature of twitter usage in padang indonesia,” Safety Science,
vol. 90, pp. 48 – 61, 2016, building Community Resilience to
Global Hazards: A Sociotechnical Approach. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0925753516300431
[12] A. Omrani and S. Shalhoub, “Middle east respiratory syndrome
coronavirus (mers-cov): what lessons can we learn?” Journal of Hospital
Infection, vol. 91, no. 3, pp. 188 – 196, 2015. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0195670115003060
[13] I.-H. Kim, C.-C. Feng, Y.-C. Wang, B. H. Spitzberg, and M.-H. Tsou,
“Exploratory spatiotemporal analysis in risk communication during
the mers outbreak in south korea,” The Professional Geographer,
vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 629–643, 2017. [Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1080/00330124.2017.1288577
[14] D.-H. Choi, W. Yoo, G.-Y. Noh, and K. Park, “The impact of social
media on risk perceptions during the mers outbreak in south korea,”
Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 72, 03 2017.
[15] K. Jang and Y. Baek, “When information from public health officials
is untrustworthy: The use of online news, interpersonal networks,
and social media during the mers outbreak in south korea,” Health
Communication, vol. 34, pp. 1–8, 03 2018.
[16] I. C. Fung, K. W. Fu, Y. Ying, B. Schaible, Y. Hao, C. H. Chan, and
Z. T. Tse, “Chinese social media reaction to the MERS-CoV and avian
influenza A(H7N9) outbreaks,” Infect Dis Poverty, vol. 2, no. 1, p. 31,
Dec 2013.
[17] Y. Zhu, K.-W. Fu, K. A. Grpin, H. Liang, and I. C.-H. Fung, “Limited
early warnings and public attention to coronavirus disease 2019 in china,
januaryfebruary, 2020: A longitudinal cohort of randomly sampled
weibo users,” Disaster Medicine and Public Health Preparedness, p.
14, 2020.
[18] J. Gao, P. Zheng, Y. Jia, H. Chen, Y. Mao, S. Chen, Y. Wang, H. Fu,
and J. Dai, “Mental health problems and social media exposure during

[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]

[23]
[24]
[25]

[26]

COVID-19 outbreak,” PLOS ONE, vol. 15, no. 4, p. e0231924, Apr.
2020. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0231924
N. Karisani and P. Karisani, “Mining coronavirus (covid-19) posts in
social media,” 2020.
S. Boberg, T. Quandt, T. Schatto-Eckrodt, and L. Frischlich, “Pandemic
populism: Facebook pages of alternative news media and the corona
crisis – a computational content analysis,” 2020.
C. Murray, L. Mitchell, J. Tuke, and M. Mackay, “Symptom extraction
from the narratives of personal experiences with covid-19 on reddit,”
2020.
A. B. Kadam and S. R. Atre, “Negative impact of social
media panic during the COVID-19 outbreak in india,” Journal of
Travel Medicine, vol. 27, no. 3, Apr. 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1093/jtm/taaa057
A. Depoux, S. Martin, E. Karafillakis, R. Preet, A. Wilder-Smith, and
H. Larson, “The pandemic of social media panic travels faster than the
covid-19 outbreak,” Journal of Travel Medicine, 03 2020.
C. Ziems, B. He, S. Soni, and S. Kumar, “Racism is a virus: Anti-asian
hate and counterhate in social media during the covid-19 crisis,” 2020.
J. J. V. Bavel, K. Baicker, P. S. Boggio, V. Capraro, A. Cichocka,
M. Cikara, M. J. Crockett, A. J. Crum, K. M. Douglas, J. N. Druckman,
J. Drury, O. Dube, N. Ellemers, E. J. Finkel, J. H. Fowler, M. Gelfand,
S. Han, S. A. Haslam, J. Jetten, S. Kitayama, D. Mobbs, L. E. Napper,
D. J. Packer, G. Pennycook, E. Peters, R. E. Petty, D. G. Rand,
S. D. Reicher, S. Schnall, A. Shariff, L. J. Skitka, S. S. Smith, C. R.
Sunstein, N. Tabri, J. A. Tucker, S. van der Linden, P. van Lange,
K. A. Weeden, M. J. A. Wohl, J. Zaki, S. R. Zion, and R. Willer,
“Using social and behavioural science to support COVID-19 pandemic
response,” Nature Human Behaviour, vol. 4, no. 5, pp. 460–471, Apr.
2020. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-0884-z
(2020) Social Media Stats Sri Lanka. [Online]. Available: https:
//gs.statcounter.com/social-media-stats/all/sri-lanka

