Modeling and Simulation of COVID-19 Pandemic for
Cincinnati Tri-State Area
Michael Rechtin1, Vince Feldman 2, Sam Klare3, Nathan Riddle4, Rajnikant Sharma5
University of Cincinnati

Abstract—In this paper, we use SIR model to simulate the COVID-19 pandemic for Cincinnati Tri-State Area. We have built a
representative population of Cincinnati that includes movements for traveling to stores, schools, workplaces, and traveling to friends
houses. Using this model, we simulate the effect of quarantine, return to work, and panic buying. We show that that there will be a
second wave of infections when people return to work and significant increase in number of infections when there is panic buying at
stores with the announcement of the quarantine measures.
Keywords—COVID-19, modeling and simulation, Cincinnati, SIR, pandemic.

I. INTRODUCTION
As the novel coronavirus, COVID-19, continues to sweep the world, countless models on a multitude of scales have been
generated[1-6]. These models have played a crucial role in developing a response to the virus on a national scale (US [7], China[8],
and Australia[9]). However, much less modeling and simulation has been
explored at the community level. Motivated by a paper describing a small
community model and simulation for an influenza pandemic[10], we have
created an individual-based model that takes advantage of easily accessible
publicly available data for the Cincinnati Tri-State region.
By utilizing county specific data for households, stores, workplaces, and
schools, we have been able to generate an accurate representation of the
Cincinnati Tri-State Region. For our model we considered the 19 counties
seen in figure 1 which constitutes a population of about 2.3 million[11].
Once these initial conditions were set, a single individual infected with
COVID-19 was introduced to the population. Multiple simulations were run
to assess the effectiveness of differing countermeasures. We explored
implementing and releasing quarantine when varying percentages of the
population were infected, as well as with varying amounts of workers being
classified as essential. Besides being a community level individual-based Figure 1: Map of Counties in Cincinnati Tri-State Area
model, our model is unique in its attention to the immediate spike in
shopping when quarantine is first implemented. Since our model has been deployed relatively late, it also has more emphasis on the
second wave when compared to earlier models.
This paper is an extension of a final project for our undergraduate 2020 Modeling and Simulation[12] class taught in Aerospace
Engineering at the University of Cincinnati which is a part of ONR sponsored Naval workforce development program. Since our
project group consists of four native Cincinnatians, we set our objective as testing the individual based modeling approach on the tristate area. This paper describes the methodology used to create the model and the trends identified in the model’s results
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II presents proposed methodology for creating the population model, modeling
movement, and simulation architecture. We present various simulation results in Section III and our conclusions and discussions are
presented in Section IV.

Michael Rechtin is an undergraduate student in Aerospace Engineering. Email: rechtima@mail.uc.edu
Vince Feldman is an undergraduate student in Aerospace Engineering, Email: feldmavp@mail.uc.edu
3 Sam Klare is an undergraduate student in Aerospace Engineering, Email: klaresh@mail.uc.edu
4 Nathan Riddle is an undergraduate student in Aerospace Engineering, Email: riddlend@mail.uc.edu
5 Rajnikant Sharma is an assistant professor in Aerospace Engineering, Email rajnikant.sharma@uc.edu
1
2

XXX-X-XXXX-XXXX-X/XX/$XX.00 ©20XX IEEE

II. METHODOLOGY
A. Modeling Architecture
The model described in the paper was built using Python because to its robust support for tabular data. This capability
was paramount when it came to tracking and recording the details and movements of the 23,000 individuals within the model.
Using the “pandas” package, data frames were constructed to contain different layers of information about individuals and
counties. The final model contained the following separate data frames: School Data, Store Data, Workplace Data, Household
Data, Friends Data, and People Data. The Python script, as well as the data used in this model, can be found in our GitHub
repository (https://github.com/rajnikant1010/covid19-cincinnati.git ). This model focuses on the fact that people within a
community do not move randomly. People move with a purpose in the real world and in our model. Our population travels to
the store, work, school, and other people’s houses. We tried to capture these patterns in regards to people within the
Cincinnati Tri-state area as best as we could. However, we acknowledge that there is inevitably some randomness in people’s
day-to-day lives. To compensate for this, some randomness was incorporated into the model through people’s choices.
Randomness was introduced into in our model by varying the time and day that people visit stores, work, or friends’ houses.
B. Creating Population
To build a representative population of the Cincinnati Tri-State area, relevant data must be found. The relevance of this data is
completely defined by the scope of the model, so it is critical to start with this definition. Specifically, the individual movements
contained within the simulation must be defined. In the simulation described in this paper, the movements include traveling to stores,
schools, workplaces, and friends’ houses. This scope was defined based on the timeframe we had to create and run the model as well
as available data. To begin the model, data that contained the number of schools and stores in each county was used to generate
locations for schools and stores throughout each county[13-15]. The stores were split into categories of “grocery”, “supercenter”, and
“convenience.” The locations were generated using Pythons pseudorandom number generating function with a random seed. The
result was a uniform spread of stores and schools throughout each county as seen in Figure 2 and Figure 3.

Figure 2: Locations and types of stores in each
county

Figure 3: Locations of simulated schools in each
county

The shape of each county was not considered for this model and they were all modeled as 1x1 squares on a plot. Rather than
trying to collect, scale, and model real county specific data for workplaces, we generated an estimation based off the average commute
time and size of each county. The number of workplaces in a county was meant to correctly model how quickly the virus would
spread across the county due to workplace infections rather than exactly modeling the number and size of the businesses. The resulting
workplaces and locations can be visualized in Figure 4. Data derived from the US Census that contains the number and average size
of households in each county was used to produce a new scaled value of households in each of our simulated counties [10]. Given
our simulation has a “Big O Notation” of O(n), scaling the number of households by 0.01 resulted in a good balance of definition
and run time. Determining the home location of each of the 9200 households was done by using the pseudorandom number generator
in python to create a uniform distribution across the county. (Figure 5a) Once the households had been created and positioned, a
workplace, grocery store, supercenter, and convenience store were assigned to each household based on their proximity. To account

2

for the fact that not everyone goes to the closest store, school, or workplace to their home, some randomness was introduced into the
final assignments. This introduction of randomness can be seen in the function that selects stores for each household (Figure 5b)

Figure 4: Locations of simulated workplaces in each
county

Figure 5a: Locations of simulated households in
each county

Figure 5b: Store selecting function chooses the closest store of a type to each household 90% of the time but a random store the
remaining 10% of the time.

An important aspect of daily life that we deemed necessary to include in our model is interactions with friends. Since the location
of each household is known, a list of “friends” is built for each individual. The list includes five other households that are within a
defined proximity to the original household. Throughout the simulation people of different age ranges visit their friends’ houses at
different times of the day. The frequency and timing these visits depend on the person age. As with the functions previously described
in this paper, randomness is introduced to account for the fact that a given person’s friends are not always strictly determined by
proximity. Using data for the average household size in each county, the number of residents in each household was assigned
accordingly [10]. Knowing the number of residents in each household allowed us to build a dataframe that contained every person
from every household [10]. The resulting table is referred to as “people.” The people table contains all the necessary data from the
household table along with other personal information such as age and sex. Age was a key attribute of our population since it dictates
daily behaviors. Eight age ranges are defined in the model, and the number of people in each age range was dictated by data collected
by the US census[11]. Sex was a field within the “people” table but was ultimately not used during the simulation. The approach to
building our population through a series of dataframes can be seen in Figure 6 below.

3

Figure 6: Modeling approach to building a
population

C. Modeling Movements
In the model described in this paper, a given day was divided into four even steps of time. Each person in the population then
moves location at each of these time steps. Determining the location of each person at a given timestep was done based on age. For
example, in the simulation a person below the age of 20 is located at their designated school location for the first two timesteps of
the day during weekdays. In contrast, many people between 20 and 50 visit their workplace for the first two timesteps of weekdays.
The full extent of the population’s movements can be seen in the code posted to the GitHub repository
(https://github.com/rajnikant1010/covid19-cincinnati.git ). In our model, it is assumed that everyone is home for the last timestep of
each day. This simulates typical interaction with family members that can result in the transmission of the virus. People’s trips to
stores are random throughout the week while the frequency between their store visits is based off age. Much of the decisions for how
people move throughout the duration of the simulation is based off the modelers’ intuition and experience. Although a data-based
approach would be preferred for obtaining the most accurate results, the approach taken was the practical choice for our particular
scope. Since COVID-19 is not known to be airborne, and since travel by car is the most prevalent mode of transportation in the
Cincinnati tri-state area, our model does not consider virus transmission during travel between locations.
When quarantine is instituted in our model it is assumed that school’s transition to online classes and a large percentage of people
are working from home or have been temporarily laid off. The percentage of people working is varied throughout our test to show
the effects of quarantine.

D. Running Simulation
The starting point of the virus was a randomly selected person in the population. For all the runs displayed in this paper, the
same population and initial infection point was used. The spread of the disease in our model is based off proximity. If a given person
is at the same location as an infected person then their probability of contracting the virus is a function of the total number of people
at their location. This equation is shown below.
𝜆
Equation 1
𝐼𝑛𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 =
𝑛
In this equation “n” is defined as the number of people at a given location, and “λ” is defined as factor that determines the virus’s
contagiousness. Analyzing our results showed that a λ of 0.25 resulted in a Ro value of 1.75. Four stages of illness were defined:
“Healthy”, “No Symptoms”, “Showing Symptoms”, and “Recovered.” The duration of each of these stages was based off
preliminary CDC reports about the COVID-19 virus[6]. It is important to note that once a person is considered “Recovered” there
is no probability of them contracting the disease again. A person’s infection status influences their daily behavior. Persons showing
symptoms in our model are 90% likely to stay home throughout the day.

III. RESULTS

4

The following results are divided into four different sets of simulations. The first simulation was run to obtain a baseline for
how the virus spreads with no countermeasures. The second set of simulations measures the effectiveness of traditional
countermeasure techniques such as online schooling and working from home. The third set of simulations compares a sudden
return to work with a gradual return to work. The fourth and final set of simulations measures the effect of a panic buying period
when quarantine measures are first introduced to the community.
A. Covid-19 spread with no countermeasures

For all simulations, a scaled population of 23,000 people was used. An initial simulation was conducted with no
countermeasures to obtain baseline results for how the virus spread. This run, seen in Figure 7 below, resulted in a
peak number of infected of approximately 14,000, or 60% of the population. Over the duration of the virus, nearly
90% of the population was infected and then “Recovered”. The “Recovered” condition in our model replaces the
traditional state of “Removed” used in most SIR models. This state accounts for both people who contracted the virus
and have healthy recoveries as well as people who contract the virus and die. Once an individual is “Recovered,”
they are no longer able to transmit the virus or become infected again. This simulation gave us a valuable dataset to
compare how effective quarantine measures are against limiting the spread of the virus.
Figure 7: SIR plot of generated
by the model when no
countermeasures are taken to
prevent the spread of the virus.

B. Modeling quarantine measures and return to work

After obtaining the baseline results, two sets of simulations were completed to measure the effectiveness of
quarantining and returning to work at different levels of infection. In each case, when quarantine was initiated, all
schools immediately transition to online classes. To simulate different levels of quarantine, one simulation for each
set was run with 50% of the population working during quarantine and one simulation for each set has 10% of the
population working during quarantine.
a.

Quarantine at 5% infected, return to work at 1% infected

The first set of quarantine simulations initiated a quarantine when 5% of the population became infected and
had people return to their jobs when 1% of the population was infected. The black lines in the below Figures 8a and
8b illustrate the beginning and end of the quarantine.

5

Figure 8a: SIR plot generated by model when a
quarantine is instituted when 5% of the population is
infected. During quarantine 50% of the workforce still
visits work in person each weekday. Quarantine is ended
when the number of infected persons drops below 1% of
the population.

Figure 8b: SIR plot generated by model when a
quarantine is instituted when 5% of the population is
infected. During quarantine 10% of the workforce still
visits work in person each weekday. Quarantine is ended
when the number of infected persons drops below 1% of
the population.

Figure 8a shows the results of the simulation when 50% of the population continues working during
quarantine. At the peak of the wave 6700 people are infected. The next simulation, seen in Figure 8b, shows 10% of
people still going to work during quarantine. The peak of the 1st wave occurs when 3600 people are infected.
Approximately 1500 are infected at the peak of the 2nd wave. As seen in Figure 2a, the peak number of infected is
higher when 50% of people are working throughout quarantine. When only 10% of people are working, the peak
number of infected is lower; however, there is a second wave of increased infections after quarantine countermeasures
are lifted. Both methods ultimately result in nearly the same number of recovered/dead.
b.

Quarantine at 1% infected, return to work at 0.5% infected

The following two simulations institute a quarantine when 1% of the population becomes infected and lifts the
quarantine when 0.5% of the population is still infected. However, two different levels of “essential workers” are
used for these simulations to identify the effect limiting essential businesses has on the virus spread. The first
simulation was conducted with 50% of the population working during quarantine and the second simulation was
conducted with 10% of the population working during quarantine.

6

Figure 9a: SIR plot generated by model when a
quarantine is instituted when 1% of the population is
infected. During quarantine 50% of the workforce still
visits work in person each weekday. Quarantine is ended
when the number of infected persons drops below 0.5% of
the population.

Figure 9b: SIR plot generated by model when a
quarantine is instituted when 1% of the population is
infected. During quarantine 10% of the workforce still
visits work in person each weekday. Quarantine is ended
when the number of infected persons drops below 0.5% of
the population.

Figure 9a shows the simulation when 50% of the population continues to work. Approximately 6600 people
become infected at the peak. Figure 9b shows that around 2000 people are infected at the peak of the first and second
wave as 10% of people continue to work during quarantine. These peaks are both lower than the peak of the
simulation where 50% of the population continues to work. The simulation with 10% people working has slightly
more people within the “recovered” category.
C. Modeling gradual and immediate return to work

To measure the effectiveness of a gradual return to work over a sudden return to work, two simulations were
conducted. In both simulations, quarantine was initiated at 5% infected and a work return was initiated at 1%
infected. Additionally, 10% of the population worked during quarantine for both simulations. In the case of the
immediate return to work, the population is sent back to work all at once. With a gradual return to work, workers
resume in-person work gradually throughout a two-week period. The gradual return to work is designed to simulate
different fields of work returning to work at different times.

7

Figure 10a: SIR plot generated by model when a
quarantine is instituted when 5% of the population is
infected. During quarantine 10% of the workforce still
visits work in person each weekday. Quarantine is ended
when the number of infected persons drops below 1% of the
population. At the end quarantine the remainder of the
workforce returns to in-person work in an immediate
fashion

Figure 10b: SIR plot generated by model when a
quarantine is instituted when 5% of the population is
infected. During quarantine 10% of the workforce still
visits work in person each weekday. Quarantine is ended
when the number of infected persons drops below 1% of the
population. At the end quarantine the remainder of the
workforce returns to in-person work in a gradual manner
over two weeks.

Figure 10a shows the immediate return to work. The image on the right, Figure 10b, is for the gradual return to work.
The initial peaks match each other in both cases, as is expected. In contrary, the second wave of infections differ due
to the return to work process differences. The results of the model show that an immediate return to work resulted in
less infections than a gradual return. This result initially surprised the modelers since it seems counter-intuitive. Our
model calculates the probability of transmission as a function of the number of people at a given location. If there are
fewer people at a location, they have a higher chance of interacting with each other and thus being in the same
location as an infected person with a low number of total people results in a higher infection probability. More
simulations still need to be run to fully explore this trend and determine its accuracy.
D. Modeling the effect of panic buying due to quarantine announcement

As can be readily seen at the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic in the United States, initial announcements of
quarantines and restrictions often result in “panic” for a short period of time. During these panic periods, the
population swarms grocery stores and supercenters to buy essential items for an extended stay in their home. A result
of this panic is higher density and traffic in these supermarket stores. To determine the effects of these panic buying
periods, two simulations were run. In both simulations, quarantine was initiated at 1% infected and a work return was
initiated at 0.5% infected. One simulation implemented a three-day panic in which the odds an individual goes to a
grocery store are increased drastically. The results of these simulations can be seen in Figure 11. While difficult to see
in Figure 11, the panic buying results in almost 350 more cases of Covid-19 at the peak of infection. While 350 cases
do not seem like many, this increase is for a scaled population of 23,000 people. For the entire Greater Cincinnati
population of around 2 million people, this panic buying period could result in upwards of 30,000 additional Covid-19
positive cases.

8

Figure 11a: SIR plot generated by model when a
quarantine is declared when 1% of the population is
infected. Immediately after quarantine a 3 day “Panic”
period is simulated. This period consists of highly rates of
visiting grocery stores and supercenters. During
quarantine 10% of the population continues to work in
person. In this specific run quarantine is not ended
because the first wave of infections was the focus.

Figure Number
7
8a

8b

9a

9b

10a

10b

11a

11b

Description
No countermeasures (baseline)
Quarantine at 5%
Work return at 1%
50% Work
Quarantine at 5%
Work return at 1%
10% Work
Quarantine at 1%
Work return at 0.5%
50% Work
Quarantine at 1%
Work return at 0.5%
10% Work
Quarantine at 5%
Work return at 1%
10% Work
Immediate return to work
Quarantine at 5%
Work return at 1%
10% Work
Gradual return to work
Quarantine at 1%
Work return at 0.5%
3 day panic
Quarantine at 1%
Work return at 0.5%
No panic

Figure 11b: SIR plot generated by model when a
quarantine is declared when 1% of the population is
infected. In this run there is NO “Panic” period. During
quarantine 10% of the population continues to work in
person. In this specific run quarantine is not ended
because the first wave of infections was the focus.

Max Infected
14200
6766

Not Infected
1100
7315

Recovered/Removed
21848
15633

3611

6983

15955

6621

7547

15401

2027

6081

16867

6766

7315

15633

2872

6542

16406

1925

13571

9377

1961

13914

9034

Table 1. Simulated final data for epidemic

9

IV. DISCUSSION

The simulations conducted were aimed to measure three items:
• The effectiveness of quarantine
• The effect of a gradual return to work over an immediate return to work
• The effect of a sudden panic buying period when quarantine announcements are made
The model helped reinforce some of our predictions of the effectiveness of quarantine in the Tri-state area.
First, instituting a quarantine lowered the total number of cases within the population. This is apparent by comparing
the number of “Recovered” people in Figures 8 and 9 (with quarantine) with Figure 7 (no quarantine). Furthermore,
our models show the amount of people working during quarantine plays a large role in the spread of the virus and the
effects of a second wave. Comparing Figure 8a with 8b or Figure 9a with 9b, illustrates these trends. The runs where
50% of the population working during quarantine (Figure 8a and 9a), have a much higher number of people infected
at the peak when compared to the runs when only 10% of the population worked (Figure 8b and 9b). It can be seen
from the plots that when a large percentage of the population gets the virus during the first wave, there is little or no
second wave. On the other hand, when quarantine is taken more seriously, with only 10% of the population
continuing to work, the wave lasts much longer, and the population is more susceptible to a second wave. It is
important to realize that the runs with 10% and 50% of the population had similar numbers of “removed” people at
the end of the run. This shows the effectiveness of a quarantine at reducing the strain on the health system by
lowering the maximum number of infections at the peak of the wave. Additionally, it shows that to lower the overall
number of people infected, a strict quarantine would need to be instituted and held until there were no infectious cases
remaining in the population. However, it can also be clearly seen by comparing our quarantine runs to our run without
quarantine (Figure 7) that any amount of quarantine or social distancing reduces the number of infections.
Studying the gradual versus immediate return to work, turned out to be the most challenging aspect of our
project. Due to the methodology used to calculate a person’s individual likelihood of becoming infected (Equation 1),
a given person has a higher probability of becoming infected when they are at the same location as an infected person
and there are only a few people there vs when it is a crowded. As a result, when our model slowly starts reintroducing people to the workplace the number of employees at each location is rather small. This meant that our
model predicted that a gradual return to work would yield a slightly higher second wave then an immediate return to
work. This can be seen when comparing Figure 10a with Figure 10b. Furthermore, a gradual return to work resulted
in more people having contracted the virus overall. This result seemed counter-intuitive so making changes to the
model to account for workplaces implementing PPE and social distancing may be needed.
The model’s analysis of a “panic” induced by the announcement of quarantine ended up being quite
interesting. Figure 11 measures the effect of a sudden panic buying period compared with no panic. The three-day
panic period results in more overall Covid-19 cases, due to the increased number of people being exposed to
potentially infectious people while at grocery stores and supermarkets. When this increased number of infected was
scaled to the full size of the Cincinnati Tri-State area, the model predicted approximately 30,000 extra cases due to
the panic of the quarantine announcement.
V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work is supported by ONR STEM Grant # N000141912486. We thank the experts from Naval Surface Warfare Centers at
Crane and Dahlgren for their feedback.

10

REFERENCES

[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]

[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]

C. Anastassopoulou, L. Russo, A. Tsakris, and C. Siettos, "Data-based analysis, modelling and forecasting of the
COVID-19 outbreak," PloS one, vol. 15, no. 3, p. e0230405, 2020.
M. Gilbert et al., "Preparedness and vulnerability of African countries against importations of COVID-19: a modelling
study," The Lancet, vol. 395, no. 10227, pp. 871-877, 2020.
J. Hellewell et al., "Feasibility of controlling COVID-19 outbreaks by isolation of cases and contacts," The Lancet
Global Health, 2020.
A. J. Kucharski et al., "Early dynamics of transmission and control of COVID-19: a mathematical modelling study," The
lancet infectious diseases, 2020.
K. Prem et al., "The effect of control strategies to reduce social mixing on outcomes of the COVID-19 epidemic in
Wuhan, China: a modelling study," The Lancet Public Health, 2020.
S. A. Lauer et al., "The incubation period of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) from publicly reported confirmed
cases: estimation and application," Annals of internal medicine, vol. 172, no. 9, pp. 577-582, 2020.
S. M. Moghadas et al., "Projecting hospital utilization during the COVID-19 outbreaks in the United States,"
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 117, no. 16, pp. 9122-9126, 2020.
L. Peng, W. Yang, D. Zhang, C. Zhuge, and L. Hong, "Epidemic analysis of COVID-19 in China by dynamical
modeling," arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.06563, 2020.
S. L. Chang, N. Harding, C. Zachreson, O. M. Cliff, and M. Prokopenko, "Modelling transmission and control of the
COVID-19 pandemic in Australia," arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.10218, 2020.
G. J. Milne, J. K. Kelso, H. A. Kelly, S. T. Huband, and J. McVernon, "A small community model for the transmission
of infectious diseases: comparison of school closure as an intervention in individual-based models of an influenza
pandemic," PloS one, vol. 3, no. 12, 2008.
"Census Reporter." www.censusreporter.org (accessed 2020).
P. Khare. "Modeling and Simulation." http://khare.uc.edu/mod_sim.html (accessed 2020).
"Universities and trade schools data." https://datausa.io/ (accessed 2020).
"Private school data." https://www.privateschoolreview.com/ (accessed 2020).
"Public School K-12 data." https://www.publicschoolreview.com/ (accessed 2020).

11

