arXiv:2006.06674v4 [econ.TH] 20 Oct 2020

Corona Games: Masks, Social Distancing and Mechanism Design
Balázs Pejó, Gergely Biczok
Laboratory of Cryptography and System Security
Deptartment of Networked Systems and Services
Budapest University of Technology and Economics
email: {familyname}@crysys.hu

Abstract

different levels of success employing these measures
as evidenced by the varying normalized death tolls
and confirmed cases1 .
We believe that apart from the intuitive (e.g.,
genetic differences, medical infrastructure availability, hesitancy, etc.), there are two significant factors
that have not received enough attention. First, the
individual incentives of citizens, e.g., “is it worth
more for me to stay home than to meet my friend?”,
have a significant say in every decision situation.
While some of those incentives can be inherent to
personality type, clearly, there is a non-negligible rational aspect to it, where individuals are looking to
maximize their own utility. Second, countries have
differed in their specific implementation of response
measures, e.g., whether they have been distributing free masks (affecting the efficacy of mask wearing in case of equipment shortage) or providing extra unemployment benefits (affecting the likelihood
of proper self-imposed social distancing). Framing
pandemic response as a mechanism design problem, i.e., architecting a complex response mechanism with a preferred outcome in mind, can shed
light on these factors; what’s more, it has the potential to help authorities (mechanism designers) fight
the pandemic efficiently. The objective of this paper is to show that both individual incentives and
the actual design and implementation of the holistic pandemic response mechanism can have a major
effect on how this pandemic plays out.

Pandemic response is a complex affair. Most governments employ a set of quasi-standard measures
to fight COVID-19 including wearing masks, social
distancing, virus testing and contact tracing. We argue that some non-trivial factors behind the varying
effectiveness of these measures are selfish decisionmaking and the differing national implementations
of the response mechanism.
In this paper, through simple games, we show the
effect of individual incentives on the decisions made
with respect to wearing masks and social distancing, and how these may result in a sub-optimal outcome. We also demonstrate the responsibility of national authorities in designing these games properly
regarding the chosen policies and their influence on
the preferred outcome. We promote a mechanism
design approach: it is in the best interest of every government to carefully balance social good and
response costs when implementing their respective
pandemic response mechanism.

1

Introduction

The current coronavirus pandemic is pushing individuals, businesses and governments to the limit.
People suffer owing to restricted mobility, social life
and income, complete business sectors face an almost 100% drop in revenue, and governments are
scrambling to find out when and how to impose
and remove restrictions. In fact, COVID-19 has
turned the whole planet into a “living lab” for human and social behavior where feedback on response
measures employed is only delayed by around two
weeks (the incubation period). From the 24/7 media coverage, all of us have been introduced to a set
of quasi-standard measures introduced by national
and local authorities, including wearing masks, social distancing, virus testing, contact tracing and so
on. It is also clear that different countries have had

Contribution.
In this paper we model decision situations during a
pandemic with game theory where participants are
rational, and the proper design of the games could
be the difference between life and death. Our main
contribution is two-fold. First, regarding decisions
on wearing a mask, we show that i) the equilibrium
1 Johns Hopkins Coronavirus Resource Center. https://
coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html

1

outcome is not socially optimal under full information, ii) when the status of the players are unknown
the equilibrium is not to wear a mask for a wide
range of parameters, and iii) when facing an infectious player it is almost always optimal to wear a
mask even with low protection efficiency. Furthermore, for social distancing, using current COVID-19
statistics we showed that i) going out is only rational when it corresponds to either a huge benefit or
staying home results in a significant loss, and ii) we
determined the optimal duration and meeting size
of such an out-of-home activity. Second, we take a
look at pandemic response from a mechanism design perspective, and demonstrate that i) different
government policies influence the outcome of these
games profoundly, and ii) individual response measures (sub-mechanisms) are interdependent. Specifically, we discuss how contact tracing enables targeted testing which in turn reduces the uncertainty
in individual decision making regarding both social
distancing and wearing masks. We recommend governments treat pandemic response as a mechanism
design problem when weighing response costs vs.
the social good.

these models is proposed in [Santosh, 2020], which
discusses how factors such as hospital capacity,
test capacity, demographics, population density,
vulnerable people and income could be integrated
into these models. In contrast with the previous
models, the one in [Lagos et al., 2020] takes into
consideration the networked structure of human
interconnections and the locality of interactions,
without attempting a mean-field approach. In the
following we briefly review some related research
efforts in the intersection of epidemics and game
theory. For a comprehensive survey we refer the
reader to [Chang et al., 2019].
Some researchers modeled the behavioral changes
of people to a pandemic:
for instance in
[Poletti et al., 2012] authors used evolutionary
game theory, and showed that slightly reducing the
number of people an individual was in contact with
could make a difference regarding the spread of disease. Another group showed that there was a critical level of concern, i.e., empathy, by the infected
individuals above which the disease is eradicated
rapidly [Eksin et al., 2017]. Others focused on the
mobility habits of people traveling between areas
affected unevenly by the disease, and found conflict
between the Nash Equilibrium (individually optimal
strategy) and the Social Optimum (optimal group
strategy) only under specific changes in economic
and epidemiological conditions [Zhao et al., 2018].
In [Bairagi et al., 2020] an optimization problem
was formalized by accommodating both isolation
(modeled by how far individuals are from home)
and social distancing (how far individuals are from
each other). Authors also provided incentives for
maintaining social distancing to prevent the spread
of COVID-19 (i.e., making “staying home” the Nash
Equilibrium). Moreover, social distancing was also
shown to be able to delay the epidemic until a vaccine becomes widely available [Reluga, 2010].
Several studies focused on how the availability
of vaccines affects human behaviour. A model
was introduced in [Bhattacharyya and Bauch, 2011]
where vaccine delayers relied on herd immunity and
vaccine safety information generated by early vaccinators. Consequently, the Nash Equilibrium was
“wait and see”. Another study concerning this
vaccination dilemma proposed a model with incentives for individuals to choose the prevention strategy according to risks and expenses in the epidemic campaign [Bauch and Earn, 2004]. Similarly,
researchers in [van Boven et al., 2008] showed the
optimal use of anti-viral treatment by individuals
when they took into account the direct and indi-

Organization.
The remaining of the paper is structured as follows.
Section 2 briefly describes related work while Section 3 recaps some basics of game theory. Section 4
develops and analyzes the Mask Game adding uncertainty, mask efficiency and multiple players to
the basic model. Section 5 develops and analyzes
the Distancing Game including the effects of meeting duration and size. Section 6 frames pandemic
response as a mechanism design problem using the
design of the two games previously introduced as
examples. Finally, Section 7 outlines future work
and concludes the paper.

2

Related Work

In this section we review some well-known epidemic
spreading models and game-theoretic works in relation to pandemics.
COVID-19
have
been
modelled
using
different models:
for instance using SIR
[Carletti et al., 2020], SEIQR [Zhang et al., 2020],
and SIDARTHE [Giordano et al., 2020]. Which
model suits the ongoing epidemic best is still
undetermined.
Besides the model, the input
data instantiating the model may be imperfect as
well, thus some efforts are also made to account
for potential inaccuracies in the reported data
[Hong and Li, 2020]. An orthogonal extension of
2

rect costs of treatment. The game-theoretic model
in [Sun et al., 2009] focused on the various level of
drug stockpiles in different countries, and found controversial results: sometimes there was an optimal
solution with a central planner (such as the WHO),
which improved on the decentralized equilibrium,
but other times the central planner’s solution (minimizing the number of infected persons globally) required some countries to sacrifice part of their population.
The exact dynamics of demand and supply for
medical resources at different phases of a pandemic
was also studied [Chen et al., 2020]. Predicting
such dynamics would provide a quantitative basis
for mechanism designers (e.g., decision makers of
healthcare systems) to understand the potential imbalance of supply and demand. The authors extended the concepts of reserving and capital management in the classical insurance literature and
aimed to provide a quantitative framework for quantifying and assessing pandemic risk, and developed
optimal strategies for stockpiling spatio-temporal
resources.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
created a policy review of social distancing measures for pandemic influenza in non-healthcare settings [Fong et al., 2020]. They identified measures
to reduce community influenza transmission such
as isolating the sick, tracing contacts, quarantining exposed people, closing down school, changing
workplace habits, avoiding crowds, and restricting
movement. The impact of several of these (and
wearing masks) was studied in [Silva et al., 2020]
in which the authors model the pandemic by emulating people, business and government. Other researchers demonstrated that early school and workplace closure, and restriction of international travel
are independently associated with reduced national
COVID-19 mortality [Papadopoulos et al., 2020].
On the other hand, lock-down procedures could
have devastating impact on the economy. This was
studied in [Chao, 2020] with a modified SIR model
and time-dependent infection rate. The authors
found that, surprisingly, in spite of the economic
cost of the loss of workforce and incurred medical
expenses, the optimum point for the entire course
of the pandemic is to keep the strict lock-down as
long as possible.
As detailed above, related work has mostly studied narrowly focused specifics of epidemic modelling
such as the intricate behaviour of individuals in relation with vaccines or the preferred actions of mechanism designers such as healthcare system opera-

tors. In contrast, our work takes a step back, and
focuses on the big picture: we model decision situations during a pandemic as games with rational
participants, and promote the proper design of these
games. We highlight the responsibility of mechanism designers such as national authorities in constructing these games properly with adequately chosen policies, taking into account their interdependent nature.

3

Preliminaries

In this section we shortly elaborate on the main
game theoretical notions used in this paper, to enable the conceptual understanding of the implications of our results.
Game theory [Harsanyi et al., 1988] is “the study
of mathematical models of conflict between intelligent, rational decision-makers”. Almost every
multi-party interaction can be modeled as a game.
In relation to COVID-19, decision makers could be
individuals (e.g., whether to wear a mask), cities
(e.g., whether to enforce wide-range testing within
the city), governments (e.g., whether to apply contact tracking within the country), or companies
(e.g., whether to apply social distancing within the
workplace). Potential decisions are referred to as
strategies; decision makers (players) choose their
strategies rationally so as to maximize their own
utility.
The Nash Equilibrium (NE) — arguably the
most famous solution concept — is a set of strategies where each player’s strategy is a best response strategy. This means every player makes
the best/optimal decision for itself as long as the
others’ choices remain unchanged. NE provides a
way of predicting what will happen if several entities are making decisions at the same time where
the outcome also depends on the decisions of the
others. The existence of a NE means that no player
will gain more by unilaterally changing its strategy
at this unique state. Another game-theoretic concept is the Social Optimum, which is a set of strategies that maximizes social welfare. Note, that despite the fact that no one can do better by changing
strategy, NEs are not necessarily Social Optima (we
refer the reader to the famous example of the Prisoner’s Dilemma [Harsanyi et al., 1988]). In fact, it
is a central problem in game theory how much a
distributed outcome (NE) is worse than a centrally
planed social optimum.
If one knows the NE they prefer as the outcome
of a game, e.g., everybody wearing a mask, and
they have the power to instantiate the game ac3

while valved masks are only recommended for
medical personnel in direct contact with infected individuals. The cost of this protection
type is Cin >> Cout .

cordingly, i.e., fixing the structure, game flow and
any free parameters, then we talk about mechanism
design [Mas-Colell et al., 1995]. In a way, mechanism design is the inverse of game theory; although a significant share of efforts within this field
deals with auctions, mechanism design is a much
broader term widely applicable to any mechanism,
e.g., optimal organ matching for transplantation
or school-student allocation, aimed at achieving a
given steady state result.

4

Besides which mask they use (i.e., the available
strategies), the players are either susceptible or infected3 . The latter has some undesired consequence;
hence, we model it by adding a cost Ci to these players’ utility (which is magnitudes higher than even
Cin , i.e., Ci >> Cin >> Cout ). We summarize
all the parameters and variables used for the Mask
game in Table 1.

The Mask Game

Probably the most visible consequence of COVID19 are masks: before their usage was mostly limited to some Asian countries, hospitals, constructions and banks (in case of a robbery). Due to the
coronavirus pandemic, an unprecedented spreading
of mask-wearing can be seen around the globe. Policies have been implemented to enforce their usage
in some places, but in general, it has been up to the
individuals to decide whether to wear a mask or not
based on their own risk assessment. In this section,
we model this decision situation via game theory.
We assume that there are several types of masks,
providing different level of protection.

Variable
Cout
Cin
Ci
Cuse
ρ
p
a
b

Meaning
Cost of playing out
Cost of playing in
Cost of being infected
Cost of playing use
Prob. of being infected
Prob. of using a mask
Protection Efficiency
Spreading Efficiency

Table 1: Parameters of the Mask Games

Using these states and masks, we can present the
• No Mask corresponds to the behavior of using
basic game’s payoffs where two players with known
no masks during the COVID-19 (or any) panhealth status meet and decide which mask to use.
demic. Its cost is consequently 0; however, it
The payoff matrix in Table 2 corresponds to the
does not offer any protection against the virus.
case when both players are susceptible. Note, that
• Out Mask is the most widely used mask (e.g., in case both players are infected, the payoff matrix
cloth mask or surgical mask). They are meant would be the same with an additional constant Ci .
to protect the environment of the individual us- Table 3 corresponds to the case when one player is
ing it. They work by filtering out droplets when infected while the other is susceptible.
coughing, sneezing or simply talking, therefore
no
out
in
they limit the spreading of the virus. They do
no
(0, 0)
(0, Cout )
(0, Cin )
not protect the wearer itself against an airborne
out (Cout , 0) (Cout , Cout ) (Cout , Cin )
virus. The cost of deciding for this protection
in
(Cin , 0)
(Cin , Cout )
(Cin , Cin )
type is noted as Cout > 0.
• In Mask is the most protective prevention gear
designed for medical professionals (e.g., FFP2
or FFP3 mask with valves). Valves make it
easier to wear the mask for a sustained period
of time, and prevent condensation inside the
mask. They filter out airborne viruses while
breathing in, however the valved design means
they do not filter the while air breathing out.
Note that CDC guidelines2 recommend using
a cloth/surgical mask for the general public,

Table 2: Payoff matrices when both players are susceptible
In Table 2 it is visible that both players’ cost is
minimal when they do not use any masks, i.e., the
Nash Equilibrium of the game when both players
are susceptible is (no, no). This is also the social
optimum, meaning that the players’ aggregated cost
is minimal. The same holds in case both players
3 We
simplify
the
well-known
SIR
model
[Diekmann and Heesterbeek, 2000] since in case of COVID19 it is currently unclear if and for how long an individual is
resistant after recovery.

2 Centers

for
Disease
Control
and
Prevention.
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/
prevent-getting-sick/prevention.html

4

multiplication with 1 − ρ at the beginning), while
the last line captures when she is infected. Either
way, she plays use with probability p2 , which incurs
a cost of Cuse . Otherwise she plays no, which has
no cost except when Player 1 is infected and she
plays no as well.

are infected, as this only adds a constant Ci to the
payoff matrix.
When only one of the players is susceptible as
represented in Table 3, using no mask is a dominant strategy for the infected player4 , since it is
a best response, independently of the susceptible
player’s action. Consequently, the best option for
the susceptible player is in, i.e., the NE is (in, no).
On the other hand, the social optimum is different:
(no,out) would incur the least burden on the society since Cout << Cin .
In social optimum, susceptible players would benefit, through a positive externality, from an action that would impose a cost on infected players; therefore it is not a likely outcome.
In
fact, such a setting is common in man-made distributed systems, especially in the context of cybersecurity. A well-fitting parallel is defense against
Distributed Denial of Service Attacks (DDoS) attacks [Khouzani et al., 2013]: although it would be
much more efficient to filter malicious traffic at the
source (i.e., out), Internet Service Providers rather
filter at the target (i.e., in) owing to a rational fear
of free-riding by others.

4.1

U2 = (1 − ρ) · [(1 − ρ) · [p2 · Cuse + (1 − p2 ) · 0]+
ρ · [p2 · Cuse + (1 − p2 ) · [(1 − p1 ) · Ci + p1 · 0]]]+
ρ · [p2 · (Ci + Cuse ) + (1 − p2 ) · Ci ]
(1)
Since this formula is linear in p2 , its extreme point
within [0,1] is situated exactly at the boundary. We
take its derivative to uncover the function steepness:
the condition for the function to be decreasing (i.e.,
higher probability for using a mask corresponds to
lower cost) is seen below. Consequently, the only
scenario which might admit wearing a mask with
non-zero probability corresponds to the availability
of sufficiently cheap masks.
Cuse
∂U2
<0⇔
< ρ · (1 − ρ) · (1 − p1 ) ≤ 1 (2)
∂p2
Ci

Bayesian Game

Since in the basic game no player plays out, we simplify the choice of the players to either use a mask
or no (hence, we note the cost of a mask with Cuse ).
To represent the situation more realistically, we introduce ambiguity about the status of the players:
we denote the probability of being infected as ρ. We
know from the basic game that if both players are
infected (with probability ρ2 ) or susceptible (with
probability (1−ρ)2 ) they play (no,no), while if only
one of them is infected (with probability 2·ρ·(1−ρ))
the infected player plays no, while the susceptible
plays use. Hence, the players play no in most of
the cases (e.g., with probability 1 − (ρ · (1 − ρ))).
On the other hand, this is not the case if we do
not assume that the players know their statuses.
Consequently, with uncertainty we must minimize
the costs of the players: if both players are infected
with equal probability, the payoff for Player 2 is
Equation 1 where pn is the probability that Player
n plays use (otherwise she plays no). The payoff for
the other player is similar since the game is symmetric. In more detail, the first two lines correspond to
the case when Player 2 is not infected (hence the

Example.
Lets assume Alice is going to meet Bob after a long
time without any correspondence. Consequently,
she does not know whether Bob has been exposed to
SARS-CoV-2 recently. Actually, Alice herself could
have been exposed as well without her knowledge,
as up to 80% of the infectious cases could be asymptomatic.5 For this reason, without taking into account any available spatial data, she estimates that
they could be infectious with ρ = 50%: either yes or
no. She also does not have any information about
Bob’s mask wearing habits, so she guesses p1 = 0.5
as well.
Alice is tested at her workplace every day, and she
is sent to a 1-week quarantine without payment if
tested positive. If we represent Alice as an average
American, she earns approximately 1000 USD per
week6 , hence, we set Ci = 1000. Substituting these
into the right side of Equation (2), she decides to
wear a mask only if it costs less than 125 USD,
which does hold as of September 2020.

5 Centre
for
Evidence-Based
Medicine.
that the payoffs does not take into account https://www.cebm.net/covid-19/
the legal consequences of a deliberate infection such covid-19-what-proportion-are-asymptomatic/
6 Bureau of Labour Statistics.
as
in
https://www.theverge.com/2020/4/7/21211992/
https://www.bls.gov/
coughing-coronavirus-arrest-hiv-public-health-safety-crime-spread.
news.release/pdf/wkyeng.pdf
4 Note

5

no
out
in

no
(Ci , Ci )
(Cout + Ci , Ci )
(Cin , Ci )

out
(0, Cout + Ci )
(Cout , Cout + Ci )
(Cin , Cout + Ci )

in
(Ci , Cin + Ci )
(Cout + Ci , Cin + Ci )
(Cin , Cin + Ci )

Table 3: Payoff matrices for the cases when only one player is susceptible.

4.2

Efficiency Game
U =p2 · (Cuse + Ci · a · b)+

In the basic game we assumed in provides perfect
protection from infected players, while out protects
the other player fully. However, in real life, these
strategies only mitigate the infection by decreasing
its probability (i.e., ρ) to some extent. For this reason, we define a, b ∈ [0, 1] in a way that the smaller
value of the parameter corresponds to better protection; a measures the protection efficiency of the
protection strategy, while b captures the efficiency of
eliminating the further spread of the disease. Consequently, a and b was set in the previous cases to
aout = 0, ain = 1 (in prevents further spreading,
while out does not), bout = 1 (out has no effect on
protecting the player) bin = 0 (in perfectly protects
the player).

p · (1 − p) · (Cuse + Ci · a)+
(1 − p) · p · (Ci · b)+
(1 − p)2 · Ci

(3)

2

⇒ U =p · (Cuse + Ci · 0.2̇)+
p · (1 − p) · (Cuse + Ci )+
(1 − p)2 · Ci
From this we easily deduce that use corresponds
to a smaller cost that no if CCuse
< 79 , which holds by
i
default as Cuse  Ci (even for less efficient masks).
Moreover, use (i.e., p = 1) is the best response most
of the time because of the following.
1. The utility is a second order polynomial, hence
it has one extreme point.

We simplify the action space of the players as we
did in the Bayesian game: in and out is merged into
use Obviously, no corresponds to ano = bno = 0.
We abuse the notion a and b to represent ause and
buse respectively. We set b = 32 , as surgical masks
on the infectious person reduce cold & flu viruses in
aerosols by 70% according to [Milton et al., 2013].
Parameter a is much harder to measure. It should
be a ≤ b since any mask keeps the virus inside the
players more efficiently than stopping the wearer
from getting infected. For the sake of the analysis we set a = 2b = 13 , but any other choice would
be possible.

2. This extreme point is a minimum due to U 00 =
4
9 · Ci > 0.
3. The utility (i.e., cost) is decreasing on the left
and increasing on the right of this minimum
point.
4. The utility’s minimum point is at p =
Ci −Cuse
due to U 0 = Cuse − Ci + 49 · Ci · p.
Ci

9
4

·

5. The minimum point is expected to be above 1
due to Cuse  Ci .

We are interested in the mask-wearing probability of a susceptible player when the other player is
infected.7 The utility in such a situation is shown
in Equation (3), where for simplification we defined
p = p1 = p2 , i.e., both players play a specific strategy with the same probability. With such a constraint, we restrict ourselves from finding all the solutions; however, since the game is symmetric, an
equilibrium of this reduced game is also an equilibrium when the players could use different strategy
distributions.

6. p ∈ [0, 1] is on the left of the minimum point,
hence, a higher p corresponds to a smaller cost.

4.3

Multi-Player Game

This game can be further extended by allowing more
players to participate. In this extension — if we assume all players meet with probability 1 — with
any number of infected players (who play no as we
showed already) all the susceptible players should
play in. This NE is the SO as well if the ratio of
the infected (which is identical to the probability ρ
of being infected) is sufficiently high: the accumu7 The Bayesian game combined with efficiency is left for
lated cost when the susceptible players play in (and
future work due to the lack of space.
the infected play no) is less than the accumulated
6

Example.

cost when the infected players play out (and the
ρ
in
< 1−ρ
. Although it is
susceptible play no) if CCout
mathematically possible that the infected plays no
in the SO, but it is doubtful: both the cost of in is
significantly higher than out, and the infection ratio
ρ is low (at least at the beginning of the pandemic).

5

For instance, should a rational American citizen
(e.g., Alice) go out based on how much she values
her life? We estimate9 m = 0.034 and ρ = 0.0077
#{deceased}
as 0.028 ≈ #{deceased}
#{all cases} < m < #{closed cases} ≈ 0.04
cases}
while #{active
#{population} ≈ 0.0077.
Using these values, Alice should go out only if
1
she values her life less than 3820(= 0.034·0.0077
)
times the benefit (of going out) and the loss
(of staying home) together.
According to
[Trottenberg and Rivkin, 2013], the value of a statistical life in the US was 9.2 million USD in 2013,
which is equivalent to 11.3 million USD in 2020
(with 0.3% interest rate). This means, Alice should
only meet someone if the benefit of the meeting (and
thus the cost of missing out) would amount to more
than USD 2, 958 (= 11.3M
3820 ).

The Distancing Game

Another phenomenon most people has experienced
during the current COVID-19 pandemic is social
distancing. Here we introduce a simple Distancing Game; it is to be played in sequence with the
previously introduced Mask Game: once a player
decided to meet up with friends via the Distancing
Game, she can decide whether to wear a mask for
the meeting playing the Mask Game. To improve
readability, we summarize all the corresponding parameters and variables in Table 4.
Variable
C
B
m
L
ρ
p
t
g

5.1

Meaning
Cost of staying home
Benefit of going out
Mortality rate
Value of Life
Probability of infection
Probability of meeting
Time duration of meeting
Group size of meeting

Number of Participants and Duration

B+C
<L
ρ·m
(4)

One way to improve the above model is by introducing meeting duration and size. Leaving our disinfected home during a pandemic is risky, and this risk
grows with the time. Similarly, a meeting is riskier
when there are multiple participants involved. In
the original model, we captured the infection probability with ρ = 1 − (1 − ρ). This ratio increases to
1 − (1 − ρ)g·t when there are g possible infectious
sources for t time. Since g and t are interchangeable, we merge this two together under a common
notation: z = g · t.
This extended model can be used to determine
the optimal duration and size of a meeting, once
the player decided to go out according to the basic
Distancing Game. We define 0 < z < 100, as no
player has infinite time or meeting partners. Moreover, the benefit and the loss of attending and missing a meeting should depend on this new parameter.
For instance, staying home in isolation for a longer
period might cause anxiety, which could get worse
over time (i.e., increasing the cost); on the other
hand, attending a meeting with many friends at the
same time could significantly boost the experience
(i.e., increase the benefit). Consequently, a rational person should leave her home only if Equation
(5) holds which is the extension of the right side of
Equation (4).


B(z) + C(z)
max
<L
(5)
0<z<100 (1 − (1 − ρ)z ) · m

8 This is an optimistic approximation, as besides dying the
infection could bear other tolls on a player.

9 Data
from
https://www.worldometers.info/
coronavirus/ (accessed September 2020)

Table 4: Parameters of the Distancing Games
We represent the cost of getting infected with
m · L, i.e., the mortality rate of the disease multiplied with the player’s evaluation about her own
life.8 Besides the risk of getting infected, going out
or attending a meeting could benefit the player, denoted as B. On the other hand, staying home or
missing a meeting could have some additional costs,
denoted as C. The probability of getting infected
is denoted as ρ. With these notations, the utility
of the Distancing Game is captured on the left of
Equation (4), where p is the probability of going
out. Since this is linear in p, its maximum is either
at p = 0 (stay home) or p = 1 (go out). Precisely,
the player prefers to stay home if the right side of
Equation (4) holds.

U = p · (B − ρ · m · L) − (1 − p) · C

7

Figure 1: A few examples for various benefit and cost functions of the lower limit on the life value which
would ensure that Alice (i.e., a rational American) would stay home (i.e.,left side of Equation (5)) with
m = 0.034 and ρ = 0.0077.
In Figure 1, we present three use-cases of the formula inside the maximization above: the left one
represents the case when both the benefit and the
cost are constant, the right one corresponds to the
case when both of them are linear. In the middle,
there is a mixture of these two. Note that we needed
to restrict z to be under a certain amount as it represents both the time and the size of a meeting.

6

the lack of space. Instead, we shed light on how government policy can affect the sub-mechanisms, how
sub-mechanisms can affect each other and, finally,
the outcome of the mechanism itself. We illustrate
the importance of mechanism design applying different policies to our two games, and adding testing
and contact tracing to the mix.

6.2

Pandemic Mechanism Design

Policy
impact
on
submechanisms and the final mechanism

Here we analyze the impact of commonly seen poliPandemic response is a complex affair. The two cies: compulsory mask wearing, distributing free
games described above model only parts of the big- masks, limiting the amount of people gathering and
ger picture.
total lock-down.

6.1

The government as mechanism Compulsory mask wearing and free masks.
If the government declares that wearing a simdesigner
ple mask is mandatory in public spaces (such as
shops, mass transit, etc.), it can enforce an outcome (out,out) that is indeed socially better than
the NE. The resulting strategy profile is still not
SO, but it i) allocates costs equally among citizens;
ii) works well under the uncertainty of one’s health
status; and iii) may decrease the first-order need
for large-scale testing, which in turn reduces the response cost of the government. By distributing free
masks, the government can reduce the effect of selfishness and, potentially, help citizens who cannot
buy or afford masks owing to supply shortage or
unemployment.

We refer to the collection (and interplay) of measures implemented by a specific government fighting the epidemic in their respective country as
mechanism. Consequently, decisions made with regard to this mechanism constitutes mechanism design [Mas-Colell et al., 1995]. In its broader interpretation, mechanism design theory seeks to study
mechanisms achieving a particular preferred outcome. Desirable outcomes are usually optimal either from a social aspect or maximizing a different
objective function of the designer.
In the context of the corona pandemic, the immediate response mechanism is composed of e.g.,
wearing a mask, social distancing, testing and contact tracing, among others. Note that this is not an
exhaustive list: financial aid, creating extra jobs to
accommodate people who have just lost their jobs,
declaring a national emergency and many other conceptual vessels can be utilized as sub-mechanisms by
the mechanism designer, i.e., usually, the government; we do not discuss all of these in detail due to

Limiting the amount of people gathering and
total lock-down.
If the government imposes an upper limit l for the
size of congregations, this will put a strict upper
bound on the “optimal meeting size” g ∗ , and the
resulting group size will be min(l, g ∗ ). Note that if
l < g ∗ then it creates an “opportunity” for longer
meetings (larger t), as Equation (5) maximizes for
8

Contact
Tracing

Testing

Social
Distancing

Social
Outcome

Govt.
Policies
Mask
Wearing

Response Mechanism

Govt. Cost

Figure 2: Pandemic response mechanism as influenced by government policy (dotted lines) and the interplay of sub-mechanisms (solid lines)
government’s perspective, mandatory mass testing is extremely expensive11 . (Similarly, from
the concerned individual’s perspective, a single
test could be unaffordable.)
Contact tracing,
whether traditional or mobile app-based, serves
as an important input sub-mechanism to testing [Ferretti et al., 2020]. It identifies the individuals who are likely affected based on spatial proximity, and inform both them and the authorities
about this fact. In game-theoretic terms, for such
players, the benefit of testing outweigh the cost (per
capita) with high probability. From the mechanism
designer’s point of view, contact tracing reduces the
overall testing cost by enabling targeted testing, potentially by orders of magnitude, without sacrificing
proper control of the pandemic. Another potential
cost of contact tracing for individuals could be the
loss of privacy. Note that mobile OS manufacturers
are working on integrating privacy-preserving contact tracing into their platform to eliminate adoption costs for installing an app12 .

z = gt. On the other hand, if the chosen restrictive
measure is a total lock-down, both the Distancing
Game and the Mask Game are rendered moot, as
people are not allowed to leave their households.
Testing and contact tracing.
It is clear that the Distancing and the Mask Games
are not played in isolation: people deciding to meet
up invoke the decision situation on mask wearing.
On the other hand, so far we have largely ignored
two other widespread pandemic response measures:
testing and contact tracing.
With appropriately designed and administered
coronavirus tests, medical personnel can determine
two distinct features of the tested individual: i)
whether she is actively infected spreading the virus
and ii) whether she has already had the virus, even if
there were no or weak symptoms. (Note that detecting these two features require different types of tests,
able to show the presence of either the virus RNA or
specific antibodies, respectively.) In general, testing
enables both the tested person and the authorities
to make more informed decisions. Putting this into
the context of our games, testing i) reduces the uncertainty in Bayesian decision making, and ii) enables the government to impose mandatory quarantine thereby removing infected players. Even more
impactful, mandatory testing (as in Wuhan10 ) completely eliminates the Bayesian aspect, essentially
rendering the situation to a full information game:
it serves as an exogenous “health oracle” imposing
no monetary cost on the players. To sum it up, the
testing sub-mechanism outputs results that serve as
inputs to both the Distancing and the Mask Game.
Naturally, a “health oracle” does not exist: someone has to bear the costs of testing. From the

The big picture.
As far as pandemic response goes, the mechanism
designer has the power to design and parametrize
the games that citizens are playing, taking into account that sub-mechanisms affect each other. After
games have been played and outcomes have been
determined, the cost for the mechanism designer itself are realized (see Figure 2). This cost function is
very complex incorporating factors from ICU beds
through civil unrest to a drop in GDP over multiple time scales [McDonald et al., 2008]. Therefore, governments have to carefully balance the –
11 But
not
without
precedence,
e.g.,
in
Slovakia
(https://edition.cnn.com/world/
live-news/coronavirus-pandemic-10-18-20-intl/h_
beb93495fe9b83701023eafd5f28e39d)
12 Apple. https://covid19.apple.com/contacttracing

10 New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/
26/world/asia/coronavirus-wuhan-tests.html

9

very directly interpreted – social optimum and their References
own costs; this indeed requires a mechanism design
[Bairagi et al., 2020] Bairagi, A. K., Masud, M.,
mindset.
Kim, D. H., Munir, M., Nahid, A. A., Abedin,
S. F., Alam, K. M., Biswas, S., Alshamrani, S. S.,
7 Conclusion
Han, Z., et al. (2020). Controlling the outbreak
of covid-19: A noncooperative game perspective.
In this paper we have made a case for treating
arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.13305.
pandemic response as a mechanism design problem. Through simple games modeling interacting [Bauch and Earn, 2004] Bauch, C. T. and Earn,
D. J. (2004). Vaccination and the theory of
selfish individuals we have shown that it is necessary
games. Proceedings of the National Academy of
to take individual incentives into account during a
Sciences, 101(36):13391–13394.
pandemic. We have also demonstrated that specific government policies significantly influence the
[Bhattacharyya and Bauch, 2011] Bhattacharyya,
outcome of these games, and how different response
S. and Bauch, C. T. (2011). “wait and see” vacmeasures (sub-mechanisms) are interdependent. As
cinating behaviour during a pandemic: A game
an example we have discussed how contact tractheoretic analysis. Vaccine, 29(33):5519–5525.
ing enables targeted testing which in turn reduces
the uncertainty from individual decision making re- [Carletti et al., 2020] Carletti, T., Fanelli, D., and
garding social distancing and wearing masks. GovPiazza, F. (2020). Covid-19: The unreasonable
ernments have significantly more power than tradieffectiveness of simple models. arXiv preprint
tional mechanism designers in distributed systems;
arXiv:2005.11085.
therefore it is even more crucial for them to carefully
study the tradeoff between social good and the cost [Chang et al., 2019] Chang, S. L., Piraveenan, M.,
Pattison, P., and Prokopenko, M. (2019). Game
of the designer when implementing their pandemic
theoretic modelling of infectious disease dynamics
response mechanism.
and intervention methods: a mini-review. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1901.04143.
Limitations and future work.
Clearly, we have just scratched the surface of pandemic mechanism design. The models presented
are simple and mostly used for demonstrative purposes. Also, the mechanism design considerations
are only quasi-quantitative without proper formal
mathematical treatment. In turn, this gives us
plenty of opportunity for future work. A potential
avenue is extending our models to capture the temporal aspect, combine them with epidemic models
as games played by many agents on social graphs,
and parametrize them with real data from the ongoing pandemic (policy changes, mobility data, price
fluctuations, etc.). Relaxing the rational decisionmaking aspect is another prominent direction: behavioral modeling with respect to obedience, otherregarding preferences and risk-taking could be incorporated into the games. Finally, a formal treatment of the mechanism design problem constitutes
important future work, incorporating hierarchical
designers (WHO, EU, nations, municipality, household), an elaborate cost model, and analyzing optimal policies for different time horizons. If done with
care, these steps would help create an extensible
mechanism design framework that can aid decision
makers in pandemic response.
10

[Chao, 2020] Chao, S.-P. (2020). Simplified model
on the timing of easing the lockdown. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2007.14072.
[Chen et al., 2020] Chen, X., Chong, W. F., Feng,
R., and Zhang, L. (2020). Pandemic risk management: resources contingency planning and allocation.
[Diekmann and Heesterbeek, 2000] Diekmann, O.
and Heesterbeek, J. (2000). Mathematical Epidemiology of Infectious Diseases: Model Building,
Analysis and Interpretation, volume 5. John Wiley & Sons.
[Eksin et al., 2017] Eksin, C., Shamma, J. S., and
Weitz, J. S. (2017). Disease dynamics in a
stochastic network game: a little empathy goes
a long way in averting outbreaks. Scientific reports, 7:44122.
[Ferretti et al., 2020] Ferretti, L., Wymant, C.,
Kendall, M., Zhao, L., Nurtay, A., AbelerDörner, L., Parker, M., Bonsall, D., and Fraser,
C. (2020). Quantifying sars-cov-2 transmission
suggests epidemic control with digital contact
tracing. Science, 368(6491).

[Fong et al., 2020] Fong, M. W., Gao, H., Wong, [Papadopoulos et al., 2020] Papadopoulos, D. I.,
J. Y., Xiao, J., Shiu, E. Y., Ryu, S., and
Donkov, I., Charitopoulos, K., and Bishara, S.
Cowling, B. J. (2020). Nonpharmaceutical mea(2020). The impact of lockdown measures on
sures for pandemic influenza in nonhealthcare setcovid-19: a worldwide comparison. medRxiv.
tings—social distancing measures. Emerging in[Poletti et al., 2012] Poletti, P., Ajelli, M., and
fectious diseases, 26(5):976.
Merler, S. (2012). Risk perception and effectiveness of uncoordinated behavioral responses in an
[Giordano et al., 2020] Giordano, G., Blanchini, F.,
emerging epidemic. Mathematical Biosciences,
Bruno, R., Colaneri, P., Di Filippo, A., Di Mat238(2):80–89.
teo, A., and Colaneri, M. (2020). Modelling
the covid-19 epidemic and implementation of [Reluga, 2010] Reluga, T. C. (2010). Game theory
population-wide interventions in italy. Nature
of social distancing in response to an epidemic.
Medicine, pages 1–6.
PLoS computational biology, 6(5).
[Harsanyi et al., 1988] Harsanyi, J. C., Selten, R.,
et al. (1988). A general theory of equilibrium
selection in games. MIT Press Books.

[Santosh, 2020] Santosh, K. (2020). Covid-19 prediction models and unexploited data. Journal of
medical systems, 44(9):1–4.

[Hong and Li, 2020] Hong, H. G. and Li, Y. (2020). [Silva et al., 2020] Silva, P. C., Batista, P. V., Lima,
H. S., Alves, M. A., Guimarães, F. G., and Silva,
Estimation of time-varying reproduction numbers
R. C. (2020). Covid-abs: An agent-based model
underlying epidemiological processes: A new staof covid-19 epidemic to simulate health and ecotistical tool for the covid-19 pandemic. PloS one,
nomic effects of social distancing interventions.
15(7):e0236464.
Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, page 110088.
[Khouzani et al., 2013] Khouzani, M., Sen, S., and
[Sun et al., 2009] Sun,
P.,
Yang,
L.,
and
Shroff, N. B. (2013). Incentive analysis of bidirecDe Véricourt, F. (2009). Selfish drug allotional threat filtering in the internet. In Workcation for containing an international influenza
shop on Economics of Information Security. Citepandemic at the onset. Operations Research,
seer.
57(6):1320–1332.
[Lagos et al., 2020] Lagos, A.-R., Kordonis, I.,
and Papavassilopoulos, G. (2020).
Games
of social distancing during an epidemic: Local vs statistical information. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2007.05185.

[Trottenberg and Rivkin, 2013] Trottenberg,
P.
and Rivkin, R. (2013). Guidance on treatment
of the economic value of a statistical life in
us department of transportation analyses. Revised departmental guidance, US Department of
Transportation.

[Mas-Colell et al., 1995] Mas-Colell, A., Whinston,
M. D., Green, J. R., et al. (1995). Microeconomic
theory, volume 1. Oxford university press New
York.

[van Boven et al., 2008] van Boven, M., Klinkenberg, D., Pen, I., Weissing, F. J., and
Heesterbeek, H. (2008).
Self-interest versus
group-interest in antiviral control. PLoS One,
3(2):e1558.

[McDonald et al., 2008] McDonald, M., Scott, K.,
Edmunds, W., Beutels, P., and Smith, R. (2008).
[Zhang et al., 2020] Zhang, Y., Jiang, B., Yuan, J.,
The macroeconomic costs of a global influenza
and Tao, Y. (2020). The impact of social dispandemic. In Global Trade Analysis Project 11th
tancing and epicenter lockdown on the covid-19
Annual Conference on Global Economic Analysis,
epidemic in mainland china: A data-driven seiqr
Future of Global Economy, Helsinki, June.
model study. medRxiv.
[Milton et al., 2013] Milton, D. K., Fabian, M. P.,
Cowling, B. J., Grantham, M. L., and McDevitt, J. J. (2013). Influenza virus aerosols in
human exhaled breath: particle size, culturability, and effect of surgical masks. PLoS Pathog,
9(3):e1003205.

[Zhao et al., 2018] Zhao, S., Bauch, C. T., and He,
D. (2018). Strategic decision making about travel
during disease outbreaks: a game theoretical approach. Journal of The Royal Society Interface,
15(146):20180515.

11

