Pervasive Communications Technologies For
Managing Pandemics
Mohammad Ilyas

Basit Qureshi

College of Engineering and Computer Science
Florida Atlantic University
Boca Ratom, FL 33431 USA
ilyas@fau.edu

College of Computer and Information Sciences
Prince Sultan University
Riyadh, 11586 Saudi Arabia
qureshi@psu.edu.sa

Abstract—Pandemics always have had serious consequences
unless they were effectively contained. Recent experiences with
COVID-19 show that by using a smart and swift approach to deal
with pandemics, avoids overwhelming of healthcare systems, and
reduces loss of precious life. This paper is about using smart
technologies such as Mobile Edge Clouds (MEC), Internet of
Things (IoT), and Artificial Intelligence (AI), as an approach to
effectively manage pandemics. IoT provides pervasive
connectivity among various devices and can be used for collecting
information such as location and symptoms of potentially infected
individuals. MECs provide cloud services on the edge, integrating
IoT infrastructure and execution of sophisticated AI algorithms in
the Cloud. In this paper, we develop a prototype to demonstrate
the convergence of pervasive technologies to support research in
managing pandemics. Low-cost Single Board Computers (SBC)
based clusters are integrated within MEC to support remote
medical teams in the field. The prototype implements a lightweight
Docker container orchestrated by Kubernetes eco-system which is
deployed on the clusters. The prototype successfully demonstrates
that mobile medical facilities can utilize the proposed solution to
collect information and execute AI algorithms while on the go.
Finally, we present a discussion on the role of converging pervasive
technologies on managing pandemics.
Keywords—pandemic management, Internet of things (IoT),
artificial intelligence (AI), Mobile Edge Clouds, Kubernetes, Single
Board Computer Clusters.

I. INTRODUCTION
History of pandemics is as long as the history of humanity.
Although not all details on earlier pandemics are documented,
there is some information available on the major pandemics
dating back to 5000 years [1].
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Prehistoric epidemic: Circa 3000 B.C.
Plague of Athens: 430 B.C.
Antonine Plague: 165 – 180 A.D.
Plague of Cyprian: 250 – 271 A.D.
Plague of Justinian: 541 – 542 A.D.
The Black Death: 1346 – 1353 A.D.
Great Plague of London: 1665 – 1666 A.D.
Great Plague of Marseille: 1720 – 1723 A.D.
Russian plague: 1770 – 1772 A.D.
Philadelphia yellow fever epidemic: 1793 A.D.
American polio epidemic: 1916 A.D.
Spanish Flu: 1918 – 1920 A.D.
Asian Flu: 1957 – 1958 A.D.

•
•
•
•
•

AIDS pandemic and epidemic: 1981 – Present
H1N1 Swine Flu pandemic: 2009 – 2010 A.D.
West African Ebola epidemic: 2014 – 2016 A.D.
Zika Virus epidemic: 2015 – Present
COVID-19 Novel Coronavirus: 2019 – Present

The global population is currently over 7.5 Billion and is
rapidly increasing. Over 4.1 Billion people live in urban areas,
often in densely populated cities and towns. The congested
urban areas and dense population centers provide a hotbed for
pandemics to flourish and have a devastating effect on
population health and the resulting death toll [2]. The recent
novel coronavirus COVID-19 pandemic rapidly spread
throughout the globe. Despite the availability of advanced
diagnostic and treatment options, the global infection rate and
the death toll due to COVID-19 is still very high. Thanks to the
pervasive communication and disruptive technologies, it was
possible to monitor the vast and rapid spread of the pandemic.
Recent experiences with COVID-19 show that a robust and swift
approach to collect, process and analyze data and therefore
taking precautionary measures helped flatten the pandemic
curve. That step eased the burden on the healthcare systems
effectively reducing the loss of precious life.
This paper is about leveraging pervasive communication
technologies such as the Internet of Things (IoT), Mobile Edge
Clouds and, artificial intelligence (AI), as a mechanism for
effective management of pandemics [3, 4]. The IoT can be a
powerful platform for collecting information such as the
location and symptoms of potentially infected individuals [5, 7].
The IoT Cloudlet can provide a platform for various medical
devices to connect and relay data from devices to a central
service for further processing. These devices include smart
thermometers, blood-pressure measurement units, wearable
vitals sensors, connected inhalers, and ventilators, etc [19].
Furthermore, smartphone location data can be useful to
determine individual’s movement patterns etc. This information
can be analyzed through sophisticated artificial intelligence
algorithms to extract movement patterns of pandemic patients
and tracking others who may have come in contact with these
patients and may have been potentially infected. This approach
is extremely important for healthcare infrastructure to provide
treatment to those who need it immediately, and also to limit and
slow the spread of the infection [6,7,8].
The IoT and smart devices usually have limited resources
on-board and are incapable of processing large amounts of data
on their own. Researchers in [28, 29] have developed ways to

offload large amounts of data from resource-constrained IoT
devices to the cloud for processing. Consequently, the increase
in network traffic creates congestion, disrupting the seamless
connectivity and affecting the overall quality of service which is
ever important in these scenarios. To address these concerns, we
develop and deploy an inexpensive and lightweight cluster of
Single Board Computers (SBC) that provides cloud services on
the Mobile Edge Cloud (MEC). The SBC-MEC cluster provides
an opportunity for offloading computation required by
applications running sophisticated AI algorithm(s) in the cloud
to a nearby SBC-MEC cluster on the edge rather than a distant
data center. A prototype of the SBC-MEC cluster with an
application for collecting data from medical devices within the
IoT is successfully deployed.
The next section of the paper discusses communication
technologies that can be utilized to effectively manage
pandemics. Section III discusses a platform using pervasive
communications technologies and artificial intelligence for
managing pandemics. Section IV details the SBC-MEC cluster
implementation and deployment. Issues and challenges are
presented in section V followed by a summary and conclusions.
II. PERVASIVE COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGIES
Over the past few decades, the Internet has evolved rapidly.
Smaller and cost-effective hardware components packed with
tremendous processing power, have led to many powerful and
beneficial applications of the Internet that have changed the
way we manage various aspects of our life. These applications
are impactful because they provide ease of use, mobile
connectivity, broader control, and automation. Hence, an
unprecedented number of devices are being connected to the
Internet, leading to the evolution of IoT.
IoT is a pervasive form of the Internet that provides
connectivity to almost all the objects (things) that we
commonly use. These objects are uniquely identifiable, and
accessible from anywhere and at any time. These objects are
also capable of collecting and/or sensing information,
processing it, and communicating it. Technically, an object
connected to IoT will have adequate processing power and
communication capability. Technological advances continue to
make these objects smaller, more powerful, energy-efficient,
and cost-effective [10,11]. IoT has rapidly evolved over the past
decade and its impact on our daily activities is becoming
visible. To put the IoT growth in perspective, the number of
devices connected to IoT in 2016 was estimated to be 6.4
Billion, and this number is estimated to be 64 billion by the year
2025. This implies that the average number of devices per
capita will be about 8. Such a pervasive level of connectivity
can be very effective in collecting data about anyone in the
world and even tracing and tracking individuals with the help
of IoT devices associated with individuals [12,13]. Such a
platform for collecting data and communicating it to a central
location such as public cloud platforms [30], is ideal for
managing any local, national, or global pandemics.
IoT and artificial intelligence go hand-in-hand for most of
the applications. As indicated earlier, IoT is an ideal platform
for collecting data. The goal of integrating artificial intelligence
with IoT is not only to make devices/systems smart but also to
help them make autonomous decisions. Smart devices,

equipped with AI capabilities, use available data to learn from
past trends and make efficient and effective smart decisions for
the future. The data collected by IoT devices can be processed
locally (edge computing), or centrally using a cloud computing
environment or both. However, due to constrained battery
power and the absence of sophisticated AI algorithms onboard
IoT devices, the decision-making abilities of edge devices may
be limited [14]. Components of an AI environment is depicted
in Figure 1 [15].

Figure 1. Components of artificial intelligence [15].

III. MANAGING PANDEMICS BY USING PERVASIVE
COMMUNICATION TECHOLOGIES
Before we start discussing the management of pandemics by
using pervasive communication technologies, we need to
understand how diseases spread to become pandemics and how
they can be contained. All pandemics have serious and
unfortunate consequences that impact society in many ways
resulting in the loss of precious life. The pandemics spread
through contact, the speed at which they spread, and the severity
of their consequences depend upon several factors including the
following [2]:
• Population and population density: Higher the population
density, higher will be the rate of spread. There is a higher
likelihood of an infected person coming in contact with a
larger number of individuals.
• Ways the virus transmits: Some viruses spread through
physical contact, some spread through the exchange of
bodily fluids; others can be airborne and may spread by an
individual being in close proximity of others. The last
category is more dangerous than others and is difficult to
contain.
• Number of days a virus stays contagious: The duration for
which an infected person stays contagious is an important
factor. Infected individuals may not even show any
symptoms for several days. The only way to find if a
person is infected is through testing. A negative test result
implies the individual may not be infected that day
however, there is no guaranty for that individual to get
infected the next day.
• Social dynamics: There is a frequent chance for an
individual who visits crowded places or attends a social
gathering to become infected than individuals who do not.
Precautionary measures such as maintaining good hygiene,
washing hands and social distancing are absolutely
necessary to reduce the spread of the virus.
World population combined with higher population density
in urban regions makes individuals more vulnerable for being
infected by others. Social dynamics of a society also play a

major role in spreading contagious diseases. In addition, the
phenomenon of globalization is a major factor in the rapid
spread of pandemics because this phenomenon has shrunk the
distances, made travel easier and frequent, has softened the
national borders, and has morphed the world into a global
village.
The spectacular spread of COVID-19 pandemic has
exposed some of the structural deficiencies that otherwise may
not have been so obvious. As of June 2020, the number of
infected cases continues to grow, the dreadful death toll
continues to climb, and the virus continues to spread. These
unfortunate facts have left the governments struggling to find
ways to effectively contain the spread of COVID-19 and to
minimize its impact. A few aspects that are critical for
managing this and, for that matter, any pandemic include
testing and tracking the carriers and potential carriers of such a
virus.
Recognizing a pandemic, identification of infected
individuals (by testing), limiting the spread of infection by
tracking and implementing appropriate measures/precautions
such as social distancing and wearing face masks, are essential
to contain and mitigate. Recent experiences with COVID-19
show that a robust and swift approach to stay ahead of the curve
can flatten the pandemic curve, avoid overwhelming the
healthcare systems, and reduces the loss of precious life.
In managing any pandemic, it is important to understand
how it spreads. That will allow developing recommendations
for the communities to follow for slowing the spreading rate.
For instance, COVID-19 has been spreading by becoming in
contact with an infected individual, touching an infected
surface, or by being in close proximity to infected individuals.
Therefore, the recommendations were developed to wash hands
frequently, wear a facial mask, avoid crowded places, and
practice social distancing of at least six feet. By practicing these
recommendations, the rate of spread can be reduced and that
has tremendous advantages. Such interventions flatten the
pandemic curve [16]. Flattening the curve gives more time to
further understand the nature of the pandemic and find ways to
manage it effectively. Having more time will allow the
healthcare system and the authorities to prepare and plan for the
treatment of patients. In addition, this will allow time to
stockpile the necessary quantity of medications to treat
pandemic patients and medical equipment including facial
masks and personal protective equipment (PPE) for healthcare
professionals.
We propose leveraging pervasive communication
technologies such as IoT, and AI, as a mechanism for effective
management of pandemics [17, 18, 19]. IoT is a very attractive
solution for managing pandemics. It can effectively serve as a
platform for collecting data about individuals being tested, data
about location/movements of infected individuals, and tracing
the individuals who may have been infected by being in contact
or in close proximity of infected individuals. One of the major
advantages of IoT is that any object (things) connected to it,
becomes a source of data. Telemetry data originating from these
devices can be identified using the MAC address. Each IoT
device has its own unique identification and can be accessed
from anywhere and at any time. The objects connected to IoT

include wearables that continuously monitor vitals (including
temperature, oxygen level, heart rate etc.) of the individuals
wearing those. In the case of limited testing supplies, this
information can become helpful in identifying individuals to be
tested. These features provide a powerful platform for
collecting information such as location data and symptoms of
potentially infected individuals.
This information can be analyzed through sophisticated
artificial intelligence algorithms to extract movement patterns
of pandemic patients, and tracing others who may have come in
contact with these patients and may have been potentially
infected. Limited AI algorithms can be implemented by the IoT
devices, however the limited resources onboard these devices
may not be capable of processing large amounts of data. More
advanced analytics can be performed using more powerful
computing devices available in remote data-centers through
cloud computing [28, 29]. This approach is extremely important
for healthcare service provides to extend treatment to
individuals in need of immediate attention [20, 21, 22], and also
to limit and slow the spread of the infection.
We know that current IoT infrastructure is severely
constrained on communication bandwidth. IoT devices are
expected to generate copious amounts of data, transferring large
amounts of data to the cloud using the existing infrastructure
results in network latency and quality of service issues. We
address these issues in the next section by deploying a cluster
of small, mobile, and low cost on the edge. The integration of a
Mobile Edge Cloud (MEC) cluster reduces the network traffic
between IoT devices and the cloud by processing and analyzing
data locally. The MEC extends the AI application executing in
the cloud to the local environment available on the edge of the
cloud network.
IV. SBC-MEC CLUSTERS BASED PROTOTYPE
The SBCs are ever more becoming powerful devices at
increasingly lower costs. The low price offered by SBCs is an
attractive opportunity for creating SBC based clusters. SBCMEC clusters provide an opportunity to extend the cloud
computing paradigm to the edge at a very low cost, where a
mobile micro cloud cluster exists between the data-center and
the data source, Figure 2. The data source or IoT devices may
consist of sensors and medical devices acquiring data from a
location. These devices usually run on batteries having limited
onboard resources (processor, memory, etc.) relaying
information to a ground station in the field. The ground station
would relay the collected data to a centralized cloud-based data
center intermittently for further processing.
The SBC-MEC cluster provides an opportunity for
offloading computation required by applications running
sophisticated AI algorithm(s) in the cloud to a nearby SBCMEC cluster on the edge rather than a distant data center.
Generally, the network latency, quality of service in
transmission and computation/service time are important to
achieve higher dependability. The SBC-MEC cluster i)
processes data accumulated from the IoT devices, and/or ii)
processes intermediate data on the edge and later transmit the
processed information to the distant data center for further
processing or storage. In both cases, the network traffic is

reduced, positively affecting the traffic congestion, therefore
improving the overall network latency and throughput, which
are key characteristics for seamless operability for medical field
teams in the event of managing a pandemic.

Figure 2. SBC-MEC Clusters providing Cloud services on the edge

A. Kubernetes as a MEC service orchestrator
The Kubernetes ecosystem deployed on the Edge-cloud
leverages the use of lightweight cloud computing technologies
suitable for resource constrained SBC devices. The framework
utilizes Docker-based lightweight containers [23] with a small
footprint in comparison to the traditional virtual machines
(VM) that are resource hungry. Most of the operating system
functions including file management system, memory address
space, and networking can be virtualized in a container. The
small size of containers as opposed to a VM allows easier copy
and move operations on the container images between devices.
Kubernetes [24] is a container orchestration tool that allows
different physical machines to host containers. The distributed
environment deploys multiple containers that execute various
instances of an application on multiple physical machines. A
master node provides a singular point of control providing
access control and communication with the slave nodes referred
to as Kubernetes agents (KA). A KA is deployed on a physical
machine and is responsible for managing the various containers
deployed on that physical machine. The Master node is
responsible for orchestration consisting of numerous activities
including resource allocation, scheduling, container
deployment, etc. The Kubernetes orchestrator controls all
containers regardless of the physical deployment on the
physical nodes.
Figure 3 presents a high-level architecture of the SBC-MEC
deployment within the Kubernetes Eco-system. The Master
node, execute on the health-care provider/ research center
public cloud. The system administrators or users configure and
approve the deployment of SBC-MEC cluster requests by
medical staff in the field. Once approved, the SBC-MEC
clusters configure/deploy containers from the cloud. Various
containers can be deployed on physical nodes, within the data
center and on the edge in the SBC-MEC. The medical
devices/sensors communicate and transfer information from the
IoT devices to the cluster using various mediums including but
not limited to Application Programming Interfaces (APIs),
RESTful web-services, etc.
In the next section, we present the SBC-MEC cluster
implementation followed by a RESTful web-service that allows

medical devices to connect to the Kubernetes agent, executing
the data collection service in a container on the SBC-MEC.
B. SBC-MEC Clusters
We develop three small clusters using three different kinds of
SBCs, Ordoid Xu-4 [25], Raspberry Pi [26] and Latte-Panda
[27]. The Ordoid Xu-4 was developed by HardKernel and is
available for 49 USD. Xu-4 uses Samsung Exynos5 Quad-core
ARM Cortex-A15 Quad 2Ghz and Cortex-A7 Quad 1.3GHz
CPUs with 2Gbyte LPDDR3 RAM at 933MHz. Two USB 3.0
ports, as well as a USB 2.0 port, allows faster communication
with attached devices.
The Raspberry Pi (RPi) is predominantly the market leader
with a low cost and affordable price starting at 23 USD. The
RPi Model 3B+ uses a Broadcom BCM2837 System-on-chip
(SoC) with a Quad-core processor running at 1.4 GHz. The
device allows various modes of connectivity with a Gigabit
Ethernet, HDMI, USB, Wi-Fi, and Bluetooth. A newer model
4B is available with 8GB of RAM with a faster 1.5 GHz Quadcore processor.

Figure 3. Kubernetes Eco-System for SBC-MEC

The Latte Panda 4G was developed as an SBC device with
Microsoft Windows support. This device comes with Intel
Atom Cherry Z8350 SoC with a quad core processor at 1.8
GHz, supporting Intel HD Graphics 200-500 GPU and 4 GB of
on-board RAM. This device also supports HDMI, Ethernet, WiFi, Bluetooth connectivity, and costs 169 USD. All listed prices
are quoted as of June 2020.
SBC based edge clusters using the Raspberry Pi 3B+,
Odroid Xu-4, and LattePanda 4G SBCs were built. Figure 4
shows the three clusters with 3 SBC each or Raspberry Pi and
Odroid Xu-4 and 2 Latte Pandas in the third cluster. Ubuntu
MATE was installed on the clusters built using Raspberry Pi
and Xu-4 SBC. Windows 10 IoT was installed on LattePanda.
Kubernetes agents/slaves on each device were initialized and
configured to connect to the Kubernetes master node. The
devices in each cluster connect to a local Ethernet switch that
connects to the campus network providing Internet access. To
realize the SBC-MEC architecture, we installed the Kubernetes
master node on a PC in the lab. This PC connects to the SBCMEC clusters over the Internet.

C. Data collection service application
We develop a data collection service application to test the
SBC-MEC clusters. The application deployment on the cluster
serves as a prototype implementation. The main objective of
this application is to log data collected from sensors and
medical devices, process the data locally in the SBC-MEC, and
send updates to the cloud service.

if the status changed from disconnected to connected, the log
file is subsequently updated. Every 24 hours, the application
reads the log file to process the data. It determines the
connectivity time for each device by processing the timestamps
of the records annotated as connected within the log file.
The results are processed into a Comma Separated Value (CSV)
format and can be processed further in the cloud by application
managers. The processData function is called at regular
intervals which can be specified by the user. Figure 5 shows the
Nodes script and the processData function used in the
application.
The SBC-MEC cluster was deployed with-in the lab
environment. The results demonstrate the accurate functioning
of the prototype.
V. ISSUES AND CHALLENGES

Figure 4. A Kubernetes Agent installed on a 3 clusters. (a) Raspberry Pi (b)
Odroid Xu-4 (c) Latte Panda; devices in each cluster connect to a network
switch.

The application listens to the gateway using SocketIO
for any updates from within a container. After the initial
handshake, the application listens to the Nodes event which
sends the current status of the connected sensors/medical
devices. All received data is appended with a time stamp, the
results are stored within the container as log files synchronized
by the time stamp. Timestamps are used to calculate the
connectivity time of a medical device.
socket.on('Nodes', (receivedData) => {
console.log(data);
receivedData.data.forEach(MDevice => {
MDevice.Nodes.forEach(Node => {
Node['timestamp'] = new Data().getTime();
Node['connectTime'] = 0;
NodeList.push(Node);
});
});
});
function processData(){
updateConnectionTime();
const records = [];
NodesList.forEach(Node => {
records.push({NodeID: Node.id, connectionTime:
.connectionTime});
Node.connectionTime = 0;
});
csvWriter.writeRecords(records)
.then{() => {
console.log('Done');
});
}

Figure 5. Listing for Nodes script and processData function

Another event is NodesUpdate which gets triggered at
any time the status of the connected Node changes. As an
update is triggered, the gateway sends relevant information
about the selected Node/device. If the status of the Node
changes from connected to disconnected, the
difference between the current time-stamp and the stored time
stamp is computed, the result is stored in the log file. Similarly,

Integrating IoT, Cloud and AI solutions to create an
effective and efficient platform for managing pandemics is
expected to result in the following:
1. A robust and smart platform for managing pandemics
such as COVID-19. The platform will have capabilities
for identifying individuals for testing and tracking their
movement. IoT can help with tracking the movement
of infected individuals.
2. A smart platform using AI for forecasting the growth
patterns of the virus after integrating the identified
location of infected or potentially infected individuals
with geographical maps and population maps.
3. A platform that is scalable and applicable to city,
county, state, or country.
There are various issues and challenges to developing such
a smart platform.
The world population is expected to be about 10 Billion by
2050 and naturally, population clusters will have higher
population density. In pervasive communication environments,
it is expected that there will be an average of eight connected
(and mostly mobile) devices per capita. Each of these devices
will have its own, globally unique internet address to receive
and send information. The effectiveness and efficiency of such
a system for managing pandemics is highly dependent on the
available resources. We know that current IoT infrastructure is
severely constrained on communication bandwidth. IoT
devices have limited processing capability and limited energy
resources.
The population density will impact the analytical outcomes
and will influence the measures to be employed for containment
and mitigation of a pandemic. In addition to IoT telemetry data
originating from medical devices and wearables, testing and
tracking data of individuals with the geographical mapping
along with the population data will be considered. Deployment
of these solutions in the densely populated areas will generate
copious amounts of data that may overwhelm the infrastructure.
Striking a balance between the amount of AI data analysis
at the IoT edge devices and clusters, and the amount of data
offloaded to the cloud for further analysis is also an important
aspect to consider. Such a balance depends on many factors
including the processing power available at the IoT edge

devices, the energy (and hence the operational longevity) of the
edge devices, the complexity of the decisions, and nature of the
decisions (local or broader), etc. The efficiency of the AI data
analysis is not expected to have a linear relationship with the
division of data processing between the edge devices and the
cloud. For a given situation, there must be an optimal division
of data processing tasks among the edge devices and the cloud.
Maintaining the privacy of information is essential and it is
assumed that the system will have provisions for safeguarding
the personal information of individuals.
Overall, for a smart and robust approach to managing
pandemics,
robust communication, and computing
infrastructure is absolutely essential.

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

VI. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Pandemics are real and historically have had serious
consequences unless they were effectively contained.
Management of pandemics requires the identification of infected
individuals (by testing), limiting the spread of infection by
tracking and implementing appropriate measures/precautions
such as social distancing and using personal protective
equipment. Recent experiences with COVID-19 show that by
using a smart and swift approach to deal with pandemics, avoids
overwhelming of healthcare systems, and reduces the loss of
precious life. This paper has proposed the use of pervasive
communication technologies such as IoT, MEC and AI, as an
approach to effectively manage pandemics. IoT provides
pervasive connectivity among the common devices and can be
used for collecting information such as the location and
symptoms of potentially infected individuals. This information
can be offloaded to a MEC cluster or the cloud where it can be
analyzed through sophisticated AI algorithms to extract useful
information. An inexpensive and lightweight cluster of SBC is
deployed that provides cloud services on the MEC. A prototype
of the SBC-MEC cluster with an application for collecting data
from medical devices within the IoT is successfully deployed.
This approach is essential for managing pandemics by avoiding
the possibility of overwhelming the healthcare system. The
platform can also be effective in containing the spread of the
infection.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]

[7]

Jarus, O., “20 of the worst epidemics and pandemics in history”, Retried
from: https://www.livescience.com/worst-epidemics-and-pandemics-inhistory.html.
“Pandemics:
How
they
spread?”,
Retrieved
from
https://www.nctm.org/ClassroomResources/Illuminations/Interactives/Pandemics-How-Are-VirusesSpread/.
Al-Jijiman (Editor), “Artificial Intelligence in IoT”, Springer, 2019.
Cohn, J. and Stanford-Clark, A., “The future of IoT”, IEEE Internet of
Things Magazine, Vol. 1, Issue 1, September 2018, pp. 28-33.
Ahson S. and Ilyas, M., “Location-Based Services Handbook:
Applications, techniques, and Security”, CRC Press, 2011.
Ahmed, S., Ilyas, M. and Raja, M.Y.A., “Smart Living: Ubiquitous
Services Powered by Ambient Intelligence (AmI)”, 16 th IEEE
International Conference on Smart Cities: Improving Quality of Life
using ICT, IoT, and AI, Charlotte, North Carolina, October 2019.
Ahmed, S., Ilyas, M. and Raja, M.Y.A., “Internet of Things: Applications
in Smart Healthcare”, Proceedings of the 9 th International Conference on

[12]

[13]
[14]
[15]

[16]

[17]
[18]
[19]

[20]
[21]

[22]

[23]
[24]
[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]

[29]

[30]

Society and Information Technology (IICSIT 2018), Orlando, Florida,
March 13-16, 2018, pp. 19-24.
Ilyas, M., “Internet of Things (IoT) and Emerging Applications”, The
Journal of Systemics, Cybernetics, and Informatics, Vol. 17, No. 5, pp.
27-31, 2019.
Carmen, A., “How the Internet of Things is changing how the world
works”,
Retrived
from
http://www.islandinstitute.org/workingwaterfront/how-%E2%80%98-internet-things%E2%80%99-changinghow-world-works.
Ahmed, S., Ilyas, M., and Raja, M.Y.A., “Internet of Things: Application
in Smart Healthcare”, Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on
Society and InformationTechnology (IICSIT 2018), Orlando, Florida,
March, 2018, pp. 19-24.
Ahmed, S., Ilyas, M. and Raja, M.Y.A., “Smart Living: Ubiquitous
Services Powered by Ambient Intelligence (AmI)”, 16th IEEE
International Conference on Smart Cities: Improving Quality of Life
using ICT, IoT, and AI, Charlotte, North Carolina, October 2019.
Al-Fuqaha, A. Guizani, M., Mohammadi, M., Aledhari, M., and Ayyash,
M., “Internet of Things: A survey on Enabling Technologies, Protocols,
and Applications”, IEEE Communication Surveys and Tutorials, Vol. 17,
No. 4, pp. 2347-2376, 2015.
Ahson S. and Ilyas, M., “Location-Based Services Handbook:
Applications, techniques, and Security”, CRC Press, 2011.
Al-Jijiman (Editor), “Artificial Intelligence in IoT”, Springer, 2019.
Lateef, Z., “Types of Artificial Intelligence You Should Know”,
Retrieved
from
https://www.edureka.co/blog/types-of-artificialintelligence/.
Ryan, J., “Coronavirus pandemic: How social distancing can help flatten
the curve”, Retrieved from https://www.cnet.com/news/coronaviruspandemic-how-social-distancing-can-help-flatten-the-curve/
Elshimi, A., “How IoT can help control pandemc”, Retrieved from
https://www.eetimes.com/how-iot-can-help-control-pandemic/#
Ilyas, M., “Wireless Sensor Networks for Smart Healthcare”, Proceedings
of ICCAIS 2018, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, April 2018.
Pratap, R., Javaid, M., Haleem, A., Vaishya, R., and Ali, S., “Internet of
Medical Things (IoMT) for orthopaedic in COVID-19 pandemic: Roles,
challenges, and applications”, Journal of Clinical Orthopaedics and
Trauma, Rdetrieved from https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcot.2020.05.011
Chedli, M., “The Management of Crisis”, Journal of Economic
Development, Environment of People, Vol. 5, Issue, 2, pp. 6-14, 2016.
Al-Taie, M., Ali, A., “A Self-Organizing Communication Model for
Disaster Risk Management”, International Journal of Adv. Soft Comput.
Applic., Vol. 9, No. 2, pp. 17-30, 2017.
Ali, O., Ajmi, S., and Ali, S., “Stay Connected – Internet of Things”,
International Journal of Applied Engineering Research, Vol. 13, No. 6,
pp. 4599-4605, 2018.
“Docker platform, available at https://docs.docker.com
“Kubernetes orchestration, available at https://kubernetes.io
“The
odroid
XU-4.
available
online
at
https://www.hardkernel.com/shop/odroid-xu4
“The raspberry foundation” available: https://www.raspberrypi.org.
The
latte
panda
4G
platform.
available
online
at
https://www.lattepanda.com/products/3.html last accessed: April 2020.
Qureshi, B., "An Affordable Hybrid Cloud Based Cluster for Secure
Health Informatics Research," International Journal of Cloud
Applications
and
Computing
(IJCAC)
8
(2018):
2,
doi:10.4018/IJCAC.2018040102
Qureshi B., Koubaa A., Al Mhaini M., "A Lightweight and Secure
Framework for Hybrid Cloud Based EHR Systems", Smart Societies,
Infrastructure, Technologies and Applications. SCITA 2017.
Qureshi B., “Profile-based power-aware workflow scheduling framework
for energy-efficient data centers,” Future Generation Computer Systems,
vol. 94, pp. 453 – 467, 2019.

