The Questions We Are Asking

COVID-19
Contact-Tracing
Mobile Apps:
Evaluation And
Assessment For
Decision Makers
1

Table Of
Contents

Table Of Contents

The Case For Action
04

The Case For Action

05

The COVID-19 Pandemic Challenge

06

The Contact-Tracing Solution

08

Contact-Tracing Apps Around
The Globe

Evaluating Contact-Tracing Mobile Apps:
The Questions We Are Asking
11

Is The Project Open Source?

19

Who Is Supporting The App?

12

Does the App Use GPS, Bluetooth,
Or Both?

20

How Will The App Be Deployed?

14

Are Location And Contact Data Stored
And Processed In A Centralized Or
Decentralized Manner?

20

What Steps Are Being Taken To Address
Challenges In Scaling The Solution?

21

What Incentives Are In Place To Promote
Deployment And Adoption?

22

What Does User Notification Of A Potential
Exposure To COVID-19 Look Like?

15

How Does The App Decide Which People
Could Have Been Exposed To Others
Infected With COVID-19?

15

How Is Data Collected From People Who
Experience Symptoms Of COVID-19?

22

How Does The App Prevent
Fraudulent Reports?

16

Will The Data Be Used For Other Purposes
Besides Contact Tracing?

22

What Is The Policy For Correcting
False Reports?

16

How Do Users Know The Data Are Not
Used For Other Purposes?

22

What Happens If Identifiable Information
Is Accidentally Released?

17

How Is The Privacy Of Healthy Users
Protected?

23

How Does The App Address The Risk For
Panic Or Risky Behavior Among Users?

17

How Is The Privacy Of Users Who Have
Been Infected With COVID-19 Protected?

24

What Relationships Does The Team Have
With Epidemiologists And Health Officials?

18

Are People Who Are Infected With
COVID-19 Forced To Share Their
Location History?

24

How Does The Solution Interact With
Public Health Officials?

18

Are Healthy People Required To Use
The App?

25

How Will The Team Measure Its Impact
On The Pandemic?

Conclusion
26

Conclusion

References
28

References

31

Authors

03

The Case
For Action

4

The Case For Action

More than 150,000 deaths are now attributed to the global COVID-19
pandemic. Many thousands more lives are expected to be lost before
we have brought the disease under control and are capable of managing
future spikes in the number of cases. In an effort to both slow and stop the
disease, communities across the world have halted everyday life, requesting
or requiring their residents to close non-essential businesses, stop going
to school, and stay home. Digital initiatives hope to support safe and wellconsidered approaches to the reopening of our societies while simultaneously
reducing the human loss of life by giving frontline officials modern tools with
which to control this pandemic.
One particular set of modern digital tools aims to upgrade contact-tracing
capacity, typically a lengthy and laborious process. In addition to increasing
the speed with which contact-tracers can reach those who have been
exposed to the disease, these tools can increase the accuracy of contact
tracing. However, many first-generation digital contact-tracing tools have
paved the way for a post-pandemic surveillance state and the mistreatment
of private, personal information. Privacy must remain at the forefront of the
global response, lest short-term pandemic interventions enable long-term
surveillance and abuse. The design and development of the next generation
of contact-tracing tools offers an opportunity to sharply pivot to solutions
using privacy-first principles and collaborative, open-source designs.
These tools present an opportunity to save lives by flattening the curve
of the pandemic and to provide economic relief without allowing privacy
infringements now or in the future.

The COVID-19 Pandemic Challenge
COVID-19 virus transmission occurs for several days before a person shows any symptoms. During
this time, a person going about their daily life may interact with, and possibly pass the infection to,
as many as a thousand people. Without knowing they are infected, an individual who has only mild
symptoms or is asymptomatic may continue to interact with others, further spreading the virus. This
creates an exponential rise in infections.
Stopping the spread of COVID-19 with pharmaceutical treatments and vaccines remains at least
6–18 months away from widespread availability. Therefore, public health countermeasures, such
as social distancing, offer the only possibility of stopping virus proliferation in the near future. When
applied broadly, such measures disrupt every aspect of society and risk economic collapse. Already,
unemployment rates have skyrocketed, tenants are struggling to pay rent, and critical supply chains,
including the food supply chain, have been interrupted. The longer strict social distancing measures
remain in place, the more severe the consequences for economies and societies will be. However,
if social distancing measures are lifted too quickly, the virus will spread once again, claiming many
additional lives.

05

The Contact-Tracing App As A Solution

The Contact-Tracing
App As A Solution
The contact-tracing process evaluates the
recent location history and social connections
of those who become infected and notifies
the people they have interacted with of their
exposure to the virus. In this way, contacttracing methods allow targeted measures (e.g.,
quarantining, virus testing) to be applied only to
exposed individuals. Traditionally, public health
officials perform contact tracing manually, by
interviewing patients diagnosed with a disease
about their activity over the past days or
weeks. Then, officials reach out to people who
crossed paths with the patient during the time
the patient was contagious and recommend
targeted interventions to prevent further spread
of the disease.
Widespread, rapid transmission of a virus by
respiratory droplets, as in the case of COVID-19,
challenges the practicality of the traditional
contact-tracing process. Manual tracing is
resource intensive, is time consuming, and will,
at best, be limited to contacts within the social
circles of the infected—and thus cannot trace
strangers effectively. Furthermore, the patient
being interviewed is often extremely ill and at
risk for memory errors during the interview.
Digital contact-tracing tools may help mitigate
these challenges.

Today, almost half of the world’s population
carries a device, such as a smartphone, capable
of GPS tracking and Bluetooth communication
with nearby devices. Each device is able to
create a location trail—a timestamped log of
the locations of an individual, as well as a list of
anonymous ID tokens that are collected when
the device user crosses near another device. By
comparing the device users’ location trails or the
anonymous ID tokens they have collected with
those from people who have COVID-19, one can
identify others who have been near the person
who is infected; this facilitates contact tracing
in a more accurate and timely manner than
the traditional manual approach. Several pilot
programs, particularly in China and South Korea,
have demonstrated the technical feasibility of
contact-tracing applications as tools to help
contain the COVID-19 outbreak within a large
population. However, these programs also
highlight the very real risks that exist with the
use of such technologies.
A location trail and list of nearby device IDs
contains highly sensitive, private information
about a person: everything from where they live
and work and which businesses they support,
to which friends and family members they visit.
Location data can be used to identify people
who are infected and might then be targeted
by their community. For example, data sent
out by the South Korean government to inform
residents about the movements of persons
recently diagnosed with COVID-19 sparked
speculations about the individuals’ personal
lives, from rumors of plastic surgery to infidelity
and prostitution. More frightening still, enabling
access to a person’s location data by a third
party, particularly a government, opens a path
to potentially unrestrained state surveillance.
In China, users suspect that an app developed
to help citizens identify symptoms and their risk
of carrying a pathogen was used to spy on them
and share personal data with the police. Care
must be taken in the design of such apps.
06

The Contact-Tracing App as a Solution

A number of groups, from governments to
non-profits, have quickly acted to innovate the
contact-tracing process: they are designing,
building, and launching contact-tracing apps
in response to the COVID-19 crisis. A diverse
range of approaches exist, creating challenging
choices for officials looking to implement
contact-tracing technology in their community
and raising concerns about these choices
among citizens asked to participate in contact
tracing. We are frequently asked how to
evaluate and differentiate between the options
for contact-tracing applications. Here, we share
the questions we ask about app features and
plans when reviewing the many contact-tracing
apps appearing on the global stage.

“

[Some of my patients]
were more afraid of
being blamed than dying
of the virus”
— Lee Su-young, Psychiatrist at
Myongji Hospital, South Korea

Examples of the messages that alert
South Koreans to new cases

07

Contact-Tracing Apps Around the Globe

Contact-Tracing
Apps Around
The Globe

8

Contact-Tracing Apps Around the Globe

North America

Europe

COVID Safe Paths

Covid Symptom Tracker

USA

CoEpi
Covid Watch

UK

France
StopCovid

South America
Peru

PeruEnTusManos (“Peru in Your Hands”)

Asia

Poland
ProteGO

Iceland
Rakning C-19

Singapore

Croatia

TraceTogether

STOP Corona!

South Korea

Austria

Corona 100m (Co100)

Stopp Corona

China
Alipay Health Code, WeChat, QQ

Middle East

India

HaMagen

Aarogya Setu
Tracy

Israel

Track Virus

Bahrain
BeAware Bahrain

Africa

South Africa
Covi-ID
Additional proposed apps beyond this list may exist. All
apps listed are not necessarily available in Apple iOS store
and Google Playstore at this time. As part of this paper, we
have begun to seek answers to the questions that follow
for each of these apps. These answers are being gathered
into a table; the working draft can be found here:
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/tracing_apps_table
We invite readers to submit additions and suggestions
to the table at info@pathcheck.org

PCI is not responsible for any errors or omissions,
or for the results obtained from the use of this
information. All information in this report is
provided “as is”, with no guarantee of completeness,
accuracy, timeliness or of the results obtained from
the use of this information. We welcome additions,
modifications, and corrections. Please reach out to us
at info@pathcheck.org with additions, modifications,
and corrections.

09

Evaluating Contact-Tracing Apps: The Questions We are Asking

The Questions
We Are Asking

10

The Questions We Are Asking

Is The Project Open Source?

An open-source approach lets programmers and other experts outside the app
development team review the code for a project. These outside programmers
can make improvements, copy the code, or use it to create something entirely
new. Open source offers a layer of trustworthiness. Because the code is
publicly available, it can be reviewed by experts around the world to confirm
it works the way the development team says it should. There are, at times,
valid reasons to not use an open-source approach, such as when a business is
seeking to develop a proprietary technology.
During the COVID-19 crisis, we believe that open-source projects promote
collaboration and foster community.

11

The Questions We Are Asking

Does the App Use GPS, Bluetooth, or Both?

Contact-tracing apps require the use of a data source to infer contact between two people: two of the most
useful data sources are GPS location data and Bluetooth broadcasting. GPS-based apps create a “location
trail” for each user by recording their time-stamped GPS location. If a person catches COVID-19, they can
share their location trail with the responsible authority—the health worker, public health official, government
official, or app creator. The authority then releases some or all of the location trail for other users to compare
to. In some applications, the person who is infected might be able to directly share their location trail with
other users.
Other apps rely on Bluetooth to determine who the person who is infected has crossed paths. Such apps
create a unique identifier, a number or token, which the app broadcasts to nearby devices. The user’s phone
then records the identifiers of other phones it has been near. If a person becomes infected, their unique
identifiers can be compared to those stored by other users to determine who the infected person has crossed
paths with. In some cases, such as the Singapore TraceTogether app, the central authority stores user
information and can determine the user’s phone number and identity from an identifier. In others, such as
COVID Watch and CoEpi, the identifiers provided by the person who declares themselves to be infected cannot
be used by the central authority to determine the person’s real world identity.
Both approaches offer distinct advantages and challenges:

•

•

GPS-Based Approach
Allows for estimation of exposure related to surface
transmission of disease. Unlike Bluetooth, GPS-based
systems can notify users if they were in a location
shortly after a person infected with COVID-19,
when the chance for exposure to the virus through
commonly touched surfaces is high.
Enables users to import historical data. Other
applications on the users’ phones, such as Google
Maps, are already collecting the potential user’s
location histories before they install the contacttracing app. When users import these historical
data, the app can alert the user to potential exposures
from their location history, even before they
downloaded the app.

•

Provides redacted, anonymized GPS data to help
public health officials follow the spread of disease
within a community.

•

Is able to record the user’s location history using
a small amount of data, making scaling and
implementation in regions with high data costs
more likely.

•

Bluetooth-Based Approach
Uses signal strength, which is reduced by walls and
other barriers, to estimate the distance between users.
In some places, such as a large, multi-floor building,
this estimate more accurately reflects the chance of
exposure to disease than a GPS-based approach.

•

Uses time-range-dependent, randomly generated
numbers as IDs to ideally achieve relative anonymity.

•

Requires the use of a compatible app by other users
to record possible exposures. If an app is not widely
adopted, the potential utility is limited.

•

No potential to collect historical data from before the
user downloaded the app.

12

The Questions We Are Asking

In the near-future, some solutions, including
COVID Safe Paths, will integrate both
approaches, allowing the user to harness the
advantages of each while mitigating
some challenges.

GPS: HaMagen (Israel)

Bluetooth: Trace Together (Singapore)

Fixed vs. Time-Variable Identifiers
Some Bluetooth-based apps use a fixed
identifier, meaning the unique number
assigned to the device does not change and
is permanently associated with the user.
Time-variable identifiers change on a set
time interval, such as an hour, so each user
is associated with many different identifiers.
The use of time-variable identifiers adds
a layer of privacy protection by making it
difficult for a third party to track a particular
phone over time based upon
a single identifier.
Both GPS and Bluetooth: Aarogya Setu (India)
13

The Questions We Are Asking

Are Location And Contact Data Stored And Processed In A Centralized Or
Decentralized Manner?

In a centralized version of contact tracing, location and contact data are collected and consolidated centrally
by a single authority, often a government entity. China utilized a centralized approach with its app. Other
information about the user, such as mobile telecommunication service provider or payment data, may be
collected and paired with the location data.
The central authority identifies people who are infected, determines their contacts, and requests specific
actions by those who may have been exposed to the virus. Centralized systems create powerful tools for
analysis and public health decision making. However, such systems also expose a person’s data to a central
authority, creating an opportunity to undermine the person’s privacy.
In a decentralized approach, the healthy user’s data never goes to a central server. Location data are stored
and processed on the phone of the user. Only the location data of people confirmed to be infected need to
be shared. Tools, such as redaction and blurring of the infected person’s data, can be used to help preserve
their privacy. An Israeli app, Track Virus, is an example of a decentralized approach, as is COVID Safe Paths.
Decentralized systems typically offer greater privacy protection and are, therefore, more in line with privacy
requirements and regulations such as GDPR. Some utility may be lost compared to centralized systems as
collection and aggregation of large data sets from users can be used for beneficial public health research.
However, as we consider the various approaches, the grave privacy risks associated with centralized systems
far outweigh the limited additional benefits, leading us to highly value decentralized approaches.

A previous version of this report incorrectly described
Track Virus. Track Virus is a live platform with
increasing use. It utilizes a decentralized approach to
processing and storing data in order to preserve user
privacy. More can be learned about Track Virus here:
https://www.track-virus.com/

A Push or a Pull?
When checking if a healthy user has been
exposed to COVID-19, contact-tracing apps
may either push the healthy user’s data to
the authority (centralized processing) or pull
a list of locations and/or contact IDs of those
who have been infected from the authority
(decentralized processing). With a push,
the healthy user’s data is pushed (shared)
off of the user’s device and is compared by
the authority to the data of people who have
been infected. This exposes a large amount
of data to the authority. In a pull model,
an anonymized history of location data or
identifiers from people who have been infected
are pulled onto the healthy user’s device
so that the comparison can take place locally
without compromising the privacy of
healthy individuals.

14

The Questions We Are Asking

How Does the App Decide Which People Could Have Been Exposed To Others
Infected With COVID-19?

At the base of every contact-tracing app lies an algorithm that determines whether the app user has been
exposed to people who are infected and might have an increased chance of being infected themselves. The
algorithm integrates many factors, such as the distance between the users, the length of time the users were
in the same location, or the amount of time between the contact and the start of symptoms. Two apps with
different algorithms will potentially give a different likelihood of exposure to the same user. Understanding
the algorithm used is necessary for public health officials and healthcare providers to provide appropriate
guidance to users who receive an exposure notification. Contact-tracing app developers must clearly
communicate their algorithm with all stakeholders and failure to do so will be a significant red flag.

Potential Exposures to COVID-19
Given what is known to date about person-to-person transmission of COVID-19, contact-tracing apps can
properly assess users’ potential exposure to the virus if they take four important factors into consideration:
•

The distance between the person who is infected and the user.

•

The length of time the person who is infected and the user occupied the same space.

•

How many days prior to becoming infected the person interacted with the user.

•

Whether or not the user may have had contact with contaminated surfaces after interaction with the
person who is infected.

How Is Data Collected From People Who Experience Symptoms
Of COVID-19?

A location history must be collected from a person who has been diagnosed with COVID-19 in order for
contact tracing to occur. Several approaches are being piloted. In general, these approaches fall into two
categories:
•

An authority (public health official, healthcare provider, government official) collects the location history
from the person who is infected and makes it available to users of the app.

•

The patient self-reports symptoms and directly shares their data with other users of the app.

Use of an authority offers the advantage of confirmation that the person has COVID-19. The overlap of
symptoms between COVID-19 and other common respiratory illnesses might cause someone to suspect
they have COVID-19 when they actually have the flu or a common cold. Systems where people self-report
themselves as infected pose the risk that people with symptoms, but without a confirmed diagnosis, share
their location trail. Self-reporting approaches are also at risk from bad actors who may misreport their status
as infected in order to create chaos and fear. However, self-reporting systems have the advantage of fuller
consent of the infected person as the person definitively decides to share their location trail without influence
from an authority figure. When evaluating contact-tracing solutions, we seek to understand how data
will be collected from the person who is infected and how the solution will confirm that the person truly
has COVID-19.
15

The Questions We Are Asking

Will The Data Be Used For Other Purposes Besides
Contact Tracing?

Location data may potentially be repurposed to achieve additional objectives
beyond contact tracing. We believe these data should be used only for
response to an ongoing pandemic and that other uses should be strictly
forbidden. Turning app data over to law enforcement or other non-health
actors, such as commercial entities seeking to target ads to potential
customers, threatens users’ rights and privacy. Critically, this undermines
public trust. Without trust, citizens will not adopt contact-tracing apps at a
wide enough scale to effectively control the spread of the epidemic. Therefore,
access to location-tracking data should be tightly limited to specific public
health initiatives working on pandemic response.

How Do Users Know The Data Is Not Used For
Other Purposes?

Users should be able to confirm how their data is used. Promises by the app’s
developers to delete data are insufficient. Users should be able to check
exactly what location data has been collected and stored and to confirm that
their data is no longer there after the deadline for deletion (the disease’s
incubation period, 14 to 37 days for coronavirus). Apps must obtain users’
unforced and informed consent for any disclosure of their data.

Recently, the A1 Teleom Austria Group shared aggregated user
location data from an app not regularly used for public health
purposes with the Austrian government’s COVID-19 emergency
management team for reasons that were not initially specified.
Observers believe that A1’s data was most likely being used to
forecast disease spread or to monitor the population for large
gatherings that might transmit the virus. However, the sharing of
location data with government agencies for unspecified purposes
attracted the criticism of privacy rights activists and created
suspicions that weakened user trust, threatening long-term
success.

16

The Questions We Are Asking

How Is The Privacy Of Healthy Users Protected?

An opportunity for misuse and privacy violations arises whenever a third party, a government, a
corporation, or any other entity is able to access the data of healthy users. A decentralized approach
prevents privacy compromise for healthy users because they are doing all the calculations on their
own phones. Time-limited storage of location data also protects user privacy, such as only storing
28 days of data with deletion of everything beyond this point. All contact-tracing app development
teams should clearly articulate how they protect the privacy of all users – whether healthy or
infected. As an example, a preliminary draft of the privacy principles of the COVID Safe Paths team
can be accessed in COVID-19 Contact Tracing Privacy Principles. This overview of model privacy
practices explains how the application embraces principles such as Privacy by Design, the Fair
Information Practice Principles (FIPPs), and Legal Protection by Design.

How Is The Privacy Of Users Who Have Been Infected
With COVID-19 Protected?

Historical location data and nearby device IDs must be collected from a person who is infected to
enable contact tracing. However, both the collection and release of that information have broad
implications for the privacy rights of the individual. As the most vulnerable stakeholder, several
efforts must be undertaken to protect, to the highest degree possible, the privacy of the person who
is infected.
App development teams may design for privacy by utilizing a variety of approaches:
•

Limiting the amount of data published publicly.

•

Providing users with the ability to correct
incorrect information.

•

Providing tools that allow the person who has
been diagnosed and their healthcare providers
to redact any sensitive locations, such as a
home or workplace.

•

Notifying individuals about what data is
collected, how long it is stored, and who will
have access to it during each stage of use.

•

Enabling people to obtain access to
information about potential exposures
to COVID-19 without requiring that they
consent to share their data with
other parties.

•
Supporting strict regulation around access
to and usage of the data by any entity that
collects it, particularly governments.

Deleting user location data after it is no
longer necessary to perform contact tracing.

•

Alignment with the Fair Information Practice
Principles.

Obtaining targeted, affirmative, informed
consent for each use of the person’s data.

•

Using open-source software to foster trust
in the app’s privacy protection claims.

•

End-to-end encryption of location data before
sensitive locations are redacted.

•

Eliminating the risk of third-party access
to information by enabling voluntary selfreporting by the person who is infected.

•

•

•

Providing users with the ability to see how
their data is being used and revoke consent for
usage of their information.
17

The Questions We Are Asking

Are People Who Are Infected With COVID-19 Forced To Share Their
Location History?

Requiring people who are infected or potentially infected to track their movements and
disclose their contacts achieves the highest degree of efficacy in contact tracing within
a community. However, if residents cannot choose to at least selectively withhold their
information, they may be stigmatized, persecuted, or exploited by malicious actors
on the basis of their data. Voluntary reporting respects users’ rights to privacy and to
informed consent. It encourages app developers to include safeguards that reduce the
risk for abuse of sensitive data. However, when individuals who become infected refuse
to share their contact-tracing data, the accuracy of contact tracing declines, potentially
contributing to misinformation and a false sense of security.
We believe that no one should be forced to relinquish highly sensitive personal data. We
dislike solutions that require potential users to consent to share their data if they become
infected in order to access information about whether or not they have crossed paths with
someone who was infected. Incentives such as those outlined in the following sections
should be implemented to encourage users who become infected to share their data.

Are Healthy People Required To Use
The App?

People who are healthy should also proactively choose
to use a contact-tracing app rather than being mandated
to do so. Potential users should be encouraged to do so
by incentives, such as the opportunity to take control of
their information to benefit their health, strong privacy
protection policies, trust in the app’s developers, clear
communication, and informed consent.

“Alipay Health Code (China): An example of
a contact-tracing approach with mandatory
participation tied to freedom of movement
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/01/
business/china-coronavirus-surveillance.html

18

The Questions We Are Asking

Who Is Supporting The App?

In order to roll out a contact-tracing app on a global scale, three groups must
work together: a substantial team to create and promote the app; large, trusted
institutions to support development and deployment of the app; and local, onthe-ground partners in the various communities in which the app is deployed.
Contact-tracing apps are tools, not complete solutions. Disease containment
utilizing these tools requires multidisciplinary collaborations across the
technology, healthcare, public health, and government sectors.
We are working hard to create these partnerships for COVID Safe Paths and
look for such partnerships in other apps we evaluate.
Among those partnerships teams should be seeking to build are:
•

Cloud players (AWS, Azure, GCP, etc.)

•

Mobile carriers and local telecommunications providers.

•

Partnerships with health authorities; these partnerships are particularly
important in light of app store requirements for all apps addressing the
COVID-19 pandemic to have the support of a health organization

•

Government agencies

•

Local public health workers and healthcare providers: contact-tracing apps
will only succeed if those who crossed paths with someone who became
infected can receive guidance and support from local providers on what
steps to take to protect themselves and their families.

•

Current contact tracers; integrating into the current contact-tracing
protocol increases the effectiveness of a contact-tracing app within
a community

•

Non-profit organizations and academic institutions

19

The Questions We Are Asking

How Will The App Be Deployed?

We see apps aiming to deploy at a variety of levels, from a single city to an entire nation
to those aiming for a global reach. Regardless of the level at which they are deployed,
contact-tracing apps must be paired with existing infrastructure in order to support a
successful containment strategy. Public health officials and healthcare providers must
be ready to answer user questions, offer testing, or provide advice about what to do if
someone has been exposed to a person with COVID-19. The resources and support
necessary to follow this advice must also be made available. We look for well-considered
deployment strategies with aggressive outreach to local partners. For this reason, we are
building not only a contact-tracing app, but also Safe Places, a web-based tool for public
health officials working to contain the COVID-19 pandemic.
It is also worth noting that as global travel resumes, cross-communication between
apps operating in different regions will be necessary to achieve global containment of
COVID-19. We look for teams that are thinking ahead and building the technological
foundation for this collaboration into their application.

What Steps Are Being Taken To Address Challenges In Scaling
The Solution?

Taking any software tool from idea to widespread solution requires the team to think
creatively. Contact-tracing apps gain value with each additional user. Many approaches to
encouraging user adoption exist, and good teams will use a variety of them. A few steps
we encourage are:
•

Fostering trust

•

Developing key partnerships, including with community officials who can help drive
local support for the solution

•

Creating solutions that meet the needs of public health officials responding to the
pandemic

•

Focusing on the needs of the users

•

Providing value to the user during a contact-tracing interview even if they choose not
to download the app before they have been diagnosed with COVID-19

20

The Questions We Are Asking

What Incentives Are In Place To Promote Deployment And Adoption?

Contact-tracing apps need a strong value proposition for each stakeholder—the healthy
user, the person who is infected, the public health worker responsible for contact tracing,
the public health authority responsible for the community’s response to the pandemic,
and government officials tasked with coordinating the local or national response to
COVID-19. As an example, the incentives for each stakeholder from the Safe Paths
solution are presented here.
Healthy Users: The General Population
Offers an opportunity to take control and gain information. The user is able to make
decisions about where they should be going and what activities are safe for their families
and themselves. Users are more confident and more informed about their actual risk of
spreading the disease.
Person with COVID-19
Gives the ability to quickly and accurately share location history with public health contact
tracers. Sharing their history offers an opportunity to help protect their community.
Contact Tracers
Gives immediate relief to contact tracers. Provides a tool to more efficiently conduct
interviews and gather information from patients. Increases data accuracy over current
methods (e.g., remembering). Enables them to work with infected patients to quickly
remove information that the patient asserts is personal, private, and/or confidential.
Public Health Authorities
Allows more efficient and more accurate data collection and analysis about the spread
of COVID-19 within their jurisdiction. Provides data to make better, more targeted
recommendations for intervention to their community and to utilize limited testing
resources most constructively. Offers an opportunity to communicate a personalized risk
profile to each citizen, answering the question “Should I be concerned or not?” for every
individual in their constituency and to closely monitor those who have the highest chance
of experiencing complications from COVID-19.
Government Officials
Faster and more accurate contact tracing allows officials to catch up with the virus and
more effectively deploy resources. Rather than undifferentiated application of lockdown measures risking economic and subsequent financial collapse, officials are able to
implement a differentiated approach with targeted measures as recommended by the
WHO.

21

The Questions We Are Asking

What Does User Notification Of A Potential Exposure To COVID-19
Look Like?

The utmost care must be taken when notifying users of a potential exposure to COVID-19
given the serious health, economic, and social consequences of a notification. During
this stressful time, clear, easy-to-understand communication reduces the possibility for
the user to misjudge their situation. High-quality translations should be available for all
users. Transparency about how the decision to notify the user was made helps the user
and their public health officials make decisions about whether and which containment
measures the user needs to undertake. Notifications should evolve to reflect advances
in the understanding of disease transmission as scientists around the world continue to
clarify how COVID-19 passes from person to person.

How Does the App Prevent Fraudulent Reports?

Contact-tracing apps, particularly those that allow individuals to self-report themselves
as infected, must address the risk that some people will make fraudulent reports. In
some instances, a false report may be done in good faith—the person truly suspects
they have COVID-19, but they have not undergone definitive testing and actually have
a different virus. In other cases, bad actors may report themselves as infected with
COVID-19 in order to create chaos. Storing sensitive information in an anonymized,
redacted, and aggregated manner minimizes the risk of data-tampering, yet it does not
eliminate the chance for human error or malicious intervention. One approach to reducing
fraud requires the diagnosis to be confirmed by a healthcare provider. However, creative
teams may find other ways to prevent false reports of illness.

What Is The Policy For Correcting False Reports?

With large-scale deployment, most apps will experience an occasional false report or
find an error in an otherwise correct report. Each app should develop a protocol for
its response when an incorrect report is identified. Easy-to-use tools should allow all
involved in reporting to quickly mark and remove errors as soon as the false report is
identified. Most often, users should be notified of the change in their exposure history.

What Happens If Identifiable Information Is Accidentally Released?

While most apps aim to obscure the identity of the person who is infected, accidental
release of information sufficient to identify the person can occur on rare occasions,
similar to accidental release of protected health information. These low risks should be
communicated to the users during the consent process. A process for quickly removing
identifiable information from public access should be in place.

22

The Questions We Are Asking

How Does The App Address The Possibility Of Panic Or Risky
Behavior Among Users?

Notification of a potential exposure to COVID-19 will be frightening to many, particularly
those at increased risk for serious complications, and may lead to panic among users.
Large groups of people seeking medical evaluation or demanding testing could quickly
overwhelm an already strained healthcare system. We have seen panic related to the
pandemic lead to hoarding and vigilantism. Conversely, users who are not notified of
a potential exposure may assume they are at no risk to catch COVID-19 and disregard
critical social distancing and hygiene recommendations. Any contact-tracing solution will
need to provide users with accurate information to reduce the chance for panic or risky
behavior. When reviewing an app, we look for the following:
•

Clear, easy-to-understand, culturally appropriate communication with the user

•

Engagement of epidemiologists, public health officials, and healthcare providers,
both as core members of the decision-making team and as local partners within
the community to which the app is deployed, in order to provide assessment and
recommendations to people who may have been exposed to COVID-19

•

Measures to prevent individuals from falsely reporting themselves infected and
thoughtful consideration of how a person reported to be infected is confirmed to
have COVID-19

•

Use of both GPS and Bluetooth systems, utilizing the strengths of each technology

•

Creative algorithms that reduce the chance that insignificant exposures are flagged

23

The Questions We Are Asking

What Relationships Does The Team Have With Epidemiologists And
Health Officials?

Contact-tracing apps should be viewed as a tool to be utilized by experts in infectious disease
control. Epidemiologists, public health officials, and healthcare providers must be core members of
any team designing and implementing a contact-tracing app. We look to see that such experts are
included as team members, mentors, and strategic partners.

How Does The Solution Interact With Public Health Officials?

Ideally, contact-tracing apps should fit into the current care pathway. One of the leaders in this area
is TraceTogether in Singapore, which supports a contact-tracing process put in place long before the
app was ready. TraceTogether uses Bluetooth to identify nearby phones with the app installed and
tracks both proximity and timestamps. If a person is diagnosed with COVID-19, they can choose to
allow the Ministry of Health to access their TraceTogether data, which is then used by the manual
contact-tracing team to alert those who may have been exposed. The manual contact-tracing team
then alerts those who may have been exposed.
We also aim to lead in this area with the development of COVID Safe Places, a web-tool allowing
public health officials to work more quickly, collect better data, and better respond to what is
happening in their community. We are partnering with public health workers around the world to
deploy COVID Safe Places.

24

The Questions We Are Asking

How Will The Team Measure Its Impact On The Pandemic?

The success of any contact-tracing program should be measured in lives saved. Lives are
saved both by a reduction in the spread of disease and by a reduction in the psychosocial
and economic consequences of widespread quarantine actions. Quantitative analysis
of the effect of this new technology should be undertaken—not only to allow for further
improvements during the current COVID-19 pandemic, but also to better address the next
outbreak of infectious disease. In addition to collecting real-world data about the impact
of contact-tracing apps, teams should work to communicate their success to the public.
If the apps are effective in helping to control the pandemic, the public may fail to notice
the extent to which their use was critical to the community’s ability to control the spread
of disease.

25

The Questions We are Asking

Conclusion

26

Conclusion

The COVID-19 pandemic will not last forever. If we falter in our
response and choose digital contact-tracing tools that compromise
individual privacy for efficacy, the consequences will extend long
after the last store has reopened and the last child has returned to
school. We believe privacy does not have to be compromised in order
to reduce new infections and slow the spread of disease. We are
building COVID Safe Paths with privacy protection at the forefront for
this pandemic and the next. Here, we have begun to detail the key
questions that should be asked as we evaluate contact-tracing apps
developed and deployed against the COVID-19 pandemic. We plan to
continue this discussion and are committed to serving as a resource
for countries, states, cities, and individuals throughout the world.
We welcome additions to and modifications of this report and
analysis. To submit a change please email info@pathcheck.org

27

References

References

28

References

Berke, A., Bakker, M., Vepakomma, P., Larson, K., & “Sandy” Pentland, A. (2020, April 8). Assessing
disease exposure risk with location data: A proposal for cryptographic reservation of privacy. arXiv.
arXiv:2003.14412v2 [cs.CR]. https://arxiv.org/pdf/2003.14412.pdf
Birnbaum, M. (2020, April 11). How Europe manages to keep a lid on coronavirus unemployment while
it spikes in the U.S. The Washington Post. https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/europe/how-europemanages-to-keep-a-lid-on-coronavirus-unemployment-while-it-spikes-in-the-us/2020/04/11/29b23c907b4f-11ea-a311-adb1344719a9_story.html
Cavoukian, A. (2011). Privacy by design: The 7 foundational principles. Implementation and mapping of fair
information practices.
https://dataprotection.industries/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/privacy-by-design.pdf
Center for Systems Design and Engineering at Johns Hopkins University. (2020). COVID-19 dashboard.
Retrieved April 18, 2020, from https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2020, April 3). Recommendation regarding the use of cloth face
coverings. Retrieved April 2020, from https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-sick/
cloth-face-cover.html
Choudhury S. (2020, March 25). Singapore says it will make its contact tracing tech freely available to
developers. CNBC. https://www.cnbc.com/2020/03/25/coronavirus-singapore-to-make-contact-tracing-techopen-source.html
Dougherty, Conor. (2020, April 8). 31% can’t pay the rent: ‘It’s only going to get worse.’” The New York Times.
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/08/business/economy/coronavirus-rent.html
The Federal Trade Commission (FTC). (1998, June). Fair information practice principles. In Privacy online:
A report to Congress (pp. 7-14). https://www.ftc.gov/sites/default/files/documents/reports/privacy-onlinereport-congress/priv-23a.pdf
Greenberg, A. (2020, April 8). Clever cryptography could protect privacy in COVID-19 contact tracing apps.
WIRED. https://www.wired.com/story/covid-19-contact-tracing-apps-cryptography/
Greenwood, D., Nadeau, G., Tsormpatzoudi, P., Wilson, B., Saviano, J., & “Sandy” Pentland, A. (2020, April 5).
COVID-19 contact tracing privacy principles. [Working draft]. MIT Computational Law Report. https://law.mit.
edu/pub/covid19contacttracingprivacyprinciples
Hellewell, J., Abbott, S., Gimma, A., Bosse, N.I., Jarvis, C.I., Russell, T.W., Munday, J.D., Kucharski, A.J.,
Edmunds, W.J., Centre for the Mathematical Modelling of Infectious Diseases COVID-19 Working Group, Funk,
S., & Eggo, R.M. (2020). Feasibility of controlling COVID-19 outbreaks by isolation of cases and contacts. The
Lancet Global Health, 8(4), e488–96. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2214-109X(20)30074-7.

29

References

Hernandez, M., Scarr, S., & Sharma, M. (2020, March 12). 2019 coronavirus: The Korean clusters. Reuters Graphics.
https://graphics.reuters.com/CHINA-HEALTH-SOUTHKOREA-CLUSTERS/0100B5G33SB/index.html.
Hildebrandt, M. (2019). 10. ‘Legal by Design’ or ‘Legal Protection by Design’? In Law for Computer Scientists. https://
lawforcomputerscientists.pubpub.org/pub/gfzd6k0g
Johns Hopkins Medicine. Coronavirus disease 2019 vs. the flu. Retrieved April 2020, from https://www.
hopkinsmedicine.org/health/conditions-and-diseases/coronavirus/coronavirus-disease-2019-vs-the-flu
Keeling, M.J., Hollingsworth, T.D., and Read, J.M. (2020). The efficacy of contact tracing for the containment of the
2019 novel Coronavirus (COVID-19). medRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.14.20023036
Kim, N. (2020, March 5). ‘More scary than Coronavirus’: South Korea’s health alerts expose private lives. The
Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/mar/06/more-scary-than-coronavirus-south-koreas-healthalerts-expose-private-lives
Lauer, S.A., Grantz, K.H., Bi, Q., Jones, F.K., Zheng, Q., Meredith, H.R., Azman, A.S., Reich, N.G., & Lessler, J. (2020).
The incubation period of Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) from publicly reported confirmed cases: Estimation
and application. Annals of Internal Medicine. https://doi.org/10.7326/M20-0504
Lawler, Dave. (2020, April 11). How the Coronavirus is disrupting the global food supply. Axios. https://www.axios.
com/coronavirus-global-food-supply-6967bf05-689e-4ac9-889b-f1d99e7e3163.html
Mozur, Paul. (2020, March 1). In Coronavirus fight, China gives citizens a color code, with red flags. The New York
Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/01/business/china-coronavirus-surveillance.html
Paton, J. (2020, March 31). Coronavirus vaccine in 18 months? Experts urge reality check. Bloomberg. https://www.
bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-03-31/coronavirus-vaccine-is-coming-in-a-year-to-18-months-show-me
Rabouin, Dion. (2020, March 11). Coronavirus has disrupted supply chains for nearly 75% of U.S. companies. Axios.
https://www.axios.com/coronavirus-supply-chains-china-46d82a0f-9f52-4229-840a-936822ddef41.html

30

References

Privacy International. (2020, March 17). Austria: Telco A1 gives government location data to test movement
restrictions. https://privacyinternational.org/examples/3432/austria-telco-a1-gives-government-location-datatest-movement-restrictions
Raskar, R., Schunemann, I., Barbar, R., Vilcans, K., Gray, J., Vepakomma, P., Kapa, S., Nuzzo, A., Gupta, R., Berke,
A., Greenwood, D., Keegan, C., Kanaparti, S., Beaudry, R., Stansbury, D., Arcila, B.B., Kanaparti, R., Pamplona, V.,
Benedetti, F.M., … Werner, J. (2020, March 19). Apps gone rogue: Maintaining personal privacy in an epidemic.
arXiv. arXiv:2003.08567v1 [cs.CR]. https://arxiv.org/pdf/2003.08567.pdf
Tufekci, Z. (2020, April 2). Don’t believe the COVID-19 models: That’s not what they’re for. The Atlantic. https://
www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2020/04/coronavirus-models-arent-supposed-be-right/609271
Webber, T. (2020, April 2). People tattle on neighbors flouting COVID-19 shutdown orders. Time. https://time.
com/5814488/businesses-not-following-shutdown-orders/
World Health Organization. (2017, May 10). Contact tracing. https://www.who.int/features/qa/contact-tracing/en
World Health Organization. (2020, March 25). COVID-19 virtual press conference. https://www.who.int/
docs/default-source/coronaviruse/transcripts/who-audio-emergencies-coronavirus-press-conference-full25mar2020.pdf
Zarroli, J., & Schneider, A. (2020, April 9). Jobs carnage mounts: 17 million file For unemployment in 3 weeks.
National Public Radio. https://www.npr.org/sections/coronavirus-live-updates/2020/04/09/830216099/6-6million-more-file-for-unemployment-as-coronavirus-keeps-economy-shut

Authors

Ramesh Raskar | Greg Nadeau | John Werner | Rachel Barbar | Ashley Mehra | Gabriel Harp |
Markus Leopoldseder | Bryan Wilson | Derrick Flakoll | Praneeth Vepakomma |
Deepti Pahwa | Robson Beaudry | Emelin Flores | Maciej Popielarz | Akanksha Bhatia |
Andrea Nuzzo | Matt Gee | Jay Summet | Rajeev Surati | Bikram Khastgir |
Francesco Maria Benedetti | Kristen Vilcans | Sienna Leis | Khahlil Louisy
Design by: Tony Pham

31

covidsafepaths.org

