COSRE: Community Exposure Risk Estimator for the COVID-19
Pandemic
Ziheng Sun1
Center for Spatial Information Science and Systems
George Mason University

Abstract: Due to the complexities of virus genotypes and the stochastic contacts in human society, it is a
big challenge to estimate the potential risks of getting exposed to a widely spreading virus. To allow the
public to be aware of the exposure risks in their daily activities, we proposed a birthday-paradox-based
probability model and implement it into a web-based system named COSRE for estimating community
exposure risks of public gathering during a pandemic. The exposure risk means the probability of people
meeting potential COVID hosts in public places like grocery stores, gyms, libraries, restaurants, coffee
shops, office suits, etc. The model has three inputs: the real-time potential active patients, the population in
local communities, and the customer counts in the room. With COSRE, people can explore the possible
impacts of the pandemic by doing spatiotemporal analysis, e.g., moving through time and testing a different
number of people to see the changes of risks as the pandemic unfolds. The system has the potential to
advance our ability to know the accurate exposure risks in various communities and allow us to make plans
with improved preparedness and precise responses for the pandemic. We use spatial analysis tools and drew
the county-level exposure risks of the United States from April 1 to May 15. The experiment shows that
the estimation model is very promising to assist people to be more specifically precise about their safety
control in daily routine and social lives and help businesses to dynamically adjust their COVID-19 policies
to accelerate their recovery.

Keywords: Exposure Risk; COVID-19; Probability Model; Community Social Risk; Birthday Paradox;
Spatial Analysis.

1. Introduction
1.1 Motivation
History always repeats itself regarding the pandemic [1]. Reducing the impact of the pandemic relies
on early detection and mitigation strategies that slow the early spread to allow more preparatory work to be
done. However, as the pandemic is already spreading right now, it puts a burden on all of us and it is not
an easy way to go back to the normal. New lifestyles spread diseases further and faster than before. New
and more intense factors amplify the transmission of diseases [2]. These risks apply at least equally to
densely populated areas. Environmental changes such as disruptive climate, also contribute to the spreading.
With the number of cases dramatically rising in United States communities exponentially, the need for risk
estimation and immediate actions is never so urgent. Although self-quarantine and self-isolation are already
in place in most states for several weeks, the virus is still spreading among people in grocery stores,
hospitals, community activities, private parties, etc. Considering the peak might have passed, states like
1

E-mail: zsun@gmu.edu; Mail: 4400 University Drive, MSN 6E1, Fairfax, VA 22030

1

Georgia start to reopen businesses to restore the economy. To assist the reopening with key assistance
information, risk assessment tools are essential to guide people to determine where and when to visit.
Reopening would be a very daunting challenge for many businesses in the United States this year [3].
The duration of the pandemic is uncertain yet and the influence could last for a long time. The current
guidelines for reopening are very general and not very customizable to fit in the real scenarios of different
communities. The situation of each community is different regarding the population, store types, average
spent time, patients, air quality, etc. It is improper to cope with them using any one-size-for-all solution. A
safer plan should be able to flexibly fit by considering specific factors like the locally confirmed cases,
potential asymptomatic patients, store space, layout, people density, local population composition,
commodities, age distribution, capacity limit, social distancing, temperature check, violation enforcement,
etc. However, further precise recommendations are rarely available for business managers to use yet. Very
few quantitative models could give estimations tailored for individual businesses to make smarter decisions
on balancing between life safety and economy.

1.2 Significance
To find a balancing point between a full lockdown in fear of the virus and a plan of reopening businesses
out of socioeconomic concerns, we urgently need a mechanism to help us assist that decision. The decisionmakers to be supported include not only the policymakers but also the business managers and their
customers. The system should give a customized real-time risk estimation for store managers to flexibly
adapt their operation to the unpredictable pandemic. The risk estimation will also provide the customers
with the information regarding their risks of visiting the businesses and increase their awareness and
confidence about their next move.
To achieve that goal, this project proposes a straightforward social probability model based on birthday
paradox theory to estimate the risk of people meeting at least one COVID patient, either asymptomatic or
symptomatic, in public places like shopping centers, grocery stores, recreational areas, restaurants, office
suite, etc. A prototype web-based system named COSRE [4] has been implemented to take zip codes as
inputs and output a probability of the risk. The risk is calculated based on the real-time data collected from
public resources. The purpose of the tool is to give people a reasonable quantitative estimation about their
risks of being exposed to the contact of COVID-19 virus in their communities, grocery stores, gyms,
restaurants, workplaces, and public recreational areas.

2. Related Work
Pandemics are large scale outbreaks of infectious diseases that can greatly increase mortality over a big
geographic area and cause significant economic, social, and political disruption [5]. The intensive global
travels and long-distance contacts in human society have greatly raised the likelihood of pandemics. One
example of past pandemics is the 2003 severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), that results in critical
threats to public health [6]. The World Health Organization compel all its member states to meet specific
standards for detecting, reporting on, and responding to infectious disease outbreaks. The framework
contributes to a more coordinated global response during the 2009 influenza pandemic [7]. Global public
health departments look for improving the preparedness through some refined standards and responding
plans to flatten the curves and reduce the deaths. The management of community risks in a pandemic needs
to apply more restrictive emergency management strategies than other hazards. The objectives of risk
management are to strengthen our responding capacities to contain the diseases, enable and promote linkage
and integration across the governments and societies. Accurate estimation of risks is the first and
fundamental step in making an effective risk management plan. Common responding practices are to limit
the point of entry to reduce the possibility of virus traveling. People, communities, states, and countries
2

should keep communicating with information and advice. Precise information provided early and often will
enable the community to correctly understand the health risks they face, and will make it easier to engage
them in actions to protect themselves. [8]
The COVID-19 virus was first isolated from a patient with pneumonia in Wuhan, China. Genetic
analysis revealed that it is closely related to SARS-Cov and genetically clusters within the genus
Betacoronavirus, subgenus Sarbecovirus [9]. Although pathology studies have been done for the COVID19 virus, as an ongoing pandemic, there are few tools available to evaluate the real-time social exposure
risks. A general classification of risk assessment is grouped into several levels: little, lower, medium, high,
very high, severe. Nicholas et al proposed a conceptual full-risk-spectrum comprehensive pandemic risk
management system (CPRMS) to prevent, prepare for, respond to, and mitigate the multisectoral impacts
of severe pandemics [10]. It contains six institutional building blocks in the global domain: governance and
leadership, sustainable financing, information and knowledge systems, human capital resources, essential
commodities and logistics, and operational service delivery. But the detailed framework still needs lots of
work to implement in each geographical area [10].
CDC has developed an online tool called Influenza Risk Assessment Tool (IRAT) that assesses the
potential pandemic risk posed by influenza A viruses [11]. The IRAT uses 10 scientific criteria to measure
the potential pandemic risk associated with each of these scenarios. These 10 criteria can be grouped into
three overarching categories: “properties of the virus”, “attributes of the population”, and “ecology &
epidemiology of the virus”. A composite score for each virus is calculated based on the given scenario. The
score gives the means to rank and compares influenza viruses to each other in terms of their potential
pandemic risks. It is an evaluation tool and should not be used as a predictive tool [12].
To take in-time, effective and appropriate actions to slow an ongoing disease outbreak, it is vital to
identify risk factors such as age, gender, occupation, and health conditions, and estimate the death risk
accurately in a real-time manner. For real-time infectious risk management, Jung et al proposed an approach
to do a real-time estimation of the risk of death from COVID-19 infection by inferencing using the reported
cases [13]. They used the exponential growth rate of the incidence to estimate the confirmed case fatality
risk (cCFR) in mainland China. Tang et al studied the reproduction number of COVID-19 and tried to get
more accurate R0 by using time-dependent contact and diagnosis rates to retrain their dynamics
transmission model. Castro et al presented a quantitative framework for real-time ZIKV risk assessment
that captures uncertainty in case reporting, importations, and vector-human transmission dynamics [14].
Their approach is divided into three sections: (1) county-level estimates of ZIKV importation and relative
transmission rates, (2) country-specific ZIKV outbreak simulations, and (3) ZIKV risk analysis. They fit a
probabilistic model (maximum entropy) to build a predictive model for the virus import risk. All these
researches above provide important references and inspired this work.

3. Method
3.1 Risk Estimator Core Algorithm
The idea of calculating birthday paradox probability [15] is reused here. The probability distribution is
similar to the Binomial distribution [16]. The basic formula is:
𝑃𝑟(

, , )

=

1−

(𝑝 − 𝑎)!
, 𝑖𝑓 𝑝 ≠ 0 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑛 ≠ 0 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑎 ≠ 0
𝑝!
0,
𝑖𝑓 𝑝 = 0 𝑜𝑟 𝑛 = 0 𝑜𝑟 𝑎 = 0

where 𝑃𝑟 is the probability function of meeting someone with COVID-19, 𝑝 is the total community
population (town, village, city, county, region, country), 𝑎 is the total number of potential COVID-19 cases
3

in the area, 𝑛 is the number of the people in the businesses like grocery stores, shopping centers, gyms,
restaurants, workplaces, recreational areas, etc [17].
The idea is first to calculate the odds of NOT meeting any infected person and subtract that odds from
1 to get the probability of meeting at least one infected patient in that group of people.
This model is based on several assumptions. First, it assumes that all the people in the population 𝑝
could visit the store with equal chance. If the chance is not equal for everybody, the 𝑛 and 𝑝 should be
changed according to reality. For example, the population of Fairfax County is over a million [18]. The
number 𝑝 should exclude the people who are unlikely to show up in the stores like children, selfquarantined people, people with restricted mobility like prisoners, etc. The potential number 𝑛 should also
remove those deceased and recovered. The business density in the area should be used to adjust the customer
predicting equation for the businesses.

3.2 Result Interpretation
This risk estimation can help people to react reasonably instead of panicking or just being indifferent
towards the virus. The formula takes three parameters as inputs and the output is the probability of the risk
meeting at least one infected person in the store. The result ranges from 0 to 1. The risk can be generally
interpreted as the probability of exposure to another COVID-infected person. Besides, many useful
practices could be recommended by quantitatively classifying the probability into several levels. An
example classification is that: the risk less than 25% is considered as relatively safe if the social distancing
principle is honored and wear a mouth mask, 25-50% means the risk is relatively serious and people should
wear masks and probably gloves as well, 50-75% reflect the place is very risky and masks, gloves, eye
protectors are all recommended and avoid touches with the surface of any public objects (elevator buttons,
stair handrails, doorknobs, etc), >75% means highly risky and the only best thing to do is stay at home and
avoid any contact with anyone in public places. This is just an example and the classification should be
validated with the realistic situation and evaluate its correlation between the classification and the real
exposure data collected in businesses and public areas. Based on the correlation analysis results the
policymakers or the people will have a better understanding of the risk numbers and take corresponding
actions to avoid being exposed in their specific county.

4. Results
Using the proposed algorithm, this work has calculated the risks for all the counties of the lower states,
and generated a series of maps since Apr 1. The COVID data comes from John Hopkins University CSSE
[19], the population data for zip codes comes from the United States Census [18]. The people in the room
is assumed to be 100. The estimation is made on the county level. Fig. 1 shows four of the maps on the
dates of April 1, April 15, May 1, and May 13, from which we could observe the trends of social exposure
risks in the pandemic.
The map of April 1 shows that New York City, Albany in Georgia, New Orleans, Denver, Salt Lake
City, and Sun Valley in Idaho become the centers with high exposure risks. On the contrary, the two states,
California and Washington, where the very first COVID-19 patients were found, have relatively low risks.
Overall, the epidemic centers already emerge on April 1 and started spreading among the neighboring
counties. At that time, most states already have their social distancing and stay-at-home orders in place.
Most people start to stay at least 6 feet from other people and avoid gathering in groups. Many people tried
to stay out of crowded places and most of the mass gathering is canceled following the guidelines of CDC.
However, the affected people start to show symptoms and the confirmed cases are distributed all over the
states. As Fig. 1(a) displays, almost every county has non-zero social risks. But risks are still low except
the first several states with COVID confirmed cases. On April 1st, the risks were highest in the New York
4

City metropolitan, New Orleans metropolitan, Denver metropolitan, the Blaine County in Idaho, and the
Summit County in Utah. A potential Outbreak could be foreseen from these areas as the curves start to rise.
The April 15 map shows that the serious areas on April 1 got even worse after two weeks. It could be
seen that the red counties become more and denser. The outbreak centers on April 1st didn’t change much
while the spreading areas surrounding them becomes red as well. The virus spreads faster in New York,
Albany, and New Orleans than the spreading in Denver, Salt Lake City, and Sunny Valley. New York has
taken the hardest hit with a big portion of the neighboring counties to New York city becoming dark red.
Louisiana and Mississippi are in deep red. Most counties in the two states have a significant amount of
confirmed cases comparing to their population. The three counties in northern Arizona and the northwestern
counties of New Mexico start to have high risks. For example, the Navajo county in Arizona only has a
population of 110,924 (2019) but found 390 confirmed cases and the population-patient ratio is very high.
Besides, unlike the metropolitans, the Navajo county has fewer stores and public places, which would make
it even risker if businesses reopen and people gather. Besides, the Detroit and Chicago areas start to join.
However, the risk in Washington and California remains at a relatively low level comparing to the other
outbreak centers in the eastern and southern U.S. Florida also shows the same pattern and only have
relatively high risk in the Miami region.
The calculation of the maps in May is a little different from those in April. As suggested by physicians
that most confirmed cases will either recover or die within a 30-day window, the patient number used in
the May calculation will extract the number of the same day in April (one month ago). The formula is:
𝑛

_

=𝑛

−𝑛

__

__

where 𝑖 represents the day in the month. As May has 31 days and April only has 30 days, we will use
April 30 data in the calculation of May 31. The map of May 1 shows that New York, Pennsylvania, New
Jersey, and Massachusetts have high exposure risk all over their coastal counties. New York City and its
associated counties are the most dangerous areas. People in those areas should wear mouth masks and keep
up with social distancing principles in public places. Stay home for 14 days after traveling and self-monitor
for symptoms by checking temperature twice a day and watching for fever, cough, shortness of breath, and
other symptoms of COVID-19. People in those risky areas should be more cautious by avoiding any contact
with vulnerable groups, like people 65 years or older, and people who live in a nursing home or long-term
care facility. The other east coast states, including Maryland, Virginia, Washington D.C., North Carolina,
South Carolina all start to turn darker. The inland region, such as western Pennsylvania, West Virginia,
western Virginia, west of North Carolina, east fo Tennessee, has relatively lower exposure risks. On May
1, the populous counties in the middle states like Iowa, Nebraska, Ohio, Indiana, Kentucky, Minnesota,
have turned dark red. But they are not spreading like New York or other metropolitans. The risks are
restricted in certain counties and show no obvious signs of a wide outbreak within the entire states. Those
red counties are very scattered and isolated. The reason is probably that the other less populous counties
intentionally reduced their contacts with the populous counties. The connections among different counties
are not as intense as those in the east coast counties. The risk in Washington, California, Nevada, Texas,
and Florida, is slowly rising and remains lower than the other outbreak states.
According to the map of May 13, the riskiest areas are still on the eastern coast, however, with the sign
of decreasing in some suburban counties in New York, Pennsylvania, and Georgia. The surrounding
counties of Columbus in Georgia saw the risks are reducing regarding the peak might be over and the curve
of New York is on the downside. The populous counties in the Mississippi downstream basin and the corn
belt states have become darker. The counties in the west Oklahoma and Kansas have spreading several
more, and some of them are darker red. On the other hand, the risk in the New Orleans metropolitan is
5

much lower than two weeks ago. The risk on the western coast is relatively low. The most serious counties
in northern Arizona are Navajo and Apache, and in northwestern New Mexico are San Juan county and
Mckinley county. The Chicago metropolitan turns to red and is very likely to become dark red on June 1.
The western coast and Florida stay nearly unchanged since the beginning of this month. The two states that
need to watch out in the next two weeks are those corn belt states, including Illinois, Michigan, Ohio,
Kentucky, Tennessee, Wisconsin, Iowa, Indiana, and Missouri. These states haven’t clearly shown a drop
in the curves and some of them have begun to reopen, which probably might contribute to a big spike in
the confirmed cases.

(a) April 1

(b) April 15

6

(c) May 1

(d) May 15
Figure 1. The Community Exposure Risk of the United States on April 1, April 15, May 1, and May 15
2020

5. Discussion
5.1 Community Exposure Risk and Transmission Risk
The community exposure risk is an important contributing factor to the transmission risk. The
relationship could be simply delineated using the following equation:
𝑅

=

𝑅

×𝑅
𝐼

where 𝑅
is the exposure risk in community daily activities, 𝑅
is the infection risk. The
two risks come from two steps. The former risk estimates the possibility of people contacting the virus hosts
7

and sources. For example, people staying at home has lower exposure risk than people who go to grocery
stores. The latter risk estimates the possibility of being infected by the virus after contacting the sources. If
people wear mouth masks, safety glasses, disposable gloves, and footwear, their contracting risk will be
much lower than people who wear no protections. 𝐼
represents the immune ability of the person or
the community to the virus. People with antibodies could be immune to certain types of viruses and their
immunity is higher. The transmission risk is inversely proportional to the immune ability of the person or
the entire community.

5.2 Exposure Risk Evaluation
It is difficult to evaluate the accuracy of the estimation. This work gives a customized quantitative
estimation on the social exposure risks of people showing up in public places. The results are tailored for
every community by considering their local population, potential patients, store number, potential guest
flow. The purpose is to help people increase their awareness of their risks and help U.S. businesses adjust
their store policy dynamically. It is also supposed to accelerate the reopening of the business while
maintaining a low risk of virus contact to protect the wellbeing of both employees and customers. Upon the
success of this project, people will have a clear understanding of the risk of going to the store and both
customers and businesses can make wiser decisions on the fly.
However, all of these will not happen without a solid evaluation of the effectiveness and precision of
the results. Model evaluation should use real data. The exposure data is rarely available right now. Only
big companies like Apple and Google and some Chinese companies have used their platform and service
to trace the potential patients by using the Bluetooth of their smartphones. Based on the patient tracing data,
we could compare the real probability of the store with COVID patients present with the estimated risks of
this work. Since the pandemic is still ongoing, such a dataset is relatively sensitive and hard to retrieve at
present. Model evaluation with real-world data is our next step of work.

5.3 Model Reliability in Reality
A reliable model that is designed to be used in the real-world must consider many realistic factors.
More refinement work should be done to improve the accuracy of the three input numbers. For example,
the model assumes that the confirmed patients covers all the existing patients and are all free to move.
However, in reality, there is not true. As an improvement, R0 should be used to calculate new potential
COVID patient numbers and make them as close to the real numbers as possible. For the population, the
model assumes that everyone in the population has the same chance of showing up in one store, which is
not true in reality neither. Everyone has their preferences in grocery stores, shopping centers, coffee shops,
libraries and the chance is various. One solution is to restrict the population number to the pool of potential
place goers and the way to do that is getting store visiting data from SafeGraph, analyzing the age, gender,
and other characteristics of the store customers, and derive a reasonable customer pool based on the regional
population census. Remove people without the same chance of showing up from the population used for
calculation. The third number also needs to be further improved by adjusting the real-time store visitors
based on popular hours, business density, county income level, and real-time customer count prediction,
etc.

6. Conclusion
To allow the public to be aware of the virus exposure risks in their social activities, we propose a
birthday-paradox-based probability model and developed a web-based system for calculating community
exposure risks for public gathering, either essential or non-essential, during a pandemic. The risks are
generated based on the real-time potential COVID-19 patients, the population in local communities, and
the people number in the stores. With the system, people can explore the effects of the pandemic on the
8

population through a geographical spatiotemporal view, moving through time and testing a different
number of people to see the changes of risks as the pandemic unfolds. As the virus testers become more
available and cover more population, the ability to monitor and predict community-level risks amid a
pandemic could be greatly augmented. The system integrates the risk estimation model, computational tools,
and the analysis of evolutionary pathways, together with refinements to virus surveillance.
The experiment results show that the proposed model is promising in improving our ability to assess
the risks posed to humans by the COVID-19 virus and other influenza viruses, and equipping us with
improved preparedness and response for this ongoing and all the future pandemics. The application
scenarios of the system are set to be in the middle of a pandemic when the tracking of patients is in place.
However, due to the inaccuracy of the input three numbers and the complexity caused by the numerous
realistic factors, the estimated risks might be far from reality. We are still working to improve it to be
accurate and reliable enough to be practically used in the ongoing pandemic.

Acknowledgment
The authors thank all the involved colleagues, the MIT COVID-19 Datathon organizers, the members and
mentors of Team-E-006 for their valuable advice. Thanks for the COVID-19 dataset provided by John
Hopkins University, the population data from U.S. Census, and the foot traffic data kindly provided by
SafeGraph Inc. Thanks to all the developers of the Python libraries and tools used in this work.

Reference
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]

[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]

Y. Ghendon, "Introduction to pandemic influenza through history," European journal of
epidemiology, vol. 10, pp. 451-453, 1994.
P. Dashraath, W. J. L. Jeslyn, L. M. X. Karen, L. L. Min, L. Sarah, A. Biswas, M. A. Choolani,
C. Mattar, and S. L. Lin, "Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic and pregnancy,"
American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 2020.
B. WORKPLACES. (2020, 5/22/2020). GUIDANCE FOR CLEANING AND DISINFECTING.
Available: http://stjohns.floridahealth.gov/_files/_documents/business-toolkit-covid19.pdf
Z. Sun. (2020, 5/22/2020). COSRE: COVID-19 Community Social Risk Estimator. Available:
https://zihengsun.github.io/covid.html
N. Madhav, B. Oppenheim, M. Gallivan, P. Mulembakani, E. Rubin, and N. Wolfe, "Pandemics:
risks, impacts, and mitigation," in Disease Control Priorities: Improving Health and Reducing
Poverty. 3rd edition, ed: The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World
Bank, 2017.
T. G. Ksiazek, D. Erdman, C. S. Goldsmith, S. R. Zaki, T. Peret, S. Emery, S. Tong, C. Urbani, J.
A. Comer, and W. Lim, "A novel coronavirus associated with severe acute respiratory
syndrome," New England journal of medicine, vol. 348, pp. 1953-1966, 2003.
R. Katz, "Use of revised International Health Regulations during influenza A (H1N1) epidemic,
2009," Emerging infectious diseases, vol. 15, p. 1165, 2009.
WHO, "A checklist for pandemic influenza risk and impact management: building capacity for
pandemic response: 2018 update. Geneva: The Organization; 2018," ed: cited, 2018.
E. C. f. D. P. a. Cont, "Outbreak of acute respiratory syndrome associated with a novel
coronavirus, Wuhan, China; first update – 22 January 2020," ECDC: Stockhol5/22/2020 2020.
N. G. Studzinski, "Comprehensive pandemic risk management: A systems approach. London:
Visiting International Research Fellow Policy Institute, King's College; 2020.[accessed on
February 29, 2020]," ed, 2020.
9

[11]
[12]
[13]

[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]

N. J. Cox, S. C. Trock, and S. A. Burke, "Pandemic preparedness and the influenza risk
assessment tool (IRAT)," in Influenza pathogenesis and control-Volume I, ed: Springer, 2014, pp.
119-136.
CDC. (2020). Influenza Risk Assessment Tool (IRAT): Questions & Answers. Available:
https://www.cdc.gov/flu/pandemic-resources/national-strategy/risk-assessment.htm
S.-m. Jung, A. R. Akhmetzhanov, K. Hayashi, N. M. Linton, Y. Yang, B. Yuan, T. Kobayashi, R.
Kinoshita, and H. Nishiura, "Real-time estimation of the risk of death from novel coronavirus
(COVID-19) infection: inference using exported cases," Journal of clinical medicine, vol. 9, p.
523, 2020.
L. A. Castro, S. J. Fox, X. Chen, K. Liu, S. E. Bellan, N. B. Dimitrov, A. P. Galvani, and L. A.
Meyers, "Assessing real-time Zika risk in the United States," BMC infectious diseases, vol. 17, p.
284, 2017.
P. Flajolet, D. Gardy, and L. Thimonier, "Birthday paradox, coupon collectors, caching
algorithms and self-organizing search," Discrete Applied Mathematics, vol. 39, pp. 207-229,
1992.
P. M. Altham, "Two generalizations of the binomial distribution," Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society: Series C (Applied Statistics), vol. 27, pp. 162-167, 1978.
Z. Sun. (2020, 5/22/2020). What is the chance of meeting a COVID-19 infected person in grocery
stores? Available: https://medium.com/@jensensunny/what-is-the-chance-of-meeting-a-covid19-infected-person-in-grocery-stores-3ca7357fafb2
U. S. Census. (2010, 5/22/2020). County Population Totals: 2010-2019. Available:
https://www.census.gov/data/tables/time-series/demo/popest/2010s-counties-total.html
E. Dong, H. Du, and L. Gardner, "An interactive web-based dashboard to track COVID-19 in real
time," The Lancet infectious diseases, 2020.

10

