Speech can produce jet-like transport relevant to asymptomatic spreading of virus
Manouk Abkarian,1, ∗ Simon Mendez,2, ∗ Nan Xue,3 Fan Yang,3 and Howard A. Stone3, †
1

Centre de Biochimie Structurale, CNRS UMR 5048INSERM UMR 1054,
University of Montpellier, 34090 Montpellier, France
2
Institut Montpelliérain Alexander Grothendieck, CNRS,
University of Montpellier, 34095 Montpellier, France
3
Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering,
Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544 USA

arXiv:2006.10671v3 [physics.flu-dyn] 26 Sep 2020

Many scientific reports document that asymptomatic and presymptomatic individuals contribute
to the spread of COVID-19, probably during conversations in social interactions. Droplet emission
occurs during speech, yet few studies document the flow to provide the transport mechanism. This
lack of understanding prevents informed public health guidance for risk reduction and mitigation
strategies, e.g. the “six-foot rule”. Here we analyze flows during breathing and speaking, including phonetic features, using order-of-magnitudes estimates, numerical simulations, and laboratory
experiments. We document the spatio-temporal structure of the expelled air flow. Phonetic characteristics of plosive sounds like ‘P’ lead to enhanced directed transport, including jet-like flows that
entrain the surrounding air. We highlight three distinct temporal scaling laws for the transport
distance of exhaled material including (i) transport over a short distance (< 0.5 m) in a fraction
of a second, with large angular variations due to the complexity of speech, (ii) a longer distance,
approximately 1 m, where directed transport is driven by individual vortical puffs corresponding
to plosive sounds, and (iii) a distance out to about 2 m, or even further, where sequential plosives
in a sentence, corresponding effectively to a train of puffs, create conical, jet-like flows. The latter
dictates the long-time transport in a conversation. We believe that this work will inform thinking
about the role of ventilation, aerosol transport in disease transmission for humans and other animals,
and yield a better understanding of linguistic aerodynamics, i.e., aerophonetics.

∗
†

M. A. and S. M. contributed equally.
To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: hastone@princeton.edu

2
INTRODUCTION

The rapid spread of COVID-19, the disease caused by the virus SARS-CoV-2, highlights the lack of guidelines and
mitigation strategies for reducing the impact of airborne viruses in the absence of a vaccine. The inherent structural
features of the air flows created by exhalation and inhalation during speech or simple breathing could be a potent
yet, until recently, unsuspected transport mechanism for pathogen transmission. This important topic surrounding
viral transmission has largely been absent from the fluid mechanics and transport phenomena literature, and even
absent more generally from quantitative studies of virus transport in the public health realm. We take steps toward
quantifying fluid dynamic characteristics of this transmission pathway, which in the case of COVID-19, has been
suggested to be associated with asymptomatic and presymptomatic carriers during relatively close social interactions,
like breathing, speaking, laughing and singing. We focus on identifying and quantifying the complex flows associated
with breathing and speaking; important areas for future research are indicated also. We recognize that much remains
to be done, including integrating the findings and ideas here with potential mitigation strategies.
There are many recent news articles reporting on the possibility of virus transmission during everyday social
interactions. For example, documented cases include parties at homes, lunches at restaurants [1], side-by-side work
in relatively confined spaces [2], choir practice in a small room [3], fitness classes [4], a small number people in a
face-to-face meeting [5], etc. Also, an editorial in the New England Journal of Medicine summarizes differences
between SARS-CoV-1, which is primarily transmitted from symptomatic individuals by respiratory droplets after
virus replication in the lower respiratory tract, and SARS-CoV-2, for which viral replication and shed apparently
occur most in the upper respiratory tract and do so even for asymptomatic individuals [6]. These differences were
suggested to be at least one reason why public health measures that were successful for SARS-CoV-1 have been much
less effective for SARS-CoV-2.
Much has been written over many decades about droplet shedding and transport during sneezing and coughing
[7–11]. There remain open questions about the long-range transport of droplet nuclei or aerosols resulting from droplet
evaporation [12], which is important to understand virus transmission from symptomatic individuals in all airborne
respiratory diseases. In addition, researchers in the last decades have shown that droplet emission also occurs during
speech [8, 9, 13, 14], yet there are few quantitative studies of the corresponding breathing and speaking flows that
provide the transport mechanism for such aerosols. For example, experiments and numerical simulations, based on
scale models involving mannequins in rooms, have been used to study droplet transport and potential infection risk,
e.g. [15–17], including large-scale flow visualization studies of model out-flows [18–20] and the influence of ventilation
strategies [21].
In this paper, we take first steps towards characterizing the fluid dynamics of speech. For example, questions that
motivate our paper include how does an asymptomatic or a presymptomatic individual affect their surroundings by
breathing, speaking, laughing or singing? What are the corresponding spatio-temporal features that quantify these
changes and how do they affect the transport of exhaled material? Is there a better position or orientation to adopt
when in a social interaction at a cafe, party, or workplace to minimize potential risk associated with the exhaled air
from a speaker nearby?
We will illustrate that there is a characteristic, time-varying structure to the expelled air associated with conversations. Phonetic characteristics of plosive sounds like ‘P’ lead to significantly enhanced directed transport, including
jet-like flows that entrain the surrounding air. We will show that the transport distance of exhaled material versus
time, in the form of three distinct scaling laws, represents the typical structure of the flow, including (i) a short
(< 0.5 m) distance, with large angular variations, where the complexity of language is evident and responsible for
material transport in a fraction of second, (ii) a longer distance, out to approximately 1 m, where directed transport
occurs driven by individual vortical puffs corresponding roughly to individual plosive sounds, and (iii) a distance out
to about 2 m, or even further, where spoken sentences with plosives, corresponding effectively to a train of puffs,
create conical, jet-like flows. The latter dictates the long-time transport in a conversation. Inevitably, there are other
complex features, including phonetic structures and the ambient flow, e.g. ventilation, that hopefully will motivate
many future studies.

FLOW STRUCTURES OF EXHALATION AND INHALATION: EXPERIMENTS

Breathing and speaking are part of our every day activities. We utilize both our mouth and nose. We focus on the
dynamics of in-flow and out-flow from the mouth since we believe that they are more directed towards a potential
facing interlocutor, and we show how some of the features change between breathing and speaking, and are influenced
by distinct features of speech, with consequences for transport of exhaled material.

3

FIG. 1: Flow visualization snapshot of exhalation in a laboratory-generated fog and parallel to a laser sheet in two
different breathing situations. (A) Calm breathing with (B) the corresponding flow speeds shown with the color
code and arrows, and (C) a case of strong blowing with (D) the corresponding velocity field. Notice the much higher
velocities associated with blowing. However, the flows in the two cases are qualitatively similar over a sufficiently
long period of time of a few seconds and exhibit jet-like features. The field-of-view in all of the images is 1 meter.
(E) Sketch of blowing out a candle (or not). (F) Sketch of the qualitative contrast between exhalation and
inhalation for breathing and speaking.

TABLE I: Peak flow rates or flow velocities in human breathing and speaking reported in the literature. We assume
a typical length scale for the orifice or mouth of diameter 2a = 2 cm for calculating the Reynolds numbers,
Re = 2ua/ν, where u is the average speed at the mouth or orifice exit and the kinematic viscosity of air
ν ≈ 1.5 × 10−5 m2 /s.
breathing
speaking
peak flow rates
0.7 L/s [22]
0.3 − 1.6 L/s
or velocities
0.5 m/s [23]
[22, 24–28]
peak Reynolds numbers 7 × 102 − 3 × 103 1 × 103 − 7 × 103

Orders of Magnitude

The typical human adult has a head with approximate radius 7 cm. We may define the characteristic length scale
of the mouth, whose shape is approximately elliptical, with the radius a of a circle having the same surface area.
Measurements show that the average mouth opening areas are approximately 1.2 cm2 for breathing and 1.8 cm2 (with
peak values of the order of 5.0 cm2 ) for speaking [22]. For an order-of-magnitude estimate of the Reynolds numbers,
a = 1 cm is chosen. It is perhaps surprising to many that typical air flow speeds are u ≈ 0.5 − 2 m/s (volumetric flow
rates ≈ 0.2 − 0.7 L/s) when breathing and u ≈ 1 − 5 m/s (volumetric flow rates ≈ 0.3 − 1.6 L/s) when speaking; see
Table I. When breathing, exhalation and inhalation occur approximately evenly over a cycle with period about 3 − 5
seconds [22, 29], while during speaking the exhalation period is generally lengthened so that 2/3rds or even greater
than 4/5ths of the time may be spent in exhalation.
The local fluid mechanics of exhaled and inhaled flows of speed u are characterized by Reynolds numbers Re =2ua/ν
−5
(the kinematic viscosity of air ν ≈ 1.5 × 10
m2 /s), which have typical magnitudes Re= O 7 × 102 − 3 × 103 when

3
3
breathing and Re= O 1 × 10 − 7 × 10 when speaking. Inertial effects are expected to dominate these flows, which
will also generally be time dependent and turbulent, as discussed below.

4
Breathing and Blowing as Jet-like Flows

We characterize first the nature of breathing and blowing flows (Fig. 1). We set up a laboratory experiment with
a laser sheet (1 m × 2 m × 3 mm), where no light hits the speaking subject, who sits adjacent to the sheet. A fog
machine generates a mist of microscopic aqueous droplets whose large-scale motions are observed with a high-speed
camera oriented perpendicular to the sheet. We obtain the velocity field of exhalation (both during breathing and
speaking) by observing how the air stream drags and deforms the cloud in the sheet of light using correlation image
velocimetry (see typical images in Fig. 1A and C, with details in Materials and Methods).
The flows are qualitatively similar during breathing or strong blowing (Fig. 1A and C), though the velocity magnitudes can be quite different (Fig. 1B and D). For instance, typical velocities observed in the air flow while breathing
with a slightly open mouth (∼ 1 cm × 2 cm) remain of the order of 0.3 m/s to 1 m/s as visible in Fig. 1B (see Movie
S1 in Supplementary Information (SI)), while velocities can be as high as a few meters per second in the blowing
stream (Fig. 1D) (see Movie S2 in SI). Most significantly, a jet-like, conical structure is visible for the two different
situations as depicted by the white lines in Fig. 1A and C, with a cone angle 2α ≈ 20◦ . We can expect stronger
propagation when breathing after exercising, as the volumetric flow rates are increased, which could make breathing
in such a case closer to blowing. These observations call for comparison for the more complex situation relevant for
pathogen transport, which is the case of speaking, where aerosols are produced during speech [13, 14]. Next, though,
we comment on a fundamental asymmetry of exhalation and inhalation.

Asymmetry of Exhalation and Inhalation

At these Reynolds numbers, we expect exhalation and inhalation to be asymmetric. A reader may be aware that
one extinguishes a candle by blowing, but it is not possible to do so by inhalation (Fig. 1E), which is a characteristic
of the flows for breathing and speaking. Long exhalation should produce starting jet-like flows propagating away from
the individual over a significant distance of the order of a meter (e.g. Fig. 1A-D), while inhalation is more uniform
and draws the air inward from all around the mouth (Fig. 1F); it is this asymmetry that explains the phenomenon
related to extinguishing a candle (Fig. 1E). These out-flows are in fact responsible for transporting large droplets and
aerosols away from the speaker.
For such inertially-dominated flows, a continuous or long out-flow should be similar to an ordinary jet [30], and
during the initial instants over a time T the propagation distance, while smaller than the naive estimate L = uT =
O(1) m (see below), is still larger than the typical size of the head (e.g. Fig. 1). Moreover, since L  a, it follows
that, in ordinary circumstances, one breaths in little of what is breathed out. Wearing a mask (as recommended as a
mitigation strategy for COVID-19) should be expected to produce more symmetric flow patterns during exhalation
and inhalation, localizing air flow around the face.

Speaking, Plosive Sounds and Jet-like Flows

Flows exiting from an orifice are well-known to produce vortices, even in the absence of coughing, and these drive
the transport about the head, as evident in Fig. 1. Speaking introduces two further differences: (i) the typical time
of inhalation is about 1/4–1/2 of the exhalation time [29] and (ii) language includes rapid pressure and flow rate
variations associated with sound productions (plosives, fricatives, etc.), as previously characterized acoustically by
linguists [26]. We also note that the stop consonants, or what are referred by linguists as plosives consonants, such
as (‘P’, ‘B’, ‘K’, ... ), have been demonstrated recently to produce more droplets [14]. In these cases, the vocal tract
is blocked temporarily either with the lips (‘P’, ‘B’) or with the tongue tip (‘T’, ‘D’) or body (‘K’,‘G’), so that the
pressure builds up slightly and then is released rapidly, producing the characteristic burst of air of these sounds; in
contrast, fricatives are produced by partial occlusion impeding but not blocking air flow from the vocal tract [31].
We now visualize flow during speaking, which seems different than breathing as, for instance, when saying a sentence
like ‘We will beat the corona virus’, as shown in Fig. 2A (and visible in the Movie S3 of SI). A color code illustrates
the average speeds (averaged over the time to say the phrase), but note that these are not representative of the true
instantaneous velocities, which in the remainder of this section were estimated from the movies in the SI. Over the
approximately 2.5 s to say the sentence, the air flow is more jerky and changes direction depending on the sound
emitted. In this particular case, the sentence contains starting vowels (in ‘We’ and ‘will’) and pulmonic consonants as
fricatives (as ‘V’ and ‘S’ in ‘virus’) and plosives (like ‘B’ and ‘K’ in ‘beat’ and ‘corona’). Three different directions are
revealed when averaging the velocity field over the time to say the sentence in Fig. 2A: ‘We will beat’ being slightly
up and to the front with a typical velocity of about 5-8 cm/s, ‘the corona’ being directed downward between −40◦
and −50◦ with higher velocities of almost 8-12 cm/s while saying the two syllables ‘coro’. Finally, the short air puff

5

FIG. 2: Mean velocity field produced when speaking three different sentences. A color code illustrates the average
speeds but note that single images of the magnitude of speeds are not representative of the true instantaneous
velocities, which were estimated from the movies in the SI. (A) ‘We will beat the corona virus’, which is a mixture of
vowels, fricatives and plosives. (B) ‘Sing a song of six pence’ (SSSP) [25], mainly composed of the fricative ‘S’
except the last word that starts with ‘P’. (C) The distance travelled by the extremity of the air puff as a function of
time when saying ‘pence’ at the end of SSSP for three different runs. (D) ‘Peter Piper picked a peck’ (PPPP) [25],
which is mainly composed of many plosives ‘P’.

associated to ‘virus’ is directed upward at about 50◦ with speeds of 5-7 cm/s. We believe that an interlocutor and
potential receiver of the exhaled material will be most exposed after a few seconds by the horizontally directed part
of the flow, whose velocity reaches, in this case, the ambient circulation speed at about half a meter at most.
Next, we illustrate a sentence of the same time lapse of about 2.5 s containing many times the same starting fricative
‘S’ as in ‘Sing a song of six pence’ [25] with only one starting bilabial plosive sound ‘P’ in the last word: most of the
air puffs produced are emitted downward at an estimated angle of −50◦ from the horizontal (and become visible in
this sequence only when the air flow hits a nearby table and crosses the laser sheet, see Fig. 2B and Movie S4 in SI).
However, a distinct, directed air puff appears in front of the speaker when ‘pence’ is pronounced (Fig. 2B), which
propagates forward at initially high speeds of about 1.4 m/s as visible in Movie S4, but decelerates rapidly to ≈ 1
m/s at half a meter distance from the mouth; the puff has a speed of 30 cm/s at about 0.8 m (see Movie S4).
These images of typical speech raise the question of the dynamics of individual puffs. In Fig. 2C we report the
distance L travelled by the air puff as a function of time t when pronouncing ‘pence’. The data demonstrates that
the starting plosive sounds like ‘P’ induce a starting jet flow, which grows initially for very short timescales of under
10-100 ms as t1/2 , but rapidly transitions to a slower movement characterized by a t1/4 response, typical of puffs
[32] and vortex rings [33]. In fact, when looking at the flow, a vortex ring stabilizes the transport over a distance of

6

FIG. 3: Time evolution of the flow from a phrase, ‘Peter Piper picked a peck’ (PPPP), with many plosives, spoken
parallel to a laser sheet. The speaker is indicated by the dotted curve to the left. to the (A) Flow visualization with
the individual plosives identified. (B) Vorticity field with individual vortices clearly visible for each plosive ‘P’
pronounced in the sentence. Notice the interactions between the first vortices, as well as the different upward angle
of the vortex produced when the syllable ‘Pi’ is pronounced in ‘picked’.

almost a meter. This transition between two different dynamics, ending with the dynamics of an isolated puff, is also
measured in coughs [10].
In contrast, when we speak a sentence with many ‘P sounds, such as ‘Peter Piper picked a peck’ (PPPP) [25],
as illustrated in Fig. 2D, the distribution of the average velocity field approaches that of a conical jet with average
velocities of tens of cm/s and over long distances of about a meter. Peak velocities are seen at the emission of the
sound ‘P’ with values close to 1.2-1.5 m/s (Movie S5 in SI). This more directed flow situation shares features of
breathing and blowing and thus material will be transported faster and further than individual puffs. But, unlike
breathing, we believe that this distinct feature of language is more likely to be important for virus transmission since
droplet production has been linked to the types of sounds [14].
It should be evident that language is complicated (Fig. 2A, B). Given the possibility of asymptomatic transmission
of virus by aerosols during speech, we have focused on the phrases in language, those usually containing plosives, that
produce directed transport in the form of approximately conical turbulent jets (Fig. 2D, and also see Figs. 4 and 6
below).
In addition, to see that thermal effects are small until the jet speeds are reduced to closer to ambient speeds,
consider the Richardson number Ri =

g dρ
dz
.
ρ(du/dz)2

So approximately Ri ≈

∆ρ g∆z
ρ (∆u)2 .

For a 15◦ C degree temperature

change in air, ∆ρ
ρ ≈ 0.05, so with ∆u ≈ 0.5 m/s and a length scale say ∆z ≈ 0.1 m (which is relatively large),
we find Ri ≈ 0.2 < 1. The thermal effects should be expected to be important at longer distances where the jet
speed is reduced (usually where the ventilation may also matter) or if a mask is used which decreases the flow speed
substantially.
We document the distinct role of the individual plosives in the phrase ‘Peter Piper picked a peck’ (PPPP) with
the time-lapse images displayed in Fig. 3A (see also Movie S5 in SI). By performing correlation image velocimetry
to calculate the vorticity field ω = ∇ ∧ u, where u is the in-plane velocity field, as shown in Fig. 3B, we could
follow the vortical structures created by the pronunciation of ‘P’s in PPPP. Vortices shedding from the mouth are
clearly visible, interact, and survive downstream where they easily reach the meter scale. The transition from puff-like
dynamics associated to single plosives and the development of turbulent jet-like flow during longer sentences seems to
be associated with the sequential accumulation of ‘puff-packets’ pushing air exhaled from the mouth. We will explore
this transition in more detail using the numerical simulations below.

MODELING

To assist with the interpretation of the experimental results just presented, and the numerical results we will report
below, for completeness we summarize a few results of well-known mathematical models.

7
Characteristic Features of a Steady Turbulent Jet

In a high-Reynolds-number steady turbulent jet, it is of interest to characterize the volume flux, linear momentum
transport and kinetic energy transported by the jet, as well as the entrainment of the surrounding air that dilutes the
jet [34]. These properties also help to understand the fluid dynamics of breathing and speaking. There are at least
three significant conclusions that characterize the flow: (i) Denoting the direction of the jet as x, the typical axial
speed of the jet as v(x), and its cross-sectional area as A(x), in a steady jet issuing into an environment at a constant
pressure, the flux of linear momentum is constant, or v 2 A = constant. If the exit flow near the mouth is characterized
1/2
by a speed v0 , volumetric flow rate Q0 and area A0 , we conclude that v(x)/v0 = (A0 /A(x))
< 1. For a conical
2
jet-like configuration of angle α (Fig. 1), then beyond the mouth A(x) ∝ (αx) . (ii) The corresponding volume flux
1/2
Q = vA, so that the out-flow leads to a volume flux Q/Q0 = (A(x)/A0 )
> 1, i.e., there is entrainment of the
surrounding air into the jet, which is an important feature of mixing of the surroundings. (iii) Any material expelled
from the mouth with concentration c0 is reduced in concentration as the jet evolves, with c(x)/c0 = Q0 /Q(x). Since
the jets are approximately conical, then the above results predict that the characteristic quantities vary with distance
−1
2
−1
as v(x) ∝ (αx) , A(x) ∝ (αx) , Q ∝ αx and c ∝ (αx) . Although these arguments are based on the assumption of
a steady jet, we shall now see that they apply approximately to the unsteady features of speaking on the time scale
of many cycles and far enough from the mouth or exit of an orifice.

Starting Jets and Puffs

A jet formed by the sudden injection of momentum out of an orifice is referred to as a starting jet. Such flows reach
a self-preserving behavior some distance downstream of the source, where the penetration distance grows over time
like L ∝ t1/2 [32, 35]; see also equation (2) below.
On the other hand, a rapid release of air, or puff, injects a finite linear momentum into the fluid, e.g. Fig. 2. For
the inertially dominated flows of interest here, the linear momentum of the puff is conserved, so that the distance
travelled is L ∝ t1/4 [32, 35], similar to interrupted jets, i.e., starting jets when the flow is suddenly stopped.
However, during breathing or speaking, the interrupted jet and the puffs are released one after the other and interact
with each other in front of the source, as illustrated by Fig. 3. The jet is neither continuous like in starting jets nor
isolated like in classical puffs. What is then the dynamics of such a “train of puffs”? In the next section, we use
numerical simulations to investigate the dynamics of puff trains and quantify their growth in space and time.

THREE-DIMENSIONAL NUMERICAL SIMULATIONS: CHARACTERIZING THE “PUFF TRAINS” OF
BREATHING AND SPEAKING

To explore quantitatively the various flows we have introduced above, we report 3-D simulations of the incompressible Navier-Stokes equations (the flow speeds are much smaller than the speed of sound). To highlight the dynamics of
breathing and speaking, simulations are driven by representative time-periodic flow rate variations [25] from an elliptical orifice comparable to a large open mouth (of radii 1 cm × 1.5 cm). Speaking produces relatively high-frequency
changes to the volume flow rate (or fluid speed) during exhalation, though the variations are much smaller than sound
frequencies; we do not study the initial formation of the sounds of speech at the glottis [36]. Furthermore, as we have
seen above, natural plosive sounds also create special characteristic features that we investigate. Nevertheless, it has
to be stressed that the simulations are a model and lack the phonetic complexity introduced by the tongue and the
cavity of the mouth, yielding flows directed in front of the mouth only.

Contrasting Four Situations of Exhalation

We contrast four situations with comparable period and given volumes exhaled and inhaled, with zero net out-flow
over one cycle (Fig. 4A-D): (i) normal breathing with a 4-second period split into intervals of exhalation (2.4 s) and
inhalation (1.6 s); (ii) a breathing-like signal but with a (slow) speaking-like distribution of exhalation (2.8 s) and
inhalation (1.2 s), (iii) a spoken phrase, ‘Sing a song of six pence’ [25], and (iv) a phrase with many plosive sounds,
‘Peter Piper picked a peck’ [25]. We either ran 1-cycle simulations using the flow rate profiles over a single period,
followed by no further out-flow, to quantify a single “atom” of breathing and speaking, and for many periods (or
cycles) to understand how the local environment around an individual is established and changes in time. Different

8

FIG. 4: Numerical simulations of periodic breathing versus speaking signals for cycles of 4.0 s. The jets issue from a
sphere with an open elliptic orifice of semi-axes 1.0 cm and 1.5 cm. (A-D) volumetric flow rate signals for cases with
0.5 L per breath (hence the ‘50’ in the labels), where the vertical dashed lines mark the separation between
exhalation and inhalation. (A) Case B50 is a breathing-like signal with 2.4 s exhalation and 1.6 s inhalation. (C)
Case P50 and (D) case S50 are speaking signals sampled from [25], and recorded during articulation of ‘Peter Piper
picked a peck’ and ‘Sing a song of six pence’, respectively, with speaking time of 2.8 s and a 1.2 s inhalation. The
P50 and S50 signals have been adjusted to 0.5 L per breath. (B) Case C50 is a calm signal of the same macroscopic
characteristics as P50 and S50, but with a smooth signal similar to B50. Three series of simulations have been
performed at different volumes per breath, i.e., 0.5 L, 0.75 L and 1.0 L per breath. For the simulation of ‘Peter
Piper picked a peck’ for instance, the simulations at 0.75 L and 1.0 L per breath are referred to as P75 and P100,
and are obtained by multiplying the input flow rate signal of P50 by 1.5 and 2.0, respectively. (E-H) Examples of
jets obtained for cases B75, C75, P75 and S75 after 9 cycles (36 s), as visualized by perfect tracers issued from the
mouth and color-coded by their residence time in the computational domain (dark blue tracers were exhaled during
the last cycle). The scale is the same for all plots. For each case, a point marked by a ’+’ is positioned to indicate
the axial and radial extent of the jet. The x and y coordinates of the point are reported as (x;y) in the figures
(E-H). The sphere representing the head is shown to the left in each panel.

volumes of exhalation typical of speaking, from 0.5 − 1 L per breath, were studied (see the full table of runs in the
SI, Table S1).
The results of simulations of these different flow rate profiles are shown in Fig. 4E-H for an exhaled volume of 0.75 L
per breath. To visualize the flow, tracers injected at the in-flow are shown, color-coded by the residence time of the
tracers. For every case, a conical jet flow is produced, with similar cone angles as well, which is reminiscent of typical
features of turbulent jets studied in laboratory experiments and many applications, e.g. [34, 37]; see also Figs. 1-2.
Qualitatively, we observe that breathing produces a jet with an axial flow comparable to speaking, which some may
find surprising. Jet lengths in particular are very similar, despite a factor of 2.6 in the peak flow rate of cases P75
and C75 for instance (see Table S1). The phrase with plosives produces qualitatively a rougher jet (Fig. 4G) due
to the ejection of vortex rings away from the main jet and vortex interactions. Speaking jets (P75 and S75) yield
the largest cone angles and consequently an axial extent somewhat reduced compared to breathing (B75 and C75).
Short high-speed puffs associated with speaking thus seem to increase the jet entrainment, but do not enhance the
long-range transport in the axial direction.
For all cases, even those with complex phonetic characteristics, we observe that the resulting jets display many
of the features of a turbulent jet, which leads to transverse spreading and mixing of the exhaled contents with the
environment. These features actually build up over the continual cycles of exhalation and inhalation in both breathing
and speaking. Particle residence time (Fig. 4E-H) notably show the progressive formation of the jet. However, a
striking feature is the absence of obvious signature of the flow pulsation in the far field. From the global point of
view, all computed jets, whatever the details of the in-flow signal, are similar to steady turbulent jets away from the
immediate vicinity of the mouth.

Quantifying the Jets

We ran simulations for three different flow rate signals and exhaled volumes (0.5, 0.75 and 1 L/breath) to understand
the characteristics of the flows generated by multi-cycle breathing and speaking. Because the flows are time-varying

9

;

FIG. 5: Jet characteristics in the simulation of the breathing and speaking signals shown in Fig. 4A-D. (A) Example
of calculation of jet length L and angle α for S75, based on the emitted tracer particles color-coded here by
residence time, as described in Fig. 4E-H. L(t) is such that 90% of the particles are located upstream of x = L at
time t. The cone angle α is calculated to enclose 90% of the particles is a cone passing through the mouth exit
(radius is 1 cm at x = 0). This angle is verified to remain stable with time after the initial cycles. (B) Principle of
the calculation of the cycle-averaged velocity fields presented in (C-D): The velocity is time-averaged independently
over each cycle. (C-D) Progressive formation, along increasing cycles of exhalation and inhalation, of a turbulent
jet-like velocity profile v(x) in the far field. Examples of cases C50 (C) and S50 (D): cycle-averaged axial velocity
along the x axis from the mouth exit to 2.0 m downstream, for different cycles, extending to 14 cycles or 56 s. The
black dashed line is the v(x) ∝ 1/x scaling, plotted here as a guide for the eye, which is suggested by a model of a
steady turbulent jet. (E) Evolution of the non-dimensional jet length L/a as a function of 2v0 t/(aα) (see Eq. 2),
with a ≈ 1.22 cm the equivalent radius of the mouth exit and v0 the average axial speed during exhalation for the
different simulations. Two power laws are plotted as a guide for the eyes to assess the evolution of L with time. Raw
data for L(t) is plotted in Fig. S2.

and turbulent we quantified the cone half angle α by determining the angle inside of which reside 90% of the exhaled
tracer particles (Fig. 5A). The included angles differed from case to case, but were of the order of 10 − 14◦ (see
Table S1). The typical jet lengths, L(t), were also calculated based on the criterion that 90% of the tracers are
located upstream of x = L at time t. Raw data of L(t) are presented in the SI, Fig. S2, and the jet angles are reported
in Table S1. First, higher mean flow rates (exit speeds) produce longer lengths, as expected. For a given exhaled
volume per cycle, different types of exhalation produce comparable jet lengths, as suggested by the qualitative analysis
of Fig. 4E-H. Modulation of the in-flow signal (cases P and S) systematically tends to increase the lateral growth of
the jet, increasing the jet angle and decreasing the jet length.

A Train of Puffs

We ran the multi-cycle simulations over many periods to quantify the development of the transient velocity field. In
order to filter the turbulent fluctuations that prevent direct comparisons of the velocity fields as a function of time, we

10
performed time averages over each period (see Fig. 5B) to produce an approximate profile for the distribution of axial
speeds in the exhaled jet. In the far field, though time varying, breathing and speaking may be viewed as periodic
processes where the time scales are much longer than an individual period. Moreover, we have already explained
that inhalation has little effect on exhalation because of the differences expected of high-Reynolds-number motions.
Indeed, when we plot the axial speed as a function of axial distance we find that for each period of exhalation, the
axial velocity falls along the curve v(x) ∝ x−1 for both speech and breathing, shown, respectively, in Fig. 5C and
D. Not only does the head of the jet evolve as that of a starting jet, but the whole flow downstream of a certain
distance from the mouth behaves similarly to as a steady turbulent starting jet. This is particularly striking as the
near-mouth flow is laminar and completely different from a steady jet (Fig. 5C-D). Thus, at the Reynolds numbers
characteristic of breathing and speaking, a train of puffs transitions to a turbulent, jet-like flow that dominates the
transport associated with breathing and speaking.

A Diffusive-like, Directed Cloud of Exhaled Air

For growing jets at constant angle, we can estimate the spreading of the cloud with time. The time t it takes to
reach an axial distance from the orifice, or the mouth, is estimated by
Z

L(t)

t=
0

dx
αL2
≈
v(x)
2v0 a

(1)

or (using a to make the equation non-dimensional)
L(t)
≈
a



2 v0 t
aα

1/2
.

(2)

The scaling from this equation is that expected for starting jets [32].
The theoretical prediction for the length of the exhaled air column for a starting jet (Eq. 2) is then compared to the
non-dimensional numerical data in Fig. 5E. The scaling captures quantitatively the trends provided that v0 is defined
as the average speed at the orifice exit (mouth) during exhalation. The peak velocity is not relevant: strikingly, the
details of the flow rate signal do not impact the scaling, but only influence the spreading angle of the jet. In addition,
for 1-cycle simulations (1P75 and 1S50), we recover that the whole exhaled material acts as a unique large puff [32],
and L ∝ t1/4 is obtained, which is consistent with the experiments (Fig. 2C).
These results allow the quantification of concentration of exhaled material in the far field. From the previous results,
we expect the concentration field of the exhaled cloud is quasi-steady and falls off with distance, c(x)/c0 ∝ a/ (αx).
Note that for a = 1 cm, α = 10◦ , and L = 2 m (the six-foot rule), then for directed jets the concentration of any
exhaled material has fallen off by a factor of (a/ (αL)) ≈ 0.03. Typical dilution levels of 0.04-0.05 have been found
in the different simulations at 1.5 m, which is consistent with this estimate. It is evident that this result is not an
especially large dilution and the concentration is much larger than might be estimated based on a model of diffusion
from a sphere.

EXPERIMENTAL CHARACTERIZATION OF THE SPREADING

To complement the numerical simulations and to further characterize the propagation of the exhaled jets we placed
a laser sheet perpendicular to a speaker (Fig. 6 inset). We measured the time t for the laser sheet to be visibly
disturbed when placed a distance L in front of the speaker, who said the sentence ‘Peter Piper picked a peck’ (PPPP)
N times. The data of L(t) (circles), including breathing (diamonds), along with the background flow (crosses) and
SSSP (triangles), is shown in Fig. 6. For the plosive phrase, for all N , we observe good agreement with the prediction
L ∝ t1/2 (the solid curve) obtained by representing the far field of the out-flow from speech as a steady turbulent jet.
We note that the data for SSSP at long times deviates from the theory, perhaps because of intermittency introduced
by only an occasional plosive. The prefactor of the fit of 0.48 obtained for the PPPP data together with breathing
data compare well to the scaling law given in Eq. 2: considering a mouth on average opened at a = 1 − 2 cm while
saying PPPP, a typical air speed v0 ∼ 1.2 − 1.5 m/s at the exit of the mouth when saying the plosives ‘P’ (see Movie
1/2
S5) and an angle of α = 10◦ , we obtain (2v0 a/α)
≈ 0.37 − 0.59.
Note that there is a weak ambient flow in the laboratory throughout the experiments. The speed of the ambient flow
is O(0.05 m/s), where the initial speeds of the experiments with many plosives and words are O(0.5 m/s). Therefore,
the ambient flow does not significantly affect the initial spreading of the puff (e.g. L < 1 m), but does affect the

11

FIG. 6: Speech propagation distance L to a laser sheet versus time t while saying ‘Peter Piper picked a peck’
(PPPP) and ’Sing a song of six pence’ (SSSP); N indicates the number of times the sentence has been repeated
(with 1 second inhalation in between) before total silence and N = Infinite means the sentence has been pronounced
until the sheet was reached. The solid line represents a fit with a t1/2 power law. ‘Silent ambient flow’ (crosses)
refers to the control case where the fog is convected by the ambient flow alone.

transport of the puff during spreading and deceleration (e.g. L > 2 m). The ambient flow introduces uncertainty to
these experiments of about 20 % (Fig. 6). On the other hand, the existence of an ambient flow is ubiquitous and our
results can provide a means to estimate the cross-over between speech-dominated transport and ventilation-dominated
transport. Though we do not pursue the topic here, the effect of the ambient flow is an interesting and important
problem for further investigation.

DISCUSSION

We believe that this work is one of the first to quantify the fluid dynamics of the environment about the head of a
person while breathing or speaking. Some features are relatively easy to understand, such as the natural asymmetry
of exhalation and inhalation, which contribute to the “cloud” of exhaled air being continually pushed away as it mixes
with the environment. Taken together, our results have identified three typical regions of transport associated with
conversations (i.e., a series of sentences) that contain plosives: (i) Less than about 50 cm from the speaker, exhaled
material is delivered in a fraction of a second with flows directed upwards (about 40◦ from the horizontal), downwards
about 40◦ from the horizontal) and directly in front (especially the bilabial plosives), where the latter regime obeys a
t1/2 starting-jet power law; (ii) out to about 1 m, longer, though slower, transport occurs driven by individual vortical
puffs created by syllables with single plosives, where the time variation follows a t1/4 power law; (iii) finally, out to
about 2 m, or even further, due to an accumulation of puffs, the exhaled material decelerates to about a few cm/sec
and becomes susceptible to the ambient circulation (in our ventilated lab). In this last regime, we discovered that
the series of puffs, from plosives in a spoken sentence, produces a conical, jet-like flow, again similar to a starting jet,
with a t1/2 power law.
In the absence of significant ventilation currents, or air motions driven by other speakers, we have seen that often
the exhaled cloud will largely be in front of the speaker, with a modest angle as shown in this paper. The dynamics
of “puffs” associated with individual breaths or sounds have a distinct dynamics with the very early-time formation
phase having a distance that scales with t1/2 after which the puff advances a downstream distance that varies with
t1/4 ; these dynamics are common to starting jets of all types (e.g. [32]), including coughs [10]. However, speech is
similar to a train of puffs, effectively generating a continuous turbulent jet, which mimics many of the features of
1/2
exhalation in breathing and speaking, where the local exhaled cloud increases in size approximately as L ∝ (v0 t) ;
both longer times and larger flow velocity (or increased breathed volume in the case of exercise for instance) increase
the affected environmental volume. Moreover, the droplet emission rate (number of droplets per time) increases with

12
louder speech [13]. With social situations in mind, in hindsight, it should perhaps not be surprising that droplet
and aerosol generation, and possible virus transmission, are enhanced during rapid and excited speech during parties,
singing events, etc. [3, 4]
The results presented in this paper do not account for some real features, e.g. movement of the head or trunk of
the speaker and the influence of background motions of the air due to the ventilation. There is obviously much to be
done to quantify the many details and nuances, especially as the different sounds in speech produce vortical structures
of different strengths that influence the spread (axial and transverse) of the exhaled jet.
The authors are not trained in public health, nor have professional standing in the public health arena, so we should
be cautious in conclusions to be drawn from our results regarding social distancing guidelines. Nevertheless, there
are general results that can be extracted from this work. Our results show that typical airflow speeds at 1 – 2 m
distances from a speaker are typically tens of centimeters per second. This means that the ambient air current may be
dominant at such distances from a speaker, which makes the definition of guidelines difficult. When thinking about
quantitative features to discuss social distancing guidelines (six feet, approximately 2 m, in the United States or 1
m in the World Health Organization’s interim guidance published on June 5, 2020 [38]), both spatial and temporal
characteristics matter, e.g., during conversations, the time spent in front of a speaker, and the distance from the
speaker, are needed to define an estimate for the dose of virus received; the dose is proportional to the concentration
of aerosol at that distance. Based on the experimental and numerical results reported in this paper, exhaled materials
reach 0.5 – 1 m in a second during normal breathing and speaking, and in fractions of a second in the case of plosive
consonants (Figs. 1-3). If one is directly in the path of the speaker, then at 2 m and within about 30 seconds, the
exhaled materials are diluted to about 3% of their initial value. However, more extended discussions, and meetings
in confined spaces, mean that the local environment will potentially contain exhaled air over a significantly longer
distance. It follows that in conversations longer than 30 seconds it is better, in our opinion but based on the results
in this paper, to move beyond 2 m of separation, and to stand to the side of a speaker, e.g., outside of a cone of 40-50
degrees (half angle), further reduces possible inhaled aerosol. Most significantly, our results illustrate that 2 m, or six
feet, does not represent a “wall, but rather that behavior can help minimize risk by increasing separation distances
and relative position for longer conversations when masks are not used.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

We have provided a quantitative framework to describe a fundamental mechanism of transport that can be generalized to many pathogens. Obviously, much remains to be done for understanding the fluid mechanics associated with
simple human activities, i.e., breathing and speaking. Similar ideas apply to other mammals, though the scales are
different between a bat, a bird or a cow. Furthermore, many pathogens might have adapted to use the respiratory systems of humans and other mammals as an efficient transport mechanism. Our work will help better understand virus
transmission in mammals, which can have catastrophic consequences in nature or affect the food supply. Building on
the understanding of the fluid dynamics of viral and pathogen transmission we believe it will be possible to design
potential mitigation strategies, in addition to masks, and vague social distancing rules, and link to poorly understood
issues of viral dose [39] to better manage societal interactions prior to introduction of a vaccine. We invite researchers
to combine the full aerodynamics of sound production, including the different phonetic characteristics, and even sound
generation in animals, with droplet formation from saliva and mucus to better understand and describe how airborne
pathogen biology is adapted for this mode of transport and transmission.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank the NSF for support via the RAPID grant CBET 2029370 (Program Manager is Ron Joslin). M.A. thanks
the IRN “Physics of Living Systems” (CNRS/INSERM) for travel support, as well as K. Meersohn for pointing out
the importance of plosives in almost all languages of the world. S.M. thanks V. Moureau and G. Lartigue (CORIA,
UMR 6614) and the SUCCESS scientific group for providing YALES2, which served as a basis for the development
of YALES2BIO. Simulations with YALES2BIO were performed using HPC resources from GENCI-CINES (Grant
No. A006 and A0080307194) and from the platform MESO@LR. S.M. acknowledges the LabEx Numev (convention
ANR-10-LABX-0020) for support for the development of YALES2BIO. We thank A. Smits for loaning the fog machine
and P. Bourrianne and J. Nunes for help measuring flow rates during breathing.

13
Appendix A: Speaker

Due to difficulties imposed by the pandemic, only one subject could enter the lab and participate in the experiments.
The subject volunteered for the study, is male and 44 years old, with no known physical conditions. The study was
approved by the Princeton University IRB (protocol # 12834). The subject provided informed consent.

Appendix B: Flow visualization

In the laboratory experiments, a point-wise laser light (wavelength λ = 532 nm , 1 W power, DPSS DMPV-532-1,
Del Mar Photonics) passes through a concave cylindrical lens (focal length F = −3.91 mm) and spreads to form a
laser sheet about 2 m in length and 1 m in height. The mean thickness of the laser sheet is approximately 3 mm. To
maintain safe use, the laser light shines from above so that no light hits the speaker who sat adjacent to the sheet.
Laser safety glasses were worn by the speaker.
The flow is seeded by a fog machine (Mister Kool by American DJ), which uses a water-based juice (Swamp Juice
by Froggys Fog) and generates droplets with diameters of about one micrometer. The fog can last for tens of minutes
and no notable sedimentation of the droplet is observed throughout the course of the experiments. Therefore, the
droplets can track the local flow, effectively as passive tracers. Images are captured via a high-speed camera (v7.3,
Phantom) with frame rate f = 300 fps (frame per second). However, we note that there is inevitable background flow
in the experiments due to the droplet emission by the fog machine, as well as the natural ventilation in the room.
Specifically, the background flow is of the order of O(1) cm/s and moves from the left to the right in the experiments
reported in the main text (e.g., Fig. 1) and only slightly enhances the propagation of the jets. Although we do not
pursue it here, the effect of the background flow due to ventilation on the transport of the out-flows from breathing
and speaking is an interesting and fundamental problem for future investigations.
A similar setup is used when speaking a distance L in front of a laser sheet to determine the axial structure of the
out-flows, e.g., the measurement presented in Fig. 6. The laser sheet is perpendicular to the flow and the camera is
perpendicular to the laser sheet.

Appendix C: Correlation image velocimetry

In order to quantify the structure of the jets from breathing and speaking, the seeded image sequences captured
on video are processed using PIVlab [40]. The cross-correlation method is applied to the image sequences to measure
the local velocities in the particle image velocimetry (PIV) analyses. Square interrogation windows of 16 pixels × 16
pixels (approximately 2 cm × 2 cm) with an overlap step of 50 % (8 pixels, 1 cm) are used to obtain the velocities,
e.g. those presented in Fig. 1B.

Appendix D: Numerical simulations

The computations are performed with the in-house flow solver YALES2BIO [41–45] (https://imag.umontpellier.
fr/~yales2bio/). These are large eddy simulations [46], which are well suited to study transport in turbulent flows,
in particular in the context of speech production [35]. In addition, they are well adapted to intermittent/transitional
regimes [41, 42]. The spatially filtered, incompressible form of the Navier-Stokes equations are solved. The so-called
sigma model [47] is used to treat the effect of the numerically unresolved scales on the resolved scales. Particles are
injected into the flow to characterize the jets issuing from the orifice (mouth). They are perfect Lagrangian tracers
displaced at the local fluid velocity, and do not affect the flow. In the simulations buoyancy effects are not considered;
the temperature, density and dynamic viscosity are constant. The geometry of the model of the mouth remains
constant over time and does not depend on the type of in-flow signal (breathing or speaking). The mouth opening is
an ellipse of semi-axes 1.0 cm and 1.5 cm, which corresponds to the upper limit of the range of mouth surface area
observed during speaking [22]. Simulations are performed with different flow rate signals at the in-flow, as detailed
in Fig 4. The in-flow signal is perfectly periodic with a fixed cycle duration of 4.0 s for all cases reported in this
paper. More details about the physical model, the numerics and the simulations are provided in the SI. Note that we
report simulations of turbulent transient flows. Only ensemble averaging could yield results specific to each case and
quantify small differences. However, we use simulations to establish trends which are common to the different cases.
In the SI, the question of the reproducibility of the results and the influence of the definition of jet characteristics are

14
notably discussed in more details.

[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]
[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]
[30]
[31]
[32]
[33]
[34]
[35]
[36]
[37]
[38]
[39]
[40]
[41]
[42]

[43]
[44]
[45]
[46]
[47]

J. Lu, J. Gu, K. Li, C. Xu, W. Su, and e. a. Z. Lai Z, Emerg Infect Dis. (2020), 10.3201/eid2607.200764.
S. Y. Park, Y.-M. Kim, S. Lee, and e. a. Baeg-Ju Na, Emerging Infectious Diseases 26 (2020).
L. Hamner, P. Dubbel, and e. a. I. Capron, MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 69, 606610 (2020).
S.Jang, S. Han, and J.-Y. Rhee, Emerg Infect Dis. (2020), 10.3201/eid2608.200633.
D. Hijnen, A. Marzano, K. Eyerich, C. GeurtsvanKessel, A. Giménez-Arnau, P. Joly, C. Vestergaard, M. Sticherling, and
E. Schmidt, Emerg Infect Dis. 26 (2020), 10.3201/eid2608.201235.
M. Gandhi, D. S. Yokoe, and D. V. Havlir, New England Journal of Medicine (2020), 10.1056/NEJMe2009758.
W. F. Wells, American Journal of Epidemiology 20, 611 (1934), https://academic.oup.com/aje/articlepdf/20/3/611/785084/20-3-611.pdf.
J. Duguid, Epidemiol Infect 44, 471 (1946).
G. Johnson, L. Morawska, Z. Ristovski, M. Hargreaves, K. Mengersen, C. Chao, M.-P. Wan, Y. Li, X. Xie, D. Katoshevski,
and S. Corbett, Journal of Aerosol Science 42, 839 (2011).
L. Bourouiba, E. Dehandschoewercker, and J. W. M. Bush, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 745, 537 (2014).
R. Mittal, R. Ni, and J.-H. Seo, J. Fluid Mech. 102, 7426 (2005).
L. Bourouiba, JAMA 323, 1837 (2020).
S. Asadi, A. S. Wexler, C. Cappa, S. Barreda, N. M. Bouvier, and W. D. Ristenpart, Scientific Reports 9, 2348 (2019).
S. Asadi, A. S. Wexler, C. Cappa, S. Barreda, N. M. Bouvier, and W. D. Ristenpart, PLOS One 15, e0227699 (2020).
P. V. Nielsen, I. Olmedo, M. R. de Adana, P. Grzelecki, and R. L. Jensen, HVAC & R Research 18, 552 (2012).
L. Liu, Y. Li, P. V. Nielsen, J. Wei, and R. L. Jensen, “Short-range airborne transmission of expiratory droplets between
two people,” (2017).
Z. Ai and A. Melikov, Indoor Air 28, 500 (2018).
O. Ozcan, K. E. Meyer, and A. K. Melikov, J. Visualization 8, 9 (2005).
C. Xu, P. Nielsen, L. Liu, R. Jensen, and G. Gong, Building and Environment 112, 190 (2017).
L. Feng, S. Yao, H. Sun, N. Jiang, and J. Liu, Building and Environment 94, 683 (2015).
I. Olmedo, P. Nielsen, A. R. de Adana, R. Jensen, and P. Grzelecki, Indoor Air 22, 640 (2012).
J. Gupta, C.-H. Lin, and Q. Chen, Indoor Air 20, 31 (2010).
C. Xu, P. V. Nielsen, G. Gong, L. Liu, and R. L. Jensen, Indoor Air 25, 188 (2015).
Y. Chi, K. Honda, J. Wei, H. Feng, and J. Dang, Proceedings of Interspeech 2015 , 2167 (2015).
J. D. Subtelny, J. H. Worth, and M. Sakuda, Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 9, 498 (1966).
N. Isshiki and R. Ringel, Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 7, 233 (1964).
J. Machida, Cleft Palate J. 4, 240 (1967).
C. H. Shadle, in The Oxford Handbook of Innovation, edited by W. J. Hardcastle, J. Laver, and F. E. Gibbon (WileyBlackwell, 2010) Chap. 2, pp. 39–80.
B. Conrad and P. Schönle, Archiv Psych Nerv 226, 251 (1979).
E. J. List, Ann Rev Fluid Mech 14, 189 (1982).
C. Chen, Elements of Human Voice (World Scientific, 2016).
R. Sangras, O. C. Kwon, and G. M. Faeth, Transactions of the ASME 124, 460 (2002).
T. Maxworthy, J Fluid Mech 64, 227 (1974).
J. Lee and V. Chu, Turbulent Jets and Plumes - A Lagrangian Approach (Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2003).
D. Derrick, P. Anderson, B. Gick, and S. Green, J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 125, 2272 (2009).
R. Mittal, B. Erath, and M. Plesniak, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 45, 437 (2013).
I. Choutapallo, A. Krothapalli, and J. H. Arakeri, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 631, 23 (2009).
World Health Organization, “Advice on the use of masks in the context of COVID-19: Interim guidance,”.
J. D. Rabinowitz and C. R. Bartman, New York Times (2020).
W. Thielicke and E. Stamhuis, J Open Res Soft 2 (2014).
V. Zmijanovic, S. Mendez, V. Moureau, and F. Nicoud, Int J Num Meth Biomed Eng 33, e02789:1 (2017).
F. Nicoud, C. Chnafa, J. Sigüenza, V. Zmijanovic, and S. Mendez, in Biomedical Technology. Modeling, Experiments and
Simulation, Springer Series: Lecture Notes in Applied and Computational Mechanics, edited by T. L. P. Wriggers (2018)
pp. 147–167.
V. Moureau, P. Domingo, and L. Vervisch, Comp Rend Méc 339, 141 (2011).
V. Moureau, P. Domingo, and L. Vervisch, Comb Flame 158, 1340 (2011).
M. Malandain, N. Maheu, and V. Moureau, J Comp Phys 238, 32 (2013).
P. Sagaut, Large Eddy Simulation for Incompressible Flows: An Introduction (Springer Science & Business Media, 2006).
F. Nicoud, H. Baya Toda, O. Cabrit, S. Bose, and J. Lee, Phys Fluids 23 (2011).

