Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

Pore-Scale Transport and Two-Phase Fluid Structures
in Fibrous Porous Layers: Application to Fuel Cells
and Beyond

arXiv:2006.12607v3 [physics.flu-dyn] 10 Nov 2020

Meisam Farzaneh · Henrik Ström · Filippo
Zanini · Simone Carmignato · Srdjan
Sasic · Dario Maggiolo

Received: date / Accepted: date

Abstract We present pore-scale simulations of two-phase flows in a reconstructed
fibrous porous layer. The three dimensional microstructure of the material, a fuel
cell gas diffusion layer, is acquired via X-ray computed tomography and used as
input for lattice Boltzmann simulations. We perform a quantitative analysis of
the multiphase pore-scale dynamics and we identify the dominant fluid structures
governing mass transport. The results show the existence of three different regimes
of transport: a fast inertial dynamics at short times, characterised by a compact
uniform front, a viscous-capillary regime at intermediate times, where liquid is
transported along a gradually increasing number of preferential flow paths of the
size of one-two pores, and a third regime at longer times, where liquid, after having
reached the outlet, is exclusively flowing along such flow paths and the two-phase
fluid structures are stabilised. We observe that the fibrous layer presents significant variations in its microscopic morphology, which have an important effect on
the pore invasion dynamics, and counteract the stabilising viscous force. Liquid
transport is indeed affected by the presence of microstructure-induced capillary
pressures acting adversely to the flow, leading to capillary fingering transport
mechanism and unstable front displacement, even in the absence of hydrophobic
treatments of the porous material. We propose a macroscopic model based on an
effective contact angle that mimics the effects of the such a dynamic capillary pressure. Finally, we underline the significance of the results for the optimal design of
face masks in an effort to mitigate the current COVID-19 pandemic.
Preprint submitted to Transport in Porous Media
M. Farzaneh, H. Ström, S. Sasic, D. Maggiolo
Department of Mechanics and Maritime Sciences,
Chalmers University of Technology,
Göteborg, SE-412 96, Sweden
F. Zanini, S. Carmignato
Department of Management and Engineering,
University of Padova,
Stradella San Nicola 3, 36100 Vicenza, Italy
D. Maggiolo
E-mail: maggiolo@chalmers.se

2

Meisam Farzaneh et al.

Keywords two-phase flows · X-ray computed tomography · pore-scale simulations · fuel cells · COVID-19

1 Introduction
Hydrogen is a clean and flexible energy carrier that plays an important role in
the decarbonisation of the industry and transport sectors (European Commission,
2020). As an example, hydrogen can be used in fuel cells to generate electricity,
power or heat. Owing to their many advantages such as high power density, nearzero emissions and low noise, hydrogen-based Polymer Electrolyte Membrane fuel
cells (PEMFC) are a reliable alternative to fossil-based fuel engines for transport,
industrial and household applications (Cano et al., 2018).
The core of a PEMFC consists of the polymer electrolyte membrane sandwiched between two thin catalyst layers and two porous electrodes, which are
called Gas Diffusion Layers (GDLs). The catalyst layer has a great impact on the
cost of fuel cells and research efforts have been devoted to its improvement (Brown
et al., 2019). On the cathode catalyst layer surfaces, protons and oxygen participate in an exothermic chemical reaction the products of which are water and heat.
Within the pores and interstices of the GDL porous microstructure, the reactant
gas and the produced water flow to and from the catalyst layer. The GDL is the key
component for regulating the transport phenomena inside the cell and, in turn,
its design is an important factor to determine cell performance (Majlan et al.,
2018; Balakrishnan et al., 2020). In particular, the GDL porous microstructure is
fundamental in determining the two-phase (liquid-gas) dynamics and distribution
in the cell, a complex mechanism of mass transport that affects the management
of the produced water (Berg et al., 2004).
Managing the water balance inside fuel cells is a great challenge. An optimal
operation of a fuel cell requires an adequate hydration of the membrane for allowing proton conductivity. On the other side, excessive water fills up the pores
and interstices of the GDL, blocking the access of reactant gas to the surfaces of
the catalyst layer and decreasing the available active sites for reaction (Culubret
et al., 2020). Consequently, the accumulation of produced water, which is mostly
observed at high current densities, limits cell performance (Li et al., 2008). The imbalance of water inside the cell is particularly important in new types of fuel cells,
such as anion exchange membrane fuel cells (Eriksson et al., 2019; Chen, 2020).
An inefficient water management in fuel cells is also recognized as one of the leading mechanisms that induce fuel starvation and cell degradation – two well-known
ongoing issues that reduce the lifetime of fuel-cell systems (Chen et al., 2019;
Nandjou et al., 2016). It is therefore of great interest to investigate the interplay
between two-phase flow phenomena and GDL microstructure, in order to establish
efficient water management strategies, and increase the performance, robustness
and competitiveness of fuel cells in the energy market.
GDLs are composed of a highly porous (porosity > 70%) woven carbon cloth
or carbon paper with 100 − 500 µm thickness. The diameter of fibres composing
the GDLs is typically 10 − 15 µm and the mean pore size is 50 − 120 µm (Gostick
et al., 2007; Lu et al., 2010). The GDL porous microstructure provides a complex
network of narrow and dilated pore throats giving rise to local constrictions of
the flow paths. This complex topology induces high curvatures of the liquid-gas

Pore-Scale Transport and Two-Phase Fluid Structures in Fibrous Porous Layers

3

interface and, given the presence of surface tension, it produces significant capillary
forces that act as a resistance to the flow (see e.g. Lu et al. (2019)). The presence
of these capillary forces is a source of pressure buildup and intermittent water
dynamics in the GDL. This behaviour often results in impulsive forces that flush
out the water to restore the cell operational performance (Li et al., 2008).
The strongly intermittent transport phenomena in GDL samples have been experimentally observed. As an example, fluctuations of the pressure drop, induced
by the breakdown and re-build of water flow paths, have been measured (Mortazavi
and Tajiri, 2014; Niknam et al., 2020). Water can emerge from different preferential
locations on the porous surface when transported through a GDL, an observation
that suggests that the spatial distribution of flow paths is also intrinsically dynamic (Lu et al., 2010). The observed behaviours of liquids penetrating into GDLs
are consistent with the physical description of two-phase flows in porous media, as
characterised by intermittent fluid connectivities that are strongly related to the
porous microstructure (Reynolds et al., 2017). Recent advances in imaging analysis
techniques have allowed the access to pore-scale flow visualization within fuel cells,
for instance by means of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) imaging, neutron
imaging and X-ray computed tomography (CT). Even though these experimental methods provide valuable information on microscale water transport behaviour
within fuel cells, their application is often challenging due to opacity of the system,
limited spatial and temporal resolutions, cost and availability (Bazylak, 2009).
Numerical simulations provide a valuable tool for overcoming the limitations
related to experimental techniques, in terms of both investment and temporal
costs (Andersson et al., 2016). As an example, the two-phase flow in fuel cells has
been mathematically modelled and simulated using continuum approaches based
on the volume averaging of physical quantities (Nam and Kaviany, 2003). However,
GDLs suffer from the lack of length scale separation since the thickness of a GDL
measures only few pore sizes, making the application of continuum models controversial (Rebai and Prat, 2009). To incorporate the GDL pore-scale structure in
numerical simulations, Pore Network (PN) models (Lenormand et al., 1988; Rebai
and Prat, 2009) and artificially generated fibrous material have been used (Chen
et al., 2012; Deng et al., 2019; Hao and Cheng, 2010). PN models represent the
microstructure of porous media as a two- or three-dimensional network of idealized pores and throats, whereas artificial materials are usually created by means
of stochastic techniques based on macroscopic design specifications, such as porosity and fiber size. Such studies can catch the small-scale transport mechanisms
usually filtered out in macroscopic continuum models but they rely on simplified
microstructures. Therefore, pore-scale simulation of liquid water transport and
distribution inside realistic GDLs geometries can unveil a much richer physical
picture. An interesting approach for the investigation of pore-scale two-phase dynamics makes use of X-ray computed tomography for reconstructing porous media
as input for microscale simulations (see e.g. Raeini et al. (2014)). Some studies
have exploited this strategy focusing on reconstructed GDL geometries (Rama
et al., 2012; Gao et al., 2013). These studies investigated the three-dimensional
evolution of liquid invasion in hydrophilic and hydrophobic GDLs under different
pressure gradients. The prominent effect of microstructure on two-phase fluid distribution and dynamics has been observed in samples with surface areas of the
size of only few pores, i.e. of the order of a hundred micrometers squared. These
insights depict the significance of such analyses and motivate further investiga-

4

Meisam Farzaneh et al.

tions of two-phase flows in GDLs, applying the analysis to samples of larger size.
Indeed, a comprehensive analysis of the pore-scale two-phase transport in GDL
samples is still lacking, thus limiting the possibility of understanding the microscopic behaviours of the fluids inside the fuel cell.
Recent studies have shown the potential of combining lattice Boltzmann simulations and X-ray computed tomography for the investigation of single-phase flows
in large samples of porous battery electrodes, notably providing the computation
of electrode conversion and reactive properties (Kok et al., 2019; Maggiolo et al.,
2020). In the present study, we adopt a similar approach to perform pore-scale
two-phase lattice Boltzmann simulations in the porous structure of a commercially available carbon paper GDL for fuel cells (AvCarb MGL370), reconstructed
via X-ray computed tomography. Such fibrous layer materials are characterised
by much larger lateral dimensions compared to the thickness. The pore-scale heterogeneities are expected to be statistically significant along the minor dimension,
which is of the size of a few pores, and to play an important role in the global
performance of the material. We are particularly interested in the effect that the
microstructural variations have in determining the dynamics along the medium
thickness.
Three samples with a surface area and thickness of the order of 1 square millimetre and 200 µm, respectively, are extracted from the reconstructed materials
and used as input for three-dimensional two-phase flow simulations to mimic a
liquid-gas (water-vapour) system. The results of the simulations are presented in
terms of liquid water dynamics, spatial distribution and flow preferential paths.
We capture the two-phase flow dynamics within the GDL at the pore-scale and
we illustrate that the flow experiences a complex dynamics in the form of different spatial patterns, where inertial, capillary and viscous forces all contribute
to the intermittent flow behaviour. These results provide important information
for expanding the knowledge about the physical mechanisms underlying the intermittent mass transport phenomena in fuel cells, which often cause fluctuation in
the performance and unstable operation of a fuel cell (Ji and Wei, 2009; St-Pierre
et al., 2000). Finally, we also propose a model to describe the water transport in
the GDL based on extracted effective permeability values.
The results on the two-phase flow dynamics and fluid structures, and their
relation to the porous microstructure, provide new insight on the pore-scale mechanisms of transport in fibrous materials, also beyond the application to fuel cells.
In the final part of the paper, we will share important aspects regarding the optimal design of face masks with an improved filtering performance, and we discuss
how the use of certain type of materials in the production of personal protective
equipment can possibly contribute to limit the transmission of viruses and mitigate
the current COVID-19 and future pandemics.
The manuscript is organized as follows: in Section 2 the material reconstruction technique and the numerical methodology for simulating two-phase flows are
presented; in Section 3 we present and discuss results of the numerical analysis;
in Section 4 we discuss the relevance of the results for the design of face masks
devoted to the mitigation of virus transmission, and in Section 5 we summarize
the main findings of the research.

5

3.2 mm

Pore-Scale Transport and Two-Phase Fluid Structures in Fibrous Porous Layers

3.2 mm

Fig. 1 A cross-sectional view extracted from the CT reconstructed volume and binarised to
discriminate between material (black) and pores (white). The size of the total surface area is
∼ 3.2 mm × 3.2 mm

2 Numerical Methodology
2.1 GDL reconstruction via X-ray computed tomography
The three-dimensional geometry of the GDL material (AvCarb MGL370) is acquired and reconstructed via X-ray CT. For that purpose, a metrological CT system (Nikon Metrology MCT225) is used, which is characterised by micro-focus Xray source (minimum focal spot size equal to 3 µm), 16 bit detector with 2000x2000
pixels and cabinet ensuring controlled temperature of 20 ◦ C. The used CT scanning
parameters are reported in Table 1. In order to effectively acquire the geometry
of micro-scale fibres, the CT metrological structures resolution has to be maximised (Zanini and Carmignato, 2017). To this end, the voxel size is minimised
by reducing the relative distance between the sample and the X-ray source. This
is possible because small portions are cut out from the initial material, with dimensions of about 3.2 mm × 3.2 mm × 0.37 mm. Since the thickness (0.37 mm)
is lower than the other dimensions, eight samples are packed and scanned with
a single acquisition procedure. As a consequence, the scanning time reported in
Table 1 is the time needed to scan up to 8 material portions. In addition, to further
improve the scanning resolution, the focal spot size is also minimised by keeping
the X-ray power below 7 Watts. A large number of bi-dimensional projections
(i.e. gray-scale images representing the local attenuation of X-rays occurring when
traversing the samples material) are acquired at a different angular position of
the samples during their revolution around the rotary table axis. Starting from
these projections, a three-dimensional reconstruction is conducted using a filtered
back-projection algorithm (Feldkamp et al., 1984) and cross-sectional images (as
the one seen in Fig. 1) are extracted for each sub-sample (with the distance be-

6

Meisam Farzaneh et al.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 2 Illustration of the 3 portions of the CT reconstructed GDL geometry (REVs) selected
for flow simulations. The size of the REVs is characterized by a surface area of A = 819.2 µm ×
819.2 µm and thickness Lpm = 192 µm
Table 1 The CT scanning parameters.
Parameter

Value

Unit

Voltage
Current
Power
Exposure time
Nr. of projections
Voxel size
Scanning time

80
83
6.6
4000
2000
3.2
133

kV
µA
W
ms
–
µm
min

tween consecutive sections equal to the voxel size), exported into image stacks and
binarised to discriminate between material (black) and pores (white).
Even if the resolution is maximized, the smallest fibres may present discontinuous shapes (as seen in Fig. 1), because their microstructure cannot be fully
captured by the CT scan. For this reason, a filtering procedure is operated, based
on the cubic interpolation of three-dimensional geometry in a grid with increased
resolution. Following this image analysis technique we obtain an enhanced threedimensional representation of the material, with a final resolution of 1.6 µm. Compared to the original material’s specifications, we obtain a slightly higher porosity,
from 78% to 80%. We also have to reduce the thickness of the sample, from the
original 370 µm to 192 µm in order to avoid unphysical effects at the borders due
to the presence of adjacent materials at the two sides of the GDL during the CT
acquisition.
Subsequently, we select three portions (representative element volumes, REVs,
Fig. 2) of the reconstructed GDL to serve as input for the numerical simulations.
The three REVs are chosen in order to increase the statistical confidence of the
simulation data. The computational domain of each sample is then characterized
by a cross-sectional surface area of 819.2 µm×819.2 µm and a thickness of 192 µm,
to which correspond 512 × 512 and 120 computational cells, respectively. The pore
size distributions of each materials samples are presented in Fig. 3 where we also
depict the pore size distribution averaged over the 3 samples. We observe that the

Pore-Scale Transport and Two-Phase Fluid Structures in Fibrous Porous Layers

7

0.08
Sample 1
Sample 2
Sample 3
Averaged value

Frequency

0.06

0.04

0.02

0

0

20

40
60
Pore radius (µm)

80

100

Fig. 3 Probability distribution function of pore diameters for the three REVs used as input
for numerical simulations and averaged values. The pore size distributions are calculated using
the watershed algorithm presented in (Rabbani et al., 2014). It is observed that all the three
REVs have similar pore size characteristics

material has a microscopical structure characterized by pore sizes that range from
a few microns to tens of microns. The average pore radius results rp = 40 µm,
on the basis of which we argue that the size of the domain, with a surface area
approximately 102 times larger than the average pore size, well captures the spatial
variation that characterizes the GDL microstructure.

2.2 Lattice Boltzmann Method for two-phase flow simulations
The lattice Boltzmann method is a numerical approach that allows the study
of multiphase flows in porous media at a low computational cost (Zhao et al.,
2019). It is well suited for numerical solutions of complex flows with pore-scale
accuracy and it is therefore able to capture the two-phase fluid-dynamic behaviors
determined by the material microstructural characteristics of a fuel cell GDL. The
GDL geometry, reconstructed via CT and filtered as explained in Section 2.1, is
here used as input for pore-scale simulations. We make use of a single-component
two-phase flow model to mimic a liquid-gas (water-vapour) system by means of
the numerical methodology proposed by Shan and Chen (Shan and Chen, 1993)
for the simulation of surface tension effects. Such a methodology does not rely on
the dynamic solution of the two-phase interface. Instead, the surface tension force
acting between the two phases is simulated by Van-der-Waals-like intermolecular
interactions.
The two-phase flow is solved on a three-dimensional regular Cartesian grid
(D3Q19) by means of the local solution of the probability distribution function
fr , a statistical quantity that indicates the molecular probability of fluid mass and
momentum (Succi, 2001). The lattice Boltzmann equation reads as:
fr (x + cr δt, t + δt) − fr (x, t) = −τ −1 (fr (x, t) − freq (x, t)) + Fr

(1)

8

Meisam Farzaneh et al.

where x = (x, y, z) is the position vector, t is the time, cr is the so-called discrete
speed, freq is the equilibrium distribution function, and the subscript r = 1...19
indicates the lattice directions. The relaxation time τ is directly linked to the fluid
dynamic viscosity as µ(x, t) = ρc2s (τ − 0.5), where cs is the speed of sound and
ρ = ρ((x, t) the fluid density. The fluid is forced by an applied body force Fr that
mimics the effect of a pressure gradient −∇x P acting on the x direction. The body
force is defined as (Guo et al., 2002):




cr u
1
cr − u
wr
+
c
Fr = 1 −
(−∇x P )
(2)
r
2τ
c2s
c4s
where wr represents the weighting coefficient and u = u(x, t) the Eulerian velocity
vector. It should be noted that in our simulations the pressure gradient ∇x P acts
only in the streamwise direction x, whereas it is null along the transverse directions
y and z (see also the sketch in Fig. 4). The value of the applied pressure gradient
is discussed in the next subsection.
The equilibrium distribution function is defined along the r-th direction as:


ueq ueq
eq
, r=1
(3)
fr (x, t) = wr ρ 1 −
2c2s


cr ueq
(cr ueq )2
freq (x, t) = wr ρ 1 +
+
, r = 2 − 19 ,
(4)
2
cs
2c4s
where ρueq = ρu + (τ − 1/2)Fsc (Chen et al., 2014). The interaction force between
different phases Fsc (x, t) is based on a density-dependent pseudopotential function
Ψ (ρ) (Shan and Chen, 1993):
X
Fsc (x, t) = −GΨ (x, t)
wr Ψ (x + δx, t)cr
(5)
r

where G determine the strength of interaction between the two phases (G = −5.5
in the present model). The form of the psudopotential function, defined as Ψ (ρ) =
1 − e−ρ , yields a non-ideal equation of state that allows the coexistence of the two
phases:
G
(6)
P (ρ) = ρc2s + c2s Ψ (ρ)2 .
2
One of the known limitations of the two-phase lattice Boltzmann models is the
emergence of numerical instabilities and spurious currents in cases with high density and dynamic viscosity ratios between the phases. In the present study, the
dynamic viscosity ratio is set as M = µ/µg = 35 (with µ and µg the viscosities of
liquid and gas, respectively), a value that we found as a good compromise between
accuracy of the solution (M = 100 for water-air systems) and numerical stability.
The reader is referred to the work presented in Pettersson et al. (2020) for the
two-phase flow algorithm validation.
The fluid-wall interaction at the three-phase contact line (liquid-gas-solid), in
terms of chemical properties of the surface (wetting), can be tuned by means of
an averaging of the pseudopotential values in the neighboring nodes N :


X
Ψwall (ρ) = Ψ N −1
ρ + ∆w
(7)
N

Pore-Scale Transport and Two-Phase Fluid Structures in Fibrous Porous Layers

9

GDL

Water

rc

Liquid-gas
interface

L

x

Lpm

(a)

(b)

Fig. 4 (a) Schematic of the computational geometry in the present work; The flow cross
section A is 819.2µm × 819.2µm and the GDL thickness Lpm is 192µm (b) Representation of
the liquid front penetrating through the space between two fibers and the induced liquid-gas
interface curvature of radius rc . The value of rc can be approximated with the pore throat
radius, i.e. rc ≈ rp

The resulting contact angle is determined by the value of the parameter ∆w (De Maio
et al., 2011; Vaitukaitis et al., 2020). The contact angles in fuel cells GDLs have
been measured to widely vary, over a range θ ≈ 80 − 150◦ on the basis of temperature and hydrophobic agent content (Lim and Wang, 2004). The value of the
contact angle is known to affect fuel cells performance (see e.g. Park and Popov
(2009)) but less is known about the effect of the porous microstructure. Both
wettability and medium geometrical disorder are expected to greatly impact fluid
displacement in porous media (see e.g. Wang et al. (2019)), thus motivating the
need of a deeper understanding of the effects of pore-scale microstructural traits
on multiphase flows in fuel cells. In the present study, we address such a scientific question by simulating the two-phase flow dynamics within a GDL without
hydrophobic treatments, and the equilibrium contact angle is set to θeq = 90◦ .
Finally, the macroscopic fluid density and momentum are determined through
the statistical averaging of the molecular probability distribution functions as (Succi,
2001):
X
ρ=
fr (x, t)
(8)
r

ρu =

X
r

1
1
fr (x, t)cr + (−∇x P ) + Fsc .
2
2

(9)

2.3 Simulations setup
We investigate the dynamic infiltration into the GDL of a volume of water V ∼
0.13 mm3 . Such a volume is equal to the total volume of the investigated porous
samples ALpm , so that we ensure that all the media can possibly be filled with
water, i.e. a situation where the cell is experiencing high flooding. A sketch of
the computational domain is presented in Fig. 4(a). Along the streamwise x direction we impose a pressure gradient that drives the water through the GDL
microstructure and periodic boundary conditions at the domain boundaries. At

10

Meisam Farzaneh et al.

the boundaries along the transverse directions y and z, the symmetry is guaranteed by imposing free-slip boundary conditions.
When the water produced on the catalyst layer approaches a pore throat,
such as the constriction induced by intersecting fibers (see e.g. Fig. 4(b)), it is
temporary held up and its transport impeded until the local water pressure exceeds the capillary pressure induced by the liquid-gas interface curvature. The
competition between the values of the pressure experienced by the water and the
pressure threshold induced by the pore geometry is the mechanism that determines if the pore throat is infiltrated or not. Based on the mean pore radius of our
sample, the capillary pressure threshold can be in the first instance estimated as
Pt ∼ 2σ/rp = 3.6 kP a (with σ = 0.072 N/m the water-air surface tension). Such
a value is indeed consistent with experimental observations of water penetrating
a GDL and with the corresponding measured pressure buildup (Mortazavi and
Tajiri, 2014).
We then assume that the driving force for water motion is the pressure gradient −∇x P determined by the difference between the pressure buildup at the GDL
entrance (at the catalyst layer-GDL interface) and the pressure of the gas phase
at the end of the porous domain (at the GDL-gas channels interface). The gas
channel is assumed to be at atmospheric pressure. Following this reasoning, the
pressure gradient results −∇x P = Pt /Lpm = −187 kP a/cm. This is the value of
the pressure gradient that forces the flow in our simulations, implemented through
equations 1 and 2. We neglect gravitational effects, since in fuel cells applications
the associated volumetric force ρg ∼ 0.1 kP a/cm results three orders of magnitude lower. It should be noted that the value of the water pressure at the catalyst
layer-GDL interface can vary greatly during cell operation. For instance, such a
variation can be due to the intermittent production of water that a cell experiences or to the complex effects that microstructural and chemical properties of
the catalyst layer induce on the thermodynamical properties of water (Eikerling
and Kornyshev, 1998). The presence of a microporous layer in between the catalyst layer and the GDL can complicate the picture even more. However, the water
production and behavior in the catalyst layer are out of the scope of this study.
Since we are interested in following the time-dependent dynamics of water induced
by the pressure buildup in the cell electrodes, we consistently apply the pressure
conditions relevant to such an investigation. Under such conditions, as simulations
will show, liquid penetrates in some pores of the medium and will accumulate
in others, producing a rich spatial and temporal behavior that unveils important
insights about water transport in fuel cell GDLs.

3 Results
3.1 Water infiltration and two-phase flow dynamics
We first qualitatively look at the dynamics of water infiltrating the reconstructed
GDL. Figure 5 shows an example of water infiltration for one of the three investigated samples, at three different times. We observe the predicted heterogeneous
behavior, with some pores filled much faster than others, and the presence of
pronounced curvatures of the liquid-gas interface induced by the geometrical constraints of the porous medium. We also observe that at time t∗ ∼ 0.8 the liquid

Pore-Scale Transport and Two-Phase Fluid Structures in Fibrous Porous Layers

11

Fig. 5 Three snapshots of the displacing liquid water from lattice Boltzmann simulations in
sample 3: (a) t∗ = 0.2, (b) t∗ = 0.5 and (c) t∗ = 0.8. The visualization illustrates that the
liquid phase is squeezed into the microscopic void space of the fibrous material and transported
through the porous medium microstructure. The grey coloured structure represents the solid
fibers. At time instant t∗ ∼ 0.5, the breakthrough of the liquid-water front occurs and water
emerges from the surface of the GDL

phase has reached the GDL outlet, emerging in the form of spatially distributed
fingers.
From a macroscopic perspective, the liquid infiltration can be quantified by
the percentage of volume of pores invaded by water at each instant, i.e. by the
porous medium saturation S(t). In Fig. 6 we report the variation of saturation with
time. For this figure, as for the other ones throughout the paper, the computed
quantities refer to the average value among the three different REVs (see also
Section 2.1). For comparative purposes, we non-dimensionalise the time as t∗ =
t/tc , where tc = Lpm /Uc is the time that the considered liquid would take to fill
a tube of radius rp and length Lpm , when it experiences an average characteristic
velocity Uc = −∇x P rp2 /(4µw ) (i.e. the Poiseuille’s velocity averaged in time
during infiltration of a liquid in a pipe at a constant pressure drop). From this
first comparison, we observe that at the latter characteristic time, i.e. when t∗ = 1,
the porous medium is not completely filled and S(t∗ = 1) < 1. At a time t∗ ∼ 0.5
we observe the appearance of the first liquid cluster on the GDL outlet surface, a
time that we herein refer to as the breakthrough time. At a time t∗ ∼ 1 roughly
1% of the total water has emerged along certain preferential flow paths. In the
next subsection we will further discuss the mechanism that determines the spatial
distribution of these preferential flow paths.
Fig. 6 also shows that the liquid dynamics is characterised by three distinctive
regimes: (i) a ballistic one where the saturation increases as S(t) ∝ t∗2 , (ii) a
less pronounced infiltration dynamics, where saturation increases with the square
root of time, S ∝ t∗1/2 , and (iii) a final stage where the saturation approaches
a constant value. This behaviour points out that the initial infiltration is inertiadominated, with the average liquid penetration height h(t) = S(t)Lpm advancing
with an increasing velocity dh/dt. We note that this inertial regime occurs when
the liquid invades the initial part of the GDL (approximately the 20%) and it can

12

Meisam Farzaneh et al.
0.2

100
t∗ 1/2

0.15

S(t)

0.1
10−1

αexit (t)

t∗ 2

0.05
Saturation (LBM)
Eq. 12
Water exiting the GDL
10−1

100

0

∗

t

Fig. 6 Water saturation as a function of time (left ordinate axis). The liquid front initially
propagates with a rate ∝ t∗2 , due to inertial forces, whereas at the later stages, when viscous
effects becomes important, the liquid penetrates ∝ t∗1/2 . The liquid saturation at long times
is fitted by Eq 12. The figure also reports on the right ordinate axis the cumulative fraction
of the liquid emerging from the GDL outlet surface, αexit = Vexit /V (dashed line), with V
the total liquid volume in the numerical domain. The latter plot is showed till 2.5t∗ , when
the water that emerges from the outlet is reconnected with the inlet liquid front due to the
periodic boundary conditions

also be affected by the water dynamics in the catalyst layer. We then argue that
in the presence of high pressure buildups at the catalyst layer-GDL interface, this
mechanism can significantly impact the water transport in fuel cell GDLs.
When the liquid penetrates the porous medium, the amount of fibre surface
wetted by the liquid increases and, in turn, the viscous resistance becomes increasingly important. At longer times the macroscopic liquid transport is then
determined by the competition between the pressure drop −∇x P Lpm and the
viscous forces acting on the liquid µw h. The macroscopic liquid infiltration rate
does not increase, but it rather decreases proportionally to h:
dh
∇x P Lpm
∝−
.
dt
µw h

(10)

Such a competition between the pressure and viscous forces leads to the scaling
S ∝ t∗1/2 , which is the classical result of Darcy’s law for a liquid infiltrating a
porous medium (that is, the equivalent of the Lucas-Wahsburn solution for a flow
driven by a pressure drop). We observe a direct transition from the initial inertial
regime S ∝ t∗2 to the viscous regime S(t) ∝ t∗1/2 , and thus a lack of the often
observed convective regime S ∝ t∗ . This kind of a transition is duepto the lack
of separation of the time scales characterising the inertial time ti = ρrp3 /σ and
2
the viscous time tv = rp
p /ν, that is, to the relatively high value of the Ohnesorge
number Oh = ti /tv = ρν 2 /(σ rp ) ≈ 10−1 . This observation points out that the
viscous forces start to play a dominant role at relatively short times and that the
convective regime, which is usually observed at ti < t < tv , occurs in a short time
interval (Stange et al., 2003). Since in such a short period preceding the viscous
regime, an inertial-viscous transition regime is also expected (Fries and Dreyer,

Pore-Scale Transport and Two-Phase Fluid Structures in Fibrous Porous Layers

13

2008), we deduce that the convective, purely inertial regime cannot be observed
here.
After a time t∗ ≥ 2 the saturation growth rate is reduced and tends asymptotically to zero, dS/dt → 0. As we will see in the next section, the transport behaviour
at long times is in fact characterised by the occurrence of preferential flow paths
that connect the inlet and outlet of the medium, and the global mechanism of
medium filling is inhibited.
The inertial and viscous forces are not the only forces contributing to water
transport. As we previously argued, the microstructural traits of the GDL induce
strong curvatures of the liquid-gas interface and give rise to capillary forces. We
measure the time-dependent average capillary pressure Pc (t) = Pl (t) − Pg (t) −
Pv (t)/2 , as the Rdifference between the spatially averaged liquid and gas pressures
Pl,g (t) = 1/Vl,g Vl,g p(x, t) dV (with Vl and Vg the liquid and gas volumes, respectively), minus half of the estimated viscous pressure drop in the liquid from Darcy’s
law Pv (t) = ul µh(t) 4/rp2 (with ul the liquid-phase velocity). For this estimation,
we assume a linear decrease of the pressure along the flow direction because of the
viscous forces in the liquid, and we also assume negligible the gas viscous forces;
following these assumptions we can write Pc (t) + Pv (t) = Pin (t) − Pout (t), with
Pin (t) and Pout (t) indicating the pressures at the inlet and outlet of the medium,
and derive Pc (t) = Pin − Pv − Pg = Pl − Pv /2 − Pg . A positive value of Pc indicates
that the liquid-gas interface is convex with respect to the streamwise direction x
and it represents a resistance to the flow. On the other side, a negative or a null
value point to a concave or flat interface and do not provide resistance to the flow.
Fig. 7 presents the variation of capillary pressure and the values of the capillary
number Ca(t) = dh/dt µw /σ during the liquid infiltration. The capillary pressure
is non-dimensionalised with the estimated capillary pressure based on the average
pore size Pt . The computed values are plotted as a function of the saturation of
the medium. In the early stage, the capillary pressure increases as the liquid enters
the GDL, i.e. dPc /dS > 0. We can imagine this increment as a result of the initial
inertial stage, where the strong dynamics induces incrementally larger curvatures
of the interface. This argument is further corroborated by the increasing value of
the capillary number.
After the initial growth and after having reached a maximum, the capillary
pressure slightly decreases. The observed maximum at Pc ∼ 1.2Pt suggests the
presence of pore throats smaller than the average pore size, which induce high
interface curvatures and capillary pressures, when the liquid front has advanced,
on average, roughly the 20% of the medium length. To the observed decrease of
the capillary pressure at S(t) > 0.2 corresponds a decrease of the liquid infiltration
rate, quantified by the capillary number Ca(t), and, in turn, the beginning of the
regime where viscous forces incrementally contribute to the flow resistance. The
regime transition occurs at a time comparable with the non dimensional viscous
time t∗v ∼ 0.64. However,the viscous time characterising such a transition can
significantly vary depending on various conditions defining the two-phase system,
even in simple geometries, and thus the formulation of tv chosen here offers us only
an approximated indication of the expected flow behaviour (see e.g. Stange et al.
(2003) for an interesting discussion on the topic). We indeed have to consider the
additional effect that the microstructure could induce on the partitioning between
inertial, viscous and capillary forces. We then argue that the transition between

14

Meisam Farzaneh et al.
(b)

(a)
0.12

1.4

10−1

h0 /rp

1.2

0.10

1

0.08

0.8
0.06
0.6

10−2

101
h0

0.4

0.02

0.1

0.2

−1

0.2

Ca(t)
Pc (t)/Pt
0

10−2
100

10−1
S(t)
(c)

0.3

0.4
S(t)

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

∆Pf (h0 )/Pt

0.04

Pc (t)/Pt

Ca(t)

100

100

10−1

100
h0 /rp

Fig. 7 Right panel (a): capillary pressure and capillary number plotted as functions of water
saturation. In the inertia-dominated region, S < 0.2, inertial effects dominate, the liquid
accelerates and the capillary pressure sharply increases, i.e. dCa/dS > 0 and dPc /dS > 0. For
S > 0.2, the flow dynamics is characterized by both capillary and viscous resistance forces.
In this regime we observe, dCa/dS < 0 and dPc /dS ∼ 0. Left panels: (b) front width h0 as
function of time, and (c) the non-dimensional pressure drop along the front width ∆Pf /Pt as
function of the front width h0

flow regimes is likely to be also induced by a significant geometrical constriction, i.e.
by the presence of a significant amount of small pore throats. Given the observed
variation of pore radius values in the samples (see Fig. 3), we expect both small and
larger pore throats delineating the morphology of such a constriction. The liquid
phase breaks through the largest pore (with the smallest capillary resistance), the
interface curvature is reduced and in turn the capillary pressure. The infiltration
velocity also decreases as a consequence of the increased viscous resistance. By
looking at the observed macroscopic behaviour of the liquid infiltration shown in
Fig. 6 we immediately recognize that to S(t) ∼ 0.2 approximately corresponds
the transition from the ballistic dynamics to the later regime S(t) ∝ t∗1/2 . In the
next section we will further evaluate the impact of the GDL morphology on the
dynamic transition between two-phase flow regimes.
In the late stage, the capillary pressure approaches a constant value of Pc ∼ Pt
while the capillary number tends to zero. The latter observation does not imply
that the liquid flow is null, but rather that the saturation does not change in time
and the liquid follows preferential paths, so that Ca(t) ∝ dh/dt → 0. The initial
trend suggests that the capillary pressure experiences a dynamic behaviour, which
results proportional to the average velocity of infiltration and dPc /dS ∝ dCa/dS,
as already observed in literature (see e.g. (Weitz et al., 1987)). It is important to
stress that for S(t) > 0.2, both the viscous and capillary forces play an important
role in determining the liquid motion, so that this regime can be referred to as a
capillary-viscous one.
In order to further characterise the two-phase interface displacement, we estimate the front width
P (or roughness) as the root mean square of the front fluctuations as h0 (t) = ( A (h∗ (y, z, t) − h(t))2 /(Aφ))1/2 (with h∗ the local front position
along x). We observe that in the viscous-capillary regime, the front width increases

Pore-Scale Transport and Two-Phase Fluid Structures in Fibrous Porous Layers

15

in time, as can be observed in the Fig. 7 (b). We also observe that in such a flow
region the pressure drop along the front width ∆Pf (h0 ) (between the base h − h0
and tip h + h0 ) decreases almost linearly with h0 , in Fig. 7 (c). These two observations suggest that, after the initial invasion event, the infiltration occurs in an
unstable manner. A decrease of the pressure difference between base and tip of
the front indeed suggests that, as the front becomes rougher, the probability of
invasion at the tip increases with respect to that at the base, promoting unstable
front displacement. In another equivalent perspective, the viscous resistance (pressure drop) along the front width decreases during kinetic roughening. A similar
destabilising mechanism has been discussed for instance by Xu et al. (1998). In
the next section we will observe that it is the microstructure variation along the
through-thickness direction that is responsible for such a peculiar front dynamics.

3.2 Pore-scale water spatial distribution within the GDL
Pore-scale numerical simulations provide much deeper insights than do the models
based on macroscopic quantities. As it can be observed from Fig. 5, the spatial distribution of liquid in GDLs results heterogeneous and, as discussed in the previous
section, the front exhibits kinetic roughening. The heterogeneous redistribution of
water inside the porous medium can be observed along the primary direction of
the flow, as shown in Fig. 8. The liquid phase does not penetrate uniformly, but
rather the liquid front presents a smooth shape, as indicated by the decrease of the
saturation along the thickness of the medium. This decrement indicates that, after
the breakthrough time t∗ ≥ 0.5, the liquid phase exhibits a compact uniform front
at the GDL entrance, whereas farther along the GDL, it is redistributed along different preferential flow paths (see also the right panels of Fig. 8). These preferential
finger-shaped paths are fluid structures typically observed during two-phase fluids
invasion in porous media. For instance, viscous fingering refers to the situation
when a less dense fluid displaces a denser one and, for sufficiently high invasion
velocities, viscous forces destabilise the invading front and sustain the formation
of fingers at the interface (Méheust et al., 2002). On the contrary, when a denser
fluid invades a medium initially filled with a less dense one, the viscous forces tend
to stabilise the front (Aker et al., 2000). In fuel cells the GDL is usually initially
filled with a gaseous fluid (hydrogen or oxygen). As the cell starts operating, liquid water (more dense) is produced and invades the medium. In such a situation,
with M = µ/µg  1, viscous forces contribute to stabilise the front while the
distribution of pore-scale capillary thresholds determines the onset of fingers, a
phenomenon known as capillary fingering. The occurrence of capillary fingering is
known to depend also on other physical parameters, such as the capillary number
and the hydrophobicity of the material, the latter determining the shape of the
liquid-gas curvature at the pore throats (Lenormand et al., 1988; Cottin et al.,
2010).
For instance, the transition from uniform infiltration to capillary fingering
has been observed in media with uniform randomly distributed pore sizes, when
changing the liquid-gas-solid contact angle, from hydrophilic to hydrophobic (Jung
et al., 2016), or when controlling the competition between pore size gradients and
medium disorder (Lu et al., 2019). Here, we observe a similar transition, but
strongly governed by the porous microstructure. The high value of the capillary

16

Meisam Farzaneh et al.
(a)

(b)

(c)

1

0.8

S(t, x)

0.6

0.4
t∗
t∗
t∗
t∗

0.2

0

0

= 0.5
= 1.0
= 1.8
= 3.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

x/Lpm

Fig. 8 (a) Cross-sectional saturation along the domain thickness at various times t∗ after the
breakthrough. The value of saturation diminishes along the flow direction x indicating that less
and less portions of the cross sections are occupied by the liquid phase. On the right panels,
a snapshot is presented of liquid-gas distribution in a (x − y) plane at dimensionless times
t∗ = 0.5 (b) and t∗ = 1.8 (c)

pressure recorded (see Fig. 7) can be interpreted as the result of an “effective”
contact angle, which, rather than by the chemical properties of the solid surface
(have in mind that in our simulations the equilibrium contact angle is θeq = 90◦ ),
is induced by the combination of strong dynamics of the capillary pressure and the
presence of significant local constrictions of the flow path, which leads to a high
curvature of the two-phase interface. Subsequently, the interface experiences a mechanical instability and a successive sudden invasion event occurs across certain
pore throats. Such an effective contact angle appears then to induce noncooperative burst instabilities that dominate the interface advance to form ramified fluid
structures, as observed for porous media with contact angles & 120◦ (Jung et al.,
2016). In other words, the invading fluid can be considered as “non-wetting” as
we observe the occurrence of capillary fingering even with non-hydrophobic surfaces. The mechanism of microstructure-induced capillary thresholds counteracts
the viscous forces to destabilise the front as also confirmed by the scaling of the
pressure drop at the front width observed in Fig. 7. In Section 3.4 we will quantify
such an effect through the formulation of an effective model. A similar physical
approach, which makes use of an effective contact angle, has been used for example
for the understanding and characterisation of two-phase flow dynamics in soils, see
e.g. Wessel (1988).
In Fig. 9 we report the variation of planar porosity along the domain. The variation of the porosity suggests the presence of pore constrictions followed by pore
enlargements. Such a microstructural traits is likely to induce a positive permeability gradient along the flow direction, thus to destabilise the front after it invades
the first pore constriction at S ∼ 2, and to induce the capillary fingering observed
in Fig. 8 and the scaling depicted in Fig. 7 (Xu et al., 1998). This mechanism
can also be intuitively understood by considering that the viscous pressure drop
is inversely proportional to permeability (Darcy’s law) and that thus a sufficiently
high increase of the permeability along the flow direction can cause a decrease in

Pore-Scale Transport and Two-Phase Fluid Structures in Fibrous Porous Layers

0.3

0.3

0.3

0.15

0.15

0.15

0

20

(a)

40

0

20

(b)

40

0

20

17

40

(c)

Fig. 9 Porosity, φ, as a function of GDL normalized thickness x/L (top) and the probability
distribution functions (PDFs) of pore radii at three cross sections (bottom) for the three
samples. In the bottom figure, the vertical and horizontal axes are the relative frequency and
pore radius, respectively. The PDFs are presented at x/Lpm ∼ 0.1 (black lines), x/Lpm ∼ 0.25
(blue lines) and x/Lpm ∼ 0.8 (red lines)

the viscous drop along the front. It also confirms the important role that porescale statistical variations along the medium thickness can have in determining
a fluid displacement, given the lack of separation of length scales characterising
the pore and minor medium dimensions. Notably, we observe a minimum value of
the porosity at x/Lpm ∼ 0.25, an observation that sustains our hypothesis that a
significant change in the two-phase flow behaviour coincides with the occurrence
of a change in the pores morphology (see also Fig. 7). In particular, the pore radius
PDFs computed at different cross-sections depicted in the bottom of Fig. 9 show
the more frequent occurrence of small pore throats at x/Lpm ∼ 0.2. Such small
pores of radius ∼ 15 µm are significantly smaller than the average pore radius
rp = 40 µm. We suggest that the presence of pores with a small radius in a certain
region of the GDL can be due to an inhomogeneous distribution of the binder,
which is used to bound together the polymer matrix during GDL fabrication. A
bimodal distribution of pore sizes has been for instance observed in reconstructed
GDLs and associated with substantial differences in the binder amount in different
regions (Zenyuk et al., 2016), a difference that here we observe to be significant in
the through-plane direction.

The transition occurs thus both in space and time: liquid invasion occurs
rapidly and uniformly for short times, until the front reaches x/Lpm ∼ 0.2 (just
before the observed constriction at x/Lpm ∼ 0.25). Later in time and farther in
space, the liquid is divided into clusters; infiltration occurs firstly on the large
pores and then along various flow paths or fingers in an unstable manner.

18

Meisam Farzaneh et al.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 10 Liquid distribution at the breakthrough time at three slices along the streamwise
direction for sample 3; (a) x/Lpm = 0.4, (b) x/Lpm = 0.6 and (c) x/Lpm = 0.8. The white
domains represent liquid clusters (fingers), while the black ones are solids or gas. The simulations illustrate that the invading fingers of the liquid water become thinner as the liquid
advances in the porous medium.

3.3 The structure of the liquid phase emerging from the GDL
The breakthrough time defines the moment when the first portion of liquid reaches
the outlet. It is then interesting to observe the spatial configuration of the liquid
phase at this instant, since it provides information about how the porous structure has affected the mass transport from the inlet to the outlet of the medium.
We should also emphasise that the breakthrough time (t∗ ∼ 0.5) occurs shortly
after the transition between the ballistic and viscous-capillary regimes (t∗ ∼ 0.3),
an insight that suggests a fast dynamics of pore invasion after the liquid front
overcomes the capillary barrier induced by the pore constriction at x/Lpm ∼ 0.2.
In Fig. 10 the spatial configuration of the liquid fingers at various cross sections
after the constriction is shown for one of the REVs at the breakthrough time
t∗ ∼ 0.5. After x/Lpm ∼ 0.2, the average dimensionless diameter df /(2rp ) and
number nf of the fingers gradually decrease along the cross-sections of the medium.
This trend is quantified in Fig. 11, where the latter quantities are plotted along the
medium thickness. We firstly note that the initial part of the GDL (x/Lpm < 0.2)
is almost uniformly filled with water, since d2f π/4 nf ∼ Aε. In this region, rather
than fingers, we observe clusters of liquid separated by fibers, with the medium
almost fully filled, as also shown in Fig. 8, where S(x/Lpm < 0.2) ∼ 1.
Closer to the GDL outlet, the diameter of the fingers decreases from an average
size of df ∼ 160 µm = 4rp at x/Lpm ∼ 0.5, to df ∼ 80 µm = 2rp at x/Lpm ∼
1. In Fig. 11, a decrease of the number of fingers along the GDL thickness is
also observed. The quantification of the liquid structures thus offers us another
important insight: at the breakthrough time, the distribution of liquid invasion
gradually changes in space along the medium, from a collaborative pore filling
behaviour, with clusters of the size of few pores df (x/Lpm ∼ 0.5) ∼ 4rp , to a
preferential flow along a single pore, when df (x/Lpm = 1) ∼ 2rp , as more and
more pore throats contribute to impede liquid transport along the direction of
the flow. Interestingly, this finding motivates a possible new design of GDLs, as
characterized by an increasing size of the pore diameters, as a recent study also
suggested (Balakrishnan et al., 2020). Such a design should promote the water
transport in the GDL by decreasing the capillary pressure thresholds, induced
by the pore throats, along the flow direction. However, such an innovative design
should also be carefully tailored to take into account the effects of the spatial

Pore-Scale Transport and Two-Phase Fluid Structures in Fibrous Porous Layers
(a)

19

(b)
25
t∗1/D
20
100
15

6

101

10

4

`f (t)/(2rp )

5

2

0

(c)

nf

df (x)/(2rp )

8

df (t)/(2rp )

df /(2rp )
nf

10

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

0

100

100
∗

x/Lpm

t

Fig. 11 Left panel (a): cross-sectional average fingering diameter df and number of fingers
nf in the through-thickness direction at breakthrough time ( t∗ = 0.5). The average diameter
and the number of liquid clusters or fingers nf decrease as the liquid evolves along the GDL
thickness. Note that the initial part of the GDL (x/Lpm < 0.2) is almost uniformly filled with
water. Right panels: average fingering diameters df (b) and and average finger distance `f (c)
on the outlet surface of the GDL (x/Lpm = 1) as function of time after breakthrough t∗ ≥ 0.5.
The finger dimension shows a time-dependent increase, suggesting df ∝ t∗1/D

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 12 Liquid distribution at the outlet surface for the three samples at t∗ ∼ 2

distribution of pore sizes (i.e. the amount disorder of the medium), a parameter
which is found to be important for the control of capillary fingering phenomena (Lu
et al., 2019).
The observed spatial redistribution of the liquid phase from clusters to single invaded pores at the breakthrough time suggests that water primarily emerges
from individual pores distributed on the GDL outlet surface. To better understand
the characteristics of the structures characterising the liquid transport along such
preferential paths, from the inlet to the outlet of the GDL, we quantify the shape
and dynamics of the liquid fingers at the outlet cross-section, after the breakthrough time, for t∗ ≥ 0.5. The computed values of df are reported in Fig. 11,
where the average distance between emerging fingers `f is also computed, while in
Fig. 12 the emerging fingers at the outlet cross-section are displayed for a visual
comparison. As previously suggested, the liquid phase emerges in the form of fingers with the size comparable with the average pore sample diameter ∼ 2rp . In the
times following the breakthrough, the average size of the fingers slightly increases,

20

Meisam Farzaneh et al.

as well as their number (not shown here), as more liquid reaches the outlet of the
medium along a gradually increasing number of pores.
The time-dependent increase of finger dimension on the outlet surface suggests
a power-law scaling df ∝ t∗1/D , being D the fractal dimension of the emerging
cluster. This observation is consistent with classic percolation-invasion studies that
predict the more probable invasion site occurring at a distance ∝ t∗1/D from the
previous event, with D ∼ 1.82 (Furuberg et al., 1988; Wilkinson and Willemsen,
1983). A least-square fit would give us D ∼ 2.3, even though we note that such
a scaling is limited to just half a decade. On the contrary, we find that the occurence of emerging fingers on the GDL surface appears to be uncorrelated, since
their average computed distance fluctuates around a constant value `f ∼ 2rp , as
reported in the bottom-right panel of Fig. 12.

3.4 Modelling water transport in the GDL
We have observed three regimes that characterise the mass transport within the
GDL. Among them, the ballistic regime occurs at short times and only in the
entrance region of the GDL. In this section we aim at modelling the water transport
from a macroscopic perspective and we therefore delineate a model based on the
long time regimes that dominate the great part of the two-phase flow dynamics in
GDLs.
During the viscous-capillary stage, the liquid flows through an increasing number of preferential pores and it experiences an increasing viscous resistance induced
by the augmented liquid-solid interface. As observed in Fig. 6, the liquid transport
globally follows a power law S(t) ∝ t∗1/2 until a significant amount of water has
reached the outlet of the GDL and dS/dt ∼ 0. We can express the transport of water inside the GDL until this time (t∗ ∼ 2) by means of a model based on Darcy’s
formulation. The latter assumes a linear relation between the pressure drop and the
flow rate, as expressed in equation 10, which is quantified by the permeability of
the medium. Darcy’s equation describes the flow in terms of average values, which
are obtained at length scales much larger than the structural heterogeneities of the
porous materials. Therefore, a model based on Darcy’s equation must inevitably
rely on effective quantities that convey information from micro- to macro- scales.
To build up a Darcy-based model, we then extract the effective quantities that
govern the dynamics of liquid infiltration in the capillary-viscous regime, where
we observe a Darcian behaviour of the fluid, i.e. S(t) ∝ t∗1/2 . In this regime, the
flow dynamics is induced by the pressure drop −∇x P Lpm acting on the average
penetration length h; the capillary pressure induced by the porous microscructure
adds an additional resistance to the flow, which cannot be neglected, as discussed
in Section 3.1. We can then define an effective permeability Keff that embeds the
effect of the microstructure and rewrite equation 10 as:
Keff ∇x P Lpm
dh
=−
,
dt
µw h

(11)

where Keff = 1.2 10−10 m2 is the effective permeability extracted by fitting the
values reported in Fig. 6. The same equation can be rewritten in a dimensionless
form as:
1
∗
S(t) = Keff
t∗ 2 ,
(12)

Pore-Scale Transport and Two-Phase Fluid Structures in Fibrous Porous Layers

21

∗
with Keff
= Keff /(rp2 /4) = 0.30, which points out that, from a macroscopic perspective, the liquid infiltration occurs similarly to the infiltration in a pipe with an
effective radius rp,eff ∼ 0.55 rp ∼ 22 µm. The value of the effective radius, lower
than half of the observed average finger diameter, indicates the adverse effects of
the capillary pressure on the flow dynamics, which is then characterised by an
increased resistance to the flow. Recalling the picture of an effective contact angle
induced by the microstructure discussed in Section 3.2, we can estimate this angle
from the value of the calculated effective radius. The liquid-gas curvature induced
by the microstructure provides an additional resistance to the flow in the form
2
of an effective capillary pressure Pc,eff = −∇x P Lpm (1 − rp,eff
/rp2 ). This value
(Pc,eff ∼ 0.7 Pt ) is very close to the observed value of capillary pressure at long
times (see e.g. Fig. 7). From the effective capillary pressure, the effective contact
angle is then calculated as:


rp
≈ 134◦ ,
(13)
θeff = arccos − Pc,eff
2γ

a value that we notice places the two-phase flow dynamics in the regime of noncooperative burst instabilities for two-phase flows in porous media (Jung et al.,
2016).
It is interesting to observe that by using the calculated effective contact angle
or, equivalently, the effective pore radius, we determine the characteristic invasion
2
velocity as Uc,eff = rp,eff
/rp2 ∼ 0.3 Uc and the characteristic time for liquid to
reach the GDL outlet as tc,eff ∼ 3 tc . Indeed, at around this time, for t∗ > 2,
the mechanism changes by which water is transported, since enough preferential
flow paths connecting the inlet and outlet of the medium are formed. In this later
stage, the liquid is transported preferentially along the liquid fingers and the total
saturation of the medium approaches a constant value S ∼ 0.75. We can estimate
the volumetric flow rate at the outlet in this later stage by means of the product
between the average liquid velocity uf = −πd2f ∇x P/(16µw ) and the liquid area
at the outlet Af = nf d2f π/4. The calculation leads to a volumetric flow rate
qout = uf Af ∼ 5 cm3 /s, and a capillary number Caout (t) ∼ 0.5, at the time
t∗ = 2.5. These are useful quantities for the prediction of water emerging from the
GDL and transported within the fuel cells gas channels.
In a macroscopic effective model that predicts the two-phase mass transport in
fuel cells, Eq. 11 can describe the motion of the fluid in the bulk of the GDL, via an
effective contact angle given in Eq 13. Furthermore, the calculated flow rate and
the capillary number at the outlet can serve as microscopic input parameters for
the boundary conditions of transport at the GDL-gas channels interface. As a final
note we point out that the value of Caout (t), which is close to unity, underlines the
fast dynamics that water experiences when the liquid reaches the GDL outlet and,
in turn, the prominent role that inertia plays in the formation of liquid droplets
emerging from the GDL surface.

4 The transport of large respiratory droplets within fibrous porous
microstructures
Because of the urgent need for sharing research results and information in a global
effort to deal with the current COVID-19 pandemic, we finally want to highlight

22

Meisam Farzaneh et al.

the significance of the present results for the understanding and development of effective personal protective equipment (PPE). Among them, face masks play an important role for source control (used by infected persons) or prevention of COVID19 (used by healthy persons), whether they are surgical masks used in health care
environments or nonmedical masks used in the community setting (World Health
Organization, 2020). It is crucial to optimise the face masks effectiveness in filtering pathogen-bearing respiratory droplets, without significantly compromising
their comfort and accessibility to the public (cost). A possible solution lies in
the identification of the optimal microstructural design of the masks’ filter layers,
which in turn facilitates both the decision-making process to issue recommendations with regards to wearing certain types of masks, and the production of new
low-cost effective materials. The fibrous porous structure of the gas diffusion layer
investigated here strongly resembles many common fabrics materials that can be
used as PPE, being composed of layers of interconnecting fibres.
For the sake of clarity, we here define “large respiratory droplets” as the large
pathogen-bearing droplets characterised by diameters db significantly larger than
the mean pore size of the filter layer, that is, with db  2rp . In such a way, they
can be well represented by a liquid front impacting a surface area of the size of the
here investigated samples, A ≈ (20rp )2 . For instance, for face masks with a mean
pore size of ≈ 50 µm, the size of the large respiratory droplets would be ≈ 500
µm, a value that characterises a small yet important portion of cough-generated
droplets, since this portion is more likely to contain pathogenic organisms (Duguid,
1946). The present results unveil three very important insights about the transport
of large pathogen-bearing through filter layers of face masks.
(i) The fibrous microstructure, even if not hydrophobic, induces an effective
resistance to the their transport. Such an effective resistance, which we quantified
via an effective contact angle in Eq. 13, is particularly important when the expiratory event induces a high value of the pressure difference between the two sides
of the mask, and the resulting pressure drop is comparable with the characteristic
capillary pressure of the microstructure Pt = 2σ/rp . Such a scenario is for instance
encountered when a mask-wearing subject coughs and the oesophageal pressure
exhibits very high values, in the order of tens of kilopascal (Lavietes et al., 1998).
(ii) Since, as we have observed, pore throats incrementally contribute to impede
liquid transport, the design of a layered porous structure with a decreasing size of
the pore diameters along the flow direction can augment the filtration mechanism
of large respiratory droplets, without necessarily increasing the thickness of the
filter layer. Since the filtration mechanism in protective masks can be important
both in inward and outward directions (e.g. during inhaling and exhaling), such
a gradient in pore sizes could be designed as function of thickness relative to the
middle plane of the porous material. A similar design should however also take into
account the microstructure-induced pressure drop and thus the provided comfort
(breathability). The existence of an effective capillary pressure opposing the liquid
transport in neutrally wetted porous media and the expected positive effect of
microstructures with variable pore sizes can possibly explain why layered designs
of commonly available fabric materials, devoid of protective hydrophobic layers,
have been found to offer protection about equivalent to the filtration offered by
5-layer N95 masks (Lustig et al., 2020).
(iii) Finally, we also observe the emergence of the liquid phase from the outer
surface of the porous medium, in the form of fingers with diameter sizes comparable

Pore-Scale Transport and Two-Phase Fluid Structures in Fibrous Porous Layers

23

with the mean pore size of the material. These fingers are rather homogeneously
spatially distributed and their characteristic velocity is quantified via Caout ∼ 0.5.
Such an information is important for both the possible targeted design of masks
with acceptable limits in the size of transmitted droplets, and for the delineation
of health risk assessments related to the expected size and velocity of pathogenbearing droplets expelled from face masks.

5 Conclusions
We have presented lattice Boltzmann simulations of two-phase flows performed
in a CT reconstructed fuel cell gas diffusion layer (GDL). We have been able to
identify the pore-scale characteristics of the two-phase flow dynamics and spatial
distribution within the porous medium, with a micrometre accuracy. We have
sampled three different regions of the reconstructed material to allow a statistically
robust analysis.
We have identified three regimes that characterise the two-phase flow dynamics
in GDLs. At short times, for t∗ ≤ 0.3, the liquid phase rapidly invades the medium
rather uniformly with saturation following a ballistic behaviour S(t) ∝ t∗2 . When
the liquid front reaches the first significant flow constriction, represented by an
increase in the number of small pore throats, it exhibits a different behaviour. We
have observed that to such a change in the porous morphology (presumably related
to a local increase of the binder in the gas diffusion layer) corresponds a maximum
value of the computed capillary pressure. The capillary pressure is found to act
adversely to the flow, being induced by a convex shape of the liquid-gas interface
when approaching the pore throats. Such an effect is observed in a three-phase
(liquid-gas-solid) system with a neutral contact angle and it is therefore purely
induced by the interplay between flow dynamics and microstructure. From this
moment, at intermediate times 0.3 < t∗ ≤ 2.5, the liquid phase breaks through
certain pores and forms preferential flow paths of the size of one-two pores. We
have observed the liquid phase to be transported mainly through the mechanism
of capillary fingering during this stage, with an increasing number of preferential
flow paths contributing to the global transport. During this stage, the invasion
dynamics exhibits an unstable displacement and a kinetic roughening of the front,
which is sustained by the sudden enlargement of the pore throats. At the same
time, we have observed a gradual decrease of the liquid velocity as a consequence
of the gradually increasing liquid-solid surface that provides viscous resistance, so
that the saturation follows a power law S(t) ∝ t∗1/2 . At long times, for t∗ > 2.5,
when a sufficient amount of liquid has reached the outlet, the two-phase fluid
structure stabilises and the liquid flows exclusively following the previously formed
preferential flow paths.
On the basis of these observations, we have proposed a model to mimic and
predict the liquid transport along the gas diffusion layer. By making use of an effective contact angle that quantifies the effect of the measured capillary pressure, we
have been able to build up a simple equation of motion, based on Darcy’s equation,
that well approximates the transport of water within the fuel cell material. We
argue in the paper that such an effective contact angle does not only explain the
noncooperative pore filling and unstable front displacement behaviours observed

24

Meisam Farzaneh et al.

but also the strong intermittent dynamics of two-phase flows and pressure signals
often measured in fuel cells during flooding conditions.
In the last part of the manuscript, we have highlighted the significance of these
results for the optimal design of filter layers of protective masks. We have explained
the mechanisms governing the transport of large respiratory droplets, produced
by intensive expiratory events, through fibrous porous microstructures. We have
discussed how such forms of pathogens transmission can be efficaciously mitigated
also through the use of nonmedical face masks made of common fabrics materials,
provided that the proper characteristics of the different layers that compose them
are selected.

Declarations
Funding
The research project to which this work belongs has received funding from the
European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the
Marie Sklodowska-Curie grant agreement No 790744 and from the Chalmers’ Areas
of Advance Transport. The computations were enabled by resources provided by
the Swedish National Infrastructure for Computing (SNIC).

Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

Availability of data and material
An excerpt of data is available on the EUDAT B2SHARE platform at https://
b2share.eudat.eu/records/32e06d230539414d8afb146f595ca6ea under a Creative Common Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.

Code availability
The code used for the numerical simulations is accessible at https://gitlab.com/
dariom/lbdm under a Creative Common Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
4.0 International License.

References
Aker E, Måløy KJ, Hansen A (2000) Viscous stabilization of 2d drainage displacements with trapping. Physical Review Letters 84(20):4589
Andersson M, Beale S, Espinoza M, Wu Z, Lehnert W (2016) A review of cell-scale
multiphase flow modeling, including water management, in polymer electrolyte
fuel cells. Applied Energy 180:757–778

Pore-Scale Transport and Two-Phase Fluid Structures in Fibrous Porous Layers

25

Balakrishnan M, Shrestha P, Ge N, Lee C, Fahy KF, Zeis R, Schulz VP, Hatton
BD, Bazylak A (2020) Designing tailored gas diffusion layers with pore size
gradients via electrospinning for polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells. ACS
Applied Energy Materials
Bazylak A (2009) Liquid water visualization in pem fuel cells: A review. International journal of hydrogen energy 34(9):3845–3857
Berg P, Promislow K, Pierre JS, Stumper J, Wetton B (2004) Water management
in pem fuel cells. Journal of the Electrochemical Society 151(3):A341–A353
Brown R, Vorokhta M, Khalakhan I, Dopita M, Vonderach T, Skála T, Lindahl N,
Matolínová I, Grönbeck H, Neyman KM, et al. (2019) Unravelling the surface
chemistry and structure in highly active sputtered pt3y catalyst films for the
oxygen reduction reaction. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces
Cano ZP, Banham D, Ye S, Hintennach A, Lu J, Fowler M, Chen Z (2018) Batteries
and fuel cells for emerging electric vehicle markets. Nature Energy 3(4):279–289
Chen H, Zhao X, Zhang T, Pei P (2019) The reactant starvation of the proton
exchange membrane fuel cells for vehicular applications: A review. Energy conversion and management 182:282–298
Chen L, Luan HB, He YL, Tao WQ (2012) Pore-scale flow and mass transport
in gas diffusion layer of proton exchange membrane fuel cell with interdigitated
flow fields. International Journal of Thermal Sciences 51:132–144
Chen L, Kang Q, Mu Y, He YL, Tao WQ (2014) A critical review of the pseudopotential multiphase lattice boltzmann model: Methods and applications. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 76:210–236
Chen Z (2020) Water balancing. Nature Energy pp 1–2
Cottin C, Bodiguel H, Colin A (2010) Drainage in two-dimensional porous media:
From capillary fingering to viscous flow. Physical Review E 82(4):046315
Culubret S, Rubio M, Sanchez D, Urquia A (2020) Dynamic modeling of the
effect of water management on polymer electrolyte fuel cells performance. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 45(9):5710–5722
De Maio A, Palpacelli S, Succi S (2011) A new boundary condition for threedimensional lattice boltzmann simulations of capillary filling in rough microchannels. Communications in Computational Physics 9(5):1284–1292
Deng H, Hou Y, Jiao K (2019) Lattice boltzmann simulation of liquid water transport inside and at interface of gas diffusion and micro-porous layers of pem fuel
cells. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 140:1074–1090
Duguid J (1946) The size and the duration of air-carriage of respiratory droplets
and droplet-nuclei. Epidemiology & Infection 44(6):471–479
Eikerling M, Kornyshev A (1998) Modelling the performance of the cathode catalyst layer of polymer electrolyte fuel cells. Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry
453(1-2):89–106
Eriksson B, Grimler H, Carlson A, Ekström H, Lindström RW, Lindbergh G,
Lagergren C (2019) Quantifying water transport in anion exchange membrane
fuel cells. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 44(10):4930–4939
European Commission (2020) Europe’s moment: Repair and prepare for the next
generation COM/2020/456 final
Feldkamp LA, Davis LC, Kress JW (1984) Practical cone-beam algorithm. Josa a
1(6):612–619
Fries N, Dreyer M (2008) The transition from inertial to viscous flow in capillary
rise. Journal of colloid and interface science 327(1):125–128

26

Meisam Farzaneh et al.

Furuberg L, Feder J, Aharony A, Jøssang T (1988) Dynamics of invasion percolation. Physical review letters 61(18):2117
Gao Y, Zhang X, Rama P, Chen R, Ostadi H, Jiang K (2013) Lattice boltzmann
simulation of water and gas flow in porous gas diffusion layers in fuel cells reconstructed from micro-tomography. Computers & Mathematics with Applications
65(6):891–900
Gostick JT, Ioannidis MA, Fowler MW, Pritzker MD (2007) Pore network modeling of fibrous gas diffusion layers for polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells.
Journal of Power Sources 173(1):277–290
Guo Z, Zheng C, Shi B (2002) Discrete lattice effects on the forcing term in the
lattice boltzmann method. Physical Review E 65(4):046308
Hao L, Cheng P (2010) Lattice boltzmann simulations of water transport in gas
diffusion layer of a polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell. Journal of Power
Sources 195(12):3870–3881
Ji M, Wei Z (2009) A review of water management in polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells. Energies 2(4):1057–1106
Jung M, Brinkmann M, Seemann R, Hiller T, de La Lama MS, Herminghaus S
(2016) Wettability controls slow immiscible displacement through local interfacial instabilities. Physical Review Fluids 1(7):074202
Kok MD, Jervis R, Tranter TG, Sadeghi MA, Brett DJ, Shearing PR, Gostick JT
(2019) Mass transfer in fibrous media with varying anisotropy for flow battery
electrodes: Direct numerical simulations with 3d x-ray computed tomography.
Chemical Engineering Science 196:104–115
Lavietes M, Smeltzer S, Cook S, Modak R, Smaldone G (1998) Airway dynamics,
oesophageal pressure and cough. European Respiratory Journal 11(1):156–161
Lenormand R, Touboul E, Zarcone C (1988) Numerical models and experiments on
immiscible displacements in porous media. Journal of fluid mechanics 189:165–
187
Li H, Tang Y, Wang Z, Shi Z, Wu S, Song D, Zhang J, Fatih K, Zhang J, Wang H,
et al. (2008) A review of water flooding issues in the proton exchange membrane
fuel cell. Journal of Power Sources 178(1):103–117
Lim C, Wang C (2004) Effects of hydrophobic polymer content in gdl on power
performance of a pem fuel cell. Electrochimica Acta 49(24):4149–4156
Lu NB, Browne CA, Amchin DB, Nunes JK, Datta SS (2019) Controlling capillary
fingering using pore size gradients in disordered media. Physical Review Fluids
4(8):084303
Lu Z, Daino MM, Rath C, Kandlikar SG (2010) Water management studies in
pem fuel cells, part iii: Dynamic breakthrough and intermittent drainage characteristics from gdls with and without mpls. International Journal of Hydrogen
Energy 35(9):4222–4233
Lustig S, Biswakarma JJ, Rana D, Tilford SH, Hu W, Su M, Rosenblatt MS
(2020) Effectiveness of common fabrics to block aqueous aerosols of virus-like
nanoparticles. ACS Nano
Maggiolo D, Picano F, Zanini F, Carmignato S, Guarnieri M, Sasic S, Ström
H (2020) Solute transport and reaction in porous electrodes at high schmidt
numbers. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 896:A13
Majlan E, Rohendi D, Daud WRW, Husaini T, Haque M (2018) Electrode for proton exchange membrane fuel cells: a review. Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews 89:117–134

Pore-Scale Transport and Two-Phase Fluid Structures in Fibrous Porous Layers

27

Méheust Y, Løvoll G, Måløy KJ, Schmittbuhl J (2002) Interface scaling in a twodimensional porous medium under combined viscous, gravity, and capillary effects. Physical Review E 66(5):051603
Mortazavi M, Tajiri K (2014) Liquid water breakthrough pressure through gas
diffusion layer of proton exchange membrane fuel cell. international journal of
hydrogen energy 39(17):9409–9419
Nam JH, Kaviany M (2003) Effective diffusivity and water-saturation distribution
in single-and two-layer pemfc diffusion medium. International Journal of Heat
and Mass Transfer 46(24):4595–4611
Nandjou F, Poirot-Crouvezier JP, Chandesris M, Blachot JF, Bonnaud C, Bultel Y (2016) Impact of heat and water management on proton exchange membrane fuel cells degradation in automotive application. Journal of Power Sources
326:182–192
Niknam SA, Mortazavi M, Santamaria AD (2020) Signature analysis of two-phase
flow pressure drop in proton exchange membrane fuel cell flow channels. Results
in Engineering 5:100071
Park S, Popov BN (2009) Effect of cathode gdl characteristics on mass transport
in pem fuel cells. Fuel 88(11):2068–2073
Pettersson K, Maggiolo D, Sasic S, Johansson P, Sasic-Kalagasidis A (2020) On
the impact of porous media microstructure on rainfall infiltration of thin homogeneous green roof growth substrates. Journal of Hydrology 582:124286
Rabbani A, Jamshidi S, Salehi S (2014) An automated simple algorithm for
realistic pore network extraction from micro-tomography images. Journal of
Petroleum Science and Engineering 123:164–171
Raeini AQ, Blunt MJ, Bijeljic B (2014) Direct simulations of two-phase flow on
micro-ct images of porous media and upscaling of pore-scale forces. Advances
in water resources 74:116–126
Rama P, Liu Y, Chen R, Ostadi H, Jiang K, Gao Y, Zhang XX, Fisher R, Jeschke
M (2012) Simulation of liquid water breakthrough in a nanotomography reconstruction of a carbon paper gas-diffusion layer. AIChE Journal 58(2):646–655
Rebai M, Prat M (2009) Scale effect and two-phase flow in a thin hydrophobic
porous layer. application to water transport in gas diffusion layers of proton
exchange membrane fuel cells. Journal of Power Sources 192(2):534–543
Reynolds CA, Menke H, Andrew M, Blunt MJ, Krevor S (2017) Dynamic fluid
connectivity during steady-state multiphase flow in a sandstone. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 114(31):8187–8192
Shan X, Chen H (1993) Lattice boltzmann model for simulating flows with multiple
phases and components. Physical review E 47(3):1815
St-Pierre J, Wilkinsor D, Knights S, Bos M (2000) Relationships between water
management, contamination and lifetime degradation in pefc. Journal of New
Materials for Electrochemical Systems 3(2):99–106
Stange M, Dreyer ME, Rath HJ (2003) Capillary driven flow in circular cylindrical
tubes. Physics of fluids 15(9):2587–2601
Succi S (2001) The lattice Boltzmann equation: for fluid dynamics and beyond.
Oxford university press
Vaitukaitis P, Maggiolo D, Remmelgas J, Abrahmsén-Alami S, Bernin D, Siiskonen
M, Malmqvist J, Sasic S, Sardina G (2020) Water transport and absorption in
pharmaceutical tablets–a numerical study. Meccanica 55(2):421–433

28

Meisam Farzaneh et al.

Wang Z, Chauhan K, Pereira JM, Gan Y (2019) Disorder characterization of
porous media and its effect on fluid displacement. Physical Review Fluids
4(3):034305
Weitz D, Stokes J, Ball R, Kushnick A (1987) Dynamic capillary pressure in
porous media: Origin of the viscous-fingering length scale. Physical review letters
59(26):2967
Wessel A (1988) On using the effective contact angle and the water drop penetration time for classification of water repellency in dune soils. Earth Surface
Processes and Landforms 13(6):555–561
Wilkinson D, Willemsen JF (1983) Invasion percolation: a new form of percolation
theory. Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and General 16(14):3365
World Health Organization (2020) Advice on the use of masks in the context of
covid-19: interim guidance, 6 april 2020. Tech. rep., World Health Organization
Xu B, Yortsos Y, Salin D (1998) Invasion percolation with viscous forces. Physical
Review E 57(1):739
Zanini F, Carmignato S (2017) Two-spheres method for evaluating the metrological structural resolution in dimensional computed tomography. Measurement
Science and Technology 28(11):114002
Zenyuk IV, Parkinson DY, Connolly LG, Weber AZ (2016) Gas-diffusion-layer
structural properties under compression via x-ray tomography. Journal of Power
Sources 328:364–376
Zhao B, MacMinn CW, Primkulov BK, Chen Y, Valocchi AJ, Zhao J, Kang Q,
Bruning K, McClure JE, Miller CT, et al. (2019) Comprehensive comparison
of pore-scale models for multiphase flow in porous media. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 116(28):13799–13806

