From predictions to prescriptions: A data-driven
response to COVID-19
Dimitris Bertsimasa,b,1 , Leonard Boussiouxb , Ryan Cory-Wrightb , Arthur Delarueb , Vassilis Digalakisb , Alexandre
Jacquillata,b , Driss Lahlou Kitaneb , Galit Lukinb , Michael Lib , Luca Mingardib , Omid Nohadanic , Agni Orfanoudakib , Theodore
Papalexopoulosb , Ivan Paskovb , Jean Pauphiletb , Omar Skali Lamib , Bartolomeo Stellatob , Hamza Tazi Bouardib , Kimberly
Villalobos Carballob , Holly Wibergb , and Cynthia Zengb
a

Sloan School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142; b Operations Research Center, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02139; c Benefits Science Technologies, Boston, MA 02110

arXiv:2006.16509v1 [stat.AP] 30 Jun 2020

This manuscript was compiled on July 1, 2020

The COVID-19 pandemic has created unprecedented challenges
worldwide. Strained healthcare providers make difficult decisions
on patient triage, treatment and care management on a daily basis.
Policy makers have imposed social distancing measures to slow the
disease, at a steep economic price. We design analytical tools to support these decisions and combat the pandemic. Specifically, we propose a comprehensive data-driven approach to understand the clinical characteristics of COVID-19, predict its mortality, forecast its evolution, and ultimately alleviate its impact. By leveraging cohort-level
clinical data, patient-level hospital data, and census-level epidemiological data, we develop an integrated four-step approach, combining descriptive, predictive and prescriptive analytics. First, we aggregate hundreds of clinical studies into the most comprehensive
database on COVID-19 to paint a new macroscopic picture of the disease. Second, we build personalized calculators to predict the risk
of infection and mortality as a function of demographics, symptoms,
comorbidities, and lab values. Third, we develop a novel epidemiological model to project the pandemic’s spread and inform social
distancing policies. Fourth, we propose an optimization model to reallocate ventilators and alleviate shortages. Our results have been
used at the clinical level by several hospitals to triage patients, guide
care management, plan ICU capacity, and re-distribute ventilators. At
the policy level, they are currently supporting safe back-to-work policies at a major institution and equitable vaccine distribution planning
at a major pharmaceutical company, and have been integrated into
the US Center for Disease Control’s pandemic forecast.

to cope with the disease by “flattening the curve” (4) but
also come at a steep economic price (5, 6). Nearly all governments are now confronted to difficult decisions balancing
public health and socio-economic outcomes.
This paper proposes a comprehensive data-driven approach
to understand the clinical characteristics of COVID-19, predict
its mortality, forecast its evolution, and ultimately alleviate
its impact. We leverage a broad range of data sources, which
include (i) our own cohort-level data aggregating hundreds of
clinical studies, (ii) patient-level data obtained from electronic
health records, and (iii) census reports on the scale of the pandemic. We develop an integrated approach spanning descriptive analytics (to derive a macroscopic understanding of the
disease), predictive analytics (to forecast the near-term impact
and longer-term dynamics of the pandemic), and prescriptive
analytics (to support healthcare and policy decision-making).
Specifically, our approach comprises four steps (Figure 1):
• Aggregating and visualizing the most comprehensive clinical database on COVID-19 (Section 1). We aggregate
cohort-level data on demographics, comorbidities, symptoms and lab values from 160 clinical studies. These data
paint a broad picture of the disease, identifying common
symptoms, disparities between mild and severe patients,

COVID-19 | Epidemiological modeling | Machine learning | Optimization

In the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic, healthcare providers
and policy makers are wrestling with unprecedented challenges.
How to treat COVID-19 patients with equipment shortages?
How to allocate resources to combat the disease? How to plan
for the next stages of the pandemic? We present a data-driven
approach to tackle these challenges. We gather comprehensive
data from various sources, including clinical studies, electronic
medical records, and census reports. We develop algorithms to
understand the disease, predict its mortality, forecast its spread,
inform social distancing policies, and re-distribute critical equipment. These algorithms provide decision support tools that
have been deployed on our publicly available website, and
are actively used by hospitals, companies, and policy makers
around the globe.

Significance Statement

I

n just a few weeks, the whole world has been upended by the
outbreak of COVID-19, an acute respiratory disease caused
by a new coronavirus called SARS-CoV-2. The virus is highly
contagious: it is easily transmitted from person to person via
respiratory droplet nuclei and can persist on surfaces for days
(1, 2). As a result, COVID-19 has spread rapidly—classified by
the World Health Organization as a public health emergency
on January 30, 2020 and as a pandemic on March 11. As of
mid-May, over 4.5 million cases and 300,000 deaths have been
reported globally (3).
Because no treatment is currently available, healthcare
providers and policy makers are wrestling with unprecedented
challenges. Hospitals and other care facilities are facing shortages of beds, ventilators and personal protective equipment—
raising hard questions on how to treat COVID-19 patients
with scarce supplies and how to allocate resources to prevent
further shortages. At the policy level, most countries have
imposed “social distancing” measures to slow the spread of the
pandemic. These measures allow strained healthcare systems
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.XXXXXXXXXX

D.B., R.C.W., A.D., A.J., D.L.K., M.L., O.N., A.O., I.P., J.P., O.S.L., B.S., H.T.B. and H.W. designed
research; L.B., R.C.W., A.D., V.D., A.J., D.L.K., G.L., M.L., L.M., A.O., T.P., I.P., J.P., O.S.L., B.S.,
H.T.B., K.V.C., H.W. and C.Z. performed research; R.C.W., A.D., D.L.K., M.L., L.M., A.O., T.P., I.P.,
J.P., O.S.L., B.S., H.T.B., and H.W. analyzed data; D.B., R.C.W., A.D., A.J., M.L., O.N., A.O., J.P.,
H.T.B. and H.W. wrote the paper.
No author has any competing interest to declare.
1

To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: dbertsim@mit.edu

PNAS

|

July 1, 2020

|

vol. XXX

|

no. XX

|

1–10

Data

Descriptive analytics

Cohort-level data
[clinical research]

Patient characteristics
(Section 1)
Insights

Patient-level data
[electronic medical record]

Predictive analytics

Prescriptive analytics

Impact

Clinical understanding
Mortality/infection risk
(Section 2)

Triaging and treatment

Parameters
Census-level data
[public reports]

DELPHI-pred
(Section 3)

Parameters

Inputs

DELPHI-presc
(Section 3)

Social distancing policies

Ventilator allocation
(Section 4)

Resource allocation

Fig. 1. Overview of our end-to-end analytics approach. We leverage diverse data sources to inform a family of descriptive, predictive and prescriptive tools for clinical and policy
decision-making support.

and geographic disparities—insights that are hard to derive from any single study and can orient future clinical
research on COVID-19, its mutations, and its disparate
effects across ethnic groups.
• Providing personalized indicators to assess the risk of
mortality and infection (Section 2). Using patient-level
data, we develop machine learning models to predict
mortality and infection risk, as a function of demographics,
symptoms, comorbidities, and lab values. Using gradient
boosting methods, the models achieve strong predictive
performance—with an out-of-sample area under the curve
above 90%. These models yield personalized calculators
that can (i) guide triage, treatment, and care management
decisions for strained healthcare systems, and (ii) serve as
pre-screening tools for patients before they visit healthcare
or testing facilities.
• Developing a novel epidemiological model to forecast the
evolution of the disease and assess the effects of social
distancing (Section 3). We propose a new compartmental
model called DELPHI, which accounts for COVID-19 features such as underdetection and government response.
The model estimates the disease’s spread with high accuracy; notably, its projections from as early as April 3
have matched the number of cases observed in the United
States up to mid-May. We also provide a data-driven
assessment of social distancing policies, showing that the
pandemic’s spread is highly sensitive to the stringency
and timing of mitigating measures.
• Proposing an optimization model to support ventilator
allocation in response to the pandemic (Section 4). We
formulate a mixed-integer optimization model to allocate
ventilators efficiently in a semi-collaborative setting where
resources can be shared both between healthcare facilities
or through a central authority. In the United States,
this allows us to study the trade-offs of managing the
federal ventilator stockpile in conjunction with inter-state
transfers. Results show that limited ventilator transfers
could have eliminated shortages in April 2020.
A major contribution of our work is to treat these different questions as interdependent challenges raised by the
pandemic—as opposed to a series of isolated problems. Indeed,
clinical decision-making depends directly on patient inflows
and available supplies, while resource planning and govern2

|

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.XXXXXXXXXX

ment responses react to patient-level outcomes. By combining
various data sources into descriptive, predictive and prescriptive methods, this paper proposes an end-to-end approach to
design a comprehensive and cohesive response to COVID-19.
Ultimately, this paper develops analytical tools to inform
clinical and policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic.
These tools are available to the public on a dedicated website.∗ They have also been deployed in practice to combat
the spread of COVID-19 globally. Several hospitals in Europe
have used our risk calculators to support pre-triage and posttriage decisions, and a major financial institution in South
America is applying our infection risk calculator to determine
how employees can safely return to work. A major hospital
system in the United States planned its intensive care unit
(ICU) capacity based on our forecasts, and leveraged our optimization results to allocate ventilators across hospitals when
the number of cases was rising. Our epidemiological predictions are used by a major pharmaceutical company to design
a vaccine distribution strategy that can contain future phases
of the pandemic. They have also been incorporated into the
US Center for Disease Control’s forecasts (7).

1. Descriptive Analytics: Clinical Outcomes Database
Early responses to the COVID-19 pandemic have been inhibited by the lack of available data on patient outcomes.
Individual centers released reports summarizing patient characteristics. Yet, this decentralized effort makes it difficult to
construct a cohesive picture of the pandemic.
To address this problem, we construct a database that aggregates demographics, comorbidities, symptoms, laboratory
blood test results (“lab values”, henceforth) and clinical outcomes from 160 clinical studies released between December
2019 and May 2020—made available on our website for broader
use. The database contains information on 133,600 COVID-19
patients (3.13% of the global COVID-19 patients as of May
12, 2020), spanning mainly Europe (81, 207 patients), Asia
(19, 418 patients) and North America (23, 279 patients). To
our knowledge, this is the largest dataset on COVID-19.
A. Data Aggregation. Each study was read by an MIT re-

searcher, who transcribed numerical data from the manuscript.
The appendix reports the main transcription assumptions.
∗

www.covidanalytics.io

Dimitris Bertsimas et al.

Each row in the database corresponds to a cohort of
patients—some papers study a single cohort, whereas others study several cohorts or sub-cohorts. Each column reports
cohort-level statistics on demographics (e.g., average age, gender breakdown), comorbidities (e.g., prevalence of diabetes,
hypertension), symptoms (e.g., prevalence of fever, cough),
treatments (e.g., prevalence of antibiotics, intubation), lab
values (e.g., average lymphocyte count), and clinical outcomes
(e.g., average hospital length of stay, mortality rate). We also
track whether the cohort comprises “mild” or “severe” patients
(mild and severe cohorts are only a subset of the data).
Due to the pandemic’s urgency, many papers were published
before all patients in a cohort were discharged or deceased. Accordingly, we estimate the mortality rate from discharged and
deceased patients only (referred to as “Projected Mortality”).
B. Objectives. Our main goal is to leverage this database to

derive a macroscopic understanding of the disease. We break
it down into the following questions:
• Which symptoms are most prevalent?
• How do “mild” and “severe” patients differ in terms of
symptoms, comorbidities, and lab values?
• Can we identify epidemiological differences in different
parts of the world?
C. Descriptive Statistics. Table 1 depicts the prevalence of
COVID-19 symptoms, in aggregate, classified into “mild” or
“severe” patients, and classified per geographic region. Our
key observations are that:
• Cough, fever, shortness of breath, and fatigue are the
most prevalent symptoms of COVID-19.
• COVID-19 symptoms are much more diverse than those
listed by public health agencies. COVID-19 patients can
experience at least 15 different symptoms. In contrast,
the US Center for Disease Control and Prevention lists
seven symptoms (cough, shortness of breath, fever, chills,
myalgia, sore throat, and loss of taste/smell) (8); the
World Health Organization lists three symptoms (fever,
cough, and fatigue) (9); and the UK National Health
Service lists two main symptoms (fever and cough) (10).
This suggests a lack of consensus among the medical
community, and opportunities to revisit public health
guidelines to capture the breadth of observed symptoms.
• Shortness of breath and elevated respiratory rates are
much more prevalent in cases diagnosed as severe.
• Symptoms are quite different in Asia vs. Europe or North
America. In particular, more than 75% of Asian patients
experience fever, as compared to less than half in Europe
and North America. Conversely, shortness of breath is
much more prevalent in Europe and North America.
Using a similar nomenclature, Figure 2A reports demographics, comorbidities, lab values, and clinical outcomes (an
extended version is available in the appendix). In terms of
demographics, severe populations of patients have a higher
incidence of male subjects and are older on average. Severe patients also have elevated comorbidity rates. Figures 2B and 2C
visually confirm the impact of age and hypertension rates on
population-level mortality—consistent with (11–13). In terms
of lab values, CRP, AST, BUN, IL-6 and Protocalcitonin are
highly elevated among severe patients.
Dimitris Bertsimas et al.

D. Discussion and Impact. Our database is the largest available source of clinical information on COVID-19 assembled
to date. As such, it provides new insights on common symptoms and the drivers of the disease’s severity. Ultimately, this
database can support guidelines from health organizations,
and contribute to ongoing clinical research on the disease.
Another benefit of this database is its geographical reach.
Results highlight disparities in patients’ symptoms across
regions. These disparities may stem from (i) different reporting
criteria; (ii) different treatments; (iii) disparate impacts across
different ethnic groups; and (iv) mutations of the virus since
it first appeared in China. This information contributes to
early evidence on COVID-19 mutations (14, 15) and on its
disparate effects on different ethnic groups (16, 17).
Finally, the database provides average values of key parameters into our epidemiological model of the disease’s spread
and our optimization model of resource allocation (e.g., average length of stay of hospitalizations, average fraction of
hospitalized patients put on a ventilator).
The insights derived from this descriptive analysis highlight
the need for personalized data-driven clinical indicators. Yet,
our population-level database cannot be leveraged directly
to support decision-making at the patient level. We have
therefore initiated a multi-institution collaboration to collect
electronic medical records from COVID-19 patients and develop clinical risk calculators. These calculators, presented in
the next section, are informed by several of our descriptive
insights. Notably, the disparities between severe patients and
the rest of the patient population inform the choice of the features included in our mortality risk calculator. Moreover, the
geographic disparities suggest that data from Asia may be less
predictive when building infection or mortality risk calculators
designed for patients in Europe or North America—motivating
our use of data from Europe.

2. Predictive Analytics: Mortality and Infection Risk
Throughout the COVID-19 crisis, physicians have made difficult triage and care management decisions on a daily basis.
Oftentimes, these decisions could only rely on small-scale
clinical tests, each requiring significant time, personnel and
equipment and thus cannot be easily replicated. As the burden on “hot spots” has ebbed, hospitals began to aggregate
rich data on COVID-19 patients. This data offers opportunities to develop algorithmic risk calculators for large-scale
decision support—ultimately facilitating a more proactive and
data-driven strategy to combat the disease globally.
We have established a patient-level database of thousands of
COVID-19 hospital admissions. Using state-of-the-art machine
learning methods, we develop a mortality risk calculator and an
infection risk calculator. Together, these two risk assessments
provide screening tools to support critical care management
decisions, spanning patient triage, hospital admissions, bed
assignment and testing prioritization. A more detailed model
for mortality with lab values is presented in (18).
A. Methods. This investigation constitutes a multi-center

study from healthcare institutions in Spain and Italy, two
countries severely impacted by COVID-19. Specifically, we
collected data from (i) Azienda Socio-Sanitaria Territoriale
di Cremona (ASST Cremona), the main hospital network in
the Province of Cremona, and (ii) HM Hospitals, a leading
PNAS

|

July 1, 2020

|

vol. XXX

|

no. XX

|

3

Table 1. Count and prevalence of symptoms among COVID-19 patients, in aggregate, broken down into mild/severe patients, and broken
down per continent (Asia, Europe, North America). Mild and severe patients only form a subset of the data, and so do patients from Asia,
Europe and North America. A “-” indicates that fewer than 100 patients in a subpopulation reported on this symptom.
Symptom

All patients

Severe

Asia

Europe

North America

Count

(%)

Count

(%)

Count

(%)

Count

(%)

Count

(%)

Count

(%)

94, 950
95, 870
17, 290
11, 560
7, 613
83, 170
12, 150
7, 376
3, 928
11, 430
10, 070
3, 303
16, 520
1, 639
3, 116

52.8%
48.1%
33.7%
31.4%
26.3%
22.2%
17.5%
16.4%
15.8%
15.7%
12.4%
11.3%
11.1%
8.7%
8.7%

6, 833
6, 864
6, 006
5, 313
4, 995
3, 513
4, 455
527
1, 641
5, 068
4, 238
767
5, 687
2, 176
2, 751

63.0%
79.3%
16.1%
35.3%
29.2%
14.2%
16.4%
9.7%
14.2%
12.2%
6.5%
12.2%
9.7%
6.5%
9.9%

5, 803
6, 077
5, 373
1, 989
1, 216
921
1, 643
642
808
1, 541
1, 798
588
5, 369
234
520

50.4%
76.7%
60.7%
40.6%
34.2%
8.2%
19.1%
38.4%
15.4%
8.6%
5.6%
19.6%
9.0%
14.1%
9.4%

14, 034
14, 750
11, 330
11, 320
7, 395
6, 013
8, 517
1, 257
3, 566
7, 929
8, 262
2, 984
11, 470
1, 369
2, 794

56.2%
76.6%
19.7%
30.8%
26.7%
10.4%
15.5%
14.6%
13.8%
9.9%
8.2%
12.2%
10.8%
8.9%
8.2%

78, 430
78, 450
3, 512
226
−
75, 235
1, 633
−
312
1, 633
312
−
3, 512
−
−

52.2%
43.5%
69.9%
64.2%
−
22.9%
33.5%
−
40.5%
27.2%
22.4%
−
10.4%
−
−

1, 113
1, 481
1, 111
−
176
550
755
6, 117
−
551
259
−
1, 066
258
268

63.6%
41.3%
49.2%
−
10.9%
9.8%
25.3%
16.8%
−
8.7%
9.0%
−
15.4%
7.4%
11.5%

111, 700

11.7%

7, 428

0.4%

9, 146

74.0%

12, 820

16.7%

79, 750

9.9%

19, 060

15.8%

Cough
Fever
Short Breath
Fatigue
Sputum
Sore Throat
Myalgia
Elev. Resp. Rate
Anorexia
Headache
Nausea
Chest Pain
Diarrhea
Cong. Airway
Chills
Proj. Mortality

Mild

Projected Mortality Rate (%)

0.8

0.6

China
Europe/North America
France
Germany
Italy
Mexico
USA
United Kingdom

0.4

0.2

0.0

B

20

40

60

80

Median Age in Study (years)

Projected Mortality Rate (%)

0.8

A

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0
0.0

C

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Proportion Hypertension in Study (%)

Fig. 2. Summary of demographics, comorbidities and lab values in mild and severe COVID-19 patients. (A) Comorbidities, demographics, average lab values, average length of
stay and projected mortality among COVID-19 patients, in aggregate and broken down into mild/severe patients. (B) Impact of median age on projected mortality at a cohort
level. (C) Impact of hypertension rates on projected mortality at a cohort level. The size of each dot represents the number of patients in the cohort, and its color represents the
nation the study was performed in. We only include studies reporting both discharged and deceased patients.

hospital group in Spain with 15 general hospitals and 21 clinical centers spanning the regions of Madrid, Galicia, and León.
We applied the following inclusion criteria to the calculators:
• Mortality Risk: We include adult patients diagnosed
with COVID-19 and hospitalized. We consider patients
who were either discharged from the hospital or deceased
4

|

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.XXXXXXXXXX

within the visit—excluding active patients. We include
only lab values and vital values collected on the first day in
the emergency department to match the clinical decision
setting—predicting prognosis at the time of admission.
• Infection Risk: We include adult patients who underwent a polymerase chain reaction test for detecting
Dimitris Bertsimas et al.

COVID-19 infection at the ASST Cremona hospital (19).†
We include all patients, regardless of their clinical outcome. Each patient was subject to a blood test. We omit
comorbidities since they are derived from the discharge
diagnoses, hence not available for all patients.
We train two models for each calculator: one with lab
values and one without lab values. Missing values are imputed using k-nearest neighbors imputation (20). We exclude
features missing for more than 40% of patients. We train
binary classification models for both risk calculators, using the
XGBoost algorithm (21). We restrict the model to select at
most 20 features, in order to make the resulting tool easily usable. We use SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) (22, 23)
to generate importance plots that identify risk drivers and
provide transparency on the model predictions.
To evaluate predictive performance, we use 40 random data
partitions into training and test sets. We compute the average
Area Under the Curve (AUC), sensitivity, specificity, precision,
negative predictive value, and positive predictive value. We
calculate 95% confidence intervals using bootstrapping.
B. Results.
Study Population. The mortality study population comprises
2,831 patients, 711 (25.1%) of whom died during hospitalization while the remaining ones were discharged. The infection
study population comprises 3,135 patients, 1,661 (53.0%) of
whom tested positive for COVID-19. The full distributions of
patient characteristics are reported in the appendix.
Performance Evaluation. All models achieve strong out-of-sample

performance. Our mortality risk calculator has an AUC of
93.8% with lab values and 90.5% without lab values. Our
infection risk calculator has an AUC of 91.8% with lab values
and 83.1% without lab values. These values suggest a strong
discriminative ability of the proposed models. We report in
the appendix average results across all random data partitions.
We also report in the appendix threshold-based metrics,
which evaluate the discriminative ability of the calculators at
a fixed cutoff. With the threshold set to ensure a sensitivity of
at least 90% (motivated by the high costs of false negatives),
we obtain accuracies spanning 65%–80%.
The mortality model achieves better overall predictive performance than the infection model. As expected, both models
have better predictive performance with lab values than without lab values. Yet, the models without lab values still achieve
strong predictive performance.
Model Interpretation. Figure 3 plots the SHAP importance plots

for all models. The figures sort the features by decreasing
significance. For each one, the row represents its impact on
the SHAP value, as the feature ranges from low (blue) to high
(red). Higher SHAP values correspond to increased likelihood
of a positive outcome (i.e. mortality or infection). Features
with the color scale oriented blue to red (resp. red to blue)
from left to right have increasing (resp. decreasing) risk as the
feature increases. For example, “Age” is the most important
feature of the mortality score with lab values (Figure 3A), and
older patients have higher predicted mortality.
†

HM Hospitals patients were not included since no negative case data was available.

Dimitris Bertsimas et al.

C. Discussion and Impact. The models with lab values provide
algorithmic screening tools that can deliver COVID-19 risk
predictions using common clinical features. In a constrained
healthcare system or in a clinic without access to advanced
diagnostics, clinicians can use these models to rapidly identify
high-risk patients to support triage and treatment decisions.

The models without lab values offer an even simpler tool
that could be used outside of a clinical setting. In strained
healthcare systems, it can be difficult for patients to obtain
direct advice from providers. Our tool could serve as a prescreening step to identify personalized infection risk—without
visiting a testing facility. While the exclusion of lab values
reduces the AUC (especially for infection), these calculators
still perform strongly.
Our models provide insights into risk factors and biomarkers related to COVID-19 infection and mortality. Our results
suggest that the main indicators of mortality risk are age,
BUN, CRP, AST, and low oxygen saturation. These findings
validate several population-level insights from Section 1 and
are in agreement with clinical studies: prevalence of shortness
of breath (24), elevated levels of CRP as an inflammatory
marker (25, 26), and elevated AST levels due to liver dysfunction in severe COVID-19 cases (11, 27).
Turning to infection risk, the main indicators are CRP,
WBC, Calcium, AST, and temperature. These findings are
also in agreement with clinical reports: an elevated CRP
generally indicates an early sign of infection and implies lung
lesions from COVID-19 (28), elevated levels of leukocytes
suggest cytokine release syndrome caused by SARS-CoV-2
virus (29), and lowered levels of serum calcium signal higher
rate of organ injury and septic shock (30). The agreement
between our findings and clinicl observations offers credibility
for the use of our calculators to support clinical decisionmaking—although they are not intended to substitute clinical
diagnostic or medical expertise.
When lab values are not available, the widely accepted
risk factors of age, oxygen saturation, temperature, and heart
rate become the key indicators for both risk calculators. We
observe that mortality risk is higher for male patients (blue in
Figure 3B) than for female patients (red), confirming clinical
reports (31, 32). An elevated respiratory frequency becomes
an important predictor of infection, as reported in (33). These
findings suggest that demographics and vitals provide valuable
information in the absence of lab values. However, when lab
values are available, these other features become secondary.
A limitation of the current mortality model is that it does
not take into account medication and treatments during hospitalization. We intend to incorporate these in future research
to make these models more actionable. Furthermore, these
models aim to reveal associations between risks and patient
characteristics but are not designed to establish causality.
Overall, we have developed data-driven calculators that
allow physicians and patients to assess mortality and infection
risks in order to guide care management—especially with
scarce healthcare resources. These calculators are being used
by several hospitals within the ASST Cremona system to
support triage and treatment decisions—alleviating the toll of
the pandemic. Our infection calculator also supports safety
protocols for Banco de Credito del Peru, the largest bank in
Peru, to determine how employees can return to work.
PNAS

|

July 1, 2020

|

vol. XXX

|

no. XX

|

5

Mortality Prediction without Lab Values

Mortality Prediction with Lab Values

A

B
Infection Prediction with Lab Values

C

Infection Prediction without Lab Values

D

Fig. 3. SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) importance plots for the mortality and infection risk calculators, including: (A) the mortality model with lab values; (B) the mortality
model without lab values; (C) the infection model with lab values; and (D) the infection model without lab values. The five most important features are shown for each model.
Gender is a binary feature (female is equal to 1, shown in red; male is equal to 0, shown in blue). Each row represents the impact of a feature on the outcome, with higher
SHAP values indicating higher likelihood of a positive outcome.

3. Predictive and Prescriptive Analytics: Disease Projections and Government Response
We develop a new epidemiological model, called DELPHI
(Differential Equations Leads to Predictions of Hospitalizations
and Infections). The model first provides a predictive tool to
forecast the number of detected cases, hospitalizations and
deaths—we refer to this model as “DELPHI-pred”. It then
provides a prescriptive tool to simulate the effect of policy
interventions and guide government response to the COVID-19
pandemic—we refer to this model as “DELPHI-presc”. All
models are fit in each US state (plus the District of Columbia).
A detailed presentation and discussion on the implications
of the DELPHI model especially with respect to government
interventions is presented in (34).
A. DELPHI-pred: Projecting Early Spread of COVID-19.
A.1. Model Development. DELPHI is a compartmental model,
with dynamics governed by ordinary differential equations.
It extends the standard SEIR model by defining 11 states
(Figure 4A): susceptible (S), exposed (E), infectious (I), undetected people who will recover (UR ) or decease (UD ), detected
hospitalized people who will recover (DHR ) or decease (DHD ),
quarantined people who will recover (DQR ) or decease (DQD ),
recovered (R) and deceased (D). The separation of the UR /UD ,
DQR /DQD and DHR /DHD states enables separate fitting of
6

|

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.XXXXXXXXXX

recoveries and deaths from the data.
As opposed to other COVID-19 models (see, e.g., 35), DELPHI captures two key elements of the pandemic:
• Underdetection: Many cases remain undetected due
to limited testing, record failures, and detection errors.
Ignoring them would underestimate the scale of the pandemic. We capture them through the UR and UD states.
• Government Response: “Social distancing” policies
limit the spread of the virus. Ignoring them would overestimate the spread of the pandemic. We model them
through a decline in the infection rate over time. Specifically, we write: dS
= −αγ(t)S(t)I(t), where α is a condt
stant baseline rate and γ(t) is a time-dependent function
characterizing each state’s policies, modeled as follows:
2
γ(t) = arctan
π



−(t − t0 )
k


+ 1.

The inverse tangent function provides a concave-convex relationship, capturing three phases of government response.
In Phase I, most activities continue normally as people
adjust their behavior. In Phase II, the infection rate
declines sharply as policies are implemented. In Phase
III, the decline in the infection rate reaches saturation.
The parameters t0 and k can be respectively thought of
as the start date and the strength of the response.
Dimitris Bertsimas et al.

Ultimately, DELPHI involves 13 parameters that define
the transition rates between the 11 states. We calibrate six of
them from our clinical outcomes database (Section 1). Using
non-linear optimization, we estimate seven parameters for each
US state from the data to minimize in-sample error. This
training procedure leverages historical data on the number of
cases and deaths per US county (36). We include each state
as soon as it records more than 100 cases. We provide details
on the fitting procedure in the appendix.
A.2. Validation. DELPHI was created in late March and has been

continuously updated to reflect new observed data. Figure 4B
shows our projections made on three different dates, and
compares them against historical observations. This plot
focuses on the number of cases, but a similar plot for the
number of deaths is reported in the appendix.
In addition to providing aggregate validation figures, we
also evaluate the model’s out-of-sample performance quantitatively, using a backtesting procedure. To our knowledge,
this represents the first attempt to assess the predictive performance of COVID-19 projections. Specifically, we fit the
model’s parameters using data up to April 27, build projections from April 28 to May 12, and evaluate the resulting
Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE). Figure 4C reports
the results in each US state.
A.3. Discussion and Impact. Results suggest that DELPHI-pred

achieves strong predictive performance. The model has been
consistently predicting, with high accuracy the overall spread
of the disease for several weeks. Notably, DELPHI-pred was
able to anticipate, as early as April 3rd, the dynamics of the
pandemic in the United States up to mid-May. At a time
where 200,000–300,000 cases were reported, the model was
predicting 1.2M–1.4M cases by mid-May—a prediction that
proved accurate 40 days later.
Our quantitative results confirm the visual evidence. The
MAPE is small across US states. The median MAPE is 8.5%
for the number of cases—the 10% and 90% percentiles are
equal to 1.9% and 16.7%. The median MAPE is 7.8% for the
number of deaths—the 10% and 90% percentiles are equal
to 3.3% and 25.1%. Given the high level of uncertainty and
variability in the disease’s spread, this level of accuracy is
suggestive of excellent out-of-sample performance.
As Figure 4C shows, a limitation of our model is that
the relative error remains large for a small minority of US
states. These discrepancies stem from two main reasons. First,
errors are typically larger for states that have recorded few
cases (WY) or few deaths (AK, KS, NE). Like all SEIRderived models, DELPHI performs better on large populations.
Moreover, the MAPE metric emphasizes errors on smaller
population counts. Second, our model is fitted at the state
level, implicitly assuming that the spread of the pandemic is
independent from one state to another—thus ignoring interstate travel. This limitation helps explain the above-median
error in a few heartland states which were confronted to the
pandemic in later stages (MN, TN, IA).
In summary, DELPHI-pred is a novel epidemiological model
of the pandemic, which provides high-quality estimates of
the daily number of cases and deaths per US state. This
model has been incorporated to the forecasts used by the US
Center for Disease Control to chart and anticipate the spread
of the pandemic (7). It has also been used by the Hartford
Dimitris Bertsimas et al.

HealthCare system—the major hospital system in Connecticut,
US—to plan its ICU capacity, and by a major pharmaceutical
company to design a vaccine distribution strategy that can
most effectively contain the next phases of the pandemic.
B. DELPHI-presc: Toward Re-opening Society. To inform the

relaxation of social distancing policies, we link policies to the
infection rate using machine learning. Specifically, we predict
the values of γ(t), obtained from the fitting procedure of
DELPHI-pred. For simplicity and interpretability, we consider
a simple model based on regression trees (37) and restrict the
independent variables to the policies in place. We classify
policies based on whether they restrict mass gatherings, school
and/or other activities (referred to as “Others”, and including
business closures, severe travel limitations and/or closing of
non-essential services). We define a set of seven mutually
exclusive and collectively exhaustive policies observed in the
US data: (i) No measure; (ii) Restrict mass gatherings; (iii)
Restrict others; (iv) Authorize schools, restrict mass gatherings
and others; (v) Restrict mass gatherings and schools; (vi)
Restrict mass gatherings, schools and others; and (vii) Stayat-home.
We report the regression tree in the appendix, obtained
from state-level data in the United States. This model achieves
an out-of-sample R2 of 0.8, suggesting a good fit to the data.
As expected, more stringent policies lead to lower values of
γ(t). The results also provide comparisons between various
policies—for instance, school closures seem to induce a stronger
reduction in the infection rate than restricting “other” activities. More importantly, the model quantifies the impact of
each policy on the infection rate. We then use these results
to predict the value of γ(t) as a function of the policies (see
appendix for details), and simulate the spread of the disease
as states progressively loosen social distancing policies.
Figure 4D plots the projected case count in the state of New
York (NY), for different policies (we report a similar plot for
the death count in the appendix). Note that the stringency of
the policies has a significant impact on the pandemic’s spread
and ultimate toll. For instance, relaxing all social distancing
policies on May 12 can increase the cumulative number of
cases in NY by up to 25% by September.
Using a similar nomenclature, Figure 4E shows the case
count if all social distancing policies are relaxed on May 12 vs.
May 26. Note that the timing of the policies also has a strong
impact: a two-week delay in re-opening society can greatly
reduce a resurgence in NY.
The road back to a new normal is not straightforward:
results suggest that the disease’s spread is highly sensitive to
both the intensity and the timing of social distancing policies.
As governments grapple with an evolving pandemic, DELPHIpresc can be a useful tool to explore alternative scenarios and
ensure that critical decisions are supported with data.

4. Prescriptive Analytics: Ventilator Allocation
COVID-19 is primarily an acute respiratory disease. The
World Health Organization recommends that patients with
oxygen saturation levels below 93% receive respiratory support (9). Following the standard Acute Respiratory Distress
Syndrome protocol, COVID-19 patients are initially put in the
prone position and then put in a drug induced paralysis via a
neuromuscular blockade to prevent lung injury (38). Patients
PNAS

|

July 1, 2020

|

vol. XXX

|

no. XX

|

7

S
E
I
D QD

D QR

DHD

A

D

DHR

UD

UR

R

Fig. 1. Simplif ed Flow Diagram of DELPHI

UR

D

UD
I

DHR
DHD

D

D QR
D QD

T

B

E

RA
F

S

R

C

D

Fig. 2. Simplif ed Flow Diagram of DELPHI

E

Fig. 4. DELPHI, an epidemiological model to guide government response. (A) Simplified flow diagram of DELPHI. (B) Cumulative number of cases in the United States
according to our projections made at different points in time, against actual observations. (C) Out-of-sample Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE) on the number of cases
and deaths per US state. (D) Impact of different policies on the future number of cases, in NY. (E) Impact of the timing of policies on the future number of cases, in NY.

are then put on a ventilator, which delivers high concentrations
of oxygen while removing carbon dioxide (39). Early evidence
suggests that ventilator intubation reduces the risk of hypoxia
for COVID-19 patients (40).
As a result, hospitals have been facing ventilator shortages
worldwide (41). Still, local shortages do not necessarily imply
global shortages. For instance, in April 2020, the total supply
of ventilators in the United States exceeded the projected
demand from COVID-19 patients. Ventilator shortages could
thus be alleviated by pooling the supply, i.e., by strategically
allocating the surge supply of ventilators from the federal
government and facilitating inter-state transfers of ventilators.
We propose an optimization model to support the allocation
of ventilators in a semi-collaborative setting where resources
can be shared both between healthcare facilities or through
a central authority. Based on its primary motivation, we formulate the model to support the management of the federal
supply of ventilators and inter-state ventilator transfers in the
United States. A similar model has also been used to support
inter-hospital transfers of ventilators. The model can also support inter-country ventilator allocation during the next phases
of the pandemic. This model leverages the demand projections
from DELPHI-pred (Section 3) to prescribe resource allocation
recommendations—with the ultimate goal of alleviating the
health impact of the pandemic.

model was first developed for influenza planning (42). A timedependent stochastic optimization model was developed to support transfers to and from the federal government for COVID19, given scenarios regarding the pandemic’s spread (43). In
this section, we propose a deterministic time-dependent model,
leveraging the projections from DELPHI-pred.
We model ventilator pooling as a multi-period resource
allocation over S states and D days. The model takes as input
ventilator demand in state s and day d, denoted as vs,d , as
well as parameters capturing the surge supply from the federal
government and the extent of inter-state collaboration. We
formulate an optimization problem that decides on the number
of ventilators transferred from state s to state s0 on day d,
and on the number of ventilators allocated from the federal
government to state s on day d. We propose a bi-objective
formulation. The first objective is to minimize ventilator-day
shortages; for robustness, we consider both projected shortages
(based on demand forecasts) and worst-case shortages (including a buffer in the demand estimates). The second objective
is to minimize inter-state transfers, to limit the operational
and political costs of inter-state coordination. Mixed-integer
optimization provides modeling flexibility to capture spatialtemporal dynamics and the trade-offs between these various
objectives. We report the mathematical formulation of the
model, along with the key assumptions, in the appendix.

A. Model. Resource allocation is critical when clinical care

B. Results. We implemented the model on April 15, a time of

depends on scarce equipment. Several studies have used optimization to support ventilator pooling. A time-independent

pressing ventilator need in the United States. We estimate
the number of hospitalizations from DELPHI-pred as the sum

8

|

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.XXXXXXXXXX

Dimitris Bertsimas et al.

2000

Ventilator shortage

1500

1000
Pooling Strategy
Baseline
Federal & States
Federal Only
States Only

500

Number of ventilators
transferred
300

0

A

Apr 15

Apr 22
Date

200

Apr 29

100

Total transfer distance
(million ventilator-kilometers)

Maximum fraction
of supply shared

States facing
shortages

5%
10%
15%
20%

2

Yes
No

1

B

0

8,000

12,000
16,000
Total shortage (ventilator-days)

C

20,000

Fig. 5. The edge of optimization to eliminate ventilator shortages. (A) Projected shortages (in ventilator-days) in a baseline setting (without transfers) and with optimized
transfers between the states and/or from the federal government. (B) Pareto frontier between transfer distance and total shortage, for different state pooling fractions. (C) Map
of inter-state transfers recommended on April 15 in the US Northeast. For clarity, we do not plot shortages of fewer than 5 ventilators and transfers of fewer than 10.

of DHR and DHD . From our clinical outcomes database in
Section 1, we estimate that 25% of hospitalized patients are
put on a ventilator, which we use to estimate the demand for
ventilators. We also obtain the average length of stay from
our clinical outcomes database (Figure 2).
Figure 5A shows the evolution of ventilator shortages with
and without ventilator transfers from the federal government
and inter-state transfers. These results indicate that ventilator
pooling can rapidly eliminate all ventilator shortages. Figure
5C shows ventilator transfers recommended in the US Northeast on April 15 (with inter-state transfers only), overlaid on
a map displaying the predicted shortage without transfers.
There are different pathways toward eliminating ventilator
shortages. Figure 5B shows the trade-off between shortages
and transfer distance—each line corresponds to the maximal
fraction of its own ventilators that each state can pool. Overall,
states do not have to share more than 10% of their supply at
any time to efficiently eliminate shortages. States can largely
meet their needs with help from neighboring states, with crosscountry transfers only used as a last resort. Broadly, results
underscore trade-offs between ventilator shortages, the extent
of inter-state transfers, the number of ventilators allocated
from the federal government, and the robustness of the solution.
We discuss these trade-offs further in the appendix.
C. Discussion and Impact. Our main insight is that ventilator

shortages could be eliminated altogether through inter-state
transfers and strategic management of the federal supply. Results also underscore (i) the benefits of inter-state coordination
and (ii) the benefits of early coordination. First, ventilator
shortages can be eliminated through inter-state transfers alone:
leveraging a surge supply from the federal government is not
required, though it may reduce inter-state transfers. Under our
Dimitris Bertsimas et al.

recommendation, the most pronounced transfers occur from
states facing no shortages (Ohio, Pennsylvania, and North
Carolina) to states facing strong shortages (New York, New
Jersey). Second, most transfers occur in early stages of the
pandemic. This underscores the benefits of leveraging a predictive model like DELPHI-pred to align the ventilator supply
with demand projections as early as possible.
A similar model has been developed to support the redistribution of ventilators across hospitals within the Hartford
HealthCare system in Connecticut—using county-level forecasts of ventilator demand obtained from DELPHI-pred. This
model has been used by a collection of hospitals in the United
States to align ventilator supply with projected demand at a
time where the pandemic was on the rise.
Looking ahead, the proposed model can support the allocation of critical resources in the next phases of the pandemic—
spanning ventilators, medicines, personal protective equipment
etc. Since epidemics do not peak in each state at the same
time, states whose infection peak has already passed or lies
weeks ahead can help other states facing immediate shortages
at little costs to their constituents. Inter-state transfers of
ventilators occurred in isolated fashion through April 2020;
our model proposes an automated decision-making tool to
support these decisions systematically. As our results show,
proactive coordination and resource pooling can significantly
reduce shortages—thus increasing the number of patients that
can be treated without resorting to extreme clinical recourse
with side effects (such as splitting ventilators).

5. Conclusion
This paper proposes a comprehensive data-driven approach to
address several core challenges faced by healthcare providers
PNAS

|

July 1, 2020

|

vol. XXX

|

no. XX

|

9

and policy makers in the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic.
We have gathered and aggregated data from hundreds of clinical studies, electronic health records, and census reports. We
have developed descriptive, predictive and prescriptive models, combining methods from machine learning, epidemiology,
and mixed-integer optimization. Results provide insights on
the clinical aspects of the disease, on patients’ infection and
mortality risks, on the dynamics of the pandemic, and on the
levers that policy makers and healthcare providers can use
to alleviate its toll. The models developed in this paper also
yield decision support tools that have been deployed on our
dedicated website and that are actively being used by several
hospitals, companies and policy makers.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Dr. Barry Stein, Dr. Ajay Kumar,
Dr. Rocco Orlando, and Michelle Schneider from the Hartford
HealthCare system, Dr. Angelo Pan, Dr. Rosario Canino,
Sophie Testa and Federica Pezzetti from ASST Cremona, and
HM Hospitals for discussions and data, as well as Hari Bandi,
Katherine Bobroske, Martina Dal Bello, Mohammad FazelZarandi, Alvaro Fernandez Galiana, Samuel Gilmour, Adam
Kim, Zhen Lin, Liangyuan Na, Matthew Sobiesk, Yuchen
Wang and Sophia Xing from our extended team for helpful
discussions.
1. G Kampf, D Todt, S Pfaender, E Steinmann, Persistence of coronaviruses on inanimate surfaces and its inactivation with biocidal agents. J. Hosp. Infect. (2020).
2. S Sanche1, et al., High Contagiousness and Rapid Spread of Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome Coronavirus 2. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 27 (2020).
3. John Hopkins University,
Center for Systems Science and Engineering
(https://systems.jhu.edu/research/public-health/ncov/) (2020).
4. RM Anderson, H Heesterbeek, D Klinkenberg, TD Hollingsworth, How will country-based
mitigation measures influence the course of the covid-19 epidemic? The Lancet 395, 931–
934 (2020).
5. N Fernandes, Economic effects of coronavirus outbreak (covid-19) on the world economy.
Available at SSRN 3557504 (2020).
6. WJ McKibbin, R Fernando, The global macroeconomic impacts of covid-19: Seven scenarios.
CAMA Work. Pap. (2020).
7. US Center for Disease Control, COVID-19 Forecasts (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019ncov/covid-data/forecasting-us.html) (2020).
8. US
Center
for
Disease
Control,
Symptoms
of
Coronavirus
(https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/symptoms-testing/symptoms.html)
(2020)
(Accessed 11 May 2020).
9. World Health Organization, Coronavirus (https://www.who.int/health-topics/coronavirus)
(2020) (Accessed 11 May 2020).
10. National
Health
Service,
Check
if
you
have
Coronavirus
symptoms
(https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/coronavirus-covid-19/check-if-you-have-coronavirussymptoms) (2020) (Accessed 11 May 2020).
11. Wj Guan, et al., Clinical characteristics of coronavirus disease 2019 in china. New Engl.
journal medicine 382, 1708–1720 (2020).
12. P Goyal, et al., Clinical characteristics of Covid-19 in New York City. New Engl. J. Medicine
(2020).
13. CM Petrilli, et al., Factors associated with hospitalization and critical illness among 4,103
patients with covid-19 disease in new york city. medRxiv (2020).
14. P Forster, L Forster, C Renfrew, M Forster, Phylogenetic network analysis of SARS-CoV-2
genomes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 117, 9241–9243 (2020).
15. LA Holland, et al., An 81 nucleotide deletion in SARS-CoV-2 ORF7a identified from sentinel
surveillance in Arizona (Jan-Mar 2020). J. Virol. (2020).
16. S Garg, Hospitalization rates and characteristics of patients hospitalized with laboratoryconfirmed coronavirus disease 2019—covid-net, 14 states, march 1–30, 2020. MMWR. Morb.
Mortal. Wkly. Rep. 69 (2020).
17. FS Vahidy, et al., Racial and ethnic disparities in sars-cov-2 pandemic: Analysis of a covid-19
observational registry for a diverse us metropolitan population. medRxiv (2020).
18. D Bertsimas, et al., Covid-19 Mortality Risk Assessment: An international multi-center study.
– (2020) submitted for publication.
19. L Lan, et al., Positive RT-PCR test results in patients recovered from COVID-19. Jama 323,
1502–1503 (2020).
20. O Troyanskaya, et al., Missing value estimation methods for dna microarrays. Bioinformatics
17, 520–525 (2001).
21. T Chen, C Guestrin, Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system in Proceedings of the 22nd
acm sigkdd international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining. pp. 785–794
(2016).
22. SM Lundberg, SI Lee, A unified approach to interpreting model predictions in Advances in

10

|

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.XXXXXXXXXX

23.
24.

25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.

31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.

39.
40.
41.
42.
43.

Neural Information Processing Systems 30, eds. I Guyon, et al. (Curran Associates, Inc.), pp.
4765–4774 (2017).
SM Lundberg, et al., From local explanations to global understanding with explainable AI for
trees. Nat. Mach. Intell. 2, 2522–5839 (2020).
Y Wang, Y Wang, Y Chen, Q Qin, Unique epidemiological and clinical features of the emerging 2019 novel coronavirus pneumonia (covid-19) implicate special control measures. J. medical virology 92, 568–576 (2020).
TP Velavan, CG Meyer, The covid-19 epidemic. Trop. medicine & international health 25, 278
(2020).
D Caruso, et al., Chest ct features of covid-19 in rome, italy. Radiology, 201237 (2020).
C Huang, et al., Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan,
China. The Lancet 395, 497–506 (2020).
W Ling, C-reactive protein levels in the early stage of COVID-19. Med. et Maladies Infect.
(2020).
Y Shi, et al., COVID-19 infection: the perspectives on immune responses (2020).
Q Shi, et al., Serum calcium as a biomarker of clinical severity and prognosis in patients
with coronavirus disease 2019: a retrospective cross-sectional study. Critical Care Emerg.
Medicine (2020).
RE Jordan, P Adab, K Cheng, Covid-19: risk factors for severe disease and death (2020).
Y Liu, et al., Neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio as an independent risk factor for mortality in
hospitalized patients with covid-19. J. Infect. (2020).
F Zhou, et al., Clinical course and risk factors for mortality of adult inpatients with covid-19 in
wuhan, china: a retrospective cohort study. The Lancet (2020).
ML Li, et al., Forecasting COVID-19 and Analyzing the Effect of Government Interventions. –
(2020) submitted for publication.
SM Kissler, C Tedijanto, E Goldstein, YH Grad, M Lipsitch, Projecting the transmission dynamics of sars-cov-2 through the postpandemic period. Science (2020).
New York Times, Coronavirus in the U.S.:
Latest Map and Case Count
(https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/us/coronavirus-us-cases.html) (2020).
L Breiman, J Friedman, CJ Stone, RA Olshen, Classification and regression trees. (CRC
press), (1984).
RA Cornejo, et al., Effects of prone positioning on lung protection in patients with acute
respiratory distress syndrome. Am. journal respiratory critical care medicine 188, 440–448
(2013).
T Bein, et al., The standard of care of patients with ARDS: ventilatory settings and rescue
therapies for refractory hypoxemia. Intensive care medicine 42, 699–711 (2016).
L Meng, et al., Intubation and Ventilation amid the COVID-19 Outbreak Wuhan’s Experience.
Anesthesiol. The J. Am. Soc. Anesthesiol. (2020).
ML Ranney, V Griffeth, AK Jha, Critical supply shortages—the need for ventilators and personal protective equipment during the Covid-19 pandemic. New Engl. J. Medicine (2020).
HC Huang, et al., Stockpiling ventilators for influenza pandemics. Emerg. infectious diseases
23, 914 (2017).
S Mehrotra, H Rahimian, M Barah, F Luo, K Schantz, A model of supply-chain decisions for
resource sharing with an application to ventilator allocation to combat COVID-19. Nav. Res.
Logist. (NRL) (2020).

Dimitris Bertsimas et al.

