Discontinuous response of the epidemic peak to mitigation
measures
Davide Scarselli1†, Nazmi Burak Budanur1†, Björn Hof1
1

Institute of Science and Technology Austria, Am Campus 1, 3400 Klosterneuburg, Austria
†These authors contributed equally to this work

As the COVID-19 epidemic spreads around the globe, countries rely on non-pharmaceutical
interventions to slow the outbreak. An overarching aim is to flatten the epidemic curve so as to not
exceed health care capacity limits. Inherent to this strategy is the assumption that with increasing
mitigation strength the peak of the epidemic curve continuously decreases. We show that in any
setting, where intervention measures include suspect testing and contact tracing, this assumption is
incorrect and the process is discontinuous. This discontinuity is linked to a super-exponential growth
phase and it considerably raises the stakes in epidemic control: The decisiveness of mitigation
measures is not merely a question of ‘flattening the curve’ anymore but it sets the dividing line
between effective suppression and a catastrophic outbreak.

In epidemic models the population is commonly divided into compartments such as
susceptible (S), infectious (I) or recovered (R) and the evolution of these compartments is
traditionally (1) modeled by ordinary differential equations (ODEs). The choice of such a
deterministic approach compared to more complex models that take population structure
and stochasticity into account is often motivated by the simplicity of implementation as well
as by the greater ease in analyzing and interpreting the results. In particular in large
populations the deterministic mean field approach is usually suitable whereas in small
populations fluctuations become relevant and here network models are a more appropriate
choice. With this perspective in mind, in large scale outbreaks such as the ongoing COVID-19
pandemic, ODE models would be expected to capture the general features of the epidemic
spread, leaving aside that the mean field limit cannot account for the heterogeneous
connectivity of real societies (e.g. highly connected hubs ‘super-spreaders’). However as we
will show in the following even in large populations, if intervention measures such as
suspect testing and contact tracing are included with realistic capacity limits, the nature of
the epidemic transition fundamentally changes and the mean field assumption does not
hold. In the critical phase that decides between success and failure of these intervention
efforts, a key quantity is the difference between the number of daily available tests (NT) and
the number of suspects (NS), i.e. symptomatic individuals or such that are contacts of known
cases. Regardless of the population size, this difference (Δ Test=NT – NS) can become small,
introducing stochasticity, and if it becomes negative the epidemic spread subsequently
accelerates, i.e. during this phase the growth is faster than exponential. It is precisely this
effect which alters the nature of the epidemic transition from continuous to discontinuous.
A small variation of the epidemic parameters does not cause the expected small change to
the growth exponent but it can have disproportionate consequences.
In order to demonstrate the effect of capacity limits in testing and contact tracing we adopt
a simple dynamic lattice model previously used in studies of Ebola (2). In this model each tile
of the two dimensional lattice falls into one of four compartments, susceptible, exposed,
infectious or recovered (SEIR). In addition in the present case infectious are split into two

categories, strong- and weak-symptom cases, where the latter may be considered as
individuals with unspecific or no symptoms. As a result of intervention measures each of
above states can be put under quarantine, formally increasing the number of possible states
to eight. The key features of the model can be understood from the example given in Fig. 1.
Strong-symptom individuals (red tile) are immediately identified and automatically
quarantined (blue dashed border). After testing positive, its four nearest neighbors are
quarantined and queued for testing. For every new positive case, the quarantining and
testing procedure is continued. In this simple scenario, all local contacts (four neighbors) are
traced, however, prior interactions with distant sites are assumed untraceable. Weaksymptom cases (brown tile bottom right of Fig.1) go undetected unless identified through
contact tracing. At each time step they can spread the disease with a constant probability to
the four nearest neighbors plus to a randomly chosen distant site (mimicking random
encounters, e.g. during travel).
We start the simulations from a small number of weak-symptom infectious randomly
scattered across a population of P = 107. We model the incubation and infectious period
with a Gamma distribution with unitary scale parameter and mean of 3 and 4 days,
respectively (the epidemiological parameters are similar to the ones reported for COVID-19,
cf. (3)). The transmission probability is set to 0.38 to reproduce the average growth rate
~exp(κt) with κ = 0.3 dayt) with κt) with κ = 0.3 day = 0.3 day-1 observed during the early exponential phase of the ongoing
COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, we assume 50% of the new infections to show only weak
symptoms. While the exact ratio of weak-symptom carriers of COVID-19 is unknown, their
prevalence is reported in multiple studies (4–7). Moreover, to allow for a realistic testing
scenario we set an upper limit of daily tests of 10 -4 P (i.e. 1000 tests per day). This limit was
chosen since it approximately corresponds to the largest fraction of the population tested in
any European country during the COVID-19 outbreak (8). In most countries the daily tests
conducted were significantly lower during the early phase of the epidemic. The exact value
of the limit is not relevant as long as the daily test limit is significantly smaller than the total
population (NT<<P). Equally the number of daily tests may change in time (e.g. linear ramp
up in available tests).
This parameter choice results in a basic reproduction number, R0≈3, and an outbreak
(leftmost curve in Fig.2A) with such a high transmission rate can in general (i.e. in the
thermodynamics limit) not be halted by above testing and contact tracing intervention
scheme. We next consider how the outcome of the epidemic is altered if the testing and
contact tracing interventions are aided by additional mitigation measures (e.g. social
distancing). Unlike testing and quarantining which are simulated directly as described
above, additional mitigation measures are modelled by a reduction in the transmission rate.
To investigate the response to different levels of mitigation we hence continuously reduce
the transmission rate, which translates to a continuous reduction in the basic reproduction
number. As shown in Fig.2A the epidemic curve flattens at first continuously as the
mitigation strength increases. However once the basic reproduction number marginally
drops below a value of 2.5 the epidemic peak discontinuously drops to a very low value.
Hence for R0<2.5 the outbreak is halted (the fraction of infected tends to zero in the
thermodynamic limit). In contrast when we remove testing interventions, we recover the
familiar continuous picture of flattening the curve as shown in Fig. 2B. Here a continuous
reduction in R0 causes the expected continuous decrease of the peak of the epidemic curve.

The discontinuity in the presence of testing and contact tracing is equally apparent when
considering the total number of infected at the end of the epidemic (NF), shown for
decreasing mitigation strength (i.e. increasing R0) in Fig. 2C. While testing and contact
tracing can suppress outbreaks with basic reproduction numbers significantly larger than
one, once containment fails it does so catastrophically, i.e. the fraction of the population
eventually infected jumps from close to zero directly to a large fraction, in this case
approximately 0.5P. The cause of the discontinuous response can be understood from the
time evolution of the empirically-computed (2) effective reproduction number Rt. As shown
in Fig. 2D, for a suppressed outbreak (R0=2.3, black circles) testing and contact tracing
reduce the reproduction number to just below one and hence the number of infectious
decreases exponentially and the outbreak is eventually suppressed. For R0=2.7 however the
effective reproduction number can only be reduced to a value slightly larger than one.
Consequently the number of infectious increases exponentially. So far the difference
between these two cases is exactly as standard models would predict. As time proceeds
however, in the latter case the number of suspects will eventually reach the test capacity
limit (ΔTest=0). Subsequently, a fraction of the infectious are only tested with a delay and
therefore have a larger probability to transmit the disease. As shown in Fig. 2D this leads to
an increase in the reproduction number and hence the outbreak accelerates. Once set into
motion the number of unchecked suspects continues to increase and so does the
reproduction number. Instead of the familiar exponential growth during epidemics, the
growth at this stage is super-exponential. A marginal difference in R0 (compared to the
suppressed case) is amplified into a significant difference in the effective reproduction
number (RT) once the contact tracing capacity limit is exceeded. It is precisely this basic
amplification mechanism that turns flattening the epidemic curve into a discontinuous
process. This mechanism is not specific to the simple model chosen here but is equally
found in small world (9, 10) or scale free networks (11) and will generally apply if testing and
contact tracing have an upper capacity limit.
A limited testing capacity does not only alter the response to mitigation during the early
stages of an epidemic but equally introduces a discontinuity when considering lock down
scenarios of varying strength. For a simple illustration we again simulate an outbreak in a
population of size P=107 that has spread to 104 infectious. At this point we assume a basic
reproduction number of R0=2. This could be either interpreted as a less contagious disease,
or as the same disease as in the previous case, where the reproduction number has been
reduced by social distancing measures. At this stage of the outbreak the number of suspects
in the population already far exceeds the number of daily available tests (Δ Test<0) and
contact tracing cannot suppress the outbreak. To get the situation back under control strong
mitigation measures (i.e. a lock down) are required and we consider that as a result the
basic reproduction number is further decreased by 0<ΔR0<2. In each case the lock down is
enforced for 30 days. As shown in Fig. 3, for sufficiently strong lock downs (ΔR0>0.7) the
outbreak is eventually suppressed (i.e. the effective reproduction number is reduced below
one). However, if the lock down is just marginally weaker and ΔR0<0.7 containment
catastrophically fails: At the end of the lock down the number of suspects still (marginally)
exceeds the test capacity and as time proceeds Rt increases (not shown). While in Fig. 2A the
discontinuity separates epidemics subject to different mitigation levels, here the
discontinuity arises from the difference in the number of active cases at the end of the lock
down.

In common epidemic models testing and contact tracing are often incorporated in the basic
reproduction number; an approach that does not take capacity limits into account and
hence cannot reflect situations in which such capacities are eventually exhausted as the
epidemic continues to spread. While during the COVID-19 pandemic the focus has been on
the key role of mitigation in protecting the health care systems, as shown here additional
mitigation measures can play an equally vital role in protecting the efficiency of testing and
contact tracing. If it fails, no matter how marginally, the disease begins to spread at a faster
than exponential rate and will in due course infect a large fraction of the population. In
practice the eventual outcome of the epidemic can still be averted by subsequent steps. This
however does not alter the fact that once the test limit is reached (i.e. ΔTest < 0), the
reproduction number begins to increase. Afterwards the suppression of the outbreak comes
at a significantly higher cost, since more stringent mitigation measures are required to
regain control.
References
1.
W. O. Kermack, A. G. McKendrick, G. T. Walker, A contribution to the mathematical
theory of epidemics. Proc. R. Soc. London. Ser. A, Contain. Pap. a Math. Phys. Character. 115,
700–721 (1927).
2.
V. Wong, D. Cooney, Y. Bar-Yam, Beyond Contact Tracing: Community-Based Early
Detection for Ebola Response. PLOS Curr. Outbreaks. 1 (2016).
3.
Y. M. Bar-On, A. Flamholz, R. Phillips, R. M., Science Forum: SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19)
by the Numbers. Elife. 9, e57309 (2020). 4. M. Gandhi, D. S. Yokoe, D. V Havlir,
Asymptomatic Transmission, the Achilles’ Heel of Current Strategies to Control Covid-19. N.
Engl. J. Med. 382, 2158–2160 (2020).
5.
N. W. Furukawa, J. T. Brooks, J. Sobel, Evidence Supporting Transmission of Severe
Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 While Presymptomatic or Asymptomatic. Emerg.
Infect. Dis. 26 (2020).
6.
K. Mizumoto, K. Kagaya, A. Zarebski, G. Chowell, Estimating the Asymptomatic
Proportion of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Cases on Board the Diamond Princess
Cruise Ship, Yokohama, Japan, 2020. Euro Surveill. 25 (2020).
7.
M. Day, Covid-19: Four Fifths of Cases Are Asymptomatic, China Figures Indicate.
BMJ. 369, m1375 (2020).
8.
M. Roser, H. Ritchie, E. Ortiz-Ospina, J. Hasell, Coronavirus Pandemic (COVID-19).
Publ. online OurWorldInData.org (2020).
9.
D. J. Watts, S. H. Strogatz, Collective dynamics of ‘small-world’ networks. Nature.
393, 440–442 (1998).
10.

J. M. Kleinberg, Navigation in a Small World. Nature. 406, 845 (2000).

11.
A. -L. Barabási, R. Albert, Emergence of scaling in random networks. Science. 286,
509–512 (1999).

Fig. 1 Spatial epidemic model with testing and quarantining. Every day an infectious individual
interacts with their neighbors and a randomly selected individual, and transmits the disease (arrows
in figure) with a constant probability if the individuals they interact with are susceptible. The tiles
with yellow and white stripes denote the potential contacts that can be exposed. Upon identification
of a positive case (red tile) all the neighbors are put into quarantine and tested (blue dashed border).
Weak-symptom cases (brown tile with blue dashed border) can only be identified if they are
neighbors of a known positive case.

Fig. 2 Discontinuity in flattening of epidemic curves. A Daily new cases for continuously decreasing
values of R0 (3>R0>0), mimicking mitigation measures of increasing strength. Testing and
quarantining are carried out at the same time with a capacity limit of NT = 1000 tested individuals per
day. Initially the peak reduces continuously in response to mitigation (red curves from left to right),
however once R0 is reduced below 2.5 the epidemic curve drops to very small numbers of new cases
(curves not visible in the figure scale). B Daily new cases for decreasing values of R0 (1.5>R0>0)
without testing and quarantining. Decreasing progressively R0 gradually flattens the epidemic curve
(blue curves from left to right) until a very low number of cases is reached (curves not visible in the
figure scale). C Final fraction of infected (NF/P) as a function of R0 corresponding to the curves shown
in A (red dots) and B (blue dots). The black dots denote outbreaks that have been effectively
suppressed. When testing and quarantining are active the epidemic transition becomes
discontinuous at happens at approximately at a higher basic reproduction number (approximately
R0=2.5) with respect to the usual continuous epidemic transition observed at R0 = 1. D Evolution of
the reproduction number with testing and quarantining active. This intervention can efficiently
reduce the reproduction number Rt below one for R0 < 2.3 (black dots). For larger values of R0 testing
and quarantining can initially reduce the reproduction number to a constant level, however Rt
remains above one (red dots). Due to the continuing spread the number of suspects will eventually
exceed the daily test limit and hence Δ Test changes sign (red dashed line in D). At this point the spread
accelerates and R0 increases. The values of Rt have been averaged over 800 simulations for each case
(R0=2.3 and R0=2.7). In all these cases the population P=107 people and epidemics start with 100
initial infectious.

Fig. 3 Discontinuous lock down scenarios. Cumulative total cases for R0 = 2 starting from 104
infectious in a population P=107 and subjected to gradually stronger lock downs. Mitigation
measures are simulated by a reduction in the basic reproduction number in the range of 0<ΔR0 <2.0.
The duration is 30 days in all cases. Testing is limited to NT=1000 individuals per day. Mild
interventions (0<ΔR0 <0.7, red curves) only result in an initial drop (see inset) in daily new cases but
ultimately cannot prevent a subsequent rise in numbers and eventually a high proportion of the
population becomes infected. Stronger interventions (0.7<ΔR0 <2.0, blue curves) on the other hand
efficiently bring the epidemic under control. Inset, corresponding epidemic curves of daily new
cases. Reducing continuously R0 during lock down produces a family of epidemic curves that
ultimately result in a discontinuous outcome: Either the outbreak is suppressed (blue curves), or
containment fails catastrophically leading to a high proportion of the population being infected (red
curves).

