arXiv:2006.15195v2 [physics.soc-ph] 27 Jul 2020

Uncovering socioeconomic gaps in mobility reduction
during the COVID-19 pandemic using location data
SAMUEL P. FRAIBERGER, World Bank, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, New York University
PABLO ASTUDILLO, World Bank, Oxford University
LORENZO CANDEAGO, World Bank, Fondazione Bruno Kessler
ALEX CHUNET, World Bank
NICHOLAS K. W. JONES, World Bank
MAHAM FAISAL KHAN, World Bank
BRUNO LEPRI, Fondazione Bruno Kessler
NANCY LOZANO GRACIA, World Bank
LORENZO LUCCHINI, Fondazione Bruno Kessler
EMANUELE MASSARO, World Bank, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, École Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne

ALEISTER MONTFORT, World Bank
Using smartphone location data from Colombia, Mexico, and Indonesia, we investigate how non-pharmaceutical
policy interventions intended to mitigate the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic impact human mobility. In all
three countries, we find that following the implementation of mobility restriction measures, human movement
decreased substantially. Importantly, we also uncover large and persistent differences in mobility reduction
between wealth groups: on average, users in the top decile of wealth reduced their mobility up to twice as
much as users in the bottom decile. For decision-makers seeking to efficiently allocate resources to response
efforts, these findings highlight that smartphone location data can be leveraged to tailor policies to the needs
of specific socioeconomic groups, especially the most vulnerable.
CCS Concepts: • Information systems → Location based services; • Social and professional topics →
Economic impact.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: COVID-19, mobility, physical distancing, GPS location data

1

INTRODUCTION

2020 has seen the SARS-CoV-2 infect millions of people and cause unprecedented disruptions
around the world, pushing healthcare services to their limits and grinding economies to a halt.
Pursuant to guidelines issued by the World Health Organization (WHO), national and local governments worldwide have implemented social distancing policies ranging from strict national
lockdowns to limited curfew hours, in an attempt to curb the virus reproduction rate and prevent
the overburdening of health care systems. It has been shown that these policies—non-pharmaceutical
interventions (NPIs)—can help reduce the transmission of the virus by limiting contacts between
individuals [1–6].
Authors’ addresses: Samuel P. Fraiberger, sfraiberger@worldbank.org, World Bank, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
New York University; Pablo Astudillo, World Bank, Oxford University, pastudilloesteve@worldbank.org; Lorenzo Candeago,
World Bank, Fondazione Bruno Kessler, lcandeago@worldbank.org; Alex Chunet, World Bank, achunet@worldbank.org;
Nicholas K. W. Jones, World Bank, njones@worldbankgroup.org; Maham Faisal Khan, World Bank, mkhan57@worldbank.
org; Bruno Lepri, Fondazione Bruno Kessler, lepri@fbk.eu; Nancy Lozano Gracia, World Bank, nlozano@worldbank.org;
Lorenzo Lucchini, Fondazione Bruno Kessler, llucchini@fbk.eu; Emanuele Massaro, World Bank, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, emassaro@worldbank.org; Aleister Montfort, World Bank,
amontfortibieta@worldbank.org.

2

Fraiberger, et al.

In this paper, we use GPS location data to characterize changes in human mobility as the pandemic
unfolded. Researchers and policy analysts are now routinely using GPS location data collected
from smartphones to quantify human mobility patterns in real-time and with high spatial precision.
Despite comparatively less coverage in low- and middle-income countries, these data sources are
nonetheless of immense value to improve our understanding of how the current crisis is unraveling
[7].
We focus our work on three developing countries in two different continents: Colombia, Mexico,
and Indonesia. Our main contribution is to combine spatio-temporal trajectories of smartphone
users with socio-economic information at high spatial granularity, allowing us to characterize
differences in mobility patterns across wealth groups. Taken together, our findings show large and
persistent differences in mobility reduction between wealth groups: on average, users in the top
decile of wealth reduced their mobility up to twice as much as users in the bottom decile as a result
of NPIs.
In the reminder of the paper, we start by contextualizing our work within the broader efforts by
the research community to quantify mobility changes during the COVID-19 pandemic. We then
provide an overview of data and methods used, followed by a description of our main results. We
close by discussing the relevance of this work for policy-making and decision support in developing
countries.
2

BACKGROUND

Since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, governments, both national and local, have enacted
social distancing measures to varying levels of stringency [8]. To quantify changes in mobility
owing to these policy measures, several large-scale technology companies have made available
anonymized location data to support pandemic response and recovery. Google’s ‘Community Mobility Maps’1 , Facebook’s expansion of its previous ‘Disaster Maps’ offerings2 [9], Apple’s ‘Mobility
Trends Reports’3 , as well as data pipelines provided by TomTom4 , Unacast5 and Cuebiq6 , are only a
few examples of these efforts.
A global community of researchers has quickly mobilized to engage these available datasets to
quantify the impact of social distancing policies and better understand their influence on the spread
of the virus [7, 10]. Abouk and Heydari [11] outlined the ways in which different types of locationbased mobility information can help to better target and design measures to contain and slow the
spread of the COVID-19 pandemic. Together with daily state-level data on COVID-19 tests and
confirmed cases, they rank policies based on their effectiveness using a difference-in-differences
approach. They found that statewide stay-at-home orders had the strongest causal impact on
reducing social interactions. Klein et al. [12] analyzed mobility data for the US and find that, by
March 23, the policies enacted had reduced by half the overall mobility in several major US cities.
Along the same line, Pepe et al. [13] analyzed GPS data in Italy and found that the restrictions in
mobility, closure of public spaces, and the enhancement of smart/remote working, led to an average
reduction of potential encounters of 8% during week the second week and almost 19% during
third week following the outbreak. Kraemer et al. [3] used real-time mobility data from Wuhan
along with travel history to investigate case transmission in cities across China and ascertain the
impact of implemented policy. Tian et al. [14] investigated the spread and control of COVID-19
1 https://www.google.com/covid19/mobility/
2 https://about.fb.com/news/2020/04/data-for-good/
3 https://www.apple.com/covid19/mobility
4 https://www.tomtom.com/covid-19/
5 https://www.unacast.com/covid19
6 https://www.cuebiq.com/visitation-insights-covid19/

Uncovering socioeconomic gaps in mobility reduction during the COVID-19 pandemic using location data

3

using a dataset that included case reports, human movement, and public health interventions, and
found that the Wuhan shutdown effectively delayed the arrival of COVID-19 in other cities by 2.91
days. Maloney and Taskin [15] used Google mobility data for a large sample of countries across
various income levels to assess the determinants of mobility changes during the pandemic. To
our knowledge, our paper is the first to quantify the differences in mobility reduction between
socioeconomic groups in developing countries.
3

DATA AND METHODS

3.1 GPS location data
Anonymized GPS location data for this study was provided by Cuebiq7 , a location intelligence
company. Cuebiq integrates a software development kit into over 86 mobile apps, allowing them to
collect data at high precision from users who have opted-in through a GDPR compliant framework.
Our dataset contains privacy-preserving, timestamped geolocation data from January 1 to May 7,
2020, from over 270 thousand users in Colombia, 1.38 million users in Mexico, and 276 thousand
users in Indonesia, representing about 0.6%, 1.1%, and 0.1% of the population respectively. Owing
to the spatial distribution of cellphone ownership in these countries, about 30% of users are located
in their capital cities.
To quantify the mobility patterns of a homogeneous set of people over time, we focus on users
who were active on at least half of the days since January 1, 2020; a user is considered active on
any given day if her GPS location was observed at least once.
3.2

Mobility indicators

To preserve user privacy, Cuebiq anonymizes users and randomizes their home location point
geometries within a geohash grid cell, thereby allowing demographic analysis based on residential
areas without revealing the precise location or identity of these users. We are therefore able to
conduct an analysis of time spent at home at the level of the smallest administrative units provided
by the most recent population census available in each country8 . We define a user’s home location to
be her most frequently visited administrative unit during nighttime hours (11pm-7am) in our period
of analysis. We characterize a user’s time spent at home to be the duration between consecutive
observations within the administrative unit identified as her home location, only considering pairs
of observations that are separated by less than 12 hours.
Next, we define a user’s work location to be the most frequently visited administrative unit for
each user during daytime hours (9am-6pm) on weekdays. To identify commuters, we compute
the share of users who are visiting the administrative unit of their work location. To quantify the
number of neighborhood visits of each user, we compute the number of unique administrative
units that she visits relative to her number of observed locations. This allows us to capture the
diversity of places visited, controlling for the level of activity of each user. We then normalize our
measure by the average number of neighborhood visits across users during the period of analysis,
for ease of interpretation. Finally, to compute the maximum distance between observed locations,
we discard observations for which the GPS accuracy is less than 200 meters. For the estimation of
the average value of each mobility indicator on a given day, we include only users who have more
than 10 GPS location points on that day.

7 https://www.cuebiq.com/
8 We

use the most recent year available for each country: 2010 for Mexico and Indonesia, and 2018 for Colombia.

4

Fraiberger, et al.

3.3

Socioeconomic characterization of users

To quantify differences in variations in mobility between socioeconomic groups, we construct a
wealth index using population census data for each country. First, we compute average values for
asset ownership (e.g. car, fridge, computer, etc.) and access to services (e.g. health, education, etc.)
within each administrative unit9 . Then, we reduce the data to a one-dimensional wealth index by
taking its principal component [16]. Finally, we proxy each user’s wealth using the index value of
the administrative unit of her home location.
4

RESULTS

4.1 Changes in mobility patterns over time
In this section we quantify the extent to which user movements decreased since the onset of the
COVID-19 pandemic. Fig 1A, B and C indicate sharp increases in time spent at home: in Colombia
from March 17 when a state of emergency was declared; in Mexico from the earliest introductions
of social distancing policies in mid-March; and in Indonesia from March 15 when the President
issued a nationwide advisory to stay at home. Between the second week of February and the second
week of April, the time users spent at home increased by 34%, 32%, and 19% in Colombia, Mexico,
and Indonesia respectively. In all three countries, sharp differences are visible between the top
and bottom deciles of wealth ("high-wealth users"): the rate of change for users in the top decile is
about twice as large as that of users in the bottom decile ("low-wealth users").
In addition to spending more time at home, a large share of users stopped commuting to work on
a daily basis [Fig. 1D-F]: the share of commuters decreased between mid-February and mid-April
by 34%, 24% and 19% in Colombia, Mexico, and Indonesia respectively. Whilst the mobility gap
between high- and low-wealth users is smaller when looking at commuting patterns than when
focusing on the time users spend at home, it is nonetheless substantial: the rate of reduction in
commuting is 25 to 30% greater for high-wealth users than for those on the lower end of the wealth
distribution.
We also found that the average number of neighborhoods that a user visits dropped sharply
between mid-February and mid-April [Fig. 1G-H]. In Indonesia, we initially see close to a 5%
increase in the number of neighborhoods visited for both the top and bottom deciles of wealth,
potentially indicating that users anticipating a possible lockdown decided to increase their movement. Immediately after this, the number of neighborhoods visited decreased and stabilized in a
manner similar to Mexico. In Colombia, mirroring the trend observed in the time users spend at
home, the number of neighborhoods visited started increasing again after the sharp decrease that
happened in mid-March.10 Overall, the number of neighborhoods visited decreased between 50
and 100% more for high-wealth users compared to low-wealth users.
Finally, the maximum distance between a user’s GPS locations on a typical day decreased by 59%,
40% and 52% in Colombia, Mexico, and Indonesia respectively [Fig. 1I-L]. Consistent with previous
results, we found that high-wealth users reduced their traveled distance almost twice as much as
low-wealth users.
5

DISCUSSION

Our findings highlight that, even in developing countries where smartphone penetration is more
limited compared to what is observed in the developed world, highly precise location data can
9 The

variables used to create the wealth index vary slightly between countries depending on data availability.
national observances are also visible in the form of sharp drops in commuter data, including Constitution Day on
February 03, Benito Juarez’s Birthday on March 16, Maundy Thursday/Good Friday on Apr 09-10, and Labor Day on May
01. Good Friday on April 10 and Waisak Day on May 07 are also low commuter days for Indonesia.

10 Other

Uncovering socioeconomic gaps in mobility reduction during the COVID-19 pandemic using location data

5

shed light on changes in mobility patterns, providing an instrument for policymakers aiming to
efficiently allocate resources to response mechanisms. Our findings also suggest that, as a measure
to protect health and livelihoods, lockdown measures may be excessively costly for the most
vulnerable, particularly in the developing world, where large proportions of the population live
hand-to-mouth, crowding levels are high, and the availability of services limited.
In light of these complex challenges, complementary policies are needed to help protect the most
vulnerable. The analysis presented here can provide information about the groups and areas that may
need targeted interventions, and where the provision of additional services complementing social
distancing measures is warranted. Such services could include dedicated information campaigns to
increase awareness, and additional resources assigned to protect those that cannot stay home. By
looking at the mobility patterns of those that are constrained to move around the city during a
lockdown, policymakers could think about how to safely provide bus routes services to maintain
connectivity between areas that are seeing sustained flows. In overcrowded areas where staying
home is difficult, policymakers could think about investments in open spaces, and through that
facilitate the implementation of social distancing measures. This type of analysis could also be
used as input to assess the risks and immediate impacts of lifting lockdown measures. Thinking
ahead, policymakers can use the analysis in this paper to identify areas that may require additional
investments to build long-term resilience through better services.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We extend our sincere gratitude to Cuebiq for providing the data to support this effort. This work
has been supported by the World Bank Group Partnership Fund for the SDGs. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the authors. They do
not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World
Bank or the governments they represent.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Chinazzi, J. T. Davis, M. Ajelli, C. Gioannini, M. Litvinova, S. Merler, A. Pastore y Piontti, K. Mu, L. Rossi, K. Sun,
C. Viboud, X. Xiong, H. Yu, E. M. Halloran, I. M. Longini, and A. Vespignani, “The effect of travel restrictions on the
spread of the 2019 novel coronavirus (covid-19) outbreak,” Science, vol. 368, no. 6489, pp. 95–400, 2020.
[2] S. Flaxman, S. Mishra, A. Gandy, H. Coupland, C. Whittaker, H. Zhu, T. Berah, J. W. Eaton, M. Monod, I. C. C.-. R.
Team, A. C. Ghani, C. A. Donnelly, S. M. Riley, M. A. Vollmer, N. M. Ferguson, L. C. Okell, and S. Bhatt, “Estimating the
effects of non-pharmaceutical interventions on covid-19 in europe,” Nature, 2020.
[3] M. U. Kraemer, C.-H. Yang, B. Gutierrez, C.-H. Wu, B. Klein, D. M. Pigott, O. C.-. D. W. Group, L. du Plessis, N. R.
Faria, R. Li, W. P. Hanage, J. S. Brownstein, M. Layan, A. Vespignani, H. Tian, C. Dye, O. G. Pybus, and S. V. Scarpino,
“The effect of human mobility and control measures on the covid-19 epidemic in china,” Science, vol. 368, no. 6490,
pp. 493–497, 2020.
[4] S. Lai, N. W. Ruktanonchai, L. Zhou, O. Prosper, W. Luo, J. R. Floyd, A. Wesolowski, C. Zhang, X. Du, H. Yu, and
A. J. Tatem, “Effect of non-pharmaceutical interventions for containing the covid-19 outbreak: an observational and
modelling study,” Nature, 2020.
[5] H. Salje, C. T. Kiem, N. Lefrancq, N. Courtejoie, P. Bosetti, J. Paireau, A. Andronico, N. Hozé, J. Richet, C.-L. Dubost,
Y. L. Strat, J. Lessler, D. Levy-Bruhl, A. Fontanet, L. Opatowski, P.-Y. Boelle, and S. Cauchemez, “Estimating the burden
of sars-cov-2 in france. 2020,” Science, 2020.
[6] J. Zhang, M. Litvinova, Y. Liang, Y. Wang, W. Wang, S. Zhao, Q. Wu, S. Merler, C. Viboud, A. Vespignani, M. Ajelli, and
H. Yu, “Aggregated mobility data could help fight covid-19.,” Science, vol. 368, no. 6498, pp. 1481–1486, 2020.
[7] N. Oliver, B. Lepri, H. Sterly, R. Lambiotte, S. Delataille, M. De Nadai, E. Letouzé, A. A. Salah, R. Benjamins, C. Cattuto,
V. Colizza, N. de Cordes, S. P. Fraiberger, T. Koebe, S. Lehmann, J. Murillo, A. Pentland, P. N. Pham, F. Pivetta, J. Saramäki,
S. V. Scarpino, M. Tizzoni, S. Verhulst, and P. Vinck, “Mobile phone data for informing public health actions across the
covid-19 pandemic life cycle,” Science Advances, 2020.
[8] T. Hale, A. Petherick, T. Phillips, and S. Webster, “Variation in government responses to covid-19,” Blavatnik School of
Government Working Paper, vol. 31, 2020.

6

Fraiberger, et al.
1A

Colombia

1B

Mexico

1C

1D

1E

1F

1G

1H

1I

1J

1K

1L

Indonesia

Fig. 1. Variations in users’ mobility patterns in Colombia (left column), Mexico (middle column), and Indonesia
(right column). We computed 4 indicators of mobility: A-C) the average time users spend at home, D-F)
the share of users commuting from home to work, G-I) the average number of neighborhoods (defined by
administrative units) in which they are active, and J-L) the maximum distance between their GPS locations.
Users are divided into deciles based on the value of the wealth index of the admin unit where they live. For
each mobility indicator, we report changes in mobility relative to the average mobility computed during the
first 2 weeks of February for all users (black), users in the top decile (orange) and users in the bottom decile
(blue). Average value during the first 2 weeks of February, and the change relative to the first 2 weeks of
April are reported in parentheses and indicated by the horizontal dotted lines. Taken together, this figure
documents a large and persistent mobility gap between users based on their wealth.

[9] P. Maas, S. Iyer, A. Gros, W. Park, L. McGorman, C. Nayak, and P. A. Dow, “Facebook disaster maps: Aggregate insights
for crisis response & recovery,” in Proceedings of the 16th ISCRAM Conference, 2019.
[10] C. O. Buckee, S. Balsari, J. Chan, M. Crosas, F. Dominici, U. Gasser, Y. H. Grad, B. Grenfell, M. E. Halloran, M. U. Kraemer,
M. Lipsitch, C. J. E. Metcalf, L. Ancel Meyers, T. A. Perkins, M. Santillana, S. V. Scarpino, C. Viboud, A. Wesolowski,
and A. Schroeder, “Aggregated mobility data could help fight covid-19.,” Science, vol. 368, no. 6487, p. 145, 2020.

Uncovering socioeconomic gaps in mobility reduction during the COVID-19 pandemic using location data

7

[11] R. Abouk and B. Heydari, “The immediate effect of covid-19 policies on social distancing behavior in the united states,”
Available at SSRN, 2020.
[12] B. Klein, T. LaRock, S. McCabey, L. Torresy, F. Privitera, B. Lake, M. U. Kraemer, J. S. Brownstein, D. Lazer, T. Eliassi-Rad,
S. V. Scarpino, M. Chinazzi, and A. Vespignani, “Assessing changes in commuting and individual mobility in major
metropolitan areas in the united states during the covid-19 outbreak,” 2020.
[13] E. Pepe, P. Bajardi, L. Gauvin, F. Privitera, B. Lake, C. Cattuto, and M. Tizzoni, “Covid-19 outbreak response: a first
assessment of mobility changes in italy following national lockdown,” medRxiv, 2020.
[14] H. Tian, Y. Liu, Y. Li, C.-H. Wu, B. Chen, M. U. Kraemer, B. Li, J. Cai, B. Xu, Q. Yang, et al., “An investigation of
transmission control measures during the first 50 days of the covid-19 epidemic in china,” Science, vol. 368, no. 6491,
pp. 638–642, 2020.
[15] W. F. Maloney and T. Taskin, “Determinants of social distancing and economic activity during covid-19 : A
global view,” tech. rep., World Bank, Policy Research Working Paper 9242. Washington, D.C. : World Bank
Group. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/325021589288466494/Determinants-of-Social-Distancing-andEconomic-Activity-during-COVID-19-A-Global-Viewhttps://covid-19-sds., 2020.
[16] S. Vyass and L. Kumaranayake, “Constructing socioeconomic status indexes: how to use principal component analysis,”
Health Policy Plan, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 459–68, 2006.

