Impact of national lockdown on COVID-19 deaths in select European countries and the US
using a Changes-in-Changes model
Mudit Kapoor (ISI, Delhi) and Shamika Ravi
Abstract
In this paper, we estimate the impact of national lockdown on COVID-19 related total and daily
deaths, per million people, in select European countries. In particular, we compare countries that
imposed a nationwide lockdown (Treatment group); Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy,
Norway, Spain, United Kingdom (UK), and the US, to Sweden (Control group) that did not impose
national lockdown using a changes-in-changes (CIC) estimation model. The key advantage of the
CIC model as compared to the standard difference-in-difference model is that CIC allows for mean
and variance of the outcomes to change over time in the absence of any policy intervention, and
CIC accounts for endogeneity in the choice of policy intervention. Our results indicate that in
contrast to Sweden, which did not impose a national lockdown, Germany and, to some extent, the
US were the two countries where nationwide lockdown had a significant impact on the reduction
in COVID-19 related total and daily deaths per million people. In Norway and Denmark, there was
no significant impact on total and daily deaths per million people relative to Sweden. Whereas in
other countries; Belgium, France, Italy, Spain, and the UK, the effect of the lockdown was in the
opposite direction, that is, they experienced significantly higher COVID-19 related total and daily
deaths per million people, post the lockdown as compared to Sweden. Our results suggest that the
impact of nationwide lockdown on COVID-19 related total and daily deaths per million people
varied from one country to another.

1

Introduction
COVID-19 pandemic has infected more than 7 million people and taken more than four hundred
thousand lives across the world. Even though the epidemic started in Wuhan, China, it has
disproportionately affected Western European and the North American region; together, they
account for approximately 50% and 70% of the cases, and deaths, respectively, while only
accounting for about 11% of the population. The most common policy response to the pandemic
of the countries in regions of Northern America and the Western European region has been to
impose a national lockdown of varying measures, which included restrictions on mobility,
quarantines, and some form of curfews. In contrast, Sweden made a conscious decision not to
impose a national lockdown. Instead, Swedish authorities believed that voluntary self-preventive
measures taken by the general public would be sufficient to contain the pandemic. However, in
light of the recent excess deaths particularly among the elderly, Swedish response to the epidemic
has come under scrutiny.1,2
In this paper, we use statistical techniques such as the changes-in-changes (CIC) model developed
by Athey and Imbens (2006)3 to estimate the impact of national lockdown in select Western
European and North American countries; Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Norway,
Spain, and United Kingdom, and the United States (US), in terms of COVID-19 related total and
daily deaths, per million people, by comparing to Sweden that did not impose a national lockdown.

Data and Methods
We use data from COVID-19 Dashboard by the Center for Systems Science and Engineering
(CSSE) at Johns Hopkins University, referred here as JHU data.4 JHU data provides daily countrylevel data on confirmed cases (deaths) which includes presumptive and probable cases (deaths) as

2

per the Center for Disease guidelines on April 14th.5 The countries in our sample, include Belgium,
Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Norway, Spain, and the United Kingdom, the United States
(US), and Sweden. The time frame for each country was the date when the first case was reported
till May 20th, 2020 (which is the date by which countries had lifted the lockdown).
For each country, we compute COVID-19 related total and daily deaths per million people on a
daily basis. The population data for each country is from the open database of the World Bank.6
We perform a pair-wise comparison for each country that imposed the national lockdown
(Treatment group) with Sweden (Control group) that did not impose the nationwide lockdown. We
use two dependent variables, total deaths per million people, and daily deaths per million people,
to study the impact of the lockdown.
We use changes-in changes (CIC) model developed by Athey and Imbens (2006)3 to estimate the
impact of lockdown for each of the countries. The CIC model generalizes the more commonly
used differences-in differences (DID) model, which is typically used to measure the impact of
policy. In a typical DID model, there is a treatment group, which in our analysis is the country that
imposed the national lockdown, and a control group, Sweden, that did not impose the nationwide
lockdown. For each of the treatment countries, dates prior to the lockdown are the control period,
and dates post the lockdown is the treatment period. There are three distinct advantages of using
the CIC model over the DID model; first, the CIC model is a generalization of the DID model. As
Athey and Imbens (2006)3 note that “it allows for the distribution of the unobservable to vary
across groups in an arbitrary way.” Second, it allows for the possibility that outcomes could change
over time without any policy intervention. In our setting, this is important as individual behavior
could also change in response to the pandemic (prevalence elasticity of demand for selfprotection), as was observed in previous epidemics such as the H1N1 flu (see Bhattacharya, Hyde,

3

and Tu (2013))7. Third, the policy intervention is not exogenous; it is more likely to be adopted
when the policymakers believe that it will have the most significant impact, the CIC model allows
for this possibility while DID assumes exogeneity of policy intervention.
As explanatory variables, we allow for time trend with a structural break. To estimate structural
break in the trend for each country, we use the logarithmic value of total deaths per million people
and regress it on time for each country and determine the date when there is a structural break in
trend.
The CIC model is computed using the cic command developed by Keith Kranker, which is Stata
implementation of the Athey and Imbens (2006)3 Changes-in-Changes model in STATA 14.2
(StataCorp LLC, Texas, USA). The standard errors are computed using the bootstrap estimation
based on 50 replications. We report mean and median estimates of the CIC with standard errors,
results of the DID estimates are also reported. The structural break in the trend is estimated using
the STATA command estat sbsingle.

Results
First, we report the evolution of COVID-19 related total deaths per million people, for each of the
countries in the treatment group while comparing it to Sweden (see figure 1). We find that
Belgium, France, Italy, Spain, and the United Kingdom had higher total deaths per million people
as compared to Sweden for all periods post the lockdown. While in Denmark, Germany, Norway,
and the US, it was lower compared to Sweden. Next, we report COVID-19 related daily deaths per
million people, over time, and for each country compute the 7-day centered moving average, which
is highlighted as the red line. We observed that for each of the countries (treatment and control),
daily deaths per million people increased reached a peak, and then declined. However, it is

4

interesting to note that for Sweden, the daily deaths per million seems noisier as compared to other
countries. Moreover, for Demark, Germany, and Norway, daily deaths per million people remained
less than 5 (see figure 2).
Our next set of results report the CIC (mean and median) and DID estimates for total deaths per
million people, along with the bootstrap standard errors for each of the treatment countries (see
figure 3). We find that for Germany and the US, the CIC and the DID estimates are negative, and
the 95% confidence intervals do not intersect 0, suggesting that there was a significant negative
impact on total deaths per million people. However, the effect was higher for Germany as
compared to the US. For Demark and Norway, only the DID impact is negative and significant,
but the CIC estimates are positive and insignificant for Denmark, and negative and insignificant
for Norway. While for other countries, CIC and DID estimates are positive and significant. We
also report results, for daily deaths per million people, this is a more noisy variable, which is
reflected in wider standard errors (see figure 4). However, CIC estimates suggest that there was a
significant negative impact only for Germany. While for other countries in terms of the CIC
median impact, we did not find any significant effect of the national lockdown as compared to
Sweden.

Discussion
Using the CIC model, we do a pair-wise comparison of countries that imposed the national
lockdown (treatment group) in select Western European countries and the US with Sweden
(control group) that did not impose a lockdown. Our results indicate that in terms of COVID-19
related total deaths per million people, the lockdown was effective only in Germany and the US.
Based on these estimates of CIC mean, Germany had 127 fewer COVID-19 related deaths per

5

million people. This implies that in Germany, approximately 10529 (129% of 8144) extra lives
were saved due to the lockdown as on May 20th, 2020. Similarly, the US would have had 69 fewer
COVID-19 related deaths per million people. This implies that in the US, approximately 22541
(24% of 93439) extra lives were saved due to the lockdown as on May 20th, 2020.
If Sweden had imposed the lockdown with a similar effect as Germany, they would have saved on
an average of 127 deaths per million people, implying that Sweden would have had 1292 fewer
deaths (27% of 4795 deaths) as on May 20th, 2020. However, when we contrast Sweden to
countries such as Belgium, France, Italy, Spain, and the UK, then Sweden has done much better
in comparison. However, as compared to Demark and Norway, there seems to be no differential
impact in Sweden. When we compare Sweden to the US, Sweden would have had 763 fewer deaths
(16% of 4795 deaths).
This implies that the impact of national lockdown was not uniform across all countries. Germany
and the US seem to have benefitted from the lockdown as compared to Sweden, while Denmark
and Norway had no differential impact. Still, in other countries, Belgium, France, Italy, Spain, and
the United Kingdom, the effect of lockdown has been in the opposite direction as compared to
Sweden. This would perhaps imply that these nations were delayed in their national lockdown
decisions, costing too many lives compared to Sweden.
It is essential to put our results in context. CIC models allow for individual behavior to change in
the absence of any policy intervention. In other words, these results suggest that elasticity of
demand for self-protection is positive. Perhaps, individual demand for self-protection, which
responds not only to prevalence but also to the mortality rates, could have played an important role
in Sweden to keep the pandemic in check. Even though Sweden could have done much better when
compared to Germany and the US, but in contrast to other select Western European countries, it

6

has not performed poorly in terms of COVID-19 related total deaths per million people. Our results
suggest that we need more studies using individual-level data to estimate the elasticity of demand
for self-protection, which could also play an important role in controlling the epidemic. Results
from studies on previous outbreaks in the US; AIDS epidemic, measles, and the seasonal influenza
epidemic suggests that elasticity of demand for self-protection is positive.7 We need similar studies
for the COVID-19 pandemic.

Limitation
Our paper has several limitations. However, the noteworthy ones are related to data. We do not
have individual-level data that would have allowed us to do a more rigorous application of the CIC
model. In essence, we are treating all individuals in a country to be homogenous. Several examples
in the popular press have revealed a disproportionate impact of the pandemic on race, ethnic
minority, gender, age, comorbidities, etc. Further individual level and more rigorous studies would
be needed to account for that. Second, there is no consensus on the definition of a COVID-19 death
even in Western European countries, and the US (see Mark Handley’s discussion on deaths).8

Conclusion
In this paper, we find that the impact of lockdown was not uniform across all countries. Germany
and the US, seemed to have benefitted due to the lockdown as compared to Sweden that did not
impose a national lockdown. Though Denmark and Norway have lower COVID-19 related deaths
per million people as compared to Sweden, our analysis suggests that this might not be driven by
a policy of the national lockdown. However, in other countries such as Belgium, Italy, France,
Spain, and the United Kingdom, even though they imposed a nationwide lockdown, it is not clear

7

whether it had the desired impact when compared to Sweden. However, we cannot answer the
question on what would have happened had these countries imposed a lockdown sooner as
suggested by some experts.9

8

References:
1. Herd on the street - Is Sweden’s approach to covid-19 wise or reckless? | Europe | The
Economist. https://www.economist.com/europe/2020/05/16/is-swedens-approach-to-covid-19wise-or-reckless.
2. Sweden Stayed Open. A Deadly Month Shows the Risks. - The New York Times.
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/05/15/world/europe/sweden-coronavirusdeaths.html.
3. Athey, S. & Imbens, G. W. Identification and Inference in Nonlinear Difference-in-Differences
Models. Econometrica 74, 431–497 (2006).
4. CSSEGISandData/COVID-19. GitHub https://github.com/CSSEGISandData/COVID-19.
5. CDC. Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention

https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/cases-updates/cases-in-us.html

(2020).
6. World Bank Open Data | Data. https://data.worldbank.org/.
7. Health

Economics.

Macmillan

International

Higher

Education

https://www.macmillanihe.com/page/detail/Health-Economics/?K=9781137029966.
8. CoVID 19 Growth Rate. http://nrg.cs.ucl.ac.uk/mjh/covid19/#deaths-eu-norm.
9. Coronavirus:

‘Earlier

lockdown

would

have halved

death

toll’

- BBC News.

https://www.bbc.com/news/health-52995064.

9

Figure 1: Total deaths per million people over time, Across countries till May 20th, 2020

10

Figure 2: Daily deaths per million people over time, Across countries till May 20th, 2020

Note: The red line is the 7-day centered moving average. The black dotted line is the start of the national lockdown.

11

Figure 3: Changes-in-Changes (CIC) and Differences-in-Differences (DID) estimates for total deaths per
million people, for each country with Sweden as the control group

Notes: The standard errors are computed using bootstrap estimation with 50 replications. 95% Confidence intervals
are in parenthesis.

12

Figure 4: Changes-in-Changes (CIC) and Differences-in-Differences (DID) estimates for daily deaths per
million people, for each country with Sweden as the control group

Notes: The standard errors are computed using bootstrap estimation with 50 replications. 95% Confidence intervals
are in parenthesis.

13

