A Pandemic-Resilient Open-Inquiry Physical Science Lab Course Which
Leverages the Maker Movement

F. R. Bradbury, Amsterdam University College, Amsterdam, The Netherlands,
F.R.Bradbury@auc.nl
C. F. J. Pols, University of Technology Delft, Delft, The Netherlands, C.F.J.Pols@tudelft.nl

published in:
ELECTRONIC JOURNAL FOR RESEARCH IN SCIENCE & MATHEMATICS
EDUCATION, VOL. 24, NO. 3, 60-67, 2020
https://ejrsme.icrsme.com/article/view/20416

Abstract:
Without any major changes, a pilot version of a physical science lab course was able to
continue when the COVID-19 crisis necessitated the abrupt suspension of on-campus
education. The ‘Maker Lab’ course, in which students conceive and set up their own
experiments using affordable microcontrollers, required students to follow the entire arc of an
empirical research cycle twice. Pedagogical literature on teaching the process of experimental
research and the scientific method motivate use of these open-inquiry assignments. Further,
the flipped classroom approach was used, where contact time is devoted to discussions and
the students’ actual experiments were carried out independently at home or elsewhere without
the supervision of an instructor. Despite the COVID-19 measures, all students were able to
produce interesting and successful research projects. While there were of course difficulties
encountered due to the abrupt transition to online teaching, we found several
counterbalancing advantages that bear consideration for inclusion even when all teaching
activities can return to campus. We believe that three components in the design of the course
were vital to the resilience of the course: the choice for fully open-inquiry projects, the
decision to use Arduinos as measurement tools, and the flipped aspect of the instruction
methods. We also include considerations for adapting these pandemic-resilient methods in
other courses and programs.

Keywords: science education, COVID-19, open-inquiry
1

Introduction
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and the associated social distancing measures have
required many universities to quickly adjust to distance education methods, an adjustment
which is especially difficult for science lab courses. We report on a new physical science lab
course piloted this spring at Amsterdam University College (AUC) which was fortuitously
found to be pandemic-resilient. The ‘Maker Lab’ course aims to present students with a
different way of learning skills in experimental science via open-inquiry projects that follow
the entire arc of an empirical research cycle using widely available microcontrollers. It is
cross-listed between AUC’s physics and information science tracks, and is open to all natural
science students who have completed their first year mathematics requirements.
Piloting a totally new course on scientific inquiry at university level for students of different
backgrounds is already ambitious. But on March 13th the instructors and students
encountered an extra challenge: the university buildings closed for the remainder of the
semester. It is purely coincidence that this pilot was running at the time of the COVID-19
outbreak, but with hindsight, the course design played a critical role in the course’s
pandemic-resilience.
Although the course’s methods and results must still be rigorously evaluated, we can present
our preliminary observations that point toward the validation of our methods for achieving
the intended learning outcomes. This article focuses on the course’s pandemic resilience,
and specifically which features allowed it to continue without any significant changes. Our
methods can help other practitioners in switching to pandemic-resilient open-inquiry
approaches in a broad selection of science lab courses.

Problem situation
In a traditional science lab course, students do many of the easiest tasks of a particular
experimental project (e.g. setup the materials and take repeated observations) while under
instructor supervision in a laboratory. Traditional “confirmation” and “structured inquiry”
activities (Table 1) do not ask the students to practice defining a feasible research question
nor design a procedure for investigating it. Students are typically sent home to do the
difficult work of analyzing and drawing conclusions from their data. It is rarely seen that
students are asked to evaluate the reliability of their work (Hodson, 1990; Holmes &
Wieman, 2016).
Table 1: The levels of inquiry in lab assignments are determined by how much of an
experiment’s components are given or specified by the instructor (Tamir, 1991).
Problem

Procedure

Conclusion

Confirmation

given

given

given

Structured inquiry

given

given

open

Guided inquiry

given

open

open

Open inquiry

open

open

open

2

Students from AUC, to a large extent, devise their own curriculum by choosing their own
courses. A restriction is that natural science students must include at least one dedicated
lab course in their curriculum. As students do not engage in many lab courses, a main goal
of our four month, six ECTS credit course is that students with very different educational
backgrounds should authentically experience the empirical research process firsthand. This
requires moving away from traditional “cookbook” experiments, where a step-by-step recipe
is given which students must complete. This aim is in line with recent pedagogical research
(Ansell & Selen, 2016; Wilcox & Lewandowski, 2016; Zwickl, Hirokawa, Finkelstein, &
Lewandowski, 2014) showing that moving away from traditional “cookbook” experiments
leads to more effective teaching of the process of experimental research and the methods of
scientific research, while not disadvantaging students’ conceptual learning outcomes
(Holmes, Olsen, Thomas, & Wieman, 2017; Wilcox & Lewandowski, 2017). These shifts
involve requiring students to design their experimental methods (“guided inquiry”) or even
to choose their topic and their research question (fully “open inquiry”), thus achieving a
more authentic experience in conducting experimental research, see Table 1.
A constraint at AUC is the college’s lack of in-house laboratory facilities. Lab courses
typically consume a substantial amount of a department’s educational budget as special
instruments and lab rooms are required. In this case, our liberal arts and sciences honors
college pays other departments for using their facilities for our lab courses. Before the
Maker Lab pilot, AUC had provided only one lab course per natural science discipline.
The course is thus designed with the aim of teaching scientific inquiry in a flipped classroom
style using affordable and accessible materials.

Course design
To support students in navigating the full research cycle, the most open variant of inquiry in
Table 1 was chosen. The choice is further warranted by pedagogical research showing that
open-inquiry methods outperform guided-inquiry in teaching students the strategies,
attitudes, and habits of mind which are advantageous in experimental science (Wilcox &
Lewandowski, 2016), well as research showing that open-inquiry activities address the full
variety of cognitive tasks necessary for an empirical research cycle (Holmes & Wieman,
2016; Wieman, 2015). In order to give students sufficient time for design, reflection, and
iteration in their open-inquiry projects, we heeded literature suggesting that more time
devoted to fewer projects allows for greater learning outcomes (Luckie et al., 2012).
Open inquiry also has consequences for student ownership. When given sufficient support
to carry it through, student choice of their research topic usually increases student
motivation (Hodson, 2014). We give students opportunity and support in defining their
project topic, a specific research question, and the methods for measurement and data
analysis. The inquiry is their own, and success and failure are framed in terms of their own
goals. With the responsibility in their hands, their critical engagement is ensured at every
step in the research cycle. Finally, the students’ freedom in choosing project topics allows
the Maker Lab to indeed cater to an interdisciplinary group of natural science majors.
Partly to address the lack of facilities and partly to enable fully open inquiries, we applied
the idea of “flipped classrooms” in our course design, whereby the students’ actual
3

measurements are conducted outside of a supervised classroom environment. This allows
the instructor contact time to focus on the most challenging activities (Hodson, 2014) (e.g.
experimental design, data and uncertainty analysis, iterative improvements for advancing
scientific evidence). Instructor-student discussions focus on goal-setting, planning, and
evaluating findings; and the students hold chief responsibility in all of these discussions for
effectively communicating their ideas and work.
When choosing for open-inquiry and flipped classroom approaches, there are associated
constraints on students’ inquiries regarding the choice of their instruments. The
experimental tools must be cheap enough to accept the risk of being damaged, sufficiently
flexible and accessible to be of value in the hands of a diverse and inexperienced group of
students, and inherently safe for un-supervised use. To more fully empower students in the
experimental design process, these tools must allow for a sufficient level of control and
insight into their workings. A pre-calibrated “black-box” measurement device affords little
or no control of - and often scant information on - its readout uncertainties and their
possible effects on students’ measurements. Rather, building their experimental tools from
more basic components gives students fuller control and insight into measurement
calibration and uncertainties (Bouquet, Bobroff, Fuchs-Gallezot, & Maurines, 2017). As a
consequence, students better understand the accuracy and limitations of their data and
their validity in being used as scientific evidence.
We chose Arduinos and the myriad variety of sensors they can control because they satisfy
all of the above-mentioned requirements. Students receive a short training in using
Arduinos to control and read electronic sensors and are further directed to consult userfriendly sensor documentation, Maker forums, and online instructional videos; all of which
are easily discoverable and accessible thanks to the open-source ethos of the mature and
dynamic Maker movement.

Results
After receiving substantial training on Maker skills & data analysis via short structured
experiments which are designed to explicitly motivate steps in the empirical research
process, students dedicated much time (two thirds of the course) to two successive openinquiry projects, performed in pairs. In the first round, students posed questions addressing:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

building and improving the signal processing of an Arduino theremin
comparing water retention of alternative potting soils against those with
unsustainably harvested peat-moss
optically measuring heart rate and characterizing its post-exercise recovery to
equilibrium
measuring color fidelity of a Macbook's screen with an RGB sensor
investigating a photovoltaic cell's power's dependence on illumination angle
pushing the Arduino's sampling rate for precision sound frequency determination
measuring local wind-speeds to determine suitable bee-habitat

The COVID-19 crisis started soon after the start of the first round projects, but the students
already had their most important tools in hand, thus their projects could continue without
any structural problems. It should be noted, however, that this first round occurred during
the most stressful period of the pandemic, and for this reason several students were delayed
4

in submitting their first round assignments. The second round of open-inquiry projects were
completed start-to-finish under the pandemic’s social distancing restrictions.
The only adaptations in project scope involved just one student due to the severe lock-down
restrictions they faced back home in South Africa. It was decided to allow this student to use
sensors in a smartphone instead of controlled directly by Arduinos because of the limited
material that they had been able to take home, and also to work individually instead of in a
pair.
The inquiry process for the second round projects was observed to be generally much
smoother for students than the first round, where there were a couple false-starts and some
misunderstandings in the construction of scientific evidence. Judging by the improvements
in the second round, the feedback provided on the first projects and/or the experience the
students had gained must have been effective. The second round projects addressed the
following topics:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

comparing signatures of bicep muscle fatigue between dominant and non-dominant
arms with median frequency evolution of the electromyography (EMG) power
spectrum
building and characterizing performance of a swiveling Arduino sonar radar
comparing accelerometer measurements of a beam's fundamental oscillation
frequency with the Euler-Bernoulli model
comparing air pollution levels inside apartments on the road-side and courtyard-side
of the student residence building
investigating whether self-reported joke funniness correlates with EMG signals of
facial muscles
comparing two measurements of bread-dough rise / yeast activity: CO2 gas sensing
& volume changes via ultrasonic ranging
studying effects of temperature on germination of cress seeds

Following the original plan, most instructor contact hours during the open-inquiry projects
were devoted to individual team meetings. Interestingly, the flipped lab methods and
distance learning constraints guaranteed that student projects retained independence. This
physical separation alleviates a concern that our instincts as teachers to help can go too far
and counter-productively rob students of ownership, leaving them with an exercise in
confirmation or structured inquiry (Hodson, 1990).
We also observed a desired consequence of student ownership related to our open-inquiry
and flipped-lab methods: student communication skills are continuously sharpened as they
are wholly responsible for conveying their ideas, reasoning, and observations in their
individual meetings with instructors.
To give one concrete example of how students were supported in their open-inquiry
process, we look at the top of the list of second round projects: comparing electrical
signatures of muscle fatigue.
One pair investigated muscle fatigue and how it might be different for different
people. They used electromyography sensor boards that amplify the small voltage
differences which are passively picked up by electrodes on the skin. They reviewed
literature and found that a muscle’s EMG signal’s median frequency (defined via its
power spectrum) typically decreases as it becomes fatigued. They proposed a simple
static hold experiment which eliminated any complications involved in muscle
movement. Upon explaining their ideas, they were given the go-ahead and they
5

ordered the sensor and supplies, and started testing. Before the midway point of the
project, in an individual team meeting video call, they demonstrated a live plot of
their own EMG data acquired from the bicep.
In subsequent team meeting video calls, they reported on results and were helped
with data analysis and drawing conclusions. They mainly needed help to understand
and implement the use of a Fourier transform and a power spectrum for finding a
median frequency. After seeing a single example, they were able to chop their 18
time series data sets into segments, calculate median frequencies, plot their
evolutions during the muscle fatigue experiments, and check in briefly about whether
their observations and conclusions sounded reasonable.
Similar to this example, all of the second round projects exhibited substantial student
independence and rational progression through the empirical research process.
While full course evaluation will not be complete until later this summer, we can already
claim success on the most critical measures: the students have succeeded in conceiving,
designing, and carrying out a wide variety of experiments suiting their interdisciplinary
interests. With the experience of running this pilot, we find that the required initial
investment of materials is less than €100 per student and that annual costs thereafter are
much lower.
Factors contributing to pandemic-resiliency
The Maker Lab’s resiliency for continuing with little adjustment despite the transition to
distance learning seems exceptional for a science lab course as most are currently being
altered in significant ways, delayed, or even canceled. For descriptions of changes to physics
labs, see for example (Fox, Werth, Hoehn, & Lewandowski, 2020; Pols, 2020). The only significant
changes in instructional and assessment methods were switches to conducting individual
team meetings over video call and the replacement of most synchronous in-class
presentations with pre-recorded videos, and neither of these small changes seemed to
compromise the main learning objectives. In our understanding we see three main factors
that contributed to pandemic resiliency: the choice for fully open inquiries, the decision to
use Arduinos as measurement tools, and the flipped aspect of the instruction methods.
Besides these principal course design choices, it was also advantageous that the course was
given in a four month extensive format and that it included two full open-inquiry projects.
We briefly discuss these five factors and their contribution to the resiliency.
The most important factor in pandemic-resiliency is that Maker Lab students were tasked
with conducting measurements outside of supervised classroom environments. Our
subsequent choice to leverage Arduinos and the sensors they can control is important for
enabling this flipped lab approach. Thanks in part to their low cost and inherent safety all
students could be provided with an Arduino and sensors to conduct their experiments at
home, where the accessibility of online Arduino resources supported students in overcoming
hurdles and making progress independently. When required, additional sensors and
supplies could be ordered and quickly shipped to students’ homes directly.
As mentioned above, the only change in instruction was the moving of individual team
meetings with the instructor to video calls; and even this change was not actually so
negative. As instructors, we found it straightforward and worthwhile to discuss and support
6

students’ own plans, feasibility estimates, and findings. Supporting open inquiries was thus
found to be easier than attempting over video call to guarantee that students were correctly
taking all the pre-defined steps and reaching the end-goals of more structured or
“cookbook” style inquiries. Trouble-shooting coding problems over video call was actually
found to be much easier when not having to crowd three or more people around a single
laptop screen. Code snippets could be written on our own keyboards and shared over the
video call’s chat interface. Further, with the experiments built up in students’ residences,
the video calling saved them considerable time and problems incurred by breaking down,
transporting, and again setting up equipment in the university building to demonstrate the
setup to their peers and instructor. On the other hand, some types of instructor support
were definitely less efficient via video call (e.g. helping to trouble-shoot a problem with
electrical wiring or conveying ideas through a quick sketch). However, independent student
researchers quickly learned the golden rule that any professional experimental scientist
knows: if part of a setup is working, don’t touch it!
Another factor contributing to resiliency that relates to AUC’s curriculum structure is the
offering of the Maker Lab as a stand-alone course over an extended four month timeframe.
Since students’ projects often required acquisition of new sensors or supplies, it was lucky
that a single open-inquiry project was stretched out over 5.5 weeks to leave sufficient time
for initial delivery of materials. Several projects also required taking measurements over
many hours or days (which the Arduinos were set up to perform autonomously), meaning
that iterative improvements on experimental methods required significant time.
Additionally, it is hypothesized that students benefit from having time to sleep on or allow
ideas to ferment, especially in the process of conducting empirical research.
Finally, the implementation of two full open-inquiry projects was advantageous for assessing
individual students, especially given the decision to continue working mostly in pairs during
the social distancing measures. The project pairs received grades on their assignments in a
“first author – second author” format, whereby the first author was expected to lead and
deliver the presentation and the second author played a supporting role whereby the
assignment had a correspondingly smaller weight in their final grade. Because there were
two projects, all students played the role of first author for all graded assignment types. In
the circumstances of mandated social distancing, many project pairs naturally distributed
the experimental work according to which team member would be the first author for the
next presentation. But the first author for a particular presentation could count on their
partner’s support and critical feedback because their partner would share in the grade.
Further considerations for pandemic-resiliency
While here in the Netherlands the pandemic control measures are now being refined and
scaled back, there is still uncertainty about whether autumn semester courses can get back
to normal, and if so, whether all students will be able to participate on campus. Planning a
course like the Maker Lab for full pandemic resiliency requires some small adaptations in the
first third of the course – which occurred this year before the start of the COVID-19 crisis.
Further, one of us (CFJP) is working on adapting similar methods for a large first year physics
lab course at the Delft University of Technology (TU Delft). The Maker Lab pilot and its
abrupt transition to distance learning hold important lessons for optimizing the balance
between independence, interaction, and personalized attention.
7

To enable online instruction of a Maker Lab-like course from day one, the tools may need to
be delivered to (some) students at the beginning of the term, depending on whether
collection on campus is possible. Further, for rigid lockdown situations or in less-developed
regions of the world, the initially distributed set of tools should include a larger array of
sensors and supplies in case students are not able to quickly purchase sensors according to
their project topics. Of the 14 projects chosen by students this spring, half could have been
served by a well-stocked initial set of tools, leaving lots of room for student choice and
creativity. Our colleagues at TU Delft have relevant experience as they run a hands-on
design course in which ~150 students build prototypes, where each group requires different
sensors, Arduinos, and other materials that must be distributed to them.
Another practical consideration is the elimination of the need for soldering via a
combination of jumper wires/breadboards and a supply of common connectors/cables.
While the Maker Lab students were generally happy to have learned soldering skills, many
did so the hard way via much trial and error, and these frustrations would have been
exacerbated if they had not gotten in-class training in the first week of the course.
Further adaptations and improvements are now in development within a consortium of
educators. Besides adapting materials for different programs and levels, we are looking into
possibilities for enabling more peer interactions and for including teaching assistants (TA’s)
in the teaching team. The Maker Lab’s original peer-feedback plans were substantially
reduced after the transition to distance learning due to the perceived difficulty of holding
regular synchronous class sessions. However, this resulted in cutting sessions for everyone
because a few could not (always) partake. The Maker Lab course did not utilize TA’s, so their
potential roles and necessary training will require some consideration. We expect that welltrained TA’s will be able to individually conduct many of the individual team meetings,
supervise peer-sharing and peer-feedback sessions, and fill in first drafts of student
assessment forms.
Based on the achieved learning outcomes, and regardless of whether education is being
offered on-campus or online, we recommend consideration of open-inquiry and flippedclassroom approaches, using modern technologies made accessible by the Maker
movement. We additionally hope our work can inform a “playbook” for transitioning
physical science lab courses to fully online environments in case the COVID-19 pandemic
continues, or in future circumstances that we now cannot foresee. The Maker Lab and
associated course materials have been published by Bradbury (2020). Interested readers are
encouraged to contact the authors directly.
Acknowledgments
We would like to acknowledge support in this project from the Comenius Fellowship grant
from the Netherlands Initiative for Education Research (NRO) and the Dutch Ministry for
Education (OCW) as well as AUC’s Blending Learning funds and our supportive departments
at AUC and TU Delft. The Maker Lab pilot course greatly benefitted from input and help
from Jasper Homminga, Gary Steele, Jan Koetsier, Thierry Slot, and especially co-instructor
Paul Vlaanderen, and we are grateful for helpful discussions in the last month with Andy
Buffler, Jean Heremans, and Thomas O’Donnell.

8

References
Ansell, K., & Selen, M. (2016). Student attitudes in a new hybrid design-based introductory physics
laboratory. Paper presented at the Physics Education Research Conference, Sacramento, CA.
Bouquet, F., Bobroff, J., Fuchs-Gallezot, M., & Maurines, L. (2017). Project-based physics labs using
low-cost open-source hardware. American Journal of Physics, 85(3), 216-222.
Bradbury, F. (2020). Makerlab Course Material. Retrieved from
https://github.com/forrestbradbury/MakerLab
Fox, M. F., Werth, A., Hoehn, J. R., & Lewandowski, H. (2020). Teaching labs during a pandemic:
Lessons from Spring 2020 and an outlook for the future. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.01271.
Hodson, D. (1990). A critical look at practical work in school science. School science review, 70(256),
33-40.
Hodson, D. (2014). Learning science, learning about science, doing science: Different goals demand
different learning methods. International Journal of Science Education, 36(15), 2534-2553.
Holmes, N. G., Olsen, J., Thomas, J. L., & Wieman, C. (2017). Value added or misattributed? A multiinstitution study on the educational benefit of labs for reinforcing physics content. Physical
Review Physics Education Research, 13(1), 010129.
Holmes, N. G., & Wieman, C. (2016). Examining and contrasting the cognitive activities engaged in
undergraduate research experiences and lab courses. Physical Review Physics Education
Research, 12(2), 020103.
Luckie, D. B., Aubry, J. R., Marengo, B. J., Rivkin, A. M., Foos, L. A., & Maleszewski, J. J. (2012). Less
teaching, more learning: 10-yr study supports increasing student learning through less
coverage and more inquiry. Advances in Physiology Education, 36(4), 325-335.
Pols, F. (2020). A Physics Lab Course in Times of COVID-19. The Electronic Journal for Research in
Science & Mathematics Education, 24(2), 172-178.
Tamir, P. (1991). Practical work in school science: an analysis of current practice. Practical science,
13-20.
Wieman, C. (2015). Comparative cognitive task analyses of experimental science and instructional
laboratory courses. The Physics Teacher, 53(6), 349-351.
Wilcox, B. R., & Lewandowski, H. (2016). Open-ended versus guided laboratory activities: Impact on
students’ beliefs about experimental physics. Physical Review Physics Education Research,
12(2), 020132.
Wilcox, B. R., & Lewandowski, H. (2017). Students’ views about the nature of experimental physics.
Physical Review Physics Education Research, 13(2), 020110.
Zwickl, B. M., Hirokawa, T., Finkelstein, N., & Lewandowski, H. (2014). Epistemology and expectations
survey about experimental physics: Development and initial results. Physical Review Special
Topics-Physics Education Research, 10(1), 010120.

9

