arXiv:2006.05357v2 [q-bio.PE] 11 Jun 2020

On the interplay between mobility and
hospitalization capacity during the COVID-19
pandemic: The SEIRHUD model
Tomás Veloz1,2,3,4 , Pedro Maldonado1 , Samuel Ropert1 , César
Ravello1,5 , Soraya Mora1,5 , Alejandra Barrios1 , Tomás Villaseca1 ,
César Valdenegro1 , and Tomás Perez-Acle1,5,6
1

Computational Biology Lab (DLab), Fundación Ciencia & Vida,
Santiago, Chile
2
Fundación para el Desarrollo Interdisciplinario de la Ciencia, la
Tecnología y las Artes - DICTA
3
Centre Leo Apostel for Interdisciplinary Studies, Vrije Universiteit
Brussel
4
Universidad Andrés Bello, Facultad de Ciencias para la Vida
5
Universidad San Sebastián
6
Centro Interdisciplinario de Neurociencia de Valparaíso, Universidad
de Valparaíso
June 2020

Abstract
Measures to reduce the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic require a
mix of logistic, political and social capacity. Depending on the country,
different approaches to increase hospitalization capacity or to properly
apply lock-downs are observed. In order to better understand the
impact of these measures we have developed a compartmental model
which, on the one hand allows to calibrate the reduction of movement
of people within and among different areas, and on the other hand it
incorporates a hospitalization dynamics that differentiates the available
kinds of treatment that infected people can receive. By bounding the
hospitalization capacity, we are able to study in detail the interplay
between mobility and hospitalization capacity.

1

Introduction

The SARS-Cov2 virus, first reported in China by the end of the year 2019,
generated a pandemic with a high death toll, having a large impact in the
1

global economy and in the daily lives of millions of people. While a small proportion of countries are experiencing a reduction in the number of new daily
cases, the disease is still rapidly spreading in the majority of countries. Due
to the lack of innate immunity by humankind and since there is still no cure
nor a vaccine, the only way to prevent contagion is to reduce the chances of
viral transmission by reducing person to person contact: a strategy generally
termed non-pharmaceutical intervention [1]. In this regard, defining strategies to control the spread of the disease while at the same time preserving
the well-being of people, preventing the loss of jobs and limiting the impact
on the economy, has become an urgent endeavour. Without proper tools
to forecast accurately the outcome of possible counter-measures focused on
controlling the virus spread, reducing the impact over the sanitary system,
the design and execution of optimal strategies is a complex endeavour.
Among all the possible variables that can modulate the impact of the
disease, reductions of mobility and increments on the hospitalization capacity are possibly the two most significant ones. On the one hand, it is
well known that the case fatality rate (CFR), i.e. the ratio between the
COVID-19 deaths and COVID-19 infected people, in the absence of a sanitary system is around 15%, and in the presence of a virtually unlimited
sanitary system, meaning that every infected person who needs treatment
will get it, CFR should be around 2.5% [2]. As it is also known that the
infection peak can reach very large values, hence hospitalization capacity can
collapse increasing the CFR to values that approximate 15%. On the other
hand, reductions of mobility might have different impacts, but also different
logistic costs, ranging from total reduction of mobility, i.e. total lock-down,
vanishing the disease between two to four weeks, but being impossible to
apply because the government would have to manage the biological, psychological and economical necessities of the entire locked-down population,
to more realistic reductions such as cancelling massive events, implementing
work-from-home, and lock-downs that allow a certain degree of mobility (to
buy supplies, workout and walk pets, among others), that move the peak of
infection to the future, and also reduce the number of infected people in the
peak, flattening the infection curve [3, 4] [5]. The increase of the hospitalization capacity and the reduction of mobility are both fundamental aspects
of the policies implemented by most countries to control the impact of the
COVID-19 pandemic [6, 7].
Since either increasing the hospital capacity or implementing effective reductions of mobility depend on the economic, political and social capabilities
of each country, we performed a study to get insights on the interplay between these two variables, so we can identify optimal policies involving these
variables but considering the country’s capabilities to achieve the proposed
goal. To do so, we have extended the classical SEIR model to incorporate
four types of infected individuals: asymptomatic, mild symptoms, severe
symptoms and critical symptoms. While the first two kinds do not require
2

hospitalization, they are the most infectious due to their ability move without restrictions among the population. In contrast, the other two kinds of
infected individuals require hospitalization. Individuals with severe symptoms will require intensive care treatment without the use of mechanical
ventilators, while critical individuals will require the use of ventilator [8]. To
account for these differences, we defined two kinds of hospitalization stages,
incorporating intermediate hospitalization states to include facts such as the
aggravation of symptoms from severe to critical while hospitalized. Importantly, we assume a finite hospitalization capacity, that can be incremented
over time.
Another aspect in which we improve the SEIR model is the incorporation
of a mobility parameter to model the reduction of interactions due to changes
in social behavior, quarantines, lock-downs, and check-points among others.
We start from a mobility baseline which we can reduce by hand to simulate
different lock-down scenarios, and also we can set it to the reductions of
mobility observed by geo-referenced tracking of anonymized mobile phones
data [9]. Having both the mobility and hospitalization parameters in hand,
we will investigate whether and when the hospitalization system is capable
to treat the incoming infected people by calculating the ratio between deaths
and infected people who require hospitalization to survive. We termed this
parameter as the should-be-hospitalized fatality rate (SHFR).
The paper is organized as follows. We first introduce the SEIR model
that incorporates mobility. Next, we introduce the extended model with
different infection and hospitalization states. Next, we provide numerical
examples of the model to understand some interesting qualitative aspects of
it, and show how this model forecasts the situation in Chile. We conclude
discussing what improvements are still required in the model to achieve more
exact predictions of the future of the disease at a country-wide scale.

2
2.1

Models
A SEIR model with mobility

The SEIR epidemiological model, and several variations of it, have been
extensively studied both for the purpose of understanding dynamics [10, 11,
12, 8, 13, 14, 15] as well as optimal policy making [16, 17, 18, 19, 20]. For a
comprehensive review see [21, 22].
Let N be the size of a population where no birth occurs (or recently
born babies are not susceptible to COVID19). We define S, E, I, and R
as the amount of susceptible, exposed, infected and recovered inhabitants
respectively, with S + E + I + R = N .
We shall now describe the interactions between susceptible and infected
populations by assuming two general conditions

3

• There is an intrinsic rate infection parameter β which modulates the
success of infection transmission due to interactions, and does not depend on the population sizes or time, but only on the virus type. We
assumed β = 0.2 obtained from literature [22].
• The rate of interaction events is proportional to the product between
the susceptible population S, the effective density of infected people
given by NI , and a factor α(t) which denotes changes in mobility, and
thus the number of interactions, due to personal, social, and political
measures that change the behaviour of people.
The latter specification is only an approximation of the real population dynamics because we are implicitly assuming random mixing, thus neglecting
the spatial constrains that are imposed on the movement of people on a
more realistic scenario. Therefore our mobility parameter, on the one hand
accounts for the fact that space reduces the number of interactions compared
to random mixing when the population density is sufficiently large, and on
the other hand it allows to introduce the effect of the mobility reductions produced by quarantines, lockdowns, personal mobility restrictions, etc. Hence,
our approximation is useful to not only describe the qualitative dynamics
but also to provide estimations of the total number of infected people, the
one or many peaks, and various other measures of the pandemics such as
SHFR. We elaborate further on the mobility issue in the discussion section.
Using the standard construction of the SEIR model for E, I, and R, we
have that the equations ruling the evolution of this system are
dS
I
= −α(t)βS
dt
N
dE
I
= α(t)βS − σE
dt
N
dI
= σE − γI
dt
dR
= γI
dt

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

Where γ −1 and σ −1 are the recovery time and incubation period.
Since our main interest is the interplay between mobility and hospitalization capacity, we extended this SEIR model to appropriately incorporate
the hospitalization phenomenology.

4

2.2

Incorporating different types of infected states and the
hospitalization system

Before explaining in deeper details the extended transitions of our model,
it is important to keep in mind that we have four kinds of infected people.
While the asymptomatic and mild symptoms, Ias and Imi respectively, do
not require hospitalization before recovering (and thus only contribute to the
transmission dynamics), infected with severe and critical symptoms, Ise and
Icr respectively, require hospitalization with different treatment. Infected
with severe symptoms require intensive care and possibly the use of oxigen,
and infected with critical symptoms will require ventilator treatment. Since
the treatment of severe patients is limited by the number of hospitalization
UCI beds, and the treatment of critical patients is limited by the number of
ventilators, we consider a maximal (but time dependent) UCI-hospitalization
(hospitalization from now on) and ventilator capacities Htot and Vtot , respectively. Whenever the number of patients requiring each of this treatments
reach its maximal capacity, the new infected people coming cannot receive
the respective treatment and eventually die. Considering that the death
rate is 2.5% and 15% with and without treatment capacity, it is extremely
important understand the conditions under which such capacity is reached.
In order to facilitate the understanding of the situation we provide two
figures. In the fig. 1 we show a diagram of the time and proportions of the
different transitions compiling various sources in the literature [7, 2, 8, 23,
22, 24, 25], and in fig. 2 we show a compartmental-model-diagram of those
transitions, making more explicit the way in which the differential equations
are built.
We will explain in more detail the transitions of the model in fig. 2:
• Every susceptible S can become exposed with an asymptomatic or
symptomatic future. We introduce two exposed states Eas and Esy to
differentiate them.
• Every Eas becomes infected asymptomatic Ias , which later becomes
recovered R.
• Every Esy can become either infected with mild symptoms Imi , infected
with severe symptoms Ise or infected with critical symptoms Icr . While
Imi will not require hospitalization, Ise will require basic hospitalization
to recover (at most oxigen), and Icr will require the use of a ventilator
to recover.
• Since not only the proportion but also the mobility of Ise and Icr is
small compared to Ias and Imi , we consider that the infection rate
depends only on Ias and Imi .

5

Figure 1: Covid19 states and the distribution of infected population detected,
according to the severity of their symptoms. Namely, 30% of infected people
will show no symptoms, while 55% of those will have mild symptoms. In
both cases, hospitalization will not be required. The 15% of those infected
will present severe symptoms, so they will need hospital care. The 5% of
those infected will show severe symptoms, requiring hospitalization via ICU
/ UTI coupled with mechanical respirator. Of these latest patients, around
50% dies from complications derived from Covid19.
• When Ise is hospitalized, then it enters in a state Hin which means it
is hospitalized. From such state it can evolve to either Hout meaning it
will recover, or to Hcr−in meaning its symptoms worsen so it requires
ventilation treatment.
• If the hospitalization capacity is reached, then Ise cannot be hospitalized and dies.
• When Icr is hospitalized it enters in state Hcr−in and goes to the ventilator treatment state V . From V , it can either improve and transit
to Hout ending up as recovered R, or die during the treatment.
• If the hospitalization capacity is reached, then Icr and Ise cannot be
hospitalized (represented by states Hcr−in and Hin respectively), and
eventually transit to a dead state.
• For both Icr and those Ise whose symptoms worsen, once hospitalized
in state Hcr−in , if the ventilator capacity is reached, then they cannot
enter in the ventilator treatment and die.
The system is ruled by the following equations
6

Figure 2: Representation of the transitions in the SEIRHUD model. For a
given transition x → y, the number above the transition arrow represents the
proportion of population who undergoes such transition from the previous
state, and the number below the arrow is an estimate of days in which such
transition is expected to occur. Hence the ratio between the first and second
number is the transition rate σx,y .

S
(Ias + Imi )
N
S
= σS,Eas βα(t) (Ias + Imi ) − σEas ,Ias Eas
N
S
= σS,Eas βα(t) (Ias + Imi ) − (σEsy ,Imi + σEsy ,Ise + σEsy ,Icr )Esy
N
= σEas ,Ias Eas − σIas ,R Ias

S 0 = −βα(t)
0
Eas
0
Esy
0
Ias

0
Imi
= σEsy ,Imi Esy − σImi ,R Imi
0
Ise
= σEsy ,Ise Esy − σIse ,D Hsat − σIse ,Hin (1 − Hsat )
0
Icr
= σEsy ,Icr Esy − σIcr ,Hcr (1 − Hsat ) − σIcr ,D Hsat
0
Hin
= σIse ,Hin (1 − Hsat ) − σHin ,Hcr Hin − σHin ,Hout Hin
0
Hcr
= σIcr ,Hcr Icr (1 − Hsat ) + σHin ,Hcr Hin − σHcr ,V Hcr (1 − Vsat ) − σHcr ,D Hcr Vsat

V 0 = σHcr ,V Hcr (1 − Vsat ) − σV,Hout V (1 − Hsat ) − σV,D V
0
Hout
= σHin ,Hout Hin + σV,Hout V (1 − Hsat ) − σHout ,R Hout

D0 = σIcr ,D Hsat + σIse ,D Hsat + σHcr ,D Hcr Vsat + σV,D V
R0 = σIas ,R Ias + σImi ,R Imi + σHout ,R Hout ,
(6)
7

where the transition parameters σx,y represent the rate of the transition1
from state x to state y, Hsat is a function whose value is 1 if Hin +Hcr +Hout ≥
Htot and 0 else, and Vsat is a function whose value is 1 if V ≥ Vtot and 0 else.
The code for solving and analyze these equations is available for download
in [26]. The parameter table is below
rate
β
σEas ,Ias
σEsy ,Imi
σEsy ,Ise
σEsy ,Icr
σIas ,R
σImi ,R
σIse ,Hin
σIcr ,Hcr−in
σIse ,D
σIcr ,D
σHin ,Hout
σHin ,Hcr−in
σHcr−in ,V
σHcr−in ,D
σV,D
σV,Hout
σHout ,R

value
0.19
0.2
0.156
0.028
0.016
0.066
00.066
1
1
0.33
0.33
0.2475
0.01
1
0.33
0.03
0.03
0.33

meaning
success of transmission infected to susceptible
change from exposed to infected asymptomatic
change from exposed to infected mild symptoms
change from exposed to infected severe symptoms
change from exposed to infected critical symptoms
change from infected asymptomatic to recovered
change from infected asymptomatic to recovered
change from infected severe symptoms to hospitalized
change from infected critical symptoms to hospitalized
change from infected severe symptoms to death
change from infected critical symptoms to death
change from hospitalization state to start of the recovery
worsen of symptoms during hospitalization
change from hospitalization state to ventilation
change from hospitalization to death
change from ventilator to death
change from ventilator to start recovering
exit from hospitalization

Table 1: Parameters we use to run our solver.

3

Preliminary Analysis

We will first study the interplay between the mobility function α(t) and the
hospital capacities Htot and Vtot using a numerical scenario.
We will concentrate in the SHFR defined by the ratio between the number
of dead people by COVID19 and the number of infected people that require
hospitalization.
D(t)
(7)
SHFR(t) = Z t
Ise (τ ) + Icr (τ )dτ
0
1

the ratio between numbers above and below the arrow representing the transition in
fig. 2.

8

From Fig. 1 we have that 15% of the infected have either severe or critical
symptoms, and in case there is no hospitalization capacity whatsoever they
would all die. In this case SHFR(t) = 1. Moreover, since we have that the
fraction of people with severe symptoms is twice the fraction of people with
critical symptoms, we have that Ise ∼ 2Icr , and that the chance of recovering
of hospitalized patients with severe symptoms is almost 100%, while for the
case of critical patients in ventilators, the chance of recovering is 50%, we
can estimate a lower bound of the SHFR(t) as follows:
D(t)

SHFR(t) = Z

t

Ise (τ ) + Icr (τ )dτ
0

Z

τ

Z

t

Ise (τ ) + 0.5Icr (τ )dτ
=

t=0

Z

∼

t

Zt=0
t

Ise (τ ) + Icr (τ )dτ
t=0

Icr (τ )dt 
Icr (τ )dt

2 + 0.5
2+1



1
∼ .
6

t=0

Hence, we have that SHFR(t) in active pandemic conditions, i.e. if none of
the measured variables are zero, should range between an optimal value 16
and a worst value 1.
In our simulation we consider a system with 1.000.000 people, and leave
the α parameter constant through each simulation at different values from 0.2
to 1. Based on [27], we consider an estimate between 1 and 25 hospitalization
beds per thousand people, covering most of the world’s realities, and estimate
that 30%. of such capacity corresponds to ventilators. This estimation can be
considered rough, however, it is still useful for the purpose of understanding
the interplay between hospitalization capacity and mobility.
In figure 3 we observe the converging SHFR value for the tested scenarios
(convergence found to be stable after 250 days in all scenarios). It is interesting to note that in this case the mobility α ≤ 0.4 controls the pandemics
in all possible Htot scenarios. This result is consistent with [28] where a similar mobility parameter was found. This means that with mobility below 0.4
there is no spread of the disease, i.e. R0 < 1. For α > 0.4 we observe that
in the absence of beds very little mobility induces a big increase in SHFR.
For example in the bottom case (1 bed per thousand people), changing the
mobility from α = 0.4 to 0.5 we increase SHFR from 0.2 to 0.8, while the
same change of mobility having 3 beds per thousand people increases SHFR
up to 0.4.
It is well know from many mobility studies, such as the one developed
by Google [9], that in the countries where measures to reduce the mobility
have been implemented, the effective reductions range between 20% and
60%. Therefore, we must observe the interval α ∈ [0.4, 0.8]. Clearly, in the
case above 10 beds per thousand people the situation is under control with
a minimal reduction of mobility. However, for the case below 5 beds per
9

thousand people, α > 0.6 results in SHFR greater than 0.5, implying that
the severe patients have the same mortality than critical patients. Hence,
the Infected Fatality Rate reaches the value of 7.5% approximately.

Figure 3: SHFR value for different values of α and Htot .

4

Discussion

The mobility parameter α(t) is a way to introduce a reduction of the number
of interactions from the baseline random mixing giving by S NI . The mobility should be extended to incorporate the population density distribution,
strong but specific deviations from average mobility, and the way people
from different areas move to other areas.
In future work we will incorporate all these mobility aspects, and we
consider important to incorporate the role that several other variables have
in the system under study. For example, information technologies will have in
the control of the disease by not only using AI to predict and detect trends,
but also to incorporate tele-medicine to the possible treatments [29, 29].
Moreover, it is important to consider how other non-health related variables
are impacted by the pandemics such as economical drops [30] and social
demands.

5

Conclusion

We conclude that mobility must remain below to 0.4 to control the pandemics without a hospitalization system, and when there is a hospitalization
system the mobility can increase above 0.4, but only up to a limit which is
specified by the number of beds available, as shown in Fig. 3. Using this
10

model it is possible to provide a much deeper understanding of how to control the pandemics by forecasting the pandemic situation including both the
reductions of mobility of different partial or total lockdowns and the plan for
increase of hospital capacity which most countries are applying.

6

Acknowledgments

The authors acknowledge the access to supercomputing capacity from the
National Laboratory for High Performance Computing (NLHPC), Universidad de Chile, Powered@NLHPC. Partial economic support is acknowledged to Programa de Apoyo a Centros con Financiamiento Basal AFB
170004 to FCV, Instituto Milenio Centro Interdisciplinario de Neurociencia de Valparaíso (ICM-ANID P09-022-F). Research was partially sponsored
by the Army Research Laboratory under Cooperative Agreement Number
W911NF-19-2-0242, and by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research under
award number FA9550-19-1-0368. The views and conclusions contained in
this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as
representing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of the Army
Research Laboratory or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government is
authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Government purposes
notwithstanding any copyright notation herein. Any opinions, finding, and
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the United States Air
Force.

References
[1] S. Eubank, I. Eckstrand, B. Lewis, S. Venkatramanan, M. Marathe,
and C. L. Barrett, “Commentary on ferguson, et al., "impact of nonpharmaceutical interventions (npis) to reduce covid-19 mortality and
healthcare demand",” Bull Math Biol, vol. 82, p. 52, 04 2020.
[2] S. A. Lauer, K. H. Grantz, Q. Bi, F. K. Jones, Q. Zheng, H. R. Meredith, A. S. Azman, N. G. Reich, and J. Lessler, “The incubation period of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) from publicly reported confirmed cases: estimation and application,” Annals of internal medicine,
vol. 172, no. 9, pp. 577–582, 2020.
[3] L. Matrajt and T. Leung, “Evaluating the effectiveness of social distancing interventions to delay or flatten the epidemic curve of coronavirus
disease.,” Emerging infectious diseases, vol. 26, no. 8, 2020.

11

[4] F. E. Alvarez, D. Argente, and F. Lippi, “A simple planning problem for
covid-19 lockdown,” tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research,
2020.
[5] P. Walker, C. Whittaker, O. Watson, M. Baguelin, K. Ainslie, S. Bhatia,
S. Bhatt, A. Boonyasiri, O. Boyd, L. Cattarino, et al., “Report 12: The
global impact of covid-19 and strategies for mitigation and suppression,”
2020.
[6] S. Das, P. Ghosh, B. Sen, and I. Mukhopadhyay, “Critical community
size for covid-19–a model based approach to provide a rationale behind
the lockdown,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.03126, 2020.
[7] R. Verity, L. C. Okell, I. Dorigatti, P. Winskill, C. Whittaker, N. Imai,
G. Cuomo-Dannenburg, H. Thompson, P. G. Walker, H. Fu, et al.,
“Estimates of the severity of coronavirus disease 2019: a model-based
analysis,” The Lancet infectious diseases, 2020.
[8] Y. Liu, L.-M. Yan, L. Wan, T.-X. Xiang, A. Le, J.-M. Liu, M. Peiris,
L. L. Poon, and W. Zhang, “Viral dynamics in mild and severe cases of
covid-19,” The Lancet Infectious Diseases, 2020.
[9] Google, Local mobility report, 2020.
[10] S. A. Al-Sheikh, “Modeling and analysis of an seir epidemic model with
a limited resource for treatment,” Global Journal of Science Frontier
Research Mathematics and Decision Sciences, vol. 12, no. 14, pp. 56–
66, 2012.
[11] W. Lyra, J. D. do Nascimento, J. Belkhiria, L. de Almeida, P. P.
Chrispim, and I. de Andrade, “Covid-19 pandemics modeling with seir
(+ caqh), social distancing, and age stratification. the effect of vertical
confinement and release in brazil.,” medRxiv, 2020.
[12] W. C. Roda, M. B. Varughese, D. Han, and M. Y. Li, “Why is it difficult to accurately predict the covid-19 epidemic?,” Infectious Disease
Modelling, 2020.
[13] N. Picchiotti, M. Salvioli, E. Zanardini, and F. Missale, “Covid-19 pandemic: a mobility-dependent seir model with undetected cases in italy,
europe and us,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.08882, 2020.
[14] K. Linka, M. Peirlinck, F. Sahli Costabal, and E. Kuhl, “Outbreak dynamics of covid-19 in europe and the effect of travel restrictions,” Computer Methods in Biomechanics and Biomedical Engineering, pp. 1–8,
2020.

12

[15] L. López and X. Rodo, “A modified seir model to predict the covid-19
outbreak in spain and italy: simulating control scenarios and multi-scale
epidemics,” Available at SSRN 3576802, 2020.
[16] A. Chandak, D. Dey, B. Mukhoty, and P. Kar, “Epidemiologically and
socio-economically optimal policies via bayesian optimization,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2005.11257, 2020.
[17] N. Askitas, K. Tatsiramos, B. Verheyden, et al., “Lockdown strategies,
mobility patterns and covid-19,” tech. rep., Institute of Labor Economics (IZA), 2020.
[18] A. Pan, L. Liu, C. Wang, H. Guo, X. Hao, Q. Wang, J. Huang, N. He,
H. Yu, X. Lin, et al., “Association of public health interventions with the
epidemiology of the covid-19 outbreak in wuhan, china,” Jama, 2020.
[19] Y. Fang, Y. Nie, and M. Penny, “Transmission dynamics of the covid-19
outbreak and effectiveness of government interventions: A data-driven
analysis,” Journal of medical virology, vol. 92, no. 6, pp. 645–659, 2020.
[20] C. Hou, J. Chen, Y. Zhou, L. Hua, J. Yuan, S. He, Y. Guo, S. Zhang,
Q. Jia, C. Zhao, et al., “The effectiveness of quarantine of wuhan city
against the corona virus disease 2019 (covid-19): A well-mixed seir
model analysis,” Journal of medical virology, 2020.
[21] D. W. Berger, K. F. Herkenhoff, and S. Mongey, “An seir infectious
disease model with testing and conditional quarantine,” tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research, 2020.
[22] M. Park, A. R. Cook, J. T. Lim, Y. Sun, and B. L. Dickens, “A systematic review of covid-19 epidemiology based on current evidence,”
Journal of Clinical Medicine, vol. 9, no. 4, p. 967, 2020.
[23] N. M. Ferguson, D. Laydon, G. Nedjati-Gilani, N. Imai, K. Ainslie,
M. Baguelin, S. Bhatia, A. Boonyasiri, Z. Cucunubá, G. CuomoDannenburg, et al., “Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (npis)
to reduce covid-19 mortality and healthcare demand. 2020,” DOI,
vol. 10, p. 77482, 2020.
[24] G. Giordano, F. Blanchini, R. Bruno, P. Colaneri, A. Di Filippo,
A. Di Matteo, and M. Colaneri, “Modelling the covid-19 epidemic
and implementation of population-wide interventions in italy,” Nature
Medicine, pp. 1–6, 2020.
[25] G. E. Weissman, A. Crane-Droesch, C. Chivers, T. Luong, A. Hanish,
M. Z. Levy, J. Lubken, M. Becker, M. E. Draugelis, G. L. Anesi, et al.,
“Locally informed simulation to predict hospital capacity needs during
the covid-19 pandemic,” Annals of internal medicine, 2020.
13

[26] Dlab, COVID19 Geomodeller project Github, 2020.
[27] C. S. M. Barrientos, IndexMundi, 2020.
[28] H. Xiong and H. Yan, “Simulating the infected population and spread
trend of 2019-ncov under different policy by eir model,” Available at
SSRN 3537083, 2020.
[29] Z. Yang, Z. Zeng, K. Wang, S.-S. Wong, W. Liang, M. Zanin, P. Liu,
X. Cao, Z. Gao, Z. Mai, et al., “Modified seir and ai prediction of the
epidemics trend of covid-19 in china under public health interventions,”
Journal of Thoracic Disease, vol. 12, no. 3, p. 165, 2020.
[30] A. A. Toda, “Susceptible-infected-recovered (sir) dynamics of covid-19
and economic impact,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.11221, 2020.

14

