COVID-19: Social Media Sentiment Analysis on Reopening

Mohammed Emtiaz Ahmed, Md Rafiqul Islam Rabin, Farah Naz Chowdhury
Department of Computer Science, University of Houston
mahmed24@uh.edu, mrabin@central.uh.edu, fchowdh2@central.uh.edu

arXiv:2006.00804v1 [cs.SI] 1 Jun 2020

Abstract
The novel coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic
is the most talked topic in social media platforms in 2020. People are using social media
such as Twitter to express their opinion and
share information on a number of issues related to the COVID-19 in this stay at home
order. In this paper, we investigate the sentiment and emotion of peoples in the U.S.A on
the subject of reopening. We choose the social
media platform Twitter for our analysis and
study the Tweets to discover the sentimental
perspective, emotional perspective, and triggering words towards the reopening. During
this COVID-19 pandemic, researchers have
made some analysis on various social media
dataset regarding lockdown and stay at home.
However, in our analysis, we are particularly
interested to analyse public sentiment on reopening. Our major finding is that when all
states resorted to lockdown in March, people
showed dominant emotion of fear, but as reopening starts people have less fear. While this
may be true, due to this reopening phase daily
positive cases are rising compared to the lockdown situation. Overall, people have a less
negative sentiment towards the situation of reopening.

1

Introduction

COVID-19, a new strain of coronavirus, originated
in Wuhan, China in December 2019 (Huang et al.,
2020). On 11th March 2020, the World Health Organization announced the COVID-19 outbreak as a
pandemic. This highly infectious COVID-19 has
crossed boundaries in a speed anybody could have
imagined turning the world upside down. COVID19 has already claimed more than 0.3 million lives,
with around 6 million people infected in more than
200 countries or territories 1 up to May 31, 2020.
1
https://www.who.int/emergencies/
diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/

It has shaken the global economic and social
structure so badly, that resuming normal life is a
thing to envision. As a measure to control the
situation, a number of countries have resorted to
complete lockdown (Mitjà et al., 2020). When the
whole world is COVID-19 stricken, the lockdown
has been the only solution to get a hold (Ghosal
et al., 2020). Since then much of the debate has
been going on how the countries should ease the
lockdown program. As lockdown is not the ultimate solution, easing the restrictions is the only
way to minimize economic loss and keep the society functional. As the whole world is still not free
from the deadly clutch of corona and continuing
to claim human lives, reopen decisions from the
government is a huge step to take. Public sentiment
towards this reopen decision can help policymakers
and general people to better understand the situation through classified information.
This COVID-19 outbreak has not only caused
economic breakdown (Fernandes, 2020) across the
world but also left a great impact on human minds.
To capture human emotions, social media websites
work as one of the best possible sources (De Choudhury and Counts, 2012). It is the fastest way for
people to express themselves and thus the news
feed is flooded with data reflecting thoughts dominating the peoples minds at this time. Apart from
sharing their thoughts, people use these media to
disseminate the information. During this lockdown,
people have taken social networks to express their
feelings and thus find a way to calm themselves
down.
Emotions and sentiments are the driving force
that people are sharing in social media. If we analyze the social media posts then we can find the
insights of those posts along with emotions and sentiments. From this kind of analysis, we may find
what people like, what they want, and what are the
main concerns of them. Twitter has a large number

of daily active users all around the world where people share their thoughts and information regarding
any topic of recent concern through this medium.
It is a searchable archive of human thought. The
affluence of publicly available data shared through
Twitter has encouraged researchers to determine
the sentiments on almost everything, including sentiments towards any product, service. Researchers
and practitioners are already giving useful information on issues related to this COVID-19 outbreak.
We have mainly contributed to the issue of the
reopening phase giving an insight into people’s reactions. Coordination of responses from online
and from the real-world is sure to reveal promising results to address the current crisis. Our major
finding is that during this reopen phase fear among
people is less dominant compared to the previous
times when the states made lockdown decisions.
Another finding is that as the reopen phase starts,
the number of new cases is also increasing. People
are sharing their thoughts and opinions to combat
this situation.

measures. (Barkur et al., 2020) analyzed Twitter
data and found that people of India were positive towards the lockdown decision of their government to
flatten the curve. (Dubey, 2020) made a sentiment
analysis on the tweets related to COVID19 in some
or the other way from March 11 to March 31 on
twelve different countries, USA, Italy, Spain, Germany, China, France, UK, Switzerland, Belgium,
Netherland, and Australia. They found that while
most of the countries are taking a positive attitude
towards this situation, there is also negative emotion such as fear, sadness present among people.
Countries specially France, Switzerland, Netherlands, and the United States of America have shown
distrust and anger more frequently compared to
other countries. (Rajput et al., 2020) Made a statistical analysis of Twitter data posted during this Coronavirus outbreak. The number of tweet ids tweeting about coronavirus rose rapidly making several
peaks during February and March. An empirical
analysis of words in the messages showed that the
most frequent words were Coronavirus, Covid19,
and Wuhan. The immense number of tweet messages within a period of 2-3 months and the frequency of these words clearly show the threats
the global population is exposed to. (Abd-Alrazaq
et al., 2020) Aimed to identify the main topics
posted by Twitter users related to the COVID-19
pandemic between February 2, 2020, and March
15, 2020. Users on Twitter discussed 12 main topics related to COVID-19 that were grouped into
four main themes, 1) the origin of the virus; 2) its
sources; 3) its impact on people, countries, and
the economy that were represented by six topics:
deaths, fear, and stress, travel bans and warnings,
economic losses, panic, increased racism, and 4)
the last theme was ways of mitigating the risk of
infection. (Cinelli et al., 2020) ran a comparative analysis of five different social media platforms Twitter, Instagram, YouTube, Reddit, and
Gab about information diffusion about COVID19. They wanted to investigate how information
is spread during any critical moment. Their analysis suggests that information spread depends on
the interaction pattern of users engaged with the
topic rather than how reliable the information is.
(Samuel and Ali) Identified public sentiment using
coronavirus specific tweets and provided insights
on how fear sentiment evolved over time specially
when COVID-19 hit the peak levels in the United
States. As they classified tweets using sentiment

Contributions. This paper makes the following
contributions.
• First, we generate the word cloud and N-gram
representation of tweets to see the insights of
twitter users during the reopening phase (more
details in section 5.1).
• Second, we conduct a shallow analysis to
study the sentiment and the emotion in reopening related tweets (more details in section 5.2
and section 5.3).
• Third, we analyze the actual effects of lockdown and reopening using real data (more
details in section 5.4).
• Finally, we have made our code publicly available for an extensible work in similar areas.
The structure of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a literature review and
some considerations of the previous work. Section 3 contains the information of dataset. Section 4
describes the experimental setup to analysis the reopening tweet. Section 5 provides an analysis of
the results and findings. Section 6 discusses some
of the challenges and threats to validity. Finally,
Section 7 concludes the paper with future works.

2

Related Work

Researchers all around the world are analyzing
Twitter data to discover people’s reactions to the
corona virus related issues such as lockdown, safety
2

• US-reopen: In section 5.1 - 5.3, we first filtered tweets by locations (States of US) and
then selected tweets having word ‘reopen’.
• Stopwords and Gazetteers: In section 5.1 for
most frequent words, we removed words from
tweets that are found in the Python NLTK
stopwords and gazetteers corpus 4 .
We also split the tweets into a list of words
using the Python NLTK TweetTokenizer, and
represent different forms of words to a single
word using the Python NLTK WordNetLemmatizer (Loper and Bird, 2002).
• Multi-line Tweet: In section 5.2 for emotion
analysis, we converted the multi-line tweet
into a single-line tweet in order to use the
corresponding APIs.

analysis, the fear sentiment, which was the most
dominant emotion across the entire tweets and by
the end of march its seriousness became clearly
evident as the fear curve showed a steep rise.

3

Dataset

We used data from multiple sources. The primary source of this analysis is the social platform
Twitter. We used the Python library Tweepy 2
(Roesslein, 2009) and Twitter developers API 3 for
collecting the tweet data from Twitter. We used
a unique Twitter dataset, which is specifically collected for this study using a date range from May 3,
2020, to May 15, 2020. Tweets were extracted
using the hashtags: #covid19, #covid, #corona,
#coronaviras, #corona-virus, #covid19-virus, and
#sarscov2. We collected a total of 5,703,590 tweets
from Twitter. In addition, we collected the COVID19 time-series dataset from the GitHub repository
CSSEGISandData/COVID-19 (Dong et al., 2020),
maintained by the amazing team at Johns Hopkins University Center for Systems Science and
Engineering (CSSE). It contains country and statewise daily new cases, recovered and death data of
COVID-19.

4.2

Sentiment Analysis

In this section, we will describe the data preprocessing, and the experimental setup for sentiment
and emotion analysis.

We used the Python library TextBlob (Loria,
2018) for finding the sentiments from tweets. In
TextBlob, sentiments of tweets are analyzed in
two perspectives: (1) Polarity and (2) Subjectivity.
Based on tweets, this library returns the polarity
score and subjectivity score. Polarity score is float
value within the range [-1 to 1] where 0 indicates
Neutral sentiments, the positive score represents
Positive sentiments and the negative score represents Negative sentiments. Subjectivity score is
also a float value within the range [0 to 1] where 0
indicates that it is a Fact and other values indicate
the public opinions.

4.1

4.3

4

Methodology

Data Preprocessing

We used the Python implementation of IBM Watson Tone Analyzer service 5 to detect emotional
tones in tweets. The ToneAnalyses API uses
the general-purpose endpoint to analyze the emotional tones of a tweet and reports the following
seven tones: analytical, tentative, confident, joy,
fear, sadness, and anger. The emotion detection
process is summarized as following steps:

The data we used from the Twitter post between
May 3-15, 2020 is noisy and unstructured text in
nature. Therefore, we applied the following preprocessing steps to clean the raw tweet.
• URL and Email: Removing URLs and emails
from tweets using regular expression.
• Mention and Tagging: Removing mentions
(@ symbol and word after @ symbol) and
hashtags (only # symbol) from tweets using
regular expression.
• Noisy Words: Removing irrelevant words (i.e.
RT, &amp;) after manual inspection, and stripping non-ASCII characters from the tweet.
• Newline and Whitespace: Removing newlines
and extra whitespaces from tweets.
2
3

Emotion Analysis

• Create a Tone Analyzer service in IBM Cloud
for a specific region and API plan.
• Get the API key, the service endpoint URL,
and the version of API.
• Authenticate to the API using IBM Cloud
Identity and Access Management (IAM).
4
https://www.nltk.org/api/nltk.corpus.
html
5
https://cloud.ibm.com/apidocs/
tone-analyzer?code=python

https://github.com/tweepy/tweepy
https://developer.twitter.com/en/docs

3

(b)

(a)

Figure 1: Word Cloud Representations. These are the visual representations of words within tweets whose
importance is visualized by way of their size. (a) word cloud representation of the overall dataset, (b) word cloud
representation of reopen related tweets within the United States.

• Request up to 100 sentences (no more than
128 KB size in total) for the sentence-level
tone analysis.
• Parse the JSON responses that provide the
results for each sentence of the tweet.

used in reopen related tweets. Figure 1b represents
only the reopen related most frequent words within
the United States. We can see that ‘businesses’,
‘schools’, ‘gyms’, ‘economy’, and ‘protesters’ are
the most frequently used words. Few tweets are
‘Protesting to reopen the economy’, ‘reopen the
economy against shelter in place which is a false
choice’, ‘As schools make plans to reopen after
#COVID19 shutdowns, how should we proceed?’,
‘Any rush to reopen without adequate testing and
tracing will cause a resurgence.’, ‘As we reopen
shuttered offices and buildings, there is a danger of
an outbreak of Legionnaire disease’. From these
few tweets, we can see that few people are protesting to reopen, but most of the people are concerned
about the reopening timing, aftermath of reopening,
and thinking about the precaution measures needed
after reopening.

Here for our analysis, the ToneAnalyses requires a tweet as a single sentence for detecting
sentence-level emotional tones.

5

Results and Analysis

In this paper, we seek to answer the following research questions.
•
•
•
•

RQ1:
RQ2:
RQ3:
RQ4:

5.1
5.1.1

What are the most frequent words?
What are the trends of sentiment?
What are the trends of emotion?
What are the effects of reopening?

RQ1: Most Frequent Words
5.1.2

Word Cloud Representation

N-gram Representation

We searched for the most frequent words that appeared in twitter posts of our collected data. For
this section, we only considered actual tweets and
ignored all kinds of re-tweets from our dataset. After applying the preprocessing steps mentioned in
section 4.1, we also removed hashtags and nonalphabetic characters from tweets. We split the rest
of the tweet into chunks of n consecutive words.
Next, we merged the chunks of all tweets as a flat
list, where n ∈ [1, 2, 3]. After that, we count the
frequency of each unique chunk and sorted those
by frequency. The top 15 most frequent chunks,
known as n-gram, are shown in Table 1.
From Table 1, we can see that the ‘business’,
‘economy’, ‘back’, and ‘need’ clearly indicate the

The tweets were organized into word clouds to analyze which words have been frequently used by
Twitter users around the world. As word cloud visualization consists of the size and visual emphasis
of words being weighted by their frequency of occurrence in the textual corpus, we can get insights
from the most frequent words occurring. From
figure 1a, we can see that along with the words
‘COVID’, ‘corona’, or ‘virus’, words like ‘new’,
and ‘cases’ got a large number of mentions. No
wonder the rising number of new cases everyday
around the world contribute to the good number
of mentions of these words. Our main goal is to
see the effect of reopening in our analysis that’s
why we also investigate the most frequent words
4

1-gram
state
business
plan
economy
people
today
back
case
testing
country
need
phase
county
restaurant
week

2-gram
testing site
social distancing
white house
state begin
small business
look like
public health
stay home
back work
wear mask
hair salon
next week
task force
business begin
contact tracing

3-gram
drivethru testing site
moderate discussion business
discussion business leader
keep calling transparency
calling transparency investigation
transparency investigation fort
stock fluctuated economic
fluctuated economic plan
economic plan mixed
plan mixed earnings
mixed earnings company
training class course
class course offer
course offer full
offer full service

showed that towards the end of March the ‘Fear’
emotion was the most dominant among all emotions and hit a peak. But after the announcement
of the lockdown easement program people had less
fear.
From figure 2b, we can see that, during May 1315, ‘Anger’, ‘Sadness’ and ‘Analytical’ had high
peaks. The rest emotional tones ‘Confident’, ‘Joy’,
‘Tentative’, and ‘Fear’ had a steady curve during
the time period of our data collection.
5.3

Sentiment analysis identies words contextual polarity and subjectivity. We used Python library
TextBlob (Loria, 2018) for sentiment analysis.
The details of TextBlob is available in section 4.
Fig. 3 represents the details of twitter sentiments.
Fig. 3a corresponds to the barplot of sentiment
polarities of tweets and Fig. 3b corresponds to the
daily counts of polarities. It can be seen that the majority of tweets have a neutral sentiment (43.66%)
followed by positive (39.89%) sentiments. Also,
the daily trend of positive and negative tweets follows the same pattern. So, people are taking the
reopen decision positively. Fig. 3c indicates that
people are mostly posting their own opinion and
Fig. 3d shows an interesting point that day by day
people are posting their own opinion rather than
facts.

Table 1: Top-15 N-grams (US-reopen).

economic breakdown and necessity to overcome
this situation through reopen. The ‘plan’, ‘case’,
‘testing’, and ‘phase’ surely emphasize the safety
measures that need to be followed while reopening as a control measure. The ‘state’ and ‘people’
surely stands for how all states beginning to reopen
in some way.
From 2-grams, the ‘social distancing’, ‘stay
home’, ‘wear mask’, and ‘contact tracing’ imply
users try to raise awareness through their posts.
The ‘testing site’, ‘public health’, and ‘task force’
imply the safety measures people and policymakers
should abide by to curb the spread during the reopen situation. The ‘state begin’, ‘small business’,
‘back work’, and ‘business begin’ indicate as people are going to resume their work after states are
reopening.
From 3-grams, the economic breakdown, stockmarket fluctuation, business plan, and training
course are the topic that draws our attention. This
surely indicates there were numerous posts about
how the loss due to this pandemic can be overcome
through the strategy of the people who are in charge
of the decisions.
5.2

RQ3: Sentiment Analysis

5.4

RQ4: Effect of Reopen

We saw that many peoples are protesting for reopening states and countries. We also saw it in
Fig. 1b. We investigated the reopening effect in
the United States. Fig. 4(a) and (b), shows that
after reopening the new COVID19 cases are increasing. On the other hand, Fig. 4(c) and (d),
shows that lockdown helps to reduce the number
of new COVID19 cases. Lockdown also helps to
reduce the new cases in other countries (Lau et al.,
2020). It would be better if the lockdown continues
for few more days or if the states or country decide
to reopen, then they can take proper precautions before the reopen and people need to strictly maintain
the instructions from health organizations.

RQ2: Emotion Analysis

From figure 2a, we can see that the highest percentage of emotional tone is ‘Analytical’(34.7%). The
second highest tone was ‘Joy’(17.35%). The next
few tones are ‘Tentative’, ‘Sadness’, and ‘Confident’, respectively. ‘Anger’ and ‘Fear’ had the
lowest percentage in our data collection.
The ‘Analytical’ tone implies that people shared
information and their constructive thoughts through
their posts. ‘Joy’ implies that people showed a positive attitude towards the situation. (Samuel and Ali)

6

Threats to Validity

The followings are the main challenges and threats
to the validity of our study.
Limited Data. We only conducted a shallow analysis of the twitter post from May 3, 2020 to May
5

(b)

(a)

Figure 2: Emotional Distribution. (a) tweet percentages of different kinds of emotional tones (b) daily tweet
percentages of different kinds of emotional tones.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 3: Sentiment Distribution. (a) tweet percentages of different kinds of sentiments (b) daily tweet counts of
different kinds of sentiments (c) distribution of subjectivity types and (d) daily tweet counts of different kinds of
subjectivity.

15, 2020. Therefore, our results may not reflect the
actual effect. We leave the large scale evaluation as
future work.

ing is challenging and important as it has a direct
impact on the analysis.
Internal Validity. We used some open source
toolchains in this paper and some issues may exist
in those APIs. However, to reduce the issue in our
implementation, other collaborators reviewed the
code and manually inspected some results.

Noisy Data. The dataset contains posts from social
media (i.e. Twitter) that are noisy and unstructured.
Having mis-spelling and unknown words are also
common in the post. Additionally, the dataset contains other languages but written using the English
alphabet that can negatively impact the analysis.
There are many posts whose length is very small
(i.e. around 3 words). Therefore, dataset clean-

7

Conclusion

In this work, we try to get insights into public reaction as the reopen phase starts. There has been
6

Figure 4: Effect of reopen. This figure represents the daily confirmed cases from 4 different states of the United
States. We used two kinds of shaded regions to indicate the lockdown and reopen times: red shaded area represents
the lockdown period, and the green shaded area represents the reopen period.

some analysis from social media data about how
people are reacting in the lockdown time. We make
an effort to understand whether there is a change

in public sentiment from the lockdown phase to
the reopen phase. We have made our analysis on
Twitter data on reopening related issues during this

7

COVID-19 outbreak. From our analysis, we have
found that even though people are showing a positive attitude to reopen their areas to make the economy functional, they are also urging the authority
in concern to make plans for avoiding the highly
predictable second wave. From real data, we have
seen that the new cases are increasing as the reopen
phase starts. Given this situation, the coordination
of responses from online and from the real world
is sure to reveal promising results to address the
current crisis. We want to put stress on the fact that
along with traditional public health surveillance,
infoveillance studies can play a vital role.
Source Code. We have released the source
code for public dissemination and can be found
at https://github.com/emtiaz-ahmed/COVID19Twitter-Reopen.

Nuno Fernandes. 2020. Economic effects of coronavirus outbreak (covid-19) on the world economy.
Available at SSRN 3557504.
Samit Ghosal, Rahul Bhattacharyya, and Milan Majumder. 2020. Impact of complete lockdown on total infection and death rates: A hierarchical cluster
analysis. Diabetes & Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical
Research & Reviews.
Chaolin Huang, Yeming Wang, Xingwang Li, Lili
Ren, Jianping Zhao, Yi Hu, Li Zhang, Guohui Fan, Jiuyang Xu, Xiaoying Gu, et al. 2020.
Clinical features of patients infected with 2019
novel coronavirus in wuhan, china. The lancet,
395(10223):497–506.
Hien Lau, Veria Khosrawipour, Piotr Kocbach, Agata
Mikolajczyk, Justyna Schubert, Jacek Bania, and
Tanja Khosrawipour. 2020. The positive impact
of lockdown in wuhan on containing the covid19 outbreak in china. Journal of travel medicine,
27(3):taaa037.

References

Edward Loper and Steven Bird. 2002. Nltk: The natural language toolkit. In In Proceedings of the ACL
Workshop on Effective Tools and Methodologies for
Teaching Natural Language Processing and Computational Linguistics. Philadelphia: Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Alaa Abd-Alrazaq, Dari Alhuwail, Mowafa Househ,
Mounir Hamdi, and Zubair Shah. 2020.
Top
concerns of tweeters during the covid-19 pandemic: Infoveillance study. J Med Internet Res,
22(4):e19016.

Steven Loria. 2018. textblob documentation. Release
0.15, 2.

Gopalkrishna Barkur, Vibha, and Giridhar B. Kamath.
2020. Sentiment analysis of nationwide lockdown
due to covid 19 outbreak: Evidence from india.
Asian Journal of Psychiatry, 51.

Oriol Mitjà, Àlex Arenas, Xavier Rodó, Aurelio Tobias, Joe Brew, and José M Benlloch. 2020. Experts request to the spanish government: move
spain towards complete lockdown. The Lancet,
395(10231):1193–1194.

Matteo Cinelli, Walter Quattrociocchi, Alessandro
Galeazzi, Carlo Michele Valensise, Emanuele Brugnoli, Ana Lucia Schmidt, Paola Zola, Fabiana Zollo,
and Antonio Scala. 2020. The covid-19 social media
infodemic.

Nikhil Kumar Rajput, Bhavya Ahuja Grover, and
Vipin Kumar Rathi. 2020. Word frequency and sentiment analysis of twitter messages during coronavirus pandemic.

Munmun De Choudhury and Scott Counts. 2012. The
nature of emotional expression in social media: measurement, inference and utility. Human Computer
Interaction Consortium (HCIC).

Joshua Roesslein. 2009. tweepy documentation. Online] http://tweepy. readthedocs. io/en/v3, 5.

Ensheng Dong, Hongru Du, and Lauren Gardner. 2020.
An interactive web-based dashboard to track covid19 in real time. The Lancet infectious diseases,
20(5):533–534.

J. Samuel and M.M.; Esawi E.; Samuel Y. Ali,
G.G.M.N.; Rahman. Covid-19 public sentiment insights and machine learning for tweets classification.

Akash Dutt Dubey. 2020. Twitter sentiment analysis
during covid-19 outbreak.

8

