The Impact of COVID-19 on Flight Networks
*Toyotaro Suzumura∗ , *Hiroki Kanezashi† , Mishal Dholakia‡ , Euma Ishii§ ,
Sergio Alvarez Napagao∗ , Raquel Pérez-Arnal∗ Dario Garcia-Gasulla∗ and Toshiaki Murofushi†

arXiv:2006.02950v3 [cs.SI] 14 Feb 2021

∗ Barcelona

Supercomputing Center
suzumura@acm.org, sergio.alvarez@bsc.es, raquel.perez@bsc.es, dario.garcia@bsc.es
† Tokyo Institute of Technology
kanezashi.h.aa@m.titech.ac.jp, murofusi@c.titech.ac.jp
‡ IBM
mishal.dholakia1@ibm.com
§ Massachusetts Institute of Technology
euma@mit.edu
¶ Tokyo Medical and Dental University
152011ms@tmd.ac.jp

Abstract—As COVID-19 transmissions spread worldwide, governments have announced and enforced travel restrictions to
prevent further infections. Such restrictions have a direct effect
on the volume of international flights among these countries,
resulting in extensive social and economic costs. To better
understand the situation in a quantitative manner, we used
the OpenSky Network data to clarify flight patterns and flight
densities around the world and observe relationships between
flight numbers with new infections, and with the economy
(unemployment rate) in Barcelona. We found that the number
of daily flights gradually decreased and suddenly dropped 64%
during the second half of March in 2020 after the US and
Europe enacted travel restrictions. We also observed a 51%
decrease in the global flight network density decreased during
this period. Regarding new COVID-19 cases, the world had
an unexpected surge regardless of travel restrictions. Finally,
the layoffs for temporary workers in the tourism and airplane
business increased by 4.3 fold in the weeks following Spain’s
decision to close its borders.

I. I NTRODUCTION
A. Background
As COVID-19 transmissions spread worldwide, governments announced and enforced both domestic and international
travel restrictions. These restrictions affected the trend of
flight networks around the world such as major airlines [1]
and tourism-dependent cities [2]. All or a portion of flights
connecting these restricted countries and areas were cancelled.
The date of travel restriction enforcement varies by country,
therefore the period and degree of flight reductions also vary
by country and continents.
B. Overview
We quantitatively investigated how flight restrictions affect
domestic and international travel in countries and continents
through time-series analytics and graph algorithms. We also
investigated the negative effect of these restrictions on employment and the number of infected cases in Barcelona, where
the majority of revenue depends on the travel industry.
*Toyotaro Suzumura and Hiroki Kanezashi contributed equally to this work.

The structure of this paper is as follows; In Section II, we
introduce the flight dataset which we used for our analysis.
We compared the dataset with other flight datasets and discussed the limitations and potential biases. In Section III,
we summarize the statistical analytics of airport and flight
data by country and continent. In Section IV, we analyze
the number of daily flights globally as well as by region
(continent and country level), and discuss the relationship
between government announcements and the decline of flights.
In Section V, we visualize flight networks and apply graph
analytic techniques to the network to evaluate the quantitative
impacts on travelers. We examine economic effects on travel
restrictions and cities depending on tourism industries from
the public data from Barcelona in Section VI, and we evaluate
the relationship between incoming flights from Europe and the
number of new infection cases in the United States in Section
VII. Finally, we discuss our findings, limitations and related
work in Section VIII, and explain the summary and future
perspectives of our research in Section IX.
II. M ETHODS
A. Methods and Algorithms
In order to evaluate the effect of travel restrictions on the
flights, we conducted the following analyses step by step.
First, we summarized the total number of airports, flights
and potential passengers for each country and continent from
an open dataset. Next, we counted up the number of daily
flights for countries and continents, and compared the period
of the flight reductions and the date of the travel restriction
enforcement. In order to evaluate the density of the flight network quantitatively, we also applied graph analytics methods
to the time-series flight data. Finally, we analyzed time-series
data sets about the number of incoming flights, number of
infected cases and unemployment in Barcelona [3], where
tourism industries is a main revenue source, and hypothesized
the correlation among these data.

B. The OpenSky Network Dataset
For time-series flight analytics, we used an open dataset [4]
from The OpenSky Network [5]. The dataset contains flight
records with departure and arrival times, airport codes (origin
and destination), and aircraft types. The dataset includes the
following flight information during 2020 January 1 to April 30.
The dataset for a particular month is made available during the
beginning of the following month. Note that the year of all of
the following dates is 2020. In total, our dataset is composed
by:
• 655,605 (35%) international flights
• 1,213,100 (65%) domestic flights
• 616 major airports covering 148 countries (out of 195
world countries)

therefore these continents were excluded from the following
sections.

III. S TATISTICAL A NALYSIS OF F LIGHT DATA
A. Distribution of the Number of Airports
We extracted flight data regarding 616 primary airports from
148 countries. Figure 1 describes the number of major airports
per continent and country. Currently, approximately 33% of
the world’s airports belong in North America and 170 airports
(27.6%) in the United States. 27% (166) and 26% (162) belong
to Asia and Europe respectively, and China (5.7%) and the
United Kingdom (4.4%) have the highest number of airports
within each continent.

Fig. 2. Number of Departed Flights per Continent and Country

C. Number of Potential Passengers
The OpenSky Network Dataset does not contain the final
number of passengers for each flight. However, since the data
contained each aircraft type used, we used this to estimate
the number of passengers for each trip. Since the information
regarding the flights were extracted from the capacity data of
each aircraft type from their respective Wikipedia pages [6],
we aim to obtain more accurate information on aircraft types
and their capabilities for our future analysis.
The proportion of international passengers travelling from
Asia was approximately 31.2% of all passengers, and the
number of flights were 23.5% of overall flights. On the
other hand, the total number of passengers of international
flights within Europe is about 46.5% while the proportion of
international flights outside of Europe is 55.5%. The gap of
proportions between passengers and flights comes from the
difference in capacities of the aircraft.
IV. D ESCRIPTIVE A NALYSIS OF T IME - SERIES F LIGHT
DATA

Fig. 1. Number of Major Airports per Continent and Country

B. Number of Flights per Area and Country
Figure 2 describes the total number of flights from January
1 to April 30 2020 for each continent and country. More than
half of flights in this dataset departed from Europe. 10% of
international flights departed from Germany (10%) and the
United States (10.7%). In Asia, Hong Kong, the United Arab
Emirates, and Singapore had the highest number of flights
(2.9%, 2.6%, and 2.2% respectively), yet there were very
few flights connecting to China. The number of flights in
South America, Africa, and Oceania were too small to analyze,

A. Overview
Announcements and enforcement regarding lockdowns (border closures and travel restrictions, etc.) were implemented to
slow the rate of transmissions and prevent overburdening of
health facilities. The date of implementation, length, and extent
vary by country. In the US, the Secretary of Health and Human
Services declared a public health emergency on January 31
[7]. The US government suspended incoming flights from
Europe (Schengen Area) on March 14 [8], and closed the
border between the US and Canada on March 18 [9]. Germany
closed borders with neighboring countries on March 16 [10].
Countries in the European Union agreed to reinforce border
closures and restrict non-essential travels from March 17 [11]

onwards. In this section, we show the changes in the number
of daily flights in each region, and discuss the correlations
between travel restrictions and the number of flights in each
country.
B. Overall International Flights
Figure 3 describes the number of daily international flights
in the world. Before the end of February, the daily number of
international flights was approximately 8,000. However, the
number of daily flights gradually decreased to 6,000 by early
March and then drastically dropped to less than 1,000 (around
10% of regular seasons) by the end of March.

D. Continental Flights
Figure 5 describes the number of continental flights within
each continent. In Europe, more than 3,000 flights were
operating per day until the beginning of March, but dropped
to 10% of the regular number of flights from mid March
to the end of March. In Asia, the number of flights has
gradually decreased from February. In North America, the
number of flights was steady until mid-March, before dropping
significantly.

Fig. 5. Number of Daily International Flights per Continent

Fig. 3. Total Number of Daily Departed International Flights

C. Inter-continental Flights
Figure 4 describes the number of intercontinental flights
that departed from each continent. Inter-continental flights
from Europe, Asia, and North America drastically decreased
from March 13 as many flights were canceled. The decrease
probably reflects the declaration of pandemic by WHO on
March 11 and national emergency in the United States on
March 13.

In Europe, the UK, Ireland, and Germany had the highest
number of flight passengers [12]. In Germany, international
flights decreased from the beginning of March and then
dropped after the nation closed its borders on March 16 (Figure
6). This reflected the EU’s agreement to ban incoming travel
from areas outside the EU, UK, and Switzerland on March
17.
Most of the continental flights had been operating in North
America (the US in particular) until mid-March and half
number of these flights in the Beginning of January are still
in operation today (Figure 7). On the other hand, the number
of flights in Asia, Europe, and Oceania have dropped to less
than 20% to that of January 1.
E. Domestic and International Flights in the United States

Fig. 4. Total Number of Daily Departed Inter-continental Flights per Continent

In the US, the number of domestic flights suddenly dropped
from mid-March. However, roughly 50% of all regular flights
were still in operation on March 31 (Figure 8), although the
US government and airlines planned to ban or reduce flights
by that point [13]. In April, the number of flights gradually
declined but 30% of regular flights were still in operation.
The number of flights from European countries to the
US suddenly dropped after March 14 (Figure 9). The US
suspended incoming travel from Europe (Schengen area) from
March 13. In the overall number of international flights, the
primary destination from the US is Canada (green lines in
Figure 10). The number of daily flights between the US and
Canada gradually decreased after these governments agreed to
close their border on March 18.

Fig. 8. Number of Domestic Flights in the United States

Fig. 6. Number of Daily Flights from the United Kingdom and Germany to
Other European Countries

Fig. 9. Number of Flights Between the United States and European Countries
Fig. 7. Number of Daily International Flights from the United States in North
America

V. G RAPH A NALYTICS ON THE F LIGHT N ETWORK
A. Overview
F. Key Takeaways
We analyzed the number of daily flights for each country
and continent, and compared the relationship between the date
of travel restrictions and the decline of flights. We found
that many international flights suddenly declined during the
middle of March. In Europe, the number of flights dropped to
about 10% of regular seasons after the EU agreed to restrict
incoming travels on March 17. In the US, approximately half
of all domestic flights were still in operation even at the end
of March.

With travel restrictions, the global flight network gradually
became more sparse, which prevented travelers from:
1) Using direct flights to their destinations
2) Returning to their origin once they depart from the
airport
3) Departing from their current location due to absence of
flights in nearby airports
By constructing daily flight networks, we quantitatively
evaluated these effects through graph analytics. Each vertex
and edge represent an airport and a flight, respectively.

B. Connecting Airports and Flights
In regular times, many flights (edges in the flight network)
connect from the airport (vertices in the flight network) to
the airport. That helps travelers to get to more destinations
with fewer transfers. However, travel restrictions prevent them
from using direct flights and getting to their destinations. To
measure the effect quantitatively, we computed the following
metrics for each airport and each date (Figure 13).
1) Number of flights (edges) from the airport
2) Number of 1-hop neighboring airports from the airport
(the number of reachable destinations with a nonstop
flight)
3) Number of 1,2-hop neighboring airports from the airport
(the number of reachable destinations with a single
connecting flight)

Fig. 10. Number of Flights Between the United States and top-10 Countries
Fig. 13. Number of Flights and Neighboring Airports from the Airport A

1) Distribution of the number of neighboring airports and
flights (degree and neighborhood distributions)
2) Strongly connected component (SCC) extraction
3) Isolated vertex extraction
In the construction of flight networks, we aggregated multiple flights with the same origin and destination and date into
a single weighted edge in the flight network construction like
Figure 11. The edge weight is the total number of flights.

The color and size of each vertex in Figure 14 - 19 indicate
the number of departed flights from the airport. From midMarch to the beginning of April, many flights were gradually
canceled, except for domestic flights in the United States and
international flights between the United States and Europe.
The number of flights in Europe suddenly decreased from
March 16 (the day before EU countries closed borders) to
March 23. In April, only a few flights were operating and
many airports became isolated.
In North America, most of the flights in North America
were operating between the United States and Canada. In the
United States, most of the domestic flights were operating as
usual, even at the end of April.
C. Density and Clustering Coefficient

Fig. 11. Flight Edge Aggregations by Date

While multiple flights are in operation every day, not all
flights are operated every day (e.g., three days a week). To
detect long-term trends more precisely, we also aggregated
flight edges by week as an optional preprocessing (Figure 12).

Fig. 12. Flight Edge Aggregations by Week

With denser flight networks, travelers can reach more destinations. As the barometer of the flight network density, we
computed the following metrics.
Density: The ratio of the actual number of edges after aggregation against the number of edges of the complete graph.
Clustering Coefficient: The ratio of the total number of
triangles against the total number of triplets (connected three
vertices). This is mainly used for social network analytics to
measure the connectivity of friendships.
The density (red lines in Figure 20 - 22) of the global flight
network rapidly decreased by half during March 8 to April 1.
In Europe, drastic decreases in the flight network density was
similar to that of the global network, and fell to approximately
17% of the peak. In the US on the other hand, the density
gradually decreased, yet only by 20%. From March 13, the

Fig. 16. Flight Network in Europe on January 1

Fig. 14. Global Flight Network on January 1

Fig. 17. Flight Network in Europe on April 1

closures), and the number of isolated airports tripled. In the US
on the other hand, the largest SCC size and isolated airports are
almost stable (80 and 100 respectively). Although the largest
SCC size gradually decreased from March 13 to April 6, the
rate of the overall decrease is only about 10%.
E. Diameter and Radius of Flight Network
Fig. 15. Global Flight Network on April 1

clustering coefficient (blue lines) of the global flight network
gradually decreased by half in the next two weeks. In Europe,
it rapidly declined to about a quarter in the same period. In
the US, the decline of the clustering coefficient is only about
10% at the end of April.
D. Strongly Connected Component and Isolated Airports
In regular seasons, travelers departing from any airport can
typically go to any destination and return to their airport
of origin. This is due to flight networks being a strongly
connected component (SCC), within which travelers can go
from/to any airports in the same SCC. With travel restrictions,
however, many flights were canceled and the large SCC (blue
circle in Figure 23) has decomposed into smaller SCCs (yellow
and green circles in Figure 23). In the result, travelers cannot:
1) Go to other airports outside local flight networks
2) Return to their origin (a red edge from E to D)
3) Depart from isolated airports (a red vertex)
In the global flight network, the size of the largest SCC
(red line) decreased by 30% from March 13 (300) to April 6
(210), and the number of isolated airports (blue line) increased
by 30% (from 310 to 400). In Europe, the largest SCC size
on April 7 was less than half of March 10 (before border

When many flights are canceled, more transfers are required
for travellers to reach the destinations compared to regular
seasons. In order to measure the number of required transfers,
we applied a graph analysis to compute eccentricity (the maximum distance from a specified vertex to all other connected
vertices) of the flight network. An eccentricity of an airport
vertex corresponds to the number of required transfers to other
destinations in the worst case. With travel restrictions, the
diameter (the maximum value of eccentricities) and the radius
(the minimum value of eccentricities) of the flight network
become larger.
The diameter (red line in Figure 28 - 30), radius (blue line),
and average eccentricity (green line) of the largest SCC size
(black line) in the global flight network increased from April.
In the flight network in Europe, diameter and radius rapidly
increased from March 16 in two weeks. The overall flight
network’s trend in the US did not change until the end of
April.
F. Flight Edge Weight and Density
Although a number of flights still exist among most of
the airports, the flight frequency has gradually decreased. To
measure the decline of flight frequencies, we defined the
“relative weight” for each flight edge (pair of vertices as
connected airports) and network density with the weighted
edges.

Fig. 18. Flight Network in North America on January 1

Fig. 19. Flight Network in North America on April 1

Fig. 21. Density (red line) and Clustering Coefficient (blue line) of the Flight
Network in Europe

Fig. 22. Density (red line) and Clustering Coefficient (blue line) of the Flight
Network in the United States

edges.
The blue and red lines in Figure 32 - 34 represent the density
of the daily flight network with the unweighted/weighted flight
edges. The density of the whole flight network with weighted
edges in Europe dropped to almost zero in April.
In the US, the density with weighted edges has dropped
from 0.025 to 0.005 in March. Although the topology of the
flight network remains unchanged, the frequency of domestic
flights in the US significantly decreased as seen in other

Fig. 20. Density (red line) and Clustering Coefficient (blue line) of the Global
Flight Network

First, we computed the moving average of the number of
daily flights for each pair of vertices, and then computed the
ratio of the total number of flights in a week against the
baseline of the specified week (January 12 - January 18),
before defining the ratio as the relative weight of the edge.
Besides the topological density described in V-C, we computed
the density of the whole flight network with the weighted

Fig. 23. An Example of SCC Decompositions of Flight Networks

Fig. 27. An Example of the Average Eccentricity, Diameter and Radius

Fig. 24. Largest SCC Size (red line) and the Number of Isolated Airports
(blue line) of the Global Flight Network

Fig. 28. Diameter (red line) and Radius (blue line) of the Global Flight
Network

indicated that the flight networks in the overall world and
Europe became more sparse in March. We also defined the
”weighted” flight network density considering the frequency
of flights, and showed the flight network in the United States
also became more sparse from the mid of March to the mid
of April.
Fig. 25. Largest SCC Size (red line) and the Number of Isolated Airports
(blue line) of the Flight Network in Europe

VI. I MPACT ON THE T RAVEL I NDUSTRY IN BARCELONA
continents.

We applied some graph analytics to the flight data in order
to evaluate the density of flight networks. Many graph metrics
such as density, maximum SCC size, and diameter remarkably

Travel restrictions have a large impact on travel industries
and tourism-dependent countries. In this section, we investigate the correlation and causal association between the decline
of incoming flights, the number of infection cases, and the
unemployment in Barcelona.

Fig. 26. Largest SCC Size (red line) and the Number of Isolated Airports
(blue line) of the Flight Network in the United States

Fig. 29. Diameter (red line) and Radius (blue line) of the Europe Flight
Network

G. Key Takeaways

Fig. 30. Diameter (red line) and Radius (blue line) of the United States Flight
Network

Fig. 33. Density of Flight Network in Europe with Unweighted (Blue) and
Weighted (Red) Flight Edges

Fig. 31. An Example of Weighted Flight Edges

A. Incoming Flight Reductions in Barcelona
According to the unemployment dataset [14], the number of
affected temporary workers (red line in Figure 35) gradually
declined in April after it suddenly increased on Match 24. The
number of flights (blue line) arriving in Barcelona gradually
decreased until the beginning of April. These numbers seem
to have some correlations, but more investigation is required
to understand the causality and relationship between these
numbers.
B. Unemployment and New Infection Cases in Barcelona
The number of flights to Barcelona (blue line in Figure
36) has been decreasing since the beginning of March, and
suddenly halved on March 16 just before Spain closed its
borders [15]. Then, the number of affected temporary workers

Fig. 34. Density of Flight Network in the United States with Unweighted
(Blue) and Weighted (Red) Flight Edges

(red line) suddenly increased by 4.3 times (from 15,901 on
March 23 to 68,170 on March 25). It is notable that the dataset
regarding the number of affected workers became available
from March 23. The number of new infection cases in Spain
(orange line) gradually increased from March 12 and peaked
at almost 10,000 on March 25.
C. Flights to Barcelona and New Infection Cases in the Major
Origin Countries
Approximately half of all flights to Barcelona (BCN) come
from France, Germany, and the UK. The government of

Fig. 32. Density of Global Flight Network with Unweighted (Blue) and
Weighted (Red) Flight Edges

Fig. 35. Changes of the Number of Affected Temporary Workers with the
Number of Incoming Flights and Estimated Passengers in Barcelona

VII. R ELATIONSHIP B ETWEEN I NCOMING F LIGHTS AND
I NFECTION C ASES
A sequence analysis of COVID-19 virus found out that the
virus type of the most infection cases in New York City is
from Europe [17]. The first case was confirmed in the State of
New York on February 29, and the number of infection cases
gradually increased from March 15 (Figure 38). To investigate
the effects of incoming flights from Europe, we compared the
number of daily flights from Europe and new infection cases
in the US.
Fig. 36. Changes of the Number of Affected Temporary Workers (red line)
in Barcelona and the Number of New Infection Cases (orange line) in Spain

Spain closed its borders on March 16, and the number of
flights from these three countries decreased by half during the
following day. However, the number of new infection cases
for these countries has been gradually increasing even before
border closures. Considering the latent period of COVID-19
is commonly five to six days [16], the reason the trend of
increase of new infection cases continued for a week after
the border closure may be due to the immigration of infected
individuals before the border closure.

Fig. 38. Number of New Infection Cases in the United States

A. Number of Infection Cases in European Countries and the
United States
The trend of increase in newly infected cases in Europe began a week before the US (Figure 39). In particular, confirmed
new infections in Italy started to increase in the beginning of
March. Spain and Germany also confirmed cases before the US
(Figure 40). The US announced to enforce travel restrictions
from Europe on March 13 (EU mainland) and March 14
(the UK and Ireland). After these restrictions, infection cases
gradually increased in the US from March 15 and exceeded
30,000 on April 2.

Fig. 37. Number of Incoming Flights and New Infection Cases of the Top-3
Origin Countries

D. Key Takeaways
We compared the number of incoming flights, affected
temporary workers, and the number of new infection cases
in Barcelona to estimate how the travel restriction affected
the tourism industry. We found the number of flights halved
after Spain closed borders on March 16, and the number of
affected workers jumped just after the government opened the
application of unemployment on March 23. The number of
new infection cases increased until March 25 after the border
closures, potentially due to infections spreading during its
latent period.

Fig. 39. Comparison of the Total Number of Daily Infection Cases in the
United States (bold blue line) and Europe (orange line)

B. Number of Incoming Flights from Europe and Infection
Cases in United States
With the travel restrictions from European countries to the
United States, the number of incoming flights (blue line in
Figure 41) suddenly decreased from March 13 to March 24.
However, the number of infection cases (red line in Figure
41) began to increase just after these restrictions. However,
the latent period of COVID-19 is commonly five to six days
as we mentioned in Section VI-C, therefore we cannot rule

VIII. D ISCUSSION
A. Findings

Fig. 40. Comparison of the Number of Daily Infection Cases in the United
States (bold blue line) and Top-10 Countries in Europe

out the possibility that the infections had already spread out
before the US enforced these restrictions.

Fig. 41. Number of Daily Incoming Flights from Europe and New Infection
Cases in the United States

European countries such as Italy, Spain and Germany have
already reported a certain number of infection cases before
travel restrictions. Figure 42 shows the number of daily international flights from these countries to the US and the number
of daily new infections in the US (red lines). In Italy (blue
line), more infection cases were reported than other European
countries from March 1 (Figure 41), but the number of flights
to the US became almost zero just after the travel restriction
was enforced. On the other hand, some flights from Spain
(orange line) and Germany (green line) to the US were still
in operation, even after the restrictions were announced and
infection cases in the US began to increase. These flights may
be one of the reasons for the gradual increase of infections.

In Section 4, we found out when and how international
flights in each continent and countries declined due to travel
restrictions. The number of flights on April 1 had dropped to
10% of that of regular seasons. The number of flights from
Europe sharply decreased in the second half of March after
the US announced the travel restriction from most of European
countries on March 11 and the EU agreed to close borders on
March 17. On the other hand, half of regular domestic flights
in the US were still in operation at the end of March.
Besides counting the number of daily flights, we also
applied several graph analytics to daily flight networks in order
to explain how these networks became sparse in Section 5.
With the result of analytics, we found out the density of the
global flight network halved in March, and it has been divided
into small strongly connected components from the mid of
March to the end of April.
In Section 6, we evaluated the effect of reduction of
incoming flights to Barcelona on the tourism industry (e.g.
the number of affected temporary workers). The number of
incoming flights dropped just after the travel restriction by
the government of Spain on March 16, and the number of
affected workers drastically increased after the government of
Catalonia published the number of these workers from March
23. However, the number of infection cases still increased even
after travel restrictions were announced.
We also investigated the relationship between incoming
flights from Europe and the number of infections in the US
in Section 7. We found that the trend of daily infections in
Europe began a week ahead of the US, and that some European
countries confirmed cases from March 1 while the number of
infection cases in the US began to increase from March 15.
We also found that flights from Europe were still accepted in
the US even after travel restrictions were announced on March
14.
B. Related Work
Many researches have conducted evaluations and estimations how COVID-19 infections affected international flights.
Stefano et al. [18] evaluated the economic impact of travel
restrictions on flights. They constructed several scenarios of
travel restrictions based on the past pandemic cases such as
SARS in 2003 and MERS in 2005, and estimated the loss of
global GDP may amount up to 1.98% and that the number of
unemployment could reach up to 5 millions.
Hien et al. [19] evaluated the correlation of domestic
COVID-19 cases and flight traffic volumes with the OpenSky
Network dataset, and concluded the number of international
flight routes and passengers have a correlation with the risk
of COVID-19 exposures.
C. Limitations and Possible Bias

Fig. 42. Number of Daily Incoming Flights from European Countries (Italy,
Spain and Germany) and New Infection Cases in the United States

Since the flight dataset from the OpenSky Network is
aggregated voluntarily, it has some limitations. First, some
flight entries do not contain origin or destination airport codes.

We excluded such entries before analysis to construct valid
flight networks. Moreover, the dataset also has a significant
regional bias. For example, many international and domestic
flights connecting China, Oceania, South America, and some
countries in Africa are missing.

[3] B. C. Council, “Barcelona in numbers: Tourism, between
wealth
and
residents’
complaints
—
barcelona
metròpolis,”
https://www.barcelona.cat/metropolis/en/contents/
tourism-between-wealth-and-residents-complaints, 2020.
[4] M. Schäfer, M. Strohmeier, V. Lenders, I. Martinovic, and M. Wilhelm,
“Bringing up opensky: A large-scale ads-b sensor network for
research,” in IPSN-14 Proceedings of the 13th International Symposium
on Information Processing in Sensor Networks, 2014, pp. 83–94.
IX. C ONCLUSION
[Online]. Available: https://opensky-network.org
[5] T. O. Network, “The opensky network - free ads-b and mode s data for
research,” https://opensky-network.org/, 2020.
A. Overall Conclusion
[6] “List of aircraft type designators - wikipedia.” https://en.wikipedia.org/
After the declaration of a pandemic by WHO on March
wiki/List of aircraft type designators, 2020.
[7] “Proclamation on declaring a national emergency con11 and government announcements of travel restrictions durcerning
the
novel
coronavirus
disease
(covid-19)
outing the following week, the number of international flights
break,”
https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/
around the world drastically declined, particularly in Europe.
proclamation-declaring-national-emergency-concerning-novel-coronavirus-disease-cov
2020.
Although many domestic flights were still in operation in the
[8] “Proclamation - suspension of entry as immigrants and nonimmigrants
US, the frequency gradually declined.
of certain additional persons who pose a risk of transmitting 2019
These travel restrictions affected tourism-dependent counnovel coronavirus,” https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/
proclamation-suspension-entry-immigrants-nonimmigrants-certain-additional-persons-p
tries. In Barcelona in particular, many temporary workers
2020.
made applications regarding their unemployment soon after
[9] “President donald j. trump is taking necessary safety
the government opened applications on March 23. Moreover,
measures at the border to prevent further spread of the
coronavirus,”
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefings-statements/
the number of newly infected cases increased after travel
president-donald-j-trump-taking-necessary-safety-measures-border-prevent-spread-coro
restrictions were declared on March 16, most likely due to
2020.
COVID-19’s longer latency period.
[10] “Coronavirus: Germany to impose border controls over coronavirus,”
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-51897069, 2020.
[11] E. Council”, “Video conference of the members of the european
B. Future Directions
council, 17 march 2020,” https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/meetings/
2020.
Due to the limitation of publicly available data, we could [12] european-council/2020/03/17/,
T. W. Bank”, “Air transport, passengers carried,” 2020. [Online].
not conduct the same analysis for many countries as Barcelona
Available: https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/IS.AIR.PSGR
in Section 6 for this paper. Therefore, we aim to analyze [13] L. Josephs”, “Coronavirus forces airlines to consider
a
once
unthinkable
possibility
halting
us
flights,”
relationships among the number of flights, infection cases, and
2020.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.cnbc.com/2020/03/16/
the impact on the economy for more countries and continents
coronavirus-makes-airlines-consider-chances-for-a-halt-to-us-flights.
html
by combining various other data sets with the flight data in
G. de Catalunya, “Temporary employment regulation files
our next analysis. We also aim to focus on counties where [14] (erte)
presented daily and number of affected workers.” 2020.
the number of infections has soared, and investigate how the
[Online]. Available: https://analisi.transparenciacatalunya.cat/en/Treball/
Evoluci-di-ria-dels-Expedients-de-Regulaci-Tempora/atmi-6snp
increase of cases and reduction of flights affect the economy.
[15] L. Moncloa, “Government restricts access to travellers at spain’s
We also plan to trace and predict viral mutations with the
external borders,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.lamoncloa.
flight network data. The type of COVID-19 virus varies from
gob.es/lang/en/gobierno/news/Paginas/2020/20200322travellers.aspx
region to region [20], [21], and this may provide insight to [16] W. H. Organization”, “”coronavirus disease 2019 - world health organization.” q&a on coronaviruses (covid-19),” 2020. [Online]. Available:
analyzing the route of infections with viral types. With the
https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/
daily flight network data, we hope to estimate the date and
question-and-answers-hub/q-a-detail/q-a-coronaviruses
[17] A. S. Gonzalez-Reiche, M. M. Hernandez, M. J. Sullivan, B. Ciferri,
route of infections more precisely.
H. Alshammary, A. Obla, S. Fabre, G. Kleiner, J. Polanco, Z. Khan
In order to predict the economic impacts such as propagaet al., “Introductions and early spread of sars-cov-2 in the new york
tions of revenue declines in travel industries for each region,
city area,” Science, 2020.
we will apply advanced machine learning techniques for [18] S. M. Iacus, F. Natale, C. Santamaria, S. Spyratos, and M. Vespe,
“Estimating and projecting air passenger traffic during the covid-19
time-series graph data such as Graph Convolutional Network
coronavirus outbreak and its socio-economic impact,” Safety Science,
(GCN). We will also evaluate the importance of flight network
vol. 129, p. 104791, 2020.
features as well as demographic features of regions (countries [19] H. Lau, V. Khosrawipour, P. Kocbach, A. Mikolajczyk, H. Ichii,
M. Zacharski, J. Bania, and T. Khosrawipour, “The association between
and continents) in our next analysis.
international and domestic air traffic and the coronavirus (covid-19)
outbreak,” Journal of Microbiology, Immunology and Infection, 2020.
[20] P. Sagulenko, V. Puller, and R. A. Neher, “TreeTime: MaximumR EFERENCES
likelihood phylodynamic analysis,” Virus Evolution, vol. 4, no. 1, 01
2018, vex042. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1093/ve/vex042
[1] T. W. House, “Remarks by president trump and vice
[21] J. Hadfield, C. Megill, S. M. Bell, J. Huddleston, B. Potter,
president pence at a coronavirus briefing with airline
C. Callender, P. Sagulenko, T. Bedford, and R. A. Neher, “Nextstrain:
ceos,”
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefings-statements/
remarks-president-trump-vice-president-pence-coronavirus-briefing-airline-ceos/,real-time tracking of pathogen evolution,” Bioinformatics, vol. 34,
no. 23, pp. 4121–4123, 05 2018. [Online]. Available: https:
2020.
//doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bty407
[2] TCdata360,
“Travel
and
tourism
direct
contribution
to
gdp,”
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefings-statements/
remarks-president-trump-vice-president-pence-coronavirus-briefing-airline-ceos/,
2020.

