1

Using Mobility for Electrical Load Forecasting
During the COVID-19 Pandemic

arXiv:2006.08826v1 [eess.SP] 15 Jun 2020

Yize Chen, Weiwei Yang and Baosen Zhang

Abstract—The novel coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic has
posed unprecedented challenges for the utilities and grid operators around the world. In this work, we focus on the problem of
load forecasting. With strict social distancing restrictions, power
consumption profiles around the world have shifted both in magnitude and daily patterns. These changes have caused significant
difficulties in short-term load forecasting. Typically algorithms
use weather, timing information and previous consumption levels
as input variables, yet they cannot capture large and sudden
changes in socioeconomic behavior during the pandemic.
In this paper, we introduce mobility as a measure of economic
activities to complement existing building blocks of forecasting
algorithms. Mobility data acts as good proxies for the populationlevel behaviors during the implementation and subsequent easing
of social distancing measures. The major challenge with such
dataset is that only limited mobility records are associated with
the recent pandemic. To overcome this small data problem,
we design a transfer learning scheme that enables knowledge
transfer between several different geographical regions. This
architecture leverages the diversity across these regions and the
resulting aggregated model can boost the algorithm performance
in each regions day-ahead forecast. Through simulations for
regions in the US and Europe, we show our proposed algorithm
can outperform conventional forecasting methods by more than
three-folds. In addition, we demonstrate how the proposed model
can be used to project how electricity consumption would recover
based on different mobility scenarios.

patterns. The overall electricity usage has fallen to a 16-year
low in the US [2] with significant regional variations. Both
the PJM and NYISO experienced about 9% decreases in peak
demand in March of 2020 [1], with New York City observing
decreases up to 21% in April of 2020 [3]. Similar shelter-inplace directives were effective in Europe, and Italy saw the
biggest reductions of 25% of demand [4].
In addition to the changes in peak demand, the temporal
patterns in consumption have also shifted to unseen curves
as people started to stay at home. For example, Fig. 1 shows
the year-to-year changes for days in February and March for
the Boston metropolitan area [5] (Boston and the State of
Massachusetts stated to enact stay-at-home orders on March
15, 2020). The days are all weekdays with similar weather.
The load profiles for Feb 18th, 2019 and Feb 18th, 2020 are
relatively similar. However, on March 20, 2019, there is a
pronounced double peak pattern, while the same day in 2020
shows a very different pattern with relatively flat load with a
small peak in the early evening.

I. I NTRODUCTION
The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has
impacted almost every aspect of our society and the electric grid
is no exception. As many sectors continue to operate remotely
through communication technologies, the grid is more than ever
operating as the glue that holds the society together at these
challenging times. As electric utilities and system operators
strive to provide reliable power to communities when they need
it the most, the pandemic has caused challenges ranging from
the health and safety of frontline crews to the long term supply
chains [1]. In this paper, we focus on a specific challenge: the
unprecedented changes in electricity consumption patterns and
the need to provide better load forecasting algorithms.
One of the most striking impacts of the pandemic on the
grid is the changes in load consumption patterns and the peak
demands. For example, in the United States, as stay-at-home
orders were issued by the local and state governments and
social distancing were practiced to slow the outbreak of COVID19, power consumptions shifted both in magnitude and daily
Y. Chen and B. Zhang are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195; e-mails:
{yizechen,zhangbao}@uw.edu. W. Yang is with Microsoft Research, Redmond,
WA 98052; e-mail: weiwya@microsoft.com

Fig. 1. Comparison of changing load patterns of Boston Metropolitan for
February 18th and March 20th in 2019 and 2020. All four days are weekdays
and experienced similar weather conditions yet with varying load patterns.

These sudden and dramatic changes in the consumption pattern has caused difficulties in short-term load forecasting, since
no forecasting algorithm could have anticipated these levels of
changes in human behaviors. Forecast models are constructed
and validated on historical data, while the most important input
features for standard load forecasting algorithms are weather,
timing information (day of the week, time of the day, seasonal,
etc.) and previous consumption data [6]. Using these inputs, it
is not difficult to construct models—e.g., by training a deep
neural network—to achieve a day-ahead forecast error of less
than 2% for a city-scale utility [7]. In particular, daily forecasts
rely heavily on the assumption that similar days at similar

2

Germany

April 2020

April 2019

CAISO

April 2020

Error Distribution

April 2019

Fig. 2. Comparisons of day-ahead load forecasts performance in April 2019 and April 2020 for Germany and California (CAISO), respectively. The upper row
shows the magnitudes of the forecasting error for days in April of 2019 and in April of 2020. The bottom row shows the forecast error distribution over April.
The errors are significantly larger for April of 2020, even after a month of staying-at-home and adjustment in the load forecasting process.

times of the year observe similar load patterns. The COVID-19 quantitative measure of the social and economic activities to be
crisis fundamentally changes this assumption, as there are no incorporated in forecasting algorithms, and the measurements
historically similar events ever since the construction of the should be readily available to help grid operators and utilities
current grid infrastructure. Therefore it is not surprising that with forecasting and understanding of the load patterns over
load forecasting algorithms used by operators have encountered time.
much larger forecasting errors since March of 2020.
In this paper, we close the gap between on the forecasting
Forecast errors can be partly mitigated by artificially setting performance before and during the pandemic by introducing
everyday as a weekend day, but this alone is far from sufficient mobility data as a measure of economic activities. The mobility
in closing the accuracy gaps [5]. Previous research also data is used as a complementary component of load forecast
investigated adaptive learning schemes where different regions model. Population-level mobility data, for instance, transit and
or seasons are considered [8], [9], yet no literature have shopping trends, show how people are changing their behaviors
considered the forecast tasks under an unexpected pandemic. once distancing mandates are implemented. Such data are
Figure 2 shows the published day-ahead forecast errors for readily available from third parties like Apple and Google [12],
Germany and CAISO on randomly selected days in April of [13], which is location specific and aggregated across the
2019 and April of 2020.1 There is significant over-forecasting population that enabled mobile services2 . Previous research also
in April 2020 compared to forecasts made in April 2019. Note indicated that mobility is highly correlated with the economic
that at this time Germans and Californians have largely stayed activities in a region [14], [15], therefore providing a good
at home for over a month and manual adjustment have been complementary input for forecasting algorithms.
made to the algorithms, but accurate load forecasting is still
However, there still exists practical implementation issues
a challenge for the system operator. In April 2019, Germany once user mobility is taken into account. We face a smallreported an under-forecasting error of 3.51% compared to an data problem as most mobility data are only publicly available
over-forecasting error of 2.49% in April 2020, while the over- for parts of 2020. Therefore, we do not necessarily have a
forecasting errors in CAISO increased from 1.28% to 5.39%. lot of counterfactual information, since most of the mobility
Since load forecasting is a fundamental step in power system would be at low levels compared to normal, but we do not
operations and is used as the basis of decision-making problems know the values of normal data. The key benefit of mobility
such as unit commitment, reserve management, economic data is that there is a lot of geographical diversity to offset
dispatch and maintenance scheduling [6]. Consequently, the the lack of temporal data. Different countries in the world,
accuracy of forecasted loads directly impact the cost and as well as regions in the United States are returning to work
reliability of system operations [10]. As shown in Fig. 2, in heterogeneous phases [16], [17]. Therefore we propose
even if customer behaviors stabilize somewhat, it is hard for to obtain enough training samples as well as diversity by
forecasting algorithms to adjust and catch up in a short amount combining data from different regions, and to investigate
of time. This challenge is compounded by the fact that as parts how small changes in mobility would drive changes power
of the world restart their economies in phased approaches, it consumption. To this end, we design a transfer learning
is likely that customer behaviors would again undergo rapid scheme that enables knowledge sharing between several regions,
fluctuations in the foreseeable future [11]. Therefore, we need
1 Data

available from ENTSO-E at https://transparency.entsoe.eu; CAISO at
http://www.caiso.com.

2 There are many other sources of mobility and traffic data, either through
a company like INRIX or public transportation departments. These sources,
however, contain only data for specific routes or are privately owned.

3

and the resulting aggregated model can boost the algorithm historical observations is available. The training or model fitting
performance in each region’s day-ahead forecast task [18].
process is to find a θ that minimizes the error on the training
This study recognizes current difficulties in implementing dataset. During implementation, θ is fixed to predict the future
accurate and reliable load forecast algorithms, and illustrates load. We use fθ and f interchangeably when the dependence
the need to look at additional features reflecting the electricity on θ is clear.
The input features Xt typically include weather, timing
usage behaviors during these uncertain times. We demonstrate
that an accurate load forecasting, with results as good as information and historical load data [8], [22], [23]. The
those before the pandemic, is achievable by rethinking both weather features are normally considered as the most important
the forecasting models’ input and architecture. We make drivers of electricity demand, and we include temperature,
the simulation cases along with code publicly available3 . precipitation, cloud cover and air pressure in this paper. Note
Specifically, we make the following contributions in this work: that in forecasting, we make use of day-ahead, public-available
1) We identify mobility data as an important complementary weather forecasts to construct the input vectors. For timing
component for the forecast task during this global features, we include one-hot encoded variables (class variables)
for hour of the day, month of the year, weekday/weekend
pandemic (Sec. II);
4
2) We design a learning algorithm to learn and predict the distinction and holiday/non-holiday distinction. Since there
are
plenty
of
historical
records
of
load
data
and weather
electricity load by explicitly incorporating the mobility
measurements
and
aggregate
load
data
exhibits
periodic
patterns
patterns, and further adapt a transfer learning framework
well
explained
by
the
input
features,
it
is
not
difficult
to train
to tackle data insufficiency issues (Sec. III);
an
accurate
forecasting
algorithm
for
system
or
regional
loads.
3) We perform extensive numerical simulations across
various regions and countries to validate forecasting
performances, showing they can be greatly enhanced
by adopting proposed method. We also provide future
projections of electricity demand using our proposed
model (Sec. IV).
II. P ROBLEM S ETUP
In this section, we first formulate the task of day-ahead
load forecasting. We then explain the inherent difficulties of
achieving accurate forecasts during periods affected by the
COVID-19 pandemic. We advocate that mobility data is a
viable candidate feature to satisfy the necessity of incorporating
social and economic behaviors in forecasting algorithms.
A. Day-Ahead Load Forecasting
A host of models have been proposed to fulfill the task
of short-term load forecasts which include linear regression,
support vector regression, autoregressive models and neural
network models (e.g., see [7], [19], [20], [21] and the references within). Most (deterministic) forecasting algorithms are
constructed and fitted to find the mapping from a group of
specifically designed input features Xt at timestep t to future
loads Lt+k , where k is the forecasting horizon. In this paper, we
focus on the task of day-ahead forecasting at hourly resolutions,
so k ∈ [1, 24]. Without loss of generality, we normalize the
loads such that Lt+k ∈ [0, 1] for all k.
Mathematically, forecasters are interested in finding an
accurate model, parameterized by θ:
fθ (Xt−H , ..., Xt ) = L̂t+k , k = 1, . . . , 24

(1)

where H determines how much history of training data the
operators want to take into consideration for forecasting.
Accuracy is normally judged based on the error between the
forecasted load and the true load, for example, using the mean
squared error (MSE) or mean absolute error (MAE). We assume
that a training dataset Dtr = {(Xt−H , ..., Xt ); Lt+k }Tt=1 of
3 https://github.com/chennnnnyize/Load-Forecasting-During-COVID-19

Feb 15

Feb 25

Mar 6

Mar 16

Mar 26

Apr 5

Apr 15

March 10: State of Emergency

Fig. 3. The changing pattern of load, mobility and daily temperatures for
Boston area. Daily driving and transit data are from Apple Mobility Trends
Reports and Google Community Mobility Reports respectively.

B. Modeling the Effects of COVID-19
Because of economic disruptions and behavioral interventions such as shelter-in-place orders, the forecasting performance using the standard set of features described in the
previous section has degraded. This is not unexpected since
these features cannot capture the rapid changes in social
behaviors and ad hoc fixes such as treating all days like
Saturdays have had limited benefit. But inaccurate forecasts
could bring significant harm, especially at these times. For
instance, overestimation of system loads may cause generators
supplying excessive energy which cause higher grid operation
4 We

include the major national holidays with respect to each load region.

4

risks, while critical sectors such as hospitals are in need of
reliable electricity access.
In this paper, we address two fundamental challenges that
arise in forecasting during a pandemic:
1) New features: Are there other (easily accessible) features
that better represent the underlying shifts in social and
behavioral patterns?
2) Small data: We only have months of data when the
impact of COVID-19 has been evident and social patterns
continue to shift somewhat rapidly. How do we design
and train a good forecasting algorithm when there is
relatively small amount of data?
We find positive answers by introducing a mobility measure.
Essentially, the forecast algorithm needs to incorporate features
that accurately describe how people are changing their behavior
in response to COVID-19 pandemic and social distancing
policies. For instance, both the spatial and temporal load
patterns have changed once people started to work from home.
In this paper, we find a structured and concise representation
of mobility captures the strong correlation between load and
human behavior, and also serves as a valuable feature for
subsequent model design. Moreover, with the ubiquitous
adoption of smartphones, estimates of mobility are updated
frequently and openly available from service providers such as
Google and Apple. Other data sources such as stay-at-home
population, retail sector population and magnitude of night-time
light has been used, but they are more suitable for comparative
studies rather than features in a forecasting algorithm [24].
Fig. 3 shows the load, mobility data and temperature for
the Boston metropolitan area from Feb 15th to April 15th,
2020. In Fig. 3 (a), both the peak load and daily average
load have decreased over 25%, but this pattern is only weakly
correlated to increasing temperature (Fig. 3 (c)). In contrast,
the load curves exhibits a synchronous decrease with two
mobility indexes: the driving index from Apple [12] and transit
index from Google [13]. This is an example of how mobility
measurements can be utilized to take the impacts of pandemic
into account to improve load forecasting during COVID-19.

all available features as an input vector, and feed it into the
input layer Y0 = [Xt−H , . . . , Xt ].
While day-ahead weather forecasts are widely available and
fairly accurate, there are no mobility forecasts (yet). Mobility
data are often up to real-time observations, so we do a time
shift of the corresponding feature spaces to utilize all available
inputs at each time step. For instance, to do a day-ahead
forecast, we concatenate current day’s mobility data along with
day-ahead weather forecasts and other class variables as they
are all up to date information once the model is implemented.
For the m-layer neural network, we parameterize each hidden
layer Yi , i = 1, . . . , m − 1 as a fully-connected layer:
Yi =σi (Wi Yi−1 + bi ) ,
L̂t+k =Wm Ym−1 + bm ;

(2b)

where Wi , bi are trainable weights and biases at layer i, and
σ applies elementwise to a vector. The nonlinear activation
functions σi promote nonlinearity in the forecasting model and
common choices include ReLU and Sigmoid functions [26].
By collecting the actual load Lt+k , we use stochastic gradient
descent to minimize the mean absolute percentage error
(MAPE) during the training process:
LM AP E =

N
1 X L̂t+k − Lt+k
,
N i=1
Lt+k

(3)

where N is the batch size for model updates. We show in
Section IV that the mobility-augmented input features help to
achieve both smaller testing errors and better generalization in
comparison to conventional algorithms.
We note the model setup (2) and (3) are general formulations,
which are flexible to the size of input mobility data, the model
layers (e.g., recurrent [25] or residual networks [22]), and
the forecast objective (e.g., point forecasts or probabilistic
forecasts [27]).
Single Task
Output

Multiple Tasks
Output
Task
Specific
Layer

III. F ORECASTING M ODEL
In this section, we formally describe how we integrate
mobility as a socioeconomic feature vector into the forecasting
algorithm. We firstly present the architecture of proposed
algorithm, followed by a practical implementation during
that achieves better performance and generalization by using
knowledge transfer between different forecasting tasks.

Hidden
Layer

A. Mobility-Enabled Load Forecasts

Input

As discussed in Sec. II-B, mobility data has the potential
to reflect the short-term socioeconomic trends, and we are
interested in designing models to flexibly integrate this auxiliary
input. We adopt neural networks as the parameterized model
to represent fθ . Neural networks has achieved state-of-theart performances [7], [22], [25], and more importantly, they
provide a practical implementation pipeline. The queries of
mobility data can be integrated into neural networks similar to
other features such as weather data. Specifically, we concatenate

(2a)

...

Weight
Sharing
Layer

...

...

Input
Task 1

Task 2

Task T

Fig. 4. The forecast model architecture for normal forecast task (left) and
our proposed model of multiple-task learning (right).

B. Knowledge Transfer of Forecasting Tasks
With the incorporation of mobility features, the load forecasting algorithm is expected to have a better handle on the impact
of social distancing policies and individual behaviors. Yet

5

there are two challenges in using mobility for load forecasting
during COVID-19 outbreaks. The first is that normal forecasting
models could use years-long training datasets, while there are
only limited electricity consumption and mobility observations
since the onset of the pandemic (or the start of social distancing).
The second is that mobility and load both dropped sharply
in the early stage of stay-at-home orders, but a practical
forecasting algorithm should also work when strict social
distancing practices are relaxed. It is not obvious whether
we would have enough diversity in the data.
We propose to tackle two challenges with one model design,
namely, a multi-task learning framework [28]. This transfer
learning procedure is based on the intuition that for related
tasks, features useful for one task might be useful for other ones.
In our context, consider training forecasting algorithms for two
different cities. Normally, these algorithms are trained entirely
separately using different datasets. Instead, we explicitly treat
these tasks as related to construct the neural network.
We design the multi-task forecasting framework through
feature sharing among several different load forecast tasks.
Specifically, we co-train several neural networks collectively as
illustrated in Fig. 4. For a set of forecasting tasks j = 1, . . . , P
(j)
with corresponding collected training datasets Dtr , the load
forecasting models share the same weights of first l layers,
while last l − m layers are mapping the embeddings Yl to
(j)
distinct outputs L̂t+k . So we are constructing a neural network
of the following form:

sufficient to directly aggregate data from each region to train
a single forecasting model, since there would be too much
averaging and the algorithm would perform poorly for almost
all of the individual tasks. In contrast, the multi-task learning
framework is able to improve each single task’s performance,
as we show in the next section.

IV. C ASE S TUDIES
In this section, we conduct extensive simulations on the load
forecasting tasks to validate the proposed method can help
during the COVID-19 pandemic. In particular, we compare
the mobility and transfer learning enabled forecast model with
benchmark models. We also provide a planning analysis by
considering different social distancing scenarios.
A. Dataset and Simulation Platforms
1) Mobility Data: We collect mobility data from Google
COVID-19 Community Mobility Reports [13] and Apple Covid19 Mobility Trends Reports [12]. Note that for most of case
studies considered in this work, these data starting from middle
of January, 2020 include periods both before and during the
stay-at-home restrictions due to COVID-19 pandemic.
Google: The report includes 6 location-specific metrics: retail
& recreation, grocery & pharmacy, parks, transit stations,
workplaces, and residential. The baseline value is the median
during the 5-week period from January 3rd to February 6th,
2020. Google calculates these insights based on data from
users who have opted-in to Location History for their Google
Account.
Yl =σl (Wl (σl−1 (· · · σ1 (W1 Y0 + b1 ) · · · )) + bl ), (4a)
Apple: The mobility metrics include driving, walking and
(j)
(j)
(j)
(j)
(j) (j)
transit,
and are a relative volume of directions requests by
L̂t+k =Wm
(σm−1 (· · · σl+1 (Wl+1 Yl + bl+1 ) · · · )) + b(j)
.
m
(4b) mobile users per country/region, sub-region or city compared
to a baseline volume on January 13th, 2020.
To train the multi-task forecasting neural network (4), we
2) Electricity Demand Data: We collect and construct load
(j)
iteratively sample a batch of training samples from Dtr from datasets for various regions to evaluate the proposed load
each task j and update the weights for Wi , bi , i = 1, . . . , l and forecasting approach. Specifically, we use hourly electricity
(j)
(j)
Wi , bi , i = l + 1, . . . , m. A final fine-tuning step is used consumption data for systems of different sizes: countryto improve the model performance by only training on specific level data of European countries (United Kingdom, Germany
task j while fixing the trained weights Wi , i = 1, . . . , l.
and France), ISO-level data (CAISO, NYISO), zonal data in
The setting of knowledge transfer is especially helpful to ERCOT (coastal, north central and south central areas) and
load forecasting during the COVID-19 pandemic, as mobility metropolitan-level data of US cities (Seattle, Chicago, Boston,
impacts electricity consumption in every region. However, the the Mid-Atlantic area). The European load data were collected
actual mobility patterns in each region is determined by a from ENTSO-E, while the US data are publicly available from
complex set of socioeconomic factors and can different widely. several ISO and participating utilities. All the collected datasets
This is a benefit to the forecasting algorithms, since we can are available along with our code repo for evaluation. We query
pool data from different regions to create a much larger and weather forecast API World Weather Online [29] and apply
more diverse training set. The regional differences in how much data normalization to pre-process each dataset. For larger load
electricity each end-use sector consumes and the varying effects regions such as CAISO and European countries, we concatenate
of COVID-19 mitigation efforts on the sectors are learned and several major cities’ weather and mobility data as the input
represented by the final task-independent layers. In addition, feature vectors.
since different countries and regions (states in the US) are
We collect two training datasets to evaluate the proposed
in different stages of lifting the social distancing orders, the approach. The first dataset we consider excludes mobility
multi-task learning framework enables the knowledge transfer features, and it covers the time range between January 1st,
so that forecasting results can be accurate even when there is 2018 to May 15th, 2020. The second dataset makes use of
unseen training data for a particular location.
available mobility data ranging from February 15th to May
The proposed data-driven knowledge transfer scheme enables 15th, 2020, which is a relatively small data for load forecasting.
efficient modeling and learning between different forecasting This range also spans the pre- and after-lockdown periods for
tasks, as there is no limitations on the number of tasks, neural most of the test cases, so it serves as a fair benchmark to
network architecture or training data size. Note that it is not evaluate proposed forecasting method.

6

(a). Forecast Results

(b). Error Distribution

Fig. 5. Load forecast results on Seattle City Light dataset. By incorporating mobility data and using multi-task learning procedure, our model achieve lower
MAPE error on testing data, while the error distribution is more centered around 0 compared to normally constructed forecast models. The Mobi_MTL model
was collectively trained using data from Seattle, Boston, Chicago and Mid-Atlantic metro areas.

retrained when COVID-19 pandemic takes impact on electricity
loads. We train this model using data ranging from February
15th to April 30th, 2020.
Mobi: Using the techniques described in Sec.III-A, we include
the mobility feature vectors, and train this model using data
ranging from February 15th to April 30th, 2020.
Mobi_MTL: This model extends the Mobi model by using the
architecture described in Sec. III-B. We train four multi-task
learning neural networks based on a selection of similar tasks
with similar-sized load regions.
All four models are tested on the electricity load from May
1st to May 15th, 2020, and we report forecast MAPE calculated
by (3) on the testing dataset. As the underlying regions go
through different level of stay-at-home orders during the testing
period, we are interested in examining the model’s capabilities
to predict loads under different socioeconomic scenarios.

Fig. 6. Load forecast performance comparisons on testing samples from
different load regions.

3) Evaluation Methodology: The following forecasting
algorithms are used:
NN_Orig: This is a standard neural network for day-ahead
load forecasting trained on the data from January 1st, 2018 to
December 31st, 2019 without mobility data. It acts as a proxy
for the actual forecasting model implemented in practice.
Retrain: Using the same model architectures as NN_Orig,
this model simulates the case that model is updated and

The simulation platform used in this paper is a laptop with
i5-8259U CPU @ 2.30 GHz. The environment used is Python
3.6 with Tensorflow as machine learning package. To make a
fair comparison, we construct load forecasting neural networks
with 5 layers for all tasks along with Dropout regularization,
and the first layer has the most number of neurons of 512. We
construct Mobi_MTL by sharing the weights of first 3 layers
across tasks. The dimension of the largest input feature vector
in Mobi_MTL and Mobi for CAISO is 60. For all settings
and models, we use 50 epochs for training. We also note that
for the Mobi_MTL model, even several models are trained
together iteratively, the overall training time is less than 20%
of training a single model on the whole dataset which is the

7

Model

Seattle

NN_Orig 15.01
Retrain
7.55
Mobi
6.51
Mobi_MTL 2.28

Chicago

Boston

14.44
17.92
4.08
2.33

6.55
15.26
4.38
2.91

MidAtlantic
14.60
17.27
7.08
2.61

ERCOT
Coast
7.38
7.17
1.85
1.80

ERCOT
NCENT
8.48
9.60
2.70
1.59

ERCOT
SCENT
8.16
7.73
5.18
2.71

NYISO

CAISO

UK

12.91
15.55
6.25
5.24

8.51
7.77
5.97
3.15

10.11
13.78
8.74
4.46

Germany France
7.73
7.77
6.24
4.52

22.71
8.31
5.93
4.1

TABLE I
S IMULATION RESULTS FOR DAY- AHEAD LOAD FORECASTS OF 12 REGIONS WITH 4 GROUPS OF MULTI - TASK LEARNING . M O B I _MTL IS ON AVERAGE 3.98
TIMES BETTER THAN BASELINE NN_O R I G MODEL IN TERMS OF MAPE ACROSS ALL TASK BENCHMARKS .

case of NN_Orig model.
B. Evaluation Results
1) Performance on Day-Ahead Load Forecasts: Forecasted
values for the Seattle City Light service region along with the
distribution of forecast errors are shown in Fig. 5 for two weeks’
data from May 2nd to May 15th (Seattle’s shelter-in-place
order were in effect that this time). The multi-task learning
model is trained using training sets from Boston, Chicago and
Mid-Atlantic areas. The Mobi and Mobi_MTL significantly
outperform the other two methods as shown in Table I. It
can be seen that by integrating mobility data, the trained
neural network can better predict the electricity consumption
behaviors during this period. The Mobi_MTL model achieves
the smallest forecast error, validating our conjecture that crosstask forecasting knowledge can be helpful when large training
datasets are not available.
Table I compares MAPE on testing datasets are listed for
various regions. Each sub-column represents a group of tasks
for the multi-task learning setting, while other models are
trained separately for each task. The baseline NN_Orig model
results in errors of over 10% MAPE in many cases, much
larger than the typical error of 2-4% before the pandemic. This
baseline model is more accurate on weekends than weekdays,
indicating that the main changes in load pattern are occurring
during workdays. As expected, the original forecast model
does not have any knowledge of such drastic socioeconomic
changes with the outbreak of COVID-19. The Retrain model
can partly redress the overcasting by NN_Orig, yet since the
training dataset for the pandemic period is relatively small,
while the mobility patterns are changing frequently during the
testing period, such retraining process are still not satisfactory.
Across all forecasting tasks, the inclusion of mobility data
can boost the prediction accuracy. The resulting forecast results
during COVID-19 pandemic from our Mobi_MTL model are
comparable to ISO’s published results before the pandemic.
This shows that mobility data are effective proxies for social and
economic behaviors. Regional differences are also notable in
the forecasting results. Forecasts on ERCOT regions achieve the
best performance, partly due to the fact that Texas has relatively
loose restrictions during April and May compared to other US
areas under investigation [1]. On the contrary, forecasting loads
for larger geographical regions (ISO level and country level) are
generally harder than the smaller counterparts, as the mobility
data and weather data we consider in the simulation do not
encompass every possible fine-grained regions. US metropolitan
areas testing group sees the largest model improvement by
using multi-task learning model compared to other models,

partly because such forecasting tasks only consider smaller
load regions, while cities exhibit similar shifts of commercial
and residential load once stay-at-home orders were in effect.
In Fig. 6, we visualize the forecast results on various testing
cases (one region from each group of multi-task learning) for
both weekends and weekdays. It further validates that mobilityenabled forecasting algorithm can capture the intrinsic interplay
between human activities and electricity consumption.
It is interesting to observe that both Retrain and Mobi
model exhibit overfitting to the small training dataset, as the
first testing week’s error is much smaller than the second
week. This may challenge the practical implementation of such
algorithms, as the trained model can not generalize to the
future instances. On the other hand, Mobi_MTL model outputs
accurate forecasts throughout the testing period.
We also validate the model performance via the distribution
of forecasts deviation compared to actual load. Without considering the recent trends of mobility, NN_Orig and Retrain
model consistently predict greater load values compared to
actual loads. On the contrary, the error distributions of Mobi
and Mobi_MTL are more centered around 0, indicating that
mobility features serve as significant inputs.
2) Projections on Reopening Scenarios: As the objective of
research is to provide a fast response to the global pandemic
and to prepare the grid for future load changes, we do a
future projection analysis based on different mobility patterns
by utilizing the proposed load forecasting methodology. The
results are illustrated in Fig. 7 for possible load scenarios of
Seattle area in July 2020 and January 2021. We plot the two
weeks’ load curves as representative cases for typical summer
and winter load.
According to Washington state’s four-phase reopening
plan [30], the earliest expected date to enter Phase 4 (removal of
mandated social distancing orders) is July 13th, 2020. Of course,
there are high degrees of uncertainty in both governmental
policies and behaviors of people. We analyze two possible
future cases based on mobility data. The first case we consider
is a recovery of 90% normal mobility. In the second case, we
assume there may be extended duration of pandemic impacts,
and the mobility pattern stays at the current level. Both the
normal mobility and current mobility are estimated using the
weekly average values. We concatenate such estimated mobility
features along with weather data from the same weeks in
July 2019 and January 2020 to construct the input vectors
for the Mobi_MTL model. The 95% confidence interval of
mobility data is calculated based on the Gaussian assumption
of the estimated mobility indexes, while shaded areas in the
figure represent such mobility variations. The model output

8

qualitatively shows the relationship between reduced mobility
and reduced load. We can see the decreases of mobility
indexes poses more reductions of winter load, with a peak
load reduction of over 300M W if current mobility patterns
persist. We hope by incorporating the projections of mobility,
our proposed model can be served as a tool to inform electric
grid operators about possible load realizations, and can help
system planning in the reopening periods.

Fig. 7. Load projections for January 2021 and July 2020 based on Seattle
weather profiles from the previous year considering scenarios of mobility
patterns from Week 2, 2020 or from before pandemic dates. Shaded areas plot
the load projections based on 95% confidence interval of the mobility data.

V. D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we developed a novel load forecasting method
as a timely response to the challenges in load forecasting during
the sudden and global COVID-19 pandemic. We discussed
approaches to identify the load changes brought by fastchanging socioeconomic behaviors and stay-at-home orders.
By explicitly incorporating mobility patterns, our approach can
greatly reduce the error between forecasts and actual loads.
We evaluated the proposed approach on load forecasting tasks
across a large set of heterogeneous regions globally, and the
algorithm not only achieved 3.98 times smaller errors than
standard forecasting methods, but also generalized well into
varying dates after the outbreak of COVID-19. As the global
pandemic may still pose impacts to the power grids in the future,
we think techniques developed in the paper could inform grid
operators possible future load patterns.
R EFERENCES
[1] A. Paaso, S. Bahramirad, J. B. E. Bernabeu, B. Chiu, B. Enayati,
B. Hederman, L. Jones, Y. Jun, H. Koch, J. C. Montero, N. Nair,
D. Novosel, T. Pierpoint, F. Rahmatian, J. R. Aguero, C. Root, D. Sharafi,
E. Tejera, and V. Vittal, “Sharing knowledge on electrical energy
industry’s first response to COVID-19,” 2020.
[2] W. E. Forum, “COVID-19: America hasn’t used this little energy in
16 years,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.weforum.org/agenda/
2020/04/united-states-eneregy-electricity-power-coronavirus-covid19/
[3] NYISO, “COVID-19 and the Electric Grid: Load Shifts as New Yorkers
Respond to Crisis,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.nyiso.com/-/
covid-19-and-the-electric-grid-load-shifts-as-new-yorkers-respond-to-crisis

[4] IEA, “Covid-19 impact on electricity,” 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.iea.org/reports/covid-19-impact-on-electricity
[5] I. N. E. O. Forecast, “Estimated impacts of covid-19 on iso new england
demand,” ISO Newswire, 2020.
[6] G. Gross and F. D. Galiana, “Short-term load forecasting,” Proceedings
of the IEEE, vol. 75, no. 12, pp. 1558–1573, 1987.
[7] D. C. Park, M. El-Sharkawi, R. Marks, L. Atlas, and M. Damborg,
“Electric load forecasting using an artificial neural network,” IEEE
transactions on Power Systems, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 442–449, 1991.
[8] J.-B. Fiot and F. Dinuzzo, “Electricity demand forecasting by multi-task
learning,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 544–551,
2016.
[9] W. Grady, L. Groce, T. Huebner, Q. Lu, and M. Crawford, “Enhancement, implementation, and performance of an adaptive short-term load
forecasting algorithm,” IEEE transactions on power systems, vol. 6, no. 4,
pp. 1404–1410, 1991.
[10] B. F. Hobbs, S. Jitprapaikulsarn, S. Konda, V. Chankong, K. A. Loparo,
and D. J. Maratukulam, “Analysis of the value for unit commitment of
improved load forecasts,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 14,
no. 4, pp. 1342–1348, 1999.
[11] T. Barker, A. Dagoumas, and J. Rubin, “The macroeconomic rebound
effect and the world economy,” Energy efficiency, vol. 2, no. 4, p. 411,
2009.
[12] Apple, Inc., “Mobility Data,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.apple.com/covid19/mobility
[13] Google, Inc., “COVID-19 Community Mobility Reports,” 2020. [Online].
Available: https://www.google.com/covid19/mobility/
[14] C. Le Quéré, R. B. Jackson, M. W. Jones, A. J. Smith, S. Abernethy,
R. M. Andrew, A. J. De-Gol, D. R. Willis, Y. Shan, J. G. Canadell et al.,
“Temporary reduction in daily global co 2 emissions during the covid-19
forced confinement,” Nature Climate Change, pp. 1–7, 2020.
[15] L. Ecola and M. Wachs, “Exploring the relationship between travel
demand and economic growth,” The RAND Corporation, 2012.
[16] D. M. Studdert and M. A. Hall, “Disease control, civil liberties, and
mass testingcalibrating restrictions during the covid-19 pandemic,” New
England Journal of Medicine, 2020.
[17] I. Nakamoto, W. Zhuang, S. Wang, and Y. Guo, “On the heterogeneity
of infections, containment measures and the preliminary forecast of
covid-19 epidemic,” medRxiv, 2020.
[18] S. J. Pan and Q. Yang, “A survey on transfer learning,” IEEE Transactions
on knowledge and data engineering, vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 1345–1359,
2009.
[19] H. K. Alfares and M. Nazeeruddin, “Electric load forecasting: literature
survey and classification of methods,” International journal of systems
science, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 23–34, 2002.
[20] R. Weron, Modeling and forecasting electricity loads and prices: A
statistical approach. John Wiley & Sons, 2007, vol. 403.
[21] T. Hong and S. Fan, “Probabilistic electric load forecasting: A tutorial
review,” International Journal of Forecasting, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 914–938,
2016.
[22] K. Chen, K. Chen, Q. Wang, Z. He, J. Hu, and J. He, “Short-term load
forecasting with deep residual networks,” IEEE Transactions on Smart
Grid, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 3943–3952, 2018.
[23] T. Hong, M. Gui, M. E. Baran, and H. L. Willis, “Modeling and
forecasting hourly electric load by multiple linear regression with
interactions,” in IEEE PES General Meeting. IEEE, 2010, pp. 1–8.
[24] G. Ruan, D. Wu, X. Zheng, S. Sivaranjani, L. Xie, H. Zhong, and
C. Kang, “Tracking and analyzing the short-run impact of covid-19 on
the u.s. electricity sector,” 2020.
[25] J. Zheng, C. Xu, Z. Zhang, and X. Li, “Electric load forecasting in smart
grids using long-short-term-memory based recurrent neural network,”
in 2017 51st Annual Conference on Information Sciences and Systems
(CISS). IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–6.
[26] V. Nair and G. E. Hinton, “Rectified linear units improve restricted
boltzmann machines,” in Proceedings of the 27th international conference
on machine learning (ICML-10), 2010, pp. 807–814.
[27] Y. Wang, N. Zhang, Y. Tan, T. Hong, D. S. Kirschen, and C. Kang,
“Combining probabilistic load forecasts,” IEEE Transactions on Smart
Grid, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 3664–3674, 2018.
[28] R. Caruana, “Multitask learning,” Machine learning, vol. 28, no. 1, pp.
41–75, 1997.
[29] WorldWeatherOnline, “World weather online,” 2020. [Online]. Available:
http://www.worldweatheronline.com
[30] S. of Washington Office of Governor, “Safe Start Washington: A
Phased Approach to Recovery,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.governor.wa.gov/sites/default/files/SafeStartWA 4May20.pdf

