arXiv:2006.15216v1 [cs.CY] 26 Jun 2020

Mapping the South African health landscape in response to
COVID-19
Nompumelelo Mtsweni

Herkulaas MvE Combrink

Vukosi Marivate

lelo@nompumelelo.me
Independent
South Africa

University of the Free State
Dept. Computer Science, University
of Pretoria
South Africa
CombrinkHM@ufs.ac.za

Dept. Computer Science, University
of Pretoria
Council for Scientific and Industrial
Research
South Africa
vukosi.marivate@cs.up.ac.za

Figure 1: Proof of concept Health facility map of South Africa. https://dsfsi.github.io/healthfacilitymap/

ABSTRACT
When the COVID-19 disease pandemic infiltrated the world, there
was an immediate need for accurate information. As with any outbreak, the outbreak follows a clear trajectory, and subsequently,
the supporting information for that outbreak needs to address the
needs associated with that stage of the outbreak. At first, there
was a need to inform the public of the information related to the
initial situation related to the âĂĲwhoâĂİ of the COVID-19 disease.
However, as time continued, the âĂĲwhereâĂİ, âĂĲwhenâĂİ and
âĂĲhow toâĂİ related questions started to emerge in relation to
the public healthcare system themselves. Questions surrounding
the health facilities including COVID-19 hospital bed capacity, locations of designated COVID-19 facilities, and general information
related to these facilities were not easily accessible to the general
public. Furthermore, the available information was found to be
outdated, fragmented across several platforms, and still had gaps in
the data related to these facilities. To rectify this problem, a group
of volunteers working on the covid19za project stepped in to assist.
KDD 2020 Workshop on Humanitarian Mapping, ,
2020.

Each member leading a part of the project chose to focus on one of
four problems related to the challenges associated with the Hospital
information including: data quality, data completeness, data source
validation and data visualisation capacity. As the project developed,
so did the sophistication of the data, visualisation and core function of the project. The future prospects of this project relate to a
Progressive Web Application that will avail this information for
the public as well as healthcare workers through comprehensive
mapping and data quality.

KEYWORDS
COVID19,Public Health, Health Facilities, Mapping

ACM Reference Format:
Nompumelelo Mtsweni, Herkulaas MvE Combrink, and Vukosi Marivate.
2020. Mapping the South African health landscape in response to COVID-19.
In KDD 2020 Workshop on Humanitarian Mapping, San Diego, USA. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 4 pages.

KDD 2020 Workshop on Humanitarian Mapping, ,

1

INTRODUCTION

In the early phases of the COVID-19 disease in South Africa, with
the number of infectious and infected people on the incline. During
the early phases of the COVID-19 disease in South Africa, the Data
Science for Social Impact (DSFSI) research group at the University
of Pretoria and collaborators, experienced challenges related to
information on a facility level related to the COVID-19 disease
readiness [6].
As we move to the next phase of South Africa’s experience
of COVID-19 and its responses, we continue to look back at the
progress of the Coronavirus COVID-19 (2019-nCoV) Data Repository for South Africa project [5]1 , from hereon referred to as the
covid19za project. The focus for this case study is on understanding
the health system capacity in South Africa. A challenge that was
identified early on in the project was the lack of updated health system data (data about hospitals, clinics and health resources). This
challenge expanded when there was a realisation of the magnitude
of work that would need to be done to collect and harmonise public
health systems data for South Africa. This work builds on our initial
work on collecting and collating COVID-19 data for South Africa
[6]. In this case study, we discuss these challenges and present what
has been achieved so far.

2

THE BEGINNING

Initially, our goal was to collect information on the public healthcare
system related to the South African COVID-19 response. We had
anticipated that with the growth of cases, better health system
information would be needed for more localised decision making.
We collected the health system data for four primary reasons. We
wanted to be able to identify:
• Where the COVID-19 hospitals were going to be in the country;
• What the current situation in the country is related to the
COVID-19 response;
• When the shortages were going to arise within the public
healthcare system related to the COVID-19 response;
• and how to assist the public in understanding which healthcare facilities were used for what specific response amidst
the COVID-19 pandemic.
At the beginning of this task, these quetions where in their infance and fairly descriptive in nature. Initially, a few members in the
covid19za project volunteer group started asking questions about
health system information (through posting issues on GitHub).
These questions led to the intial directions of what would be tackled in building data towards mapping health systems information,
capability and capacity in South Africa. We next describe our data
collection and collation.

3 DATA
3.1 Sourcing the data
The initial data contributed to the repository for health systems was
a pivoted dataset, in a CSV format, containing the geo-coordinates
of the locations of South African hospitals in the public sector and
some of the hospitals in the private sector. This dataset is a subset of
1 https://github.com/dsfsi/covid19za

Mtsweni and Combrink, et al.

a much larger dataset from the South African National Department
of Health (NDoH)âĂŹs Data Dictionary2 . The Data Dictionary
provides a reference point for selected health information standards
to support healthcare activities within South Africa. Unfortunately,
there are differences in some of the variables in the data dictionary,
lacking some of the vital information required for the COVID-19
response that have not been updated since 2018.
Although the data from the NDoH Data Dictionary listed a large
number of facilities; it did not represent the current realities of some
hospitals. There were some parts of the data that were outdated
such as the hospital names(some hospital names have changed). The
dataset also had a large number of missing data points including
physical addresses and contact details. The facilities listed did not
include attributes such as capacity (number of beds, number of Intensive Care Unit (ICU) beds), services available, and infrastructure
(ambulances, ventilators, etc). Despite the fact that the dataset contains great details about the administrative division within which a
facility resorts, it lacks information about health districts and clusters. More information about the health district approach in South
Africa can be found at the Health Systems Trust [8]3 . The Gauteng
Province Cluster Policy defines the concept of health clusters [4]
as ’A collection of health facilities at different levels of healthcare
provision (primary, secondary, tertiary and quatenary) which are
grouped together in a designated demographic area.’
The Gauteng Cluster Policy did not only have details about
health facilities in each cluster in Gauteng but also provided some
details about the number of hospital beds in each cluster. It should
be noted that some hospitals were duplicated (meaning one hospital
could be in two different clusters) making the accounting of hospital
beds per cluster questionable. This could lead to challenges when
tallying capacity later.
Given that one of the covid19za project contribtors, Anelda van
der Walt, is involved in the Afrimapr4 the health systems task
received further input and resources to use to collect further data.
A prior study [3] had looked at the geographical mal-distribution of
surgical resources in South Africa. We reached out to the author and
obtained the underlying data. The data is now available through
a permissive creative commons license[2] to allow and encourage
re-use upon our request. The dataset has data about the number
of beds (classified into which units of hospitals they belong to) in
each hospital per province. This dataset has been the most useful
in filling the gaps from the NDoH data dictionary. We next had to
work on data cleaning and munging.

3.2

Data cleaning

To maintain the integrity of the data, we had to work on maintaining
the provenance of all of the data that is being collated in the dataset.
Since the data is being collected from a wide variety of sources,
and the data is available under a variety of licenses (or without
licenses), we had to document data sources and ensure that we
attribute people/organisations who have collected the data and are
willing to share it. This route is chosen not just for attributionâĂŹs

2 https://dd.dhmis.org/
3 https://www.hst.org.za/publications/
4 https://afrimapr.github.io/afrimapr.website/

Mapping the South African health landscape in response to COVID-19

KDD 2020 Workshop on Humanitarian Mapping, ,

sake, but to encourage others to also open up their data to assist in
such situations.
Combining various health facility lists to create a single, complete view of a countryâĂŹs health system, is not a trivial task. For
example, lists cannot be merged simply by using facility names. As
mentioned before, facility names change over time and lists are
often not updated. Furthermore, facilities may be listed under their
full names, short names, and/or common names. Typos, capitalisation, misspelling, and varying naming conventions all contribute
to the challenge of merging health facility lists by facility name.
To understand some of the real-world challenges experienced in
the analysis and merging of health facility lists and identify steps
that can be streamlined for others wanting to do the same, we set
out to assist with collating the South African data. Some aspects of
the datasets and challenges experienced are discussed in work by
Afrimapr5 and come with supporting R Markdown file6 . The full
report discussing these challenges is also available [9].
The work on the covid19za project is also feeding into Afrimapr.
Afrimapr is a Wellcome Open Research Fund project hosted at the
Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine. The overarching aim of
Afrimapr is to develop reusable open-source R building blocks to
make open African health data more accessible. One of the focus
areas at this stage is the afrihealthsites[1]7 package that currently
provides easy access to two continental open health facility datasets
- one developed by the KEMRI|Wellcome Trust Research Programme
and hosted by WHO and a second collated by healthsites.io. Ongoing work includes adding functionality to include self-defined
health facility lists (such as the ones described in this blog8 post)
for visualisation and analysis.

3.3

Gaps in the data

We have made progress with getting data but it is still not enough.
Currently, there are still useful bits of information about hospitals
that are still missing like clear hospital descriptions, their operational functions and most importantly the statuses on whether
they are COVID-19 ready or not. Data about contact details of
hospitals and contact personnel per hospital is also currently not
complete. Another crucial missing bit of data in our healthcare
facilities dataset is the estimate of population in some local municipalities and districts. Current bed numbers in hospitals are not
verified as yet, the locations of the recently developed field hospitals
are not available as yet and also a clear indication of which hospitals
(both in the public and the private sector ) are being upgraded has
not yet been made available.

4

Figure 2: German Health System Capacity Map

INSPIRATION FROM ACROSS THE WORLD

During the COVID-19 pandemic, there have been many projects
covering data analysis, modelling and mapping. Here we share a
few mapping projects that have served as inspiration for some of
the work that is being done on mapping the South African health
system. One such project worked to map the availability of hospital
resources in German hospitals. The project visualised all hospitals
5 http://www.afrimapr.org/blog/2020/merging-health-facility-lists-part1/
6 https://github.com/anelda/merge_open_hospital_data/blob/master/reports/merge_

open_hospital_data_part1.Rmd

Figure 3: Country testing map from https://www.ineff.ch/
cov19testmap/
and provides easy to understand triage of the health system capacity
for each hospital. An example is shown in Figure 2
We were inspired by a COVID-19 testing facility map9 that visualised testing facilities in South Africa, Switzerland, Slovenia,
Poland and the Czech Republic. One of the authors of this case
study contributed to the translation of the map into isiZulu and
also connected the map to the South African data in our project.
The map is shown in Figure 3.

5

ONGOING AND FUTURE WORK

Our ongoing work focuses on obtaining more sources of data to
enhance the data that we already have. As the COVID-19 pandemic
progresses in South Africa, we believe there will be more need for
coordinating the health care system response. As such next discuss
two sets of future work that we are planning.

5.1

Current state of mapping

We created a mapping visualisation of the health systems data (as
shown in 1. Our next goal is to complete missing data and update the
dataset with the current developments made by the South African

7 https://github.com/afrimapr/afrihealthsites
8 https://dsfsi.github.io/blog/mapping-healthsystem/

9 https://www.ineff.ch/cov19testmap/

KDD 2020 Workshop on Humanitarian Mapping, ,

governments. These developments include upgrading of public
hospitals, additions of beds in some hospitals and development of
field hospitals for triage. Populating the dataset with data related
to these current developments will assist in preparing for the surge
of COVID-19 that is anticipated to peak in a few months [7].

5.2

Tools for healthcare workers

We are planning to develop a Progressive Web Application that will
make accessibility of this data (amongst other data in the repository)
easier. This will make it possible to get the information even to
parts of the population that lives in remote low-bandwidth areas
where internet quality is not so strong or fast enough. This will
be both for health care workers as well as the public. This will
then open up the next phase of the project to develop tools for
better understanding of individual health facility planning for the
pandemic akin to the work on hospital projections [10].

6

CONCLUSION

The work described in this case study has been focused on how we
have worked to collect, collate and clean health systems data for
South Africa in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. This project
emerged from the necessity to assess the healthcare system from
a public point of view and inform not only the public, but the
healthcare workers on the current situation within their facilities.
Through this project, we have created our own maps of the health
system (public and private) and also contributed to other mapping
projects through making data available in an open manner. There
is a large need for the NDoH to keep their health systems data up
to date and easy to use and integrate with other systems both in
public and private domains. This data becomes critical at a local
management level if one needs to understand how well the health
system is coping during a pandemic (we showed an example of
the German ICU map that has a simple triage of each hospital).
Furthermore, other innovations can be developed on top of the data
(we showed an example of a testing facility map) that now includes
South African (publicly) testing facilities that were announced by
the Minister of Health, South Africa.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to acknowledge Anelda van der Walt who has assisted in guding this work from the beginning and had numerous
inputs into the process. We would like to acknowledge every person from the public that dedicated their time, effort and energy to
assist during this pandemic. For the covid19za project we would like
to acknowledge all contributors. As this is an open contribution
project, the updated list of contributors is available on the github
repo10 . We would like to thank the DSFSI research group at the
University of Pretoria for all their expertise, patience and hard work
during this time. We also would like to thank all the employees of
the NICD, DoH and WHO who assisted with data during this time.
We would like to acknowledge ABSA for sponsoring the industry
chair and it’s related activities to the project.

10 https://github.com/dsfsi/covid19za/graphs/contributors

Mtsweni and Combrink, et al.

REFERENCES
[1] Afrimapr. 2020. afrihealthsites: Access to geographic locations of african health
sites from different sources. https://github.com/afrimapr/afrihealthsites.
[2] Angela Dell. 2020. Surgical Resources. (4 2020). https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.
figshare.12066711.v1
[3] Angela June Dell. 2016. Global surgery-socioeconomic and geographic maldistribution of surgical resources. Ph.D. Dissertation. University of Cape Town.
[4] Gauteng Deparment Departmentof Health. 2019. Cluster policy framework guideline for Gauteng department of health. Technical Report. Gauteng Deparment
Departmentof Health.
[5] Vukosi Marivate, Riaz Arbi, Herkulaas Combrink, Alta de Waal, Henkho Dryza,
Derrick Egersdorfer, Shaun Garnett, Brent Gordon, Lizel Greyling, Ofentswe
Lebogo, Dave Mackie, Bruce Merry, S’busiso Mkhondwane, Mpho Mokoatle,
Shivan Moodley, Jabu Mtsweni, Nompumelelo Mtsweni, Paul Myburgh, Jannik
Richter, Vuthlari Rikhotso, Simon Rosen, Joseph Sefara, Anelda van der Walt,
Schalk van Heerden, and Jay Welsh. 2020. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) case
data - South Africa. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3819126
[6] Vukosi Marivate and Herkulaas MvE Combrink. 2020. Use of Available Data To
Inform The COVID-19 Outbreak in South Africa: A Case Study. Data Science
Journal 19, 1 (2020), 1–7. https://doi.org/10.5334/dsj-2020-019
[7] Modelling, South African DSI-NRF Centre of Excellence in Epidemiological Modelling Simulation Hub Africa (MASHA), Health Economics Analysis (SACEMA),
and National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD) Epidemiology Research Office (HE2RO). 2020. Estimating cases for COVID-19 in South Africa:
Long-term national and provincial projections. Technical Report. NDoH.
[8] Jillan Nicholson. 2001. Bringing Health Closer to People - Local Government and
the Health District System. Health Systems Trust.
[9] Anelda van der Walt. 2020. Merging Open Health Facility Data Sets: Part 1.
https://github.com/anelda/merge_open_hospital_data/.
[10] Teng Zhang, Kelly McFarlane, Jacqueline Vallon, Linying Yang, Jin Xie, Jose
Blanchet, Peter Glynn, Kristan Staudenmayer, Kevin Schulman, and David
Scheinker. 2020. A model to estimate bed demand for COVID-19 related hospitalization. medRxiv (2020).

