Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

A Modified Epidemiological Model to Understand the Uneven
Impact of COVID-19 on Vulnerable Individuals and the
Approaches Required to Help them Emerge from Lockdown

arXiv:2006.10495v2 [physics.soc-ph] 19 Jun 2020

Dario Ortega Anderez*1 · Eiman Kanjo1 · Ganna Pogrebna3 · Shane
Johnson2 · John Alan Hunt4

Received: date / Accepted: date

Abstract
Background: COVID-19 has shown a relatively low
case fatality rate in young healthy individuals, with the
majority of this group being asymptomatic or having
mild symptoms. However, the severity of the disease
among the elderly as well as in individuals with underlying health conditions has caused significant mortality
rates worldwide. Understanding this variance amongst
different sectors of society and modelling this will enable the different levels of risk to be determined to enable strategies to be applied to different groups. Longestablished compartmental epidemiological models like
SIR and SEIR do not account for the variability encountered in the severity of the SARS-CoV-2 disease
across different population groups.
Objective: The objective of this study is to investigate
how a reduction in the exposure of vulnerable individuals to COVID-19 can minimise the number of deaths
caused by the disease, using the UK as a case study.
Methods: To overcome the limitation of long-established
compartmental epidemiological models, it is proposed
that a modified model, namely SEIR-v, through which
Dario Ortega Anderez and Eiman Kanjo1 School of Science
and Technology, Nottingham Trent University, Clifton Lane,
NG11 8NS, UK. E-mail: dario.ortegaanderez02@ntu.ac.uk Email: eiman.kanjo@ntu.ac.uk · Shane Johnson
2
University College London (UCL) Jill Dando Institute, 35
Tavistock Square, London, WC1H 9EZ, UK
Ganna Pogrebna
3
The University of Sydney Business School, Abercrombie
Building H70, Darlington NSW 2006, Australia and the Alan
Turing Institute, 96 Euston Road, London, NW1 2DB, UK
John Hunt
4
Medical Technologies Innovation Facility, Nottingham Trent
University, Nottingham, NG11 8NS, U.K. College of Biomedical Engineering, China Medical University, Taichung 40402,
Taiwan

the population is separated into two groups regarding
their vulnerability to SARS-CoV-2 is applied. This enables the analysis of the spread of the epidemic when
different contention measures are applied to different
groups in society regarding their vulnerability to the
disease. A Monte Carlo simulation (100,000 runs) along
the proposed SEIR-v model is used to study the number of deaths which could be avoided as a function of
the decrease in the exposure of vulnerable individuals
to the disease.
Results: The results indicate a large number of deaths
could be avoided by a slight realistic decrease in the
exposure of vulnerable groups to the disease. The mean
values across the simulations indicate 3,681 and 7,460
lives could be saved when such exposure is reduced by
10% and 20% respectively.
Conclusions: From the encouraging results of the modelling a number of mechanisms are proposed to limit
the exposure of vulnerable individuals to the disease.
One option could be the provision of a wristband to
vulnerable people and those without a smartphone and
contact-tracing app, filling the gap created by systems
relying on smartphone apps only. By combining very
dense contact tracing data from smartphone apps and
wristband signals with information about infection status and symptoms, vulnerable people can be protected
and kept safer.
Keywords COVID-19 · Coronavirus · Infection
Spread Modelling · Epidemiological Model

1 Introduction
Coronaviruses (CoV) are a large family of enveloped,
positive-strand RNA viral diseases capable of infecting
a variety of host species, including humans and several

2

other vertebrates [14]. CoVs predominantly cause gastrointestinal and respiratory tract infections, inducing
a wide range of clinical symptotic manifestations [53].
Before the latest strain of coronavirus SARS-CoV2 in December 2019, six human CoVs including four
endemic (HCoV-OC43, -229E, -NL63, and -HKU1) and
two epidemic (SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV) viruses had
been identified.
Despite the recent scientific progress across different domains and the increasing levels of public hygiene
worldwide, the combination of various key adverse factors has translated the SARS-CoV-2 outbreak into a
global epidemic with a real risk to life. The COVID-19
outbreak originated in Wuhan, China, which in addition to being the largest city in central China, is home
to the largest deep-water port, airport and train station
in that same area [58]. The outbreak coincided with increased levels of travel prior to the Chinese New Year,
that resulted in more than five million people travelling
out from Wuhan in the first few days of the outbreak
before Wuhan was put under lockdown [57]. This facilitated the spread of COVID-19 within Mainland China
as well as in countries with high volumes of air traffic with China, such as South Korea, Japan, Thailand
and Singapore [10]. Initial estimates from the World
Health Organisation (WHO) for the basic reproduction
number (R0 ) of COVID-19 were in the range of 1.4 to
2.5, whereas recent studies suggest this estimated basic
reproduction number could have been higher, with statistical studies giving R0 values in the range (2.2-3.58)
[29,65, 26], mathematical studies from 1.4 to 6.49 [47,
12,54], and stochastic approaches from 2.2 to 2.68 [62,
42]. This implies the reproduction number of COVID-19
may be a lot higher than originally estimated and therefore significantly greater than that of MERS (R0 < 1)
[37] and in the range of SARS’ (R0 ≈ 3) [36]. As the
COVID-19 epidemic unfolds, the commonality of mild
and asymptomatic cases has become apparent. This is
a key issue, since unlike with other CoVs like SARS,
where peak viral shedding occurred after patients were
severely ill and therefore easily identifiable, preliminary
evidence suggests that COVID-19 can be transmitted
at the early phases of the disease where no symptoms
are observed [44].
The combination of these factors has led to the
rapid international spread of SARS-CoV-2 and it being
declared a Public Health Emergency of International
Concern on 1 February 2020 and thereafter a pandemic
on the 11 March 2020. The dramatic consequences of
the pandemic have translated into unprecedented nonpharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) internationally, including national and international travel restrictions,
quarantine and isolation of large populations, the clo-

Dario Ortega Anderez*1 et al.

sure of universities, schools and social spaces, as well as
a widespread social distancing policy and the banning
of public gatherings and events. Despite these containment measures by different countries, as of 2 June 2020,
over 6.4 million cases of COVID-19 have been reported
worldwide causing death to over 378,290 people [59].
While COVID-19 has the potential to infect every
individual in the world, the disease has been extremely
dangerous with a greater risk of mortality in groups
older than 70 years of age as well as in people with
underlying health conditions (e.g., high blood pressure;
respiratory problems, etc.). Given the current increasingly aging population in many parts of the world, particularly, in developed nations such as the UK, where
2018 figures from the Office for National Statistics [15]
reported that 18.3% of people were 65 or over. Put this,
with the number of younger individuals who have underlying health conditions, then there is an approximate
20% of the UK population having a considerably high
risk of death if infected. Motivated by the disparate
mortality rates across different groups in society, this
work proposes a modified compartmental epidemiological model (SEIR-v) to study the impact of reducing
the contact rate of vulnerable individuals on the potential to reduce the number of fatalities caused by the
disease. The motivation behind the model was that traditional epidemiological models like SIR [22] and SEIR
[7] assume equal contact rates and death rates for every
individual in the population (i.e., these models, essentially, abstract from significant individual, behavioral,
and spacial heterogeneity observed in the population
of any country). In contrast, SEIR-v provides a means
of studying the progression of the number of fatalities
when differing contention measures are applied across
different groups of individuals regarding their vulnerability to the disease, while also accounting for the
characteristic variability seen in the case fatality rates
across these groups. As outlined in [20], the original
mathematical models the British government used to
inform policy in the UK did not account for vulnerable people. In contrast, SEIR-v provides the opportunity to distinguish between vulnerable groups and
low-risk groups, allowing policy recommendations for
each segment, rather than applying a one-size-fits-all
policy. Predictions made with SEIR-v outlined the importance of minimising the chances of vulnerable people contracting the disease, with an estimated reduction of 3681 and 7406 further deaths if their exposure
to the virus was decreased by only 10% and 20% respectively. The widespread policies of physical distancing restrictions, may now have contributed to another
health problem: loneliness. Those who do not have close
family or friends, and rely on the support of volun-

A Modified Epidemiological Model to Understand the Impact of COVID-19 on Vulnerable Individuals

tary services or social care, may feel vulnerable, according to recent correspondence published in The Lancet
[6]. The impact on physical health, arising from mental
health problems due to loneliness should not be underestimated and ignored.
There is therefore a need to help vulnerable people exit the lockdown whilst addressing their continued
protection and provide them with the means to participate in the contact-tracing process. Here, we consider
practical options for facilitating the exit strategy for
vulnerable groups from lockdown. In line with this, we
provide a set of recommendations:
1. the use of wearable devices (henceforth, wearables)
to enable vulnerable people to take part in contact
tracing,
2. the development of effective incentive mechanisms
in order to motivate people to engage in contact
tracing,
3. the use of digital tools to maintain physical distancing and monitor health symptoms,
4. the use of personal protective equipment,
5. the planning for easing the contention measures.
The most important determinants of outcome are:
1. reduction of transmission rates post lockdown in the
vulnerable populations;
2. fewer restrictions on the vulnerable post-lockdown
with noticeable improvement in their well-being (many
may already be suffering from loneliness and mental
health problems due to the lockdown);
3. maintenance of keeping vulnerable people and the
hard-to-reach connected and closely monitored.
2 Methods
2.1 Compartmental Epidemiological Models
Generally, the spread of infectious diseases like COVID19 are studied through the use of compartmental epidemiological models. Such models provide a simplified
means of describing the transmission of the infectious
disease through the different individuals within a population by dividing the individuals into different states
regarding their current susceptibility to the disease and
their disease transmission capabilities. Within such models, the SIR [22] and the SEIR [7] models are widely
employed and published in the literature in the field.
A visual representation of the SIR and SEIR models is
depicted in Figure 1.

3

Fig. 1: SIR and SEIR epidemiological models.
and recovered. The transition between one compartment to its following are controlled by the model transition parameters:
1. Infectious rate (β): is the rate of spread of the virus
given by the probability of transmitting the disease
between an infectious individual and a susceptible
individual. This is subject to the disease transmission probability and the chance of contact.
1
2. Recovery rate (γ) = Tlat
is determined by the average duration of the infectious period of the disease
(Tlat ).
3. Re-susceptibility rate (ξ) is the rate at which recovered individuals return to the susceptible state
due to loss of immunity (normally ignored due to
long-term immunity).
Given the definition of the above parameters, the
SIR model can be expressed by:
∂S
βIS
=−
,
∂t
N
∂I
βIS
=
− γI,
∂t
N

(1)

∂R
= γI
∂t
where S, I and R are the number of susceptible, infected and recovered (or removed) individuals respectively, and N is the total population, which follows N =
S(t) + I(t) + R(t).
Provided the set of equations above, the dynamics of
the infectious disease given by its reproduction number
(R0 ) is calculated as:
R0 =

β
γ

(2)

2.1.1 SIR Model

2.1.2 SEIR Model

The SIR model divides the entire population into three
different compartments, namely susceptible, infectious

The SEIR model proposed in [7] is a slight variation of
the SIR model, in that it includes an additional state

Dario Ortega Anderez*1 et al.

4

‘Exposed’ to the three states used in the SIR model.
The motivation behind this comes from the fact that
some infectious diseases exhibit a considerable postinfection incubation period in which an infected person
(exposed) is not yet infectious, thereby affecting significantly the dynamics of the transmission of the disease.
The SEIR model can be expressed as follows:
Fig. 2: Non-pharmaceutical interventions applied by the
UK government.

∂S
βIS
=−
,
∂t
N
βIS
∂E
=
− σE,
∂t
N
(3)
∂I
= σE − γI,
∂t
∂R
= γI
∂t

2.2 The Role of Non Pharmaceutical Interventions and
Herd Immunity
Non Pharmaceutical Interventions (NPIs) are those actions or measures employed with the aim of limiting the
spread of a viral disease when pharmaceutical interventions, such as anti-viral medications and vaccines, are
still not available. A general classification into two main
contention strategies, namely suppression and mitigation, is made based on whether the measures applied
aim at quickly reducing the reproduction number (the
average number of secondary cases generated per typical infectious case), R, to values lower than 1, or to
simply slow down the spread of the virus by controlling the value of R, while allowing it to take values in
(R ≥ 1).
In other words, suppression strategies aim to turn
the pandemic phase of the disease (R > 1) into the endemic phase (R < 1), where each infectious individual,
on average, spreads the virus to less than one person,
thereby causing a decay in the daily number of new
cases. In contrast, mitigation strategies, unless combined with certain levels of population immunity, are
not aimed at the suppression of the virus per se. Instead, they are employed to reduce the health impact
of the epidemic by controlling the curve through the
contention of R, so that even though each individual,
on average, spreads the disease to more than one person, such spread is to some extent controlled to meet
the capacity of the respective health care system, while
building up population immunity along the course of

the epidemic phase. Ultimately, such built up immunity will prevent the disease from spreading any further, leading thereby to a rapid decline in the number
of new infections and the consequent endemic phase of
the disease.
To date, hybrid strategies through which mitigation and suppression measures are combined to fight
the spread of the epidemic, are being adopted by the
vast majority of countries severely affected by COVID19. Such strategies have overall included the implementation of diverse contention measures including the
instruction to self-isolate to confirmed and suspected
cases, the encouragement of social distancing, the banning of non essential travel, mass gatherings and public events, the closure of schools and universities and
the lockdown of the population. Whilst allowing key
workers to carry out their duties and then broadly the
general public in lockdown at home were allowed to go
out for essentials like food and exercise. The analysis of
existing data has already demonstrated that mass testing and the isolation of infected individuals can on its
own have a suppressive impact on the curve, thereby
reducing significantly the size of the peak [2]. Examples include the strategies followed by South Korea and
Germany. However, it must be noted that the adoption of suppression strategies is challenging due to the
low level of herd immunity achieved as function of time
throughout the progression of the disease, thereby, to
avoid the eventual increase of new infections, the contention measures have to be maintained until pharmaceutical interventions are available.
Although still no empirical evidence can be found
suggesting the dismissal of the possibility of reinfection from COVID-19, the results reported on studies
investigating the persistence of antibodies in patients
exposed to similar CoVs [32, 63, 3, 41] suggest the antibody immunity built up by individuals exposed to the
SARS-CoV-2 virus may potentially last until medical
interventions are available. For instance, the study in
[32] showed the persistence of antibodies in patients
infected by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV), could last for at least two years.

A Modified Epidemiological Model to Understand the Impact of COVID-19 on Vulnerable Individuals

5

Fig. 3: SEIR-v epidemiological model.
The results reported in [63], where 176 patients were
found to maintain SARS-specific antibodies for 2 years
were in line with those of [32]. A significant reduction
of immunoglobulin Gpositive was the case in the third
year. Thus, SARS patients might be susceptible to reinfection 3 years after the initial exposure to the virus.
Regarding the immunity against MERS-CoV, the work
in [3] studied the antibody response in 9 healthcare
workers in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, who had previously
suffered from the disease showing symptoms of severe
pneumonia. A further study in [41], explored the longterm antibody response against MERS-CoV. This research reported the persistence of antibodies, including
neutralising antibodies, in 6 out of the 7 (86%) explored
individuals for at least 34 months after the outbreak.

nerability to the disease. The SEIR-v compartmental
model can be defined as follows:
∂S
βIS
βv IS
= −(1 − pv )
− pv
,
∂t
N
N
∂E
βIS
= (1 − pv )
− σE
∂t
N
∂Ev
βv IS
= pv
− σEv ,
∂t
N
∂I
= σE − γI,
∂t
(4)
∂Iv
= σEv − γIv ,
∂t

2.3 Proposed Model: SEIR-v
The need to develop the SEIR-v model comes from the
consideration of the characteristic variability encountered in the severity of COVID-19 across different individuals with respect to their age group and state of
health during the early phase of the infection. Evidence
suggests, the mortality rate in individuals of advanced
age and / or with underlying health conditions is significantly higher than that in younger healthier individuals [19]. Thereby, to reduce the number of fatalities,
it is crucial to have detailed means of looking more
closely into the impact of the application of the different
NPIs across the different population groups regarding
their vulnerability to the disease on the overall mortality rate. SEIR-v provides a means of studying the
impact of the different NPIs on the number of deaths,
when these are only applied to people with higher vul-

∂R
= γI(1 − µ),
∂t
∂Rv
= γI(1 − µv ),
∂t
∂D
= γIµ + γIv µv
∂t
where S is the number of susceptible individuals. E, I,
R are the number of non vulnerable exposed, infectious
and recovered individuals respectively. Ev Iv , Rv are
the number of vulnerable exposed, infectious and recovered individuals respectively. D is the total number
of deaths caused by the disease. pv is the probability
of an individual being vulnerable to the disease. β and
βv are the contact rates by non vulnerable and by vulnerable individuals respectively. σ is the rate at which

6

Dario Ortega Anderez*1 et al.

an exposed individual becomes infectious. γ is the the
rate at which an infectious individual recovers from the
disease. µ and µv are the case fatality rates for non vulnerable and for vulnerable individuals respectively. The
conceptual diagram of SEIR-v can be seen in Figure 3.

2.4 Model Parameterisation
Definitive values for the different parameters that define the spread of the COVID-19 and the impact of the
contention measures in place are still unknown, given
that the disease is still spreading globally and key information is still unknown. For instance, the number of
asymptomatic cases and consequently the total number of individuals who are or have been infected by the
disease remains to be determined. Consequently, the
case fatality rate of the disease is also unknown. Motivated by this fact, first efforts were aimed at estimating
the value of the different model parameters through the
comparison of the estimated number of deaths and the
real number of deaths as reported in [60].To do so, the
incubation period (σ) and the recovery rate (γ) estimated in previous work were taken into consideration
[28]. With these figures, the best fit parameters were
identified by running a Monte Carlo simulation with
100.000 iterations, allowing the rest of the parameters
to take random values from a Gaussian distribution
within their respective expected intervals. The definitions of the different model parameters can be found in
Table 1.
2.4.1 Virus Transmissibility Study
Given the parameters provided in Table 1, the final
mortality rate of COVID-19 was studied as a function
of the percentage decrease in the contact rate of vulnerable individuals (βv ). The mean values across the
different Monte Carlo simulations and the reduction in
the number of deaths caused by the disease estimated
by the best fit model are provided.

3 Results
The results achieved by the analysis of the number of
deaths caused by COVID-19 as a function of the contact
rate of vulnerable individuals (βv ) are presented in this
section. Two different scenarios were considered:
1. The vulnerable group contact rate, βv , is decreased
from the beginning of the outbreak. With this scenario, the potential reduction in the number of deaths
if more protective measures for vulnerable groups

Fig. 4: Reduction in the number of deaths as a function of the percentage decrease in βv , given that this
reduction is applied at the beginning of the outbreak.

had been applied from the beginning of the outbreak
was studied.
2. The vulnerable group contact rate, βv , is decreased
from now (2 June 2020). With this, the potential
reduction in the number of deaths the disease will
cause from today was studied.
It should be noted that the Fear Factor (η) already
takes into consideration the widespread risk of the disease in vulnerable groups and the recommendation made
by the UK government for vulnerable individuals to
stay at home for at least 12 weeks at the beginning
of the outbreak. The decreases in Bv are therefore additional to that caused by η. Initial simulations using
higher case fatality rates significantly overestimated the
number of deaths caused by the disease in the UK as
compared to those reported in [60]. It is thus believed
the case fatality rate is significantly lower than that
reported in [19].

3.1 Reduction of the Contact Rate of Vulnerable
Individuals from the Beginning of the Outbreak
The potential reduction in the number of deaths caused
by COVID-19 as a function of the percentage decrease
applied to βv achieved by the Monte Carlo simulation
is shown in Figure 4. From this data, the reduction of
the exposure of vulnerable groups to the disease at the
beginning of the outbreak greatly decreases the number
of deaths, The mean figures for the prevented deaths for
each 10% decrease in βv are shown in Table 2.
Similarly, the results obtained by the use of the best
fit model across the Monte Carlo simulation are shown
in Figure 5. The performance of this model at predicting
the number of deaths caused by COVID-19 can be seen
in Figure 6. The prediction given by the best fit model

A Modified Epidemiological Model to Understand the Impact of COVID-19 on Vulnerable Individuals

7

Table 1: Description of the SEIR-v model parameters
Parameter

Description

Value

Comments

N

Population

67.838.235 [61]

Total population in the UK as of 2020

Ev0

Vulnerable Exposed

2

Vulnerable individuals exposed to the disease at the beginning of the outbreak

E0

Exposed

4

Non-vulnerable individuals exposed to the disease at the beginning of the outbreak

Iv0

Infected

0

Vulnerable infected individuals at the beginning of the outbreak

I0

Infected

1

Non-vulnerable infected individuals at the beginning of the outbreak

Tinc

Incubation period

5.6 [28]

σ=

1
Tinc

The time it takes for an exposed individual to become infectious

7.5 [28]

γ=

1
Tlat

The time it takes for an infectious individual to recover

[0.005-0.037, 95% CI]%

Case fatality rate of COVID-19 on vulnerable individuals

[0.000007-0.000011, 95% CI]%

Case fatality rate of COVID-19 on non-vulnerable individuals

0.2

Probability of an individual being vulnerable to the disease

Tlat

Latent period
Vulnerable

µv
Case Fatality Rate
Non-vulnerable
µ
Case Fatality Rate
pv

Vulnerable probability

Fear factor caused by the recommendation made by the UK government for
η

Fear Factor

0.33

vulnerable individuals to stay at home for at least 12 weeks at the beginning
of the outbreak and the widespread severity of the disease within this group

β0

Initial Contact Rate

[0.5-2.1, 95% CI]

Contact rate at the beginning of the outbreak

β1

Contact Rate 1

[0.9-0.95, 95% CI]*β0

Contact rate after the mandate of case-based self isolation

β2

Contact Rate 2

[0.9-0.95, 95% CI]*β1

Contact rate after government encouragement for social distancing

β3

Contact Rate 3

[0.75-0.85, 95% CI]*β2

Contact rate after schools closure

β4

Contact Rate 4

[0.40-0.60, 95% CI]*β3

Contact rate after lockdown order and banning of public events

β5

Contact Rate 5

[1.1-1.9, 95% CI]*β4

Contact rate after recommendation for people to go back to work

βvi

Vulnerable Contact Rate

η ∗ βi

Contact rate of vulnerable individuals.

Table 2: Relationship between the decrease in βv and the resultant number of deaths avoided when this decrease
is applied from the beginning of the outbreak expressed as the mean value of the Monte Carlo simulation
Decrease in βv

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

70%

80%

90%

Decrease in number of deaths

7699

15512

23428

31434

39519

47671

55876

64122

72395

for the total number of deaths caused by COVID-19 in
the UK at the end of the outbreak is 39825.
3.1.1 Reduction of the Contact Rate of Vulnerable
Individuals at Present
While this data from modelling reported the decrease
in the number of deaths if the exposure of vulnerable
people to the virus had been reduced from the beginning of the SARS-CoV-2 outbreak, this section presents
the benefits this reduction would bring if actions were
taken from this point in time going forwards.
The potential reduction in the number of deaths
caused by COVID-19 as a function of the percentage

decrease applied to βv achieved by the Monte Carlo
simulation is shown in Figure 7. As it can be seen in
the figure, the reduction of the exposure of vulnerable
groups to the disease from today (2 June 2020) greatly
decreases the number of further deaths, The mean figures for the prevented deaths for each 10% decrease in
βv are shown in Table 3.

The results obtained by the use of the best fit model
are shown in Figure 8.

Dario Ortega Anderez*1 et al.

8

Table 3: Relationship between the decrease in βv and the resultant number of deaths avoided when this decrease
is applied from today (2 June 2020) expressed as the mean value of the Monte Carlo simulation.
Decrease in βv

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

70%

80%

90%

Decrease in number of deaths

3681

7406

11172

14975

18810

22673

26559

30464

34383

Fig. 5: Reduction in the number of deaths as a function
of the percentage decrease in βv for the best fit model,
given that this reduction is applied at the beginning of
the outbreak.

Fig. 8: Reduction in the number of deaths as a function
of the percentage decrease in βv for the best fit model,
given that this reduction is applied from 2 June 2020.
4 Discussion
From the results of the modelling, it has been evidenced
it is crucial to consider the contrasting vulnerability
in different groups of the population regarding their
age and overall health condition when developing plans
to return to normality. Motivated by this, three main
points for consideration are proposed, namely 1) the use
of dedicated wristbands for the vulnerable to enable
social distancing and protect their well-being, 2) the
use of Personal Protective Equipment(PPE) and 3) the
lockdown easing plan and the benefits they can bring.

Fig. 6: Predicted number of deaths using the best fit
model vs the number of deaths reported (real).
4.1 Protecting the Vulnerable People

Fig. 7: Reduction in the number of deaths as a function of the percentage decrease in βv , given that this
reduction is applied from 2 June 2020.

Contact tracing, which has been used alongside other
protection measures across the world, can keep a record
of any new infection cases and anyone who has been
close to them [56]. This could enable uninfected and
immune people to leave their homes, while people who
might have been infected instructed to self-isolate. However, contract tracing is time consuming and resource
intensive and to be strictly accurate and valid requires
100% adoption. Bluetooth technology has been used
previously for messaging and tracking of nearby devices using proximity detection [21] [17]. Apple and
Google along with many health authorities have proposed software smartphone hosted apps using Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) to automate the contact trac-

A Modified Epidemiological Model to Understand the Impact of COVID-19 on Vulnerable Individuals

ing process [5]. BLE is a form of wireless communication designed especially for short-range communication
suitable for situations where battery life is preferred
over high data transfer speeds. Unfortunately, vulnerable and older people are more likely to use older smartphones that dont come equipped with the BLE feature,
e.g. about 9-12% of smartphones in the UK lack the
BLE functionality needed for it to work. In addition,
data from Ofcom shows that while around 80 per cent
of all adults owned a smart mobile phone in 2018, only
47% of 65-74 year old’s, and 26% of over 75s did [35].
This is supported by data published by Statista, which
indicates that only 40% of over 65s used a smart phone
to connect to the internet in 2019 [52]. Furthermore,
many people have privacy concerns about using their
smart phones as a tracer and they might not be willing to download a contact tracing app. With this background, three possible solutions to support vulnerable
people are proposed 1) contact Tracing wristband or
wearable,2) social distancing alert mechanism and, 3)
a wearable to monitor symptoms.
4.1.1 Wearables for Contact Tracing
The effectiveness of contact tracing hinges on how many
people use it. It is proposed that governments could
provide vulnerable individuals with a BLE wristband
similar to the one in Figure 9), closing a data collection
hole created by systems relying on smartphones and an
app only. Aiming to take a population to 100
The wristband includes a proximity sensor powered
by BLE. It also includes a manual control to self-report
and change a wearers status, recording states like selfisolating, symptomatic and, tested negative or tested
infected. When a user updates their state to indicate
an infection after testing, that updates others they have
been in close proximity with.

Fig. 9: Wristband for Vulnerable People

9

Fig. 10: A schematic of wearable-based COVID-19
proximity tracing
with a smartphone and Contact Tracing app comes
within read range (longer range than close proximity)
and downloads the records broadcasted by the wristband A. In turns. The individual wearing the wristband A could be alerted in real time using LED light
(or sound) of close proximity events. We believe that
adopting wearable (e.g. wristbands) solutions is advantageous over mobile apps for the following reasons:
1. Mobile phones might not be always with users. Instead, they might be left at home, in the car or at
work, which means their social encounters don’t always correspond to actual contact.
2. A wristband solution will only have radio technology
with a small memory and a battery with no access
to users data which could help to preserve privacy,
as it is low power it can always be on. It does not
require setting up or installation by the wearer.
3. Phone apps require to be installed and activated by
the users, Bluetooth need to be switched on. These
requirements make the apps unfeasible for vulnerable people with difficulties in remembering instructions; and lack of digital literacy, vision or motor
control.
4. Contact Tracing app can consume more energy as
they are often kept active with battery optimisation
features disabled.
5. Wearables are more likely to be work in front of
the body (e.g. wristbands, necklace or a keyfob),
which could potentially improve the accuracy of the
proximity detection in the case of the face of face
contact.
6. Smart phones come with different operating systems
and settings, which means each model might require
individual calibration and configuration.
4.1.2 Digital tools to maintain Social distancing

Figure 10 shows how the wristband concept works.
Contacts of an individual wearing the wristband A are
recorded on the wristband. A passer-by (e.g. postman)

By combining very dense contact tracing data from
smartphone apps and wristbands signals with informa-

10

Dario Ortega Anderez*1 et al.

4.1.3 Wearable to monitor symptoms

Fig. 11: A BLE mobile app and a keyfob concept developed at Nottingham Trent University (NTU) to alert
people when they are within 2m proximity.

tion about infection status and symptoms, vulnerable
people can be protected and kept safe. Many countries
have introduced wristbands for different purposes. For
instance, in South Korea, people found to be violating lockdown rules can be ordered to wear a tracking
band, which alerts the police if people leave the house
[1]. The trackers were introduced after people started
to leave their phones at home to avoid detection. The
devices also alert the authorities if people try to remove
it. Bulgaria has been testing Comarch LifeWristbands,
developed in Poland [1]. This system in addition to confirming a person is staying at home, can monitor the
wearer’s heart rate and then be used to call the emergency services.
Contact Tracing apps and Internet of Things (IOT)
such as key fobs, tags or wrist bands can also be used
to alert people (e.g. using vibration) if another device
comes within a specified distance. Figure 11 shows BLE
keyfob and KeepyourDistance app concepts being developed at Nottingham Trent University (NTU) to maintain social distancing. The KeepyourDistance screenshots show the signal strengths of nearby devices and
it vibrates when other phones with the same app are in
close proximity.

Dedicated health wristbands can be provided to vulnerable people with underling health conditions to track
their health including: temperature, breathing and heart
rate, and transmit it to their doctors. In addition to
the above functionalities, most commercially available
smart-wristbands and smart-watches incorporate an inertial measurement unit (IMU) composed of tri-axial
accelerometers and gyroscopes. The work in [23] reports a face touching frequency of 23 times per hour
with 44% of the face touches involving contact with a
mucous membrane. Wristbands should be programmed
to incorporate an alert mechanism to warn users whenever a potential movement of the hand towards the face
is detected. The accuracy achieved by relevant gesture
recognition work using inertial sensors [4, 40] suggests
that the development of such alerting features is feasible. These wearables can then be re-purposed once
the COVID-19 epidemic is over. For example they can
be given to older people and individuals with underling
heath conditions to monitor their health and well-being.
Also they can be used to keep vulnerable people connected with local volunteers and community services.
4.2 Disease Transmission and the Use of Personal
Protective Equipment
As outlined by the WHO [38], COVID-19 is primarily transmitted from person to person through small
droplets exhaled by the mouth or nose when an infected
individual speaks, sneezes or coughs. Direct transmission then occurs when such droplets travel onto the
mucous membranes of susceptible recipients, necessitating contact at close range (usually within 1 meter)
[24]. In addition to this, exhaled droplets can also come
to rest on surfaces around the infected individual. According to the WHO, the COVID-19 virus can survive
up to 4 hours on copper, 24 hours on cardboard and
up to 72 hours on plastic and stainless steel surfaces.
As a consequence, these become a potential source of
infection when touched by susceptible individuals prior
to touching their nose, mouth or eyes. Although exhaled droplets are often heavy enough not to travel
great distances, sinking quickly to the ground or surrounding surfaces, viral particles in the form of bioaerosols can remain airborne for an extended period
of time, particularly when droplet diameters are either
too small for gravitational deposition (<2 µm) or too
large for diffusive deposition (>200 µm) [51]. Experimental results on SARS during the 2003 epidemic [11]
support these statements, showing viral particles in the
form of bio-aerosols were being emitted by hospitalised

A Modified Epidemiological Model to Understand the Impact of COVID-19 on Vulnerable Individuals

patients. Likewise, recent work by [16] demonstrates
aerosol COVID-19 remains viable and infectious with
a half-life on the order of 1 hour, thus confirming the
plausibility of its transmission via airborne particles.
Given the above, the use of personal protective equipment (PPE) can be a key aspect to prevent the transmission of COVID-19. In this context, PPE includes,
among other equipment, the use of respiratory protection to safeguard the mucous membranes and to prevent
the transmission of viral droplets such as masks and
respirators, as well as that of physical barriers such as
gloves, goggles and face shields.
4.2.1 The Use of Masks and Respirators
According to the European standards EN149:2001 and
EN14683, there are four types of filtering masks, namely
Filtering Face Piece 1 (FFP1), FFP2 1 , FFP3 and surgical masks, with different models differing primarily in
the filtration efficiency given by their capability to filtrate inwards and outwards particles. For the scope of
this work, the use of surgical and FFP2 masks is discussed. In terms of inwards filtration, surgical masks
are designed to protect against droplets, sprays and
any other particle with a diameter greater than 100µm
[50]. FFP2 masks, however, retain >94% of the particles smaller than 0.5µm. As the work in [8] indicated,
exhaled particles can range from 0.01 to 1000 µm, with
COVID-19 particles exhibiting a round or elliptic shape
with diameters ranging from 0.06 to 0.14 µm [13]. As a
consequence, surgical masks can prevent the inhalation
of COVID-19 particles when these are expelled in the
form of droplets with diameters greater than 100µm
but not when expelled in the form of small airborne
particles. In contrast, FFP2 masks or respirators prevent the inhalation of both droplet and airborne viral
particles. Despite the drawbacks encountered on surgical masks when it comes to the prevention of the filtration of small airborne particles, it must be noted
that they can reduce the emission of viral particles into
the environment [25]. It is worth noting that mask effectiveness decreases with increasing concentrations of
water vapour and carbon dioxide between the face and
the mask/respirator caused by each subsequent exhalation [50]. Thus, masks should be replaced frequently. I
should also be noted face masks have to fitted correctly
and form a seal peripherally to stop air passing around
the mask and not through it.
It should also be stated, the incorrect use of PPE,
such as not changing disposable masks or gloves, can
have a counterproductive effect, thus jeopardising their
1

The American and Chinese equivalents for FFP2 are N95
and KN95 respectively

11

protective effect and even increasing the risk of infection [18]. Given this, health organisations and government bodies should be spreading good clear information
covering how to wear and discard the different recommended protective equipment components properly.
4.2.2 Other Personal Protective Equipment
As mentioned above, although COVID-19 is mainly transmitted through direct contact between an infected and
a susceptible individual, indirect transmission is also
plausible. In addition to masks and respirators, the use
of further PPE can help to reduce the risk of the transmission of COVID-19 both directly and indirectly. In
this context, face shields and eye protection equipment
such as goggles can play an important role in preventing
both direct and indirect transmission.
A face shield is a PPE component which provides a
physical protective barrier to the facial area and related
mucous membranes [43]. Various experimental works
[27, 49] have shown the potential effectiveness of face
shields against the transmission of viral respiratory diseases like COVID-19. For instance, the work in [27]
employed a cough aerosol simulator filled up with influenza virus (aerosol mean diameter of 8.5µm) alongside a breathing simulator to test the effectiveness of
a face shield against the transmission of the virus. The
results reported outline risk reductions of 96% and 92%
on the inhalational exposure right after a cough at distances of 46cm and 183cm respectively. Reducing the
aerosol diameter to 3.4µm resulted in a reduction of
the blocking effectiveness to 68% at 46 cm right after a cough and to a 23% over a post-cough period of
1 to 30 minutes. The experimental work in [49] used
a fluorescent dye (particle diameter ≈ 5µm, distance
≈ 50cm) to evaluate the effectiveness of a face shield
at protecting eye contamination from aerosol particles.
The results outlined the use of a full face shield (FFS)
completely prevented eye contamination. Additionally,
it was demonstrated that the combination of the FFS
with a N95 respirator offered full protection of the eyes,
nose and mouth from contamination. In contrast, the
use of safety glasses with either a surgical mask or N95
respirator resulted in some eye contamination.
According to WHO recommendations [39], gloves
should be worn by medical personnel, laboratory technicians manipulating respiratory samples, caregivers who
provide direct care to confirmed COVID-19 patients
and visitors entering a COVID-19 patient’s room. Therefore, the WHO does not consider the general use of disposable gloves by the community necessary. Instead, a
thorough hand hygiene is proposed. Besides hand hygiene, a consistent disinfection of commonly touched

12

Dario Ortega Anderez*1 et al.

(e.g., providing tax-rebates, etc.) or (ii) providing priority access to some services (e.g., medical services, etc.).
For example, in the past, people successfully adopted
healthy behaviours when they received financial incentives [30]. From this, it follows that if incentives are
offered people (a) adopt a certain behavior or (b) engage in a behavioral change. Rightly or wrongly these
incentives may be more effective if they appeal to people’s ”present bias”, which is the tendency to pursue
smaller and more immediate rewards (e.g. getting a
small amount of money every day) rather than bigger
4.2.3 Final Recommendations on the Use of PPE
and more abstract goals, such ”eradicating COVID-19
in the world”. One potential incentivization mechanism
Provided the analysis upon the effectiveness of the difcould be offering a better value proposition to the user
ferent PPE components on the prevention of the spread
that goes beyond tracing. Considering that the vulnerand on the contraction of COVID-19 carried out in
able population generally tend to procure care services
Sections 4.2.1 4.2.2, the following recommendations are
more often [48], the function of contact tracing is likely
made:
to succeed if it is embedded into the general care appli1. Masks should be worn by every individual in the
cations and services. An example of such general care
population. Non-vulnerable individuals should use
services would be framing the contact tracing technolsurgical masks. FFP2 masks or respirators should be
ogy as a digital nurse for the vulnerable groups, that
worn by vulnerable individuals, especially in closed
aims to monitor (in real time) the state of the wearer
environment public spaces such as supermarkets,
and potentially offer some desirable care features. Feapharmacies and public transport.
tures such as health monitoring or being able to make
2. Face shields are recommended for vulnerable indiautomated calls for medical help in case the wearable
viduals, especially in closed spaces. Ideally, face shields detects signs of distress, etc. [55]. Having a clear value
should be worn in conjunction with an FFP2 mask
proposition, which would go beyond the functional puror respirator.
pose of tracing would allow the technological solutions
3. Gloves are not recommended for the general public.
to succeed with the elderly population [45] more easily,
as users will see not only how their data can benefit
society, but also how their data can help them receive
4.3 Adoption and Incentive Mechanisms for
better, more efficient, and higher quality care. In such
Behavioral Change
situations, due to the behavioural ”privacy paradox”
[34], users, who are concerned about privacy, are also
One of the challenges around implementing the prolikely to perceive the added value of the technological
posed solutions is getting people to adopt and use them.
solutions as a trade-off between their personal data and
In analogous settings, when young drivers were encourdesirable services. If the benefits of using the technolaged to use tracing technology solutions to improve
ogy outweighs the cost (in terms of personal data loss),
their driving habits; young drivers, who participated
users will be much more likely to adopt the new wearin the technology trials, only used behaviour monitorables, even if that requires disclosing their location [64].
ing apps while the incentives lasted and stopped when
This, in turn, will significantly increase the chances of
the incentives stopped. Moreover, drivers often tried to
technology adoption as well as ensure policy success.
play and work the system in order to obtain extra incenConsidering that people tend to attribute greater value
tive points [33]. While the need to motivate individual
and use products that have a cost associated with them
adoption is universal, a segmented reaction to the pro(e.g., people see greater value in goods and services they
posed solutions and best practise is anticipated, so difneed to pay for rather than free goods and services),
ferent strategies and incentive mechanisms might be resuch value proposition (i.e., offering medical or care
quired for different groups. Successful adoption depends
service benefits in exchange for personal data) is likely
on individual motivation, incentives provided through
to be self-sustainable. An alternative incentive mechaa variety of strategies. The incentive mechanisms can
nism can be implemented through material incentives
range from providing information that is meant to resby offering to buy personal data from the users (i.e.,
onate with basic values, such as using this technology
the users will receive financial remuneration for their
will save lives to material and non-material incentives
personal data) [46]. This mechanism will leverage on
in the form of (i) paying people for their personal data
surfaces is recommended when an individual is quarantined after contracting the disease to prevent its spread
to susceptible individuals who may co-handle those surfaces. In line with the WHO, it should not be recommended that the general public use disposable gloves,
as this is unlikely to reduce the risk of infection and it
may lead to a potential unnecessary shortage for scenarios in which they are indispensable and absolutely
necessary.

A Modified Epidemiological Model to Understand the Impact of COVID-19 on Vulnerable Individuals

13

made by the application of such epidemiological models. Given this, government bodies should be pressed to
carry out prevalence studies to further support the estimations obtained by the use of epidemiological models,
as it is crucial for the minimisation of further infection
cases and consequently for the reduction of the number of further deaths caused by the disease, to have
accurate numbers for the number of people who have
already had and recovered from the disease and have,
thus produced antibodies against it.
4.5 Conclusions and Future Work
Fig. 12: Adoption Approaches

participants’ willingness to trade privacy in the context
of willingness to accept (WTA) money in exchange for
data. The mechanism could work through offering a certain amount of money or an equivalent in discounts for
users’ personal data in a clear and transparent transaction [9]. The key to success in this case is full transparency about (i) who is the data buyer (government or
third-party organizations); (ii) how the data buyer will
use the data; and (iii) how the data buyer will protect
user data. The third strategy to push for adherence
to the use of the proposed solutions, is through legal
means. For example, contact tracing could be mandated
by law and distributed to the eligible population. The
use of the technology can then be monitored and ”fines”
for non-compliance could be introduced. The ”fines” do
not necessarily have to be monetary. They can be implemented as decreased benefits. The success of such this
approach greatly depends on cultural values and social
norms (in some societies punishment may work better
than reward in policy implementations) [31]. The three
suggested approaches are summarized on Figure 12.

4.4 Lockdown Easing Plan
Once past the peak of the epidemic, that is, the exponential phase of the curve, it is then time to develop
plans for a gradual easing of the imposed restrictions.
Several research works [22, 7, 20], including the work
presented here, have proposed a variety of epidemiological models to study the spread of the disease and to
make the consequent estimations of the total number
COVID-19 cases in different territories. Having done
that, it is possible to have estimations on the herd immunity gained throughout the progression of the disease. However, there are still many unknowns of the disease which may potentially compromise the estimations

The key driver for this work has been the large size of
the vulnerable population and their higher risk of severe
infection and death. This group is also prone to suffer
from loneliness resulting from the prolonged period of
lockdown. Governments need to balance the need to
socially isolate vulnerable people and shield them while
also taking into account their mental health and wellbeing which might be severely affected by the isolation
measures.
A modified SEIR model, namely SEIR-v, through
which the population was separated into two groups regarding their vulnerability to the disease was proposed
to provide a means of studying the spread and the case
fatality rate of COVID-19 when different contention
measures are applied to different groups regarding that
vulnerability. Using SEIR-v, the impact of a reduction
in the exposure of vulnerable individuals to COVID19 on the number of fatalities caused by the disease
was analysed. The results indicate an average of 3681
deaths can still be saved by only reducing by 10% the
exposure of vulnerable groups to the disease from now.
In line with this and also considering the negative consequences caused by the application of strict isolation
measures on people’s mental health, a set of recommendations including the adoption of digital tools and
protective equipment was proposed. Future work will
be directed towards the analysis of the lockdown easing
steps taken by the U.K. government and their potential
impact on further fatalities caused by COVID-19.
Conflict of interest
On behalf of all authors, the corresponding author states
that there is no conflict of interest.
References
1. Coronavirus: People-tracking wristbands tested to enforce lockdown. BBC News (2020). URL https://www.
bbc.co.uk/news/technology-52409893

14

Dario Ortega Anderez*1 et al.

2. Aleta, A., Moreno, Y.: Evaluation of the potential in19. Ferguson, N., Laydon, D., Nedjati Gilani, G., Imai, N.,
cidence of covid-19 and effectiveness of contention meaAinslie, K., Baguelin, M., Bhatia, S., Boonyasiri, A., Cusures in spain: a data-driven approach. medRxiv (2020)
cunuba Perez, Z., Cuomo-Dannenburg, G., et al.: Report
9: Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (npis) to
3. Alshukairi, A.N., Khalid, I., Ahmed, W.A., Dada, A.M.,
reduce covid19 mortality and healthcare demand (2020)
Bayumi, D.T., Malic, L.S., Althawadi, S., Ignacio, K.,
Alsalmi, H.S., Al-Abdely, H.M., et al.: Antibody response
20. Ferretti, L., Wymant, C., Kendall, M., Zhao, L., Nurtay,
and disease severity in healthcare worker mers survivors.
A., Abeler-Dörner, L., Parker, M., Bonsall, D., Fraser, C.:
Emerging infectious diseases 22(6), 1113 (2016)
Quantifying sars-cov-2 transmission suggests epidemic
control with digital contact tracing. Science 368(6491)
4. Anderez, D.O., Lotfi, A., Pourabdollah, A.: Temporal
(2020)
convolution neural network for food and drink intake
recognition. In: Proceedings of the 12th ACM Interna21. Kanjo Eiman Platzer Elisabeth, K.C.: Viral message
tional Conference on PErvasive Technologies Related to
passing framework for crowd and sensor applications. In:
Assistive Environments, pp. 580–586 (2019)
NDT, pp. 24–33 (2012)
5. Apple: Apple and google partner on covid22. Kermack, W.O., McKendrick, A.G.: A contribution to
19 contact tracing technology (2020).
URL
the mathematical theory of epidemics. Proceedings of
https://www.apple.com/uk/newsroom/2020/04/
the royal society of london. Series A, Containing papers
apple-and-google-partner-on-covid-19-contact-tracing-technology/
of a mathematical and physical character 115(772), 700–
721 (1927)
6. Armitage, R., Nellums, L.B.: Covid-19 and the consequences of isolating the elderly. The Lancet Public Health
23. Kwok, Y.L.A., Gralton, J., McLaws, M.L.: Face touch(2020)
ing: A frequent habit that has implications for hand hygiene. American journal of infection control 43(2), 112–
7. Aron, J.L., Schwartz, I.B.: Seasonality and period114 (2015)
doubling bifurcations in an epidemic model. Journal of
theoretical biology 110(4), 665–679 (1984)
24. Leder, K., Newman, D.: Respiratory infections during air
travel. Internal medicine journal 35(1), 50–55 (2005)
8. Bake, B., Larsson, P., Ljungkvist, G., Ljungström, E.,
Olin, A.: Exhaled particles and small airways. Respira25. Leung, N.H., Chu, D.K., Shiu, E.Y., Chan, K.H., McDetory research 20(1), 8 (2019)
vitt, J.J., Hau, B.J., Yen, H.L., Li, Y., Ip, D.K., Peiris,
J.M., et al.: Respiratory virus shedding in exhaled breath
9. Bizon, W., Poszewiecki, A.: The willingness to trade priand efficacy of face masks. Nature Medicine pp. 1–5
vacy in the context of wta and wtp. International Journal
(2020)
of Trade, Economics and Finance 7(4), 121–124 (2016)
26. Li, Q., Guan, X., Wu, P., Wang, X., Zhou, L., Tong,
10. Bogoch, I.I., Watts, A., Thomas-Bachli, A., Huber, C.,
Y., Ren, R., Leung, K.S., Lau, E.H., Wong, J.Y., et al.:
Kraemer, M.U., Khan, K.: Potential for global spread of
Early transmission dynamics in wuhan, china, of novel
a novel coronavirus from china. Journal of travel medicine
coronavirus–infected pneumonia. New England Journal
27(2), taaa011 (2020)
of Medicine (2020)
11. Booth, T.F., Kournikakis, B., Bastien, N., Ho, J.,
Kobasa, D., Stadnyk, L., Li, Y., Spence, M., Paton, S.,
27. Lindsley, W.G., Noti, J.D., Blachere, F.M., Szalajda,
Henry, B., et al.: Detection of airborne severe acute resJ.V., Beezhold, D.H.: Efficacy of face shields against
piratory syndrome (sars) coronavirus and environmental
cough aerosol droplets from a cough simulator. Journal of
contamination in sars outbreak units. The Journal of
occupational and environmental hygiene 11(8), 509–518
infectious diseases 191(9), 1472–1477 (2005)
(2014)
12. Cao, Z., Zhang, Q., Lu, X., Pfeiffer, D., Jia, Z., Song, H.,
28. Linton, N.M., Kobayashi, T., Yang, Y., Hayashi, K.,
Zeng, D.D.: Estimating the effective reproduction numAkhmetzhanov, A.R., Jung, S.m., Yuan, B., Kinoshita,
ber of the 2019-ncov in china. medRxiv (2020)
R., Nishiura, H.: Incubation period and other epidemiological characteristics of 2019 novel coronavirus infections
13. Cascella, M., Rajnik, M., Cuomo, A., Dulebohn, S.C.,
with right truncation: a statistical analysis of publicly
Di Napoli, R.: Features, evaluation and treatment coroavailable case data. Journal of clinical medicine 9(2),
navirus (covid-19). In: Statpearls [internet]. StatPearls
538 (2020)
Publishing (2020)
29. Liu, T., Hu, J., Kang, M., Lin, L., Zhong, H., Xiao, J., He,
14. Channappanavar, R., Perlman, S.: Pathogenic human
G., Song, T., Huang, Q., Rong, Z., et al.: Transmission
coronavirus infections: causes and consequences of cydynamics of 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) (2020)
tokine storm and immunopathology. In: Seminars in immunopathology, vol. 39, pp. 529–539. Springer (2017)
30. Marteau, T.M., Ashcroft, R.E., Oliver, A.: Using financial incentives to achieve healthy behaviour. Bmj 338,
15. Coates, S., Tanna, P., Scott-Allen, E.: Overview of the
b1415 (2009)
uk population: August 2019 (2019)
31. Milberg, S.J., Burke, S.J., Smith, H.J., Kallman, E.A.:
16. van Doremalen, N., Bushmaker, T., Morris, D.H., HolValues, personal information privacy, and regulatory apbrook, M.G., Gamble, A., Williamson, B.N., Tamin, A.,
proaches. Communications of the ACM 38(12), 65–74
Harcourt, J.L., Thornburg, N.J., Gerber, S.I., et al.:
(1995)
Aerosol and surface stability of sars-cov-2 as compared
with sars-cov-1. New England Journal of Medicine
32. MO, H., ZENG, G., REN, X., LI, H., KE, C., TAN,
382(16), 1564–1567 (2020)
Y., CAI, C., LAI, K., CHEN, R., CHAN-YEUNG, M.,
et al.: Longitudinal profile of antibodies against sars17. Eiman, K.: Tools and architectural support for mobile
coronavirus in sars patients and their clinical significance.
phone based crowd control systems. network protocols
Respirology 11(1), 49–53 (2006)
and algorithms. Network Protocols and Algorithms 4(3),
4–14 (2012)
33. Musicant, O., Lotan, T.: Can novice drivers be motivated
to use a smartphone based app that monitors their be18. Feng, S., Shen, C., Xia, N., Song, W., Fan, M., Cowling,
havior? Transportation research part F: traffic psycholB.J.: Rational use of face masks in the covid-19 pandemic.
ogy and behaviour 42, 544–557 (2016)
The Lancet Respiratory Medicine (2020)

A Modified Epidemiological Model to Understand the Impact of COVID-19 on Vulnerable Individuals
34. Norberg, P.A., Horne, D.R., Horne, D.A.: The privacy
paradox: Personal information disclosure intentions versus behaviors. Journal of consumer affairs 41(1), 100–126
(2007)
35. Ofcom: Adults media use and attitudes report 2019 30
may 2019 (2019). URL https://www.ofcom.org.uk/
36. Organisation, W.H., et al.: Consensus document on the
epidemiology of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars)
(2003)
37. Organization, W.H., et al.: Who mers-cov global summary and assessment of risk. Geneva: WHO (2017)
38. Organization, W.H., et al.: Modes of transmission of virus
causing covid-19: implications for ipc precaution recommendations: scientific brief, 27 march 2020. Tech. rep.,
World Health Organization (2020)
39. Organization, W.H., et al.: Rational use of personal protective equipment (ppe) for coronavirus disease (covid19): interim guidance, 19 march 2020. Tech. rep., World
Health Organization (2020)
40. Ortega Anderez, D., Lotfi, A., Pourabdollah, A.: Eating and drinking gesture spotting and recognition using
a novel adaptive segmentation technique and a gesture
discrepancy measure. Expert Systems with Applications
140, 112888 (2020)
41. Payne, D.C., Iblan, I., Rha, B., Alqasrawi, S., Haddadin,
A., Al Nsour, M., Alsanouri, T., Ali, S.S., Harcourt, J.,
Miao, C., et al.: Persistence of antibodies against middle
east respiratory syndrome coronavirus. Emerging infectious diseases 22(10), 1824 (2016)
42. Riou, J., Althaus, C.L.: Pattern of early human-to-human
transmission of wuhan 2019 novel coronavirus (2019ncov), december 2019 to january 2020. Eurosurveillance
25(4) (2020)
43. Roberge, R.J.: Face shields for infection control: A review. Journal of occupational and environmental hygiene
13(4), 235–242 (2016)
44. Rothe, C., Schunk, M., Sothmann, P., Bretzel, G.,
Froeschl, G., Wallrauch, C., Zimmer, T., Thiel, V., Janke,
C., Guggemos, W., et al.: Transmission of 2019-ncov infection from an asymptomatic contact in germany. New
England Journal of Medicine 382(10), 970–971 (2020)
45. Roupa, Z., Nikas, M., Gerasimou, E., Zafeiri, V., Giasyrani, L., Kazitori, E., Sotiropoulou, P.: The use of
technology by the elderly. Health Science Journal 4(2),
118 (2010)
46. Schwartz, P.M.: Property, privacy, and personal data.
Harv. L. Rev. 117, 2056 (2003)
47. Shen, M., Peng, Z., Xiao, Y., Zhang, L.: Modelling the
epidemic trend of the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak in
china. bioRxiv (2020)
48. Shivayogi, P.: Vulnerable population and methods for
their safeguard. Perspectives in clinical research 4(1),
53 (2013)
49. Shoham, S., Acuna-Villaorduna, C., Cotton, M., Hardwick, M.: Comparison of protection against ocular contamination with disposable eyewear products
50. Smereka, J., Ruetzler, K., Szarpak, L., Filipiak, K.J.,
Jaguszewski, M.: Role of mask/respirator protection
against sars-cov-2. Anesthesia and Analgesia (2020)

15

51. Stahlhofen, W., Rudolf, G., James, A.: Intercomparison
of experimental regional aerosol deposition data. Journal
of Aerosol Medicine 2(3), 285–308 (1989)
52. Statista: Share of individuals who accessed the
internet on a mobile phone in great britain
from 2010 to 2019, by age (2020).
URL
https://www.statista.com/statistics/320974/
internet-usage-on-mobile-phones-gb-age/
#statisticContainer
53. Su, S., Wong, G., Shi, W., Liu, J., Lai, A.C., Zhou, J.,
Liu, W., Bi, Y., Gao, G.F.: Epidemiology, genetic recombination, and pathogenesis of coronaviruses. Trends in
microbiology 24(6), 490–502 (2016)
54. Tang, B., Wang, X., Li, Q., Bragazzi, N.L., Tang, S.,
Xiao, Y., Wu, J.: Estimation of the transmission risk of
the 2019-ncov and its implication for public health interventions. Journal of clinical medicine 9(2), 462 (2020)
55. Vegesna, A., Tran, M., Angelaccio, M., Arcona, S.: Remote patient monitoring via non-invasive digital technologies: a systematic review. Telemedicine and e-Health
23(1), 3–17 (2017)
56. WHO: WHO contact tracing (2020).
URL
https://www.who.int/csr/disease/ebola/training/
contact-tracing/en/
57. Wilder-Smith, A., Chiew, C.J., Lee, V.J.: Can we contain
the covid-19 outbreak with the same measures as for sars?
The Lancet Infectious Diseases (2020)
58. Wilson, M.E., Chen, L.H.: Travellers give wings to novel
coronavirus (2019-ncov) (2020)
59. Worldometers.info: Coronavirus (2020). Data retrieved
from, https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/
60. Worldometers.info: Coronavirus uk (2020).
Data
retrieved
from,
https://www.worldometers.info/
coronavirus/country/uk/
61. Worldometers.info: Uk population (2020).
Data
retrieved
from,
https://www.worldometers.info/
world-population/uk-population/
62. Wu, J.T., Leung, K., Leung, G.M.: Nowcasting and forecasting the potential domestic and international spread
of the 2019-ncov outbreak originating in wuhan, china: a
modelling study. The Lancet 395(10225), 689–697 (2020)
63. Wu, L.P., Wang, N.C., Chang, Y.H., Tian, X.Y., Na,
D.Y., Zhang, L.Y., Zheng, L., Lan, T., Wang, L.F.,
Liang, G.D.: Duration of antibody responses after severe
acute respiratory syndrome. Emerging infectious diseases
13(10), 1562 (2007)
64. Xu, H., Luo, X.R., Carroll, J.M., Rosson, M.B.: The personalization privacy paradox: An exploratory study of decision making process for location-aware marketing. Decision support systems 51(1), 42–52 (2011)
65. Zhao, S., Lin, Q., Ran, J., Musa, S.S., Yang, G., Wang,
W., Lou, Y., Gao, D., Yang, L., He, D., et al.: Preliminary estimation of the basic reproduction number of novel
coronavirus (2019-ncov) in china, from 2019 to 2020: A
data-driven analysis in the early phase of the outbreak.
International Journal of Infectious Diseases 92, 214–217
(2020)

