Quant Bust 2020
Zura Kakushadze§†1
§

Quantigic® Solutions LLC,2 1127 High Ridge Road, #135, Stamford, CT 06905
†
Free University of Tbilisi, Business School & School of Physics
240, David Agmashenebeli Alley, Tbilisi, 0159, Georgia
April 7, 2020

“You know, I couldn’t do it. I couldn’t reduce it [why spin-1/2 particles obey Fermi-Dirac
statistics] to the freshman level. That means we really don’t understand it.”
– Richard Feynman3
Abstract
We explain in a nontechnical fashion why dollar-neutral quant
trading strategies, such as equities Statistical Arbitrage, suffered
substantial losses (drawdowns) during the COVID-19 market
selloff. We discuss: (i) why these strategies work during “normal”
times; (ii) the market regimes when they work best; and (iii) their
limitations and the reasons for why they “break” during extreme
market events. An accompanying appendix (with a link to freely
accessible source code) includes backtests for various strategies,
which put flesh on and illustrate the discussion in the main text.

1

Zura Kakushadze, Ph.D., is the President and a Co-Founder of Quantigic® Solutions LLC and a Full Professor in the
Business School and the School of Physics at Free University of Tbilisi. Email: zura@quantigic.com
2
DISCLAIMER: This address is used by the corresponding author for no purpose other than to indicate his
professional affiliation as is customary in publications. In particular, the contents of this paper are not intended as
an investment, legal, tax or any other such advice, and in no way represent views of Quantigic® Solutions LLC, the
website www.quantigic.com or any of their other affiliates.
3
[Goodstein, 1989].

1

The recent coronavirus outbreak (the infectious disease COVID-19 caused by the virus
SARS-CoV-2 [CDC, 2020]), that originated in Wuhan, China, has caused a stock market rout of
the kind most young traders and other finance professionals have not seen before. The fact
that long positions were liquidated and trillions of dollars were wiped out in market
capitalization is unsurprising. However, what many apparently did find surprising is that, quant
trading strategies, portfolios and funds, many of which are dollar-neutral (i.e., hold equal long
and short positions), got obliterated in the process.4 And all this transpired despite most hedge
funds nowadays – following the hype – using sophisticated machine learning (ML) and artificial
intelligence (AI) techniques in identifying their portfolio composition as well as trading signals.
It is natural to wonder, how come? Is it not the whole point of having a dollar-neutral
portfolio not to be sensitive to market ups and downs? A short answer is: not quite. The goal
of this note is to provide a longer answer in a relatively nontechnical fashion, by i) elaborating
on why dollar-neutral strategies (such as statistical arbitrage, or StatArb) work during “normal”
times in the first instance, and ii) thereby understanding their limitations and why they “break”
during violent market selloffs (and not only). It is precisely the lack of such understanding that
trips up both fund managers and investors when they believe that dropouts with no requisite
knowledge of the financial markets, whose skills are limited to knowing how to call off-the-shelf
Python libraries,5 will magically decipher the stock market by what not that long ago was called
“data mining” (with a derogatory connotation) and now is artfully disguised as “data science”.
So, what happened to quant strategies during what we term here as Quant Bust 2020
triggered by the COVID-19 market selloff? To address this question, let us focus on dollarneutral quant trading strategies, as long-only strategies6 generally are expected to lose money
during market routs. Furthermore, a priori dollar-neutral strategies can also vary substantially
in their characteristics, including the holding period,7 the number of stocks held in the portfolio,
and how the portfolio positions are determined. Here we will primarily focus on StatArb, which
trades portfolios composed of a sizable number of stocks (typically, a few thousand most liquid
U.S. stocks), with the portfolio composition and trading signals8 determined algorithmically,
based on some systematic quantitative approach (which can and often does include ML/AI
techniques). This is to be contrasted with the so-called long-short fundamental trading
strategies, which trade many fewer stocks based on research done by human analysts and the
4

For some media reports, see, e.g., [Aliaj, Wigglesworth and Kruppa, 2020], [Aliaj, Wigglesworth and Sender,
2020], [Burton, 2020], [Fletcher, 2020], [Teodorczuk, 2020], [Wigglesworth, 2020], [Wigglesworth and Aliaj, 2020].
Expectedly, there has also been a lively discussion in the social media, much of which, however, has been plagued
with misconceptions and erroneous promulgations, which obscure the underlying reasons for this quant debacle.
5
Without understanding how they work, or that they were not specifically developed for financial applications.
6
Or, more generally, not just long-only but also net-long strategies, such as 130/30 – see, e.g., [Lo and Patel, 2008].
7
Which is related to the daily portfolio turnover defined as an average fraction of the total portfolio dollar holdings
traded (or “turned over”, using the trader lingo) daily. The turnover is inversely proportional to the holding period.
8
Or alphas, using the trader lingo, which are essentially the expected (future) returns of the stocks in the portfolio.

2

trading decision-making includes substantial human-discretionary component.9 Furthermore,
here we will focus on StatArb portfolios with “medium” holding periods, which very roughly can
be stated as 1-20 days, albeit they can sometimes be somewhat longer or intraday.10 To be
clear, we specifically exclude strategies with holding periods of months or years, as well as high
frequency trading (HFT)11 strategies operating on ultra-short horizons (milliseconds and below).
To understand why StatArb works during “normal” times in the first instance, it is
important to appreciate that the profitability of such quant trading strategies is due to a trickledown effect stemming from long horizons. At long holding horizons (measured in years) longonly investment strategies (mutual funds, pension funds, etc.) dominate. Their portfolios are
primarily based on fundamental considerations such as book-to-price (B/P) ratio, price-toearnings (P/E) ratio, dividend yield, etc.12 This can make stock returns for different companies
correlated if the latter are related by some pertinent similarity criterion, e.g., if they belong to
the same sector, industry or sub-industry. However, even if the stock price forecasts based on
fundamental analyses were foolproof (which they are not as there is much uncertainty in
them), in the market stock prices are determined by supply and demand. Thus, due to a large
number of market participants and the virtual impossibility to predict supply and demand
imbalances or their precise timings, mispricings and inefficiencies are inevitable. Furthermore,
when a long-horizon long-only institutional player decides to buy a stock (or liquidate/reduce
an existing position), it is not concerned with the price at which it wishes to execute the trade
with a penny-order-of-magnitude precision, and rightfully so. First, if the position is to be held
for many months or years, it is virtually impossible to forecast the target future price with such
precision. Second, such entities execute large order sizes13 and market impact is unavoidable.
So, worrying about pennies per share is impracticable. In contrasts, quant trading strategies
have much slimmer margins, where not only each penny but a tenth of a penny per share can
make or break a strategy.14 So, long-horizon strategies create arbitrage opportunities on
somewhat shorter horizons; strategies on such scales create arbitrage opportunities on yet
shorter time scales; and so on – all the way down to HFT strategies. This is the aforesaid trickledown effect – the profitability of quant strategies (which can be dollar-neutral) ultimately
comes from the long-horizon long-only strategies. And the reason why quant strategies work is
due to the aforesaid correlations between various stocks created by long-horizon strategies.
9

See, e.g., [Jacobs and Levy, 1993]. In hybrid “quantamental” strategies quantitative tools are utilized (often along
with human-discretionary research) for stock picking – see, e.g., [Slimmon and Delany, 2018]. Typically, such
portfolios still consist of a modest number of stocks, as opposed to a few thousand stocks in StatArb portfolios.
10
Even, say, 10- or 20-day holding period StatArb strategies have intraday components as they rebalance intraday.
11
See, e.g., [Aldridge, 2013], [Jarrow and Protter, 2012], [Lewis, 2014], [O’Hara, 2015] and references therein.
12
See, e.g., [Basu, 1977], [Black and Scholes, 1974], [Campbell and Shiller, 1998], [Chan, Jegadeesh and Lakonishok,
1996], [Fama and French, 1998], [Rosenberg, Reid and Lanstein, 1985], [Stattman, 1980] and references therein.
13
Albeit, not necessarily at once; orders can be broken up into smaller sequential orders to reduce market impact.
14
Quant strategies have much higher turnover than long-horizon ones, so it is a slim-margin/high-volume game.

3

So, inefficiencies lead to volatility and mispricings at various time horizons.15 These
mispricings are then arbitraged away by what can be viewed as “mean-reversion” (or
“contrarian”) strategies.16 The premise here can be understood on the simplest meanreversion strategy: pairs trading.17 This dollar-neutral strategy amounts to identifying a pair of
historically highly correlated stocks and, when a mispricing (i.e., a deviation from the high
historical correlation) occurs, shorting the “rich” stock (whose return is higher than the mean
return of the two stocks) and buying the “cheap” stock (whose return is lower than said mean
return). This can also be done for multiple stocks (e.g., those in the same industry): rich/cheap
(w.r.t. the industry-mean return) stocks are shorted/bought (within a dollar-neutral portfolio).
There is also a flipside. For a given mean-reversion time horizon there may also exist
opportunities to profit via what can be viewed as “momentum” strategies on somewhat shorter
and/or longer time horizons (e.g., while the mispricing is occurring, say, when one of the stocks
in a pair runs up compared with the other stock; or, e.g., if mean-reversion “overshoots” in
correcting an existing mispricing thereby creating a new mispricing in the opposite direction).
In practice, while there are pure mean-reversion and pure momentum quant strategies,
many strategies intertwine (often unwittingly) mean-reversion and momentum in ways that
make it virtually impossible to detangle these components. This is especially so in the case of
uninterpretable black-box ML/AI based strategies, which often combine large numbers (millions
and more) of weak trading signals such that the combined signal is strong and thus tradable.18
In many cases quant trading strategies can even end up being factor investment strategies in
disguise.19 So, an inexperienced quant can get easily confused (and confuse investors) with all
this complexity as to why a quant strategy works or stops working under a given market regime.
However, to demystify things, let us focus on, say, dollar-neutral mean-reversion equity
StatArb strategies trading a few thousand (e.g., 2,000-2,500) most liquid U.S. stocks in their
portfolios, with 1-20 day holding periods (see above). So, how is such a portfolio constructed?
In his seminal work on mutual fund performance,20 Sharpe [1966] eloquently posits:
“The key element in the portfolio analyst’s view of the world is his emphasis on both expected
return and risk.” Construction of a trading portfolio for equities StatArb schematically can be
15

For more on the trickle-down effect, see [Kakushadze, 2015d] (cf. [Lo, 2008]). Also, once all players and costs
are accounted for, the market is a “zero-sum” game [Kakushadze, 2015d] (cf. [Sharpe, 1991], [Pedersen, 2018]).
16
For some literature on mean-reversion strategies, see, e.g., [Avellaneda and Lee, 2010], [Black and Litterman,
1991], [Idzorek, 2007], [Jegadeesh and Titman, 1995], [Kakushadze, 2015a], [Kakushadze and Serur, 2018],
[Lakonishok, Shleifer and Vishny, 1994] and references therein.
17
See, e.g., [Engle and Granger, 1987], [Gatev, Goetzmann and Rouwenhorst, 2006], [Kakushadze, 2015a].
18
The literature on this subject is extremely scarce due to the highly secretive nature of this subject. See, e.g.,
[Kakushadze, 2016b], [Kakushadze and Tulchinsky, 2016], [Kakushadze and Yu, 2017a], [Tulchinsky et al, 2015].
19
On factor investing, see, e.g., [Blitz, 2015] and references therein.
20
This paragraph (with some tweaks) is borrowed from [Kakushadze, 2016a].

4

thought of as consisting of two steps. First, one comes up with some expected returns for
stocks in the trading universe. This drives the “reward” part of the portfolio. Second, one
constructs the portfolio holdings based on these expected returns. It is mainly this stage that
deals with the “risk” part.21 In the context of mean-reversion StatArb, a basic (but not the only)
way of constructing the expected return for a given stock is, e.g., to average its daily close-toclose returns22 over some number of prior days. So, e.g., a 10-day mean-reversion StatArb
strategy in computing its trading signal for trading today would use a 10-day average daily
close-to-close returns computed based on the 10 prior trading days’ prices.23 However, one still
needs to know what these returns are mean-reverting against, i.e., the “benchmark” returns.
A priori these “benchmark” returns can be anything, they do not even have to have a
clear financial or economic interpretations. In fact, in black-box ML/AI strategies this is often
the case. However, based on our discussion above, the correlations between various stocks
that underlie mean-reversion StatArb are not random and stem from longer-horizon strategies.
In this regard, there are essentially two types of fundamental (non-statistical/non-data-mined)
“benchmark” returns – also known as factors (see below) – one can distinguish. First, there are
the so-called style factors based on some estimated/measured properties of stocks. Examples
of style factors are size (log of market capitalization), value (B/P ratio), growth (earnings
growth), momentum (historical return), liquidity (average daily dollar volume, or ADDV),
volatility (historical or option-implied standard deviation), etc.24 Second, there are industry
factors based on a similarity criterion such as stocks’ membership in sectors, industries, subindustries, etc. (depending on a particular nomenclature and desired granularity) under a given
industry classification.25 For long-horizon investment strategies with low turnover typically the
granularity of the industry classification is limited to sectors (whose number is of order 10) or
industries (whose number is of order 50). However, for short-horizon trading strategies with
higher turnover such as mean-reversion StatArb, usually higher granularity at the level of subindustries (or similar) is required, and their number for a typical trading universe is in hundreds.
On the other hand, the number of style factors is only of order 10, and the number of relevant
style factors is even smaller (4 or fewer) for short-horizon trading strategies.26 As a result,
21

Albeit, some elements of “risk management” can be (and often are) incorporated into the expected returns, e.g.,
sector/industry-neutrality (see below; albeit, in our examples industry-neutrality is incorporated at the “risk” step).
22
By the daily close-to-close return (using the trader lingo) for a given trading day  we mean the return from the
previous trading day’s price at the market close (which, with the exception of a few special days during the year, is
4 PM Eastern Time, when trading at the New York Stock Exchange closes) to the price at the market close on day .
23
I.e., going back 10 trading days starting with yesterday (or whatever the previous trading day may be), inclusive.
24
See, e.g., [Kakushadze and Liew, 2015] for references.
25
Such as GICS (Global Industry Classification Standard), BICS (Bloomberg Industry Classification System), SIC
(Standard Industrial Classification), ICB (Industry Classification Benchmark), etc.
26
See [Kakushadze and Liew, 2015], [Kakushadze, 2015b], [Kakushadze and Yu, 2016a]. In a nutshell, long-horizon
style factors such as growth, which is based on multi-quarter earnings changes, are of no import for holding
periods measured in days. This decoupling of time horizons was discussed in [Kakushadze and Liew, 2015]. To

5

purely due to their ubiquity, industry factors overwhelmingly dominate compared with style
factors.27 So, for our purposes we can focus on granular industry factors (sub-industries).28
There are many (in fact, infinite) ways of constructing a mean-reversion StatArb
portfolio based on industry factors. However, the actual implementation will not be crucial for
our purposes here. What is important is the concept. And the concept is that, we have factor
returns for each industry,29 and the returns for stocks belonging to a given industry are
assumed to be mean-reverting around the factor return for said industry. As above, the rich
stocks (w.r.t. to said return) are shorted and the cheap stocks are bought. A simple (but, once
again, not the only) way to implement such a strategy is via a weighted cross-sectional
regression. Such a portfolio is industry-neutral by construction.30 Another construction is via
mean-variance optimization31 using a multifactor risk model which is based on (or includes)
industry factors. In this case the portfolio is not industry-neutral32 and the dollar-neutrality is
imposed as a constraint in optimization. Either way, the premise behind mean-reversion is that
stocks in the same industries historically are highly correlated and when these correlations are
temporarily undone, they are expected to snap back to normal, hence arbitrage opportunities.
Now, this premise (largely) holds during “normal” times (see below). However, it breaks
badly during violent market routs (when volatility spikes) such as the COVID-19 selloff. Why?
The reason is quite prosaic. During a selloff both long-only and dollar-neutral portfolios are
liquidated. However, long-only portfolios dominate by orders of magnitude, and here we are
most physicists who have studied quantum field theory (QFT) this result would be almost axiomatic due to the
well-familiar decoupling theorems in QFT (see, e.g., [Appelquist and Carazzone, 1975], [Symanzik, 1970],
[Weinberg, 1973]). However, apparently, to most people in (quant) finance this is not at all evident without
empirical proof, which is provided in [Kakushadze and Liew, 2015] along with intuitive theoretical considerations.
27
See [Kakushadze and Yu, 2016a] for a detailed discussion and empirical analysis. Also see [Hong, Torous and
Valkanov, 2007] for an empirical analysis in the context of longer horizons with essentially similar conclusions.
28
To be clear, this is not to say that, e.g., earnings announcements are not important in short-horizon strategies, in
fact, they are as volatility increases around earnings announcements. However, monitoring earnings
announcements and, e.g., not trading stocks immediately following their earnings announcements to avoid getting
tripped up by the increased volatility (see below) is not the same as using, e.g., a growth style factor (which, as
mentioned above, is based on multi-quarter earnings changes) for, say, 10-day mean-reversion as this would only
add noise to the mean-reversion signal, thereby leading to overtrading and unnecessarily increasing trading costs.
29
Again, in most cases “industry” stands for “sub-industry” or a similar granular level in an industry classification.
30
Stock returns are cross-sectionally regressed against a “dummy” (i.e., binary) matrix of 1s and 0s, whose rows
are labeled by stocks and columns are labeled by industries, and whose element is 1 if a given stock belongs to a
given industry, and 0 otherwise. The regression weights can be taken to be inverse historical variances of stock
returns. This results in a portfolio which is automatically industry-neutral (i.e., for each industry the holdings are
dollar-neutral, so the entire portfolio is also dollar-neutral). Furthermore, the stock holdings are suppressed by the
aforesaid historical variances, so the contributions of the volatile stocks are suppressed. See [Kakushadze, 2015a].
31
See [Markowitz, 1952]. Alternatively, the Sharpe ratio [Sharpe, 1994] can be maximized [Kakushadze, 2015a].
32
The portfolio can be thought of as approximately industry-neutral (see [Kakushadze, 2015a]). In fact, it can be
decomposed into a linear combination of two portfolios. The first portfolio, as above, is a dollar-neutral meanreversion portfolio based on a weighted linear regression, so it is industry-neutral. The second portfolio is dollarneutral and has exposures to industry factors (some long and some short), so it is a factor-momentum portfolio.

6

further interested in quant strategies. So, while the following numbers are not meant to
precisely reflect the proportions of long-only investment strategies vs. dollar-neutral quant
trading strategies, they illustrate the key point here. Thus, according to BarclayHedge,33 in
2019, Q4 the total assets under management (AUM) for hedge funds34 was $3.194T. However,
AUM of “equity market neutral” funds was $76.2B, and AUM of “equity long/short” funds was
$196.3B. Some quant dollar-neutral trading strategies may also be grouped under the “multistrategy” funds, whose total AUM was $360.7B.35 On the other hand, according to YCharts,36
the U.S. total market capitalization peaked at 158.9% of GDP (gross domestic product) on
February 19, 2020, and bottomed out at 103.4% of GDP on March 23, 2020 (resulting in a peakto-trough drawdown of 34.93%).37 Using the 2019, Q4 GDP level of $21.73T [BEA, 2020], we
thus get roughly $12T for the peak-to-trough drawdown in the U.S. total market capitalization.
So, the selloff was driven by the long-only liquidations. But, again, the question is, why
does this affect dollar-neutral quant trading strategies so adversely? The answer is that, when
large long-only liquidations begin, they do not preserve the “normal” correlations structure
between, e.g., stocks in the same (sub-)industries. Metaphorically speaking, such liquidations
do not proceed in an “orderly fashion”. Indeed, large long-only liquidations arise by selling,
among other things, large index-linked funds (mutual funds and ETFs) and futures. Some of
these indexes are market capitalization weighted, some have other weighting schemes. Either
way, there is absolutely no reason why the aforesaid “normal” correlation structure would be
preserved in such liquidations and, in fact, it is not. Instead, most correlations go out of whack.
Now, mean-reversion StatArb is a reactive strategy. When a mispricing (as compared
with its normal, historical expectation) occurs, it shorts what it perceives to be rich stocks and
buys cheap stocks – anticipating a snap-back. However, during extreme market routs there is
no snap-back.38 The correlations become more and more undone as a result of long-only
liquidations, so a StatArb strategy loads up more and more on losing positions. This is basically
a serial double-down on losing bets. At some point the strategy loses money beyond its risktolerance parameters (especially when the positions are leveraged), so the portfolio manager
starts to unwind it (typically, haphazardly). These dollar-neutral liquidations compound on top
of the long-only liquidations that triggered the debacle in the first instance further contributing
into undoing the aforesaid “normal” correlation structure. It becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy.
33

See https://www.barclayhedge.com/solutions/assets-under-management/hedge-fund-assets-undermanagement/.
34
Excluding funds of funds, whose total AUM during the same period was $290.4B.
35
And also under “other” funds, whose total AUM was $43.2B.
36
See https://ycharts.com/indicators/us_total_market_capitalization.
37
On February 19, 2020 S&P500 was at 3,380.39 and peaked a tiny bit higher on February 20, 2020 at 3,380.45. It
bottomed at 2,290.71 on March 23, 2020. So the peak-to-trough drawdown was 32.24% (consistently with the
above YCharts number). Historical data source: https://finance.yahoo.com/quote/%5EGSPC/history?p=%5EGSPC.
38
At least for some time, until the market starts to bottom out, and the correlations begin to stabilize/normalize.

7

However, there is another effect that exacerbates the avalanche-like effect discussed
above. On short time horizons it is precisely the StatArb strategies that keep the correlation
structure intact. With StatArb liquidations the correlation structure goes haywire and all hell
breaks loose. And what makes it worse is that mean-reversion StatArb is, by design, a liquidityproviding strategy. In the market regime where StatArb is expected to work well (see below), in
the zeroth approximation mean-reversion StatArb is essentially a market-making strategy that
attempts to fill its buy orders at the bid and sell-short orders at the ask.39 During the market
routs liquidity for sell-short orders dries up, so to maintain dollar-neutrality, the strategy must
start executing more aggressively on that side40 thereby getting execution prices that are much
worse than the prices at which the strategy would normally expect to get orders filled.41 This is
exacerbated even further by the fact that under such conditions many stocks may become
hard-to-borrow,42 so some stocks become impossible or expensive (due to high stock borrow
fees) to sell short.43 On the other hand, the market trades right through the buy orders. So,
the strategy is losing money not only because it is reactively doubling-down on losing trades,
but also on both sides (buys and short-sales) of trade executions, so this is a double-whammy.
So, mean-reversion StatArb is simply not designed to make money or even fare well
through rough market routs. What about rallying markets? When the market goes up, up and
up on a straight-line trajectory, mean-reversion StatArb does not do all that well either. This is
because there are not enough good arbitrage opportunities in such a market. While there is a
clear asymmetry between rallies and selloffs,44 during rallies long-only strategies also pump
money, among other things, into large index-linked funds and futures, which is not necessarily
conducive to creating “healthy” mean-reversion arbitrage opportunities. In such environments
StatArb tends to underperform the market. Thus, S&P500 opened at 2,476.96 on January 2,
2019 and closed at 3,230.78 on December 31, 2019,45 which translates into a 30.43% annual
return for 2019. On the other hand, in 2019, BarclayHedge’s Equity Market Neutral Index
39

This is not always possible and in real life more sophisticated executions are used [Kakushadze and Serur, 2018].
Including sending out market orders or marketable limit orders. See [Kakushadze and Serur, 2018] for details.
41
A.k.a. “slippage” (trader lingo); the buy orders (see below) get “adverse selection” [Kakushadze and Serur, 2018].
42
See, e.g., [Engelberg, Reed and Ringgenberg, 2018] and references therein. The SEC (U.S. Securities and
Exchange Commission) “Regulation SHO requires a broker-dealer to have reasonable grounds to believe that the
security can be borrowed so that it can be delivered on the date delivery is due before effecting a short sale order
in any equity security. This “locate” must be made and documented prior to effecting the short sale.” [SEC, 2015].
43
During 2002-2007, among other things, I was doing equities StatArb trading at RBC Capital Markets (RBCCM). At
that time RBCCM had the largest Index Arbitrage (a.k.a. cash-and-carry arbitrage) book on Wall Street. An
IndexArb book carries a long position in a diverse basket of stocks and an offsetting short position in index futures
contracts (see, e.g., [Kakushadze and Serur, 2018]). Our dollar-neutral StatArb book consisted of long and “short”
stock positions. However, thanks to our Index Arbitrage long stock holdings, our StatArb strategies almost never
had to sell many of the stocks in their trading universe short. This gave us a sizable advantage over other players.
44
During rallies money flows into the market so the overall “pie” increases, while during selloffs money flows out
so the “pie” shrinks. Also, during rallies the liquidity issues with short-sales arising during selloffs largely are moot.
45
Source: https://finance.yahoo.com/quote/%5EGSPC/history?p=%5EGSPC.
40

8

(based on 21 funds) had a negative return of -0.56%, Equity Long/Short Index (based on 29
funds) had a positive return of 6.59%, and Multi Strategy Index (based on 36 funds) had a
positive return of 5.23%, all significantly underperforming S&P500.46 In fact, when the market
rallies, many dollar-neutral strategies that make money have a significant positive market
beta,47 either intentionally, or inadvertently, when alphas (trading signals) are found through
extensive data mining, often using uninterpretable, convoluted black-box ML/AI algorithms.48
So, what is the market regime where mean-reversion StatArb works well? The answer
jumps out from our discussion above: it is the so-called “sideways” market,49 with decent
volatility, but not too high. A sideways market is ideal as snap-back (mean-reversion) is pretty
much guaranteed. Very low volatility is not conducive to generating arbitrage opportunities.
On the other hand, a sideways market with too high volatility (a.k.a. “choppy” market) can have
liquidity issues (large slippage), so the profitability of mean-reversion StatArb trading can suffer.
Based on the foregoing, it is clear that dollar-neutrality of quant trading strategies does
not make them “market-neutral”.50 A mean-reversion StatArb, effectively, is akin to selling
deep out-of-the-money put options on a broad market index. When a black-swan event51 hits,
such as the 2007 Quant Crash (a.k.a. 2007 Quant Meltdown) in August of that year,52 or COVID19,53 there is just no way around it – this kind of strategies are designed to lose money. Any
promulgations to the contrary are just smoke and mirrors. It is like claiming that an insurance
company would not lose money as a result of a 9/11-like event. And no “bells and whistles” can
change that fundamental fact. No fancy/convoluted ML/AI black-box could have averted Quant
Bust 2020. Indeed, if your ML/AI could predict the COVID-19 market selloff, why would you
want to trade StatArb?54 You could simply (effectively) short the market (including, effectively
with leverage) and make a huge return on capital (cf. Bill Ackerman’s almost 100-fold return).55
Put differently, StatArb and other quant trading strategies are not “all-weather” strategies. In
46

Source: https://portal.barclayhedge.com/cgi-bin/indices/displayIndices.cgi?indexID=hf.
I.e., a strategy has a significant correlation with the broad market.
48
And the alpha researcher, either through inexperience, or carelessness, or both, fails to check the market beta.
49
When prices remain in a relatively tight range, without clear up or down trends.
50
In fact, “market-neutrality” is a vague concept. For one thing, one needs to define what one means by the
“market”. Is it a broad market index such as S&P500 or Russell3000, or some other broad-basket benchmark? And
once such a benchmark is defined, neutrality w.r.t. it is only one condition on a portfolio consisting of, say, 2,000
stocks. This single condition is not any more constraining than dollar-neutrality. In practice there are many more
constraints (exact, as in the case of a weighted regression, or approximate, as in the case of mean-variance
optimization – see above) imposed on the portfolio, which, along with dollar-neutrality include (approximate)
neutrality w.r.t. industry and non-industry (e.g., style) factors. However, for the aforesaid reasons, this does not
immunize a portfolio against large drawdowns during extreme market routs such as the COVID-19 market selloff.
51
See [Taleb, 2007].
52
See, e.g., [Ben-David, Franzoni and Moussawi, 2012], [Khandani and Lo, 2011], [Mussalli, 2018].
53
Which, apparently, is a “30-sigma event” in terms of jobless claims – see, e.g., [Galt, 2020].
54
StatArb is nontrivial to run. It involves substantial human, technological and other costs (see, e.g., [Lo, 2010]).
55
See, e.g., [Gara, 2020]. Interestingly, it was not ML/AI but a human-discretionary approach making money there.
47

9

fact, no strategy is “all-weather”, or else multi-strategy hedge funds, which diversify across
many different types of strategies, would not exist.56 No one complained about StatArb when it
made high annualized Sharpe ratio (6+) returns with a few (or no) down months. Now it lost
money because it is designed to lose money in such events; it would be surprising if it did not.57
It is a separate issue that many investors (as well as some traders) do not understand
idiosyncratic facts about StatArb and quant trading more generally. The ML/AI hype did not
help in this regard. In fact, one can wonder, if ML/AI, which most (if not all) quant trading
shops use these days, is such a “panacea”, why did it not prevent Quant Bust 2020? A simple
answer is that ML/AI is not a panacea. It cannot predict black-swan events any better than a
simple linear regression can. In fact, a sensationalist – and in this day and age sensationalism
appears to have become a norm – could turn the tables around and blame ML/AI for Quant
Bust 2020. In fact, there are ways that ML/AI can make things worse in situations such as
Quant Bust 2020. How come? ML (and especially AI)58 can have a large number of often
obscure (uninterpretable) parameters. In various other applications (such as computer vision,
document classification, some bioinformatics/computational biology problems, etc.) these
parameters can in fact be stable out-of-sample.59 However, in trading applications such out-ofsample stability is rarely (if ever) the case for long periods of time, so trading signals tend to be
ephemeral by nature. Another way of phrasing this is that, in trading applications signal-tonoise ratios are notoriously low, and uncerebral, brute-force applications of ML/AI to such
problems (all the hype notwithstanding) is rarely successful. A much more successful approach
is to carefully identify the noise and factor it out before applying ML/AI to discern the signal
from so-denoised data – after all, no matter the number of computational cycles, by definition,
one cannot machine learn the noise. However, identifying and factoring out the noise is what
requires deep understanding of the financial markets, which (quoting from above) “dropouts
with no requisite knowledge of the financial markets, whose skills are limited to knowing how
to call off-the-shelf Python libraries” do not possess, also by definition. As is aptly put in [AQR,
2019], “finance is more complex than many other domains of ML research (cats don’t begin
morphing into dogs once the algorithm becomes good at cat recognition).” Taking this analogy
further, most ML/AI algorithms trained on cats and dogs would misidentify hyenas as canines,
56

To be clear, multi-strategy funds are not a free lunch. They cost a lot of money to run and in good times employ
hundreds of (or even more) people. In contrast, Berkshire Hathaway’s Omaha, Nebraska corporate office employs
only 26 people (albeit its subsidiaries’ employee count totaled over 391,000 in 2019) [Berkshire Hathaway, 2019].
57
This exposure to market selloffs can in principle be hedged by buying deep out-of-the-money put options on a
broad market index. However, this costs money and cuts into the strategy returns. Some studies argue (albeit in
other contexts) against using protective puts [Israelov and Nielsen, 2015], [Israelov, Nielsen and Villalon, 2017].
58
AI algorithms use large weights matrices (determined via training), which can easily have 1,000s of elements.
59
In the ML/AI lingo, if this is the case, an algorithm generalizes well, i.e., the parameters discerned from a training
dataset also work well on new datasets. However, in many cases there can be overfitting of an algorithm, so it
lacks predictive power when it comes to new datasets. This can happen not only due to a badly built model, but
also if the problem intrinsically has highly heterogeneous data and lacks generalizability from dataset to dataset.

10

even though hyenas are much more closely related to cats: hyenas and cats belong to suborder
feliformia, while dogs belong to suborder caniformia (both are suborders of order carnivora).
So, if the underlying fundamental reason for why mean-reversion StatArb works during
the “normal” times is rooted in long-horizon long-only investment strategies (see above), then
what does ML/AI do in this context? There are (at least) two parts to it. First, there is the hype
(and related smoke and mirrors). There is not much to add to that. However, there are ML/AI
based trading signals that do work. In fact, there is a plethora of such trading signals. However,
typically they are weak and short-lived, so to generate a strong trading signal, many (sometimes
millions or more) such signals are combined with nontrivial weights (see above). However, one
can still inquire, what is the underlying financial interpretation of these data-mined (however
ephemeral and weak) ML/AI trading signals? The answer basically lies in the aforesaid trickledown effect from long horizons to shorter ones: due to a large number of market participants
and the virtual impossibility to predict supply and demand imbalances or their precise timings,
mispricings and inefficiencies are inevitable and arise at various time horizons. Data-mining
techniques can uncover the aforesaid ephemeral and weak trading signals, albeit in many cases
it is virtually impossible to pinpoint a precise economic/financial reason for why a given such
signal exists in the first instance.60 It is then unsurprising that trading strategies based on such
signals can stop working when a dramatic regime change (selloff) transpires in the marketplace.
Also, to be clear, not all quant trading strategies lost money during Quant Bust 2020.
While mean-reversion StatArb – expectedly – got obliterated, other types of strategies did not,
in fact, some even made money. For instance, momentum/trend following strategies that got
the direction of the market right (be it due to sheer luck or some honest-to-goodness secret
sauce) and went short would make money, but then again, such strategies would not be dollarneutral. Strategies that had (intentional or unwitting) factor exposure could also make money,
including dollar-neutral strategies. For instance, if a strategy had a substantial short exposure
to oil stocks (which means that it was not industry-neutral or even approximately industryneutral), then it might very well have made money during the COVID-19 selloff: WTI (West
Texas Intermediate, a.k.a. Texas light sweet) crude oil price was trading at $53.86 a barrel on
2/20/2020 (the day S&P500 peaked at 3,380.45 – see above) and crashed to the low twenties in
March 2020 (it was trading at $23.36 a barrel on March 23, 2020, the day S&P500 bottomed
out at 2,290.71 – see above).61 Those lucky (or smart) to be short oil stocks likely made money.
So, Quant Bust 2020 happened for a good reason, and it was not because ML/AI (or
alternative data – see below) was not used. Quite the contrary, often the uninterpretability of
60

To be clear, these signals need not be purely “mean-reversion” or “momentum” signals. They can be convoluted
and utterly indiscernible combinations of mean-reversion and momentum signals from a number of time horizons.
61
Thus, from February 20, 2020 to March 23, 2020 oil lost 53.63% (and this rout was triggered by the Oil War [Cho
et al, 2020]). Oil prices data source: https://www.macrotrends.net/2516/wti-crude-oil-prices-10-year-daily-chart.

11

ML/AI is what obscures things, for (see the Feynman quote above) if it cannot be reduced to
the freshman level, it means that one does not understand it. Also, once again, ML/AI cannot
predict black-swan events such as COVID-19. We know this to be true empirically for, if the
opposite were the case, we would not be talking about Quant Bust 2020 (or Bill Ackerman’s
human-discretionary bet – see above). However, there is a prosaic theoretical reason for this
as well. ML/AI needs to be trained on data to see patterns in new data.62 If the patterns in new
data are not contained in the training data, it is a tall order to expect an ML/AI algorithm to
magically identify such patterns in new data.63 As the 12th century Georgian poet Shota
Rustaveli aptly put it, “What is in the jar is what will flow out.”64 It still holds nine centuries on.
To summarize, quant trading strategies are not “all-weather” or a free-lunch. As with
everything else, they have limitations. Así es la vida. I hope the above discussion helps clear
things up in this regard. Appendix A contains explicit backtests of mean-reversion (and other)
trading strategies to put some flesh on and illustrate what happened during Quant Bust 2020.
However, a word of caution: these backtests are by no means intended to be exhaustive in any
sense, only illustrative. Not all quant trading strategies lost money amid the COVID-19 selloff.65

Appendix A
StatArb strategies (except purely intraday ones) usually hold positions overnight.66
However, overnight holdings increase portfolio volatility and can obscure the trading signal
(alpha). So, here we “strip down” StatArb strategies such that they (at least on paper – see
62

In this regard, one may wonder why alternative data (geolocation, satellite imagery, social media sentiment,
credit card transactions, online browsing activity and other data exhaust, web-scraped job postings, flight and
shipping trackers, etc. – see, e.g., [Drenik, 2019], [McPartland, 2017], [Monk, Prins and Rook, 2019]) did not make
a big difference in the context of foreseeing the COVID-19 selloff (or, for that matter, why more generally it has not
had the impact that might have been expected from it based on a prior hype). There is a simple explanation to
this. Trading signals based on each individual alternative datafeed tend to be rather weak (and in many cases also
ephemeral). So, to get a strong signal one would need to combine many such weak signals. However, there are
not that many alternative data feeds to begin with. Thus, according to https://alternativedata.org/stats/, there are
only 445 alternative data providers (as of April 3, 2020), and not all those sources necessarily add value in trading.
63
To be clear, there are plenty of past occurrences where, say, mean-reversion StatArb lost money in highvolatility environments. Experienced quant traders know this and no ML/AI is needed to confirm this for the
reasons discussed above. However, once again, mean-reversion StatArb is a reactive strategy and loses money in
such environments by design. Training ML/AI on the past mean-reversion StatArb meltdowns is not going to make
it “learn” anything new in this regard. It certainly will not make it any better at forecasting new black-swan events.
64
This is my own translation of an aphorism (which, sadly, greatly suffers in translation) from a stanza in Rustaveli's
sole known epic poem, whose title often is erroneously translated as “The Knight in the Panther’s Skin” (or similar)
– see, e.g., [Rustaveli, 2015]. In my humble opinion, not only is this poem the greatest masterpiece of the (rich)
Georgian literature, but also one of the greatest literary writings of all time worldwide. It consists of over 1,600
perfectly rhymed shairi or Rustavelian quatrains, each of which contains 16 = 8 + 8 syllables per line with a caesura
between the 8th and 9th syllables. How a human brain can come up with such perfection is mind-boggling,
especially considering that this poem tells an extremely complex story complete with dialogs, aphorisms, etc.
65
Our backtests in Appendix A suggest that, e.g., momentum strategies might have done well during that period.
66
Albeit there are purely intraday StatArb strategies frequently trading in and out of positions throughout the day.

12

below) only have intraday holdings: they establish at the open and liquidate at the close of each
trading day. Now, this is not how things are done in practice,67 but it suits our purposes here as
we wish to illustrate how StatArb alphas went bad during Quant Bust 2020, even before any
trading costs, due to the “normal” correlation structure between the stocks becoming undone.
The backtrsting framework is discussed in detail in Appendix A of [Kakushadze and
Serur, 2018], which also provides the backtesting source code. Therefore, we will not rehash it
here and instead will focus on the salient points. The pricing data for the universe of all
exchange-listed U.S. equities (common stocks and class shares only; no preferred shares,
warrants, rights, ETFs, etc.) was downloaded from https://finance.yahoo.com on March 25,
2020 (so the data contains prices going back from March 24, 2020, inclusive). However, since
some of the backtests involve overnight returns (close-to-open returns), the most recent date
for which P&L (profits and losses) is computed is March 23, 2020. Also, the backtest goes back
1 year (252 trading days).68 The trading universe consists of 2,000 most liquid stocks by ADDV
(average daily dollar volume) computed based on the prior 21 trading days (i.e., 1 month).
However, the trading universe itself is only updated every 21 trading days (so the backtesting
period of 252 trading days consists of 12 such 21-trading-day periods, and the universe is
updated only at the beginning of such 21-trading-day period). The trading portfolio is always
dollar-neutral. Furthermore, the absolute69 dollar holdings for each stock cannot exceed 1% of
ADDV for that stock. This ensures that the portfolio never trades more than 1% of ADDV for
any given stock. These trading bounds coincide with the position bounds in these strategies.
We backtest a number of different strategies. There are 6 different types of returns
used, 4 of which are 1-day, 5-day, 10-day and 20-day close-to-close returns (see above). These
returns are used in mean-reversion strategies.70 Another return is the previous trading day’s
open-to-close return,71 and in this case we actually have a momentum strategy. I.e., it bets not
on mean-reversion (w.r.t. an industry-average return), but in the opposite direction (that the
excess return w.r.t. said industry-average return on the previous trading day will continue to
the next). Finally, we have overnight close-to-open returns72 used in mean-reversion strategies.
67

Executing trades at the open and close can be associated with substantial slippage, so in real life in most cases
strategies execute their trades more evenly throughout the day. Furthermore, a 20-day mean-reversion StatArb
strategy trades substantially less than a purely intraday strategy, so turning a 20-day mean-reversion strategy into
an intraday strategy would invariably increase trading costs. However, our goal here is to understand what
happened to StatArb alphas during Quant Bust 2020, not to delve into how trades would realistically be executed.
68
However, there are 251 daily P&L values for each backtest (due to the aforesaid overnight return computations).
69
We use the convention where long (short) holdings have positive (negative) dollar amounts.
70
So, e.g., a 10-day mean-reversion trading signal is based on the 10-day close-to-close returns for the stocks in a
given (sub-)industry mean-reverting w.r.t. their (weighted – see below) average return across said (sub-)industry.
71
The signal for a given trading day is based on the return from the open to the close of the previous trading day.
72
The signal for a given trading day  is based on the return from the close of the previous trading day to the open
on the trading day . This is an example of the so-called “delay-0” signal (see [Kakushadze, 2015a], [Kakushadze

13

The second differentiating feature of the strategies is how the portfolios are constructed
based on the aforesaid returns. Following our discussion above, we use a weighted regression
and mean-variance optimization, both with bounds (1% of ADDV on individual stock positions –
see above). Without bounds the weighted regression would be done as follows – albeit, to be
clear, we always use bounds (see above and below). Given an industry classification (see
below) we have a “dummy” (i.e., binary) matrix of 1s and 0s, whose rows are labeled by stocks
and columns are labeled by industries, and whose element is 1 if a given stock belongs to a
given industry, and 0 otherwise. We cross-sectionally regress the stock returns (see above)
against this “dummy” matrix with the regression weighs given by inverse historical variances of
daily close-to-close returns computed over the previous 21 trading days (1 month) and updated
with the same 21-trading-day frequency as the trading universe (see above). The stock dollar
holdings are given by the negated residuals of the aforesaid cross-sectional weighted regression
divided by the aforesaid historical variances. The so-obtained stock holdings by construction
are industry-neutral, and the entire portfolio is dollar-neutral. With bounds things get trickier
and we use the algorithm and source code for the bounded regression given in Appendix A of
[Kakushadze, 2015c]. For mean-variance optimization with the dollar-neutrality constraint and
bounds (1% of ADDV on individual stock positions – see above) we use the algorithm and
source for the optimizer with constraints and bounds given in Appendix C of [Kakushadze,
2015e]. Mean-variance optimization also requires a multifactor risk model as an input. We use
heterotic risk models of [Kakushadze, 2015e] (also see [Kakushadze and Yu, 2016a])73 based on
a given industry classification (see below). A given risk model is recomputed 100% out-ofsample with the same 21-trading-day frequency as the trading universe (see above). The stock
dollar holdings in the portfolio are dollar-neutral by construction (due to the dollar-neutrality
constraint explicitly included in the optimizer), but are only approximately industry-neutral.
We use two types of industry classification. One is based on fundamental data. Above
we discussed examples of such industry classifications (GICS, BICS, SIC, ICB, etc.). Most of this
data is not free and in fact is not cheap. However, SIC (Standard Industrial Classification) data is
available from the SEC website, albeit in a not-user-friendly format, including no up-to-date
data for stock tickers (only company names). Happily, open-source code for downloading and
processing this data into a useful (for backesting and other purposes) form is freely available in
[Kakushadze and Yu, 2017b], so we use the most granular level of SIC (called “industries” in the
SIC nomenclature, and essentially corresponding to sub-industries in GICS and BICS). There are
and Serur, 2018]): it uses today’s open price to compute the trading signal to trade at today’s open. In real life
there would always be a delay (however small), so if today’s open price is used to compute the signal, then the
strategy would have to execute the trades sometime after today’s open. So, this “delay-0” signal essentially
measures the pure overnight alpha. The actual real-life trading signal would be much weaker by sizable slippage.
73
Source code for constructing heterotic risk models is given in Appendix B of [Kakushadze, 2015e]. Source code
for a more general construction (which includes heterotic risk models as a particular case), which allows to
incorporate style and principal component factors, is further given in Appendix A of [Kakushadze and Yu, 2016a].

14

roughly 320-325 SIC industries for a typical trading universe of 2,000 most liquid stocks (by
ADDV) we use in our backtests (see above), so it is quite granular.74 Another type of “industry
classification” we use does not involve any fundamental data, only the pricing data, is purely
statistical, and utilizes unsupervised ML (clustering) techniques. Source code for building this
so-called “statistical industry classification” is given in Appendix A.2 of [Kakushadze and Yu,
2016b], which contains a detailed description of the clustering techniques used, rationale, etc.75
Finally, we run backtests both without (pure alpha) and with (simulated) trading costs.
The costs are estimated exactly as in Appendix A of [Kakushadze and Serur, 2018] and on
average correspond to assuming that, to establish/liquidate an equally-weighted portfolio, it
costs 10 bps76 of the total dollar amount executed.77 However, the cost model we use is not
uniform across all stocks but takes into account their liquidity (ADDV) and historical volatility.78
The results of our backtests are summarized in Table 1 and Figures 1-6. In Table 1 the
legends are as follows. The second column shows which industry classification is used: the
legend “SIC” stands for the Standard Industrial Classification (based on fundamental data), and
the legend “STAT” stands for the statistical industry classification (based on ML/clustering
techniques) of [Kakushadze and Yu, 2016b] (see above). The third column shows whether
mean-variance optimization with bounds and the dollar-neutrality constraint (the legend
“OPT”) or the bounded weighted regression (the legend “REG”) is used in the portfolio
construction (see above). The fourth column shows whether trading cost are included (the “Y”
or “N” legends) in the backtest (see above). The first column shows which return is used with
the following legends: C2C1 = 1-day close-to-close return, C2C5 = 5-day close-to-close return,
C2C10 = 10-day close-to-close return, C2C20 = 20-day close-to-close return (all mean-reversion
strategies); MOM1 = previous trading days’ open-to-close return (momentum strategy); D0 =
previous trading days’ close to current trading days’ open (overnight) return (delay-0 meanreversion strategy); see above for details. The fifth column shows the annualized return-oncapital (ROC), which is computed as the average daily P&L multiplied by 252 (the number of
trading days in a year) and divided by the total capital invested (long plus short), which in these
backtests is assumed to be $20M ($10M long and $10M short).79 The sixth column shows the
annualized Sharpe ratio [Sharpe, 1994], which is computed as the average daily P&L divided by

74

When building a heterotic risk model, we augment this granular level with another one corresponding to a single
factor for the entire universe (i.e., the “market” factor – see [Kakushadze, 2015e], [Kakushadze and Yu, 2016a]).
We do not use intermediate-granularity levels (e.g., “industry groups” in SIC ) as they do not alter our main results.
75
We run our backtests with a 3-level statistical industry classification with 100, 30 and 10 clusters in the 3 levels.
76
1 bps = 1 basis point or 1/100 of 1%.
77
This is reasonable (and in some cases might even be conservative) during “normal” times. During violent market
routs, however, execution costs/slippage can be much higher for sell orders, and especially short-sales (see above).
78
The trading costs are based on the model of [Almgren et al, 2005] – see [Kakushadze and Serur, 2018] for details.
79
We assume no leverage in our backtests.

15

the standard deviation of the daily P&L and multiplied by √252 (the annualization factor). The
seventh column shows cents-per-share (CPS), which is computed by dividing the total P&L
expressed in cents (as opposed to dollars) by the total number of shares traded. The eighth
column shows the P&L drawdown (peak-to-trough reduction), between February 20, 2020 (the
day on which S&P500 peaked – see above) and March 23, 2020, expressed as a percentage of
the total capital invested ($20M).80 The drawdown applies only to the C2C1, C2C5, C2C10 and
C2C20 mean-reversion strategies. The performance characteristics for the D0 strategies, even
with trading costs, should be taken with a grain of salt as these are delay-0 signals (see above).
The backtests suggest the following. The close-to-close (C2C) mean-reversion strategies
where essentially flatlined (before the costs) even before Quant Bust 2020 (as the market was
in the rallying regime – see above). They all had large drawdowns (around 10% for 1-day
strategies, around 15% for longer-horizon SIC strategies, and even deeper for longer-horizon
STAT strategies).81 Optimized SIC strategies did better than those based on the weighted
regression.82 The momentum (MOM1) strategies also were essentially flatlined (before the
costs) before Quant Bust 2020, and had P&L spikes (opposite to the mean-reversion strategy
drawdowns) during Quant Bust 2020 (even after the modeled trading costs). The delay-0
mean-reversion strategies (D0) unsurprisingly had positive returns even before Quant Bust
2020 (and even after the modeled trading costs) and had P&L spikes during Quant Bust 2020
(with the aforesaid “grain-of-salt” comment regarding the D0 strategies). The lesson and the
bottom line are that, while the C2C mean-reversion strategies were wobbling around (before
the costs) in the upward market prior to Quant Bust 2020, they all had large drawdowns during
Quant Bust 2020 for the simple reason we discuss above: the previously existing correlations
between the stocks got undone during the COVID-19 selloff, and the mean-reversion strategies
reactively got loaded (doubled-down) more and more on losing trades anticipating a snap-back.

References
Aldridge, I. (2013) High-Frequency Trading: A Practical Guide to Algorithmic Strategies and
Trading Systems. (2nd ed.) Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
80

In our backtests the profits intentionally are not assumed to be reinvested. Since the strategies are simulated to
trade purely intraday, it is assumed that a $10M long plus $10M short portfolio is established at each open and the
portfolio is liquidated at the close of the same trading day, so P&L from each day is independent from other days.
81
That fundamental industry classifications (even SIC, which is decent, but not as good a classification as, e.g., GICS
or BICS) outperform statistical industry classifications in this context is not news [Kakushadze and Yu, 2016b],
[Kakushadze and Yu, 2019]. Well-built fundamental industry classifications are based on analyzing companies'
sources of revenues, products, services, customers, partners, suppliers, competitors, etc. (which information can
be obtained for publicly traded companies from their 10-Q and 10-K SEC filings and other sources). While parts of
this process can be and in many cases are automated, there can be instances where human analysts have to make
judgment calls in terms of assigning companies to various industries, sub-industries, etc. Clustering algorithms
based on only pricing data cannot compete with the fundamental approach as their signal-to-noise ratio is too low.
82
We did not include backtests for STAT strategies based on the weighted regression as the results are very similar.

16

Almgren, R., Thum, C., Hauptmann, E. and Li, H. (2005) Equity market impact. Risk Magazine
18(7): 57-62.
Aliaj, O., Wigglesworth, R. and Kruppa, M. (2020) Renaissance tripped up by coronavirusinduced market upheaval. Financial Times (March 17). Available online:
https://www.ft.com/content/1afde374-67e1-11ea-800d-da70cff6e4d3.
Aliaj, O., Wigglesworth, R. and Sender, H. (2020) Hedge fund Millennium shuts several ‘trading
pods’ over virus turmoil. Financial Times (March 19). Available online:
https://www.ft.com/content/8605e046-696b-11ea-800d-da70cff6e4d3.
Appelquist, T. and Carazzone, J. (1975) Infrared singularities and massive fields. Physical Review
D 11(10): 2856-2861.
AQR (2019) “Can Machines “Learn” Finance?” Portfolio Solutions Group (Report, Q2).
Greenwich, CT: AQR Capital Management. Available online: https://images.aqr.com//media/AQR/Documents/Alternative-Thinking/AQR-Alternative-Thinking-2Q19-Can-MachinesLearn-Finance.pdf.
Avellaneda, M. and Lee, J.H. (2010) Statistical arbitrage in the U.S. equity market. Quantitative
Finance 10(7): 761-782.
Basu, S. (1977) The investment performance of common stocks in relation to their price to
earnings ratios: A test of the efficient market hypothesis. Journal of Finance 32(3): 663-682.
Ben-David, I., Franzoni, F. and Moussawi, R. (2012) Hedge Fund Stock Trading in the Financial
Crisis of 2007-2009. Review of Financial Studies 25(1): 1-54.
Berkshire Hathaway (2019) 2019 Annual Report. Omaha, NE: Berkshire Hathaway, Inc. Available
online: https://www.berkshirehathaway.com/2019ar/2019ar.pdf.
Black, F. and Litterman, R. (1991) Asset allocation: Combining investors’ views with market
equilibrium. Journal of Fixed Income 1(2): 7-18.
Black, F. and Scholes, M. (1974) The effects of dividend yield and dividend policy on common
stock prices and returns. Journal of Financial Economics 1(1): 1-22.
Blitz, D. (2015) Factor Investing Revisited. Journal of Index Investing 6(2): 7-17.
Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) (2020) Gross Domestic Product, Fourth Quarter and Year
2019 (Third Estimate); Corporate Profits, Fourth Quarter and Year 2019 (March 27). Suitland,
MD: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. Available online:
https://www.bea.gov/news/2020/gross-domestic-product-fourth-quarter-and-year-2019-thirdestimate-corporate-profits.
17

Burton, K. (2020) Steve Cohen’s Point72 Quant Unit Falls 22% in March. Bloomberg (March 19).
Available online: https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-03-19/cohen-s-point72quant-unit-falls-22-in-march-on-market-plunge.
Campbell, J.Y. and Shiller, R.J. (1998) Valuation ratios and the long-run stock market outlook.
Journal of Portfolio Management 24(2): 11-26.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) (2020) Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Available online: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/index.html.
Chan, K.C., Jegadeesh, N. and Lakonishok, J. (1996) Momentum Strategies. Journal of Finance
51(5): 1681-1713.
Cho, S., Cheong, S., Chen, S., Cang, A., Su, S. and Blas, J. (2020) Saudis Face Pricing Dilemma as
Oil War Enters Second Month. Bloomberg (April 3). Available online:
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-04-03/saudis-face-pricing-dilemma-as-oilwar-enters-second-month.
Drenik, G. (2019) Alternative data. What is it, who uses it and why is it interesting? Forbes
(December 12). Available online:
https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbesinsights/2019/12/12/alternative-data-what-is-it-whouses-it-and-why-is-it-interesting/#2d1fa7046123.
Engelberg, J.E., Reed, A.V. and Ringgenberg, M.C. (2018) Short-Selling Risk. Journal of Finance
73(2): 755-786.
Engle, R.F. and Granger, C.W.J. (1987) Co-integration and error correction: Representation,
estimation and testing. Econometrica 55(2): 251-276.
Fama, E.F. and French, K.R. (1998) Value versus Growth: The International Evidence. Journal of
Finance 53(6): 1975-1999.
Fletcher, L. (2020) Hedge fund Schonfeld hit as investors slash risk. Financial Times (March 19).
Available online: https://www.ft.com/content/182a7edc-6a0c-11ea-a3c9-1fe6fedcca75.
Galt, J. (2020) Record Jobless Claims (30 Sigma Event). TheoTrade Blog Post (March 27).
https://theotrade.com/record-jobless-claims-30-sigma-event/.
Gara, A. (2020) Billionaire Bill Ackman Made 100-Fold Return On Coronavirus Hedge That
Yielded $2.6 Billion. Forbes (March 25). Available online:
https://www.forbes.com/sites/antoinegara/2020/03/25/billionaire-bill-ackman-100-foldreturn-on-coronavirus-hedge-2-billion/#6cfed5486fcc.

18

Gatev, E., Goetzmann, W.N. and Rouwenhorst, K.G. (2006) Pairs Trading: Performance of a
Relative-Value Arbitrage Rule. Review of Financial Studies 19(3): 797-827.
Goodstein, D.L. (1989) Richard P. Feynman, Teacher. Physics Today 42(2): 70-75.
Hong, H., Torous, W. and Valkanov, R. (2007) Do Industries Lead Stock Markets? Journal of
Financial Economics 83(2): 367-396.
Idzorek, T. (2007) A Step-by-Step Guide to the Black-Litterman Model. In: Satchell, S. (ed.)
Forecasting Expected Returns in the Financial Markets. Waltham, MA: Academic Press.
Israelov, R. and Nielsen, L.N. (2015) Still Not Cheap: Portfolio Protection in Calm Markets.
Journal of Portfolio Management 41(4): 108-120.
Israelov, R., Nielsen, L.N. and Villalon, D. (2017) Embracing Downside Risk. Journal of Alternative
Investments 19(3): 59-67.
Jacobs, B.I. and Levy, K.N. (1993) Long/Short Equity Investing. Journal of Portfolio Management
20(1): 52-63.
Jarrow, R.A. and Protter, P. (2012) A Dysfunctional Role of High Frequency Trading in Electronic
Markets. International Journal of Theoretical and Applied Finance 15(3): 1250022.
Jegadeesh, N. and Titman, S. (1995) Overreaction, delayed reaction, and contrarian profits.
Review of Financial Studies 8(4): 973-993.
Kakushadze, Z. (2015a) Mean-Reversion and Optimization. Journal of Asset Management 16(1):
14-40. Available online: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2478345.
Kakushadze, Z. (2015b) 4-Factor Model for Overnight Returns. Wilmott Magazine 2015(79): 5662. Available online: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2511874.
Kakushadze, Z. (2015c) Combining Alphas via Bounded Regression. Risks 3(4): 474-490.
Available online: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2550335.
Kakushadze, Z. (2015d) On Origins of Alpha. Hedge Fund Journal 108: 47-50. Available online:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2575007.
Kakushadze, Z. (2015e) Heterotic Risk Models. Wilmott Magazine 2015(80): 40-55. Available
online: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2600798.
Kakushadze, Z. (2016a) Shrinkage = Factor Model. Journal of Asset Management 17(2): 69-72.
Available online: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2685720.

19

Kakushadze, Z. (2016b) 101 Formulaic Alphas. Wilmott Magazine 2016(84): 72-80. Available
online: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2701346.
Kakushadze, Z. and Liew, J.K.-S. (2015) Custom v. Standardized Risk Models. Risks 3(2): 112-138.
Available online: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2493379.
Kakushadze, Z. and Serur, J.A. (2018) 151 Trading Strategies. Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave
Macmillan/Springer Nature. Available online: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3247865.
Kakushadze, Z. and Tulchinsky, I. (2016) Performance v. Turnover: A Story by 4,000 Alphas.
Journal of Investment Strategies 5(2): 75-89. Available online:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=2657603.
Kakushadze, Z. and Yu, W. (2016a) Multifactor Risk Models and Heterotic CAPM. Journal of
Investment Strategies 5(4): 1-49. Available online: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2722093.
Kakushadze, Z. and Yu, W. (2016b) Statistical Industry Classification. Journal of Risk & Control
3(1): 17-65. Available online: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2802753.
Kakushadze, Z. and Yu, W. (2017a) How to Combine a Billion Alphas. Journal of Asset
Management 18(1): 64-80. Available online: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2739219.
Kakushadze, Z. and Yu, W. (2017b) Open Source Fundamental Industry Classification. Data
2(2): 20. Available online: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2954300.
Kakushadze, Z. and Yu, W. (2019) Machine Learning Risk Models. Journal of Risk & Control 6(1):
37-64. Available online: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3308964.
Khandani, A.E. and Lo, A.W. (2011) What happened to the quants in August 2007? Evidence
from factors and transactions data. Journal of Financial Markets 14(1): 1-46.
Lakonishok, J., Shleifer, A. and Vishny, R.W. (1994) Contrarian investment, extrapolation, and
risk. Journal of Finance 49(5): 1541-1578.
Lewis, M. (2014) Flash Boys: A Wall Street Revolt. New York, NY: W.W. Norton & Company, Inc.
Lo, A.W. (2008) Where Do Alphas Come From?: A New Measure of the Value of Active
Investment Management. Journal of Investment Management 6(2): 1-29.
Lo, A.W. (2010) Hedge Funds: An Analytic Perspective. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Lo, A.W. and Patel, P.N. (2008) 130/30: The New Long-Only. Journal of Portfolio Management
34(2): 12-38.

20

Markowitz, H. (1952) Portfolio Selection. Journal of Finance 7(1): 77-91.
McPartland, K. (2017) Alternative Data for Alpha (Report, January 31). Stamford, CT: Greenwich
Associates. Available online: https://www.dnb.com/content/dam/english/dnbsolutions/alternative-data-for-alpha-final.pdf.
Monk, A., Prins, M. and Rook, D. (2019) Rethinking Alternative Data in Institutional Investment.
Journal of Financial Data Science 1(1): 14-31.
Mussalli, G. (2018) Quant Meltdown: 10 Years Later (January). Boston, MA: PanAgora Asset
Managemen. Available online: http://www.panagora.com/assets/PanAgora-Quant-Meltdown10-Years-Later.pdf.
O’Hara, M. (2015) High frequency market microstructure. Journal of Financial Economics
116(2): 257-270.
Pedersen, L.H. (2018) Sharpening the Arithmetic of Active Management. Financial Analysts
Journal 74(1): 21-36.
Rosenberg, B., Reid, K. and Lanstein, R. (1985) Persuasive evidence of market inefficiency.
Journal of Portfolio Management 11(3): 9-16.
Rustaveli, Shota (2015) The Knight in the Panther’s Skin. (Translation by Lyn Coffin, 1st Edition.)
Tbilisi, Georgia: Poezia Press Ltd.
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) (2015) Key Points About Regulation SHO (April 8).
Washington, DC: U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. Available online:
https://www.sec.gov/investor/pubs/regsho.htm.
Sharpe, W.F. (1966) Mutual Fund Performance. Journal of Business 39(1): 119-138.
Sharpe, W.F. (1991) The Arithmetic of Active Management. Financial Analysts Journal 47(1): 79.
Sharpe, W.F. (1994) The Sharpe Ratio. Journal of Portfolio Management 21(1): 49-58.
Slimmon, A. and Delany, L. (2018) Quantamental investing: The future is now. New York, NY:
Morgan Stanley Asset Management. Available online:
https://www.morganstanley.com/im/publication/insights/investmentinsights/ii_quantamentalinvesting_us.pdf.
Stattman, D. (1980) Book Values and Stock Returns. Chicago MBA: A Journal of Selected Papers
1980(4): 25-45.

21

Symanzik, K. (1970) Small distance behaviour in field theory and power counting.
Communications in Mathematical Physics 18: 227-246.
Taleb, N.N. (2007) The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable. New York, NY:
Random House.
Teodorczuk, T. (2020) Quants suffer in market rout while macro and volatility funds thrive.
Financial News (March 19). Available online: https://www.fnlondon.com/articles/quants-sufferin-market-rout-while-macro-and-volatility-funds-thrive-20200319.
Tulchinsky, I. et al. (2015) Finding Alphas: A Quantitative Approach to Building Trading
Strategies. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Weinberg, S. (1973) Current Algebra and Gauge Theories. I. Physical Review D 8(2): 605-625.
Wigglesworth, R. (2020) DE Shaw quant fund takes hit from markets gone haywire. Financial
Times (March 24). Available online: https://www.ft.com/content/90876f5c-6cf0-11ea-89df41bea055720b.
Wigglesworth, R. and Aliaj, O. (2020) Glitchy coronavirus markets cause quant funds to misfire.
Financial Times (March 24). Available online: https://www.ft.com/content/101cbb3c-6dbe11ea-89df-41bea055720b.

22

Table 1. Backtest results. ROC = annualized return-on-capital (without leverage). Sharpe =
annualized Sharpe ratio. CPC = cents-per-share (P&L in cents divided by the total shares
traded). Drawdown = peak-to-trough P&L reduction (in %, relative to the total capital invested,
$20M) during the period February 20, 2020 to March 23, 2020 (the trough in all cases occurred
on March 18, 2020). Costs = whether trading costs are included. OPT/REG = mean-variance
optimization or weighted regression. STAT = statistical industry classification. D0 = delay-0
close-to-open return. MOM1 = previous open to previous close return (momentum strategy).
C2C{} = -trading-day close-to-close return starting with previous close. See Appendix A.
Return
D0
D0
MOM1
MOM1
C2C1
C2C1
C2C5
C2C5
C2C10
C2C10
C2C20
C2C20
D0
D0
MOM1
MOM1
C2C1
C2C1
C2C5
C2C5
C2C10
C2C10
C2C20
C2C20
D0
D0
MOM1
MOM1
C2C1
C2C1
C2C5
C2C5
C2C10
C2C10
C2C20
C2C20

Classification
SIC
SIC
SIC
SIC
SIC
SIC
SIC
SIC
SIC
SIC
SIC
SIC
SIC
SIC
SIC
SIC
SIC
SIC
SIC
SIC
SIC
SIC
SIC
SIC
STAT
STAT
STAT
STAT
STAT
STAT
STAT
STAT
STAT
STAT
STAT
STAT

OPT/REG
REG
REG
REG
REG
REG
REG
REG
REG
REG
REG
REG
REG
OPT
OPT
OPT
OPT
OPT
OPT
OPT
OPT
OPT
OPT
OPT
OPT
OPT
OPT
OPT
OPT
OPT
OPT
OPT
OPT
OPT
OPT
OPT
OPT

Costs
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y

ROC
27.88
13.79
10.32
-5.95
-8.7
-25.1
-8.5
-25.48
-10.77
-27.86
-7.89
-25.04
31.42
18.34
8.48
-6.5
-8.48
-23.57
-8.64
-24.29
-10.9
-26.64
-8.33
-24.02
24.73
12.92
7.02
-7.12
-7.42
-21.03
-10.55
-24.8
-11.63
-27.13
-11.21
-26.44

Sharpe
4.6
2.28
1.53
-0.88
-1.24
-3.59
-0.99
-2.95
-1.22
-3.15
-0.94
-2.99
6
3.49
1.42
-1.09
-1.39
-3.85
-0.96
-2.71
-1.21
-2.96
-0.99
-2.85
4.77
2.4
1.25
-1.11
-1.24
-3.65
-1.1
-2.62
-1.21
-2.82
-1.18
-2.84

CPC
1.47
0.74
0.55
-0.32
-0.47
-1.36
-0.45
-1.35
-0.56
-1.46
-0.41
-1.3
1.81
1.08
0.5
-0.39
-0.5
-1.41
-0.51
-1.43
-0.63
-1.56
-0.48
-1.4
1.5
0.8
0.44
-0.45
-0.46
-1.32
-0.64
-1.52
-0.7
-1.65
-0.67
-1.59

Drawdown
--------11.2
12.48
12.97
13.94
14.64
15.53
13.36
14.25
--------9.92
10.9
13.9
14.7
15.64
16.45
14.13
14.95
--------9.91
10.84
16.39
16.81
16.95
18.08
16.95
17.47
23

Figure 1. P&L plots over a 1-year period ending March 23, 2020 for the strategies with the
following attributes: SIC, REG, N (columns 2-4 of Table 1); ordered first left-to-right and then
top-to-bottom in the graph: C2C20, C2C10, C2C5, C2C1, MOM1, D0 (in column 1 of Table 1).

24

Figure 2. P&L plots over a 1-year period ending March 23, 2020 for the strategies with the
following attributes: SIC, REG, Y (columns 2-4 of Table 1); ordered first left-to-right and then
top-to-bottom in the graph: C2C20, C2C10, C2C5, C2C1, MOM1, D0 (in column 1 of Table 1).

25

Figure 3. P&L plots over a 1-year period ending March 23, 2020 for the strategies with the
following attributes: SIC, OPT, N (columns 2-4 of Table 1); ordered first left-to-right and then
top-to-bottom in the graph: C2C20, C2C10, C2C5, C2C1, MOM1, D0 (in column 1 of Table 1).

26

Figure 4. P&L plots over a 1-year period ending March 23, 2020 for the strategies with the
following attributes: SIC, OPT, Y (columns 2-4 of Table 1); ordered first left-to-right and then
top-to-bottom in the graph: C2C20, C2C10, C2C5, C2C1, MOM1, D0 (in column 1 of Table 1).

27

Figure 5. P&L plots over a 1-year period ending March 23, 2020 for the strategies with the
following attributes: STAT, OPT, N (columns 2-4 of Table 1); ordered first left-to-right and then
top-to-bottom in the graph: C2C20, C2C10, C2C5, C2C1, MOM1, D0 (in column 1 of Table 1).

28

Figure 6. P&L plots over a 1-year period ending March 23, 2020 for the strategies with the
following attributes: STAT, OPT, Y (columns 2-4 of Table 1); ordered first left-to-right and then
top-to-bottom in the graph: C2C20, C2C10, C2C5, C2C1, MOM1, D0 (in column 1 of Table 1).

29

