A scaling approach to estimate the age-dependent
COVID-19 infection fatality ratio from incomplete
data

arXiv:2006.02757v2 [q-bio.PE] 27 Jan 2021

Beatriz Seoane
Departamento de Fı́sica Teórica,
Universidad Complutense,
28040 Madrid, Spain.
beseoane@ucm.es
January 28, 2021
Abstract
SARS-CoV-2 has disrupted the life of billions of people around the world since
the first outbreak was officially declared in China at the beginning of 2020. Yet,
important questions such as how deadly it is or its degree of spread within
different countries remain unanswered. In this work, we exploit the ‘universal’
increase of the mortality rate with age observed in different countries since the
beginning of their respective outbreaks, combined with the results of the antibody
prevalence tests in the population of Spain, to unveil both unknowns. We test
these results with an analogous antibody rate survey in the canton of Geneva,
Switzerland, showing a good agreement. We also argue that the official number of
deaths over 70 years old might be importantly underestimated in most of the
countries, and we use the comparison between the official records with the number
of deaths mentioning COVID-19 in the death certificates to quantify by how much.
Using this information, we estimate the infection fatality ratio (IFR) for the
different age segments and the fraction of the population infected in different
countries assuming a uniform exposure to the virus in all age segments. We also
give estimations for the non-uniform IFR using the sero-epidemiological results of
Spain, showing a very similar increase of the fatality ratio with age. Only for
Spain, we estimate the probability (if infected) of being identified as a case, being
hospitalized or admitted in the intensive care units as function of age. In general,
we observe a nearly exponential increase of the fatality ratio with age, which
anticipates large differences in total IFR in countries with different demographic
distributions, with numbers that range from 1.82% in Italy, to 0.62% in China or
even 0.14% in middle Africa.

1

Introduction

The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has quickly spread
around the world since its first notice in December of 2019. The pandemic of the disease
caused by this virus, the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), at the moment of this
writing, has claimed more than 400 thousand lives. Many countries in the world have
declared different levels of population confinement measures to try to minimize the
number of new infections and to prevent the collapse of their respective health systems.
As the first wave of the outbreak starts to be controlled, the question of how to proceed

1

next arises. The daily number of deaths is progressively decreasing in Europe, and with
it, the majority of the countries are starting to release the national lock-downs. The
design of future strategies will be sustained on the evolution of the official statistics, and
the problem is that these statistics are very defective and incomplete. This is so because,
on the one hand, the total number official cases is strongly limited by each country’s
screening capacity, which means that only a small fraction of the total infections is
correctly identified (typically those presenting symptoms above a certain level of severity
fixed by each country’s policy). On the other hand, the shortage of screening tests and
an overwhelmed health system also tend to underestimate the number of deaths in the
official records. The actual degree of under-counting for both measures is unknown and
most likely country dependent, combined with the fact that the pandemic is still on
going, results in largely irreconcilable case fatality ratios (CFR) all over the world [1–3].
Efforts have been made to determine the clinical severity of the virus [4–8] and its
dependence with factors such as age [9], sex [10] or comorbidities [11–13], but
determining precisely how deadly this virus is remains hard [14, 15]. Many different
solutions using the available data have been proposed to extract the correct
CFR [2, 16–21], estimate the number of infections [22, 23] or the infection fatality
ratio [24–27]. Even the results of some early sero-epideomiological tests sampling the
population degree of immunity have been strongly controversial [28, 29]. Probably the
most reliable estimations for the infection fatality ratio (IFR, the probability of dying
once infected) as a function of the patient’s age, were proposed by Verity et al. in
Ref. [25] using the data from 4999 individual cases in mainland China and exported
cases outside China. The ratios obtained were further validated with the reported cases
in the Diamond Princess cruise ship [30]. Yet, these estimations were based on two
assumptions. Firstly, a perfect detection of all the infections among people in their
fifties, a debatable hypothesis given the difficulty of systematically identifying all the
mild and asymptomatic infections. And second, that the virus had spread uniformly
within the population of all ages, which is rather improbable because they were
analyzing mainly infections among travelers (that tend to be younger). Nevertheless,
the picture is clear, the lethality of the virus increases sharply with the patients’ age,
being particularly deadly for elderly people and mild for kids.
In the absence of a reliable number of confirmed infections, most of the statistics
have focused on the number of deaths, which are expected to be a fraction of the first
one. But deaths are much less common than infections, which means that in order to
estimate correctly the infections, one needs a very accurate death counting. In this
sense, it is widely accepted that the number of real deaths linked to COVID-19 is
noticeably larger than what officials statistics say [31, 32], but estimating precisely how
much is hard and will likely depend strongly on the country data collection policy and
capacity. One can try to estimate the size of this discrepancy from the excess mortality
observed since the beginning of the pandemic in the public death records. This
approach, though apparently infallible, is not without difficulties. Indeed, in most of the
countries, the epidemic peak took place at the same time as that of the lock-down
measures, which means that, on the one hand, the mortality for accidents and injuries
has decreased [33–36], and on the other hand, the health system being under a lot of
stress, the mortality linked to lack of medical assistance for other diseases has strongly
increased too [37]. Correcting these effects in the reference mortality trend requires a
careful an exclusive analysis.

2

Materials and Methods

In this work, we attempt to estimate the IFR as function of age using scaling arguments
relating the cumulative number of deaths reported in different countries and age groups.

January 28, 2021

2/28

We provide all the details concerning the databases used for the analysis in the
Materials section below (Section 2.1) and the definitions of our variables in the Methods
Section (Section 2.2). We then use these age-distributed measures to establish a direct
correspondence between the mortality rates in patients below 70 years old (where we
argue the official counting is more accurate, see Section 3.1) published in different
countries around the world (but mostly in Europe) in Section 3.2. This good
correspondence allows us to make predictions about the degree of spread of the virus in
different populations, or the global IFR of a country, as compared to another one. We
also observe that the collapse of the mortality rate with age in different countries is
compatible with a pure exponential increase of the IFR with age (assuming a uniform
attack rate). The scale of total infections is then consistently fixed from the rate of
immunity obtained via blood tests of a statistical sampling of the citizens Spain in
Section 3.3 (and compared to seroprevalence tests in Geneva, Switzerland, and New
York City, United States). This scale allows us to compute the IFR as function of age
and the number of current infections in each country that are given in Table 1. In
addition, we estimate the probability of being detected as official case, needing
hospitalization and intensive care (if infected) as function of age in Spain in Section 3.4.
All these rates are obtained under the assumption of a uniform attack rate, an
assumption that seems fairly reasonable seeing the immunity measures of the Spanish
test, measures that, when once taken into account, do not change qualitatively the
results discussed so far (see in Section 4.1). Finally, we estimate the extent of the
under-counting of deaths linked to COVID-19 among the elderly in the different
countries (assuming, again, a uniform attack rate) and give estimations for the overall
lethality of the virus in Section 4.2.

2.1

Materials

We provide below the details and sources concerning the data used in the analysis.
2.1.1

Age profile of the COVID-19 deaths

We study the distribution of cumulative deaths by age-groups in different countries and
regions. In general, we consider only COVID-19 confirmed deaths (that of patients
tested positive for the disease). In order to quantify the possible under-counting of
deaths associated to COVID-19, we also consider registers of the deaths were COVID-19
appeared in the death certificate, even as a simple suspicion, details are given in the
Under-reporting of deaths subsection.
National data
The information about the distribution of the number deaths associated to
COVID-19 with age in different countries is taken from the database prepared by the
“Institut national d’études démographiques (Ined)” (France) freely available for scientific
use at the website https:/dc-covid.site.ined.fr/fr/donnees/. For the rest of
epidemic’s measures in Spain (cases, hospitalizations, entries to intensive care unit and
deaths), we used the COVID-19 datadista database [38]. In both cases, these databases
collect together the official information published by each country’s health authorities.
More details about each country’s data sources and apparition of these data in the
paper are given in Table S1.
Some countries give the age profile for a sub-group of the total number of deaths. If
this were the case, we assumed a uniform sampling of the ages in all the age segments,
and we renormalize all the cumulative deaths by age so that the sum of the deaths over
all the age groups matches the total number of deaths published by each country on the
22nd of May of 2020.

January 28, 2021

3/28

Regional and local data In addition to the national data, we also discuss the
age-profiles of different regions in France, Switzerland and Unite States of America in
Section 3.3. For the distribution of COVID-19 deaths with age by department in France,
we used the data furnished by Santé Publique France, in particular the
“donnees-hospitalieres-classe-age” available at the Données hospitalières relatives à
l’épidémie de COVID-19 website (data downloaded the 20/05/2020). The information
about the COVID-19 deaths in the Canton of Geneva is taken from the “N. 5 - 18 au 24
mai 2020” report in the République et canton de Genève website. The information
about the deaths in New York city is taken from the “Total Deaths” reports of NYC
health website,
Under-reporting of deaths
We estimate the degree of under-reporting of deaths linked to COVID-19 by
comparing systematically the number of deaths having COVID-19 mentioned in their
death certificate (even if the link was just a mere suspicion), with the number of deaths
having laboratory confirmation for COVID-19. In order to compare data between age
groups, we normalize this difference by the number of confirmed deaths, that is:
Deaths (COVID-19 suspected & confirmed)-Deaths (confirmed)
Deaths (confirmed)
(1)
The data concerning deaths mentioning COVID-19 in the death certificate was taken
from the “up to week ending the 22nd of May” report in the ONS website (England and
Wales) and the “Informe de situación 22 de mayo 2020” from Comunidad de Madrid
website.
The age distribution of the official data (to generate Fig. 2) is taken for (England
only) from the Ined database (which is extracted from the daily report of the National
Health Service that includes only deaths tested positive for Covid-19 occurred in
hospitals only). In order to account for the deaths in Wales, we multiplied the English
distribution by 1.05 (Wales deaths represent a 5% of the sum of the deaths of Wales and
England in the ONS report). In order to estimate the official age distribution of deaths
in Madrid, we renormalized the national age distribution of cumulative deaths by the
official cumulative number of Madrid at the 14th and 22nd of May. This is a reasonable
approximation considering that almost a third of the total COVID-19 deaths in Spain
occurred in Madrid.
Fraction of under-counting =

2.1.2

Demographics information

For the demographics distribution of the different countries, we used the data available
at the Ined database which corresponds to the last distribution published by each
country official statistics’ agencies (more details can be found in Table S1), and the
database from the “World Population Prospects” of the United Nations
https://population.un.org/wpp/Download/Standard/Population/ (the estimation
for 2020) for the discussions about demography distribution in other parts of the world
and their expected effect in the Global IFR (see Section 4.3). The demographics of the
Geneva canton was extracted from Statistiques cantonales in the République et canton
de Genève website. For the demographics of New York City we used the data published
in the NYCdata website from 2016.

2.2

Methods

Statistical offices and health institutions of many countries have been publishing
regularly the age distribution of the cumulative number of deaths occurred in their
territory since the beginning of the outbreak. We have combined national data from

January 28, 2021

4/28

Denmark, England & Wales, France, Germany, Italy, South Korea, Netherlands,
Norway, Portugal and Spain, regional data from Geneva (Switzerland) and Madrid
(Spain), and local data from New York City (Unite States of America). Unless
something else is mentioned, we consider 10 age groups, each gathering together
patients with ages in the same decade (with the exception of the patients over 90 years
old, which are grouped together). Since the different age segments are not uniformly
populated, and this distribution changes significantly from one country to another, we
discuss always the number of deaths normalized by the number density of people xα (C)
in each age group α and country C, that is,
D̂α (t; C) ≡

Dα (t; C)
,
xα (C)

(2)

being Dα (t; C) the cumulative number of deaths at a time t. In the following, we will
refer to D̂α (t; C) as the normalized cumulative number of deaths and we will omit the
country variable C, unless explicitly needed. We show in Fig. 1–A the evolution of D̂α (t)
in France for our ten age groups. As shown, once the effects of the demographic
pyramid are removed (the fact that there are much more people in their fifties than in
the nineties in any population, for example), the mortality expands over almost five
orders of magnitude between kids and elderly people.
Asymptotically, that is, for a large number of total infections in a country, the
cumulative number of deaths in each α at a given t, will be a fixed fraction of the
cumulative number of infected individuals in that group, Iα , at a previous date t − ∆,
thus ∆ is an effective time related to the time elapsed between infection and death
(estimated to be, in average, around 20 days [39–41])1 . Then,

p
fα I α ,
(3)
Dα (t) = fα Iα (t − ∆) + O
being the proportionality factor, fα , the infection fatality ratio (IFR) for the age group2 .
The assignment of a unique delay for all the cases is, of course, an over simplification,
but which yet works quite well as the number of infections becomes large. We show, for
instance, the perfect match in time between the cumulative number of cases and deaths
at a later time in Spain in Fig. S1.
P
In general, we do not know either the total number of infections I = α Iα , or the
number of infections in a particular age segment Iα , but we know the latter should be an
(essentially constant) fraction of the total number of infections, plus fluctuations, that is,
p

Iα (t) = rα xα I(t) + O
rα xα I ,
(4)
with rα (∼ Iα /xα I) being the relative risk of infection for group α as compared to the
probability of infection if all ages had the same probability of getting infected (that is,
rα = 1 for all α). In other words, rα > 1 (or rα < 1) means that group α is more (or
less)
P prone to being infected than by random. Note also, that, by definition,
α rα xα = 1. This rα has the advantage of being dimensionless, and differs from the
standard definition of attack rate for an age-group, which would be rα I/N , with N the
total country population. Recent results analyzing the spread of the virus within close
contacts in the outbreak in China suggests a uniform exposure of the virus across the
1 In general, ∆ depends on α and on the country C, but we omit it here for simplicity because the
differences are extremely subtle at this time of the outbreak.
2 Note that the probability that n people of age within α die (among a total number of infections I),
is described by a Binomial distribution, B(n, p), where p is the probability of being infected and dying
at that age (i.e. p = Iα fα /I). Then, thep
expected number of deaths, is E(n) = N p = fα Iα and the
√
expected error of this value is Desv(n) = Ip(1 − p) ≈ fα Iα since p  1.

January 28, 2021

5/28

population [42], meaning that rα = 1 for all the groups (quite different from the
patterns observed for the seasonal flu [43, 44]). There is, however, an important debate
whether the low fatality observed in patients below 20 years old is related to a low risk
of death or a low risk of infection. For the moment we keep this variable free and we
will discuss it at the end of the paper. This risk of infection rα could, in principle, vary
with time, but we do not observe a systematic change with time (at least in the period
studied). This will be clearer with the discussion around Fig. 1–B for the cumulative
deaths, or for the analogous figure concerning the daily measures (which should be more
sensitive to a change in rα ) in Supplemental Fig. S2.

A
0-9
10-19
20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60-69
70-79
80-89
90+

105

D (t)

104
103
102

22
/03
29
01/03
/04
08
/04
15
/04
22
/04
29
01/04
/05
08
/05
15
/05
22
/05

101

B

date

102

-79

80

-69

age group

70

-59

60

-49

50

-39

40

10

-29

2

30

10

-19

1

0-9

10

-89
90
+

2020-03-22
2020-03-31
2020-04-10
2020-04-20
2020-04-30
2020-05-10
2020-05-21

100

20

D (t)/D50

59 (t)

101

Fig 1. Normalized number of deaths occurred in French hospitals as a
function of age. A We show the evolution with time of the cumulative number of
deaths normalized by the number density of individuals in age group α (i.e. D̂α (t) in
Eq. (2)). In B, we show D̂α (t)/D̂50−59 (t) as function of the age group, for all the times
in A (the darker the color, the more recent the measurement, and we give some dates in
the legend). This quotient is essentially time-independent as discussed in Eq. (7), and it
lets us estimate the quotient between the UIFR (the IFR under the assumption of
uniform attack rate, see Eq. (6)) of the two age groups, that is, fˆα /fˆ50−59 .

January 28, 2021

6/28

3

Results

3.1

The counting of deaths is more accurate below 70 years old

The under-counting of deaths comes from mainly two sources: (i) only the deaths that
can be directly linked to COVID-19 (by means of a positive result in a PCR test,
typically) are included in the official counting and (ii) countries mostly count the deaths
occurred within hospital facilities in the statistics. Source (i) tells us that all the
patients that die before being tested are invisible. This will happen eventually at all
ages but since old patients are more prone to develop severe symptoms and have more
difficulties to seek immediate medical attention, this situation will be far more common
among the elderly. Also source (ii) mainly affects old people because being hospitals
crowded, the oldest patients have been often treated in retirement/care homes or in
their own homes. For these reasons, we expect a significantly more accurate reporting of
the deaths of younger patients (in particular, under 70 years old). As we show below, it
is also possible to quantify this idea.
According to the Office of National Statistics in the United Kingdom, among deaths
mentioning COVID-19 in the death certificate (in England and Wales by the 22nd of
May) 64% took place in hospital, 29% in care houses and 5% at home [45]. Analogous
data published by the Community of Madrid’s government (which counts more than 1/3
of the official deaths in Spain) reports similar ratios: 61% hospitals, 32% socio-sanitary
places and 6% home. France counts separately the deaths occurring in hospitals and in
care homes, and the latter being almost 60% of the former. Deaths occurring in care
houses are a large portion of the total in all countries, which means that an incomplete
counting there, modifies notably the overall statistics. However, once we look at the
mortality per age group, such under-counting only affects the patients of a certain age.
In fact, we can compare the number of deaths having COVID-19 mentioned in the
death certificate (even if it is only a suspicion, which most probably represents an
over-counting of the real deaths) and the official counting of deaths linked to COVID-19.
In Fig. 2, we show fraction of under-counted deaths with respect to the official numbers
(see the definition in Eq. (1)) for England and Wales and the Community of Madrid. In
both places, the under-counting is relatively age independent under 70-80 years old, and
very important above, specially for the patients above 90 years old, where real numbers
may probably double the official counting. Furthermore, this mismatch is getting worse
as records in England and Wales are correctly updated (in Madrid it seems rather
stabilized). Details on the data used to generate these plots are given in the Materials.
In summary, we expect a small mismatch between the real and the official number of
deaths among patients under 70 years old (the ∼ 30% of under-counting is probably too
large because deaths caused by other diseases are probably also included in this count),
and a much higher systematic under-counting for the older segments. The actual
numbers will depend on the country capacity to detect quickly the infections, but also
on the particular details concerning the counting of official deaths (which
establishments are considered). We give these details, together with the last date used
for each country in the Methods and Dataset section.

3.2

Scaling between age segments

The combination of Eqs. (3) and (4) tells us that:

q
ˆ
ˆ
fα I/xα ,
D̂α (t) = fα I(t − ∆) + O

(5)

where
fˆα = rα fα ,

January 28, 2021

(6)

7/28

B 1.50

+
80

-79
60

-39

20

-59

E&W up to 2020-05-22
E&W up to 2020-05-15
E&W up to 2020-05-08
E&W up to 2020-05-01
E&W up to 2020-04-24
E&W up to 2020-04-17

40

1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

Fraction of under-counting

A

age group

Fraction of under-counting

Madrid data up to 2020-05-22
Madrid data up to 2020-05-14

1.25
1.00
0.75
0.50

+
90

-89
80

-79
70

-69
60

-59
50

40

0.00

-49

0.25

age group
Fig 2. Under-counting of deaths per age groups. We show the fraction of
under-counted deaths, per age groups, observed when comparing the number of deaths
certificates where COVID-19 was mentioned either confirmed or suspected, and the
official deaths attributed to COVID-19, relatively to this second number, see Eq. (1) for
the definition, for England and Wales in A, and for the Community of Madrid B. The
horizontal lines mark the mean rate of ’under-counting’ below 80 years old.

would be the probability of dying with age α if the virus attacked uniformly all ages
within the population. In other words, this is the “apparent” fatality since it weights
how deadly the virus is (statistically) for a patient in an age group, with the relative risk
of getting infected at that particular age. For this reason, we refer to fˆα as the uniform
infection fatality rate (UIFR) (i.e. the IFR under the assumption of uniform attack rate
between ages), as compared to fα , which is the real (potentially non-uniform) IFR
associated to the disease. Both measures are only equal if rα = 1 for all α.
All together, for all age segments, D̂α (t; c) is expected to be proportional to the total
number of infections at a previous date, I(t − ∆). Alternatively, the quotient between
the mortality rate of two distinct age groups,
q

q

fˆα
β
β
ˆ
ˆ
=
+O
fα I/xα + O
f I/x
D̂β (t)
fˆβ

D̂α (t)

(7)

should be time independent (as long as the number of the expected deaths for each
group is large enough), and equal to the quotient between the UIFR of each group. This
is precisely what we observe for the deaths occurred in French hospitals (see Fig. 1–B)
where we show the quotient between each D̂α (t), and the deaths among patients in their
fifties, D̂50−59 (t) for all daily reports since the 22nd of March of 2020 (the darker the
color the more recent the measurements)3 . Thus, with this kind of analysis, even if we
3 The other countries considered shows qualitatively the same behavior, we decided to show France
because it has been reporting age statistics (on a daily basis) for the entire number of deaths occurred
up to that date.

January 28, 2021

8/28

do not know the exact mortality associated to the virus, we can determine how deadlier
it is, at least apparently, for an age group as compared to another. We say apparent,
because up to here, we cannot distinguish if the virus seems less aggressive for an age
segment because the lethality is low (that is, fα  1) or because so few individuals of
that age got infected (that is, rα  1).
The same kind of arguments applies to data from different countries at a fixed time.
Indeed, one expects that the IFR, fα , should not vary too much from country to
country (at least within countries with comparable health systems). However, the
relative attack risk rα may do. Yet, if these differences are not large, also fˆα should be
country independent. In such case, Eq. (5) tells us that the different D̂α (C), essentially
differ by a multiplicative constant proportional to the total number of infections, I(C),
in each country. We show in Fig. 3–A, the counting D̂α by the 22nd of May of 2020
available for the different countries where we found information about the death profiles
by decades of age (see Materials section for details) as a function of α.
As argued, the different countries’ curves are essentially parallel in logarithmic scale,
with the exception of the Netherlands, where the mortality increases in the elderly
segments must faster than the rest of the countries (we do not known the reason, it
might be related to a significantly different rα ). In other words, we can extract both the
number of total infections and the UIFR by age (but for a multiplicative constant
common to all the countries, or all the ages, respectively) from the collapse of these
curves. We show in Fig. 3–B this collapse (where Netherlands was excluded even if the
curve collapses well with the rest below 70 years old), which works extremely well for all
the countries in the age region between 30-69 years old (despite the different orders of
magnitude of D̂α (C)). Deaths below 30 are very rare, which means that strong
fluctuations between countries are expected (see Eq. (5)). The collapse is less satisfying
above 70 years old, but, as discussed, we believe it is mostly related to a different degree
of under-counting of deaths for these segments of age (though other effects, such as an
effective protection of the elderly population might be an important effect in some
countries too). Yet, we believe that it is mostly related to under-reporting effects,
because, for instance, the French curve would quickly match the rest of the countries if
one added (for the segment over 80 years old) the official deaths occurring in care
houses to the hospital deaths shown here4 . We will try to estimate the extent of this
under-reporting in each country below.
One can now exploit this similarity in the increase of cumulative deaths with age
between countries to remove the statistical fluctuations. Thus, the country average of
this collapse gives us the UIFR (but for an unknown proportionality constant fˆ0
common to all age segments). We give the values of this average in Table S2. Data
obtained is compatible with an exponential growth of the UIFR with age (as shown in
Fig. 3–C). In fact, we obtain a very good fit of the data to
fˆα ∝ exp (A × ageα )

(8)

with A = 0.115(7)5 . This strong dependence of the fatality with age anticipates a
P
widely variable global UIFR ( α xα fˆα ) between countries due to the different
demographic distributions. We will discuss this point in Section 4.3. Let us stress that
we show this fit with a purely descriptive purpose, since we shall not use these results
any further in the analysis.
4 see, the data published by Sante Publique France https://www.santepubliquefrance.fr/
maladies-et-traumatismes/maladies-et-infections-respiratoires/infection-a-coronavirus/
articles/infection-au-nouveau-coronavirus-sars-cov-2-covid-19-france-et-monde.
5 In particular, we used the least squares method to fit log fˆ (and its error) as function of age via a
α
α
linear regression. The good quality of the fit is evaluated through the low value of the χ2 /d.o.f = 3.8/8.

January 28, 2021

9/28

A
106

Spain
Portugal
Norway
Netherlands
Korea
Italy
Germany
France
England
Denmark

105
D( )

104
103
102

0-9

10
-19
20
-29
30
-39
40
-49
50
-59
60
-69
70
-79
80
-89
90
+

101
age group

B 106

average

105
D ( )/ ( )

104
106
105
104
103
102
101

103
102
101

exp. fit

-89
90
+

-79

80

-69

age group

70

60

-59

-49

50

-39

40

-29

30

-19

20

10

0-9

010 9
20 19
30 29
40 39
50 49
60 59
70 69
80 79
-8
90 9
+

100

C

Fig 3. Normalized number of deaths in different countries as a function of
age. A We show the normalized number of deaths per age group (defined in Eq. (2))
for a selection of countries affected by the COVID-19 epidemic at very different scales.
In B, we show the same data (excluding the Netherlands) but where each country has
been multiplied by a constant D(C) so that it collapses with the Spanish curve in the
age region in between 30 and 70 years old. The values of each country’s constants are
given in Table S2. In black, we show the country average for each age segment (errors
calculated with the boostrap method up to a 95% of confidence), and in C the fit of
this average to a pure exponential function, see Eq. (8).

Furthermore, the collapsing constant is essentially the relative of the total number of
infected people in a country with respect to our reference country, that is,
I(C)/I(Spain). This is not entirely true due to the different country policies concerning
the death-counting, but, as discussed, we estimated that the unreported fraction under
70 years old is inferior to 30% (see Fig. 2) and the quotient of the under-estimation of
the two countries would, in general, much smaller. We show these collapsing constants
in Table S2.

3.3
3.3.1

Fixing the scale
Number of infections and uniform fatality rate

Up to this point, we have only obtained the number of infections by country with
respect to the number of total infections in Spain, and a quotient proportional to the
UIFR (the IFR assuming uniform attack rate) by age. In both cases, the proportionality

January 28, 2021

10/28

Uniform infection fatality rate
% Population infected
age group with under-counting estimation without under-counting Country
0-9
0.0012%(4)
0.00118%(0.00082-0.0016)
Spain
5.0%(4)
10-19
0.0021%(7)
0.00211%(0.0014-0.0028)
Portugal
1.0%(4)
20-29
0.009%(23)
0.00878%(0.0065-0.012)
Norway
0.33%(12)
30-39
0.024%(5)
0.0241%(0.019-0.032)
Korea
0.06%(2)
40-49
0.072%(18)
0.0722%(0.056-0.097)
Italy
4.3%(16)
50-59
0.26%(5)
0.256%(0.21-0.35)
Germany
0.8%(3)
60-69
0.84%(0.14)
0.839%(0.71-1.1)
France
3.4%(12)
70-79
2.8%(5)
3.47%(2.9-4.7)
England
6%(2)
80-89
8.9%(18)
12.7%(11.-17.)
Denmark
0.9%(3)
90+
23.%(7)
42.1%(34.-57.)
Table 1. Estimations assuming a uniform attack rate. We show our estimation for the
uniform infection fatality rate (UIFR) before and after quantifying the effects of the systematic
under-counting of deaths. We also estimate the percentage of the population infected in each
country by the end of May of 2020. Errors include the statistical error (±sigma, the standard
deviation obtained through error propagation of the results in Table 1, and the uncertainty of the
prevalence survey in Spain) and a systematic error of 35% of possible under-counting of deaths,
see Section 4.2).

constants (though both related) are unknown. In order to fix the scale, one can look at
the statistical studies of prevalence of antibodies against SARS-Cov2 in different
populations. In particular, we refer to the preliminary results of the sero-epidemiological
study of the Spanish population (inferred from 60983 participants) made public by the
Spanish Health Ministry the 13th of May of 2020 [46], that estimates that only a 5.0%
(95% interval of confidence (IC): 4.7%-5.4%) of the Spanish population had been
infected (from blood tests drawn in between 27/04-11/05/2020). Also, as an
independent control of the scale, we use the results of an analogous sero-prevalence
survey of the residents of the Geneva, Switzerland (from 1335 participants) [47].
The sampled rate of immunity in the Spanish population allows us to fix I(Spain) in
Table S2 and with it, estimate the number of infections in each of the countries shown
in Fig. 3, as summarized in Table 1). The results obtained are lower, but compatible,
with the independent estimations by Phipps et al. [23] or Salje et al. for France [48],
and compatible with the results of small antibody prevalence survey in England [6.78%
(95% C.I. 5.21%-8.64%)] [49] and marginally compatible with a survey among blood
donors in Denmark [1.7% (95% C.I. 0.9%-2.3%)] [50]. As shown, the rates of infection
(for the entire country) are rather low, in particular compared to the 60-70% herd
immunity threshold (even if it were lowered for other effects [51]). Yet, it is important
to stress that the propagation of the virus has been rather heterogeneous in the
territory, being the contagion rather high in certain regions and insignificant in others.
We take for example France, where the age distribution of the COVID-19 deaths is
available for all the departments (see Materials). Using also the data up to the 22nd of
May, we estimate that the percentage of the population infected has reached 12% in the
Island of France (the department of Paris), 7% in the Great East, 2.5% in Upper France,
and it is 1% or less in the rest of departments.
Furthermore, the total number of infections allows us to estimate the UIFR as
function of the age in Spain just by dividing our D̂α by this number, that is, using
Eq. (3),
D̂α (Spain)
fˆα (Spain) ∼
.
(9)
I(Spain)
We show the values obtained using this formula in Fig. 4–A. Then, we can extract fˆ0

January 28, 2021

11/28

from the comparison of fˆα (Spain) with the values fˆ0 fˆα in Table 1, in the age regions
where we believe that the counting of deaths is reliable (the region where the collapse of
50−59 ˆ50−59
Fig. 3–B is good). We use the group 50-59 to fix this constant (fˆ0 = fˆSpain
/f
),
which allows us to reconstruct entirely our estimate for the averaged UIFR (we show
these values in Fig. 4–A and Table 1). This determination of the UIFR is expected to
underestimate the fatality ratio for the oldest segments of population, we will try to
correct this bias in the next section. We will also include this corrected estimation in
Table 1).
We can test the accuracy of the estimated IFRs by this method, using another
independent sero-epidemiological survey. In particular, we use the work by Stringhini et
al. [47] that measures the degree of seroprevalence in the canton of Geneva (Switzerland)
from samples of 1335 participants. Up to the 24th of May of 2020, the canton’s
authorities had reported 277 deaths, all but one in patients above 50 years old. We can
use the age distribution of these deaths and our estimation of the IFR in Table 1, to
guess the fraction of the population that have been infected so far using Eq. (3). We
show in Fig. 4–B, the quotient Dα /xα fˆα N , being N the total population of the canton
of Geneva. If our fˆα were, indeed a good estimation for the real IFR, this quotient
should give us the fraction of the population infected in that age group, which was
estimated to be very similar above 50 years old and equal to 3.7% (95% CI 0.99-6.0)
and about 8.5% (95%CI 4.99-11.7) in between 20-49 years old [47]. As shown, our
predictions are in very good agreement with the survey estimation (specially once the
systematic under-counting of deaths in the estimation of the IFR is corrected, see
Section 4.2).
The perfect match between the results in Spain and Switzerland (and in a lesser
detail with England and Denmark) lends great confidence to the estimated ratio
between deaths and infections. Yet, let us stress that these estimations might be only
valid for similar health systems, similar percentages of comorbidities in the population,
and for hospitals not too overwhelmed during the worst moments of the epidemic peak.
In fact, if we use the IFR of Table. 1 to estimate the percentage of infections in New
York City (NYC) from the distribution of the deaths by age published by NYC Health
at different dates (we show the results in Fig. S3), we obtain predictions for the overall
antibody prevalence that evolve in time from 27% (data from 15th of April), 48% (the
1st of May), 57% (the 15th of May), to 63% (the 2nd of June). In other words, this
would suggest that herd immunity would had already been reached in the city. However,
there are proofs that this is not true. Indeed, the presence of antibodies within the
NYC’s citizens was randomly sampled during the last weeks of April, in the base of a
survey of 15000 people in all the New York State. The results announced by the
Governor in a press conference the 2nd of May of 2020 reported that only a 19.9% of
the tested presented antibodies. If we move forward ∼ 20 days in time to see this
reflected in the deaths [39, 40], we overestimate the infections by a factor 3, which
inevitably suggests that the IFR was higher in New York City that what it was in Spain
or in Geneva, unless there are issues in the sero-prevalence study, something hard to
estimate because technical details of the survey have not been published so far (to our
knowledge). The origin of this mismatch might be multiple: a non universal access to
health care, higher presence of comorbidities among the young population and/or
collapse of hospitals. For this point, we would like to stress that the effects of a possible
sanitary collapse must be more evident in NYC than nowhere else, given the
disproportionate dimension of the NYC outbreak with respect to the rest of countries
considered here. For instance, just in NYC there were almost twice more deaths in
patients below 50 years old than in the whole Italy during the Spring of 2020.
We can also compare our IFR with previous estimations. Our numbers are smaller
than the estimation by Verity et al. [25] for all the age segments except those that

January 28, 2021

12/28

concern the elderly patients (though still compatible with their confidence interval for
most of the age groups), and about three times smaller than the CFR (the probability
of dying among the confirmed cases) per age group measured in South Korea (where a
massive number of screening tests were made). This difference could be explained, in
both cases, from an under-estimation of the total number of infections. On the one
hand, the IFR in Ref. [25] was estimated from the CFR, and the statistical prevalence
of antibodies among the travelers returning home from repatriation flights (which
represents a much lower sampling that the one considered in the Spanish survey). On
the other hand, Korea has been very successful identifying new infections by tracking
the social contacts of the infected, but it is very unlikely that they are able to trace all
the infections.
Before ending this Section, we want to warn about the limitations of the current
sero-epidemological surveys, which will probably affect our results (even though we
would like to stress that the Spanish survey has been praised for its robustness [52]). In
fact, extracting accurate results from them is challenging for different reasons. Firstly,
because the study must be well designed to avoid undesirable bias in the recruitment of
the participants. Secondly, because the probability of detecting the antibodies change
with time [53] (an effect that must be taken into account [54]). Thirdly, because
available tests are not very accurate [55], which means that statistical adjustments must
be included in the analysis to avoid mistaking the antibody rate with the false positive
rate [56]. And finally, because the spread of the virus have been very heterogeneous in
space (as we illustrated for France above), which means that very large samples are
necessary to get the correct picture of a country.

3.4

Other probabilities

Spain also gives age distributed data (for groups of patients with ages in the same
decades) for the cumulative number of official cases, Cα , new hospitalizations, Hα , and
new admissions in intensive care units, Sα . Due to the shortage of screening tests, for
most of the age groups, the number of cases gives us a measure of the number of
patients with symptoms severe enough to visit an emergency room. For the oldest
groups, it might not be the case because care houses with confirmed cases have been
more systematically tested than the rest of the population. Then, we apply the same
reasoning used to compute the UIFR to these indicators, which allows us to estimate
the probability of being included in each of the other three categories (always assuming
uniform attack rate). Unlike the deaths, policies concerning who get tested, hospitalized
and/or admitted in an intensive care unit probably depend strongly on the country,
which means that these probabilities might not be directly extrapolated to other
countries.
Equation (5) reads for a general observable X (X = C, H, S, or D),
q

fˆαX I/xα ,
X̂α (t) = fˆαX I(t − ∆X ) + O
(10)
which means that we can directly extract the probability of being included in the X
category fˆX using the measure I(Spain) from the antibody prevalence study [46]. Note
that knowing the precise value of ∆X is not crucial here because the propagation of the
disease was essentially interrupted in Spain during by the end of May, which means that
I(t − ∆X ) changes very little with time at this point. We show the estimations of these
probabilities per age group in Fig. 5.
We see that, between 20-80 years old, the probability of being confirmed as a case
does not depend too much on age, and it keeps fixed around 1 every 10 infections. The
probability is higher for older segments and much smaller for people below 20 years old.

January 28, 2021

13/28

For the other indicators, we observe a strong dependence of all levels of severity with
age. For the intensive care unit admissions, however, above 70 years old, one sees clearly
the effects of the policies regulating the access to intensive care with age, an access that
becomes rare over 80 years old. A situation which certainly contributes to increasing
slightly the mortality rate for the oldest age groups. We show in Fig. 5–B narrower age
groups concerning the youngest patients. This second Figure tells us that the severity
related to COVID-19 in children is rather heterogeneous in age, being particularly
dangerous for kids below 2 years old (an age segment for which the admissions in
intensive care are more common than for patients above 40 years old as shown in
Fig. 5–B). Furthermore, these probabilities might be underestimated by the uniform
attack rate assumption, since one expects a significantly lower exposure to the virus at
these low ages (we will see this confirmed in the data shown in Fig. 6).

4
4.1

Discussion
On the non-uniform distribution of infections

Our indicator for the IFR, the UIFR fˆα (and the probabilities of presenting different
degrees of acuteness), measure how more probable is to die with a given age, which is
not necessarily the true IFR (that is, the probability of dying once infected, our fα in
(3)). The two observables are only equal if the contagion is uniform among all age
segments of the population (we recall that, in our definition, fα = fˆα /rα , and uniform
attack rate implies rα = 1). In other words, with our approach we are not able to
distinguish if the mortality is low in a particular age segment because (i) the disease is
mild at these ages (low fα ) or (ii) because this age segment is rarely infected (low
exposure, rα  1 in Eq. (4)). Previous studies estimating the IFR per age group, for
instance Ref. [25], assumed a uniform spread of the virus, something that seems justified
by contagion dynamics studies [42].
The sero-epidemiological study [46], gives also some clues about this point, because
it also estimates the attack rate for different age groups. We can extract our relative
risk, rα , from the estimated attack rate (we recall that the attack rate given by rα I/N ,
with N the country-population). We show the values we obtain in Fig. 6–A. The
measures only report a significantly lower spread among children (which might be
related to the closure of the schools during the lock-down), but for the rest of the ages
the distribution is not so far away from the uniform attack rate. In any case, no
exponentially increasing attack rate with age is found to balance the strong increase of
the fatality with age. However, the much lower exposure of the kids to the virus tells us
that the probabilities estimated in Fig. 5–B might be underestimated in that age
segment, something that could change the overall picture of the severity of COVID-19
in babies, that might be similar to that of the adults. The change of tendency of the
severity with age in the case of infants could related with the suspected connection
between the COVID-19 and Kawasaki diseases [57–59].
We can nevertheless compute the real (non-uniform) IFR using these values for rα
for the Spanish data, and compare it with our previous estimation. We show the results
in Fig. 6–B. As shown, both estimations are essentially compatible for all the age
segments, which lends confidence to our previous results. The real fatalities will slightly
change once the effect of the non-uniform attack rate is included, but we do not expect
these non-uniform fatalities to change drastically with respect to the uniform
estimations we gave above.

January 28, 2021

14/28

4.2

On the under-counting of deaths

As discussed above, one expects the number of deaths associated to COVID-19 to be
underestimated in the official statistics, specially on what concerns to the elderly people.
In this section, we try to estimate by how much. The collapse of Fig. 3–B shows us that
Norway reports a higher number of deaths in the age segments above 70 years old than
the rest of the countries, while the scaling of the normalized number of deaths in lower
age groups are fairly similar to other countries. We believe that their counting is more
accurate than in the rest of countries for two reasons. Firstly, because the Norwegian
authorities reported deaths (of patients tested positive for COVID-19) occurring
everywhere: hospitals (38%), caring and retirement houses (59%) and homes (2%). And
second, because the country was much less affected than the rest of countries considered
(Norway has reported only 235 deaths so far), which means that they are much better
equipped to properly detect and treat all the infections. For this reason, we can use the
Norwegian measures to estimate quantitatively our under-determination of the IFR
among the elderly. In particular, we estimate an under-estimation of the mortality in
the elderly groups of 70-79: 22%, 80-89: 40% and 90+: 86%. We show in Fig. 4–B, that
this simple (and uncorrelated) correction allows us to predict correctly the measured
prevalence of antibodies among the oldest people in the canton of Geneva
(Switzerland) [47].
Yet, from the comparison with the Norwegian data we can only argue in terms of the
scaling of the IFR of an age segment with respect to other, but not on the factor
common to all age segments. For this, we can use the comparison between our
estimation for the UIFR based on official COVID-19 deaths and those where COVID-19
appeared mentioned in the death certificate. The sero-prevalence study [46] estimated
that a 11.3% of the population of the Community of Madrid had been infected, so we
can use this number to estimate the IFR of the region. Such a IFR has to be regarded
as an upper limit of the real one, because “suspicion of COVID-19” probably
encompasses many other respiratory diseases. We show this IFR compared to our
previous estimation, and the estimation after correcting the under-counting of the oldest
segments (using the Norwegian death data) in Fig. S4. We observe that, firstly, the
“Norwegian” correction introduced for the elderly segments is in perfect agreement with
the scaling observed in the Madrid regional data, with attaches confidence to this
correction, and second, that Madrid’s estimation is around 35% larger than our previous
estimation for all age groups. This comparison gives us an upper limit of the real IFR,
which means that it allows us to estimate the maximum error of the predictions given
up to now (as discuss, the real IFR is expected to lie in between the estimation based
on the official COVID-19 deaths and this suspected deaths’ one). We show these
estimations in Table 1 and Fig. 4–A after taking the effects of under-counting into
account.
We can use these corrections to estimate the number of unreported deaths for each
of the countries considered and the values of the UIFR per age to compute the global
IFR of each country. We show this data in Table 2. Considering that a lower diffusion
of the virus among the elderly would result also in a lower apparent mortality in these
groups, we give also the expected total IFR if the actual counting were perfect (left side
of the parenthesis), and if a constant 35% of under-counting was present in all the age
groups (right-side of the parenthesis).

4.3

On the overall infection fatality ratios and demographics

The values of Table 2 shows us that the global fatality of the disease depends strongly
on the demographics pyramid of each country, which is a direct consequence of the
nearly exponential dependence of the UIFR with age. In fact, we can use the average

January 28, 2021

15/28

% of missing deaths
% total IFR
Spain
38.%(0-86)
1.6%(1.1-2.1)
Portugal
9.1%(0-47)
1.3%(1.2-1.8)
Norway
0%(0-33)
1.2%(1.2-1.6)
Korea
16.%(0-57)
0.87%(0.70-1.2)
Italy
61.%(0-120)
1.8%(0.98-2.4)
Germany
32.%(0-78)
1.6%(1.1-2.1)
France∗
110%(0-190)
1.6%(0.84-2.2)
England
79.%(0-140)
1.3%(0.88-1.8)
Denmark
29.%(0-74)
1.3%(0.97-1.7)
Table 2. Country-dependent estimates. We estimate the percentage of
unreported number of deaths for each country together with the expected fatality ratio
once included these estimated missing deaths. In the parenthesis we include the
expected values if the current death counting was perfect (no missing deaths, left side of
the parenthesis) and if heavy under-counting was present, such as the one observed
when comparing with number of deaths with COVID-19 in the death certificate (right
side of the parenthesis). ∗ France numbers were computed using only the deaths
occurring in hospital facilities, which means that a 58% of under-counting is already
confirmed with the counting of deaths occurring in care-houses. We cannot correct the
minimum IFR because we do not have the age profile of these deaths.
values given in Table 1 to explore how the global IFR would change in different parts of
the world just due to a different distribution of the number of citizens with age (that is,
leaving aside the differences related to the different health systems or economical/social
conditions). This observation was previously proposed in [60]. With our estimations, we
expect that, while for Italy the IFR would be 1.8%, the same IFR age profile predicts a
0.62% IFR in China (extremely similar to the one estimated in Ref. [25]) or a 0.14% in
middle Africa, which could explain, partially, why the outbreaks have been significantly
less important there than in Europe (where the overall IFR would be 1.38%).

5

Conclusions

We have studied the scaling of the cumulative number of deaths related to COVID-19
with age in different countries. After normalizing these numbers by the fraction of
people with that age over the entire population, we observe that the lethality of the
disease increases (almost) exponentially with age, expanding over almost 5 orders of
magnitude between the 0-9 and 90+ age segments. In addition, we show that this
scaling with age is essentially country independent for ages under 70 years old. We
argue that the differences observed over this age are mostly related to different levels of
under-counting of deaths among elderly people. The collapse of the mortality data
allows us establish direct correspondences between the cumulative number of infections
occurred in each country since the beginning of the outbreak.
At a second stage, we use the Spanish survey of the sero-prevalence
anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibodies in the Spanish population [46] to fix the scale between the
number of infections and the number of deaths, which allows us to estimate the
COVID-19 infection fatality ratio as function of age (under the assumption of uniform
attack rate). We evaluate these numbers with an analogous prevalence survey of the
Genova canton [47]. We also show that, when applied to the COVID-19 death profile of
New York City, our predictions are not compatible with the antibody rates estimated by
the New York State [61]. This observation suggests that either the real immunity rate is
much higher (and reached herd immunity levels) or the fatality ratio has been

January 28, 2021

16/28

significantly higher in New York City than in Spain or Geneva, a discrepancy that
might be related to a different health system, a higher prevalence of comorbidities in
their population or a collapse of the sanitary system during the worse moments of the
epidemics. The scale of the number of infections allows us to compute as well the
probability (if infected) of being classified a case, hospitalized, admitted in intensive
care units or dying in Spain. The results show a clear increase of all degrees of severity
with age, with the notable exception of the infections in patients below 2 years old that
lead to much more complications than for older young patients, a situation that could
be aggravated by the low exposure of this population to the virus during the lock-down
measures.
We further discuss the validity of the uniform attack rate hypothesis using the age
distribution of the antibody rates in the Spanish sero-epidemiological study, concluding
that even if differences of exposure of the virus between ages are observed, differences
do not change qualitatively our estimations for the infection fatality ratio. However, the
low attack rate measured among babies warns us that our estimations for the infection
fatality rate below 2 years old might be importantly underestimated.
We use information concerning the number of death certificates where COVID-19
was referred as possible death cause to show that the under-counting of deaths is a
problem that mostly concerns the deaths of old patients. We use the scaling of the
mortality with age in Norway to estimate the real fatality ratio of the elderly age
segments (in other words, reverse the under-counting). We then test these estimations
with the age profile of deaths in the canton of Geneva and of the deaths certificates in
the Community of Madrid.
Finally, our analysis relies exclusively on public statics’ data and can easily be
updated as more accurate information is available (for instance regarding the attack
rates in different countries or better estimations of the total number of infections). For
instance, severity rates are now known to be strongly dependent on the patients sex [10]
or comorbidities [13] too, features that could be directly included in this analysis with
no effort and that would greatly help to understand the interplay between them and age.
In addition, if consolidated, the probabilities and the approach explained here, can be
easily used to estimate the degree of penetration of the SARS-CoV-2 in different cities,
regions, or countries, and to track the evolution of the pandemics.
Finally, but not least, we want to stress that we only analyzed the changes of the
total mortality with age, but the socio-economical environment of the patients plays
also an important role. This study could be generalized to include such variables.

6

Acknowledgments

I would like to thank Aurélien Decelle, Luca Leuzzi, Enzo Marinari, Giorgio Parisi,
Federico Ricci-Tersenghi, Riccardo Spezia and Francesco Zamponi for useful and
interesting discussions, and to Elisabeth Agoritsas, Ada Altieri, Alessio Andronico,
Marco Baity-Jesi and David Yllanes for a critical and constructive read of the
manuscript.

References
1. Worldometer. Coronavirus (COVID-19) Mortality Rate.
https://wwwworldometersinfo/coronavirus/coronavirus-death-rate/.
2020;.
2. Böttcher L, Xia M, Chou T. Why estimating population-based case fatality rates
during epidemics may be misleading. arXiv preprint arXiv:200312032. 2020;.

January 28, 2021

17/28

3. Chirico F, Nucera G, Magnavita N. Estimating case fatality ratio during
COVID-19 epidemics: Pitfalls and alternatives. Journal of Infection in
Developing Countries. 2020;14(5):438–439. doi:10.3855/jidc.12787.
4. Guan Wj, Ni Zy, Hu Y, Liang Wh, Ou Cq, He Jx, et al. Clinical characteristics
of coronavirus disease 2019 in China. New England journal of medicine.
2020;382(18):1708–1720.
5. Wu JT, Leung K, Bushman M, Kishore N, Niehus R, de Salazar PM, et al.
Estimating clinical severity of COVID-19 from the transmission dynamics in
Wuhan, China. Nature Medicine. 2020;26(4):506–510.
6. Surveillances V. The epidemiological characteristics of an outbreak of 2019 novel
coronavirus diseases (COVID-19)—China, 2020. China CDC Weekly.
2020;2(8):113–122.
7. Buonanno P, Galletta S, Puca M. Estimating the severity of COVID-19:
Evidence from the Italian epicenter. Plos one. 2020;15(10):e0239569.
8. Cao J, Tu WJ, Cheng W, Yu L, Liu YK, Hu X, et al. Clinical features and
short-term outcomes of 102 patients with coronavirus disease 2019 in Wuhan,
China. Clinical Infectious Diseases. 2020;71(15):748–755.
9. Dudel C, Riffe T, Acosta E, van Raalte A, Strozza C, Myrskylä M. Monitoring
trends and differences in COVID-19 case-fatality rates using decomposition
methods: Contributions of age structure and age-specific fatality. PLOS one.
2020;15(9):e0238904.
10. Vahidy FS, Pan AP, Ahnstedt H, Munshi Y, Choi HA, Tiruneh Y, et al. Sex
differences in susceptibility, severity, and outcomes of coronavirus disease 2019:
Cross-sectional analysis from a diverse US metropolitan area. PloS one.
2021;16(1):e0245556.
11. Brandão Neto RA, Marchini JF, Marino LO, Alencar JC, Lazar Neto F, Ribeiro
S, et al. Mortality and other outcomes of patients with coronavirus disease
pneumonia admitted to the emergency department: A prospective observational
Brazilian study. PloS one. 2021;16(1):e0244532.
12. Araújo MPD, Nunes VMdA, Costa LdA, Souza TAd, Torres GdV, Nobre TTX.
Health conditions of potential risk for severe Covid-19 in institutionalized elderly
people. PloS one. 2021;16(1):e0245432.
13. Chidambaram V, Tun NL, Haque WZ, Majella MG, Sivakumar RK, Kumar A,
et al. Factors associated with disease severity and mortality among patients with
COVID-19: A systematic review and meta-analysis. PloS one.
2020;15(11):e0241541.
14. Ruan S. Likelihood of survival of coronavirus disease 2019. The Lancet Infectious
Diseases. 2020;.
15. Mallapaty S. How deadly is the coronavirus? Scientists are close to an answer.
Nature. 2020;582(7813):467–468. doi:10.1038/d41586-020-01738-2.
16. Angelopoulos AN, Pathak R, Varma R, Jordan MI. Identifying and Correcting
Bias from Time-and Severity-Dependent Reporting Rates in the Estimation of
the COVID-19 Case Fatality Rate. arXiv preprint arXiv:200308592. 2020;.

January 28, 2021

18/28

17. Baud D, Qi X, Nielsen-Saines K, Musso D, Pomar L, Favre G. Real estimates of
mortality following COVID-19 infection. The Lancet Infectious Diseases.
2020;20(7):773. doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30195-X.
18. Spychalski P, Blażyńska-Spychalska A, Kobiela J. Estimating case fatality rates
of COVID-19. The Lancet Infectious Diseases. 2020;20(7):774–775.
doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30246-2.
19. Rosakis P, Marketou ME. Rethinking case fatality ratios for covid-19 from a
data-driven viewpoint. Journal of Infection. 2020;81(2):e162–e164.
doi:10.1016/j.jinf.2020.06.010.
20. Abate SM, Ahmed Ali S, Mantfardo B, Basu B. Rate of Intensive Care Unit
admission and outcomes among patients with coronavirus: A systematic review
and Meta-analysis. PloS one. 2020;15(7):e0235653.
21. Narayanan CS. A novel cohort analysis approach to determining the case fatality
rate of COVID-19 and other infectious diseases. Plos one. 2020;15(6):e0233146.
22. Flaxman S, Mishra S, Gandy A, Unwin HJT, Coupland H, Mellan TA, et al.
Estimating the number of infections and the impact of non-pharmaceutical
interventions on COVID-19 in European countries: technical description update.
arXiv preprint arXiv:200411342. 2020;.
23. Phipps SJ, Grafton RQ, Kompas T. Estimating the true (population) infection
rate for COVID-19: A Backcasting Approach with Monte Carlo Methods.
medRxiv. 2020;.
24. Jung Sm, Akhmetzhanov AR, Hayashi K, Linton NM, Yang Y, Yuan B, et al.
Real-time estimation of the risk of death from novel coronavirus (COVID-19)
infection: inference using exported cases. Journal of clinical medicine.
2020;9(2):523.
25. Verity R, Okell LC, Dorigatti I, Winskill P, Whittaker C, Imai N, et al.
Estimates of the severity of coronavirus disease 2019: a model-based analysis.
The Lancet infectious diseases. 2020;.
26. Sonoo M, Kanbayashi T, Shimohata T, Kobayashi M, Hayashi H. Estimation of
the true infection rate and infection fatality rate of COVID-19 in the whole
population of each country. medRxiv. 2020;.
27. Modi C, Boehm V, Ferraro S, Stein G, Seljak U. How deadly is COVID-19? A
rigorous analysis of excess mortality and age-dependent fatality rates in Italy.
medRxiv. 2020;.
28. Bendavid E, Mulaney B, Sood N, Shah S, Ling E, Bromley-Dulfano R, et al.
COVID-19 Antibody Seroprevalence in Santa Clara County, California. MedRxiv.
2020;.
29. Bennett ST, Steyvers M. Estimating COVID-19 Antibody Seroprevalence in
Santa Clara County, California. A re-analysis of Bendavid et al. medRxiv. 2020;.
30. Russell TW, Hellewell J, Jarvis CI, Zandvoort KV, Abbott S, Ratnayake R, et al.
Estimating the infection and case fatality ratio for coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) using age-adjusted data from the outbreak on the Diamond Princess
cruise ship, February 2020. Eurosurveillance. 2020;25(12):2000256.
doi:10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2020.25.12.2000256.

January 28, 2021

19/28

31. Leon DA, Shkolnikov VM, Smeeth L, Magnus P, Pechholdová M, Jarvis CI.
COVID-19: a need for real-time monitoring of weekly excess deaths. The Lancet.
2020;395(10234):e81.
32. Economist T. Tracking covid-19 excess deaths across countries; 2020.
https://www.economist.com/graphic-detail/2020/04/16/
tracking-covid-19-excess-deaths-across-countries.
33. Oguzoglu U. COVID-19 Lockdowns and Decline in Traffic Related Deaths and
Injuries. IZA Discussion Paper. 2020;13278.
34. Christey G, Amey J, Campbell A, Smith A. Variation in volumes and
characteristics of trauma patients admitted to a level one trauma centre during
national level 4 lockdown for COVID-19 in New Zealand. NZ Med J.
2020;24:81–8.
35. Saladié Ò, Bustamante E, Gutiérrez A. COVID-19 lockdown and reduction of
traffic accidents in Tarragona province, Spain. Transportation Research
Interdisciplinary Perspectives. 2020; p. 100218.
36. Nuñez JH, Sallent A, Lakhani K, Guerra-Farfan E, Vidal N, Ekhtiari S, et al.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on an Emergency Traumatology Service:
Experience at a Tertiary Trauma Centre in Spain. Injury. 2020;.

37. Ricci-Tersenghi F. An estimate of direct and indirect deaths related to the
COVID-19 epidemic in Italy. https://medium.com/@riccife/
an-estimate-of-direct-and-indirect-deaths-related-to-the-covid-19-epidemi
Medium. 2020;.
38. Datadista. COVID 19; 2020.
https://github.com/datadista/datasets/tree/master/.
39. He X, Lau EH, Wu P, Deng X, Wang J, Hao X, et al. Temporal dynamics in viral
shedding and transmissibility of COVID-19. Nature medicine. 2020;26(5):672–675.
40. Linton NM, Kobayashi T, Yang Y, Hayashi K, Akhmetzhanov AR, Jung Sm,
et al. Incubation period and other epidemiological characteristics of 2019 novel
coronavirus infections with right truncation: a statistical analysis of publicly
available case data. Journal of clinical medicine. 2020;9(2):538.
41. Verma V, Vishwakarma RK, Verma A, Nath DC, Khan HT. Time-to-Death
approach in revealing Chronicity and Severity of COVID-19 across the World.
PloS one. 2020;15(5):e0233074.
42. Bi Q, Wu Y, Mei S, Ye C, Zou X, Zhang Z, et al. Epidemiology and transmission
of COVID-19 in 391 cases and 1286 of their close contacts in Shenzhen, China: a
retrospective cohort study. The Lancet Infectious Diseases. 2020;.
43. Ferguson NM, Cummings DA, Cauchemez S, Fraser C, Riley S, Meeyai A, et al.
Strategies for containing an emerging influenza pandemic in Southeast Asia.
Nature. 2005;437(7056):209–214.
44. Mossong J, Hens N, Jit M, Beutels P, Auranen K, Mikolajczyk R, et al. Social
contacts and mixing patterns relevant to the spread of infectious diseases. PLoS
medicine. 2008;5(3).
45. for National Statistics (UK) O. Deaths registered weekly in England and Wales,
provisional; 2020. Download data.

January 28, 2021

20/28

46. de Sanidad (Spain) M. ESTUDIO ENE-COVID19: PRIMERA RONDA
ESTUDIO NACIONAL DE SERO-EPIDEMIOLOGÍA DE LA INFECCIÓN
POR SARS-COV-2 EN ESPAñA; 2020. See report.
47. Stringhini S, Wisniak A, Piumatti G, Azman AS, Lauer SA, Baysson H, et al.
Repeated seroprevalence of anti-SARS-CoV-2 IgG antibodies in a
population-based sample from Geneva, Switzerland. medRxiv. 2020;.
48. Salje H, Tran Kiem C, Lefrancq N, Courtejoie N, Bosetti P, Paireau J, et al.
Estimating the burden of SARS-CoV-2 in France. Science.
2020;doi:10.1126/science.abc3517.
49. for National Statistics (UK) O. Coronavirus (COVID-19) Infection Survey pilot:
28 May 2020; 2020. Report.
50. Erikstrup C, Hother CE, Pedersen OBV, Mølbak K, Skov RL, Holm DK, et al.
Estimation of SARS-CoV-2 infection fatality rate by real-time antibody screening
of blood donors. medRxiv. 2020;.
51. Gomes MGM, Aguas R, Corder RM, King JG, Langwig KE, Souto-Maior C,
et al. Individual variation in susceptibility or exposure to SARS-CoV-2 lowers the
herd immunity threshold. medRxiv. 2020;.
52. Yasinski E. Researchers Applaud Spanish COVID-19 Serological Survey. The
Scientist. 2020;.
53. Sethuraman N, Jeremiah SS, Ryo A. Interpreting Diagnostic Tests for
SARS-CoV-2. JAMA. 2020;doi:10.1001/jama.2020.8259.
54. Rosado J, Cockram C, Merkling SH, Demeret C, Meola A, Kerneis S, et al.
Serological signatures of SARS-CoV-2 infection: Implications for antibody-based
diagnostics. medRxiv. 2020;.
55. Whitman JD, Hiatt J, Mowery CT, Shy BR, Yu R, Yamamoto TN, et al. Test
performance evaluation of SARS-CoV-2 serological assays. MedRxiv. 2020;.
56. Sempos C, Tian L. Adjusting Coronavirus prevalence estimates for laboratory
test kit error. medRxiv. 2020;.
57. Riphagen S, Gomez X, Gonzalez-Martinez C, Wilkinson N, Theocharis P.
Hyperinflammatory shock in children during COVID-19 pandemic. The Lancet.
2020;395(10237):1607–1608.
58. Jones VG, Mills M, Suarez D, Hogan CA, Yeh D, Segal JB, et al. COVID-19 and
Kawasaki disease: novel virus and novel case. Hospital Pediatrics.
2020;10(6):537–540.
59. Harahsheh AS, Dahdah N, Newburger JW, Portman MA, Piram M, Tulloh R,
et al. Missed or delayed diagnosis of Kawasaki disease during the 2019 Novel
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The Journal of Pediatrics. 2020;.
60. Dowd JB, Andriano L, Brazel DM, Rotondi V, Block P, Ding X, et al.
Demographic science aids in understanding the spread and fatality rates of
COVID-19. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
2020;117(18):9696–9698.
61. State) GPONY; 2020. https://www.governor.ny.gov/news/amid-ongoing-covid19-pandemic-governor-cuomo-announces-results-completed-antibody-testing.

January 28, 2021

21/28

A
1

10

2

10

3

10

4

10

5

10

6

unreliable
region

f

10

-89
90
+

-79

80

-69

70

-59

age group

B 17.5

8.5% pevalence tests 20-49 ys
3.7% pevalence tests 50+ ys
expected
expected + under-counting

15.0
12.5
10.0
7.5
5.0

+

90

-89

-79

80

Age group

70

-69

60

50

-49

40

-39

30

20

-29

2.5

-59

Seroprevalence Geneve [%]

60

-49

50

-39

40

-29

30

-19

20

10

0-9

antibody test Spain
estimation China\nVerity et al.(2020)
CFR South Korea
Average-country estimation
Under-counting corrected

Fig 4. Probabilities assuming a uniform attack rate. A We use the
measurements of the number of infections in Spain to estimate the UIFR using Eq. (3)
in both regions. We fix the constant fˆ0 in Table S2 using the estimation of the UIFR in
Spain for the age group 50-59 to infer the values of the country average UIFR (from the
collapse of Fig. 3–B). We show this first estimation in red, and in green, we show the
UIFR after correcting the under-counting of deaths over 70 years old. We compare
these results with the estimation by Verity et al. [25] and the CFR (i.e. the probability
of dying for confirmed COVID-19 cases, not the IFR) by age in South Korea. In B, we
use the IFR estimations from A and Table 1, to predict the seroprevalence of
¯
anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibodies in the population of Geneva, Switzerland, from the official
distribution of deaths per age of a total of 277 deceases. The predicted fraction of
infections is given in dots (in green, if we used the bare estimation of Eq. (9), in violet,
if we include the corrections linked to under-counting). In horizontal lines (and the 95%
of confidence interval in gray shadow), we show the actual values measured from the
antibody survey of Ref. [47] in patients of different age-groups.

January 28, 2021

22/28

100

100

1

10

2

10

3

10

4

10

5

10

6

<2
2-4
5-1
4
15
-29
30
-3
40 9
-49

10

Rates Spain

-79

-89
90
+

fS
fD

80

-69

age group

70

-59

10

0-9

fC
fH

60

5

-49

10

50

4

-39

10

40

3

-29

10

30

2

-19

10

B

20

1

Rates Spain

A 10

age group

Fig 5. Other probabilities as function of age assuming uniform attack rate.
In A we show the probability of being classified as official case, fˆC , being hospitalized,
fˆH , admitted in intensive care, fˆS , and dying, fˆD , in Spain in Spring 2020, as function
of the age using age segments of 10 years. B, we show the same data but were the kid’s
information has been grouped by smaller age-segments, evidencing the severity of the
cases in patients under 2 years old. A is generated using the data by the Spanish
Health Ministry up to the 22nd of May and B with the data published by the RENAVE,
see Materials and Table 2.1.

January 28, 2021

23/28

A

2.0
1.5

r

1.0
0.5

<1
1-4
5
10 -9
15-14
20-19
25-24
30-29
35-34
40-39
45-44
50-49
55-54
60-59
65-64
70-69
75-74
80-79
85-84
-89
90

0.0
age group

B

1

10

2

10

3

10

4

10

5

IFR fD Spain
UIFR fD Spain
CFR Spain

0-9

10
-19
20
-29
30
-39
40
-49
50
-59
60
-69
70
-79
80
-89
90
+

Rates Spain

10

age group

Fig 6. Uniform versus non uniform IFR. A We show the relative risk of infection
for an age segment rα (see Eq. (4) and definition below) taken from the
sero-epidemiological study of the Spanish population [46]. While the youngest segments
of the population seem to be less hit by the virus, the distribution of the infections is
rather similar to that of a uniform attack rate, indicated by the dashed line rα = 1 here.
The 95% confidence interval for rα is indicated by the red shadow. B We show the
estimated uniform and nonuniform IFR for Spain and compare it with the CFR as a
function of age. The error for the non-uniform IFR is shown by a red shadow.

January 28, 2021

24/28

Country

dates
21/05/2020

Spain

21/05/2020

Origin of the data (from INED)
Ministerio de Sanidad, Consumo y Bienestar Social
(MSCBS)
MSCBS
database

from

datadista

Portugal

19/05/2020

Norway

20/05/2020

Red Nacional de Vigilancia Epidemiológica (RENAVE)
Serviço Nacional de Saúde,
SNS-Direção Geral da Saúde,
DGS
Folkehelseinstituttet, “COVID19 Dagsrapport”

Netherlands

21/05/2020

Rijksinstituut voor Volksgezondheid en Milieu

South Korea

15/04/2020

Korea Centers for Disease Control & Prevention (KCDC)

Italy

18/05/2020

Germany

21/05/2020

21/05/2020

Italian National Institute of
Health (Istituto superiore di
sanità - ISS); Daily Infographics,

Data details
Cumulative deaths with confirmed COVID-19 infection
occurred in hospitals or elsewhere
Confirmed cases, hospitalizations, deaths occurred in hospitals or elsewhere, and entries in ICU
Deaths occurred in hospitals
or elsewhere
Cumulative deaths with confirmed COVID-19 infection

Demographic sources
Instituto
Nacional
de Estadı́stica (INE)
01/07/2019

Cumulative deaths in hospitals and in other health institutions (nursing homes, etc)
and homes
Cumulative deaths with confirmed COVID-19 infection
in hospitals and elsewhere
Cumulative deaths with confirmed COVID-19 infection

Norway Statistics, Table
07459: ”Population, by
age and sex, 1986 - 2020”

Cumulative deaths

”

Figs. 5–B

”
Eurostat, © European
Union, 1995-2020

Fig. 3–A.

KOSIS (Korean Statistical Information Service) statistical database
23/04/2020.
Italian National Institute of Statistics (Istat)
01/01/2019

Figs. 3 and 4
and Tables S2,
1, and 2.

Figs. 3 and 4
and Tables S2,
1, and 2.
Figs. 3 and 4
and Tables S2,
1, and 2.

Data are communicated daily
by Public Health France (SpF)
to the French Institut for Demographic Studies (INED)

Cumulative deaths with confirmed COVID-19 infection
occurred in hospitals

22/03
to
21/05/2020

”

”

”

England and Wales

22/05/2020

Office for National Statistics (ONS). Deaths registered
weekly in England and Wales.

England

22/05/2020

Denmark

20/05/2020

21/05/2020
France

Cumulative deaths with confirmed COVID-19 infection

Cumulative deaths (COVID19 was mentioned on the
death certificate) occurred in
hospitals or elsewhere.
Cumulative deaths with conNational Health Service (NHS) firmed COVID-19 infection
occurred in hospitals.
Cumulative deaths with conStatens Serum Institut (SSI)
firmed COVID-19 infection

Figs. 3 and 4
and Tables S2,
1, and 2.
Figs. 3 and 4
and Tables S2,
1, and 2.

CBS Statistics Netherlands 01/01/2019

Eurostat,
© European Union, 1995-2020,
10/04/2020.
L’Institut national de la
statistique et des études
économiques (Insee)

Robert Koch-Institut (RKI)

Data used for
Figs. 3,4 and
6–B and Tables S2, 1, and
2.
Figs. 5–A

Figs. 3 and 4
and Tables S2,
1, and 2.

.
Figs. 1

Office for National Statistics (ONS) 30/06/2018

Figs. 3 and 4
and Tables S2,
1, and 2.

Office for National Statistics (ONS) 30/06/2018

Fig. 2.

Statistics
01/01/2020

Figs. 3 and 4
and Tables S2,
1, and 2.

Denmark

Table S1. Source and details of the age-distributed data (by country) used in the analysis. In the last column, we detail the
Figures and Tables generated with these data. All these data are freely available for scientific use at the website:
https:/dc-covid.site.ined.fr/fr/donnees/.

January 28, 2021

25/28

Scaling relations
age group
∝ fˆα
Country D(C) = IC /I(Spain)
0-9
28(9)
Spain
1.0(0)
10-19
51(14)
Portugal
0.045(2)
20-29
21(4)×10
Norway
0.0076(4)
30-39
60(10)×10
Korea
0.014(2)
40-49
18(3)×102
Italy
1.1(2)
50-59
63(8)×102
Germany
0.27(2)
60-69
21(1.6)×103
France
0.96(8)
70-79
69(7)×103
England
1.48(2)
80-89
22(3)×104
Denmark
0.02(-)
90+
5.6(16)×105
Table S2. Collapse of the mortality rate in different countries. We give the
values extracted from the collapse of Fig. 3–B: the increase of the mortality with age
(proportional to the uniform fatality ratio fˆα ) and the number of infections in each
country with respect to the number of infections in Spain IC /ISpain equal to the
collapsing constant D(C). The relative scaling of the mortality above 70 years old is
expected to be significantly underestimated. Errors are obtained using the boostrap
method at 95% of confidence. The errors of D(C) are only the statistical errors
extracted from the data collapse, they do not include the systematic error associated to
the different policies of death counting the different countries which would be much
larger, we try to give a better estimate below.

105

C(t)
D(t)

104
103

101

102

C(t)
D(t 5) × 9
15/04

29/03
01/04

15/03

29/02
01/03

100

15/05

104

29/04
01/05

102

Fig S1. Simple scaling relation linking the evolution of the cumulative
number of deaths and the cases with time. We show the evolution with time of
the cumulative total number of official COVID-19 cases and deaths in Spain. In the
inset the deaths’ curve is displayed 5 days backwards in time and multiplied by 9,
following very precisely the cases’ evolution once it surpassed approximately the 100
cases. Please not that cases are confirmed much later than the infection date and later
than the onset of apparition of symptoms.

January 28, 2021

26/28

2020-03-31
2020-04-10
2020-04-20
2020-04-30
2020-05-10
2020-05-21

104

A
D (t)

103
102

-89
90
+

-79

80

-69

70

-59

60

-49

50

-39

40

-29

30

-19

101
100

-89
90
+

-79

80

-69

age group

70

60

-59

-49

50

-39

40

30

10

-29

1

0-9

10

age group

2020-03-31
2020-04-10
2020-04-20
2020-04-30
2020-05-10
2020-05-21

-19

D (t)/ D60

69 (t)

102

20

B

20

10

0-9

101

Fig S2. Daily normalized number of deaths registered in French hospitals
as function of age and time. A We show the daily measures of deaths for age group
α (normalized by the population density at this group), ∆D̂α (t), for different dates.
The darker the color, the more recent the measure. In B we show the collapse of the
data when we normalize the data with the numbers of group 60-69 years old. Distinct
date data collapse worse in a single curve than in the case of the cumulative number of
deaths in Fig. 1 because being the daily measures smaller, the fluctuations are much
larger, yest, we do not observe any systematic change of the attack risk rα with time.

January 28, 2021

27/28

19.9% survey [2nd of May]
up to 15th of April
up to 1st of May
up to 15th of May
up to 2nd of June

80
60
40

ear

s

ars

ry

ye

lde

-74
75

an

do

65

45

-64

-44
18

ye

ye

ear
7y
0-1

ars

ars

20

s

prediction prevalence NYC [%]

100

Fig S3. Predictions for the sero-prevalence in New York City. We show our
predictions for the sero-prevalence presence in New York City using the death age profile
published at different dates and the IFR of Table 1 (without under-counting corrections).
Our predictions are significantly higher than the results of the sero-epidemiological
survey announced by the New York State Governor the 2nd of May of 2020.

100

10

2

f Madrid

Averages countries
+adjustement Norway

-89
90
+

80

-79

70

-69

60

-59

50

-49

10

40

5

-39

10

30

4

-29

10

20

3

0-9

10

-19

f

10

1

age group
Fig S4. Estimation of the uniform infection fatality rate by age for the Community of
Madrid using the number of deaths where COVID-19 was mentioned in the death
certificate (black dots), compared with our estimation of the UIFR extracted from the
average of several countries (blue line) and the same estimation where the fatality of the
oldest segments was adjusted to take into account the systematic under-counting of
elderly deaths (estimated using the Norwegian distribution of deaths with age). We see
that this correction match very well the scaling observed in Madrid’s data.

January 28, 2021

28/28

