In-Ear Measurement of Blood Oxygen Saturation: An Ambulatory
Tool Needed To Detect The Delayed Life-Threatening Hypoxaemia in
COVID-19

arXiv:2006.04231v1 [eess.SP] 7 Jun 2020

Harry J. Davies, Ian Williams , Nicholas S. Peters, and Danilo P. Mandic

Abstract—Non-invasive ambulatory estimation of blood oxygen
saturation has emerged as an important clinical requirement to
detect hypoxemia in the delayed post-infective phase of COVID19, where dangerous hypoxia may occur in the absence of subjective breathlessness. This immediate clinical driver, combined
with the general quest for more personalised health data, means
that pulse oximetry measurement of capillary oxygen saturation
(SpO2 ) will likely expand into both the clinical and consumer
market of wearable health technology in the near future. In this
study, we set out to establish the feasibility of SpO2 measurement
from the ear canal as a convenient site for long term monitoring,
and perform a comprehensive comparison with the right index
finger - the conventional clinical measurement site. During resting
blood oxygen saturation estimation, we found a root mean square
difference of 1.47% between the two measurement sites, with a
mean difference of 0.23% higher SpO2 in the right ear canal.
Through the simultaneous recording of pulse oximetry from both
the right ear canal and index finger during breath holds, we
observe a substantial improvement in response time between
the ear and finger that has a mean of 12.4 seconds and a
range of 4.2 - 24.2 seconds across all subjects. Factors which
influence this response time, termed SpO2 delay, such as the
sex of a subject are also explored. Furthermore, we examine
the potential downsides of ear canal blood oxygen saturation
measurement, namely the lower photoplethysmogram amplitude,
and suggest ways to mitigate this disadvantage. These results are
presented in conjunction with previously discovered benefits such
as robustness to temperature, making the case for measurement
of SpO2 from the ear canal being both convenient and superior
to conventional finger measurement sites for continuous nonintrusive long term monitoring in both clinical and everyday-life
settings.

I. I NTRODUCTION
NE of the major roles of blood is to supply oxygen to
tissues throughout the body. This is achieved through the
protein haemoglobin within red blood cells, which has a high
affinity to oxygen. Thus, as blood passes through capillaries
in the lungs, the haemoglobin in red blood cells binds to
oxygen which is subsequently pumped through arteries via the
heart and transported to various tissues. The maintenance of
a high arterial blood oxygen saturation is therefore extremely
important, as otherwise tissues cease to be adequately supplied. The term blood oxygen saturation specifically refers to
the proportion of haemoglobin in the blood that is carrying
oxygen [1], and is given by

O

Oxygen Saturation =

HbO2
HbO2 + Hb

(1)

where Hb refers to haemoglobin not bound with oxygen and
HbO2 refers to haemoglobin bound to oxygen.

Arterial blood oxygen saturation is typically estimated using
pulse oximetry, with peripheral capillary oxygen saturation
(SpO2 ) serving as a proxy, given that it is recorded on the
body surface. It has been established that those with a healthy
respiratory system typically exhibit SpO2 values of 96-98% at
sea level [2]. According to the World Health Organisation,
hypoxia is defined as a blood oxygen saturation level of
less than 94%, while a blood oxygen level of less than
90% may indicate the need for clinical action [3]. Hypoxic
SpO2 readings are a sign of hypoxia without breathlessness in
COVID-19 patients [4] [5] where the major respiratory failure
peaks 10 days after initial infection [6]. Indeed, in the case of
COVID-19 it is strongly recommended that patients receive
supplemental oxygen if their SpO2 reading falls below 90%
[7]. Hypoxic SpO2 levels may also occur in other examples of
respiratory failure [8] and during breathing obstruction which
is common in sleep apnea [9].
In practice, the SpO2 levels are calculated using photoplethysmography (PPG), the non-invasive measurement of
light absorption (usually green, red and infrared) through
the blood. In short, when more blood is present, more light
is reflected, so given a pulsatile increase in blood volume
with each heart beat, PPG effectively measures the pulse.
Depending on the level of blood oxygen saturation, the PPG
measurements also experience a change in the ratio of light
absorbance between the red and infrared light. Namely, the extinction coefficient of oxygenated haemoglobin with red light
(≈ 660nm) is lower than it is for deoxygenated haemoglobin,
and the reverse is true for infrared light (≈ 880 − 940nm) [10].
Thus, a simultaneous measurement of the absorbance of both
infrared and red light allows for an estimation of blood oxygen
saturation. Calculation of blood oxygen saturation, referred to
as the ratio of ratios method, will be fully explained in the
Methods section.
Reflective PPG can be measured from any site with skin
that has vasculature [11], but is, for convenience, commonly
measured from the fingers (usually the index finger), wrist
and earlobe. This convenience comes with some disadvantages
pertaining to 24/7 continuous measurements, which include the
intrusive nature of measurements given that living life with a
finger or earlobe clip is problematic, and also poor sensor skin
contact and motion artefacts in the case of the wrist. On the
other hand, the recent interest in the development of Hearables
[12], has promoted the ear canal as a preferred site for the
measurement of vital signs in eHealth technology. Indeed, the
ear canal represents a unique opportunity for physiological
measurements, due to its proximity to the brain (ear-EEG
[13]), the property of the ear canal to act as a shield from

external electrical noise (nature-built Faraday cage [12]), and
the general fixed position of the head wrt. vital signs and
neural function, as the head does not move much in daily
life unlike sites such as the wrist. Owing to these desirable
properties, the ear-canal has been established as a feasible
wearable site by Ear-EEG [13] [14] and Ear-ECG [12].
When it comes to ear-PPG, unlike the finger PPG signal and
the earlobe signal, it has been shown that the ear canal offers a
photoplethysmogram which is stable and resistant to changes
in blood volume which occur during hypothermia [15]. This
is because peripheral areas of the body experience restricted
blood flow during the cold, whereas the ear canal, being a
narrow cavity surrounded by skin, maintains internal blood
flow levels. Additionally, this makes the ear canal a preferred
site for accurate core body temperature measurement. The PPG
from the ear canal has also been shown to be far more sensitive
than earlobe and finger PPG to amplitude variations that arise
from respiration, thus allowing for a better measurement of
respiration rate [16]. Furthermore, a significant delay has been
evidenced between earlobe pulse oximetry and pulse oximetry
on the hand or the foot for detection of hypoxemia (low levels
of blood oxygen) [17]. The robustness of the PPG signal
from the ear canal, the faster SpO2 response time of the
earlobe to changes in blood oxygen levels and the potential
for relatively non-intrusive 24/7 ambulatory monitoring of
COVID-19 patients form the motivation for our research into
ear canal pulse oximetry. The aim of this study is therefore
to investigate the feasibility, establish technical characteristics,
and identify advantages in the recording of SpO2 from the ear
canal, compared with the most commonly used site, the right
index finger.

660nm, 880nm) gave us three measures of pulse, and also
the signals required to estimate blood oxygen saturation and
respiration rate. The PPG circuitry was packaged in a small 3D
printed case which was positioned just outside the ear canal,
as shown in Fig. 1. This same sensor was secured to the right
index finger with medical tape for the simultaneous finger PPG
measurement.
B. Experimental Protocol

PPG sensor:
in-ear

I nstruction
display

Data logging
circuit board
PPG sensor:
index finger

Fig. 2. Simultaneous PPG recording from the ear canal and finger. One PPG
sensor is placed in the right ear canal, and another is attached to the right
index finger. The simultaneous recordings are linked via a circuit board which
logs the respective data streams on SD cards. The subjects are instructed on
when to breathe normally, exhale and hold their breath via a video played on
a monitor (see Fig. 3 for the protocol), with a built in count down so that
they also know how long they have left in each phase.

Normal
Breathing
n = 1 120s

II. M ETHODS
A. Hardware
n = n+1
Normal
Breathing
60s
if n < 3

Exhale
5s

Holding
breath
20s
if n = 3
Normal
Breathing
120s

Fig. 1. The in-ear photoplethysmography sensor used in our study. Left:
Wearable in-ear photoplethysmography sensor for pulse oximetry, with a
trimmed memory foam earbud and a 3D printed case to house the circuitry.
Right: The sensor placed within the ear canal.

Fig. 3. Flow diagram of the experiment, outlining the sequence of participants’ breathing. The duration of each stage is provided beneath in seconds.
The exhale and holding breath stages are repeated three times, the 60 seconds
normal breathing is repeated twice, and 120 seconds of normal breathing
occurs both at the start and at the end of the experiment.

The photoplethysmography sensor used was the MAX30101
digital PPG chip by Maxim Integrated, consisting of green
(537nm), red (660nm) and infrared (880nm) light emitting
diodes as well as a photo-diode to measure the reflected light.
In our study, the PPG sensor was embedded in a cut out rectangular section of a viscoelastic foam earbud [18], allowing for
comfortable insertion. The three light wavelengths (at 537nm,

The participants in the recordings were 14 healthy subjects
(7 males, 7 females) aged 19 - 38 years. Two PPG sensors
were used per subject, one secured within the right ear canal
and the other to the right index finger; both sensors recorded
simultaneously. The subjects were seated in front of a monitor
during the recording where a video guided them on when to
breathe normally, as well as when to exhale and hold their

Example Breath Hold Recording

100

SpO2 (%)

98
96
94

SpO2 Ear
SpO2 Finger

92

Breath Hold

90
50

100

150

200

250

300

350

400

Time (s)

Fig. 4. Exemplar SpO2 recording following the breath hold protocol (see Fig. 3). The breath holds (starting with the exhale and finishing at the end of the
breath hold) are designated with the shaded regions. The SpO2 recorded from the right index finger is denoted by the solid blue line, and the SpO2 recorded
from the right ear canal by the solid red line. The three significant drops in SpO2 levels correspond to the three breath holds. The breath holds also vary
slightly in length as they adhere to when the subject holds down a button rather than the set time of the instructional display, thus mirroring the true breath
hold duration more accurately.

C. Extraction of the SpO2 Signal

ACred
DCred
ACin f rared
DCin f rared

Amplitude

0
-200

2

125
10 5

130

0
-1000
-2000
120

Time (s)
Ear DC

2

1.5
1
0.5
120

1000

Offset

Amplitude

200

-400
120

Finger AC

2000

125

130

125
10 5

(2)

An empirically derived linear approximation can then be
used to calculate an SpO2 value as a proxy to oxygen satura-

130

Time (s)
Finger DC
Infrared
Red

1.5
1
0.5
120

Time (s)

125

130

Time (s)

Fig. 5. Examples of the alternating current (AC) and direct current (DC)
waveforms within a PPG measurement, from both the right ear canal and the
right index finger. The amplitude is lower in the right ear canal for both the
red and infrared signals, but the signal is clear and usable. The maximum
to minimum amplitude was used as the AC signal and is divided by the DC
signal in the ratio of ratios metric to calculate SpO2 .

tion. Using the manufacturers suggested calibration [20], the
SpO2 value was calculated as
SpO2 = 104 − 17R

The ratio of absorbance of infra-red to red light within
the PPG sensor changes depending on the proportion of
haemoglobin that is oxygenated in the blood. This change can
be quantified through the so called ratio of ratios metric [19],
given by
R=

Ear AC

400

Offset

breath. The position of the sensors, monitor and recording
device relative to the subject is shown in Fig. 2. This video
included a built in count down, so that at every stage of the
protocol, depicted in Fig. 3, the subject knew how long they
had left. The experiment lasted for 435 seconds, consisting of
120 seconds of normal breathing, 3 repeats of 5 seconds of
exhaling and 20 seconds of breath holding with 60 seconds of
normal breathing between, and a final 120 seconds of normal
breathing, as depicted in Fig. 3. The exhale before the breath
hold was included because if the oxygen from the lungs is
expelled before holding one’s breath, there is a sharper desaturation in blood oxygen than if a subject did not exhale first,
thus allowing for clearer comparisons of sensitivity between
the different measurement sites. Furthermore, in a real world
scenario, such as obstructive sleep apnea, the lungs would
not be filled with oxygen before the obstruction to inspiration
occurred, making the conventional breath hold, where a subject
inhales before holding their breath, less realistic. Subjects were
also told to hold down a button, connected to the circuit board,
from the moment they started exhaling until they stopped the
breath hold. This was necessary, in order to know precisely
when the subject was holding their breath, as reaction times
would add uncertainty if the instructional display was used as
the ground truth. The recordings were performed under the
881/MODREC/18 ethics approval, and all subjects gave full
informed consent.

(3)

To obtain the alternating current (AC) components within
the PPG measurements, the raw signals were firstly bandpass filtered between 1Hz and 30Hz. Peak detection was then
performed on the infrared and red AC filtered signals to find
their peaks and troughs. Next, the peak values and trough
values were separated and interpolated, before their absolute
values were added together to give a constant estimate of
the AC amplitude. The direct current (DC) components were
obtained by low-pass filtering the raw signals at 0.01Hz. These
waveforms are shown in Fig. 5.

SpO 2 Delay for the Ear and Finger

30

Finger
Ear to Finger
Ear

Delay (s)

25
20
15
10
5
0

1[M]

2[M]

3[M]

4[F]

5[M]

6[M]

7[F]

8[M]

9[F]

10[F]

11[M]

12[F]

13[F]

14[F]

Subject

Fig. 6. The absolute blood oxygen delay from the button press to the finger (blue), to the ear (red) and the relative delay between the ear and the finger
(purple), shown for every subject. Male subjects are designated with [M] and female subjects with [F]. The delay is calculated from the time that the breath
hold stops (true minimum blood oxygen) to the time at which the measuring site detects a minimum in SpO2 . Error bars are included to show the range of
the three delay measurements for individual subjects.

D. Data Analysis

III. R ESULTS
For rigour, and to demonstrate non-inferiority of in-ear pulse
oximetry to finger pulse oximetry, the experimental results
span three major aspects related to the feasibility of in-ear
PPG; these are the comparison of resting oxygen levels against
standard finger PPG, the respective delays in detection of
hypoxic events and the corresponding PPG signal amplitudes.
A. Resting Oxygen Comparison
The difference in resting SpO2 between the right ear canal
and the right index finger across all subjects had a root mean

98

SpO 2 (%)

1) Resting SpO2 comparison. The resting SpO2 was calculated over the 60 second section of normal breathing before
the first exhale began. This time was ascertained from the
timing of the first button press, explained in the Experimental
Protocol subsection. The SpO2 signal from the finger and ear
were averaged individually over this 60 second window to give
a resting blood oxygen comparison for each of the measuring
sites for every subject. The root mean square difference in
average resting SpO2 was then calculated across all subjects,
as well as the mean difference across all subjects.
2) SpO2 delay. The blood oxygen estimation delay was
calculated by using the button release point as the marker
for minimal blood oxygen, corresponding to the point at
which the breath hold ends. The time between this point
of minimal blood oxygen and the first trough of the SpO2
waveform for the ear and the finger was then used to calculate
the SpO2 delay for the ear, the finger and then the relative
delay between the ear and the finger. Three measurements
for delay were taken for each measuring site, one for every
consecutive breath hold as shown in Fig. 4. The mean of these
three recorded delays was taken to give an average delay for
each measurement site for each subject. The range, on a per
subject basis, was taken as a measure of variability within the
recordings for each subject. The distribution of mean delays
was analysed against age and sex, whereby a paired sample
t-test was employed to compare male and female delays while
Pearson’s correlation coefficient was utilised to determine if
subject age was correlated to delay.

Average Resting SpO2 Comparison

100

96
94
Ear
Finger
Healthy Range

92
90
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

Subject

Fig. 7. Mean resting SpO2 levels taken for each individual subject for the
right ear canal (red circles) and the right index finger (blue crosses). The
mean was taken across the 60 seconds of SpO2 data before the first breath
hold sequence. The area within the two green dotted lines represents the
healthy blood oxygen range of 94-100%.

square value of 1.47% with a mean difference of 0.23% higher
saturation in the ear. The distribution of resting values across
subjects is provided in Fig. 7, and shows that all resting SpO2
values were within the physiologically healthy range of 94100%, and therefore there was a complete agreement between
the ear canal and finger as measuring sites on whether or not
a subject had ’healthy’ blood oxygen levels.
B. Blood Oxygen Delay
The mean relative time delay per subject between the ear
and finger pulse oximetry, in other words the time it took
from detecting minimal blood oxygen in the ear to detecting
minimal blood oxygen in the finger, ranged from 4.18 seconds
to 24.2 seconds. The mean relative delay across all 14 subjects
was 12.4 seconds, with a mean relative delay of 9.67 seconds
for the female subjects and a mean relative delay of 15.13
seconds for the male subjects. A paired sample t-test showed
that the male and female means were significantly different
(P=.045). The SpO2 delay values for all subjects are shown in
Fig. 6, highlighting the large inter-subject variability in SpO2
delay and moreover the large inter-trial variability in the ear
canal vs finger delay for many individual subjects.
Across our 14 subjects there was no overlap between the
absolute SpO2 delay from the right ear canal and the right

Normalised Resting Infrared Amplitude for Different Sensor Positions

Absolute SpO2 Delays
Normalised AC p-p amplitude

25

Absolute Delay (s)

1

20
15
10
5
0
Ear

Finger

Recording Site

Finger
Ear

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

Subject

Fig. 8. Boxplots of the mean absolute delays, for all subjects, between
the right ear canal and the right index finger. The top and bottom of each
coloured box represent respectively the upper and lower quartiles, the dotted
lines represent the median, and the whisker lines extending out of the box
represent the range. In our data, there is no overlap between the range of
absolute delay from the ear canal and the absolute delay from the right index
finger.

Fig. 9. The mean resting maximum to minimum AC amplitude of the
photoplethysmography signal for all subjects. These values were measured
from the 60 seconds of filtered PPG data before the first breath hold and
were normalised to the maximum mean AC amplitude across all subjects.

IV. D ISCUSSION
index finger, as shown in Figure 8. The absolute delay from
the right ear canal had a mean of 4.35 seconds, with a range
of 0.97-7.31 seconds. The absolute delay from the right index
finger had a mean of 16.75 seconds, with a range of 8.52-28.14
seconds. When separated by sex, the mean absolute delay from
the finger was 14.0 seconds for the female subjects and 19.5
seconds for the male subjects. The mean absolute delay from
the ear canal was 4.3 seconds for females and 4.4 seconds for
males, as summarised in Table I. Furthermore, there was no
correlation found between age and oxygen delay across the
participants.
For rigour, the SpO2 delay between the left and right ear
canal was also examined for a single subject, giving a mean
delay of 0.46 seconds from the left ear canal to the right ear
canal across the three breath holds, suggesting that measuring
SpO2 from the left ear would yield a similar response time to
the right ear, if not slightly faster.
TABLE I
S UMMARY OF MEAN S P O 2 DELAY VALUES ( SECONDS )

Female
Male
Total

Relative
9.70
15.13
12.40

Finger
14.00
19.49
16.75

Ear Canal
4.33
4.36
4.35

C. Photoplethysmogram Amplitude
It was observed that 13 out of 14 subjects had a higher
AC PPG amplitude from the right index finger than the right
ear canal with the mean finger PPG amplitude 2.35 times
higher than for the ear canal. Fig. 9 presents the individual
normalised resting infrared PPG amplitude for the finger and
ear canal results for all 14 subjects. Importantly, even in the
lowest amplitude cases, the in-ear PPG signals were effective
for peak detection and thus usable for the calculation of SpO2 .

A. Resting SpO2
Blood oxygen saturation measurements from the right ear
canal and the right index finger were comparable at rest, with
a minimal systematic offset between the two, indicated by the
mean difference of 0.23% higher resting SpO2 in the right
ear canal, as shown in Fig. 7. The variability between the
two measurement sites, indicated by the root mean square
difference of 1.47%, is to be expected, given that mean SpO2
values were shown to vary as much as 0.9% even across
fingers on the same hand [21]. The blood oxygen saturation
delay between the ear and the finger may also be a source of
error when using the same absolute 60 second time window
for comparison, although given that the window was long in
comparison with the SpO2 delay and the fact that resting
values stay fairly constant, this source of error should be
minimal. Both sensor positions were in 100% agreement
concerning the patients having healthy SpO2 levels of 94%
to 100%. The established similarity in the resting oxygen
saturation values with the commonly used right index finger
location are a first step towards validating the ear canal as an
alternative measurement site for pulse oximetry.
B. SpO2 Delay
Our results indicate a mean oxygen saturation delay between
the right ear canal and the right index finger of 12.4 seconds.
In other words, a steep drop in SpO2 is detected on average
12.4 seconds faster from the right ear canal than it is from the
right index finger, with two subjects exhibiting over 20 seconds
faster detection from the right ear canal. The faster response
from the ear-canal strongly recommends the incorporation of
in-ear SpO2 measurements into so-called Hearables, as there
are many situations where fast SpO2 response time is critical,
such as improving outcomes during neonatal resuscitation [22]
and closed loop automatic oxygen therapy [23]. Moreover, this
opens the avenue to aid comparison of sleep stage scoring and
sleep apnea events by aligning changes in SpO2 to the correct
30 second sleep epoch [24].
We found a large inter-subject variability in both the absolute oxygen delay to the right ear canal and the absolute

oxygen delay to the right index finger. On average, the female
subjects had lower relative oxygen delay between the ear and
the finger, caused by the much smaller absolute delay to the
right index finger in combination with an almost identical
absolute delay to the right ear canal. We hypothesise that
this could be related to males being taller on average and
therefore having longer arms, which would give oxygenated
blood further to travel from the heart to the fingers. However,
there may be other factors contributing to this large delay, as
pulse transit times (the time for blood to travel from the heart)
to the fingers are on the order of a few 100 milliseconds [25]
and not multiple seconds. Importantly, age was not found to be
a correlating factor to oxygen delay in our subjects. In future,
it would be important to investigate the SpO2 delay in older
cohorts that may have underlying cardiovascular conditions,
and not just young healthy subjects. The natural question
arises, could SpO2 delay be an indicator of the health of a
patients circulatory system?
C. Photoplethysmogram Amplitude
A significant drawback of in-ear PPG in this study was
the far smaller amplitudes from the ear canal when compared
with the finger. The two reasons for a lower PPG amplitude
are: i) less vascular density of the tissue and ii) poorer sensor
contact with the skin. Considering that the ear and fingers are
both common PPG placement sites, given the high density of
arterioles and capillaries [26], the most likely explanation for
a lower PPG amplitude was therefore sensor placement issues
within the ear canal. The large variability in ear canal sizes was
somewhat mitigated by different available earbud sizes, but
even with the smallest earbud some subjects found it difficult
to insert the sensor fully into the ear canal. Some subjects
with wider ear canals also noted that the sensor became looser
during the trial. These issues do not affect the conclusive
nature of this feasibility study and will be addressed in future
with an improved sensor design, such as by employing earhooks, commonly used with sports headphones, to stabilise
the position of sensor within the ear. Importantly, despite a
lower signal amplitude, all data recorded from the ear canal
was functional for peak detection of the AC PPG signal and
therefore the SpO2 calculation.
V. C ONCLUSION
TABLE II
S UMMARY OF DIFFERENT S P O 2 SENSOR POSITIONS
Placement
Finger
Earlobe
Ear canal

Fast response
No
Yes [17]
Yes

Robust to temperature
No
No
Yes [15]

Improved non-intrusive wearable SpO2 monitoring is desirable particularly in COVID-19 outpatients with a threat of
respiratory deterioration. To this end, we have investigated the
possibility of estimation of blood oxygen saturation from the
ear canal and have comprehensively demonstrated its noninferiority compared with conventionally used finger pulse

oximetry, with a significantly faster response time averaging
12.4 seconds. The results have indicated that the favourable
speed of in-ear pulse oximetry, in conjunction with the previously documented advantage of resilience to changes in circulation associated with environmental temperature changes,
may offer significant clinical advantages. Given its privileged
position on the human body and a fixed distance to vital signs
during most daily activities and while sleeping, the ear canal
may even be a superior site for measurement of SpO2 in the
scenario of 24/7 monitoring. In an era of urgency for enhanced
tracking of COVID-19 symptoms and increasing use of smart
devices for health monitoring, this study provides a compelling
argument for the integration of ear canal pulse oximetry into
current state-of-the-art Hearables.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the Racing Foundation grant
285/2018, MURI/EPSRC grant EP/P008461, the Dementia
Research Institute at Imperial College London, the BHF Centre
of Research Excellence, the Imperial Centre for Cardiac Engineering, the Imperial Health Charity and the NIHR Biomedical
Research Centre.
R EFERENCES
[1] A. Jubran, “Pulse oximetry,” p. R11, May 1999.
[2] G. B. Smith, D. R. Prytherch, D. Watson, V. Forde, A. Windsor, P. E.
Schmidt, P. I. Featherstone, B. Higgins, and P. Meredith, “SpO2 values
in acute medical admissions breathing air-Implications for the British
Thoracic Society guideline for emergency oxygen use in adult patients?”
Resuscitation, vol. 83, no. 10, pp. 1201–1205, Oct 2012.
[3] World Health Organization, Pulse Oximetry Training Manual, 2011.
[4] L. Gattinoni, D. Chiumello, P. Caironi, M. Busana, F. Romitti, L. Brazzi,
and L. Camporota, “COVID-19 pneumonia: different respiratory treatments for different phenotypes?” Intensive Care Med, Apr 2020.
[5] M. Cascella, M. Rajnik, A. Cuomo, S. C. Dulebohn, and R. Di
Napoli, Features, Evaluation and Treatment Coronavirus (COVID-19).
StatPearls Publishing, Apr 2020.
[6] F. Pan, T. Ye, P. Sun, S. Gui, B. Liang, L. Li, D. Zheng, J. Wang, R. L.
Hesketh, L. Yang, and C. Zheng, “Time Course of Lung Changes On
Chest CT During Recovery From 2019 Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Pneumonia,” Radiology, p. 200370, Feb 2020.
[7] W. Alhazzani, M. H. Møller, Y. M. Arabi, M. Loeb, M. N. Gong et al.,
“Surviving Sepsis Campaign: guidelines on the management of critically
ill adults with Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19),” 2020.
[8] R. G. Khemani, N. J. Thomas, V. Venkatachalam, J. P. Scimeme,
T. Berutti, J. B. Schneider, P. A. Ross, D. F. Willson, M. W. Hall,
and C. J. L. Newth, “Comparison of SpO2 to PaO2 based markers of
lung disease severity for children with acute lung injury,” Critical Care
Medicine, vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 1309–1316, Apr 2012.
[9] A. Oksenberg, E. Arons, K. Nasser, T. Vander, and H. Radwan, “REMrelated Obstructive Sleep Apnea: The Effect of Body Position,” Tech.
Rep. 4, 2010.
[10] M. Nitzan, A. Romem, and R. Koppel, “Pulse oximetry: Fundamentals
and technology update,” pp. 231–239, Jul 2014.
[11] L. Nilsson, T. Goscinski, S. Kalman, L.-G. Lindberg, and A. Johansson,
“Combined photoplethysmographic monitoring of respiration rate and
pulse: a comparison between different measurement sites in spontaneously breathing subjects,” Acta Anaesthesiologica Scandinavica,
vol. 51, no. 9, pp. 1250–1257, Aug 2007.
[12] V. Goverdovsky, W. Von Rosenberg, T. Nakamura, D. Looney, D. J.
Sharp, C. Papavassiliou, M. J. Morrell, and D. P. Mandic, “Hearables:
Multimodal physiological in-ear sensing,” Scientific Reports, vol. 7,
no. 1, pp. 1–10, Dec 2017.
[13] D. Looney, P. Kidmose, C. Park, M. Ungstrup, M. Rank, K. Rosenkranz,
and D. Mandic, “The in-the-ear recording concept: User-centered and
wearable brain monitoring,” IEEE Pulse, vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 32–42, 2012.

[14] T. Nakamura, Y. D. Alqurashi, M. J. Morrell, and D. P. Mandic,
“Hearables: Automatic Overnight Sleep Monitoring with Standardized
In-Ear EEG Sensor,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering,
vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 203–212, Jan 2020.
[15] K. Budidha and P. A. Kyriacou, “Investigation of photoplethysmography
and arterial blood oxygen saturation from the ear-canal and the finger
under conditions of artificially induced hypothermia,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE Annual International Conference of the Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Society, EMBS, Nov 2015, pp. 7954–7957.
[16] ——, “In vivo investigation of ear canal pulse oximetry during hypothermia,” Journal of Clinical Monitoring and Computing, vol. 32, no. 1, pp.
97–107, Feb 2018.
[17] E. A. Hamber, P. L. Bailey, S. W. James, D. T. Wells, J. K. Lu, and N. L.
Pace, “Delays in the detection of hypoxemia due to site of pulse oximetry
probe placement,” Journal of Clinical Anesthesia, vol. 11, no. 2, pp.
113–118, Mar 1999.
[18] V. Goverdovsky, D. Looney, P. Kidmose, and D. P. Mandic, “In-Ear
EEG from viscoelastic generic earpieces: robust and unobtrusive 24/7
monitoring,” IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 271–277, Jan
2016.
[19] T. L. Rusch, R. Sankar, and J. E. Scharf, “Signal processing methods
for pulse oximetry,” Computers in Biology and Medicine, vol. 26, no. 2,
pp. 143–159, 1996.
[20] MaximIntegrated, “Recommended Configurations and Operating Profiles for MAX30101/MAX30102 EV Kits,” Tech. Rep., 2018.
[21] G. Basaranoglu, M. Bakan, T. Umutoglu, S. U. Zengin, K. Idin, and
Z. Salihoglu, “Comparison of SpO2 values from different fingers of the
hands,” SpringerPlus, vol. 4, no. 1, Dec 2015.
[22] H. Baquero, R. Alviz, A. Castillo, F. Neira, and A. Sola, “Avoiding
hyperoxemia during neonatal resuscitation: time to response of different
SpO2 monitors,” Acta Paediatrica, vol. 100, no. 4, pp. 515–518, Apr
2011.
[23] E. P. Morozoff and J. A. Smyth, “Evaluation of three automatic oxygen
therapy control algorithms on ventilated low birth weight neonates,” in
Proceedings of the 31st IEEE Annual International Conference of the
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, 2009, pp. 3079–3082.
[24] R. B. Berry, R. Brooks, C. E. Gamaldo, S. M. Harding, R. M. Lloyd,
S. F. Quan, M. M. Troester, and B. V. Vaughn, “AASM — Scoring
Manual Version 2.4 The AASM Manual for the Scoring of Sleep
and Associated Events RULES, TERMINOLOGY AND TECHNICAL
SPECIFICATIONS VERSION 2.4,” Tech. Rep., 2017.
[25] P. Fung, G. Dumont, C. Ries, C. Mott, and M. Ansermino, “Continuous
noninvasive blood pressure measurement by pulse transit time,” in
Proceedings of the 26th IEEE Annual International Conference of the
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, vol. 26 I, 2004, pp. 738–
741.
[26] P. D. Mannheimer, “The LightTissue Interaction of Pulse Oximetry,”
Anesthesia & Analgesia, vol. 105, no. On Line Suppl., pp. S10–S17,
Dec 2007.

