arXiv:2006.10532v2 [cs.AI] 8 Jul 2020

COVID-ABS: An Agent-Based Model of COVID-19
Epidemic to Simulate Health and Economic Effects of
Social Distancing Interventions
Petrônio C. L. Silvaa,b,c , Paulo V. C. Batistaa,b , Hélder S. Limab , Marcos A.
Alvesc,e , Frederico G. Guimarãesc,d , Rodrigo C. P. Silvac,f
a

Grupo de Pesquisa em Ciência de Dados e Inteligência Computacional - {ci∂ic}
b
Instituto Federal do Norte de Minas Gerais (IFNMG), Brazil
c
Machine Intelligence and Data Science (MINDS) Laboratory, Federal University of
Minas Gerais, Brazil
d
Department of Electrical Engineering, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais (UFMG),
Brazil
e
Graduate Program in Electrical Engineering - Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais Av. Antônio Carlos 6627, 31270-901, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil
f
Department of Computer Science, Universidade Federal de Ouro Preto (UFOP), Brazil

Abstract
The COVID-19 pandemic due to the SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus has directly
impacted the public health and economy worldwide. To overcome this problem, countries have adopted different policies and non-pharmaceutical interventions for controlling the spread of the virus. This paper proposes the
COVID-ABS, a new SEIR (Susceptible-Exposed-Infected-Recovered) agentbased model that aims to simulate the pandemic dynamics using a society of
agents emulating people, business and government. Seven different scenarios
of social distancing interventions were analyzed, with varying epidemiological
and economic effects: (1) do nothing, (2) lockdown, (3) conditional lockdown,
(4) vertical isolation, (5) partial isolation, (6) use of face masks, and (7) use
of face masks together with 50% of adhesion to social isolation. In the impossibility of implementing scenarios with lockdown, which present the lowest
number of deaths and highest impact on the economy, scenarios combining
the use of face masks and partial isolation can be the more realistic for implementation in terms of social cooperation. The COVID-ABS model was
implemented in Python programming language, with source code publicly
available. The model can be easily extended to other societies by changing the input parameters, as well as allowing the creation of a multitude of
Preprint submitted to Chaos, Solitons & Fractals

July 10, 2020

other scenarios. Therefore, it is a useful tool to assist politicians and health
authorities to plan their actions against the COVID-19 epidemic.
Keywords: COVID-19, Agent-based Simulation, epidemic models, SEIR
1. Introduction
The Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic is an ongoing outbreak, caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (so-called
SARSCoV2). The outbreak was identified in Wuhan, China, in December
2019 [1]. The World Health Organization (WHO) declared the outbreak a
Public Health Emergency of International Concern on January 30th 2020,
and a pandemic on March 11th. In Brazil, the first confirmed case was on
February 25th 2020, when a man from So Paulo tested positive for the virus.
Since then, Brazil has been severely affected. As of June 26th 2020, the
country reached more than 1,220,000 confirmed cases and more than 55,000
deaths by COVID-19, according to official data by the Brazilian Ministry of
Health.
In addition to the public health crisis, the coronavirus has impacted all aspects of life, politics, education, economy, social, environment and climate. It
is also having an unprecedented impact on global supply chains and production. The only known effective course of action to fight the disease outbreak
is to implement highly restrictive social distancing measures on the population, as reported by a number of studies and systematic reviews [2, 3, 4].
Many countries are implementing such interventions with different degrees
of success.
Given the complexity of the societies, it is hard to predict the implications
of such actions in the short and medium terms [5]. Therefore, modeling
and simulating the COVID-19 epidemic is a relevant and helpful way to
understand the spread of the disease and the epidemiological effects of social
distancing interventions. For this purpose, many studies in the literature
have developed or adapted equation-based models to simulate the COVID19 epidemic, using the Susceptible-Infected-Recovered (SIR) model or the
Susceptible-Exposed-Infected-Recovered (SEIR) model to characterize the
dynamics, see references in Section 2. Nonetheless, agent-based models have
also been proposed for this goal, see for instance [6, 7] and other studies
discussed with more detail in Section 2.

2

In this paper, we develop an Agent-based Model (ABM) to simulate the
dynamics of the COVID-19 epidemic and the epidemiological and economic
effects of social distancing interventions. The proposed ABM aims to emulate a closed society living on a shared environment, consisting of agents
that represent people, houses, businesses, the government and the healthcare
system, each one with specific attributes and behaviors.
A society living over a territory is a complex and dynamic system. Such
systems have many interacting variables, present nonlinear behavior and their
properties evolve over time. Their behavior is generally stochastic and may
depend on the initial conditions. It can be affected by neighbor societies
(with different policies and dynamics) and it can show emergence of complex
behaviors and patterns. Agent-Based Simulations (ABS) are a good choice
to simulate such systems, due to their simplicity of implementation and accurate results when compared with real data [8]. The main goal of ABS is to
simulate the temporal evolution of the system, storing statistics derived from
the internal states of the agents in each iteration and the global behaviors
that emerge due to the interactions between the agents over the iterations.
This approach allows the simulation of systems with intricate nonlinear relationships, complex conditions and restrictions that may be hard to describe
mathematically. Since in this paper we are interested in simulating the effects of different social-distancing interventions and other control measures
that affect the behaviors of agents and groups of agents, it is much easier
to simulate these scenarios with an agent-based model. The epidemiological
and economic effects are observed as emerging from the interactions of the
agents in the simulation.
The ABM proposed here not only simulates the epidemic dynamics but
also models the economy in this society of agents, which can help us estimate the economic impact under different types of interventions. The model
(described in Section 3) allows the design of scenarios that correspond to different types of interventions performed in the society, by changing the simulation environmental variables and measuring their effects. Therefore, the
proposed ABM becomes a useful tool to assist politicians and health authorities in planning their actions against the COVID-19 epidemic. The model
was implemented in Python version 3.6 programming language and encapsulated in the COVID ABS package, whose source code is available at https:
//bit.ly/COVID19_ABSsystem. The source code of all the experiments reported herein is available at https://bit.ly/covid_abs_experiments.
The main contributions and findings are listed below:
3

• A new SEIR agent-based model to simulate the COVID-19 epidemic
using a society of agents.
• Assessment of the economic effects of seven different scenarios with
specific social-distancing interventions, via simulation of COVID-ABS:
(1) do nothing, (2) lockdown, (3) conditional lockdown, (4) vertical
isolation, (5) partial isolation, (6) use of face masks, and (7) use of
face masks together with 50% of adhesion to social isolation. These
scenarios and their simulated results are described in Section 5.
• The simulations support the notion that lockdown and conditional lockdown are the best scenarios in terms of controlling the number of infected and deaths, which is primary goal. Economical countermeasures and subsidies are required by the government since this scenario
presents the worst economic losses to the industry with potential unemployment, and recession can be observed during the lockdown period.
Also, to be effective, these scenarios depend on the ability of the government to enforce the social isolation.
• Our simulations present additional evidence that the so-called vertical
isolation simply does not work, although it is the policy advocated by
some governments like the Brazilian one1 .
• The scenario combining the use of masks and partial isolation of the
population could be a good compromise and it is more realistic for
implementation in terms of social cooperation. The infection curve is
flattened and the economy has smoother effects than the scenarios with
lockdown.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides a brief review of related work with focus on the mathematical modeling for epidemics
and some recent papers related to the SARS-CoV-2. Section 3 details the
proposed agent-based system modeling. Section 4 describes the experimental
methodology and Section 5 shows the simulations results and some discussions related to the pandemic. Section 6 concludes the paper and gives future
directions.
1

https://agenciabrasil.ebc.com.br/en/politica/noticia/2020-04/
bolsonaro-brazil-must-not-be-informed-through-panic

4

2. Related Work
Since WHO announced the Coronavirus Disease 2019, the scientific community has been working hard to investigate SARS-CoV-2 epidemiological
dynamics. Some works used the SIR model to characterize the COVID-19
dynamics [9, 10, 11, 12]. However, more precise simulations usually used an
approach based on the SEIR model [13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23,
24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30]; given that this disease has a known incubation
period [31]. Some authors added new states to refine the model, for instance,
super-spreaders [32] or isolated [19, 14, 27, 26, 24, 23, 20, 18, 16, 13], hospitalized [19, 14, 27, 23, 20, 13], and asymptomatic infected [28, 23, 21, 20, 18].
We note that equation-based models to simulate the epidemic represent
the majority among those proposed in the literature. Nonetheless, some
papers with agent-based models have also been proposed for it. For a discussion about ABM and its advantages over equation-based models, we refer the
reader to [8, 33]. In the report released by Ferguson et al. [6], an individualbased simulation model was used to explore scenarios for COVID-19 in GB
and USA and the impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions on the healthcare demand. Bossert et al. [7] developed an agent-based model combining
socio-economic and traffic data to analyze COVID-19 spreading in a South
Africa city under social isolation scenarios. The prediction suggests that
lockdown strategy is useful to mitigate the disease. Another study using
an ABM also analyzed several scenarios and highlighted that with 90% of
the population in isolation, it is possible to control the disease within 13
weeks when joined with effective case isolation and international travel restrictions, considering the Australian context [34]. An appealing characteristic of agent-based modeling is the easiness to simulate different scenarios. For
instance, the scenario that considers universal use of masks integrated with
social distance is the recommended one to control the pandemic according to
Braun et al. [35] and Kai et al. [36]. Given the flexibility of the agent-based
approach, previous works have employed this method to simulate specific
topics in the COVID-19 context, such as testing policies [37], strategies for
reopening public buildings [38], hypothetical effective treatments [39], and a
spatio-temporal strategy for vaccination [40].
Few works in the literature used agent-based models to simulate the economic impacts of the COVID-19. For instance, Inoue and Todo [41] quantified that a possible one month lockdown in Tokyo would lead to a total
production loss of 5.3% in Japanese annual gross domestic product (GDP).
5

Dignum et al. [42] proposed a tool to analyze the health, social, and economic impacts of the pandemic when the government implements a number
of interventions, such as closing schools, requiring that employees work at
home, and providing subsidy for the population.
In this work, we use a SEIR agent-based model to simulate the health and
economic impacts of the COVID-19 epidemic. We perform analysis to seven
possible scenarios: (1) do nothing, (2) lockdown, (3) conditional lockdown,
(4) vertical isolation, (5) partial isolation, (6) use of face masks, and (7)
use of face masks together with 50% of social isolation. We use data from
Brazil for all scenarios considered but the proposed agent-based model is
fully parameterized and can be easily transferred to other contexts given
that corresponding data is provided.
3. COVID-ABS: Proposed Agent-based System Modeling
The proposed agent-based approach aims to emulate a closed society living on a shared finite environment, composed of humans, which are organized
in families, business and government, which interact with each other. This
characterization is trying to cover the main elements of the society. The
agents, their attributes and possible actions are described in Table 1.
The model is an iterative procedure, with T representing the number of
iterations. The model takes an input parameter set P , listed in Table 2, and
produces a response Yt (observable variables), related to epidemiological or
economic effects of the pandemic. Its internal state Θt (t = 1 . . . T ) consists
of the union of the internal states of the
θti , where i = 1 . . . n and n is
Snagents
the number of agents, such that Θt = i=1 θti .
The model is described in Algorithm 1. The initialization of internal
states in line 1, discussed in subsection 3.2, creates the agents. The simulation
dynamics starts in line 2, discussed in subsection 3.3, and depends on the
type of the agent, the parameter P and the current iteration t (discrete time).
As mentioned before, each type of agent has its own set of actions in different
time frames (hourly, daily, weekly or monthly).
At each iteration, it checks if there was contact between any pair of agents.
A contact happens when the distance between any two agents is less than or
equal to a threshold δ defined in P . The contact can be epidemiological (if
the agents are of type A1) or economical (A1 and A3). The computation of
the distance between each pair of agents per iteration makes the asymptotic
complexity of the method equal to O(n2 ), where n is the number of agents.
6

Description

Attributes

Actions

Description
Attributes
Actions
Description
Attributes
Actions
Description
Attributes
Actions
Description
Attributes

A1: Person
A1 is the main type of agent. Its dynamic position varies according to the environment and may be associated with A2, or not
(homeless) and A3, or not (unemployed).
Position (dynamic), Age, House (A2), Employer (A3), Epidemiological status, Infection status, Wealth, Income and Social Stratum
Walk freely (daily), Go home (daily), Go to work (daily), Personal
contact (hourly), Business contact (hourly), Go to the hospital
A2: Houses
A2 represent the families. They share a house and financial bills.
Position (static), Social stratum, Housemates (group of A1),
Wealth, Incomes and Expenses
Homemate check-in (daily), Accounting (monthly)
A3: Business
A3 are the economical agents, e.g. industries, shops or markets.
It interacts with A1 by paying a salary or selling a product.
Position (static), Social stratum, Employees (group of A1),
Wealth, Incomes and Expenses
Accounting (monthly), Business contact (hourly)
A4: Government
A4 is a singleton agent that receives taxes from A2 and A3, provide
funds to A5 and insurance for homeless and unemployed A1.
Position (static), Wealth
Accounting (monthly)
A5: Healthcare System
A5 is also a singleton, which represents the health system that
ideally should be able to serve the entire population.
Position (static), Wealth
Table 1: Types of agents and their attributes and actions.

3.1. Parameter estimation
Some parameters in Table 2 were empirically estimated, in a way that
the epidemiological response variables present in Table 3 correspond to those
produced by a SEIR model. For that purpose the Epidemic Calculator2 was
employed – this is an open-source SEIR implementation and visual tool for
2

https://gabgoh.github.io/COVID/

7

Variable

α1 - Height
α2 - Width
α3
α4
α5
α6

-

Population size
Age
Average family size
Mobility

α7 - Homeless rate
β1 - Contagion distance
β2 - Contagion probability
β3 - Incubation time
β4 - Transmission time
β5 - Recovering time
β6 - Hospitalization rate
per age
β7 - Severe cases rate per
age
β8 - Death rate per age
β9 - % initial infected
β10 - % initial immune
β11 - Critical limit of the
Health System
γ1 - Income distribution
γ2 - Proportion of businesses
γ3 - Total GDP
γ4 - Public GPD rate
γ5 - Business GPD rate
γ6 - Personal GPD
γ7 - Minimum income
γ8 - Minimum expenses
γ9 - Unemployment rate
γ10 - Proportion of informal businesses
γ11 - EAP age group

Domain/ Current References and Observations
Unit
value
Social and Demographic
N+
500
Defined empirically. Each unit
corresponds to 7 meters.
N+
500
Defined empirically. Each unit
corresponds to 7 meters.
N+ /people 300
Defined empirically.
[0, 100]
β(2, 4)
[43]
N+ /people 3
[44]
N+
10
Defined empirically. Each unit
corresponds to 7 meters.
[0, 1]
0.0005
[45]
Epidemiological
R+
1
[46]
[0, 1]
0.9
[46]
N+ /days
5−6
[47, 48]
N+ /days
8 − 10
[49]
N+ /days
20
[50]
[0, 1]
Table 6
[46]
[0, 1]

Table 6

[46]

[0, 1]
[0, 1]
[0, 1]
[0, 1]

Table 6
0.01
0.01
0.05

[46]
Defined by the authors.
Defined by the authors.
The proportion of ICU beds to
the population

R+
R+ /R$
[0, 1]
[0, 1]
[0, 1]
R+ /R$
R+ /R$
[0, 1]
[0, 1]

Economical
Table 4
0,01875

[51, 52]
Considering the number of businesses per 100k inhabitants [53]
1.000.000, 00Defined by the authors.
0.01
Defined by the authors.
0.05
Defined by the authors.
0.04
γ6 = 1 − %A4 − %A3
900, 00
600, 00
0.12
[54]
0.40
Informal economy [54, 55]
16 < EAP < 65

Table 2: Definitions of the parameters of the proposed ABS model

8

Algorithm 1 General procedure of the proposed agent-based approach
Require: P the parameter set, T the number of iterations
Θ0 ← initialize(P )
for t ← 1 to T do
for all agent ai ∈ Θt do
θti ← ai .execute actions(t, P, Θt )
if type of ai = A1 then
for all agent aj ∈ Θt | i 6= j do
if distance(ai , aj ) ≤ δ then
ai .contact(aj )
end if
end for
end if
end for
Yt ← summarize(Θ
t)
Sn i
Θt+1 ← i=1 θt
end for
epidemic simulations. The initial percentage of infected (β9 ) and immune
(β10 ) agents were chosen in order to represent the complete epidemic dynamics.
The population size parameter, α3 , is particularly concerning because
it affects the execution time of the simulation. On the other hand, the
Population density, defined as α3 /(α1 α2 ), follows the population density of
the area under study which is 24 people per km2 . The mobility parameter α6
was empirically estimated as the average range that a person walks randomly
in his free time.
The Total GDP, parameter γ3 , and the percentage rates by kind of agent
(γ4 , γ5 and γ6 ) are abstractions of closed local economy. The minimum income γ7 represents the minimum net salary, the nominal income after taxes,
and the minimum expense γ8 represents the approximate market value of a
basic needs grocery pack.
3.2. Initialization
The simulation is performed in a squared bi-dimensional environment
shared by all types of agents. Ai agents, i ∈ {2, 3, 4, 5}, are randomly initialized inside this environment given by Equation (1).
9

Variable
St
It
ItA
ItH
ItS
Rt
Dt
A1
WS,t
A3
WS,t
A4
WS,t

Description
Epidemiological
Percentage of Susceptible agents in population
Percentage of Infected agents in population
Percentage of Infected Asymptomatic agents in population
Percentage of Infected Hospitalized agents in population
Percentage of Infected Severe agents in population
Percentage of Recovered and Immune agents in population
Percentage of Dead agents in population
Economical
Percentage of Gross Domestic Product owned by the people
(A1 agents) at time t under scenario S
Percentage of Gross Domestic Product owned by businesses
(A3 agents) at time t under scenario S
Percentage of Gross Domestic Product owned by government
(A4 agent) at time t under scenario S
Table 3: Response Variables


Aipos =

x ∼ U(0, α1 )
y ∼ U(0, α2 )

(1)

where U(a, b) is a sample from a uniform distribution in the interval [a, b).
Agents A1 are initialized in their A2 location, following Equation (2),
where σk is the variability of the position inside the house. For homeless
agents, Equation (1) is used.
A1pos = A2pos + N (0, σk )

(2)

where N (µ, σ) is a sample from a normal distribution with mean µ and
standard deviation σ.
The number of A1 agents is controlled by the variable population size,
that is |A1| = α3 . The number of houses (A2 agents) is calculated using
Equation (3) considering the average family size α5 :
 
α3
|A2| =
(3)
α5

10

The number of A3 agents is calculated according to Equation (4), considering the population size α3 , the proportion of formal and informal businesses,
γ2 and γ10 , respectively.
|A3| = dα3 γ2 + α3 γ10 e

(4)

When a person, A1 type, is created, it is assigned to a randomly chosen
house, type A2, or it is considered homeless according to the Homeless Rate,
α7 . Parameter γ9 defines the probability of an A1 to be unemployed. If
a person is employed and belongs to Economical Active Population (EAP)
(controlled by γ11 ) an employer is randomly chosen among the available A3s.
A single instance of A4 and A5 agents are created.
The age distribution of A1 agents is given by α4 parameter, such as
A1age ∼ β(2, 5) as explained in [56], where β(a, b) is the beta distribution
with shape parameters a, b.
The social stratum of A1, A2 and A3 is represented by the income distribution γ1 , listed in the Table 4, meaning the slice of the wealth represented
by the GDP parameter γ3 . The social stratum of agents is sampled such
that Aistratum ∼ U(1, 5), for i = {1, 2, 3}. The total wealth of the simulation,
represented by γ3 , is shared among agents, according to public, business and
personal percentages defined by γ4 , γ5 and γ6 .
Quintile

Social Stratum

Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q5

Most Poor
Poor
Working Class
Rich
Most Rich

% of GDP
Cummulative
Share
% of GDP Share
3.62
3.62
7.88
11.50
12.62
24.17
19.71
43.88
56.12
100.00

Table 4: Income distribution (γ1 ). Adapted from World Bank [52]

After the creation of all agents the simulation model starts its iteration
loop, which represents the time dynamics, explained in the next section.
3.3. Simulation Dynamics
Each iteration represents one hour when the agents are invoked to perform actions that depend on their type and behaviors, as shown in Figure 1
for A1 agents, and more detailed in subsection 3.3.1. During its movement,
11

an A1 agent may get in the proximity with other A1, A2 or A3 agents. Subsection 3.3.2 presents the possibility of contagion that can happen through
contact between two A1 agents. Finally, subsection 3.3.3 presents the economic relationships between agents, caused by contact of A1 and A3 agents
(commercial transactions), payment of taxes for the government (A4 agent),
labor relationships between A3 and A1 agents and house expenses between
A2 and A1 agents.
Do nothing

Homeless
?

No

Yes
Walk Freely

No
Alive?
Employed
?
Update
Infect. Status

Go Home

Yes

Yes

Business
Contact

Go to Hospital

Go to Work

Yes
Business
?

Infection
Severe ?

Yes

No

No
Check
Contagion

Yes

No

Contact
?

No

Figure 1: A1 agent activity cycle

3.3.1. A1 Mobility Patterns
The distribution of A1 agents’ work, rest and leisure hours is shown in
Table 5 and it is based on the Universal Declaration of Human Rights [57].
Basically, it is the standard deviation of a Gaussian distribution with average
µ = 0, representing the variability of the movement amplitude of A1 in its
free time or, in other words, how far the agent can walk from its actual
position.
The actions “Go home”, “Go to work” and “Walk freely” occur according
to the Equations (5), (6) and (7). Besides these ordinary actions, all the
agents that are infected and have infection severity equal to hospitalization
or severe execute the “Go to hospital” action, according to the Equation (8).
All the dead agents have their positions set to zero.

12

Start Time

End Time

Activity

0

8

Rest

8

12

Job

12

14

Lunch

14

18

Job

18

0

Recreation

Action
If A1 is not homeless:
Go home (Equation (5))
Otherwise:
Walk freely (Equation (7))
If A1 is not unemployed:
Go to work (Equation (6))
Otherwise:
Walk freely (Equation (7))
Walk Freely (Equation (7))
If A1 is not unemployed:
Go to work (Equation (6))
Otherwise:
Walk freely (Equation (7))
Walk freely (Equation (7))

Table 5: A1 agent movement routines considering a full day and different activities

A1pos
A1pos
A1pos
A1pos

= A2pos + N (0, σk )
= A3pos + N (0, σk )
= A1pos + N (0, α6 )
= A5pos + N (0, σk )

(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

where σk = 0.01 is the random noise variance for “Go to...” actions, and
the mobility parameter α6 is the random noise variance for “Walk freely”
action, representing the amplitude of movement the A1 agents have in their
free time.
3.3.2. Contagion Spreading
COVID-19 is a highly contagious disease. According to the Report 3 of
the Imperial College London “on average, each case infected 2.6 (uncertainty
range: 1.53.5) other people up to 18th January 2020” [58]. Following the
SEIR model, in each simulation, there is an initial percentage of infected
and immune people (β9 and β10 , respectively), and the remaining population
consists of susceptible individuals. There is also a Dead status, since part of
the population dies due to the disease and its complications [59].

13

The possibility of contagion happens by the interaction of the agents by
proximity or contact. Hence, the higher the mobility of a person, the greater
the probability that he/she approaches an infected person and gets infected.
Each simulation considers a contagion distance threshold β1 , which is the
minimal distance that two agents have to be to occur the viral transmission,
and a probability of contagion β2 in case of contact.
The model of the medical condition evolution of the infected agents follows [60, 61]. Once an agent is infected, it can be in one of these sub-states:
a) asymptomatic, which includes mild symptoms without hospitalization, b)
hospitalization and c) severe, used in cases of hospitalization in intensive care
unit (ICU). These states and their transitions are illustrated in Figure 2.
Incubation Time - β3

Recovering Time - β5

Transmission Time - β4
Infected - It
Assymptomatic

Susceptible - St

- IA

β6

Contagion

β2

β7

Severe - IS

Recover
Recover

No Contagion

Hospitalization - IH

Recovered/Immune - Rt

Recover

Death - β8
Dead - Dt

Figure 2: Epidemiological and infection state diagram for A1 agents based in SEIR model,
with the corresponding population response variables and parameters of their transition
probabilities

The evolution of the medical condition is stochastic and follows the probabilities summarized in Table 6, represented by the parameters β6 , β7 and
β8 , respectively. The hospitalization cases require medical infrastructure,
which is limited. It varies from country to country, but is always less than
the total population. In each simulation, a critical limit β11 is considered,
it represents the percentage of the population that the healthcare system is
capable to handle simultaneously. As a consequence, if the number of hospitalizations and severe cases increase above this limit, there are no beds in
hospitals to manage the demand.

14

Age-group
(years)
0-9
10 - 19
20 - 29
30 - 39
40 - 49
50 - 59
60 - 69
70 - 79
80+

β6 - % symptomatic cases β7 - % hospitalised cases β8 - Infection Fatality
requiring hospitalization
requiring critical care
Ratio
0.100
5.000
0.002
0.300
5.000
0.006
1.200
5.000
0.030
3.200
5.000
0.080
4.900
6.300
0.150
10.200
12.200
0.600
16.600
27.400
2.200
24.300
43.200
5.100
27.300
70.900
9.300

Table 6: Rates of medical conditions considering hospitalized (β6 ) and severe (β7 ) and
death (β8 ) cases grouped by age. Adapted from Ferguson et al. [6]

3.3.3. Economic Transactions
The secondary goal of this study is to simulate the impact caused in
the economy by the different types of mobility restrictions [62, 63, 64, 65]
imposed by the authorities.
Figure 3 shows the transactions by which agents exchange wealth in the
simulation. The economic dynamics follows seasonal routines that also depend on the type of the agent.

Figure 3: Economic relationships between agents.

The “business contact” action happens hourly, when an A1 agent in its
free time gets in contact with an A3, and occurs the transference of wealth
from A1 to A3. These economic transactions are the most sensitive to the
A1 agents mobility (the more the agents move, the more they spend) and
15

affects the A3 agent income. In pandemic times, that can happen in almost
all scenarios, since the population tends to leave their houses just to buy
essential items or to solve a problem which could not have been solved over
the Internet. The values exchanged in “business contact” depend on the
social stratum of the A1 agents, and the higher the quintile the higher the
spending following the wealth distribution γ1 . In each day, the wealth of A2
and A3 agents is decreased by its minimal fixed expenses, proportional to
the sum of the expenses of housemates and employees, respectively.
The “accounting” actions happen monthly for A2, A3 and A4 agents.
Accounting is the payment of taxes from A2 and A3 agents to A4, and
it represents the major income of A4. During accounting, A3 agents also
pay salaries to their A1 employees determined in the initialization by the
social stratum. Finally, A2 agents transfer money to a random A3 agent,
representing supplier payments.
The accounting of the government agent, A4, transfers funds to A5 agent,
equivalent to its fixed expenses and the daily expenses of the hospitalized
agents. Eventually, the A4 agent pays aids for unemployed and homeless A1
agents.
Considering the periodicity of the economic transactions, it is necessary
to execute at least one complete cycle (720 iterations) in order to execute all
economic transactions at least once.
3.4. Discussion
The proposed model tries to apprehend the complexity of the social,
epidemiological and economical relationships, but without being simplistic.
Then, the complexity of the model reflects the complexity of the system being
modelled although on a smaller scale.
Previous versions of the model did not consider social constraints and
routines and, despite the good performance of the epidemiological response
variables, it could not accurately represent the economic dynamics. The
introduction of social constructs, as families and businesses, and periodical routines, such as working hours, free time and bed time, brought more
feasibility to the simulation and improved the performance of the economic
response variables when compared with the real world values.
These social constructs and periodic routines are hard-coded, although
they can be adapted by users. Major flexibility is provided by the parameter
set that can be adjusted to represent from a single community to a complete
country.
16

In the next section, the experimental methodology is discussed, as well
as the performance metrics and their evaluation.
4. Experimental Methodology
To evaluate the proposed approach, seven different scenarios that reflect
adopted and/or hypothetical social distancing interventions have been formulated. The proposed ABS model was implemented in Python version 3.6
programming language and encapsulated in the COVID ABS package, whose
source code is available at https://bit.ly/covid_abs_experiments and
https://bit.ly/COVID19_ABSsystem.
Each scenario simulates the impact of a given social distancing policy,
considering the values of the parameters in Table 2, on the response variables,
summarized in Table 3. For each scenario 35 executions were performed,
each one with T = 1, 440 iterations. Since each iteration corresponds to one
hour, each execution covers exactly 2 months and one complete accounting
cycle for houses, government and business, with one salary and tax payment,
which occur in the 30th day of the month. The monthly “accounting” event
is important for A2, A3 and A4 agents due to its severe cash impact and
wealth transfers among agents.
The main goal of social interventions is to minimize the death curve Dt .
It is directly related to flattening the infection curve It , in order to keep the
hospitalization ItH and severe ItS cases below the critical limit of the healthcare system β11 . Flattening the It curve means minimizing the infection peak
IP , defined in Equation (9), and extending the time TIP spent to reach this
peak, defined in Equation (10).
IP = max{ It | t = 1 . . . T }
TIP = min{ t | It = IP }

(9)
(10)

To compare the scenarios, the response variables Dt , It will be considered,
condensed in the metrics IP and TIP .
The economical analysis aims to assess the evolution of wealth, repre∗
sented by the WS,t
response variables. To allow the economic comparison
among scenarios with respect to the same reference, a baseline scenario, B,
without a pandemic was designed. It is meant to isolate the economic dynamic and can be used to assess the impacts of the different interventions in
the economy.
17

For comparison among scenarios, the increase in wealth, ∆WSi , for the
group of agents, i ∈ {A1, A3, A4}, in scenario S is computed as follows:
∆WSi =

i
i
WS,T
− WB,T
i
WB,T

(11)

i
where WB,T
is the wealth of the group of agents, i, at the final simulation
time step, T , of B.
In the following section, the scenarios are defined, their simulation results
are presented and compared, and the main findings discussed.

5. Results and Analysis
This section shows the results for seven scenarios, chosen to represent the
major interventions adopted or defended by governments. In this study, the
parameters are based on data from Brazil. Nevertheless, in order to encourage further studies and/or applications, it is possible to easily transfer the
model to other societies by changing the social, demographic and economical parameters listed in Table 2 and creating a multitude of other scenarios
adapted to the new regions.
The meaning of each scenario, its parameters and dynamics of the response variables are discussed below.
5.1. Baseline (B): No Coronavirus Pandemic
This scenario simulates the economic behavior without a pandemic. It
is used as baseline for comparison with all the other scenarios. To generate
this scenario, set parameters to β9 ← 0 and β10 ← 1.
Despite the economic result of this simulation, it is artificial data and
consequently it does not represent the reality of any country. Nonetheless,
we argue that it is based on projections before the pandemic outbreak. See,
for instance, the references regarding each parameter listed in Table 2.
The evolution of GDP is illustrated in Figure 4. The GDP indicates a
recession chart where the population (A1) and government (A4) is losing
wealth and the businesses (A3) are floating at the equilibrium point (when
the incomes and expenses are equal). Initially the A3 are profiting but, in the
accounting day, the profits are settled by the labor and tax expenses. The
baseline scenario is consistent with the economic predictions of stagnation in
Brazil.
18

Figure 4: Daily averaged response variables for B.

5.2. Scenario 1: Do Nothing
This scenario represents what could happen if politicians decided not to
take any actions to avoid the increase of the number of people infected by the
SARS-CoV-2 virus. Usually, this decision only targets the economic point of
view. Figure 5 shows the epidemiological and economical average curves of
this scenario and their variances. It can be seen that the economic curves
look closer to the ones of the baseline, confirming the economic motivation
of keeping the environment without interventions.
However, when the contagion curve It is considered, it is possible to note
how the Healthcare System critical limit β11 was trespassed, pushing the
death curve Dt up. The high number of lost lives makes this the most
catastrophic scenario, despite its economic resemblance with B.
5.3. Scenario 2: Lockdown
This scenario represents the complete social isolation, following the WHO
recommendations, during a well defined date range. In this scenario, all A1
agents are kept in their houses, and the “walk freely” and “go to work”
routines are suppressed. Also α6 ← 1, reducing the mobility amplitude of
all A1 even the homeless, as discussed in Section 3.3.1. The lockdown is
unconditional, meaning that from t = 0 to T , all the restrictions are applied.
This scenario is highly conservative in healthcare terms, and the main
goal is to save as many lives as possible by minimizing viral spreading. In
the impossibility of effective testing, the entire population stays in lockdown
19

Figure 5: Daily averaged response variables for scenario “Do Nothing”

for a predefined period of time. Broadly speaking, the infected agents only
have contact with their housemates and the It (and especially ItS ) stays
below the healthcare critical limit β11 , and the deaths Dt ← 0, meaning that
the healthcare system could handle effectively all cases, using its available
resources3 .
Considering the economic point of view, see Figure 6, this scenario is the
worst for the industry because the A1 agents cannot generate wealth, but
keep receiving their labor incomes4 . A3 does not have income, but keeps
paying taxes to A4 and labor expenses to A1. In this scenario, after two
A3
in Figure 6.
months, the businesses lost 20% of its GDP share, see WS,T
The key point for the success of lockdown policy is staying at home (voluntarily or under laws). Economical countermeasures to its harm can also be
adopted by A4, as tax exemptions and universal income, in order to minimize
the wealth losses. In the impossibility of implementing this scenario, another
one that considers protective and distance measures should be evaluated.
5.4. Scenario 3: Conditional Lockdown
This scenario imposes the same restrictions on A1 mobility presented in
scenario 2, but conditionally. In the system, when the infection curve grows
above a certain threshold, It ≥ 0.05, the lockdown restrictions are activated,
being released when It ≤ 0.05.
3

Considering the given population size in the simulation.
In our simulation, people can not get fired, which means that the onus of keeping
them at home is for the company. In practice this may generate unemployment.
4

20

Figure 6: Daily averaged response variables for Scenario 2

As we can see in Figure 7, the viral spreading represented by the infection curve It is controlled, not allowing the explosion of Dt curve. Economii
cally, recession can be observed during the lockdown period, W3,t
lower than
i
WB,t ∀i, but as soon as the restrictions are released the business performance
A3
A3
but above the complete lockdown
remains below WB,t
is recovered. W3,t
i
curve W2,t .
Less conservative than scenario 2 (and also less efficient in terms of Dt ),
this scenario was implemented in New Zealand [66], and it depends on an
effective healthcare system that is capable of carrying out the necessary tests
in the population, granting reliability in It estimates and, as in scenario 2,
the governmental ability to enforce the social isolation.

Figure 7: Daily averaged response variables for Scenario 3

21

5.5. Scenario 4: Vertical Isolation
Vertical isolation is the name given to the social intervention policy where
the known infected people and the known risk groups – elderly and people
with pre-existent diseases – are kept in social isolation, whereas young people
and adults are allowed to work regularly. This policy has, for instance, been
advocated by the Brazilian president5 .
In terms of the proposed model, over 65, below 18 years old and symptomatic regardless of the age stay at home.
The assumption of this policy is that all the people outside the risk groups
would not develop the severe cases of the disease. This assumption was
proved to be fragile and this policy showed to be ineffective by [67]. The
results shown in Figure 8 are in accordance with the literature [67] and
produced almost the same epidemiological and economical results of Scenario
1, i.e., the same results of doing nothing.

Figure 8: Daily averaged response variables for Scenario 4

5.6. Scenario 5: Partial Isolation
In the scenarios with lockdown (2 and 3), the mobility of all agents must
be restricted, requiring restrictive public policies enforced by the government. When these policies are non-existent or are not taken seriously by the
entire population, partial isolation levels are reached. The partial isolation
5

See
https://agenciabrasil.ebc.com.br/en/politica/noticia/2020-04/
bolsonaro-brazil-must-not-be-informed-through-panic - Acessed:
June 03,
2020, and https://www.bbc.com/814portuguese/internacional-52043112 - Acessed:
June 03, 2020

22

level IL ∈ [0, 1] means the percentage of the population that is fulfilling the
isolation, while the remaining 1 − IL is not.
Then, it is possible to define that in the lockdown IL ≥ 0.9, considering
that essential services and a few industries can not stop in order to avoid
supply breakdown. On the other hand, the scenarios 0 and 1 have IL ≤ 0.1,
and the scenario 4 has IL ≈ 0.2, because of the age distribution and the
definition of risk groups.
This scenario aims to assess the effects of intermediate ILs. It was simulated by randomly choosing agents A1 with probability IL ← 0.5 to stay at
home.
Observing the results in Figure 9, although the It curve is flattened when
compared with scenarios B and 4, it is still less efficient than scenarios 2 and
3. Notice the Dt still grows exponentially before reaching the peak. For the
economic perspective, this scenario behaves similarly to the baseline. These
metrics offer evidence that IL ← 0.5 is not enough for effective epidemiological control, and a level of isolation greater than that is recommended.
The impact of different isolation levels can be seen in Figures 10 and
11, for IL ∈ [0.3, 0.9], which represents the response of epidemiological and
economical curves for increasing IL. In Figure 10 it is possible to see how
the infection curve It flattens as the isolation level increases from no isolation towards lockdown. Figure 11 shows that as the value of IL increases,
A3
wealth loss of the A3 agents is higher, represented by WS,t
curve, showing
the importance of agent’s mobility in the economy.

Figure 9: Daily averaged response variables for Scenario 5

23

Figure 10: Infection curves by varying values of partial isolation level (IL).

A3
curves by varying values of partial isolation level (IL).
Figure 11: WS,t

5.7. Scenario 6: Use of Face Masks
Evidence was found about the use of masks and gloves as measures against
viral spreading [68]. This scenario represents the policy of mandatory usage
of face masks and physical distancing, but without imposing restrictions on
the mobility of agents.
This scenario was implemented by reducing the contagion distance β1 =
0.5 and the contagion rate β2 = 0.3 as the effect of using masks and physical
distancing. Figure 12 shows a flatter It curve when compared to scenario 5
while still keeping economic performance close to B. Notice, however, that
Dt is significantly higher when compared with scenarios 2 and 3.
5.8. Scenario 7: Use of Face Masks and 50% of Social Isolation
This scenario combines the policies used in the scenarios 5 and 6, granting
the necessary use of face masks plus partial isolation of the population. This
scenario was implemented by using β1 = 0.5, β2 = 0.3 and IL = 0.5.
24

Figure 12: Daily averaged response variables for Scenario 6

Figure 13 shows the dynamics of this scenario. Although the Dt is still
above the values of scenarios 2 and 3, it presents less resistance from the
general population. The It is flattened, and the economy, despite the downturn, suffers less than it would in scenarios with lockdown. This scenario has
already been discussed in [68] with similar results.

Figure 13: Daily averaged response variables for Scenario 7

5.9. Comparisons Among the Scenarios
The It curves (averages) of each scenario are shown in Figure 14. There,
the effects of each intervention policy in flattening the curve can be observed
and contrasted. The epidemiological effectiveness of the scenarios are shown
in Figure 15, which compares the infection peak IP reached in each case, the
number of days TIP to reach the peak IP and the max number of deaths Dt
(as a proportion of the population).
25

As expected, scenarios 2 and 3 have the best epidemiological values followed by scenario 7.

Figure 14: Infection evolution for the several scenarios

Figure 15: Death evolution for the several scenarios

Figure 16 shows the economic result of each scenario for the agent types
A1, A3 and A4. Assuming that businesses are not firing anyone, from the
point of view of the citizen, scenarios 2 and 3 are not economically damaging. On the other hand, the same scenarios are the worst from the business
perspective. At this point, it is important to explain that the expenses of
government in our simulation are related with the costs of the healthcare
system. Thus, in scenarios with a high number of deaths, such as scenarios
26

1 and 4, the cost of maintaining the healthcare system is increased which
demands an increase of public expenses.

Figure 16: Economical result of each scenario compared to Scenario 0 by response variable

Figure 17 shows the scatter plots of the wealth increase (with respect
to the baseline) of each type of agent by the percentage of deaths in the
populations. It can be seen that, from a life preservation perspective, there
is no better policy than the lockdown (scenario 2). Furthermore, in the
simulated model, scenario 2 Pareto dominates6 all the scenarios for both
people an government. On the other hand, it represents the worst case,
financially, for businesses.
6

Given a set of criteria, Pareto optimality can be defined as a situation where no
individual criterion can be better off without making at least one other criterion worse off.
Given an initial situation, a Pareto improvement is a new situation where there will be
gains in all criteria. A situation is called Pareto dominated if it has a Pareto improvement.
Finally, a situation is called Pareto optimal if no change could lead to an improvement in
all the objectives.

27

In the impossibility of enforcing a lockdown (discarding scenarios 2 and
3), which may happen in underdeveloped countries, the best solution is represented by scenario 7. From the remaining Pareto optimal solutions for
businesses, it is the one with lowest number of deaths. It also becomes
the best solution for government and people in both wealth and number of
deaths.

Figure 17: Percentage of deaths versus percentage of GDP variation

6. Conclusion
The COVID-19 pandemic brought to humankind many challenges, including the demand for new medical treatments, social policies and economical
approaches. The fast response of the scientific community to deal with coronavirus was divided into studies of the epidemiological aspects, proposals
of new treatments and diagnostic tools and new models to forecast the viral spreading, including SIR and SEIR models among others. Nonetheless,
few studies focused on looking at the pandemics as a governmental policymaking problem. With this viewpoint, although the epidemiological aspects
are priority, the social and economical aspects can not be neglected.
The present work proposed an Agent-Based Model (ABM) that simulates the epidemiological and economical effects of COVID-19 pandemic in a
closed society, whose results can be generalized for wider contexts and used
by governmental rulers to prospect social policies and assess its potential
effectiveness in real scenarios.
The model was encapsulated in the free and open source software library
COVID-ABS, which contains 29 epidemiological, social, demographic and
28

economic input parameters, and 10 output response variables. New features
can be designed and the library can be easily extended to other scenarios.
In a wider perspective, the proposed approach can be used as a decisionsupport system for the governments and scientific community. Policy-makers
can design scenarios and evaluate the effectiveness of social interventions
through different simulations, and analyse how the P parameters, in the
time horizon of T , can affect the response variables Θt .
Seven different scenarios were elaborated to reflect specific social interventions. Lockdown and conditional lockdown were the best evaluated scenarios
in preserving lives. These scenarios present a slower evolution of the epidemic, a smaller number of infections and deaths. Given the impossibility
of implementing lockdown policies, the scenario with 50% of social isolation with using masks and physical distancing was the best approach in the
preservation of lives. On the other hand, the vertical isolation scenario is
totally ineffective and resembles the “Do nothing” scenario.
The results showed that COVID-ABS approach was capable to effectively
simulate social intervention scenarios in line with the results presented in the
literature. Also, the results showed that policies adopted by some countries,
for instance US, Sweden and Brazil, are ineffective when the objective is to
preserve lives. Governments that chose to preserve the economy by not using
severe isolation policies, fatally reached a situation with a high cost in human
lives, and still embittered economic losses. The evidence provided by the
simulation model shows that there is a false dichotomy between healthcare
and the economy. In the scenarios where it was tried to save the economy by
not taking hard social isolation policies, consequently, the social costs ended
up impacting negatively into the economy.
COVID-ABS is an open software and can be easily extended and customized. Also, new scenarios can be designed, taking into consideration the
specificities of each region under study. Future research aims to improve the
model by implementing mechanisms to close and open companies as well as
allowing people to get fired. In addition, it will be integrated with optimization libraries, for automatic scenario creation, and multi-criteria decision
making tools that could help governmental crisis committees to plan and
manage the social policies to mitigate the COVID-19 effects.

29

Acknowledgements
Petrônio Silva, Paulo Batista and Helder Seixas would like to thank the
financial support given by the Instituto Federal do Norte de Minas Gerais,
Brazil.
Marcos A. Alves declares that this work has been supported by the Brazilian agency CAPES.
Frederico Gadelha Guimarães would like to thank the support given by
the Brazilian Agencies CNPq (grant no. 306850/2016-8) and FAPEMIG.
References
[1] C. Huang, Y. Wang, X. Li, L. Ren, J. Zhao, Y. Hu, L. Zhang, G. Fan,
J. Xu, X. Gu, Z. Cheng, T. Yu, J. Xia, Y. Wei, W. Wu, X. Xie, W. Yin,
H. Li, M. Liu, Y. Xiao, H. Gao, L. Guo, J. Xie, G. Wang, R. Jiang,
Z. Gao, Q. Jin, J. Wang, B. Cao, Clinical features of patients infected
with 2019 novel coronavirus in wuhan, china, Lancet 395 (2020) 497–
506. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30183-5.
[2] M. Bakker, A. Berke, M. Groh, A. S. Pentland, E. Moro, Effect of social
distancing measures in the New York City metropolitan area, Technical
Report, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Boston, 2020.
[3] K. Prem, Y. Liu, T. W. Russell, A. J. Kucharski, R. M. Eggo, N. Davies,
M. Jit, P. Klepac, The effect of control strategies to reduce social mixing
on outcomes of the COVID-19 epidemic in Wuhan, China: a modelling
study, Lancet Public Health 5 (2020) E261–E270.
[4] T. Jefferson, R. Foxlee, C. D. Mar, L. Dooley, E. Ferroni,
B. Hewak, A. Prabhala, S. Nair, A. Rivetti,
Physical interventions to interrupt or reduce the spread of respiratory viruses:
systematic review,
BMJ 336 (2008) 77–80. URL: https://www.
bmj.com/content/336/7635/77. doi:10.1136/bmj.39393.510347.BE.
arXiv:https://www.bmj.com/content/336/7635/77.full.pdf.
[5] M. H. D. M. Ribeiro, R. G. da Silva, V. C. Mariani, L. dos Santos Coelho,
Short-term forecasting covid-19 cumulative confirmed cases: Perspectives for brazil, Chaos, Solitons & Fractals (2020) 109853.

30

[6] N. Ferguson, D. Laydon, G. Nedjati Gilani, N. Imai, K. Ainslie,
M. Baguelin, S. Bhatia, A. Boonyasiri, Z. Cucunuba Perez, G. CuomoDannenburg, et al., Report 9: Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) to reduce COVID19 mortality and healthcare demand,
Technical Report, Imperial College London, London, 2020.
[7] A. Bossert, M. Kersting, M. Timme, M. Schröder, A. Feki, J. Coetzee,
J. Schlüter, Limited containment options of covid-19 outbreak revealed
by regional agent-based simulations for south africa, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.05513 (2020).
[8] H. Van Dyke Parunak, R. Savit, R. L. Riolo, Agent-based modeling
vs. equation-based modeling: A case study and users’ guide, in: J. S.
Sichman, R. Conte, N. Gilbert (Eds.), Multi-Agent Systems and AgentBased Simulation, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1998,
pp. 10–25.
[9] C. Anastassopoulou, L. Russo, A. Tsakris, C. Siettos, Data-based analysis, modelling and forecasting of the covid-19 outbreak, PloS one 15
(2020) e0230405.
[10] N. S. Barlow, S. J. Weinstein, Accurate closed-form solution of the sir
epidemic model, Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena (2020) 132540.
[11] G. E. Weissman, A. Crane-Droesch, C. Chivers, T. Luong, A. Hanish,
M. Z. Levy, J. Lubken, M. Becker, M. E. Draugelis, G. L. Anesi, et al.,
Locally informed simulation to predict hospital capacity needs during
the covid-19 pandemic, Annals of internal medicine (2020).
[12] D. Fanelli, F. Piazza, Analysis and forecast of covid-19 spreading in
china, italy and france, Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 134 (2020) 109761.
[13] S. Choi, M. Ki, Estimating the reproductive number and the outbreak
size of covid-19 in korea, Epidemiology and Health 42 (2020).
[14] D. I. Vega, Lockdown, one, two, none, or smart. modeling containing
covid-19 infection. a conceptual model, Science of The Total Environment (2020) 138917.
[15] T. Kuniya, Prediction of the epidemic peak of coronavirus disease in
japan, 2020, Journal of clinical medicine 9 (2020) 789.
31

[16] S. Kim, Y.-J. Kim, K. R. Peck, E. Jung, School opening delay effect
on transmission dynamics of coronavirus disease 2019 in korea: Based
on mathematical modeling and simulation study, Journal of Korean
medical science 35 (2020).
[17] S. Sugiyanto, M. Abrori, A mathematical model of the covid-19 cases
in indonesia (under and without lockdown enforcement), Biology,
Medicine, & Natural Product Chemistry 9 (2020) 15–19.
[18] C. Manchein, E. L. Brugnago, R. M. da Silva, C. F. Mendes, M. W.
Beims, Strong correlations between power-law growth of covid-19 in
four continents and the inefficiency of soft quarantine strategies, Chaos:
An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science 30 (2020) 041102.
[19] B. Tang, F. Xia, S. Tang, N. L. Bragazzi, Q. Li, X. Sun, J. Liang,
Y. Xiao, J. Wu, The effectiveness of quarantine and isolation determine
the trend of the covid-19 epidemics in the final phase of the current
outbreak in china, International Journal of Infectious Diseases (2020).
[20] A. R. Tuite, D. N. Fisman, A. L. Greer, Mathematical modelling of
covid-19 transmission and mitigation strategies in the population of ontario, canada, CMAJ 192 (2020) E497–E505.
[21] M. S. Abdo, K. Shah, H. A. Wahash, S. K. Panchal, On a comprehensive
model of the novel coronavirus (covid-19) under mittag-leffler derivative,
Chaos, Solitons & Fractals (2020) 109867.
[22] A. Maugeri, M. Barchitta, S. Battiato, A. Agodi, Estimation of unreported novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2) infections from reported deaths: A
susceptible–exposed–infectious–recovered–dead model, Journal of Clinical Medicine 9 (2020) 1350.
[23] B. Ivorra, M. R. Ferrández, M. Vela-Pérez, A. Ramos, Mathematical
modeling of the spread of the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) taking
into account the undetected infections. the case of china, Communications in Nonlinear Science and Numerical Simulation (2020) 105303.
[24] Z. Liu, S. Huang, W. Lu, Z. Su, X. Yin, H. Liang, H. Zhang, Modeling the trend of coronavirus disease 2019 and restoration of operational
capability of metropolitan medical service in china: a machine learning
32

and mathematical model-based analysis, Global Health Research and
Policy 5 (2020) 1–11.
[25] M. Peirlinck, K. Linka, F. S. Costabal, E. Kuhl, Outbreak dynamics of
covid-19 in china and the united states, Biomechanics and modeling in
mechanobiology (2020) 1.
[26] K. Chatterjee, K. Chatterjee, A. Kumar, S. Shankar, Healthcare impact
of covid-19 epidemic in india: A stochastic mathematical model, Medical
Journal Armed Forces India (2020).
[27] S. Li, K. Song, B. Yang, Y. Gao, X. Gao, Preliminary assessment of
the covid-19 outbreak using 3-staged model e-ishr, Journal of Shanghai
Jiaotong University (Science) 25 (2020) 157–164.
[28] J. Arino, S. Portet, A simple model for covid-19, Infectious Disease
Modelling (2020).
[29] H. Wang, Z. Wang, Y. Dong, R. Chang, C. Xu, X. Yu, S. Zhang,
L. Tsamlag, M. Shang, J. Huang, et al., Phase-adjusted estimation
of the number of coronavirus disease 2019 cases in wuhan, china, Cell
discovery 6 (2020) 1–8.
[30] J. T. Wu, K. Leung, G. M. Leung, Nowcasting and forecasting the
potential domestic and international spread of the 2019-ncov outbreak
originating in wuhan, china: a modelling study, The Lancet 395 (2020)
689–697.
[31] S. A. Lauer, K. H. Grantz, Q. Bi, F. K. Jones, Q. Zheng, H. R. Meredith,
A. S. Azman, N. G. Reich, J. Lessler, The incubation period of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) from publicly reported confirmed cases:
estimation and application, Annals of internal medicine 172 (2020) 577–
582.
[32] F. Ndairou, I. Area, J. J. Nieto, D. F. Torres, Mathematical modeling
of covid-19 transmission dynamics with a case study of wuhan, Chaos,
Solitons & Fractals (2020) 109846.
[33] G. P. Figueredo, P. O. Siebers, M. R. Owen, J. Reps, U. Aickelin, Comparing stochastic differential equations and agent-based modelling and simulation for early-stage cancer, PloS one 9 (2014) e95150.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0095150.
33

[34] S. L. Chang, N. Harding, C. Zachreson, O. M. Cliff, M. Prokopenko,
Modelling transmission and control of the covid-19 pandemic in australia, arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.10218 (2020).
[35] B. Braun, B. Taraktaş, B. Beckage, J. Molofsky, Phase transitions and
social distancing control measures for sars-cov-2 on small world networks, arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.09751 (2020).
[36] D. Kai, G.-P. Goldstein, A. Morgunov, V. Nangalia, A. Rotkirch, Universal masking is urgent in the covid-19 pandemic: Seir and agent based
models, empirical validation, policy recommendations, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.13553 (2020).
[37] A. Gopalan, H. Tyagi, How reliable are test numbers for revealing
the covid-19 ground truth and applying interventions?, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.12782 (2020).
[38] M. D’Orazio, G. Bernardini, E. Quagliarini, How to restart? an agentbased simulation model towards the definition of strategies for covid19” second phase” in public buildings, arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.12927
(2020).
[39] N. Hoertel, M. Blachier, C. Blanco, M. Olfson, M. Massetti, F. Limosin,
H. Leleu, Facing the covid-19 epidemic in nyc: a stochastic agent-based
model of various intervention strategies, medRxiv (2020).
[40] J. Grauer, H. Löwen, B. Liebchen, Strategic spatiotemporal vaccine
distribution halves deaths due to an infectious disease, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.04056 (2020).
[41] H. Inoue, Y. Todo, The propagation of the economic impact through
supply chains: The case of a mega-city lockdown against the spread of
covid-19, Available at SSRN 3564898 (2020).
[42] F. Dignum, V. Dignum, P. Davidsson, A. Ghorbani, M. van der Hurk,
M. Jensen, C. Kammler, F. Lorig, L. G. Ludescher, A. Melchior,
et al., Analysing the combined health, social and economic impacts of
the corovanvirus pandemic using agent-based social simulation, arXiv
preprint arXiv:2004.12809 (2020).

34

[43] IBGE,
Pirmide
etria,
https://educa.ibge.gov.br/jovens/
conheca-o-brasil/populacao/18318-piramide-etaria.html,
Acess: June 02, 2020.
[44] IBGE, Censo demogrfico: Tabela 2019 - moradores em domiclios particulares permanentes por densidade de moradores por cmodo e nmero
de banheiros, https://sidra.ibge.gov.br/tabela/2019, Acess: June
02, 2020.
[45] IPEA, Estimativa da populao em situao de rua no brasil, http://
repositorio.ipea.gov.br/bitstream/11058/7289/1/td_2246.pdf,
Acess: June 02, 2020.
[46] N. Ferguson, D. Laydon, G. Nedjati Gilani, N. Imai, K. Ainslie,
M. Baguelin, S. Bhatia, A. Boonyasiri, Z. Cucunuba Perez, G. CuomoDannenburg, et al., Report 9: Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) to reduce COVID19 mortality and healthcare demand,
Technical Report, Imperial College London, 2020.
[47] C. M. A. d. O. Lima, Informações sobre o novo coronavı́rus (covid-19),
Radiologia Brasileira 53 (2020) V–VI.
[48] Q. Li, X. Guan, P. Wu, X. Wang, L. Zhou, Y. Tong, R. Ren, K. S.
Leung, E. H. Lau, J. Y. Wong, et al., Early transmission dynamics in
wuhan, china, of novel coronavirus–infected pneumonia, New England
Journal of Medicine (2020).
[49] S. A. Lauer, K. H. Grantz, Q. Bi, F. K. Jones, Q. Zheng, H. R. Meredith,
A. S. Azman, N. G. Reich, J. Lessler, The incubation period of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) from publicly reported confirmed cases:
estimation and application, Annals of internal medicine 172 (2020) 577–
582.
[50] T. Housen, A. E. Parry, M. Sheel, How long are you infectious
when you have coronavirus?, https://theconversation.com/
how-long-are-you-infectious-when-you-have-coronavirus-135295,
Acess: June 02, 2020.
[51] IndexMundi, Income distribution: Percentage share of income or consumption is the share that accrues to subgroups of population indicated by deciles or quintiles, https://www.indexmundi.com/facts/
35

visualizations/income-distribution/#country=br, Acess:
02, 2020.

June

[52] World Bank, Lac equity lab: Income inequality - composition
by
quintile,
https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/poverty/
lac-equity-lab1/income-inequality/composition-by-quintile,
Acess: June 03, 2020.

[53] IBGE, Demografia das empresas e empreendedorismo 2017: taxa
de sobrevivncia foi de 84,8%, https://agenciadenoticias.ibge.
gov.br/agencia-sala-de-imprensa/2013-agencia-de-noticias/
releases/25738-demografia-das-empresas-e-empreendedorismo-2017-taxa-de-sobrev
Acess: June 03, 2020.
[54] Exame, Desemprego sobe para 12,2% no 1o trimestre e
atinge 12,9 milhes, diz ibge, https://exame.com/economia/
brasil-tem-desemprego-de-122-no-primeiro-trimestre-diz-ibge/,
Acess: June 03, 2020.
[55] Sebrae, Estudo sobre o Empreendedorismo Informal no Brasil 2018,
Technical Report, Sebrae, May, 2019.
[56] L. M. Howden, J. A. Meyer, Age and Sex Compositions: 2010. 2010 Census Briefs, Technical Report, U.S. Department of Commerce, Economics
and Statistics Administration. U.S. Census Bureau, 2010.
[57] U. N. H. Rights, Universal declaration of human rights at 70: 30 articles
on 30 articles - article 24, https://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/
Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=23966&LangID=E, Acess: June 02,
2020.
[58] N. Imai, A. Cori, I. Dorigatti, M. Baguelin, C. A. Donnelly, S. Riley,
N. M. Ferguson, Report 3: transmissibility of 2019-nCoV, Technical
Report, Imperial College London, 2020.
[59] G. Giordano, F. Blanchini, R. Bruno, P. Colaneri, A. Di Filippo,
A. Di Matteo, M. Colaneri, Modelling the covid-19 epidemic and implementation of population-wide interventions in italy, Nature Medicine
(2020) 1–6.

36

[60] R. Verity, L. C. Okell, I. Dorigatti, P. Winskill, C. Whittaker, N. Imai,
G. Cuomo-Dannenburg, H. Thompson, P. Walker, H. Fu, et al., Estimates of the severity of covid-19 disease, MedRxiv (2020).
[61] I. Dorigatti, L. Okell, A. Cori, N. Imai, M. Baguelin, S. Bhatia,
A. Boonyasiri, Z. Cucunubá, G. Cuomo-Dannenburg, R. FitzJohn, et al.,
Report 4: severity of 2019-novel coronavirus (nCoV), Technical Report,
Imperial College London, London, 2020.
[62] R. Singh, R. Adhikari, Age-structured impact of social distancing on
the covid-19 epidemic in india, arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.12055 (2020).
[63] D. Meidan, N. Schulamann, R. Cohen, S. Haber, E. Yaniv, R. Sarid,
B. Barzel, Alternating quarantine for sustainable mitigation of covid19, arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.01453v2 (2020).
[64] M. S. Warren, S. W. Skillman, Mobility changes in response to covid-19,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.14228 (2020).
[65] S. Engle, J. Stromme, A. Zhou, Staying at home: mobility effects of
covid-19, Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3565703 or
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3565703 (2020).
[66] S. Cousins, New zealand eliminates covid-19, The Lancet 395 (2020).
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)31097-7.
[67] L. H. Duczmal, A. C. L. Almeida, D. B. Duczmal, C. R. L. Alves,
F. C. O. Magalhães, M. S. d. Lima, I. R. Silva, R. H. C. Takahashi,
Vertical social distancing policy is ineffective to contain the covid-19
pandemic, Cadernos de Saúde Pública 36 (2020) e00084420.
[68] D. K. Chu, E. A. Akl, S. Duda, K. Solo, S. Yaacoub, H. J. Schünemann,
A. El-harakeh, A. Bognanni, T. Lotfi, M. Loeb, et al., Physical distancing, face masks, and eye protection to prevent person-to-person
transmission of sars-cov-2 and covid-19: a systematic review and metaanalysis, The Lancet (2020).

37

