Study of Air Curtain in Context of Individual Protection from
Exposure to Coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) Contained in
Cough-Generated Fluid Particles

arXiv:2006.11411v3 [physics.med-ph] 6 Jul 2020

Alexander S. Sakharova,b

1

and Konstantin Zhukovb,c

a Physics

Department, Manhattan College
4513 Manhattan College Parkway, Riverdale, NY 10471, United States of America
b Experimental
c P.N.

Physics Department, CERN, CH-1211 Genève 23, Switzerland

Lebedev Physical Institute of the Russian Academy of Sciences, 53 Leninskiy Prospekt,
119991, Moscow, Russia

Abstract
The ongoing respiratory COVID-19 pandemic has heavily impacted the social and private
lives of the majority of the global population. This infection is primarily transmitted via virusladen fluid particles (i.e., droplets and aerosols) that are formed in the respiratory tract of
infected individuals and expelled from the mouth in the course of breathing, talking, coughing,
and sneezing. To mitigate the risk of virus transmission, in many places of the world, the public
has been asked or even obliged to use face covers. It is plausible that in the years ahead we
will see the use of face masks, face shields and respirators become a normal practice in our life.
However, wearing face covers is uncomfortable in some situations, like, for example, in summer
heat, while staying on beaches or at hotel swimming pools, doing exercises in gyms, etc. Also,
most types of face cover become contaminated with time and need to be periodically replaced
or disinfected. These nuisances are caused by the fact that face covers are based on material
barriers, which prevent inward and outward propagation of aerosol and droplets containing the
pathogen. Here, we study a non-material based protection barrier created by a flow of well
directed down stream of air across the front of the open face. The protection is driven by
dragging virus-laden particles inside the width of the air flow and hence, as a consequence,
displacing them away from their primary trajectories. Applying well established gas-particle
flow formalism, we analyzed the dynamics of aerosols and droplets at different regimes of the
flow laying over the bodies of the fluid particles. The analysis allowed us to establish the rates
of velocity gain of the fluid particles of dimensions relevant for the pathogen transmissions,
while they are crossing the width of the air barrier. On the basis of this analysis, we provide
a comprehensive study of the protection effectiveness of the air barrier for a susceptible individual located indoor, in an infected environment. Our study shows that such, potentially
1

Corresponding author (Alexandre.Sakharov@cern.ch)

1

portable, air curtains can effectively provide both inward and outward protection and serve as
an effective personal protective equipment (PPE) mitigating human to human transmission of
virus infection like COVID-19.
Keywords: COVID-19, SARS-CoV-2, virus transmission, aerosol, droplets, nano-particles
transport, personal protective equipment (PPE)
June 2020

1

Introduction

The Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) has caused the COVID19 pandemic disease. The virus of diameter 70–90 nm [1] is transmitted from human to human,
primarily being carried by virus-laden fluid particles ejected from the mouth of infected individuals. In general, COVID-19 infection has multiple mode of transmission. It may spread by
respiratory droplets and aerosols [2–4], via direct contact such as hand shake or trough indirect contact via contaminated surfaces [2]. The infectious dose for SARS-CoV-2 is not known.
Extrapolating from studies of other viruses where more data are available, one might expect
the threshold to vary from a few tens to a few thousand virus exemplars [5]. From these data,
it is also likely that the larger the dose of virus an individual is exposed to, the higher the
likelihood of infection occurring. Whether the disease severity correlates with the size of the
infectious dose is also unclear. However, based on animal experiments performed with a variety
of viruses [6], it is reasonable to assume that this is the case. SARS-CoV-2 can remain infective
in aerosols for 3 h and on surfaces for 72 h in laboratory conditions [2]. However, evidence
about acquiring the infection via contaminated surfaces is scarce [7].
Fluid particles responsible for the respiratory transmission are represented by aerosol and
droplets [2–4]. In this context, aerosol particles may contain exemplars of virus pathogen,
epithelial and other cells or remnants of those, natural electrolytes and other substances from
mucus and saliva, and water which typically evaporates quite fast, depending on the relative
humidity of the surrounding air. Staying in the air for a long enough time (minutes or hours),
aerosol particles of dimensions .5 µm can be inhaled and airborne transferred over long distance
in an indoor environment [8, 9]. Large droplets &200 µm stay airborne only for few seconds.
Their movement mainly follows ballistic trajectories and to less extend the ambient air flow.
Such droplets settle to the ground or other surrounding surface. Smaller droplets, say .5 µm
would evaporate in less than 3 s, at typical indoor relative humidity RH = 50%. Since the
sedimentation time of such a droplet is about 30 s, it would evaporate completely before reaching
2

the background. Actually, the evaporation time for water droplets smaller than 80 µm does
not exceed their sedimentation time [3]. The drying process would leave residuals of droplets
after drying to moisture in equilibrium with ambient air. These residuals, so called droplet
nuclei, are also airborne transferred aerosols. Aerosols particles (.10 µm) can float on the air
and spread a significant distance (O(10) m [3]) following air flow streams, in particular after
being dried [3, 10].
The number density, velocity, and size distributions of fluid particles ejected in the course
of expiratory events have important implications for transmission [3, 10–12]. A single sneeze
action can generate O(104 ) fluid particles moving with velocities up to 20 m/s [11]. Coughing
generates 10–100 fewer droplets than sneezing at lower velocity . 10 m/s [10]. Along with
coughing and sneezing, speaking also plays a significant role in spreading the virus contained
particles [12]. In particular, as it is normally done continuously over a longer period of time, the
contribution into virus transmission can be significant. Moreover, the rate of particle production
in the course of normal human speech is in positive correlation with the loudness (amplitude)
of vocalization, ranging from approximately 1 to 50 particles per second [12]. Needless to
say, that SARS-CoV-2 infected individuals can spread the disease before the onset of clinical
symptoms and the infection will be mostly transmitted in course of speaking generated virusladen particles. Measured ejected particle size spans four orders of magnitude from '0.1 to
'1000 µm [12, 13].
Face cover masks are currently treated as the best accepted personal protective equipment
(PPE) in mitigating aerosol dispersal. In conditions of gradual softening of the pandemic
outbreak measures, in many places, public has been asked or even obliged to wear masks.
Thus, face masks, in some sense, become a norm in our lives. However, wearing face masks
may become uncomfortable in some situations, like, for example, in summer heat, while staying
on beaches or at hotel swimming pools, doing exercises in gyms, etc. Also, if an individual has a
chronic respiratory condition such as asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD),
covering her/his mouth and nose can be especially challenging. The material barrier of the mask
makes it harder to take in air. It also traps some carbon dioxide as it is exhaled, which means
that one ends up breathing in air that is warmer and moister. Unfortunately, that sensation of
having trouble breathing in a mask might get even worse in summer time. Many people with
chronic lung conditions find it harder to breathe in hot, humid air (though some others fare
worse when the weather is cold and dry).
The focus of the paper is understanding the physics that underpins the effectiveness of a
possible non-material personal defense against airborne pathogens like SARS-CoV-2. The barrier of such non-material protection is supposed to be created by a flow of well directed, slightly
inclined, down stream of air which screens the front of the open face in the manner of an air
3

curtain. The protection mechanism is driven by the dragging of virus-laden airborne particles
inside the width of the flow and as a consequence displacing them away from their primary
trajectories. Our study shows that such, potentially portable, air curtain can provide both
inward and outward protection and serve as an effective personal protective equipment (PPE)
mitigating from human to human transmission of virus infection like COVID-19.
The structure of the paper is as follows. In Section 2, we describe the main elements of
the setup of a potentially portable air curtain to be used as PPE from airborne transmission
of virus infection like COVID-19. In Section 3, we investigate how the fluid particles gain their
velocities being dragged by an air flow in different regimes of the flow layer over bodies. In
Section 4, we discuss the protection mechanism of the air barrier and validate its efficiency. In
Section 5, we conclude and comment upon the results of our study.

2

Air curtain as PPE to mitigate airborne virus
transmission

We want to consider a portable air curtain as a sort of dynamical PPE from exposure of
a recipient’s mouth, nose and conjunctiva to virus-laden fluid particles injected by infected
individuals. The air curtain is supposed to be created as a flow of well directed downward
stream of air across the front of the open face, as schematically shown in Figure 1. This air
stream should provide a kind of dynamical barrier which steadily displaces inward running virusladen aerosolized particles that would otherwise be inhaled by an uninfected person. In this
setup, the outward protection is also provided by stimulation of a ground settling of outgoing
virus-laden particles expelled by an infected person, so that sedimentation on surfaces located
substantially bellow the typical level of the face openings would proceed faster than in usual
conditions of indoors air background streams. One assumes that the curtain is formed out of
surrounding air and streamed downwards in a way that the flow lines do not cross the plane of
the face. For a sufficient downward bending of the barrier penetrating inward running particles,
the plane of the air curtain should be inclined at a small angle α with respect to the vertical
plane, as illustrated in Figure 1.
We assume that an appropriately designed system can create such a stream across the entire
height and width of the protected face. As a rough example of a particular realization, one
can imagine that the air flow is injected from the edge of a brim equipped with a properly
designed and instrumented air outlet which streams the air in a way that it forms a thin air
barrier of the horizontal shape defined by the geometry of the edge of the brim. A good
coverage can be already provided with dimensions and shape used for brims of the more-or-less
standard baseball caps. For the instrumentation, we rely on current development of technology
4

Figure 1: Schematic representation of the barrier of air curtain formed by narrow width, w,
downward stream of velocity u∗ , inclined at an angle α and localized at distance d from the
plane of the protected face.
for construction of portable, low noisy and low consuming pumping units, which will be able
to create an air curtain of about 1 cm thick with stable flow velocity .10 m/s across an area
of typical face dimensions.
In the current study, we investigate the effectiveness of a portable air curtain in inward and
outward protection from transmission of respiratory infections such as COVID-19. The protection effectiveness, in conditions of a typical parameters appropriate for creation of individual
air curtain, mostly depends upon the ability of the air flow to band downward trajectories of
the fluid particles containing influenza, in a way to prevent them coming into contact with the
face surface of an uninfected individual.
In our setup, the degree of banding of the trajectories is defined by the effectiveness of the
air flow, streamed at certain velocity u∗ and angle α, to drag the fluid particles (aerosol and
droplets) along the lines of the stream (see Figure 1), while they are crossing the air curtain in
transverse direction, thus being immersed for some time into the flow. The drag force excreted
to a particle by moving media is defined as the component of the force parallel to the direction
of the motion of the flow of the media 2 . This force depends on the properties of the media,
which is, in our case, the air at atmospheric pressure, its velocity, the size of a particle immersed
into the media and its material properties. At a given velocity of the media, which we take
u∗ = 10 m/s for our benchmark setup, the particles of different sizes will gain their velocity in
different regimes defined by the hydrodynamic conditions of the flow layer over the body of the
particles. These regimes are investigated in the following section.
2

For a review see [14, 15].

5

3

Dragging of virus-laden aerosols and droplets
by air flow

In case a particle velocity vector up is different from the air velocity vector, u, the drug force
exerted by the gas is given by Newtonian force
Fs = −CD Sm

ρ(up − u)(up − u)
,
2

(1)

where ρ is the density of the flow, Sm is the maximal area of a body in the plane perpendicular
to the flow direction and CD is the drug (resistance) coefficient. The drug coefficient of a body
depends on the velocity and the viscosity of the drugging media (gas or liquid) and is defined
by the Reynolds number
ρ|up − u|D
,
(2)
µ
where D and µ are the dimension of the body and the dynamical viscosity of media. The Reynolds
Re =

number totally defines the mode of the flow layer over the body and thus the law of resistance.
Depending on the value of Re one defines the three regimes’ flow layers over the a body, namely,
the laminar regime (0 < Re < 1), the intermediate regime, i.e., a transition from laminar to
turbulent (1 < Re < 700), and the turbulent regime (Re > 700) [14, 15]. The equation describing the resistance (drugging) response of a media to transport of a particle depends on the
regime of the flow laying over the particle, thus it depends on the Reynolds number.
As discussed above, the size of particles ejected by a speaking, coughing or sneezing person
spans the range between 0.1 µm and '1000 µm depending on the circumstances of the ejection.
Further, we assume that the particles are spherical with smallest size 100 nm [12, 13]. In our
task, to understand the regimes of movement of particles with different sizes, we estimate
their Reynolds numbers in a steady state flow of air at atmospheric pressure and velocity
u = 10 m/s, when a particle is initially at rest, up = 0. Throughout the paper, we use for
the air density ρ = 1.205 kg/m3 and for its dynamical viscosity µ = 1.81 × 10−5 Pa · s. For a
particle of size DL = 1.5 µm the Reynolds number is Re = 0.998, which implies that sub-micron
particles should move in laminar regime. Bigger particles, namely those of the size between DL
and DI = 1050 µm, for which Re = 699, should move in an intermediate regime. Eventually,
particles with dimension DT exceeding DI will be drugged in a turbulent, so-called, auto-model
regime.
Let us study in detail the drugging of the aerosol particles by a steady air flow in these
three regimes.
For the laminar regime, the drug (resistance) coefficient of a hard spherical body obeys the
Stocks formula
CD =
6

24
.
Re

(3)

Therefore, the resistance force for a Stocks particle reads
FS = 3πµuD(up − u)

(4)

In the range of Reynolds numbers between 1 and 700, for the dependence CD (Re) a number
of empirical approximations are used. For the turbulent regime Re > 700 the drug coefficient
is constant, in particular, for a hard spherical body, CD = 0.44.
Let us consider the drugging of a disperse particle by a steady state one dimensional flow
of media of density ρ propagating along the x axis. We model the particle by a hard spherical
body of diameter D made out of material of density ρp , so that the mass of the particle is given
by
πD3
ρ.
(5)
m=
6
Assume, that at x = 0 the particle with initial velocity up0 gets injected into the flow and
let us evaluate the velocity of the particle with time up (t). The equation of motion can be
expressed as follows
πD2 u − up
πD3 dup
ρp
= CD
ρ
(u − up ).
6
dt
4
2
In Stocks regime (Re < 1), which implies
CD =

24µ
,
ρ(u − up )D

(6)

(7)

equation (6) can be reduced to the form
D2 ρp dup
= (u − up ).
18µ dt
The coefficient
tS∗ =

D 2 ρp
,
18µ

(8)

(9)

in front of the derivative in Equation (8), is the dynamical relaxation time in Stocks regime,
which indicates the estimate of time scale needed for a drugged particle to reach the velocity
of the flow. Further, for the flow of constant velocity u(x) = u∗ , one can reduce the equation
of motion to the dimensionless form

dy
= 1 − y,
dτ
where y = up /u∗ and τ = t/t∗ . Solving in Equation (10), we arrive to
y = 1 − (1 − y0 ) exp(−τ ),
where y0 = up0 /u∗ is set for the initial condition.
7

(10)

(11)

In the intermediate regime of flow layer over a particle, the drug (resistance) coefficient
CD (Re) is given by the Klyachko formula [15]
CD(I) =

24
4
+ 1/3 ,
Re Re

(12)

often used as a good empirical approximation.
Using CD(I) instead of CD and introducing a new variable z = Re1/3 , one can re-write the
equation of motion (6) as follows
dz
= −Hz(6 + z 2 ),
dτ1

(13)

2

where t1∗ = ρpµD is a time scale so that τ1 = t/t1∗ and H = ρpµD2 is a distance scale. Integrating
this equation at initial conditions set to τ1 = 0 and z = z0 one arrives to


−1/2
√
6
.
(14)
z = 6 1 + 2 exp(−12τ1 ) − 1
z0
Finally, after introduction of new variables y = up /u and τI = −12τ1 , the solution takes the
following form
√ 1 − y0
y =1−6 6
Re0
where Re0 =

ρuD
(1
µ

"
1+

6

#−3/2

!

2/3

Re0

exp(τI ) − 1

,

(15)

− y0 ). We notice, that the relaxation time is given by
tI∗ =

D 2 ρp
.
12µ

(16)

Finally, in the turbulent regime of flow layer over a particle, when Re > 700, the drug
coefficient is just a constant CD(T) = 0.44 [14, 15]. Thus, the equation of motion (6) takes the
form

where the coefficient xT ∗ =

ρD
dup
4
·
·
= (u − up )2 ,
3 ρp CD(T) dt
ρD
4
3 ρp CD(T)

(17)

has a dimension of length. Introducing the characteristic

time as
tT ∗ =

xT ∗
4 ρD
=
,
u∗
3 uρp CD(T)

(18)

one can rewrite Equation (17) in following form
dy
= (1 − y)2 ,
dτT

(19)

where we use τT = t/tT ∗ . The solution of Equation (19), with initial condition y = y0 , is given
by following expression
y=

y0 + τT |1 − y0 |
.
1 + τT |1 − y0 |
8

(20)

4

Discussion

Using the result of Section 3, one can estimate the effectiveness of the individual air flow barrier
in providing inward and outward protection.
In our benchmark setup, described in Section 2, we use the barrier formed by downward
stream of air with width w = 1 cm, which is well localized in d ≈ 10 cm away from the surface
of a protected face and provides a constant flow velocity u∗ = 10 m/s across vertical and
horizontal dimensions of the face, as shown in Figure 1. For the current theoretical study, to
some extend, the distance d is an arbitrary parameter. The choice of its value can be regulated
by other factors, not directly related to the effectiveness of the PPE under study. The plane of
the barrier is inclined at an angle α with respect to the vertical plane (see Figure 1). The value
of α will be discussed bellow.
A susceptible individual, while walking indoors, through an environment containing virusladen particles, has a high risk of exposure to the infection through the openings of his face.
The particles themselves, being airborne-transmitted, experience motion due to the environmental low speed background air flows with maximal velocity ub = 0.2 m/s [3]. Assuming
the maximal indoor walking speed uw = 1.5 m/s, one infers that an inward running particle,
entering horizontally under the exterior plane of the air curtain, will cross the width of the
barrier within tw & 6 ms. Actually, tw is the time available for the particle to gain velocity up
aligned with the direction of the barrier air flow, due to its drag force. In course of drugging,
within the inclined air barrier, the particle will gain a horizontal outward velocity in amount
of uph = up sin α. Thus, the inward (horizontally) running particle velocity will be reduced by
uph or even inverted in its direction, depending on the value of the inclination angle α. If the
gained vertical velocity is high enough to displace the particle down, namely sufficiently away
from a potential contact with mucus and conjunctiva of the host’s face, the effectiveness of the
protection is treated as justified. The fractional velocity gained by the particle, in different
laying over regimes, is given by Formulas (11), (15) and (20).
As we have discussed in the introduction, the airborne virus transmission is associated with
droplets smaller than about 100 µm that are suspended and transported in an air current [8,9].
These droplets can evaporate in a few seconds [8, 9], so that droplet nuclei may be formed.
Sometimes, a vapour-rich, buoyant turbulent expiratory jet can slow down this evaporation [16].
The droplet nuclei size spans range from sub-microns to about 10 µm. Thus, as argued in
Section 3, at a chosen velocity of the barrier flow, the gas-particles motion of this droplets size
range is driven by Stocks and intermediate regimes.
The smallest aerosols, up to size DL = 1.5 µm, should move in the Stocks regime with a
fractional velocity gaining rate given by Equation (11). For the above benchmark parameters
of the barrier, the temporal progress of the fractional velocity gain is displayed in Figure 2.
9

1
0.9

0.5 m
1 m
1.5 m

0.8
0.7

y

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

0.5

1

1.5

t(s)

2

2.5

3
10

-5

Figure 2: The temporal progress of the fractional velocity, y = up /u∗ (u∗ = 10 m/s), gain for
aerosol particles of different dimensions dragged by the protecting air flow at Stocks regime.
One can see that the biggest Stocks driven aerosol particles will reach 90% of the barrier’s
flow velocity, up = 9 m/s, within 16 µs (the corresponding rate is indicated by the solid line
plotted for particle size 1.5 µm). Let us adjust the inclination angle in a way that the outward
horizontal velocity gaining component would compensate for the inward running velocity, so
that uw ≈ uph . This implies that sin α ≈ uw /up , so that α ≈ 9.6◦ . We can naturally assume
that such compensation is maintained with accuracy up to the background speed of the indoor
air, ∆uph = uw − uph . 0.2 m/s. Thus, the particle being immersed into the air barrier will be
able to leave its width in about ∆tw ≈ w/∆uph ≈ 5 ms, which can be mapped into the variation
of the inclination angle, ∆α ≈ 1.15◦ . Herewith, the vertical component of the particle velocity
will reach upv = 8.9 m/s and hence the particle would be displaced ddsp ≈ upv ∆tw ≈ 44 cm
downward. Thus, we expect that the particle will sweep out downward, to avoid a potential
contact with the face openings of the host. If the host is moving with lower velocity, ∆uph
can be negative, so that an inward running particle will even be reflected in addition to the
downward displacement described above. Similar reflection might take place in the case of
bigger inclination angle; however, in practice, it is better to maintain it at an optimal value
α ≈ 10◦ to minimize spurious horizontal contributions of the barrier flow into the environmental
background air streaming.
Bigger aerosols, up to 20 µm, which might still be suspended in the indoor environment
for a long time [3], will be moved in an intermediate regime in Equation (15) at slower time
progress of the velocity gain, as shown in Figure 3. Again, as one can see, the airborne aerosols
in an intermediate barrier dragging regime will be accelerated up to 90% of the barrier’s flow
10

1
0.9
0.8

2.5 m
5 m
10 m
20 m

0.7

y

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

0.5

1

1.5

t(s)

2

2.5
10 -3

Figure 3: The same as in Figure 2 plotted for aerosol particles moving at intermediate regime.
Aerosols of these sizes are still airborne transmittable over long distance.
velocity within less than in 2 ms. The corresponding rate is indicated by the solid line plotted
for particle size 20 µm. Since the velocity gain is still fast enough, i.e., the full acceleration
will be achieved well before the elapsing of tw , all arguments given in the above paragraph are
valid for the biggest still airborne transmittable particles. These particles will be successfully
displaced (&44 cm) from trajectories potentially crossing the face.
The analysis above testifies that the air barrier is able to effectively mitigate inward propagation of airborne transmitted virus-laden fluid particles of all possible sizes.
We note that smaller particles, ≤5 µm, might carry higher concentration of the virus than
larger ones [17, 18] and moreover can be transported deep into the lungs, avoiding defence of
the upper respiratory system [19, 20]. Also, small aerosols inoculation has been shown to cause
more severe symptoms than bigger particles administered by intranasal inoculation and the
dose of influenza required for inoculation by small aerosols route is 2–3 orders of magnitude
lower than that required by intranasal inoculation [17].
The protection is effectivity degraded for droplets which still can be transformed into airborne aerosols through evaporation, namely whose sedimentation time starts to exceed their
evaporation time. Thus the smallest size droplets 80 µm which will still be able to reach the
ground before evaporation [3] gain half of the velocity of the barrier stream within tw . This
is indicated in Figure 4, by the dashed dotted line, i.e., a particle of such dimension starts to
move with velocity up ≈ 5 m/s after 5 ms. Therefore, the expected downward displacement
will amount to ddsp ≈ 22 cm. 100 µm and 150 µm droplets will be displaced by ddsp ≈ 17 cm
and ddsp ≈ 11 cm respectively. Although, the displacements are not enough, except, probably,
11

0.6
80 m
100 m
150 m

0.5

y

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
0

1

2

3

t(s)

4

5

6
10 -3

Figure 4: The temporal progress of the fractional velocity gain for droplets whose sedimentation
time exceeds their evaporation time. The evaporation indicates the transformation of droplets
into airborne aerosols. The drug force for such droplets is driven by an intermediate regime.
for 80 µm droplets, such particles, being displaced by the air barrier, proceed to fall freely
in still air following their equation of motion, which is defined by gravity g = 9.81 m/s2 and
kinematic time scale given in Equation (9). For example, a 80 µm droplet should reach its terminal velocity ug = tS∗ g ≈ 0.2 m/s within tS∗ ≈ 2 ms and hence would meet the ground after
tg = h/ug ' 8 s from the moment it was expelled at a hight of h = 1.6 m. A bigger droplet,
of 150 µm size, will terminate its acceleration at ug ≈ 0.8 m/s, which implies its sedimentation
time tg ' 2 s. Therefore, we believe that it is very likely that droplets of such sizes being moved
down by the air barrier will proceed to settle to the ground instead of coming in a contact with
the host’s face. However, one should say, that the definitive conclusion on the effectivity of this
kind of stimulating sedimentation can be established in numerical simulations.
Outward protection is also an important issue in the COVID-19 pandemic, since SARS-CoV2 transmission may occur earlier in the course of infection, from asymptomatic and minimal
symptomatic hosts, which may expel fluid particles in the range from aerosol size up to a few
millimeters. In the case of the air curtain, the outward protection, for outgoing droplets, is
provided due to a kind of stimulation of ground settling of outgoing particles described above.
Moreover, bigger outgoing droplets, of about &1 mm size, will be moved by the barrier gasparticle flow with respect to the auto-model regime in Equation (20), with the kinematic time
scale given by Equation (18). This implies that, within tT ∗ ≈ 0.36 µs (for D = 1 mm), the
droplet will reach half of the speed of the barrier, namely up = 5 m/s, to be pointed almost
12

vertically down. Thus it will be ground settled directly around infected individual within
0.3 s instead of following its ballistic trajectory which can spread 1-2 meters along horizontal
direction in violent expiratory events like coughing and sneezing [16, 21, 22]. Since outgoing
aerosols are also displaced by the air barrier, up to 0.5 m downwards, we believe that it will
suppress the aerosols transport over long distances with indoor air flow. However, again, for
definite answer, numerical simulations, like for example [3], would be required.

5

Concluding remarks

In the current respiratory COVID-19 pandemic, airborne virus-laden aerosols are considered as
the primary route of transmission of of SARS-CoV-2 pathogen. Staying in the air for a long
enough time (minutes or hours), aerosol particles can be transferred over long distance in an
indoor environment [8, 9] to be inhaled by a susceptible host. Face cover masks are currently
treated as the best accepted PPE in mitigating aerosol dispersal. Thus, iregarding mitigation
of the virus transmission, face masks have become a norm in our everyday lives. However,
wearing face masks may become uncomfortable in some situations like in summer heat, while
staying on beaches or at hotel swimming pools, doing exercises in gyms, etc. Moreover, the
material barrier of masks or respirators makes it harder to take in air, which might be not be
acceptable for an individual with a chronic respiratory condition like asthma, COPD, etc.
Therefore, we performed the study of a PPE based on non-material protective barrier created
by a flow of well directed down stream of air across the front of an open face. Unlike in the case
of material based protection, such as face masks and respirators, which trap virus-laden fluid
particles via the combined effects of diffusion, inertial impaction, interception, and electrostatic
attraction [23], the air curtain PPE dynamically displaces the trajectories of infected particles
that would otherwise be inhaled by an uninfected individual from reaching the surface and
the openings of the host’s protected face. In our analytical study of the benchmark setup we
demonstrated that the inward protection effectiveness of the air barrier is very high for airborne
aerosols of all possible sizes.
For the sake of fairness and consistency, one should say that, unlike in the case of materialbased face covers, the air barrier does not provide the trapping of outward going fluid particles.
However, instead, it stimulates the ground settling of big droplets very close to the infected
host and displaces exhaled aerosols up to 0.5 m downwards and hence, very likely, suppresses
the airborne transport of the infection over long distances with indoor air flow. Moreover,
while a mask’s material can significantly reduce the velocity of the through flow jet during
expiratory events, presence of the same material leads to an increase of pressure in the region
between the mask and the face and hence results in an increased perimeter leakage in the
13

form of side jets, as shown analytically and numerically in [24] and investigated experimentally
in [25]. The impact of this process depend on fluid structure, the structural design of the mask
as well as the permeability of the mask’s material. The leakage jets that are ejected from
the perimeter can be turbulent and highly directed (see, for example, the flow visualizations
presented in [25]), potentially serving as effective dispersers of respiratory aerosols in transverse
directions. Spasmodic expiratory events such as coughing and sneezing that generate high
transient expulsion velocities will significantly diminish the outward protection effectiveness of
face masks [25]. The air barrier does not suffer from the above disadvantages just because there
is no physical cover material which otherwise would cause overpressure and perimeter leakage.
Instead, the air barrier’s stream can substantially spoil the structures of jets generated by
spasmodic expiratory events. The details of the outgoing fluid structure interaction with the
air barrier is a matter of numerical modeling, in a manner of [24], and as well as, perhaps,
experimental studies developed in [25] and other dedicated publications.
Our theoretical study of the benchmark setup is aimed to focus the attention of relevant
community on the principal ability of a potentially portable air curtain to serve as an effective PPE in mitigation of the human to human transmission of respiratory virus infection like
COVID-19. For an equipment realization and instrumentation we rely on the current development of technology for construction of portable, low noisy and low consuming air steaming
engines. However, some general attractive every day life advantages of the air curtain PPE may
be elucidated already now. Indeed, there is no necessity of hand washing and disinfection like in
case of putting on and taking off the face masks. Instead, it is supposed that the air streaming
equipment can be simply powered on and off. This also means that the face washing procedure,
which is also important for the removal of sedimented pathogens in the vicinity of mucus and
conjunctiva, is much more simplified compared to the wearing of face masks, respirators or face
shields. It is difficult to manage to cover the mouth and nose with a flexed elbow or tissue, when
coughing or sneezing with a face mask or respirator on, in particular if a face shield as a PPE is
installed as well. It is clear that this is not the case for an air curtain PPE-wearing individual.
The interior of the inner instrumentation of the equipment can be disinfected by installing a
miniature interior UV source to be activated while the protecting device is taken off, so that
the unit is self-disinfected. Although the stream of the barrier is formed out of surrounding
air which itself can contain virus-laden fluid particles, their trajectories will always lie along
the plain of the barrier and hence will never come in a contact with mucus or conjunctiva of
the protected face. Thus, there is no need to instrument the device with a kind of on-flight
disinfection equipment.

14

References
[1] W.B. Park, et al, Virus isolation from the first patient with sars-cov-2 in Korea, Journal
of Korean Medical Science 35 (2019) doi:10.3346/jkms.2020.35.e84.
[2] N. van Doremalen, at. al., Aerosol and surface stability of sars-cov-2 as compared with sarscov-1, New England Journal of Medicine 382, (2020) 1564 doi:10.1056/NEJMc2004973.
[3] V. Vuorinen, et al., Modelling aerosol transport and virus exposure with numerical simulations in relation to SARS-CoV-2 transmission by inhalation indoors, arXiv: 2005.05882
[physics.flu-dyn].
[4] S. Asadi, N.M. Bouvier, A.S. Wexler, W.D. Ristenpart, The coronavirus pandemic and
aerosols: Does covid-19 transmit via expiratory particles?, Aerosol Science and Technology
54, (2020) 635 doi:10.1080/02786826.2020.1749229.
[5] S. Yezl, and J.A. Otter, Minimum Infective Dose of the Major Human Respiratory and
Enteric Viruses Transmitted Through Food and the Environment,, Food Environ Virol 3,
1 (2011) doi:10.1007/s12560-011-9056-7.
[6] X Tao, et al., Characterization and Demonstration of the Value of a Lethal Mouse Model
of Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus Infection and Disease, Edited by A.
Garca-Sastre. Journal of Virology 90 (1), (2016) 57 https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.02009-15.
[7] S.S. Kumar, S. Shao, J. Li, Z. He, J. Hong, Droplet evaporation residue indicating SARSCOV-2 survivability on surfaces, arXiv: 2005.05882 [physics.med-ph].
[8] W.F. Wells, On Air-Borne Infections: Study II. Droplets and Droplet Nuclei, American
Journal of Epidemiology 20 (3), (1934) 611618, publisher: Oxford University Press.
[9] X. Xie, Y. Li, A.T.Y. Chwang, P.L. Ho, W.H. Seto, How far droplets can move in indoor
environments - revisiting the Wells evaporation-falling curve, Indoor Air 17 (3), (2007)
211.
[10] W.G. Lindsley, J.S. Reynolds, J.V. Szalajda, J.D. Noti, D.H. Beezhold, A cough aerosol
simulator for the study of disease transmission by human cough-generated aerosols, Aerosol
Science and Technology 47, (2013) 937 doi:10.1080/02786826.2013.803019.
[11] Z.Y. Han, W.G. Weng, Q.Y. Huang, Characterizations of particle size distribution of the
droplets exhaled by sneeze, Journal of The Royal Society Interface 10 (88), (2013) 20130560.

15

[12] S. Asadi, A.S. Wexler, C.D. Cappa, S. Barreda, N.M. Bouvier, W.D. Ristenpart, 2019.
Aerosol emission and superemission during human speech increase with voice loudness,
Scientific reports 9, (2019) 1 doi:10.1038/s41598-019-38808-z.
[13] W.G. Lindsley, et al., Quantity and size distribution of cough-generated aerosol particles
produced by influenza patients during and after illness, Journal of Occupational and Environmental Hygiene 9, (2012) 443 doi:10.1080/15459624. 2012.684582.
[14] R.W. Fox, P.J. Pritchard; A.T. McDonald, Fox and McDonald’s introduction to fluid
mechanics, Hoboken, N.J: Wiley (2011).
[15] G. Rudinger, Fundamentals on gas-particle flow, Elsevier B.V. (1980), ISBN 978-0-44441853-1.
[16] L. Bourouiba, E. Dehandschoewercker, J.W.M. Bush, Violent expiratory events: on coughing and sneezing, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 745, (2014) 537.
[17] W.G. Lindsley, et al., Viable Influenza a Virus in Airborne Particles from Human
Coughs, Journal of Occupational and Environmental Hygiene 12 (2), (2015) 107
doi:10.1080/15459624.2014.973113.
[18] N.H.L. Leung, et al., Respiratory Virus Shedding in Exhaled Breath and Efficacy of Face
Masks, Nature Medicine, 26, (2020) 676 doi:10.1038/s41591-020-0843-2.
[19] W.G. Lindsley, et al., Measurements of Airborne Influenza Virus in Aerosol Particles from
Human Coughs. PLoS ONE 5 (11), (2010) doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0015100.
[20] B.G. Madas, P. Füri, A. Farkas, et al.,“Deposition distribution of the new coronavirus
(SARS-CoV-2) in the human airways upon exposure to cough-generated aerosol”, arXiv:
2005.05882 [physics.med-ph].
[21] J. Wei, Y. Li, Enhanced spread of expiratory droplets by turbulence in a cough jet, Building
and Environment 93, (2015) 86 doi:10.1016/j.buildenv.2015.06.018.
[22] J. Wei, Y. Li, Human Cough as a Two-Stage Jet and Its Role in Particle Transport, PLoS
ONE 12 (1), (2017) doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0169235.
[23] D. Thomas, A. Charvet, N. Bardin-Monnier, J.C. Appert-Collin, Aerosol filtration, Elsevier
Ltd (2017) ISBN 978-1-78548-215-1.
[24] R. Peric, M. Peric, Analytical and numerical investigation of the airflow in face masks
used for protection against COVID-19 virus – implications for mask design and usage,
arXiv:2005.08800 [physics.med-ph].
16

[25] I.M. Viola et al., Face Coverings, Aerosol Dispersion and Mitigation of Virus Transmission
Risk, arXiv:2005.10720 [physics.med-ph].

17

