Disparate Patterns of Movements and Visits to Points of Interests Located in Urban
Hotspots across U.S. Metropolitan Cities during COVID-19
Qingchun Li1, Liam Bessell2, Xin Xiao3, Chao Fan4, Xinyu Gao5, Ali Mostafavi6

arXiv:2006.14157v1 [physics.soc-ph] 25 Jun 2020

1

Ph.D. student, Zachry Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Texas A&M
University, 199 Spence St., College Station, TX 77843-3136; e-mail: qingchunlea@tamu.edu
2
Undergraduate student, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas A&M
University, 199 Spence St., College Station, TX 77843-3112; e-mail: lbessell@tamu.edu
3
Undergraduate student, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas A&M
University, 199 Spence St., College Station, TX 77843; e-mail: xyx56@tamu.edu
4
Ph.D. student, Zachry Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Texas A&M
University, 199 Spence St., College Station, TX 77843-3136; e-mail: chfan@tamu.edu
5
Ph.D. student, Zachry Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Texas A&M
University, 199 Spence St., College Station, TX 77843-3136; e-mail: xy.gao@tamu.edu
6
Assistant Professor, Zachry Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Texas A&M
University,
199
Spence
St.,
College
Station,
TX
77843-3136;
e-mail:
amostafavi@civil.tamu.edu
ABSTRACT
We examined the effect of social distancing on changes in visits to urban hotspot points of
interest. The understanding of population movements and mobility is critical to the modeling of
and subsequent containment of pandemics. Urban hotspots, such as central business districts, are
gravity activity centers orchestrating movement and mobility patterns in cities. In a pandemic
situation, urban hotspots could be potential superspreader areas as visits to urban hotspots can
increase the risk of contact and transmission of a disease among a population. In this study, we
mapped origin-destination networks from census block groups to points of interest (POIs), such as
restaurants, museums, and schools, in sixteen cities in the United States. We adopted a coarsegrain approach to cluster origin and destination nodes into hotspots and non-hotspots and studied
movement patterns of visits to POIs among the clusters from January to May 2020. Also, we
conducted chi-square tests to identify POIs with significant flux-in changes during the analysis
period. The results showed disparate patterns across different cities in terms of reduction in POI
visits to hotspot areas. The sixteen cities are divided into two categories based upon movement
patterns related to visits to POIs in hotspot areas. In one category, which includes the cities of, San
Francisco, Seattle, and Chicago, we observe a considerable decrease in visits to POIs in hotspot
areas, while in another category, comprising the cites of, Austin, Houston, and San Diego, among
others, the visits to hotspot areas did not greatly decrease during the social distancing period. In
addition, while all the cities exhibited overall decreasing visits to POIs, one category maintained
the proportion of visits to POIs in the hotspots. The proportion of visits to some POIs (e.g.,
Restaurant and Other Eating Places) remained stable during the social distancing period, while
some POIs had an increased proportion of visits (e.g., Grocery Stores). We also identified POIs
with significant flux-in changes, which indicated that related businesses were greatly affected by
social distancing measures. The findings highlight that social distancing orders do yield disparate
patterns of reduction in movements and visits to POIs in urban hotspots. The reduction of visits to
1

POIs in urban hotspots is an important component of containing pandemics and epidemics. The
findings could provide insights for better evolution and monitoring of the effectiveness of social
distancing measures in reducing visits to POIs in hotspot areas.
KEYWORDS
Origin-Destination Network, urban hotspots, COVID-19, movement patterns, epidemical control
INTRODUCTION
The objective of this study is to examine movement patterns to urban hotspots in United
States cities during the initial 2020 COVID-19 outbreak. Urban mobility and movement patterns
are important characteristics of urban dynamics, reflecting the collective human behavior and
social interactions (Hamedmoghadam et al. 2019). Urban mobility drives the spatial flux of
populations, and effective epidemic control measures greatly rely on characterization of urban
mobility patterns (Danon et al. 2009; Le Menach et al. 2011; Merler and Ajelli 2010; Wesolowski
et al. 2012). Assessment of urban mobility is a critical element of epidemic control (Gao et al.
2020). Most standard epidemic models employ mobility patterns in prediction of a disease
outbreak trajectory. Tizzoni et al. (2014) used commuter movement data to model the spatial
spread of epidemics in European countries. The study examined whether the mobility data matched
the empirical mobility pattern and how the observed discrepancies of mobility patterns would
affect the results of influenza-like illnesses spread simulation. Balcan et al. (2009) developed a
worldwide epidemic model to evaluate the force of infection based on the description of mobility
patterns obtained by the gravity model. The results showed that long-range airline traffic
determined the global epidemic dynamic, while the short-range mobility patterns determined the
local epidemic diffusion pattern. Ferguson et al. (2005) developed a transmission model for the
H5N1 influenza in Southeast Asia taking the community mobility into consideration. The model
tested containment strategies such as prophylaxis and social distancing measures under different
reproduction number of the virus. Meloni et al. (2011) found that it is essential to consider how
the epidemic directives enacted by states, for instance, induce changes in mobility patterns and
how the changes in turn affect the propagation of the epidemic. Meloni et al. (2011) developed an
epidemic model taking into consideration changes of mobility patterns due to the response to an
epidemic outbreak. The results showed that self-initiated behavioral changes (e.g., changes in
traveling routes) may accelerate the spread. These studies and models highlight the necessity of
characterizing mobility and movement patterns for better understanding the extent and trajectories
of COVID-19 in metropolitan urban areas.
While the reduction in overall movements and mobility could promote containment, it is
equally important to monitor and evaluate movement reduction to urban hotspots. In comparing
the effectiveness of social distancing measures between cities, it has been observed that epidemic
spread trajectories are different, while the overall mobility reduction is similar across cities. These
disparate trajectories could be in part due to differences in movement patterns to urban hotspots.
Urban hotspots and sub-centers usually have higher populations and employment densities and
more points of interest (POIs) compared with other areas of cities (McMillen 2001; McMillen and
Smith 2003). Urban hotspots and sub-centers, therefore, are gravity activity centers affecting
population movement, mobility patterns, and human interactions. In a pandemic situation, however,
urban hotspots could be potential ‘superspreader’ POIs (Chang et al. 2020), because visits to
hotspots can greatly increase the risk of contact and transmission of a disease. Understanding
mobility patterns of the visiting of urban hotspots is critical for developing and monitoring
2

effective epidemic control measures. Origin-destination (OD) networks, under such a situation,
are especially helpful for locating hotspots and for studying the urban mobility patterns of visiting
urban hotspots (Chang and Tao 1999; Egu and Bonnel 2020; Oliver et al. 2020). Louail et al. (2014,
2015) and Hamedmoghadam et al. (2019) used the OD matrix and a coarse-grain approach to study
the mobility among hotspots and non-hotspots. The OD matrices aggregate mobility of individuals
from one point to another (Ortúzar and Willumsen 2011; Weiner 2016). Therefore, the OD
matrices include insightful information of population movements and patterns of movements
within and across cities (Louail et al. 2015; Mazzoli et al. 2019). In addition to traditional surveys
and counting to develop OD matrices, increasing studies extracted OD matrices based on the
emerging digital footprint data (Barbosa et al. 2018; Blondel et al. 2015). Mazzoli et al. (2019)
extracted the OD matrices from Twitter data to map daily commuting flows in London and
Paris. Lenormand et al. (2014) mapped the OD matrices from three datasets, including Twitter,
mobile phone, and census data. This study showed strong correlations between three datasets
regarding individual mobility patterns, lending support to interchanging the three datasets to study
mobility patterns.
In this paper, we discuss movement patterns related to a population’s visits to urban
hotspots using origin-destination networks from census block groups (CBGs) to points of interest
(POIs) in 16 cities of United States based on the digital trace data from SafeGraph. The POI data
enable identification of urban hotspots to enable evaluation of movement patterns and changes in
visiting urban hotspots due to social distancing measures during COVID-19. We adopted a
modified coarse-grain approach to clustering the hotspots and non-hotspots nodes in OD networks
(Hamedmoghadam et al. 2019). Then, we studied movement patterns related to visiting POIs
among hotspots and non-hotspots across 16 cities. Figure 1 illustrates the conceptual model of four
types movements among hotspots and non-hotspots. Furthermore, we conducted chi-square tests
to identify what POIs had significant flux-in changes during COVID-19. As each POI node is
associated with a business category, the results could also help identify what business industries
were affected due to social distancing during COVID-19.

Figure 1. Coarse-grain approach to categorize origin-destination movements to four types of
movements among hotspots and non-hotspots: (a) hotspots and non-hotspots, (b) individual OD
movements, (c) conceptual representation of four types of movements., (Figure is based on
Houston SafeGraph data.)
DATA AND METHODOLOGY
We used point of interest data provided by SafeGraph to map the origin-destination
network. SafeGraph aggregates POI data from diverse sources (e.g., third-party data partners, such
as mobile application developers), and removes private identity information to anonymize the data.
The POI data include base information of a POI, such as the location name, address, latitude,
3

longitude, brand, and business category. SafeGraph uses standard North American Industry
Classification System (NAICS) to classify POI business categories. The data reveal the visit
pattern of POIs including the aggregated number of visits to the POI during the data range, the
number of visits to the POI each day over the period, and the aggregated number of visitors to the
POI from census block groups during the period (e.g., one week and one month).
In this paper, we used the POI data: Weekly Pattern Version 2, to study movement patterns
across sixteen cities in the United States (SafeGraph 2020). Among these 16 cities are 14 largest
cities in United States by population. In addition, Seattle and Detroit were studied. Seattle was the
first city in the United States to report a diagnosed COVID case, and Detroit had a burst in the
number of cases in March 2020. The analysis comprises four major steps: 1) map the OD network,
2) Identify hotspots and non-hotspots based on the mapped OD network, 3) examine movement
patterns between hotspots and non-hotspots, and 4) identify POIs with significant flux-in changes.
We explain each step in the following sections.
1. Map the OD network
We mapped the OD movement network based on the number of visitors to POIs from
CBGs. The mapped OD networks are directed and weighted bipartite networks. The partite of
origin nodes are CBGs and the partite of destination nodes are POIs. Links in the OD network
represent visits from CBGs to POIs, and weights of links are the number of visitors during the
covered period. We mapped the weekly OD network because SafeGraph aggregates the number
of visitors from CBGs to POIs by week. Figure 2 illustrates an example of the mapped OD network
in Jacksonville, Florida.

Figure 2. Mapped OD network of the week of January 27, 2020, in Jacksonville, Florida. Total
83,661 visits. Red nodes are hotspots (1,314 nodes) and blue nodes are non-hotspots (10,820
nodes)
2. Identify hotspots and non-hotspots
In the literature, different methods have been proposed to separate hotspots and nonhotspots (Giuliano and Small 1991; McMillen 2001; McMillen and Smith 2003). Louail et al.
(2014, 2015) developed a method to identify hotspots and non-hotspots based on the Lorenz curve
4

of divided 1−𝑘𝑚! cells. This method yields lower and upper boundaries of identified hotspots. In
this paper, we adopted a centroid-based clustering method to separate hotspot and non-hotspot
nodes in the mapped OD network (Hamedmoghadam et al. 2019). Each mapped weekly OD
network has a correspondent OD bi-adjacency matrix. The columns and rows of the OD matrix
represent origin nodes and destination nodes, and the elements are the weights of links. First, we
summed all the rows and columns to get the total flux-out and flux-in values of origin and
destination nodes, respectively. Then, we sorted flux-out and flux-in values of origin and
destination nodes in an ascending order: 𝑂" < 𝑂! < ⋯ < 𝑂# and 𝐷" < 𝐷! < ⋯ < 𝐷# . To
separate hotspots and non-hotspots in these two lists, we used Equation 1 to determine the
separation point 𝑂$ and 𝐷$ . Nodes with flux-out and flux-in values greater than 𝑂$ and 𝐷$ are
hotspots of origins and destinations. In Equation 1, 𝑞% could represent either 𝑂" , 𝑂! , ⋯ , 𝑂# or
𝐷" , 𝐷! , ⋯ , 𝐷# .
$

$

#

#

1
1
arg min 1 |𝑞% − 41 𝑞' 5 | + 1 |𝑞( −
4 1 𝑞* 5 |
$
𝑐
𝑛−𝑐
%&"

'&"

(&$)"

(1)

*&$)"

3. Examine movement patterns between hotspots and non-hotspots
We used a coarse-grain approach to examine the mobility pattern (Hamedmoghadam et al.
2019; Louail et al. 2014, 2015). The approach reduces the mobility flows to four types: (1) 𝐻𝐻:
from hotspot origins (CBGs) to hotspot destinations (POIs), (2) 𝑁𝐻 : from non-hotspot origins to
hotspot destinations, (3) 𝐻𝑁 : from hotspot origins to non-hotspot destinations, and (4) 𝑁𝑁 : from
non-hotspot origins to non-hotspot destinations. If we use 𝐹 to represent the original OD biadjacency matrix, then we could reduce 𝐹 to the coarse-grained matrix Λ.
𝐻𝐻 𝑁𝐻
?
(2)
𝐻𝑁 𝑁𝑁
In matrix Λ, each sub-matrix could be calculated as follows pattern (Hamedmoghadam et
al. 2019; Louail et al. 2014, 2015).
Λ=>

𝐻𝐻 =

1 𝐹%( / 1 𝐹%(
%∈,,(∈.

𝑁𝐻 =

1 𝐹%( / 1 𝐹%(
%∉,,(∈.

𝐻𝑁 =

(4)

%,(

1 𝐹%( / 1 𝐹%(
%∈,,(∉.

𝑁𝑁 =

(3)

%,(

(5)

%,(

1 𝐹%( / 1 𝐹%(
%∉,,(∉.

(6)

%,(

where 𝐹%( represents each element in the original OD matrix, 𝑀 represents the set of hotspot
origins, and 𝑃 represents the set of hotspot destinations determined in step 2. Equations 3 through
6 illustrates how we calculated the proportion of each types of movements. We normalized each
mobility type by the total mobility flow. Therefore, the proportion of each type of movement, 𝐻𝐻,
𝑁𝐻, 𝐻𝑁, and 𝑁𝑁 ∈ [0,1] and the sum of them equals 1. 𝐻𝐻, 𝑁𝐻, 𝐻𝑁, and 𝑁𝑁 could represent
5

the proportion of each type of movement flow in the whole OD network (Hamedmoghadam et al.
2019).. This characterization is particularly important to examine and monitor reduction in
movements to urban hotspots (reduction in the proportion on 𝐻𝐻 and 𝑁𝐻 movements) during
social distancing periods.
4. Clustering analysis of movement patterns across cities
We conducted clustering analysis after we obtained movement patterns of cities. We used
the sum of proportions of two movements, 𝐻𝐻 + 𝑁𝐻, as an indicator of cluster movement patterns
within cities. These two movements would contribute to spreading of the epidemic because the
extent of visits to the hotspot POIs could increase the transmission rate of COVID-19. We scaled
the time series data related to movement patterns so that each time series has zero mean and unit
standard deviation. This step enabled us to focus on comparing the shapes and trends of time-series
data. We compared three algorithms (Euclidean distances, dynamic time warping (DTW), cross
correlation) for time series clustering (Cuturi and Blondel 2017; Paparrizos and Gravano 2015;
Petitjean et al. 2011) and used the silhouette coefficient to determine the number of clusters
(Rousseeuw 1987). (Results of algorithms are within the supplemental information.)
5. Identify POIs with significant flux-in changes
We compared OD matrices from two milestone dates (e.g., March 1 and March 29). We
summed columns of the matrices to obtain the weighted node degree centrality of destinations.
Then we calculated differences in the weighted degree centrality of each pair of destination nodes
in the two matrices: 𝐶" , 𝐶! , ⋯ , 𝐶# . Accordingly, 𝐶#! /𝐶 ! approximately follows the chi-square
distribution if the weighted node degree centrality did not have significant changes. (Proof process
is discussed in the supplemental information.) Here, 𝐶 ! is the average of the square of degree
centrality difference. We used the upper tail test (𝐻" : |𝐶| > 0, 𝐻0 : |𝐶| = 0) of the chi-square
distribution to determine the P-value for each node. Because each test was conducted separately
for each node, the degree of freedom is 1, and we adjusted P-value for multiple tests using the
Benjamini-Hochberg (B-H) false discovery rate (FDR) correction (Benjamini and Hochberg 1995).
We tested the destination node set and identified the POIs with significant in-degree changes (with
FDR equal to 0.1 and adjusted P-value < 0.01), which could reflect significant flux-in changes.
Furthermore, because each POI has its NAICS code indicating its business activity, we can identify
the extent to which business activities were impacted due to COVID-19.
RESULTS
1. Movement patterns of visiting POIs in 16 cities
The first set of results shows that the sum of absolute visits to POIs showed a decreasing
trend for all 16 cities after the enforcement of shelter-in-place orders (Figure 3). However, four
types of movements (HH, HN, HH, and NH) varied across different cities. Figure 3 includes the
result of clustering analysis, and the 16 cities were divided into two categories. Figure 5 illustrates
the detailed clustering results.
We can observe from Figure 3 that the HH movements in category 1 cities (San Diego,
Fort Worth, Dallas, Houston, and Austin) did not show a clear declining trend. In category 1 cities,
a decline in HN and NN movements caused a decrease in the total number of visits. In fact, the NH
movements in cities of category 1 (except for New York) showed an increasing trend after the
6

enforcement of shelter-in-place order. In category 2 cities, HN and NN movements remained stable,
while HH and NH movements show a clear downward trend.
We also investigated the proportion of each type of movement in 16 cities. We can observe
from Figure 4 that the proportion of HH and NH movements in category 1 cities did not show a
declining trend, even though the absolute value of HH and NH movements in some cities, such as
Phoenix, San Antonio and New York, declined (as shown in Figure 3). The proportion of HN and
NN movements in most cities (except for New York) of category 1 did not show a clear upward
trend. This result demonstrates that although people in category 1 cities had decreased their
absolute visits to POIs, the proportion of their visits to the hotspots of POIs were stable.
For category 2 cities, the proportion of HH and NH movements showed a clear downward
trend, while the proportion of HN and NN movements had a clear upward trend. The barycenter of
two city categories illustrated in Figure 5 indicates that the proportion of HH and NH movements
had an upward trend in category 1 cities, while the proportion of HH and NH movements showed
a downward trend in cities of category 2. These results imply that people in cities of category 2
kept reducing the proportion of their movements to urban hotspots of POIs due to the social
distancing measure. We can conclude from the above results that while the overall mobility in all
cities declined due to social distancing orders, the movement patterns related to visits to hotspots
followed two different trends in the two categories of studied cities. The disparate patterns could
imply differences in transmission risks.
In addition, we can observe from Figure 4 that the proportion of HH and NH movements
in some category 2 cities (Detroit, Jacksonville, Chicago, Los Angeles, San Francisco, Seattle, and
San Jose) started to decline much earlier than the enforcement of the shelter-in-place orders. This
result may imply that people in these cities had started to proactively reduce visits to hotpots. The
first cases occurred quite early in most of these cities, such as Detroit, Chicago, Los Angeles,
Seattle and San Jose. As there is a clear gap between the date of the first case and the enforcement
of shelter-in-place orders in these cities, this result may suggest that the information of the first
case may trigger proactive actions.

7

Figure 3. Absolute visits related to four types of movements in 16 cities (weeks from December
30, 2019 to May 11, 2020). We used the rolling mean (window = 4) to smooth the data, original
data could refer to supplemental document.

8

Figure 4. Proportion of four types of movements in 16 cities (weeks from December 30, 2019
through May 11, 2020), rolling mean (window = 4)

Figure 5. Result of clustering analysis using dynamic time warping barycenter averaging (weeks
from December 30, 2019 through May 11, 2020). Each gray line represents movement of one
city in categories; the red line represents the barycenter of the category
2. Proportion of persons visiting POIs in hotspots
The next set of results indicates one dominant POI in hotspots across all 16 cities:
Restaurants and Other Eating Places (NAICS code: 7225). Museums, Historical Sites and Similar
Institutions (NAICS code: 7121) was the second dominant POI in many of the studied cities. Based
on the description of NAICS, Museums, Historical Sites and Similar Institutions encompasses
several sub-categories, including Museums, Historical Sites, Zoos and Botanical Gardens, and
Nature Parks and Other Similar Institutions. Surprisingly, the proportion of visits to these two POIs
remained fairly stable during the unfolding of the COVID-19 pandemic and the enforcement of
shelter-in-place orders. Figure 6 illustrates the top seven hotspot POIs with the highest proportion
9

of visits in four cities: Austin, New York, San Francisco, and Seattle (The results for the other
cities are provided in the supplemental information.) We selected two cities from each category
and one week at the end of each January, February, March, and April to illustrate the patterns.

Figure 6. Top 7 hotspot POIs in hotspots during the last week of January, February, March, and
April.
As illustrated in Figure 6, the proportion of visits to POIs in hotspots showed a similar
pattern in the weeks of January 27, 2020, and February 24, 2020, in addition to the two dominant
POIs (i.e., restaurants and museums), Other Amusement and Recreation Industries (NAICS code:
7139) ranked third for three cities (ranked fourth in Austin), while the fourth and fifth place POIs
varied across cities: Child Day Care Services (NAICS code: 6244) and Traveler Accommodation
10

(NAICS code: 7211) in New York; Sporting Goods, Hobby, and Musical Instrument Stores
(NAICS code 4511) and Traveler Accommodation (NAICS code: 7211) in San Francisco; as well
as Sporting Goods, Hobby, and Musical Instrument Stores (NAICS code: 4511) and Grocery
Stores (NAICS code: 4451) in Seattle. In Austin, Lessors of Real Estate (NAICS code: 5311),
Gasoline Stations (NAICS code: 4471), and Elementary and Secondary Schools (NAICS code:
6111) had large proportions of visits. With the unfolding of COVID-19 and shelter-in-place orders,
although the proportion of visits to the top two POIs slightly decreased, the top two POIs in each
city still were the dominant places visited. After the unfolding of COVID-19 and social distancing
orders, the proportion of visits to Grocery Stores (the red element in Figure 6) increased. Also, the
proportion of visits to Other Amusement and Recreation Industries and Travel Accommodation
declined. For the week of March 30, Grocery Stores started to rank fifth while another essential
POI, Gasoline Stations, ranked fourth in Austin. Also, Grocery Stores started to rank fourth in the
weeks of March 30 and April 27 in the other three cities. In Austin, the proportion of Grocery
Stores visits decreased in the weeks of March 30 and April 27, but the rank increased. In other
cities, both the rank and the proportion of Grocery Stores visits increased. We also found that
Health and Personal Care Stores (NAICS code: 4461) POIs and General Merchandise Stores,
including Warehouse Clubs and Supercenters (NAICS code: 4523) POI showed an upward trend
in most of the cities after the outbreak started. For example, the Healthcare POI ranked among the
top seven in the weeks of March 30 and April 27 in New York and Austin. In Seattle, the proportion
of visits to Health and Personal Care Stores POI rose to fifth place in ranking in the weeks of
March 30 and April 27. The proportion of visits to the Merchandise POI rose to the top 7 in the
weeks of March 30 and April 27 in Houston, Dallas, Detroit, Phoenix and rose to the top 3 in
Jacksonville and San Antonio.
Because we determined POI hotspots based on the total number of visits to POIs, the
evolution of the proportion of visits to POIs in hotspots could provide insights about movement
patterns of people across different cities. The results showed that although the absolute number of
visits decreased for all the POIs during COVID-19, the proportion of visits to restaurants and
museums remained dominant in most cities. Also, the results showed that the proportion of visits
to grocery stores and healthcare facilities increased, while the proportion of visits to amusement
and recreation industries decreased. Furthermore, the patterns of visits to POIs did not show a
relationship with city categories based on movements to hotspots. Instead, the visits to POIs highly
depended on the attributes of cities. For example, Gasoline Station was the second highest visited
POI hotspot in Houston and was third in Dallas and Detroit, while representing only a small
proportion of hotspot POI visits in New York. Museums, Historical Sites and Similar Institutions
was the second highest proportion of hotspot POI visits in most studied cities, such as Dallas,
Detroit, Philadelphia, Los Angeles and San Jose, while it formed a small proportion of hotspot
POI visits in Jacksonville, Fort Worth and Houston.
3. POIs with significant flux-in changes
Based on the number of nodes with significant flux-in changes, we identified several
businesses highly affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, including Restaurants and Other Eating
Places, Museums, Historical Sites, and Similar Institutions, Lessors of Real Estate, Elementary
and Secondary Schools (NAICS code: 6111), Support Activities for Air Transportation (NAICS
code: 4881) and Religious Organizations (NAICS code: 8131). Also, some of the affected POIs
varied across the 16 cities. Figure 5 illustrates the POIs with significant flux-in changes in four
selected cities: New York, Austin, San Francisco, and Seattle. (The results for other cities could
11

be found in the supplemental information.) We selected one week at the end of each January,
February, March and April to compare the trends with the week of January 13 (with the assumption
that most businesses had returned to normal schedules and patterns of visits after the winter break).

Figure 5. POIs with significant flux-in changes in the four one-week periods: (a) New York, (b)
Austin, (c) San Francisco, (d) Seattle. We included top 5 businesses related to hotspot POIs with
significant flux-in changes in each week. The indicator on the radar chart refers to the number of
weeks the business activity was in the top 5 affected POIs.
Figure 5 illustrates that visits to Restaurants and Other Eating Places and Museums and to
Historical Sites, and Similar Institution POIs were greatly affected in all four cities. These two
POIs ranked in the top 5 affected business activities across all four studied weeks. Other
Amusement and Recreation Industries was another highly affected POI, ranking in the top 5
affected POIs four times in New York and San Francisco, and in top 5 affected POIs list three
times in Austin and Seattle. Also, the extent of affected POIs varied across different cities, such as
Lessors of Real Estate and Elementary and Secondary Schools in Austin, Support Activities for
Air Transportation in New York and San Francisco, and College, University and Professional
Schools and Other Information Services in Seattle.
The results indicate that some POIs are universally affected across all cities during the
January through May time period examined in this study. The effects of the pandemic of other
POIs varied across cities and months. For example, the effect on Support Activities for Air
Transportation visits were related to travel restrictions which had the greatest impact in New York
and San Francisco. We can observe from Figure 4 that Travel Accommodation had relatively large
proportion of POI hotspots in New York and San Francisco (ranked top 4 and 5, respectively,
before March). Also, the shelter-in-place order affected Elementary and Secondary Schools in
Austin and College, University and Professional Schools in Seattle due mainly to closure of
schools and colleges.
DISCUSSION
12

The results of this study provide a deeper insight into the effect of social distancing on
changes in population visits to hotspot POIs during the COVID-19 pandemic. Although the
absolute number of visits to POIs showed a downward trend in the 16 studied cities, one category
of cities sustained the proportion of movements to hotspot POIs, while the second category of
cities reduced the proportion of movements to hotspot POIs and increased the proportion of
movements to non-hotspots POIs. Another COVID-19 study in Italy demonstrated that human
mobility in Italy was strongly related to the spread and control of COVID-19 (Cintia 2020).
Movements to hotspot and non-hotspot, however, may have different transmission risks and cause
different epidemic diffusion patterns. Balcan et al. (2009) considered two types of mobility: longrange mobility and short-range mobility when building an epidemic model. The results showed
that two types of mobility determined different epidemic diffusion patterns at regional and local
levels. Meloni et al. (2011) showed that changes of mobility patterns due to an epidemic outbreak
may have a negative effect on epidemic control. Furthermore, Chang et al. (2020) identified
‘superspreader’ POIs (e.g., fitness centers and restaurants) that may cause huge amount of
infections. Hence, the proportion of movements to POIs in urban hotspots could be a critical
indicator of the manner in which cities responded to an epidemic breakout. The results of this study
could facilitate better monitoring of the effect of enforced epidemic control measures. Furthermore,
we investigated which POIs maintained their pre-epidemic proportion of visits, and which POIs
experienced declines and increases in proportion visits during the unfolding of COVID-19 and the
enforcement of shelter-in-place orders. The results facilitate a better understanding of human
lifestyles and its changes during the epidemic and could inform developing effective epidemic
control measures.
Also, we conducted chi-square test to pinpoint POIs with significant flux-in changes. The
process could be a good complement to the coarse-grain approach that was adopted to analyze the
OD network. The coarse-grain approach clustered nodes to hotspots and non-hotspots and grouped
individual OD flows into four types of movements. While the approach could provide a useful
picture of human movements among hotspots and non-hotspots, it does not provide information
about single POIs. An understanding the flux-in changes for single POIs is important for the
examination of pandemics. Because our study focused on the effect of social distancing measures
and shelter-in-place orders, the POIs with significant flux-in changes showed a decrease in visits
during the studied period. This set of results could provide additional insights regarding
community response to COVID-19 and inform the monitoring of the control measure effectiveness.
On the other hand, these POIs could expect a significant flux-in increase after the shelter-in-place
orders are lifted. Specifying these POIs could provide valuable information to develop reopening
policies and strategies (e.g., multi-steps to reopen POIs with significant flux-in changes).
Other research directions could be explored based on the findings of this study. For
example, based on the results of the proportions of visits to POIs during the studied period across
cities, we could refine the understanding of essential and non-essential services for humans in
urban disruptions, such as natural hazards and epidemic outbreaks (Esmalian et al. 2019), and
future research could take characteristics of cities into consideration. Furthermore, the results
could facilitate the understanding how the urban disruptions would affect business (e.g., what
business industries would be more affected during disruption compared with other business),
helping to develop business disaster planning and recovery strategies in urban disruptions (Karim
2011; Marshall and Schrank 2014).
The research also has some limitations. We tried to study movement patterns in some less
populated cities in United States that were highly affected by COVID-19, such as Randolph,
13

Terrell, and Early in Georgia, as well as Union, Bergen, and Hudson in New Jersey. The
movement data in these cities, however, were very sparse and difficult to build the OD network.
The results in this paper, therefore, focused primarily on cities with large populations.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors would like to acknowledge funding support from the National Science
Foundation RAPID project #2026814: Urban Resilience to Health Emergencies: Revealing Latent
Epidemic Spread Risks from Population Activity Fluctuations and Collective Sense-making.” The
authors would also like to acknowledge that SafeGraph provided POI data. Any opinions, findings,
and conclusion or recommendations expressed in this research are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the view of the funding agency. The authors would like to thank Jan Gerston
for copy-editing services.
REFERENCES
Balcan, D., Colizza, V., Gonçalves, B., Hud, H., Ramasco, J. J., and Vespignani, A. (2009).
“Multiscale mobility networks and the spatial spreading of infectious diseases.”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, National
Academy of Sciences, 106(51), 21484–21489.
Barbosa, H., Barthelemy, M., Ghoshal, G., James, C. R., Lenormand, M., Louail, T., Menezes,
R., Ramasco, J. J., Simini, F., and Tomasini, M. (2018). “Human mobility: Models and
applications.” Physics Reports.
Benjamini, Y., and Hochberg, Y. (1995). “Controlling the False Discovery Rate: A Practical and
Powerful Approach to Multiple Testing.” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B
(Methodological), 57(1), 289–300.
Blondel, V. D., Decuyper, A., and Krings, G. (2015). “A survey of results on mobile phone
datasets analysis.” EPJ Data Science.
Chang, G. L., and Tao, X. (1999). “An integrated model for estimating time-varying network
origin-destination distributions.” Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice,
33(5), 381–399.
Chang, S. Y., Pierson, E., Koh, P. W., Gerardin, J., Redbird, B., Grusky, D., and Leskovec, J.
(2020). “Mobility network modeling explains higher SARS-CoV-2 infection rates among
disadvantaged groups and informs reopening strategies.” medRxiv, 2020.06.15.20131979.
Cintia, P. (2020). “THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN HUMAN MOBILITY AND VIRAL
TRANSMISSIBILITY DURING THE COVID-19 EPIDEMICS IN ITALY.” arXiv eprints, arXiv:2006.03141.
Cuturi, M., and Blondel, M. (2017). “Soft-DTW: A differentiable loss function for time-series.”
34th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2017, 1483–1505.
Danon, L., House, T., and Keeling, M. J. (2009). “The role of routine versus random movements
on the spread of disease in Great Britain.” Epidemics, 1(4), 250–258.
Egu, O., and Bonnel, P. (2020). “How comparable are origin-destination matrices estimated from
automatic fare collection, origin-destination surveys and household travel survey? An
empirical investigation in Lyon.” Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice,
138, 267–282.
Esmalian, A., Ramaswamy, M., Rasoulkhani, K., and Mostafavi, A. (2019). “Agent-Based
Modeling Framework for Simulation of Societal Impacts of Infrastructure Service
Disruptions during Disasters.” Computing in Civil Engineering 2019: Smart Cities,
14

Sustainability, and Resilience - Selected Papers from the ASCE International Conference on
Computing in Civil Engineering 2019, 16–23.
Ferguson, N. M., Cummings, D. A. T., Cauchemez, S., Fraser, C., Riley, S., Meeyai, A.,
Iamsirithaworn, S., and Burke, D. S. (2005). “Strategies for containing an emerging
influenza pandemic in Southeast Asia.” Nature, 437(7056), 209–214.
Gao, S., Rao, J., Kang, Y., Liang, Y., and Kruse, J. (2020). “Mapping County-Level Mobility
Pattern Changes in the United States in Response to COVID-19.” SSRN Electronic Journal.
Giuliano, G., and Small, K. A. (1991). “Subcenters in the Los Angeles region.” Regional Science
and Urban Economics, 21(2), 163–182.
Hamedmoghadam, H., Ramezani, M., and Saberi, M. (2019). “Revealing latent characteristics of
mobility networks with coarse-graining.” Scientific Reports, 9(1).
Karim, A. J. (2011). “Business Disaster Preparedness: An Empirical Study for measuring the
Factors of Business Continuity to face Business Disaster.” International Journal for
Business and Social Science, 18(18), 183–192.
Lenormand, M., Picornell, M., Cantú-Ros, O. G., Tugores, A., Louail, T., Herranz, R.,
Barthelemy, M., Frías-Martínez, E., and Ramasco, J. J. (2014). “Cross-checking different
sources of mobility information.” PLoS ONE, 9(8).
Louail, T., Lenormand, M., Cantu Ros, O. G., Picornell, M., Herranz, R., Frias-Martinez, E.,
Ramasco, J. J., and Barthelemy, M. (2014). “From mobile phone data to the spatial structure
of cities.” Scientific Reports, 4.
Louail, T., Lenormand, M., Picornell, M., Cantú, O. G., Herranz, R., Frias-Martinez, E.,
Ramasco, J. J., and Barthelemy, M. (2015). “Uncovering the spatial structure of mobility
networks.” Nature Communications, 6.
Marshall, M. I., and Schrank, H. L. (2014). “Small business disaster recovery: A research
framework.” Natural Hazards, 72(2), 597–616.
Mazzoli, M., Molas, A., Bassolas, A., Lenormand, M., Colet, P., and Ramasco, J. J. (2019).
“Field theory for recurrent mobility.” Nature Communications, 10(1).
McMillen, D. P. (2001). “Nonparametric employment subscenter identification.” Journal of
Urban Economics, 50(3), 448–473.
McMillen, D. P., and Smith, S. C. (2003). “The number of subcenters in large urban areas.”
Journal of Urban Economics, 53(3), 321–338.
Meloni, S., Perra, N., Arenas, A., Gómez, S., Moreno, Y., and Vespignani, A. (2011). “Modeling
human mobility responses to the large-scale spreading of infectious diseases.” Scientific
Reports, 1.
Le Menach, A., Tatem, A. J., Cohen, J. M., Hay, S. I., Randell, H., Patil, A. P., and Smith, D. L.
(2011). “Travel risk, malaria importation and malaria transmission in Zanzibar.” Scientific
Reports, 1.
Merler, S., and Ajelli, M. (2010). “The role of population heterogeneity and human mobility in
the spread of pandemic influenza.” Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences,
277(1681), 557–565.
Oliver, N., Letouzé, E., Sterly, H., Delataille, S., Nadai, M. De, Lepri, B., Lambiotte, R.,
Benjamins, R., Cattuto, C., Colizza, V., Cordes, N. de, Fraiberger, S. P., Koebe, T.,
Lehmann, S., Murillo, J., Pentland, A., Pham, P. N., Pivetta, F., Salah, A. A., Saramäki, J.,
Scarpino, S. V., Tizzoni, M., Verhulst, S., and Patrick Vinck. (2020). “Mobile phone data
and COVID-19: Missing an opportunity?” arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2003.12347 (2020).
Ortúzar, J. de D., and Willumsen, L. G. (2011). Modelling Transport. Wiley.
15

Osorio, D., Zhong, Y., Li, G., Huang, J. Z., and Cai, J. J. (2020). “scTenifoldNet: a machine
learning workflow for constructing and comparing transcriptome-wide gene regulatory
networks from single-cell data.” bioRxiv, 2020.02.12.931469.
Paparrizos, J., and Gravano, L. (2015). “K-shape: Efficient and accurate clustering of time
series.” Proceedings of the ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of
Data, 1855–1870.
Petitjean, F., Ketterlin, A., and Gançarski, P. (2011). “A global averaging method for dynamic
time warping, with applications to clustering.” Pattern Recognition, 44(3), 678–693.
Rousseeuw, P. J. (1987). “Silhouettes: A graphical aid to the interpretation and validation of
cluster analysis.” Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics, 20(C), 53–65.
SafeGraph. (2020). “Weekly Pattern Version 2.” SafeGraph,
<https://docs.safegraph.com/docs/weekly-patterns>.
Tizzoni, M., Bajardi, P., Decuyper, A., Kon Kam King, G., Schneider, C. M., Blondel, V.,
Smoreda, Z., González, M. C., and Colizza, V. (2014). “On the Use of Human Mobility
Proxies for Modeling Epidemics.” PLoS Computational Biology, 10(7).
Weiner, E. (2016). Urban transportation planning in the United States: History, policy, and
practice: Fifth edition. US Department of Transportation.
Wesolowski, A., Eagle, N., Tatem, A. J., Smith, D. L., Noor, A. M., Snow, R. W., and Buckee,
C. O. (2012). “Quantifying the impact of human mobility on malaria.” Science, 338(6104),
267–270.

16

SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION:
1. Results of different clustering algorithms.
Table S1 illustrates the results of silhouette coefficient of different clustering algorithms and
different clustering numbers. Figure S1 illustrates the clustering results of different algorithms.
We finally choose DBA (dynamic time warping barycenter averaging) with two clusters.
Table S1. Silhouette coefficients of different clustering algorithms and different clustering
numbers.
Silhouette coefficient
Algorithms
N=2
N=3
N=4
N=5
N=6
Euclidean
0.501
0.483
0.373
0.421
0.366
DBA
0.514
0.483
0.408
0.482
0.431
Soft-DTW
0.501
0.483
0.408
0.451
0.407
K-shape
0.0006
0.01150
-0.067
0.1237
0.0778

17

Figure S1. Results of clustering algorithms (weeks from December 30, 2019 through May 11,
2020)

18

2. Proof of Chi-square distribution:
For two studied moments (e.g., March 1 and March 29), weighted degree centrality of nodes
are 𝑑"" , 𝑑"! , ⋯ , 𝑑"# and 𝑑!" , 𝑑!! , ⋯ , 𝑑!# . Then the difference of weighted degree centrality
of each pair of nodes are 𝐶" , 𝐶! , ⋯ 𝐶# = (𝑑"" − 𝑑!" ), (𝑑"! − 𝑑!! ), ⋯ , (𝑑"# − 𝑑!# ). Therefore,
if the weighted degree centrality of nodes in the aggregated weekly OD networks of two studied
moments does not have significant changes (null hypothesis), the difference of weighted degree
centrality of pair of nodes, 𝐶" , 𝐶! , ⋯ 𝐶# , approximately follows a normal distribution. The mean
1!" )1"" )⋯)1#"

of the normal distribution equals to 0, and the standard deviation equals to M

#

= N𝐶 ! .

𝐶#!
P ! approximately follows a chi-square distribution with degree of
𝐶
freedom is 1. Osorio et al. (2020) provides the result but does not have the proof process.
Therefore, the 𝑍 ! =

3. Top 7 POIs in hotspots in cities

Figure S2. Chicago

Figure S3. Dallas

19

Figure S4. Detroit

Figure S5. Fort Worth

Figure S6. Houston

20

Figure S7. Jacksonville.

Figure S8. Los Angeles.

Figure S9. Philadelphia.

21

Figure S10. Phoenix.

Figure S11. San Antonio.

Figure S12. San Diego.

22

Figure S13. San Jose
4. Highly affected POIs in four studied weeks

Figure S14. (a) Chicago, (b) Los Angeles, (c) Philadelphia, (d) San Jose.

23

Figure S15. (a) Houston, (b) San Antonio, (c) Detroit, (d) Jacksonville.

Figure S16. (a) San Diego, (b) Phoenix, (c) Dallas, (d) Fort Worth.
4. Original data of four types of movements in 16 cities:

24

Figure S20. Absolute visits of four types of movements

Figure S21. Proportion of four types of movements in 16 cities.
25

