Extracting and categorising the reactions to COVID-19 by the South
African public - A social media study

arXiv:2006.06336v1 [cs.SI] 11 Jun 2020

Avashlin Moodley
Athandiwe Saba
Vukosi Marivate
CSIR, South Africa
Mail and Guardian
Dept. Computer Science
University of Pretoria amoodley1@csir.co.zaathandiwes@mg.co.za
CSIR, South Africa
vukosi.marivate@cs.up.ac.za

Abstract
Social Media can be used to extract discussion topics during a disaster. With
the COVID-19 pandemic impact on South
Africa, we need to understand how the law
and regulation promulgated by the government in response to the pandemic contrasts with discussion topics social media
users have been engaging in. In this work,
we expand on traditional media analysis
by using Social Media discussions driven
by or directed to South African government officials. We find topics that are
similar as well as different in some cases.
The findings can inform further study into
social media during disaster settings in
South Africa and beyond.

1

Introduction

It is a few months since the first reported
COVID-19 case in South Africa (Kiewit, 2020).
This has been a time in the country’s history
that has been categorised with unprecedented
government engagement. Government tries to
balance their responses in taking care of the
health crisis to also respond to the social and
economic impacts (de Kadt, 2020). Research
continues to be done on studying the pandemic
spread in South Africa (Mbuvha and Marwala,
2020; Arashi et al., 2020; Marivate and Combrink, 2020). We take a different direction in
this work in that we look at the engagement
on social media as a window into some of the

concerns that the public in South Africa might
have.
In this work, we extract patterns of social
media interactions between the South African
government (through its representatives) and
citizens (the public). Extracting the discussion
patterns is important, even with the limitation
that social media is not a representation of all
parts of our society. South Africa has a 60%
internet penetration and 36% of the population
on any type of social media. If we concentrate on Twitter, South Africa has just over 2.3
million users on Twitter (Kemp, 2020), out of
an estimated total population of 58.8 million
(Africa, 2019).
We use an empirical approach to extract topics from gathered social media data from South
Africa. We analyse this data to answer the following questions: What are the most discussed
issues?; How have the discussions changed
over time in relation to the announced policy
changes by the government?; What topics are
similar and dissimilar between official and public sources?

2

COVID-19 progression in South
Africa and online discussion

The COVID-19 response by the South African
government has been multi-modal (briefings,
announcements, question & answer sessions)
as the government tries to bring citizens into

3

Data and exploratory analysis

We collected data from Twitter that covers the
periods of 01 March 2020 to May 17 2020.
We collect government communication from
a few official accounts (see Table 1). Traditional media analysis has highlighted that journalists had focused on President Ramaphosa
and Dr Zweli Mkhize for comments when it
comes to to COVID-19 in South Africa (Dayile, 2020). We utilised TWINT1 to collect the
data. The data collection was under ethical
clearance EBIT/88/2020.
We collected 919,019 social media posts
1
https://github.com/twintproject/
twint

National Account

Description

@CyrilRamaphosa
@DrZweliMkhize
@HealthZA
@nicd sa

President of RSA
Minister of Health, RSA
National Department of Health [NDOH]
National Institute of Communicable Diseases [NICD] RSA

Table 1: Twitter keywords (in the form of accounts) tracked for our study
Social media engagements per week

120000
100000
Number of posts

80000
60000
40000
20000
2020-05-11

2020-05-04

2020-04-27

2020-04-20

Week

2020-04-13

2020-04-06

2020-03-30

2020-03-23

2020-03-16

2020-03-09

0
2020-03-02

their confidence (Dayile, 2020). The Minister
of Health, Dr. Zweli Mkhize, holds daily briefings on a number of topics related to the Healthcare system’s response to COVID-19. The
president, Cyril Ramaphosa, has held briefings
before major changes (such as introducing and
declaring a national state of disaster, announcing lockdown and lockdown levels etc.).
The public has many opinions and reactions
on the COVID-19 pandemic and interventions
(by government and other sectors). There is a
need to find ways to better understand these reactions. Social media analysis and traditional
media analysis can be useful in extracting topics that are important in tracking a pandemic
(Ghosh et al., 2017). Analysis of media information (traditional and social) can extract
what may be concerns to citizens but can also
help us highlight gaps in the engagement (Dayile, 2020; Ghosh et al., 2017). Social Media, in South Africa and beyond, has been
used to engage in debate and organise groups
that mobilise volunteers that assist the vulnerable (Hamann et al., 2020) or for COVID-19
data collection efforts (Marivate and Combrink,
2020), mirroring past use in times of disaster (Chae et al., 2014).

Figure 1: Weekly number of posts [Timeline]

from 189,266 unique users. The data was
segmented into two subsets, TweetsOfficial
and TweetsPublic. TweetsOfficial contains
tweets published by accounts in Table 1, TweetsPublic contains the remaining tweets that reference the accounts in Table 1. TweetsOfficial contains 2,537 tweets from 4 unique
users. TweetsOfficial contains a coherent message from government officials to the public
whereas TweetsPublic contains the public response which can be incoherent and noisy due
to the number of users contributing to the data.

4

Topic extraction and analysis of
discussions

Preliminary experiments with an unsupervised
topic model built on TweetsPublic produced
topics that could not be deciphered. Furthermore, the model poorly segmented the data
into representative clusters. In work by (Ghosh
et al., 2017; Gallagher et al., 2017), a supervised topic modelling approach was used to
seed the topic model with a manually curated
set of words to guide the formulation of top-

ics. Our approach aims to test whether topics
created from a model trained on TweetsOfficial and supervised by curated seed words can
be used to supervise the training of a model
trained on TweetsPublic to identify associated
topics in the larger, noisier corpus. If the TweetsOfficial model can effectively supervise the
TweetsPublic model to find topics that are associated with TweetsOfficial topics, it will provide a reflection of the public response to the
different topics of information propagated by
government. The models were trained with 20
topics and trained for 100 iterations. The models were used to label tweets with a topic label
to conduct analysis on the topics produced.
4.1

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
11

12
13

Keywords
travel,movement,year,old,male,
female,travelled,relocation,italy,switzerland
cases,recoveries,death,confirmed
,total,number,deaths,today,recovered,related
testing,tests,screening,conducted,
eligible,listed,feeling,flattenthecurve,hotline,sick
alcohol,ly,bit,spreadthefacts,
guide,wash,vvnfkf,step,dry,ih
smoking,smoke,cigarettes,ukuthi,
abantu,lesifo,bakithi,ukhozi fm,uma,ngoba
lockdown,home,distancing,social,
essential,hygiene,stay,groceries,grants,graphic
avoid,touching,droplets,coughing,
nose,markets,tv,pscp,spoiled,stray
children,school,earn,tax,reprieve,
salary,option,considering,uif,provisions
minister,president,mkhize,zweli,
ramaphosa,command,dr,cyril,
health,cyrilramaphosa
hospital,healthcare,masks,
nurses,doctor,ppe,doctors,
nurse,collecting,workers
fake,news,smart,kind,
stayathome,help,spread,ps,message,deal

Label
Travel
Case
Reports
Testing/
Screening
Alcohol/
Hygience
Cigarettes
Lockdown/
Distancing
COVID-19
Info
Schools/
Jobs
Officials/
Command
Council
PPE/
Healthcare
Fake News

Table 2: Highlighted topics

Highlighted Topics

The topics produced by the TweetsOfficial
and TweetsPublic model were very similar
due to the effects of the supervised approach
taken. The topics in Table 2 provide a general
overview of COVID-19 themes that were central to the engagements during the observed
period. The keywords were similar for both
models thus they are illustrated together in one
column for brevity. The models produced topics directly related to COVID-19 and heathcare; the officials from Table 1; the imposed
lockdown; and the policies applied by government for the lockdown (alcohol and cigarette
bans, school closure, job loss mitigation and
hygiene guidelines).
4.2

Topic

Topic Timelines

We use topic timelines to study the temporal
properties of topics. Since the topics from both
models are aligned in context, the objective is
to analyse spikes in volume to understand the
interaction between government and the public.
Key dates are highlighted to associate spikes
in volume with events that transpired.
Figure 2 illustrates topic timelines for
lockdown-related topics. The lockdown topic

Figure 2: Official vs Public Topics on Lockdown
Related Issues

is consistently discussed with spikes in volume
occurring near key dates. Official communication spikes in volume at the start of lockdown
but receives limited coverage elsewhere. The
cigarettes topic receives spikes in public attention near key dates, most notably in the period
between level 4 being announced and being
active because government changed their decision to allow cigarette sales in level 4 lockdown
in that period. Official tweets don’t appear to
focus on this topic. The other topics experience
spikes aligned to the lockdown topic.
Figure 3 illustrates topic timelines for topics
related to public officials, personal protective
equipment (PPE) and fake news. Public en-

Figure 4: Topic similarity heatmap

Figure 3: Official vs Public Topics on Other Issues

gagement towards key officials consistently occurred throughout with spikes in volume near
key dates. The spike in volume before the
announcement of level 4 lockdown can be attributed to the public’s eagerness for the lockdown to be eased. The PPE/healthcare topic
receives low volumes of attention but is consistently present in the public discourse. The fake
news topic peaks alongside the public official
topic.
4.3

Topic Similarity

As a result of the supervised topic modelling
approach, the TweetsOfficial and TweetsPublic
models had topics described by very similar
keywords. We use topic similarity heatmaps to
analyse the syntactic similarity between topics
from different models. The method consists
of creating sub-corpora for each topic from
each model, train a vectorizer on the union of
a pair of sub-corpora, one from each model.
Thereafter, a heatmap illustrates the pairwise
cosine similarity of two models.
Figure 4 illustrates the topic similarity
heatmap for the official and public topics. The
strong similarity seen on the diagonal of the
heatmap indicates that related topics from each
model have a strong syntactic similarity to each
other. The ’heat’ seen in most of the heatmap

is a result of the data covering a limited domain of public engagements with government
officials related to the pandemic. The very
high similarity seen for topics 2 (Case Reports),
3(Testing/Screening) and 12(PPE/Heathcare)
are likely due to these topics being informative in nature resulting in the scope for public
opinion being limited.

5

Conclusion

The topics produced highlight central themes
in the discourse between government officials
and the public. The topics address themes such
as lockdown and the restrictions put in place;
general information on COVID-19.The topic
timelines indicated that the public attempted
to engage more near key dates in the observed
period. Peaks in volume provided insights into
when certain topics received attention. The
high syntactic similarity seen between related
topics from each model indicates that the supervised topic modelling approach taken can
be used to find targeted insights from a larger
noisier data set by seeding the training process
with a smaller and more coherent data set that
relates to the domain being studied. The application of this approach can yield informative
insights about the interactions between government officials and the public. Furthermore, the
topics can be used as features in downstream
supervised tasks aimed at stronger citizen engagement on social media.

References
Statistics South Africa. 2019. Mid-year population estimates. StatsSA.
Mohammad Arashi, Andriette Bekker, Mahdi
Salehi, Sollie Millard, Barend Erasmus, Tanita
Cronje, and Mohammad Golpaygani. 2020.
Spatial analysis and prediction of covid-19
spread in south africa after lockdown. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2005.09596.
Junghoon Chae, Dennis Thom, Yun Jang, SungYe
Kim, Thomas Ertl, and David S Ebert. 2014.
Public behavior response analysis in disaster
events utilizing visual analytics of microblog
data. Computers & Graphics, 38:51–60.
Azola Dayile. 2020. Analysis of covid-19 media coverage: Brief 2. Technical report, Media
Monitoring Africa.
Ryan J Gallagher, Kyle Reing, David Kale, and
Greg Ver Steeg. 2017. Anchored correlation
explanation: Topic modeling with minimal domain knowledge. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 5:529–542.
Saurav Ghosh, Prithwish Chakraborty, Elaine O
Nsoesie, Emily Cohn, Sumiko R Mekaru,
John S Brownstein, and Naren Ramakrishnan.
2017. Temporal topic modeling to assess associations between news trends and infectious disease outbreaks. Scientific reports, 7(1):1–12.
Ralph Hamann, Annika Surmeier, Jody Delichte,
and Scott Drimie. 2020. Local networks can
help people in distress: South africa’s covid-19
response needs them. The Conversation.
Julia de Kadt. 2020. Covid-19 highlights south
africa’s need for local level social data. The
Conversation.
Simon Kemp. 2020. Digital 2020: South africa.
DataReportal.
Lester Kiewit. 2020. Health department confirms
south africa’s first covid-19 case. Mail and
Guardian.
Vukosi Marivate and Herkulaas MvE Combrink.
2020. Use of available data to inform the covid19 outbreak in south africa: A case study. Data
Science Journal, 19(1).

Rendani R Mbuvha and Tshilidzi Marwala. 2020.
On data-driven management of the covid-19
outbreak in south africa. medRxiv.

