Differentially Private Health Tokens for
Estimating COVID-19 Risk
David Butler∗† , Chris Hicks∗† , James Bell† , Carsten Maple†‡ and Jon Crowcroft†§
Email: {dbutler, chicks, jbell, cmaple, jcrowcroft}@turing.ac.uk
Turing Institute, ‡ Univerity of Warwick, § University of Cambridge

arXiv:2006.14329v2 [cs.CR] 8 Jul 2020

† Alan

Abstract—In the fight against Covid-19, many governments and businesses are in the process of evaluating,
trialling and even implementing so-called immunity passports. Also known as antibody or health certificates, there
is a clear demand for any technology that could allow
people to return to work and other crowded places without
placing others at risk. One of the major criticisms of
such systems is that they could be misused to unfairly
discriminate against those without immunity, allowing the
formation of an ‘immuno-privileged’ class of people. In
this work we are motivated to explore an alternative
technical solution that is non-discriminatory by design. In
particular we propose health tokens — randomised health
certificates which, using methods from differential privacy,
allow individual test results to be randomised whilst still
allowing useful aggregate risk estimates to be calculated.
We show that health tokens could mitigate immunity-based
discrimination whilst still presenting a viable mechanism
for estimating the collective transmission risk posed by
small groups of users. We evaluate the viability of our
approach in the context of identity-free and identity-binding
use cases and then consider a number of possible attacks.
Our experimental results show that for groups of size 500
or more, the error associated with our method can be as
low as 0.03 on average and thus the aggregated results
can be useful in a number of identity-free contexts. Finally,
we present the results of our open-source prototype which
demonstrates the practicality of our solution.

I. I NTRODUCTION
The discussion surrounding immunity, antibodies and
transmission risk have become synonymous with the
fight against COVID-19. One technique that has been
proposed is to certify each individuals’ immunity status
in a so-called immunity-passport. Because immunity to
COVID-19 is not well understood, and the correlates to
protection have not been fully identified, it has been
proposed that these certificates (which are currently
based on antibody testing) should be called antibody
certificates [9].
A number of antibody certificate solutions have already been proposed [2], [7], [10], [5], [9] and there
has been significant discussion of the technical, social
and ethical implications of the technology [12], [1], [13].
One of the main concerns relating to antibody certificates
is that they could be misused to unfairly discriminate
against people with respect to their immunity status. It
has been suggested [9] that antibody certificates should

not restrict peoples access to services, or freedom of
travel, but could instead be useful as a tool for measuring aggregate transmission risk levels. To this end we
approach this work with two assumptions in mind:
1) Immunity status is an attribute that should not be
a basis for widespread, arbitrary discrimination.
2) It is useful to know the ratio (or count) of immune
vs non-immune people that have accessed a service
over a period of time — for example customers in
a shop over a number of hours.
Our first assumption is motivated by concerns that
immunity-based discrimination could threaten freedom,
fairness and public health [13]. Particularly in the absence of a widely-available and effective vaccine: access
to shops, transportation, religious establishments and
medical services should perhaps not depend on whether
wealth or luck has favoured an individual with immunity. We are motivated by these concerns to develop
a system that technically mitigates immunity-based discrimination, using differential privacy, and to explore the
limitations and practicality of our approach. Our second
assumption is motivated by the idea that the presence
and proximity of immune individuals may offer a proxy
for estimating the risk of infection to those who are still
susceptible [8].
Within the framework of these two assumptions we
develop the idea of a health token: a randomised health
certificate that allows the collective transmission risk1
posed by groups of users to be estimated whilst also
protecting individuals from immunity-based discrimination. Unlike previous work on antibody certificates,
randomised health tokens are less likely to be used
to restrict access to services or transportation due to
the uncertainty introduced in their true value. Health
tokens provide each user with a transmission risk that
is plausibly deniable. Consequently, there is minimal
incentive for user fraud and so the need to bind each
user to their token is greatly diminished. Our health
tokens comprise only a digitally signed, differentially
1 We assume that a measure of transmission risk exists and that it
can be accurately determined.

private transmission risk status that allows aggregate
transmission risk statistics to be computed.
In our proposed system, the transmission risk of each
user is first evaluated by a healthcare provider who
then cryptographically signs and issues the user a health
token. Of course, our system is independent of how this
infection risk is calculated and can support any number
of different risk profiles, for example a scale of 1 to k.
Like many technology-based approaches to mitigating
COVID-19, the effectiveness of health tokens is dependant on the number of people willing to participate in the
system voluntarily. We envisage that, like digital contact
tracing apps, citizens will be motivated to use health
tokens by their will to bring social distancing measures
to an end and to help in the fight against the disease.
In addition, our proposal may encourage users who
would be reluctant to engage with a regular immunitypassport system that binds them directly to a certificate.
Indeed our health tokens do not reveal any personal
information, such as a name or photograph, which could
either be used to trace a user across multiple contexts
or be otherwise mishandled. Moreover the non-binding
nature of our system means there is little risk of feature
creep.
In Section II we detail our proposed system and in
Section III we consider two types of use case: identityfree cases such as shops and identity-binding cases such
as aeroplane flight booking. We consider and analyse
some possible attacks on our system in Section IV.
Finally in Section V we discuss the practicalities and
limitations of our approach and in Section VI we review
the related work and conclude.

A. The Health Token System
Here we present the three phases of our system in turn.
First we denote the three stakeholders as follows: the
healthcare provider Henry (H), the user Alice (A) and
the service provider Verity (V, alliterative for verifier).
Let protocol DP denote the differential privacy protocol
that we use to compute our health tokens, then the three
phases of our system are as follows:
Issue
1) H assesses A’s transmission risk indicator to be
itrue ∈ {0, . . . , k − 1}.
2) H computes token ← protocolDP (itrue , ) and
produces {token}sgnH for A.
3) A receives itrue and {token}sgnH .
Check
1) A presents {token}sgnH to V before accessing a
service.
2) V verifies the signature and records the value
token.
Aggregate
1) V finds the frequency, f , of each element of
{0, . . . , k − 1} amongst the tokens it has received.
2) V debiases the frequency estimates as per Equation
1 to get an unbiased estimate of the the sum of the
health tokens it has collected.
Each token is cryptographically signed by H. In particular we denote by {token}sgnH the user token token,
signed with H’s private signing key sgnH . The bitstring
representation of each signature will be unique (except
for a negligible probability) for each token thus can be
used as an identifier for each health token. We denote
this identifier by TID — token identification number.
Note that regardless of the user token value, A learns
their true transmission risk.

II. N ON D ISCRIMINATORY T OKEN S YSTEM
Our system consists of three phases: issue, check
and aggregate. In the issue phase a healthcare provider
assesses the transmission risk of a user and then issues
them with a cryptographically signed health token. In
the check phase the service provider records the value
of the users’ health token. Finally, the aggregate phase
allows the service provider to reconstruct the overall
transmission risk associated with the ‘checked’ tokens.
The high-level details of our health token system are
depicted in Figure 1.

B. The Differential Privacy Protocol
We use the differential privacy technique of randomised response [17] to produce a token based on the
transmission risk of a user as evaluated by a healthcare provider. Informally, the protocol which we denote
protocol DP is as follows.
The input is the users’ true risk status itrue ∈
{0, . . . , k − 1}, which can be one of k options, and .
Here,  is a measure of the trade-off between privacy and
accuracy; a low value of epsilon provides high privacy,
but low utility (as the underlying distribution is more
random) and vice versa. The protocol outputs itrue with

−1
, else we select a uniformly random
probability ee+k−1
response from {0, . . . , k − 1}. Clearly it is possible to
select a response at random and to still end up providing
the true value.
An unbiased estimate fˆ of the frequency f of a
given option is calculated by putting the frequency it

Fig. 1. The high-level details of our health token system.

2

is returned as a response, f˜, into the following formula:

One can imagine a process where at the time of checkin, a passenger must also submit their health token value
and the airline computes an aggregated risk value in the
same way as a shop does. At this point an issue arises:
the users’ health token is now bound to their identity
through their passport. We highlight two immediate
negative consequences of this: (1) the binding can be
remembered and could be used to unfairly impact users
with unfavourable health token values such as when
purchasing insurance or booking future flights and (2)
airlines are incentivised to allow only low risk passengers
on-board (to maximise flight capacity) thus reintroducing
discrimination.
The problem here is caused by the identity-binding
of the health token. While all situations are different,
and thus in some identity-binding situations there may
be possible solutions we conclude that health tokens are
only suitable for identity-free use cases.

e + k − 1 ˜
fˆ =
(f − 1/k).
(1)
e − 1
Error in re-aggregating the data is, of course, introduced with such a method. We visualise this error in
our experiments in Section VI.
III. U SE C ASES
Here we first give an example use case of our system,
specifically we show how a shop could implement a
risk analysis using health tokens. We then discuss the
situations we do not think health tokens are appropriate;
we conclude that health tokens are only suitable for
identity free use cases.
Identity-Free Use Case – Allowing users into a shop:
We consider a shop that wants to monitor the level of
transmission risk inside at any given time. We construct
a rudimentary risk model that demonstrates how our
system could add benefit.
Let R be the natural number that represents the upper
bound on acceptable risk in a shop at any one time and
let T be the set of health tokens associated to people
currently in the shop. Then
X
r=
t

IV. ATTACKS AND A NALYSIS
In this section we first define numerous attack vectors
against our system and then analyse their effect and
possible mitigations.
A. Attack Vectors
All distributed systems are susceptible to Sybil attacks
[4] in which an adversary impersonates another user or
otherwise exploits the lack of binding between users
and credentials. After Sybil attacks, we also consider
adversaries who wish to learn about a user based on
observing their behaviour or demanding to see their
health token. We define a compromised health token to
be one that is used without user consent.
a) Sybil-type A: A Sybil-type A adversary attempts
to disrupt a service provider by repeatedly presenting a
set of compromised tokens to a service provider. For
example, if the adversary presents tokens that indicate a
high level of risk, the service provider may be forced to
close or act more cautiously.
b) Sybil-type B: A Sybil-type B adversary builds
on the type A adversary. Here the adversary attempts
to use a set of compromised tokens to attack multiple service providers. For example, an adversary could
corrupt real user’s phones with malware that overwrites
the original certificate to the one of their choosing. The
adversary’s goal here could be to change government
policy by artificially altering the aggregated transmission
risk at a national scale.
c) Queue Observer: This adversary is interested
in inferring a persons true transmission risk status by
monitoring when they are allowed (and when they are
refused) entry to services. We assume this adversary may
be interested in monitoring a user over a long period of
time.

t∈T

is a measure of the total transmission risk in the shop2 .
We let tn and te denote the token value of the next
customer (in the queue to enter) and the exiting customer
(the next customer to exit the shop). The next customer
is let if and only if r − ie + in ≤ R.
Moreover it may be beneficial to aggregate the cumulative level of risk the shop has been exposed to over the
course of a day or week — this may help guide when
cleaning is most required, for example.
We reiterate that the risk model we have presented
here is primitive. The method however could be abstracted to any risk model that is based on the customers
token value. For example, it could take into account the
size of the shop, the current staffing levels, or even the
current spatial distribution of customers in the shop.
The example above suggests the utility of health
tokens in adding a net positive benefit to society. Comparable uses could be monitoring the risk of crowds at
sports stadiums and classes in schools.
Limits on Use Cases - Identity-Binding: We identify
that not all situations are suitable for health tokens.
Consider the example of filling seats on an aeroplane
based on transmission risk. The objective function is illdefined however the airline would likely want to limit
risk while also filling as many seats as possible.
2 Note this has an error associated with it due to the randomness of
the health tokens introduced in the Issue phase.

3

d) Malicious Service Provider: This adversary is
interested in learning a user’s true transmission risk
status and potentially discriminating against them based
on its value. While it is likely such an adversary will be
a service provider, our definition also however includes
unauthorised or coercive peers.

party computation protocol might be used to do so in
a privacy-preserving way.
While it is often desirable to avoid using a central
authority where possible, it is likely that method (2) will
both involve too large a communication overhead and
place too much burden on service providers. Therefore
in this work we only consider solutions using method (1).
Naor et al. [15] present a secure method to find ‘heavy
hitting passwords’ (i.e. commonly used passwords) using
a central authority. This solution can also be applied
here to allow a central authority to learn, in a privacypreserving way, if there are any health tokens with
an unreasonably large usage across multiple service
providers. We outline the details of this approach for
this application in Appendix A.
c) Queue Observer: No adversary can be confident
of knowing the users true transmission risk status because the randomised response that is applied to each
health token provides plausible deniability. However,
an adversary who tracks a user across multiple service
providers could learn (with a degree of uncertainty) a
users token value.
To stop an adversary that observes multiple queues,
service providers or policy makers could introduce batch
admission to services. With this proviso, any information
an adversary can learn by observing a user is masked by
the other users in the batch.
d) Malicious Service Provider: By definition,
health tokens are plausibly deniable and protect against
immunity-based discrimination.

B. Analysis of Attacks
When analysing the Sybil-type attacks we assume the
adversary does not have access to a large number of valid
health tokens — that is we assume they only have access
to a small number of compromised certificates which
they can use. On one hand this is reasonable as a valid
certificate is signed by H and thus cannot be forged. On
the other hand since our health tokens are not binding, a
malicious user can easily use a token that was issued to
someone else. Indeed, a malicious user could post their
health token online for others to use should they choose.
Under this informal assumption, which it is important
to debate beyond this work, we show how Sybil-type
attacks can be mitigated.
a) Sybil-type A: As our health tokens are nonbinding, an adversary may attack a service provider by
repeatedly presenting a compromised health token of
their choosing. A determined adversary may even convince many users, unsuspecting or otherwise, to present
a singular compromised token that has been distributed
online for this purpose.
To prevent this attack a service provider can simply
count the number of times each TID is seen in the period
of a day or week. In this way a limit can be imposed
on the number of times each certificate can be used over
a given period of time. For an adversary to effectively
use such an attack despite this mitigation they would
need access to a large number of signed tokens with
their desired value. In practice they would also need to
convince or trick many individuals into using them.
b) Sybil-type B: By rate-limiting the number of
uses of each token with respect each service provider,
the adversary is limited to attempting to present each
compromised token they hold the maximum number
of times and to as many different service providers as
possible. This adversary might try to alter the overall
risk aggregates across a country, or on a smaller scale
might try all the shops in a particular shopping mall or
tube station.
To prevent this more widespread attack we need to
monitor the usage of a certificate across multiple service
providers. There are at least two methods of achieving
this: (1) a central body requests and aggregates the
usage count of each health token across multiple service
providers and (2) the service providers communicate
directly with each other to learn which certificates are
being used the most — here we envisage a multi-

V. L IMITATIONS AND I MPLEMENTATION
Here we discuss the limitations of our proposed
approach and then demonstrate the practicality of our
solution by presenting the results of our open-source
implementation which can be found at [11].
A. Limitations
a) Error in aggregation: Our system perturbs a
users true transmission risk with some randomness to
produce a health token value. It is essential that health
tokens are only used when considering a large sample
of users and not for individual cases. For example,
determining if a specific user is allowed into a care
home is probably best left to a system with strong usercertificate binding such as [9].
We illustrate the error associated with our method by
calculating the average error in computing the expected
value of a health token (E[X]) for a set number of
users. First we let  = log 3, which corresponds to
outputting the correct risk status in the first step of
the underlying differential privacy protocol (as described
in Section II-B) with probability 12 , and show how the
error changes as we increase k. Second we keep k = 2

4

constant and vary  to allow for 14 , 21 and 34 chance of
outputting the truth after the first (bias) coin flip in the
underlying differential privacy protocol. We iterate the
experiments 100 times for each number of users from 1
to 500. We see that, as expected, increasing the number
of options for risk status value (increasing k) results in
a larger error, as does increasing .

their health token to service providers. It may be difficult
to anticipate, measure and correct for this bias.
d) National aggregation and reporting: In our system, service providers keep track of their local aggregate risk value and how many users have been in
their environment during a specific period. We have not
considered in this work how multiple service providers
can aggregate their results and contribute to a wider
geographical or national risk model. This is challenging because a service provider could be incentivised
to report misinformation, particularly if restrictions on
trade could be imposed as a result of reporting a high
risk measurement. While it could be difficult to verify
each service providers reporting, it would be possible to
spot providers that continually misreport relative to their
peers.
B. Implementation
We implement our system in Python using using QR
codes as a means of presenting and verifying a signed
health token. As shown in Figure 4, our prototype allows
for the generation and verification of a health token
signed using 512-bit ECDSA [3].

Fig. 2. The average error introduced by our system for a given number
of users. We let  = log (3) and plot the error for k = 2, k = 3 and
k = 4.

Fig. 4. Example token generated by our prototype.

VI. R ELATED W ORK AND C ONCLUSION
A. Related Work
To the best of our knowledge this is the first antibody certificate system that, by design, mitigates against
immunity-based discrimination. Other proposed systems
are dependant on policy and legal measures to achieve
the level of non discrimination achieved by our proposal.
In [9], the secure antibody certificate system (SecureABC) was introduced that uses a standard public-key
signature scheme to ensure the binding and authenticity
of certificates. Likewise in [6] a system composed of
W3C-standard ‘verifiable credentials’ [16], the ‘Solid’
platform for decentralised social applications [14] and
a federated consortium blockchain was developed. In
both these works however the user is strongly bound to
their certificate. In fact it is implied that certificates are
only issued to those who pass a test, thus not holding a
certificate is synonymous with not having immunity and
therefore not being immuno-privileged.
Therefore we suggest these identity-bound systems,
along with similar industry led proposals [2], [10] are
more applicable to situations where immunity-based

Fig. 3. The average error introduced by our system for a given number
of users. We let k = 2 and plot the error for  = log ( 53 ),  = log
(3),  = log (7) and k = 2.

b) No binding: As the tokens are not binding, their
misuse is harder to mitigate or track. As the Sybil-type
attacks show, it is possible that compromised certificates
could be used maliciously by adversaries. It is also
possible that a user will be incentivised to be tested
repeatedly until they get issued a more desirable health
token value; In other words a user with an undesirable
risk status may be incentivised by our system to test
again (or to bribe their healthcare provider).
c) User behaviour: We cannot fully anticipate the
impact of our system on user behaviour. For example,
users assigned high risk values may choose not to present

5

discrimination can be justified. For example for workers
in a care home and the identity-binding use cases we
considered in Section III.
a) Conclusion: In this work we were motivated to
develop a tool for measuring the viral transmission risk
of groups of users which, by design, mitigates immunitybased discrimination. While there are a number of limitations to our proposed health tokens, we have shown that
in identity-free situations our approach has the potential
to have a net-positive benefit on society.

A PPENDIX
Naor et al. [15] present a solution to the problem
of identifying commonly used passwords – we propose
their method for out situation. Similarly to identifying
password outliers with respect to their frequency of use,
we require a method to identify health tokens that are
used so frequently that adversarial behaviour is indicated.
Here we present the original solution of Naor et al. for
completeness. A central authority can securely aggregate
the count of health token TIDs as follows:
1) For each health token, V hashes the TID, vj =
H(TIDj ) — assume this is an l-bit string, in
practice we suggest l = 32.
2) The server sends V a uniformly distributed l-bit
string rj .
3) V sends back the one bit value of the inner product
of vj and rj over GF[2], denoted as hvj , rj i.
4) The server keeps a table T[x] of 2l counters, corresponding to all possible l-bit values x (initialized
to zero on system setup).
5) For every value of x if hx, rj i = hvj , rj i the corresponding counter is incremented by one, otherwise
it is decreased by one. Equality holds for exactly
half of the values.
Let the total number of service providers that ran the
protocol be N and p be the frequency of the hash value
x. The expected numbers of increments and decrements
(1−p)
respectively. The expected
are N (p+ (1−p)
2 ) and N
2
value of the counter is E(T [x]) = pN . For a threshold
frequency τ , the server publishes all x values such as
T [x] > τ N . Each V checks if H(TID) is in the
published hash values list. V can then act accordingly,
either by discarding the certificate in the aggregation, or
refusing entry to the user.
While this method can be used to detect Sybil-type B
attacks there are a number of limitations to be considered. We consider three here: (1) To be practical we must
efficiently increment and decrement all the counters with
each certificate use, the naive approach to this requires a
significant amount of memory and computational power.
(2) A certificate hash will only be suspicious if, for n
the total number√of times any certificate is used, that one
hash is used Ω( n) times. This could allow an attacker
√
to use each of many certificates slightly fewer than n
times without (most of their certificates) being detected.
(3) An adversarial service provider could submit false
reports of certificates with the intention of causing false
alarms, this could result in legitimate users having their
certificates invalidated due to a hash collision with one
of those certificates.

R EFERENCES
[1] WHO Scientific Brief - ”Immunity passports” in the context of COVID-19. Online, Accessed 9 May 2020, Available at: https://www.who.int/news-room/commentaries/detail/
immunity-passports-in-the-context-of-covid-19.
[2] CERTUS - A novel and simple solution for certificate issuers,
holders and verifiers. Online, Accessed 19 May 2020, Available
at: https://www.certusdoc.com/.
[3] Digital Signature Standard (DSS) (FIPS 186-4). Technical report,
National Institute of Standards and Technology, July 2013.
[4] J. Douceur. The sybil attack. In Proceedings of 1st International
Workshop on Peer-to-Peer Systems (IPTPS), January 2002.
[5] M. Eisenstadt, M. Ramachandran, N. Chowdhury, A. Third, and
J. Domingue. Covid-19 antibody test / vaccination certification:
There’s an app for that. IEEE Open Journal of Engineering in
Medicine and Biology, pages 1–1, 2020.
[6] Marc Eisenstadt, Manoharan Ramachandran, Niaz Chowdhury,
Allan Third, and John Domingue. Covid-19 antibody test /
vaccination certification: There’s an app for that. IEEE Open
Journal of Engineering in Medicine and Biology, 2020.
[7] Estonia tests first digital immunity passports for workplaces.
E&T editorial staff, Online, Accessed 02 June 2020, Available
at: https://eandt.theiet.org/content/articles/2020/05/estonia-testsfirst-digital-immunity-passports-for-workplaces/, May 2020.
[8] P. Fine, K. Eames, and D. L. Heymann. “Herd Immunity”: A
Rough Guide. Clinical Infectious Diseases, April 2011.
[9] Chris Hicks, David Butler, Carsten Maple, and Jon Crowcroft.
SecureABC: Secure antibody certificates for COVID-19. CoRR,
abs/2005.11833, 2020, (Currently under review).
[10] ImmuPass - A simple and secure certificate of COVID-19 immunity. Available at: https://www.immupass.org.
[11] Implementation available at: https://github.com/alan-turinginstitute/DPHT.
[12] Ada Lovelace Institute. Rapid evidence review: Exit through
the App Store. Online, Accessed 20 May 2020, Available
at:
https://www.adalovelaceinstitute.org/wp-content/uploads/
2020/04/Ada-Lovelace-Institute-Rapid-Evidence-Review-Exitthrough-the-App-Store-April-2020-2.pdf.
[13] N. Kofler and F. Baylis. Ten reasons why immunity passports
are a bad idea. Nature, 581(7809):379–381, May 2020.
[14] E. Mansour, A. V. Sambra, S. Hawke, M. Zereba, S. Capadisli,
A. Ghanem, A. Aboulnaga, and T. Berners-Lee. A demonstration
of the solid platform for social web applications. In WWW
(Companion Volume), pages 223–226. ACM, 2016.
[15] M. Naor, B. Pinkas, and E. Ronen. How to (not) share a
password: Privacy preserving protocols for finding heavy hitters
with adversarial behavior. In ACM Conference on Computer and
Communications Security, pages 1369–1386. ACM, 2019.
[16] M Sporny, D Longley, and D Chadwick. Verifiable credentials
data model 1.0. W3C Candidate Recommendation, March, 2019.
[17] S. L. Warner. Randomized response: A survey technique for
eliminating evasive answer bias. Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 60(309):63–69, 1965. PMID: 12261830.

6

