arXiv:2006.01968v2 [q-bio.MN] 22 Jun 2020

Identifying Human Interactors of SARS-CoV-2
Proteins and Drug Targets for COVID-19 using
Network-Based Label Propagation
Jeffrey N. Law1 , Kyle Akers1 , Nure Tasnina2 , Catherine M. Della
Santina3 , Meghana Kshirsagar4 , Judith Klein-Seetharaman5 , Mark
Crovella6 , Padmavathy Rajagopalan7 , Simon Kasif3 , and T. M. Murali2,*
1

Interdisciplinary Ph.D. Program in Genetics, Bioinformatics, and
Computational Biology, Blacksburg, VA, USA
2
Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA
3
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Boston University, Boston, MA,
USA
4
AI for Good Lab, Microsoft, Redmond, WA, USA
5
Department of Chemistry, Colorado School of Mines, Golden, CO USA
6
Department of Computer Science, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA
7
Department of Chemical Engineering, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA,
USA
*
Corresponding author. Email: murali@cs.vt.edu

Motivated by the critical need to identify new treatments for COVID19, we present a genome-scale, systems-level computational approach
to prioritize drug targets based on their potential to regulate hostvirus interactions or their downstream signaling targets. We adapt
and specialize network label propagation methods to this end. We
demonstrate that these techniques can predict human-SARS-CoV2 protein interactors with high accuracy. The top-ranked proteins
1

that we identify are enriched in host biological processes that are potentially coopted by the virus. We present cases where our methodology generates promising insights such as the potential role of
HSPA5 in viral entry. We highlight the connection between endoplasmic reticulum stress, HSPA5, and anti-clotting agents. We
identify tubulin proteins involved in ciliary assembly that are targeted by anti-mitotic drugs. Drugs that we discuss are already undergoing clinical trials to test their efficacy against COVID-19. Our
prioritized list of human proteins and drug targets is available as
a general resource for biological and clinical researchers who are
repositioning existing and approved drugs or developing novel therapeutics as anti-COVID-19 agents.

Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic has created many clinical, economic, and societal challenges
world-wide. It has galvanized scientists to develop vaccines and drugs for the disease (1,2).
Existing antiviral agents such as remdesivir to treat COVID-19 are already in clinical
trials (3). These drugs interfere with different aspects of the viral life cycle, including
fusion with the cell membrane, proteolysis, translation, and RNA replication (4). Since a
virus must necessarily co-opt host cellular processes in order to replicate, an alternative
attractive approach is to develop or repurpose drugs that target human proteins that the
virus requires. To this end, a global, whole-genome view of host-pathogen interactions
is likely to be valuable (5), especially in the case of SARS-CoV-2, given the size of its
genome and the complexity of the observed clinical and epidemiological manifestations of
COVID-19 (6).
2

(a)
26 SARS-CoV-2 proteins
333 Human interactors

(b)

STRING Network

Drug-Target
Network

Validation

Diﬀusion Analysis

Network propagation score
High
Low

Supervised Learning
Network Propagation

(c)
Functional Enrichment,
Drug Targets

Figure 1: Our analysis framework comprising of (a) data integration: experimentally
determined host-pathogen network, genome-scale functional linkage network, function
ontologies, and drug-target databases; (b) computational analysis: network propagation,
validation and statistical analysis, and network diffusion tracking; and (c) functional
enrichment and literature-based examination of promising protein targets and drugs.

3

In this work, we present a strategy based on network-based functional label prediction
to prioritize human proteins as drug targets and to highlight existing, approved drugs as
anti-COVID-19 agents (Figure 1). We base our computational approach on the hypothesis that human proteins belonging to complexes or signaling pathways that are proximal
to human interactors of viral proteins are potentially good targets for inhibition. Accordingly, we take advantage of a recently published dataset of human proteins that physically
interact with SARS-CoV-2 (7). These SARS-CoV-2 interactors are entry points to host
cellular processes that may be hijacked by viral infection.
Although these viral interactors are crucial starting points, we note that the proteomics
pipeline used to discover them (7) may not capture in vivo conditions and tissue-specific
interactions, leading to false negatives. Therefore, to prioritize additional human proteins, we formulate identification of downstream interactors of SARS-CoV-2 as a network
labeling problem capable of tolerating uncertainty in its inputs. Specifically, given the
known human protein interactors of SARS-CoV-2 proteins and a whole-genome protein
interaction network, we use network propagation algorithms to predict other potential
SARS-CoV-2 interactors. We first demonstrate with that this approach predicts known
SARS-CoV-2 interactors with high accuracy. We further analyze highly-ranking proteins
computed by these methods to identify statistically-enriched biological cellular processes
and pathways that may be impacted by SARS-CoV-2. Additionally, we integrate drugprotein interactions into this framework to propose drugs that may be repositioned to
treat COVID-19. We present several case studies that illustrate how drugs that target
highly-ranked proteins may inhibit the virus in different stages of its life cycle. Some of
these drugs are already in clinical trials for COVID-19. We emphasize that the drugs discussed in this work are in silico predictions that require further experimental and clinical
validation before they can be used as treatments for COVID-19.
4

Results
We took inspiration from the success of network propagation in diverse applications in
systems biology (8). Our underlying hypothesis was that network propagation was a reasonable mechanism for predicting SARS-CoV-2 interactors. To test this hypothesis, we
conducted the following validation. For each interactor of a SARS-CoV-2 protein (7), we
computed the propagation score (also called “diffusion score” or “heat” in the literature)
treating all the other interactors of SARS-CoV-2 as sources. To this end, we applied
the Regularized Laplacian (RL) (9), a widely-used technique for semi-supervised learning
(“Methods”). These scores were significantly larger than the scores of randomly-selected
nodes (Figure 2(a); p-value of 2.1 × 10−78 for the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, Table S1).
This trend held true for other viruses as well, e.g., SARS-CoV, HIV-1, and HSV-1 (Figure 2(a); p-values of 3.7 × 10−28 , 2.1 × 10−106 , and 1.1 × 10−49 , respectively), indicating
that network proximity may be a general property of human proteins that bind to a virus.

Prioritization of Potential SARS-CoV-2 Interactors
These results encouraged us to prioritize putative human protein interactors of SARSCoV-2. In addition to RL, we used GeneMania (GM) (10), a variant of RL that has been
used for finding associations between GO terms and proteins, and SinkSource (SS) (11), a
related approach previously used to prioritize human proteins that are dependency factors
for HIV. We also used two off-the-shelf classifiers: a Support Vector Machine with a linear
kernel (SVM), and Logistic Regression (LR). For these classifiers we used the adjacency
vector of each protein in the human interaction network as its feature vector. Finally, we
tested Local, a method which sets each node’s score to be the weighted average of the
scores of its neighbors.
We evaluated the performance of these algorithms using 5-fold cross validation of the
5

40
20
0

100
50
0

0.008 0.016 0.024 0.032

RL Propagation Scores

1.0

1.0

0.9

0.9

0.8

0.8

0.7

50
25
0

0.012

0.015

0.030

0.5
GM

SS

SVM

LogReg

Local

180
120
60
0

0.060

0.005 0.010 0.015 0.020

RL Propagation Scores

1.0

0.7

0.5
RL

0.045

HSV-1 Interactors
Random Proteins

240

RL Propagation Scores

0.6

0.6

(c)

0.008

75

RL Propagation Scores

AUPRC

AUROC

(b)

0.004

HIV-1 Interactors
Random Proteins

100

Probability Density

60

SARS-CoV Interactors
Random Proteins

150

Early Precision @0.1 Recall

SARS-CoV-2 Interactors
Random Proteins

Probability Density

80

Probability Density

Probability Density

(a)

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5

RL

GM

SS

(d)

SVM

LogReg

RL

Local

GM

SS

SVM

LogReg

20

cilium assembly

Organelle
Organization

Local

microtubule nucleation
18

Golgi organization
rRNA processing
tRNA export from nucleus

16

Transcription/
Translation

viral transcription
cotranslational protein
targeting to membrane
ribosomal large subunit biogenesis
ribonucleoprotein complex
subunit organization
NADH dehydrogenase complex assembly
mitochondrial ATP synthesis
Respiration
coupled proton transport
protein import into mitochondrial matrix

12

10

ubiquitin-dependent ERAD pathway

8

6

Rab protein signal transduction

4

bic_8

bic_7

bic_6

bic_5

bic_4

bic_3

bic_2

Kr

zinc ion transport
RL

Other

protein folding
protein demannosylation
protein N-linked glycosylation
via asparagine
oligosaccharide-lipid intermediate
biosynthetic process
GPI anchor biosynthetic process

bic_1

PTMs

protein folding in ER

SVM

ER Stress

-log(pval)

14

2

Figure 2: Network propagation results. (a) Distribution of network propagation scores
among human interactors of a virus (solid curves) compared to distribution of scores
of random proteins (dotted curves). The four plots are for SARS-CoV-2, SARS-CoV,
HIV-1, and HSV-1, respectively. Each curve is a Gaussian kernel density estimate of the
distribution. (b) Comparison of AUPRC, AUROC, and precision at 0.1 recall across six
algorithms. The positive:negative ratio is one. The dashed line indicates the score for
a random predictor. ‘LogReg’ is an abbreviation for logistic regression. (c) Heat map
displaying contribution of each SARS-CoV-2 interactor to top-ranking proteins from RL.
Ellipses highlight manually selected biclusters. Each bicluster includes a set of SARSCoV-2 interactors that contribute high scores to a set of top-ranking proteins. We used
Morpheus https://software.broadinstitute.org/morpheus, to generate this figure. (d) Heat
map summarizing GO biological process terms enriched in top ranking proteins from
RL and SVM, the biclusters highlighted in (c), and human interactors of SARS-CoV-2
proteins (indicated as ‘Kr’). We manually6 grouped the terms into broader categories
shown in bold text. The color of a group matches the colors in Figure 3. A gray cell
indicates a p-value larger than 0.01.

positive examples (human interactors of SARS-CoV-2 proteins). We used three measures
of performance: the area under the receiver-operator characteristic curve (AUROC), the
area under the precision-recall curve (AUPRC), and the precision at a recall of 0.1 (early
precision). The third measure permitted us to estimate the accuracy of the methods for
high-confidence proteins, which are likely to be the basis for experimental validation.
RL achieved a median AUROC of 0.76, a median AUPRC of 0.75, and an early
precision of 0.89, values which were approximately 1.5–1.8 times superior to those of a
random predictor. SVM and logistic regression achieved somewhat lower scores than RL.
We obtained these results when we sampled as many negative examples as positive (see
“Methods”). When we increased the sample size to five times or ten times the number
of positives, RL continued to achieve the highest measures of performance (Figure S1).
Local was consistently the worst-performing method, confirming the relative superiority
of network propagation for this problem.
The strength of this cross-validation performance encouraged us to apply these methods to the full set of positive examples to rank the remaining proteins in the STRING
network. We then used a stratified sampling approach to estimate the statistical significance of the resulting node scores (see “Methods”). For subsequent analyses, we selected
one network propagation method (RL) and one supervised classifier (SVM). We chose
RL because it performed the best in our evaluations, particularly with respect to early
precision (Figure 2(b)). We chose SVM since it also had very good performance in crossvalidation. Moreover, the protein rankings computed by the two methods were fairly
dissimilar (Spearman’s correlation of 0.4 and Jaccard index of 0.3 for the top-300 ranks;
Section S2.1). We considered the top 332 predictions of RL and SVM that were statistically significant at p ≤ 0.05 (Table S2), i.e., we selected as many top-ranking proteins as
the number of experimentally-determined human proteins that interact with SARS-CoV-2
7

proteins (7). We selected this many proteins reasoning that that each of the SARS-CoV-2
interactors would themselves interact with or otherwise affect at least one other human
protein.
We refer to these as “top-ranking proteins” below. We reasoned that due to their
low overlap, using the two sets of proteins identified by RL and by SVM would result
in broader coverage of human cellular processes and provide additional insights into the
potential effects of SARS-CoV-2 as compared to using the results of just one method.

Enriched Biological Processes
We tested for enrichment of Gene Ontology (GO) biological processes (Benjamini-Hochberg
corrected p-value ≤ 0.01) among the top-ranking proteins from RL and from SVM, as
well as in the interactors of SARS-CoV-2 (“Methods”). Since parent-child relationships
in the GO cause many closely related terms to be enriched, we used a heuristic to select
a non-redundant set of terms that were enriched in at least one of these sets of proteins
(“Methods” and Section S2.4). While some terms were common to all three sets of proteins, there were many that were enriched only in our predictions (Figure 2(d), Table S3),
indicating that network propagation successfully identified specific cellular processes involving proteins proximal to, but not directly interacting with, viral proteins. We observed
that GO terms related to transcription and translation (second group in Figure 2(d)) were
enriched in the SVM’s top-ranking proteins but not in RL’s list.
We sought to gain a deeper understanding of the trace of evidence linking a top-ranked
protein to an experimentally-determined SARS-CoV-2 interactor. To this end, we computed the contribution of each SARS-CoV-2 interactor to every top-ranking prediction
computed by RL (“Methods”). Visual examination of this matrix (Figure 2(c), Table S4)
revealed the presence of numerous biclusters (numbered ellipses in Figure 2(c)). Each

8

bicluster contained a subset of SARS-CoV-2 interactors that made high contributions to
the scores of a subset of top-ranking proteins. The GO biological processes enriched in
the top-ranking proteins in each bicluster had a high correspondence with the terms enriched in the full set of top-ranking proteins (Figure 2(d)). Thus, these biclusters provide
useful information on which human proteins the virus may use as “gateways” to target
host cellular processes. We further study these biclusters and the largest contributors to
individual top-ranking proteins in Section S2.3.
Our top-ranking proteins were enriched in five broad categories of GO biological processes: organelle organization, transcription and translation, respiration, ER stress, and
post-translational modifications (Figure 2(d)). In addition, two processes did not belong
to any of these categories. Figure 3 provides a high-level view of these GO terms and
their connections in the STRING network to SARS-CoV-2 interactors and SARS-CoV-2
proteins. In the rest of this section, we examine the relevance of some of these processes
to the viral cell cycle. In subsequent sections, we consider other enriched processes from
the viewpoint of identifying promising drug targets.
One group of enriched terms are related to protein translation (green nodes in Figure 3)
including “rRNA processing” (p-value 3.96 × 10−26 for SVM and 0.05 for SARS-CoV-2
interactors), “ribonucleoprotein complex subunit organization” (p-value 1.75 × 10−5 for
SVM and 0.48 for SARS-CoV-2 interactors), and “ribosomal large subunit biogenesis” (pvalue 1.12 × 10−10 for SVM and 0.69 for SARS-CoV-2 interactors). RNA viruses appear
to reduce protein synthesis in host cells, including in the case of SARS-CoV (12). A
recent proteomics study that infected Caco-2 cells with SARS-CoV-2 (13) revealed that
while global translation rates in host cells exhibited only minor changes, the levels of
a significant number of human proteins involved in translation were highly positively
correlated with levels of key viral proteins. This study further showed that translation
9

nsp14

nsp12

nsp8

nsp4

orf10 nsp10

nsp6

Figure 3: Overview of connections between SARS-CoV-2 interactors and the GO biological
process terms enriched in the top-ranking proteins. Each circle is a GO term shown in
Figure 2(d); the color of the GO term corresponds to its group in Figure 2(d) and its
size corresponds to the number of annotated top-ranking proteins. Each box with a red
border is a SARS-CoV-2 protein (the box labels). The box contains one or more human
proteins that interact with that viral protein. A viral protein may label more than one
box. A gray edge connects a red box to a GO term. The width of the edge is proportional
to the fraction of the human interactors of the viral protein that are connected in the
STRING network to the top-ranking proteins annotated to the term (considering only
STRING edge weights ≥ 900). We do not show edges with a fraction < 0.05, except for
the edge between orf9c and “zinc ion transport” (0.026). If a viral interactor is annotated
to a GO term, its color is the same as that of the GO term.

10

inhibitors prevented SARS-CoV-2 replication. The authors concluded that SARS-CoV-2
may increase production of proteins involved in the translation machinery components so
as to compensate for inhibition of translation in host cells.
The GO term “viral transcription” is enriched in top-ranking SVM proteins (p-value
3.44×10−19 ) but not in SARS-CoV-2 interactors (p-value 0.05). The proteins involved are
primarily nucleoporins and members of the large ribosomal subunit. An overwhelming
fraction of the annotations to this GO term come from the Reactome pathway “Viral
Messenger RNA Synthesis” (R-HSA-168325). This pathway describes how the influenza
A virus co-opts the host machinery to transcribe its mRNAs. Thus the enrichment of this
GO term in the top-ranking SVM proteins may indicate a similar exploitation of the host
by SARS-CoV-2.
N-linked glycosylation is an important post-translational protein modification that is
conserved across eukaryortes (14). It involves the attachment of an oligosaccharide to
an asparagine residue of a protein (14). The process takes place in two major stages.
The first step involves the biosynthesis of lipid-linked oligosaccharides (14) corresponding
to the GO term “oligosaccharide-lipid intermediate biosynthetic process” (Figure 4(a)),
which is enriched in top-ranking RL proteins (p-value 1.77 × 10−9 ) but not in SARS-CoV2 interactors (p-value 0.35). In the second step, oligosaccharyltransferases enable the
transfer of the oligosaccharide to the asparagine residue. These proteins are annotated to
the GO term “protein N-linked glycosylation via asparagine”, which is enriched in topranking RL proteins (p-value 2.06 × 10−7 ) but not in SARS-CoV-2 interactors (p-value
0.2).
Several viruses can exploit the host glycosylation pathway to modify viral proteins in
order to enter host cells and evade the immune response (15). An extensive glycan shield
that covers the S protein in human coronavirus NL63 (HCoV-NL63) masks the protein
11

(b)

(a)

Top-ranking
human protein
Drug

Human interactor
of SARS-CoV-2
SARS-CoV-2
protein

Drug under
COVID-19 trial
Human PPI
Drug target

(d)

(c)

(e)

Human PPI with
interactor of
SARS-CoV-2
SARS-CoV-2 Human PPI

(g)

(f)

Figure 4: Networks of the top-ranking proteins for RL (green nodes) that are annotated
to the enriched terms (a) “oligosaccharide-lipid intermediate biological process” and “protein N-linked glycosylation via asparagine,” (b) “GPI anchor biosynthetic process,” (c)
“protein import into mitochondrial matrix,” (d) “protein demannosylation,” (e) “protein
folding in ER,” (f) “cilium assembly,” or (g) “NADH dehydrogenase complex assembly.”
The number below the name of a green protein is its rank in RL. A rectangle encompasses
proteins (top-ranking or SARS-CoV-2 interactors) annotated to the respective term. Proteins discussed in the text are highlighted with a red border. For each top-ranking protein,
we also display its connections with neighboring SARS-CoV-2 interactors. We removed
STRING edges with weight < 700 to simplify the visualization. In (d), we limited proteins
to those that are the target of an approved or investigational drug. In (f), we removed
drugs that promote clotting.

12

surface, thus limiting access to neutralizing antibodies (16). The receptor-binding and
fusion-peptide domains of the S protein (fusion protein) in SARS-CoV-2, SARS-CoV, and
MERS-CoV contain N-glycans (17,18). It appears that the N-linked glycan modifications
of SARS and MERS CoV S proteins are extensive but do not form as effective a shield
as in viruses such as HIV-1 (17). Drugs that target host N-linked glycosylation pathways
have been proposed as treatments for COVID-19 (19).
The term “(GPI)-anchor biosynthetic process” is significantly enriched in the topranking proteins from RL (p-value 4 × 10−4 ) but not in the human interactors of SARSCoV-2 (p-value 0.21). The proteins prioritized by our methods (Figure 4(b)) are either
components of the Gycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) transamidase complex or transfer
GPI to proteins during the synthesis of GPI anchors; these anchors tether proteins to
lipid bilayers (20). GPI-anchored proteins are often associated with lipid rafts, which
are microdomains in plasma membranes that are enriched with cholesterol and sphingolipids (20). Lipid rafts play a major role in viral entry, assembly, replication, and
budding. They are known to be involved in the entry of SARS-CoV into host cells (21).
Thus, the proteins involved in (GPI)-anchor biosynthesis that we prioritize may provide
a deeper understanding on SARS-CoV-2 entry into host cells.
Several GO terms related to cellular respiration (blue nodes in Figure 3) were enriched
in the top-ranking proteins, e.g., “protein import into mitochondrial matrix” (Figure 4(c);
p-value of 1.21 × 10−8 for RL and 0.3 for SARS-CoV-2 interactors). Many of the proteins annotated to this term are translocases of the inner and outer membranes of the
mitochondrion. These proteins comprise complexes that transport proteins across the
mitochondrial membranes. “NADH dehydrogenase complex assembly” is a related GO
biological process (Figure 4(d)), which has a p-value of 2.8 × 10−12 for RL in contrast to
a p-value of 0.035 in SARS-CoV-2 interactors. NADH dehydrogenase is the first complex
13

in the mitochondrial respiratory chain. Viral infections have been proposed to cause the
Warburg effect that is frequently associated with cancer (22). Due to oxygen deprivation,
cells switch from respiration to glycolysis. We note that a recent genome-wide CRISPR
screen for human genes that regulate SARS-CoV-2 infection (23) identified several members of the respiratory chain as “anti-viral”, i.e., the knockout of the gene sensitizes the
host cell to virus-induced cell death. Thus, the GO terms enriched in our results may
suggest mechanisms by which SARS-CoV-2 modulates cellular respiration in the host to
promote infection.

The Role of Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress, HSPA5, and AntiClotting Drugs
We now describe the connection unearthed by our analysis between interactors of SARSCoV-2, proteins involved in endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress (orange nodes in Figure 3,
and anti-clotting drugs . The GO biological process “protein demannosylation”, the
removal of a mannose group from a protein, is enriched in top-ranking RL proteins (pvalue 4.48 × 10−8 ) but not in SARS-CoV-2 interactors (p-value 0.08). Key top-ranking
proteins in this network (Figure 4(e)) include MAN1B1 and UGGT1, which are localized
to the ER. Enveloped viruses have been shown to hijack the host cell’s ER for survival
and replication, thereby causing ER-associated degradation (ERAD) (24). MAN1B1 plays
a role in protein quality control as well as in their degradation (25). The utilization of
UGGT1 by enteroviruses leads to increased viral replication and higher pathogenicity (26).
Viral protein Orf8 interacts with human OS9 (an ER degradation protein), which
in turn interacts with top-ranking protein EDEM1 (ER degradation-enhancing alphamannosidase-like protein 1). EDEM1 controls the degradation of mis-folded glycoproteins
and is a key player in ERAD (27) When EDEM1 is cleared from the ER, it is transported

14

out of the organelle in nanoscale vesicles that are called EDEMosmomes. Coronavirusess
such as the mouse hepatitis virus subsequently hijack these organelles and remodel them
to form double membrane vesicles (DMVs) (28). DMVs are widely used by viruses,
including coronaviruses, to promote viral replication (29).
The GO biological process “protein folding in endoplasmic reticulum” was also enriched in the top-ranking proteins (p-value 2.29 × 10−7 for RL and 0.28 for interactors
of SARS-CoV-2). Viral protein nsp9 interacts with several human nucleoporins (NUP54,
NUP62, NUP88 and NUP214) (7), which in turn interact with heat shock protein HSPA5
in the STRING network (Figure 4(f)). HSPA5, also referred to as glucose regulated protein (GRP78) or immunoglobulin binding protein (BiP) in the literature, is evolutionarily
conserved from prokaryotes to humans (30). It has a repertoire of functions associated
with ER stress response. HSPA5 is usually localized in the ER. When the ER is stressed,
HSPA5 can translocate to the cell surface, the nucleus and mitochondria (31, 32). On
the cell surface, HSPA5 plays a multi-functional role in cell proliferation, cell viability,
apoptosis, and regulation of innate and adaptive immunity (32, 33).
HSPA5 has been proposed as a universal target for human diseases (34). It has increasingly well-documented essential interactions and activities during viral infections. In
particular, the role of HSPA5 in viral entry and pathogenesis has been widely investigated. As a cell surface protein, HSPA5 has been reported to play an important role
in viral entry (35, 36). SARS-CoV-2 infection has been shown to lead to ER stress and
the up-regulation of HSPA5 (35, 36). The S protein of SARS-CoV-2 can induce transcriptional activation of HSPA5 (36). This protein can serve as a point of attachment
for both MERS-COV and bat coronavirus (bCOV HKU9) (37). Both Zika virus and
Japanese encephalitis virus use HSPA5 to prevent apoptosis and to help in viral replication (38). A recent molecular docking study has predicted HSPA5 as a potential receptor
15

for the SARS-CoV S protein (39). Based on its observed expression in vitro in airway
epithelial cells, it has been suggested that HSPA5 may serve as an additional receptor
for SARS-CoV-2 in these cells (40). Based on our network-based analysis and support
in the literature, we hypothesize that HSPA5 may serve as a co-receptor, a point of viral
attachment, or aid in viral entry of SARS-CoV-2.
Blood hypercoagulability is reported to be common among COVID-19 patients (41).
We now present the linkage between the “protein folding in ER” network (Figure 4(f)) and
coagulation. We also suggest how anti-coagulant drugs may function within the context of
COVID-19. SARS-CoV-2 protein Orf8 interacts with human hypoxia up-regulated protein
1 (HYOU1). HYOU1 (also known as GRP170) plays a cytoprotective role in response to
oxygen deprivation (30). In addition to HSPA5, HYOU1 interacts with calnexin (CANX)
and calreticulin (CALR), both of which are chaperone proteins found in the ER (42).
HSPA5, CANX and CALR act as protein chaperones for pro-coagulant proteins such as
Factor V and Factor VIII. Once Factor VIII is secreted, it binds to another pro-coagulant
protein von Willebrand factor (vWF) to prevent degradation of clots (43). Although
Factor V, Factor VIII, and vWF are not among the top-ranking proteins and thus do not
appear in Figure 4(f), this network is suggestive of mechanisms that SARS-CoV-2 may
use to cause abnormal blood coagulation.
Anti-coagulant drugs that interact with HSPA5, CANX or CALR include Tenecteplase,
a third generation plasminogen activating enzyme and the investigational drug Lanoteplase, which is a serine protease that binds to fibrin leading to the formation of plasmin (44), an enzyme that breaks clots. Lanoteplase is a second-generation derivative of
alteplase, and a third generation derivative of recombinant plasminogen. It is notable that
there is a clinical trial for Alteplase (ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT04357730) to test its effectiveness in treating COVID-19. Calcium citrate, a known anti-coagulant agent also interacts
16

with CANX and CALR (45). Aspirin, also present in (Figure 4(f)), binds to and inhibits
the ATPase activity of HSPA5 (46). A clinical trial (ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT04363840)
is testing whether early treatment of COVID-19 patients with aspirin and vitamin D can
inhibit the production of blood clots and decrease rates of hospitalization.

Cilium Assembly and Tubulin-Modulating Drugs
GO biological processes related to cilia were significantly enriched in the top-ranking
predictions RL and SVM predictions (yellow nodes in Figure 4(g), e.g., “cilium assembly,” p-value 9.16 × 10−52 for RL) but not in the human interactors of SARS-CoV-2
(p-value 0.31). Many proteins annotated to this term belong to the tubulin family, which
are components of microtubules. The SARS-CoV-2 M protein binds to two γ-tubulins
(TUBGCP2 and TUBGCP3), which interact with several α- and β-tubulins among the
top 332 predictions (Figure 4(g)). Microtubules are polymers that provide shape and
structure to eukaryotic cells and are necessary in cell transport and cell division, among
other functions (47). α- and β-tubulins compose microtubule filaments, while γ-tubulins
connect them to the microtubule organizing center.
Viruses commonly utilize microtubules for cellular entry, intra-cellular trafficking, and
exit from cells (48). For instance, the S protein of human α-coronavirus interacts with
tubulin α and β chains (49), suggesting that tubulin may be involved in the transport and
localization of the S protein and its assembly into virions (49). Relevant to SARS-CoV-2,
microtubules are the primary structural component of cilia, which line epithelial cells in
the respiratory tract and are responsible for the transport of mucus out of cells (50). The
ACE2 receptor that SARS-CoV-2 uses to enter cells appears to be expressed primarily
on the cilia of respiratory tract epithelial cells (51, 52), further implicating microtubules
in viral infection. The combination of high expression levels of ACE2 and the presence of

17

cilia may also explain the detection of the virus in multiple organs (53) and the deleterious
effect of COVID-19 on the renal, gastroinstestinal, and olfactory systems (54).
Next, we turned our attention to drugs that targeted Tubulin proteins (Figure 4(g)).
Our methods highlighted the drug Colchicine since it had the smallest p-value (0.001)
among the approved or investigational drugs that target proteins annotated to “ciliary
assembly.” Colchicine is FDA-approved for treating gout.

Its effectiveness against

COVID-19 is being tested in thirteen ongoing clinical trials (clinicaltrials.gov).
The drugs that target proteins involved in ciliary assembly (Figure 4(g)) are mostly
anti-mitotic agents, which are also being investigated as anti-cancer therapeutics. These
drugs fall into three broad classes depending on how they affect the dynamic equilibrium
between unpolymerized and polymerized tubulin (55). Colchicine, Podofilox, Vinchristine, Vinflunine, and Vinblastine destabilize microtubules by binding to specific sites
of α- and β-tubulins, thereby preventing their assembly. Albendazole, Mebendazole, and
Oxibendazole, Cabazitaxel, Milataxel, and CYT99 (a synthetic drug) inhibit tubulin polymerization thereby affecting the assembly and dynamics of microtubules and slowing cell
growth. Two other drugs in this network, Patupilone and Epithilone-D, also cause cellcycle arrest but by a different mechanism: they stabilize the tubulin network. In the case
of COVID-19, we hypothesize that drugs that destabilize the microtubule network might
prove to be more efficacious since they may prevent viral proteins from using microtubules
for intra-cellular trafficking. In addition, as in the case of Colchicine, they may act as
anti-inflammatory agents and provide additional benefits to COVID-19 patients.

Discussion
Drug development is widely acknowledged to be one of the most challenging industrial
processes requiring billions of dollars and high levels of diverse expertise to overcome pro18

found scientific and logistic barriers. There remains a high failure rate in the steps that lie
between discovering a drug target and manufacturing a drug for market (56). The COVID19 pandemic and its medical and economic impact created a new and urgent challenge for
research and pharmaceutical communities to develop a therapeutic response (4). As one
manifestation of this community response, a recent proteomics effort by a consortium of
scientists generated a first-of-a-kind interactome associated with the SARS-CoV-2-human
interface (7). This interactome inspired a large-scale drug repositioning effort targeting
the human proteins that directly interact with the virus.
This important and timely advance signals a very promising direction in drug development for COVID-19. The set of human proteins reported to interact with SARS-CoV-2
is likely to have both false positives and false negatives due to the properties of the proteomic screening pipeline used. Thus, we sought to further extend the results of this
study and significantly expand the resources available to the drug development and repositioning community through the use of state-of-the-art network prediction algorithms.
We also aimed to demonstrate that the area of function prediction using network propagation has achieved significant technological maturity since its introduction over 15 years
ago (57, 58, 59, 60). In particular, network propagation-based approaches to implement
label propagation have evolved to be relatively easy to implement and validate statistically (8), thereby making them amenable for translational research.
In this work, we take full advantage of these mature predictive platforms to significantly expand the resources available to the COVID-19 community by producing a larger
set of putative SARS-CoV-2 interactors. Many of these proteins could serve as drug targets and several are already under development or in clinical trials. Our methods predict
interactors with high accuracy. We expect this performance to be further improved by
the computational biology community building on our and other resources.
19

Our initial findings suggest existing as well as new drug targets. Several targets are
associated with ER stress, a well-documented initial response to viral infections with
lethal or severe clinical outcomes. These ER stress response proteins include a number of
well-studied heat shock proteins (e.g., HSPA9, rank 9, p-value 0.031 and HSPA5, rank 18,
p-value 0.035 for RL, Table S1). We have discussed one of them, HSPA5, as a promising
drug target. Other authors have also noted the potential for HSPA5 in the context of
COVID-19 (61). Other HSPs in our prediction list are also natural targets for drug
repositioning. More broadly, targeting ER stress is a promising direction to reduce cell
death (62).
In addition to the primary drug targets we have identified in “Results”, we point
out VDAC proteins, which are voltage-dependent anion channels (e.g., VDAC2, rank 99,
p-value 0.035 and VDAC1, rank 182, p-value 0.037 for RL) that have been associated
with mitochondria-triggered pro-apoptotic processes. We speculate that several recently
identified inhibitors of VDAC1 may be considered as therapeutic interventions to inhibit
anion transport channels. An example is DIDS, which leads to a potential decrease in
ROS-associated cell death (63).
We have noted that anumber of dehydrogenases appear among our top ranking proteins. This finding naturally promotes NADH as a promising drug target to treat SARSCoV-2 infection. NADH is also associated with metabolic health and has been studied
as an energy currency, suggesting a number of promising biological follow-ups. The Warburg effect mentioned earlier is targeted by a number of metabolic drugs, which offer new
directions for viral treatments. We also note the classical connection between elevated inflammation and metabolic slowdown associated with both aging and viral infections (64).
Thus, a combined immuno-metabolic combinatorial drug regimen might be worth considering for COVID-19 patients to prevent severe outcomes.
20

We have already begun to integrate our current techniques both with other omics
data and with orthogonal methods to predict more biologically meaningful networks and
processes impacted by the virus. In particular, single-cell RNAseq data offer many opportunities to examine cellular heterogeneity and context-specific interactions. In this
context, we note complementary efforts to repurpose drugs for SARS-CoV-2 that are
based on protein structures (65), observational studies of treatments being administered
to patients (66), and shortest paths in protein networks (67).
In summary, this paper provides a significant new resource for drug repurposing and
development to the COVID-19 community. The relatively quick turn-around of this
project and the host-virus protein interaction resource on which we have built (7), demonstrates that biological network science and network propagation (8) have achieved significant maturity, as further evidenced by their strong presence in cancer and chronic diseases.
These efficient computational methods and rapidly generated data have allowed us to develop high accuracy predictions of proteins involved in specific functional activities as an
expeditious response to this global pandemic.

References
1. J. M. Sanders, M. L. Monogue, T. Z. Jodlowski, J. B. Cutrell, JAMA - Journal of
the American Medical Association (2020).
2. M. P. Lythgoe, P. Middleton, Trends in Pharmacological Sciences (2020).
3. G. Li, E. De Clercq, Nat Rev Drug Discov 19, 149 (2020).
4. R. K. Guy, R. S. DiPaola, F. Romanelli, R. E. Dutch, Science 368, 829 (2020).
5. C. V. Forst, Infectious Disease Informatics (Springer, 2010), pp. 123–147.

21

6. M. Z. Tay, C. M. Poh, L. Rénia, P. A. MacAry, L. F. Ng, Nature Reviews Immunology
pp. 1–12 (2020).
7. D. E. Gordon, et al., Nature (2020).
8. L. Cowen, T. Ideker, B. J. Raphael, R. Sharan, Nature Reviews Genetics 18, 551
(2017).
9. D. Zhou, B. Schölkopf, ICML Workshop on Statistical Relational Learning and Its
Connections to Other Fields (2004), pp. 132–137.
10. S. Mostafavi, D. Ray, D. Warde-Farley, C. Grouios, Q. Morris, Genome Biology 9, S4
(2008).
11. T. M. Murali, M. D. Dyer, D. Badger, B. M. Tyler, M. G. Katze, PLoS computational
biology 7, e1002164+ (2011).
12. W. Kamitani, C. Huang, K. Narayanan, K. G. Lokugamage, S. Makino, Nat. Struct.
Mol. Biol. 16, 1134 (2009).
13. D. Bojkova, et al., Nature (2020).
14. J. Breitling, M. Aebi, Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 5, a013359 (2013).
15. D. J. Vigerust, V. L. Shepherd, Trends Microbiol. 15, 211 (2007).
16. A. C. Walls, et al., Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 23, 899 (2016).
17. Y. Watanabe, et al., Nat Commun 11, 2688 (2020).
18. Y. Watanabe, J. D. Allen, D. Wrapp, J. S. McLellan, M. Crispin, bioRxiv (2020).
19. S. J. Williams, E. D. Goddard-Borger, Biochem. Soc. Trans. (2020).
22

20. C. Metzner, B. Salmons, W. H. Günzburg, J. A. Dangerfield, Virology 382, 125
(2008).
21. Y. Lu, D. X. Liu, J. P. Tam, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 369, 344 (2008).
22. E. L. Sanchez, M. Lagunoff, Virology 479-480, 609 (2015).
23. J. Wei, et al., bioRxiv (2020).
24. S. E. Bettigole, L. H. Glimcher, Annu. Rev. Immunol. 33, 107 (2015).
25. Y. Wu, M. T. Swulius, K. W. Moremen, R. N. Sifers, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
100, 8229 (2003).
26. P. N. Huang, et al., PLoS Pathog. 13, e1006375 (2017).
27. Y. Yoshida, K. Tanaka, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1800, 172 (2010).
28. F. Reggiori, et al., Cell Host Microbe 7, 500 (2010).
29. G. Wolff, C. E. Melia, E. J. Snijder, M. Bárcena, Trends Microbiol. (2020).
30. A. S. Lee, Nat. Rev. Cancer 14, 263 (2014).
31. Y. Zhang, R. Liu, M. Ni, P. Gill, A. S. Lee, J. Biol. Chem. 285, 15065 (2010).
32. Y. L. Tsai, et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 115, E4245 (2018).
33. M. Ni, Y. Zhang, A. S. Lee, Biochem. J. 434, 181 (2011).
34. L. Booth, et al., J. Cell. Physiol. 230, 1661 (2015).
35. M. L. DeDiego, et al., PLoS Pathog. 7, e1002315 (2011).
36. C. P. Chan, et al., J. Virol. 80, 9279 (2006).
23

37. H. Chu, et al., J. Biol. Chem. 293, 11709 (2018).
38. H. R. Lyoo, S. Y. Park, J. Y. Kim, Y. S. Jeong, Virol. J. 12, 32 (2015).
39. I. M. Ibrahim, D. H. Abdelmalek, M. E. Elshahat, A. A. Elfiky, J. Infect. 80, 554
(2020).
40. J. A. Aguiar, et al., bioRxiv (2020).
41. E. Terpos, et al., Am. J. Hematol. (2020).
42. D. B. Williams, J. Cell. Sci. 119, 615 (2006).
43. R. J. Kaufman, S. W. Pipe, L. Tagliavacca, M. Swaroop, M. Moussalli, Blood Coagul.
Fibrinolysis 8 Suppl 2, 3 (1997).
44. M. Flemmig, M. F. Melzig, J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 64, 1025 (2012).
45. K. G. Mann, M. F. Whelihan, S. Butenas, T. Orfeo, J. Thromb. Haemost. 5, 2055
(2007).
46. W. G. Deng, K. H. Ruan, M. Du, M. A. Saunders, K. K. Wu, FASEB J. 15, 2463
(2001).
47. E. Nogales, Annu. Rev. Biochem. 69, 277 (2000).
48. U. F. Greber, M. Way, Cell 124, 741 (2006).
49. A. T. Rüdiger, et al., Virology 497, 185 (2016).
50. P. Satir, S. T. Christensen, Annu. Rev. Physiol. 69, 377 (2007).
51. I. T. Lee, et al., medRxiv (2020).

24

52. W. Sungnak, et al., Nat. Med. 26, 681 (2020).
53. V. G. Puelles, et al., N. Engl. J. Med. (2020).
54. C. Huang, et al., Lancet 395, 497 (2020).
55. Y. Lu, J. Chen, M. Xiao, W. Li, D. D. Miller, Pharmaceutical Research (2012).
56. S. Pushpakom, et al., Nat Rev Drug Discov 18, 41 (2019).
57. M. Deng, K. Zhang, S. Mehta, T. Chen, F. Sun, J Comput Biol 10, 947 (2003).
58. A. Vazquez, A. Flammini, A. Maritan, A. Vespignani, Nat Biotechnol 21, 697 (2003).
59. S. Letovsky, S. Kasif, Bioinformatics 19 Suppl 1, i197 (2003).
60. U. Karaoz, et al., Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 101, 2888 (2004).
61. D. P. Ha, R. Van Krieken, A. Carlos, A. S. Lee, J. Infect. (2020).
62. J. D. Malhotra, et al., Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105, 18525
(2008).
63. D. Ben-Hail, V. Shoshan-Barmatz, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1863, 1612 (2016).
64. G. Pawelec, D. Goldeck, E. Derhovanessian, Curr. Opin. Immunol. 29, 23 (2014).
65. C. Wu, et al., Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica B (2020).
66. M. Vaduganathan, et al., New England Journal of Medicine 382, 1653 (2020).
67. Y. Zhou, et al., Cell discovery 6, 1 (2020).

25

Data and Software Availability
Our software is available under the GNU Public License version 3 at https://github.
com/Murali-group/SARS-CoV-2-network-analysis. The networks in Figures 3 and 4
are available for visualization and download on GraphSpace at http://graphspace.org/
graphs/?query=tags:2020-sarscov2-network-analysis.
We used publicly available datasets for our analysis.

Acknowledgments
TMM acknowledges support from NSF grants DBI-1759858 and MCB-1817736. KA acknowledges support from the Genetics, Bioinformatics, and Computational Biology program at Virginia Tech. JK acknowledges support from NSF grant CCF-2029543. MC
acknowledges support from NSF grant CNS-1618207. CMDS acknowledges support from
the Hariri Institute and the Department of Biomedical Engineering at Boston University.
PR acknowledges support from NSF grant CBET-1510920 and USDA-NIFA grant 201807578. PR and TMM acknowledge support from the Computational Tissue Engineering
Graduate Education Program at Virginia Tech.
The authors wish to thank S. Alabdullatif, S. Alshuaib, M. Iennaco, M. Kouzminov, S.
Murthy, S.Makwana, N. Naguib, C. Tagliettii, and M. Zanna for exploratory research on
this data and insightful and thought-provoking analysis. We also thank Roded Sharan,
Noga Alon, Dan Lancour and Rich Roberts for discussions that helped formulate the
techniques and ideas we used in this paper.

26

Supplementary materials
Methods
Algorithms
We describe each of the algorithms we use for label propagation and prediction. We are
given a weighted, undirected network G = (V, E, w) and a set P of positive examples.
Each node in G is a human protein and each edge represents a physical or functional
interaction between two proteins. We describe the network we use in more detail in
“Datasets”. The set P comprises of human proteins that interact with SARS-CoV-2
proteins (7). We seek to compute a score s(v) ≥ 0 for every node in G that indicates
our confidence that v either physically interacts with or is functionally linked to a SARSCoV-2 protein.

Regularized Laplacian (RL) (9). We first provide some intuition behind this method.
We seek to compute a diffusion score that represents the probability that a given node
in the network will be reached by a random walk of a given length from a set of seed
nodes (the human interactors of SARS-CoV-2); the parameter α introduced below governs
the length of the random walk. Biologically, this model captures the stochasticity in
protein interactions in signaling networks or complexes that depends on many factors
such as concentrations, conditions, co-factors, chaperones, ATP levels, etc. Thus, any
given signaling cascade may be modelled as a random walk that will reach its target with
some probability. In our context, the higher the diffusion score our algorithms compute
for a node, the more likely it is that the node may be involved in the host response to the
virus or be used by the virus in its life cycle.
Formally, this method defines a label vector ~y over the nodes in G where y(u) = 1 if

27

node u is a SARS-CoV-2 interactor and y(u) = 0, otherwise. It computes a score s(u)
between 0 and 1 for each protein u in G. Let W ∈ Rn×n denote the adjacency matrix of
G and W̃ = D−1/2 W D−1/2 denote the normalized network, where D is a diagonal matrix
P
with Duu = v auv , for every node u in G. Then, to compute the scores for each node,
we minimize the following sum, where α > 0 is a parameter:

X
u∈V

s(u) − y(u)

2

+α

X

2
w̃uv s(u) − s(v) ,

(u,v)∈E

where n is the number of nodes in the graph and the minimization ranges over all vectors
s ∈ Rn . We note that L̃ = I − W̃ is the normalized Laplacian of G. To minimize the above
expression, we solve the system of linear equations (I + αL̃)~s = ~y . It can be shown that
for any connected graph G this system always has a unique solution, and that (I + αL̃)
is always invertible. The matrix (I + αL̃)−1 can be interpreted as the amount of diffusion
that flows in the network between any two node pairs, and is termed the Regularized
Laplacian (9).

GeneMANIA (10). This method is a variation of RL that can take negative examples
into consideration. Starting with a label vector ~y where y(u) represents the prior evidence
for protein u being a SARS-CoV-2 interactor, this algorithm computes a score s(u) between −1 and 1 for each protein u in G. The value of y(u) is 1 or -1 if u is a positive
or negative example, respectively. Let the number of positive examples be n+ and the
number of negative example be n− . If u is an unknown example, then y(u) =

n+ −n−
,
n+ +n−

the

mean of the labels of the labeled nodes. Apart from this definition of ~y , this method is
identical to RL. Note that the original version of GeneMANIA implicitly chose α = 1.
We introduce the parameter α to allow a tradeoff in the importance given to the input
node labels ~y vis-a-vis the similarity of adjacent labels in the output ~s.
28

SinkSource (11). This method fixes the score s(u) = 1 for every positive example and
s(u) = −1 for every negative example. It computes the score of every other node in G by
minimizing the following function:

X

2
wuv s(u) − s(v) .

(u,v)∈E

Let U denote the set of nodes in G that are unlabeled, i.e., are not positive or negative
examples. For every node u ∈ U , we define the set of its neighbours as N (u) and use
f (u) =

X

wuv −

v∈N (u)
v is positive

X

wuv

v∈N (u)
v is negative

to denote the sum of the weighted scores of its neighbors that are positive or negative
examples. Let f~ denote the vector containing these values and let W denote the adjacency
matrix of the subgraph of G induced by U . Defining D as a diagonal matrix of W as in
the case of GeneMANIA but only for the nodes in U , we compute ~s as the solution of the
linear system of equations (I + W D−1 )s = f .
When negative examples are not available, as is the case here, SinkSource adds an
artificial negative example to the network, and connects each node to the artificial negative
with an edge of weight λ, where λ > 0 is a tunable parameter.

Local. We set s(v) = 1 for every node in P . For every other node u, we initialise
s(u) = 0 and then compute s(u) as the weighted average of the scores of its neighbors.

Support Vector Machine (SVM). We set each node’s feature vector to be its adjacency vector in the normalized network W̃ . We trained a linear kernel using the LinearSVC
function in the scikit-learn Python package with default parameters.

29

Logistic Regression. We set each node’s feature vector as in the case of SVM. We used
the LogisticRegression function in the scikit-learn Python package with default
parameters.

Network Proximity Among Interactors of SARS-CoV-2
We sought to develop a statistical justification for the RL method that we use to prioritize
additional viral interactors using their network propagation distance to the set P of human
proteins that interact with SARS-CoV-2 proteins. we used the following procedure to this
end. We applied the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test to evaluate whether the distribution of
scores of any given protein in P from the other proteins in P is the same as the null
distribution of scores of randomly selected proteins in the network from P .
In more detail, for every protein p in P , we computed the contribution of the other
proteins in P to the score of p after running RL, akin to leave-one-out cross validation.
Specifically, we set y(p) = 0 and executed RL to compute the score s(p) of p. We also
computed the scores in this manner for 1,000 proteins selected uniformly at random from
the other nodes in G. These distributions appear in Figure 2(a).

Statistical Significance
To estimate the statistical significance of each node’s scores, we adopted a null hypothesis
corresponding to the distribution of scores obtained from a randomly chosen positive set
P 0 where |P 0 | = |P |. (As an alternative to randomizing the positive set, randomizing the
network (e.g., via a degree-preserving edge swap process) would destroy the correlations
between adjacent nodes (homophily) that are important contributions to pathway and
neighborhood structure in the network.) We note that the degrees of the nodes in P may
have a strong effect on the resulting distribution of scores. For example, if many nodes

30

in P have high degree, then scores may tend to be larger overall than if there are few
nodes in P with high degree. Thus if the degree distribution of P does not approximately
match that of P 0 , the resulting p-values will be biased.
Had we selected each random sample uniformly at random from all nodes in G, then
the degree distribution of the chosen nodes would not be ensured to match that of the
nodes in P . Therefore, we implemented a stratified sampling approach, as follows: Given
a number of bins b, we partitioned the nodes in G into b sets as follows:
1. We sorted the nodes by weighted degree, i.e., we computed the degree sequence of
G.
2. We executed k-means clustering on the degree sequence of G to compute b clusters
(i.e., we set k = b in the k-means algorithm).
This approach emphasizes nearly-equal-degree groups. Then, to generate a random sample P 0 having |P | nodes, for every positive example v in P , we determined the subset
whose range endpoints contained v and sampled a node from that subset uniformly at
random. After evaluating various values of b, we selected the second approach and b = 10
for use in our results (see Section S2.2).
For each P 0 we designated these nodes to be the set of positive examples and executed
each of the prediction algorithms, ensuring that the negative samples we selected for each
P 0 did not intersect with the original set of positive examples P . Repeating this procedure
1,000 times, we constructed a distribution of scores for each node in P . We then estimated
the p-value of a node’s score as the fraction of values in this distribution that were at least
as large as the score. We did not correct these scores for multiple hypothesis testing.

31

Identification of Biclusters with High Diffusion from SARS-CoV2 Interactors to Top-Ranking Proteins
Let K denote the regularized Laplacian matrix (I + αL̃)−1 . We remind the reader that
the RL algorithm ranks proteins based on diffusion scores that associate a node u in the
P
network with a diffusion score s(u), where s(u) = v∈P Kuv , where v ranges over the set
P of all SARS-CoV-2 interactors. We sought to identify the experimentally determined
interactors that contributed the most to the predicted diffusion scores. This analysis is
important for tracing the provenance of computational predictions to their experimental
sources (68, 69).
We considered the sub-matrix of K where every column represented one of the 332
SARS-CoV-2 interactors and every row corresponded to one of the top 332 proteins identified by the RL algorithm. In this submatrix, each value Kuv quantifies the diffusion
between a given SARS-CoV-2 interactor in column v and a top-ranking protein in row
u. We replaced each element in row u and column v by the value Kuv /s(u), i.e., the
fractional contribution of a SARS-CoV-2 interactor to the overall score for top-ranking
protein u. We performed hierarchical clustering on both the rows and columns of this
matrix using Pearson’s correlation as the similarity measure and average linkage. We
manually identified eight biclusters and validated this selection with tests for enrichment
of GO biological processes.

Datasets
SARS-CoV-2–Human PPIs. We obtained 332 human proteins that interact with
SARS-CoV-2 (7) and treated them as positive examples for our analysis. We added the
ACE2 receptor to this set.

32

Virus–Human PPIs for network proximity computations. We obtained 104, 283,
and 296 human proteins that interact with SARS-CoV, HIV-1, and HSV-1, respectively,
from the VirHostNet database (70). We used these sets of proteins for the analysis in
Figure 2(a).

Functional and protein interaction networks. We started with the human functional interaction network in the STRING database (version 11) (71), comprising of 18,886
nodes and 977,789 edges after applying a “medium” score cutoff of 400. We used the interaction reliabilities provided by STRING as edge weights; we divided each value in
STRING by 1, 000 to scale them between 0 and 1. An edge in this network may be
derived from experimental data or computational analysis. Thus, an edge may represent
either direct physical binding or indirect functional interaction. Of the 332 viral interactors, 328 were present in this network; REEP6 (Q96HR9), PPIL3 (Q9H2H8), RAB18
(Q9NP72), and FKBP7 (Q9Y680) were missing.

Negative Examples. To evaluate the precision of our predictions, we needed negative
examples. Since datasets of human proteins that are certain not to interact with SARSCoV-2 proteins are not available, we took the simple expedient of sampling them uniformly
at random from the STRING network. We considered three different numbers of negative
examples: as many as, five times, and ten times the number of positive examples. When
we applied the methods to the full set of positive examples, we averaged the results over
100 random samples, with a positive:negative ratio of 1:5.

Drug-protein interactions. We downloaded interactions among drugs and proteins
from the DrugBank database (version 5.1.6) (72). This dataset contained 16,503 drugprotein target pairs among 5,665 drugs and 2,891 target proteins. Limiting the targets
33

to those in the STRING network reduced the number of drugs and targets to 5,589 and
2,769, respectively.

Evaluation
We evaluated the prediction algorithms using 100 runs of five-fold cross validation. In
each run we ensured that all algorithms saw identical partitions of the examples into folds.
We computed three measures of performance: (a) the area under the receiver operator
characteristic (ROC) curve. (b) the area under the precision-recall curve, and (c) precision
at a recall of 0.1 (early precision).

Functional Enrichment
We used the clusterProfiler package in R (73) to compute Gene Ontology terms,
KEGG pathways, and Reactome pathways enriched in our predictions or in the human
interactors of SARS-CoV-2 proteins. This package uses Fisher’s exact test to estimate the
enrichment of an individual term or pathway and the method of Benjamini and Hochberg
to correct for testing multiple hypotheses. We applied this correction for each database
(GO, KEGG, Reactome) separately. We used a threshold of 0.01 to decide if a GO term
or KEGG/Reactome pathway was significantly enriched.
The enrichment analysis yields many highly similar statistically significant GO terms
and KEGG and Reactome pathways; by “similar”, we mean that two different terms
or pathways may annotate many proteins in common. This problem is well-known with
several approaches that have been proposed to mitigate it either by grouping similar terms
and selecting a small subset of dissimilar terms (74, 75) or by directly computing a set
of non-redundant GO terms (76, 77). As far as we can tell, these methods have been
developed to consider the enriched GO terms for one set of terms. When we apply them

34

independently to different sets of proteins (e.g., predictions from RL and predictions from
SVM), they may select one term for one set of proteins but a similar but not identical
term for another set, making the distinctions in enrichment hard to discern.
Therefore, taking inspiration from previously developed methods (cited above), we
developed a simple heuristic based on the weighted set cover algorithm that simultaneously
simplifies multiple sets of enriched terms or pathways.

For every term that is enriched

in at least one protein set, we defined its composite odds ratio to be the product of
the odds ratios for that term across the protein sets. We iteratively selected the term
with the largest composite odds ratio, deleted the proteins annotated to this term from
the annotations of all other enriched term, adjusted the odds ratio for every term, and
recomputed the composite odds ratios. We stopped when the maximum composite odds
ratio of the remaining terms became less than one. We demonstrate how this algorithm
was successful in reducing the redundancy among enriched GO terms in Section S2.4.
In the case of two terms automatically selected by this algorithm, there was a different, highly overlapping term that we felt would be more interpretable in the context
of SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19. Therefore, we manually replaced the selected terms by
their alternative choices. Specifically, we replaced “ciliary basal body-plasma membrane
docking” and “mRNA transport” with “cilium assembly” and “viral transcription”, respectively. To substantiate our choices, we computed the Jaccard index between the
original and replaced term. Here we considered the proteins annotated by a term across
all the protein sets (i.e., top-ranking proteins from RL and SVM and human interactors
of SARS-CoV-2 proteins). The Jaccard index value was 0.95 between “ciliary basal bodyplasma membrane docking” and “cilium assembly” with all 88 proteins annotated by the
first term being annotated by the second, which had 93 annotations. The Jaccard index
between “mRNA transport” and “viral transcription” was 0.46. The terms annotated 40
35

and 43 proteins, respectively, with 26 proteins in common. In addition, we removed many
terms with a small number of annotations (≤ 7) that were fairly similar to other terms
in the list. We used the final list of terms for further analysis.

Supplementary Files
These two supplementary files are available at the GitHub site mentioned above.
Table S1: Network propagation score of each SARS-CoV-2 interactor using the remaining SARS-CoV-2 interactors as seeds. Each row contains a SARS-CoV-2 interactor,
its score, the average score of 1,000 randomly-selected proteins, and a p-value. This
p-value is the fraction of randomly-selected proteins whose score was as least as
large as that of the protein in that row.
Table S2: The prediction rank and p-value computed by RL and SVM for each human
protein on the STRING network, the list of drugs that target the protein (when this
information is available in DrugBank), and the closest SARS-CoV-2 interactor and
SARS-CoV-2 protein. For the last piece of information, we computed the shortest
weighted path, where we defined the weight of a path to be the sum of the absolute
value of the base-10 logarithm of the weights of the edges in the path.
Table S3: Enrichment results for RL, SVM and the viral interactors on GO biological
processes.
Table S4: Matrix of contributions to the network propagation score from each SARSCoV-2 interactor to every top-ranking protein.
Table S5: Sorted contributions from SARS-CoV-2 interactors to specific proteins discussed in the paper. The table is divided into pairs of columns: the first column
36

specifies the rank and the name of a top-ranked protein followed by the SARSCoV-2 interactors. The second column shows the fractional contribution from each
interactor to the top-ranked protein.

37

Supplementary Text
S1

Supplementary Figures

P:N 1:5

P:N 1:10

0.8
0.7

AUROC

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

0.8
0.7

AUPRC

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

Early Precision @0.1 Recall

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
RL

GM

SS

SVM

LogReg

Local

RL

GM

SS

SVM

LogReg

Local

Figure S1: Cross validation results for positive:negative ratios of 1:5 and 1:10.

38

20

cilium assembly

Organelle
Organization

microtubule nucleation

18

Golgi organization
rRNA processing
tRNA export from nucleus

16

Transcription/
Translation

viral transcription
cotranslational protein
targeting to membrane
ribosomal large subunit biogenesis
ribonucleoprotein complex
subunit organization
NADH dehydrogenase complex assembly

12

cellular respiration
Respiration
mitochondrial ATP synthesis
coupled proton transport
protein import into mitochondrial matrix

10

-log(pval)

14

ubiquitin-dependent ERAD pathway

6

4

Rab protein signal transduction
zinc ion transport

Kr

2
RL

Other

8

protein folding
protein N-linked glycosylation
via asparagine
protein alpha-1,2-demannosylation
oligosaccharide-lipid intermediate
biosynthetic process
GPI anchor biosynthetic process

SVM

PTMs

protein folding in ER

RL600

ER Stress

Figure S2: Comparison of GO terms enriched in two sets of top-ranking proteins in
RL (top-332 and top-600), top-332 proteins from SVM, and SARS-CoV-2 interactors
(abbreviated as ‘Kr’). Terms related to transcription and translation are enriched in the
top-600 RL proteins and the top-332 proteins in the SVM set.

39

S2

Supplementary Text

S2.1

Overlap Among Algorithms

a

Heatmap of Spearman Correlation
100

75

Local

21

31

7

7

84

45

11

9

40

10

7

13

4

RL

75

SS

21

84

SVM

31

45

40

7

11

10

LogReg

13

Heatmap of Jaccard Index

b

k = 100

12 0

Local
80

60

40

2

RL 12

SS

SVM

LogReg

0

2

13 18 4

0

32 4

0

1 19

5

0

1 30 29

0

1

0 13

0

0 18 32
0

4

k = 200

4

5

11 1
11

4

1

2

19 30 4

0

29 6

0

1 23

7

0

2 2934

0

1 5 4 6

6

1

k = 300

7

100

11 1 2 1 1
11

2329 5 1
34 4 0
6 0

0

0

0

1 1 0 0 0
Local
RL
SS
SVM
LogReg
GM

0

GM

2

SVM

0

LogReg

0

RL

0

SS

0

Local

SVM LogReg GM

2

GM

SS

GM

SVM

RL

2

LogReg

Local

4

RL

7

SS

9

40

20

Local

7

60

0

20
GM

80

Figure S3: Similarity of predictions between every pair of methods. (a) Spearman correlations of node prediction scores. (b) Overlap of the top k predictions of each method,
measured using the Jaccard index. The number in each cell is the value of the corresponding correlation or Jaccard index multiplied by 100.
To understand the diversity of the predictions across the prediction methods, between
each pair of algorithms, we computed the Spearman’s correlation of all scores. We also
compared the top-ranking predictions between algorithms using the Jaccard index. RL
had a high correlation with Local (0.75), which was surprising given the poor performance
of Local. However, the Jaccard index for the two methods was around 0.1 (Figure S3(b)),
suggesting that they shared very few top-ranking predictions and that the high correlation
may be caused by lower-scoring proteins. SVM had moderate values of correlation and
Jaccard’s index with RL and SS (around 0.4 and 0.3, respectively). Logistic regression
and GM both had low correlations and Jaccard’s indices with all other methods (< 0.15).

40

S2.2

Parameter Selection

Algorithms. To tune the methods, we varied the parameter α for RL, the weight of
the edges λ connecting each node to the artificial sink for SS, and the parameter C
controlling the inverse of the regularization strength for SVM and LR. For each setting
of these parameters, we repeated 5-fold cross-validation with all three positive:negative
ratios. We show the results for the ratios 1:1, 1:5, and 1:10 in Figure S4 and observed
the results were fairly consistent across ratios. We focused on optimizing early precision
values since we were interested in the analysis of top-ranking predictions.
For RL, GM, and SS, we found that in general, constraining the propagation locally
around positive examples (i.e., small values of α, large λ) achieved higher early precision
than more global propagation (i.e., large α, small λ). We chose the parameter values
α = 0.01, α = 0.1, and lambda = 100 for RL, GM, and SS, respectively.
For the supervised classifiers SVM and LR, we found that decreasing the regularization
parameter (i.e., trying large values of C) resulted in a slight increase in median early
precision (about 0.05 for SVM, and 0.07 for LR) over the default C = 1. However, to
avoid overfitting, we chose to use C = 1 for both methods.

Stratified sampling. The number b of bins is a parameter. We tested b = 10, 20, 30
and found that in each case, almost all of the top 332 nodes had a p-value < 0.05 with
the exception of the top 15 predictions for SVM, many of which had p-values slightly
higher than the cutoff (Figure S5). In general, the p-values for SVM were slightly higher
than those for RL. Since we did not observe much difference when varying b, we selected
b = 10.

41

GM

0.9

SS

SVM

LogReg

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4

Early Precision @0.1 Recall
AUPRC
AUROC

0.3
0.2

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

100.0

1.0

10.0

0.1

0.01

0.001

100.0

10.0

0.1

0.01

0.001

100.0

2.0

1.0

C

1000.0

λ

10.0

1.0

0.5

0.1

0.01

100.0

2.0

10.0

0.5

0.1

0.01

100.0

2.0

1.0

α

1000.0

α

10.0

1.0

0.5

0.01

0.2
0.1

P:N 1:1

AUROC / AUPRC / EP @0.1

P:N 1:5

AUROC / AUPRC / EP @0.1

P:N 1:10

0.9

AUROC / AUPRC / EP @0.1

RL
0.9

C

Figure S4: Parameter search results for each method, evaluated using AUROC, AUPRC,
and early precision (at recall equal to 0.1) of 5-fold CV with a positive:negative ratio of
1:1, 1:5, and 1:10 on the STRING network. Each point shows the median value of 100
repetitions

42

SVM

RL

−0.5

b = 20

−1.0

−1.5

−2.0

−2.5

−3.0

−0.5

b = 30

−1.0

−1.5

−2.0

−2.5

−3.0
−3.0

−2.5

−2.0

−1.5

−1.0

−3.0

−0.5

−2.5

−2.0

−1.5

−1.0

−0.5

b = 10

b = 10

Figure S5: Base-10 logarithms of the p-values of node scores of the top 500 ranked proteins
for RL and SVM for three values of b. The red dashed lines show the significance cutoff
of 0.05, while the diagonal line shows x = y.

43

Analyis of Biclusters
p -value

GFER
BCS1L
DNAJC19
GRPEL1
PMPCA
PMPCB
TIMM10B
TIMM10
TIMM9
TIMM8B
TOMM70

Bicluster Enriched terms
- Cilium assembly
1
- Microtubule nucleation
2

- NADH dehydrogenase complex assembly 3.87E -31
5.60E -17
- Cellular respiration

3

- Protein import into mitochondrial matrix

5.52E -17

4

- Golgi organization

3.50E -09

SARS-CoV-2 interactors

row min

LMAN1
ATL3
DELE1
DNAJC10
EDEM1
TXNDC16
FAF2
VCP
SEL1L
SYVN1
AMFR
DERL2
DERL1
DERL3
ERLIN2
ERLIN1
EMC3
EMC7
EMC8
UBAC2
DNAJC3
SEC63
DNAJB11
ALG3
ALG12
ALG9
ALG9-210
ALG10
ALG10B
ALG6
RFT1
ALG2
STT3A
DPAGT1
GANAB
CANX
UGGT1
STT3B
RPN1
DDOST
MAN1A1
CALR
MAN1B1

row max

Top-ranking proteins

7
6

ATP5MG
ACAD9
ECSIT
NDUFAF2
NDUFAF1
NDUFB9

TIMM21
TIMM44
TIMM50
TIMM17B
TIMM17A
PAM16
TIMM23
SLC25A4
TIMM22
TOMM40
CHCHD4
TIMM13
TOMM22
TIMM8A
TAZ
ATP5F1A
ATP5MC1
ATP5F1B
HSPD1
CYC1
IDH3G
YME1L1
HSPA9
MTX2
COQ2
FXN
GRPEL2
HSCB
LDHD
PHB2
UQCRC1

1.63E -102
4.66E -18
FOXRED2
ERO1B
HYOU1
EDEM3
ERLEC1
OS9
EMC1
FAM8A1
NGLY1
SELENOS
UBXN8

S2.3

TIMMDC1
NDUFV1
NDUFS1
NDUFA11
NDUFS2
NDUFB5
NDUFS5
NDUFA9
NDUFB8
NDUFS3
NDUFV2
NDUFAF5
NDUFAF3

ALG11
ALG5
ALG8
MOGS
UGGT2

HSPA5

3

CENPF
CEP350
NIN
AKAP9
CNTRL
CEP250
CDK5RAP2
CEP135
PCNT
CEP43
PRKAR2B
NINL
RAB8A
TUBGCP2
TUBGCP3

ALG3
ALG12
ALG9
ALG9-210
ALG10
ALG10B
ALG6
RFT1
ALG2
STT3A
DPAGT1
GANAB
CANX
UGGT1
STT3B
RPN1
DDOST
MAN1A1
CALR
MAN1B1

8
NUP210
NUP214
NUP54
NUP88
NUP62

2

SEC13
NCOA5
NXF1
NUP62CL
XPOT
RGPD2
NUP93
NUP155
NUP205
NUP50
NEK7
SNUPN
GEMIN5
SNRPF
SNRPG
HNRNPC
NCBP2
EIF4E
HSPA5
HSPA1L
HSPA1A
HSPA6
HSPA12A
HSPA13
HSPA4
MCCC1

ARF6
RAB10
RAB14
RALA
RAB5C
RAB18
RAE1
RAB7A

1

4

RAB11A
RAB6A
RAB6B
RAB30
RAB36
RAB42
EEA1

5

Bicluster Enriched terms
5
- Rab protein signal transduction

p -value
4.02E -09

6

- tRNA export from nucleus
- protein N-linked glycosylation via asparagine

1.12E -15
5.20E -09

7

- Ubiquitin-dependent ERAD pathway
- Protein alpha-1,2-demannosylation

1.04E -16
6.05E -11

8

- tRNA export from nucleus

3.61E -10

ERC1
GCC1
GCC2
GOLGA3
GOLGA2
GORASP1
GOLGB1
RAB1A
RAB2A

CEP170
CNTLN
SASS6
OPTN
YWHAG
YWHAE
NME7
TUBB4B
TUBB
TUBB4A
TUBA4A
TUBA1A
NUMA1
HAUS6
CETN2
TUBGCP6
NEDD1
CEP290
MZT1
PCM1
CLASP1
MZT2B
TUBG1
CEP192
CEP164
CCP110
CEP152
CEP63
CENPJ
ODF2
CEP76
PLK4
SDCCAG8
OFD1
SSNA1
CEP131
CEP57
TUBG2
HAUS2
TUBGCP4
MZT2A
TUBGCP5
HAUS7
CEP72
HAUS1
HAUS5
SFI1
CEP78
HAUS8
CEP70
HAUS4
HAUS3
CEP41
ALMS1
MARK4
NDE1
CDK11A
CDK11B
CEP89
SCLT1
FBF1
CEP83
CEP97
TTBK2
KIF24
NPHP4
CC2D2A
IQCB1
TCTN1
TCTN2
TMEM216
TCTN3
MAPRE1
CKAP5
PAFAH1B1
CSNK1D
DYNC1H1
DYNC1I2
DCTN2
DCTN3
ACTR1A
DYNLL1
SEPTIN2
PLK1

TRIP11
GOLGA5
GORASP2
GOLGA4
USO1
GOLPH3
BLZF1
RAB11A
RAB6A
RAB6B
RAB30
RAB36
RAB42
EEA1
SEC24A
SEC24B

Figure S6: Figure 2(c) reproduced with individual biclusters visualized and GO
terms denoted in additional tables. We generated this figure using MORPHEUS
https://software.broadinstitute.org/morpheus.
Figure S6 shows a number of biclusters that represent groups of experimentally iden44

tified viral interactors (columns) that contribute substantially to diffusion scores of predicted high-ranking proteins in the network as described in “Methods”. High diffusion
biclusters can naturally emerge either in long signaling chains or in dense subnetworks
such as complexes. We hypothesize that these biclusters may arise from densely-connected
subnetworks that are exploited by the virus to perturb host processes to promote viral
infection.
One limitation of this approach arises when a protein matches well with multiple
biclusters, in which case proteins with closely related functions may not appear in close
proximity after we perform hierarchical clustering of the matrix of diffusion scores. In
the case of HSPA5, we find that despite it having well-documented connections to CANX
and CALR, it does not appear alongside them in bicluster 7 and instead is included in
bicluster 8. This behavior could arise from the many additional functions HSPA5 has
on the cell surface in addition to its role in blood coagulation along with CANX and
CALR as discussed in “Results”. Despite not being included in bicluster 7, the HSPA5
score contributions that are attributed to the viral interactors of bicluster 7 are indicative
of relatively high diffusion similar to that of the other rows in bicluster 7. Although
HSPA5, CANX, and CALR are not directly adjacent in Figure S6, further observation
reveals that there is notable overlap in the viral interactors that significantly contribute
to their respective diffusion scores. We illustrate this point in Figure S6 in the form of
the additional row shown in the breakout for bicluster 7.
To verify that these biclusters are associated with functionally coherent subnetworks
implicated in viral pathogenesis, we performed gene set enrichment on the genes in each
identified bicluster (“Methods”). The results indicated that each bicluster can be effectively mapped to one or more enriched GO terms (Figure S6). This type of biclustering
analysis also serves as a nuanced visual representation of how the RL diffusion algorithm
45

works and its contrast to other network properties such as shortest path lengths or centrality.

The biclustering analysis reveals that in several cases the majority of diffusion

for a given protein can be attributed to a single or a small group of seed nodes. For
example, 100% of the diffusion score for RTF1 originates from four viral interactors: (1)
ALG11: 37%; (2) ALG5: 26%; (3) ALG8: 21%; and (4) MOGS: 16%. This analysis
also reveals that in several cases the highest contributor to a given protein’s score may
not be the nearest seed node by path length. For instance, 8.91% of the score for protein
TUBB4B can be attributed to TBCA despite UPF1 being the nearest viral interactor and
only contributing 7.48 × 10−4 %. To further explore the trends among top contributors, we
sorted the components contributing to each protein score in descending order (Table S5)
and plotted the results. Figure S7 shows this analysis for a group of four tubulin proteins

TUBA4A

RL Rank: 148

0.1
0.05
0

SARS-CoV-2 interactors

0.1
0.05
0

TBCA
CYB5R3
PTGES2
NPC2
TUBGCP3
NINL
CEP250
TUBGCP2
CNTRL
GLA
CDK5RAP2
CEP135
CEP43
CLIP4
PCNT
GGH
PRKAR2B
AKAP9
RAB8A
RAB7A
AP2M1
NIN
CEP350
NEK9
CENPF
PDE4DIP
RAB18
MARK2
GOLGA2
RAB2A
RAB1A
ERP44
MARK1
RAB10
PRKAR2A

TBCA
AKAP8
CYB5R3
PTGES2
NPC2
TUBGCP3
NINL
CEP250
TUBGCP2
CNTRL
GLA
CDK5RAP2
CEP135
CEP43
CLIP4
PCNT
GGH
PRKAR2B
AKAP9
RAB8A
RAB7A
NIN
CEP350
NEK9
CENPF
PDE4DIP
PRKAR2A
ERP44
GOLGA2
TIMM9
RAB1A
PSMD8
RAB18
MARK2
GORASP1

0.05

RL Rank: 81

TUBA1A

RL Rank: 158

0.1
0.05
0

TBCA
TUBGCP3
NINL
TUBGCP2
CEP250
CNTRL
CDK5RAP2
CEP135
CEP43
CLIP4
PCNT
PRKAR2B
AKAP9
RAB8A
CEP350
RALA
RAB7A
NIN
NEK9
CENPF
PDE4DIP
MAP7D1
RAB1A
PRKAR2A
EMC1
POLA1
RAB18
PSMD8
MARK2
GOLGA2
RAB10
PRIM1
RHOA
DCAF7
RAE1

0.1

0

TUBB

RL Rank: 47

Fractional Contribution to diffusion score (out of 1)

TUBB4B

TBCA
TUBGCP3
NINL
TUBGCP2
CEP250
CNTRL
CDK5RAP2
CEP135
CEP43
CLIP4
PCNT
PRKAR2B
AKAP9
RAB8A
CEP350
RTN4
RAB7A
NIN
MAP7D1
NEK9
PDE4DIP
CENPF
FYCO1
RAB1A
MIB1
PSMD8
POLA1
CHMP2A
PRKAR2A
RAB18
PRIM1
POLA2
GOLGA2
PDZD11
VPS11

Fractional Contribution to diffusion score (out of 1)

that all appear in bicluster 1 and in the network related to cilium assembly (Figure 4(g)).

SARS-CoV-2 interactors

Figure S7: Top 35 SARS-CoV-2 interactors contributing to the diffusion score of 4 notable
proteins: TUBB4B, TUBB, TUBA4A, and TUBA1A with RL ranks of 47, 81, 148, and
158 respectively. Each observation represents the fractional contribution by the viral
interactor on the x-axis to the total predicted score of the protein in each title.
The four proteins depicted share the same highest contributor, TBCA, and all demon46

strate a sharp decrease from the first to second contributing node. TBCA is the gene
that codes for the tubulin-specific chaperone A protein which is involved in beta-tubulin
binding to facilitate tubulin complex assembly (78,79). Within the first 25 highest ranked
contributors in each plot, we observe another sharp decrease to near zero relative contribution from the remaining seed nodes. We view this steep drop-off as an indication that
seed nodes could be clustered such that diffusion from one group of seed nodes to a given
protein far outweighs that of another set of seed nodes. These lower contribution seed
nodes could be configured in either a distant cluster or such that many individual nodes
are distributed widely. Further analysis using diffusion mapping techniques could assist
in distinguishing between these two proposed configurations.

S2.4

Evaluation of the Method for Simplifying Functional Enrichment Results

The main goal of simplifying the result from enrichment analysis was to filter out the
redundant terms, i.e., terms that have highly overlapping annotated proteins. To evaluate
how our simplification method (“Methods”) performs in terms of reducing overlap , we
analyzed the enrichment results from each protein set (i.e., top-ranking proteins from RL,
top-ranking proteins from SVM, and human interactors of SARS-CoV-2 proteins) in two
ways. We performed each analysis for the set of terms before simplification and for the
set of terms after simplification. We show the results RL as an exemplar.
First, for each enriched term t, we computed the largest Jaccard index between t and
every other enriched terms. We plotted the distributions of these quantities. We expected
the Jaccard indices to be large in the ’before’ set and small in the ’after’ set of terms. Indeed, we observed that our results exhibited these trends for each protein set. We present
the result from top-ranking RL proteins in Figure S8(a). For the top-ranking RL proteins,

47

there were 181 and 23 enriched terms before and after simplification respectively. The
maximum Jaccard index was ≥ 0.5 for 78% of the terms before simplification. This percentage reduced to 4.5% of the terms after simplification. Moreover, after simplification,
for 86% of the terms, the maximum Jaccard index was < 0.3, which indicates a considerable improvement in overlap. An exception was the pair of terms “NADH dehydrogenase
complex assembly” and “cellular respiration”, which were both present after simplification
yet had a Jaccard index of 0.51 and an overlap of 29 annotated proteins. Of these two
terms, our method selected “NADH dehydrogenase complex assembly” first since it had
the higher composite odds ratio. The second term still had 14 annotated proteins that
were not covered by any other previously selected term. Its resulting composite odds ratio
of 1.85 > 1 enabled its selection by the algorithm in the later iterations. Of these two
highly overlapping terms, we only retained “NADH dehydrogenase complex assembly”
(which had the higher composite odds ratio) for further analysis due to the low composite
odds ratio of “cellular respiration”.
Second, we considered the set of proteins annotated by at least one enriched term
before simplification. There were 260 such proteins from the top-ranking RL results and
GO biological processes. For each such protein, we computed the number of enriched
terms that contained the protein and plotted the distributions of these counts. With
the same set of proteins, we repeated the analysis after simplification. We observed that
before simplification, 72% of proteins were annotated by more than 5 enriched terms. This
percentage reduced to 18% of proteins after simplification. Moreover, the percentage of
proteins annotated by five or fewer terms increased dramatically after simplification. We
observed that before simplification 7%, 8%, 5%, 2%, and 4% of proteins were covered by
1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 terms, respectively. In contrast, these values were 54%, 20%, 5%, 1%, and
3% after simplification. In addition, 18% of proteins were not covered by any terms after
48

(a)

(b)

Before
After

0.5

0.8
0.7
0.6

Fraction of proteins

Fraction of terms

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

0.1

0.1
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

0

1.0

20

40

60

80

100

120

Number of terms covering a protein

Maximum Jaccard index for a term

Figure S8: Results of simplification of enriched terms. (a) Distribution of the maximum
Jaccard index values for the enriched GO biological processes in the top-ranking RL
proteins, both before and after simplification. The x-axis corresponds to the maximum
Jaccard index and the y-axis to the fraction of terms that have a maximum Jaccard index
in a particular range. (b) Distribution of the number of enriched enriched GO biological
processes containing each protein, considering the top-ranking RL proteins, both before
and after simplification. The thin bar at 0 indicates the fraction of proteins in the protein
universe left uncovered after simplification.

49

simplification. However, no GO terms were enriched in this set of proteins at the 0.01 level.
Overall, these results confirmed the efficacy of our approach in computing non-redundant
enriched terms.

References
68. B. P. Anton, et al., PLoS Biol. 11, e1001638 (2013).
69. S. Kasif, R. J. Roberts, To appear (2020).
70. V. Navratil, et al., Nucleic Acids Research 37, D661 (2009).
71. D. Szklarczyk, et al., Nucleic Acids Research 45, D362 (2016).
72. D. S. Wishart, et al., Nucleic Acids Research (2018).
73. G. Yu, L. G. Wang, Y. Han, Q. Y. He, OMICS A Journal of Integrative Biology 16,
284 (2012).
74. Supek, F. and Bos̆njak, M. and S̆kunca, N. and Tomislav, S̆. , PLoS One 6, e21800
(2011).
75. D. Merico, R. Isserlin, O. Stueker, A. Emili, G. D. Bader, PLoS ONE 5, e13984
(2010).
76. Y. Lu, R. Rosenfeld, I. Simon, G. J. Nau, Z. Bar-Joseph, Nucl. Acids Res. 36, e109+
(2008).
77. S. Bauer, J. Gagneur, P. N. Robinson, Nucleic Acids Research 38, 3523 (2010).
78. The UniProt Consortium, Nucleic Acids Research 47, D506 (2018).

50

79. P. Gaudet, M. S. Livstone, S. E. Lewis, P. D. Thomas, Briefings in bioinformatics
12, 449 (2011). Edition: 2011/08/27 Publisher: Oxford University Press.

51

