Effectiveness and Compliance to Social Distancing During COVID-19

arXiv:2006.12720v2 [stat.AP] 19 Jul 2020

Kristi Bushman, Konstantinos Pelechrinis, Alexandros Labrinidis∗
Abstract. In the absence of pharmaceutical interventions to curb the spread of COVID-19, countries relied on a number
of nonpharmaceutical interventions to fight the first wave of the pandemic. The most prevalent one has been
stay-at-home orders, whose the goal is to limit the physical contact between people, which consequently will
reduce the number of secondary infections generated. In this work, we use a detailed set of mobility data to
evaluate the impact that these interventions had on alleviating the spread of the virus in the US as measured
through the COVID-19-related deaths. To establish this impact, we use the notion of Granger causality between
two time-series. We show that there is a unidirectional Granger causality, from the average fraction of people
staying completely home weekly to the number of COVID-19-related deaths with a lag of 3 weeks. We further
analyze the mobility patterns at the census block level to identify which parts of the population might encounter
difficulties in adhering and complying with social distancing measures. This information is important, since it
can consequently drive interventions that aim at helping these parts of the population.

1. Introduction. Since the first reported case of COVID-19 in early December 2019 in Wuhan,
China, the world has experienced dramatic changes in an effort for societies to deal with the pandemic.
Given the absence of pharmaceutical interventions (i.e., a medical treatment or a vaccine), governments and health officials have relied on non-pharmaceutical interventions, including shelter-at-home
orders, contact tracing and volume testing. The reasoning behind shelter-at-home interventions is to
limit the physical contacts between people, which furthermore limits the transmission of the virus.
Given the absence of a vaccine, this does not mean that the virus will be eradicated but rather, limiting people’s mobility will allow the health systems to operate under capacity and be as effective as
possible, consequently limiting the number of fatalities.
Of course, these measures have not been without controversy. Hence, it is important to examine whether they are effective in achieving their goal. Using a granular mobility dataset for the US
obtained from SafeGraphs (details provided in the following sections) and COVID-19-related fatalities we show that average fraction of people staying home weekly Granger-causes the number of
COVID-19-related fatalities with a 3-weeks lag. We also examined for and did not find any evidence
of bidirectional Granger causality, i.e., feedback effects of people altering their mobility as a response
to the change of the number of fatalities (e.g., as a reaction to the news). We also provide a shortterm prediction model for the number of COVID-19 related fatalities in US one-week out, using only
information about population-level mobility behavior and fatalities over the past three weeks.
Given the effectiveness of these measures it is critical to understand who in the population complies and to what extent. Differences in compliance levels are not necessarily by choice. For example,
many people are essential workers and hence, need to spend time outside of their home. Others might
not have to physically be at work, but they have to take care of family members living in other households etc. Identifying these parts of the population can provide critical information on possible policies/interventions that could further increase compliance, without compromising the needs of people.
Therefore, in this work we build a framework using a beta regression model to predict the percentage of time spent daily at home within a census block based on demographic characteristics. Using
∗

School of Computing and Information, University of Pittsburgh (k.bushman@pitt.edu, kpele@pitt.edu,
labrinid@pitt.edu)
1

2

K. BUSHMAN ET AL.

these models we can then examine various hypotheses on whether specific demographics of interest
are associated with a change in mobility above and beyond of what was expected from the mobility
patterns prior to stay-at-home orders. We focus on two particular demographics, age and race, and
show that show that minorities and older people, while significantly increasing their stay at home, this
increase is smaller compared to that white and younger people. We further provide some possible
mechanisms that lead to this observation and show that income disparities can explain a sizable part
of this difference. The main contributions of our work can be summarized as follows:
• Provide a Granger-causality analysis on the impact of stay-at-home orders on COVID-19related fatalities
• Design a framework for quantifying adherence to social distancing according to various demographics
• Design a dynamic dashboard to visualize both the raw mobility data as well as, the results
from our analysis.
We believe that our work can provide critical information to local officials and policy makers. The
rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a description of the data we used for our
analysis, as well as, a brief review on related to our study literature. Section 3 provides our Grangercausality analysis, while Section 4 introduces our framework for identifying the relationship between
social distancing compliance and demographics. We conclude our work and discuss its limitations and
directions for future work in Section 5.
2. Data and Related Work. In this section we describe the dataset we use for our analysis, as
well as, relevant to our study literature. The code for the analysis presented in the paper can be found
on our github repository: https://github.com/kpelechrinis/epiDAMIK20-COVID.
SafeGraph data: SafeGraph has released a detailed mobility dataset based on the locations of
about 18 million mobile phones across the US. This information is obtained through various mobile
applications that partner with SafeGraph. This provides diverse population coverage, while the data
are provided in an aggregated manner, with steps taken towards satisfying differential privacy requirements. While a detailed description can be found on SafeGraph’s COVID-19 data consortium page
[25], the main information that we will use is the daily mobility patterns for census block groups
(CBG). In particular, for each day and each census block group since 01/01/2020 we obtain - among
other - the following daily information:
• completely home device count: This is the number of devices within the CBG of
interest that did not leave their home.
• distance traveled from home: This is the median distance traveled during the day
from all the devices whose home is within the CBG of interest
• median percentage time home: This is the median percentage of time spent at home
during the day from devices whose home is within the CBG of interest
• destination cbgs: This is the CBGs that were visited during the day from devices whose
home is within the CBG of interest. Each destination block is also associated with the number
of devices in the SafeGraph dataset that performed this transition.
COVID-19 data: In order to evaluate any (Granger causal) impact between mobility and COVID19-related fatalities we need to utilize data related to the number of confirmed cases and deaths. While
an accurate number for the daily number of infections would be the most appropriate variable for this
analysis, it is widely known that the reported numbers are a severe undercount of the actual number

EFFECTIVENESS AND COMPLIANCE TO SOCIAL DISTANCING DURING COVID-19

3

of infections. On the other hand the number of fatalities is also inaccurate but it is considered a more
robust signal for the prevalence of the disease. Albeit it is a lagged signal, with an average of 15-20
days delay [15]. We obtain our data from the NY Times github repository [28].
COVID-19 and mobility: Excluding clinical interventions (potential treatments, vaccine, etc.),
limiting mobility and inter-personal contacts has been the most central intervention in an effort to
contain the pandemic. As such, several studies have analysed the changes in human mobility across
various regions using granular mobility data (e.g., [9, 13, 23, 4] with the list being non-exhaustive).
Aleta et al. [2] further utilize these mobility information to drive agent-based simulators in order to
understand the impact of contact tracing and testing on a possible second wave of the disease. Zhang
et al. [31] have further analyzed contact surveys from the early epidemic stage in China and built
transmission models to quantify the impact of social distancing and school closures. This line of
research is of course still developing as restrictions are lifted, new measures potentially coming in the
possibility of a second wave etc.
Public health non-pharmaceutical evaluation: Of course, similar non-pharmaceutical interventions have been applied in the past as well and there is a volume of research that evaluates their impact.
For example, Ahmed et al. [1] provide a review study on social distancing measures in workplace.
Their review includes both epidemiological as well as, modeling studies and they concluded that overall workplace social distancing reduced the influenza attack rate approximately 23%. Similarly, Rashid
et al. [24] reviewed studies that evaluated various measures (school closings, work-from-home etc.)
for dealing with the 2009 influenza pandemic. They identified that workplace interventions provide
moderate reduction in transmissions (20-30%). Other non-pharmaceutical interventions include the
banning of mass events. While intuitively this seems to be a particularly effective strategy, prior literature has shown that this is true only in combination with other interventions [12, 16]. One of
the reasons for this is the contact time at such events is relatively small compared to the time spent
in schools, workplaces, or other community locations [7]. The literature aforementioned is not exhaustive. However, to the best of our knowledge, there is no study that uses the notion of Granger
causality for non-pharmaceutical interventions. Contrary to the majority of existing studies that rely
on large-scale simulation models, or, analyzing a small case (e.g., a restaurant, a specific workplace
etc.), we take a macroscopic approach, looking at the aggregate adherence to these interventions and
the macroscopic results (e.g., total fatalities).
3. Evaluating Social Distancing. In this section we will begin by introducing the notion of
Granger causality between two time series and then we will see how it applies to our case.
3.1. Granger Causality. Granger causality is a statistical test that aims at identifying whether
a time-series x(t) provides useful information in predicting timeseries y(t) [10]. It is eminent to
understand that Granger causality is what Granger himself described, “temporally related” or “predictive causality”, rather than the traditional notion of causality. Simply put, x(t) is said to Granger-cause
y(t) if it precedes in time and is able to improve the predictions of y(t) beyond auto-regressive models.
While this might not be a useful notion for what is needed in areas like clinical treatments, it is particularly useful and has been extensively used in econometrics, public policy etc. (e.g., [5, 3, 11, 6, 18]
with the list being non-exhaustive).
Formally, the examination of whether x(t) Granger-causes (G-causes for short) y(t) one needs to
build the following two models:

4

K. BUSHMAN ET AL.

(3.1)

M0 :

y(t) = a00 +

m
X

a0i y(t − i) + 0

i=1

(3.2)

M1 :y(t) = a10 +

m
X
i=1

a1i y(t − i) +

p
X

bi x(t − i) + 1

i=1

The first model (Eq. 3.1) is essentially a pure auto-regressive model on y up to lag m (called the
restricted model), while the second one includes lagged terms from the time-series x(t) to be explored
as a potential Granger cause (called the unrestricted model). Given this setting the following null
hypothesis is examined: via conducting an F-test:
(3.3)

H0 :b1 = b2 = · · · = bp = 0

The null here is the hypothesis that no explanatory power is jointly added from the lags of x.
So eventually, we retain all the lagged values of x that are individually statistically significant (tstatistic), but in order to reject H0 that x does not G-cause y, all these lags need to add explanatory
power (as compared to the restricted model). We would like to note here that the time series need to
be stationary before performing the Granger test. Hence, if the original data are not stationary they
should be transformed to eliminate the possibility of autocorrelation (e.g., through differentiation).
3.2. Shelter-at-home and COVID-19 fatalities. We are interested in examining whether the
mobility of people in the US G-causes the number of fatalities from COVID-19. Here, we would
like to emphasize that for the latter, we are using the number of COVID-19 deaths φ reported from
health authorities as discussed in Section 2. We do not make use of any information related to excess
fatalities, or any attempt to estimate the under-reporting factor in fatalities. For the G-cause variable,
we first obtain the fraction of devices in each census block group b that stayed exclusively at home
daily1 hb . We then obtain a weighted average value over all the CBGs, hU S (t), for each day t, where
the weights are the sample size in each block. We further aggregate the data weekly, since there are
known inconsistencies and delays in reporting cases and deaths. Weekly aggregation should remove
some of the associated noise with COVID-19 daily reports.
Figure 1 shows the two weekly time-series of interest for the period between 01/21/2020 (when the
COVID-19 cases started being recorded) and 07/03/2020. We apply the KwiatkowskiPhillips SchmidtShin test [14] and we identify that these time-series are not stationary. However, differentiating both
time-series will lead to stationarity. Running the Granger causality test for lags up to 6 weeks (given
the length of our time-series longer lags cannot be tested), we obtain the results in Table 1. As we can
see, there is evidence that mobility G-causes COVID-19-related fatalities at a lag of about 2 weeks. We
also examined for bidirectional G-causality, i.e., people listening to the news and number of fatalities,
and reacting with changes in their mobility. However, we did not find any supporting evidence.
Given the results from our Granger causality analysis we can build a time-series prediction model
for estimating the weekly number of fatalities in the near-future (e.g., one week ahead). We experiment
1

We also examined the median percentage of time spent at home, with similar results. In fact, the median percentage
of time spent at home and the fraction of people staying completely at home daily are highly correlated, with a correlation
coefficient ρ = 0.93.

EFFECTIVENESS AND COMPLIANCE TO SOCIAL DISTANCING DURING COVID-19

5

Figure 1. Weekly time series for COVID-19-related fatalities (left) and percentage of people staying at home (right).

Lag
1

2

3

4

5

6

236.9∗

230.9∗

344.4∗∗

432.7∗∗
348.1∗
-

539.6∗∗
516.2∗
186.7
-

447.8∗∗
675.9∗∗
−18.1
145.6
-

289.5∗
574.9∗
760.1∗
65.1
−64.3
−10.3

0.77
11.1
(<0.01)

0.79
18.9
(<0.01)

0.91
8.5
(<0.01)

0.9
12.6
(<0.01)

b1
b2
b3
b4
b5
b6

263.4∗
-

156.0
401.4∗∗
-

Adjusted R2
F-test (p-val)

0.46
5.08
(0.03)

0.69
10.3
(<0.01)

** p

< 0.01, * p < 0.05, . p < 0.1
Table 1
Individual coefficients’ significance and F-test result for various lags.

with two different models, namely, a Vector AutoRegression (VAR) and a Long-Short Term Memory
neural network. The VAR model is essentially the unrestricted model in the Granger-causality test
(Equation 3.2), where m = p = 3 Table 2 shows the corresponding model. As we can see, increased
fraction of people staying home will result in a reduction in the predicted number of fatalities 3 weeks
ahead. We also examined a stacked LSTM architecture, with 2 layers with 50 hidden units each, followed by a dense layer with ReLU activation. We use again a sequence of size of 3 and train the model
over multiple epochs using early stopping. The results from our two models are presented in Figure 2.
In particular, we provide predictions for the last 5 weeks (as of this writing) and we train each model
using all the data up to the week of interest. Consequently we make our out-of-sample predictions
with each model which are overlaid with the actual fatalities. Overall, both models perform relatively
well, especially given the short span of the time-series, as well as, the simplicity of the models in terms
of input features. We would like to note here that these models are not appropriate for longer term predictions (e.g., fatality count in 4 months), which is the focus of most of the fatality-related prediction
models developed (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/covid-data/forecasting-us.html).

6

K. BUSHMAN ET AL.

Figure 2. Both models perform reasonably out-of-sample, relative to the amount of data available for learning and
the simplicity of the input features.

Variable

Coefficient

p-val

hU S (t − 1)
hU S (t − 2)
hUS (t − 3)
y(t-1)
y(t-2)
y(t-3)

137.9
252.4
−384.7
1.35
−0.59
0.19

0.21
0.15
< 0.01
< 0.01
0.16
0.40

R2
SEres

0.86
1250

*** p

< 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1

Table 2
VAR model for predicting weekly fatalities one-week-out.

4. Quantifying social distancing behavior per demographics. In the previous section, we saw that there is strong evidence that limiting mobility Granger-causes fewer fatalities from
COVID-19. Therefore, it is important to understand if and which parts of the population are not able
to adhere to the guidelines. This information is critical to be communicated to health officials and
policy makers, since it can drive interventions that will help everyone follow the recommendations to
the extent possible. In this section, we present a framework based on a beta regression model from

EFFECTIVENESS AND COMPLIANCE TO SOCIAL DISTANCING DURING COVID-19

7

the daily percentage of time spent home and the difference-in-differences method that can identify the
relationship between demographics of interest and the way they relate to social distancing behavior.
4.1. Beta regression model. Our goal is to model the percentage of time hP that a specific
population P spends home daily. Given that our dependent variable hP is real-valued, bounded in
the unit interval a linear regression is not an appropriate model. Hence, we choose to use a beta
regression model [8], where essentially the data are assumed to follow a beta distribution. A useful
parametrization of the beta distribution for this type of models is given by:

(4.1)

f (y|µ, φ) =

Γ(φ)
y µφ−1 (1 − y)(1−µ)φ−1
Γ(µφ) · Γ((1 − µ)(φ))

where µ is the mean of the beta distribution and φ is a parameter called precision. φ controls the
variance of the distribution; for a fixed µ, higher precision leads to smaller variance. With this setting
the beta regression model for hP is:

(4.2)

g(hP ) = xTP · b + 

where hP is the average daily fraction of time spent home for P, xP is the vector of the model’s
covariates, b is the vector of the regression’s coefficients and g(·) is a link function (strictly increasing
and twice differentiable). This model is very similar to a generalized linear model (e.g., logistic,
Poisson or negative binomial regression) and it is solved through a Maximum Likelihood Estimation
(MLE). The MLE identifies the coefficients b, but also the precision parameter φ, which is a constant
and not a function of xP 2 .
4.2. Demographics Analysis. In this section we will begin by modeling the fraction of time
spent at home daily in each census block as a function of specific demographics of the population.
We start with race, where census data provide information on the percentage of people within each
census block that belong to the following categories: White, Black, Hispanic, Asian, American Indian or Native Alaskan, and Other races3 . Since we want to estimate the relationship between these
demographics and the changes observed after the social distancing recommendations, we build two
separate models; one that captures the mobility prior to stay-at-home orders (Mpre ) and one that captures mobility after these orders were put in place (Mpost ). One of the problems is that different parts
of the country put these measures in place in different times through the course of the pandemic. Given
that the majority of the orders were put in place sometime within March 2020, we build Mpre using
data from February 2020, and Mpost using data from April 2020. Table 3 presents the results of these
regressions. Using these results we can start examining the average percentage of time spent daily
at home by the population of a hypothetic census block group (HCBG) with a specific racial demographic composition. For example, Figure 3 presents the beta distribution for racially homogeneous
(hypothetical) census block groups. As we can see, there are differences across these hypothetical
2

0

There are extensions of this model [26] that models the precision as a function of a set of regressions z, i.e., g (φ) =
z · c + .
3
For the purposes of our analysis we merge the American Indian and Native Alaskan category with the Other races
category.
T

8

K. BUSHMAN ET AL.

census block groups, both for the same time period, as well as, their shift as the stay-at-home orders
were put in place. More specifically, Table 4 presents the average stay home percentage for each of
the hypothetical blocks.
Variable

Mpre

Mpost

White%
Black%
Hispanic%
Asian%
Natives+Others%
constant

−0.45∗∗∗
−0.27∗∗∗
0.29∗∗∗
−0.40∗∗∗
−0.51∗∗∗
1.39∗∗∗

−0.48∗∗∗
−0.56∗∗∗
0.39∗∗∗
1.87∗∗∗
−0.93∗∗∗
2.5∗∗∗

φ
N

14.5
201,917

5.8
201,917

*** p

< 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1

Table 3
Beta regression model for the average daily percentage of time of stay home at a census block group before (02/20) and
after (04/20) stay-at-home orders.

Hypothetical Block

Pre

Post

White
Black
Hispanic
Asian
Natives+Others

71.8%
75.6%
84.4%
72.9%
70.7%

89.6%
88.6%
94.9%
98.9%
84.8%

Table 4
Percentage of time spent home daily for hypothetical racially homogeneous census block groups based on the beta
regression models from Table 3.

Table 4, while providing us with a quick view of how specific parts of the population might comply
with the social distancing recommendations (in terms of staying home), it does not provide the whole
picture. In particular, we can see that different demographics are associated with different levels of
mobility outside of their home even before the stay-at-home order. So any change observed after
the orders were put in place, they need to be compared with the original difference. This process
is visualized in Figure 5, where we see two populations P1 and P2 , with their pre-lockdown daily
percentage of staying home, as well as, their post-lockdown daily percentage of staying home. While
∆2 provides us with information about what is happening in the two populations after the stay-athome orders were put in place, it does not adjust for the behavior of the two populations prior to the
intervention, and the difference δ(P1 , P2 ) = ∆2 − ∆1 is more informative. Hence, in order to identify
demographic discrepancies between two populations, P1 and P2 , in complying with stay-at-home
orders, we performed the following hypothesis test:

EFFECTIVENESS AND COMPLIANCE TO SOCIAL DISTANCING DURING COVID-19

9

Figure 3. Beta distribution for hypothetical - racially homogeneous - census block group before (left) and after (right)
stay-at-home orders across the US.

10

K. BUSHMAN ET AL.

(4.3)

H0 :δ(P1 , P2 ) = 0

(4.4)

H1 :δ(P1 , P2 ) 6= 0

In order to perform this test, we use the full beta distribution for each population-time combination
and repeatedly sample them to build the distribution of δ(P1 , P2 ). Then we can perform the above
hypothesis test. Table 5 presents the results for the various comparisons between the minority HCBG
and the white one. As we can see all minority HCBG - except the Asian one - exhibit a smaller
increase as what was expected based on their pre-intervention patterns. Particularly interesting is the
case of the Hispanic HCBG, which even though exhibits the second highest daily percentage of staying
home after the stay-at-home orders, the observed increase is smaller as compared to the white HCBG.
Furthermore, it is interesting that the Asian HCBG exhibits a 7.5% higher compliance as compared
to the white HCBG. While the reasons for this are not clear - and we cannot identify them through
the data we have - there are a few reasons that are plausible, including the increase of racist attacks
targeting Asians in the US at the wake of the pandemic [21, 20, 29, 22, 30, 19].
P1

P2

δ(P1 , P2 )

Black
Hispanic
Asian
Natives+Others

White
White
White
White

−4.8%∗∗∗
−6.2%∗∗∗
7.5%∗∗∗
−3.6%∗∗∗

*** p

< 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1

Table 5
Minority HCBGs exhibit lower percentage of stay-at-home, as compared to white HCBGs.

While for the Asian population, staying at home more might also be a way of avoiding racist
attacks, the question remains, why are there discrepancies for the rest of the minorities as compared to
the white HCBG ? One plausible explanation is that a large fraction of these minorities are essential
workers and while overall they increase their stay at home, they really need to go to their work.
Another possible reason is that minorities live in inner cities and as such they are close to their families.
Furthermore, these minorities have come to rely and support their extended families [27] and hence,
they might be providing them with help (e.g., childcare support for essential workers etc.) during this
time, leading to higher mobility outside the home. Other plausible reasons include the relationship
between these groups and technology. In particular, ethnic minorities have traditionally been slower
in adopting new technology for a variety of reasons [17] and this could mean in a situation like the
current pandemic, their inability or unwillingness to use online platforms for essential errands such as
grocery shopping. While we cannot show with our current data whether any of these plausible reasons
are in play, we can examine one additional factor that is relevant to all of the above possibilities; their
median income. Low income families typically live in inner-city and are of ethnic minorities, they
have issues with accessing and adopting technology, while many of the essential workers are low-paid
employees (e.g., grocery store workers, delivery, etc.). Tables 6 and 7 present the same results when
we adjust for the median income of an HCBG. As we can see, the mobility differences between black

EFFECTIVENESS AND COMPLIANCE TO SOCIAL DISTANCING DURING COVID-19

11

and white HCBGs, as well as native and other minorities and white HCBGs, disappears, while for
Hispanic and Asian HCBGs the differences are reduced.
Variable

Mpre

Mpost

White%
Black%
Hispanic%
Asian%
Natives+Others%
Median Income
constant

−0.43∗∗∗
−0.29∗∗∗
0.27∗∗∗
−0.29∗∗∗
−0.52∗∗∗
−9.9 · 10−7 ∗∗∗
1.43∗∗∗

−0.61∗∗∗
−0.3∗∗∗
0.7∗∗∗
0.87∗∗∗
−0.79∗∗∗
9.9 · 10−6 ∗∗∗
2.13∗∗∗

φ
N

14.6
201,917

6.34
201,917

*** p

< 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1

Table 6
Beta regression model for the average daily percentage of time of stay home at a census block group before (02/20) and
after (04/20) stay-at-home orders adjusting for median income (expressed in thousands of $s) in the CBGs.

P1

P2

δ(P1 , P2 )

Black
Hispanic
Asian
Natives+Others

White
White
White
White

6 · 10−4 %
−4.3%∗∗∗
5.7%∗∗∗
−5 · 10−3 %

*** p

< 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1

Table 7
When adjusting for income a large percentage of the mobility differences between HCBGs during stay-at-home orders
is explained.

We also examined another demographic attribute, namely, age. While census provides a breakdown of the age of a census block group in several age brackets, we aggregated them into two bins;
younger or older than 50 year old4 . Again, we build a beta regression model with the same dependent
variable as before but the independent variable is the percentage of the population in the CBG that is
older than 50 years old. The results are presented in Table 8, where as we can see the older population
is associated with a reduced stay-at-home daily time as compared to younger population (less than 50).
Figure 4 further visualizes the beta distributions for hypothetical CBGs with only population older or
younger than 50 years old. Furthermore, by performing a similar hypothesis test as in Eq. (4.3)-(4.4),
we find that the HCBG with population older than 50 years old stays at home 2.6% (p-val ¡ 0.01)
less time at home on average as compare to younger population and based on their pre-intervention
4

Obviously one can repeat the analysis with more bins, but we wanted to keep things simpler mainly for presentation
purposes.

12

K. BUSHMAN ET AL.

Figure 4. Beta distributions for the daily fraction of time spent at home for population older and younger than 50.

patterns. In contrast to the race case, when adjusting for the median income, the difference remains
(-2.5%, p-val ¡ 0.01). A potential reason for this difference between population in the opposite side of
the 50 years old mark, can be their technology fluency. Younger people that are avid users of (mobile)
technology can take advantage of various services that can help people complete their errands (e.g.,
grocery shopping), while staying at home. This might not be the case for older people (at least to the
same extent). Again, while this is a plausible mechanism that can drive the observed difference, the
data in our disposal does not allow us to further examine this.
Variable

Mpre

Mpost

Older50%
constant

0.09∗∗∗
0.98∗∗∗

−0.28∗∗∗
2.39∗∗∗

φ
N

14.2
201,917

5.5
201,917

*** p

< 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1

Table 8
Beta regression model for the average daily percentage of time of stay home at a census block group before (02/20) and
after (04/20) stay-at-home orders based on the percentage of the population that are older than 50 years old.

EFFECTIVENESS AND COMPLIANCE TO SOCIAL DISTANCING DURING COVID-19

13

hP
Before stay-at-home

After stay-at-home
P1
∆2

Stay-at-home
orders

P2

P1
∆1
P2
Date
02/2020

03/2020

04/2020

Figure 5. When comparing the mobility post-lockdown for different populations, we need to consider the pre-lockdown
mobility as well.
.

Figure 6. Our dashboard for Allegheny County showing the outgoing mobility from the selected CBG (red) alongside
with demographic information. The two time-series plots further provide information related to the interaction between the
selected CBG and another CBG that the user hovers over.

4.3. Dashboard. We have also created a dashboard to visualize this mobility information in an
interactive manner5 . Figure 6 presents a screenshot from the dashboard that depicts the census block
tracts of Allegheny County on the left half. The user can choose a tract (the selected tract will be
colored red as in the figure) and information about the outgoing mobility (i.e., movements of people
5

We will provide a URL with the live dashboard soon.

14

K. BUSHMAN ET AL.

whose home CBG is the selected one) and incoming mobility (i.e., movements from people whose
home CBG is not the selected one but they visited it) associated with it is presented. The choice
between outgoing and incoming mobility can be made through the control buttons above the map. For
example, in Figure 6 outgoing mobility information for people whose home CBG is the selected origin
CBG (420035231001) is presented on the map. The color for each census block group tract i represents
the fraction of the total foot traffic from the residents of the origin CBG, over the period selected from
the user6 , that visited CBG i. On the right half of the figure, there are two time-series depicted that
provide temporal information for the CBG that the user is currently hovering over (say CBGh ). In the
specific situation depicted here, this is CBG 420035231001. The top time series provides the daily
number of visits in CBGh from the origin CBG, while the bottom time series represents the fraction
of time residents of CBGh spent at home. It is interesting here to note that if we hover over the origin
CGB, i.e., CBGh is the selected CBG, then the top time-series represents self-loops. That is, traffic
from residents of the CBG that was destined to other venues/points of interest within the CBG. Finally,
we also present a table with some basic demographic information about the origin CBG related to our
analysis, such as racial and age composition of the population, median income and total population.
We would also like to note here that this dashboard is still work-in-progress in the sense that new
features are being added prior to going publicly live. For example, our immediate future plan is to visualize information about specific businesses and their geographical reach (i.e., where do customers of
different establishments come from?). This information can be very helpful for local health authorities
when identifying a plan for interventions and the corresponding protocols.
5. Conclusions and Discussion. In this study we perform a macroscopic analysis of the effectiveness of social distancing measures in the US during the COVID-19 pandemic using the notion
of Granger causality. Our analysis indicate that the average daily fraction of population staying completely at home Granger-causes the number of COVID-19 fatalities in a 3-week period. We further
examine the presence of bidirectional Granger causality and we do not find any supporting evidence.
Using this observation, we also build two simple prediction models for weekly COVID-19-related
fatalities, using auto-regressive and mobility features. We further provide a framework to identify
the relationship between demographics and social distancing behavior. While this analysis does not
provide causal relationships, it can certainly provide important information for policy makers while
thinking of ways to increase compliance. Finally, we provide a visualization dashboard with the raw
data as well as, the results from our analysis. This dashboard is constantly being updated with new
results and data.
We would like to emphasize here that even though we have included a prediction model in our
analysis, this is only to showcase in practise the conclusions from the Granger causality analysis7 .
Furthermore, while the model performs well out-of-sample, several improvements can be achieved
by including even more informative features. For instance, just an aggregate number of how many
hours a person spends out of their home does not capture factors important for the prediction of infections. Was this movement to a high-risk location (e.g., a grocery store) or was it for a stroll around
the neighborhood? Disentangling this is certainly not trivial and we are working in methods for identifying the number of potential contacts a person from a specific CBG is expected to have based on
6

The user can select the time period through the slider under the map.
Furthermore, there are several well-performing prediction models in the public sphere - tracked by CDC as well - and
our goal is certainly not to add yet another model.
7

EFFECTIVENESS AND COMPLIANCE TO SOCIAL DISTANCING DURING COVID-19

15

their mobility and the POI foot traffic data. Furthermore, it will be particularly useful to extend our
analysis to a more (spatially) fine granularity, focusing on a microscopic analysis (e.g., at the county,
or city, level). This will allow us to identify the exact time points of interventions and possibly attempt
to extract causal relationships using quasi-experimental methods, such as instrumental variables and
difference-in-differences.
REFERENCES
[1] F. A HMED , N. Z VIEDRITE , AND A. U ZICANIN, Effectiveness of workplace social distancing measures in reducing
influenza transmission: a systematic review, BMC public health, 18 (2018), p. 518.
[2] A. A LETA , D. M ARTIN -C ORRAL , A. P. Y P IONTTI , M. A JELLI , M. L ITVINOVA , M. C HINAZZI , N. E. D EAN ,
M. E. H ALLORAN , I. M. L ONGINI , S. M ERLER , ET AL ., Modeling the impact of social distancing, testing,
contact tracing and household quarantine on second-wave scenarios of the covid-19 epidemic, medRxiv, (2020).
[3] M. B. A RVIN , R. P. P RADHAN , AND N. R. N ORMAN, Transportation intensity, urbanization, economic growth, and
co2 emissions in the g-20 countries, Utilities Policy, 35 (2015), pp. 50–66.
[4] J. BAYHAM , J. A DAMS , D. G HOSH , AND P. JACKSON, Colorado mobility patterns during the covid-19 response,
Technical Report, (2020).
[5] J. B OLLEN , H. M AO , AND X. Z ENG, Twitter mood predicts the stock market, Journal of computational science, 2
(2011), pp. 1–8.
[6] W. H. B UITER, Granger-causality and policy effectiveness, Economica, 51 (1984), pp. 151–162.
[7] N. F ERGUSON , D. L AYDON , G. N EDJATI G ILANI , N. I MAI , K. A INSLIE , M. BAGUELIN , S. B HATIA ,
A. B OONYASIRI , Z. C UCUNUBA P EREZ , G. C UOMO -DANNENBURG , ET AL ., Report 9: Impact of nonpharmaceutical interventions (npis) to reduce covid19 mortality and healthcare demand, (2020).
[8] S. F ERRARI AND F. C RIBARI -N ETO, Beta regression for modelling rates and proportions, Journal of applied statistics, 31 (2004), pp. 799–815.
[9] S. G AO , J. R AO , Y. K ANG , Y. L IANG , AND J. K RUSE, Mapping county-level mobility pattern changes in the united
states in response to covid-19, Available at SSRN 3570145, (2020).
[10] C. W. G RANGER, Investigating causal relations by econometric models and cross-spectral methods, Econometrica:
journal of the Econometric Society, (1969), pp. 424–438.
[11] M. H OOD , Q. K IDD , AND I. L. M ORRIS, Two sides of the same coin? employing granger causality tests in a time
series cross-section framework, Political Analysis, 16 (2008), pp. 324–344.
[12] D. A. I SHOLA AND N. P HIN, Could influenza transmission be reduced by restricting mass gatherings? towards an
evidence-based policy framework, Journal of epidemiology and global health, 1 (2011), pp. 33–60.
[13] B. K LEIN , T. L A ROCKY, S. M C C ABEY, L. T ORRESY, F. P RIVITERA , B. L AKE , M. U. K RAEMER , J. S. B ROWN STEIN , D. L AZER , T. E LIASSI -R AD , ET AL ., Assessing changes in commuting and individual mobility in major
metropolitan areas in the united states during the covid-19 outbreak, 2020.
[14] D. K WIATKOWSKI , P. C. P HILLIPS , P. S CHMIDT, Y. S HIN , ET AL ., Testing the null hypothesis of stationarity against
the alternative of a unit root, Journal of econometrics, 54 (1992), pp. 159–178.
[15] S. A. L AUER , K. H. G RANTZ , Q. B I , F. K. J ONES , Q. Z HENG , H. R. M EREDITH , A. S. A ZMAN , N. G. R EICH ,
AND J. L ESSLER , The incubation period of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) from publicly reported confirmed
cases: estimation and application, Annals of internal medicine, 172 (2020), pp. 577–582.
[16] H. M ARKEL , H. B. L IPMAN , J. A. NAVARRO , A. S LOAN , J. R. M ICHALSEN , A. M. S TERN , AND M. S. C ETRON,
Nonpharmaceutical interventions implemented by us cities during the 1918-1919 influenza pandemic, Jama, 298
(2007), pp. 644–654.
[17] K. M OSSBERGER , C. J. T OLBERT, D. B OWEN , AND B. J IMENEZ, Unraveling different barriers to internet use:
Urban residents and neighborhood effects, Urban Affairs Review, 48 (2012), pp. 771–810.
[18] P. K. NARAYAN AND S. P OPP, The energy consumption-real gdp nexus revisited: Empirical evidence from 93 countries, Economic Modelling, 29 (2012), pp. 303–308.
[19] N.
N EWS,
Smashed
windows
and
racist
graffiti:
Vandals
target
asian
americans
amid
coronavirus,
2020,
https://www.nbcnews.com/news/asian-america/
smashed-windows-racist-graffiti-vandals-target-asian-americans-amid-coronavirus-n1180556
(accessed
2020-05-31).

16

K. BUSHMAN ET AL.

[20] NPR, New site collects reports of racism against asian americans amid coronavirus pandemic,
2020,
https://www.npr.org/sections/coronavirus-live-updates/2020/03/27/822187627/
new-site-collects-reports-of-anti-asian-american-sentiment-amid-coronavirus-pand (accessed 2020-05-31).
[21] PBS, Asian americans describe ǵut punchóf racist attacks during coronavirus pandemic, 2020, https://www.pbs.org/
newshour/nation/asian-americans-describe-gut-punch-of-racist-attacks-during-coronavirus-pandemic (accessed
2020-05-31).
[22] T. W. P OST,
As the coronavirus spreads,
so does online racism targeting asians,
new
research
shows,
2020,
https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2020/04/08/
coronavirus-spreads-so-does-online-racism-targeting-asians-new-research-shows/ (accessed 2020-05-31).
[23] G. P ULLANO , E. VALDANO , N. S CARPA , S. RUBRICHI , AND V. C OLIZZA, Population mobility reductions during
covid-19 epidemic in france under lockdown, Epicx-lab Technical Report, (2020).
[24] H. R ASHID , I. R IDDA , C. K ING , M. B EGUN , H. T EKIN , J. G. W OOD , AND R. B OOY, Evidence compendium
and advice on social distancing and other related measures for response to an influenza pandemic, Paediatric
respiratory reviews, 16 (2015), pp. 119–126.
[25] S AFE G RAPH, Safegraph covid-19 data consortium, 2020, https://www.safegraph.com/covid-19-data-consortium (accessed 2020-05-31).
[26] A. B. S IMAS , W. BARRETO -S OUZA , AND A. V. ROCHA, Improved estimators for a general class of beta regression
models, Computational Statistics & Data Analysis, 54 (2010), pp. 348–366.
[27] R. J. TAYLOR , L. M. C HATTERS , A. T. W OODWARD , AND E. B ROWN, Racial and ethnic differences in extended family, friendship, fictive kin, and congregational informal support networks, Family relations, 62 (2013),
pp. 609–624.
[28] T. N. Y. T IMES, Covid-19 data, 2020, https://github.com/nytimes/covid-19-data (accessed 2020-06-03).
[29] T. N. Y. T IMES, How asian-american leaders are grappling with xenophobia amid coronavirus, 2020, https://www.
nytimes.com/2020/03/29/us/politics/coronavirus-asian-americans.html (accessed 2020-05-31).
[30] U. T ODAY, ẃe just want to be safe:́
Hate crimes, harassment of asian americans rise
amid
coronavirus
pandemic,
2020,
https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2020/05/20/
coronavirus-hate-crimes-against-asian-americans-continue-rise/5212123002/ (accessed 2020-05-31).
[31] J. Z HANG , M. L ITVINOVA , Y. L IANG , Y. WANG , W. WANG , S. Z HAO , Q. W U , S. M ERLER , C. V IBOUD ,
A. V ESPIGNANI , ET AL ., Changes in contact patterns shape the dynamics of the covid-19 outbreak in china,
Science, (2020).

