Backtesting the predictability of COVID-19

arXiv:2007.11411v1 [physics.soc-ph] 22 Jul 2020

Dmitry Gordeev∗
H2O.ai
dmitry.gordeev@h2o.ai

Philipp Singer∗
H2O.ai
philipp.singer@h2o.ai

Mathias Müller
H2O.ai
mathias.mueller@h2o.ai

Marios Michailidis∗
H2O.ai
marios.michailidis@h2o.ai
SriSatish Ambati
H2O.ai
sri@h2o.ai

A BSTRACT
The advent of the COVID-19 pandemic has instigated unprecedented changes in many countries
around the globe, putting a significant burden on the health sectors, affecting the macro economic
conditions, and altering social interactions amongst the population through a number of mitigation
measures and governmental instructions. In response, the academic community has produced multiple
forecasting models, approaches and algorithms to best predict the different indicators of COVID-19,
such as the number of confirmed infected cases, the number of deceased and economic indicators.
Specifically at the beginning of the pandemic, researchers had little to no historical information
about the pandemic at their disposal in order to inform their forecasting methods. Our work studies
the predictive performance of models at various stages of the pandemic to better understand their
fundamental uncertainty and the impact of data availability on such forecasts.
We use historical data of infected, deceased and recovered cases of COVID-19 from 253 regions from
the period of 22nd January 2020 until 22nd June 2020 to predict, through a rolling window backtesting
framework, the cumulative number of infected cases for the next 7 and 28 days. We implement three
simple models to track the root mean squared logarithmic error in this 6-month span, a baseline
model that always predicts the last known value of the cumulative confirmed cases, a power growth
model and an epidemiological model called SEIRD. Within our presented backtesting framework,
each model is re-fitted daily and its best parameters are obtained with information known as of that
point in time (in terms of historical confirmed, deceased and recovered cases) and predictions are
extended for the 7-days and 28-days forecast horizons.
We demonstrate that prediction errors are substantially higher in early stages of the pandemic,
resulting from limited data. Throughout the course of the pandemic, errors regress slowly, but steadily.
The more confirmed cases a country exhibits at any point in time, the lower the error in forecasting
future confirmed cases. Our work emphasizes the significance of having a rigorous backtesting
framework to accurately assess the predictive power of such models at any point in time during the
outbreak which in turn can be used to assign the right level of certainty to these forecasts and facilitate
better planning.

∗

All authors contributed equally.

1

Introduction

In the event of a pandemic outbreak, stakeholders such as politicians, pharmaceutical companies or hospitals attempt
to forecast the spread of the pandemic to make informed decisions about actions and policies such as lock-downs,
supply chain optimization, or, in worst case, even crucial decisions about intensive care units. However, every pandemic
is unique in itself and COVID-19 reached a magnitude and severity that has not been observed over the last decades
[17, 21, 52]. As a result, little historical information about similar pandemics was at our disposal at the beginning of the
outbreak in order to make good estimates about the future development of the disease. This information bottleneck
leads to uncertainty in forecasting methods and can be crucial in the efforts to develop new medicine, vaccines, public
guidelines and other important aspects to guarantee public health and safety.
Background. Substantial research has been published over the course of the pandemic, as evident from the COVID-19
Open Research Dataset (CORD-19) [1] containing close to 30,000 COVID-19 related research papers; the dataset
has been extended to cover publications from similar corona-viruses and fostered NLP-related research on the corpus
[4, 28]. In Figure 1, we depict the number of research publications containing the term “Covid“ in the title and having
a publication date2 as well as the weekly number of new cases retrieved from data made available from the John’s
Hopkins University (see Section 2). Similar to the rapid spread of the pandemic, we observe an accelerating number of
publications indicating the strong efforts of the research community to study the pandemic across disciplines.
Many different types of models have been proposed to model and forecast the number of infections within and
across countries. A prominent and frequently applied type is the classical epidemiological framework [32] modeling
susceptible, exposed, infected, and recovered agents (SEIR) that has also found its application in several COVID-19
forecasting approaches [13, 14, 26, 27, 35, 36, 48]. A second type of category represents autoregressive moving average
models that attempt to extrapolate future data by means of aggregating recent data. These types of models have had
many successful implementations in time series forecasting—e.g. financial methods [16]—and have recently also
been applied to predict COVID-19 numbers [15, 42, 45]. Third, several curve fitting and statistical models have been
proposed to be well-tailored for COVID-19 forecasting, including power-law models [56], simple linear or polynomial
models [41, 54], logistic models [49], mixed-effects models [11, 19], and many others. Finally, many approaches in the
realm of machine learning have been developed [5], including e.g. Facebook’s prophet algorithm [40], gradient boosted
trees [47], or neural networks [55]. This list only covers a small fraction of published models, an exemplary overview
of others is also given in [3, 20, 33].
Kaggle, a large competitive data science platform with around five million users [25], conducted a series of five
competitions [6, 7, 8, 9, 10] allowing data scientists to develop and submit their COVID-19 forecasting models to
predict confirmed cases and fatalities across ∼300 regions—including mostly country-level and in certain cases
province-level or state-level predictions—for no less than 30 days into the future3 . The models were always developed
on historical data and then evaluated live over a period of four succeeding weeks or more. Across all competitions,
different types of models have performed well including the above-mentioned machine learning models (boosting
trees, neural networks) as well as a diverse set of curve fitting, statistical, and autoregressive models. The series
of competitions captures the state of development of these kinds of models during a pandemic quite well, with the
models being initially quite simple and uninformed [6, 7], and developing to more robust models and ensembles over
time [8, 9, 10]. While many strong solutions have been developed, it has also been shown that a lot of subjective
adjustments[22, 37] can make a model shine or fail and that it is explicitly complex to forecast rapidly changing patterns.
Objectives. As summarized, a plethora of research has been conducted in order to forecast the COVID-19 pandemic.
However, given the rapidly changing environments, data irregularities as well as the inherent difficulty of predicting
these numbers, this type of research has also been criticized due to the sensitivity of the topic at hand and the potential
huge implications of poorly performing models [29, 30]. Wynants et al. [53] conducted a review of 66 published models
with focus on predicting different aspects of COVID-19 or similar diseases including models for forecasting hospital
admissions due to pneumonia, diagnostic models for detecting COVID-19 as well as prognostic models for assessing
mortality risk, length of stay in the hospital and exacerbation of the disease. Their review rated the aforementioned
models as of high or unclear risk and biased due to improper testing frameworks, with non-representative selection of
control patients. They also highlighted the lack of clarity in the reporting of the findings and that these models have
a high risk of overfitting. They concluded that a reporting guideline needs to be adhered from all works predicting
COVID-19 or similar diseases to avoid unreliable predictions as the latter “could cause more harm than benefit in
guiding clinical decisions“.

2
3

All publications from WHO database do not have a date and are excluded from this visualization.
In each of the five competitions, at least one author of this paper finished in the top 5.

1

Figure 1: Research publications and COVID-19 confirmed cases. This figure shows the number of published articles
derived from the CORD-19 dataset as well as the worldwide number of new cases on a weekly aggregation level.

We still strongly believe in the fundamental value of these types of models, specifically for application in potential
second waves or other future pandemics. In order to be able to utilize these types of models, they have to be properly
evaluated and made transparent [18].
Nonetheless, most of these models have been developed during the outbreak of the pandemic, and thus, could only be
evaluated on historical data up to that point. While some countries still see rising numbers in COVID-19 infections as of
this writing4 (e.g., Brazil, India or the US), most countries are well past the peak and see rapid flattening of the curves.
However a few potential instances of 2nd waves may already be happening [50]. Consequently, we are now in the
unique position to backtest and investigate predictive performance of COVID-19 forecasting models across countries at
different points in time. This not only allows us to study the fundamental prediction difficulty of infection curves, but
also measure predictive performance at various stages of the pandemic.
Contributions and findings. To study these and similar questions, we make the following contributions: (i) We apply
two simple, yet well-known and robust, short-term forecasting methods along with a baseline to predict confirmed
COVID-19 cases. (ii) We introduce a thorough backtesting framework that allows us to provide accurate assessments
about a model’s prediction performance. (iii) We utilize this framework to empirically study the general predictability
of COVID-19 across various stages of the outbreak.
Our work highlights the importance of proper testing, tracking and quantifying of the prediction error through time as
well as through different levels of accumulated infected cases. We observe that the prediction error is substantially
higher in the early stages of the pandemic, when the number of confirmed cases is still low and the trends are still
undeveloped. Then follows a period of approximately 15 days (past the early days of March) where the error drop
significantly by about 3.5 times. From that point on it regresses steadily to lower levels as more data becomes available.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the source of the data used as well as the methods by which the
latter was transformed and processed to underpin the experiments. A power growth model and a version of the SEIR
model called SEIRD are optimized and applied via multiple moving windows in a backtesting setting across all countries
to predict the confirmed infected cases of COVID-19 and track the prediction error over time. Section 3 describes the
methodology supporting these models in terms of their parameters, optimization routines and loss functions minimized
within the context of the backtesting framework. Section 4 highlights the conducted experiments and core findings.
Ultimately, the conclusions of the experiments are drawn in Section 5.
4

Beginning of July 2020

2

Figure 2: Data preparation. This figure depicts our data cleaning routine, where a linear interpolation is applied to
replace two consecutive points of the same value.

2

Data

The primary source of data is the data repository of the Johns Hopkins University Centre for Systems Science and
Engineering [2]. It contains daily updates about confirmed, deceased, and recovered cases at country level. Due to given
irregularities in the way different countries report daily COVID-19 statistics, we employ a basic data cleaning routine.
As we are working on a cumulative level of confirmed cases, we aim at guaranteeing the monotonicity requirement.
The corrective measure to ensure monotonicity is applied when the value between two consecutive dates remains the
same and then increases with a high pace. In this case, the latter of the two is replaced with a linear interpolation of the
neighbor values (i.e., the average between the previous value and the next value). The reasoning behind this measure is
that often the cases remain the same due to irregularities and delays of the reporting system [31, 43]. An example of
applying this transformation is shown in Figure 2, assuming the confirmed cumulative count is originally as depicted in
the solid blue line, we transform it to the dashed blue line. Even though the overall expansion of a curve may not be
linear in respect to time, finding a better method to correct the same-value irregularity is an exhaustive task and out of
scope for this analysis.
Overall, our dataset contains 253 regions, with daily statistics ranging from the 22nd January 2020 to the 22nd June
2020. We observe around 9.1 million confirmed cases and 472, 000 fatalities; see also Figure 1 for a visualization of the
development over time.

3

Methodology

This section details the elements utilized to implement the experiments of tracking and understanding the error in
predicting the COVID-19 confirmed infected cases over time across the globe at the country level. We start by
elaborating our core backtesting methodology in Section 3.1 which we utilize to study the RMSLE loss function (see
Section 3.2) over time. Within the scope of backtesting, we employ three models described in Section 3.3: a simple
baseline model, a power growth model, and an extension of the well-known SEIR model, called SEIRD.
3

3.1

Backtesting

Backesting—or the process of evaluating a model or an algorithm over different past periods of time—is commonly
associated with trading strategies, banking, or risk prediction [51]. Backtesting in predictive modeling can be an
important tool in finding the optimal parameters for the used models as well as for measuring the volatility of predictions
through time. Assessment of the forecast accuracy can be dramatically biased if done on the same data used for model
fitting [23]. A technique of setting up a single hold-out sample can serve as a way to derive more accurate forecast error
estimations, however it does not provide the information about how the model accuracy improves over time, as more
information becomes available. Moreover, an assessment based on a single sample is not robust given the limited size
of the data available to fit the models.
In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, backtesting the models aimed to predict different aspects of the disease (in
confirmed, deceased, or recovered cases) can facilitate understanding of the sensitivity of these models in producing
accurate and robust results given varying sizes of training history. Such an approach can enable defining the time (or the
amount of training history) required to produce results of certain accuracy levels, quite often essential in order to use
them efficiently in decision systems.
Using the EDI model, an exponentially decreasing intensity growth model, Moriconi [39] used backtesting on China’s
daily confirmed COVID-19 cases, starting from 13th February 2020, and observed substantial overestimation for
(approximately) the first week of predictions before the model started being significantly more accurate. Volatility in
predictions (via varying levels of over- and underestimation) were also observed in the work of Lesage [34] where the
Hawkes process [24] was utilized to predict via backtesting the number of confirmed cases in both France and China in
different periods of February and March.
Rouabah et al. [44] used the SEIQRDP model—a variant of the SEIRD model that also incorporates quarantined (Q)
individuals to be considered as active cases as well as the protected population (P) for cases that strictly follow the
standard advised protection measures—in order to forecast the elements of that model for the next six months past the
last training day of 24th May 2020 for Algeria. Their work emphasizes the threat of creating unstable models due to
overfitting and underfitting, plus they point out that overfitting is a major issue in epidemic dynamical models due to the
noise embedded in the data. The SEIQRDP model’s parameters were optimized using a genetic algorithm, enhanced
by published information for these parameters. To find the optimum number of iterations for the genetic algorithm
to obtain the best parameters, a time-based cross validation procedure was applied in different countries so that the
first n days for a given country’s infected numbers are used to fit the algorithm and the last v are used for validation.
This process was tested on the countries of Italy, Spain, Germany and South Korea before applying it to Algeria. The
ratio of v/n can be adjusted based on the number of parameters that need optimization. In this case the ratio was about
1/4. The study highlights that there is an inverse relationship between the training sample’s size and the number of
iterations required in the genetic algorithm. As more data becomes available for a given country, the optimum number
of iterations decreases. Therefore re-evaluating the optimization at different points in time is important for obtaining the
most accurate results.
With the application of backtesting, we can not only derive the accuracy of predictions made in the past, but also
show how the accuracy changes during the pandemic. The main idea behind backtesting is to make the predictions by
the model at a fixed time point t in the past and estimate the error at the time point t + H, where H is a predefined
prediction horizon. In this paper, we focus on two values, H = 7 days for short-term predictions and H = 28 days for
a longer forecast.
Denote by X a p × N matrix, where p is number of regions, and N is number of days with available numbers of
confirmed cases. Let us denote by X (t1 )(t2 ) = Xi,j where i = 1, ..., p and j = t1 , ..., t2 the matrix of observations
available between days t1 and t2 and by X (t) = Xi,t where i = 1, ..., p the values at the day t. The backtesting implies
fitting a model f : Rp×t → Rp×t+H for each day t = 1, ..., N − H
θ̂t = argmin Lf it (f (X (1)(t) ; θ)(1)(t) , X (1)(t) )

(1)

θ

where Lf it is the loss function.
We later assess the error of the forecast with horizon H as
ERRH (t) = Leval (f (X (1)(t) ; θ̂t )(t+H) , X (t+H) )

(2)

where Leval is the evaluation metric. The experiment results in two (H = 7 and H = 28) time series of errors per
model f , showing the values of forecast error, the fluctuations of the error and its dynamics during the pandemic.
4

3.2

Loss function

The choice of the loss function was driven by the fact that most models predicting the development of number of
confirmed infection cases assume exponential growth. In such a case, metrics like RMSE (root mean squared error) and
MAE (mean absolute error), based on absolute difference in number of predicted and realized cases, tend to significantly
penalize any exponential over-estimations. Therefore, root mean squared logarithmic error (RMSLE) was chosen as the
evaluation metric Leval .
s
RM SLE(X, Y ) =

1 X
(ln(1 + X) − ln(1 + Y ))2
N ∗ p i,j

(3)

where X and Y are matrices of the same size N × p.
Also, consistent with [6, 7, 8, 9], the loss function is applied to the cumulative number of cases.
3.3

Models

Next, we specify three models that we employ utilizing our backtesting framework to study the RMSLE error over time.
(1) For reference, we utilize a simple parameter-free baseline model that predicts future confirmed cases by using the
latest known data point, (2) we introduce a power-growth model employing constant growth that decays over time, and
(3) we utilize a variation of the well-known epidemiological SEIR model called SEIRD.
Baseline model. As a reference point for the evaluation metric across the pandemic development, a simple parameterfree baseline model was applied. Denoting by Ct number of cumulative confirmed cases in a region at point in time t,
the baseline predictions are
Ct+i = Ct , i = 1, ..., N

(4)

The baseline model is not intended to produce reasonable forecasts, but rather to indicate how difficult it is to make
accurate predictions at each point in time t.
Power-growth model. This model is motivated by different types of COVID-19 forecasting models such as statistical
power law models with exponential growth [38], or autoregressive moving average models as described in Section 1.
We have utilized this model successfully across all five Kaggle competitions [6, 7, 8, 9, 10] and the version presented
in this paper is the final adaption of it. The main idea of the model is to forecast COVID-19 cases, by employing a
constant growth rate that is derived from previous observations. This growth rate is decaying over time and the decay
can accelerate. In detail, we can define the power-growth model as follows:
Ct+i = Ct + gr · max(0, (1 + grd · (1 + grda )i )log(t+i) )

(5)

In Equation 5 we want to predict the cumulative number of cases C at time t + i, i = 1, ..., H using the number of cases
at time t; gr refers to the growth rate, grd to the decay of the growth rate, and grda to the acceleration of the decay.
The growth rate is calculated for each region separately by taking an exponential weighted average of the observed
daily growth rate over a certain number of past days (ndays ). If a region does not exceed a minimum number of cases
(min_cases), a default growth rate (grdef ) is employed. The growth rate decay grd as well as its acceleration grda are
constant across all regions. All parameters except the growth rate are thus hyperparameters that are optimized based on
a global metric across regions. The modified power-growth model fitting was performed the following way.
θ̂t = argmin Lf it (f (X (1)(t−21) ; θ)(t−20)(t) , X (t−20)(t) )

(6)

θ

Meaning that the most recent 21 days of data were used to optimize the hyperparameters. Loss function is the same as
the evaluation metric Lf it = Leval = RM SLE.
SEIRD model. The SEIR model belongs to a family of epidemiological models (see also Section 1 that map the spread
of an epidemic through the sequential interaction of 4 groups or states (represented as ordinary differential equations),
the susceptible (or number of individuals that can contract the disease), exposed, infected and removed.
5

Our implementation uses a variation of the SEIR model called SEIRD [12]. In this application, the removed category is
further divided into recovered and deceased. The equations that map the rate of change in respect to the main states are
displayed below:
∂S
S
= −βI
∂t
N

(7)

where ∂S
∂t represents the change applied to the susceptible population S at time t, β is the infection rate (or how many
people an infected individual infects), I the infected population at time t and N the total population.
∂E
S
= βI − δE
∂t
N

(8)

where ∂E
∂t represents the change applied to the exposed population E at time t, δ is a parameter that controls the rate by
which the exposed population transitions to the infected state and it can be interpreted as 1 divided by the incubation
period (or in other words, the period that an individual is infected but asymptomatic and unable to spread the disease to
others).
∂I
= δE − (1 − α)γI − αρI
∂t

(9)

Similarly, to compute the change applied to the infected group at time t, a parameter γ is used to represent the recovery
rate, or how quickly individuals move to the recovered state. Equivalently, ρ controls how quickly individuals move to
the deceased state. The parameter α represents the fatality rate or the proportion of the infected population that will
transition to the deceased state. The (1 − α) represents the proportion of the infected population that will transition to
the recovered state.
∂R
= (1 − α)γI
∂t

(10)

which expresses the change applied to the recovered group R at time t. Finally,
∂D
= αρI
∂t
expresses the change applied to the deceased group D at time t.

(11)

For each country, and given a set of bounds for the model’s parameters (of N, β, δ, γ, α, ρ), a stochastic, populationbased optimisation algorithm with differential evolution [46] is applied to find the optimum values for these parameters
in order to minimize the RMSE 5 across all the infected, recovered and deceased groups up to a selected point in
time. The bounds-based optimization algorithm was preferred over others (like gradient-based), because the bounds
were selected based on latest known information in regards to infection rate, incubation period, and fatality rate and it
provided a fairly narrow constrained environment for the algorithm to converge more quickly.
v
u n
u1 X
rmse(y, ŷ) = t
(yi − ŷi )2
n i=1

(12)

Where y is the observed value for either one of infected, recovered or deceased and ŷ the corresponding predicted value
for these groups. Then the overall metric to optimize can be defined as:
ˆ
b δ,
bγ
b , β,
ˆ R, R̂, D, D̂) = rmse(I, I) + rmse(R, R̂) + rmse(D, D̂)
N
b, α
b, ρb = argmin(N,β,δ,γ,α,ρ) M (I, I,
3

(13)

ˆ rmse(R, R̂), rmse(D, D̂) which
Where M is the objective to minimize and connotes the average of rmse(I, I),
are the respective root mean squared errors for infected, recovered and deceased. Once the optimum parameters
5

Experiments indicated better results and faster convergence with RMSE instead of RMSLE for SEIRD; we still report RMSLE
from here onwards for fair comparison.

6

b δ,
bγ
b , β,
N
b, α
b, ρb have been obtained, the curves for infected, recovered and deceased are extrapolated in time to match
the forecasting period. Since the predicted values are based on the fit with the known values, it is possible that the
cumulative predicted numbers are lower than the last known value. In that case, the differences between the predicted
points are computed and added to the last known value to form the new cumulative predictions.

(a) 7 days forecast horizon

(b) 28 days forecast horizon

Figure 3: Backtesting error over time. This plot shows the errors for each model versus time (baseline, power-growth,
SEIRD) for the two forecast horizons of 7 days in (a) and 28 days in (b), limiting the analysis to regions having at least
100 confirmed cases. The x-axis depicts the forecast date—i.e., the point in time where respective model has been fitted
on past data only—and the left y-axis its respective prediction error based on the given forecast horizon. For instance,
in (a), the green point at May 10 refers to the RMSLE error seven days in the future for a SEIRD model fitted on all
historic up to this point in time. The grey bars highlight the global number of new confirmed cases (right y-axis) on
each day for visual reference. Note that the last data points plotted for (a) and (b) are 7 and 28 days prior to the last
evaluation date of 22nd June 2020 as such were the periods required to calculate the evaluation error.
7

4

Experiments

Our experiments are based on the data spanning the period from the 22nd January (d = 1) until the 22nd June 2020
(d = 153), counting N = 153 days of data points from each of p = 253 regions. In order to provide at least a month
of data for training the models, backtesting results are reported from d = 31 onwards. Two prediction horizons were
chosen for the experiments: H = 7 and H = 28. Many regions report new cases with weekly cycle, where lower cases
are reported during the weekend, therefore, horizons over full weeks are suggested to avoid instability. We make the
backtesting framework as well as further code to run the experiments available online6 .
The first experiment aggregates the ERRH (t) by the date t in order to show how forecasting error develops over the
course of the pandemic. We show respective results for both forecasting horizons in Figure 3. A first observation is
that it is easier to capture short-term trends, compared to long-term trends, as evident from smaller absolute prediction
errors across all models for the 7-days forecasts in Figure 3a compared to the 28-days forecasts in Figure 3b. Both the
power-growth and SEIRD model perform better than the simple baseline for most parts of the curve, which is why we
focus on them next.
We observe a steady trend of prediction error decreasing together with error of a baseline model. We see that in the
beginning of the outbreak in early March, both models depict high errors in predicting confirmed infected cases which
are near the levels of 1.3 and 5 respectively for the 7-days and 28-days forecast horizons. Over time, the models’ errors
move down elastically and reach 0.4 and 1.5 respectively for the two forecast horizons. In other words, the error gets
reduced about three times by middle-to-end of March, which is roughly 15 extra days of observed data. From that point
on the errors regress more inelastically through time and gradually reach 0.1-0.2 and 0.5 for the two forecast periods in
June.
Given the decreasing error over time, we are now interested in studying the effect of historical data volume on prediction
errors. To that end, our second experiment visualized in Figure 4, contrasts how the error depends on the accumulated
number of confirmed cases. The evaluation metric was aggregated by Ct —number of confirmed cases at the date
when the forecast was made. We focus on a forecasting horizon of 28 days, but can observe similar trends for the
7-days forecast horizon. We can clearly see, that the error decreases with more training data available. SEIRD is even
performing worse than the baseline with very limited number of recorded cases. As soon as a region reaches 1000
confirmed cases, we observe that the forecast accuracy is securely below the baseline and monotonically decreasing.
The power-growth model shows constant improvement of the error with increasing Ct .

5

Conclusions

In this paper, we studied the predictive performance of COVID-19 forecasting models throughout the course of the
pandemic. To that end, we examined the error (through RMSLE) for predicting COVID-19 confirmed cases across
multiple countries around the globe through time and volume starting from 22nd January until 22nd June 2020. The
error was investigated via applying three models, a simple baseline model, a power growth model, and the well-known
epidemiological SEIRD model, under a rigorous back testing framework that required refitting the models’ parameters
every day on historical data up to this point and making predictions, covering the whole six-month period. We used
7-days and 28-days forecast horizons for our measurements.
Our work highlights the importance of applying a rigorous backtesting framework to predicting the different stages
of COVID-19. It is clearly demonstrated (and expected) that different time and volume can result in different error
levels. In the early days of the outbreak, when the volume of observed cases is still low, the error is larger (with higher
volatility) versus later stages when the curves have more developed shapes. Accurately depicting the error level can
facilitate better usage of such epidemic models when they get integrated into decision systems as it can help the decision
maker decide how much confidence to place in such models at different stages throughout the epidemic. It is imperative
to understand whether the error level of an epidemic model is low enough at any given point in time to provide a useful
or exploitable prediction as the cost the of the models’ errors may result in more than financial losses.
Acknowledgements. We want to thank Dr. Christof Henkel (kaggle.com/christofhenkel) for collaboration on
Kaggle developing our proposed power-growth model.

6

https://github.com/h2oai/covid19-backtesting-publication

8

Figure 4: Backtesting error by number of cases. This plot shows how the error evolves based on the number of
historical confirmed cases; it highlights the errors grouped by the number of confirmed cases in a country or region.
The x-axis depicts buckets of number of cases at the point in time when the model was fitted. The left y-axis depicts
the average error 28 days in the future, across all countries falling into the respective bucket of cases at any point in
time. The grey bars (right y-axis) show how many overall observations (region-day pairs) are accumulated for each
bucket. For example, the 256-512 bucket captures all observations where the historical number of confirmed cases falls
into this range at any specific day of interest for fitting the models. The y-axis then depicts the average error across all
region-day pairs (which sums to approximately 1,700 observations for this bucket). A single country can fall multiple
times into the same bucket.

References
[1] Cord-19 covid-19 open research dataset. https://www.semanticscholar.org/cord19. Accessed: 2020-06-03.
[2] Covid-19 data repository by the center for systems science and engineering (csse) at johns hopkins university. https:
//github.com/CSSEGISandData/COVID-19. Accessed: 2020-06-03.
[3] Covid-19 forecast hub. https://github.com/reichlab/covid19-forecast-hub. Accessed: 2020-06-02.
[4] Covid-19 open research dataset challenge (cord-19).
CORD-19-research-challenge. Accessed: 2020-06-03.

https://www.kaggle.com/allen-institute-for-ai/

[5] Covid-19 projections using machine learning. https://covid19-projections.com/. Accessed: 2020-06-02.
[6] Covid19 global forecasting (week 1). https://www.kaggle.com/c/covid19-global-forecasting-week-1. Accessed:
2020-06-03.
[7] Covid19 global forecasting (week 2). https://www.kaggle.com/c/covid19-global-forecasting-week-2. Accessed:
2020-06-03.
[8] Covid19 global forecasting (week 3). https://www.kaggle.com/c/covid19-global-forecasting-week-3. Accessed:
2020-06-03.
[9] Covid19 global forecasting (week 4). https://www.kaggle.com/c/covid19-global-forecasting-week-4. Accessed:
2020-06-03.
[10] Covid19 global forecasting (week 5). https://www.kaggle.com/c/covid19-global-forecasting-week-5. Accessed:
2020-06-03.
[11] Ihme covid-19 projections. https://covid19.healthdata.org/. Accessed: 2020-06-02.
[12] Infectious disease modelling:
Beyond the basic sir model.
https://towardsdatascience.com/
infectious-disease-modelling-beyond-the-basic-sir-model-216369c584c4. Accessed: 2020-06-03.
[13] Lanl covid-19 confirmed and forecasted case data. https://covid-19.bsvgateway.org/. Accessed: 2020-06-02.
[14] S. Afonso, J. Azevedo, and M. Pinheiro. Epidemic analysis of covid-19 in brazil by a generalized seir model. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.11420, 2020.
[15] R. Anne. Arima modelling of predicting covid-19 infections. medRxiv, 2020.

9

[16] A. A. Ariyo, A. O. Adewumi, and C. K. Ayo. Stock price prediction using the arima model. In 2014 UKSim-AMSS 16th
International Conference on Computer Modelling and Simulation, pages 106–112. IEEE, 2014.
[17] S. R. Baker, N. Bloom, S. J. Davis, K. J. Kost, M. C. Sammon, and T. Viratyosin. The unprecedented stock market impact of
covid-19. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2020.
[18] C. M. Barton, M. Alberti, D. Ames, J.-A. Atkinson, J. Bales, E. Burke, M. Chen, S. Y. Diallo, D. J. Earn, B. Fath, et al. Call for
transparency of covid-19 models. Science, 368(6490):482–483, 2020.
[19] I. COVID, C. J. Murray, et al. Forecasting the impact of the first wave of the covid-19 pandemic on hospital demand and deaths
for the usa and european economic area countries. medRxiv, 2020.
[20] C. S. Currie, J. W. Fowler, K. Kotiadis, T. Monks, B. S. Onggo, D. A. Robertson, and A. A. Tako. How simulation modelling
can help reduce the impact of covid-19. Journal of Simulation, pages 1–15, 2020.
[21] S. Flaxman, S. Mishra, A. Gandy, H. Unwin, H. Coupland, T. Mellan, H. Zhu, T. Berah, J. Eaton, P. Perez Guzman, et al.
Report 13: Estimating the number of infections and the impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions on covid-19 in 11 european
countries. 2020.
[22] G. Fodor.
1st place solution lgbm with some adjustments.
https://www.kaggle.com/c/
covid19-global-forecasting-week-5/discussion/155638. Accessed: 2020-07-22.
[23] J. Friedman, T. Hastie, and R. Tibshirani. The elements of statistical learning. chapter 7.10. Springer series in statistics New
York, 2001.
[24] A. G. Hawkes. Spectra of some self-exciting and mutually exciting point processes. Biometrika, 58(1):83–90, 1971.
[25] M. Henze. Kaggle milestone: 5 million registered users!
2020-07-22.

https://www.kaggle.com/general/164795. Accessed:

[26] P. Hernández, C. Pena, A. Ramos, and J. Gómez-Cadenas. A simple formulation of non-markovian seir. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.09975, 2020.
[27] T. Hulshof, J. Jorritsma, and J. Komjáthy. Not all interventions are equal for the height of the second peak. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.06880, 2020.
[28] M. Huttson. Artificial-intelligence tools aim to tame the coronavirus literature. https://www.nature.com/articles/
d41586-020-01733-7. Accessed: 2020-06-15.
[29] J. P. Ioannidis, S. Cripps, and M. A. Tanner. Forecasting for covid-19 has failed. https://forecasters.org/blog/2020/
06/14/forecasting-for-covid-19-has-failed/. Accessed: 2020-06-15.
[30] N. P. Jewell, J. A. Lewnard, and B. L. Jewell. Caution warranted: using the institute for health metrics and evaluation model for
predicting the course of the covid-19 pandemic, 2020.
[31] A. J. Kucharski, T. W. Russell, C. Diamond, Y. Liu, J. Edmunds, S. Funk, R. M. Eggo, F. Sun, M. Jit, J. D. Munday, et al. Early
dynamics of transmission and control of covid-19: a mathematical modelling study. The lancet infectious diseases, 2020.
[32] M. Kuperman and G. Abramson. Small world effect in an epidemiological model. Physical Review Letters, 86(13):2909, 2001.
[33] S. Latif, M. Usman, S. Manzoor, W. Iqbal, J. Qadir, G. Tyson, I. Castro, A. Razi, M. N. K. Boulos, A. Weller, et al. Leveraging
data science to combat covid-19: A comprehensive review. 2020.
[34] L. Lesage. A Hawkes process to make aware people of the severity of COVID-19 outbreak: application to cases in France.
PhD thesis, Université de Lorraine; University of Luxembourg, 2020.
[35] Q. Lin, S. Zhao, D. Gao, Y. Lou, S. Yang, S. S. Musa, M. H. Wang, Y. Cai, W. Wang, L. Yang, et al. A conceptual model
for the outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) in wuhan, china with individual reaction and governmental action.
International journal of infectious diseases, 2020.
[36] L. López and X. Rodo. A modified seir model to predict the covid-19 outbreak in spain and italy: simulating control scenarios
and multi-scale epidemics. Available at SSRN 3576802, 2020.
[37] M. Michailidis.
Some ml, a lot of judgement and luck.
https://www.kaggle.com/c/
covid19-global-forecasting-week-5/discussion/143893. Accessed: 2020-07-22.
[38] M. Mitzenmacher. A brief history of generative models for power law and lognormal distributions. Internet mathematics,
1(2):226–251, 2004.
[39] F. Moriconi. A model with exponentially decreasing intensity for covid-19 epidemic outbreak. Available at SSRN 3575705,
2020.
[40] B. M. Ndiaye, L. Tendeng, and D. Seck. Analysis of the covid-19 pandemic by sir model and machine learning technics for
forecasting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.01574, 2020.
[41] G. Pandey, P. Chaudhary, R. Gupta, and S. Pal. Seir and regression model based covid-19 outbreak predictions in india. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2004.00958, 2020.
[42] H. R. Pourghasemi, S. Pouyan, Z. Farajzadeh, N. Sadhasivam, B. Heidari, S. Babaei, and J. P. Tiefenbacher. Assessment of the
outbreak risk, mapping and infestation behavior of covid-19: Application of the autoregressive and moving average (arma) and
polynomial models. medRxiv, 2020.

10

[43] M. Roser, H. Ritchie, E. Ortiz-Ospina, and J. Hasell. Coronavirus pandemic (covid-19). Our World in Data, 2020.
[44] M. Rouabah, A. Tounsi, and N. Belaloui. Epidemic seiqrdp model using genetic fitting algorithm with cross-validation and
application to early dynamics of covid-19 in algeria. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.13516, 2020.
[45] R. K. Singh, M. Rani, A. S. Bhagavathula, R. Sah, A. J. Rodriguez-Morales, H. Kalita, C. Nanda, S. Sharma, Y. D. Sharma,
A. A. Rabaan, et al. Prediction of the covid-19 pandemic for the top 15 affected countries: Advanced autoregressive integrated
moving average (arima) model. JMIR public health and surveillance, 6(2):e19115, 2020.
[46] R. Storn and K. Price. Differential evolution–a simple and efficient heuristic for global optimization over continuous spaces.
Journal of global optimization, 11(4):341–359, 1997.
[47] Y. Suzuki and A. Suzuki. Machine learning model estimating number of covid-19 infection cases over coming 24 days in every
province of south korea (xgboost and multioutputregressor). medRxiv, 2020.
[48] B. Tang, X. Wang, Q. Li, N. L. Bragazzi, S. Tang, Y. Xiao, and J. Wu. Estimation of the transmission risk of the 2019-ncov and
its implication for public health interventions. Journal of clinical medicine, 9(2):462, 2020.
[49] D. Tátrai and Z. Várallyay. Covid-19 epidemic outcome predictions based on logistic fitting and estimation of its reliability.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.14160, 2020.
[50] P. Venkatesan. Covid-19 in iran: round 2. The Lancet. Infectious Diseases, 20(7):784, 2020.
[51] N. K. Virdi. A review of backtesting methods for evaluating value-at-risk. International Review of Business Research Papers,
7(4):14–24, 2011.
[52] P. Walker, C. Whittaker, O. Watson, M. Baguelin, K. Ainslie, S. Bhatia, S. Bhatt, A. Boonyasiri, O. Boyd, L. Cattarino, et al.
Report 12: The global impact of covid-19 and strategies for mitigation and suppression. 2020.
[53] L. Wynants, B. Van Calster, M. M. Bonten, G. S. Collins, T. P. Debray, M. De Vos, M. C. Haller, G. Heinze, K. G. Moons, R. D.
Riley, et al. Prediction models for diagnosis and prognosis of covid-19 infection: systematic review and critical appraisal. bmj,
369, 2020.
[54] S. Yang, P. Cao, P. Du, Z. Wu, Z. Zhuang, L. Yang, X. Yu, Q. Zhou, X. Feng, X. Wang, et al. Early estimation of the case
fatality rate of covid-19 in mainland china: a data-driven analysis. Annals of translational medicine, 8(4), 2020.
[55] Z. Zhao, K. Nehil-Puleo, and Y. Zhao. How well can we forecast the covid-19 pandemic with curve fitting and recurrent neural
networks? medRxiv, 2020.
[56] A. L. Ziff and R. M. Ziff. Fractal kinetics of covid-19 pandemic. medRxiv, 2020.

11

