Exploratory Analysis of COVID-19 Related Tweets in North America to
Inform Public Health Institutes
Hyeju Jang1, 2 , Emily Rempel2 , Giuseppe Carenini1 , Naveed Janjua2
1
Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia
2
British Columbia Centre for Disease Control
{hyejuj, carenini}@cs.ubc.ca
{emily.rempel, naveed.janjua}@bccdc.ca

arXiv:2007.02452v1 [cs.CL] 5 Jul 2020

Abstract
Social media is a rich source where we can
learn about people’s reactions to social issues.
As COVID-19 has significantly impacted on
people’s lives, it is essential to capture how
people react to public health interventions and
understand their concerns. In this paper, we
aim to investigate people’s reactions and concerns about COVID-19 in North America, especially focusing on Canada. We analyze
COVID-19 related tweets using topic modeling and aspect-based sentiment analysis, and
interpret the results with public health experts.
We compare timeline of topics discussed with
timing of implementation of public health interventions for COVID-19. We also examine
people’s sentiment about COVID-19 related issues. We discuss how the results can be helpful for public health agencies when designing a
policy for new interventions. Our work shows
how Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques could be applied to public health questions with domain expert involvement.

1

Introduction

Globally, more than 10 million people have been
diagnosed with COVID-19 infection and 500,000
people have died as of June 29, 2020. Since there
is no vaccine or effective treatment, governments
across the world implemented wide-ranging nonpharmaceutical interventions such as hand hygiene,
face masks, contact tracing, isolation and quarantine, and physical (social) distancing through banning mass gatherings and lockdowns to reduce the
transmission of SARS-CoV-2.
Similar to previous infectious disease outbreaks
such as Ebola, people are using social media to
share news, information, opinions and emotions.
Thus, social media is an important source to learn
about people’s reactions and concerns, and this information can be beneficial for public health institutes when designing interventions. Understanding

both people’s reactions to COVID-19 and where
their concerns lie helps to tailor public health strategy and ultimately create better informed interventions.
In this paper, we investigate Twitter user’s reactions to COVID-19 in North America, especially focusing on Canada. We analyze COVID-19 related
tweets using topic modeling and Aspect-Based
Sentiment Analysis (ABSA) using human-in-theloop, and interpret the results with public health
experts. We first discover topics in COVID-19 related tweets using a widely used topic modeling
approach, Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) (Blei
et al., 2003). To assess changes in topics of discussion over time, we compare timelines of topic distributions and timing of implementation of public
health interventions for COVID-19. Furthermore,
we examine the sentiment of tweets about COVID19 related aspects such as social distancing and
masks, by using ABSA based on domain specific
aspect and opinion terms. We also discuss how
the results can inform public health interventions.
Our work shows how Natural Language Processing
(NLP) techniques could be applied to public health
questions with domain expert involvement.

2

Related Work

Topic modeling and sentiment analysis have been
widely used to identify issues and people’s opinions
in public health. In this paper, we will only introduce a few examples relevant to COVID-19. Liu
et al. (2020a) applied topic modeling to identify patterns of media-directed health communications and
discuss the role of the media during the COVID-19
pandemic in China. Sha et al. (2020) also identified
topics related to COVID-19 on tweets posted by
U.S. governors and presidential cabinet members.
Sharma et al. (2020) used topic modeling and sentiment analysis to provide topic and trend analysis as

#
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6

Representative words
social, distancing, outside, park, walk,
quarantinelife, stayhome
china, travel, canada, russia, flights,
trade, border
hands, wash, health, public, use, need,
safety
home, stay, safe, work, sick, family, essential
positive, testing, tested, cases, patients,
hospital, data
masks, wear, face, hand, sanitizer,
gloves, surgical

Interpretation
Social and physical distancing, including spending time
outside during quarantine.
Air travel and regional border restrictions/outbreaks.
Hand washing and what people can do to prevent
COVID-19.
The need to stay home and the impact of COVID-19 on
essential workers and family.
This topic focuses on data, particularly number of tests
and cases.
Things we can do to prevent COVID-19, e.g., masks and
face coverings.

Table 1: Topics most relevant to public health and their interpretations.

well as public sentiment towards social distancing
and work-from-home policy interventions.
Our work is distinct from other efforts in that
public health experts are actively involved in the
process, with the specific goal of informing public
health interventions. Our results are interpreted by
these public health experts, and we use a human-inthe-loop ABSA approach to obtain domain specific
aspect and opinion terms.

3

Data

We use a public twitter dataset about the COVID19 pandemic, collected by Chen et al. (2020) using numerous COVID-19 related keywords such as
“coronavirus”, “COVID-19” and “pandemic”. The
data collection started on January 28, 2020, and is
still ongoing, which has published over 123 million
tweets.
For our work, we select tweets from January to
May, whose location is Canada and United States
(US).1 Among the 372,711 tweets in total (Canada:
30,235, US: 342,476), we only include tweets
written in English using tweet metadata and the
spacy-langdetect toolkit2 . This process resulted
in 319,524 tweets in total, 25,595 for Canada, and
293,929 for US. To remove tweet specific keywords
and urls, we use the tweet-preprocessor toolkit3 .
We do not remove hashtags and mentions because
they can be informative for our work. We lowercase, tokenize using the Spacy toolkit (Explosion,
2017). Since the methods we use in this paper
are all unsupervised, we do not split the data for
1

Note that tweets with location tags are limited.
https://pypi.org/project/spacy-langdetect/
3
https://pypi.org/project/tweet-preprocessor/
2

training and test.

4

What Do Twitter Users Discuss about
COVID-19?

To discover topics and track the topic change over
time, we construct topic models on our Twitter data
using LDA4 implement in the scikit-learn package
(Pedregosa et al., 2011). We choose a model with
20 topics among 5, 10, 20, and 50 because 20 topics
showed diverse and less redundant topics when
manually examined.
The discovered topics are highly related to public health promotions and interventions, such as
physical distancing, border restrictions, hand washing, staying-home, and face coverings, as shown in
Table 1. Other topics include US President Donald Trump, initial outbreaks in Wuhan, economic
concerns and negative reactions. The entire set of
topics is listed in Appendix.
The most prevalent topics in Canada and US
show differences, as shown in Table 2. In both
countries, age and COVID-19 transmission is the
most prevalent topic. The discussion around the initial outbreak in Wuhan and US President Trump’s
statement was also active in both countries. However, the topic about air travel and regional border restrictions is highly ranked only in Canada
whereas the topic is not even listed in the top-10 in
the US. Similarly, the topics about COVID-19 being like the flu and staying home are highly ranked
in the US tweets but ranked lower than other topics
in the Canadian tweets.
4

We also built a Non-negative Matrix Factorization (NMF)
model, but LDA results were more distinct in categories according to public health experts’ assessment.

#
1
2
3
4
5

Canada
Age and COVID-19 transmission, as well
as time.
Initial outbreak in Wuhan.
US President Trumps statement.

United States
Age and COVID-19 transmission, as well
as time.
US President Trumps statement.
Early debate on whether coronavirus is like
the flu.
Initial outbreak in Wuhan.

Thank yous related to the pandemic mixed
with discussion of cruise ship outbreaks.
Air travel and regional border restric- The need to stay home and the impact of
tions/outbreaks.
COVID-19 on essential workers and family.
Table 2: Top-5 prevalent topics in Canada and United States.

(a) Canada

(b) United States

Figure 1: Topic changes over time. T1: social and physical distancing, T2: air travel and regional border restrictions/outbreaks, T3: hand washing and preventive measures, T4: the need to stay home and impact of COVID-19
on essential workers and family, T5: number of tests and cases, T6: masks and face coverings.

To analyze the dynamics of public health relevant topics, we investigate the change in the prevalence of the topics over time. We present a basic
analysis based on examination of the estimates of
θ, a document-to-topic distribution, produced by
the model. We first divide tweets into 10-days time
buckets, e.g., Jan. 21 – Jan. 31, Feb. 1 – Feb. 10,
and Feb. 11 – Feb. 20. Note that we use time in
UTC-12 because tweet timestamps are in the time
zone. Then, we compute a mean θ vector for tweets
in each bucket as in (Griffiths and Steyvers, 2004).
Based on the mean θ vector for each bucket, we
draw graphs of public health relevant topics over
time as shown in Figure 1.
First, we can observe that the patterns in the
US tweets and Canadian tweets are very similar.
Although there are slight differences, the overall
increase and decrease patterns are almost identical.
For example, the topic about air travel and regional
border restrictions (T2) shows a peak in February
and drastically decreases. Second, we can see that
the topic trend is highly related to public health
interventions. For example, the topic about social

distancing (T1) starts to increase in early March
after COVID-19 became an issue in Seattle, US,
at the end of February. Hand washing (T3) also
started to be emphasized then. The topic about the
need to stay home (T4) starts to increase around
the end of March. In Canada, the Federal Quarantine Order was issued on March 24, and in the
US, many states issued stay-at-home orders around
that time as well. Discussion about the number
of tests and cases (T5) gradually increases. Interestingly, the topic about masks and face coverings
(T6) slightly decreases from March this is possibly
because public health institutes in both countries
announced their position about masks around that
time.

5

How Do Twitter Users React to
COVID-19?

Understanding people’s reactions to the COVID19 pandemic is important to public health agencies because it informs how public health agencies
should frame their health messaging. To capture

sentiment revealed in tweets towards important aspects of COVID-19, we use ABSA. In our work,
aspects can include public health interventions or
issues associated with COVID-19 such as “socialdistancing”, “reopening”, and “masks”. We investigate people’s opinion (positive/negative) towards
these aspects.
We use ABSApp, a weakly-supervised ABSA
system (Pereg et al., 2019). We choose ABSApp
because it does not require labeled data for training,
and allows manually editing domain-specific aspect
and opinion lexicons produced by the method. This
feature is particularly beneficial for us because we
can select/add aspects public health agencies are
interested in.
After training the tweet data using ABSApp,
we obtained 806 aspect terms and 211 opinion
terms. Editing the lexicons by public health experts resulted in 545 aspect terms (e.g., “vaccines”,
“economy”, and “masks”) and 60 domain specific
opinion terms (e.g., “infectious”- negative, and
“professional”- positive). Then, these manually
edited terms were used for inference of sentiments.
The results of selected aspects are shown in Figure 2. We observe that the sentiment about the
coronavirus outbreak itself is dominantly negative.
With this, the twitter users’ reactions to preparedness and misinformation appear to be more negative than being positive, suggesting the frustration about the current situation and misinformation.
The mixed sentiment about masks might reflect the
conflicting situation around mask usage. The negative sentiment towards asians found may imply
the Anti-Asian social phenomenon escalated due
to COVID-19.

Figure 2: Aspect-based sentiment analysis results for
selected aspects. The ratio between # of positive occurrences and # of negative occurrences.

6

Discussion

The topics identified demonstrate Twitter users’
focus on discussing and reacting to public health

interventions. This kind of information helps public health agencies to understand public concerns
as well as what public health messages are resonating in our populations who use Twitter. For
example, public health agencies in North America
have focused their messaging around encouraging
hand hygiene, limiting physical contact when sick
and staying home to prevent infection. We can
see this messaging echoing in the topics around
hand washing, staying home, mask-wearing and
social/physical distancing.
The change over time in the age topic shows an
area for improving our public messaging. Early
public health data showed a strong correlation between age and severe COVID-19 outcomes (Liu
et al., 2020b; Nikolich-Zugich et al., 2020). However, we now know that SARS-CoV-2 transmission does not show the same correlation (Ontario Agency for Health Protection and Promotion,
2020). A renewed focus on messaging to highlight this difference would likely benefit our public
health response.
ABSA has the potential to track stigma related
to COVID-19. Our communities of Asian ethnicity have experienced unprecedented stigma and
discrimination due to COVID-19. If we can understand the nature and change in stigma over time,
we can develop counter-acting messages and measures.

7

Conclusion

In this paper we presented the exploratory results
of topic modeling and ABSA on COVID-19 related tweets in North America. We compared topic
modeling results of Canada and the US, and also
showed public health intervention related topic
changes over time. In addition, our human-inthe-loop aspect-based sentiment analysis showed
twitter user’s reactions about COVID-19 related
aspects, which can be beneficial for public health
policy makers. The limitation of this work is that
we used only a small set of Twitter data because
tweets with the location information were limited
compared to the whole data set. However, this
study is still useful for public health interventions
and messaging. For future work, we will analyze
our results with other types of public health data
such as patient statistics for different regions or
mobility information.

References

A

David M Blei, Andrew Y Ng, and Michael I Jordan.
2003. Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of machine Learning research, 3(Jan):993–1022.

A.1

Emily Chen, Kristina Lerman, and Emilio Ferrara.
2020. Tracking social media discourse about the
covid-19 pandemic: Development of a public coronavirus twitter data set. JMIR Public Health Surveill,
6(2):e19273.
AI Explosion. 2017. spacy-industrial-strength natural
language processing in python.
Thomas L Griffiths and Mark Steyvers. 2004. Finding scientific topics. Proceedings of the National
academy of Sciences, 101(suppl 1):5228–5235.
Qian Liu, Zequan Zheng, Jiabin Zheng, Qiuyi Chen,
Guan Liu, Sihan Chen, Bojia Chu, Hongyu Zhu,
Babatunde Akinwunmi, Jian Huang, et al. 2020a.
Health communication through news media during
the early stage of the covid-19 outbreak in china:
Digital topic modeling approach. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 22(4):e19118.
Yang Liu, Bei Mao, Shuo Liang, Jia-wei Yang, Haiwen Lu, Yan-hua Chai, Lan Wang, Li Zhang, Qiuhong Li, Lan Zhao, et al. 2020b. Association between ages and clinical characteristics and outcomes
of coronavirus disease 2019. European Respiratory
Journal.
Janko Nikolich-Zugich, Kenneth S Knox, Carlos Tafich
Rios, Bhupinder Natt, Deepta Bhattacharya, and
Mindy J Fain. 2020. Sars-cov-2 and covid-19 in
older adults: what we may expect regarding pathogenesis, immune responses, and outcomes. Geroscience, pages 1–10.
Ontario Agency for Health Protection and Promotion.
2020. Covid19 - what we know so far about infection in children.
F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel,
B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer,
R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos,
D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and E. Duchesnay. 2011. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in
Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
12:2825–2830.
Oren Pereg, Daniel Korat, Moshe Wasserblat, Jonathan
Mamou, and Ido Dagan. 2019. Absapp: A portable
weakly-supervised aspect-based sentiment extraction system. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.05608.
Hao Sha, Mohammad Al Hasan, George Mohler, and
P Jeffrey Brantingham. 2020. Dynamic topic modeling of the covid-19 twitter narrative among us
governors and cabinet executives. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.11692.
Karishma Sharma, Sungyong Seo, Chuizheng Meng,
Sirisha Rambhatla, and Yan Liu. 2020. Covid-19 on
social media: Analyzing misinformation in twitter
conversations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.12309.

Appendices
Topics discovered by topic modeling

#
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
T8
T9
T10
T11
T12
T13
T14
T15
T16
T17
T18
T19
T20

Representative words
social, distancing, outside, park, walk,
quarantinelife, stayhome
corona, beer, stupid, die, cure, flu, drink,
cold
china, travel, canada, russia, flights,
trade, border
hands, wash, health, public, use, need,
safety
home, stay, safe, work, sick, family, essential
positive, testing, tested, cases, patients,
hospital, data
masks, wear, face, hand, sanitizer,
gloves, n95
trump, china, americans, hoax, cdc,
democrats, pandemic
students, pandemic, nyc, petition, climate, college, university
trump, house, white, president, press,
vote, conference
test, cdc, facts, vaccine, fake, lab, control
china, cases, death, wuhan, outbreak,
spread, rate
time, old, years, day, feel, life, long
cases, deaths, york, million, state, total,
cuomo
thanks, help, support, cruise, community, team, proud
health, need, care, public, emergency,
fighting, stigma, curve, job
money, pay, paper, toilet, buying, water,
price
stayhome, lockdown, order, quarantine,
florida, beach, california
shit, fucking, ass, wow, damn, dumb,
hell
break, trip, spring, school, classes, summer, quarnantinelife

Interpretation
Social and physical distancing, including spending time
outside during quarantine.
Early debate on whether coronavirus is like the flu and
around corona beer sales.
Air travel and regional border restrictions/outbreaks.
Hand washing and what people can do to prevent
COVID-19.
The need to stay home and the impact of COVID-19 on
essential workers and family.
This topic focuses on data, particularly number of tests
and cases.
Things we can do to prevent COVID-19, e.g., masks and
face coverings.
US President Trump’s statement of whether COVID-19
is a hoax and his discussion of China.
A mix of discussion around school closures, the climate
and the outbreak in New York City.
USA politics including the white house press conferences and the US election.
Lab testing for COVID-19 and vaccination discussions,
as well as discussing ‘fake’ tests available.
Initial outbreak in Wuhan and it’s associated case and
death statistics.
A mix of discussion around age and COVID-19 transmission, as well as time.
The statistics around deaths, particularly cases and
deaths in New York City.
Thank yous related to the pandemic mixed with discussion of cruise ship outbreaks.
The need for health care related to addressing the
COVID-19 pandemic in the USA.
General economic concerns including pay and bulk buying.
Quarantine and lockdown orders, particularly in Florida
beaches and California.
Negative reactions to COVID-19 and emotional usage
of swearing.
COVID-19 school closures and spring break.

Table A1: LDA generated topics and their interpretations.

