How Work From Home Affects Collaboration: A
Large-Scale Study of Information Workers in a
Natural Experiment During COVID-19
Longqi Yang, Sonia Jaffe, David Holtz, Siddharth Suri, Shilpi Sinha, Jeffrey Weston,
Connor Joyce, Neha Shah, Kevin Sherman, CJ Lee, Brent Hecht, Jaime Teevan
Microsoft Corporation
Correspondence: Longqi.Yang@microsoft.com

ABSTRACT
The COVID-19 pandemic has had a wide-ranging impact on information workers such as higher stress levels,
increased workloads, new workstreams, and more caregiving responsibilities during lockdown. COVID-19
also caused the overwhelming majority of information workers to rapidly shift to working from home (WFH).
The central question this work addresses is: can we isolate the effects of WFH on information workers’
collaboration activities from all other factors, especially the other effects of COVID-19? This is important
because in the future, WFH will likely to be more common than it was prior to the pandemic.
We use difference-in-differences (DiD), a causal identification strategy commonly used in the social sciences,
to control for unobserved confounding factors and estimate the causal effect of WFH. Our analysis relies on
measuring the difference in changes between those who WFH prior to COVID-19 and those who did not.
Our preliminary results suggest that on average, people spent more time on collaboration in April (Post WFH
mandate) than in February (Pre WFH mandate), but this is primarily due to factors other than WFH, such as
lockdowns during the pandemic. The change attributable to WFH specifically is in the opposite direction:
less time on collaboration and more focus time. This reversal shows the importance of using causal inference:
a simple analysis would have resulted in the wrong conclusion. We further find that the effect of WFH is
moderated by individual remote collaboration experience prior to WFH. Meanwhile, the medium for
collaboration has also shifted due to WFH: instant messages were used more, whereas scheduled meetings
were used less. We discuss design implications -- how future WFH may affect focused work, collaborative
work, and creative work.

KEYWORDS
Work-from-home, remote work, COVID-19, causal inference, information worker

1 Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic has affected information workers in myriad ways: for many school closures
have given them additional caregiving responsibilities, lockdowns have restricted their nonwork
activities, and health concerns have raised stress levels. The pandemic also forced many information
workers to switch to work from home (WFH) to avoid catching the disease. Because of the confounding
factors caused by the pandemic, one cannot infer work-from-home effects from pure observational
changes measured before and after COVID-19. There may also be simultaneous factors unrelated to
the pandemic that affected information workers, such as changes in workloads due to seasonality.
Thus, the research question this work addresses is: can we isolate the effect of switch to working from
home on information workers’ collaboration activities from all other factors?
The effect of WFH is an important research question not only for supporting work during the COVID19 crisis, but also for informing what will happen in the future. During COVID-19, 34.1% of Americans
switched to work from home [5]. It is estimated that 37% of jobs in United States can be done remotely
[7], and many technology companies have decided to embrace much more remote work moving

1

forward [1,12,14,18]. This suggests that whatever equilibrium society reaches post-COVID-19, it will
likely be one between the extremes of little WFH and complete WFH. The goal of our research is to
inform such future using the almost overnight shift as a natural experiment.
In this paper, we conduct causal inference with a difference-in-differences (DiD) analysis of large-scale
software usage logs from Microsoft to disentangle the causal effects of WFH from other confounding
factors. Intuitively, our analysis works as follows. Any change in the behavior of those already working
from home prior to COVID-19 was due to other factors beyond the WFH transition. On the other hand,
any change in the behavior of those working in the office prior to COVID-19 was due to other factors
combined with the move to working from home. If the trends were parallel to begin with, taking the
difference allows us to isolate the effect of working from home. We also analyze how the effects are
moderated by remote collaboration experience prior to WFH.
Our initial study characterizes people’s collaboration behavior through the lens of focus hours, and the
hours spent on scheduled meetings, messaging, and emails. We find that
•

•

•

Though on average total collaboration hours were higher and focus hours were lower in April
relative to February, 1 WFH specifically caused an opposite change – WFH decreased
collaboration hours (-2.0%) and increased focus hours (+3.6%). The observational trends
would have resulted in the opposite, wrong conclusion.
WFH caused people to shift between collaboration tools: while email hours stayed stable,
scheduled meeting hours were decreased (-6.4%), and messaging hours were increased
(+27.7%). The increase in messaging due to WFH accounts for less than half of the observed
increase, which further justifies the need of using causal inference to control for confounding
factors.
The effect differs by individuals’ experience with remote collaboration; among those who
previously worked in an office, we find that the effects are primarily for those who had less
remote collaboration experience (i.e., less than 20% of collaborations were with coworkers in different cities or WFH), compared to those who previously did at least 70% of
their collaboration remotely. This suggests that for most outcomes, the effect of WFH is due to
workers’ need to collaborate remotely, not to their physically working from home.

In total, our findings suggest that WFH could impact not only the usage of productivity tools, but also
how workers accomplish different types of work. A shift to WFH may be beneficial for those engaging
in focused work that requires large blocks of free time but may be detrimental for those engaging in
work that is highly collaborative in nature. Our study also highlights the importance of causal
inference. Simply comparing worker behavior before and during the pandemic does not accurately
measure the effects of WFH, and in many cases it suggests an effect with the opposite sign of the actual
effect. If we hope to use the COVID-19 pandemic as an occasion to predict the effects of future WFH, it
is critical to separate the effect of WFH from other confounding factors. We plan to extend this research
by investigating the impacts of WFH on a broader set of measures for both work practices and
productivity.

2 Related Work
The majority of prior studies related to telecommuting and remote work are based on cross-sectional
data (see survey papers [2,16] for details), which cannot be directly used to draw causal conclusions
regarding the impact of WFH. There have been two large studies using experimental variation to
1

The data was from the year of 2020.

2

analyze WFH effect. Bloom et al. [4] analyzed a travel company that randomly allowed half of its call
center workers who were interested in working from home, and had sufficient broadband and space,
to do so. They found that employees working from home missed fewer days of work and took less
break time during the workday, leading to a 13% increase in calls answered. Choudhury et al. [6]
analyzed a policy change for employees of the US Patent Office. Due to union negotiations, the policy
allowing “work from anywhere” was rolled out in three phases, with employees randomly assigned to
a phase. The study found a 4% increase in productivity.2
Our study makes several contributions relative to prior causal work: (1) We look at changes in finergrained aspects of people’s work practice and behavior, such as time spent on collaboration, meetings
etc. (2) Since WFH is mandatory for most employees during COVID-19, we measure the effect of WFH
for the average office worker as opposed to the effect for those who volunteer or request WFH. (3) We
study a broad population of information workers, making our results potentially more generalizable
than evidence from a single very specific profession. Our findings can also inform better design of
productivity tools for remote work [8,11,13,17,19], which is an important topic of research for HumanComputer Interaction (HCI) and Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW).

3 Methodology
Prior to COVID-19, some employees worked from home, whereas others worked in an office. However,
a simple comparison of these two groups is unlikely to provide an unbiased estimate of the causal
effect of WFH, since employees who work from home are likely to differ from those who do not in
important and potentially unobservable ways, e.g., the content of their jobs and/or their working
styles. Similarly, a simple comparison of pre-COVID-19 and post-COVID-19 outcomes for employees
who were previously working in an office is unlikely to generate credible causal estimates, since any
observed differences may be driven by many factors that are unrelated to WFH, such as seasonal
changes in work behavior and productivity or COVID-19-related impacts, e.g., childcare
responsibilities, social isolation and existential dread. In order to obtain a credible causal estimate of
the effect of WFH on collaboration behavior, we employ a difference-in-differences identification
strategy, which takes into account both time invariant differences between the two groups of workers
and temporal trends that are common to the two groups of workers.

3.1 Background: difference-in-differences
We use a difference-in-differences (DiD) identification framework [3] to separate the causal impact of
WFH on collaboration metrics from differences between groups and over time. In a simple version of
DiD where the researcher does not control for additional covariates, the difference-in-differences
framework assumes that the outcome for person 𝑖 belonging to group g at time t, yigt, can be modeled
as

yigt = γg + λt + δ∙dgt + εigt , (1)
where γg is a group-level fixed effect that accounts for time-invariant differences between groups, λt is
a time fixed effect that accounts for any temporal trends that affect all groups in the same way, dgt
indicates whether or not group g has been treated at time t, and εigt is a residual with E(εigt | g,t ) = 0.

It should be noted that employees were already allowed to work from home four days a week; while the effect could be due to employees not
having to commute the one-day week, the authors attribute it mostly to employees moving out of the Washington DC area – and perhaps being
able to afford a better home office or being more motivated.
2

3

The treatment effect, δ, is causally identified so long as Eq. 1 accurately represents the data generating
process. That is, there must be one time effect (e.g. COVID or seasonality), captured by λt, that applies
to both the treatment and control group in each time period, so if, counter-factually, the treatment
group had not been treated at time 𝑡, the expected average outcome for the group would have been γg
+ λt . Equivalently, the average expected change in outcome between periods 𝑡 and 𝑡′ in the
counterfactual where the group is not treated would have been λt’ – λt, the same as the control group.
It is impossible to verify that this “parallel trends” assumption holds, given that the outcome absent
treatment is not observed for people after they have been treated. However, the credibility of the
parallel trends assumption is often established by verifying that pre-treatment time series trends are
parallel [9].

3.2 Our difference-in-differences model
In our context, those who were working from home prior to COVID-19 (g = P-WFH) are the “control
group” for the natural experiment: the change in their outcomes during the WFH mandate captures
the effects of seasonality, product cycles, social isolation, etc. The difference between the control
group’s change in outcome and the change for those who had previously worked in an office (g = PWFH) is attributed to the latter group’s having switched to working from home. In other words, the
treatment indicator dgt in Eq. 1 can be expressed as

dgt = 𝟙(g = P-OFC) ∙ 𝟙(t = post-COVID-19), (2)
where 𝟙(x) = 1 if x is true. This means that in contrast to the classic difference-in-differences setup,
our difference-in-differences model relies on two identifying assumptions. First, that the time series
for the two groups would have moved in parallel absent COVID-19, and second, that the non-WFH
effects of COVID-19 were on average the same for those who were previously working from home and
those who were previously working in an office.
In order to make our identifying assumptions more credible, we use coarsened exact matching [10] to
reweight control group observations, so that the control and treatment groups are balanced with
respect to three covariates: job role, managerial status, and a binary measure of level (i.e., seniority).
This makes our model robust to deviations from the “parallel trends” assumption that can be explained
by these observables and increases the precision of the estimates. The matching procedure removes
approximately 1% employees from our sample, because they belong to strata that do not contain both
control and treatment employees.
Although we observe data from many time periods both pre- and post-COVID-19, we aggregate data
for each worker into one “pre-treatment” observation and one “post-treatment” observation to
address potential autocorrelation. We also cluster standard errors at the level of employee manager,
i.e., workers who report to the same manager are in the same “cluster”.
Prior work [2] has shown that the extent to which people were exposed to remote work may affect
WFH experience. Therefore, we also estimate a version of the DiD model in Eq. 2 that allows the effect
of WFH to vary for workers with different levels of prior remote collaboration experience. Specifically,
we consider a model with two subgroups of the treatment group, those that had less (g = P-WFH-L)
and those that had more (g = P-WFH-M) remote collaboration experience, respectively, and estimate a
treatment effect δL and δM for each of the groups.

4

4 Dataset
We measure the causal effect of WFH on a few different collaboration-related metrics from Workplace
Analytics [15], a product that aggregates the software usage patterns of Microsoft US employees. The
definitions of the metrics are presented in Table 1.
Table 1: Definition of collaboration related metrics from Workplace Analytics [15].
Metric
Definition
Focus hours
Total number of hours with two or more-hour blocks of time where the
person had no meetings.
Email hours
Total number of hours a person spent sending and receiving emails.
Message hours
Total number of hours a person spent in instant messages through Microsoft
Teams with at least one other person.
Meeting hours
Total number of hours a person spent in meetings with at least one other
person.
Collaboration
Email hours + Message hours + Meeting hours.
hours
Since the WFH mandate in United States officially went effective in March 2020, for each outcome
variable, we computed the average monthly outcome in February and April and treated them as “pretreatment” and “post-treatment” observations, respectively. We hypothesize that switching to WFH
would have a larger effect for employees with less experience in remote collaboration. We measure a
worker’s remote collaboration experience prior to WFH by computing the percentage of an employee’s
interactions (including meetings, emails, and instance messages) in January that were with co-workers
in different cities or who worked from home. We then assigned workers did less than 20% and more
than 70% of their collaborations remotely into low previous remote work experience (P-OFC-L) and
high previous remote work experience (P-OFC-M), respectively. Note that the data from January is not
used to measure pre- or post-treatment outcomes.

5 Findings and results
WFH lowered collaboration. As shown in Table 2, total collaboration hours decreased by 1.95% and
focus hours increased by 3.57%. Within collaboration, WFH caused a shift from meeting hours,
decreasing them by 6.43%, to message hours, increasing them by 27.71%. We do not detect a
statistically significant effect of WFH on email hours. The decrease in collaborations can have
important implications on how different types of work gets done in remote settings, which we discuss
in Section 6.
Table 2: Causal effect of WFH (δ/y̅ feb) for different outcome variables, as well as the amount of change
in those outcome variables that is common to both the treatment group and control group (λ/y̅ feb). The
coefficients are normalized by the average level of the outcome variable in the treatment group to give
percent differences. We also show the observed change ((y̅ apr –y̅ feb)/ y̅ feb) from February to April.
%
Collaboration Meeting
Message
Email hours Focus hours
hours
hours
hours
Effect of WFH -1.95 *
-6.43 ***
27.71 ***
1.29
3.57 ***
(δ/y̅ feb)
(0.89)
(1.1)
(1.86)
(1.06)
(0.71)
Time-fixed
effect (λ/y̅ feb)

23.26 ***
(0.88)

30.65 ***
(1.09)

37.20 ***
(1.80)

5

12.22 ***
(1.04)

-6.62 ***
(0.71)

Observed
((y̅ apr –y̅ feb)/ y̅ feb)

21.31 ***

24.22 ***

64.90 ***

13.51 ***

-3.04 ***

Contrasting causal estimates with simple observed changes. The bottom row of Table 2 shows that the
observed changes are a combination of the effect of WFH and everything else that changed between
February and April, the latter of which is captured by the observed change in outcome for the control
group. Looking at these numbers, a simple analysis would suggest that WFH leads to more total
collaboration hours, more meeting hours, and fewer focus hours. However, our causal estimates
indicate that the effect of WFH was the opposite: WFH decreased collaboration hours, decreased
meeting hours, and increased focus hours. In the case of message hours and email hours, a simple
comparison suggests that WFH had a much larger effect than our causal estimates indicate. This
highlights the importance of causal approaches in understanding the WFH effect.
Table 3 reports the heterogenous effect of WFH (δM/y̅ feb-M and δL/y̅ feb-L) in percentage terms for
employees with different levels of remote collaboration experience. As one might expect, the effects
are much larger for employees with less remote collaboration experience. The effects for both total
collaboration hours and meeting hours are small and statistically insignificant for employees with
more remote collaboration experience; for employees with less remote collaboration experience the
effects are substantial: -3.1% and -9.23% respectively. For message hours, the effect is statistically
significant for employees with more remote collaboration experience, but it is much smaller than for
employees with less remote collaboration experience, +5.24% versus +38.5%. For focus hours, there
is no effect (insignificant -.75%) for those with more remote collaboration experience and a larger,
4.9%, effect for those with less remote experience. For all variables except email hours, where neither
group saw a significant effect, the difference between the two groups is statistically significant.
Table 3: Causal effect of WFH for employees with two different levels of remote collaboration
experience: less than 20% of their coworkers were in a different city or working from home (P-OFCL) and more than 70% of their coworkers were in a different city or working from home (P-OFC-M).
Collaboration Meeting
Message
Email hours Focus hours
%
hours
hours
hours
WFH effect for 1.44
1.96
5.24 **
0.48
-0.75
P-OFC-M
(1.00)
(1.28)
(1.93)
(1.14)
(0.76)
δM/y̅ feb-M
WFH effect for -3.10 **
-9.23 ***
38.52 ***
1.81
4.91 ***
P-OFC-L
(1.03)
(1.21)
(2.28)
(1.29)
(0.82)
δL/y̅ feb-L
Difference
-4.54 ***
-11.19 ***
33.29 ***
1.33
5.67 ***
(0.59)
(0.73)
(1.36)
(0.72)
(0.45)
The fact that employees with more experience in remote collaboration were less affected by working
from home suggests that some of the effect of WFH is due to the need to collaborate remotely as
opposed to only the need to physically do one’s work at home. The fact that the effects are near-zero
for all variables except message hours suggests that physically doing one’s work at home is not an
important factor for those variables. For message hours, the non-zero effect for those with more
remote collaboration experience suggests that for time spent messaging either 1) there is an important
effect of physically doing one’s work at home instead of in the office, 2) there is a real difference
between doing 70% and 100% of one’s collaboration remotely, or 3) both. There were not enough

6

employees working in the office with 100% remote collaborators prior to COVID-19 to separate these
two effects.

6 Implications for the future of remote work
The disruptive effects that many corporations observe during pandemic are mostly likely due to
factors other than WFH, so researchers should be cautious about directly generalizing raw changes in
work practices in outcomes during the current time to make predictions about WFH in the future. This
paper shows the feasibility of using difference-in-differences to make more robust and reliable
inferences.
Our study suggests that normal WFH, without a pandemic, could cause an increase in blocks of free
time, which people can use to focus on their core tasks. Meanwhile, workers could be collaboratively
isolated as meeting time decreases. Given the two effects, the implications for creative work are mixed
as such work often requires both deep thought and frequent exchange of ideas. More broadly, since
the overwhelming majority of information workers are currently WFH, and post-COVID-19 we expect
a new equilibrium with more WFH than the past [1,12,14,18], can companies continue to innovate and
create while their workforce is WFH? This is an important longer-term question that the informationwork industry should be monitoring.
Our findings also reveal potential opportunities in the design of productivity tools for remote work.
(1) As people start to adopt new mediums of communication shifting towards more rapid forms of
messaging such as instant messages, more research is needed to understand the special
communication needs of remote workers, such as ways to supplement the “water-cooler
conversations” that happened in in-person settings. (2) Understanding the heterogeneity of WFH
effects with respect to different individual characteristics can lead to the development of tools that
provide personalized support, intervention, and recommendation for remote work. This paper shows
that people’s prior remote collaboration experience is an important dimension of heterogeneity. Our
future work will further extend to broader individual attributes.

7 Conclusions
We presented a large-scale study on how WFH specifically affects collaboration by leveraging the
massive natural experiment happening during COVID-19. Through a difference-in-differences causal
inference framework, we show how to control for confounding factors happened concurrently with
WFH in order to draw robust and generalizable insights on the effects of WFH. Our findings suggest
that the observed changes during the pandemic are mainly due to factors other than WFH, and WFH
under normal circumstances is likely to decrease collaboration and increase focus time. Our future
work will further expand on our current findings by investigating broader work and productivity
measures.

REFERENCES
[1] Adam D’Angelo. Remote First at Quora. Retrieved from https://www.quora.com/q/quora/RemoteFirst-at-Quora
[2] Tammy D. Allen, Timothy D. Golden, and Kristen M. Shockley. 2015. How Effective Is
Telecommuting? Assessing the Status of Our Scientific Findings. Psychol Sci Public Interest 16, 2
(October 2015), 40–68. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1177/1529100615593273
[3] Joshua David Angrist and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. 2009. Mostly harmless econometrics: an empiricist’s
companion. Princeton University Press, Princeton.

7

[4] Nicholas Bloom, James Liang, John Roberts, and Zhichun Jenny Ying. 2015. Does Working from
Home Work? Evidence from a Chinese Experiment*. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 130, 1
(February 2015), 165–218. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qju032
[5] Erik Brynjolfsson, John Horton, Adam Ozimek, Daniel Rock, Garima Sharma, and Hong-Yi TuYe.
2020. COVID-19 and Remote Work: An Early Look at US Data. National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, MA. DOI:https://doi.org/10.3386/w27344
[6] Prithwiraj Choudhury, Cirrus Foroughi, and Barbara Larson. 2019. Work-from-anywhere: The
Productivity Effects of Geographic Flexibility. SSRN Journal (2019).
DOI:https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3494473
[7] Jonathan Dingel and Brent Neiman. 2020. How Many Jobs Can be Done at Home? National Bureau of
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. DOI:https://doi.org/10.3386/w26948
[8] Paul Dourish and Sara Bly. 1992. Portholes: supporting awareness in a distributed work group. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’92),
Association for Computing Machinery, Monterey, California, USA, 541–547.
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/142750.142982
[9] C. W. J. Granger. 1969. Investigating Causal Relations by Econometric Models and Cross-spectral
Methods. Econometrica 37, 3 (August 1969), 424. DOI:https://doi.org/10.2307/1912791
[10] Kori Inkpen, Rajesh Hegde, Mary Czerwinski, and Zhengyou Zhang. 2010. Exploring Spatialized
Audio & Video for Distributed Conversations. In CSCW 2010, Association for Computing Machinery,
Inc. Retrieved from https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/exploring-spatializedaudio-video-for-distributed-conversations/
[11] Jennifer Christie. Keeping our employees and partners safe during #coronavirus. Retrieved from
https://blog.twitter.com/en_us/topics/company/2020/keeping-our-employees-and-partners-safe-duringcoronavirus.html
[12] Brennan Jones, Yaying Zhang, Priscilla N. Y. Wong, and Sean Rintel. 2020. VROOM: Virtual Robot
Overlay for Online Meetings. In Extended Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems, ACM, Honolulu HI USA, 1–10. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3334480.3382820
[13] Kate Conger. Facebook Starts Planning for Permanent Remote Workers. Retrieved from
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/21/technology/facebook-remote-work-coronavirus.html
[14] Microsoft. Workplace Analytics. Retrieved from https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/workplaceanalytics/
[15] Mary C. Noonan and Jennifer L. Glass. 2012. The hard truth about telecommuting. Monthly Labor
Review (2012), 38–45.
[16] Brid O’Conaill, Steve Whittaker, and Sylvia Wilbur. 1993. Conversations Over Video Conferences:
An Evaluation of the Spoken Aspects of Video-Mediated Communication. Human–Computer
Interaction 8, 4 (December 1993), 389–428. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327051hci0804_4
[17] Sundar Pichai. Working from home and the office. Retrieved from https://blog.google/insidegoogle/working-google/working-from-home-and-office
[18] John Tang, Gina Venolia, Kori Inkpen, Charles Parker, Robert Gruen, and Alicia Edelman Pelton.
2018. Crowdcasting: Remotely Participating in Live Events Through Multiple Live Streams.
(February 2018). Retrieved June 27, 2020 from https://www.microsoft.com/enus/research/publication/crowdcasting-remotely-participating-live-events-multiple-live-streams/

8

