SARS-CoV-2 Impact on Online Teaching Methodologies and the Ed-Tech Sector: Smile and
Learn Platform Case Study
Natalia Lara Nieto-Márquez1,2, Alejandro Baldominos3,4, Almudena González Petronila2
1
Faculty of Health and Education, Universidad Camilo José Cela, 28692 Madrid, Spain
2
Educational Department, Smile and Learn Digital Creations, 28043 Madrid, Spain
3
Computer Science Department, Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, 28911 Madrid, Spain
4
Data Science Department, Smile and Learn Digital Creations, 28043 Madrid, Spain
Abstract
In the past few years, the use of new technologies and digital, educational material has been increasing.
Owing to the situation brought about in Spain by the SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) pandemic, schools
have closed and families were asked to confine at home since March 2020. During this period there has
been a need of resources to be made available to the families and teachers so that they would be able to
continue their teaching practice. Consequently, this study analyzes the importance of online
methodologies and usage tendency of an educational resource example: The Smile and Learn platform.
Thereby, the study presents the different models implemented to support education and its impact in the
use of the platform. The analyzed outcomes and their effect on education are discussed.
Keywords: Ed-Tech, e-learning, digital material, education, COVID-19, teaching,
methodologies, online instruction
1. Introduction
For many years, there has been observed in the education sector an increase in material, platforms and
online resources (Brown and Green, 2017). This may indicate a decision to invest in implementing
digital resources in the classroom. Nevertheless, the process of implementing such resources has been
challenged by limiting factors. Some of these limiting factors related to technology can be the lack of
devices in schools, obsolete devices or poor connectivity. Regarding teachers, who in many cases they
are motivated to implement this sort of resources, the lack of specific training and time to be able to use
them in class are highlighted (Bekker et al., 2015; McKnight et al., 2016). In many instances, this leads
to inadequate use of online methodologies or digital devices.
In view of the global pandemic, the confinement and the closings of schools, the educational community
has been obligated to rely on these resources (Crawford et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2020; Zhou et al.,
2020). This necessity has been encouraged for the continuity of instruction. In this way, many teachers
have seen themselves compelled to adapt to the situation to be able to continue teaching. At the same
time, this has signified an added engagement for the families. The application of online methodologies
has also been limited by the shortage of electronic devices at home or the lack of digital competencies.
To be able to continue with their classes, many teachers have opted for online methodologies or elearning. E-learning is characterized by being a distance teaching and learning methodology based on
the use of technology devices and digital resources (Karmakar y Nath, 2014). In like manner, online
teaching allows the continuity of the use of mixed methods that were already being used in the
classroom. This way, this digital material can be used as complementary material to other
methodologies that make use of digital resources like the Flipped Classroom method (e.g. Roehl et al.,
2013) or game-based learning (e.g. Moreno-Ger et al., 2008).

Consequently, this article puts forward the analysis of the use of the Smile and Learn digital material in
Spain during the COVID-19 confinement period. On March 9th, authorities announced that as of March
11th student attendance in Spain would cease. The confinement of the population was declared on
March 14th. This study aims at answering the following questions based on user categorization: Has
the number of the users of the platform risen? Has the amount of digital resources usage time increased?
Which time slot are more popular regarding the use of such digital material? What kind of digital,
educational activities are singled out during the use of the platform?
2. Plataform Smile and Learn
Smile and Learn is an intelligent, digital platform in the Ed-Tech sector. The platform includes activities
that cover core curriculum subjects from preschool to elementary school (3-12-year-olds). This way,
the different subjects are merged together facilitating the use of a single resource which can adapt itself
to all areas of study. Likewise, the platform helps students to work with other aspects like competences
and cognitive skills such as content language integrated learning (CLIL).
Currently (May 2020), the platform has more than 5,000 activities in five different languages (Spanish,
English, Portuguese, French and Italian), ergo these activities are divided into:
•

•

•
•
•

Quizzes: activities with the objective to evaluate the theoretical knowledge gained while
working with applications of a specific study area/core subject. This way, in this kind of
activities game mechanics like information, questions, answers and feedback are interconnected
with learning mechanics like identifying, discovering, tasks, reflection or repetition. The
pedagogical objective in combining these mechanics lies in understanding, remembering,
analyzing and evaluating (Arnab et al., 2014; Lim et al., 2015). Similarly, according to Baptista
et al. (2015) using quizzes in learning promotes the development of strategic thinking skills like
decision making (decision quality) and technical learning.
Games: more practice-based activities to work on curriculum concepts or cognitive skills. In
these activities, game mechanics like behavior, information, steps, answers, progress, points or
feedback are interconnected with learning mechanics like guides, identifying, exploring,
experimenting, tasks, repetition, reflection or analysis. Thereby, the pedagogical objectives are:
to understand, remember, analyze, apply and evaluate (Arnab et al., 2014; Lim et al., 2015).
The games integrated in the platform work on strategic skills like Technical Learning, Decision
quality and problem solving, Intellectual Acumen. These games alsos work on operational skills
like the amount of time spent in decision making. (Baptista et al., 2015).
Stories: activities to foment an interest in reading through interactive resources and reading
comprehension (Rajabi y Khodabakhshzadeh, 2015; Wright et al., 2013).
Theory: activities to learn basic concepts through interaction with the device
Videos: through visual channels and with the help of theories like the Cognitive Theory of
Multimedia Channels (Mayer, 2005), core curricular theory concepts are visually displayed for
learners. By this means, what is intended, is to achieve a meaningful learning experience using
different information processing channels (visual and auditory) (Zhang et al., 2006).

These types of activities have been arranged in eight different worlds according to different learning
areas:
•

Literacy: In this world students work on core curricular literacy content together with grammarbased concepts. There are other applications as well focusing on verbal-linguistic intelligence,
stories with values, Escape Rooms or reading comprehension skills.

•

•
•

•

•
•

Logic: it features core curricular content related to the subjects of math and robotics. There are
also activities for learners to work on their calculation skills, thinking process speed, memory
and reasoning.
Science: this world features several categories aimed for learners to work on scientific thinking
and science concepts.
Emotions: this world features plenty of applications that help learners work on emotional
intelligence. In like manner, there are also activities that discuss the responsible use of
electronic devices aiming at raising awareness regarding this issue.
Art: the categories in the Art World include activities to work on art and music core curricular
concepts. At the same time, there are also activities for learners to practice graphomotor skills,
planning and organization skills, and creativity working with art and drawing concepts.
Spatial: this world features different activities arranged in categories for learners to practice
visual-spatial skills, coordination skills, visual-motor skills and thinking process speed.
Multi-Player: in this world there are activities that allow learners to play together using one
device. This way teamwork and social skills are boosted by means of technology.

All activities provide learners with progress feedback with relation to the mistakes they made, the
answers they got right and the time spent on the application. Some activities give a more personalized
feedback regarding going up levels, reflection questions to evaluate learning or moving up to the next
level (C.f. Lara Nieto-Márquez, Baldominos y Pérez-Nieto, 2020).
•

The eighth world is customizable to each profile: this last world is related to the gamification
system which is integrated in the platform. This world features two categories: Fantasy Village
and Urban Village. In both words, users can work on resource management skills using the
tokens they earned while playing (smilies) or the ones they earn every time they go up a level
(gems).

The platform features an open source gamification system. Each time a child plays, he/she gains a
number of tokens depending on the difficulty or time needed to complete the activity. Concluding the
challenge will help the learner go up a level, based on the number of activities attempted. This way,
learners will be able to earn “gems” when they go up a level. Gems and Smilies will be used to build
cities in both Villages, in the eighth world. They can also use them to customize the avatar and their
house.
The platform also features a recommender system based on artificial intelligence. The platform’s lower
tab serves as a recommending tool which suggests activities to learners based on their progress. They
can try these activities in order to continue improving academically. The recommender system also
suggests activities based on what learners may like most, in regard to what he/she played before (C.f.
Baldominos y Quintana, 2019).
Smile and Learn has also collaborated in different proposal plans focused on all the population:
On the one hand, there has been an agreement with the Spanish Ministry of Education and Training,
and Radio Televisión Española (Spanish public service television) according to which specific Smile
and Learn didactic content (videos) will be broadcasted from Monday to Friday during the morning
time slots. The morning show “Aprendemos En Casa” (Learning At Home) is an inclusive, educative
program which aims at reaching every household, including those that lack interactive electronic
devices.
Smile and Learn has also presented families with an offer exclusive for them, which enables free access
to all platform content for the first month.

3. Results
Next, we display the increase in the number of users and the time spent using the platform according to
the classification made by schools or users in general.
3.1. COVID-19 Impact on the usage of Smile and Learn
Concerning education centers and schools, there has been an increase in the need of digital material.
Figure 1 shows the rising number of users which opted for the school promotional offer as of March
11, when the school closing announcement was made official.
Upon analyzing the nature of the subscriptions of general users (number and time of use) which cover
families too, we have observed an increase in the number of petitions in the beginning of the
confinement period.

Figure 1. Users subscribed since January 2020 (Y axis is relative to 100%, which is the value for Jan
01).
3.2. Schools usage.
Regarding user accounts created for schools with the COVID-19 promotional offer, we highlight the
peak observed one week after the confinement had begun. The number of school accounts starts
dropping during the weeks following the confinement official announcement.
To be able to analyze the use of material by the schools, we have calculated the time schools employed
using this material since January 2020 and the time schools that subscribed owing to the confinement
situation, have started to employ. Consequently, Figure 2 reflects a daily use based on the sessions
planned by the school, while Figure 3 reflects a more consistent use.

Figure 2. Smile and Learn Platform Use by Subscribed Schools - Time Slots Defined as of January
2020 (Y axis is relative to 100%, which is the value for Jan 01).

Figure 3. Smile and Learn Platform Use by schools subscribed owing to schools closings as of March
11, arranged in time slots (Y axis is relative to 100%, which is the value for March 11).
A significantly higher use of the platform has been observed between March 17 and March 18. This
fact coincides with an increase in the number of subscription petitions received by schools. On another
note, Figure 2 shows that the platform has been barely used outside school hours. Both Figure 2 and

Figure 3 reflect the fact that once the confinement period begun, there has been an increase in the use
of the platform outside school hours. However, the use of the platform during school hours (from 8am
to 5pm) is still greater.
Notwithstanding, regarding schools there has been observed a residual tendency of use during the
weekends before confinement started. However, during confinement there has been an increase during
the weekends, in the use of the platform by users designated as “schools”. Parents work during the week
and there are times that they cannot attend to the needs of their children. That’s why certain tasks could
be scheduled for the weekend. In like manner, the increased use of the platform can be explained by the
fact that families have been more involved in the learning process and support of their children. As a
result, depending on the situation of the parents, study time slots for the entire week may be organized
accordingly.
With regard to the type of activities used in the platform, we highlight the use of those classified as
educational games. Figure 4 depicts activity use in percentages: games, theory, questionnaires, videos
or stories.
Usage of activities by COVID-19 schools

4%
2%

5%

5%

Game
Quiz
Tale
Theory
Video

84%

Figure 4. Percentage of time of use of the activities by educational centers during the months of March,
April and May.
Following the use of games, videos are the second choice/option for students to practice core curricular
content.
3.3. General usage
In contrast to education centers, the use of the platform by general users is homogeneous, as it is evenly
distributed along all time slots, aside the school hours limitation (Figure 5). Once the confinement
period began, the number of users has increased same as the number of schools. This rise in the use of
the platform mirrors the increase in use of technology of the families subscribed.

Figure 5. Use of the Smile and learn platform by general users in different time slots based on hours
(Y axis is relative to 100%, which is the value for Jan 01).
In relation to the use of activities, games are still marked as the number one choice of the users, followed
by videos (Figure 6).

Figure 6. Percentage of the time of use of activities by general users in the months of March, April and
May.
4. Conclusions and Outline of Action Plan
The use of activities and the number of Smile and Learn users has increased owing to school closings
and the confinement of the families. This fact has brought about a greater need/demand of digital
resources on behalf of teachers as to continue their classes with their students. In similar manner, there
has been observed an increase in the general use of the platform, including weekends. This way, it

would be interesting to ask ourselves whether or not there has been a change in the schedules of the
students, and how such change has affected family life.
This study regards the utility of these digital resources as supplementary material to teacher practice
and home based learning. The study also underlines the fact that the most popular learning activities
according to the preferences of different users are games followed by videos.
In a similar way, we should take this investigation a step further and look into teacher training regarding
those teachers who actually did use the Smile and learn resources, and the methodology they followed.
We also stress that content customization makes more sense when the teacher is not present. Digital
material enhances the possibility of tracing learning to boost areas students are challenged by. This task
can promote ongoing evaluation.
Another course of future study to consider would involve the resources available to families apace with
the use of this material by students. This way, we could direct our approach to the needs of the school
community (families, teachers and students) in relation to the use of technology and digital educational
material.
5. Acknowledgements
Special mention to Iphigeneia Mariou, Sara Paz and Beatriz Martos for their contributions in this study.
6. References
Arnab, S., Lim, T., Carvalho, M. B., Bellotti, F., De Freitas, S., Louchart, S., et al. (2014). Mapping
learning and game mechanics for serious games analysis. British Journal of Educational
Technology 46(2), 391-411. doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.12113
Baldominos, A. & Quintana, D. (2019) Data-Driven Interaction Review of an Ed-Tech Applications.
Sensors, 19(8), 1910. doi: 10.3390 / s19081910
Baptista, R.; Coelho, A. & de Carvalho, C. V. (2015) Relationship between game categories and skills
development: Contributions for serious game design. In Proceedings of the European
Conference
on
Game
Based
Learning
1,
pp.
34-42.
Available
at:
https://books.google.es/books?hl=es&lr=&id=XQloCwAAQBAJ&oi=fnd&pg=PA34&dq=Ba
ptista,+R.%3B+Coelho,+A.%3B+de+Carvalho,+C.+V.+Relationship+between+game+categor
ies+and+skills+development:+Contributions+for+serious+game+design.+In+ECGBL+9th,+20
15&ots=GZm4XkQri0&sig=u_WiyEKj9PfmHsZaI5GP0wmUsZI#v=onepage&q&f=false
Bekker, T.; Bakker, S.; Douma, I.; Van Der Poel, J. & Scheltenaar, K. (2015) Teaching children digital
literacy through design-based learning with digital toolkits in schools. Int. J. Child Comput.
Interact, 5, 29–38. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcci.2015.12.001
Brown A. & Green T. (2017) Issues and Trends in Instructional Technology: Increased Use of Mobile
Technologies and Digital Content to Provide Untethered Access to Training and Learning
Opportunities. In: Orey M., Branch R. (eds) Educational Media and Technology Yearbook.
Educational Media and Technology Yearbook, 40, pp.15-46. Springer, Cham.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-45001-8_2
Crawford, J., Butler-Henderson, K., Rudolph, J., & Glowatz, M. (2020). COVID-19: 20 Countries'
Higher Education Intra-Period Digital Pedagogy Responses. Journal of Applied Teaching and
Learning (JALT), 3(1). https://researchrepository.ucd.ie/bitstream/10197/11344/2/covid19_edu_2020.pdf
Huang, R. H., Liu, D. J., Tlili, A., Yang, J. F., & Wang, H. H. (2020). Handbook on facilitating flexible
learning during educational disruption: The chinese experience in maintaining undisrupted
learning in covid-19 outbreak. Beijing: Smart Learning Institute of Beijing Normal University.
Available at: http://www.alecso.org/nsite/images/pdf/1-4-2.pdf
Karmakar, A., & Nath, A. (2014). E-Learning Methodologies, Strategies and Tools to implement
lifetime education anywhere anytime. International Journal of Innovative Research in Advanced

Engineering,
1(4),
193-194.
Available
at:
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Asoke_Nath/publication/276174074_ELearning_Methodologies_Strategies_and_Tools_to_implement_lifetime_education_anywhere
_anytime/links/5551d00708ae739bdb9238ac.pdf
Lara Nieto-Márquez , N.; Baldominos, A. & Pérez-Nieto, M.Á. (2020). Digital Teaching Materials and
Their Relationship with the Metacognitive Skills of Students in Primary Education. Educ. Sci.
10. doi: https://doi.org/10.3390/educsci10040113
Lieberman, D. A., Bates, C. H., and So, J. (2009). Young children's learning with digital media.
Computers in the Schools 26(4), 271-283. doi: 10.1080/07380560903360194
Lim, T., Carvalho, M. B., Bellotti, F., Arnab, S., De Freitas, S., Louchart, S., et al. (2015). The LM-GM
framework
for
serious
games
analysis.
Available
at:
chromeextension://oemmndcbldboiebfnladdacbdfmadadm/http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/downlo
ad?doi=10.1.1.678.6172andrep=rep1andtype=pdf
Lin, M.H.; Chen, H.C. & Liu, K.S. (2017). A study of the effects of digital learning on learning
motivation and learning outcome. Eurasia J. Math. Sci. Technol. Educ. 13, 3553–3564. doi:
https://doi.org/10.12973/eurasia.2017.00744a
Mayer, R. E. (2005). Cognitive theory of multimedia learning. The Cambridge handbook of multimedia
learning 41, 31-48. Available at: https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/cambridge-handbookof-multimedia-learning/cognitive-theory-of-multimedialearning/A49922ACB5BC6A37DDCCE4131AC217E5
McKnight, K.; O’Malley, K.; Ruzic, R.; Horsley, M.K.; Franey, J.J. & Bassett, K. (2016) Teaching in
a digital age: How educators use technology to improve student learning. J. Res. Technol. Educ.
48, 194–211. https://doi.org/10.1080/15391523.2016.1175856
Montaner-Villalba, S. (2018). Content and language integrated learning (CLIL): an effective
methodological approach to teach foreign languages in mainstream education, International
Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism. doi: 10.1080/13670050.2018.1478667
Moreno-Ger, P., Burgos, D., Martínez-Ortiz, I., Sierra, J. L., & Fernández-Manjón, B. (2008).
Educational game design for online education. Computers in Human Behavior, 24(6), 25302540.
Avaiable
at:
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.140.5271&rep=rep1&type=pdf
Rajabi, A., & Khodabakhshzadeh, H. (2015). The effect of implementation of smart board on Iranian
lower-intermediate EFL learners' reading comprehension and their intrinsic motivation in
reading.
Mediterranean
Journal
of
Social
Sciences,
6(4),
281-289.
https://www.mcser.org/journal/index.php/mjss/article/viewFile/7008/6712
Roehl, A., Reddy, S. L., & Shannon, G. J. (2013). The flipped classroom: An opportunity to engage
millennial students through active learning strategies. Journal of Family & Consumer Sciences,
105(2),
44-49.
Avaiable
at:
https://www.kent.ac.uk/teaching/documents/academicpractice/RoehlReddy%20%20SHannon%20(2013)%20The%20flipped%20classroom%20as%
20a%20way%20of%20engaging%20the%20Millenial%20through%20active%20learning%20
strategies.pdf
Slussareff, M., Braad E., Wilkinson P. & Strååt B. (2016) Games for Learning. In Entertainment
Computing and Serious Games. Lecture Notes in Computer Science 9970. eds. Dörner R., Göbel
S., Kickmeier-Rust M., Masuch M., Zweig K. Springer, Cham. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/9783-319-46152-6_9
Wright, S., Fugett, A., & Caputa, F. (2013). Using e-readers and internet resources to support
comprehension. Journal of Educational Technology & Society, 16(1), 367-379.
https://www.ds.unipi.gr/et&s/journals/16_1/32.pdf
Zhang, D.; Zhou, L.; Briggs, R.O. & Nunamaker, J.F., Jr. (2006) Instructional video in e-learning:
Assessing the impact of interactive video on learning effectiveness. Inf. Manag, 43, 15–27. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2005.01.004
Zhou, L., Wu, S., Zhou, M., & Li, F. (2020). 'School’s Out, But Class’ On', The Largest Online
Education in the World Today: Taking China’s Practical Exploration During The COVID-19
Epidemic Prevention and Control As an Example. Best Evid Chin Edu, 4(2), 501-519. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3555520

