arXiv:2007.02935v2 [econ.GN] 8 Jul 2020

The Home Office in Times of COVID- 19
Pandemic and its impact in the Labor Supply
José Nilmar Alves de Oliveira
Processamento de Dados Amazonas S.A.,
Governo do Estado do Amazonas, Brasil
Jaime Orrillo
Catholic University of Brasilia, Brazil
Franklin Gamboa
Federal University of Mato Grosso, Brazil
July 9, 2020
Abstract
We lightly modify Eriksson’s (1996) model to accommodate the
home office in a simple model of endogenous growth. By home office
we mean any working activity carried out away from the workplace
which is assumed to be fixed. Due to the strong mobility restrictions
imposed on citizens during the COVID-19 pandemic, we allow the
home office to be located at home. At the home office, however, in
consequence of the fear and anxiety workers feel because of COVID-19,
they become distracted and spend less time working.
We show that in the long run, the intertemporal elasticity of substitution of the home- office labor is sufficiently small only if the intertemporal elasticity of substitution of the time spent on distracting
activities is small enough also.

Keywords: COVID-19; Social Distancing; Home Office; Economic
growth model.
JEL Codes: O41.

1

1

Introduction

The home office is a modality of working away from a fixed job location the
office and therefore can be carried out in any place different from a physical
office. This modality of labor has existed for a long time and has been mainly
common in multinational enterprises1 . However, this modality of working has
increased over time around the world as shown in a survey carried out by
Ipsos, see Fig. 1 below.

Figure 1: India, Indonesia and Mexico had the highest amount of telecommuters.
In spite of the significant gains from working from home in terms of
worker productivity and satisfaction as shown in Bloom et al. (2015), it does
not seem to be the case during the COVID-19 pandemic, as workers could
engage in distracting activities2 placing workers’ productivity at risk. In this
same vein of reasoning, Dutcher and Jabs Saral (2012) highlight, even in
normal times, the difficulties that may arise if telecommuting workers are
not properly monitored.
In spite of the fact that the home office or working from home3 in the
past it was only applied to specific jobs, nowadays, because the COVID-19
pandemic, most firms seem to be obligated to adopt it to continue operating
in their markets. Consequently, both the demand and supply for home offices
seem to increase. Hence, it is the purpose of this paper to theoretically
determine the factors which influence the home-office job supply.
1

Where some workers like managers needed to get away from the office.
Due to the fear and the anxiety produced by the current pandemic.
3
Working from home is a very special kind of home office and it seems to be the rule
in times of the current pandemic.
2

2

Of course not all jobs can be accomplished in a remote way 4 This makes
the productive sector seek to reorganise itself so that working from home
becomes the best alternative due to the strong mobility restrictions imposed
by the authorities of countries. It is also well known that many enterprises
are planning on adopting home offices even after the current pandemic. So
much so, that in many countries some businesses, like hotels, are planning
to adapt their spaces to offer them as places to set up home offices. This
obliges us to make a long-run analysis of the home-office job supply.
To accomplish our purpose we consider a simple economic growth model
with an endogenous labor supply like that of Eriksson (1996). Although our
model is very similar to Eriksson?s model, we depart from it in the following
aspect. We assume that the effort attached to human capital depends on the
time spent on distracting activities, occurring during the working period. We
assume that these distracting activities give some pleasure to workers, but
we should not confuse such activities with leisure activities since the latter
are supposed to occur outside normal working hours.
It is also useful to note that during the COVID-19 pandemic, workers
are put on quarantine. It is therefore natural to assume that workers are
more prone to be distracted by activities that decrease their home office
production. We can interpret such distracting activities as being negative
“shocks” to the labor supply. The word shock used here is not used in its
rigorous sense of being stochastic since the economic growth model we used
here is deterministic5 .
Our paper is related to the recent literature on the economic effects of
the COVID-19 crisis. The papers in this literature have different objectives
- from understanding its evolution to predicting its impacts on the world
economy. Nonetheless, our paper is more related to the working-from-home
literature which is surveyed by Allen et al. (2015). These authors address a
type of home office, namely telecommuting and analyse how effective it is.
Our objective in this paper is much more modest in the sense that we seek
to discover how the preferences for consumption and displeasure for working
affect the growth of home- office job supply. More precisely, we show that this
growth rate is affected by the parameters that represent both the workers?
preferences for consumption and the workers? displeasure for working. This
is important for both firms and governments as it allows them to implement,
in an optimal way, the incentives for home-office job supply by adjusting the
goals of each policy maker. Our specific findings are related to the growth
4

The construction sector is one from them for instance.
However, in our model, the time spent on distracting activities is supposed to change
over time, reflecting the intrinsic uncertainty imposed by the quarantine which makes
workers choose, in a random way, those activities which result in a decline of hours worked.
5

3

rate of variables along balanced-growth solution paths. We show that in the
long run the intertemporal elasticity of substitution of home-office labor is
sufficiently small only if the intertemporal elasticity of substitution of the
time spent on distracting activities is small enough too.
The paper is organised as follows: Section 2 presents the model in which
are described both households and firms. In this same section, the social
planner?s problem is formulated. Section 3 presents the main results and the
paper ends with a short section which analyses the theoretical results and
gives some concluding remarks.

2

The model

Our model is a centralised economy like that of Eriksson (1996) with some
key modifications allowing us to make the labor supply endogenous via distracting activities. By distracting activities here I mean any activity which
decreases labor time. They are not properly leisure but rather activities
which produce both pleasure and affect or influence the acquisition of human
capital which is placed in motion to produce consumption good/capital.
Remark 1 Distracting activities influence the effort which is allocated to
produce either consumption goods or capital for future investments. Moreover, these activities also influence the effort used to acquire human capital.

2.1

Households

We allow each worker, within a constant population, to supply labor lt . We
assume that during the working hours each worker spends time st in distracting activities which give a certain pleasure. It is useful to pointing out that
the time st is not leisure since it occurs during working hours lt . Thus, ls − st
is the effective labor.
We model the instantaneous payoff of each worker to be
V (ct , st , lt ) = u(ct ) − v(lt − st )

(1)

This payoff consists of two parts: the former is the pleasure coming from
consumption and the latter is the displeasure felt while working.

2.2

Production

On the production side of the economy, the output is produced by using
both capital, kt and effective labor lt − st which is potentiated by the human
capital ht . We formalise this by assuming the effort depends on st .
4

Differently from Uzawa (1965) and Lucas (1988), we make human capital
endogenous by postulating each worker’s effort e : [0, lt ] → [0, 1] depends
on the time spent st in the following way: e(st ) = 1 − sltt . We also assume
that this effort is allocated both to the production of human capital and the
consumption good/capital. Our allocation is (1 − e) for the former and e for
the latter. More precisely, we assume that both human and physical (or real)
capitals accumulate according to
ḣt = ht (1 − e(st ))

(1)

k̇t = f (kt , ht e(st )(lt − st )) − ct

(2)

respectively. Using the functional form of e, we can rewrite (1) and (2)
to be
st
ḣt = ht
(3)
lt
ht
k̇t = f (kt , (lt − st )2 ) − ct
(4)
lt

2.3

The planner

After describing the consumption and production sides, we are going to formulate the benevolent planner’s problem. The benevolent planner’s problem
is then to chose paths of consumption c, labor l, and time spent s on distracting activities in order to maximise the discounted stream of payoffs by
every identical agent in the economy
Z ∞
e−ρt V (ct , lt , st )dt
(5)
0

subject to (3) and (4) with ko > 0 and ho > given.
Here, ct , lt and st are control variables and ρ is the discount factor; and
kt and ht are state variables. In what follows we will drop all indexes of time
from variables which depend on the time to attain analytical tractability.
In this model the effort e is endogenous, not by itself, like Eriksson (1996),
but because it depends on the time spent on distracting activities. However,
for the sake of comparison with related literature and mainly with that of
Eriksson’s (1996) paper, we maintain, like him, that the instantaneous payoff
is additively separable:
(l − s)1+γ
c1−σ
−
, 1 6= σ > 0, γ > 0,
1−σ
1+γ
and the production function like a Cobb-Douglas one :
h
f (k, he(l − s)) = k β [ (l − s)2 ]1−β .
l
V (c, s, l) =

5

(6)

(7)

3

Theoretical results

We begin this section by characterising the solutions of the benevolent planner?s problem. For that, we consider the current-value Hamiltonian for the
optimal problem, with “prices” λ1 and λ2 used to value increments to physical
and human capital respectively.
H=

c1−σ
(l − s)1+γ
h
s
−
+ λ1 [k β [ (l − s)2 ]1−β − c] + λ2 h .
1−σ
1+γ
l
l

The necessary conditions for optimality are:
1.
Hc = 0 ⇔ c−σ = λ1

(8)

2.
2s
h
h
Hs = 0 ⇔ (l − s)γ + (1 − β)λ1 k β [ (l − s)2 ]−β h(−2 + ) + λ2 = 0 (9)
l
l
l
3.
h
s2
s
2 −β
Hl = 0 ⇔ −(l−s) +λ1 (1−β)k [ (l−s) ] h(1− 2 )−λ2 h 2 = 0 (10)
l
l
l
γ

β

4.
λ̇1 = ρλ1 − Hk
m
h
λ̇1 = λ1 {ρ − βk β−1 [ (l − s)2 ]1−β }.
l

(11)

5.
λ̇2 = ρλ2 − Hh
m
2
h
s
2 −β (l − s)
λ̇2 = λ2 ρ − λ1 (1 − β)k [ (l − s) ]
− λ2
l
l
l
β

(12)

(8) -(10 ) are the the first order conditions to to maximise H, and (11)
and (12) give the rates of change of λi , i = 1, 2 of both capitals.

6

3.1

Steady state path

Next, we will seek the balanced growth path from (8)-(12) which are solutions
on which consumption and both kinds of capital are growing at constant percentage rates, the prices of the two kinds of capital are declining at constant
rates.
In what follows we will present our first results which have to do with the
relationships between the rates of change of our variables k, c, l − s and h.
Proposition 1 Along the balanced growth solution of the planner’s problem,
we have
ˆ s) − ˆl
k̂ = ĉ = ĥ + 2(l −
Proof.
From (8) we have λ̂1 = −σĉ. So that if ĉ = θ, then from (11) we get that
the marginal productivity of capital is constant. That is,
ρ + σθ
h
.
k β−1 [ (l − s)2 ]1−β =
l
β

(13)

Dividing by k through (4) and using (7), we have
c
h
= k β−1 [ (l − s)2 ]1−β − k̂
k
l

(14)

Using (13) and the fact that k̂ grows at a constant rate, by hypothesis, one
has kc is a constant. After Differentiating (14) logarithmically with respect
to time we get
k̂ = ĉ = θ.
(15)
Differentiating (13) logarithmically with respect to time one has that the
common growth rate of consumption and capital is
ˆ s) − ˆl
θ = ĥ + 2(l −

Proposition 2 Under the same hypotheses of Proposition 1, one has:
ˆ s) =
1. ŝ = ˆl = (l −
2. k̂ = ĉ =

1−σ
ĥ
γ+σ

1+γ
ĥ
γ+σ

7

(16)

Proof.
Summing (9) and (10) we get
h
λ1
(1 − β)k β [ (l − s)2 ]−β (l − s) = 1
l
λ2

(17)

Differentiating (17) logarithmically with respect to time and using (15)
and (8) one has
ˆ s) − β ĥ + (β − σ)θ
λ̂2 = (1 − β)(l −

(18)

Manipulating (9) and (17) we have
(l − s)γ = 2

hλ2
l

(19)

Differentiating (19) logarithmically with respect to time we have
ˆ s) = λ̂2 + ĥ − ˆl
γ (l −

(20)

ˆ s = ˆl. Using this fact, (16)
Manipulating (12) and using (17) we have l −
and (20) become
ˆ s)
θ = ĥ + (l −
(21)
ˆ s) = λ̂2 + ĥ
(γ + 1)(l −

(22)

respectively.
Putting (18) and (21) into (22) and after arranging it we have.
ˆ s) = 1 − σ ĥ
(23)
(l −
γ+σ
ˆ s = ˆl,
Since ĥ is constant we have that ˆl = ŝ by (3). Using the fact that l −
stablished above, we get Item 1. Putting (23) into (21) we get
θ = ĥ +

1−σ
1−σ
ĥ = (1 +
)ĥ
γ+σ
γ+σ

(24)

Hence, Item 2 follows.
The following proposition shows that the growth rates in terms of parameters.
Proposition 3 Under the same hypotheses of Proposition 1, one has:
ˆ s) =
1. ŝ = ˆl = (l −

(1−σ)(ρ−1)
1−σ(2+γ)

8

2. k̂ = ĉ =

(1+γ)(ρ−1)
1−σ(2+γ)

Proof.
After manipulating (12) and to use (17) and (3) we reach to
λ̂2 = ρ − 1

(25)

Putting (25) into (22) one has
ˆ s) = ρ − 1 + ĥ
(1 + γ)(l −

(26)

Putting (21) into (26) we have
(1 + γ)θ = (2 + γ)ĥ + ρ − 1

(27)

Putting (24) into (27) and after simplifying the result we get
ĥ =

(γ + σ)(ρ − 1)
1 − σ(2 + γ)

(28)

Finally, Proposition 3 follows after substituting (28) into Items 1 and 2
of Proposition 2.
The following corollary shows the growth rate of the output equals the
growth rate of the capital (or consumption).
Corollary 1 Under assumptions of Proposition 3, one has
ŷ = k̂ = ĉ
Proof. This result follows from Differentiating (7) logarithmically with respect to time and using (16) and Item 2 of Proposition 3.

3.2

Convergent utility and transversality conditions

In this section, we establish the convergence of the utility function and the
transversality condition. We will do it by considering the balanced path and
under the assumption that σ > 1.
First, the utility integral can be written as
Z ∞
Z ∞
ˆ
((1−σ)ĉ−ρ)t
U = A1
e
dt − A2
e((1+γ)(l−s)−ρ)t dt
0

0

9

1−σ
1+γ
o)
o
ˆs
and A1 = (lo −s
. Substituting the values of ĉ and l −
where A1 = c1−σ
1+γ
given by Proposition 3 we have that U is
Z ∞
U = (A1 − A2 )
ext dt

0

where x = (1+γ)(1−σ)(ρ−1)
− ρ is negative since σ > 1 and ρ < 1. Thus, U is
1−σ(2+γ)
finite since x is negative.
Second, the transversality conditions associated with the benevolent planner’s problem also hold. That is to say,
lim kλ1 e−ρt = 0 and lim hλ2 e−ρt = 0

t→∞

t→∞

The former follows from the facts λ̂1 = −σĉ and k̂ = ĉ. Thus, one has
kλ1 e−ρt = ko (λ1 )o e(k̂−σĉ)t = ko (λ1 )0 e[(1−σ)ĉ−ρ]t
Since (1 − σ)ĉ − ρ = x and x is negative from its definition (see above), the
former result follows.
Finally, the latter follows from (25) and (28). To see it, it suffice to
observe that
hλ2 e−ρt = ho (λ2 )o e(ĥ+λ̂2 −ρ)t
where ĥ + λ̂1 − ρ equals x. Since x is negative, the latter result follows.

3.3

The intertemporal elasticity of distracting activities

We start by setting the elasticity of the marginal utility of time spent on
distracting activities, V2 (ct , st , lt ). Here the sub-index represents the partial
derivative with respect to st .
By definition of elasticity one has
EV (st ) =

∂V2 st
∂st V2

Using (6) we compute EV (st ). Thus,
EV (st ) = γ
Manipulating and using (3) we get
10

st
lt − st

EV (st ) = γ

ĥ

1 − ĥ
Considering again the balanced path and using (28) we write EV (st ) in terms
of parameters
EV (st ) = γ

1

(γ+σ)(ρ−1)
1−σ(2+γ)
− (γ+σ)(ρ−1)
1−σ(2+γ)

We know that the intertemporal elasticity of substitution of time spent on
distracting activities IES is defined as EV 1(st ) so that
IES(s) =

(1 + γ)(1 − σ) − ρ(γ + σ)
γ(γ + σ)(ρ − 1)

(29)

For σ > 1 and ρ < 1, we clearly have that IES(s) tends to 0 as γ → ∞.

4

Analysis of results and concluding remarks

First, in relation to the home-office job supply represented by lt − st we know
from (6) that the intertemporal elasticity of substitution of the home office
is γ1 and the intertemporal elasticity of substitution of consumption is σ1 .
Second, for the balanced growth path satisfying (8) - (12) to be a solution of
the benevolent planner’s problem it is sufficient that the transversality conditions are satisfied. This is achieved by assuming σ > 1. Third, differently
from Eriksson’s (1996) model we have considered the productivity of human
capital sector as being 1 and the discount factor ρ < 1. Lastly, if workers
had been patients ( ρ = 1), we would have considered the productivity of
the human capital sector as being greater than 1 in order to keep the results
similar to that of Eriksson as is shown in Propositions 2, 3 and Corollary 1.
Using all the results of the previous paragraph, we can then say that the
intertemporal elasticity of substitution of time spent on distracting activities, IES(s) is small enough provided that the intertemporal elasticity of
substitution of home-office is small enough. More precisely one has that
lim IES(s) = 0

γ→∞

The intuition behind this result is that if workers want to avoid fluctuations in home-office labor, they should display strong preference to avoid
fluctuations on distracting activities. This result does not seem to be plausible in the short-run due to the high volatility of the distracting activities
11

because of the COVID-19 pandemic that has spread throughout the world
provoking fear and anxiety in citizens and particularly in workers. However,
to have IES(s) small enough does seem to be quite plausible in the long-run
since workers will end up incorporating home office work if it is adopted as
a form of labor.
We finish this section by saying that although our paper is deterministic,
it does explain to a certain degree, the long-run behaviour of the home-office
job supply in terms of time spent on distracting activities. More precisely,
a necessary condition for the home-office job supply to be smooth is that
the intertemporal elasticity of substitution of distracting activities be small
enough, as shown in the previous limit. We hope that in future research the
home-office job supply will be analysed in ampler settings, including markets
and government.

12

References
[1] Allen, T. D., Golden, T. D., & Shockley, K. M., 2015. How effective is
telecommuting? Assessing the status of our scientific findings. Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 16, 40-68.
[2] Bloom, Nicholas, James Liang, John Roberts, and Zhichun Jenny Ying,
2015, Does Working from Home Work? Evidence from a Chinese Experiment, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Volume 130, Issue 1,
February 2015, Pages 165-218
[3] Dutcher, E. Glenn, and Krista Jabs Saral. 2012. ?Does Team Telecommuting Affect Productivity? An Experiment.? MPRA Paper no. 41594,
University Library of Munich.
[4] Eriksson, C., 1993, Economic growth with endogenous labour supply,
European Journal of Political Economy Vol. 12 (1996) 533-544
[5] Lucas, R.J., 1988, On the mechanics of economic development, Journal
of Monetary Economics 22,3-42.
[6] Uzawa, H., 1965, Optimum technical change in an aggregative model of
economic growth, International Economic Review 6, 18-31.

13

