arXiv:2007.10287v1 [cs.AI] 4 Jul 2020

Coronavirus Knowledge Graph: A Case Study
Chongyan Chen

Islam Akef Ebeid

University of Texas at Austin
Austin, Texas
chongyanchen_hci@utexas.edu

University of Texas at Austin
iaebeid@utexas.edu

Yi Bu

Ying Ding

Peking University
Beijing, China
buyi@pku.edu.cn

University of Texas at Austin
ying.ding@ischool.utexas.edu

ABSTRACT
The emergence of the novel COVID-19 pandemic has had a significant impact on global healthcare and the economy over the past few
months. The virus’s rapid widespread has led to a proliferation in
biomedical research addressing the pandemic and its related topics.
One of the essential Knowledge Discovery tools that could help the
biomedical research community understand and eventually find a
cure for COVID-19 are Knowledge Graphs. The CORD-19 dataset is
a collection of publicly available full-text research articles that have
been recently published on COVID-19 and coronavirus topics. Here,
we use several Machine Learning, Deep Learning, and Knowledge
Graph construction and mining techniques to formalize and extract
insights from the PubMed dataset presented in [8] and the CORD19 dataset [1] to identify COVID-19 related experts and bio-entities.
Besides, we suggest possible techniques to predict related diseases,
drug candidates, gene, gene mutations, and related compounds as
part of a systematic effort to apply Knowledge Discovery methods
to help biomedical researchers tackle the pandemic.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Applied computing → Health informatics; Biological networks; • Computing methodologies → Information extraction; Knowledge representation and reasoning; • Information systems → Information systems applications;

KEYWORDS
corona virus, named entity Recognition, BioBERT, knowledge Graph,
drug discovery
ACM Reference Format:
Chongyan Chen, Islam Akef Ebeid, Yi Bu, and Ying Ding. 2020. Coronavirus
Knowledge Graph: A Case Study. In KDD2020: ACM Knowledge Discovery in
Databases, August 23–27, 2020, San Diego, California. ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 8 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
KDD ’2020, August 23–27, 2020, San Diego, California
© 2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

1 INTRODUCTION
1.1 Knowledge Graphs
A Knowledge Graph (KG) is a graph-based data structure used to
represent unstructured information so that a machine can read
it. Emerging from Knowledge Bases, KGs now represent a ubiquitous set of methods for representing and integrating knowledge in
various domains. A KG contains descriptions of entities and their
relationships as information in the form of first-order logical facts
such as <Mount Fuji is located in Japan> that can be retrieved and
queried heuristically. KGs emerged to power what was known in
the eighties and the nineties as Expert Systems - an early form
of Artificial Intelligence and Decision Support Systems [25]. The
number of entity types and relationships in a KG is finite and is
usually but not necessarily organized in a schema or an ontology.
In 2012 Google introduced the Google Knowledge Graph [21], a
technology that converts multiple information sources to a graph
structure where the nodes represent real-life entities and types.
The edges represent the relationships between those entities and
types, and the technology was aimed at enhancing the users’ search
experience through predicting the users’ search intent and introducing a Knowledge Panel on the right of page [21]. Knowledge
Graph technology today has been adopted in many domains and
fields to store, integrate, and represent unstructured information
in a structured format that is more flexible and machine-readable
than the traditional entity-relationship data model [6].
Other examples of widely used and adopted KGs in different
domains such as Social Networks and Life Sciences include the
Facebook Social Graph [30] and Chem2Bio2RDF [5]. The advancement of KG construction and mining was powered by the already
established research fields of Machine Learning, Deep Learning,
Graph Mining, and Complex Networks. The techniques and methods developed by researchers in such fields are used to mine data
and information in KGs to extract insights crucial to advancing
knowledge in various domains. Research in Information Networks
also played a role in the construction and mining of KGs mainly
through relying on statistical methods and machine learning techniques [28]. Information networks are widely heterogeneous graphs
of nodes and edges representing meta-information about a published corpus of literature such as authors, papers, publications,
and venues. Hence, information networks are KGs in which graph
mining techniques can be applied to extract insights about author
collaboration patterns and their topics of interest. Mining information networks as KGs has to lead to understanding trends such as

KDD ’2020, August 23–27, 2020, San Diego, California

collaboration patterns and potential drug re-purposing opportunities in a specific domain without reading the entire literature in a
field.
KGs have been curated manually, yet, over the years, KG construction techniques have changed. For example, Cyc [18] is a KG
that was manually curated, while Freebase [3] and Wikidata [32]
were crowd-sourced. KGs can also be extracted using Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques such as in DBpedia [17] and
YAGO [27]. Alternatively, KGs can be constructed using a combination of manual curation and automatic extraction like in NELL
[4] and Knowledge Vault [11]. Regardless of the approach of how
a KG has been constructed, KGs need to be queried and mined to
map complex real-world phenomena and eventually be exploited
to solve important research questions. For example, Facebook’s
Social Graph needs to be mined to suggest new friends for users.
Life Sciences KGs like Chem2Bio2RDF need to be mined to answer
research questions related to biomedical science.

1.2

Named Entity Recognition in Knowledge
Graph Construction

The move towards natural language understanding through semantic technologies has gained much ground in the past decade,
promoting Named Entity Recognition (NER) to a central NLP task.
NER has been crucial for building and constructing KGs as the
primary method of extracting entities and possibly relations from
free text. Also, tasks such as link prediction, relation extraction,
and graph completion on KGs are aided by NER. NER can be impactful when applied to mine domain-specific scientific literature
such as the biomedical literature to extract bio entities aiding in
constructing KGs and advancing downstream knowledge discovery
tasks in biomedicine.
Although research in NER has been advancing since the nineties
[20], early efforts in domain-specific biomedical NER came later in
the early 2000s [26]. Those methods in biomedical NER relied on
feature engineering and graphical models such as Hidden Markov
Models (HMM) and Conditional Random Fields (CRF) [26]. When
applying CRF models to the biomedical text, the objective is to
construct a chain out of the words then predict the assigned labels
based on a conditionally trained finite state machine where the
probability of each label assigned to a word is correlated with a
feature set. The objective was then to maximize the log-likelihood
of the label given the word directly. The accuracy of the recognition of bioentities in CRF and HMM models were quite low when
compared to state of the art today. The current state of the art
relies on the latest in Deep Learning in contextual embedding such
as BERT. BERT is a deep learning model developed in [9] by a
team at Google to be fine-tuned for machine translation tasks. The
model was based on the transformer architecture described in [31].
Multiple attention heads are used to train a contextual embedding
where the task is to predict masked words of the input sentences.
The sophisticated inner architecture of BERT based on multiple
encoder-decoder layers allows for learning high-quality embedding
from a large corpus of data where the learned weights can be later
transferred and fine-tuned to downstream tasks. In [16], the authors
trained a BERT model on the corpus of PubMed and PMC named
BioBERT. The result was a biomedical contextual embedding model

Chongyan Chen, Islam Akef Ebeid, Yi Bu, and Ying Ding

that was later fine-tuned and used in a biomedical NER task producing high accuracy tagging and extraction of bio entities such
as drugs, diseases, and genes. The high accuracy of the BioBERT
model allowed and aided in the construction of the PubMed KG
presented in [33].

1.3

The COVID-19 Knowledge Graph

Several months amid the emergence of the acute respiratory syndrome COVID-19 caused by the novel coronavirus Sars-CoV-2 in
China, the disease has risen to a global pandemic level affecting
almost every country on earth and infecting more than 6 million
people across the globe and killing more than 350000 [2]. As a result, researchers from every domain have reoriented their efforts
towards finding ways and solutions to tackle the pandemic. Specifically, the biomedical literature on COVID-19 and SARS-CoV-2 and
other related acute respiratory syndromes that have reached an epidemic level such as SARS and MERS have increased exponentially
since the virus’s appearance back in December 2019. As a result,
government-backed calls and research institutions like the Allen
Institute for AI have released a COVID-19 Open Research Dataset
CORD-19 [1]. The dataset contains over 65000 full-text scholarly
articles related to COVID-19, SARS-CoV-2, and other related topics.
This effort aims to encourage the NLP and KG researcher community to mine the dataset to generate insights through text mining
techniques and methods to help point biomedical researchers in
the right direction to fight against the virus.
We see the release of the CORD-19 dataset of machine-readable
scientific literature as an opportunity to extract a comprehensive
and cohesive COVID-19 KG of the entities and relationships though
cooccurrence within the corpus of articles. The extracted KG will
help understand the relationships between the diseases, the genes,
the viruses, and the cures involved in and related to COVID-19 so
that future graph and network mining efforts can be applied to
extract insights from the dataset. Here we present our vision in
contributing to that effort.
We demonstrate methods of entity extraction and KG building
to harvest a COVID KG capable of being a useful dataset for future
mining in the hope that it will help biomedical researchers find
a cure and tackle the pandemic through generating deep insights.
We first introduce how to use BioBERT for named entity recognition in the PubMed and CORD-19 datasets. Then we built several
Coronavirus Knowledge Graphs based on two different kinds of
measurements. One measure the relationship between source node
and each target node based on co-occurrence frequency. The other
is to use Cosine Similarity to measure the similarity between the
source node and each target node.

2

RELATED WORK

Previous efforts and trials to build a comprehensive COVID-19 KG
have lacked in several areas. For example [10] built a COVID-19
related KG based on 145 articles and provided a web application for
ease of use and access. This COVID-19 KG contains 3954 nodes and
9484 relations, covering ten entity types. It reveals host-pathogen
interactions, comorbidities, symptoms, and discovered over 300
candidate drugs for COVID-19. Nevertheless, the effort was limited
in terms of the number of publications included in constructing the

Coronavirus Knowledge Graph: A Case Study

KG. [12] applied a machine learning model (BERE [14]) to integrate
and mine KG to also aide in the effort of identifying candidate drugs
for COVID-19. Besides, [24] used a pre-built KG for COVID-19 drug
discovery and identified the drug "baricitinib" to protect lung cells
from being infected by the virus. Previously mentioned efforts
though promising, yet they lacked the large scale KG construction
and mining approaches necessary to extract more profound and
in-depth insights about the disease and possible cures, treatments,
and genetic influences.
NLP techniques have also been utilized outside of the KG construction arena, for example, [29] introduced CovidQA, a question
answering dataset, which comprises 124 questions and answers of
triples built by hand from knowledge collected from the CORD-19
dataset. [13] developed a self-supervised context-aware COVID-19
document exploration based on BERT. [19] used BERT to analyze a
large collection of COVID-19 literature from the CORD-19 dataset
[15] to extract COVID-19 related radiological findings. Though rigorous in using large datasets such as CORD-19, the previous NLP
techniques were limited in terms of applications and the impact of
those applications on the COVID-19 oriented biomedical research
field.

3 DATASETS
3.1 PubMed dataset
The PubMed database contains more than 30 million citations
within the various fields of life sciences. The PubMed citation database archived by the MEDLINE archive has always been the desired
datasets for biomedical text and graph mining research communities.
We select PubMed dataset because it is a popular dataset in
biomedical area and reflect general biomedical knowledge.

3.2

The PubMed Knowledge Graph

[33] built a PubMed KG which connects disambiguated author
names, their articles, and bio-entities using the PubMed database
were they parsed 29 million PubMed abstracts from 1781 till 2019. In
addition to funding extracted from the National Institutes of Health
using ExPORTER, and affiliations were extracted from ORCID and
MapAffil.

3.3

The CORD-19 Dataset

The CORD-19 dataset was released in response to COVID-19, where
the US Government has issued requests for research groups and
institutions to combine efforts to release the COVID-19 Open Research Dataset (CORD-19). The datasets contain more than 135000
articles with over 68000 full texts on topics related to Coronavirus
and the COVID-19 pandemic. The data set was released to help the
biomedical research community by applying the latest in NLP to
extract deep insights and understandings of the pandemic patterns
and the possible drugs, cures, and genes that might be involved and
identified [1].
Here we perform our analysis on the entities and relationships
extracted from the three datasets and we show the potential in
knowledge discovery.

KDD ’2020, August 23–27, 2020, San Diego, California

4

EXPERIMENT-0 IDENTIFY EXPERTS ON
CORONAVIRUS TOPICS

We would like to identify the experts for COVID to encourage
collaboration. To do that, we analyzed COVID-19 44k dataset and
ranked the researchers according to the number of articles they
published in the COVID-19 44K dataset. Part of the results are
shown in Table 1.
Table 1: COVID-19 related researchers
Author
Perlman, Stanley
Drosten, Christian
Yuen, Kwok-Yung
Baric, Ralph S
Jiang, Shibo
Enjuanes, Luis
Snijder, Eric J
Weiss, Susan R

# of articles published
in COVID-19 dataset
142
137
136
132
120
116
104
92

5

EXPERIMENT-1 NAMED ENTITY
RECOGNITION WITH BIOBERT
5.1 Model
BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers)
[9] is a highly influential Natural Language Processing model that
proposed back in 2018. BERT was inspired by many advanced Deep
Learning models, such as semi-supervised sequence learning[7],
ELMo [23] and the Transformer architecture [31].
The input representation of BERT is the sum of a token embedding using WordPiece, a segmentation embedding indicating
whether each token belongs to sentence A or sentence B, and a
position embedding. A [CLS] flag is added before the first word of
the sentence, and a [SEP] flag is added as a separator token.
BERT has two tasks for pre-training: Masked Language Model
task and Next Sentence Prediction task. Considering most of traditional NLP model, instead of training a left-to-right or right-to-left
model based on the input language, it is better to use the bidirectional model. However, the bidirectional model is not suitable for
the conditional task. Thus, inspired by the Cloze task, a masked
language model is adapted as the first task for BERT pre-training.
The second task for BERT pre-training is Next Sentence Prediction
(NSP), which allows the model to understand sentence relationships.
BioBERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers for Biomedical Text Mining) [16] is a biomedical language
representation model based on BERT [9]. It is proposed because
directly adapting BERT to text mining in the biomedical area was
not promising, given the word shift from generic domain to the
biomedical domain. BioBERT is pre-trained on PubMed abstracts
and PubMed Central full-text articles (PMC).
We select BioBERT-Base v1.1 (+PubMed 1M) based on the BERTbase-Cases model. For our fine-tuning section, we fine-tuned it on
the NCBI disease dataset. The input to the BioBERT model is a

KDD ’2020, August 23–27, 2020, San Diego, California

Table 2: Named Entity Recognition using BioBERT in
PubMed dataset
Word
Asymptomatic
carrier
state
,
acute
respiratory
disease
,
and
pneumonia
due
to
severe
acute
respiratory
syndrome
coronavirus
2
(
SARSCoV
2
)
:
Facts
and
myths

Label
O-MISC
O-MISC
O-MISC
O-MISC
B-MISC
I-MISC
I-MISC
O-MISC
O-MISC
B-MISC
O-MISC
O-MISC
O-MISC
B-MISC
I-MISC
I-MISC
I-MISC
I-MISC
O-MISC
O-MISC
O-MISC
O-MISC
O-MISC
O-MISC
O-MISC
O-MISC
O-MISC

sentence embedded following BERT’s embedding process. Parts of
the token-level evaluation looks like: "[CLS]Ang ##iot ##ens ##in
- converting enzyme 2 (AC ##E ##2 ) as a SA ##RS - Co ##V - 2
receptor: molecular mechanisms and potential therapeutic target.
[SEP]". The output of this model will be a sentence with labels.
Label "B-MISC" means the Begining of bioentities, "I-MISC" means
Insdie the bio entities, and "O-MISC" means Outside the bio entity.
We tested BioBERT on PubMed KG and the CORD-19 dataset.

5.2

Results

Examples of entity-level recognized names from the PubMed dataset
are shown in Table 2. The recognized bio-entities are "acute respiratory disease", "pneumonia", and "acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2". "SARSCOV-2" should, but is not recognized as bioentities.
Since we do not have detailed labels for BioBERT fine-tuning
training and thus cannot predict detailed labels directly from BioBERT.
To get more detailed labels, we trained a Random Forest model on
around 100,000 PubMed bio-entities labeled with five categories:
species, gene, diseases, drug, gene mutation, and tested on the bioentities recognized by BioBERT. The F1-score is shown in Table
3. The F1-Score of disease, gene, and drug recognition are all over
75%. However, the model poorly predicts when it comes to label

Chongyan Chen, Islam Akef Ebeid, Yi Bu, and Ying Ding

Table 3: Specific named entity classification using Random
Forest
Label
Species
Disease
Gene
Drug
Gene mutation

Precision
0.72
0.94
0.95
0.66
0.5

Recall
0.31
0.61
0.64
0.99
0.17

F1-Score
0.43
0.74
0.76
0.79
0.25

Data Size
15519
12077
18678
53523
36

Table 4: named entity Recognition using BioBERT in
COVID-19 44K dataset
Word
Thrombocytopenia
is
associated
with
severe
coronavirus
disease
2019
COVID
19
infections
A
meta
analysis

Label
O-MISC
O-MISC
O-MISC
O-MISC
O-MISC
B-MISC
I-MISC
I-MISC
B-MISC
I-MISC
I-MISC
O-MISC
O-MISC
O-MISC
O-MISC
O-MISC

"Species" and labels "Gene mutation," probably because the dataset
was very unbalanced (Gene mutation only has 17 samples, and
Species has only 1395 samples).
Examples of named entity recognized from CORD-19 44K dataset
are shown in Table 4. In the example, the recognized bio-entities are
"coronavirus disease 2019", and "COVID-19". "Thrombocytopenia,"
a kind of disease, should, but is not recognized. From these cases,
we find that BioBERT does not perform greatly, despite its high
accuracy. It may be because BioBERT can easily recognize the easy
and common bio-entities with a high occurrence rate but fail to
recognize rare biomedical terms.

6

EXPERIMENT-2.1 CO-OCCURRENCE
FREQUENCY BASED KNOWLEDGE GRAPH
6.1 Method
We used Gephi to build the co-occurrence frequency based Knowledge Graph. Co-occurrence frequency is an above-chance frequency
of occurrence of two entities from an article. The data is from
the PubMed Knowledge Graph. For each target node (related bioentities), we calculated the times it shows up with the source
node and treat the times(co-occurrence frequency) as target node’s
weight. The higher the co-occurrence frequency, the closer the
target node is to the source node.

Coronavirus Knowledge Graph: A Case Study

KDD ’2020, August 23–27, 2020, San Diego, California

Figure 1: remdesivir related disease KG based on cooccurrence frequency

Figure 2: remdesivir related drug KG based on co-occurrence
frequency

6.2

The diseases highly related to ribavirin are: HIV, HCC, cirrhosis, hepatitis, liver cirrhosis, liver transplantation, AIDS, RSV, depression, chronic diseases, and etc. The drugs highly related to
ribavirin are: telaprevir, ledipasvir, alanine, sofosbuvir, boceprevir,
PEG, daclatasvir, simeprevir, ritonavir, paritaprevir, ombitasvir, and
dasabuvir.
The diseases highly related to tamiflu are: influenza, avian influenza, CCHF, pneumonia, HBV infection, cough, headache, hypernatremia, fever, and etc. The drugs highly related to tamiflu
are: amantadine, zanamivir, amino acid, oseltamivir, carboxylateribavirin, oseltamivir Phosphate, Peramivir, rimantadine, and laninamivir.
The diseases highly related to umifenovir are: influenza, acute
respiratory infections, viral infections, pneumonia, fever, and mepatitis B virus (HBV) infection. The drugs highly related to umifenovir
are tamiflu, rimantadine, ribavirin, ingavirin, amantadine, ARB,indole,
Zanamivir, Triazavirin, Reaferon, and etc.
Figure 3, Figure 4, and Figure 5 show two corona virus diseases
(SARS, MERS) and Ebola centered KG, respectively. Figure 3 shows
that SARS’s highly related diseases are acuate respiratory distress
syndrome, fever, influenza, HIV-1, Osteonecrosis, allergic inflammation, lung disease, atypical pneumonia, allergic rhinitis, cough,
and etc. SARS’s highly related genes/chemicals are CD8+, CD4+,
TNF-alpha, interferon-gamma, IFN-alpha, IL8, lgG, C-reactive protein, S protein, lactate dehydrogenase, ACE2 gene, and etc. SARS’s
highly related drugs are ribavirin, methylpredinisolone, and corticosteroids, and etc.
Figure 4 shows that MERS’s highly related diseases are Severe
Acute Respiratory Syndrome, PRCV infection, and influenza. MERS’s
highly related drugs are macrolides, ribavirin, azithromycin, lopinavir,
and nitonavir. MERS’s highly related genes/chemicals are CD26, S
protein gene, amino peptidase N, and etc.

Result

Figure 1 and Figure 2 shows remdesivir centered KGs. In Figure 1,
the source node is remdesivir and the target nodes are remdesivir
related disease. As shown, “ COVID-19", “Ebola", “SARS", “EVD",
“MERS", “EBOV", “cytokine storm", “acute cardiac injury", and “
ARDS" are related to remdesivir. In Figure 2 the source node is
remdesivir and the target nodes are remdesivir related drugs from
PubMed bio-entity knowledge graph. The edge’s weights are based
on co-occurrence frequency. As shown, “favipiravir" (used for influenza), “ritonavir" (used for HIV), “lopinavir (used for HIV)", “ribavirin" (used for severe lung infections), “chloroquine" (used for
lupus, malaria, and rheumatoid arthritis), and “pyrazofurin", which
has antibiotic, antiviral and anti-cancer properties with severe side
effects, are remdesivir related drugs.
We also generated other 6 drug-centered KGs. The 6 drugs are
favipiravir, ritonavir, lopinavir, ribavirin, tamiflu, and umifenovir.
The diseases highly related to favipiravir are: Ebola, influenza,
Epstein-Barr virus, HBV infection, CCHF, avian influenza, hemorrhagic fever, Lassa fever, thrombocytopenia syndrome, Rift Valley fever, and etc. The drugs highly related to favipiravir are: ribavirin, tamiflu, peramivir, amantadine, laninamivir, BCX4430, T1105, Pyrazine, and etc.
The diseases highly related to ritonavir are: HIV, AIDS, hepatitis
C virus, cirrhosis, nausea, and etc. The drugs highly related to
ritonavir are: lopinavir, indinavir, darunavir, lamivudine, atazanavir,
nelfinavir, and etc.
The diseases highly related to lopinavir are: HIV, AIDS, cardiovascular disease, lipodystrophy, hepatitis C, diarrhea, malaria,
nausea, and etc. The drugs highly related to lopinavir are: ritonavir,
saquinavir, abacavir, nucleoside, indinavir, lamivudine, darunavir,
atazanavir, nelfinavir, tenofovir, nevirapine, zidovudine, amprenavir,
and etc.

KDD ’2020, August 23–27, 2020, San Diego, California

Figure 3: SARS centered KG based on co-occurrence frequency

Chongyan Chen, Islam Akef Ebeid, Yi Bu, and Ying Ding

Figure 5: Ebola centered KG based on co-occurrence frequency

Figure 6: ACE2 centered KG based on co-occurrence frequency
Figure 4: MERS centered KG based on co-occurrence frequency

Figure 5 shows that Ebola’s highly related diseases are hemorrhagic fever, hyperthermia, malaria, and mosquito-borne infections. MERS’s highly related drugs are favipiravir and amodiaquine.
MERS’s highly related genes/chemicals are CD8+, CD4, DC-SIGN,
CD317, GP2, IFN-g, IRF3, RBBP6, and etc.
Figure 6 shows Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) centered Knowledge Graph. ACE2 is an enzyme, which lowers blood
pressure by catalysing the hydrolysis of angiotensin II into angiotensin (1-7). ACE2 is the receptor that COVID-19 uses to infect
lung cells. It also serves as receptor for other coronaviruses such as
HCoV-NL63, SARS-CoV. As shown, ACE2’s related genes/chemicals
are renin, RAS, angiotensin, insulin, Mas receptor, vascular endothelial growth factor-A, and etc. ACE2’s related diseases are diabetes,
hypertensive, chagas disease, severe acute respiratory syndromeassociated coronavirus. ACE2’s related drugs are streptozotocin,
nitric-oxide, and aldosterone .ACE2’s related gene mutations are
“rs2106809" and “rs2074192".

From the results we believe the PubMed Knowledge Graph is
very promising. However, this kind of KG has a entity name disambiguation issue. For example, “Favipiravir" could also be shown
as “favipiravir". Another case is “ACE-2", which is the abbreviation
of Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2. Besides, the co-occurrence
frequency cannot reflect the relationship between the source node
and the target node well. For example, if “A has nothing to do with
B" mentioned lots of times in different documents, its co-occurrence
frequency will be very high.

7

EXPERIMENT-2.2 COSINE SIMILARITY
BASED KNOWLEDGE GRAPH
7.1 Method
To deal with problems with co-occurrence frequency based KG, we
first normalized the entity using some human designed rules to deal
with entity name disambiguation issue. We mainly focus on case
sensitive, singular and plural, and disambiguation. For example,
“SIAsNN" will be normalized as "siann" and“respiratory illnesses"
will be normalized as "respiratory illness". Then we used Word2Vec
to convert the normalized entity to vector with length of 100. We

Coronavirus Knowledge Graph: A Case Study

KDD ’2020, August 23–27, 2020, San Diego, California

Figure 7: favipiravir-centered KG (related chemical) based
on cosine similarity
Figure 8: favipiravir-centered KG (related gene) based on cosine similarity
then use Cosine Similarity to measure the similarity between the
source node and each target node. The Cosine Similarity is defined
as follows:
Ín
ST
i=1 Si Ti
cos(S, T) =
= qÍ
(1)
q
∥S∥∥T∥
n (S )2 Ín (T )2
i=1 i
i=1 i
The KG based on cosine similarity is also built using Gephi
software.

7.2

Results

Figure 7 shows part of the favipiravir-centered knowledge graph
(chemical related). The source node is favipiravir and the target
node are related chemicals. The edge is cosine similarity relations.
The closer the target node is to the source node, the similar the
target node is to the source node. As shown, the top 10 chemical
related to favipiravir are guanine, csa, lysine, nh2, titanium, proline,
methicillin, anthraquinone, rimantadine, polyacrylamide. Figure
8 shows part of the favipiravir-centered knowledge graph (gene
related). As shown, the top 10 gene related to favipiravir are gm csf,
abortion, rig i, isg15, csa, akt, mtor, p53, th1, p38, tgf beta.
We also generate other 5 drug-centered KGs based on cosine similarity. The top 10 chemicals related to lopinavir are retinoic acid, nucleoside, tyr, glutamine, ribavirin, glycyrrhizin, co2, lopinavir, phosphonate, lymphoma, ifitm3. The top 10 genes related to lopinavir
are neuraminidase, p53, eif2alpha, apod, ribavirin, infection, cox-2,
ifitm3, iron.
The top 10 chemicals related to ribavirin are glycyrrhizin, lactate,
corticosteroid, coronavirus, steroid, nucleoside, ribavirin, sodium,
glucose, infection, oxygen, calcium, obesity. The top 10 genes related to ribavirin are toxicity, p53, swine, fibrosis, iron, neuraminidase,
diabetes, ribavirin, anemia, inflammation, infection.

The top 10 chemicals related to ritonavir are atp, ritonavir, cyclophosphamide, mtt, toxicity, sialic acid, sds, encephalitis, superoxide, sucrose, ethanol. The top 10 genes related to ritonavir are jnk,
p53, rig i, encephalitis, rnase l, stat3, toxicity, akt, neuraminidase,
stat1.
The top 10 chemicals related to tamiflu are superoxide, prednisolone, flavonol, proline, nitric oxide, thymidine, glycyrrhizin,
propidium iodide, nitrogen, aspirin, tamiflu. The top 10 genes related to tamiflu are il-10, cd44, eif2alpha, tgf beta1, tlr2, ifn, cxcl10,
tumor necrosis factor tnf)-alpha, ire1, ccl2, tbk1.
The top 10 chemicals related to umifenovir are: tacrolimus, alkyl,
carbon monoxide, ca(2, cd, nucleolin, cytosine, glycyrrhizic acid, 2’o, umifenovir, prostaglandin e2. The top 10 genes related to umifenovir are parp, pd l1, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1, nef, cxcr4,
cd45, nucleolin, dc ign, annexin v, cd19, mmp-2.

8

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

In this research, we first used BioBERT to recognize entities in the
PubMed and the CORD-19 dataset. Our results show that most of the
recognized entities are strictly biomedical. Most of the recognized
entities in the CORD-19 dataset are disease lacking diversity in
entity types due to a lack in finding a suitable bio-medical training
dataset with detailed labeled bio-entity. For future work, we will
explore more other bio-medical dataset and try other biomedical
NLP models for named entity recognition, e.g., blueBERT [22].
Furthermore, we introduced the construction of Coronavirus
Knowledge Graph based on two different methods: co-occurence
frequency and cosine similarity. We explored and revealed that the
drug candidates recommended by drug-centered KG are promising.
We will consult experts in COVID-related research to verify our

KDD ’2020, August 23–27, 2020, San Diego, California

Figure 9: auto drug profiling example

drug-centered KG and conduct a more in-depth analysis for future
work.
Also, we aim to build a wider COVID related KG, connecting all
COVID related bio-entities rather than small drug/disease-centered
KG. The extracted KG will help understand the relationships between the diseases, the genes, the viruses, and the cures involved
in and related to COVID-19.
Finally, we hope to build an automatic profiling system to generate expert, drug, or disease profiling. The expected disease profiling
will look like Figure 9, which includes description, related bio entities (drugs, gene, protein, species), topic distribution, related experts,
organization, and featured publications.

9

CONTRIBUTIONS

Y.D. and Y.B. proposed the idea and supervised the project. C.C.
wrote the paper. I.A.E wrote the Introduction and revised this paper.
C.C. conducted the named entity recognition and Knowledge Graph
building. I.A.E conducted the Word2Vec for Experiment 2.2.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like express our gratitude to Prof. Jaewoo Kange’s DMIS
Lab team for pretraining BioBERT, Vinay Locharulu for suggestion
and support, Prof. Jian Xu for providing PubMed Knowledge Graph,
and Yifei Wu for conducting entity normalization.

REFERENCES
[1] [n.d.]. COVID-19 Open Research Dataset Challenge (CORD-19). https://kaggle.
com/allen-institute-for-ai/CORD-19-research-challenge
[2] [n.d.]. Johns Hopkins Coronavirus Resource Center. https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/
[3] Kurt Bollacker, Colin Evans, Praveen Paritosh, Tim Sturge, and Jamie Taylor.
2008. Freebase: a collaboratively created graph database for structuring human
knowledge. In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM SIGMOD international conference on
Management of data. 1247–1250.
[4] Andrew Carlson, Justin Betteridge, Bryan Kisiel, Burr Settles, Estevam R Hruschka, and Tom M Mitchell. 2010. Toward an architecture for never-ending
language learning. In Twenty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
[5] Bin Chen, Xiao Dong, Dazhi Jiao, Huijun Wang, Qian Zhu, Ying Ding, and David J
Wild. 2010. Chem2Bio2RDF: a semantic framework for linking and data mining
chemogenomic and systems chemical biology data. BMC bioinformatics 11, 1
(2010), 255.
[6] Peter Pin-Shan Chen. 1976. The entity-relationship modelâĂŤtoward a unified
view of data. ACM transactions on database systems (TODS) 1, 1 (1976), 9–36.
[7] Andrew M Dai and Quoc V Le. 2015. Semi-supervised sequence learning. In
Advances in neural information processing systems. 3079–3087.

Chongyan Chen, Islam Akef Ebeid, Yi Bu, and Ying Ding

[8] Franck Dernoncourt and Ji Young Lee. 2017. Pubmed 200k rct: a dataset for sequential sentence classification in medical abstracts. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.06071
(2017).
[9] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2018. Bert:
Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1810.04805 (2018).
[10] Daniel Domingo-Fernandez, Shounak Baksi, Bruce Schultz, Yojana Gadiya,
Reagon Karki, Tamara Raschka, Christian Ebeling, Martin Hofmann-Apitius,
et al. 2020. COVID-19 Knowledge Graph: a computable, multi-modal, cause-andeffect knowledge model of COVID-19 pathophysiology. BioRxiv (2020).
[11] Xin Dong, Evgeniy Gabrilovich, Geremy Heitz, Wilko Horn, Ni Lao, Kevin Murphy, Thomas Strohmann, Shaohua Sun, and Wei Zhang. 2014. Knowledge vault:
A web-scale approach to probabilistic knowledge fusion. In Proceedings of the 20th
ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining.
601–610.
[12] Yiyue Ge, Tingzhong Tian, Sulin Huang, Fangping Wan, Jingxin Li, Shuya Li,
Hui Yang, Lixiang Hong, Nian Wu, Enming Yuan, et al. 2020. A data-driven
drug repositioning framework discovered a potential therapeutic agent targeting
COVID-19. bioRxiv (2020).
[13] Dusan Grujicic, Gorjan Radevski, Tinne Tuytelaars, and Matthew B Blaschko.
2020. Self-supervised context-aware Covid-19 document exploration through
atlas grounding. (2020).
[14] Lixiang Hong, JinJian Lin, Jiang Tao, and Jianyang Zeng. 2019. BERE: An accurate
distantly supervised biomedical entity relation extraction network. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.06916 (2019).
[15] Scite Inc. 2020. CORD-19_ scite_citation_tallies+contexts. https://doi.org/10.5281/
zenodo.3724818
[16] Jinhyuk Lee, Wonjin Yoon, Sungdong Kim, Donghyeon Kim, Sunkyu Kim,
Chan Ho So, and Jaewoo Kang. 2020. BioBERT: a pre-trained biomedical language
representation model for biomedical text mining. Bioinformatics 36, 4 (2020),
1234–1240.
[17] Jens Lehmann, Robert Isele, Max Jakob, Anja Jentzsch, Dimitris Kontokostas,
Pablo N Mendes, Sebastian Hellmann, Mohamed Morsey, Patrick Van Kleef, Sören
Auer, et al. 2015. DBpedia–a large-scale, multilingual knowledge base extracted
from Wikipedia. Semantic Web 6, 2 (2015), 167–195.
[18] Douglas B Lenat. 1995. CYC: A large-scale investment in knowledge infrastructure. Commun. ACM 38, 11 (1995), 33–38.
[19] Yuxiao Liang and Pengtao Xie. 2020. Identifying Radiological Findings Related
to COVID-19 from Medical Literature. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.01862 (2020).
[20] David Nadeau and Satoshi Sekine. 2007. A survey of named entity recognition
and classification. Lingvisticae Investigationes 30, 1 (2007), 3–26.
[21] Heiko Paulheim. 2017. Knowledge graph refinement: A survey of approaches
and evaluation methods. Semantic web 8, 3 (2017), 489–508.
[22] Yifan Peng, Shankai Yan, and Zhiyong Lu. 2019. Transfer learning in biomedical
natural language processing: An evaluation of BERT and ELMo on ten benchmarking datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.05474 (2019).
[23] Matthew E Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt Gardner, Christopher
Clark, Kenton Lee, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2018. Deep contextualized word
representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.05365 (2018).
[24] Peter Richardson, Ivan Griffin, Catherine Tucker, Dan Smith, Olly Oechsle, Anne
Phelan, and Justin Stebbing. 2020. Baricitinib as potential treatment for 2019nCoV acute respiratory disease. Lancet (London, England) 395, 10223 (2020),
e30.
[25] Stuart J Russell and Peter Norvig. 2016. Artificial intelligence: a modern approach.
Malaysia.
[26] Burr Settles. 2004. Biomedical named entity recognition using conditional random
fields and rich feature sets. In Proceedings of the International Joint Workshop on
Natural Language Processing in Biomedicine and its Applications (NLPBA/BioNLP).
107–110.
[27] Fabian M Suchanek, Gjergji Kasneci, and Gerhard Weikum. 2007. Yago: a core of
semantic knowledge. In Proceedings of the 16th international conference on World
Wide Web. 697–706.
[28] Yizhou Sun and Jiawei Han. 2012. Mining heterogeneous information networks:
principles and methodologies. Synthesis Lectures on Data Mining and Knowledge
Discovery 3, 2 (2012), 1–159.
[29] Raphael Tang, Rodrigo Nogueira, Edwin Zhang, Nikhil Gupta, Phuong Cam,
Kyunghyun Cho, and Jimmy Lin. 2020. Rapidly Bootstrapping a Question Answering Dataset for COVID-19. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.11339 (2020).
[30] Johan Ugander, Brian Karrer, Lars Backstrom, and Cameron Marlow. 2011. The
anatomy of the facebook social graph. arXiv preprint arXiv:1111.4503 (2011).
[31] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones,
Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In Advances in neural information processing systems. 5998–6008.
[32] Denny Vrandečić and Markus Krötzsch. 2014. Wikidata: a free collaborative
knowledgebase. Commun. ACM 57, 10 (2014), 78–85.
[33] Jian Xu, Sunkyu Kim, Min Song, Minbyul Jeong, Donghyeon Kim, Jaewoo Kang,
Justin F Rousseau, Xin Li, Weijia Xu, Vetle I Torvik, et al. 2020. Building a PubMed
knowledge graph. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.04308 (2020).

