Optimizing testing policies for detecting COVID-19 outbreaks

arXiv:2007.04827v3 [physics.soc-ph] 1 Jan 2021

Janni Yuval

∗†

Mor Nitzan

∗‡

Neta Ravid Tannenbaum

∗§

Boaz Barak

∗¶

January 5, 2021

Abstract
The COVID-19 pandemic poses challenges for continuing economic activity while
reducing health risks. While these challenges can be mitigated through testing, testing
budget is often limited. Here we study how institutions, such as nursing homes, should
utilize a fixed test budget for early detection of an outbreak. Using an extended
network-SEIR model, we show that given a certain budget of tests, it is generally
better to test smaller subgroups of the population frequently than to test larger groups
but less frequently. The numerical results are consistent with an analytical expression
we derive for the size of the outbreak at detection in an exponential spread model.
Our work provides a simple guideline for institutions: distribute your total tests over
several batches instead of using them all at once. We expect that in the appropriate
scenarios, this easy-to-implement policy recommendation will lead to earlier detection
and better mitigation of local COVID-19 outbreaks.

Introduction
Viral testing is crucial in monitoring and controlling the spread of Covid-19, and a key
factor in policy adjustments [1]. Limitations of financial and medical resources make it
imperative to find efficient ways for testing large populations. Testing can be used to
achieve several different goals: (1) Diagnostic testing: Test patients that display symptoms
or have had contact with suspected-positive individual, in order to determine the best
course of treatment as well as whether isolation is required. (2) Spreading suppression:
Wide-spread testing of asymptomatic individuals in order to detect and isolate infectious
individuals, as well as trace their contacts. (3) Outbreak detection: If the prevalence of
the infection in the population is sufficiently low, randomized testing of asymptomatic
individuals can be used for outbreak detection. In such a setting the goal of testing is to
∗

All authors contributed equally to this manuscript.
MIT.
‡
The Hebrew University.
§
Technion
¶
Harvard University
†

1

detect an introduction of an infection into the institution before the outbreak becomes too
large. Once such an outbreak is detected, other emergency measures can be implemented,
including contact tracing, large-scale testing, and temporary closures.
Much of the literature on COVID-19 testing protocols has been focused on spreading
suppression, where the goal is to test the population frequently enough so that any infected
asymptomatic individual will be detected before they had a chance to infect many others.
Combining mass testing with other measures, such as self-isolation and household quarantine could substantially reduce transmission rates [2]. In places where the transmission rate
is especially large, such as college and university campuses, and in high-risk groups, such as
health workers, periodic testing can play a crucial role in reducing transmission [3, 4, 5, 6],
and many universities already require students and personnel to get periodically tested if
they are on campus [7]. Unfortunately, testing the population in such environments less
frequently than once in two days is unlikely to reduce the reproductive number below one
[8, 9], which is the threshold needed to contain an outbreak.
While frequent extensive testing is ideal, not every institution in every locality has the
resources to perform it. Furthermore, the likelihood of an introduction of infection into an
institution depends on both the community prevalence and the size of the institution. If
both are sufficiently small so that introductions are relatively rare, and the institution is
able to switch to emergency footing to contain and suppress an outbreak once detected,
then potentially fewer tests can be used. In this work we consider such institutions where
new Covid-19 cases are rare and we focus on testing policies for outbreak detection. If the
prevalence is high enough or the institution is large enough that introductions of infection
are frequent (e.g., daily) or in cases where emergency measures, such as partial or temporary
closures, are not an option, then different suppression strategies need to be used. Such
suppression strategies are beyond the scope of this work.
Outbreak detection is crucial for institutions, such as nursing homes, that are comprised
of susceptible populations, but can be useful in other cases as well. Such institutions have
a limited budget of tests and typically do not have “in house” testing facilities. Hence in
some cases they rely on mobile testing units that visit the institution at some frequency
to test all of its members (see [10, 11]). The question we study is whether there are better
ways to distribute the same number of tests to reduce the risk of undetected outbreaks.
To illustrate this, consider the setting where the budget of tests allows for testing all
of the members of the institution once per 28 days. Two potential policies to distribute
the same budget are: (1) single batch policy, where every four weeks there is a testing day
in which the entire population is tested, and (2) frequent-and-partial policy, where every x
days we test a random x/28 fraction of the population (for example test a quarter of the
population every week).
Intuitively, there is a trade-off between the two testing policies. If we assume for
simplicity that infected individuals do not recover and test results are 100% accurate, then
with the single-batch policy we are guaranteed to detect any outbreak that may exist on
each testing day, since the entire population is being tested that day. However, such an
2

outbreak is likely to be quite large by the time it is detected. Instead, with the frequentand-partial policy, when testing more frequently but only a random subset of the population
each time, there is no guarantee of catching an outbreak on a testing day. However, if an
infected individual is detected, then the corresponding outbreak might be earlier in its
course and therefore of smaller size at the time of detection.
In this work we show that in many cases, choosing the frequent-and-partial policy,
namely distributing the same number of tests into smaller subsets that are performed
more frequently, will lead to better outcomes and decrease the expected number of people
infected by the time the outbreak is detected. For example, instead of testing all residents
and staff of a nursing home on the same day once a month, it would be better to test twice
a month half of the members at each round of testing. We demonstrate this numerically
based on extensive simulations in an elaborate network-based SEIR model, that accounts
for incubation period, heterogeneity in connections, false negative tests, and testing results
lag. We also show that our results are consistent with the analysis of a simple (and
analytically tractable) exponential spread model.

Results
Outbreak detection - SEIR model
We start by analyzing the effect of tests distribution on outbreak detection based on a
mathematical model for epidemic spread in a population. The SIR (Susceptible-InfectiousRecovered) epidemic model [12] and its variations such as SEIR (e.g. [13, 14], where the E
stands for Exposed) were recently shown to be useful as a modeling framework for COVID19 analysis [15, 16]. In such a model, each member of the population may be at a given time
either susceptible (S), exposed (E), infectious (I), or recovered (R). In this basic model,
a susceptible member of the population can transition to an exposed state by interacting
with a member in an infectious state. Once a member is exposed, they will transition to
the infectious and then to recovered state. We use a network-based SEIR model [17], in
which individuals can interact via links in a social network with a predetermined structure.
A detailed description of the model along with its parameter values are elaborated in the
Methods.
To study the effect of the distribution of a given budget of tests on outbreak detection
we assume a budget of N tests per a period of T days, where N is the population size.
Two extreme testing policies are: (1) “one-batch policy”: test all N individuals together,
once every T days, and (2) “frequent daily policy”: testing 1/T fraction of the population
daily. We evaluate the testing policies by their associated “cost”, which is defined as the
number of individuals that are infected at the time the first infectious individual is detected.
In more detail, to study intermediate variations between the 1-batch and frequent daily
policies, and to obtain concrete estimates for the number of people infected when the
first infectious person is detected under different conditions, we perform simulations with
3

varying testing frequencies (testing once every 28,14 and 1 days) and different values of
reproductive number R, while holding T (which is proportional to the testing budget)
constant at 28 days. When using a frequent testing policies, we divide randomly the
population to fixed prearranged subgroups which are tested consecutively. We use a fixed
population size (N = 500), where the possibility of interactions between individuals is set
by a social network structure, while we also enable random infrequent interactions between
any two individuals (Methods).
We assume that individuals within our population (representing for example individuals
within a nursing home) can be infected by an external source (for example, by interaction
with a visitor). We initially investigate the epidemic spread in simulations where infections
by external sources are infrequent. Specifically, we first assume that there is only a single
infection due to an external source at a random time, and later show that the results
hold when external sources are more frequent. As mentioned above, we expect outbreak
detection to be a suitable policy when infections by external sources are infrequent. Due
to the stochastic nature of the simulations we estimate the mean number of individuals
that are infected by the first detection of an infectious individual for each testing policy
and R value using 400 realizations.
Since our focus is on outbreak detection, we stop the simulation at the first reported
positive test result (accounting for false negatives and reporting lag time). Any mitigation
or suppression efforts following detection will vary greatly according to context and are
beyond the scope of this paper. The goal of the outbreak detection strategy is to minimize
the overall number of individuals that were infected up until the point of detection.
We find that, across varying parameters, the cost is largest for the 1-batch policy
(testing the whole population every 28 days), smaller for the 2-batch policy (testing half of
the population every 14 days; Fig. S1) and smallest for the frequent daily policy (Fig. 1).
Depending on the reproductive number, even a relatively low budget of tests (allowing to
test the whole institution once per month) can still enable detection of an outbreak before
it becomes very large, but using the same budget with larger frequency of testing can
substantially decrease the size of the outbreak at detection (Fig. 1). Beyond reducing the
mean cost, increased testing frequency reduces the probability of missing a large outbreak
(Fig. 1). Our results are robust to changes in the overall testing budget (Fig. 2), changes
in the frequency of individuals who are infected from an external source (Fig. 3), and
changes in the social network structure (Fig. S2). Generally, we find that frequent testing
is substantially better than the “1-batch policy” in cases where an outbreak is expected
to be large. For example, in cases where the reproductive number is large (Fig. 1), the
budget is small (Fig. 2), or when there are individuals who are infected from an external
source frequently (Fig. 3), the frequent-testing policy outperforms the 1-batch policy.

4

Figure 1 – The number of people infected when the first infectious individual is
detected (i.e., cost) for different testing policies and reproductive numbers. The
distributions of the cost of testing the whole population simultaneously every 28 days (“1batch policy”; orange) and testing 1/28 of the population daily (“frequent daily policy”; blue)
as a function of the reproductive number. The dotted black lines show the mean cost and the
dotted gray lines show the 90th percentile of cost for each policy and reproductive number.
Both policies have the same testing budget of testing 100% of the population every 28 days. In
all simulations used in this figure we consider the introduction of a single exposed individual
at a random time.

5

Figure 2 – The mean number of people infected when the first infectious individual
is detected (i.e., cost) as a function of the testing budget and reproductive number
for different testing policies. The mean cost for (a) the “frequent daily policy” (test 1/T
fraction of the population per day) and (b) the “1-batch policy” (test 100% of the population
every T days) as a function of the testing budget (1/T , where T is the number of days until the
whole population is tested once) and the reproductive number. (c) The ratio between the two
policies in percentages (< 100% means that frequent daily policy is better than the 1-batch
policy). In all simulations used in this figure we consider the introduction of a single exposed
individual at a random time.

Figure 3 – The mean number of people infected when the first infectious individual
is detected (i.e., cost) as a function of the mean daily number of individuals that
are infected from an external source and the reproductive number for different
testing policies. The mean cost for (a) the “frequent daily policy” (test 1/T fraction of the
population per day) and (b) the “1-batch policy” (test 100% of the population every T days).
(c) The ratio between the two policies in percentages (< 100% means that frequent daily policy
is better than the 1-batch policy). Simulations with external infection sources start with zero
infected individuals, and in every day there is a probability (πext ) for each susceptible member
of the population to get infected (Methods). The mean daily external infection is N πext where
N is the population size. The first testing day in the simulation with the 1-batch policy is
chosen randomly to be any value between 1 to T days.

6

Outbreak detection - exponential model
To support the generality of our results, and to get more intuitive understanding of our
findings, we consider a simplified variation of the network-SEIR model which is analytically tractable. Specifically, we consider an exponential infection spread model (branching
process model with an unbounded total population) [18, 19]. From an epidemiological
perspective, this is a model for infection where each infected individual infects exactly g
other individuals per time unit t. Infected individuals never recover, and testing is 100%
sensitive and specific for infected individuals. Here we compare two testing policies: ”1batch policy” - test all individuals every T days, and ”frequent policy” - test  fraction of
the population every T days. We define the cost as the overall number of infected individuals at detection, which can be expressed using a single variable - the infection growth
rate per testing period (G ≡ g T ). A detailed description of the exponential model and the
derivation of the cost for each testing policy appear in the Methods section.
In this model we prove that:
• The expected cost (i.e., overall number of infected individuals) for the “1-batch policy” in which we test 100% of the population every time unit is G−1
ln G individuals.
• The expected cost for the “frequent policy” where we test  fraction of the population
every  units equals (in the limit of  → 0) 1 + ln G individuals.
The difference between the cost of the “1-batch policy” and the “frequent policy” is
positive when G > 3.01, and the difference grows as G increases (Fig. 4). For low G values,
the cost of the 1-batch policy can be lower than the cost of the “frequent policy”, but
this difference is never less than 3 − e ≈ 0.28 individuals (when G = e). Conversely, the
cost of the frequent policy can sometimes be much lower than that of the “1-batch policy”
(Fig. 4), especially for low testing budgets (small testing budget increases G).
To test the relevance of the analytical expressions derived with the exponential infection
spread model to a more realistic scenario, represented here by the extended network-SEIR
model, we conduct simulations with different R and T values for the “1-batch policy” and
the “frequent daily policy” where a single external infection is introduced at a random time
in the simulation, and N = 2000. We choose a larger population size for these simulations
to avoid situations where a considerable fraction of the population is infected, since in
that case we do not expect the analytical results to hold (and outbreak detection policy
is probably not very useful). To enable a comparison between the analytical result and
the results from the network-SEIR simulations we need to evaluate G in these simulations.
To evaluate G for each combination of T and R (overall 70 combinations), we run 400
realizations, where each realization is run for T days and is initialized with a single external
infection at the initial time step of the simulation (and no testing policy is used).
We find that the cost difference between the “1-batch policy” and the “frequent policy”
derived from the exponential spread model is in close agreement with the cost difference
7

Figure 4 – The difference in the mean number of infected people when infection is
detected (i.e., the cost) between frequent and non-frequent testing as a function
of the infection growth rate per testing period. Analytical prediction (blue line) and
numerical simulations (dots) of the difference between the mean cost in the “1-batch policy”
(test 100% of population every T days) and “frequent policy” (test 1/T fraction every day in
simulations, and testing frequency goes to infinity in the analytical expression), as a function
of the infection growth rate per testing period (G). A positive value means that the “1-batch
policy” has a larger cost than the “frequent policy”. Different colors of dots correspond to
different reproductive numbers (R), and dots with same colors correspond to different T values
(T = 1, 2, 7, 14, 28, 35 and 52 days). Results from simulations are obtained by calculating the
average over 400 realizations.

8

between the “1-batch policy” and the “frequent daily policy” of the more elaborate networkSEIR model (Fig. 4). Specifically, the “frequent testing” policy performs much better than
the “1-batch policy” for large G values (G > 10), and for smaller G values the two policies
lead to comparable results (Fig. 4). The difference in the cost between the two testing
policies increases when G, R or T increase, and this can be explained by: (1) the cost
of “1-batch policy” increases roughly linearly for large values of G, while the cost of the
“frequent policy” increases logarithmically with G (these scaling relation are also obtained
using network-SEIR model, though the logarithmic growth of the “frequent daily policy”
has a larger slope than what was derived for the analytical expression, possibly due to the
use of infinite testing frequency in analytical derivation; Fig. S3), and (2) G increases when
R or T increase. Specifically, we show that in the network-SEIR model G ≈ cRT (Fig. S4)
where c is a constant that depends on other parameters, such as social network structure,
infection period etc.

Discussion
In this work we primarily focus on testing policies for outbreak detection in small institutions. We find that given a fixed testing budget, frequent testing of small subgroups
within institutions reduces the risk of large undetected outbreaks compared to testing larger
groups, but less frequently. Moreover, as the testing budget decreases and the reproductive
number increases frequent testing of small subgroups becomes substantially more effective
in limiting the size of outbreaks compared to testing larger groups less frequently. Overall,
our work suggests frequent testing of subgroups as a strategy to enable safer re-opening of
institutions. We show this both via numerical studies of an elaborate network-based SEIR
model, and analytically for the exponential spread model. Using the exponential spread
model we derive an analytic formula for the number of infected people when the outbreak is
detected (i.e., the cost) for different testing policies. We show that the cost of frequent subpopulation testing grows logarithmically with the growth-factor of the infection, as opposed
to nearly linearly for periodic full-population testing. We demonstrate that these results
hold also when using network-based SEIR model. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the
frequent subgroup testing is robustly superior to the periodic full-population testing for
different testing budgets, reproductive numbers and different rates of external infection
sources.
The parameters we use, including the length of incubation period, infectious period,
and the false negative rates, are taken from the literature, and could be refined with
further knowledge. However, we do not expect these to change any of the qualitative
results. We remark that a complete Covid-19 mitigation strategy involves many factors
beyond testing, including re-organization, screening for symptoms, and changing testing
frequencies based on business role or risk factors. We do not model such strategies in this
paper, beyond their effect on the reproductive number. We stress that the aim of this

9

study is to compare different strategies of randomized testing of asymptomatic individuals
constrained by limited budget, whose goal is to detect an outbreak relatively early (before
many infected people are detected following symptoms [20, 21]). Future work could test
how to effectively combine the testing strategy suggested in this study with different types
of tests, such as group tests [22, 23, 24] or less sensitive (but cheaper) tests [25, 26], which
could reduce the budget necessary for outbreak detection even further.
While detailed knowledge of institution members roles, connections within the institution, preexisting conditions, and other characteristics could be leveraged to optimize a
testing protocol, in this work we aim to offer a simple and general policy, and therefore
consider testing schedules that are independent of individual characteristics. Such testing
policies, which are oblivious to symptoms, are crucial in the discovery of asymptomatic
or pre-symptomatic individuals. Overall, our main result is that frequent testing of subpopulations can enhance early outbreak detection of Covid-19 under limited medical and
financial resources.

Methods
Extended network-based SEIR simulations
The equations describing the network-SEIR model we use can be expressed as:
"
!#
P
ij
βI
j∈CG (i) δ β1X j =I
i
P (S → E) = πext + (1 − πext ) p
+ (1 − p)
1X = S ,
N
|CG (i)|

(1)

P i (E → I) = σ1X = E ,

(2)

P i (I → R) = γ1X = I ,

(3)

where P i (X → Y ) is the probability of patient i to move from state X to state Y; S, E, I
and R are the susceptible, exposed, infectious and recovered states, respectively; σ is the
rate of progression to infectiousness state (inverse of latent period) and is set to 1/5.2 [27];
γ is the rate of progression to recovered state (inverse of infectious period) and is set to
1/6.5 days−1 [16]; β is the transmissibility of infected individuals where in each simulation
β is determined by the following formula β = R/γ, and we report the R values instead of
β values for easier interpretation; CG (i) represents close contacts of an individual i, where
close contacts are determined by the random network described by Erdős-Rényi random
graph [28] with a probability of each edge being 15/N (average degree 15(N − 1)/N ≈ 15);
p is the proportion of interactions out of the network (p = 0.2); N is the population size;
1Xi=Z is an indicator function where it equals to 1 if the state of node i is Z, and equals
to 0 otherwise; πext is the probability to get infected from an external population (outside
the population of interest), and we report the overall mean daily external infections in
10

Fig. 3 which is N πext . The external infection probability is set to be zero in all simulations
without external infection sources.
We assume that some tests can be false negative, and for simplicity we assume that the
false negative rate for the exposed population is 100% and for infectious population the
false negative rate is 25%. These false negative rates are in the range that was found in a
previous study [29]. Furthermore, we assume that there is a lag of one day between taking
a test and getting the test result.

Exponential dynamics
In the exponential infection dynamics, we consider one initial infection at time t0 . The
number of infected people at time t can be written as
I(t) = g t−t0

(4)

where g is the growth rate per time unit. The testing budget contains N tests for a time
period T , where N is the population size. For convenience, we define the growth rate
per testing period: G ≡ g T . We define the cost of detecting the outbreak at time t as
the number of infected individuals at this time, and we compare between the costs of two
policies:
1. One batch policy: testing the entire population every time period T .
1
k

2. k batches policy: testing

fraction of the population every time period

T
k.

For the one batch policy, the cost is simply g T −t0 . Averaging over different values of t0 we
get the mean cost of the one batch policy:
1
C1 (G) =
T

Z

T

g T −t0 dt0 =

0

G−1
.
ln (G)

(5)

For the k batches policy, (and in the limit of 1/k  1) the probability that we fail
iT

iT
k
T`
k

i

is (1 − k1 )g k = (1 − k1 )G k . The probability that
is equal to the probability we failed to detect the
i
P`−1 i
Q`−1
k
i=0 G ) multiplied by the
outbreak up until this point (which is i=0 (1 − k1 )G k = (1 − k1 ) 

to detect an outbreak at time t0 +
we detect an outbreak at time t0 +

probability to detect the outbreak at time

the number of infected people at time t0 +
be written as:
Ck (G) =

∞
X

T`
k

Tn
k

`

(which is equal to
n

1 − (1 − k1 )G k ). Since

is G k , the cost of the k batches policy can



n/k −1
n
1 GG1/k −1
1 Gn/k
(1 − )
· 1 − (1 − )
· Gk .
k
k

n=0

11

(6)

For k → ∞, the summation in equation (6) can be approximated by the following integral:


Z ∞
1 − Gt
2t
C∞ (G) →
= ln(G) + 1,
(7)
dtG exp
ln(G)
t=0

where t =

n
k

Acknowledgements
We thank Alison Hill for thorough and thoughtful feedback on the manuscript. BB is
supported by NSF awards CCF 1565264 and CNS 1618026 and a Simons Investigator Fellowship. MN is supported by an Early Career Faculty Fellowship by the Azrieli Foundation.
JY is supported by the EAPS Houghton-Lorenz postdoctoral fellowship.

Code availability
Code for the SEIR dynamics is available in the GitHub repository https://github.com/
boazbk/seirsplus.

Data availability
The data that support the findings of this study are openly available in the GitHub repository https://github.com/boazbk/testingstrategies.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests

Supplementary materials
Figs. S1 to S4

References
[1] Giordano, G. et al. Modelling the covid-19 epidemic and implementation of
population-wide interventions in italy. Nature Medicine 1–6 (2020).
[2] Kucharski, A. J. et al. Effectiveness of isolation, testing, contact tracing and physical
distancing on reducing transmission of sars-cov-2 in different settings. medRxiv (2020).
[3] Bergstrom, T., Bergstrom, C. T. & Li, H. Frequency and accuracy of proactive testing
for covid-19. medRxiv (2020).

12

[4] Evans, S., Agnew, E., Vynnycky, E. & Robotham, J. V. The impact of testing and
infection prevention and control strategies on within-hospital transmission dynamics
of covid-19 in english hospitals. medRxiv (2020).
[5] Zhang, Y. & Cheng, S.-R. Periodic covid-19 testing in emergency department staff.
medRxiv (2020).
[6] Grassly, N. C. et al. Comparison of molecular testing strategies for covid-19 control:
a mathematical modelling study. The Lancet Infectious Diseases (2020).
[7] Booeshaghi, A. S., Tan, F. H., Renton, B., Berger, Z. & Pachter, L. Markedly heterogeneous covid-19 testing plans among us colleges and universities. medRxiv (2020).
[8] Paltiel, A. D., Zheng, A. & Walensky, R. P. Assessment of sars-cov-2 screening strategies to permit the safe reopening of college campuses in the united states. JAMA
network open 3, e2016818–e2016818 (2020).
[9] Chin, E. T., Huynh, B. Q., Murrill, M., Basu, S. & Lo, N. C. Frequency of routine
testing for covid-19 in high-risk environments to reduce workplace outbreaks. medRxiv
(2020).
[10] https://www.cms.gov/files/document/qso-20-38-nh.pdf.
[11] https://www.health.gov.au/resources/publications/
coronavirus-covid-19-mobile-testing-clinics-victoria.
[12] Kermack, W. O. & McKendrick, A. G. A contribution to the mathematical theory of
epidemics. Proceedings of the royal society of london. Series A, Containing papers of
a mathematical and physical character 115, 700–721 (1927).
[13] Allen, L. J. An introduction to stochastic epidemic models. In Mathematical epidemiology, 81–130 (Springer, 2008).
[14] Dottori, M. & Fabricius, G. Sir model on a dynamical network and the endemic state
of an infectious disease. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 434,
25–35 (2015).
[15] Kissler, S. M., Tedijanto, C., Goldstein, E., Grad, Y. H. & Lipsitch, M. Projecting
the transmission dynamics of sars-cov-2 through the postpandemic period. Science
(2020).
[16] Yang, Z. et al. Modified seir and ai prediction of the epidemics trend of covid-19 in
china under public health interventions. Journal of Thoracic Disease 12, 165 (2020).
[17] SEIRS+ package (2020). Package for simulating SEIR model with testing policies,
available on https://github.com/ryansmcgee/seirsplus.
13

[18] Anderson, R. M. & May, R. M. Infectious diseases of humans: dynamics and control
(Oxford university press, 1992).
[19] Kucharski, A. J. et al. Early dynamics of transmission and control of covid-19: a
mathematical modelling study. The lancet infectious diseases (2020).
[20] Gorges, R. J. & Konetzka, R. T. Staffing levels and covid-19 cases and outbreaks in
us nursing homes. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society (2020).
[21] McMichael, T. M. et al. Epidemiology of covid-19 in a long-term care facility in king
county, washington. New England Journal of Medicine 382, 2005–2011 (2020).
[22] Dorfman, R. The detection of defective members of large populations. The Annals of
Mathematical Statistics 14, 436–440 (1943).
[23] Shental, N. et al. Efficient high-throughput sars-cov-2 testing to detect asymptomatic
carriers. Science advances 6, eabc5961 (2020).
[24] Augenblick, N., Kolstad, J. T., Obermeyer, Z. & Wang, A. Group testing in a pandemic: The role of frequent testing, correlated risk, and machine learning. Tech. Rep.,
National Bureau of Economic Research (2020).
[25] Mina, M. J., Parker, R. & Larremore, D. B. Rethinking covid-19 test sensitivity—a
strategy for containment. New England Journal of Medicine (2020).
[26] Larremore, D. B. et al. Test sensitivity is secondary to frequency and turnaround time
for covid-19 surveillance. MedRxiv (2020).
[27] Li, Q. et al. Early transmission dynamics in wuhan, china, of novel coronavirus–
infected pneumonia. New England Journal of Medicine (2020).
[28] Erdős, P. & Rényi, A. On the evolution of random graphs. Publ. Math. Inst. Hung.
Acad. Sci 5, 17–60 (1960).
[29] Kucirka, L. M., Lauer, S. A., Laeyendecker, O., Boon, D. & Lessler, J. Variation in
false-negative rate of reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction–based sars-cov-2
tests by time since exposure. Annals of Internal Medicine (2020).

14

Supplementary Information

arXiv:2007.04827v3 [physics.soc-ph] 1 Jan 2021

Optimizing testing policies for detecting COVID-19 outbreaks
Yuval, Nitzan, Ravid and Barak
January 5, 2021

S1

Supplementary Figure 1 – The mean number of people infected when the first
infectious individual is detected (i.e., cost) for different testing policies and reproductive numbers. The lines correspond to the mean cost of testing the whole population
simultaneously every 28 days (“1-batch policy”; blue), testing half of the population every 14
days (orange) and testing 1/28 of the population daily (“frequent daily policy”; green) as a
function of the reproductive number (the simulated R values are 1.2, 1.6, 2, 2.4, 2.8, 3.2, 3.6 and
4). Shaded areas show the 20th and 80th percentile of cost for each policy. All policies have the
same testing budget of testing 100% of the population every 28 days. In all simulations used in
this figure we consider the introduction of a single exposed individual at a random time. The
network interactions in these simulations are described by a random network (see methods).

S2

Supplementary Figure 2 – The mean number of people infected when the first infectious individual is detected (i.e., cost) for different testing policies and reproductive
numbers when using a Gaussian random partition graph to describe network interactions. The lines correspond to the mean cost of testing the whole population simultaneously
every 28 days (“1-batch policy”; blue), testing half of the population every 14 days (orange)
and testing 1/28 of the population daily (“frequent daily policy”; green) as a function of the
reproductive number (the R values that were simulated are 1.2, 1.6, 2, 2.4, 2.8, 3.2, 3.6 and 4).
Shaded areas show the 20th and 80th percentile of cost for each strategy. All policies have the
same testing budget of testing 100% of the population every 28 days. In all simulations used in
this figure we consider the introduction of a single exposed individual at a random time. The
network that is used in these simulations is described by a Gaussian random partition graph
with 500 vertices, clusters size of 20 and a variance of 4. The probability to interact within
cluster is 0.5 (leading to an average degree of 9.5 within the cluster) and the probability to
interact outside the cluster is 5/480 (leading to an average degree of 5 outside the cluster).
Long range connections are set to be p = 0.2 (eq. 1; same value as all other simulations).

S3

Supplementary Figure 3 – The mean number of infected people when infection is detected (i.e., the cost) for frequent and non-frequent testing policies.
The analytical predictions for the exponential model are shown in lines, and results from
the network-SEIR model are shown in dots for 70 combinations of reproductive number
(R = 1.2, 1.6, 2, 2.4, 2.8, 3.2, 3.6, 4, 4.4, 4.8) and time untill all population is tested (T =
1, 2, 7, 14, 28, 35, 52 days). The blue line shows the analytical expression for the cost in “1batch policy” (test 100% of population every T days; eq. 5), the blue dots show the cost for
the “1-batch policy” in simulatons, the orange line shows the analytical expression for the cost
in “frequent policy” (frequency goes to infinity; eq. 7) and the orange dots show the cost for
the “frequent daily policy” (test 1/T fraction of the population every day) as a function of
the growth rate during the time it takes the whole population to be tested (G). Results from
simulations are obtained by calculating the average over 400 realizations.

S4

Supplementary Figure 4 – Relationship between the the infection growth rate per
testing period (G), the reproductive number (R) and the time it takes to test
the whole population once (T ). The y axis shows the empirical growth rate calculated
from simulations with different R and T values (using 400 realizations for each parameter
combination), and a population size of 2000. The x axis is the fitted empirical estimation
of the growth rate Gest = 1.037RT . We assumed that Gest = cRT , where c (the base of the
exponent) is a free parameter which we fit. The base of the exponent is a function of variables
that are not changed in these simulations (e.g., network structure, incubation time etc.). The
blue line is the y=x line. We excluded simulations were G > 300 where in these simulations
the scaling does not hold due to a large reduction in the susceptible population.

S5

