July 15, 2020

Senior Living Communities:
Made Safer by AI
Ashutosh Saxena ​and​ David Cheriton

Ashutosh Saxena is CEO and co-founder of Caspar.AI. He received his PhD in Computer Science from
Stanford University with advisor Andrew Ng. He has been recognized as one of Eight Innovators to
Watch by Smithsonian Institution, TR35 Innovator by MIT Technology Review, and a Sloan Fellow.
David Cheriton is a Silicon Valley investor who co-founded Arista Networks (IPO), Kealia (Acq. Sun
Microsystems), and Granite Systems (Acq. Cisco Systems). He wrote Google their first check and is
listed on the Forbes Midas List. He is also a Professor of Computer Science at Stanford University, and
received the SIGCOMM Lifetime Achievement Award.

Senior Living Communities:
Made Safer by AI
There is a historically unprecedented shift in demographics towards seniors, which
will result in significant housing development over the coming decade. This is an
enormous opportunity for real-estate operators to innovate and address the demand in
this growing market.
However, investments in this area are fraught with risk. Seniors often have more
health issues, and Covid-19 has exposed just how vulnerable they are – especially
those living in close proximity. Conventionally, most services for seniors are
“high-touch”, requiring close physical contact with trained caregivers. Not only are
trained caregivers short in supply, but the pandemic has made it evident that
conventional high-touch approaches to senior care are high-cost and greater risk.
There are not enough caregivers to meet the needs of this emerging demographic, and
even fewer who want to undertake the additional training and risk of working in a
senior facility, especially given the current pandemic.
In this article, we rethink the design of senior living facilities to mitigate the risks and
costs using automation. With AI-enabled pervasive automation, we claim there is an
opportunity, if not an urgency, to go from high-touch to almost "no touch" while
dramatically reducing risk and cost. Although our vision goes beyond the current
reality, we cite measurements from Caspar AI-enabled senior properties that show
the potential benefit of this approach.

1

Contents

1 Introduction

3

2 Conventional Senior Living Needs Rethinking

4

2.1 Will my mother be safe in your apartment?

4

2.2 How do you safely maintain the apartments and facilities?

5

2.3 Will my mother stay active and have social contact?

6

3 Pervasively Automated Safe Senior Living (PASSL)

7

3.1 Safe Living in Apartments with Automation

7

3.2 Maintenance and Service with Automated Analytics

10

3.3 Safe use of Common Areas with Automation

10

4 Case Study: Automated Senior Living

13

4.1 Safe and Engaged Living in Revel Apartments

14

4.2 Maintenance, Services and Visitors

15

4.3 Common Areas, Self-guided Tours and Remote management

16

5 Savings and Value Add

18

6 Conclusion

20

2

1 Introduction
There is a historically unprecedented shift in demographics towards seniors – about 30% of the population
in the United States is 55 years or older, expected to double by 2050 [5] (Figure 1). This will result in
significant housing development over the coming decade [8]. ​“As the industry envisions the future of
design, building, and operations of senior housing there is a great opportunity to optimize the health,
safety, and living experience of boomers.” said Fritz Wolff, of The Wolff Company, ranked #12 by
NMHC in 2019 as 25 Largest Apartment Developers in the US [34].
However the investments in this area are fraught with risk (e.g., operationally intensive [15], prone to
litigation [9], and high insurance rates [28]). Covid-19 has exposed just how vulnerable seniors living in
senior living facilities are [7]. A lot of Covid-related sickness and deaths have occurred in high-density
senior housing [36] – e.g., one Mardi Gras party at a Kirkland senior living community led to 35 deaths
[6]. The risk of a pandemic has been known for years [4] and Covid-19 has made that risk a reality.
Covid-19 is not the only threat that seniors face [4] – with their compromised immune systems many in
senior living facilities die of other contagious diseases every year. Additionally, time-critical events, for
instance falling from a stroke, are often detected too late [13].
Adding to the risk, the government and CDC are changing regulations on how you need to operate the
facilities [10]. Conventionally, most services require ​physical proximity of trained caregivers [7]. Not
only are trained “high-touch” caregivers in short supply [14] and only available at an increased cost
(Figure 2), the associated risks exacerbate the problem (e.g., [6,9]). Even providing basic services like
maintenance and organizing onsite events are now an operational risk.

Figure 1. There is an unprecedented
demographic shift for seniors. About 30%
of people in the US are 55 years or older,
expected to double by 2050 [5].

Figure 2. “Senior communities face an acute
shortage of trained caregivers. ​The timing is
right for tech innovation.​” said Laurie Orlov,
Analyst at Aging and Health Technology Watch.

3

In this article, we rethink the design of senior living facilities to mitigate the risks and costs discussed
earlier. With AI-enabled services, there is an opportunity to do things differently – you can design the
buildings for ​pervasive automation​. We define the problems in Section 2, present pervasive automation as
a solution in Section 3, and present the case studies in Section 4 of a senior facility with significant
automation provided by Caspar.AI, a smart home solutions company.

“​My biggest worry is
that something would
happen to her and no
one would even know.​”
Figure 3. Safety of the residents is the primary concern when moving into a senior living
facility. A high-touch approach may now discourage prospective renters from moving into a
community because of perceived risks.

2 Conventional Senior Living Needs Rethinking
As a senior housing operator, your goal is to attract, retain and delight the residents. Often the senior
resident and their family make joint decisions. Before the prospective residents move into the property,
they and their family will likely ask a variety of questions.

2.1 Will my mother be safe in your apartment?
The prospective resident’s family says, “​My biggest worry is that something would happen to her and no
one would even know.”​ The families worry about their elderly loved ones living alone, tripping and falling
(Figure 3), forgetting to turn the stove off (Figure 4), getting ill, or simply being lonely.
You explain to her about the onsite caregiver staff who do daily check-ins – they go unit by unit to check
the well-being of the resident. In the past, they would have been happy with this answer. Now they ask
the pandemic questions, ​“Who comes in?” ​“​How do you ensure safety? “Do they wear masks?” “How do
you ensure they are not bringing virus in the apartment?” ​To them, having unknown visitors already
carries a negative stigma [6,7]. Now with Covid-19, the potential risk of seniors with fragile immune
systems living in close proximity to each other is at the forefront of their mind [4,13]. ​This adds
additional burden on your property – planning for masks, disinfecting, training, and even then there are
still legal risks from ​both ​caregivers and residents.
In summary, in the past the high-touch approach was a part of the solution. Now it is a problem.

4

A resident is cooking in the kitchen.

The stove is left on, she forgets and sleeps.

Figure 4. Forgetfulness can cause safety issues for the resident as well as the property.

2.2 How do you safely maintain the apartments and facilities?
Prospective senior residents ask, “How do you schedule visits?
How does she (the resident) tell you that something is broken? Do
you do proactive maintenance?” Your staff does a variety of
tasks, however it is challenging to do them automatically and
proactively. This is especially important for many seniors who
may not be proactive themselves about requesting maintenance.
For example, a senior resident may not regularly look under the
sink, so a water leak could go unreported for days.
Now they ask the pandemic questions, ​“But how do you minimize
the spread of infectious diseases?” Residents do not want
unnecessary maintenance visits, site staff, or non-essential
personnel to enter their living space. The pandemic has changed
how they want to interact with the outside world.
They ask, ​“Do you track visitors? Do you take their
temperature?” ​You explain that your staff uses hand sanitizer
before they enter the apartment, following government regulations
[29]. But they remain worried and ask, ​“But what if they visited an
infected resident before coming to my mother’s apartment? Can
they schedule the visit when she is not at home?”

Figure 5. Guidelines by CDC
[29] are becoming an
expectation by the residents,
especially in case of an
incident.

These questions and concerns make it challenging for you to maintain high-quality service. To mitigate
the risks, there is now an additional burden imposed on you to make an operational playbook (Figure 5),
spend additional resources to train your staff, and take additional precautions to minimize the risk of an
outbreak. We discuss how our pervasive automation addresses these problems in Section 3.2.

5

2.3 Will my mother stay active and have social contact?
The family says, “​I am worried about my mother’s mental health, especially with social distancing. How
do you engage residents socially?” ​The families care about the seniors having an engaged lifestyle as it
leads to motivation [18,19] – an active and engaged lifestyle reduces loneliness and functional decline
[23, 24, 25, 30]. You show them the different activity rooms you have on the property for an enhanced
social life (Figure 6) and mention the group classes you offer like Yoga for a healthy lifestyle.
Now they ask the pandemic questions, “​Do you check if the Yoga teacher is infected? How do you ensure
that an infected resident is not attending?” ​You had designed the common areas (Figure 6) with good
intentions, but now the residents see it as a cause for concern. In a community living facility, one person
being sick with an infectious disease can spread throughout the facility. In fact, at a Kirkland facility,
there was a major outbreak of Covid-19 because of a Mardi-Gras party in a shared social space [6].
They further ask , “​Do you practice social distancing? ​How do you check that common areas aren’t too
crowded?” ​They now expect you to regulate the use of Common areas for safety considerations ​[10]:
follow social distancing and enforce density rules. This increases the burden of enforcement on your staff.
Now it is a huge liability to run social programs with high-touch caregivers.

Theater room
Party room
Game room
Figure 6. Common areas were designed with good intentions in mind. Now they are a liability.

Overall, in this post-pandemic world, the conventional approach of high-touch caregiving which
used to be a big part of the solution now has major problems:
1. Resident Expectations. ​Residents may now interpret a well-intentioned attempt of a caregiver to
engage socially to help onsite as not only privacy-intrusive but also an unnecessary risk.
2. Regulatory hurdles and legal risks. Not just training caregivers, you now face a challenge of
enforcing regulations on how your staff and visitors go on property to avoid potential legal issues
from employees or from residents [6,7,10].
3. Availability of trained, care-giving staff. ​You face a challenge to get well-trained caregiving
staff. Their availability, quality and cost is one of the biggest hurdles to cross [14].
We think pervasive automation can be a solution, which we present in the next section.

6

3 Pervasively Automated Safe Senior Living (PASSL)
Senior living can be made dramatically safer with pervasive automation. This automation also
significantly reduces the costs and risks for operators, enabling you to go from ​high-touch to (almost)
no-touch.
Pervasive automation is a system that uses the sensors to understand what is happening in the building,
and controls functionalities such as climate, lighting and locks, and sends notifications to operators. In
this section, we will illustrate how pervasive automation addresses the problems described in Section 2.

Figure 7. With pervasive automation, the home can detect incidents such as inactivity or a fall.
An alert is sent to onsite staff to help.

3.1 Safe Living in Apartments with Automation
With pervasive automation, we can detect incidents such as resident inactivity, the stove left on or a fall –
which are big concerns for the resident’s family (Section 2.1). For example, if the sensors detect that the
resident fell (Figure 7) or stove was left on (Figure 9), the system knows it is a safety risk.
The system can then alert the onsite staff. Such automated
alerts run 24/7. In some cases, such as a stroke, alerting
about the incident in a timely manner can be life saving.
Since the staff only needs to go to the unit when there is
an incident, it also reduces the risk of infection. Our
system can also report other anomalies such as those
related to daily movement levels, sleep quality, coughs,
water intake, heart-rate, temperature, fall risk from gait
change, and more – this could be useful to detect if
someone is ill in the building.
In contrast, conventional check-ins require the staff going
in physically, typically once every 24 hours. The staff has Figure 8. Analytics about a person's
to then send manual notifications to the resident’s family.
lifestyle supports various applications.

7

Resident turns the stove on to Sensors detect that she went Stove was left on, automation
cook.
to the bedroom.
turns it off for safety.
Figure 9. For safety alerts, our AI system uses sensors to obtain resident location and
activities, and then takes actions to keep the residents safe.
Healthcare partners can use data provided by pervasive automation to monitor the medical symptoms of
residents automatically. Sensor data (Figure 8) could be useful in early detection of illnesses such as
dementia [17, 21] and Parkinson's [22]. With the growing acceptance of telehealth [35], hospital visits for
simple diagnoses can be avoided with pervasive automation, hence reducing the risk of infection. Of
course, this system can be turned off if a resident is concerned more about their privacy than safety.
Furthermore, we can restrict which information goes to which party – resident vs operator vs telehealth.
An automated home can do all the aforementioned items without requiring the resident to wear any
device. Wearable devices (e.g., FitBit or necklace) can be useful extensions to our smart building system.
They give activity reports and can detect falls. However, seniors often do not wear the device, either
because of a stigma or because they feel uncomfortable using it (they take it off at night or in the
bathroom). In a pervasively automated home, no devices are visible except a wall panel (Figure 10).

Figure 10. In this pervasively automated apartment, no devices are visible except a wall panel.
Pervasive automation can enable numerous amenities for engaged living – a consideration that resident’s
family have when moving their senior into the community. The automated home can motivate the

8

residents to lead a healthy life, with more exercise, high-quality sleep, healthy food, and sufficient water
intake [13]. As an example, the home adapts the environment of the home – during sleep time slowly dim
the lights for a soothing ambiance. When the resident goes to the bathroom at night, dim lights turn on to
help the person walk safely. ​The home can open shades automatically in the morning to let in natural light
for motivation [18].

Smart toilets

Telepresence and
cleaning robots

Wearable widgets

Smart speakers

Figure 11. Pervasive automation can add numerous amenities for safe and convenient living.
The system can also manage additional amenities such as smart toilets, cleaning robots and telepresence
(Figure 11). Box solutions such as Alexa or Google Home can also provide additional functionality to the
building system, but they are difficult to set up, customize, and maintain. This increases the work of the
onsite staff, instead of reducing it. Smart functionality should be a seamless part of the building as an
integrated system, just like air-conditioning – a central system that is easy to manage and operate.

3.2 Maintenance and Service with Automated Analytics
With pervasive automation, maintenance problems are automatically
detected and alerts are created. For example if there is a water leak, then
timely detection can avoid damage. Thus, routine checks can be replaced
with checks only on an as-needed basis.
Pervasive automation can help schedule these visits when the senior is
not around. This reduces the infection risk. For example, if the apartment
is showing an anomaly in the air-conditioning running when it should Tap is left on with water
not, it could be detected. Furthermore, this air-conditioning service can overflowing. An alert is
be scheduled when the resident goes out to breakfast.
automatically created.
The key concerns of the residents in Section 2.2 are about proactive maintenance and scheduling service
visits to minimize the contact risk. Safety and health of staff working in senior living communities also
increases the risk. With automated maintenance alerts and scheduling, the infection risk can be
substantially reduced in regular tasks such as cleaning, maintenance or package delivery.
With automation, you can improve maintenance efficiency, provide more services for residents, and go
from a high-touch approach to a low-touch one.

9

3.3 Safe use of Common Areas with Automation
With pervasive automation, sensors in the common areas monitor who is there, their activities and if the
number of people exceeds a predetermined limit.
As mentioned in Section 2.2, government regulations
require measures to be taken for density
management. In common areas such as gym, game
room, movie room, corridors, elevators and model
units, pervasive automation can use sensing to detect
the number of people in the building. It can also help
in maintaining social distancing by raising alerts in Figure 12. Automation can estimate the
case the number of people is exceeded or someone
number of people in an area, and suggest
who is not part of a scheduled group is there.

schedules to help in social distancing.

To help further, schedules can be recommended to the residents about availability of the common areas.
For example at breakfast time, it can help scheduling visits and letting residents know when the number
of people is lower in the common areas. Thermal cameras can detect the temperature, and pervasive
automation can perform contact tracing by providing a trackable and auditable event history.
In addition, pervasive automation enables the use of common areas in a touch-free and remote manner​.
The lighting, shades and climate can be set automatically to the preferred ambiance. Conventionally, it
takes about 10 minutes for staff to go to each common area to change the settings, for which they need to
touch multiple devices by hand. Automation reduces this work as well as decreases the risk of infection.
There are numerous other applications that are enabled by pervasive automation, such as smart access in
the building, analytics about visitors – known vs unknown, and self-guided tours (Section 4). Automation
also saves energy and provides analytics to the operators. With such business intelligence, operators can
provide safe and engaged living for residents while reducing operational costs.

Home wakes up the resident
with natural lighting

Suggestion to go to the gym is The resident is able to use the gym with
made when it is available.
and still maintain social distance.

Figure 13. With pervasive automation, the common areas can be enabled for effective use –
with seamless experience for residents from their home to the common areas like gym.

10

4 Case Study: Automated Senior Living
We have implemented automation at several senior communities over the past three years, reducing
high-tough caregiving to low-touch. In this section, we use two properties as case studies – Revel Nevada
(Las Vegas, NV) and Revel Rancharrah (Reno, NV) – approximately 300 apartments.
"In 2017, we engaged Caspar.AI to install their automated building system to increase the safety,
comfort, and convenience for our senior residents"​ said Fritz Wolff, of The Wolff Company.

Figure 14. Revel in Las Vegas, NV – a senior community built-in 2018. It promotes a healthy
lifestyle with best-in-class wellness services and community amenities. Caspar AI-enabled
pervasive automation in apartments and common areas provides a variety of services for
increasing the safety of the residents and caregiving staff.
We equipped all the apartments and common areas with smart lighting, fans, thermostat, motorized
shades, motion sensors, speakers, microphones, bluetooth, wifi, and outdoor cameras. Our system is
installed with simple, drop-in replacement devices. This results in about 10,000 devices that our system
uses to provide a wide-variety of services to the residents. Some residents choose to add more devices
such as a smart coffee machine, cleaning robot, and pet feeder.
Our AI-enabled automation assists the residents in their apartment, while providing them with numerous
safety features. It also enables the staff to manage the building and provide services remotely.

11

4.1 Safe and Engaged Living in Revel Apartments
As discussed in Section 2.1, the resident's family is most worried that something would happen to their
mother without anyone knowing. We address their concerns with AI-based notifications that send updates
about the resident's most recent interaction with our system and movement in the apartment. Therefore,
there is no need for the staff to enter the apartment to check if she is doing fine and risk infection – this
feature allows the staff to go from a high-touch solution to a no-touch solution.
Residents’ families receive updates 24/7 rather than just once a day. This solution is built into the
apartment, and does not require the resident to wear any device. We estimate that the property staff
reduces the time spent in checking in by about 28% per day by prioritizing the physical visits (Section 5).
Furthermore, this also helps the staff because the sensor-based status, and notes from the in-person visits
are available to the resident’s family immediately. This reduces the time the staff has to spend relaying
information about the resident to the residents' families.

“I can finally sleep well knowing that my mother is safe and
well cared for, especially in these challenging times.”
- ​family member of a senior resident at Revel.
Figure 15. If a senior becomes inactive, their family knows about it. Families love this as it
gives them peace of mind 24/7. For the property staff, it is ideal as they do not risk infection by
physically checking on the residents.
In addition, automation encourages an active lifestyle with more exercise, high quality sleep, healthy
eating habits, and sufficient water intake [18,19,30,23,24,25]. Caspar AI helps by providing an automated
lifestyle coach that helps residents lead healthier lives. Our activity tracker informs the residents about
how active they are (Figure 15, left) – a study found that activity tracking is seen as a helpful motivational
tool in making lifestyle changes [31].

12

To increase motivation and create an environment of engaged living, Caspar AI changes the home
environment itself – automatically modifying climate, lighting, and shades without requiring physical
intervention from the resident. For example, at night the sleep scene sets the ambiance to help improve the
sleep quality and provide automatic night lights for additional safety. In the morning Caspar AI plays
soothing music and opens the shades to let in sunlight (Figure 17), which has been shown to increase
motivation [18]. It can even set up a Yoga scene to encourage exercise (Figure 16 right).

Figure 16. Coach for an Active Lifestyle: AI-assistants provide activity reports and set the
home environment to help residents sleep well, exercise, and wake up to natural light.

"It was a Godsend to have Caspar when I needed it most,”
- ​Kate, an 88-year old resident, who was bed-ridden with an illness.
Figure 17. AI-enabled pervasive automation helps manage home’s climate, lighting and
shades. When seniors are ill, even basic tasks like turning on a light become a challenge.

4.2 Maintenance, Services and Visitors
At Revel, we enable proactive maintenance which reduces unnecessary apartment visits to minimize
physical contact. For example, if a bulb or thermostat breaks or if there is water leak, an automated ticket
is issued to the maintenance staff; thus a repair visit can be scheduled to minimize contact between
resident and staff. The resident is alerted when the staff visits through our awareness system (Section
4.3). As staff enters, the home automatically adjusts the environment avoiding maintenance staff touching
switches or thermostats – thus reducing potential infection spread.
13

Figure 18. Proactive maintenance with alerts and tracking. The resident knows about visitors,
and for the onsite manager it gives visibility into the staff’s efficiency and can lead to
increased safety.
Our outdoor awareness cameras send a notification to the residents when visitors, cleaning staff, or
packages are at their door. Using AI face recognition, residents can differentiate between known and
unknown visitors. Additionally residents that are ill or self isolating are informed when a package or food
delivery arrives without the resident needing to come into contact with the delivery person.

Figure 19. Notification of visitors and deliveries. Residents know when their food or package
delivery arrives and can choose when to bring it in, thus minimizing contact.

4.3 Common Areas, Self-guided Tours and Remote management
As discussed in Section 2.3, common areas in senior living communities play a crucial role – allowing
residents to interact with each other. Revel holds events in a number of common areas, such as art classes
in the activity room, game nights in the dining room, or yoga classes in the studio. Unfortunately, during
the Covid-19 pandemic, common areas were the primary source of infection and therefore had to be
closed.

14

Caspar AI equips common areas with smart sensors and AI-driven analytics. Currently, our system
provides remote management of these common areas, with hands-free automation that sets the desired
ambiance – optimal settings for Yoga classes or Gym settings for exercise. This allows staff to manage
areas safely and remotely, increasing engagement and satisfaction amongst residents. We have not
deployed a comprehensive solution to address the full spectrum of pandemic concerns yet – we do not
foresee any obstacles to having an end-to-end pandemic solution this year.

“We allow only a limited number of
visitors in the activity rooms. With
Caspar AI, I do not have to go room to
room to adjust temperature and
ambiance.”

- ​an onsite staff member at Revel.

Figure 20. At Revel, common areas are managed remotely with AI-enabled automation.
In addition to common area management, our automation provides self-guided tours that allow visitors to
experience model units without staff members present. This increases the safety of visitors and staff
members. Management can set the desired ambiance for model units across multiple properties with a
single button.. Once visitors leave, the apartment automatically switches devices off to save energy.
Finally, the amount of energy saved is reported to help management make the operations sustainable.

A single toggle puts the
building into energy-saving
mode, while maintaining the
desired functionality.

Remote management: For
common areas and vacant
units, you have an
awareness of incidents.

Self-guided tours: An optimal
ambiance is set automatically
when prospective residents
are touring units.

Figure 21. At Revel, the common areas and vacant units at Revel get easier to manage.
Automation enables remote building management, while saving energy costs.

15

5 Savings and Value Add
In this section, we discuss the savings for senior home operators and the value added for residents with
pervasive automation. With pervasive automation, you can get a value of 10% of the monthly rent.
As an illustration, let us consider the senior living community described in Section 4 with the Caspar AI
system, where the monthly rent is about $2,800. We estimate a net value of $284 per month per apartment
as described below. (In our studies at other properties, we have seen that this net value varies
proportionally with the rent.)

Table 1. Pervasive automation can achieve savings and value add of
about 10% of monthly rent.
Savings for caregiving staff and operators

$174

Value to the residents for safety and refined living services

$145

Costs: customer support, 5-year amortized hardware

-$35

Net monthly value per apartment

$284

The savings come primarily from the man-hours saved in automating the existing manual services (Table
2 that assumes a rate of $20/hr). In some cases automation even provides a superior offering, e.g., 24/7
activity notification for the resident's family vs daily manual check-in. In addition to the man-hours saved,
there are additional benefits because a safe apartment minimizes legal risks, reduces insurance costs, and
helps rent the apartment faster.

Table 2. Estimated monthly savings for a 100-unit senior living property.
Feature

Description

Automated
Check-in

Each check-in takes a minimum of 7 minutes per resident.
Automated check-in saves time with a 24/7 sensing.

350

$7,000

Carecircle
notifications

Carecircle receives notifications automatically, saving 5
hours daily for staff on calls with the resident's family.

150

$3,000

Maintenance
Alerts

We estimate saving of about 1 hour per month per unit for
proactive maintenance and diagnosing maintenance issues.

100

$2,000

Remote Building
Management

Video clips give visibility about the visitors and property
events. Also remotely manage the vacant units.

100

$2,000

Man-hours Savings

16

Common Areas

Automation saves about 2 man-hours per day in setting the
optimal environment in common areas and scheduling.

50

$1,000

Remote
Auto-show

Visitors can visit units themselves. The staff can focus on
key sales points while being safe.

100

$2,000

Energy Savings

For the 5% of units that are not occupied, about $38 per
month each is wasted. Further savings in common areas.

-

$400

Faster renting

A differentiated apartment that addresses safety concerns
and provides easy-to-use amenities rents faster

-

-

Risks and
Insurance

There is additional value in reducing risks, including legal
risks due to infection, insurance risks, or water leaks.

-

-

Total monthly savings per month on a 100-unit building
Total monthly savings per month per apartment

$17,400
$174

Additionally, residents also get a variety of features for comfortable, safe and engaged living. The table
below lists the monthly fees that residents pay on an average for these services. For some features,
including Carecircle awareness, residents have told us they would pay up to $200 per month, but we have
used a more conservative number of $50. When residents have reduced mobility, they also have a larger
need for automated home control and AI-enabled assistants – the value they place is often higher than
$50, but we have used a more conservative estimate of $25.

Table 3. Monthly value added for residents per apartment.
Feature

Description

Carecircle

24/7 awareness about the resident’s safety

$50

Control and
Assistants

Voice- and app-based control for climate, lighting, shades, etc.
Assistants for sleep, wake-up, exercise, cooking, etc.

$25

Events and
video clips

Video clips for visitors, packages, and pet activities for security.
Ability to see pets and extend to a pet feeder.

$50

Engaged Living

Intelligent Assistants for engaged living. Adapt the home
environment, e.g., open curtains for natural light in the morning.

$20

Total monthly value add to resident per apartment

Value

$145

As we enhance our services and add more features from our vision for the future, which was presented in
Section 3, we have an opportunity to achieve even greater value for both operators and residents in the
form of savings and advanced AI-enabled features.

17

6 Conclusion
Pervasive automation allows you to design and operate senior living facilities in a dramatically different
way. The conventional approach of high-touch caregiving is no longer viable after Covid-19, so steps
must be taken to fundamentally alter how senior living facilities operate.
Pervasive automation can take your facilities from high-touch ​to no-touch​. It can enhance the safety and
efficiency of senior living staff – most services in homes and common areas can be managed remotely.
Residents’ carecircle can receive automated alerts about incidents such as inactivity, falling, and the stove
being left on. Automation helps with daily tasks such as turning off the lights at night and provides data
that can help signal early signs of diseases such as dementia. Residents can live a healthy and engaged
lifestyle with improved sleep quality and helpful information about their level of activity. The home
motivates them to maintain an active lifestyle, e.g., by opening the curtains in the morning to set the mood
with natural light.
This is not an abstract vision. We currently provide senior living facilities, with automation enabled
services such as automated alerts, daily check-in and common area management. This has increased the
safety of the occupants and has reduced operating costs. With their homes and common areas automated,
the residents live a healthy and engaged lifestyle without requiring unnecessary physical contact.
With pervasive automation you can mitigate the risks that you, your staff, and your residents face and be
on the forefront of this evolutionary shift in the senior housing market.

18

References
[1] Merritt, Jeff and Sarma, Sanjay. “Realizing the Internet of Things: A Framework for Collective Action.” World Economic
Forum, January 2019. ​http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Realizing_the_Internet_of_Things.pdf
[2] Hermitage, Hanae. “Smart toilet monitors for signs of disease”. News Center, April 6, 2020.
http://med.stanford.edu/news/all-news/2020/04/smart-toilet-monitors-for-signs-of-disease.html
[3] Lee, Lloyd. “Ordering home delivery? A robot could be coming to your front door.” Mountain View Online, April 28, 2020.
https://www.mv-voice.com/news/2020/04/28/ordered-home-delivery-a-robot-could-be-coming-to-your-front-door
[4] Gates, B (2015). The Next outbreak? We’re not ready. Retrieved from
https://www.ted.com/talks/bill_gates_the_next_outbreak_we_re_not_ready/
[5] ​The U.S. Census Bureau: At work for you​. (2009). U.S. Dept. of Commerce, Economics and Statistics Administration.
[6] Koh, Elizabeth, et al. “One Nursing Home, 35 Coronavirus Deaths: Inside the Kirkland Disaster,” The Wall Street Journal, 23
March 2020, ​https://www.wsj.com/articles/one-nursing-home-35-coronavirus-deaths-inside-the-kirkland-disaster-11584982494
[7] Stockman, Farah, et al. “'They're Death Pits': Virus Claims at Least 7,000 Lives in U.S. Nursing Homes.” The New York
Times, 17 April 2020, ​https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/17/us/coronavirus-nursing-homes.html
[8] Mullaney, Tim. “Senior Living Providers, Developers Think Big to Seize Huge Middle-Market Opportunity.” Senior Housing
News, 24 April 2019,
https://seniorhousingnews.com/2019/04/24/senior-living-providers-developers-think-big-to-seize-huge-middle-market-opportunit
y/
[9] Sudo, Chuck. “How Senior Living Providers Can Defend Against Rising Threat of Litigation.” Senior Housing News, 5 Feb.
2020,
https://seniorhousingnews.com/2020/02/05/how-senior-living-providers-can-defend-against-rising-threat-of-litigation/
[10] Preventing the Spread of COVID-19 in Retirement Communities and Independent Living Facilities (Interim Guidance),
CDC. Retrieved May 2020.
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/community/retirement/guidance-retirement-response.html
[11] Bowers, Lois A. “Study Suggests Ways Senior Living Can Optimize Care for Residents with Dementia - News.”
McKnight's Senior Living, 9 Aug. 2019,
https://www.mcknightsseniorliving.com/home/news/study-suggests-ways-senior-living-can-optimize-care-for-residents-with-de
mentia/
[12] “Resident Check-In.” Systems Technologies, ​https://www.wirelessnursecall.com/products/resident-check-in
[13] Díez-Tejedor, E, and B Fuentes. “Acute care in stroke: the importance of early intervention to achieve better brain
protection.“ Cerebrovasc Diseases (Basel, Switzerland), U.S. National Library of Medicine, 2004;17 Suppl 1:130-7.
[14] The Long-Term Care Workforce Crisis: A 2018 Report. Wisconsin Health Care Association. Wisconsin Center for
Assisted Living. Wisconsin Assisted Living Association. LeadingAge Wisconsin, Disability Service Provider Network.
[15] Martin, Philip. “Seniors Housing - benefitting from favorable trends, while serving resident, family, and investor needs.”

19

National Multifamily Housing Forum, April 2, 2015.
https://www.nmhc.org/contentassets/c2d5e338dd974932814e6411431f7ef0/senior-housing-combined-2015-rf.pdf
[16] Karen Wotton Senior Lecturer in Nursing, Karina Crannitch & Rebecca Munt Associate Lecturer in Nursing (2008)
Prevalence, risk factors and strategies to prevent dehydration in older adults, Contemporary Nurse, 31:1, 44-56.
[17] Y. Abe, M. Toya and M. Inoue, "Early detection system considering types of dementia by behavior sensing," 2013 IEEE 2nd
Global Conference on Consumer Electronics (GCCE), Tokyo, 2013, pp. 348-349, doi: 10.1109/GCCE.2013.6664851.
[18] Tyvimaa, T. (2011), "Social and physical environments in senior communities: the Finnish experience", International
Journal of Housing Markets and Analysis, Vol. 4 No. 3, pp. 197-209.
[19] John Hall (2019), Common areas earning special second looks as the heart of senior living spaces, May 2019. McKnights
Long Term Care Analysis.
https://www.mcknights.com/print-news/common-areas-earning-special-second-looks-as-the-heart-of-senior-living-spaces/
[20] Woodfield, Michelle, Remember to turn off the stove! : prospective memory in dementia. Massey University Thesis, 2013.
[21] Maresova, Petra et al. “Technological Solutions for Older People with Alzheimer's Disease: Review.” Current Alzheimer
research vol. 15,10 (2018): 975-983.
[22] Darweesh, Sirwan K.l., et al. “Parkinson Matters.” ​Journal of Parkinson's Disease​, vol. 8, no. 4, 2018, pp. 495–498.,
doi:10.3233/jpd-181374.
[23] Rico-Uribe LA, Caballero FF, Martín-María N, Cabello M, Ayuso-Mateos JL, Miret M. Association of loneliness with
all-cause mortality: A meta-analysis. PLoS One. 2018;13(1):e0190033. Published 2018 Jan 4.
[24] Cacioppo JT and Cacioppo S. Loneliness in the modern age: an evolutionary theory of loneliness (ETL). Advances in
Experimental Social Psychology 2018; 58:127-197.
[25] Social isolation, loneliness in older people pose health risks. National Institute on Aging. April 23, 2019.
https://www.nia.nih.gov/news/social-isolation-loneliness-older-people-pose-health-risks
[26] Hadjri, K., Faith, V. and McManus, M. (2012), "Designing dementia nursing and residential care homes", Journal of
Integrated Care, Vol. 20 No. 5, pp. 322-340.
[27] Brooke, J and Jackson, D (2020) Older people and COVID-19: Isolation, risk and ageism Journal of Clinical Nursing.
[28] Pearce, B.W., 2007. Senior living communities: Operations management and marketing for assisted living, congregate, and
continuing care retirement communities. 2nd edition, JHU Press.
[29] Management of Visitors to Healthcare Facilities in the Context of COVID-19: Non-US Healthcare Settings. The Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), May 2020.
[30] Perissinotto, Carla M., et al. “Loneliness in Older Persons.” Archives of Internal Medicine, vol. 172, no. 14, 2012,
doi:10.1001/archinternmed.2012.1993.
[31] Craig Donnachie and Kate Hunt. How fitness trackers help motivate us to keep in shape, June 28, 2017. University of
Glasgow. ​https://theconversation.com/how-fitness-trackers-help-motivate-us-to-keep-in-shape-78154

20

[32] Software is changing the world. AI is changing software. April 2018.
https://medium.com/@codescrum/software-is-changing-the-world-ai-is-changing-software-73afc882ca64
[33] Learning From GDPR And CCPA, Forbes, Andrew Sellers. May 18. 2020
https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2020/05/18/learning-from-gdpr-and-ccpa/#7ff5b0a87cf3
[34] NMHC 25 Largest Apartment Developers, National Multifamily Housing Council, 2019.
https://www.nmhc.org/research-insight/the-nmhc-50/top-50-lists/2019-developer-list/
[35] The Phone Call That Saves Lives In The Age Of COVID-19, Carrie Rubinstein, April 2020.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/carrierubinstein/2020/04/02/the-phone-call-that-saves-lives-in-the-age-of-covid-19/#18d5b91c6efc
[36] Federal Lawmakers Calculate 7,000 Covid-19 Deaths in Assisted Living, Push Bill. Chuck Sudo, Senior Housing News.
July 5, 2020.
https://seniorhousingnews.com/2020/07/05/federal-lawmakers-calculate-7000-covid-19-deaths-in-assisted-living-push-bill/

21

