COVID-19 DATA A NALYSIS AND F ORECASTING : A LGERIA
AND THE W ORLD

arXiv:2007.09755v2 [stat.AP] 22 Aug 2020

A P REPRINT
Sami Belkacem
Department of Computer Science
USTHB University
Bab-Ezzouar, Algiers, Algeria
s.belkacem@usthb.dz

May 19, 2020

A BSTRACT
The novel coronavirus disease 2019 COVID-19 has been leading the world into a prominent crisis.
As of May 19, 2020, the virus had spread to 215 countries with more than 4,622,001 confirmed cases
and 311,916 reported deaths worldwide, including Algeria with 7201 cases and 555 deaths. Analyze
and forecast COVID-19 cases and deaths growth could be useful in many ways, governments could
estimate medical equipment and take appropriate policy responses, and experts could approximate
the peak and the end of the disease. In this work, we first train a time series Prophet model to analyze
and forecast the number of COVID-19 cases and deaths in Algeria based on the previously reported
numbers. Then, to better understand the spread and the properties of the COVID-19, we include
external factors that may contribute to accelerate/slow the spread of the virus, construct a dataset from
reliable sources, and conduct a large-scale data analysis considering 82 countries worldwide. The
evaluation results show that the time series Prophet model accurately predicts the number of cases and
deaths in Algeria with low RMSE scores of 218.87 and 4.79 respectively, while the forecast suggests
that the total number of cases and deaths are expected to increase in the coming weeks. Moreover,
the worldwide data-driven analysis reveals several correlations between the increase/decrease in the
number of cases and deaths and external factors that may contribute to accelerate/slow the spread of
the virus such as geographic, climatic, health, economic, and demographic factors.
Keywords COVID-19 · Data Analysis · Time series forecasting · Algeria

1

Introduction

The novel coronavirus disease 2019 COVID-19 is an emerging betacoronavirus caused by severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) [1]. The first infected case was reported in Hubei, a province in the city
of Wuhan in China, on December 31, 2019 [2]. Infected coronavirus people commonly experience mild to severe
respiratory illness, and occasionally death in the most critical cases [1]. The danger of the COVID-19 comparing to the
other coronavirus families lies in its asymptomatic and high human-to-human transmission [3]. Moreover, there are
to date no clinical vaccines to prevent the virus and no specific therapeutic protocols to combat this communicable
disease [2]. The coronavirus epidemic has been confirmed as a global pandemic that has significantly affected the
world, not only healthcare systems but also economics, education, transportation, etc. [3]. As of May 19, 2020, the
virus had spread to 215 countries, with more than 4,622,001 confirmed cases and more than 311,916 reported deaths
worldwide, including Algeria with 7201 cases and 555 deaths1 .
In the present circumstances, understanding the early transmission dynamics of the novel coronavirus plays
important roles in the prevention of its critical impact on human lives and national economies, including in Algeria.
1

www.africacdc.org/download/outbreak-brief-18-covid-19-pandemic-19-may-2020

COVID-19 Data Analysis and Forecasting: Algeria and the World

A

PREPRINT

Boccaletti et al. [4] identified three scientific communities that may cooperate in dealing with the current pandemic:
(1) the mathematicians, virologists and epidemiologists who develop sophisticated diffusion models to the specific
properties of a given pathogen; (2) the complex systems scientists who study the spread of infections using statistical
mechanics and non-linear dynamics methods; and (3) the statisticians and computer scientists who incorporate artificial
intelligence and machine learning approaches to develop accurate predictive models. For instance, analyze and develop
a time series forecasting model that predicts cases and deaths growth could help governments in decision-making, e.g.
take appropriate policy responses, estimate medical equipment (hospital beds, ventilators, protective masks, etc.), and
approximate the peak and the end of the epidemic.
In this perspective, several works have been proposed in recent months in an attempt to understand and forecast the spread of the disease; however, as the COVID-19 is a recent emerging virus, only a few works have been
peer-reviewed to date, making it difficult to survey research in analyzing and forecasting coronavirus cases and deaths
grow. Nonetheless, significant amounts of prior research have studied and forecasted the spread of similar disease
outbreaks such as hepatitis, syphilis, gonorrhoea, seasonal flu, etc. [5]. In this context, time series models have
long been of interest in the literature to model the spread of epidemic diseases as a series of data points recorded at
successive equally spaced points in time [6], as is the case with the coronavirus where the number of cases and deaths
are recorded on a daily basis. Time series models typically attempt to predict future outbreak behaviours by modelling
and analyzing historical epidemic surveillance data [7]. According to Duarte and Faerman [8], the most commonly used
time series models for forecasting epidemic diseases are AutoRegressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA) [9],
Long Short-Term Memory networks (LSTM) [10], and Prophet [11]. In this work, we use the Prophet model to analyze
and forecast the spread of the coronavirus. Note that other time series models are also applicable and that it is out of the
scope of this paper to compare them. Prophet was proposed by the Facebook data science team, who found it to be
more effective than classical approaches in the majority of cases [11]. Prophet has been used to forecast a wide range
of problems such as cash flow [12], air pollution [13], healthcare emergency department indicators [8], but also in the
analysis and forecasting of epidemic diseases, e.g. the influenza epidemic trend [6] and seasonal flu activity [7].
In this work, we first train a time series Prophet model to analyze historical data in Algeria since the beginning of the epidemic and forecast the number of cases and deaths for the coming weeks2 . To the best of our knowledge,
this is one of the first works that study and forecast the outbreak in Algeria while it is still ongoing. Then, to get a
thorough understanding of the properties of the COVID-19, we construct a dataset from different reliable sources and
conduct a large-scale data analysis considering 82 countries worldwide. The paper is structured as follows: section 2
describes the time series Prophet model we use to predict the number of COVID-19 cases and deaths in Algeria, section
3 discusses the experiments we performed to evaluate the model and analyze worldwide data, and section 4 concludes
the paper and proposes future work.

2

Time series forecasting with Prophet

A time series is a series of data points recorded at successive equally spaced points in time, as is the case with the
coronavirus where the number of cases and deaths are recorded on a daily basis. Time series are frequently plotted via
linear curves (see Fig. 1), while time series forecasting models aim to predict an increase or decrease in the future
values based on previously observed values [14].
Prophet is an open-source time series forecasting software released by Facebook, who found it to be more effective than
any other approach in the majority of cases [11]. The Prophet model uses a decomposable time series model with three
main components combined in Equation 1: trend, seasonality, and holidays. The trend function models non-periodic
changes in the time series value, seasonality represents periodic changes (e.g., weekly and yearly seasonality), and the
holiday component represents holiday effects which occur on irregular schedules over one or several days. As to the error
term, it represents idiosyncratic changes which are not accommodated by the model; the authors make the parametric
assumption that the error is normally distributed [11]. In this paper, we focus on the non-periodic trend function
and exclude the seasonality and holiday components. Indeed, the coronavirus is unlikely to be affected by holidays,
weekdays, or months. Moreover, we need a minimum of one year to be able to use the yearly seasonality, whereas the
virus only emerged six months ago. The use of the Prophet model is motivated by its advantages, namely [11]:
• Performance: it gives accurate forecasts on a wide range of problems, including epidemic diseases [6].
• Flexibility: it allows to add a multiple periods seasonality according to the trends and the domain knowledge.
• Fully automatic: it is not necessary to space measurements, interpolate missing values, or remove outliers.
2

The content of this work is only for research purposes. The results and the predictions must be taken with caution.

2

COVID-19 Data Analysis and Forecasting: Algeria and the World

A

PREPRINT

Figure 1: A typical time series curve

• Speed: it is easy to explore many specifications thanks to the model speed.
• Tunable forecasts: it allows changes and assumptions on the forecast thanks to the interpretable parameters.
• Implementation: a library that implements the model is available in Python and R programming languages.
y(t) = g(t) + s(t) + h(t) + t

(1)

Where:
• y(t) is the forecast value at time t
• g(t) is the non-periodic trend at time t
• s(t) is the periodic (weekly, monthly, yearly) seasonality at time t
• h(t) is the irregular holiday effects at time t
• t is the error term
The Prophet model has two trend functions g(t) that cover many applications: a saturating growth model which saturates
at maximum carrying capacity, and a piecewise linear model that does not exhibit saturating growth [11]. In this work,
we use the saturating growth because, as the number of cases and deaths due to coronavirus, it is characterized by
increasing growth in the beginning period and decreasing growth at a later stage, when the forecast values get closer to
maximum capacity. For example, to forecast the number of coronavirus cases in a given country, the maximum capacity
could be the number of its population where the virus infects all people. The saturating growth is modelled using the
logistic growth function given by Equation 2; we discuss its principle in the rest of the section, while further details are
provided in [11].
g(t) =

C(t)
1 + exp (− (k + a(t)> δ) (t − (m + a(t)> γ)))

(2)

Where:
• g(t) is the non-periodic trend at time t, and the forecast value in our case
• C(t) is the limiting value, the maximum carrying capacity at time t
• exp is the exponential function, we write it this way for readability reasons
• k + a(t)> δ is the growth rate at time t
• m + a(t)> γ is the offset parameter at time t
In Equation 2, if we represent a time series via linear curves (see Fig. 1), the growth rate k would indicate how steep
the curve is, and the offset parameter m would indicate the value of the midpoint where the growth switches from
3

COVID-19 Data Analysis and Forecasting: Algeria and the World

A

PREPRINT

increasing to decreasing [11]. In the coronavirus case, the time t indicates the number of days since the first recorded
case, k corresponds to the virus spread rate, and m indicates the value of the midpoint where the number of daily new
cases/deaths starts to decrease. To estimate the parameters k and m at time t, the Prophet model learns the values
that best fit the data during the training process [11]. The aim is to fit the model on historical training data since the
beginning of the epidemic and use it to predict the number of cases and deaths in the coming weeks. As to the maximum
carrying capacity C at time t, we calculate its value using Equation 3. According to experts, one COVID-19 patient
infects between two and three other people3 ; therefore, we assume that the maximum carrying capacity corresponds to
the case where each patient infects three persons. In the next section, we discuss the experiments we performed to train
and evaluate the time series model on coronavirus data in Algeria and analyze worldwide COVID-19 data.
C(t) = t3

(3)

Where:
• t is the number of days since the first recorded coronavirus case
• 3 is the average number of people infected by a coronavirus patient

3

Experimentation and analysis

All the experiments and data analysis we performed are based on the reliable Our World in Data website [15], which
is updated daily. It provides official worldwide COVID-19 statistics according to several criteria: by country, cases,
deaths, tests performed, mortality risk, and government policy responses. The results, figures, and statistics presented in
this section have been reported at the time of writing (19/05/2020) while the epidemic is still ongoing. The rest of this
section discusses the experimentation we conducted after several data preprocessing steps using Python programming
language and Jupyter Notebook4 . The experiments are carried out in two stages: evaluate the time series model in
predicting the spread of the virus in Algeria, and data analysis considering data from 82 countries worldwide for a
better understanding of the pandemic.
3.1

Time series forecasting: Algeria

In a series of experiments, we analyzed historical data, trained, and evaluated the Prophet model in forecasting the
spread of the virus in Algeria. Note that Algeria is a case study and that the model can be used for any other country.

Figure 2: Daily new coronavirus cases and deaths in Algeria

First, Fig. 2 gives the number of daily new cases and deaths in Algeria, from the first case to date. The daily death curve
suggests that the epidemic reached its peak in early April when Algeria reported an unfortunate record of 42 deaths in a
single day. The death curve has been steadily decreasing since then and then stabilizing during the first weeks of May
with less than ten deaths a day. As to the daily case curve, the first case was recorded on February 26, 2020. The curve
3
4

www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/covid-19/questions-answers
https://jupyter.org

4

COVID-19 Data Analysis and Forecasting: Algeria and the World

A

PREPRINT

has been steadily increasing since then until it reached its first peak in early April at the same time as the death peak
when Algeria reported 185 cases in a single day. Later, unlike the death curve, the daily case curve first decreased in
April and then peaked again in early May with a new record of 199 cases in a single day. The rise in the number of
cases is certainly related to the increase in the number of COVID-19 tests performed. Indeed, with more labs across the
country, the head of the Algerian Pasteur institute stated that the number of tests increased to an average of 400 tests per
day in early May compared to 200 tests at the beginning of the epidemic5 . Later, the case curve has been stabilizing in
the first weeks of May with less than 200 cases a day.

Figure 3: Evaluation results over the past 15 days

Second, we used the total number of coronavirus cases and deaths per day in Algeria from 26 February to 04 May 2020
to train the time series forecasting model described in section 2 and evaluate it on the remaining past 15 days, from 05
to 19 May 2020. The case model and the death model are trained separately; the aim is to fit the model on historical
data since the beginning of the epidemic and use it to predict the number of cases and deaths in the coming weeks.
Fig. 3 shows the evaluation results corresponding to the predicted and actual test values, and Equation 4 gives the Root
Mean Squared Error (RMSE) measure, which is commonly used to evaluate the performance of time series models [6].
Fig. 3 shows that the model accurately predicts the number of cases and deaths with low RMSE scores of 218.87 and
4.79, respectively. Note that the error score for the number of predicted cases is higher than the score for the number of
deaths only because the number of cases is highest. Moreover, the figure indicates that the case and death functions the
model has learned are quasi-linear from 05 to 19 May 2020, as the actual case and death curves. We calculated a linear
approximation function from the two latter curves which are as follows: Y1 = 157 X1 + 4465 for cases, and Y2 = 5 X2
+ 464 for deaths; where 4465 and 464 are the number of cases and deaths respectively at the beginning of the forecast.
The functions suggest that the country recorded approximately the same daily number of cases and deaths during this
period, i.e. 157 cases and 5 deaths. These results are consistent with our observations in Fig. 2, where the case and
death curves have stabilized in early May.
v
u
n
u 1 X
RM SE = t( )
(yi − xi )2
n i=1

(4)

Where:
• n is the number of days
• yi is the predicted value for the day i
• xi is the actual test value for the day i
Finally, we retrain the time series model on all data available to date to forecast the total number of coronavirus cases
and deaths for next month, starting on 20/05/2020 (see Fig. 4). Note that the case model and the death model are trained
separately. The case curve indicates that the number of cases, currently 7201, is expected to increase by 4800 to reach
5

www.aps.dz/sante-science-technologie/104593-covid-19-hausse-sensible-du-nombre-de-tests-quotidiens-dans-leslaboratoires-de-l-ipa

5

COVID-19 Data Analysis and Forecasting: Algeria and the World

A

PREPRINT

Figure 4: Forecast for next month starting on 20/05/2020

12000 cases by mid-June, which corresponds to an average of 185 new cases a day. On the other hand, the death curve
suggests that the number of deaths, currently 555, is expected to increase by 195 to reach 750 deaths by mid-June,
which corresponds to an average of 8 new deaths a day. Therefore, we note that both case and death curves do not show
a downward trend for the coming month. Indeed, as shown in Fig. 2, the number of daily new recorded cases/deaths
has been continuously decreasing and increasing again in early May, making it difficult for the time series model to
detect a downward trend and predict the end of the epidemic. Furthermore, time series forecasting models only take the
previously reported cases and deaths as input to predict the future numbers, without any knowledge of the properties of
the COVID-19. In the next section, we include and analyze other factors that may contribute to accelerate/slow the
spread of the virus.
3.2

Data analysis: Countries of the world

To get a better understanding of the properties of the COVID-19, we conducted a large-scale data analysis considering
82 countries worldwide. In this section, we describe the dataset we constructed as well as the large-scale data analysis.
3.2.1

Dataset

First, Table 1 describes the dataset we constructed from different reliable sources, where each row represents a country,
and the columns represent geographic, climate, healthcare, economic, and demographic factors that may contribute to
accelerate/slow the spread of the coronavirus [15]. The dataset is publicly available and updated monthly with the latest
numbers of COVID-19 cases, deaths, tests.6 . Note that we selected only the main factors for which we found data and
that other factors can be used. For the rest of the paper, we will use the term "features" instead of "factors". Indeed, we
believe that leveraging the features in supervised learning algorithms is one of the future steps in understanding and
predicting the number of COVID-19 cases and deaths. As indicated in section 3, we retrieved all data from the reliable
Our World in Data website [15], except for data on continents7 , geographic-coordinates8 , temperatures9 , and share of
the population over 65 years old10 . The assumptions for the different feature categories are as follows:
•
•
•
•
•

Geography: some continents/areas may be more affected by the disease
Climate: cold temperatures may promote the spread of the virus
Healthcare: lack of hospital beds/doctors may lead to more human losses
Economy: weak economies (GDP) have fewer means to fight the disease
Demography: older populations may be at higher risk of the disease

Second, the last column of Table 1 gives, in list forms, the total number of coronavirus cases, deaths, and tests
performed per day for each of the 83 countries in the dataset, from the first day of the epidemic to date. Countries that
6

https://github.com/SamBelkacem/COVID19-Algeria-and-World-Dataset
www.kaggle.com/statchaitya/country-to-continent
8
www.kaggle.com/eidanch/counties-geographic-coordinates
9
www.kaggle.com/berkeleyearth/climate-change-earth-surface-temperature-data
10
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.POP.65UP.TO.ZS
7

6

COVID-19 Data Analysis and Forecasting: Algeria and the World

A

PREPRINT

Table 1: Data description

do not provide any information on the number of tests performed are not included in the dataset. As to Algeria, we
added the daily number of tests performed according to the numbers provided by the Algerian Pasteur institute: 200
tests per day since the beginning of the epidemic and 400 tests per day in May5 . The last column is then split into
several columns and rows, resulting in 15 columns and 7050 rows in the dataset. Moreover, to fill missing values in
some dates (112 missing values in cases, 112 in deaths, and 4102 in tests), we propagated values from the previous days
to the following days. For example, if a given country performed 500 tests on a given day, and a value is missing for the
next day, we assume the country performed as many tests as the previous day.

Figure 5: Countries in the dataset by geographic coordinates

Finally, Fig. 5 shows the geographical coordinates of all countries in the dataset where each data point corresponds to
the latitude and longitude of a given country. The 82 countries in the dataset are distributed over the six continents of
the world as follows: 32 countries in Europe, 21 in Asia, 12 in Africa, 9 in South American, 7 in North America, and 2
in Oceania. The imbalanced distribution of countries by continent is due to several factors11 : (1) North America is
11

https://worldpopulationreview.com/countries/continent-with-the-most-countries

7

COVID-19 Data Analysis and Forecasting: Algeria and the World

A

PREPRINT

represented with only seven countries because, except a few large countries, e.g. United States, Canada, and Mexico,
most other countries are small islands where the virus spread moderately, e.g. Bahamas, Haiti, Saint Lucia, etc. [3]; (2)
South America and Oceania are represented with only 9 and 2 countries respectively because these continents have
fewer countries with 12 and 14 countries respectively; (3) Africa is represented with only 12 countries out of 48 because
most countries do not provide any information on the number of coronavirus tests performed; such countries were not
included in the dataset; and (4) Europe and Asia are highly represented with 32 countries and 21 countries out of 44 and
32 respectively because, at the time of writing (19/05/2020), the virus first appeared in China, then spread widely in
Asia and Europe [2].
3.2.2

Data analysis

Figure 6: Feature distribution in all countries

First, to analyze data of Table 1 and visualize the features that may contribute to accelerate/slow the spread of coronavirus,
we show in Fig. 6 the distribution of feature values across all countries in the dataset. The x-axis corresponds to the
feature value, and the y-axis corresponds to the number of countries with that value. Due to lack of space, we discuss
only the most important findings. The figure shows that the geographic coordinates range from the extreme north
in Iceland (latitude of 64.96) to the extreme south in New Zealand (latitude of -40.9), and from the extreme east in
New Zealand (longitude of 174.89) to the extreme west in Canada (longitude of -106.35). The assumption for the
geographical features is that some continents or geographic areas may be more affected by the disease. The average
temperature a year ranges from -14°C in Denmark to 29°C in Senegal, Nigeria, and Qatar. Note 23 cold countries that
have an average temperature below 10°C and 22 warm countries that have an average temperature above 24°C. The
assumption for this feature is that warm temperatures may slow the virus. The number of hospital beds per 1000 people
ranges from 0.3 in Ethiopia, Senegal, and Nepal to 13.05 in Japan, where 28 countries have less than two beds per 1000
people. The assumption for this feature is that the fewer hospital beds available, the more overwhelmed the hospitals,
and the more human losses. The number of medical doctors per 1000 people ranges from 0.02 in Ethiopia to 7.52 in
Cuba, where 20 countries have less than one doctor per 1000 people. The assumption for this feature is that the fewer
doctors, the fewer medical staff to manage infected patients, and the more human losses. The GDP/Capita ranges from
1697.71 USD in Uganda to 116936 USD in Qatar, where 22 countries have a GDP/Capita of less than 10000 USD. The
assumption for this feature is that low-income countries may have fewer means to fight the disease. The population
size ranges from 341284 inhabitants in Iceland to 1,386,395,000 inhabitants in China, where 12 countries have more
than 100 million inhabitants. The assumption for this feature is that the number of cases and deaths may be higher in
8

COVID-19 Data Analysis and Forecasting: Algeria and the World

A

PREPRINT

populous countries. Finally, the median age ranges from 16 years old in Uganda to 48 years old in Japan, where the
median age is over 40 years old in 31 countries. As to the share of the population over 65, it ranges from 1% in Qatar to
28% in Japan, where the share is over 15% in 33 countries. The assumption for these features is that older populations
are at high risk of contracting and dying from the disease.

Figure 7: Feature correlation in all countries as of 19/05/2020

Second, to find relationships in the dataset between the features and the number of cases and deaths in the 83 countries
to date, we computed in the heatmap of Fig. 7 the Pearson correlation coefficient given by Equation 5 [16]. The latter
measures the statistical relationship between two continuous variables and has a value between +1 and -1, where 1 is a
total positive linear correlation, 0 is no linear correlation, and -1 is total negative linear correlation. Due to lack of space,
we discuss only the most important correlations. The heatmap indicates a strong positive correlation (0.87) between the
number of tests performed and the number of cases, emphasizing the importance of testing to detect infected patients,
isolate and promptly treat them, and limit the spread of the virus. The median age and the share of the population over
65 are positively correlated with the number of deaths (0.17 and 0.2 respectively), which confirms that older populations
are at high risk of death from the disease. The population size is negatively correlated with the number of medical
doctors and beds per 1000 people (-0.22 and -0.17 respectively), which suggests that populous countries may have less
healthcare means to manage infected patients. The heatmap also indicates a negative correlation between the average
temperature a year and the number of cases (-0.13), which suggests that warm temperatures may slow the virus. The
number of hospital beds per 1000 people is negatively correlated with the number of deaths (-0.024), which confirms
that the more hospital beds available, the less overwhelmed the hospitals, and the less human losses.
Pn

− x̄)(yi − ȳ)
pPn
2
2
i=1 (xi − x̄)
i=1 (yi − ȳ)

r = pPn

i=1 (xi

9

(5)

COVID-19 Data Analysis and Forecasting: Algeria and the World

A

PREPRINT

Where:
• x̄ is the mean of the variable x
• ȳ is the mean of the variable y
• n is the number of data pairs between x and y
Finally, the heatmap of Fig. 7 shows a surprising but expected positive correlation between the GDP/Capita and the
number of cases and deaths (0.21 and 0.22 respectively). Indeed, the highest case and death tolls have been reported in
wealthier countries in Europe and the United States. Experts have suggested many reasons12 : (1) the climate which is
colder in the northern countries of the world (-0.57 correlation between temperature and latitude); (2) the testing gap
between high and low-income countries (0.15 correlation between GDP/Capita and the number of tests performed);
(3) the high connectivity to China which is the country of origin of the coronavirus; and (4) the population density
which is higher in developed countries. Nonetheless, the correlation heatmap indicates that the GDP/Capita is positively
correlated with the number of tests performed, hospital beds, and medical doctors (0.15, 0.27, and 0.46 respectively).
High-income countries undoubtedly have more human and material means to fight the disease despite the extent of the
epidemic on their soil. It is lastly important to note that the correlations given in Fig. 7 only quantify the strength of the
relationship between features, which does not always indicate causation. Investigate feature correlation is a first step to
explore relationships between COVID-19 and external factors that contribute to accelerate/slow the spread of the virus.
Further analysis is required to make a proper causal inference.

4

Conclusion

In this work, we first trained a time series Prophet model to analyze and forecast the number of COVID-19 cases and
deaths in Algeria. Then, to better understand the spread of the virus, we constructed a dataset from different reliable
sources and conducted a large-scale data analysis considering 82 countries worldwide. The evaluation results show
that the time series model accurately predicts the number of cases and deaths in Algeria with low RMSE scores of
218.87 and 4.79 respectively, while the forecast suggests that the total number of cases and deaths are expected to
increase in the coming weeks. Moreover, the worldwide data-driven analysis reveals several correlations between the
increase/decrease in the number of cases and deaths and other factors that may contribute to accelerate/slow the spread
of the virus, such as geographic, climatic, health, economic, and demographic factors. However, this is a first attempt to
analyze and forecast the epidemic while it is still ongoing. Further analysis is required to get a thorough understanding
of the properties of the coronavirus.
For future work, we intend to include other features that contribute to accelerate/slow the spread of the virus,
especially regarding policy responses to the COVID-19, e.g. restrictions on public gatherings, international and
domestic travel, etc. Furthermore, to better understand and forecast the spread of the virus, we plan to extend the data
with the latest numbers and train a supervised model that predicts the number of cases and deaths for any country.

References
[1] Catrin Sohrabi, Zaid Alsafi, Niamh O’Neill, Mehdi Khan, Ahmed Kerwan, Ahmed Al-Jabir, Christos Iosifidis,
and Riaz Agha. World Health Organization declares global emergency: A review of the 2019 novel coronavirus
(COVID-19). International Journal of Surgery, 2020. Publisher: Elsevier.
[2] Wei-jie Guan, Zheng-yi Ni, Yu Hu, Wen-hua Liang, Chun-quan Ou, Jian-xing He, Lei Liu, Hong Shan, Chun-liang
Lei, and David SC Hui. Clinical characteristics of coronavirus disease 2019 in China. New England journal of
medicine, 382(18):1708–1720, 2020. Publisher: Mass Medical Soc.
[3] Muhammad Adnan Shereen, Suliman Khan, Abeer Kazmi, Nadia Bashir, and Rabeea Siddique. COVID-19
infection: origin, transmission, and characteristics of human coronaviruses. Journal of Advanced Research, 2020.
Publisher: Elsevier.
[4] Stefano Boccaletti, William Ditto, Gabriel Mindlin, and Abdon Atangana. Modeling and forecasting of epidemic
spreading: The case of Covid-19 and beyond. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, 135:109794, June 2020.
[5] Xingyu Zhang, Tao Zhang, Alistair A. Young, and Xiaosong Li. Applications and comparisons of four time series
models in epidemiological surveillance data. PLoS One, 9(2), 2014. Publisher: Public Library of Science.
12

www.voanews.com/covid-19-pandemic/why-covid-19-hit-high-income-countries-harder

10

COVID-19 Data Analysis and Forecasting: Algeria and the World

A

PREPRINT

[6] Yi-Ju Tseng and Yu-Lien Shih. Developing epidemic forecasting models to assist disease surveillance for influenza
with electronic health records. International Journal of Computers and Applications, pages 1–6, 2019. Publisher:
Taylor & Francis.
[7] Junyi Lu and Sebastian Meyer. Forecasting Flu Activity in the United States: Benchmarking an Endemic-Epidemic
Beta Model. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 17(4):1381, 2020. Publisher:
Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute.
[8] Diego Duarte and Julio Faerman. Comparison of Time Series Prediction of Healthcare Emergency Department
Indicators with ARIMA and Prophet. In 9th International Conference on Computer Science, Engineering and
Applications (ICCSEA 2019), pages 123–133. Aircc publishing Corporation, December 2019.
[9] George EP Box and David A. Pierce. Distribution of residual autocorrelations in autoregressive-integrated moving
average time series models. Journal of the American statistical Association, 65(332):1509–1526, 1970. Publisher:
Taylor & Francis Group.
[10] Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long Short-Term Memory. Neural Computation, 9(8):1735–1780,
November 1997.
[11] Sean J. Taylor and Benjamin Letham. Forecasting at scale. The American Statistician, 72(1):37–45, 2018.
Publisher: Taylor & Francis.
[12] Hans Weytjens, Enrico Lohmann, and Martin Kleinsteuber. Cash flow prediction: MLP and LSTM compared to
ARIMA and Prophet. Electronic Commerce Research, pages 1–21, 2019. Publisher: Springer.
[13] K. Krishna Rani Samal, Korra Sathya Babu, Santosh Kumar Das, and Abhirup Acharaya. Time Series based Air
Pollution Forecasting using SARIMA and Prophet Model. In Proceedings of the 2019 International Conference
on Information Technology and Computer Communications, pages 80–85, 2019.
[14] Chris Chatfield. Time-series forecasting. CRC press, 2000.
[15] Esteban Ortiz-Ospina Max Roser, Hannah Ritchie and Joe Hasell. Coronavirus pandemic (covid-19). Our World
in Data, 2020. https://ourworldindata.org/coronavirus.
[16] I. Lawrence and Kuei Lin. A concordance correlation coefficient to evaluate reproducibility. Biometrics, pages
255–268, 1989. Publisher: JSTOR.

11

