Expressive Interviewing:
A Conversational System for Coping with COVID-19
Charles Welch , Allison Lahnala , Vernica Prez-Rosas , Siqi Shen , Sarah SerajΦ ,
Larry Anι , Kenneth Resnicow† , James PennebakerΦ , Rada Mihalcea

Computer Science & Engineering, University of Michigan
Φ
Department of Psychology, University of Texas
ι
Medical School, University of Michigan
†
School of Public Health, University of Michigan
{cfwelch,alcllahn,vrncapr,shensq,lcan,kresnic,mihalcea}@umich.edu
{sarahseraj,pennebaker}@utexas.edu

arXiv:2007.03819v1 [cs.HC] 7 Jul 2020

Abstract
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has raised
concerns for many regarding personal and public health implications, financial security and
economic stability. Alongside many other
unprecedented challenges, there are increasing concerns over social isolation and mental
health. We introduce Expressive Interviewing–
an interview-style conversational system that
draws on ideas from motivational interviewing and expressive writing. Expressive Interviewing seeks to encourage users to express
their thoughts and feelings through writing by
asking them questions about how COVID-19
has impacted their lives. We present relevant
aspects of the system’s design and implementation as well as quantitative and qualitative
analyses of user interactions with the system.
In addition, we conduct a comparative evaluation with a general purpose dialogue system
for mental health that shows our system potential in helping users to cope with COVID-19
issues.

1

Introduction

The COVID-19 pandemic has changed our world in
unimaginable ways, dramatically challenging our
health system and drastically changing our daily
lives. As we learned from recent large-scale analyses that we performed on social media datasets and
extensive surveys, many people are currently experiencing increased anxiety, loneliness, depression,
concerns for the health of family and themselves,
unexpected unemployment, increased child care or
homeschooling, and general concern with what the
future might look like.1
Research in Expressive Writing (Pennebaker,
1997b) and Motivational Interviewing (Miller and
Rollnick, 2012) has shown that even simple interactions where people talk about one particular experience can have significant psychological value.
1

http://trackingsocial.life

Numerous studies have demonstrated their effectiveness in improving peoples mental and physical
health (Vine et al., 2020; Pennebaker and Chung,
2011; Resnicow et al., 2017). Both Expressive
Writing and Motivational Interviewing rely on the
fundamental idea that by putting emotional upheavals into words, one can start to understand
them better and therefore gain a sense of agency
and coherence of the thoughts and emotions surrounding their experience.
In this paper, we introduce a new interview-style
dialogue paradigm called Expressive Interviewing
that unites strategies from Expressive Writing and
Motivational Interviewing through a system that
guides an individual to reflect on, express, and better understand their own thoughts and feelings during the pandemic.
By encouraging introspection and selfexpression, the dialogue aims to reduce stress
and anxiety. Our system is currently online at
https://expressiveinterviewing.org
and
available for anyone to try anonymously.

2

Related Work

Expressive Writing. Expressive writing is a writing paradigm where people are asked to disclose
their emotions and thoughts about significant life
upheavals. Originally studied in the scope of traumatic experiences (Pennebaker and Beall, 1986),
study participants are usually asked to write about
an assigned topic for about 15 minutes for one to
five consecutive days. Later studies expanded to
specific experiences such as losing a job (Spera
et al., 1994). Expressive writing has been shown to
be effective on both physical and mental health
measures by multiple meta-analyses (Frattaroli,
2006), finding its association with drops in physician visits, positive behavioral changes, and longterm mood improvements. No single theory at

present explains the cause of its benefits, but it is believed that the process of expressing emotions and
constructing a story may play a role for participants
in forming a new perspective on their lives (Pennebaker and Chung, 2011).
Motivational Interviewing. Motivational Interviewing (MI) is a counseling technique designed
to help people change a desired behavior by leveraging their own values and interests. The approach
accepts that many people looking for a change are
ambivalent about doing so as they have reasons to
both change and sustain the behavior. Therefore,
the goal of an MI counselor is to elicit their client’s
own motivation for changing by asking open questions and reflecting back on the client’s statements.
MI has been shown to correlate with positive behavior changes in a large variety of client goals,
such as weight management (Small et al., 2009),
chronic care intervention (Brodie et al., 2008), and
substance abuse prevention (D’Amico et al., 2008).
Dialogue Systems. With the development of deep
learning techniques, dialogue systems have been
applied to a large variety of tasks to meet increasing
demands. In recent work, Afzal et al. (2019) built
a dialogue-based tutoring system to guide learners through varying levels of content granularity to
facilitate a better understanding of content. Henderson et al. (2019) applied a response retrieval
approach in restaurant search and booking to provide and enable the users to ask various questions
about a restaurant. Ortega et al. (2019) built an
open-source dialogue system framework that navigates students through course selection.
There are also dialogue system building tools
such as Google’s Dialogflow2 and IBM’s Watson
assistant,3 which enable numerous dialogue systems for customer service or conversational user
interfaces.
Chatbots for Automated Counseling. Two dialogue systems for automated counseling services
available on mobile platforms are Wysa4 and Woebot.5 These chatbots provide cognitive behavioral
therapy with the goal of easing anxiety and depression by allowing users to express their thoughts. A
study of Wysa users over three months showed that
more active users had significantly improved symp-

toms of depression (Inkster et al., 2018). Another
study shows that young students using Woebot significantly reduced anxiety levels after two weeks
of using the conversational agent (Fitzpatrick et al.,
2017). These findings suggest a promising benefit of automated counseling for the nonclinical
population.
Our system is distinct from Wysa and Woebot
in that it is designed specifically for coping with
COVID-19 and allows users to write more topic related free-form responses. It asks open-ended questions and encourages users to introspect, and then
provides visualized feedback afterward, whereas
the others have a conversational logic mainly based
on precoded multiple choice options.

3

Expressive Interviewing

Our system conducts an interview-style interaction
with the users about how the COVID-19 pandemic
has been affecting them. The interview consists of
several writing prompts in the form of questions
about specific issues related to the pandemic. During the interview, the system provides reflective
feedback based on the user’s answers. After the
interaction is concluded, the system presents users
with detailed graphical and textual feedback.
The system’s goal is to encourage users to write
as much as possible about themselves, building
upon previous findings regarding the psychological value of writing about personal upheavals and
the use of reflective listening for behavioral change
(Pennebaker, 1997b; Miller and Rollnick, 2012).
To achieve this, the system guides the interaction
by asking four main open-ended questions. Then,
based on users responses, the system provides feedback and asks additional questions whenever appropriate. In order to provide reflective feedback,
the system automatically detects the topics being
discussed (e.g., work, family) or emotions being
felt (e.g., anger, anxiety), and responds with a reflective prompt that asks the user to elaborate or to
answer a related question to explore that concept
more deeply. For instance, if the system detects
work as a topic of interest, it responds with “How
has work changed under COVID? What might you
be able to do to keep your career moving during
these difficult times?”

2

https://dialogflow.com/
https://www.ibm.com/cloud/
watson-assistant
4
https://wysa.io/
5
https://woebot.io/
3

3.1

Leading Questions

During the formulation of the guiding questions
used by our system, we worked closely with our

psychology and public health collaborators to identify a set of questions on COVID-19 topics that
would motivate individuals to talk about their personal experience with the pandemic. We formulated the following question as the system’s conversation starting point:
[Major issues] What are the major issues in your
life right now, especially in the light of the COVID
outbreak?
We also formulated three follow-up questions,
which were generated after several refining iterations.6 The order of these questions is randomized
across users of the system.
[Looking Forward] What do you most look forward to doing once the pandemic is over?
[Advice to Others] What advice would you give
other people about how to cope with any of the
issues you are facing?
[Grateful] The outbreak has been affecting
everyone’s life, but people have the amazing ability
to find good things even in the most challenging
situations. What is something that you have done
or experienced recently that you are grateful for?
3.2

Language Understanding and Reflection
Strategies

Our system’s capability for language understanding relies on identifying words belonging to various
lexicons. This simple strategy allowed us to quickly
develop a platform upon which we intend to implement a more sophisticated language understanding
ability in future work.
When a user responds to one of the main
prompts, the system looks for words belonging
to specific topics and word categories. The system
examines the user responses to identify dominant
word categories or topics and triggers a reflection
from a set of appropriate reflections. 7 If none of
these types are matched, it responds with a generic
reflection.
The word categories are derived from the LIWC,
WordNet-Affect and MPQA lexicons (Pennebaker
et al., 2001; Strapparava et al., 2004; Wiebe et al.,
6
We removed an additional question about how people’s
lives have changed since the outbreak, as well as a question
about what people missed the most about their previous lives.
7
A dominant word category is defined as a word type,
where the frequency of occurrence is at least 50% higher than
the second highest frequency category for that group.

2005) and include pronouns (I, we, others), negative emotion (anger, anxiety, and sadness), positive
emotion (joy) and positive and negative words. The
COVID-19 related topics include finances, health,
home, work, family, friends, and politics. Most
of the topics are covered by the LIWC lexicon,
with the exception of politics. For this category,
we use the politics category from the Roget’s Thesaurus (Roget, 1911) and add a small number of
proper nouns covered in recent news (e.g. Trump,
Biden, Fauci, Sanders).
We formulate a set of specific reflections for
each word category and topic, which were refined
by our psychology and public health collaborators.
For instance, if the dominant emotion category is
anxiety, the system responds “You mention feelings
such as fear and anxiety. What do you think is the
best way for people to cope with these feelings?”
Initially, we also considered reflections for different
types of pronouns, but found that they did not steer
the dialogue in a meaningful direction. Instead, we
flag responses with dominant use of impersonal
pronouns and lack of references to the self and
reflect that fact back to the user and further ask
them how they are specifically being affected. We
also crafted generic reflections to be applicable to a
large number of situations though the system does
not understand the content of what the user has said
(e.g. “I see. Tell me about a time when things were
different”, and “I hear you. What have you tried in
the past that has worked well”).
3.3

User Feedback

After the interview, the system provides visual and
textual feedback based on the user’s responses and
provides links to resources (i.e., mental health resources) appropriate given their main concerns.
The visual feedback consists of four pie charts
showing the relative usage of different word categories, including: discussed topics (work, finance,
home, health, family, friends and politics), affect
(positive, negative), emotions (anger, sadness, fear,
anxiety, joy), and pronouns (I, we, other).
The textual feedback includes a comparison with
others (to normalize the user’s reactions) and interpretations of where the user falls within normalized scales. The system also presents a summary
of the most and least discussed topics and how
they compare to the average user, along with normalized values for meaningfulness, self-reflection,
and emotional tone (using a 0-10 scale) along with

textual descriptors for the shown scale values. 8
These metrics are inspired by previous work on
expressive writing and represent the self-reported
meaningfulness, usage of self-referring pronouns,
and the difference in positive and negative word
usage (Pennebaker, 1997a). Finally, the system
provides relevant resources for further exploration
(e.g. for the work topic it lists external links to
COVID related job resources and safety practices).

3.4

Online Interface

The system is implemented as a web interface so
it is accessible and easy to use. The interface is
built with the Django platform and jQuery and uses
Python on the backend (Django Software Foundation, 2019).
Before the interaction users are asked to report
on a 1-7 scale: (1) [Life satisfaction] how satisfied they are with their life in general, and (2)
[Stressbef ore ] what is their level of stress. The user
then proceeds to the conversational interaction with
our system. After the interaction, the user is asked
again about (3) [Stressaf ter ] what is their level of
stress; (4) [Personal] how personal their interaction was; and (5) [Meaningful] how meaningful
their interaction was. Once this is submitted, the
user can proceed to the feedback page and view
details about what they wrote and how their interaction compares to a sample of recent users. The user
is finally presented with a list of resources triggered
by the topics discussed.

Rating 1

Rating 2

rho

Life satisfaction
Life satisfaction
Life satisfaction
Life satisfaction
Life satisfaction

Stressbef ore
Stressaf ter
∆ Stress
Personal
Meaningful

-0.261
-0.166
0.083
0.285
0.243

Meaningful
Meaningful
Meaningful
Meaningful

Stressbef ore
Stressaf ter
∆ Stress
Personal

0.033
-0.226
-0.202
0.675

Personal
Personal
Personal

Stressbef ore
Stressaf ter
∆ Stress

0.065
-0.067
-0.073

Table 1: Spearman correlation coefficients between
pairs of ratinga for the 174 interactions. Bold indicates
significance with p < 0.05.

4

Analysis of User Interactions

After the system was launched (and up to when we
conducted this analysis), we had 174 users interact
with the system. We analyze these interactions to
evaluate system usefulness, user engagement, and
reflection effectiveness.

We made an effort to make our system appear
human-like to make users more comfortable while
interacting with it, although this can vary for different individuals. In future work, we hope to explore
individual personas and more sophisticated rapport
building techniques. We named our dialogue agent
‘C.P.’, which stands for Computer Program. This
name acknowledges that the user is interacting with
a computer, while at the same time it makes the
system more human by assigning it a name. When
responding to the user, C.P. pauses for a few seconds as if it is thinking and then proceeds to type a
response one letter at a time with a low probability
of making typos – similarly to how human users
would type.

System Usefulness. We examine the system’s ability to help users cope with COVID-19 related issues
by analyzing the different ratings provided by users
before and after their interaction with C.P. Throughout this discussion, we use ∆Stress to indicate how
the users stress rating differs before and after the
interaction: ∆Stress = Stressaf ter - Stressbef ore .
Negative values for ∆Stress are therefore an indicator of stress reduction, whereas positive values
for ∆Stress reflect an increase in stress.
We start by measuring the Spearman correlation
between the different ratings for the 174 interactions with C.P. Results are shown in Table 1.
The strongest correlation we observe is between
the personal and meaningful ratings, suggesting
that interactions that are more meaningful appear
to feel more personal, or vice versa.
We also observe a strong negative correlation
between ∆ Stress and the meaningfulness of the
interaction, suggesting that the interactions that the
users found to be meaningful are associated with a
reduction in stress.

8
Textual descriptions are predefined for different ranges of
each scale

User engagement. We examine user engagement
by analyzing the time users spend in the interaction
and the number of words they write throughout

the session. Figure 1 shows histograms of the session lengths in the number of words used by the
user and of the session duration in seconds. The
rightmost column of Table 2 shows Spearman correlation coefficients between user ratings and the
length and duration of the sessions. We find a significant negative correlation between Stressbef ore
and Stressaf ter with session duration and number
of words, suggesting an association between user
engagement and lower stress. There is also a weak
negative correlation between duration of session
and reduction in stress (∆Stress).

Figure 1: Histograms of overall user engagement measured by session length and duration.

We also investigate if there is a relationship between the pre- and post-session ratings and how
engaged a user was with each prompt in terms of
length of and duration in writing their response. Table 2 shows Spearman correlation coefficients for
these relationships. It appears that Life Satisfaction
has no correlation with the length of any prompt
response except a potentially weak negative correlation with length on the Major Issues prompt
(p = 0.052). A lower rating may relate with having
more personal challenges to write about.
Stressbef ore has a weak negative correlation between the number of words used and the duration
spent in the response to Looking Forward. Higher
stress may relate to present concerns, which may
make one less inclined to spend time thinking and

writing about positive aspects of their future than
someone with less stress. We presume this could
be the case for the Grateful prompt, which likewise
correlates weakly and negatively with Stressbef ore .
Stressaf ter has a negative correlation between
duration spent on every prompt response except for
the time spent on Major Issues. This could be a
reflection of the fact that those who have a lot to
write about major issues in their life also incur high
levels of stress.
The Personal rating shows no correlations with
the duration spent on any of responses, except potentially Advice to Others (p = 0.074). We do
observe weak negative correlations between Personal ratings and response lengths on Major Issues
and Looking Forward, and potentially on Grateful (p = 0.054) and Advice to Others (p = 0.08).
Perhaps if a user writes more, there is a greater expectation for more personal reflections. We discuss
engagement related to reflections more deeply in
the next section.
The Meaningful rating shows weak negative correlations with length on Major Issues, Advice to
Others, and possibly on Grateful (p = 0.052) and
Looking Forward (p = 0.062). We do not observe
a significant correlation with duration on Major
Issues or Grateful, but we do observe positive correlations between duration and Looking Forward
and Advice to Others. Users who spend more time
thinking about advice they would give others facing
their issues may find the interaction more meaningful, and may experience benefits having reflected
on their agency in managing their challenges.
Reflection Effectiveness. To investigate the effectiveness of Expressive Interviewing reflections,
we compare the reflections that were triggered for
users whose stressed decreased to the reflections
that triggered for the users whose stress increased.
For each of these user groups, we compute the dominance of each reflection as its proportion of times
it was triggered out of all reflections triggered. In
Figure 2, we compare the dominance of each reflection across these user groups by dividing the
reflection dominance in the decreased-stress group
by that of the increased-stress group.
Importantly, we observe that all emotion reflections and more topic reflections were triggered
at a higher rate for users whose stress decreased,
whereas more generic reflections were triggered
at a higher rate for users whose stress increased.
While we do not presume that increased stress was

Major issues

Grateful

Looking Forward

Advice to Others

Overall

-0.096
-0.134
-0.151
-0.083
-0.129
-0.112

-0.070
-0.159
-0.151
-0.151
-0.177
-0.092

0.091
0.136
0.205
-0.099
-0.192
-0.092

0.066
0.066
0.143
-0.198
-0.233
-0.068

Length in Words
Life Satisfaction
Personal
Meaningful
Stressbef ore
Stressaf ter
∆ Stress

-0.148
-0.156
-0.181
-0.001
-0.020
-0.067

-0.121
-0.147
-0.148
-0.076
-0.135
-0.106

-0.079
-0.185
-0.142
-0.161
-0.130
-0.039

Duration in Seconds
Life Satisfaction
Personal
Meaningful
Stressbef ore
Stressaf ter
∆ Stress

-0.057
-0.017
-0.036
-0.067
-0.120
-0.069

0.016
-0.041
0.099
-0.252
-0.241
-0.023

0.048
0.053
0.173
-0.178
-0.207
-0.052

Table 2: Spearman correlation coefficients between each rating provided by a user and (top) the length in number
of words of the user’s response to each particular prompt, and (bottom) duration in seconds of the user’s response
to each particular prompt, from 174 full interactions. Bold denotes significance with p < 0.05.

HEALTH

Id like to know more about your feelings surrounding your own health and the
health of people close to you. What actions can you take to help keep you healthy
during these challenging times?
FAMILY What can you do to keep your family resilient during these tough times?
POLITICS What is it about the political world that may be hooking you? What are your
reactions saying about you?
GEN1
Interesting to hear that. How does what you say relate to your values?
GEN3
I see. Tell me about a time when things were different.
Table 3: Sample topic specific and generic reflections.

due to generic reflections, the correspondence between emotion and topic reflections with stress
reduction aligns with expectations of effective reflections from Motivational Interviewing–generic
reflections and specific reflections resemble simple
reflections and complex reflections respectively, as
referred to in Motivation Interviewing. While both
types of reflections serve a purpose, complex reflections both communicate an understanding of what
the client has said and also contribute an additional
layer of understanding or a new interpretation for
the user, whereas simple reflections focus on the
former (Rollnick and Allison, 2004).
In qualitatively analyzing the instances where
generic reflections were triggered, we observe that
contextual appropriateness seems to be the best indicator of their success (in terms of ability to elicit
a deeper thought, feeling, or interpretation) given
that the user was invested in the experience. As

these generic reflections are selected at random,
their contextual appropriateness was inconsistent,
illuminating the scenarios in which they are more
or less appropriate. For instance, out of the seven
times the reflection “Interesting to hear that. How
does what you say relate to your values?” was
triggered for the increased-stress users, one user
expanded on their previous message, one expressed
confusion about the question, and another copied
and pasted the definition of core values9 as their
response. Two other instances of this reflection
were triggered when a user had expressed negative
feelings such as worry and feeling lazy which appeared misplaced, and the last case was triggered
by a message that was not readable. Out of the thirteen times the same reflection was triggered for the
decreased-stress group, one user expressed not hav9
https://www.indeed.com/career-advice/
career-development/core-values

Figure 2: The dominance of each reflection triggered
for users whose stress decreased divided by each reflection’s dominance for users whose stress increased.
Scores above 1 (red line) correspond to a decrease
in stress; score below 1 correspond to an increase in
stress. See Table 3 for sample reflections, including the
GEN eric reflections.

ing much to say, another gave one word responses
before and after, and all others expanded on their
previous message in relation to their values or gave
a simple response to indicate a degree that it relates. This reflection appeared more “successful”
(based on if the user expanded on their previous
message or values) when it was triggered by a message with more neutral to positive sentiment, such
as when the user was expressing what they were
looking forward to, or when they had several pieces
of advice to offer for a friend in their situation, as
opposed to one with more negative sentiment like
the messages expressing worry or laziness.
In instances of other generic reflections, we observed that another issue for appropriateness was
whether the reflection matched the user’s frame of
thought in terms of past, present, or future. For
instance, the reflection “I see. Tell me about a time
when things were different,” best matched scenarios when users described thoughts about changes
to their daily lives, but not when users described future topics such as what they were looking forward
to, nor when they were already describing the past.
Based on our observations of the reflections in
action, we have three main takeaways. First, topic
and emotion specific reflections are more associated with the group of users whose stress decreased.
These reflections are only triggered if the system
determines a dominant topic or emotion, which
depends on the effectiveness of its heuristics, as
well as the amount of detail and context that a user
expresses. This leads to the next takeaway, that

the system appears to be more effective when users
approach the experience with an intention for expression, or conversely it seems less effective when
the intent to not engage and express is explicit.
Third, the generic reflections were developed with
the intent to function in generic contexts, but we
learned in practice that some clashed with emotional and situational content or were confusing
given the context. As we did observe many, if not
more, successful instances of generic reflections,
we are able to contrast these contexts to the unsuccessful contexts, and can develop a heuristic for
selecting the generic reflections rather than selecting at random, as well as adapt the language of our
current generic reflections to be more appropriate
for the Expressive Interviewing setting.

5

Comparative Evaluations

To assess the extent to which our Expressive Interviewing system delivers an engaging user experience, we conduct a comparative study between our
system and the conversational mental health app
Woebot (Fitzpatrick et al., 2017).
We recruited 12 participants and asked them to
interact independently with each system to discuss
their COVID-19 related concerns. More specifically, we asked them to use each system for 10-15
minutes and provide evaluative feedback pre- and
post-interaction. To avoid cognitive bias, we randomized the order in which each participant evaluated the systems. In addition, we randomized the
order in which the evaluation questions are shown.
Before interacting with either system, participants rated their life satisfaction and their stress
level. After the interaction, participants reported
again their stress level and rated several aspects of
their interaction with the system, including ease
of use, usefulness (in terms of discussing COVID19 related issues and motivation to write about it),
overall experience, and satisfaction using mainly
binary scales. For example, the questions “Did
<system> motivate you to write at length about
your thoughts and feelings? yes/no” and “How
useful was C.P. to discuss your concerns about
COVID? useful/not useful” assess whether the
system encouraged the user to write about their
thoughts and feelings about COVID and whether
the system provided guidance for it. Tables 4 and 5
show the percentage of users that provided positive
or high scores (> 3 on a 7-point scale) for each of
these aspects after interacting with both systems.

Stressbef ore
Stressaf ter

Woebot

Expressive Interviewing

91%
73%

91%
64%

Table 4: Percentage of users reporting high levels of
stress (> 3 on a 7-point Likert scale) before and after
using Woebot and Expressive Interviewing.

Ease of Use
Useful
Motivation to Write
User Satisfaction
Meaningful Interaction
Overall Experience

Woebot

Expr. Interv.

82%
18%
27%
36%
64%
36%

91%
73%
91%
36%
73%
46%

Table 5: Comparative evaluation Woebot and Expressive Interviewing. Percentage of users reporting positive/high ratings (with scores >3 in a 7-point Likert
scale) on usability aspects after interacting with Woebot and Expressive Interviewing.

As observed, there are fewer participants reporting high levels of stress after using either system.
However, we see a smaller fraction of participants
reporting high levels of stress after interacting with
Expressive Interviewing, thus suggesting that our
system was more effective in helping participants
to reduce their stress levels.
Overall, participants reported that Expressive Interviewing was easier to use, more useful to discuss
their COVID concerns and motivated them to write
more than Woebot. Similarly, users reported a more
meaningful interaction and a better overall experience. However, it is important to mention that Woebot was not specifically designed for discussing
COVID-19 concerns and it is of more general purpose than our system. Nonetheless, we believe that
this comparison provides evidence that a dialogue
system such as Expressive Interviewing is more
effective in helping users cope with COVID-19 issues as compared to a general purpose dialogue
system for mental health.

6

Ethical and Privacy Considerations

We followed the suggestions of previous research on automated mental health counseling and
adopted the goals of being respectful of user privacy, following evidence based methods, ensuring
user safety, and being transparent in system capabilities (Kretzschmar et al., 2019). The practices

of motivational interviewing and expressive writing have numerous studies supporting their efficacy (Miller and Rollnick, 2012; Pennebaker and
Chung, 2007). The combination of these methods in an interviewing format has not previously
been studied and we intend to continue publishing
our findings as the user population expands and
becomes more diverse. We will also continue to
improve our system and assessment.
We have taken efforts to secure user data. We
do not ask for identifiers and data is stored anonymously by session ID. The website is secured with
SSL. Data is only accessible to researchers directly
involved with our study.
Our study has been approved by the University
of Michigan IRB.

7

Conclusion

In this paper, we introduced an interview-style dialogue system called Expressive Interviewing to
help people cope with the effects of the COVID-19
pandemic. We provided a detailed description on
how the system is designed and implemented.
We analyzed a sample of 174 user interactions
with our system and conducted qualitative and
quantitative analyses on aspects such as system usefulness, user engagement and reflection effectiveness. We also conducted a comparative evaluation
study between our system and Woebot, a general
purpose dialogue system for mental health. Our
main findings suggest that users benefited from the
reflective strategies used by our system and experienced meaningful interactions leading to reduced
stress levels. Furthermore, our system was judged
to be easier to use and more useful than Woebot
when discussing COVID-19 related concerns.
In future work we intend to explore the applicability of the developed system to other healthrelated domains.

Acknowledgements
This material is based in part upon work supported
by the Precision Health initiative at the University
of Michigan, by the National Science Foundation
(grant #1815291), and by the John Templeton Foundation (grant #61156). Any opinions, findings, and
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this
material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Precision Health
initiative, the National Science Foundation, or John
Templeton Foundation.

References
Shazia Afzal, Tejas Dhamecha, Nirmal Mukhi, Renuka
Sindhgatta, Smit Marvaniya, Matthew Ventura, and
Jessica Yarbro. 2019. Development and deployment
of a large-scale dialog-based intelligent tutoring system. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 2 (Industry Papers), pages 114–121,
Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for Computational Linguistics.
David A Brodie, Allison Inoue, and David G Shaw.
2008. Motivational interviewing to change quality
of life for people with chronic heart failure: a randomised controlled trial. International journal of
nursing studies, 45(4):489–500.
Elizabeth J D’Amico, Jeremy NV Miles, Stefanie A
Stern, and Lisa S Meredith. 2008. Brief motivational interviewing for teens at risk of substance use
consequences: A randomized pilot study in a primary care clinic. Journal of substance abuse treatment, 35(1):53–61.

William R Miller and Stephen Rollnick. 2012. Motivational interviewing: Helping people change. Guilford press.
Daniel Ortega, Dirk Väth, Gianna Weber, Lindsey Vanderlyn, Maximilian Schmidt, Moritz Völkel, Zorica Karacevic, and Ngoc Thang Vu. 2019. ADVISER: A dialog system framework for education
& research. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations, pages 93–98, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
James W Pennebaker. 1997a. Writing about emotional
experiences as a therapeutic process. Psychological
science, 8(3):162–166.
James W Pennebaker and Sandra K Beall. 1986. Confronting a traumatic event: toward an understanding
of inhibition and disease. Journal of abnormal psychology, 95(3):274.
James W Pennebaker and Cindy K Chung. 2007. Expressive writing, emotional upheavals, and health.
Foundations of health psychology, pages 263–284.

Django Software Foundation. 2019. Django.
Kathleen Kara Fitzpatrick, Alison Darcy, and Molly
Vierhile. 2017. Delivering cognitive behavior therapy to young adults with symptoms of depression
and anxiety using a fully automated conversational
agent (woebot): a randomized controlled trial. JMIR
mental health, 4(2):e19.
Joanne Frattaroli. 2006. Experimental disclosure and
its moderators: a meta-analysis. Psychological bulletin, 132(6):823.
Matthew Henderson, Ivan Vulić, Iñigo Casanueva,
Paweł Budzianowski, Daniela Gerz, Sam Coope,
Georgios Spithourakis, Tsung-Hsien Wen, Nikola
Mrkšić, and Pei-Hao Su. 2019. PolyResponse: A
rank-based approach to task-oriented dialogue with
application in restaurant search and booking. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP): System Demonstrations, pages 181–186, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Becky Inkster, Shubhankar Sarda, and Vinod Subramanian. 2018. An empathy-driven, conversational artificial intelligence agent (wysa) for digital mental well-being: real-world data evaluation
mixed-methods study. JMIR mHealth and uHealth,
6(11):e12106.
Kira Kretzschmar, Holly Tyroll, Gabriela Pavarini, Arianna Manzini, Ilina Singh, and NeurOx Young Peoples Advisory Group. 2019. Can your phone be your
therapist? young peoples ethical perspectives on the
use of fully automated conversational agents (chatbots) in mental health support. Biomedical informatics insights, 11:1178222619829083.

James W Pennebaker and Cindy K Chung. 2011. Expressive writing: Connections to physical and mental health. Oxford University Press.
James W Pennebaker, Martha E Francis, and Roger J
Booth. 2001. Linguistic inquiry and word count:
Liwc 2001. Mahway: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 71(2001):2001.
J.W. Pennebaker. 1997b. Writing about emotional experiences as a therapeutic process. Psychological
Science, (8):162–166.
K. Resnicow, PJ Teixeira, and GC Williams. 2017. Efficient allocation of public health and behavior change
resources: The ”difficulty by motivation” matrix.
American Journal of Public Health, 107(1):55–57.
Peter Mark Roget. 1911. Roget’s Thesaurus of English
Words and Phrases... TY Crowell Company.
Stephen Rollnick and Jeff Allison. 2004. Motivational
interviewing. The essential handbook of treatment
and prevention of alcohol problems, pages 105–116.
Leigh Small, Deborah Anderson, Kimberly SidoraArcoleo, and Bonnie Gance-Cleveland. 2009. Pediatric nurse practitioners’ assessment and management of childhood overweight/obesity: Results from
1999 and 2005 cohort surveys. Journal of Pediatric
Health Care, 23(4):231–241.
Stefanie P Spera, Eric D Buhrfeind, and James W
Pennebaker. 1994. Expressive writing and coping
with job loss. Academy of management journal,
37(3):722–733.
Carlo Strapparava, Alessandro Valitutti, et al. 2004.
Wordnet affect: An affective extension of wordnet.
In Lrec, volume 4, page 40. Citeseer.

V. Vine, R.L. Boyd, and J.W. Pennebaker. 2020. Feelings in many words: Natural emotion vocabularies
as windows on distress and well-being. Nature Communications.
Janyce Wiebe, Theresa Wilson, and Claire Cardie.
2005. Annotating expressions of opinions and emotions in language. Language resources and evaluation, 39(2-3):165–210.

Appendices

Figure 3: Average number of words in each response
grouped by prompt order, divided by the average number of words in each response overall. Equal number
of words is at 1, marked with the line. Order of the
prompts are indicated by first letter: A = Advice to Others, G = Grateful, L = Looking Forward.

Figure 4: Histogram of the prompt response durations
in seconds.

Figure 5: Histogram of the prompt response lengths in
tokens.

Order
Advice to Others,Looking Forward,Grateful
Looking Forward,Grateful,Advice to Others
Grateful,Advice to Others,Looking Forward
Looking Forward,Advice to Others,Grateful
Grateful,Looking Forward,Advice to Others
Advice to Others,Grateful,Looking Forward

Sessions

Life Sat.

Stressb

Stressa

Personal

Meaning

∆ Stress

32
29
36
29
22
25

5.00
5.10
5.75
5.41
5.27
5.04

3.66
3.62
3.03
3.93
3.73
3.76

3.53
3.17
3.03
2.83
3.59
3.40

5.53
5.31
5.39
5.17
5.05
4.56

5.06
5.21
5.53
5.24
4.77
4.92

-0.12
-0.45
0.00
-1.10
-0.14
-0.36

Table 6: Average ratings grouped by order that the prompts appeared. All sessions begin with “Major Issues.”

Figure 6: Histograms of the number of words of each
user message preceding the generic reflections, grouping users whose stressed increased and decreased.

Figure 7: Histograms of the number of words of each
user message after the generic reflections, grouping
users whose stressed increased and decreased.

Figure 8: Top: before and after stress ratings by users whose stress increased after interaction with C.P. Middle:
before and after stress ratings by users whose stress remained the same after interaction with C.P. Bottom: before
and after stress ratings by users whose stress decreased after interaction with C.P. The bars are ordered by the
magnitude of change (top and bottom), or by the static stress rating (middle).

