A computational approach to aid clinicians in selecting anti-viral drugs
for COVID-19 trials
Aanchal Mongia1 , Sanjay Kr. Saha2 , Emilie Chouzenoux3∗ & Angshul Majumdar4∗
1

Dept. of CSE, IIIT - Delhi, India, 110020
Department of Community Medicine, IPGMER Kolkata
3
CVN, Inria Saclay, Univ. Paris Saclay, 91190 Gif-sur-Yvette, France
4
Dept. of ECE, IIIT - Delhi, India, 110020
∗
Corresponding authors contact/Email:
angshul@iiitd.ac.in, emilie.chouzenoux@centralesupelec.fr

arXiv:2007.01902v2 [q-bio.QM] 31 Jul 2020

2

3 July, 2020
Abstract
Motivation: COVID-19 has fast-paced drug re-positioning for its treatment. This work builds computational
models for the same. The aim is to assist clinicians with a tool for selecting prospective antiviral treatments.
Since the virus is known to mutate fast, the tool is likely to help clinicians in selecting the right set of antivirals
for the mutated isolate.
Results: The main contribution of this work is a manually curated database publicly shared, comprising
of existing associations between viruses and their corresponding antivirals. The database gathers similarity
information using the chemical structure of drugs and the genomic structure of viruses. Along with this database,
we make available a set of state-of-the-art computational drug re-positioning tools based on matrix completion.
The tools are first analysed on a standard set of experimental protocols for drug target interactions. The best
performing ones are applied for the task of re-positioning antivirals for COVID-19. These tools select six drugs
out of which four are currently under various stages of trial, namely Remdesivir (as a cure), Ribavarin (in
combination with others for cure), Umifenovir (as a prophylactic and cure) and Sofosbuvir (as a cure). Another
unanimous prediction is Tenofovir alafenamide, which is a novel tenofovir prodrug developed in order to improve
renal safety when compared to the counterpart tenofovir disoproxil. Both are under trail, the former as a cure
and the latter as a prophylactic. These results establish that the computational methods are in sync with the
state-of-practice. We also demonstrate how the selected drugs change as the SARS-Cov-2 mutates over time,
suggesting the importance of such a tool in drug prediction.
Availability: The dataset along with the solution is made available publicly at https://github.com/
aanchalMongia/DVA and the prediction tool named DVApred (Drug-virus association prediction server) with a
user-friendly interface is available as a webserver at http://dva.salsa.iiitd.edu.in.
Contact: angshul@iiitd.ac.in, emilie.chouzenoux@centralesupelec.fr

1

Introduction

There has been an exponential rise in the total active cases and deaths due to COVID-19 (COrona VIrus Disease2019) since the first case in Wuhan, China in December, 2019 [4]. The disease results in severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), which is known to be highly transmittable and has spread across more than
100 countries. This pandemic has wreaked havoc on people’s social life, the global economy, and most importantly
the health of the human race. The death numbers are frightening, confirming about 467K deaths worldwide till
mid-June, 2020 [4].
As medical professionals are striving to save lives, research scientists specialized in drug development, are racing
against time to develop a vaccine against SARS-CoV-2 [24]. The investigation involved for developing a vaccine
(or even a new drug) is time consuming, requiring several phases of extensive trials. Experts believe that it is
highly unlikely that a vaccine will be ready before a year or more. In such circumstances the best bet may be
to re-position existing drugs for treating COVID-19. This is a well known approach where existing drugs (which
1

have already been approved for release in the market) are investigated for new disease/s [6]. Drug re-positioning
is usually cost effective and fast (compared to developing a new drug / vaccine) since its effects are well studied.
One classic example for drug re-positioning is Chlorocyclizine , which was initially developed as an anti-allergic but
later found to act against the hepatitis C virus [27]. Another example is Imatinib mesylate (sold under the trade
name Gleevec), it was originally used as a treatment for leukemia but later was found to be effective against genes
associated with gastrointestinal-stromal tumors [36, 22].
Given the relatively large drug-virus association space, manual investigation in wet-labs is not a scalable strategy.
Putting all the anti-virals in trials for treating corona is not very feasible either; especially because time is of
essence. In such a scenario, computational approaches can help; they can be used to prune down the search space
for the drugs to be investigated [19]. Practically, such approaches could also assist the clinicians to come up with
treatments for rapidly mutating viruses by pruning the anti-viral drug space (see Discussion section). Specifically,
a computational approach which takes into account the genomic structure of the latest viral isolate or its similarity
with the previously occuring strains of viruses would be helpful in deciding the treatment. With this objective, we
have manually curated a comprehensive database called DVA (Drug Virus Association), having the approved (antiviral) drug-virus associations in the literature along with the similarity measures associated with drugs (chemical
structure similarity) and viruses (genome sequence similarity). To the best of our knowledge there is no existing
database for drug virus association.
The DVA database we propose in this work lies the foundation for further computational studies on this topic.
There can be various methodologies to predict drug virus association. The prediction problem can be approached
via feature-based classification models, neighborhood models, matrix completion models, network diffusion models
etc. A recent empirical study on well established drug-target interaction databases exhibit the best prediction
performance by matrix completion models [19]. In computer science, matrix completion is used routinely in recommendation systems. The general problem of drug-disease association can actually be thought of as a recommendation
system, where drugs are being recommended for treating a disease. Given the success of matrix completion techniques in drug target interaction, we deploy state-of-the-art matrix completion techniques on our curated DVA
database. We perform a thorough comparative analysis of those for predicting assessed drug-disease associations.
Then, we apply the methodology for pruning the search space of potential candidates for COVID-19 trial drugs.
Finally, we show how the tool helps in selecting drugs as the virus mutates.
Our objective is to make our solution user friendly for clinicians and scientists. In pursuit of this goal, we have
made the solution (dataset and algorithms) available as a webserver. The webserver can be used in two ways. First,
given the genome of the virus, the webserver can predict (and rank) the probable antivirals. Second, given a drug
and a virus, it can output a normalized score depicting how effective the drug will be against the virus.

2

Results

We assess the performance of different matrix completion techniques in this section. The techniques have been
described in the Methods section. Six matrix completion methods were used, which can be categorized into three
families provided below.
• Basic frameworks (MF: Matrix factorization [41] and MC: Matrix completion or Nuclear norm minimization
[41])
• Deep frameworks (DMF: Deep matrix factorization) [38],
• Graph regularized frameworks (GRMF: graph regularized matrix factorization [20], GRMC: graph regularized
matrix completion [39], GRBMC: graph regularized binary matrix completion [37])
Matrix factorization (MF) is the traditional matrix completion method which factorizes the data matrix into two
latent factor matrices (tall and short) and the algorithm recovers these factor matrices to recover the original matrix.
Since this problem is non-convex, it may not converge to a global minimum of the cost function. Nuclear-norm
minimization based matrix completion (MC) was proposed as a (mathematically) better alternative; it directly
recovers the matrix by penalising its nuclear norm (convex surrogate of rank). Deep matrix factorization (DMF)
generalises MF to more than two factors. None of the techniques mentioned so far can take advantage of genomic
structure of the viruses or chemical structure of the drugs. The said pieces of information can be incorporated
into the graph regularized matrix completion techniques (GRMF, GRMC, GRBMC). These techniques have been
explained in detail in the Methods section.

2

2.1

Overview: DVA prediction

The typical anti-viral drug discovery process involves genomic and biophysical understanding of the virus. It aims to
target the enzymes or peptides involved in the viral replication cycle and takes years for successful clinical validation.
Other approaches involve screening all the broad-spectrum anti-viral drugs or chemical libraries comprising large
numbers of existing compounds/databases (having information on transcriptional signatures in different cell lines)
to be further evaluated by standard anti-viral assays [57]. In view to assist acceleration of this process (by pruning
down the search space), we create and share a publicly available DVA database, along with a number of matrix
completion techniques (mentioned above) for drug-virus association prediction.

Figure 1: Schematic diagram depicting the DVA framework
The originality of the proposed work lies in the formalization of the drug-virus association prediction as a
matrix completion problem, without the need for any anti-viral assays. Such a computational approach requires
the chemical structure of the drugs and, in case of graph-regularized matrix completion techniques, the genome of
the viruses, or existing associations otherwise. Figure 1 depicts the schematic flow of the proposed work involving
data curation and implementation overview.

2.2

Empirical Evaluation

In this sub-section, we carry out extensive experimental protocol to illustrate and compare the ability of the
different methods to retrieve the drug-disease associations available in our curated dataset. The protocol dictates
three variants of 10-fold cross-validation setting (CV). In the first setting CV1 (cross validation 1), 10 % of the
associations selected at random are left out as testing set. This allows to assess each algorithm’s ability to predict
associations between existing drugs and viruses. To evaluate an algorithm for its ability to predict association for
novel drugs and viruses i.e. those which have no association information, we use two other (more stringent) CV
3

settings. In CV2 and CV3, 10 % of the complete virus and drug entities selected at random are left out as test set
respectively.
The standard metrics for evaluation are the AUC (Area under the Receiver Operating Characteristic curve) and
AUPR (Area under the precision-recall curve). AUC is more common in machine learning literature, it assumes
that the classes are evenly balanced. Problems in drug-disease association have highly imbalanced classes, in such
a scenario the AUPR is a more appropriate metric for evaluation [9, 20].
Table 1 shows how each of the 6 tested algorithms performs in retrieving the associations. A clear observation from the experiments is that the graph regularized-based matrix completion algorithms that incorporate the
similarity information associated with the drugs and viruses, perform fairly well giving an AUC greater or equal
than 0.83 in CV1. The best performing algorithm (GRBMC) exhibits an AUC and AUPR of 0.88 and 0.54 respectively. Predicting the associations for novel drugs and viruses also have a reasonable performance with the
best AUC/AUPR of 0.81/0.44 and 0.73/0.31 by GRBMC and GRMF. It can be noted that the standard matrix
completion methods, which do not take into account the metadata, fail to learn from the association data giving a
near-random performance as far as the prediction on novel viruses is concerned, depicting how very important the
similarity information is.
Metric
AUC
AUPR

MC
0.5959
0.3238

MF
0.6753
0.2656

DMF
0.6974
0.2615

GRMF
0.8652
0.4812

GRMC
0.8279
0.4445

GRBMC
0.8834
0.5220

CV2

AUC
AUPR

0.4909
0.1106

0.5033
0.0504

0.5704
0.0855

0.7346
0.3112

0.6705
0.2951

0.6632
0.2746

CV3

AUC
AUPR

0.5438
0.0538

0.5215
0.0637

0.4529
0.0824

0.7806
0.4265

0.7507
0.4333

0.8181
0.4383

CV1

Table 1: Results for association prediction for all techniques under the 3 cross validation settings.

2.3

Association prediction for new drugs

DVA database and its associated computational tools can also be used on new drugs without any previously known
virus association information. For evaluating this ability, we identified in our database all the drugs which are
known to interact with only one virus (drugs associated with a single virus only) and hide that association to the
methods. This allows us to assess the performance of the algorithms in predicting viruses associated with the new
drugs in the database.
We hide the only virus corresponding to each of the 76 drugs (with only a single virus associated with it) and
run matrix completion to predict candidate viruses for these drugs. The drugs for which the test virus associated
with it is the top-ranked virus predicted by the algorithm would have the maximum precision value (MPV) of 1.
The number and percentage of drugs with a maximum precision value of 1 are reported in Table 2.
Nearly 34 % (26/76) of single association drugs with a maximum precision of 1 were predicted using GRMF.
Other graph regularized frameworks show comparable performance in terms of predicting drugs with MPV of 1.

# drugs with MPV=1
% drugs with MPV=1

MC
2
2.6316

MF
4
5.2632

DMF
4
5.2632

GRMF
26
34.2105

GRMC
22
28.9474

GRBMC
8
10.5263

Table 2: Number and percentage of drugs predicted with MPV=1 by the matrix completion methods.

2.4

SARS-CoV-2 prediction

In this experiment, we add the SARS-CoV-2 sample in our database by providing its ONF based d2* similarity [5]
in the virus similarity matrix.
We then apply the matrix completion algorithms to predict the associations and rank prediction scores corresponding to SARS-CoV-2 to predict the top 10 recommended drugs.
4

Technique
GRMF

GRMC

GRBMC

SARS-Cov-2
Remdesivir
Ribavirin
Sofosbuvir
Umifenovir
Taribavirin
Tenofovir alafenamide
Ibuprofen
Pleconaril
Geldanamycin
Vidarabine
Remdesivir
Ribavirin
Sofosbuvir
Taribavirin
Tenofovir alafenamide
Vidarabine
Telaprevir
Boceprevir
Simeprevir
Palivizumab
Remdesivir
Ribavirin
Sofosbuvir
Umifenovir
Taribavirin
Vidarabine
Brivudine
Tenofovir alafenamide
Paritaprevir
Peginterferon alfacon-1

Table 3: Top-10 drugs predicted for SARS-Cov-2 by the DVA computational methods.
As can be seen from the results of section 2.2 (Table 1), MC, MF and DMF often yield considerably worse results
than their graph regularized counterparts (GRMF, GRMC and GRBMC). Such poor performance of non-graph
regularized versions of matrix completion methods could be explained as they do not incorporate any knowledge
about the genomic structure of the viruses and the chemical structure of the drugs. Since the three graph-based
methods perform reasonably well in the prediction task, we consider these techniques for the drug prediction on
the novel coronavirus. The top-10 drugs they predicted have been reported in Table 3 (ranked by their predicted
scores). Drugs highlighted with blue text are unanimously predicted drugs by the three considered matrix completion
techniques and those in red text are predicted by two methods. We also highlighted with yellow cells the drugs
which are under trial/investigation as a potential cure/prophylactic against COVID-19.
It can be seen that the three techniques have consistently and unanimously selected six drugs, namely Remdesivir,
Ribavarin, Sofosbuvir, Taribavirin, Tenofovir alafenamide and Vidarabine. Umifenovir has been recommended by
two (GRMF and GRBMC) out of three techniques. Amongst these recommendations, Remdesivir [7], Ribavarin
[29, 56], Sofosbuvir [46] and Umifenovir [53] are under clinical trials. Taribavirin is similar to Ribavirin but it is not
approved by the FDA. Tenofovir alafemanide (an antiretroviral for HIV-1) is on undergoing trial [18]. GRMF has
additionally selected Ibuprofen which is expected to be investigated in UK [2, 35]. The fact that three techniques
unanimously select the aforementioned drugs make us confident about these recommendation results.

2.5

Predictions evolution with mutating novel coronavirus

In the previous sub-section, we have established that the results from our models are mostly in sync with clinical
practice. In this sub-section, we will demonstrate how our proposed approach can be of help to clinicians.
All the results generated so far have been generated using the reference sequence of the SARS-Cov-2 strain
5

(collected in December, 2019 in Wuhan). The novel coronavirus is rapidly mutating [12]. In such a scenario,
it is necessary to select drugs that are effective against the mutated strain. While mutating, the virus isolates
may develop resistance to previous drugs used for its treatment. Our model may be of help to clinicians in this
respect. Before proposing a treatment regime (trial, for e.g.) for COVID-19 treatment, the practitioner may use our
approach to check the drugs selected for the particular isolate of novel coronavirus. In Table 4, we have experimented
with three isolates of the novel coronavirus (collected over an interval of 2 months), in addition to the reference
sequence (collected in December 2019). Those three isolates have been collected in February (from USA), April
(from Australia) and June (from India).
One can note from the Table 4 that the selected drugs change with mutations. Baloxavir marboxil was not
selected even once for the reference sequence from December 2019, but has been selected by two methods for the
February isolate. A recent pre-print [34] reports the results of this antiviral on COVID-19 patients. The drug
Ibuprofen, was selected by one of the methods for the December reference sequence, it was not selected for the
February isolate, then it was selected by two methods for the April isolate and selected by all three for the June
isolate. It may be worthy to note that lipid Ibuprofen is being considered in a trial in UK from starting June,
2020 [2]. Similarly, Pleconaril has been selected for by all three methods for the most recent (June) isolate, it was
selected by only one of the techniques for the reference sequence (December) and was not selected for the February
or June sequences. Pleconaril, although developed for treating enterovirus and rhinovirus, is not FDA approved.
Rilpivirine and Etravirine are two antiretrovirals developed for treating HIV positive subjects. Both of them have
been predicted by all three methods in the latest isolate, but not in the previous isolates or in the reference sequence.
To the best of our knowledge, this antiretroviral is not under study for COVID-19 trials. Note that Vidarabine,
which was getting predicted for the reference sequence (albeit wrongly) has not been predicted from the later ones.
Based on this discussion, we can see that how the mutations in genomic structure results in different predictions of
drugs. Since the novel coronavirus is mutating, it may be judicious to account for the structure of the latest isolate
while deciding the treatments to be put in trial. In such a case, our model may be of help to clinicians.

2.6

Execution time

We recorded the time taken by each of the matrix completion algorithms for a single run (Table 5), on a single
core machine with a clock speed of 2.8 GHz, 64 GB RAM (Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU E5-1603 v3 processor). All the
methods have relatively low computational requirements. Matrix factorization methods are faster than the nuclear
norm minimization based techniques, with a difference of few seconds. Such difference may not be practically
significant, given the nature of our problem as an improved anti-viral prediction in pandemic is much more crucial
than the running time in the order of seconds.

3

Discussion

We have collected a comprehensive dataset comprising of all the anti-viral drugs which act against viruses known to
infect humans, along with the similarity information associated with the drugs and the viruses (see Methods section).
On this database, we deploy state-of-the-art drug target interaction techniques based on matrix completion.

3.1

General Discussion

The drug-virus associations and the similarity information are assembled as three matrices: drug-virus association
matrix (Y ), drug similarity matrix (Sd ) and virus similarity matrix (Sv ). Several matrix completion methods have
then been implemented and compared. The matrix completion methods which are not designed to incorporate the
similarity information take association matrix as input (assuming it to be a partially filled matrix from which the full
low-rank association matrix would be recovered) along with the masking operator which stores information on the
position of train and test indices. On the other hand, the graph regularized frameworks utilize similarity information
and give an improved prediction performance in the cross-validation evaluation (Best AUC=0.88, AUPR=0.52).
The graph regularized matrix completion methods are not only capable of predicting associations between existing
drugs and viruses but can also take into account novel viruses and drugs for which no association information
is known (as can be seen in the latter two cross-validation settings). The similarity information for such novel
drugs/viruses (Sv and Sv ) can be added to the metadata using the chemical structure and sequence information of
the drug and virus respectively. The validity of the proposed pipeline is illustrated by the fact that 4 out of the
6 drugs unanimously predicted in top-10 prediction by the graph regularized methods are already under trial for
treating SARS-Cov-2.

6

Technique
GRMF

GRMC

GRBMC

SARS-Cov-2: february
Remdesivir
Ribavirin
Umifenovir
Taribavirin
Sofosbuvir
Baloxavir marboxil
Geldanamycin
Tenofovir alafenamide
Tecovirimat
Peramivir
Remdesivir
Umifenovir
Ribavirin
Taribavirin
Sofosbuvir
Vidarabine
Tenofovir alafenamide
Nelfinavir
Amprenavir
Boceprevir
Remdesivir
Ribavirin
Umifenovir
Taribavirin
Sofosbuvir
Paritaprevir
Tenofovir alafenamide
Atazanavir
Baloxavir marboxil
Favipiravir

SARS-Cov-2: april
Remdesivir
Sofosbuvir
Umifenovir
Ribavirin
Tenofovir alafenamide
Ibuprofen
Pleconaril
Hydroxychloroquine
Valomaciclovir
Dexamethasone
Remdesivir
Sofosbuvir
Tenofovir alafenamide
Boceprevir
Telaprevir
Palivizumab
Simeprevir
Ribavirin
Umifenovir
Ibuprofen
Remdesivir
Umifenovir
Sofosbuvir
Ribavirin
Taribavirin
Paritaprevir
Brivudine
Vidarabine
Daclatasvir
Beclabuvir

SARS-Cov-2: june
Remdesivir
Umifenovir
Pleconaril
Ibuprofen
Sofosbuvir
Rilpivirine
Etravirine
Tenofovir alafenamide
Rimantadine
Ribavirin
Umifenovir
Remdesivir
Ibuprofen
Pleconaril
Sofosbuvir
Chloroquine
Etravirine
Rilpivirine
Tenofovir alafenamide
Nelfinavir
Umifenovir
Remdesivir
Pleconaril
Ibuprofen
Sofosbuvir
Rilpivirine
Etravirine
Ribavirin
Tenofovir alafenamide
Trifluridine

Table 4: Top-10 drugs predicted for three isolates of SARS-Cov-2 (collected at an interval of 2 months)
by the DVA computational methods.

Time (sec)

MC
0.0859

MF
0.0149

DMF
0.0529

GRMF
0.0457

GRMC
10.55

GRBMC
5.22

Table 5: Running time of the DVA computational methods.

3.2

Drug recommendations for the novel coronavirus

From the prediction provided by graph regularized methods, we observe a consensus over the recommendation of six
drugs, namely Remdesivir, Ribavarin, Sofosbuvir, Taribavirin, Tenofovir alafenamide and Vidarabine (7th common
drug being Umifenovir recommended by 2 models). Note that Umifenovir and Remdesivir are investigational as
per FDA, Umifenovir is approved in Russia and China and Remdesivir has obtained approval for emergency use
by FDA. Researchers working on Ribavarin trials argue that since it is an established drug with ready availability
and established supply chains, it is worth to investigate its potency against COVID-19. In a study published in
April, 2020, Remdesivir was found to shorten the recovery time (median recovery time of 11 days, 31 % faster
recovery time than patients who received placebo) in adults with COVID-19 infection in clinical trials involving
1063 hospitalized patients in United states [7]. It has received Emergency Use Authorization (EUA) by the US
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for patients hospitalized with severe disease [21]. Umifenovir (arbidol) is
also being investigated as a potential prophylactic agent for the prevention of COVID-19 [53]. Ribavirin [29, 56], in
combination with other antiviral drugs has recently been studied for the effectiveness and safety of different antiviral
regimens (combination therapies) for the treatment of COVID-19. Sofosbuvir is used specifically for hepatitis C

7

infection. Currently it is under trial for treating COVID-19 patients. This is because, superposition of the hepatitis
C virus polymerase bound to sofosbuvir, with the SARS-CoV polymerase shows that the residues that bind to the
drug are present in the latter [46].
The clinical trial of Tenofovir disoproxil as a prophylactic, is based on recent albeit sparse literature that shows
that RNA synthesis nucleos(t)ide analogue inhibitors, acting as viral RNA chain terminators, like Tenofovir disoproxil, abacavir or lamivudine, amongst others, could have an effect against SARS-CoV-2 [3]. Our algorithm selects
Tenofovir alafenamide, which is less harmful to the kidneys than Tenofovir disoproxil. Tenofovir alafenamide is
known to have large antiviral efficacy at ten times lesser dose than Tenofovir disoproxil. It is also under investigation as a combination therapy (emtricitabine/tenofovir-alafenamide and lopinavir/ritonavir) to treat COVID-19
patients [18].

3.3

Symptomatic treatment options from unanimously predicted drugs

In this sub-section, our objective is to establish that the drugs selected by our algorithms for SARS-Cov-2 are
clinically sensible predictions, in the sense that they are known to be effective against a significant number of the
COVID-19 symptoms. The Table 3 shows that out of the top ten selections, six are common across all the three
techniques and another (Umifenovir) have been predicted by two out of three. Although Vidarabine has been
selected by all three models, it is an antiviral effective against DNA viruses. Since the novel coronavirus is an RNA
virus this antiviral is not supposed to work. We have discussed the rest of the six antivirals in Supplementary
section 1. The descriptions have been primarily taken from drugbank.ca.

Figure 2: List of COVID-19 symptoms treated by drugs unanimously predicted by the three graph-regularized
matrix completion methods.
Symptoms of different virus infections have been discussed in Supplemetary section 2. From a symptomatic
aspect, Umifenovir, Remdesivir and Ribavarin covers most of the symptoms for COVID-19. All of them are now
under clinical trials as discussed in the previous subsection.

3.4

Effect of viral mutations on treatments

Furthermore, significance of such computational models for predicting anti-viral therapeutics would correlate with
the rate at which a virus mutates. RNA viruses (like HIV, flu virus) are known to mutate at a much faster rate than
the DNA viruses [47], helping them to evade the human immune system and develop drug resistance. SARS-CoV-2
is no exception and has been mutating over the past few months [42]. Clinically keeping up with the evolving viruses
8

and drug resistance could be a major challenge for development of an anti-viral treatment [30]. Hence, artificial
intelligence, and in particular the presented matrix completion techniques, could help the clinicians to prune down
the drug space for viral strains which have been mutating rapidly and avoid unnecessary testing on drugs for the
new viral strain/s.

3.5

Conclusion

Computational techniques have the inherent advantage of learning from the data (which can be huge) and scale to
a large number of drugs and viruses and hence be of immense importance to the clinicians by narrowing down the
search space for the clinical trials to be carried out.
We would like to emphasize that the proposed DVA database and methods are not particular to the novel
coronavirus. Such computational approaches have the general capability to help for identification of drugs which
might be effective against a broad spectrum of viruses [28], or the viruses which can be targeted by multiple drugs
(since many drugs could target specific elements of viral replication) [48]. We believe that the proposed work will
pave the way for more scientific ideas for anti-viral drug re-positioning and assist clinicians in the process.

4
4.1

Methods
Drug-virus associations database

The proposed DVA dataset aims at being exhaustive. It compiles various existing sources, housing together all the
anti-viral drugs proved clinically to be effective against viruses infecting humans. We believe such resource would
be highly useful for analysing and proposing anti-virals not only for the novel coronaviruses but other viruses too.
Along with that, it may also be used to computationally identify viruses that a newly discovered drug may target.
The associated metadata (information about the drugs and viruses) may also help clinicians in manual analysis and
having a deeper insight.
All the associations corresponding to anti-viral drugs clinically shown to act against human host viruses have
been assembled from standard DrugBank database [55] (https://www.drugbank.ca/categories/DBCAT000066).
To ensure that the database is fully comprehensive, other literature works [45, 17, 50, 13, 23, 16, 49, 54, 31]
and resources such as ViPR [43] were also scanned for any additional drug-viral associations. ViPR or NIAID
Virus Pathogen Database and Analysis Resource (http://www.viprbrc.org/) is a repository of data and analysis
tools for virology research [43] capturing various types of information derived from comparative genomics analysis
and visualization tools. It has antiviral drug information (for 21 viral species) derived imported from DrugBank
(https://www.drugbank.ca/) [55].
The drug-virus indications have been stored (see Supplementary data section) and processed in a matrix
form of size m × n (m being no of drugs in the database and n being the number of viruses) to be used as input for
any of the 6 matrix completion algorithms we made available in our repository.
The DrugBank Identifier (DrugBank ID) of the anti-viral drugs involved is considered as the unique key for the
drugs, obtained from DrugBank vocabulary (https://www.drugbank.ca/releases/latest#open-data). Along
with the viral association information, we also store the target pathway and mechanism of action of each drug for
quick reference in any further investigation. Apart from this, each drug is mapped to its corresponding KEGG Identifier (KEGG ID) from the KEGG Compound/KEGG Drug database (https://www.genome.jp/kegg/drug/, https:
//www.genome.jp/kegg/compound/) of the KEGG (Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes) [32]. The KEGG
IDs were taken from the linking file provided at https://www.drugbank.ca/releases/latest#external-links
[55] or manually added in the case of drugs missing in the linking file.
Each virus is identified by an acronym assigned to it (in case of no acronym, full virus name is used). The viral
family, genome type, transmission route and incubation period is also available in the virus metadata file along
with the accession number of the complete genomic sequence of the viruses fetched from NCBI (National Center for
Biotechnology Information) Viral genome browser https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/GenomesGroup.cgi
[1]).

4.2

Similarity computation

To integrate the similarity information to the drug-virus associations, we have computed similarities between the
drugs based on their chemical structures and between the viruses using their complete genomic sequences.

9

• DRUG SIMILARITY: All the DrugBank IDs were mapped to KEGG IDs of the corresponding drug/compound
in the KEGG database [32]. The chemical structure similarity was measured between the drugs by computing
the SIMCOMP score [26] based on the maximum common substructures between the chemical structure of
the compounds using the KEGG API page at GenomeNet (https://www.genome.jp/tools/gn_tools_api.
html). The drugs for which the SIMCOMP score was less than the set cutoff (0.001) and the drugs with no
KEGG IDs available were assigned a similarity score of 1 to themselves and 0 to other drugs in the dataset.
• VIRUS SIMILARITY: The d2∗ distance based on ONF (Oligonucleotide frequency) measure between the DNA
sequences was shown to be the best amongst various other ONF metrics with several k-mers length in host
prediction accuracy at the genus level [5]. Hence, we compute d2* dissimilarity/distance (at k=6) between
the viral genome sequences obtained from NCBI [1]. The reference sequences of viruses were saved in FASTA
format to be used by the distance computation software (https://github.com/jessieren/VirHostMatcher)
proposed by [5]. The d2∗ distance was subtracted from 1 to obtain the similarity measure.
For the viruses with segmented structure (Influenza A virus, Influenza B virus, Influenza C virus, Lassa mammarenavirus), the coding sequence in the nucleotide sequence of each genomic segment (taken in decreasing
order of length was taken) was combined to form the complete viral sequence.

4.3

Proposed method: Matrix completion

In this subsection, we describe each of the matrix completion algorithms used (www.github.com/AanchalMongia/
DVA), along with their mathematical formulations and resolution strategies.
Let Xm×n be the complete drug-virus association matrix (with m drugs and n viruses) with binary entries (1
denoting that the drug is known to act against the virus and 0 denoting no association). Here X is the matrix to
be recovered from its sampled (partially known) entries in Y . Let M denote the masking operator (elementwise
multiplied to X) having 1’s at positions where associations are known and 0 otherwise. Then, the matrix completion
problem can be formulated as searching for X satisfying:
Y = M (X),

(1)

under specific constraints. In particular, it is typically assumed that similar drugs act in a similar manner, hence
X to be recovered (from Y and M ) is of low-rank.
4.3.1

Matrix factorization (MF)

The most straightforward technique of solving low-rank matrix completion is matrix factorization, where the data
matrix Xm×n is decomposed into two latent factor matrices Um×k and Vk×n , where k denotes the number of latent
(hidden) factors deciding if a drug is associated with a virus or not. X is recovered by solving for U and V in the
following minimization problem:
min ||Y − M (U V )||2F .
(2)
U,V

The above problem is solved in an alternating manner, by first decoupling the mask using a majorization-minimization
technique [51, 14] and then using alternating least squares method [25] to obtain U and V . The complete algorithm
is described in [41].
4.3.2

Deep matrix factorization (DMF)

An extension of matrix factorization has been proposed motivated by the success of deep dictionary learning [52],
where the data matrix X is decomposed into multiple factor matrices (analog to multiple layers) to capture more
complex hidden features in the data. The formulation of the minimization problem in the case of 2-layer matrix
factorization is given below:
min ||Y − M (U1 U2 V )||2F such that U1 ≥ 0, U2 ≥ 0.

U1 ,U2 ,V

(3)

The above problem is solve alternatively. The minimization with respect to variables U1 and V , is done in a similar
way to that of matrix factorization, while the update on U2 can be obtained as shown in [40].

10

4.3.3

Graph regularized matrix factorization (GRMF)

Another variant of Matrix factorization has been proposed to incorporate metadata associated with the row and
column entities (drug and virus similarities in this case) [20]. Here, the drug and virus entities form the nodes of two
separate graphs and the similarity between them is assumed to be the weights between the nodes. Regularization
is imposed by adding graph Laplacian penalties to the cost function of matrix factorization as shown below:
min ||Y − M (U V )||2F + µ1 tr(U> Ld U) + µ2 tr(VLv V> ),
U,V

(4)

where µ1 > 0 and µ2 > 0 are coefficients penalizing the graph regularization Laplacian terms and tr denotes the
trace of the matrix. Ld = Dd − Sd and Lv = Dv − Sv are the graph Laplacians [15] for Sd (row/drug similarity
matrix) and Sv (column/virus similarity matrix), respectively, and Ddii = Σj Sdij and Dvii = Σj Svij are the associated
degree matrices. A resolution technique for the above formulation has been shown in [20].
4.3.4

Matrix completion (MC)

Matrix factorization based approach leads to a non-convex minimization problem and hence rarely benefits from
global convergence guarantees. To limit the space of minimizers, it may be useful to impose a low-rank constraint on
the solution X. Since rank minimization is still an NP-hard problem, it was proposed to relax the above constraint
to its closest convex surrogate by making use of the nuclear norm penalty [11, 10]. The formulation for the resulting
nuclear norm minimization problem (referred to as matrix completion by the authors) is:
min ||X||∗ such that Y=M(X) .
X

(5)

The above problem can be solved alternatively, by invoking majorization-minimization arguments [51] to deal with
the mask operator M and by applying thresholding operations on the singular values to process the nuclear norm
term [41].
4.3.5

Graph regularized matrix completion (GRMC)

Just like matrix factorization, nuclear norm minimization based matrix completion can also be graph regularized
by incorporating graph Laplacian penalties to take metadata/similarity information into account. The formulation
for the minimization problem is given by:
min ||Y − M (X)||2F + λ||X||∗ + µ1 tr(X> Ld X) + µ2 tr(XLv X> ).
X

(6)

The above formulation can either be solved using ADMM (alternating direction method of multipliers) [8, 33] as
was done in [39] (referred as GRMC here) or by explicitly taking care of the constraint that the recovered values
should be in the range [0, 1]. If the latter range constraint is taken into account, we obtain then a new variant called
graph regularized binary matrix completion. The minimization with respect to X can be solved by making use
of the PPXA (parallel proximal algorithm) [44]. Such approach allows to decouple the constraints by introducing
proxy variables and then solving each subproblem in a parallel fashion as shown in [37] (referred as GRBMC here).

4.4

Setting of hyperparameters

The stepsize, regularization parameters and latent factor dimensions, for the above techniques have been tuned
using cross-validation on training set (after hiding 10 % of the data) in each of the three cross-validation settings
(see Section 2.2). The parameters obtained after extensive cross-validation on the setting CV2 (randomly hiding
the virus entities) have been further used in predicting drugs for SARS-Cov-2 and the corresponding isolates (see
Sections 2.4 and 2.5). Similarly, the parameters selected for the setting CV3 (randomly hiding drug entities) have
been used to evaluate the performance of the approaches in Section 2.3.

References
[1] NCBI. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/.
[2] New trial starts in UK to see if ibuprofen can help prevent severe breathing problems in Covid-19 patients.
https://www.thejournal.ie/ibuprofen-trial-coronavirus-5113390-Jun2020/.
11

[3] Randomized Clinical Trial for the Prevention of SARS-CoV-2 Infection (COVID-19) in Healthcare Personnel
(EPICOS). https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04334928.
[4] Coronavirus Update (Live)- Worldometer, 2019 (accessed June 22, 2020). https://www.worldometers.info/
coronavirus/.
[5] Nathan A Ahlgren, Jie Ren, Yang Young Lu, Jed A Fuhrman, and Fengzhu Sun. Alignment-free oligonucleotide
frequency dissimilarity measure improves prediction of hosts from metagenomically-derived viral sequences.
Nucleic Acids Research, 45(1):39–53, 2017.
[6] Ted T Ashburn and Karl B Thor. Drug repositioning: identifying and developing new uses for existing drugs.
Nature Reviews Drug Discovery, 3(8):673, 2004.
[7] John H Beigel, Kay M Tomashek, Lori E Dodd, Aneesh K Mehta, Barry S Zingman, Andre C Kalil, Elizabeth
Hohmann, Helen Y Chu, Annie Luetkemeyer, Susan Kline, et al. Remdesivir for the treatment of covid19—preliminary report. New England Journal of Medicine, 2020.
[8] Stephen Boyd, Neal Parikh, Eric Chu, Borja Peleato, and Johnathan Eckstein. Distributed optimization and
statistical learning via the alternating direction method of multipliers. Foundations and Trends in Machine
Learning, 3(1), 2010.
[9] Jonathan Burez and Dirk Van den Poel. Handling class imbalance in customer churn prediction. Expert Systems
with Applications, 36(3):4626–4636, 2009.
[10] Emmanuel J. Candes and Benjamin Recht. Exact matrix completion via convex optimization. Foundations of
Computational Mathematics, 9(6):717–772, December 2009.
[11] Emmanuel J. Candès and Terence Tao. The power of convex relaxation: Near-optimal matrix completion.
IEEE Trans. Inf. Theor., 56(5):2053–2080, May 2010.
[12] Sidharta Chatterjee. An overview of mutations occurring within the coronavirus-2 genome: Mutations data
reporting on sars-cov-2. Available at SSRN 3632241, 2020.
[13] Arvind Chopra, Manjit Saluja, and Anuradha Venugopalan. Effectiveness of chloroquine and inflammatory
cytokine response in patients with early persistent musculoskeletal pain and arthritis following chikungunya
virus infection. Arthritis & Rhumatology, 66(2):319–326, 2014.
[14] E. Chouzenoux, A. Jezierska, J.C. Pesquet, and H. Talbot. A majorize-minimize subspace approach for l2-l0
image regularization. SIAM Journal on Imaging Science, 6(1):563–591, 2013.
[15] Fan RK Chung. Spectral graph theory. cbms regional conference series in mathematics, no. 92, 1996.
[16] Indrani Das, Itishree Basantray, Prabhudutta Mamidi, Tapas K Nayak, BM Pratheek, Subhasis Chattopadhyay, and Soma Chattopadhyay. Heat shock protein 90 positively regulates chikungunya virus replication by
stabilizing viral non-structural protein nsp2 during infection. PLoS One, 9(6):e100531, 2014.
[17] Erik De Clercq and Guangdi Li. Approved antiviral drugs over the past 50 years. Clinical Microbiology Reviews,
29(3):695–747, 2016.
[18] Yongtao Duan, Hai-Liang Zhu, and Chongchen Zhou. Advance of promising targets and agents against 2019ncov in china. Drug Discovery Today, 2020.
[19] Ali Ezzat, Min Wu, Xiao-Li Li, and Chee-Keong Kwoh. Computational prediction of drug–target interactions
using chemogenomic approaches: an empirical survey. Briefings in Bioinformatics, 2018.
[20] Ali Ezzat, Peilin Zhao, Min Wu, Xiao-Li Li, and Chee-Keong Kwoh. Drug-target interaction prediction with
graph regularized matrix factorization. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Computational Biology and Bioinformatics
(TCBB), 14(3):646–656, 2017.
[21] US Food, Drug Administration, et al. Fact sheet for health care providers: emergency use authorization (eua)
of remdesivir (gs-5734TM ). Silver Spring, MD, US Food and Drug Administration, 2020.
[22] Simon Frantz. Drug discovery: playing dirty, 2005.
12

[23] Karen M Gallegos, George L Drusano, David Z D Argenio, and Ashley N Brown. Chikungunya virus: in vitro
response to combination therapy with ribavirin and interferon alfa 2a. The Journal of Infectious Diseases,
214(8):1192–1197, 2016.
[24] Charlotte Harrison. Coronavirus puts drug repurposing on the fast track. Nature Biotechnology, 38(4):379–381,
2020.
[25] Trevor Hastie, Rahul Mazumder, Jason D Lee, and Reza Zadeh. Matrix completion and low-rank svd via fast
alternating least squares. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 16(1):3367–3402, 2015.
[26] Masahiro Hattori, Nobuya Tanaka, Minoru Kanehisa, and Susumu Goto. Simcomp/subcomp: chemical structure search servers for network analyses. Nucleic Acids Research, 38(suppl 2):W652–W656, 2010.
[27] Shanshan He, Billy Lin, Virginia Chu, Zongyi Hu, Xin Hu, Jingbo Xiao, Amy Q Wang, Cameron J Schweitzer,
Qisheng Li, Michio Imamura, et al. Repurposing of the antihistamine chlorcyclizine and related compounds
for treatment of hepatitis c virus infection. Science Translational Medicine, 7(282):282ra49–282ra49, 2015.
[28] John W Huggins. Prospects for treatment of viral hemorrhagic fevers with ribavirin, a broad-spectrum antiviral
drug. Reviews of Infectious Diseases, 11(Supplement 4):S750–S761, 1989.
[29] Ivan Fan-Ngai Hung, Kwok-Cheung Lung, Eugene Yuk-Keung Tso, Raymond Liu, Tom Wai-Hin Chung, ManYee Chu, Yuk-Yung Ng, Jenny Lo, Jacky Chan, Anthony Raymond Tam, et al. Triple combination of interferon
beta-1b, lopinavir–ritonavir, and ribavirin in the treatment of patients admitted to hospital with covid-19: an
open-label, randomised, phase 2 trial. The Lancet, 395(10238):1695–1704, 2020.
[30] Mazhar Hussain, Henry D Galvin, Tatt Y Haw, Ashley N Nutsford, and Matloob Husain. Drug resistance in
influenza a virus: the epidemiology and management. Infection and Drug Resistance, 10:121, 2017.
[31] Zhenming Jin, Yao Zhao, Yuan Sun, Bing Zhang, Haofeng Wang, Yan Wu, Yan Zhu, Chen Zhu, Tianyu
Hu, Xiaoyu Du, et al. Structural basis for the inhibition of covid-19 virus main protease by carmofur, an
antineoplastic drug. bioRxiv, 2020. https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.09.033233v1.
abstract.
[32] Minoru Kanehisa, Susumu Goto, Masahiro Hattori, Kiyoko F Aoki-Kinoshita, Masumi Itoh, Shuichi
Kawashima, Toshiaki Katayama, Michihiro Araki, and Mika Hirakawa. From genomics to chemical genomics:
new developments in kegg. Nucleic Acids Research, 34(suppl 1):D354–D357, 2006.
[33] N. Komodakis and J. Pesquet. Playing with duality: An overview of recent primal-dual approaches for solving
large-scale optimization problems. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 32(6):31–54, 2015.
[34] Yan Lou, Lin Liu, and Yunqing Qiu. Clinical outcomes and plasma concentrations of baloxavir marboxil and
favipiravir in covid-19 patients: an exploratory randomized, controlled trial. medRxiv, 2020.
[35] Paulo Ricardo Martins-Filho, Edmundo Marques do Nascimento-Júnior, and Victor Santana Santos. No current
evidence supporting risk of using ibuprofen in patients with covid-19. International Journal of Clinical Practice,
page e13576, 2020.
[36] Sean R McLean, Mali Gana-Weisz, Basil Hartzoulakis, Richard Frow, Jeremy Whelan, David Selwood, and
Chris Boshoff. Imatinib binding and ckit inhibition is abrogated by the ckit kinase domain i missense mutation
val654ala. Molecular Cancer Therapeutics, 4(12):2008–2015, 2005.
[37] Aanchal Mongia, Emilie Chouzenoux, and Angshul Majumdar. Computational prediction of drug-disease
association based on graph-regularized one bit matrix completion. bioRxiv, 2020. https://www.biorxiv.org/
content/10.1101/2020.04.02.020891v1.abstract.
[38] Aanchal Mongia and Angshul Majumdar. Deep matrix completion on graphs: Application in drug target
interaction prediction. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP 2020), pages 1324–1328. IEEE, 2020.
[39] Aanchal Mongia and Angshul Majumdar. Drug-target interaction prediction using multi graph regularized
nuclear norm minimization. Plos One, 15(1):e0226484, 2020.

13

[40] Aanchal Mongia, Debarka Sengupta, and Angshul Majumdar. deepmc: Deep matrix completion for imputation
of single-cell rna-seq data. Journal of Computational Biology, 27, 2019.
[41] Aanchal Mongia, Debarka Sengupta, and Angshul Majumdar. Mcimpute: Matrix completion based imputation
for single cell rna-seq data. Frontiers in Genetics, 10:9, 2019.
[42] Maria Pachetti, Bruna Marini, Francesca Benedetti, Fabiola Giudici, Elisabetta Mauro, Paola Storici, Claudio
Masciovecchio, Silvia Angeletti, Massimo Ciccozzi, Robert C Gallo, et al. Emerging sars-cov-2 mutation hot
spots include a novel rna-dependent-rna polymerase variant. Journal of Translational Medicine, 18:1–9, 2020.
[43] Brett E Pickett, Eva L Sadat, Yun Zhang, Jyothi M Noronha, R Burke Squires, Victoria Hunt, Mengya Liu,
Sanjeev Kumar, Sam Zaremba, Zhiping Gu, et al. Vipr: an open bioinformatics database and analysis resource
for virology research. Nucleic Acids Research, 40(D1):D593–D598, 2012.
[44] Nelly Pustelnik, Caroline Chaux, and Jean-Christophe Pesquet. Parallel proximal algorithm for image restoration using hybrid regularization. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 20(9):2450–2462, 2011.
[45] Raymund R Razonable. Antiviral drugs for viruses other than human immunodeficiency virus. In Mayo Clinic
Proceedings, volume 86, pages 1009–1026. Elsevier, 2011.
[46] Jácome Rodrigo, Campillo-Balderas José Alberto, Ponce de León Samuel, Arturo Becerra, and Antonio Lazcano. Sofosbuvir as a potential alternative to treat the sars-cov-2 epidemic. Scientific Reports (Nature Publisher
Group), 10(1), 2020.
[47] Rafael Sanjuán, Miguel R Nebot, Nicola Chirico, Louis M Mansky, and Robert Belshaw. Viral mutation rates.
Journal of Virology, 84(19):9733–9748, 2010.
[48] Esperance AK Schaefer and Raymond T Chung. Anti- hepatitis c virus drugs in development. Gastroenterology,
142(6):1340–1350, 2012.
[49] Sergey A Shiryaev, Pinar Mesci, Antonella Pinto, Isabella Fernandes, Nicholas Sheets, Sujan Shresta, Chen
Farhy, Chun-Teng Huang, Alex Y Strongin, Alysson R Muotri, et al. Repurposing of the anti-malaria drug
chloroquine for zika virus treatment and prophylaxis. Scientific Reports, 7(1):1–9, 2017.
[50] Norio Sugaya and Yasuo Ohashi. Long-acting neuraminidase inhibitor laninamivir octanoate (cs-8958) versus
oseltamivir as treatment for children with influenza virus infection. Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy,
54(6):2575–2582, 2010.
[51] Ying Sun, Prabhu Babu, and Daniel P. Palomar. Majorization-minimization algorithms in signal processing,
communications, and machine learning. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 65(3):794–816, February
2017.
[52] Snigdha Tariyal, Angshul Majumdar, Richa Singh, and Mayank Vatsa. Deep dictionary learning. IEEE Access,
4:10096–10109, 2016.
[53] Zhenwei Wang, Xiaorong Chen, Yunfei Lu, Feifei Chen, and Wei Zhang. Clinical characteristics and therapeutic procedure for four cases with 2019 novel coronavirus pneumonia receiving combined chinese and western
medicine treatment. Bioscience Trends, 14(1):64–68, 2020.
[54] Birgit Winther and Niels Mygind. Potential benefits of ibuprofen in the treatment of viral respiratory infections.
Inflammopharmacology, 11(4):445, 2003.
[55] David S Wishart, Craig Knox, An Chi Guo, Savita Shrivastava, Murtaza Hassanali, Paul Stothard, Zhan Chang,
and Jennifer Woolsey. Drugbank: a comprehensive resource for in silico drug discovery and exploration. Nucleic
Acids Research, 34(suppl 1):D668–D672, 2006.
[56] Yan-Ming Zeng, Xiao-Lei Xu, Xiao-Qing He, Sheng-Quan Tang, Yao Li, Yin-Qiu Huang, Vijay Harypursat, and
Yao-Kai Chen. Comparative effectiveness and safety of ribavirin plus interferon-alpha, lopinavir/ritonavir plus
interferon-alpha, and ribavirin plus lopinavir/ritonavir plus interferon-alpha in patients with mild to moderate
novel coronavirus disease 2019: study protocol. Chinese Medical Journal, 133(9):1132–1134, 2020.
[57] Alimuddin Zumla, Jasper FW Chan, Esam I Azhar, David SC Hui, and Kwok-Yung Yuen. Coronaviruses—drug
discovery and therapeutic options. Nature Reviews Drug Discovery, 15(5):327–347, 2016.
14

SUPPLEMENTARY:
A computational approach to aid clinicians in selecting anti-viral drugs for
COVID-19 trials

1

Description of drugs predicted by computational models
• Remdesivir (FDA emergency use, investigational) – Remdesivir was originally investigated as a treatment
for Ebola virus, but has potential to treat a variety of RNA viruses. Its activity against the coronavirus (CoV)
family of viruses, such as SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV, was shown in 2017, and it is also being investigated
as a potential treatment for COVID-19.
• Ribavirin (approved) – Broad-spectrum activity against several RNA and DNA viruses. It is primarily
indicated for use in treating hepatitis C and viral hemorrhagic fevers. It is reported that ribavirin might be only
effective in early stages of viral hemorrhagic fevers including Lasser fever, Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever,
Venezuelan hemorrhagic fever, and Hantavirus infection. Currently Ribavirin is being used in combination
with interferon beta-1b, lopinavir–ritonavir in a trial for treating COVID-19.
• Umifenovir (Investigational) – Umifenovir is used for the treatment and prophylaxis of influenza and other
respiratory infections. Umifenovir’s ability to exert antiviral effects through multiple pathways has resulted
in considerable investigation into its use for a variety of enveloped and non-enveloped RNA and DNA viruses,
including Flavivirus / hemorrhagic fever, Zika virus, Lassa virus, Ebola virus, chikungunya virus, Hantaan
virus, and coxsackie virus A and B. Umifenovir is currently being investigated as a potential treatment and
prophylactic agent for COVID-19.
• Sofosbuvir– Sofosbuvir is a direct acting antiviral medication used as part of combination therapy to treat
chronic Hepatitis C. Currently it is undergoing clinical trial for treating COVID-19.
• Taribavirin (similar to Ribavirin) – The prodrug taribavirin is under development for the treatment of patients with chronic hepatitis C. Taribavirin is metabolized by the liver and converted into its active metabolite,
ribavirin. This pathway reduces exposure to red blood cells (RBCs) and increases exposure to the liver, the
site of HCV replication.
• Tenofovir alafenamide – Tenofovir alafenamide is a novel tenofovir prodrug developed in order to improve
renal safety when compared to the counterpart tenofovir disoproxil. Tenofovir alafenamide is indicated to treat
chronic hepatitis B, treat HIV-1 and prevent HIV-1 infections. Currently tenofovir disoproxil is undergoing
trial as a prophylactic against COVID-19 on healthcare workers. The study is supposed to be completed in
July.

2

Symptoms of different virus infections
• Hemorrhagic fever symptoms (Mayoclininc, Clevelandclinic) – fever, fatigue, dizziness, body ache,
headache, rashes, bleeding from the eyes, ears or mouth, difficulty breathing, internal bleeding, organ failure.
Drugs: Ribavarin, Umifenovir
SARS-CoV symptoms (CDC, WHO) – fever, dry cough, sore throat, shortness of breath, headache,
body ache, loss of appetite, malaise, night sweats, chills, confusion, rash and diarrhea.
Drugs: Remdesivir
MERS-CoV symptoms (CDC, WHO) – fever, chills, headache, body ache, malaise, shortness of breath,
diarrhea, dry cough, sore throat, body ache and hypoxia.
Drugs: Remdesivir
Influenza virus (CDC) – fever, body ache, chills, sweats, headache, dry cough, fatigue, nasal congestion and sore throat.
Drugs: Umifenovir, Ibuprofen
Zika virus (CDC) - mild fever, rash, body ache, headache, red eyes and malaise.

15

Drugs: Umifenovir
Lassa virus (WHO) – fever, fatigue, malaise, headache, sore throat, body ache, chest pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, cough and abdominal pain.
Drugs: Umifenovir, Ribavarin
Ebola virus (CDC, WebMD) – fever, body ache, headache, abdominal pain, rash, loss of appetite, fatigue,
diarrhea, vomiting, unexplained hemorrhaging, bleeding or bruising.
Drugs: Remdesivir, Umifenovir
Chikungunya virus (CDC) – fever, body ache, headache, joint swelling and rash.
Drugs: Umifenovir
Hantavirus (CDC) – fatigue, fever, body ache, headache, dizziness, chill, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, blurred vision, inflamed or red eyes, shortness of breath, rash, low blood pressure. Drugs:
Umifenovir, Ribavarin coxsackie virus A (WebMD) – sore throat, blisters in mouth, and small tender lesions
on the palms of their hands and bottom of their feet, inflammation of the spinal cord and brain.
Drugs: Umifenovir
Coxsackie virus B (WebMD) – fever, spasms of the abdominal and chest muscles, inflammation of the
spinal cord and brain.
Drugs: Umifenovir
Non-polio Enterovirus (CDC) – fever, runny nose, sneezing, cough, skin rash, mouth blisters, body
muscle aches.
Drugs: Pleconaril
Rhinovirus (Mayoclinic) – runny nose, sore throat, cough, congestion, mild body aches, mild headache,
sneezing, low fever and malaise.
Drugs: Ribavarin, Sofosbuvir, Taribavirin
Hepatitis B (DNA virus) (hepb.org) – fever, fatigue, body ache, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, pale or light colored stools, dark urine, jaundice, bloated stomach.
Drugs: Tenofovir alafenamide
HIV-1 (acute phase) – fever, chills, rash, night sweats, body ache, sore throat, fatigue, swollen lymph
nodes, mouth ulcers.
Drugs: Tenofovir alafenamide

3

Readme for Webserver

The web server (http://dva.salsa.iiitd.edu.in) has two tabs in the menu. The ‘Home’ page provides reference
to our work and the main functionalities of the web server. The ‘About’ page consists of a brief description of the
dataset and the algorithms used.
Home – The ‘Home’ page briefly discusses what this web server is about. It also includes reference to our pre-print.
In the sub-section ‘Functionalities’, there are two parts. The first one pertains to the prediction of drugs, given the
genomic structure of the virus. The second takes in two inputs, a drug and a virus, and it returns a normalized
score depicting the overall efficacy of the drug against the virus, as predicted by our computational model.
Figure 3 shows the ‘Home’ page of the server. Figures 4,5,6,7 show how to use the web server to run an algorithm
for the prediction of top-5 drugs for a virus already existing in the database (sample query 1: Figures 4 and 5)
or for a novel virus by uploading its genomic sequence in “.fasta” file format (sample query 2: Figures 6 and 7).
Figures 8 and 9 depict the usage of the software to predict the association score (normalized) between a drug and
a virus predicted by the chosen algorithm (sample query 3: Figures 8 and 9).
About – This page contains of a brief description about how the dataset has been curated. It also gives short
descriptions of the different algorithms used. The reference papers of the algorithms are also provided for interested

16

Figure 3: Home page of the web-server
readers.
In the side menu, we also provide some important links, to our code on Github repository, our pre-print and
other information pertaining to this work such as data sources and collaborations.

17

Figure 4: Sample query 1- To predict top-5 drugs for a virus already existing in the database

18

Figure 5: Sample query 1- Prediction results

19

Figure 6: Sample query 2- To predict top-5 drugs for a novel virus by uploading its genomic sequence

20

Figure 7: Sample query 2- Prediction results

21

Figure 8: Sample query 3- To predict association score between a drug and virus.

22

Figure 9: Sample query 3- Prediction results

23

Figure 10: About page of the web-server

24

