Using Online Implicit Association Tests in Opinion
Polling
Alan F. Smeaton1,2 , Hyowon Lee1,2 , Niamh Morris2 , and David
Hanley2

arXiv:2007.04183v1 [cs.CY] 8 Jul 2020

1

Insight Centre for Data Analytics, Dublin City University,
Glasnevin, Dublin 9, Ireland
2
School of Computing, Dublin City University, Glasnevin, Dublin 9,
Ireland
June 2020

Abstract
Opinion polls have now become a very important component of
society because they are now a defacto component of our daily news
cycle and because their results influence governments and business in
ways which are not always obvious to us. However, polling is not
always accurate and there have been some really inaccurate polling
results which have had major influences on the world going back to the
1930s but also as recently as just the last 3 or 4 years. In this paper we
analyse the phenomenon of socially desirable responding (shy voters)
which has emerged as one of the reasons for modern day inaccurate
polling. We describe how it can be exposed through implicit association
tests (IATs) and we demonstrate the shy voter effect in a small survey
on opinions in Ireland towards the United Kingdom. We argue for
inclusion of IATs in traditional polling and point to the fact that these
can be conducted accurately online, which also allows polling to reach
a larger and more diverse sample of respondents in the days of Covid19 restrictions which restricts the opportunities for poll sampling from
the general public.

1

Introduction

Opinion polls have stealthily become an element of society, deeply embedded
in our news and in decision-making. When there is no real news to report,
the results of opinion polls will drive the content of many news cycles not
only for the results they produce but how these results compare with previous polls and allowing trends to be tracked. Opinion polls happen around
1

political elections, consumer views on products and services, constitutional
decisions, referenda and plebiscites, Their influence can be enormous . . . they
can influence stock markets, election outcomes, the success or failure of new
product launches and they impact public opinion.
Polling is not new and opinion polls have been around since the 19th
century and in that time their modus operandi has not changed that much.
However, polling, in its current form, does have flaws and in particular
the flaws are around the difficulty of recruiting subjects who represent an
unbiased sample of the population, and the emergence of socially desirable
responding. This latter phenomenon has been used to partially explain the
disastrous performance of polling in events like the 2016 US Presidential
election, the UK EU membership referendum and others.
In this paper we summarise some of the known drawbacks with current
polling and we propose a greater use of the implicit association test, a simple
computer-based test which can be administered online and which reveals a
subject’s true feelings on a topic.
The rest of this paper is organised as follows. In the next section we provide a brief history of polling followed by an overview of traditional polling,
the implicit association test and how we used traditional opinion polling
and IATs in a small sample of people to evaluate their views towards the
United Kingdom. That is followed by an analysis of the results and finally
a concluding section completes the paper.

2

The History of Polling

The history of polling is one of relatively little change over many, many
decades. The principle is quite straightforward. When we want to find the
likely outcome or views of a population of individuals on topics as varied
as who they would vote for in a forthcoming election, what is their view on
an issue like climate change or their views on same-sex marriage then we
conduct an opinion poll by asking a sample of the population and extrapolating their view to the population as a whole. The two critical things in
accurate polling are firstly that the sample of people asked in the poll is
large enough and reflective of the population as a whole, and secondly that
they respondents give truthful answers to the poll questions.
The earliest polls were associated with political elections, especially Presidential elections in the United States, and for about a century, from about
1830 to 1930, polling was reliable and robust. Then, in the run-up to the
1936 US Presidential election, a large poll of over 2 million individuals predicted the incumbent President, Franklin D. Roosevelt, would lose the election. How could such a thing happen ? Meanwhile a much smaller poll
carried out by George Gallup correctly predicted Roosevelt’s re-election and
the world realised that sample size in polling does not overcome data bias in

2

the sampling. Only after the election was it realised that the larger sampled
pool had selected individuals with a strong bias towards the more affluent
members of society whereas Gallup’s pool was more scientifically unbiased.
The 1936 election brought to the fore the issue of ignoring bias in poll
sampling and since then polling has moved into mainstream to the point
where it is as a source of news on a daily basis, and an input into major
decisions in government and in business. Every day our news is peppered
with the results of polls and how the results of today’s published poll are
a change from previous polls and thus there is a shift in public opinion on
whatever is the topic of the poll. However, polling can be flawed because it
is at best only a sample of the full population and recently these flaws have
been revealed.
In the early 2010s Nate Silver was an American statistician who had
made a reputation for predicting the outcome of major league baseball games
by aggregating data from one of the most statistics-rich sports in the world
[1]. He had created an almost cult following and his methods of combining
data from multiple sources had proved to be very successful. In 2012 he
decided to turn his attention to politics, specifically aggregating the polling
information at national and at local levels, which were proliferating the news
media during the US Presidential campaign. The night before the election,
he predicted the outcome almost perfectly at state level, with Barack Obama
being re-elected and defeating Mitt Romney.
For the next 4 years polls, and in particular political polls, were regarded
as being infallible and by the time of the 2016 US Presidential election,
polling results had become a reliable source of news and a way to track trends
in public opinion. On the night before the election polls, including Nate
Silver’s aggregation of polls, had predicted a comfortable victory for Hilary
Clinton and as we now know, all the polls got it wrong and Donald Trump
was elected. How quickly the lessons of 1936 have been forgotten. And it
wasn’t just in US Presidential elections that polling was wrong. The United
Kingdom voting to leave the European Union in the Brexit referendum also
in 2016, the 2017 UK general election leading to a hung parliament, the 2015
marriage equality referendum in Ireland, in all these cases and many more,
pre-voting polling got it wrong.
So can anything be done about this persistent flaw in polling for major
societal events ? In [3] the authors explored the effects of socially desirable responding (SDR) also known as the shy voter syndrome, where poll
respondents feel their actual feelings and views on a topic may be socially
unacceptable and so they give fake answers and say that they will vote for
X, whereas in fact they will vote for Y. This is especially true of sensitive
issues like racism, gender, immigration or same-sex marriage. In [3] the authors posed a number of polarising questions to their participants and used
their responses to tease out their true or implicit preferences. Their results
did reveal that when applied to polls for the 2016 US Presidential election,
3

voters for Donald Trump were more likely to be “shy” about admitting to
vote for him than voters for Hilary Clinton.
In this paper we take this a step further, albeit on a much smaller sized
sample, by exploring how an implicit association test (IAT) on a topic can
reveal people’s true feelings and what the correlation for this is with their
responses using a traditional poll.

3
3.1

Polling and Implicit Association Tests (IATs)
Traditional Polling

Worldwide, the market research industry generates about $49 billion in
annual revenue, according to ESOMAR and BDO [14] and opinion polls
are an essential part of that industry. Polling is the “systematic gathering, recording, and analysis of qualitative and quantitative data about issues” [17]. Pollsters rely on statistics and mathematical models to predict
the behaviour and feelings of the general public towards different matters
and events. Opinion polls margins of error decrease as the sample population increases, meaning that to have a valid poll, pollsters typically have to
gather a large number of participants to get a 95% or even a 99% confidence
level.
Traditionally, a poll was considered a good poll if it reached a large
sample size, with broad representation. The move to online polling makes
the process of gathering participants easier. Recently, there has been a
pattern to move from live phone polling to online polling, primarily due to
the fact “no one picks up the phone anymore” [12].
Now, telephone polls are becoming more expensive to conduct which is
one of the main reasons for the shift to online polling. People are now harder
than ever to contact by phone due to many not answering unknown numbers.
This results in the interviewer searching for longer to make contact with a
potential customer. Also, it is increasingly difficult for polling companies to
find people to call because a lot of consumers no longer make use of their
landlines [19]
In 1997 for every 100 calls an average of 36 polls would have been conducted. If we compare that to the 6 telephone polls out of 100 calls completed in 2018 it is obvious that telephone polling is becoming untenable (see
Figure 1). With the decline in responses and the forever increasing costs of
conducting telephone polls, this has led to the rise of online polling, and it
also begs the question of who these 6% are !
According to Walter Shapiro of ’The New Republic, the polling industry
is in crisis, partly due to the misjudgement of the 2016 U.S. election [16]
where Nate Silver called it “among the greatest polling errors in primary
history”.

4

Figure 1: Decrease in Telephone Survey Responses [10]
Pollsters have been receiving criticism about the inaccuracy of their results [5] for many years. These days, one criticism is that the polling industry
often encounters difficulties reaching younger participants because opinion
polls are seen by some of them as boring and wasteful. If young voters do
agree to participate, they ”tend to hold more ideologically mixed values ”
[6]. Those answers can hinder a poll’s validity.
As we saw in the last section, one problem with traditional opinion poll
surveys is that people can lie and give answers to polling questions that they
feel will be socially accepted, e.g. “I am not a racist” [15]. This is known as
shy voting and was observed during the Trump-Clinton presidential election
in 2016 [11] and can be found in multiple polling situations over the past few
decades [7]. Some members of the public and thus some of those included
in polls were embarrassed to say they were voting for Donald Trump and so
the opinion polls showed it to be a very close race but that Hillary Clinton
would win the majority, whereas in fact Trump was elected [18].

5

3.2

Implicit Association Tests

Implicit Association Tests measure the innate biases we have between concepts (e.g.Climate change) and evaluations (e.g. good or bad). The test asks
a participant to categorise words that appear on the left and right sides of
their screen by pressing one of two keys, typically e for the left and i for
the right. It is important to note that the participant needs to have basic
knowledge of the topic in order for the test to be valuable and also that their
response is as fast as they can respond. The test is made up of five parts
with each block being a series of screen presentations which elicit a response
from the participant.

Figure 2: Example of IAT Blocks for a test on the participant’s views on
anxiety
In the first block, the participant sorts words or images that relate to the
concepts (e.g. low carbon footprint/high carbon footprint). If an energysaving bulb was shown then the participant should select a low carbon footprint as the response. In the second block, the participant sorts words
relating to the evaluation. If pleasure appeared then good would be chosen.
The third block merges the categories. e.g: low carbon or good, high carbon
or bad.
Then, in block 4, the concepts switch so low carbon would be paired with
bad and high carbon would be paired with good. The number of trials are
increased to decrease the probability that the participant could just have a
good practice. In the final block, the categories are placed on the opposite
side to where they were previously. Low carbon would appear on the right
and high carbon on the left.
The average length of time it takes the participant to categorise the
words and/or images in part three versus part five, determines their test
6

Figure 3: Participant screen from block 3, showing good or high carbon footprints versus bad or low carbon footprints (taken from Beattie and McGuires
IAT, 2012) [2]
score. A person is seen to have an implicit preference for a concept if they
are quicker to categorize the word when the concept is paired with good.
IATs have been considered valid for nearly twenty years. They work
when conducted in person in a laboratory setting but also if administered to
participants in their own homes. Carpenter et al. [4] verified that “surveysoftware IATs appear to be reliable and valid, offer numerous advantages,
and make IATs accessible for researchers who use survey software to conduct
online research”. It was also found in several articles that IAT can be just as
validly administered over the Internet in participants’ home environments
as in a standard lab setting [9] which supports the idea that IATs can be
completed by participants in their own homes. This information is highly
beneficial right now during this global pandemic as polls can be carried out
without the need for face to face human interaction.
IATs can also measure a participants unconscious bias towards one of two
categories e.g. gender-based roles [13] such as a nurse will be female. This
is deduced by calculating the participants ’D-Score’ (standardized difference
(D) between the mean [reaction time] RT to congruent and to incongruent
pairings) [8] by recording the time it takes the person to choose a category
for a word and whether they categorise this correctly.
To explore this ourselves, we administered a short Google form with the
results shown in Figures 4 and 5). Our sample Size was 50 and from this we
found that the percentage of participants who had previously participated
in an opinion poll ws 76%
The results from our questionnaire found that participants over the age of

7

Figure 4: Responses on being asked if they were truthful when answering
opinion poll

Figure 5: Participants opinion poll medium preferences
56 gave traditional polls a rating of at least 3 out of 5 on whether they
found the experience enjoyable, whereas younger participants said it was
too tedious and mostly gave scores of 1 or 2.
Our main method for contacting potential participants was through the
telephone and our survey itself was, of course, flawed in that it is susceptible
to exactly the kind of shy voter phenomenon we are addressing in this paper.

3.3

IATs and Questionnaires

To prove the value of IATs in polling, an IAT was administered to 26 participants on Zoom. The test was created using OpenIAT and PsychoPy on
the topic of ‘How amiable Irish people are towards the United Kingdom.
PsychoPy is an open-source software package written in Python, primarily used in neuroscience and experimental psychology research and we used
PsychoPy to create our IAT. Pavlovia is a website created by the PsychoPy
team and it allows for the hosting and running of an implicit association
test with the ability to download the results.
Each participant was given a random 4 digit identification number and
completed the IAT through remote access on Zoom. The gender and age

8

bracket for each participant was recorded so that analysis could be undertaken. The results were then analysed and ranked from highest IAT score
to the lowest as shown in Figure 6.

Figure 6: Distribution of 27 IAT scores
What this told us was that there is almost a balanced spread of implicit
biases for and against the IAT topic, with approximately the same numbers
of pro, neutral and against the topic
Roughly two weeks after completing the IAT, participants were asked to
complete a traditional questionnaire about their feelings towards the United
Kingdom. The questionnare results for each participant were then converted
to a score so that a comparison could be made between the IAT rankings
and the questionnaire score rankings. A list of the questionnaire questions
and its coding scheme used for comparison is given in Table 1.
In computing an overall score for each participant based on their answers in the questionnaire, the individual results need to be weighted for
different questions based on the variance of answers to each question where
the higher the variance, the larger the range that exists in the answers and
therefore the higher the value of a participant giving an uncommon answer.
For example, question three - What was your reaction to the news of Prince
Charles contracting Covid-19? - had the highest variance and so ansers to
this were given the highest weight. As a counter-example, in question eleven
- During the financial crisis in Ireland, the UK provided substantial financial assistance to Ireland. If the UK experienced similar financial difficulty
should Ireland do likewise? - the results were unanimous. This meant that
there was no value in the results for the question’s score because everyone
felt the same.
Each answer for each question was deemed either pro or anti the United

9

Figure 7: Results from some of the polarising questions
Kingdom. For example, for If the UK were to go to war, would you be happy
for Irish troops to join them?, a participant replying ’Yes’ would be more
towards the UK and therefore a lower score would be given. The lower a
participants questionnaire score, the warmer they were to the UK. A degree
of polarising answers in some of the questions are shown in Figure 7. Both
a participant’s IAT score and their questionnaire score was ranked based on
other participants and a Spearmans correlation between the two rankings
was calculated.

10

Table 1: Questionnaire: questions and answer options (blue rows indicate
the questions used for the correlation analysis)
Question
Answer Options (Coded)
Q1. If a member of the Royal family vis- -2: Very likely, -1: Likely, 0:
ited your hometown, how likely would you Neutral, 1: Less likely, 2: Not
be to go see them?
likely
Q2. If the UK were to go to war, would -2: Yes, 2: No
you be happy for Irish troops to join them?
Q3. What was your reaction to the news -2: Sympathetic, 0: Not care,
of Prince Charles contracting Covid-19?
2: Unsympathetic
Q4. Did you watch any of the Royal Wed- -2: Yes, 2: No
dings live on TV?
Q5. Are you able to name all of Will and -2: Yes, 0: Not all, 2: No
Kate’s children?
Q6. Do you know if Prince Philip is alive
or dead?
Q7. Who is your favourite member of the
Royal family?
Q8. Where is your favourite football team
located?
Q9. Would you be happy for some of -2: Yes, 2: No
Ireland’s emergency Personal Protective
Equipment(PPE) to be shared with the
UK during the Covid-19 outbreak
Q10. How did you feel when the UK left -2: Very happy, -1: Happy, 0:
the EU in January 2020?
Didn’t care, 1: Unhappy, 2:
Very unhappy
Q11. During the financial crisis in Ireland in 2008, the UK provided substantial financial assistance to Ireland. If the
UK experienced similar financial difficulty
should Ireland do likewise?

11

4

Analysis of Results

A total of 25 respondents completed both the IAT and the online questionnaire, resulting in 2 sets of responses, separated in their time of gathering
by 2 weeks. We are interested to see the degree of correlation between IAT
results and questionnaire results for individual respondents. We report the
process of the analysis we have performed and how we codify the questionnaire answers to represent respondents’ overall opinions towards/against UK
and Ireland. We also describe how we remove outlier data, then explore a
simple weighting scheme to differentiate amongst the questions, leading to
the ranking of the respondents based on their questionnaires and their IATs.
Coding the answer options: In order to calculate each respondent’s
level of pro-UK or pro-Ireland opinions, the answer options for each question
in the questionnaire were coded in the following way: the answer options
that imply an opinion supporting the UK (i.e. pro-UK) were assigned negative numbers (e.g. -2, -1), whereas the options that imply a pro-Ireland
stance (i.e. pro-Ireland) were assigned positive values (e.g. 2, 1) and neutral
sentiment as 0. For example, in Question 1: If a member of the royal family
visited your hometown, how likely would you be to go see them ? the answer
options were -2: Very likely, -1: Likely, 0: Neutral, 1: Less likely, and 2:
Not likely, from pro-UK to pro-Ireland.
Some questions were discarded from the analysis due to uncertainty in
determining the valence, resulting in 7 questions (Q1-5, Q9 and Q10) to be
used for the correlation analysis (see Table 1 for the questions and coded
answer options). Thus a total of 7 questions and their corresponding answer
options from 25 respondents were used in the analysis.
Removing the outliers: Once the sum of the answers from each of
the questions for each respondent was calculated, it was placed against the
ranking from the IAT result in order to allow direct comparison. An obvious large mismatch between the two rankings was identified. For example,
respondent ID 1980 has total questionnaire score of 26, very pro-Ireland according to the coding scheme used in the study. This respondent is the 4th
highest (in terms of pro-Ireland stance) amongst 25 respondents in the questionnaire ranking, but is 2nd lowest in the IAT ranking, exhibiting a very
opposite result between the two methods administered, which we consider
as an obvious outlier in the data. The top 4 such respondents who show
extreme differences in the two methods, were identified and removed from
the correlation analysis.
Weighting for the questions: With the codification scheme above,
all 7 questions are treated as having the same importance in determining
the overall opinion towards UK/Ireland of each respondent. We examined
the patterns of the answers by all 25 respondents on the same questions, i.e.,
the way the answers were spread, distributed or polarised in some ways, as
a way to determine the discriminative importance of each question. Overall,
12

Table 2: Extracting the spread patterns in questionnaire answers (numbers
in white cells are the number of respondents who selected the option)
Question No. \
-2
-1
0
1
2
Variance ReverseOption
rank
Deviation
rank
Q1
12
2
1
2
8
4
5
Q2
11
14
1.5
1.5
Q3
20
4
1
7
6
Q4
14
11
1.5
1.5
Q5
8
4
13
3
4
Q9
16
9
5
3
Q10
0
0
6
1
18
6
7
the questions that show lower “variance” or higher “polarity” in the answers could be given higher weight so that these questions should be more
prominently reflected in the questionnaire-based ranking of the respondents.
In determining the weighting scheme, simple variance and reverse-deviation
were tested against the overall correlation between the two rankings.
To illustrate, Table 2 shows the number of respondents who selected each
option in the question answers (white cells), and 2 simple ranking strategies
(variance and reverse-deviation). In the table, the ranking of variance in
each of the questions (second last column) means that higher in the ranking
(i.e. smaller the rank number) more equally distributed are the opinions of
respondents amongst the available options in a question, probably becoming
a less useful factor in establishing overall opinion ranking whereas lower in
the ranking (i.e. larger the rank number) means that respondents’ opinions
were more irregular across the available options, likely suggesting a higher
importance for the question. Reverse of deviation (last column) also shows
a similar ranking to variance. We experimented with these ranking metrics
as weighting schemes to differentiate the importance amongst the questions.
Table 3 shows the impact of weighting schemes and the removal of top
4 outlier respondents on the correlations in the results between IAT and
questionnaire rankings. As can be seen, using reverse-deviation ranking as
the weighting scheme to differentiate amongst the questions and excluding
the most obvious 4 outliers (second last row in the table) resulted in a
Spearman correlation of 0.590 and Pearson correlation of 0.624. Using this
scheme, Figure 8 shows the comparison of the two measures plotted by the
rankings of the answers.
Manually tweaking the individual weighting factors for each question,
the correlation improves as high as 0.714 (Spearman) and 0.699 (Pearson)
(last row in Table 3).
The weighting scheme for the individual questions could be explored

13

Table 3: Measuring the correlations between IAT and questionnaire rankings
of respondents
Weighting scheme and outliers
Spearman
Pearson
Correlation
Correlation
No weighting - all respondents
0.195
0.254
Variance ranking as weighting (all respon0.197
0.264
dents)
Variance ranking as weighting (excluding
0.429
0.565
4 outliers)
Reverse-deviation ranking as weighting
0.307
0.312
(all respondents)
Reverse-deviation ranking as weighting
0.590
0.624
(excluding 4 ourliers)
Manually-tuned weighting (Q1: 1, Q2:
0.714
0.699
0.1, Q3: 0.1, Q4: 2, Q5: 11, Q6: 1.5, Q7:
0.2) (excluding 4 ourliers)

Figure 8: Comparison of participants IAT and questionnaire score rankings

14

further, but here, using simple methods to take into account the answer
patterns within each question by respondents, we demonstrated that a reasonably high correlation can be witnessed between IAT result and questionnaire result.

5

Conclusion

In this paper we explored the relationship between traditional polling and
implicit association tests as a way to expose the impact of socially desirable
responding also known as the shy voter syndrome, in polling.
This is important because of the difficulty traditional pollsters have in
reaching participants as their usual approaches to recruiting, by telephone
calls, dries up and they are faced with real difficulty in ensuring the participants they use reflect a balanced spread of views. The topic is also important
because the traditional approaches to polling have had some spectacular failures in the last 5 years or so, yet still we see the results of polls as major
items in our news media.
We show how an implicit association test (IAT) on a topic can reveal
peoples true feelings on that topic and using a small worked example we
tease out Irish people’s views towards the United Kingdom using both a
traditional poll, and an IAT. Even with only 25 respondents and calculating
a ranking of those respondents based on their IATs and their questionnaire
results, we achieve a best performance of only 0.714 for a Spearman correlation between the two. That is achieved by adjusting relative question
weights and answer importances, in order to to maximise the correlation.
The fact that we do not get a better alignment between the two rankings,
by IAT and by questionnaire, tells us that even in this small sample, socially
desirable responding does exist.
The paper also points to work reported from elsewhere, in addition to
the work we report here, showing that IAT tests can be run successfully
over the internet and that the response times for implicit association testing,
measured in milliseconds, can be achieved. The takeaway message is thus tat
traditional polling has problems with shy voters and these can be addressed
by using IAT tests, and these can be administered remotely.

Acknowledgements:
AS and HL would like to acknowledge support from the Insight Centre for
Data Analytics which is supported by Science Foundation Ireland under
Grant Number SFI/12/RC/2289 P2

15

References
[1] Benjamin Baumer and Andrew Zimbalist. The sabermetric revolution:
Assessing the growth of analytics in baseball. University of Pennsylvania
Press, 2014.
[2] Geoffrey Beattie and Laura Mcguire. See no evil? Only implicit attitudes predict unconscious eye movements towards images of climate
change. Semiotica, 192:315–339, 01 2012.
[3] Andy Brownback and Aaron Novotny. Social desirability bias and
polling errors in the 2016 Presidential election. Journal of Behavioral
and Experimental Economics, 74:38 – 56, 2018.
[4] Thomas Carpenter, Ruth Pogacar, Chris Pullig, Michal Kouril, Stephen
Aguilar, Jordan LaBouff, Naomi Isenberg, and Alek Chakroff. Surveysoftware implicit association tests: A methodological and empirical
analysis. Behavior Research Methods, 51:1–15, 09 2019.
[5] E.J Dionne Jr. and Thomas E. Mann.
Polling and public opinion:
The good, the bad, and the ugly.
Brookings, 2003.
URL: https://www.brookings.edu/articles/
polling-public-opinion-the-good-the-bad-and-the-ugly/.
[6] C Doherty, J Kiley, and B Johnson. Political typology reveals deep
fissures on the right and left: Conservative republican groups divided
on immigration,openness. Pew Research Center, 2017.
[7] Taegan Goddard. Shy Voter, Taegan Goddard’s Political Dictionary,
2020. URL: https://politicaldictionary.com/words/shy-voter/.
[8] Graham F. Healy, Lorraine Boran, and Alan F. Smeaton. Neural patterns of the implicit association test. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience,
9:605, 2015.
[9] Katrijn Houben and Reinout W. Wiers. Measuring implicit alcohol
associations via the internet: Validation of web-based implicit association tests. Behavior Research Methods, 40:11341143, 2008. URL:
https://doi.org/10.3758/BRM.40.4.1134.
[10] Courtney Kennedy.
Response rates in telephone surveys have resumed their decline, Factank, 2019.
URL:
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2019/02/27/
response-rates-in-telephone-surveys-have-resumed-their-decline/.
[11] Courtney Kennedy, Mark Blumenthal, Scott Clement, Joshua D Clinton, Claire Durand, Charles Franklin, Kyley McGeeney, Lee Miringoff,

16

Kristen Olson, Douglas Rivers, Lydia Saad, G Evans Witt, and
Christopher Wlezien. An Evaluation of the 2016 Election Polls
in the United States. Public Opinion Quarterly, 82(1):1–33, 02
2018. arXiv:https://academic.oup.com/poq/article-pdf/82/1/
1/24265180/nfx047.pdf.
[12] Alexis C. Madrigal. Why no one answers their phone anymore:
Telephone culture is disappearing.
The Atlantic, 2018.
URL:
https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2018/05/
ring-ring-ring-ring/561545/.
[13] Katja Poppenhaeger. Unconscious gender bias in academia: From PhD
students to Professors. In AIP Conference Proceedings, volume 130001,
2109. URL: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5110149.
[14] First Research. Market research & polling services industry profile, first research, 2020. URL: http://www.firstresearch.com/
Industry-Research/Market-Research-and-Polling-Services.
html.
[15] Namika Sagara.
Behavioral science tips for researchers: Are
your participants being dishonest in your research?, Jun 2015.
URL:
http://www.sagaraconsulting.com/new-blog/2015/6/22/
are-your-participants-being-dishonest-in-your-research.
[16] Walter Shapiro. The polling industry is in crisis. The New Republic, 2019. URL: https://newrepublic.com/article/154124/
polling-industry-crisis.
[17] Gaurav Somani. Market research vs. marketing research whats the
difference?, Oct 2016. URL: https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/
market-research-vs-marketing-whats-difference-gaurav-somani/.
[18] Gillian Tett. ‘Shy’ voters: the secret of trump’s success. Financial Times Magazine, 2016. URL: https://www.ft.com/content/
af53bbe2-a085-11e6-891e-abe238dee8e2.
[19] Adrian Weckler.
Death of the landline?
why we are
hanging up on the ’home phone’.
Independent.ie, 2018.
URL:
https://www.independent.ie/business/technology/
death-of-the-landline-why-we-are-hanging-up-on-the-home-phone-37012720.
html.

17

