Health, Psychosocial, and Social issues emanating from COVID19 pandemic based on Social Media Comments using Natural
Language Processing
Oladapo Oyebode1, Chinenye Ndulue1, Ashfaq Adib1, Dinesh Mulchandani1,
Banuchitra Suruliraj1, Fidelia Anulika Orji4, Christine Chambers2, Sandra Meier3, and
Rita Orji1
Faculty of Computer Science, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada
Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada
3 Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada
4 Department of Computer Science, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada
1
2

Corresponding Author:
Oladapo Oyebode
Faculty of Computer Science
Dalhousie University
Halifax, Nova Scotia, B3H 4R2
Canada
Email: oladapo.oyebode@dal.ca

Abstract
Background: The COVID-19 pandemic has caused a global health crisis that affects
many aspects of human lives. In the absence of vaccines and antivirals, several
behavioural change and policy initiatives, such as physical distancing, have been
implemented to control the spread of the coronavirus. Social media data can reveal
public perceptions toward how governments and health agencies across the globe
are handling the pandemic, as well as the impact of the disease on people regardless
of their geographic locations in line with various factors that hinder or facilitate the
efforts to control the spread of the pandemic globally.
Objective: This paper aims to investigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on
people globally using social media data.
Methods: We apply natural language processing (NLP) and thematic analysis to
understand public opinions, experiences, and issues with respect to the COVID-19
pandemic using social media data. First, we collect over 47 million COVID-19related comments from Twitter, Facebook, YouTube, and three online discussion
forums. Second, we perform data preprocessing which involves applying NLP
techniques to clean and prepare the data for automated theme extraction. Third, we
apply context-aware NLP approach to extract meaningful keyphrases or themes
from over 1 million randomly-selected comments, as well as compute sentiment
scores for each theme and assign sentiment polarity (i.e., positive, negative, or
neutral) based on the scores using lexicon-based technique. Fourth, we categorize
related themes into broader themes.

Results: A total of 34 negative themes emerged, out of which 15 are health-related
issues, psychosocial issues, and social issues related to the COVID-19 pandemic from
the public perspective. Some of the health-related issues are increased mortality,
health concerns, struggling health systems, and fitness issues; while some of the
psychosocial issues include frustrations due to life disruptions, panic shopping, and
expression of fear. Social issues include harassment, domestic violence, and wrong
societal attitude. In addition, 20 positive themes emerged from our results. Some of
the positive themes include public awareness, encouragement, gratitude, cleaner
environment, online learning, charity, spiritual support, and innovative research.
Conclusions: We uncover various negative and positive themes representing public
perceptions toward the COVID-19 pandemic and recommend interventions that can
help address the health, psychosocial, and social issues based on the positive themes
and other remedial ideas rooted in research. These interventions will help
governments, health professionals and agencies, institutions, and individuals in
their efforts to curb the spread of COVID-19 and minimize its impact, as well as in
reacting to any future pandemics.
Keywords: Social media; COVID-19; Coronavirus; Natural language processing;
Context-based analysis; Thematic analysis; Interventions; Health issues;
Psychosocial issues; Social issues.

Introduction
Background
Infectious diseases have occurred in the past and continue to emerge. Infectious
diseases are termed “emerging” if they newly appear in a population or have existed
but are increasing rapidly in incidence or geographic range [1]. Examples of
emerging infectious diseases include acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, Ebola,
dengue hemorrhagic fever, Lassa fever, severe acute respiratory syndrome, H1N1
flu, Zika, etc. [2]. Evidence shows that emerging infectious diseases are among the
leading causes of death and disability globally [3]. For instance, a 1-year estimate of
the 2009 H1N1 flu pandemic shows that 43 to 89 million people were infected [4]
and 201,200 respiratory deaths and 83,300 cardiovascular deaths were linked to
the disease [5] globally. In addition, 770,000 HIV deaths were recorded in 2018
alone, with approximately 37.9 million people already infected with the virus
globally [6]. Ebola is another deadly infectious disease that has an average case
fatality rate of about 50%, with a range of 25% to 90% case fatality rates in past
outbreaks [2,7].
In December 2019, the novel coronavirus which causes the COVID-19 disease
emerged and soon became the latest deadly infectious disease [8,9] globally with
more than 9.4 million confirmed cases and over 482,800 deaths in 188
countries/regions as at June 25, 2020 [10]. Hence, it was declared a pandemic by the
World Health Organization. The COVID-19 pandemic has strained the global health
systems, and also caused socio-economic challenges due to job losses and

lockdowns (and other restrictive measures) imposed by governments and public
health agencies to curtail the spread of the virus. Evidence has already shown that
emerging infectious diseases impose significant burden on global economies and
public health [3,11–13]. To understand public concern and personal experiences,
and factors that hinder or facilitate the efforts to control the spread of the COVID-19
pandemic globally, social media data can produce rich and useful insights that were
previously impossible in both scale and extent [14].
Over the years, social media has witnessed a surge in active users to more than 3.8
billion globally [15], making it a rich source of data for research in diverse domains.
In the health domain, social media data (i.e., user comments or posts on Twitter,
Facebook, YouTube, Instagram, online forums, blogs, etc.) have been used to
investigate mental health issues [16,17], maternal health issues [18,19], diseases
[20–24], substance use [25,26] and other health-related issues [27,28]. Other
domains (e.g., politics, commerce, marketing, banking) have also witnessed
widespread use of social media data to uncover new insights related to election
results [29–32], election campaign [33], customer behaviour and engagement
[34,35], etc. As regards the COVID-19 crisis, social media data can reveal public
perceptions toward how governments and health agencies across the globe are
handling the pandemic, as well as the social, economic, psychological, and healthrelated impact of the disease on people regardless of their geographic locations in
line with various factors that hinder or facilitate the efforts to control the spread of
the COVID-19 pandemic globally.
In this paper, we apply natural language processing (NLP) to understand public
opinions, experiences, and issues with respect to the COVID-19 pandemic using data
from Twitter, Facebook, YouTube, and three online discussion forums (i.e.,
Archinect.com [36,37], LiveScience.com [38], and PushSquare.com [39]). NLP is a
well-established method that has been applied in many health informatics papers to
understand various health-related issues. For example, Abdalla et al. studied the
privacy implications of word embeddings trained on clinical data containing
personal health information [40], while Bekhuis et al. applied NLP to extract clinical
phrases and keywords from corpus of messages posted to an internet mailing list
[41].
The contributions of our research are as follows:
1. We apply a context-aware Natural Language Processing (NLP) approach for
extracting opinionated themes from COVID-19-related social media
comments.
2. We uncover various negative and positive themes representing public
perceptions toward the COVID-19 pandemic. Our results reveal 34 negative
themes, out of which 15 are health-related issues, psychosocial issues, and
social issues related to the pandemic from the public perspective. In addition,
20 positive themes emerged from our results.

3. We recommend interventions that can help address the health, psychosocial,
and social issues based on the positive themes and other remedial ideas
rooted in research. These interventions will help governments, health
professionals and agencies, institutions, and individuals in their efforts to
curb the spread of COVID-19 and minimize its impact, as well as in reacting
to any future pandemics.
Relevant Literature
Social media has been a rich source of data for research in many domains, including
health [42]. Research that utilizes social media in conjunction with natural language
processing (NLP) within the health domain continues to grow and cover broad
application areas such as health surveillance (e.g., mental health, substance use,
diseases, pharmacovigilance, etc.), health communication, sentiment analysis, and so
on [43]. For example, Park et al. [44] used the lexicon-based approach to track
prevalence of keywords indicating public interest in four health issues – Ebola, ecigarette, marijuana, and influenza – based on social media data. Afterwards, they
generated topics or themes that explain changes in discussion volume over time
using the Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) algorithm. Similarly, Jelodar et al. [45]
applied LDA to extract latent topics in COVID-19-related comments and used the
LSTM recurrent neural network technique for sentiment classification.
Furthermore, Nobles et al. [46] used social media data to examine the needs
(including seeking health information) of reportable sexually transmitted diseases
community. Their NLP approach involves extracting top 50 unigrams from the posts
based on frequency, and then generating topics or themes using the non-negative
matrix factorization technique instead of LDA. Paul et al. [47] applied the Ailment
Topic Aspect Model to generate latent topics from Twitter data with the aim of
detecting mentions of specific ailments, including allergies, obesity, and insomnia.
They used a list of keyphrases to automatically identify possible systems and
treatments. McNeill et al. [48] investigated how the dissemination of H1N1-related
advice in the United Kingdom encourages/discourages vaccine and antiviral uptake
using Twitter data. They conducted an automated content analysis using KH-Coder
tool to explore potential topics based on frequency of occurrence, and then
performed a more detailed or conversational analysis to understand skepticism
over economic beneficiaries of vaccination, as well as the risks and benefits of
medication based on public opinion. On the other hand, Oyebode et al. [49]
performed sentiment analysis on user reviews of mental health apps using machine
learning approach. They compared five classifiers (based on five different machine
learning algorithms) and used the best performing classifier to predict the
sentiment polarity of reviews. However, none of the approaches above considers the
context in which words appear in unstructured texts, which instinctively plays a
huge role in conveying meaning.
To investigate the significance of contextual text analysis, Dave et al. [50] compared
the non-contextual N-Gram Chunking approach and the contextual Part-of-Speech
(POS) chunking approach in their experimental research in the field of advertising.
While the N-Gram chunking method simply extracts words of varying lengths within

sentence boundary as candidate keyphrases or themes, the POS chunking method
infers the context of words using POS patterns such as one or more noun tags (NN,
NNP, NNS, and NNPS) along with adjective tags (JJ) and optional cardinal tags (CD)
and determiners (DT). They focus on keyphrases of up to length six for their
experiments. Their initial assessment showed that majority of the keyphrases
generated using the N-Gram chunking method are not meaningful within the
advertising context, hence not useful. Furthermore, they observed the impact of
keyphrases from both methods on the performance of classification systems based
on Naïve Bayes, logistic regression, and bagging machine learning algorithms. Their
findings revealed that systems using the POS chunking method outperformed those
using the N-Gram chunking method for feature extraction. We leveraged Dave et
al.’s contextual method in this work and extended it to capture additional POS
patterns, NLP preprocessing techniques, and sentiment scoring using lexicon-based
technique.
Finally, to uncover insights about the type of information shared on Twitter during
the peak of the H1N1 (swine flu) pandemic in 2009, Ahmed et al. [51] generated
eight broad themes using coding method involving expert reviewers. Similarly,
Bekhuis et al. [41] involved two dentists to manually and iteratively classify clinical
phrases into categories and subcategories. We also used this method in the theme
categorization stage of our work to group related themes or keyphrases into broad
themes.

Methods
The main goal of this paper is to understand people’s personal experiences and
opinions with respect to the COVID-19 pandemic using social media data. To achieve
this, we apply various standard and well-known computational techniques which
are highlighted below and summarized in Figure 1.
1. We collect COVID-19-related comments or posts from Twitter, Facebook,
YouTube, and three online discussion forums using programming languages
(Python and C#) and relevant application programming interfaces (APIs).
2. We perform preprocessing tasks which involve applying Natural Language
Processing (NLP) techniques to clean the data and prepare them for the
theme extraction phase.
3. We apply context-aware NLP approach to extract meaningful themes or
keyphrases which are words or phrases that convey the topical content of
the comments. This approach is in seven stages: grammar definition,
sentence breaking and tokenization, part-of-speech tagging, lemmatization,
syntactic parsing, transformation and filtering, and sentiment scoring.
4. We categorize related themes into broader themes.

Figure 1. Methodological stages
Data Collection
We utilized various automated techniques to collect 47,410,795 (over 47 million)
COVID-19 or Coronavirus-related comments from six social media platforms –
Twitter, YouTube, Facebook, Archinect.com, LiveScience.com, and PushSquare.com.
The techniques, as well as the breakdown of the data collected from each platform,
are described below:
1. Twitter: We developed a tool using C# programming language to
automatically extract tweets containing relevant hashtags in real-time
through the Twitter Streaming API [52]. The Twitter hashtags related to
COVID-19
include
#QuarantineAndChill,
#MyPandemicSurvivalPlan,
#CoronaVirus, #caronavirusoutbreak, #CoronavirusOutbreak, #Quarantined,
#pandemic, #coronapocalypse, #COVID19, #QuarantineLife, #Covid_19,
#StopTheSpread, #CoronaVirusUpdates, #StayAtHome, #selfquarantine, #
COVID ー 19, #panicbuying, #ncov2019, #Coronavid19, #CoronaCrisis,
#SocialDistancing,
#COVID,
#cronovirus,
#CoronaVirusUpdate,
#CoronavirusPandemic, and #COVID-19. A total of 47,249,973 tweets were
collected.
2. YouTube: We developed a Python script to retrieve comments associated
with relevant videos through the YouTube Data API [53] using the search
keywords such as: covid19, covid-19, and coronavirus. Due to YouTube’s
quota limits, we were only able to extract 111,722 comments across 2,939
videos.
3. Facebook: Due to Facebook’s automated search restrictions, we applied a
semi-automated approach to extract comments. First, we manually retrieved
relevant groups (n=91) and pages (n=68) using the following search
keywords: COVID-19, Coronavirus, and COVID. Afterwards, we developed a
Python script to extract 777 and 8,382 comments posted on the groups and
pages respectively.
4. Online discussion forums: We developed a Python script to extract 20,747;
793; and 18,401 comments (from Coronavirus-related threads) on
Archinect.com, LiveScience.com, and PushSquare.com respectively.
Data Preprocessing
Next, we applied the following NLP techniques to clean and prepare data for
analysis using Python:
1. Remove hashtags, mentions, and URLs
2. Expand contractions (e.g., wouldn’t is replaced with would not)

3. Unescape HTML characters (e.g., “&amp;” is replaced with the “&”
equivalent)
4. Remove HTML tags (e.g., <p>, <span>, <br />, etc.)
5. Remove special characters, except those with semantic implications such as
period and exclamation mark (which are useful for identifying sentence
boundary), comma, etc.
6. Reduce repeated characters (e.g., toooooool becomes tool)
7. Convert slangs to their equivalent English words using online slang
dictionaries [54,55] which contain 5,434 entries in total
8. Remove numeric words
After the preprocessing tasks were completed, non-English and duplicated
comments were removed, thereby reducing total number of comments to 8,021,341.
Theme Extraction
Next, we randomly selected 1,051,616 comments (representing approximately 13%
of the entire dataset) and then extracted meaningful keyphrases or themes that
convey the topical content of the comments. We refer to the dataset containing the
comments as corpus and each comment as document in the remaining parts of this
paper. We focus on themes that are opinionated (i.e., express or imply positive or
negative sentiment [56]) since our goal is to determine public opinions and impact
with respect to the COVID-19 pandemic. We extracted candidate themes from our
corpus using a seven-stage context-aware NLP approach, shown in Figure 2. We
implemented our approach using the Python programming language.

Figure 2. Context-aware Natural Language Processing (NLP) Approach
Grammar definition
A grammar is a set of rules that describe how syntactic units (such as sentences and
phrases) should be deconstructed into their constituents [57]. To derive meaningful
themes or keyphrases, we defined a grammar (see below) which specifies a
meaningful part-of-speech (POS) pattern that the syntactic parser uses to

deconstruct each sentence in the documents. Table 1 shows the various parts of
speech (or syntactic categories) covered by our grammar. These syntactic categories
are based on well-established part-of-speech tagging guidelines for English [58].
{< 𝑫𝑻 >? < 𝑱𝑱.∗>∗ < 𝑵𝑵.∗>∗ < 𝑽𝑩.∗>? (< 𝑰𝑵 >? < 𝑫𝑻 >? < 𝑱𝑱.∗>∗ < 𝑵𝑵.∗>∗)? }

In the grammar above, the “?” and “*” characters represent “optional” and “zero or
more occurrences” respectively. Our grammar is aimed at generating keyphrases
that capture both context and sentiment of a conversation using nouns, adjectives,
and verbs. Research has shown that nouns are most useful in knowing the context of
a conversation (i.e., what is being discussed) [59], while verbs and adjectives are
important for sentiment detection [60]. Determiners and prepositions are also
captured by the grammar since they usually co-occur with noun or adjective phrases
(e.g., a meal for six people, a hospital on the hilltop, etc.).
Table 1. POS tags, description, and the corresponding matching POS pattern
Tag
Description
Matching Pattern
DT
Determiner
<DT>
JJ
Adjective
JJR
Adjective (comparative)
<JJ.*>
JJS
Adjective (superlative)
NN
Noun (singular)
NNS
Noun (plural)
<NN.*>
NNP
Proper Noun (singular)
NNPS Proper Noun (plural)
VB
Verb (base form)
VBD
Verb (past tense)
VBG
Verb (gerund or present participle)
<VB.*>
VBN
Verb (past participle)
VBP
Verb (non-3rd person singular present)
VBZ
Verb (3rd person singular present)
IN
Preposition or subordinating conjunction
<IN>
Sentence Breaking and Tokenization
Next, each document is split into sentences, and then each sentence is split into
tokens or words. The sentence breaking task is achieved using an unsupervised
algorithm that considers abbreviations, collocations, capitalizations, and
punctuations to detect sentence boundaries [61].
Part-of-Speech (PoS) Tagging
The tagging module associates each token with its part of speech. The part of speech
tags are based on the Penn Treebank tagset [58,62], some of which are shown in
Table 1.

Lemmatization
Each token is reduced to its root form, depending on its part of speech. This activity
is called lemmatization. For example, worse and better which are both adjectives will
become bad and good respectively. Prior to lemmatization, each token is converted
to lowercase. While [63] applied stemming for its tokens, we chose lemmatization
over stemming since lemmatization returns root words that are always meaningful
and exist in the English dictionary. Stemming, on the other hand, may return root
words that have no meaning at all since it merely removes prefixes or suffixes based
on rule-based method [64].
Syntactic Parsing
The syntactic parsing module deconstructs each sentence into a parse tree and then
creates chunks or phrases based on the grammar or POS pattern defined in the first
step. In other words, the parser’s chunking process involves matching phrases
composed of an optional determiner, zero or more of any time of adjective, zero or
more of any type of noun, any type of verb (but optional), as well as an optional
component. This component consists of an optional preposition, an optional
determiner, zero or more of any type of adjective, and zero or more of any type of
noun. The output of this stage is the candidate themes (𝐶𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑠 ).
Transformation and Filtering
In this stage, themes that are stopwords (i.e., words that are commonly used, such as
the, a, an, with, in, that, etc.) are removed from 𝐶𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑠 using a predefined list
𝐿𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑝𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑠 compiled from multiple sources such as [65]. Also, a subset of 𝐿𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑝𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑠
are removed from the start and end of (and from within) the remaining themes in
𝐶𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑠 such that the meaning of the themes is preserved. Afterwards, duplicates
were removed from 𝐶𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑠 . In addition, themes containing more than ten words
are removed from 𝐶𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑠 . While previous research excluded themes above length
six [50], we excluded themes above length ten to prevent losing important themes
that would have enriched insights from this paper. Since our focus is on opinionated
themes (i.e., positive and negative themes), we applied a filtering technique that
involves computing sentiment score for each theme and discarding non-opinionated
themes.
Sentiment Scoring
To determine opinionated themes in 𝐶𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑠 , the scoring module computes
sentiment score, 𝑆𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 , ranging from −1 to +1 for each theme using the VADER
lexicon-based algorithm [66]. Afterwards, each theme is assigned a polarity based
on the sentiment score using the criteria in [66] and shown in Table 2. Themes with
the neutral polarity are excluded from 𝐶𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑠 since they are not opinionated.

Table 2. Criteria for sentiment scoring
Criteria
𝑆𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 > 0.05
𝑆𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 < −0.05
𝑆𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 between −0.05 and +0.05

Sentiment Polarity
Positive
Negative
Neutral

Theme Categorization
Next, we recruited four reviewers to categorize related themes into a broader theme
using thematic analysis method. We assigned the negative themes to a group of two
reviewers (G1) and the positive themes to a second group of two reviewers (G2).
Each reviewer independently examines the themes iteratively and continues to
categorize related themes until saturation level is reached (i.e., no new categories
were emerging from the themes). We measured interrater reliability using the
percentage agreement metric [67]. The percentage interrater reliability score for G1
is 98.0% while the score for G2 is 99.3%.

Results
In this section, we discuss the results of our experiments and theme categorization.
From the large corpus used for the experiment, a total of 427,875 unique negative
themes and 520,685 unique positive themes were automatically generated.
Negative Themes
Figure 3 shows top 130 sample negative themes and their dominance in terms of
frequency of occurrence. Our results revealed that death (n=10,187) is the dominant
theme, followed by die (n=7,240), fight (n=5,891), bad (n=3,808), kill (n=3,668), lose
(n=3,631), pay (n=3486), leave (n=3,234), crisis (n=2,783), hard (n=2,720), worry
(n=2,476), sick (n=2,314), sad (n=2,129), and so on. Figure 4 shows more negative
themes, such as national health emergency, scary time, life suck, everyone struggle,
dangerous lie, child die, trouble breathe, no medicine, sick people, pay bill, horrible
virus, fear coronavirus, extra cautious, steal mask, family die, people in crisis, bad
leadership, in house bore, feel horrible, total incompetence, call virus hoax, conspiracy
theory ridiculous, take no precaution, serious lockdown, increase in suicide rate,
people starve, lack of preparedness, fight menace, restriction on travel, etc.

Figure 3. Top 130 negative themes and their dominance in terms of frequency of
occurrence (larger size of the gray oval represents more dominance)

Figure 4. Sample negative themes
Positive Themes
Figure 5 illustrates top 130 positive themes and their dominance in terms of
frequency of occurrence (larger size of the gray oval represents more dominance in
the figure). Our results revealed that help (n=18,498) is the dominant theme,
followed by hope (n=7,708), protect (n=7,130), love (n=6,895), support (n=6,198),
good (n=5,740), share (n=5,187), care (n=4,917), stay safe (n=4,917), and so on.
Figure 6 shows more positive themes, such as keep everyone safe, clean environment,
trust scientific data, create cure, economic relief, encourage business, remain strong,
good mask, social distancing best way, generous, respect human right, help prevent
further spread, pray for health, social solidarity, support relief effort, protect health
worker, good immune system, practice good hand hygiene, speak truth, expand testing,
protect vulnerable people, free treatment, ease anxiety, etc.

Figure 5. Top 130 positive themes and their dominance in terms of frequency of
occurrence (larger size of the gray oval represents more dominance)

Figure 6. Sample positive themes
Theme Categories
Overall, 34 negative and 20 positive theme categories emerged after the Theme
Categorization phase discussed in the Methods section. 15 out of the 34 negative
theme categories are health-related, psychosocial, and social issues (which are the
main focus of this paper and shown in Table 3). Figure 7 shows the 15 negative
theme categories and the corresponding number of themes under each category,
while Figure 8 shows the negative theme categories and the total number of
comments for each category. Frustration due to life disruptions emerged as the top
negative theme category with the highest number of comments, followed by
Increased mortality, Comparison with other diseases or incidents, Nature of the
disease, and Harassment. On the other hand, Table 4 shows the 20 positive theme
categories, description, and sample comments. Figure 9 shows the corresponding
number of themes under each positive theme category, while Figure 10 shows the
total number of comments for each theme category. Public awareness emerged as
the top positive theme category based on the number of comments, followed by
Spiritual support, Encouragement, and Charity.
We refer to the theme categories as simply “themes” and the various themes under
each category as “subthemes” in the remaining part of this paper.

Figure 7. Negative themes and the corresponding number of subthemes

Figure 8. Negative themes and the corresponding number of comments - frequency

Figure 9. Positive themes and the corresponding number of subthemes

Figure 10. Positive themes and the corresponding number of comments - frequency

Table 3. Negative themes, descriptions, and corresponding sample comments
Theme

Description

Sample comments

Increased
mortality

Increasing number of deaths
due to the Coronavirus disease

“Grieving for the world and
my country, every night the
death count rises up. I cry for
everybody that as died, for
those people fighting it, &
family who have lost
someone. I do not know each
person by name BUT I want
you to know you are not
alone in this pain.” a [C58]

Health-related
Issues

Health
concerns

Struggling
health
systems

Health concerns expressed by
people, such as mental health
issues (e.g., anxiety, depression,
stress, obsessive compulsive
disorder, etc.), excessive
drinking, migraine, fatigue, and
others

Inability of health systems to
cope with pandemic and give
people adequate healthcare

“... The number of deaths
from the CoronaVirus in
London are doubling every
two days. London could end
up with a worse than Italy.”
[C90]
“It is been either ten or
fourteen days since the
nursing home I work at went
on lockdown due to Covid_19
and the stress/anxiety is really
starting to get to me. I am
struggling to sleep at night.”
[C3327]
“On my fifth day of sickness,
the symptoms disappeared,
leaving only an odd metallic
taste in my mouth, nasal
mucosal ulcers and intense
fatigue. This is what a former
chair of the UK RCGP went
through after catching
COVID19.” [C945]
“What clearly shows is the
correlation between
countries with clean hospitals
and countries with bad
hospitals and corona deaths.
People die with corona not of
corona. In particular New
York and California displays
its poor health system.” [C81]
“Pakistani doctors openly
saying their numbers are
being underreported. They
claim 100s of patients in
Lahore alone, and say that

Fitness issues

Rising
number of
cases

Nature of
disease

Inability to perform usual
physical activity nor attend
fitness sessions, and dislike for
indoor workout

Concerns over rising COVID-19
cases

Explaining the nature of the
COVID-19 disease, including its
symptoms (such as cough, loss
of taste and fever), its “no
symptom” (or asymptotic)
behaviour, how it spreads, and
vulnerable population

because of poor facilities,
hospitals themselves might
be spreading the virus.” [C44]
“Woke up at 8:20 am and still
in bed from the past 2 hours.
No mood of workout” [C271]
“I just need it to be known
that I hate quarantine
workouts and I miss the damn
gym. Also I never thought I
would ever say this in life!”
[209]
“The United States is
currently on the path of the
most widespread viral attack
in the world.” [C908]
“This has done a heinous
crime on humanity by
spreading to more and more
areas of the country. The head
of the Jamat must be booked
for murder crime, as many
have died due to Corona
infection after attending their
function.” [C24]
“Recent reports suggest that
Covid-19 does not only affect
the respiratory system, but
also affects the Central
Nervous System. Loss of smell
and loss of taste happen to be
some of the early symptoms
of covid-19.” [C660]
“…they are all grabbing and
touching the desk. This virus is
much more contagious than
the flu and there is 0
immunity exposure illness.
Keep doing it like this and it is
only a matter of time before
everyone who spoke will
have the virus…” [C900]

Comparison
with other
diseases or
incidents

Comparing Coronavirus disease
with other diseases or incidents,
such as flu, pneumonia, natural
disasters, war, etc.

“If 3 elders died within 72
hours and had no symptoms,
should we not be testing
everyone?” [C2447]
“A war fought with no guns or
bombs, where people flee
from what they do not see or
is it World War 3?” [C515]

“I believe Covid19 is this
mutated H5N1 avian flu virus.
It is airborne, which might
explain the rapid spread
around the world.” [C671]
Psychosocial
Issues
Expression of
Fear

Retrospection

Frustration
due to life
disruptions

Expression and spread of fear
among people, including fear of
infection, sickness, and death

People recalling past life prior to
pandemic and wished they got it
back

Expression of frustrations over
disruption to everyday life, such
as consistent homework (for
schoolers), more household
chores (for moms), difficulty
accessing family members or
loved ones, sporting event
suspension, postponement of
planned trips and tours, higher
food prices, restaurants closure,
etc.

“… Indigenous tribes are
closing off their reserves to
visitors as they fear the
disease that is fast spreading
across South America could
wipe them out…” [C3884]
“…This virus has caused a lot
of fear in the lives of many, it
has also brought about
different mindset in the heart
of men. Truly the world is
coming to an end.” [C7227]
“I miss football. I miss my
family. I miss my friends. But
more than all of that, I miss
human touch!” [C300]
“If you consider yourself and
how is social distancing going
for you? I miss walking
around and reading/writing
at local coffee shops.” [C3001]
“Everyday, I wake up from a
very normal dream, and
realize I have to do another
day in this insane world. All I
want to do is go see my mom
and give her a hug, but I
cannot! I feel so alone. I cry
every day. I cannot do this
much longer.” [C2905]
“Day 15 of I only leave my
house for food and exercise.
Living in such extremes is
confusing and disorienting for
my body. Every time I step
outside, I become hungry and
start sweating, preemptively.”
[C4484]
“Not getting a hair cut in
February was a terrible idea. I
am two hair shades away
from looking like an
overweight member of BTS”
[C89]

Work-fromhome
complaints

Panic
shopping

Complaints about working from
home during pandemic, such as
distractions/disturbance,
psychological stress, pain, sleep
issues, etc.

People stockpiling groceries and
other essential goods due to
pandemic

“Is anyone else experiencing
leg and knee pain from
working from home too much
or is it just me? If so, how
have you all dealt with it?...”
[C824]
“Working from home is an epic
fail! I am losing it between my
child, pets, monkey calls, and
renovations. Wake me when
this is over.” [C853]
“This panic buying is
ridiculous! Heart rending!
Guess it takes a situation like
to show how selfish callously
indifferent we really are
towards other humans /
animals. Have a heart
people!” [C779]
“And yet there is still no
logical reason for clearing the
shelves of toilet roll, depriving
those who are old infirm or in
poverty from accessing such
necessities because the selfserving privileged have
greedily taken it all away.”
[C4]

Social Issues
Wrong
societal
attitude

Domestic
violence

Blaming people’s wrong attitude
as causing or fanning the spread
(such as disobeying instructions
from governments and
healthcare professionals, eating
bats and wild animals, etc.)

Rise in domestic violence cases
in homes

“Cannot believe how
irresponsible people are being
in regard public health. We all
have a duty of care to each
other, please abide by the
social distance rules” [C4924]
“...We are only going to die
from our own arrogance if
people keep going outside
gathering, believing they will
never get it or infect others...”
[C2557]
“Of all women murdered with
a gun in the US, half are killed
by their intimate partners.
COVID19 pandemic is causing
a rise in domestic violence.
Close the gun stores.” [C56]
“… a police station in China
received 162 reports of
domestic violence in February
compared to 47 for the same

Harassment

Harassing and blaming people
from certain countries, race, or
religion as responsible for the
Coronavirus disease

month in 2019. Advocates
attribute this rise in cases to
the lockdown.” [C100]
“… stop being so racist
against Northeastern state of
India. We are not Corona. Get
your damn information right.
The most affected places with
is not Northeast. Instead of
being a racist and criticising
others, why do not you be
more careful?” [C1413]
“An Asian American couple in
Minnesota found a racist note
taped to their front door
blaming them for the
coronavirus” [C921]

a All comments are included verbatim throughout the paper, including spelling and grammatical mistakes.

Table 4. Positive themes, descriptions, and corresponding sample comments
Theme Category
Gratitude

Public awareness

Description
Appreciating health workers,
delivery workers, farmers, pilots,
security agents, and other
frontline worker, as well as the
government, for their active role
during the pandemic

Raising awareness intimating the
public about general safety and
control measures to limit the
spread of the disease (such as
good hygiene, social distancing,
staying at home, face masks,
healthy eating, etc.), addressing
misinformation, travel guidelines,
etc.

Sample comments
“Let us show our appreciation for hard
work the health care professionals are
doing to save lives at these thought times.”
[C37]
“Thank you to all on the Frontline and the
Key Workers, keep up the amazing work,
you are doing an amazing job, keep our
country going. Keep Smiling in challenging
times” [C156]
“Practicing good hygiene, like washing your
hands often, with soap and water, for at
least 20 seconds, is the best way to prevent
the spread of Coronavirus...” [C707]
“We can help ourselves by keep practicing
proper hygiene, assume anyone around us
could be positive and we must keep
personal distancing, wear protective gear,
mask, gloves, etc. Boost our immune
system by eating healthy food. Search what
kind of vegetable and fruits is best to
increase our body's ability to fight the
virus. Sanitize groceries before bringing
them inside the house...” [C16]
“If extremely necessary, stay healthy while
travelling by maintaining personal hygiene,
cough etiquette and keeping a distance of
at least one metre from others. Here are
some travel tips from World Health

Cleaner
Environment

Evidence of
recovery from
disease

Homemade
protective
equipment

Online learning

Connection with
family and friends

Evidence of cleaner environment,
including less pollution and good
air quality, due to pandemicrelated lockdowns

Evidence of people recovering
from Coronavirus disease with or
without treatment

People’s ingenuity in creating
essential protective equipment
(e.g., face masks, face shield, etc.)
themselves in their homes or
community

Public engagement in online
learning, such as schools teaching
students/pupils online, selfdevelopment by enrolling in
online courses covering different
domains, etc.

Spending time with family,
friends, and loved ones due to
pandemic and lockdown

Organization” [C537]
“Coronavirus, making Earth healthy again”
[C588]
“Coronavirus pandemic leading to huge
drop in air pollution” [C664]
“Remember the time when we used to
share the post that said, ‘We have only 6
months to take action and save the
environment, mend your ways or there is
no way to save the earth’. Guess what? A
virus saved the environment better than
the most evolved beings did.” [C992]
“A 95-year-old, become the oldest woman
in to recover from the novel coronavirus
without the need for antiviral treatment
after her body showed a great reaction to
the disease, doctors say.” [C214]
“He was referring to the number of
patients treated in the Baptist Healthcare
system here. He said the numbers show
90% of their Coronavirus positive patients
recover at home.” [C321]
“When your missus tells you she put
Vodka in her fairy. How was I supposed to
know she is trying to make homemade
hand sanitizer with the washing up
liquid?” [C9335]
“82 and counting. Eager volunteers all
over the city are stitching face masks to
ensure that our community remains
protected despite the imminent shortage
of PPEs in this pandemic.” [C129]
“We will all be spending more time at
home in the next few months due to
coronavirus. I have already registered
myself with number of short courses with
online learning for the subjects that
interest me. This could be a good time to
learn something new or sharpen up your
skills.” [C1648]
“Despite all the news, today is the first day
back to school for Florida's students
virtually. Distance learning might be the
new normal for a while...” [C710]
“Yesterday my mom had a video call with
her group of friends instead of going out
for their regular meetup. I am proud of my
mom. Who said boomers are outdated?”
[C7151]

Entertainment

People accessing entertaining
contents online or offline, such as
watching movies on streaming
websites, playing games, etc.

“This is not the time to be selfish. This is
the time to be more present. I did a roll
call this morning, calling all my friends
video call, family and those I care about just
to check on them...” [C2560]
“Stay at Home and Stay Safe. Please share
me good Amazon Prime or Netflix movies
and television shows.” [C93]
“Downloading the play station 1 and
nintendo 64 emulators on my pc. Can get
any game.” [C399]

Charity

Advocacy of
increased testing

Grassroots support

Provision of relief packages
(including donations, gifts, and
fundraising) for individuals,
businesses, and hospitals to ease
financial burden caused by the
pandemic

Advocacy of increased testing as
a means of curbing spread by
detecting infected people and
isolating them quickly

Extending support to people at
the local or community level
during the pandemic

“9th grade Colin has returned and will be
playing grand theft auto for 8 hours
straight” [C3192]
“Kicking off NeighborsHelpingNeighbors
here in RI with the RhodeIsland Hospitality
Relief Fund - a fund aiming to help
industry members directly affected by
COVID19.” [C3623]
“The 2 trillion emergency relief package
now before the House provides the
following: 1,200 checks for those earning
less than 75k, plus 500 per child,
unemployment benefits for 39 weeks up
from 26, unemployment benefits rise by
600/week for 4 months” [C10913]
“Zlatan Ibrahimovic has created a
fundraiser to gather 1m to help hospitals
in Italy working to tackle the coronavirus.
The striker has donated €100,000 to get
the fund started.” [C24]
“Studies in Iceland show that half of
carriers show no symptoms. Having
widespread test allows them to isolate
those with the virus, and thus, the virus
itself. Test, test, test.” [C1333]
“US surpassing all countries in number of
patients. Is it simply because they are now
testing at a faster rate even on slightest
suspicion? Yes, one of the ways to stop this
pandemic is Testing, Testing and Testing as
recommended by WHO” [C6363]
“The amazing QueerCare are offering
support to local mutual aid groups. They
have trained volunteers and are already in
contact with people who will need support
over the weeks and months to come...”
[C2839]

Access to
necessary tools

Spiritual support

Access to tracking or
communication tools/features
for information dissemination or
remote communication during
pandemic and lockdown

Offering prayer of recovery for
those with pandemic-related
health conditions and those at
risk, as well as a show of hope in
challenging times

“My self, and some other good citizens
residing in Lagos bought 150 pieces of
pocket hand Sanitizers to distribute to
people who cannot afford it or have
knowledge of what is all about and in
same process to tell them how to stay safe.
That is our own giveaway.” [C773]
“This is the most stunning visualization of
how spread around the world. A
mesmerizing and terrifying display of
globalization and virus spread.” [C6625]
“I would like to personally thank for the
private chat function during Zoom video
meetings.” [C2244]
“This tool is useful in identifying those
who are medically more at risk of
suffering complications from COVID19 ...”
[C9233]
“I pray for everyone diagnose of COVID19
swift and complete recovery in Jesus name.
Dear Lord, heal the world. Take away and
give everyone good health.” [C9230]
“Let’s pray for all African communities who
live in hostels, huts, rural areas with no
connectivity. No information. Innocents
but will also be affected by the
CoronaVirus” [C2104]

Solidarity for
frontliners

Development of
curative solutions
or treatments

Public call for support and
protection of frontliners, such as
health workers, delivery workers,
etc.

Ongoing efforts by health
researchers to develop vaccines
or drugs to cure or treat the
Coronavirus disease

“...those who have relationship with God
are less likely to become depressed than
those who do not. It is because their
confidence and hope is in Him so, let us
trust God amid the pandemic.” [C1349]
“What is New York City doing to protect
the workers at Amazon fulfillment center?
The virus is spreading quickly among the
employees…” [C3332]
“While the news of is getting more urgent
by the hour, it is great to know that during
a turbulent time some corporations
showed their support by increasing the
minute wage for frontline workers, hiring
100s of people to assist with increased
demand, helping unite.” [C4439]
“There is a bunch of solutions being
researched from I guess infusions to drugs
to slow virus reproduction, to vaccines.
None will be ready until a year or two.
Clinical studies take time and that is how
we do medical science safely.” [C5759]

Physical activity

Efforts made by people to stay
active and fit, as well as physical
activity suggestions, during
lockdown or isolation

“Coronavirus vaccine clinical trial starts
Monday, U.S. official says…But officials still
say it will take a year to 18 months to fully
validate any potential vaccine.” [C2034]
“I know it is a bad situation but damn I am
improving my fitness during this
lockdown” [C6335]
“Just finished our fitness session via skype
with friends. I live in Barcelona, lost track
of how many days since I went outside, we
have to keep the body moving though”
[C9430]

Encouragement

Support for remote
working

Innovative
research

(1) Encouraging people to stay
calm as they cope with the
pandemic situation, (2)
Encouraging people to view the
pandemic from a positive
standpoint and stay productive
amidst the challenges, (3)
Encouraging people to help
others in need and not panic buy,
and (4) Encouraging people to
obey lockdown rules, as well as
guidelines released by
governments and health
professionals

People’s support for the workfrom-home measure, including
adapting/coping with the
challenges it brings

Global research efforts to create
innovative products to address
the pandemic, including
developing interventions (such as
digital or technological
interventions) that help people
socially, physically, emotionally
or psychologically, as well as

“Get active every day with the kids or by
yourself! GoNoodle is here to help!...”
[C9364]
“Let us all stay calm. Give the authorities
time to attend to and address public
concerns…” [C3]
“Yes, we can. If we stay calm and respect
the rules, together we will defeat the
enemy.” [C38]
“Stay calm and help each other. Be careful.
Do not panic buy, and never give up!”
[C164]
“We have done it before and can do it now.
See the positive possibilities. Redirect the
substantial energy of our frustration and
turn it into positive, effective, unstoppable
determination for our safe and healthy
future” [C2273]
“Working from home with the children of
school can be challenging. We have taken a
look at some of the ways you can help
structure your day and stay on top of
working from home with our schools
closed.” [C148]
“Working from home amid Coronavirus
pandemic was amazing at least today.
Came up with some amazing designs…We
are coming up with our first property in
June. Already sold out” [C53]
“Doctors and scientists...have designed an
application to help the public monitor their
symptoms and the spread of the virus in
real-time with the contributing to their
own vital research” [C96]
“...Well, it is a huge scientific discovery!
Scientists want to use artificial intelligence

improve their overall health and
wellness

technology for a quicker and cheaper
COVID-19 screening...” [C197]
“The COVID19 Global Hackathon is an
opportunity for developers to build
software solutions that drive social impact,
with the aim of tackling some of the
challenges related to the current
coronavirus pandemic...” [C619]

Traditional remedy

Some suggestions regarding the
natural or traditional means of
protecting the body from
contracting the disease

“Gargling vitamin c, vinegar, warm water,
and a little bit of baking soda every 20
minutes. After 5 days, she tested negative.
If you or anyone you know starts getting
symptoms, this can help! Catch it early
before it gets to your lungs!” [C803]
“…I am sure I have Covid_19. I believe the
natural healing helped my daughter but
suppressed my symptoms...” [C2777]

Discussion
Principal Results
In this paper, we analyzed social media comments to uncover insights regarding
people’s opinions and perceptions toward the COVID-19 pandemic using contextaware NLP approach. Our empirical findings revealed negative and positive themes
(see Tables 3 and 4) representing negative and positive impact of COVID-19
pandemic and coping mechanisms on the world population. We discussed the
implications of the negative themes in this section and then recommend
interventions that can help tackle these issues based on the positive themes and
other remedial ideas rooted in research.
Negative issues surrounding COVID-19 Pandemic
Table 3 shows the negative themes grouped under health-related issues,
psychosocial issues, and social issues from our results. The health-related issues
include health concerns, increased mortality, struggling health systems, fitness issues,
nature of disease, rising number of cases, and comparison with other diseases or
incidents. Psychosocial issues are expression of fear, panic shopping, retrospection,
work-from-home issues, and frustration due to life disruptions. Social issues are
wrong societal attitude, domestic violence, and harassment.
Health-related issues
Evidence shows a rapid increase in the number of COVID-19 cases and a high casefatality rate of 7.2% [68]. In addition, substantial number of infected patients had
severe pneumonia or were critically ill [68]. Another evidence revealed the mental
health issues experienced by people and health professionals directly impacted by
COVID-19 pandemic [69], as well as the global healthcare systems’ inability to deal

with the outbreak [70]. The themes under this category are discussed in the
following subsections. They align with existing research and uncovered additional
insights with respect to the health-related issues caused by COVID-19 and witnessed
by people globally.
Health concerns
Based on our findings, people experienced various mental health issues (such as
anxiety, depression, stress, obsessive compulsive disorder, etc.) during the
pandemic. This is possibly due to the length of time spent staying at home (which
may be traumatic for some people while causing loneliness for others), worrying
about being infected with the disease and difficult living conditions, as well as guilt
on the part of healthcare workers who feel responsible for being unable to save
their patients from death. Research confirms that worry is associated with anxiety
and depression [71]. Cases of mental health disorders linked to COVID-19 have also
been reported [72]. Furthermore, people expressed other concerns like excessive
drinking, migraine, chest pain, mild to severe fatigue, nasal mucosal ulcers, sleep
disorder, and others. Sample comments are shown below:
“Cannot sleep. Mind is racing. Feeling anxious.” [C6648]
“I am so stressed and my anxiety has hit the roof. I am anxious about money
and how we will cope?” [C238]
“This coronavirus outbreak is more stressful for the family. Doing my best to
keep sanitized and safe. But, fear of the invisible killer lingers on, taking a
mental toll on my mother, wife, son, who are petrified every time I walk out of
the main door.” [C116]
“The chest pains today is beyond. It kinda have crawled up a bit and I feel like
I put my hand on my heart from time to time. Very tired today. But weirdly
still no fever. But I am cold and I feel sick.” [C12293]
“We have only been in for 3 weeks we are already feeling anxiety, depression
severe, so we decided to think of some ways we can keep ourselves each
other in good spirits.” [C8263]
Increased Mortality
People attested to an increase in death rates in many countries across different
continents including North America, Europe, Asia, Middle East, and Australia, as
shown in the sample comments below. Many countries, especially those in Africa,
started reporting deaths from COVID-19 (see [C1264]). Our findings also revealed
people of varying demographics died from the disease, including teenagers, adults,
and older adults, as well as those with or without underlying health conditions (see
[C8837] and [C940]).

“This is why America leads the world in the death toll already, and the pace
still is not showing any signs of slackening.” [C3399]
“UK coronavirus death rate DOUBLES as 381 die in 24 hours and boy, 13, with
no health problems becomes youngest victim” [C8837]
“Turkish health minister shares latest coronavirus data: 16 more people have
died, bringing death toll to 108” [C9000]
“Kenya has recorded the first death. According to Health Cabinet
Secretary,...the 66 years old man died on 26th in the afternoon at the
AghaKhan hospital intensive care unit.” [C1264]
“100 more UK deaths in last 24h alone. These are not all elderly co-morbid
people. Among these are the young, and the fit...” [C940]
Struggling health systems
Health systems around the world are struggling to cope with the surge in the
number of COVID-19 patients, and in most cases are unable to admit patients due to
limited resources [73]. Research has shown that healthcare burden due to COVID-19
is associated with the increase in mortality rate [74]. As revealed in the sample
comments below, our findings corroborated evidence of overstretched global health
systems during this pandemic.
“Hospitals turning away coronavirus patients in California. EMTALA being
used to set up tents outside of hospital ER, then dumping patients without
treatment or testing. I obtained recordings of standard hospital practice of
rejecting Covid19 patients.” [C4949]
“These are not just numbers. These are people and families. These lives can
be saved if the chunk of $2.2 Trillion are not used for bailing out corporations
and used to fix the broken US Health System.” [C3000]
Fitness issues
Evidence argues the prevalence of physical inactivity globally due to nationwide
quarantine or lockdown [75]. This is confirmed in our findings which show that
people have trouble staying fit due to inability to control eating habits or urges
while at home, as well as personal dislike for indoor-only workouts, as shown in the
comments below. Physical inactivity has been linked to coronary heart disease,
diabetes, stroke, and mental health issues [76–78] which, in turn, are risk factors for
mortality in COVID-19 adult inpatients [79].
“…severely missing my gym, missing routine, and cannot control my eating
while at home. Things are getting bad.” [C9002]

“During this shelter in place, I was gonna eat healthy and kill some workouts.
But instead I've been Guy Fieri'ing around the kitchen sampling all my
quarantine food every 2 hours. At this point, which will get me first coronavirus or a coronary?”
Nature of disease
People expressed their opinion about the nature of COVID-19 based on their
experiences and information available to them. As shown in the sample comments
below, people with underlying health conditions (e.g., diabetes, heart disease) are at
higher risk of developing severe complications from the disease. In addition, the
asymptotic attribute of COVID-19 is also discussed, and the possibility of the virus to
infect some critical immune cells that may lead to the failure of sensitive organs like
the lungs. People also perceived the disease as racial- or nationality-independent
but seems to pose more risk to men than women. The disease is also seen as highly
contagious and shows symptoms such as cough, fever, fatigue, loss of smell, muscle
aches, and respiratory-related symptoms (e.g., shortness of breath). These findings
align with clinical evidence regarding COVID-19 [80–85].
“Some WTC Health Program members with certain health conditions...may be
at a higher risk of serious illness from COVID19” [C3620]
“…Majority do not show symptoms while spreading Covid_19” [C10033]
“...If the coronavirus infects some of the immune cells then there is a cellular
catastrophe and organs like lungs are gone within hours.” [C9200]
“Coronavirus is a disease that pays no attention to borders, race or nationality.
However, it appears COVID-19 does pose a noticeably bigger threat to men
than it does to women.” [C1902]
“This is absolutely true. If you have a combination of cough, fever, problems
smelling, weakness, muscle aches or shortness of breath, assume you have
covid19. Don't bother getting tested. I know of many docs who don't test
anymore if patient has obvious symptoms.” [C2729]
Rising number of cases
Our findings show that more people are getting infected with COVID-19 in many
parts of the world, as shown in the sample comments below. Evidence confirms
increasing number of COVID-19 cases in North America [86,87], Europe [88], as well
as a growing concern for vulnerable continents such as Africa [89].
“There is rapid increase in cases of COVID19 in India...I request PM to extend
the lockdown to avoid community spread.” [C1325]
“Despite infection cases increasing at exponential rate doubling every 3 days,
Trump pushes workers to risk their lives for economy...” [C6522]

Comparison with other diseases or incidents
Our findings reveal that people compare COVID-19 with other diseases such as flu
(e.g., Spanish flu and H1N1 swine flu) and SARS, as well as with more extreme
incidents such as war. However, while some people tend to downplay the severity of
COVID-19 (see [C647]), others think it is dangerous or frightening (see [C922] and
[C45]). Research shows that COVID-19 has a higher transmissibility rate than SARS
[90] and killed more people than SARS and MERS combined [91], thereby making it
a highly contagious and lethal disease.
“It is just another strain of flu. People with weak and have health problem it
will affect different than people with stronger and not so much health
problems. Media is making it sound worse...” [C647]
“I was not at all concerned about swine flu, I was not at all concerned about
Ebola, I was not at all concerned about Zika virus, but this virus I was
concerned about going all the way back to January. If I had enough information
to be concerned about this virus, then so did they. We are a month behind on
dealing with this virus and there are no excuses, even a lay person like myself
knew all the way back in January that this was bigger than anything that has
come before it in my lifetime...” [C922]
“This is a war. We need to protect ourselves and minimize unnecessary contact
to avoid another Spanish flu that killed 50 million people...” [C45]
Psychosocial issues
Expression of Fear and Panic shopping
Based on our findings, people are fearful or scared about COVID-19 and while many
expressed genuine fear (including those who had lost loved ones to the disease,
contracted the disease, or had an infected family member), others attributed it to
fear mongering that is further amplified by the media. As a result of this fear, many
people engage in panic buying to stockpile essential items so they can stay
indoors/limit movements for some days or weeks to keep themselves and their
families safe. Below are sample comments:
“Very frightening when people who have travelled think that covid cannot
affect them. Such foolish behaviour and thoughts putting all of us at risk.
Those who travelled please STOP moving around and be at home.” [C8887]
“Fear mongering through projecting number of possible deaths. The media is
disgusting.” [C5559]
“Everyone who is panic shopping is driving my family and me nuts...Everyone
in our area is panic-buying groceries. We can't get noodles, rice, or really any
real staple foods. We hardly have any food already. I'm kinda scared.” [C2937]

Work-from-home complaints
Furthermore, the pandemic triggered work-from-home (or remote work) measure
to promote continuity of businesses during lockdown [92], but this may have
negative implications on people’s lifestyle and wellbeing. For example, people found
consistently working from home exhausting, boring, and distracting with kids at
home. In addition, people living in countries without stable electricity and strong
internet found it difficult and more costly to work from home, as they have to fuel
their generators and pay more for considerably good internet connectivity. Evidence
shows that people work longer hours at home than onsite due to difficulty in
maintaining clear delineation between work and non-work domains [93], thereby
leading to work-family conflict and strain [94]. Below are sample comments:
“Do you find working from home exhausting? You are not alone. Why is that
and how can you combat it?” [C11224]
“This thing of working from home annoys. Waking up at 4 am to have things
done before the Boy wakes up. Otherwise you will spend better part of the
day watching cartoons with no work done” [C9902]
“It is very clear from today's program how the government is not organized
or coordinated with this issue. How should one work from home with
constant power cuts and bad internet?” [C8855]
Frustration due to life disruptions and Retrospection
Finally, people are generally frustrated about life disruptions caused by COVID-19
(which is the top issue based on our empirical findings as shown in Figure 8). Based
on our findings, this frustration is mostly due to decreased leisure and interaction
with friends/family, authorities’ actions/inactions, as well as uncertainty of
upcoming situation which leads to cognitive dissonance [95], insecurity, and mental
discomfort [96]. People expressed their frustrations using words reflecting anger
and unhappiness/sadness, as shown in the sample comments below. Research
shows that positive emotions (e.g., happiness) and life satisfaction decreased during
COVID-19 pandemic [97]. Therefore, it is unsurprising that people missed (and
crave for) their pre-pandemic lives, in retrospection (see [C377]).
“I am getting more and more angry with this current situation we are in. My
favourite show has had to postpone its final episode, after already
postponing series 11...” [C7776]
“We are literally living in a time when arbitrary shit is more important than
health, wellness and preservation of life. Entitlement. Ignorance. Selfishness.
An untouchable mentality. Humanity at its absolute worst. April's going to be
a painful month to live through.” [C1228]

“I cannot wait until this whole thing is OVER. I miss doing nails. I miss being in
my element and doing the creative things I enjoy. I have no practice hand; I
have no work; I feel lost. I was just licensed in Jan!” [C377]
Social issues
Wrong societal attitude
Our findings revealed disapproval and concerns about people’s defiance of
precautionary measures or guidelines (such as social distancing and travel
guidelines) to curb the spread of COVID-19 (see [C7218] and [C1444] below), as
well as some people’s habit of eating animals assumed to be carriers of viruses (see
[C4013]). Research highlights certain factors responsible for reduced compliance
with public health guidelines, such as poverty, economic dislocation, lack of
compensation, and mistrust of science [98–100].
“The only good thing about Coronavirus is that it will cull the stupid people
from amongst us - those that do not take it seriously and continue to gather in
public, those that go overseas to attend weddings and other events when they
know the risk...” [C7218]
“The public response to this crisis in the UK has been absolutely pathetic.
Showing we are an entitled society who cannot handle being told what to do.
Embarrassing that people cannot follow simple instruction.” [C1444]
“Why is that someone who knows how dangerous eating these animals are
and still go right ahead and eat. Is it that they do not have any sense or is it
just irresponsible stupid people to do this then what are they crazy or just
insane?” [C4013]
Domestic Violence
Furthermore, increase in domestic violence incidents was reported as a result of the
COVID-19-related lockdown, as shown in the comments below. Evidence already
confirms the link between COVID-19 and the rising cases of domestic violence
globally [101–105].
“Cases of domestic violence in the USA has skyrocketed since the CoronaVirus
forced couples to stay home together for 14 days or more.” [C9900]
“While domestic violence across France increased by 32% in one week, in Paris
it rose by as much as 36%.” [C13720]
“What worries me more than the coronavirus, is the safety and welfare of
those stuck at home with their abusers, the children witnessing domestic
violence and the lonely relying on company. Staying home is not always safer.”
[C7910]

Harassment
Our findings also uncovered undue harassment of people from certain culture, race,
or religious background while accusing them of spreading COVID-19 disease.
Sample comments below reveal public intimidation and racist attack towards
Chinese/Asians and certain Indian tribes. This aligns with evidence of widespread
anti-Chinese and anti-Asian xenophobic or racist attacks, especially in the United
States, both physically and on social media [106–111].
“...This supermarket refuses to sell the food to the CHINESE! We should stop
going to this supermarket! We strongly against RACISM towards Chinese
people abroad! THIS MUST STOP!” [C2008]
“Coronavirus has only taught me one thing; some people are so racist,
especially on this platform. The amount of hate, racist comments and abuse I
am seeing Chinese/Asian people get is painful.” [C5000]
“Indians got racism in their blood, breath, and beyond. A Mizo girl faced racism
in Pune as a woman kept covering a face whenever the Mizo girl passed by. A
friend Naga from maternal side in Mumbai, got called corona virus in the
middle of an empty road.” [C6660]
Recommended interventions for addressing the negative issues
As lockdown and physical distancing persists, people with health concerns should
be able to receive medical attention without visiting a hospital. Considering the
proliferation of smartphones and the current wave of global digitization, digital
interventions using mobile, artificial intelligence (AI), internet of things (IoT), and
virtual reality technologies have been shown to be effective for delivering remote
healthcare (or telehealth) to patients [112–117]. This is based on our findings under
the innovative research positive theme (see Table 4) which revealed global research
efforts to create digital interventions using emerging technologies to address the
health crisis caused by COVID-19. For example, mobile apps that detect mental
health issues (e.g., depression and anxiety) based on phone sensors (or wearable
sensors) data and self-reports using machine learning/deep learning models, and
then guide users through therapeutic procedures or treatments will be useful tools
during and after the pandemic. In addition, these apps should allow users to book
appointment with doctors/clinicians/therapists and access remote medical advice,
diagnosis, and treatments when necessary.
Also, data-driven surveillance systems based on artificial intelligence that predict
location of next COVID-19 outbreak can enhance the effectiveness of containment
efforts, thereby slowing the spread of the disease and reducing case-fatality rate.
Furthermore, the development of curative solutions or treatments (see Table 4), can
be accelerated by leveraging machine learning/deep learning algorithms. For
example, deep learning models can be used to predict chemical compounds that can

halt viral replication, as well as to suggest drugs that can be effective against the
virus.
To address fitness issues during lockdown, physical activity (which is one of the
positive themes in our results) programs or sessions with personalized feedback
delivered through mobile apps will be helpful. Research has shown that
smartphone-based health programs yield significant weight loss and increase
physical activity [118]. There is also an urgent need to strengthen the global
healthcare systems to cope with current and future pandemics through public and
private investments in the health sector on an ongoing basis, such as provision of
public health infrastructure that is robust and adequate for the target population
and easily accessible, as well as the provision of health insurance for everyone
irrespective of financial status.
Public awareness (which emerged as the top positive theme in our findings) is also
crucial for addressing negative issues arising from COVID-19 by providing timely
and accurate information to people, which can be lifesaving. To reach wider
audience in an efficient manner and with less cost, public awareness can be
delivered through mobile technologies such as mobile-driven and voice-enabled
conversational AI agents (or chatbots) with access to evidence-based and clinically
validated resources (e.g., precautionary or safety measures approved by public
health agencies and organizations, as well as government-approved policies or
guidelines) can deliver accurate information regarding COVID-19 to people in their
own native language (and in an interactive fashion) through their smartphones.
These chatbots can also be made to route difficult questions to health experts for
real-time feedback within the same chat session. This will help to improve people’s
understanding of the disease, including how it differs from other infectious diseases,
and how to protect themselves and their families from getting infected with COVID19. In addition, people will be empowered with information required to effectively
respond to fear mongering, domestic violence, and harassment. Evidence already
shows the deployment of multilingual chatbot for public health awareness on
coronavirus symptoms, diagnosis, and precautionary measures [119]. Furthermore,
chatbots can also respond to emergencies by contacting appropriate security
agencies and emergency response teams on behalf of the users. Moreover, chatbots
can deliver evidence-based therapeutic interventions to people, while coordinating
with specialists behind the scenes where necessary.
For people with non-smartphone devices, public health agencies can partner with
telecommunication companies to deliver COVID-19-related information directly to
their phones as text messages at regular intervals using the short messaging service
(SMS). Social media is another platform through which evidence-based information
can be shared with the public but may be overshadowed by fake news or false
information which is mostly shared on social media [120]. Nevertheless, official
COVID-19-related channels managed by (or in conjunction with) reputable
international health organizations (e.g., World Health Organization) or local health
authorities within the social media platforms, many of which have already been

deployed, provide accurate information/updates about COVID-19 cases, fatality
rates, and safety measures/guidelines [121,122]. In addition, people receive
location-based updates on these channels, including emergency alerts, in a timely
and effective manner.
Finally, based on our findings (see Table 4), connectedness with family and friends,
encouragement, spiritual support, and charity can help to ease people’s frustrations,
anxiety, and trauma (due to life disruptions caused by the pandemic) by addressing
their emotional, physical, and spiritual needs. Evidence shows that psychological
first aid and spiritual care can promote a sense of safety, calmness, self- and
collective-efficacy, connectedness, and hope, as well as help people confront and
overcome fear [123]. Therefore, people should endeavour to frequently
communicate and follow up with loved ones (through direct voice/video calls or
using social media), encourage others in distress to stay calm and remain positive,
identify people’s immediate needs and offer necessary assistance, help people find
hope and meaning, and ensure safety and comfort of vulnerable population.
Mobile technology can play a key role in facilitating easy access to relief packages.
For instance, mobile apps can be deployed with geolocation and multilingual
features to help people locate the nearest food bank and charity organizations
offering assistance in their geographical area. In addition, charity organizations can
effectively mobilize and deliver relief items to more people, including individuals
that are indisposed, based on data collected through these apps. Also, the elderly,
the sick, and those in self-isolation can indicate their condition while requesting for
relief so that their items can be delivered to their doorstep instead of picking it up.
These apps can further integrate with other local and international charity
organizations to widen the coverage of relief efforts. Recruitment of volunteers can
also take place through these apps. The usage data collected can be further analyzed
in real-time and used to predict the communities that are in dire need of assistance
using machine learning or deep learning techniques.
Conclusions
In this paper, we explored the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on people globally
using social media data. We analyzed over 1 million comments obtained from six
social media platforms using a seven-stage context-aware Natural Language
Processing (NLP) approach to extract candidate themes or keyphrases which we
further categorized into broader themes using thematic analysis. Our results
revealed 34 negative themes, out of which 15 are health-related issues, psychosocial
issues, and social issues related to the COVID-19 pandemic from the public
perspective. Top health-related issues include increased mortality, comparison with
other diseases or incidents, nature of disease, and health concerns, while top
psychosocial issues include frustrations due to life disruptions, panic shopping, and
expression of fear. Top social issues include harassment and domestic violence.
Besides the negative themes, 20 positive themes emerged from our results. Some of
the positive themes include public awareness, encouragement, gratitude, cleaner

environment, online learning, charity, spiritual support, and innovative research. We
reflected on our findings and recommend interventions that can help address the
health, psychosocial, and social issues based on the positive themes and other
remedial ideas rooted in research.
Digital interventions using emerging technologies such as mobile apps, artificial
intelligence (AI), internet of things (IoT), and virtual reality will play a major role in
delivering remote healthcare (i.e., telemedicine or telehealth) to people in the
comfort of their homes, including empowering them to self-manage their health and
wellness. This will help to curb the spread of COVID-19 and future infectious
diseases since many people will stay away from hospitals (or clinics) to book
appointments or see doctors (or other healthcare professionals) unless it is
absolutely necessary to visit, thereby keeping health workers and patients safe.
These technologies are also useful in providing timely and accurate information
about COVID-19 symptoms, diagnosis, treatment, precautionary/safety measures
and guidelines, and other relevant information to target audience worldwide.
Finally, digital interventions and other interventions discussed in this paper can
help address the emotional, physical, and spiritual needs of people who are
traumatized or frustrated by the disruptions caused by the pandemic. They also
inform governments, health professionals and agencies, and institutions on how to
react to the current COVID-19 pandemic, as well as future pandemics.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank NSERC Discovery Grant for funding this research.
They also thank the DeepSense team at Dalhousie University, as well as Compute
Canada, for providing the computing infrastructure used to perform our research
experiments.
Authors’ Contributions
OO collected data, conducted the experiments, analyzed the results, and wrote the
manuscript. CN, DM, BS, and AA collected data and categorized the themes, and
reviewed the manuscript. RO is the research supervisor and reviewed the
manuscript. FAO is a data analyst and researcher, and reviewed the manuscript. SM
is a Psychiatry and Epidemiology researcher, and reviewed the manuscript. CC is a
clinical psychologist and reviewed the manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest
None declared
Abbreviations
NLP: natural language processing
POS: part of speech

References
1.
2.

Morse SS. Factors in the Emergence of Infectious Diseases. Plagues Polit
Palgrave Macmillan UK; 2001. p. 8–26. [doi: 10.1057/9780230524248_2]
Kimberlin DW. Red Book: 2018-2021 report of the committee on infectious

3.
4.
5.

6.
7.
8.

9.

10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.

diseases. Red B 2018-2021 Rep Comm Infect Dis American Academy of
Pediatrics; 2018;(Ed.31).
Morens DM, Folkers GK, Fauci AS. The challenge of emerging and re-emerging
infectious diseases. Nature. Nature Publishing Group; 2004. p. 242–249.
PMID:15241422
Jilani TN, Siddiqui AH. H1N1 Influenza (Swine Flu) [Internet]. StatPearls.
StatPearls Publishing; 2018 [cited 2020 May 16]. PMID:30020613
Dawood FS, Iuliano AD, Reed C, Meltzer MI, Shay DK, Cheng PY,
Bandaranayake D, Breiman RF, Brooks WA, Buchy P, Feikin DR, Fowler KB,
Gordon A, Hien NT, Horby P, Huang QS, Katz MA, Krishnan A, Lal R,
Montgomery JM, Mølbak K, Pebody R, Presanis AM, Razuri H, Steens A, Tinoco
YO, Wallinga J, Yu H, Vong S, Bresee J, Widdowson MA. Estimated global
mortality associated with the first 12 months of 2009 pandemic influenza A
H1N1 virus circulation: A modelling study. Lancet Infect Dis Elsevier; 2012
Sep 1;12(9):687–695. [doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(12)70121-4]
World Health Organization. HIV/AIDS [Internet]. 2019 [cited 2020 May 16].
Available from: https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/hiv-aids
World Health Organization. Ebola virus disease [Internet]. 2020 [cited 2020
May 16]. Available from: https://www.who.int/en/news-room/factsheets/detail/ebola-virus-disease
Tian H, Liu Y, Li Y, Wu C-H, Chen B, Kraemer MUG, Li B, Cai J, Xu B, Yang Q,
Wang B, Yang P, Cui Y, Song Y, Zheng P, Wang Q, Bjornstad ON, Yang R,
Grenfell BT, Pybus OG, Dye C. An investigation of transmission control
measures during the first 50 days of the COVID-19 epidemic in China. Science
(80- ) American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS); 2020
Mar 31;368(6491):eabb6105. PMID:32234804
Wu F, Zhao S, Yu B, Chen YM, Wang W, Song ZG, Hu Y, Tao ZW, Tian JH, Pei YY,
Yuan ML, Zhang YL, Dai FH, Liu Y, Wang QM, Zheng JJ, Xu L, Holmes EC, Zhang
YZ. A new coronavirus associated with human respiratory disease in China.
Nature Nature Research; 2020 Mar 12;579(7798):265–269. PMID:32015508
Johns Hopkins Coronavirus Resource Center. COVID-19 Map [Internet]. [cited
2020 May 16]. Available from: https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html
Jones KE, Patel NG, Levy MA, Storeygard A, Balk D, Gittleman JL, Daszak P.
Global trends in emerging infectious diseases. Nature Nature Publishing
Group; 2008 Feb 21;451(7181):990–993. PMID:18288193
Bloom DE, Black S, Rappuoli R. Emerging infectious diseases: A proactive
approach. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. National Academy of Sciences; 2017. p.
4055–4059. [doi: 10.1073/pnas.1701410114]
Fan V, Jamison D, Summers L. The Inclusive Cost of Pandemic Influenza Risk.
Natl Bur Econ Res 2016; [doi: 10.3386/w22137]
Barbier G, Liu H. Data Mining in Social Media. Soc Netw Data Anal Springer US;
2011. p. 327–352. [doi: 10.1007/978-1-4419-8462-3_12]
Kemp S. Digital 2020: Global Digital Overview [Internet]. 2020 [cited 2020
May 17]. Available from: https://datareportal.com/reports/digital-2020global-digital-overview
Robinson P, Turk D, Jilka S, Cella M. Measuring attitudes towards mental

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.
25.

26.

27.

health using social media: investigating stigma and trivialisation. Soc
Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol Dr. Dietrich Steinkopff Verlag GmbH and Co.
KG; 2019 Jan 28;54(1):51–58. [doi: 10.1007/s00127-018-1571-5]
Guntuku SC, Buffone A, Jaidka K, Eichstaedt J, Ungar L. Understanding and
Measuring Psychological Stress using Social Media. Proc 13th Int Conf Web
Soc Media, ICWSM 2019 [Internet] Association for the Advancement of
Artificial Intelligence; 2018 [cited 2020 May 17]. p. 214–225. Available from:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1811.07430
Golder S, Chiuve S, Weissenbacher D, Klein A, O’Connor K, Bland M, Malin M,
Bhattacharya
M,
Scarazzini
LJ,
Gonzalez-Hernandez
G.
Pharmacoepidemiologic Evaluation of Birth Defects from Health-Related
Postings in Social Media During Pregnancy. Drug Saf Springer International
Publishing; 2019 Mar 7;42(3):389–400. PMID:30284214
Rezaallah B, Lewis DJ, Pierce C, Zeilhofer HF, Berg BI. Social media
surveillance of multiple sclerosis medications used during pregnancy and
breastfeeding: Content analysis. J Med Internet Res Journal of Medical
Internet Research; 2019 Aug 7;21(8):e13003. [doi: 10.2196/13003]
Blumenthal KG, Topaz M, Zhou L, Harkness T, Sa’adon R, Bar-Bachar O, Long
AA. Mining social media data to assess the risk of skin and soft tissue
infections from allergen immunotherapy. J Allergy Clin Immunol Mosby Inc.;
2019 Jul 1;144(1):129–134. [doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2019.01.029]
Huang Y, Huang D, Nguyen QC. Census Tract Food Tweets and Chronic Disease
Outcomes in the U.S., 2015–2018. Int J Environ Res Public Health [Internet]
MDPI AG; 2019 Mar 18 [cited 2020 May 17];16(6):975. [doi:
10.3390/ijerph16060975]
Oyebode O, Orji R. Detecting Factors Responsible for Diabetes Prevalence in
Nigeria using Social Media and Machine Learning. 15th Int Conf Netw Serv
Manag CNSM 2019 Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc.; 2019.
[doi: 10.23919/CNSM46954.2019.9012679]
Signorini A, Segre AM, Polgreen PM. The Use of Twitter to Track Levels of
Disease Activity and Public Concern in the U.S. during the Influenza A H1N1
Pandemic. PLoS One [Internet] 2011 [cited 2020 May 17];6(5):1–10. [doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0019467]
Chew C, Eysenbach G. Pandemics in the age of Twitter: Content analysis of
tweets during the 2009 H1N1 outbreak. PLoS One 2010;5(11). [doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0014118]
Zhan Y, Etter J-F, Leischow S, Zeng D. Electronic cigarette usage patterns: a
case study combining survey and social media data. J Am Med Informatics
Assoc [Internet] 2019 [cited 2020 May 17];26(1):9–18. [doi:
10.1093/jamia/ocy140]
Hassanpour S, Tomita N, DeLise T, Crosier B, Marsch LA. Identifying substance
use risk based on deep neural networks and Instagram social media data.
Neuropsychopharmacology Nature Publishing Group; 2019 Feb 1;44(3):487–
494. [doi: 10.1038/s41386-018-0247-x]
Comito C, Forestiero A, Papuzzo G. Exploiting social media to enhance clinical
decision support. Proc - 2019 IEEE/WIC/ACM Int Conf Web Intell Work WI

28.

29.
30.
31.
32.

33.

34.

35.
36.
37.
38.
39.

40.

2019 Companion [Internet] New York, New York, USA: Association for
Computing Machinery, Inc; 2019 [cited 2020 May 17]. p. 244–249. [doi:
10.1145/3358695.3360899]
Huber J, Woods T, Fushi A, Duong MT, Eidelman AS, Zalal AR, Urquhart O,
Colangelo E, Quinn S, Carrasco-Labra A. Social Media Research Strategy to
Understand Clinician and Public Perception of Health Care Messages. JDR Clin
Transl Res [Internet] SAGE Publications Ltd; 2020 Jan 1 [cited 2020 May
17];5(1):71–81. PMID:31067411
Tumasjan. A, Sprenger TO, Sandner. PG, Welpe IM. Predicting Elections with
Twitter: What 140 Characters Reveal about Political Sentiment. Proc Fourth
Int AAAI Conf Weblogs Soc Media Predict 2010; PMID:16046402
Budiharto W, Meiliana M. Prediction and analysis of Indonesia Presidential
election from Twitter using sentiment analysis. J Big Data SpringerOpen; 2018
Dec 1;5(1). [doi: 10.1186/s40537-018-0164-1]
Tjong E, Sang K, Bos J. Predicting the 2011 Dutch Senate Election Results with
Twitter. 13th Conf Eur Chapter Assoc Comput Linguist 2012;(53):65–72.
Oyebode O, Orji R. Social Media and Sentiment Analysis: The Nigeria
Presidential Election 2019. 2019 IEEE 10th Annu Inf Technol Electron Mob
Commun Conf IEMCON 2019 Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
Inc.; 2019. p. 140–146. [doi: 10.1109/IEMCON.2019.8936139]
Bright J, Hale S, Ganesh B, Bulovsky A, Margetts H, Howard P. Does
Campaigning on Social Media Make a Difference? Evidence From Candidate
Use of Twitter During the 2015 and 2017 U.K. Elections. Communic Res
[Internet] SAGE Publications Inc.; 2019 Sep 11 [cited 2020 May
17];009365021987239. [doi: 10.1177/0093650219872394]
Ma J, Tse YK, Wang X, Zhang M. Examining customer perception and
behaviour through social media research – An empirical study of the United
Airlines overbooking crisis. Transp Res Part E Logist Transp Rev Elsevier Ltd;
2019 Jul 1;127:192–205. [doi: 10.1016/j.tre.2019.05.004]
Ibrahim NF, Wang X. Decoding the sentiment dynamics of online retailing
customers: Time series analysis of social media. Comput Human Behav
Elsevier Ltd; 2019 Jul 1;96:32–45. [doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2019.02.004]
Archinect. corona virus covid-19 and you | Forum [Internet]. [cited 2020 Apr
2]. Available from: https://archinect.com/forum/thread/150187455/coronavirus-covid-19-and-you
Archinect. COVID - 19 Thread Central | Forum | Archinect [Internet]. [cited
2020
Apr
2].
Available
from:
https://archinect.com/forum/thread/150188615/covid-19-thread-central
Future US Inc. Coronavirus & Epidemiology | Live Science Forums [Internet].
[cited
2020
Apr
2].
Available
from:
https://forums.livescience.com/forums/coronavirus-epidemiology.42/
Nlife Media. Corona Virus Panic/Discussion Thread - General Discussion
Forum
[Internet].
[cited
2020
Apr
2].
Available
from:
https://www.pushsquare.com/forums/ps_general_discussion/corona_virus_
panicdiscussion_thread
Abdalla M, Abdalla M, Hirst G, Rudzicz F. Exploring the Privacy-Preserving

41.

42.

43.

44.
45.

46.

47.
48.

49.

50.

51.

Properties of Word Embeddings: Algorithmic Validation Study. J Med Internet
Res [Internet] Journal of Medical Internet Research; 2020 Jul 15 [cited 2020
Jul 20];22(7):e18055. [doi: 10.2196/18055]
Bekhuis T, Kreinacke M, Spallek H, Song M, O’Donnell JA. Using natural
language processing to enable in-depth analysis of clinical messages posted to
an Internet mailing list: a feasibility study. J Med Internet Res [Internet]
Journal of Medical Internet Research; 2011 Nov 23 [cited 2020 Jul
20];13(4):e98. PMID:22112583
Grajales FJ, Sheps S, Ho K, Novak-Lauscher H, Eysenbach G. Social media: A
review and tutorial of applications in medicine and health care. J Med Internet
Res [Internet] Journal of Medical Internet Research; 2014 Feb 11 [cited 2020
Jul 20];16(2):1–68. PMID:24518354
Conway M, Hu M, Chapman WW. Recent Advances in Using Natural Language
Processing to Address Public Health Research Questions Using Social Media
and ConsumerGenerated Data. Yearb Med Inform [Internet] NLM (Medline);
2019 Aug 1 [cited 2020 Jun 24];28(1):208–217. [doi: 10.1055/s-00391677918]
Park A, Conway M. Tracking Health Related Discussions on Reddit for Public
Health Applications. AMIA . Annu Symp proceedings AMIA Symp [Internet]
NLM (Medline); 2017 [cited 2020 Jun 24];2017:1362–1371. PMID:29854205
Jelodar H, Wang Y, Orji R, Huang H. Deep Sentiment Classification and Topic
Discovery on Novel Coronavirus or COVID-19 Online Discussions: NLP Using
LSTM Recurrent Neural Network Approach. IEEE J Biomed Heal Informatics
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE); 2020 Jun 9;1–1. [doi:
10.1109/jbhi.2020.3001216]
Nobles AL, Dreisbach CN, Keim-Malpass J, Barnes LE. “Is This an STD? Please
Help!’’’ Online Information Seeking for Sexually Transmitted Diseases on
Reddit” [Internet]. Twelfth Int AAAI Conf Web Soc Media. 2018 Jun. Available
from: https://www.cdc.gov/std/hiv/default.htm.
Paul MJ, Dredze M. You Are What You Tweet: Analyzing Twitter for Public
Health [Internet]. Fifth Int AAAI Conf Weblogs Soc Media. 2011 Jul. Available
from: www.aaai.org
McNeill A, Harris PR, Briggs P. Twitter Influence on UK Vaccination and
Antiviral Uptake during the 2009 H1N1 Pandemic. Front Public Heal
[Internet] Frontiers Media SA; 2016 Feb 22 [cited 2020 Jun 24];4:26. [doi:
10.3389/fpubh.2016.00026]
Oyebode O, Alqahtani F, Orji R. Using Machine Learning and Thematic
Analysis Methods to Evaluate Mental Health Apps Based on User Reviews.
IEEE Access Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE); 2020 Jun
12;1–1. [doi: 10.1109/access.2020.3002176]
Dave K, Varma V. Pattern based keyword extraction for Contextual
Advertising. Int Conf Inf Knowl Manag Proc [Internet] New York, New York,
USA: ACM Press; 2010 [cited 2020 Jun 24]. p. 1885–1888. [doi:
10.1145/1871437.1871754]
Ahmed W, Bath PA, Sbaffi L, Demartini G. Novel insights into views towards
H1N1 during the 2009 Pandemic: a thematic analysis of Twitter data. Heal Inf

52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.

62.
63.
64.
65.
66.

67.

Libr J [Internet] Blackwell Publishing Ltd; 2019 Mar 1 [cited 2020 Jun
24];36(1):60–72. [doi: 10.1111/hir.12247]
Twitter Inc. Consuming streaming data [Internet]. [cited 2020 May 20].
Available from: https://developer.twitter.com/en/docs/tutorials/consumingstreaming-data
Google Inc. YouTube Data API [Internet]. [cited 2020 May 20]. Available from:
https://developers.google.com/youtube/v3
Slang Words Dictionary [Internet]. [cited 2019 Jun 19]. Available from:
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/sifei/Dictionary-for-SentimentAnalysis/master/slang/acrynom.csv
Slang Lookup Table [Internet]. [cited 2019 Jun 19]. Available from:
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/felipebravom/StaticTwitterSent/master
/extra/SentiStrength/SlangLookupTable.txt
Liu B. Sentence Subjectivity and Sentiment Classification. Sentim Anal Min
Opin Sentim Emot 2015. p. 70–88.
Nelson G. English: An Essential Grammar [Internet]. Taylor & Francis; 2019.
Available
from:
https://books.google.ca/books?id=xTiDDwAAQBAJISBN:9781351122733
Santorini B. Part-of-speech tagging guidelines for the penn treebank project
(3rd revision). Tech Reports 1990;570.
Asmuth JA, Gentner D. Context sensitivity of relational nouns. Proc 27th Annu
Meet Cogn Sci Soc 2005. p. 163–168.
Chesley P, Vincent B, Xu L, Srihari RK. Using verbs and adjectives to
automatically classify blog sentiment. Training 2006;580(263):233.
nltk.tokenize package — NLTK 3.5 documentation [Internet]. [cited 2020 May
23].
Available
from:
http://www.nltk.org/api/nltk.tokenize.html?highlight=tokenizer#nltk.tokeni
ze.punkt.PunktSentenceTokenizer
Taylor A, Marcus M, Santorini B. The Penn Treebank: An Overview. Treebanks
Build Using Parsed Corpora Springer, Dordrecht; 2003. p. 5–22. [doi:
10.1007/978-94-010-0201-1_1]
Witten IH, Paynter GW, Frank E, Gutwin C, Nevill-Manning CG. KEA: Practical
Automatic Keyphrase Extraction. 1999 Feb 4 [cited 2020 Jun 24]; Available
from: http://arxiv.org/abs/cs/9902007
Han P, Shen S, Wang D, Liu Y. The influence of word normalization in English
document clustering. CSAE 2012 - Proceedings, 2012 IEEE Int Conf Comput
Sci Autom Eng 2012. p. 116–120. [doi: 10.1109/CSAE.2012.6272740]
NLTK’s list of english stopwords [Internet]. [cited 2020 May 26]. Available
from: https://gist.github.com/sebleier/554280
Hutto CJ, Gilbert E. VADER: A Parsimonious Rule-based Model for Sentiment
Analysis of Social Media Text. Eighth Int AAAI Conf Weblogs Soc Media
[Internet]
2014.
p.
216–225.
Available
from:
https://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/ICWSM/ICWSM14/paper/viewPaper/
8109
McHugh ML. Interrater reliability: The kappa statistic. Biochem Medica
Croatian Society for Medical Biochemistry and Laboratory Medicine;

68.
69.
70.
71.

72.
73.

74.
75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

2012;22(3):276–282. PMID:23092060
Onder G, Rezza G, Brusaferro S. Case-Fatality Rate and Characteristics of
Patients Dying in Relation to COVID-19 in Italy. JAMA - J Am Med Assoc.
American Medical Association; 2020. p. 1775–1776. PMID:32203977
Xiang YT, Yang Y, Li W, Zhang L, Zhang Q, Cheung T, Ng CH. Timely mental
health care for the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak is urgently needed. The
Lancet Psychiatry. Elsevier Ltd; 2020. p. 228–229. PMID:32032543
Hick JL, Biddinger PD. Novel Coronavirus and Old Lessons - Preparing the
Health System for the Pandemic. N Engl J Med [Internet] NLM (Medline); 2020
May 14 [cited 2020 Jun 16];382(20):e55. PMID:32212515
Dar KA, Iqbal N, Mushtaq A. Intolerance of uncertainty, depression, and
anxiety: Examining the indirect and moderating effects of worry. Asian J
Psychiatr
Elsevier
B.V.;
2017
Oct
1;29:129–133.
[doi:
10.1016/j.ajp.2017.04.017]
Yao H, Chen JH, Xu YF. Patients with mental health disorders in the COVID-19
epidemic [Internet]. The Lancet Psychiatry. Elsevier Ltd; 2020 [cited 2020 Jun
20]. p. e21. PMID:32199510
Emanuel EJ, Persad G, Upshur R, Thome B, Parker M, Glickman A, Zhang C,
Boyle C, Smith M, Phillips JP. Fair Allocation of Scarce Medical Resources in
the Time of Covid-19. N Engl J Med [Internet] Massachussetts Medical Society;
2020 May 21 [cited 2020 Jun 19];382(21):2049–2055. [doi:
10.1056/NEJMsb2005114]
Ji Y, Ma Z, Peppelenbosch MP, Pan Q. Potential association between COVID-19
mortality and health-care resource availability. Lancet Glob Heal. Elsevier Ltd;
2020. p. e480. PMID:32109372
Hall G, Laddu DR, Phillips SA, Lavie CJ, Arena R. A tale of two pandemics: How
will COVID-19 and global trends in physical inactivity and sedentary behavior
affect one another? [Internet]. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. W.B. Saunders; 2020
[cited 2020 Jun 20]. [doi: 10.1016/j.pcad.2020.04.005]
Kivimäki M, Singh-Manoux A, Pentti J, Sabia S, Nyberg ST, Alfredsson L,
Goldberg M, Knutsson A, Koskenvuo M, Koskinen A, Kouvonen A, Nordin M,
Oksanen T, Strandberg T, Suominen SB, Theorell T, Vahtera J, Väänänen A,
Virtanen M, Westerholm P, Westerlund H, Zins M, Seshadri S, Batty GD, Sipilä
PN, Shipley MJ, Lindbohm J V., Ferrie JE, Jokela M. Physical inactivity,
cardiometabolic disease, and risk of dementia: An individual-participant
meta-analysis. BMJ BMJ Publishing Group; 2019 Apr 17;365. PMID:30995986
Brooks SK, Webster RK, Smith LE, Woodland L, Wessely S, Greenberg N, Rubin
GJ. The psychological impact of quarantine and how to reduce it: rapid review
of the evidence. Lancet. Lancet Publishing Group; 2020. p. 912–920.
PMID:32112714
Lippi G, Henry BM, Sanchis-Gomar F. Physical inactivity and cardiovascular
disease at the time of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) [Internet]. Eur J
Prev Cardiol. SAGE Publications Inc.; 2020 [cited 2020 Jun 19]. p. 906–908.
PMID:32270698
Zhou F, Yu T, Du R, Fan G, Liu Y, Liu Z, Xiang J, Wang Y, Song B, Gu X, Guan L,
Wei Y, Li H, Wu X, Xu J, Tu S, Zhang Y, Chen H, Cao B. Clinical course and risk

80.

81.

82.

83.
84.
85.

86.

87.

88.
89.
90.

factors for mortality of adult inpatients with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China: a
retrospective cohort study. Lancet Lancet Publishing Group; 2020 Mar
28;395(10229):1054–1062. PMID:32171076
He X, Lau EHY, Wu P, Deng X, Wang J, Hao X, Lau YC, Wong JY, Guan Y, Tan X,
Mo X, Chen Y, Liao B, Chen W, Hu F, Zhang Q, Zhong M, Wu Y, Zhao L, Zhang F,
Cowling BJ, Li F, Leung GM. Temporal dynamics in viral shedding and
transmissibility of COVID-19. Nat Med [Internet] Nature Research; 2020 May
1 [cited 2020 Jun 20];26(5):672–675. PMID:32296168
Jin J-M, Bai P, He W, Wu F, Liu X-F, Han D-M, Liu S, Yang J-K. Gender
Differences in Patients With COVID-19: Focus on Severity and Mortality. Front
Public Heal [Internet] Frontiers Media S.A.; 2020 Apr 29 [cited 2020 Jun
20];8:152. [doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2020.00152]
Bai Y, Yao L, Wei T, Tian F, Jin DY, Chen L, Wang M. Presumed Asymptomatic
Carrier Transmission of COVID-19 [Internet]. JAMA - J Am Med Assoc.
American Medical Association; 2020 [cited 2020 Jun 20]. p. 1406–1407.
PMID:32083643
Cao X. COVID-19: immunopathology and its implications for therapy
[Internet]. Nat Rev Immunol. Nature Research; 2020 [cited 2020 Jun 20]. p.
269–270. PMID:32273594
Zheng YY, Ma YT, Zhang JY, Xie X. COVID-19 and the cardiovascular system
[Internet]. Nat Rev Cardiol. Nature Research; 2020 [cited 2020 Jun 20]. p.
259–260. PMID:32139904
Chow N, Fleming-Dutra K, Gierke R, Hall A, Hughes M, Pilishvili T, Ritchey M,
Roguski K, Skoff T, Ussery E. Preliminary estimates of the prevalence of
selected underlying health conditions among patients with coronavirus
disease 2019 - United States, February 12-March 28, 2020 [Internet]. Morb
Mortal Wkly Rep. Department of Health and Human Services; 2020 [cited
2020 Jun 20]. p. 382–386. PMID:32240123
Scarabel F, Pellis L, Bragazzi NL, Wu J. Canada needs to rapidly escalate public
health interventions for its COVID-19 mitigation strategies. Infect Dis Model
KeAi
Communications
Co.;
2020
Jan
1;5:316–322.
[doi:
10.1016/j.idm.2020.03.004]
Stephanie B, Virginia B, Nancy C, Aaron C, Ryan G, Aron H, Michelle H, Tamara
P, Matthew R, Katherine R, Benjamin S, Tami S, Preethi S, Emily U, Michael V,
Hilary W, John W, CDC COVID-19 Response Team. Geographic differences in
COVID-19 cases, deaths, and incidence - United States, February 12-April 7,
2020. Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. Department of Health and Human Services;
2020. p. 465–471. PMID:32298250
Yuan J, Li M, Lv G, Lu ZK. Monitoring transmissibility and mortality of COVID19 in Europe. Int J Infect Dis Elsevier B.V.; 2020 Jun 1;95:311–315.
PMID:32234343
Kobia F, Gitaka J. COVID-19: Are Africa’s diagnostic challenges blunting
response effectiveness? AAS Open Res [Internet] F1000 Research Ltd; 2020
Apr 17 [cited 2020 Jun 20];3:4. [doi: 10.12688/aasopenres.13061.1]
Liu Y, Gayle AA, Wilder-Smith A, Rocklöv J. The reproductive number of
COVID-19 is higher compared to SARS coronavirus. J Travel Med

91.
92.
93.

94.

95.
96.
97.

98.

99.

100.

101.

102.

103.

2020;27(2):taaa021. [doi: 10.1093/jtm/taaa021]
Mahase E. Coronavirus covid-19 has killed more people than SARS and MERS
combined, despite lower case fatality rate. BMJ [Internet] NLM (Medline);
2020 Feb 18 [cited 2020 Jun 21];368:m641. [doi: 10.1136/bmj.m641]
Gottlieb C, Grobovšek J, Poschke M. Working from home across countries.
Covid Econ 2020;1(8):71–91.
Dockery M, Bawa S. Working from home in the COVID-19 lockdown [Internet].
Bankwest Curtin Economics Centre, Curtin University; 2020 May. Report No.:
5. Available from: https://bcec.edu.au/assets/2020/05/BCEC-COVID19Brief-4_Working-from-home.pdf
Thomas LT, Ganster DC. Impact of Family-Supportive Work Variables on
Work-Family Conflict and Strain: A Control Perspective. J Appl Psychol
[Internet] 1995 [cited 2020 Jun 22];80(1):6–15. [doi: 10.1037/00219010.80.1.6]
Foulds GA. A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance. Br J Psychiatry Cambridge
University Press; 1963;109(458):164–165.
Tsai J, Ford ES, Li C, Zhao G, Balluz LS. Physical activity and optimal self-rated
health of adults with and without diabetes. BMC Public Health BioMed
Central; 2010 Jun 23;10(1):1–9. [doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-10-365]
Li S, Wang Y, Xue J, Zhao N, Zhu T. The Impact of COVID-19 Epidemic
Declaration on Psychological Consequences: A Study on Active Weibo Users.
Int J Environ Res Public Health [Internet] MDPI AG; 2020 Mar 19 [cited 2020
Jun 22];17(6):2032. [doi: 10.3390/ijerph17062032]
Bodas M, Peleg K. Self-Isolation Compliance In The COVID-19 Era Influenced
By Compensation: Findings From A Recent Survey In Israel. Health Aff
[Internet] NLM (Medline); 2020 Jun 1 [cited 2020 Jun 21];39(6):936–941.
[doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.2020.00382]
Wright AL, Sonin K, Driscoll J, Wilson J. Poverty and Economic Dislocation
Reduce Compliance with COVID-19 Shelter-in-Place Protocols. SSRN Electron
J [Internet] Elsevier BV; 2020 Apr 16 [cited 2020 Jun 21]; [doi:
10.2139/ssrn.3573637]
Plohl N, Musil B. Modeling compliance with COVID-19 prevention guidelines:
the critical role of trust in science. Psychol Health Med [Internet] Informa UK
Limited;
2020
Jun
1
[cited
2020
Jun
21];1–12.
[doi:
10.1080/13548506.2020.1772988]
Bradbury‐Jones C, Isham L. The pandemic paradox: The consequences of
COVID‐19 on domestic violence. J Clin Nurs [Internet] Blackwell Publishing
Ltd; 2020 Jul 22 [cited 2020 Jun 21];29(13–14):2047–2049. [doi:
10.1111/jocn.15296]
Taub A. A New Covid-19 Crisis: Domestic Abuse Rises Worldwide [Internet].
2020.
Available
from:
https://chescocf.org/wpcontent/uploads/2020/04/Domestic-Abuse-Rises-Worldwide-New-YorkTimes.pdf
Mazza M, Marano G, Lai C, Janiri L, Sani G. Danger in danger: Interpersonal
violence during COVID-19 quarantine. Psychiatry Res Elsevier Ireland Ltd;
2020 Jul 1;289:113046. PMID:32387794

104. Piquero AR, Riddell JR, Bishopp SA, Narvey C, Reid JA, Piquero NL. Staying
Home, Staying Safe? A Short-Term Analysis of COVID-19 on Dallas Domestic
Violence. Am J Crim Justice [Internet] Springer; 2020 Jun 14 [cited 2020 Jun
21];1–35. [doi: 10.1007/s12103-020-09531-7]
105. Boserup B, McKenney M, Elkbuli A. Alarming trends in US domestic violence
during the COVID-19 pandemic [Internet]. Am J Emerg Med. W.B. Saunders;
2020 [cited 2020 Jun 21]. PMID:32402499
106. Tessler H, Choi M, Kao G. The Anxiety of Being Asian American: Hate Crimes
and Negative Biases During the COVID-19 Pandemic. Am J Crim Justice
[Internet] Springer; 2020 Jun 10 [cited 2020 Jun 21];1–11. [doi:
10.1007/s12103-020-09541-5]
107. Crockett D, Grier SA. Race in the Marketplace and COVID-19. J Public Policy
Mark [Internet] SAGE Publications Ltd; 2020 May 28 [cited 2020 Jun
21];074391562093144. [doi: 10.1177/0743915620931448]
108. Hu JR, Wang M, Lu F. COVID-19 and Asian American Pacific Islanders
[Internet]. J Gen Intern Med. Springer; 2020 [cited 2020 Jun 21]. p. 1–2. [doi:
10.1007/s11606-020-05953-5]
109. Chen HA, Trinh J, Yang GP. Anti-Asian sentiment in the United States – COVID19 and history. Am J Surg [Internet] Elsevier BV; 2020 May [cited 2020 Jun
21]; [doi: 10.1016/j.amjsurg.2020.05.020]
110. Torkamaan H, Ziegler J. Rating-based preference elicitation for
recommendation of stress intervention. ACM UMAP 2019 - Proc 27th ACM
Conf User Model Adapt Pers 2019;46–50. [doi: 10.1145/3320435.3324990]
111. Ziems C, He B, Soni S, Kumar S. Racism is a Virus: Anti-Asian Hate and
Counterhate in Social Media during the COVID-19 Crisis. 2020 May 25 [cited
2020 Jun 21]; Available from: http://arxiv.org/abs/2005.12423
112. Singh RP, Javaid M, Kataria R, Tyagi M, Haleem A, Suman R. Significant
applications of virtual reality for COVID-19 pandemic. Diabetes Metab Syndr
Clin Res Rev Elsevier Ltd; 2020 Jul 1;14(4):661–664. PMID:32438329
113. Ha SW, Kim J. Designing a Scalable, Accessible, and Effective Mobile App Based
Solution for Common Mental Health Problems. Int J Human–Computer
Interact [Internet] Taylor and Francis Inc.; 2020 Apr 26 [cited 2020 Jun
24];1–14. [doi: 10.1080/10447318.2020.1750792]
114. Torous J, Keshavan M. COVID-19, mobile health and serious mental illness
[Internet]. Schizophr Res. Elsevier B.V.; 2020 [cited 2020 Jun 24]. [doi:
10.1016/j.schres.2020.04.013]
115. Ellahham S. Artificial Intelligence: The Future for Diabetes Care. Am J Med.
Elsevier Inc.; 2020. [doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2020.03.033]
116. Bachtiger P, Plymen CM, Pabari PA, Howard JP, Whinnett ZI, Opoku F, Janering
S, Faisal AA, Francis DP, Peters NS. Artificial Intelligence, Data Sensors and
Interconnectivity: Future Opportunities for Heart Failure. Card Fail Rev
[Internet] Radcliffe Group Ltd; 2020 May 12 [cited 2020 Jun 24];6. [doi:
10.15420/cfr.2019.14]
117. Hoffman DA. Increasing Access to Care: Telehealth During COVID-19. J Law
Biosci [Internet] 2020 [cited 2020 Jun 24]; [doi: 10.1093/JLB/LSAA043]
118. Kim H-N, Seo K. Smartphone-Based Health Program for Improving Physical

119.

120.

121.
122.
123.

Activity and Tackling Obesity for Young Adults: A Systematic Review and
Meta-Analysis. Int J Environ Res Public Health [Internet] MDPI AG; 2019 Dec
18 [cited 2020 Jun 24];17(1):15. [doi: 10.3390/ijerph17010015]
Ali MY, Bhatti R. COVID-19 (Coronavirus) Pandemic: Information Sources
Channels for the Public Health Awareness. Asia-Pacific J Public Heal [Internet]
SAGE
Publications
Inc.;
2020
[cited
2020
Jul
9];
[doi:
10.1177/1010539520927261]
Ashrafi-Rizi H, Kazempour Z. Information Typology in Coronavirus (COVID19) Crisis; a Commentary. Arch Acad Emerg Med [Internet] Shahid Beheshti
University of Medical Sciences; 2020 [cited 2020 Jul 9];8(1):e19.
PMID:32185370
Facebook Inc. Coronavirus (COVID-19) Information Center [Internet]. [cited
2020 Jul 13]. Available from: https://www.facebook.com/coronavirus_info
Google LLC. COVID-19 Information and Resources [Internet]. [cited 2020 Jul
13]. Available from: https://www.google.com/covid19/
Clark PY, Joseph DM, Humphreys J. Cultural, psychological, and spiritual
dimensions of palliative care in humanitarian crises. A F Man Palliat Care
Humanit Cris [Internet] Oxford University Press, Incorporated; 2019. p. 1–
160. Available from: https://books.google.ca/books?id=eXC9DwAAQBAJ

