Antiviral Drug-Membrane Permeability: the Viral
Envelope and Cellular Organelles

arXiv:2007.14965v1 [q-bio.BM] 29 Jul 2020

Changjiang Liu,† Paolo Elvati,‡ and Angela Violi∗,†,‡,¶
†Biophysics Program, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2125, USA
‡Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
48109-2125, USA
¶Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
48109-2125, USA
E-mail: avioli@umich.edu

Abstract

Keywords

To shorten the time required to find effective new drugs, like antivirals, a key parameter to consider is membrane permeability, as a
compound intended for an intracellular target
with poor permeability will have low efficacy.
Here, we present a computational model that
considers both drug characteristics and membrane properties for the rapid assessment of
drugs permeability through the coronavirus envelope and various cellular membranes. We analyze 79 drugs that are considered as potential
candidates for the treatment of SARS-CoV-2
and determine their time of permeation in different organelle membranes grouped by viral
baits and mammalian processes. The computational results are correlated with experimental
data, present in the literature, on bioavailability of the drugs, showing a negative correlation
between fast permeation and most promising
drugs. This model represents an important tool
capable of evaluating how permeability affects
the ability of compounds to reach both intended
and unintended intracellular targets in an accurate and rapid way. The method is general and
flexible and can be employed for a variety of
molecules, from small drugs to nanoparticles,
as well to a variety of biological membranes.

lipid bilayer, kinetic, permeation, molecular dynamics, graphene quantum dots.

Introduction
The 2020 pandemic has brought the chasm between the rapid spread of infectious diseases
and the relative slow pace of scientific discovery
to stark reality. This particular event is not the
first, nor it will be the last. Since the turn of
the century three different coronavirus threats
have surfaced and emerging infectious diseases
will continue to be a threat for the foreseeable
future. Current methods for studying betacoronaviruses, responsible for the 2020 pandemic,
are technically and time demanding. Viral isolation from field sample is rarely successful and
reverse genetics recovery of recombinant virus
is labor intensive and expensive. Similarly, the
design and testing of new drugs is an extremely
lengthy process. To this end, drug repurposing,
where existing compounds that have already
been tested safe in humans, are redeployed to
combat another disease, has emerged as a critical strategy. As an example, Remdesivir, one
of the promising COVID-19 drug candidates at
the moment, is a broad-spectrum drug that was
originally targeted toward a number of viruses,
1

Figure 1: Flow and data source used in this work.
such as SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV, but also
studied to counter Ebola virus infection.
Multiple characteristics define the potency of
a drug, as well as its side effects. Among
them, bioavailability - the fraction of a compound that reaches the intended target - is
one of the hardest to estimate reliably and
rapidly. Although several factors contribute to
in defining bioavailability, passive permeability
through different biological membranes is a critical component since independent of the ability
of a drug to bind to its target, the inability to
reach the intended target often translates into
poor in vivo efficacy and may require higher
dosages with higher risks of side effects. 1
The viral life cycle encompasses several crucial steps, starting with the attachment of the
virus to the cell and finishing with the release of
the progeny virions from the host cell. SARSCoV-2 targets cells through the viral structural spike protein that binds to an enzyme
on the host cell membranes. Following receptor binding, the virus uses host cell receptors
and endosomes to enter cells. Once inside, viral polyproteins are synthesized that encode for
the replicase-transcriptase complex. The virus
then synthesizes RNA and structural proteins
leading to completion of assembly and release
of viral particles. These viral lifecycle steps
provide potential targets for drug therapy and
most of the drugs currently in clinical trials in-

hibit key components of the infection life-cycle,
such as viral entry into the host cell, viral replication, and viral RNA synthesis. 2 These targets
are localized to particular subcellular compartments, yet current drug design strategies are
focused on general bioavailability and rarely address drug delivery to specific tissues or intracellular compartments. Therefore, knowledge
of the permeability of antiviral drugs, with reference to both viral and mammalian cell compartments, is vitally important from both a
pharmacokinetics and drug design standpoint.
In an effort to accelerate translation of
promising drug candidates, as well as eliminate potentially ineffective or even harmful candidate, we present a science-based model to
predict the permeation of drug candidates for
SARS-CoV-2 into coronavirus membrane and
mammalian membranes.
Over the past decades many models have been
developed to estimate drugs’ permeability. The
most commonly used ones are the empirical
”rule of five”, 3 QSAR (Quantitative StructureActivity Relationship) 4 and QSPR (Quantitative Structure-Property Relationship) methods. 5 While QSAR/QSPR methods have shown
their efficacy in screening the binding of antiviral drugs and targets, the predicted permeability is at best only accurate to an order of
magnitude, mostly due to the incorporation of
too many descriptors that are not related to
2

Figure 2: Structural diagram of the coronavirus membrane with the anchored COVID-19 spike
protein. A) Protein colored according to secondary structure (purple for alpha helix, red for beta
sheet, and gray for random coils). In the lipid bilayer, carbon are shown in gray, nitrogen in red,
oxygen in blue, and phosphate in tan; cholesterol is shown uniformly in orange. Hydrogen atoms
omitted for clarity. B) The anchoring region (part of the heptad repeated, the transmembrane
region, and the C-tails) of the spike protein in the membrane. C) The anchoring region of the spike
protein colored by the residue type. Non-polar residues are colored in white, while polar residues
are in green.
the permeation problem, and the strong dependence on the quality of the training sets employed. 6 On the other end of the accuracy spectrum, several methods have been proposed over
the years that leverage a physical description of
the passive permeation process, like the inhomogeneous solubility diffusion model and statetransition model. 7 These models, that currently
often involve molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, are either computationally too expensive
for a rapid application or suffer from limited accuracy when drugs of various sizes and shapes
or membranes with different lipid profiles are
involved.
To bridge the gap between accuracy and
ease of use, we have recently introduced a
model to predict the rates of passive permeation of molecules and nanoparticles (up to several nm) into phosphatidylcholine membranes. 8
The Low-Density Area (LDA) model, which can
combine both experimental and computational
data, has shown accuracy equivalent to fully

atomistic MD methods with a much smaller
computational cost. Such a result was achieved
observing that the permeation process of small
compounds is controlled by the formation of
low-density areas on the membrane surface, and
by factorizing the permeation process into independent contributions of the membrane thermal
and pressure fluctuations and characteristics of
the molecules (size, shape and lipophilicity).
Leveraging the LDA model, here we report on
the permeation kinetics of promising drugs candidates through coronavirus membranes, with
the overarching goal of providing inputs to
help the design and selection of new or repurposed drugs. Additionally, since the target of
many drugs are located inside mammalian cells,
we also report on the permeation kinetics of
the same drugs through five mammalian membranes. A schematic of the overall approach
and data sources used in this study is shown in
Fig. 1. The computations were obtained using a
combination of molecular dynamics simulations
3

in conjunction with an augmented LDA model
for membranes. Seventy-nine drugs for SARSCoV-2 were analyzed, that comprise FDA approved drugs, compounds in clinical trials, and
preclinical compounds. 2 The computational results are compared with data available in the
literature on bioavailability and show the potential of the model to aid in the assessment of
drugs’ permeability into a variety of organelles.

among residues 1215:TYR, 1219:GLY, and
1223:GLY contribute to hold the three chains
together inside the hydrophobic region of the
membrane lipids. The density of the spike protein, used in our simulations, reflects the experimental density of about 100 nm2 to 200 nm2
per transmembrane proteins (of any kind), estimated from a viral envelop diameter of 80 nm
to 120 nm 13 and an approximate number of 800
transmembrane proteins per virion. 14 To reduce
the computational cost, after the initial equilibration run used to validate the stability of the
protein anchoring region, we considered only
part of the protein (Fig. 2B and C) as the rest of
the spike protein is far enough (5 nm or more) to
affect the formation and life time of low-density
areas on the viral membrane surface.
For the lipid bilayer, slightly higher concentrations of sphingomyelin and phosphatidylinositol were found in the viral envelope, compared to the ER membrane from where coronaviruses acquire their membrane envelope. 15

Results and Discussion
Molecular description of coronavirus envelope
Coronaviridae is a family of large, enveloped,
positive-stranded RNA viruses. The envelope
is derived from the host Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) membrane and consists of a lipid bilayer, in which structural proteins are anchored.
The surface glycoprotein spike that forms large
protrusions from the virus surface, binds to the
host-cell receptor and mediates viral entry. 9,10
Since surface characteristics of the biological membranes determine the permeability of
drugs, we developed a model to describe the
anchoring of the spike protein to the lipid bilayer. The spike contains three segments: a
large ectodomain, a single-pass transmembrane
anchor, and a short intracellular tail. The
region outside the viral core forms alpha helices where coiled-coil interactions, through hydrophobic contact, help stabilize the chains.
The tails near the C-terminal are mostly polar with charged residues that form random
coils inside the viral core (i.e., the cytoplasmic side after membrane fusion with the host
cell): interactions between the charged residues
and lipid head groups stabilize the end of the
transmembrane region of the spike protein. A
diagram of a section of the coronavirus envelope composed of lipid bilayer and the anchored
spike protein is shown in Fig. 2.
Based on existing data and estimated secondary structure, 11,12 we determined that the
transmembrane region of the COVID-19 spike
protein is formed by the residues in the #12101235 range. The charge-charge interactions

Drugs’ Membrane Permeability

Figure 3: Ratios of times of entry for drugs in
different membranes. The time of entry in ER
membrane is chosen as reference.

4

Figure 4: Times of permeation for drugs candidates in different organelle membranes, grouped
by A) viral baits, B) related mammalian processes when viral baits were unknown. Error bars
represent one standard deviation. Tabulated data in the supplementary materials.
The LDA model describes the permeation as
a gated entry process, regulated by the chance
of the molecule to find a low-density area on
the membrane surface and by the solubility of
the drug in the hydrophobic phase. The four
parameters used in the model separate the contributions of the characteristics of the molecules
(size, shape, solubility) from the properties of
the membranes (lipid density distribution).

In addition to the viral envelope described before (with and without spike protein), we studied the surface properties of five membranes
corresponding to various mammalian compartments (lysosome, plasma, Golgi, mitochondrial
and endoplasmic reticulum membranes) using
all-atom molecular dynamics simulations.
Fig. 3 reports the distribution of the permeation times of the 79 drugs in all the membranes

5

relative to the ER membrane, which was chosen as reference since the permeation in this
membrane is the fastest for all drugs. The results show that the inclusion of the transmembrane protein in the COVID-19 membrane has
a large impact on drug’s membrane permeability. The presence of the transmembrane protein
affects the frequency, shape, and lifetime of lowdensity areas in the LDA model. Indeed, when
comparing the distribution of permeation times
for ER and coronavirus membrane, with and
without the spike protein, we observe a ∼40%
increase in the permeation time due to the presence of proteins and ∼10% due to the change in
lipid composition. This effect is mostly due to
the reduced mobility of the lipids near a rigid
object similar to what has been observed for
C60 fullerenes in lipid bilayers. 16
While the presence of the spike protein in the
COVID-19 membrane results in an increased
stiffness, the viral membrane is still generally
two times more permeable than plasma membrane and lysosomes (before accessible surface
and concentration effects are considered). Although currently very few drugs are required
to permeate through viral membranes, this difference can potentially be exploited by other
classes of compounds, like nanoparticles, which
can amplify the effect of membrane stiffness due
to their relative large size. The individual times
of permeation of drug candidates grouped by
viral baits or, when that is unknown, by biological processes, are shown in Fig. 4. The
results show a variety of timescales going from
nanoseconds to microseconds depending on the
drug and membrane.
Albeit the bioavailability of a drug is affected by many factors, like metabolism rate
and plasma protein binding, 17 we find a negative correlation between the bioavailability of
drugs and the permeation time predicted by
the LDA model. For example, for drugs within
the same group, Lisinopril (Fig. 4B, Cell Entry) is the least permeable compound as well
as the compound with the lowest bioavailability (25% based on experimental data 18 ). On
the other hand, Captopril, Nafamostat, and
Camostat, for which we predict permeation
times that are one order of magnitude shorter

than Lisinopril, have an estimated bioavailability of 100% 1 . Similar observations can
be made for Rapamycin (Fig. 4A, N), which
has lower bioavailability than Sapanisertib and
Silmitasertib. While undeniably other factors
affect the ability of a drug to reach the intended
target, these results show how useful membrane
permeability predictions can be.
Interestingly, the permeation times of drugs
that are currently identified as most promising
candidates against COVID-19 during their clinical trial 19 are among the shortest compared to
other drugs with similar targets. For example,
drugs related to the disruption of viral translation such as Ternatin-4 20 (Fig. 4B Translation),
Zotatifin 21 (Fig. 4A, Nsp2) and Plitidepsin 22
(Fig. 4B, Translation), and sigma receptors
such as Haloperidol 23 and Compound PB28 24
(Fig. 4A Nsp6 and Orf9c), Melperone, Cloperastine, 25 and Clemastine (Fig. 4B, Protein
Processing), and the female hormone progesterone (Fig. 4B, Viral transcription) are among
the most permeable compounds in their respective categories. While a direct comparison
among these drugs is not straightforward, as
they need to cross different membranes in order to reach their intended target, the time of
permeation in their least permeable membrane
(i.e., lysosome or plasma) is 40 ns on average
with an upper bound of 62 ns, while the remaining drugs require an average of 242 ns and
a maximum of 4.6 µs.

Conclusion
In this paper, we present a model to compute
the permeability of drugs that target various
steps in the lifecycle of infection of SARS-CoV2. The model is based on the LDA theory developed by our group that describes the permeation process as regulated by low-density
area on the membrane surface and solubility of
drugs in the hydrophobic phase of the membrane itself. Starting from the virus structure,
we developed an atomistic model of the spike
protein anchored to the lipid bilayer to study
the viral envelope. Molecular dynamics simu1

6

data from http://drugbank.ca

lations of the viral and five mammalian membranes were carried out to determine the dynamics and characteristics of the membranes.
The computational results were compared with
data present in the literature on bioavailability,
and show that the LDA model can be applied
to predict the permeability of drugs through
various membranes and to gain insights on the
differences between membranes and potentially
organs or organisms. From a drug design, as
well as health assessment perspective, this predictive capability can facilitate compound evaluation by ruling out candidates with low permeability or excessive permeability in unintended
organs or organelles. Indeed, the LDA model
can be used to estimate the absorption selectivity of different targets (e.g., carcinogenic cells,
organs) by molecules and nanoparticles without
need of large set of preexisting data, making it
an invaluable tool for the comprehensive and
fast validation pipeline of new compounds.
While the results reported in this paper focus on drugs for SARS-CoV-2, the method is
general and flexible and can be employed, with
other tools to shorten the effective response
time to a global pandemic. Our work provides
a means for scientific discovery to move closer
to the speed of pandemic spreads and it can be
generalized to future events.

with period of 50 fs and 25 fs decay. To account
for the intrinsic anisotropy of the system, the
production simulations were performed in the
NPsT ensemble, where the x and y dimensions
of the periodic system (coplanar with the membrane) are allowed to vary independently from
the z dimension. Non-bonded short-range interactions where smoothly switched to 0 between
1 and 1.2 nm with a X-PLOR switch function.
The lipid compositions for cellular organelles
(plasma, lysosome, Golgi, mitochondrial) were
taken from Horvath et al., 34 and the ER and
viral membrane from van Genderen et al. 15 Table S1 provides more details about the composition of each membrane. Membranes without
spike proteins had an approximate size of 8 nm
by 8 nm, subject to round up to satisfy the required imposed by the lipid composition. The
membranes with spike proteins were extended
to guarantee at least 4 nm of separation between
the closest atom of the spike protein with its
nearest periodic image, resulting in membranes
of approximately 15.4 nm by 15.4 nm for the
system with the entire protein and 9.5 nm by
9.5 nm for the system with the anchoring region
only. System were simulated in explicit solvent
to guarantee at least 6 nm of separation between
the membrane or protein and their periodic image from top and bottom. The lipids, protein,
water molecules and ions were initially placed
by the CHARMM-GUI membrane builder. 35
Each membrane was equilibrated for at least
30 ns in the NPsT ensemble described above.
The membranes were assumed to be at equilibrium once the time average of the area per lipid
in a NPsT simulations was varying less than
10% in 10 ns. The surface properties (LDAs)
were then obtained by running a additional
100 ns.

Methods
Membrane simulations
We used NAMD 26 version 2.13 with CHARMM
Force Field 27 version 36 for lipids, and TIP3P 28
for water molecules. All MD simulations were
performed with a timestep of 2 fs while keeping all the C – H and O – H bonds rigid via
the SHAKE algorithm. 29 Long range electrostatic interactions were modeled with the particle mesh Ewald method 30 using a 0.1 nm grid
spacing, a tolerance of 10−6 and cubic interpolation; cubic periodic boundary conditions
were applied. Temperature was kept constant
at 310 K using a Langevin thermostat 31 with a
time constant of 1 ps, while pressure was kept at
101.325 kPa using Langevin piston method 32,33

Spike protein in membrane
The main structure (residues 27 to 1146) of the
spike protein can be found in the protein data
bank #6VSB, based on the cryo-EM structure
of Wrapp et al. 11 The secondary structure of
residue 1146 to 1273 was instead based on the
prediction of the C-I-TASSER model. 12 The
secondary structure of the alpha helices of the
7

lower chunk was left unmodified, while the random coils were twisted to align the alpha helices
perpendicularly to the membrane. Simulations
of 30 ns show that the anchor is stable with no
lipid rearrangement or vertical translation relative to the membrane.

Additional information about the drugs and
membranes involved in this study can be found
in the supplementary information. This material is available for download via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org/.

References

Drug properties

1. Aungst, B. J. Novel Formulation Strategies For Improving Oral Bioavailability of
Drugs with Poor Membrane Permeation
or Presystemic Metabolism. J. Pharm. Sci
1993, 82, 979–987.

To better factor the drugs’ flexibility in the
model, their size/shape was estimated by considering a large sample of conformations at
room temperature in water. For this purpose,
we run molecular dynamics simulations using
the CHARMM General Force Field 36 to model
the atomic forces and collected the molecule’s
conformations every 20 ps. CGenFF 37 software
was used to assist in the production of the
needed topology files. Each drug molecule was
presented at the center of an cubic box of 6 nm
in each dimension, containing explicit solvent
of water and 0.15 M NaCl.
MD setup for drug simulation was the same
as the membrane simulations, except the use of
an isotropic ensemble (NPT). Each system was
minimized for 1000 steps, following 0.5 ns of relaxation and 0.5 ns of production. Every 20 ps
the molecule shape was estimated using the protocol described previously 8 and then used to
calculate the PLDA for the specific conformation. The final value for PLDA was computed
by averaging over the values obtained for all
the conformations. Finally, the partition coefficients of the drugs molecules in octanol and
water were taken from PubChem website using
experimental values when available, or prediction from XLogP3 model 38 otherwise.

2. Gordon, D. E.; Jang, G. M.; Bouhaddou, M.; Xu, J.; Obernier, K.; Kris, M.;
Meara, M. J. O.; Rezelj, V. V.; Guo, J. Z.;
Swaney, D. L.; Tia, A.; Huettenhain, R.;
Kaake, R. M.; Richards, A. L.; Tutuncuoglu, B.; Batra, J.; Haas, K.; Modak, M.;
Kim, M.; Haas, P. et al. A SARS-CoV-2
Protein Interaction Map Reveals Targets
for Drug Repurposing. Nature (Just Accepted).
3. Lipinski, C. A.;
Lombardo, F.;
Dominy, B. W.; Feeney, P. J. Experimental and Computational Approaches to
Estimate Solubility and Permeability in
Drug Discovery and Development Settings.
Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 1997, 23, 3–25.
4. Kirchmair, J.;
Distinto, S.;
Roman
Liedl,
K.;
Markt,
P.;
Maria Rollinger, J.;
Schuster, D.;
Maria Spitzer, G.; Wolber, G. Development of Anti-Viral Agents Using
Molecular Modeling and Virtual Screening
Techniques. Infect. Disord.: Drug Targets
2011, 11, 64–93.

Acknowledgement The authors are grateful to Dr. Matteo Masetti and Dr. J. Scott
VanEpps for the discussions and suggestions.
This work was supported by the University of
Michigan, BlueSky project.

Supporting Information Available

5. Wu, W.; Zhang, C.; Lin, W.; Chen, Q.;
Guo, X.; Qian, Y.; Zhang, L. Quantitative
Structure-Property Relationship (QSPR)
Modeling of Drug-Loaded Polymeric Micelles via Genetic Function Approximation.
10, e0119575.
6. Gozalbes, R.; Jacewicz, M.; Annand, R.;
Tsaioun, K.; Pineda-Lucena, A. QSAR-

The following files are available free of charge.

8

based permeability model for drug-like
compounds. Bioorg. Med. Chem. 2011, 19,
2615–2624.

16. Russ, K. A.; Elvati, P.; Parsonage, T. L.;
Dews, A.; Jarvis, J. A.; Ray, M.; Schneider, B.; Smith, P. J. S.; Williamson, P.
T. F.; Violi, A.; Philbert, M. A. C60
Fullerene Localization and Membrane Interactions in RAW 264.7 Immortalized
Mouse Macrophages. 8, 4134–4144, Article.

7. Venable, R. M.; Krämer, A.; Pastor, R. W.
Molecular Dynamics Simulations of Membrane Permeability. Chem. Rev. 2019, 119,
5954–5997.

17. Khan, A. D.; Singh, L. Various Techniques
of Bioavailability Enhancement: a Review.
J. Drug Delivery Ther. 2016, 6, 34–41.

8. Liu, C.; Elvati, P.; Majumder, S.;
Wang, Y.; Liu, A. P.; Violi, A. Predicting
the Time of Entry of Nanoparticles in Lipid
Membranes. ACS Nano 2019, 13, 10221–
10232.

18. Beermann, B. Pharmacokinetics of Lisinopril. Am. J. Med. 1988, 85, 25–30.

9. Belouzard, S.; Millet, J. K.; Licitra, B. N.;
Whittaker, G. R. Mechanisms of Coronavirus Cell Entry Mediated by the Viral
Spike Protein. Viruses 2012, 4, 1011–1033.

19. Krogan, N. We Found and Tested 47 Old
Drugs That Might Treat the Coronavirus:
Results Show Promising Leads and a
Whole New Way to Fight Covid-19. 2020;
https://theconversation.com/we-foundand-tested-47-old-drugs-that-might-treatthe-coronavirus-results-show-promisingleads-and-a-whole-new-way-to-fight-covid19-136789.

10. Li, F. Structure, Function, and Evolution
of Coronavirus Spike Proteins. Annu. Rev.
Virol. 2016, 3, 237–261.
11. Wrapp, D.; Wang, N.; Corbett, K. S.; Goldsmith, J. A.; Hsieh, C. L.; Abiona, O.; Graham, B. S.; McLellan, J. S. Cryo-Em Structure of the 2019-Ncov Spike in the Prefusion Conformation. Science 2020, 367,
1260–1263.

20. Reich, S. H.; Sprengeler, P. A.; Chiang, G. G.; Appleman, J. R.; Chen, J.;
Clarine, J.; Eam, B.; Ernst, J. T.;
Han, Q.; Goel, V. K.; Han, E. Z.;
Huang, V.; Hung, I. N.; Jemison, A.;
Jessen, K. A.; Molter, J.; Murphy, D.;
Neal, M.; Parker, G. S.; Shaghafi, M.
et al. Structure-Based Design of PyridoneAminal eFT508 Targeting Dysregulated
Translation by Selective Mitogen-Activated
Protein Kinase Interacting Kinases 1 and 2
(mnk1/2) Inhibition. J. Med. Chem. 2018,
61, 3516–3540.

12. Huang, X.; Pearce, R.; Zhang, Y. Computational Design of Peptides to Block Binding of the SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein to
Human ACE2. bioRxiv 2020,
13. Haan, C. A. M. D.; Rottier, P. J. M. Molecular Interactions in the Assembly of Coronaviruses. Adv. Virus Res. 2005, 64, 165–
230.

21. Thompson, P. A.; Eam, B.; Young, N. P.;
Fish, S.; Chen, J.; Barrera, M.; Howard, H.;
Parra, A.; Molter, J.; Staunton, J., et al.
Preclinical Evaluation of eFT226, a Novel,
Potent and Selective eIF4A Inhibitor with
Anti-Tumor Activity in B-Cell Malignancies. Blood 2017, 130, 1530–1530.

14. Hogue, B. G.; Brian, D. A. Structural Proteins of Human Respiratory Coronavirus
Oc43. Virus Res. 1986, 5, 131–144.
15. van Genderen, I. L.; Godeke, G. J.; Rottier, P. J. M.; van Meer, G. The Phospholipid Composition of Enveloped Viruses
Depends on the Intracellular Membrane
Through Which They Bud. Biochem. Soc.
Trans. 1995, 23, 523–526.

22. Leisch, M.; Egle, A.; Greil, R. Plitidepsin: a Potential New Treatment For
Relapsed/Refractory Multiple Myeloma.
Future Oncol. 2019, 15, 109–120.
9

23. Hellewell, S. B.; Bruce, A.; Feinstein, G.;
Orringer, J.; Williams, W.; Bowen, W. D.
Rat Liver and Kidney Contain High Densities of Σ1 and Σ2 Receptors: Characterization by Ligand Binding and Photoaffinity
Labeling. Eur. J. Pharmacol. Mol. Pharmacol. 1994, 268, 9–18.

Cartesian Equations of Motion of a System With Constraints: Molecular Dynamics of N-Alkanes. J. Comput. Phys. 1977,
23, 327–341.
30. Darden, T.; York, D.; Pedersen, L. Particle Mesh Ewald: an Nlog(n) Method for
Ewald Sums in Large Systems. J. Chem.
Phys. 1993, 98, 10089–10092.

24. Azzariti, A.; Colabufo, N. A.; Berardi, F.;
Porcelli, L.; Niso, M.; Simone, G. M.; Perrone, R.; Paradiso, A. Cyclohexylpiperazine Derivative PB28, a σ2 Agonist and σ1
Antagonist Receptor, Inhibits Cell Growth,
Modulates P-Glycoprotein, and Synergizes
With Anthracyclines in Breast Cancer.
Mol. Cancer Ther. 2006, 5, 1807–1816.

31. Loncharich, R. J.; Brooks, B. R.; Pastor, R. W. Langevin Dynamics of Peptides:
the Frictional Dependence of Isomerization
Rates of N -Acetylalanyl-N’ -Methylamide.
Biopolymers 1992, 32, 523–535.
32. Martyna, Tobias, K. Constant Pressure
Molecular Dynamics Algorithms. J. Chem.
Phys. 1994, 101, 4177–4189.

25. Cuzzocrea, S.; Catania, M. Pharmacological and Clinical Overview of Cloperastine
in Treatment of Cough. Ther. Clin. Risk
Manag. 2011, 83.

33. Feller, S. E. Constant Pressure Molecular
Dynamics Simulation: the Langevin Piston
Method. J. Chem. Phys. 1995, 103, 4613–
4621.

26. Phillips, J. C.; Braun, R.; Wang, W.;
Gumbart, J.; Tajkhorshid, E.; Villa, E.;
Chipot, C.; Skeel, R. D.; Kalé, L.; Schulten, K. Scalable Molecular Dynamics With
Namd. J. Comput. Chem. 2005, 26, 1781–
1802.

34. Horvath, S. E.; Daum, G. Lipids of Mitochondria. Prog. Lipid Res. 2013, 52, 590–
614.
35. Jo, S.; Kim, T.; Iyer, V. G.; Im, W.
Charmm-Gui: a Web-Based Graphical
User Interface for Charmm. J. Comput.
Chem. 2008, 29, 1859–1865.

27. Klauda, J. B.; Venable, R. M.; Freites, J. A.; Connor, J. W. O.; Tobias, D. J.;
Mondragon-ramirez, C.; Vorobyov, I.;
Mackerell, A. D.; Pastor, R. W. Update
of the Charmm All-Atom Additive Force
Field for Lipids: Validation on Six Lipid
Types. J. Phys. Chem. B 2010, 2, 7830–
7843.

36. Vanommeslaeghe, K.;
Hatcher, E.;
Acharya, C.; Kundu, S.; Zhong, S.;
Shim, J.; Darian, E.; Guvench, O.;
Lopes, P.; Vorobyov, I.; Mackerell, A. D.
Charmm General Force Field: a Force
Field for Drug-Like Molecules Compatible
With the Charmm All-Atom Additive
Biological Force Fields. J. Comput. Chem.
2010, 31, 671–690.

28. MacKerell, A. D.; Bashford, D.; Bellott, M.; Dunbrack, R. L.; Evanseck, J. D.;
Field, M. J.; Fischer, S.; Gao, J.; Guo, H.;
Ha, S.; Joseph-McCarthy, D.; Kuchnir, L.;
Kuczera, K.; Lau, F. T. K.; Mattos, C.;
Michnick, S.; Ngo, T.; Nguyen, D. T.; Prodhom, B.; Reiher, W. E. et al. All-Atom
Empirical Potential for Molecular Modeling and Dynamics Studies of Proteins. J.
Phys. Chem. B 1998, 102, 3586–3616.

37. Vanommeslaeghe, K.; MacKerell, A. D. Automation of the Charmm General Force
Field (cgenff) I: Bond Perception and Atom
Typing. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2012, 52,
3144–3154.

29. Ryckaert, J. P.; Ciccotti, G.; Berendsen, H. J. Numerical Integration of the
10

38. Cheng, T.; Zhao, Y.; Li, X.; Lin, F.; Xu, Y.;
Zhang, X.; Li, Y.; Wang, R.; Lai, L. Computation of Octanol-Water Partition Coefficients by Guiding an Additive Nodel With
Knowledge. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2007, 47,
2140–2148.

11

Graphical TOC Entry

12

