Safer Workspaces at Times of Coronavirus: A Novel
Use of Antibody Tests
Patricio Foncea

arXiv:2007.05825v3 [physics.soc-ph] 4 Nov 2020

Operations Research Center, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA, foncea@mit.edu

Susana Mondschein
Department of Industrial Engineering, University of Chile and Instituto Sistemas Complejos de Ingeniería, Chile
susana.mondschein@uchile.cl

Ragheb Massouh
Medical advisor, GrupoBios, Chile rnmassou@uc.cl

The SARS-CoV-2 pandemic has transformed the way that the world functions. Health issues and population safety
have driven countries’ economies to a critical state; therefore, sustaining economic activity while keeping workers
safe has become a worldwide goal. In this paper, we present a novel safety protocol based on rapid antibody testing
(ABT). Using discrete event simulation, we evaluated its performance on the cumulative number of infected workers,
effective reproductive number (R e ), and active work force within a company.
Using a synthetic experiment, we showed that ABT twice a week (ABT 3) performed the best, detecting 5.7% of infected workers, compared to 16.9% when no ABT was applied. R e was reduced from 1.75 to 0.84, with a slight decrease
in the active workers within the firm. A sensitivity analysis on the duration of the shedding period and sensitivity of
ABT was performed and led to the same qualitative conclusions. We applied this protocol in a Chilean winery: the
estimation of the initial R e of 1.3 was reduced to 0.7 when the ABT 3 protocol was implemented, with a 27% decrease
in the number of infected workers.
Although ABT is not approved for COVID-19 diagnosis, our study shows that upgraded safety standards can already
be implemented in workspaces.
Key words: Antibody tests, COVID-19, contagion prevention, discrete event simulation, statistical analysis

1. INTRODUCTION
As SARS-Cov-2 spreads worldwide, governments struggle to keep people safe without collapsing
the economy. Social distancing and quarantines have proven to be effective measures to save lives,
yet their impact on the economy has been experienced by countries worldwide. The major challenge faced by many countries at this point of the pandemic is to find a way to keep their critical
industries, such as health, telecommunications, national security, transportation, food and energy,
functioning and slowly reopen nonessential industries, while maintaining a safe environment for
their workers.
1

Author: Safer Workspaces at Times of Coronavirus

2

In this paper, we propose a novel approach based on periodic SARS-CoV-2 antibody testing (ABT)
to reduce the risk of contagion within the workspace. Using discrete event simulation, we evaluate
the impact of this approach using different protocols regarding testing frequency and the stage of
the pandemic measured by the effective reproductive number, inside and outside the workspace.
The use of ABT is the best available option at this point: it is inexpensive, fast, widely available, and
easy to perform. We note, however, that the protocols analyzed in this study might be enhanced by
using new and/or more effective and inexpensive tests as they become available. For example, the
gold standard for diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2 is the RT–PCR. However, in most countries this is not a
suitable option for screening: it is expensive and often scarce, the acquisition of the sample is very
unpleasant, and delivery of the results is delayed by the required lab analysis. We also evaluated
and discarded the use of point–of–care antigen tests due to their poor results to date.
The antibody rapid tests we consider require a simple finger prick blood sample to obtain a result
within 15 minutes and have already gained FDA-EUA (emergency use authorization) for their use.
These tests can be taken at the workplace and have high specificity (higher than 95%) and an acceptable sensitivity (approximately 90%) after 7 days of symptom onset [19], detecting the presence
of specific anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibodies, which reflect concurrent or previous viral infection.
We propose to apply ABT to the asymptomatic working population, assuming antibody responses similar to those described for symptomatic patients since some authors have seen that
serum antibody levels do not necessarily correlate with clinical severity [22]. By applying this
model, we intend to detect as early as possible an asymptomatic worker that could unknowingly be
shedding the virus. Detecting and isolating the worker would prevent future spreading of the virus
from this patient. Furthermore, this would allow the identification and quarantine of contacts, preventing further spreading of the virus.
Given ABT’s sensitivity and specificity and the fact that antibodies develop gradually after infection, we propose a conservative approach to quarantine potential infected workers. Thus, a positive
test should be confirmed with an RT–PCR test. If this is not available, we recommend repeating the
ABT test, and if it is positive again, consider the person as COVID-19 positive, despite potential false
positives. We also note that by using periodic testing, for example, twice a week, if a person with
consecutive negative ABT results were to subsequently receive a positive antibody result, then they
would have recently been infected, and therefore could potentially be infecting other coworkers.
Although the specificity of ABT is not 100%, the likelihood of a false positive largely decreases after
the first negative screening. Current studies show that most false positives have been attributed to
an underlying cause, such as previous infection by other viruses from the Coronaviridae family;

Author: Safer Workspaces at Times of Coronavirus

3

see, for example, [3], [8]. This was also noted on previous cases of cross reactivity between corona
viruses [20]. The behavior of serologic tests in more specific conditions, such as autoimmune diseases or immunosuppressive therapy, have not yet been elucidated.
There has been an increasing concern worldwide regarding sanitary measures when a worker
has been identified as positive for the virus that could lead to closing a factory or organization. We
strongly believe that a responsible risk management strategy applying safety measures, similar to
the approach we propose and study in this paper, would justify that sanitation authorities react less
harshly when positive cases are detected.
The aim of this study is to design and evaluate protocols for screening using ABT together with
work shifts when possible, to reduce the risk of COVID-19 infections within organizations. Thus, the
goal is to detect potential asymptomatic COVID-19 workers to stop the spread of the disease among
coworkers and track all close contacts that might be infected and not yet showing symptoms, either
because they are at the incubation period or asymptomatic. We note that as in any strategy for
risk management, there are costs involved when isolating noninfectious workers as a preventive
measure. We consider those in the evaluation of the proposed protocols.
We propose several realistic protocols and evaluate them using a discrete event simulation, where
the main sources of uncertainty correspond to i) initial infection prevalence in the working population, ii) days until onset of symptoms, iii) duration of symptoms, iv) duration of infection after
symptoms subside, and v) transition probability from susceptible to exposed, given the number of
infected workers as a function of time. The latter is modeled to approximate the dynamics of the
standard SEIR compartmental model.
The metrics used for the protocol evaluation are the firm’s effective reproductive number, the
cumulative number of infected workers as a function of time, and the daily percentage of active
workers as a function of the total work force. We note that as in any strategy for risk management,
there are costs involved when isolating noninfectious workers as a preventive measure, which are
considered in the evaluation of the proposed protocols.
Our results show that the implementation of ABT and shift protocols has a significant impact
on reducing contagion within the organization. The magnitude of this reduction depends on the
effective reproductive number for the general population and the specific number within the organization. We have applied this methodology to a large Chilean winery, where the protocol of ABT
twice a week has been implemented, with weekly day and night shifts of 12 hours plus additional
weekly rests. Using the maximum likelihood estimation and the plant’s historic data of infected
workers since the beginning of the pandemic in Chile, we first estimated the plant’s effective reproductive number before protocols were implemented. For the estimation of asymptomatic infected

Author: Safer Workspaces at Times of Coronavirus

4

workers, we used the results obtained at the first ABT. With this information and data reported in
the literature regarding the evolution of the disease, we projected the reduction in the number of
infections within the company compared to the baseline in which no ABT protocols were in place.
After one month of implementation, the actual results are consistent with our projections. We also
developed an “alert system” for the company in which the protocols can be activated or deactivated
according to the stage of the pandemic.
Finally, we emphasize that the protocols that we study and evaluate in this paper are complementary to other recommendations on avoiding the spread of the virus at work, such as social
distancing, personal protective elements, home offices, shifts, no casino lunches and sanitation,
among others.

2. MATHEMATICAL MODEL
In this section, we describe what is known about COVID-19 in terms of incubation, symptoms, and
shedding periods. We also focus on the contagiousness of the virus and the production of antibodies that can be detected to isolate a potentially contagious patient. Then, we describe the relevant
parameters and random variables that are considered for the design and evaluation of protocols
using antibody tests and work shifts to reduce the risk of contagion within an organization. Finally, we describe the main features of the discrete event simulation model used to evaluate the
performance of the proposed protocols, in terms of the following metrics: i) effective reproductive
number, ii) percentage of infected workers actively working as a function of time, iii) cumulative
infected workers as a function of time, and iv) daily percentage of active workers as a function of
the total work force.

2.1. Evolution of the disease: description and assumptions
Given the insufficient data for asymptomatic patients, the timeline of viral behavior for these patients is extrapolated from what the literature describes as mild cases. This assumption is based on
studies that show similar characteristics between both types of individuals [27].
In most cases, it is not known when the person was exposed to the virus and became infected.
However, there is wide consensus that a patient becomes contagious, on average, two days before
showing symptoms [6], [13]. We assume that the time from exposure to the virus until the symptoms develop (incubation period), given that the infected person shows symptoms, is distributed
according to a lognormal distribution [16].
Current studies suggest that mild cases experience a duration of symptoms between 7 to 14
days [16], and most likely, this period would be shorter for oligosymptomatic patients, i.e., patients

Author: Safer Workspaces at Times of Coronavirus

5

with almost unnoticeable symptoms. Therefore, we assume a COVID-19-like symptom period of
random duration in the range from 5 to 10 days for oligosymptomatic patients [6].
There is consensus that the viral shedding period, i.e., the period when the infected person is contagious, starts approximately 2 days before the onset of symptoms [6], [13]. However, there is controversy on how long this period lasts after symptoms subside. In our study, we assume that contagiousness of oligosymptomatics lasts randomly from 5 to 10 days after the COVID-19-like symptoms disappear [6]. This period seemed reasonable given the WHO recommendation at the time
that we began this project (14 days of home isolation after symptoms resolve for mild cases [18]).
However, this has changed in light of recent evidence, which although not of the highest quality, has
shifted the latest guidelines from 14 days to only 11 days after the onset of symptoms [1]. However,
due to the lack of studies that show an estimate for this duration on oligosymptomatic patients, in
Section 3, we perform a sensitivity analysis regarding the expected value of this random variable.
The study in [27] finds that an infected person has a higher viral load within the first 5 days
from symptom onset and hypothesizes that this situation could lead to a higher contagious rate.
However, currently, there is no high-quality evidence that confirms this hypothesis. Therefore, we
assume a homogeneous contagious rate over time [24], [25].
The WHO-China Joint Mission Report [6] found that 81% of the infected population presents
mild symptoms, while other authors have found that this percentage is 61% for mild cases [17]. An
article from the Imperial College COVID-19 Response Team, [11], estimated that only two-thirds
of the infected present recognizable symptoms. Additionally, another study on pregnant women
showed that 80% might carry the virus without symptoms [21]. In a long-term care facility in the
United States, 56% of those who tested positive with PCR were asymptomatic [15]. Thus, combining current available information, we assume that 50% of the infected population will develop the
disease in a oligosymptomatic fashion, i.e., few or minor symptoms; see [12] for a systematic review
of asymptomatic infections.
We chose not to consider a higher incidence as found for specific population studies (e.g., pregnant or long-term care facility) or suggested by recent antibody testing on random populations,
since this might lead to overestimation. Identifying these groups is key for pandemic control because asymptomatic patients and patients with very mild COVID-19 symptoms may not seek
health care nor receive diagnosis, which leads to underestimation of the burden of COVID-19. We
note that the oligosymptomatic might shed the virus just as symptomatic patients [27], [9].
Currently, the quarantine in place in Chile works as follows: if a person shows mild symptoms
and is confirmed by PCR test, he/she is quarantined immediately for 11 days after symptom onset.

Author: Safer Workspaces at Times of Coronavirus

6

We note that in the protocols designed in this study, we used a quarantine of 14 days, since it was
the health protocol during the first months of the pandemic. This more conservative quarantine
would only have a slight impact on the number of active workers in the company but a gain in
terms of not having potentially contagious workers in the workspace.
We also consider that an asymptomatic person without a previous history of COVID-19 with a
positive antibody test – either for IgM or IgG –1 is potentially an infectious agent, and therefore is
also quarantined. If during this period, he/she presents symptoms, the quarantine is extended for
another 14 days since symptom onset. In both cases, the person at the end of the quarantine is
considered recovered, and thus, not contagious.
Given the relatively low prevalence of confirmed SARS-CoV-2 up to July 2020 in Chile (less than
2.0%) and that the first reported case was last March, we decided to use a conservative approach to
interpret the antibody results for the asymptomatic-under screening population, as follows.
IgM

IgG Interpretation

−

−

+
+
−

−
+
+

Viral shedding assumption.

Still has not come in contact with virus
or is in antibody window period.
Acute phase of infection
Acute phase of infection
Acute phase of infection(∗∗)

No(∗)
Yes
Yes
Yes

(*) We know that a negative antibody test does not rule out viral shedding, but the only way to confirm that
would be by PCR testing (or a good antigen test) and that is not currently available. Therefore, we interpret
this result as the equivalent of having citizens going to work without screening.
(**) We decided to interpret this result as active infection only after 2 or more consecutive antibody tests show
negative results, to increase our sensitivity despite losing specificity, but ensuring a safer return to work. This
is under the consideration of the following: i ) we are testing asymptomatic patients that have no previous
history of COVID–19; i i ) many will have previous antibody tests for comparison because we are testing twice
a week; therefore, we would be witnessing real seroconversion; i i i ) negative IgM could be a false negative
(this ranges from 5-15%); and i v) if at any of the first 2 tests, the person yields IgM(-) and IgG (+), that would
be considered a previous and not an acute infection. Thus, during the first week of testing, we would be
making the cut between those with serology suggestive of previous infection and those without.

As stated in the Introduction, the model’s aim is to ensure a safe work environment; therefore, we
develop an algorithm for the interpretation of the antibody test results that misses the least active
1 IgM and IgG are immunoglobulins that form part of our immune response against different microorganism. They are

two of the various known antibodies that humans produce. IgM is usually associated with the acute phase of an infection,
while IgG can be seen during the acute phase and posterior to it, lasting longer in our system. It may prevent future reinfection or prepare for a better immune response in case of reinfection. Antibody rapid tests are specific for the detection
of anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibodies.

Author: Safer Workspaces at Times of Coronavirus

7

viral shedding workers despite the possibility of quarantining a nonshedding worker until he has
his PCR done.
Notice that the interpretation of the antibodies’ results that is explained above for the oligosymptomatics under a screening population differs from the interpretation done in cases of known
COVID-19 patients who afterwards are tested with antibodies. We remark that the latter are not the
subject of this study. Regarding those who came in contact with the virus and after some time are
tested with antibodies and show IgM (-) and IgG (+), to date there is insufficient evidence to confirm
their immunity; nonetheless, there are some studies that suggest that reinfection is unlikely [5], [7].
Thus, in the near future, when more knowledge is acquired, the data gathered from screening will
provide valuable information for public health policy.

2.2. Model Description
In this subsection, we first describe the notation used for the parameters and random variables of
the model for the evolution of the disease. Then, we describe the protocols that we considered for
the application of antibody tests and workers’ shifts. Finally, we present the discrete event simulation model used for the evaluation of these protocols.
2.2.1. Random variables
• Θ = onset period; time until symptoms show up, given that the person will be symptomatic.
• V = viral shedding period, with expected value equal to E(V ).
• d s = duration of symptoms.
• d ps = duration of post-symptom contagion period.
• NS (t ) = number of workers that are susceptible on day t .
• NE (t ) = number of workers that are exposed on day t .
• N I (t ) = number of workers that are infected and contagious on day t .
• NR (t ) = number of workers that have recovered from the virus on day t .
• N = working population, which is constant over the short-term planning horizon considered.
Therefore, N = NS (t ) + NE (t ) + N I (t ) + NR (t ).
• WS (t ) = number of workers that are susceptible and working on day t .
• WE (t ) = number of workers that are exposed and working on day t .
• W I (t ) = number of workers that are infected, contagious, and working on day t .
• WR (t ) = number of recovered workers working on day t .
• W (t ) = total number of workers working on day t . W (t ) = WS (t ) + WE (t ) + W I (t ) + WR (t ).
• P (t ) = population in the geographic area where the company is located.
• P S (t ) = susceptible population at time t in the geographic area where the company is located.
• P I (t ) = infected population at time t in the geographic area where the company is located.

Author: Safer Workspaces at Times of Coronavirus

8

2.2.2. Parameters
• R 0 = Basic reproductive number (expected number of cases directly generated by one case in
a population where all individuals are susceptible to infection). This number is estimated at the
beginning of the pandemic and is a function of R 0 = τcE(V ), where τ is the transmissibility (i.e.,
probability of infection given contact between a susceptible and infected individual), c is the daily
average rate of contact between susceptible and infected individuals, and E(V ) is the expected duration of the shedding period [14]. Several estimates have been reported in the literature; see, for
example, [23], [26].
• R e (t ) = effective reproductive number for the population. This number varies as a function of
time, depending on the implemented measures, such as quarantines, social distancing, diagnostic
capacity, and traceability, among others.
• R ew (π) = Effective reproductive number within the company. It corresponds to the expected
number of new cases directly generated by one infected worker within the company. This number is
calculated as R ew (π) = τew c ew E(V (π)), where τew is the transmissibility among workers, which is highly
dependent on the sanitary measures implemented inside the company, c ew is the daily average rate
of contact between susceptible and infected individuals inside the company, and E(V (π)) is the
effective duration of the disease inside the company, calculated as the number of days an infected
worker stays actively working before being isolated. This number depends directly on the protocol
π implemented in the organization (the set of protocols is described in Subsection 2.2.3).
• S = Pr(IgM+ or IgG+ |Infected) = sensitivity of combined antibody test.
• E = Pr(IgM− and IgG− |Susceptible) = specificity of the test.
• p s = Probability of becoming symptomatic, given that the person acquires virus.
• Pr(S) = probability of being susceptible at the beginning of the planning horizon.
• Pr(E ) = probability of being exposed and not contagious at the beginning of the planning horizon.
• Pr(I ) = probability of being infected and contagious at the beginning of the planning horizon.
• Pr(R) = probability of being recovered at the beginning of the planning horizon. Note that
Pr(S) + Pr(E ) + Pr(I ) + Pr(R) = 1.
• S h = number of working hours in a shift.
• p(π, t ) = daily probability of a worker becoming infected on day t , if protocol π is implemented.
It is a combination between the probability of becoming infected outside and inside the company.
We assume that the worker sleeps for 8 hours; therefore, he is exposed inside and outside the working place for S h and (16 − S h ) hours, respectively.
p(π, t ) =

R ew (π) W I (t )
R e (t ) N I (t )
(S h /16) +
((16 − S h )/16)
E(V (π)) W (t )
E(V ) N (t )

Author: Safer Workspaces at Times of Coronavirus

9

2.2.3. Protocols In what follows, we describe the protocols defined for their evaluation. Some
of them include the use of antibody tests or working shifts or a combination of both.
1. Base: This is the baseline protocol, where only workers that show symptoms and are confirmed by PCR are quarantined. They return to work 14 days after symptoms subside.
2. ABT k: This protocol includes antibody tests every k days for all active workers, i.e., those who
are going to work. If the test is positive for either I g M or I gG, a PCR test is performed and the
worker is quarantined until the results are known. If the result is negative, then that worker goes
back to work; otherwise, he continues in quarantine for 14 days unless he shows symptoms at some
point. In the latter case, he stays isolated for 14 days after symptoms subside. We use a parameter
that specifies the average number of days that it takes to have the results of the PCR test. At the
peak of the COVID-19 pandemic in Chile, the processing time for PCR tests could easily take up to
a week.
3. Shift 14: This protocol considers that workers are divided into two shifts of 14 days each. If a
worker is infected and shows symptoms, then the regular quarantine applies for him, either if this
happens within or not within his shift.
4. Shift 14 + ABT k: This protocol is the combination of shifts of 14 days and the use of antibody
tests for workers that are in an active shift.
2.2.4. Discrete Event Simulation The flowchart diagrams in Figures 1 and 2 describe the discrete event simulation developed to evaluate the protocols designed to reduce the risk of infection
within organizations. Let N = N I (0)+NS (0)+NR (0)+NE (0) be the total number of workers at the beginning of the simulation and T the planning horizon under study. To ease the notation, we assume
that all random variables described in the previous section can be grouped in one joint distribution
D – although most of them are independent. The random variables considered in the simulation
are as follows: i) proportion of initial population at each compartment (S (susceptible), E (exposed),
I (infected), R (recovered)), ii) days until symptom onset, ii) duration of symptoms, iv) duration of
infection after symptoms subside, and v) transition probability from susceptible to exposed, given
the number of infected workers.
For each individual (worker) i = 1, . . . , N , we denote by c it ∈ {S, E , I , R} his health state at time
t , ĉ it ∈ {S, E , I , R} his observed state at time t (for example, the decision maker might believe the
worker is susceptible, although in reality, he is incubating the disease), and a it ∈ {W,Q} the working
state at time t (work or quarantine). For protocol Shift 14, we classify workers at home for 14 days;
therefore, they can become infected as any other individual in the population.
We encode a protocol by two functions ψ and ϕ. The first one, ψ decides the observed health
state of an individual. This is based on any indication of illness the protocol is allowed to measure

10

Author: Safer Workspaces at Times of Coronavirus

– e.g., symptoms for Protocols 0, results of serological tests and symptoms for the rest. Note that
given the stochastic nature of this indicator, the function ψ takes as argument the vector of previous
observed states, the current activity of each individual, and a random state drawn from D given
the actual health state and activity, i.e., if he is quarantined or not. The second function, ϕ, decides
whether the individual is allowed to work or must go into quarantine. It takes as input the vector of
observed states and activities.
In each iteration, nature draws from D the new health state of the population given the history
of health states up to that point and the activity of each worker. The distribution of workers in
quarantine or work is relevant since it determines which workers can become infected by whom.
Then, the protocol takes as input the current activities and the history of observed states, along with
hyperparameters, such as duration of quarantine and frequency of serological testing if applicable,
and uses the decision rules described above to update the activity of each individual.
After T simulated days, the algorithm stops and outputs the full history of states and activities
for every individual. Specifically, let S it = (c ti , ĉ ti , a ti ) be the vector describing worker i ; then, S t = (S it |
i = 1, . . . N ) and the algorithm outputs (S t | 0 ≤ t ≤ T ).

Author: Safer Workspaces at Times of Coronavirus

11

start

end

Global\Environment Input:
User Input:

Output:

FALSE

TRUE
Environment updates states according to
previous states, activities and transition
distribution:

Generate Initial Population:

Protocol

Protocol Input:

Figure 1

Flowchart of the algorithm.

3. Results
In this section, we describe the evolution of the disease for the protocols described above and compare them in terms of the total number of infected workers, the average daily percentage of active
workers, and the effective reproductive number within the organization as a function of the implemented protocol. We also present a sensitivity analysis regarding two critical parameters: the
duration of the contagion period and the sensitivity of the AB test. For the estimation of metrics,
we used 5,000 simulations, with a coefficient of variation of less than 1.3% for all cases.

3.1. Data
For illustration purposes, we consider an organization of 100 “identical workers’,’ in terms of working hours, close contacts, and sanitary conditions inside and outside the firm. In the next section,
we present a real application in which workers are tracked according to their own attributes. In
what follows, we describe the data used in the analysis presented in this section.

Author: Safer Workspaces at Times of Coronavirus

12

Protocol

start

end

Protocol Input:

Take decision based on
observed states and activities
Update activities:

State Input:

Analyze according to observed states and
activity and apply serological test if
applicable.
Update observed states:

Figure 2

Flowchart of the Protocol.

• R e = 1.60
• R ew (B ase) = 1.75
• S = 88% (after a week since infection).
• E = 0.97
• p s = 0.5
• Pr(S) = 0.983
• Pr(I ) = 0.017
• Pr(R) = 0.00
• S h = 8 hours.
• Θ (days) = ln N (µ = 5.1, σ2 = 1.8)
• d s = U [7, 10]
• d ps = U [5, 10]
• V = 2 + d s + d ps

Author: Safer Workspaces at Times of Coronavirus

13

3.2. Comparison of Protocols
In this subsection, we compare 6 protocols: Base, ABT 7, ABT 3, Shift 14, Shift 14 + ABT 7 , and
Shift 14 + ABT 3. Table 1 shows the performance of the baseline case and the 5 protocols evaluated
for a horizon of 5 months and 100 workers; i.e., the number and percentage of infected workers are
equivalent. As expected, the Base protocol performs the worst, having more than 8.5, 9.5, 11.2, 12.0,
and 12.3 infected workers than having shifts of 14 days, antibody tests once a week or every 3 days,
and the combination of 14-day shifts with antibody tests once a week or every 3 days, respectively.
We note that the use of antibody tests significantly reduces the number of infected individuals,
with a minimal impact on the average number of active workers: 98.5% for ABT 7 and 97.7% for
ABT 3 compared to 99.0% for the baseline case. We also note that the use of a combined strategy
of antibody tests and shifts leads to the best results in terms of infected workers; however, it has a
great impact on the number of active workers, reducing the latter to approximately a half. When
using 14-day shifts, antibodies every 3 days or once a week do not show an important difference;
therefore, the less expensive protocol is recommended.
The last column of Table 1 shows the adjusted reproductive number within the company, R ew (π),
computed for each protocol. We recall that R ew (π) = τew c ew E(V (π)), where we assume that the transmissibility τew and the rate of contact c ew among workers remain constant for all protocols; i.e., the
sanitary measures do not change. However, the duration of the contagion period within the organization, E(V (π)), strongly depends on the average number an infected worker stays working before
being detected and isolated. Thus, in the baseline case, only symptomatic workers are isolated,
leading to the highest R ew (B ase) of 1.95. We observe that the adjusted reproductive number greatly
decreases when the protocols are in place, thus reducing the number of contagion days for a worker
before being isolated. For example, in Shift 14, an asymptomatic worker stays actively working for
an average of a week before going home for his days off.
Figure 3 shows the evolution of the cumulative number of infected workers over time for a horizon of 5 months and 100 workers. For a longer planning horizon, we would eventually observe that
the number of infected converge to a constant number.
Finally, Figure 4 shows, for each simulation, the difference between the cumulative number of
infected workers between the Base and ABT 3 protocols. The solid line corresponds to the average
difference between the protocols, and the area under the upper curve envelope contains 97.5% of
the simulation paths. We observe that by the fifth month, the difference of infected workers between the two protocols might reach up to 45 individuals, which in this case, corresponds to 45%
of the total number of workers in the company. Given the random nature of the process, the uncertainty and, therefore, the width of the band grows as a function of time.

Author: Safer Workspaces at Times of Coronavirus

14

We note that the characteristics of the pandemic evolve over time; therefore, it also changes the
effective reproductive number of the targeted population, R e (t ). In section 4, where we discuss a
real application of this protocol in a Chilean company, we develop a “heat map” with the benefits
of the antibody test protocols as a function of the stage of the pandemic, R e (t ).
Protocol (π)

Total Infected Workers

Base
Shift 14
ABT 7
ABT 3
ABT 7 + Shift 14
ABT 3 + Shift 14

16.9%
8.4%
7.4%
5.7%
4.9%
4.6%

Table 1

Daily Avg.
Adjusted R ew (π)
Number of
Active Workers
99.0%
50.1%
98.5%
97.7%
49.8%
49.5%

Avg. Viral
Shedding
Period V (π)
(Days)

1.75
0.90
1.10
0.87
0.63
0.56

10.5
5.4
6.6
5.0
3.8
3.4

Comparison of performance among protocols for a horizon of 5 months.

3.3. Sensitivity Analysis
In this subsection, we perform a sensitivity analysis regarding two parameters that might vary either because of different estimates reported in the literature or technical specifications: i) duration
of the post-symptom contagion period, and ii) sensitivity of the antibody tests. For this purpose, we
simulate the ABT 3 protocol under different values for the sensitivity of the test and the duration of
the post-symptom infection.
3.3.1. Sensitivity of antibody tests

The sensitivity of the antibody tests varies depending on

the manufacturer; therefore, it is important to understand its impact on the main metrics used to
evaluate the protocols. In Table 2, we report the total number of infected workers, the daily average of active workers, and the adjusted reproductive number within the plant in a horizon of 5
months. We observe that the sensitivity of the ABT has a negligible impact on these metrics. The
main reason for this interesting result lies on the periodicity of testing. Therefore, those infected
and asymptomatic workers that could have been missed on one testing due to a false negative (one
minus the sensitivity) have additional testing a few days apart (3 days in this example). Thus, with a
sensitivity of 88%, the probability of a false negative is 12% on one test and decreases to 1.4% after
two consecutive tests. Similarly, with a sensitivity of 78%, the probability of not identifying an infected worker after 2 consecutive tests decreases to 4.8%. We remark that this is the main advantage
of having a periodic ABT testing.

Author: Safer Workspaces at Times of Coronavirus

15

Cumulative number of infected individuals

16

14

12

Protocol
10

Base
Shift 14
ABT 7
ABT 3

8
ABT 7 + Shift 14
ABT 3 + Shift 14

6

4

2

0
0

50

100

150

Days

Figure 3

Evolution of cumulative number of infected workers for different protocols.

Antibody Test
Sensitivity
N/A
0.98
0.88
0.78
0.58
Table 2

Protocol (π) Total Infected Workers

Base
ABT 3
ABT 3
ABT 3
ABT 3

16.9%
5.6%
5.7%
5.7%
5.9%

Daily Average Adjusted R ew (π)
Number of
Active Workers
99.1%
97.8%
97.7%
97.7%
97.7%

1.94
0.87
0.87
0.90
0.92

Summary of the results for the ABT 3 and Base protocols with different sensitivities of the AB test after one
week of infection.

3.3.2. Post-symptom contagion period Currently, there is a vast body of literature regarding
the characteristics of the COVID-19 infection disease. However, as discussed in Subsection 2.1,
there is no agreement regarding the duration of the contagion period. Therefore, we perform a sensitivity analysis to study the impact of different durations for the contagion period on the metrics
evaluated above. In the results reported in Subsection 3.2, we consider a random post-symptom

Author: Safer Workspaces at Times of Coronavirus

16
Difference in number of workers infected

40

30

20

10

0

0

50

100

150

Days

Figure 4

97.5% of simulations are under the upper curve for the difference of the number of infected workers between
the Base and ABT 3 protocols. The solid line corresponds to the mean.

contagion period uniformly distributed between 5 and 10 days. In Table 3 we show how the metrics
of the total number of infected workers, daily average of active workers, and adjusted reproductive number within the plant change when shortening (lengthening) the post-symptom contagion
period.
We note that the basic reproductive number inside the company is constant and equal to 3, i.e.,
an infected worker infects, on average, 3 other workers if he remains in the workspace for the total
duration of this disease. Thus, the shorter the total shedding period is, the higher the daily infection rate. Therefore, we observe that for the Base and ABT 3 protocols, the total number of infected
workers and the adjusted reproductive number decrease when the shedding period lengthens, with
the corresponding increase in the daily number of active workers. We also observed that in all cases
for the duration of the shedding period, the adjusted reproductive number is reduced to approximately a half when the ABT 3 protocol is in place compared to that when there is no antibody test
protocol.

Author: Safer Workspaces at Times of Coronavirus

17

We remark that in all cases, the ABT 3 protocol leads to significant decreases in the number of
infected workers compared to the Base protocol, independently of the duration of the shedding
period, in the analyzed range of values.
Post-symptom Protocol (π) Total Infected Workers Daily Average Adjusted R ew (π)
contagion
Number of
period (d ps )
Active Workers
1 Day
U [1, 5] Days
U[5, 10] Days
U [10, 15] Days
Table 3

ABT 3
Base
ABT 3
Base
ABT 3
Base
ABT 3
Base

10.5%
30.1%
8.1%
22.6%
5.7%
16.9%
4.6%
16.2%

97.2%
98.2%
97.5%
98.7%
97.8%
99.1%
97.9%
99.2%

1.14
2.08
0.98
1.90
0.87
1.75
0.78
1.68

Summary of the results for the ABT 3 and Base protocols with different durations for the post-symptom
infection period.

4. Real case study: application of ABT 3 to a Chilean winery
In this section, we present an application of the antibody test protocol ABT 3 to Viña San Pedro Tarapacá S.A. (VSPT), Isla de Maipo plant. VSPT Wine Group is the second largest exporter
of Chilean wine and is among the most important players in the Chilean market. The employees
are classified into different categories such as administrative, professionals, and workers. Administrative, professionals, and some workers have shifts of 8 hours from Monday to Friday, which we
classify as administrative, while others rotate in three shifts: Monday to Friday day and night shifts
and one week off (backups). Specifically, the composition of the work force is as follows:
Shift

Schedule

Administrative
12 hours day shift
12 hours night shift
12 hours backup
12 hour shift
Total
Table 4

Number of employees

9 am – 5 pm
9 am – 9 pm
9 pm – 9 am
9 am – 9 pm

202
51
47
27
18
345

Distribution of employees

The antibody test used, ActivaQ, has the following technical specifications reported by the manufacturer: i) a sensitivity and specificity of 99% and 100% for IgG antibody, respectively, and ii) a
sensitivity and specificity of 88% and 100% for IgM antibody, respectively. From April 6 to July 14,

Author: Safer Workspaces at Times of Coronavirus

18

there were a total of 8 confirmed symptomatic cases. Additionally, after the first round of antibody
tests at the beginning of the pilot, the presence of IgG antibodies was confirmed in a greater number of individuals, which correspond to workers who had the disease asymptomatically. Table 5
shows the workers who have been infected and how their contagion was determined. It should be
noted that all infections that were verified with antibody tests were classified as such during the
first week of the application of the antibody test pilot.
Detection method

Number of employees at the beginning of pilot

Symptomatic & PCR(+)
IgG(+) with close contact
IgG(+) w/o close contact
IgM(+) & PCR(+)
Table 5

8
8
11
2

Distribution of infected workers at the beginning of the pilot.

If a worker has a positive IgM, a PCR test is taken, and if this is positive, the worker is quarantined.
Employees who have positive IgG and negative IgM are considered immune to the disease, for the
time horizon of the pilot. However, since the period of immunity is not known, they are strongly
recommended to follow all the sanitary measures of the company. For the effective reproductive
number of the population, we used the value reported in [2]. Symptomatic patients diagnosed in
each town of the Metropolitan Region were used in this estimate. However, the incorporation of
asymptomatic patients does not change this estimate, under the assumption that the proportion
of symptomatic and asymptomatic patients does not change over time; see, for example, [10].
The application of the ABT 3 protocol consisted of three steps: i) estimation of R ew (B ase) for the
baseline case, ii) estimation of the average number of infected workers over time, since the beginning of the application of the protocol and the corresponding adjusted R ew (B ase) for this protocol,
and iii) elaboration of a “heat map” to recommend the application of the protocol as a function of
the stage of the pandemic and different values of the baseline reproduction rate R ew (B ase).

4.1. Estimation of the company’s effective reproductive number for the baseline case
Three months of historical data were available to perform the estimation of the reproductive number (or rate of infection) within the plant before the protocol was implemented. For each worker,
we know which days she went to work (including absences due to in-house quarantine), how many
hours each day, and any COVID-19-related event. These events include whether the worker has had
a PCR test and its result, whether the worker presented COVID-19-like symptoms, or whether the
worker was in close contact with someone who was infected.

Author: Safer Workspaces at Times of Coronavirus

19

Following the same infection dynamics used in the simulation, we assume that each worker can
become infected both inside and outside the plant. The probability of being infected outside the
plant on a given day t , q tn , is computed as the product between the effective reproductive number at
the town where worker n lives [2], and the COVID-19 incidence rate in that town, which is reported
on a biweekly basis by the Ministry of Health [4] .
Inside the plant, the probability of being infected (which we denote p t (w)) is proportional to
the ratio between the number of infected workers currently at the plant over the total number of
workers at the plant, which we call i t . The proportionality constant corresponds to the effective reproductive number at the plant, R ew (B ase) – which is assumed to be constant across time – divided
by the average number of days an infected worker stays infected in the plant, V w , before being isolated. The former parameter is unknown and will be estimated, whereas the latter can be obtained
through the data and equals V w = 10.6 days.
The number of infected workers reported by the plant is likely to underestimate the real number, since the workers that were identified as COVID-19 positive are a subset of the ones that were
tested, and the company only tested workers that presented COVID-19-like symptoms. That leaves
out all possible asymptomatic or mild cases. To account for these cases, we use the results of the
first two rounds of antibody tests performed during the protocol implementation to identify all
workers that could have been infected with COVID-19 in the past. If the worker had a COVID-19related event, we assign the infection date randomly between 3 days before and 3 days after that
event. For the case in which there is no COVID-19-related event, we randomly assign it to any date
during the observation period. Using the results of the first two rounds of antibody tests, we detected 19 workers with a positive IgG and a negative IgM antibody test. Therefore, we assume that
these workers had the disease but they are no longer contagious and were not reported by the company in the list of infected workers. However, there is a chance that any of them could have been a
false positive on repeated testing, for example, because of previous contact with other Coronaviridae virus, although this is very unlikely.
Finally, we use MLE to estimate the parameter R ew (B ase) with the infection history of the plant.
Because we randomly assign infection dates for some workers, we perform multiple MLE estimations for 1000 realizations of the joint random variable that represent the infection date of these
workers. We select the average of these estimators as our estimate of R ew (B ase). Specifically, let p tn
be the probability that worker n becomes infected on day t . We decompose this probability into
two terms:
p tn = αnt p tw + βnt q tn .

Author: Safer Workspaces at Times of Coronavirus

20

Here, p tw = R ew (B ase) · i t /Vw and q tn , defined above, are the probabilities that worker n becomes
infected during day t inside and outside the plant, respectively, whereas αn and βn are workerspecific nonnegative constants satisfying αnt + βnt ≤ 1, weighting the proportion of time the worker
spends inside the plant and outside the plant, except for sleeping.
Then, the likelihood function to maximize is given by:
Ã
!
Y Y n Y
n
pt
(1 − p t ) ,
t

n∈D t

n6∈D t

where D t is the set of workers that become infected on day t . Note that because of the random
infection date assignments, p tn and D t are random variables. The estimated R ew (B ase), computed
as the average of the MLE for each random realization over 1000 scenarios, is equal to 1.3, where
an infected worker remains an average of 7.7 days.

4.2. Projections of the number of infected workers
In this subsection, we estimate the number of infections within the plant using the protocol of two
antibody tests per week (Tuesday and Friday). These projections are compared with those resulting
from continuing to operate with the current sanitary measures but without the inclusion of the
ABT 3 protocol. Finally, these projections are compared with the real results obtained during the
application of the ABT 3 in the pilot plan carried out at the Isla de Maipo plant from July 14 to
August 7.
The contagion projections were made through a discrete event simulation simulation, in which
a daily monitoring of each worker was carried out. A susceptible worker can be infected inside
and outside the company, and this probability is calculated as a combination of both probabilities
weighted by the fraction of the time he remains inside and outside the company, on a daily basis.
Therefore, this probability changes for those workers with administrative shifts, 12-hour day shifts,
and with 12-hour shifts, day, night and back-up. It should be noted that the probability of being
infected outside the company is a function of the effective reproductive number in the town of residence ( [2]). The probability of contagion within the plant is a function of the effective reproductive
number in the plant, under the corresponding protocol.
Figure 5 shows the projections of the total number of infected workers within the plant from July
14 to October 14 (3 months). It should be noted that at the beginning of the simulation we know that
in practice, there were two asymptomatic infected workers who were identified with the antibody
test and immediately isolated. However, in the baseline situation without an antibody protocol,
these two patients would not have been identified and would remain in the plant, with subsequent

Author: Safer Workspaces at Times of Coronavirus

21

potential contagion to other workers. The total number of infected as of October 14 in the base
situation is 24.0 workers compared to 17.5 with the ABT 3, which corresponds to a reduction of
27%.
Finally, we remark that the new effective reproductive number under the protocol equals 0.7, in
contrast to the value of 1.3 that we had observed before the application of the antibody testing.
25

20

15

Protocol
ABT 3
Base

10

5

0

25

50

75

Days

Figure 5

Projected number of infected workers under the Base protocol and ABT 3 protocol.

4.3. Heat map for the ABT 3 protocol application
In this subsection, we developed a heat map as a decision support system of when to suspend/activate the antibody test protocols. These recommendations strongly depend on the stage
of the pandemic; therefore, we developed a heat map that is a function of the effective reproductive
number in the general population as well as the one in the plant under the baseline case (i.e., with
no antibody tests). We remark that the latter is a function of the sanitary measures in place as well
as any additional changes in the worker shifts.

Author: Safer Workspaces at Times of Coronavirus

22

Figure 6 presents the combinations of R e and R ew (B ase) in green color for which the use of ABT 3
leads to a decrease of less than 2% in infections with respect to the Base protocol. This percentage
is calculated as the difference between infections with and without the ABT 3 protocol divided by
the total number of workers in the company. Therefore, in the case of having 345 workers, this
difference is less than 7 infected workers. The graph shows the combinations of R e and R ew (B ase) in
yellow for which the use of ABT 3 leads to a decrease greater than 2% and less than 4% in infections
with respect to the Base protocol. In the case of having 345 workers, this difference is greater than 7
and less than 14 infected workers. The graph presents the combinations of R e and R ew (B ase) in red
for which the use of ABT 3 leads to a decrease of more than 4% in infections compared to the Base
protocol. In the case of having 345 workers, this difference is greater than 14 infected workers.

2.00

1.75

Difference

1.50

4.0%

Re

3.0%
2.0%
1.0%
1.25

1.00

0.75
1.2

1.5

1.8

2.1

2.4

Rw
e (Base)

Figure 6

Heat map for using ABT 3 protocol as a function of the effective reproductive number inside and outside the
firm. The color indicates the difference in infected workers – as a percentage of the total workers – between
using ABT 3 and the Base protocols.

Author: Safer Workspaces at Times of Coronavirus

23

5. Conclusions
The application of the ABT 3 protocol provides benefits in terms of avoiding contagion within the
plant, since it is capable of detecting asymptomatic patients during the period in which they are
still in the contagion phase and isolating them preemptively. Without the existence of these tests,
asymptomatic patients would remain throughout their contagious period in the company.
Although antibody tests are only capable of detecting patients approximately a week after their
contagion period begins, current evidence indicates that the contagion period can be between two
or three weeks. Therefore, the effect of identifying and isolating these asymptomatic patients has a
positive effect because otherwise they would continue, in some cases, to infect long after developing antibodies detectable by the test. With their isolation, the spread of the disease to other workers
is prevented.
In our real case application, the effective reproductive number, defined as the number of infections that an infected worker produces within the company, is reduced from 1.3 to 0.7 with the
application of the ABT 3 protocol (2 times a week). The effect of the application of the ABT 3 protocol has an important impact, reducing the value of the reproduction of the disease to less than one.
This result implies that if the current conditions of the pandemic are maintained, the number of
new infections within the plant should decrease over time. For comparison purposes, we simulated
the application of the ABT 1 protocol (once a week) and estimated that the effective reproductive
number is 0.8 for this case. Therefore, it would be important to analyze the savings in monetary and
nonmonetary costs when taking only one antibody test per week, since the impact on the effective
reproductive number is an increase of only 14% with respect to that obtained with the ABT 3. The
projection of the number of infections within the plant for the next 3 months, starting on July 14,
shows that there is a reduction in the number of infections of 32% and 28% when ABT 3 and ABT1
protocols are applied, respectively (22 workers compared to 15 and 16). This reduction must be
analyzed in the context of the health consequences that can derive from outbreaks or greater infections in the plant. Examples include the potential closure for 14 days when there are two or more
weekly infections or quarantines of groups of workers due to close contact with an infected person.
These sanitary measures have a significant impact on the productivity of the plant and should be
considered when making the decision whether or not to continue with the ABT protocols.
It is important to emphasize that the estimates of contagion levels in the plant are dependent on
the current situation of the pandemic in the country and, in particular, in the Metropolitan Region
and are therefore valid as long as there are no significant outbreaks at the population level. If there
are increases in infections in the population due to the suspension of quarantines, the number of
infections within the plant will also increase because the probability of contagion outside the plant
and its eventual spread within it increases.

24

Author: Safer Workspaces at Times of Coronavirus

References
[1] Actualizacion de definicion de caso sospechoso para vigilancia epidemiologica ante brote de covid-19, ordinario
b51 n° 2137, del 11 de junio del 2020. https://www.gob.cl/coronavirus/. Accessed: 2020-10-18.
[2] Informe covid-19, chile al 21.06.2020. http://saludpublica.uchile.cl/documentos/informe-covid-19-chile-al21062020-noveno-reporte-165633-5-3052.pdf. Accessed: 2020-09-22.
[3] Interim
guidelines
for
covid-19
antibody
testing.
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019ncov/lab/resources/antibody-tests-guidelines.html. Accessed: 2020-07-29.
[4] Interim guidelines for covid-19 antibody testing. https://www.minsal.cl/nuevo-coronavirus-2019-ncov/informeepidemiologico-covid-19. Accessed: 2020-10-01.
[5] J. An, X. Liao, T. Xiao, S. Qian, J. Yuan, H. Ye, F. Qi, C. Shen, Y. Liu, L. Wang, et al. Clinical characteristics of the
recovered covid-19 patients with re-detectable positive rna test. medRxiv, 2020.
[6] B. Aylward. W. liang,(prc), report of the who-china joint mission on coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19), 2020; 2019
(february) 16–24.
[7] L. Bao, W. Deng, H. Gao, C. Xiao, J. Liu, J. Xue, Q. Lv, J. Liu, P. Yu, Y. Xu, et al. Reinfection could not occur in sars-cov-2
infected rhesus macaques. bioRxiv, 2020.
[8] C. Baraniuk. Covid-19 antibody tests: a briefing. BMJ, 369, 2020.
[9] D. Chang, H. Xu, A. Rebaza, L. Sharma, and C. S. D. Cruz. Protecting health-care workers from subclinical coronavirus infection. The Lancet Respiratory Medicine, 8(3):e13, 2020.
[10] A. Cori, N. M. Ferguson, C. Fraser, and S. Cauchemez. A new framework and software to estimate time-varying
reproduction numbers during epidemics. American journal of epidemiology, 178(9):1505–1512, 2013.
[11] N. Ferguson, D. Laydon, G. Nedjati Gilani, N. Imai, K. Ainslie, M. Baguelin, S. Bhatia, A. Boonyasiri, Z. Cucunuba Perez, G. Cuomo-Dannenburg, et al. Report 9: Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (npis) to reduce
covid19 mortality and healthcare demand. 2020.
[12] Z. Gao, Y. Xu, C. Sun, X. Wang, Y. Guo, S. Qiu, and K. Ma. A systematic review of asymptomatic infections with covid19. Journal of Microbiology, Immunology and Infection, 2020.
[13] X. He, E. H. Lau, P. Wu, X. Deng, J. Wang, X. Hao, Y. C. Lau, J. Y. Wong, Y. Guan, X. Tan, et al. Temporal dynamics in
viral shedding and transmissibility of covid-19. Nature medicine, pages 1–4, 2020.
[14] J. Heesterbeek and K. Dietz. The concept of ro in epidemic theory. Statistica Neerlandica, 50(1):89–110, 1996.
[15] A. Kimball. Asymptomatic and presymptomatic sars-cov-2 infections in residents of a long-term care skilled nursing
facility—king county, washington, march 2020. MMWR. Morbidity and mortality weekly report, 69, 2020.
[16] S. A. Lauer, K. H. Grantz, Q. Bi, F. K. Jones, Q. Zheng, H. R. Meredith, A. S. Azman, N. G. Reich, and J. Lessler. The
incubation period of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) from publicly reported confirmed cases: estimation and
application. Annals of internal medicine, 2020.
[17] Y. Liu, L.-M. Yan, L. Wan, T.-X. Xiang, A. Le, J.-M. Liu, M. Peiris, L. L. Poon, and W. Zhang. Viral dynamics in mild and
severe cases of covid-19. The Lancet Infectious Diseases, 2020.
[18] W. H. Organization et al. Home care for patients with covid-19 presenting with mild symptoms and management of
their contacts: interim guidance, 17 march 2020. Technical report, World Health Organization, 2020.
[19] Y. Pan, X. Li, G. Yang, J. Fan, Y. Tang, J. Zhao, X. Long, S. Guo, Z. Zhao, Y. Liu, et al. Serological immunochromatographic approach in diagnosis with sars-cov-2 infected covid-19 patients. Journal of Infection, 2020.
[20] D. M. Patrick, M. Petric, D. M. Skowronski, R. Guasparini, T. F. Booth, M. Krajden, P. McGeer, N. Bastien, L. Gustafson,
J. Dubord, et al. An outbreak of human coronavirus oc43 infection and serological cross-reactivity with sars coronavirus. Canadian Journal of Infectious Diseases and Medical Microbiology, 17, 2006.
[21] D. Sutton, K. Fuchs, M. D’Alton, and D. Goffman. Universal screening for sars-cov-2 in women admitted for delivery.
New England Journal of Medicine, 2020.
[22] K. K.-W. To, O. T.-Y. Tsang, W.-S. Leung, A. R. Tam, T.-C. Wu, D. C. Lung, C. C.-Y. Yip, J.-P. Cai, J. M.-C. Chan, T. S.-H.
Chik, et al. Temporal profiles of viral load in posterior oropharyngeal saliva samples and serum antibody responses
during infection by sars-cov-2: an observational cohort study. The Lancet Infectious Diseases, 2020.
[23] G. Viceconte and N. Petrosillo. Covid-19 r0: Magic number or conundrum? Infectious Disease Reports, 12(1), 2020.
[24] A. T. Xiao, Y. X. Tong, and S. Zhang. Profile of rt-pcr for sars-cov-2: a preliminary study from 56 covid-19 patients.
Clinical Infectious Diseases, 2020.
[25] Z. Yongchen, H. Shen, X. Wang, X. Shi, Y. Li, J. Yan, Y. Chen, and B. Gu. Different longitudinal patterns of nucleic
acid and serology testing results based on disease severity of covid-19 patients. Emerging Microbes & Infections,
(just-accepted):1–14, 2020.
[26] S. Zhang, M. Diao, W. Yu, L. Pei, Z. Lin, and D. Chen. Estimation of the reproductive number of novel coronavirus
(covid-19) and the probable outbreak size on the diamond princess cruise ship: A data-driven analysis. International
Journal of Infectious Diseases, 93:201–204, 2020.
[27] L. Zou, F. Ruan, M. Huang, L. Liang, H. Huang, Z. Hong, J. Yu, M. Kang, Y. Song, J. Xia, et al. Sars-cov-2 viral load in
upper respiratory specimens of infected patients. New England Journal of Medicine, 382(12):1177–1179, 2020.

