Understanding the temporal evolution of COVID-19 research through machine
learning and natural language processing
Ashkan Ebadi1,4,*, Pengcheng Xi2, Stéphane Tremblay2, Bruce Spencer3,5, Raman Pall2, and
Alexander Wong6,7
1

National Research Council Canada, Montreal, QC H3T 1J4, Canada
National Research Council Canada, Ottawa, ON K1K 2E1, Canada
3
National Research Council Canada, Fredericton, NB E3B 9W4, Canada
4
Concordia University, Concordia Institute for Information Systems Engineering, Montreal, QC H3G 2W1 Canada
5
University of New Brunswick, Faculty of Computer Science, Fredericton, NB E3B 5A3, Canada
6
University of Waterloo, Department of Systems Design Engineering, Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1, Canada
7
Waterloo Artificial Intelligence Institute, Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1, Canada
*
Email: ashkan.ebadi@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca
2

Abstract
The outbreak of the novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by the severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has been continuously affecting human lives and communities
around the world in many ways, from cities under lockdown to new social experiences. Although in most
cases COVID-19 results in mild illness, it has drawn global attention due to the extremely contagious nature
of SARS-CoV-2. Governments and healthcare professionals, along with people and society as a whole,
have taken any measures to break the chain of transition and flatten the epidemic curve. In this study, we
used multiple data sources, i.e., PubMed and ArXiv, and built several machine learning models to
characterize the landscape of current COVID-19 research by identifying the latent topics and analyzing the
temporal evolution of the extracted research themes, publications similarity, and sentiments, within the
time-frame of January- May 2020. Our findings confirm the types of research available in PubMed and
ArXiv differ significantly, with the former exhibiting greater diversity in terms of COVID-19 related issues
and the latter focusing more on intelligent systems/tools to predict/diagnose COVID-19. The special
attention of the research community to the high-risk groups and people with complications was also
confirmed.

Keywords
COVID-19 research landscape, Topics evolution, Machine learning, Structural topic modeling, Text mining

Introduction
The ongoing pandemic of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by the severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), has been affecting human lives and
communities around the world, causing global social and economic disruption (International
Monetary Fund, 2020). The first case of COVID-19 can be traced back to Wuhan (China) in
December 2019 (Hui et al., 2020). The World Health Organization (WHO) declared the outbreak
in January 2020 and characterized as a pandemic in March 2020 (World Health Organization,
2020). As of June 2020, more than 6.5 million COVID-19 cases have been reported worldwide
resulting in more than 500,000 deaths, as of this writing (Johns Hopkins University, 2020), with
numbers increasing daily.
The first COVID-19 case in Canada was identified in January 2020 (Government of Canada,
2020). Although most of the COVID-19 positive Canadian cases are in the most populous
provinces with Quebec and Ontario being the top-two, as of June 2020 there have been confirmed
cases in all the Canadian provinces and territories except for Nunavut (Government of Canada,
2020). With cases of community transmission being confirmed, all Canadian provinces and
1

territories have declared states of emergency or public health emergency in one form or another in
March 2020 (National Post, 2020).
Governments and authorities worldwide are actively fighting against the disease by implementing
various measures and policies such as travel restrictions and facility closures. The scientific
community has also responded to the COVID-19 pandemic in different ways. Although medical
science, drug discovery, and epidemiology have seen the most attention, the COVID-19 pandemic
is a multidimensional phenomenon and as such has strong socio-economic, psycho-social, and
technological implications (Zhang & Shaw, 2020). Examples of socialeconomic issues caused by
the COVID-19 pandemic range from cancellation of sports, political, and cultural events to city
lockdowns and supply shortages due to panic buying (Council on Foreign Relations, 2020; Yuen
et al., 2020). Apart from setting policies, governments are investing significantly on COVID-19
research. In Canada alone, the federal government is investing $1.1 billion in research and
development on COVID-19 and vaccine development (CityNews, 2020).
The healthcare and medical research communities have rapidly and widely responded to the
COVID-19 challenge since the beginning. Drug and vaccine discovery research (Dong et al., 2020;
Gao et al., 2020), analyzing the impact of the disease on people who are suffering from other
diseases or complications (Fang et al., 2020; Klok et al., 2020), as well as on high-risk groups such
as older persons (Applegate & Ouslander, 2020), are but a few examples of the comprehensive
effort of the medical community towards fighting against the disease. Additionally, researchers
are also investigating the effects of the COVID-19 outbreak on people’s mental health state (Huang
& Zhao, 2020), including the medical staff (Chen et al., 2020), who are in the front line of the fight
against the disease.
Today, artificial intelligence (AI) and emerging technologies play a key role in responding to the
COVID-19 crisis from accelerating drug research to diagnosing the disease. The AI systems have
used both handcrafted features and deep learning features for screening patients and severity
assessment. In a study on distinguishing COVID-19 patients from community-acquired
pneumonia (CAP) (Shi, Xia, et al., 2020), the authors extracted a list of handcrafted features from
computed tomography (CT) scans, including volume, features, histogram and surface features. In
another study on assessing severity (Tang et al., 2020), chest CT scans were first segmented, and
then quantitative metrics were calculated, including infection volumes and percentage of infection
(POIs). Wang and Wong (2020) designed a tailored deep convolutional neural network named
“COVID-Net” for distinguishing normal, pneumonia, and COVID-19 patients using chest X-ray
images. Further to that, Wong et al. (2020) extended the use of COVID-Net for severity assessment
through training and validating the network for geographic extent and opacity extent scoring of
chest X-rays.
Motivated to gain a better understanding about the current COVID-19 research landscape, this
study leveraged natural language processing (NLP) and machine learning to analyze the evolution
of COVID-19 research in a quantitative manner based on scientific publications from two key data
sources, i.e., PubMed and ArXiv. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study that considers
multiple data sources of different nature to characterize the landscape of COVID-19 research and
to investigate its evolution over time, including but not limited to the similarity between the
performed research over weekly time intervals as well as the emotional trajectory. Our approach
has the potential to provide key stake-holders and decision-makers with a clear mapping of the
COVID-19 research landscape and identify the main COVID-19 research themes, their temporal
progression, evolution, and novelty. It also sheds light on the emotional dimension hidden in the
2

performed research. This would assist the policy-makers to direct and adjust their strategies if
required. The remainder of this study is as follows. First, the “Data and methodology” section
describes the data and techniques in more detail. Second, the “Results” section presents findings
of the research. Third, we discuss our findings and present our conclusions in the “Discussion and
conclusion” section. Fourth and finally, we present some future directions and limitation of the
research in the “Limitations and future work” section.
Data and methodology
The scope of this study covers all COVID-19 related publications accessible through ArXiv1 and
PubMed2 services. The metholodgy has four main steps, which are discussed in detail below.
Data collection and filtration

We initially collected all the articles published in 2019 and 2020 from the aforementioned sources
and dropped articles with no/incomplete publication dates as well as those with neither titles nor
abstracts. Next, we removed duplicated articles and only included publications in 2020 due to the
data sparsity in 2019. This resulted in a total of 14,172 publications as of May 31, 2020.
Text pre-processing

We merged the titles and abstracts of the collected publications and applied several pre-processing
steps, e.g., converting the text to lowercase, correcting special characters, removing stop words
using a customized English stop words list, and punctuations. We decided to use both titles and
abstracts for the analyses as although the abstract is a condensed representation of the articles and
contains more information, the title may also contain some informative keywords/keyphrases that
are not present in the abstract. As such, integrating both titles and abstracts provides us with more
information to build a better understanding of the COVID-19 research landscape. The processed
textual data were tokenized, and a document-term frequency matrix was generated.
Descriptive and temporal text analyses

We then performed descriptive analyses on the collected data investigating publication trends in
the examined data sources as well as extracting target countries mentioned in the publications.
Next, we did temporal text analyses to investigate keyphrases patterns, publication sentiments, and
research similarities over time. We used the TextBlob Python package (Loria, 2018) to extract
sentiment from the publications. The sentiment score is within the [-1.0, 1.0] range, where 0
indicates neutral, -1 indicates very negative sentiment, and +1 indicates very positive sentiment.
We trained a Doc2Vec model (Le & Mikolov, 2014) on the corpus to learn publication-level
embeddings and assess the similarity between publications by calculating the cosine similarity
between the embedding vectors. We aggregated the sentiment analyses and publication similarity
results by week and analyzed their trends.
Structural topic modeling

After descriptive and temporal text analyses, we did topic modeling to extract the main research
themes. As an unsupervised machine learning technique, topic modeling can find latent semantic
topics in huge text data collections, summarize the corpus automatically, and extract knowledge
(Blei et al., 2003). We used structural topic modeling (STM) to extract topics as it lets topics to be
1
2

ArXiv is an open-access archive for scholarly articles. For more information, please see: https://arxiv.org/
PubMed is a free search engine over the MEDLINE database of references on life sciences topics. For more
information, please refer to: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/

3

correlated and it also allows us to incorporate document-level covariates of interest (Roberts et al.,
2014), e.g., publication date in our case. Such properties were critical for our research objectives
as they enabled us to capture the hidden temporal aspect necessary to analyze research topics
evolution. We built three STM models: 1) STM model built on the entire dataset with a monthly
granularity, 2) STM model built only on PubMed dataset with a weekly granularity, and 3) STM
model built on ArXiv dataset with a weekly granularity. We will refer to these models as STMALL, STM-PUBMED, and STM-ARXIV in the rest of this study, respectively. Findings from the
three models were complementary, each contributing to a better mapping of the state of research
in the target publications.
The number of topics needs to be set in advance in STM as a fixed parameter. There is no general
consensus in setting the optimal number of topics in topic models (Lucas et al., 2015); however,
the choice is highly dependent on the application and objectives. A completely automatic approach
to find the optimal number of topics might not be very accurate (Maskeri et al., 2008) and it often
needs human intervention. We followed a multi-layer approach to determine the number of topics,
similar to the one proposed in Ebadi et al. (2020). We first built several baseline latent Dirichlet
allocation (LDA) models (Blei et al., 2003) with a different number of topics in the range of [2,
10] and used an intrinsic evaluation metric, i.e. topic coherence, to quantitatively evaluate them.
In particular, we used the 𝐶𝑣 coherence score proposed in Röder et al. (2015). We did this analyses
for each of the three data scenarios, i.e. the entire data, PubMed only, and ArXiv only.
For the entire data scenario, the coherence measure peaked at 3 and 7. We decided not to consider
3 as the optimal number of topics since it provided very generic topics. As the next step, we
considered the vicinity of 7, i.e. [6, 8] and followed Roberts et al. (2014) approach running several
automated tests using multiple criteria such as the exclusivity of the topics, to refine the range
further. This narrowed down the range for the optimal number of topics to [7, 8]. Three domain
experts were then provided with the results, verified the models, checked keywords, and
keyphrases assigned to each topic, analyzed topic-document distributions, and assessed the quality
of the models. Based on their assessment, the optimal number of topics for the entire corpus was
found to be 7, therefore, we used the STM model with 7 topics as the final model (STM-ALL) for
the entire data scenario. The same analyses for the other two data scenarios, i.e. PubMed only and
ArXiv only, resulted in 7 and 4 topics, respectively. The three experts manually labeled the
generated topics after careful examination of the extensive set of keywords for each topic. We used
more than one expert as well as an odd number of experts to reduce the subjectivity effect in
labeling topics as well as setting the optimal number of topics. Using the extracted topics, we
finally analyzed topic evolutions over time. The conceptual flow of the study is depicted in Figure
1.

4

Figure 1. The analytical flow. The pipeline contains four main steps, i.e. data collection, data
filtration, text processing, and data analytics. In the data collection step, COVID-19 publications
within the period of 2019–2020 are collected. Data is then filtered to only contain publications in
2020 and data is passed to the data analytics step. After performing descriptive analyses, we did
temporal text analyses to identify keyphrases and assess publications' similarity and sentiment over
time. The optimal number of topics is determined and set in the structural topic modeling
component where the final STM models are built to extract the main research themes, their
keyword sets, as well as the temporal trends.
Results
Descriptive analyses

Our target dataset contained 14,172 scientific publications about COVID-19. In this section, we
present the results of the descriptive analyses.
COVID-19 publications trend

Figure 2 shows the publication distribution separately for PubMed (the orange solid line) and
ArXiv (the blue dashed line) over months. The bold numbers on the lines show the number of
publications for the respective month. As seen, the number of publications follows a sharp
increasing trend, except for ArXiv in the final period where a slight decrease is observed. There is
only one article published in January 2020 in our final dataset. The drastic increase might reflect
several time-related aspects such as the importance of the issue, the interest of the scientific
community, and the dimensions of the problem that have augmented over time.

5

Figure 2. The trend of COVID-19 publications, from January to May 2020, in ArXiv (blue dashed
line) and PubMed (orange solid line). The figure has two y-axes, the left y-axis represents PubMed
and the right y-axis represents ArXiv data.
Geographic distribution

Using NLP techniques, we extracted country names that were mentioned in the titles and abstracts
of the publications to analyze the geographic distribution of the target countries. As seen in Figure
3-a, China has been mentioned significantly higher than the other countries in the papers over the
entire examined period. Italy and the United States rank 2nd and 3rd, respectively. From Figure 3a, it can be observed that the scientific community responded rapidly to the pandemic from a
research front, focusing on various countries' data. China is mentioned most frequently since it has
many cases and is the site of the original outbreak, while Italy, the United States, India, and other
countries are also mentioned frequently for their outbreaks and active cases. To further investigate,
we focused on the top-6 countries in Figure 3-b and analyzed the temporal trend of the geographic
distribution in those countries. With the increasing trend of publications within February-April
2020 (Figure 2), the scientific community's focus on the top-6 countries has also increased Figure
3-b). However, a constant or decreasing trend is observed after April 2020. This is in line with our
previous observation that the researchers have dynamically responded to the pandemic over time
based on its geographic movement. The decreasing trend may also explain the fact that the
pandemic has become global so that specific countries’ outbreaks are less often the focus of the
COVID-19 research papers.

6

Figure 3. a) Distribution of the countries mentioned in the titles and abstracts of the publications,
and b) Temporal trend of the top-6 most mentioned countries in the publications.
Keyphrases over time

As a preliminary step in investigating the vocabulary evolution in COVID-19 related publications,
we identified and examined keyphrases that are present in the publications. We extracted n-grams
of length 2 to 4, a maximum of 200, for each month from January to May 2020, and sorted the
keyphrases out based on their frequency and performed percentage normalization. We filtered out
keyphrases that contained highly frequent keywords such as “covid” and “coronavirus” as they
were not informative for this analyses. We dropped January from the analyses as only six
keyphrases were extracted due to the limited number of publications. Figure 4 shows the results.
The numbers on the bars in the figure reflect the exact frequency of the respective keyphrase.
Several initial observations are made: 1) While in the beginning scientific community seems to
focus more on the pandemic aspect of the disease and its acute, imminent danger to public health,
over time the attention has been gradually drawn to longer-term and chronic impacts on the public,
such as mental health, 2) Different regions and countries that are seen among the keyphrases in
different time intervals are correlated with the prevalence of the disease and number of confirmed
cases in those regions, 3) In the final period, apart from clinical trials that might be due to COVID19 vaccine generation attempts, the impact of different policies such as social distancing has
attracted the researchers’ attention. Of course, these findings are preliminary and we will further
investigate them in the next section.

7

Figure 4. The top-10 most frequent keyphrases in COVID-19 publications. The numbers on the
bars represent the exact frequency of the respective keyphrase.
Research similarity, sentiment, and topics evolution
The entire dataset, PubMed and ArXiv, monthly granularity

We employed structural topic modeling (STM) technique (Roberts et al., 2014) and extracted
seven research topics, using the month of publication as the covariate (STM-ALL model). To
improve the quality of the keywords, we followed Bischof & Airoldi (2012) approach and
extracted keywords that were not only frequent but exclusive as well. As explained in the “Data
and methodology” section, the extracted topics were verified by three domain experts, and a
representative label was generated for each topic. The seven labeled topics are: 1) Oncology, 2)
Personal protective equipment (PPE), 3) Analytics, 4) Rehabilitation-panic, 5) High-risk groups,
6) Genomics, and 7) Intubation-oxygenation. One may note that these research topics only
represent the main areas of interest of the researchers at an abstract level and in no means, they
capture all the details about the performed research.
Having the STM model built and the topics extracted, we regressed the proportion of each
publication on the date of publication, i.e., the publication-specific covariate to analyze the
evolution of topics over time. In other words, we estimated the conditional expectation of topic
prevalence given the characteristics of the publication and date of publication. The results are
depicted in Figure 5-a. The shaded areas between the dotted lines in the figure represent the 95%
confidence interval. As observed, three topics, i.e., intubation-oxygenation, analytics, and
rehabilitation-panic, followed a decreasing trend over time while the others’ prevalence increased.
Analytics and rehabilitation-panic decreased more slightly than intubation-oxygenation. In the
beginning, intubation-oxygenation was the main focus in researchers’ publications, however, in
the final period, more attention was drawn to the high-risk groups. Moreover, researchers have
almost constantly focused on genomics within the examined time interval, placing it among the
top-3 most prevalent topics in all periods. We also investigated the distribution of dominant topics
across publications over time to complement the previous findings. Each publication can belong
to more than one topic in structural topic modeling, and topics are assigned to each publication
with a probability. We extracted the publication-topic probability matrix from the generated topic
model and for each publication, we assigned the topic with the highest probability to it. Figure 5b shows the distribution of the dominant topics. Genomics was the only topic observed in January
due to data sparsity. Overall, it can be observed that oncology, high-risk group studies, and
8

genomics have been the most dominating topics. Researchers have constantly considered
genomics as one of the main areas of research with regards to COVID-19. Over time, oncology,
personal protective equipment, and studying the high-risk groups have attracted more attention.
Although in the beginning intubation-oxygenation was one of the main research areas, researchers
focused more on other areas along time. Despite some fluctuations, an almost steady trend is
observed for analytics after February 2020.

Figure 5. a) Topic prevalence in COVID-19 publications from January to May 2020, the STMALL model. The shaded areas between dotted lines indicate the 95% confidence interval, and b)
Dominant topic distribution across publications over time, the STM-ALL model. The numbers on
the figure represent the total number of publications dominated by the respective topic.
PubMed only, weekly granularity

In this section, we only focus on the PubMed publications and present the results of the STMPUBMED topic model as well as sentiment and research similarity trends over the consecutive
weeks in the period of January-May 2020. To build the topic model, we followed the same process
as discussed in the previous section, except for the granularity level that is weekly here, and
extracted seven main topics from the PubMed corpus as follows: 1) Panic pandemic, 2) Social
9

services and emergency, 3) Genomics – drugs, 4) High-risk groups, 5) Rehabilitation, 6) Pregnant
women – hospitalization, and 7) Surgical care. Figure 6-a shows the estimated conditional
expectations of topics prevalence every week. The shaded areas between the dotted lines in the
figure represent the 95% confidence interval. As seen, only two topics, i.e. surgical care and social
services and emergency, have followed an increasing trend over time while the other topics’
prevalence has declined. The range of the expected topic prevalence is not very wide, i.e. in [0.08,
0.21]. From the analyses, it can be observed that at the beginning, more attention was focused on
the high-risk groups; however, in the final period, the focus shifted more towards surgical care.

Figure 6. a) Topic prevalence in COVID-19 publications, the STM-PUBMED model, weekly
granularity. The shaded areas between dotted lines indicate the 95% confidence interval, b)
Sentiment percentages in PubMed publications, and c) Publications similarity in PubMed dataset.

10

Figure 6-b shows the sentiment percentages in PubMed publications over the examined period. In
Week-6, ~65% of the detected sentiment was positive having the rest as neutral. However, along
time some negative sentiment is detected such that at the final period (Week-22), there is ~10%
negative, ~30% neural, and ~60% positive sentiment in the PubMed publications. An almost
steady trend is observed for the negative sentiment after Week-9. Although the positive sentiment
declined from ~65% to ~45% from Week-6 to Week-10, it has maintained a level of ~50-60%
afterward. Publication similarity in the PubMed dataset is shown in Figure 6-c. Although the
similarity between the publications increases over time, in general, the similarity score is not high
as it was lower than 0.1 in all the periods. This may indicate a higher variety and a wider scope of
the research that is published in PubMed. That is, the content overlap between PubMed
publications (considering only the title and abstract) is not very high. Additionally, the figure may
also indicate a higher specificity of the research published in PubMed.
ArXiv only, weekly granularity

In this section, we present the results of the STM-ARXIV topic model as well as sentiment and
research similarity trends over the consecutive weeks in the period of January-May 2020. We
followed the same process as discussed in the previous section, i.e. with a weekly granularity. Four
main topics were extracted from the ArXiv corpus: 1) Contagion projection, 2) Deep learning –
medical imaging, 3) Drugs, 4) Social media – misinformation. The estimated conditional
expectations of topics prevalence are depicted in Figure 7-a. The shaded areas between the dotted
lines in the figure represent the 95% confidence interval. As seen, the proportion of the social
media – misinformation topic has increased over time. A slightly increasing trend is also observed
for the deep learning – medical imaging topic. Although the contagion projection was the most
prevalent topic, in the beginning, it ranked the 3rd in the final period. Compared to Figure 6-a,
wider regions of confidence intervals are observed in Figure 7-a that could be due to the smaller
dataset. Also, the range of the topic prevalence is wider in Figure 7-a compared to Figure 6-a.

11

Figure 7. a) Topic prevalence in COVID-19 publications, the STM-ARXIV model, weekly
granularity. The shaded areas between dotted lines indicate the 95% confidence interval, b)
Sentiment percentages in ArXiv publications, and c) Publications similarity in the ArXiv dataset.
The sentiment percentages in ArXiv publications are shown in Figure 7-b. Overall, the percentage
of neutral sentiment is negligible compared to positive and negative sentiments. More sentiment
fluctuation is seen at the beginning of the examined period, having ~65% of negative sentiment in
the Week-8. After the fluctuations, the proportion of the positive sentiment increased and reached
~80% in the final period. Comparing Figure 7-b with Figure 6-b, a higher positive sentiment ratio
is observed in the ArXiv dataset. This may indicate the different nature of PubMed and ArXiv data
sources. Such difference might be due to the fact that COVID-19 publications in ArXiv seem to
be more oriented toward analytics and computer science (Figure 7-a). Figure 7-c shows
publications similarity in the ArXiv dataset. The similarity between publications slightly decreases
over time, however, the level of similarity is relatively high in all periods, being in the range of
12

[0.8, 0.9]. The high similarity partially confirms our previous findings as the ArXiv publications
seem to be more oriented towards statistical and computer science algorithms and fine-tuning them
for COVID-19.
Discussion and conclusion
As the COVID-19 crisis continues, the research community is actively responding aiming to
contribute to the wellness of the society as well as patients’ outcome. The volume of research
publications related to COVID-19 produced only in the first months of 2020 has been tremendous
and has targeted a diverse set of issues. In this study, we focused on two different data sources, i.e.
PubMed and ArXiv, and employed machine learning and natural language processing techniques
to better understand the landscape of COVID-19 research and its evolution over time. Our
comprehensive analyses, performed at different levels of granularity, could assist the decision- and
policymakers to better understand COVID-19 research dynamics that might help to set or adjust
strategies.
Considering all the extracted topics from our different models, it is clear that the research
community has continuously focused on the vulnerable and high-risk populations who are in
danger of severe illness from COVID-19. This was reflected by multiple topics in our models such
as high-risk groups, pregnant women, and surgical care. Due to the importance of the matter, we
suggest continuous monitoring of the performed research to ensure the wellness of the groups at
particular risk from COVID-19, e.g. older people, pregnant women, patients with medical
complications, and make sure that they are not left behind in the COVID-19 response.
Our findings confirmed that different types of research are being published in PubMed and ArXiv.
While the latter, as an open-access repository with very fast processing time, hosts more technical
papers that aim to detect/diagnose COVID-19 or predict its spread, PubMed was found to be
hosting a diverse set of medical papers targeting a wider set of issues related to COVID-19. Low
similarity observed among PubMed publications might be an indication of the diversity of research
as well as the fast rate of change in the topics/issues that the medical community is focusing on
regarding the COVID-19 crisis. Different sentiment patterns also confirm differences between
types of research published in PubMed and ArXiv. Therefore, considering multiple data sources
in similar research could be beneficial as the findings could be complementary.
The high similarity that was observed among ArXiv publications over time along with the
extracted topics highlights the importance of advanced analytics and deep learning techniques and
their application to COVID-19 medical images. In screening COVID-19 patients, medical imaging
plays a complementary role to Reverse Transcription-Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR), the
gold standard of confirming COVID-19 patients. In particular, we see increasing use of artificial
intelligence (AI) in medical imaging for improving the efficiency of radiologists and for increased
accuracy in diagnosis. Shi et al. (2020) conducted a review on AI techniques in imaging data
acquisition, segmentation, and diagnosis for COVID-19. In image acquisition, AI can be used to
automate the scanning procedure and avoid physical contact between patients and radiologists. AI
can also improve efficiency through the accurate delineation of infections in X-ray and CT images.
Subsequent analyses of the segmented abnormalities can help radiologists make clinical decisions
for disease tracking and prognosis.
Lastly, the COVID-19 crisis has not only attracted the attention of the scientific community but
the public’s as well. Despite the advantages of such global attention, this has resulted in the spread
of misinformation on social media. Even though it is often unintentional, making/spreading bad
information could cause severe harm to society. Interestingly, researchers have been also working
13

in this area providing tools to distinguish between good and bad information, as reflected by the
social media-misinformation topic in the ArXiv dataset.
Limitations and future work
We included articles published in January-May 2020. Similar research could be performed in
various snapshots in a year as more data become available. The findings of this research may only
reflect the researchers’ focus to COVID-19 at a very high level. Other levels of abstraction could
be considered in future research using our proposed methodology. Another future direction would
be country-specific analyses. Also, as more data become available several other variables of
interest could be included in the analyses to examine different scenarios such as the impact of
government policies over time. Research topics fusion and/or division along time can be evaluated
in the future as well. Future research may consider the full body of the articles to perform the
analyses. Analyzing the methods section, in particular, might be informative revealing
methodological evolution.
References
Applegate, W. B., & Ouslander, J. G. (2020). COVID‐19 Presents High Risk to Older Persons. Journal of the
American Geriatrics Society, 68(4), 681. https://doi.org/10.1111/jgs.16426
Bischof, J. M., & Airoldi, E. M. (2012). Summarizing Topical Content with Word Frequency and Exclusivity.
Proceedings of the 29th International Coference on International Conference on Machine Learning, 9–16.
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=3042573.3042578
Blei, D. M., Ng, A. Y., & Jordan, M. I. (2003). Latent Dirichlet Allocation. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
3(Jan), 993–1022.
Chen, Q., Liang, M., Li, Y., Guo, J., Fei, D., Wang, L., He, L., Sheng, C., Cai, Y., Li, X., Wang, J., & Zhang, Z.
(2020). Mental health care for medical staff in China during the COVID-19 outbreak. The Lancet Psychiatry, 7(4),
e15–e16. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(20)30078-X
CityNews. (2020). Trudeau announces $1.1B for COVID-19 research, vaccine work.
https://www.citynews1130.com/2020/04/23/trudeau-announces-1-1b-for-covid-19-research-vaccine-work/
Council on Foreign Relations. (2020). The Coronavirus Outbreak Could Disrupt the U.S. Drug Supply. Council on
Foreign Relations. https://www.cfr.org/in-brief/coronavirus-disrupt-us-drug-supply-shortages-fda
Dong, L., Hu, S., & Gao, J. (2020). Discovering drugs to treat coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). Drug
Discoveries & Therapeutics, 14(1), 58–60. https://doi.org/10.5582/ddt.2020.01012
Ebadi, A., Tremblay, S., Goutte, C., & Schiffauerova, A. (2020). Application of machine learning techniques to
assess the trends and alignment of the funded research output. Journal of Informetrics, 14(2), 101018.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joi.2020.101018
Fang, L., Karakiulakis, G., & Roth, M. (2020). Are patients with hypertension and diabetes mellitus at increased risk
for COVID-19 infection? The Lancet. Respiratory Medicine, 8(4), e21. https://doi.org/10.1016/S22132600(20)30116-8
Gao, J., Tian, Z., & Yang, X. (2020). Breakthrough: Chloroquine phosphate has shown apparent efficacy in
treatment of COVID-19 associated pneumonia in clinical studies. BioScience Trends, advpub.
https://doi.org/10.5582/bst.2020.01047
Government of Canada. (2020, June 5). Coronavirus disease (COVID-19): Outbreak update [Alerts;education and
awareness]. Aem. https://www.canada.ca/en/public-health/services/diseases/2019-novel-coronavirusinfection.html?topic=tilelink

14

Huang, Y., & Zhao, N. (2020). Generalized anxiety disorder, depressive symptoms and sleep quality during
COVID-19 outbreak in China: A web-based cross-sectional survey. Psychiatry Research, 288, 112954.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2020.112954
Hui, D. S., I Azhar, E., Madani, T. A., Ntoumi, F., Kock, R., Dar, O., Ippolito, G., Mchugh, T. D., Memish, Z. A.,
Drosten, C., Zumla, A., & Petersen, E. (2020). The continuing 2019-nCoV epidemic threat of novel coronaviruses to
global health—The latest 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak in Wuhan, China. International Journal of Infectious
Diseases, 91, 264–266. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2020.01.009
International Monetary Fund. (2020). The Great Lockdown: Worst Economic Downturn Since the Great Depression.
IMF, PRESS RELEASE NO. 20/98. https://www.imf.org/en/News/Articles/2020/03/23/pr2098-imf-managingdirector-statement-following-a-g20-ministerial-call-on-the-coronavirus-emergency
Johns Hopkins University. (2020). Coronavirus COVID-19 dashboard.
https://gisanddata.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/bda7594740fd40299423467b48e9ecf6
Klok, F. A., Kruip, M. J. H. A., van der Meer, N. J. M., Arbous, M. S., Gommers, D. A. M. P. J., Kant, K. M.,
Kaptein, F. H. J., van Paassen, J., Stals, M. A. M., Huisman, M. V., & Endeman, H. (2020). Incidence of thrombotic
complications in critically ill ICU patients with COVID-19. Thrombosis Research, 191, 145–147.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.thromres.2020.04.013
Le, Q. V., & Mikolov, T. (2014). Distributed Representations of Sentences and Documents.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1405.4053v2
Loria, S. (2018). TextBlob Documentation. Release 0.16. https://textblob.readthedocs.io/en/dev/
Lucas, C., Nielsen, R. A., Roberts, M. E., Stewart, B. M., Storer, A., & Tingley, D. (2015). Computer-Assisted Text
Analysis for Comparative Politics. Political Analysis, 23(2), 254–277. https://doi.org/10.1093/pan/mpu019
Maskeri, G., Sarkar, S., & Heafield, K. (2008). Mining Business Topics in Source Code Using Latent Dirichlet
Allocation. Proceedings of the 1st India Software Engineering Conference, 113–120.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1342211.1342234
National Post. (2020, April 15). As the COVID-19 pandemic hit, provinces declared states of emergency. Now many
are up for renewal | National Post. https://nationalpost.com/news/provincial-states-of-emergencies-were-issued-amonth-ago-most-are-coming-up-for-renewal
Roberts, M. E., Stewart, B. M., & Tingley, D. (2014). stm: R Package for Structural Topic Models. Journal of
Statistical Software. https://doi.org/doi: 10.18637/jss.v000.i00
Röder, M., Both, A., & Hinneburg, A. (2015). Exploring the Space of Topic Coherence Measures. Proceedings of
the Eighth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, 399–408.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2684822.2685324
Shi, F., Wang, J., Shi, J., Wu, Z., Wang, Q., Tang, Z., He, K., Shi, Y., & Shen, D. (2020). Review of Artificial
Intelligence Techniques in Imaging Data Acquisition, Segmentation and Diagnosis for COVID-19. IEEE Reviews in
Biomedical Engineering, 1–1. https://doi.org/10.1109/RBME.2020.2987975
Shi, F., Xia, L., Shan, F., Wu, D., Wei, Y., Yuan, H., Jiang, H., Gao, Y., Sui, H., & Shen, D. (2020). Large-Scale
Screening of COVID-19 from Community Acquired Pneumonia using Infection Size-Aware Classification.
ArXiv:2003.09860 [Cs, Eess]. http://arxiv.org/abs/2003.09860
Tang, Z., Zhao, W., Xie, X., Zhong, Z., Shi, F., Liu, J., & Shen, D. (2020). Severity Assessment of Coronavirus
Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Using Quantitative Features from Chest CT Images. ArXiv:2003.11988 [Cs, Eess].
http://arxiv.org/abs/2003.11988

15

Wang, L., & Wong, A. (2020). COVID-Net: A Tailored Deep Convolutional Neural Network Design for Detection
of COVID-19 Cases from Chest X-Ray Images. ArXiv:2003.09871 [Cs, Eess]. http://arxiv.org/abs/2003.09871
Wong, A., Lin, Z. Q., Wang, L., Chung, A. G., Shen, B., Abbasi, A., Hoshmand-Kochi, M., & Duong, T. Q. (2020).
Towards computer-aided severity assessment: Training and validation of deep neural networks for geographic extent
and opacity extent scoring of chest X-rays for SARS-CoV-2 lung disease severity. ArXiv:2005.12855 [Cs, Eess].
http://arxiv.org/abs/2005.12855
World Health Organization. (2020). Statement of the Twenty-Fourth IHR Emergency Committee.
https://www.who.int/news-room/detail/08-04-2020-statement-of-the-twenty-fourth-ihr-emergency-committee
Yuen, K. F., Wang, X., Ma, F., & Li, K. X. (2020). The Psychological Causes of Panic Buying Following a Health
Crisis. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 17(10), 3513.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17103513
Zhang, H., & Shaw, R. (2020). Identifying Research Trends and Gaps in the Context of COVID-19. International
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 17(10), 3370. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17103370

16

