COVID-19 lockdown induces disease-mitigating structural changes in mobility
networks
Frank Schlosser,1, 2 Benjamin F. Maier,1 Olivia Jack,1 David Hinrichs,1 Adrian Zachariae,1 and Dirk Brockmann1, 2
1

arXiv:2007.01583v4 [physics.soc-ph] 18 Dec 2020

2

Robert Koch-Institute, Nordufer 20, D-13353 Berlin, Germany
Institute for Theoretical Biology, Humboldt-University of Berlin, Philippstr. 13, D-10115 Berlin, Germany
(Dated: December 21, 2020)
In the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic many countries implemented containment measures to
reduce disease transmission. Studies using digital data sources show that the mobility of individuals
was effectively reduced in multiple countries. However, it remains unclear whether these reductions
caused deeper structural changes in mobility networks, and how such changes may affect dynamic
processes on the network. Here we use movement data of mobile phone users to show that mobility
in Germany has not only been reduced considerably: Lockdown measures caused substantial and
long-lasting structural changes in the mobility network. We find that long-distance travel was
reduced disproportionately strongly. The trimming of long-range network connectivity leads to a
more local, clustered network and a moderation of the “small-world” effect. We demonstrate that
these structural changes have a considerable effect on epidemic spreading processes by “flattening”
the epidemic curve and delaying the spread to geographically distant regions.

I.

INTRODUCTION

During the first phase of the coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) pandemic, countries around the world implemented a host of containment policies aimed at mitigating the spread of the disease [1–4]. Many policies
restricted human mobility, intending to reduce closeproximity contacts, the major driver of the disease’s
spread [5]. In Germany, these policies included border
closures and travel bans, restrictions of public activity
(school and business closures), paired with appeals by
the government to avoid trips voluntarily whenever possible [6]. We will refer to these policies as “lockdown”
measures for brevity.
Based on various digital data sources such as mobile
phone data or social media data, several studies show
that mobility significantly changed during lockdowns [7].
Most studies focused on general mobility trends and
confirmed an overall reduction in mobility in various
countries[8–12]. Other research focused on the relation
between mobility and disease transmission: For instance,
it has been argued that mobility reduction is likely instrumental in reducing the effective reproduction number
in many countries [13–17], in agreement with theoretical
models and simulations, which have shown that containment can effectively slow down disease transmission [18–
20].
However, it remains an open question whether the mobility restrictions promoted deeper structural changes in
mobility networks, and how these changes impact epidemic spreading mediated by these networks. Recently,
Galeazzi et al. [21] found increased geographical fragmentation of the mobility network. A thorough understanding of how structural mobility network changes impact epidemic spreading is needed in order to correctly
assess the consequences of mobility restrictions not only
for the current COVID-19 pandemic, but also for for similar scenarios in the future.

Here, we analyze structural changes in mobility patterns in Germany during the COVID-19 pandemic. We
analyze movements recorded from mobile phones of
43.6 million individuals in Germany. Beyond a general reduction in mobility, we find considerable structural
changes in the mobility network. Due to the reduction of
long-distance travel, the network becomes more local and
lattice-like. Most importantly, we find a changed scaling
relation between path lengths and geographic distance:
During lockdown, the effective distance (and arrival time
in spreading processes) to a destination continually grows
with geographic distance. This shows a marked reduction
of the “small-world” characteristic, where geographic distance is usually of lesser importance in determining path
lengths [22, 23]. Using simulations of a commuter-based
SIR model, we demonstrate that these changes have considerable practical implications as they suppress (or “flatten”) the curve of an epidemic remarkably and delay the
disease’s arrival between distant regions.

II.

MOBILITY TRENDS IN GERMANY
A.

General mobility changes

We base our analysis on mobility flows collected from
mobile phone data. The data counts the number of trips,
where a trip is defined as a single mobile phone switching
cell towers at least once, between two resting phases of
at least 15 minutes (see Fig. 1D). A resting phase is defined as a mobile phone not switching its connected cell
tower. These trips are aggregated over the course of a day
to build the daily flow matrix F(t). The element Fji (t)
quantifies the total number of trips from location i to
location j on a given day t. Locations are the m = 401
counties of Germany. Note that flows within counties
Fii (t) are included. During times with normal mobility, (e.g. during March 2019, which we use as a baseline,

2

B

Week 11

Week 12

Week 13

9 March - 15 March

16 March - 22 March

23 March - 29 March

D

15
min

40%

40%

20%

20%

0%

0%
15

min

-20%
-40%

county j

Change in mobility

n(i ) (t )

C

county i

A

-20%
-40%

15
min

FIG. 1. Mobility changes in Germany during the COVID-19 pandemic. (A) The change in total movements ∆n(t) in 2020,
relative to March 2019. Mobility decreases drastically in mid-March, coincident with restricting measure implementations (red
bars), followed by a gradual increase in mobility concurrent with the lifting of restricting policies (teal bars). Bar width indicates
the number of policies issued or lifted on that date, respectively. (B) The change in mobility is spatially heterogeneous. Mobility
is reduced more in large cities (shown here for the 20 largest cities) and states that implemented more severe restrictions (such
as Bavaria). (C) Mobility change in German counties for the three weeks with most substantial global change. The mobility
change ∆n(i) (t) represents the number of trips that originate in county i (see Materials and Methods). (D) Illustration of
how mobility is recorded. A trip is counted when a user switches to one or multiple new cell towers, until the user becomes
stationary again (no further switch for approx. 15 minutes). Trips can be within the same county (teal, solid line) or between
different counties (red, dot-dashed line). Movements without changing cell towers are not recorded (grey, dotted line).

see below) the total flow is 176 million trips per day on
average, recorded among 43.6 million users [24], corresponding to an average of 3.8 trips per user per day. The
baseline average daily flow between all pairs of locations
is hFji (t)i = 1103 (averaged over all days in March 2019)
with a standard deviation of Std[Fji (t)] = 26.413. Flows
below a threshold of Fji (t) < 5 were omitted from the
data due to anonymization requirements.
To analyze general changes in mobility during the
COVID-19 pandemic, we focus on the daily mobility
change ∆n(t), which is thePrelative difference in the tom
tal number of trips N (t) = i,j=1 Fji (t) compared to the
baseline number of trips, i.e. during a period of “normal”
mobility. Here, we use March 2019 as this baseline period, and compare the mobility on each date t from 2020
to the average mobility on the corresponding weekday in
March 2019 (see Materials and Methods).

We find that mobility in Germany was substantially reduced during the COVID-19 pandemic, see Fig. 1. The
largest reduction occurred in mid-March, when the vast
majority of mobility-reducing interventions took effect
(information on government policies is taken from the
ACAPS dataset, see SI). Over the course of three weeks,
mobility dropped to −40% below baseline on March 27th
in the 7 day moving average. The total number of daily
recorded trips decreased from 176 million to 107 million
trips (from 3.8 to 2.3 daily trips per user). The decline was followed by an immediate rebound at the beginning of April, even though mobility-restricting regulations remained in effect during this period. In the following months, mobility increased slowly, reaching its prelockdown levels in early June. Interestingly, the increase
in mobility took place in small bursts followed by short
periods of stagnation. These bursts started at around the

3
same time that mobility-restricting policies were lifted,
hinting at a causal relationship.
Mobility did not decrease homogeneously in Germany:
Some areas witnessed a more substantial reduction than
others. We observed a greater mobility reduction in
Western and Southern states (such as Bavaria), which
were more substantially affected by the pandemic, compared to the Eastern states of Germany (for example in
Saxony-Anhalt) [25]. This difference can partially be
explained by more severe mobility restrictions in some
Western states. For instance, Bavaria passed stricter
measures on May 20th, resulting in a higher reduction
in mobility in calendar week 13. Still, most policies were
uniform across Germany and were implemented in a similar manner on a federal level. Therefore, differences in
policies can only deliver a partial explanation for regional
heterogeneities. Furthermore, we found systematic dependencies on demographic factors. Mobility is reduced
more in large cities compared to less densely populated
areas. In addition, several border regions particularly
associated with cross-border traffic exhibit a higher than
average mobility reduction , although the border as a
whole does not deviate markedly from the average.

B.

Distance-dependence of mobility reduction

The observed general reduction in mobility begs the
question of how mobility has changed, and what types of
trips were reduced. We observe a distinct dependence of
mobility change on trip length, see Fig. 2. We calculated
the mobility change ∆nD (t) for all trips in a certain distance range D. Because data is aggregated on a county
level, we use the distance between the county centroids as
an estimate of trip distance (see Materials and Methods).
Over the full range of observed distances, we find
that long-distance trips decreased more strongly than
short-distance trips. This resonates with the expectation that many social-distancing policies targeted longdistance travel specifically: Travel bans across country
and state borders, cancellations of major events, and border closures by other countries affecting holiday travel.
Furthermore, we find that the split between short- and
long-distance mobility reduction is a useful indicator for
an unusual state of the mobility network. While the total
number of trips has almost returned to its pre-pandemic
state (see Fig. 1A), which could at first glance give the
impression that normal mobility patterns have been restored, the continued discrepancy between short- and
long-distance mobility reduction indicates a long-lasting
structural change in mobility patterns (see Fig. 2). The
discrepancy, while declining slightly, remained stable over
the course of the pandemic, evidence for the prevalent
impact of mobility changes.

A

B

FIG. 2.
Mobility reduction as a function of distance.
(A) Relative mobility changes ∆nD (t) for different distance
ranges D (7 day moving averages). Long-distance trips reduction is higher. The notable increase in long-distance
trips in February coincides with school holidays in several
German states. Fluctuations in April and May are often
centered around public holidays. (B) The difference between short-distance mobility change ∆nd≤10 km (t) and longdistance change ∆nd>10 km (t) is a useful indicator for unusual
mobility.

III.

A.

STRUCTURAL CHANGES IN THE
MOBILITY NETWORK

Pre-lockdown and lockdown mobility networks

To identify key structural changes over time, we analyze the mobility networks GT for each calendar week
T , where the edge weights wji correspond to the average
daily flow along the edge during this week (see Materials and Methods). To highlight the changes occurring
during lockdown, we compare two specific time periods:
The pre-lockdown network G10 is constructed from the
trips in calendar week 10 (March 2-8), before policy interventions were passed. The lockdown network G13 , is
constructed from all trips in calendar week 13 (March
23-29, the week with the highest reduction in mobility).
The lockdown network G13 is considerably less dense
than the pre-lockdown network G10 , see Fig. 3. Many
pairs of counties with traffic under normal conditions lack

4

B

A

C
P(dji d )

100
10

2

10

4

10

6

Pre-Lockdown
Lockdown
Pre-Lockdown res.
200

400

600

800

Geographical distance d (km)

FIG. 3. Comparison of the pre-lockdown mobility network G10 and the lockdown network G13 corresponding to calendar
weeks 10 and 13, respectively. (A) Depiction of the networks. Line widths indicate the average number of daily trips along
each connection. During lockdown, there are less trips in total, less unique edges, and fewer long-distance connections. (B)
Distribution of node degrees k. The average node degree hki and network density ρ are lower during lockdown (hki = 148, ρ =
32.6%) than in the pre-lockdown network (hki = 219, ρ = 49.8%). These differences are only partially explained by a uniform,
global reduction of trips (which causes trips to fall below the anonymization threshold wc = 5), as demonstrated by comparison
to the rescaled pre-lockdown network G∗10 (T = 13) which is structurally similar to network G10 but has the same number of
total trips as G13 (see Materials and Methods). (C) The probability P (dji ≥ d) that a randomly chosen edge wji is of a distance
dji ≥ d. The lockdown network contains considerably fewer long-distance trips than the pre-lockdown network, an effect that
cannot be explained by a uniform, global reduction of flows (rescaled pre-lockdown network).

traffic during the lockdown week or, the average daily
flow fell below the anonymization threshold wc = 5. In
particular, the lockdown network has fewer long-distance
flows than the pre-lockdown network (Fig. 3C), in line
with our previous finding that mobility over long distances was reduced most substantially (compare Fig. 2).

The loss of density during lockdown cannot be explained by a global, uniform reduction of mobility alone,
which causes trips to fall below the observation threshold
wc = 5. To illustrate this point, we compare the lockdown network G13 to the rescaled network G∗10 (T = 13)
where edge weights of the pre-lockdown network G10
were rescaled such that it is structurally similar to the
pre-lockdown network G10 but has the same total number of trips as the lockdown network G13 (see Materials and Methods). This rescaling can rule out effects
that originate in a homogeneous, global mobility reduction. We find that the rescaled pre-lockdown network is
denser than the lockdown network. Specifically, we find a
greater probability of observing long-distance travel (see
(Fig. 3, panels B and C). We conclude that long-distance
travel has been reduced more substantially during lockdown than can be explained by a mere global reduction
of mobility and thresholding effects.

B.

Lockdown effects on path lengths in the
networks

The structural mobility changes during lockdown impact properties typically associated with the so-called
“small-world” characteristic of the network [22], namely
the shortest path lengths Lji between counties and the
clustering coefficient of nodes Ci (see definitions in Materials and Methods). The shortest path length can be
related to time scales for search or spreading processes,
i.e. the time it takes to reach one location starting at
another. The clustering coefficient quantifies the magnitude of the average flow between triplets of neighboring
locations—a large value indicates that two neighbors of a
location are likely to have large flows between them, too.
Numerous systems are associated with high clustering
while having small shortest paths (typically mean shortest paths scale logarithmically with systems size), which
is referred to as the “small-world” property. This property typically facilitates the spread of epidemics [26, 27].
In contrast, lattices typically have shortest paths scaling
polynomially with system size and high clustering and
thus comparatively slower spreading speeds[28].
We observe substantial changes in the structural properties of the mobility networks during lockdown, as illustrated by the shortest path trees for the weekly mo-

5
Pre-Lockdown
Week 10
March 2-8

Lockdown
Week 11
March 9-15

Week 12
March 16-22

Week 13
March 23-29

0
1
2
3

C
Shortest path length
Ld(T ) /L(T0 )

B

Distance (in L(T0 ))

A

Pre-Lockdown
Lockdown
Pre-Lockdown
rescaled

4
3
2
1
0
0

200

400

600

800

Geographical distance d (km)
FIG. 4. Lockdown effects on structural network metrics. (A) The shortest path tree originating at Berlin for the weekly
mobility networks GT . In the pre-lockdown network G10 (week T0 = 10, blue frame), long-distance connections facilitate quick
traversals. In the lockdown network G13 (week T = 13, red frame), shortest paths are generally longer and include more
local steps between neighboring counties. Radial distance is scaled in multiples of the average shortest path length L(T0 ) in
week T0 = 10. Grey circles mark the largest shortest path length in week 10. Further plots for Berlin and for other sources
(which we find to exhibit qualitatively similar changes) are provided in the SI, section 3D. (B) The average shortest path
length L(T ) and the average clustering coefficient C(T ) for weekly mobility networks GT over time, relative to their values
in week T0 = 10 (blue bar). Both metrics increase substantially in the following weeks and peak for the lockdown network
G13 (red bar), indicating a more clustered and sparser network. (C) The expected shortest path length Ld (T ) at distance
d, i.e. Ld (T ) = hLji (T )|dji ∈ [d − , d + ]i. In the pre-lockdown network G10 , the shortest path length Ld is independent of
geographical distances d at large distances, a known phenomenon of spatial small-world networks. In contrast, we observe a
continued, roughly linear, scaling relation for Ld in that distance range for the lockdown network G13 , a known property of
lattices. The rescaled, pre-lockdown network G∗10 (T = 13) does not replicate the changed scaling behavior, demonstrating that
the effect is not solely explained by a global, uniform reduction of mobility and thresholding effects.

bility networks GT (see Fig. 4A). In the pre-lockdown
network G10 , long-distance connections enable a quick
traversal of the network followed by few local steps. In
the lockdown network G13 , the shortest paths are generally longer and include more local steps between neighboring counties. As a consequence of these structural
changes, both the average shortest path length L(T ) and
average clustering coefficient C(T ) increase substantially
(see Fig. 4B). Moreover, we observe a striking difference
in expected path length as a function of geographic distance, see Fig. 4C. In the pre-lockdown network, the expected shortest path length Ld initially increases with
geographical distance d, but eventually saturates to an
almost constant niveau for d & 550 km, i.e. is independent of geographic distance. This is a well known phenomenon of spatial small-world networks, where it has
been shown that shortest path lengths typically scale as

L ∝ r with Euclidian distance r up to a critical distance
rc , followed by an independence regime, L ≈ const. for
r > rc [29]. A similar relation has been found in empirical human mobility networks such as air traffic networks
[23]. In such networks, geographic distance is an unreliable predictor for the effective arrival time because larger
geographical distances can quickly be overcome by traveling along links connecting distant places. However, in the
lockdown network, we observe a continued, almost linear
dependence of the shortest path length on geographical
distance, which is a typical property of lattices [28]. Because long-distance links are missing or weak, and travel
predominantly occurs along short-distance connections,
geographical distance dominates effective travel distance
or travel duration.
We therefore conclude that the lockdown network is
more lattice-like, with predominantly local connections

6
and fewer connections between remote locations, reflecting a reduction of the system’s “small-world” property.
As indicated above, this has important implications for
dynamical processes such as epidemic spreading, which
we will discuss in the next section.
The unexpected scaling relation between path lengths
and geographic distance during lockdown cannot merely
be explained by the fact that the total flow is reduced in
the lockdown network, neither is it due to thresholding
effects. To demonstrate this, we use the rescaled prelockdown network G∗10 (T = 13) as a comparison. As we
see in Fig. 4C, the reduced flow accounts for the changes
at small distances, but it does not explain the different
dependence of the shortest path length on geographical distance at high distances. This confirms that the
observed effect is due to structural differences between
the pre-lockdown and lockdown networks. In the Appendix section B, we present further evidence to support
this conclusion by evaluating how several spreading time
scales change over time in both the measured mobility
networks as well as rescaled networks.

IV.

EFFECT OF LOCKDOWN ON SPREADING
PROCESSES
A.

SIR model with containment

Finally, we address the question to what extent the
lockdown-induced changes in mobility impact epidemic
spreading processes mediated by the mobility network.
We simulate an SIR epidemic metapopulation model
[31, 32]. In SIR models, individuals are assumed to be
in either of three distinct states: susceptible (S), infected
(I), or removed (R) from the transmission process. Contacts between susceptibles and infecteds may lead to the
infection of the susceptible individual and infected individuals can spontaneously be removed from the transmission process by medical/non-medical interventions, death
or immunization. In metapopulation models, infecteds
based in one location can cause infections in other locations with a rate proportional to the daily flow between
locations. Implicitly it is assumed that individuals travel
back an forth and transport the infection between areas.
Note that in the following, we use epidemiological parameters similar to those of COVID-19 (see Materials
and Methods). However, we do not aim to replicate the
actual spread of COVID-19 in Germany, but rather intend to demonstrate qualitative effects of the lockdown
on epidemic spreading in general.
We implement a well-known commuter-dynamics SIR
metapopulation model [33] with minor modifications.
Specifically, the original model does not account for
changes in the total amount of mobility (i.e. total number of trips). The modified model accounts for the drastic reduction in total mobility, a substantial part of the
changed mobility patterns due to containment measures.
To include changes in the total amount of mobility in

the model, we assume that a reduction in mobility reduces the rate with which contacts between infecteds and
susceptibles cause infections. We implement this in two
variants, to capture different methodological approaches:
In the “distancing” scenario, mobility reduction leads to
a proportional reduction in the average number of contacts. The “isolation” scenario instead implies that the
equivalent percentage of the population isolates at home
while the remaining individuals do not change their behavior (see Fig. 5A for an illustration, and Materials and
Methods and Appendix for details on the SIR model).
Note that while many other non-pharmaceutical interventions may mitigate the spread of an infectious disease, we purely aim to discuss the effect of reduced and
restructured mobility here.

B.

Mobility reduction flattens the curve

An analysis of the SIR model indicates that lockdown
measures have a distinct impact on epidemic spreading,
see Fig. 5. Most prominently, a reduction of mobility reduces the overall incidence of the epidemic and delays its
spread, shifting the peak to later times: The lockdown
measures “flatten the curve” of the epidemic (Fig. 5B).
This applies to both lockdown scenarios implemented
here, where the stricter “isolation” scenario shows a lower
overall incidence. The rescaled pre-lockdown network
shows an almost identical incidence curve to the lockdown network (not shown here), which indicates that the
“flattening” is mostly caused by the reduction in overall
traffic.
In addition, lockdown measures increase the epidemic
threshold R∗0 of the disease, that is the minimal force
of infection required to infect a substantial amount of
the population, see Fig. 5C. We compare the simulations to results of the canonical well-mixed model (see
Materials and Methods). We find little difference between the results of the metapopulation simulation and
the well-mixed model, which suggests that stochasticity
plays only as small role in the metapopulation system.

C.

SIR model replicates geographic dependence of
arrival times

An important observation is that the spread of the
epidemic shows a similar functional dependence on geographic distances as the the shortest paths. This implies that the observed structural changes have considerable practical implications. To clarify this point we
measured the arrival times of the epidemic in counties,
see Fig. 5D. During lockdown, the epidemic takes longer
to spread spatially, which is caused by the reduced contact numbers due to reduced mobility. More importantly,
a stronger and continued increase of the arrival time
with geographic distance from the outbreak origin during lockdown is observed: The farther away a county is

7

A

B

Distancing

25%

Infected I(t )/N (pop)

Base
scenario

Isolation

Pre-Lockdown
Lockdown (distancing)
Lockdown (isolation)

20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Time t (in multiples of recovery time

D

C

)
1

20

0

Pre-Lockdown
Lockd. (dist.)
Lockd. (iso.)
well-mixed

40%
20%
0%
0

1

2

3

4

5

R0

Arrival time t * (in

R(t→ )/N (pop)

60%

0

)

Pre-Lockdown
Pre-Lockd. rescaled (dist.)
Pre-Lockd. rescaled (iso.)
Lockdown (dist.)
Lockdown (iso.)

100%
80%

35
1

15

+78.4%
10

+40.7%

5

+36.9%

0
0

200

400

600

800

Geographical distance to outbreak origin di * (km)

FIG. 5.
Simulations of an SIR-epidemic on pre-lockdown and lockdown mobility networks. (A) We incorporate changes
in total mobility in two scenarios in the model: In the “distancing” scenario, reduced mobility removes contacts between
individuals, uniformly distributed over all individuals. In the “isolation” scenario, reduced mobility implies that an equivalent
fraction of individuals isolate at home and are effectively removed from the system (see main text and SI for details). (B) In
both model scenarios, the epidemic curve (infecteds over time) is flattened and its peak shifted to later times during lockdown.
Note that we omit simulations on the rescaled network that yield similar results, indicating that the observed flattening effect
is dominated by a decreasing basic reproduction number rather than structural changes. Results are shown for R0 = 3 and
recovery rate µ = 1/(8d), with a single random outbreak origin of I0 = 100, averaged over 1000 simulations for each scenario.
(C) The epidemic threshold is shifted to higher values of R0 during lockdown in both lockdown scenarios. Arrows indicate
the well-mixed epidemic thresholds at R∗0 = 1 (pre-lockdown) and R∗0 = 1.67 (lockdown). The threshold is higher in the
metapopulation model compared to the well-mixed description, an expected effect caused by the heterogeneity of the system
[30]. (D) The average arrival times t∗ in counties as a function of geographic distance di∗ from the outbreak origin i∗ . The
arrival time t∗ is defined as the first time when infecteds pass the threshold of 0.1% in a county. In the lockdown network,
arrival times increase due to lower mobility. More importantly, however, we observe a similar scaling relationship as shown for
the shortest path lengths: During lockdown, the arrival time shows a continued increase as a function of geographic distance
from the outbreak origin, even in the long-distance regime. The changed scaling behavior cannot be explained by the lower
total amount of trips (rescaled network).

from the outbreak origin, the longer it will take for the
county to be affected by the epidemic. In contrast, with
pre-lockdown mobility, the arrival times exhibit only a
slow increase with geographic distance. Furthermore, the
rescaled network does not replicate the changed scaling
relation of arrival times during lockdown, which demonstrates that it is not caused by a reduction in the total
amount of trips.
The dependence of arrival times on geographic distance
in Fig. 5D matches the corresponding relationships for
the shortest path lengths depicted in Fig. 4C. Therefore,
structural changes—i.e. a reduced connectivity across

long distances—have direct consequences for the dynamics of an epidemic, mitigating the spatial spatial spread
over long distances.

V.

DISCUSSION

In this study, we report and analyze various lockdown
induced changes in mobility in Germany during the initial phase of the COVID-19 pandemic. We found a considerable reduction of mobility during the pandemic, similar to what was previously reported for other countries

8
that passed and implemented comparable policies [8–11].
The reduction in mobility can be divided into a swift decrease, early in the lockdown phase, followed by a slow
recovery. The initial rebound occured in late March although official policies remained unchanged. This could
be indicative of individuals taking up non-essential trips
again in spite of lockdown policies. We think that further
research is necessary to illuminate what part of the mobility reduction was a direct consequence of policies, and
which part was caused by voluntary behavioral changes
within these official regulations.
We found evidence for profound structural changes
in the mobility network. These changes are primarily
caused by a reduction of long-distance mobility, resulting in a more clustered and local network, and hence
a more lattice-like system. Most importantly, we found
that path lengths continually increase with geographic
distance, which is a qualitative change compared to prelockdown mobility. These changes indicate a reduction
of the small-world characteristic of the network.
In the context of human mobility, the structural network changes can be interpreted in different ways. Fewer
individuals travel along connections of growing distance.
One possible reason for this is that the individual “cost”
of traversing long-distance connections has increased,
more so than that for short-distance links, for example
due to legal restrictions on travel, missing transportation
options (such as flights), or slower and reduced transportation overall. As a result, people might avoid such
travel or break up their travel in smaller trip segments.
The practical consequences of our findings are highlighted in the epidemic simulations analysis. We found
that reduced global mobility during lockdown likely
slowed down the spatial spread of the disease. Regarding structural changes, we found that the arrival times
in counties increase continuously with the distance to
the outbreak origin during lockdown, matching results
of the topological analyses of the shortest path lengths.
This result emphasizes our argument that the changes
in the mobility network shown in this study have direct and non-trivial consequences on dynamic processes
such as epidemic spreading. Our findings also suggest
that targeted mobility restrictions may be used to effectively mitigate the spread of epidemics. In particular,
measures that reduce long-distance travel mitigate a diseases’ spread during the first phase of an outbreak while
a reduction in general mobility may be associated with a
flattened prevalence curve.
In conclusion, we hope that future research will further illuminate the complex effects of restrictive policies
on human mobility. Deeper and more complex aspects
of mobility changes may occur during lockdowns, ranging from topological properties of the mobility network
to its relation to sociodemographic and epidemiological
conditions of the affected regions. We hope that a clearer
understanding of complex effects of mobility-restricting
policies will enable policy-makers to use these tools more
effectively and purposefully, and thus help to mitigate

the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and to better prepare
us for future epidemics.
VI.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
A.

Daily mobility change

To investigate national mobility P
trends, we focus on
m
the total number of trips N (t) =
i,j=1 Fji (t) on the
date t. In order to judge whether mobility has changed
during the pandemic, we compare the mobility during
the pandemic T to a baseline period with “normal” mobility T0 . Different comparison time frames T0 can be
chosen and no clear, optimal choice that exhaustively accounts for seasonal effects, holidays, and general changes
in mobility patterns exists. Here, we use March 2019 as
a comparison, which we assume to be structurally closest to the period of March 2020 where most interventions
took place.
For a given date t within the time frame of the pandemic T , we calculate the mobility change ∆n(t) by comparing the number of trips N (t) to the expected number
of trips N0 (t) during the baseline mobility period T0 as


N (t)
∆n(t) =
− 1.
N0 (t)
Because mobility differs strongly depending on the weekday, we calculate the expected number of trips N0 (t) as
the average number of trips on all those dates Dτ in the
base period T0 that have the same weekday τ as the date
t,
N0 (t) = |Dτ |−1

X

N (t0 ).

t0 ∈Dτ

In order to analyze the mobility change for a single
county, ∆n(i) (t), we use the same procedure but only
count the number
Pm of trips that originate in the county i,
i.e. N (i) (t) = j=1 Fji (t)
B.

Mobility change for distances

When we calculate the distance-dependent mobility
change ∆nD (t), we proceed similarly to the previous section, but we only consider trips whose distance falls into
a certain distance range D = {d : dmin < d ≤ dmax }. As
a proxy for the distance of flows Fji (t), we use the geographical distance dji between the centroids of counties
i and j. The number of trips in the distance range D is
X
ND (t) =
Fji (t).
(i,j)∈ΦD

where ΦD is the set of all pairs of counties (i, j) whose
distance falls into the range D,
ΦD = {(i, j) : dji ∈ D} .

9
Using ND (t), we calculate ∆nD (t) as outlined in the previous section.

C.

Calculation of weekly mobility networks

We create weekly mobility networks GT from trips
measured during calendar week T . Let DT denote the
set of days in calendar week T . The edge weights wji (T )
are then calculated as the average daily number of trips
between counties during this week,
X
Fji (t0 ).
wji (T ) = |DT |−1
t0 ∈DT

We omit edges whose average weight is below the threshold wji (T ) < 5 to ensure consistency and comparability
with the daily data.

D.

Rescaled networks

To investigate how the global reduction of mobility affects our observations in comparison to structural
changes, we construct rescaled networks G∗10 (T ) by scaling the weights of the pre-lockdown network of calendar
week 10 by the flow lost during week T , i.e. we set
Pm
i,j=1 wji (T )
∗
.
wji (T ) = wji (T = 10) × Pm
i,j=1 wji (T = 10)
Subsequently, we apply the same thresholding procedure
as was done in the original data to the resulting net∗
work and discard all links with wij
(T ) < 5. We therefore
obtain a network that is structurally similar to the prelockdown system of calendar week 10 but has the same
total amount of trips as the corresponding system of calendar week T , which allows us to isolate the effects that
come purely from a uniform, global mobility reduction
and subsequent thresholding.

E.

Path lengths and clustering coefficient

To measure path lengths in the network, we consider
two counties to be “close” to each other when they are
connected by a large flow value and define the distance of
each link as the inverse weight along the edge `ji = 1/wji .
Using this distance metric we calculate the shortest path
length Lji between each pair of source node i and target node j using Dijkstra’s algorithm [34]. We calculate the
Pmweekly average path length L(T ) = (m(m −
1))−1 i,j=1 Lji (T ) and the average weighted and diPm
rected clustering coefficient C(T ) = m−1 i=1 Ci (T )
over all nodes for the weekly networks GT (as defined in
[35]). Because the above definition of distance is sensitive
to changes in the total flow of the network, we discuss a
variety of other distance scales in the SI, yielding similar

results (see Appendix section C2 and 3). Additionally, we
show that increasing the observation threshold wc does
not substantially change the results, indicating that the
original threshold of the data was chosen small enough
to not have an impact on our conclusions.

F.

SIR metapopulation model

We use a modified version of the model proposed in
[33] where susceptible S, infected I, and recovered individuals R are associated to be part of commuter compartments Xji (with X ∈ {S, I, R}) when they live in
location i and work in location j. The compartments
are coupled by shared work and home locations, respectively, and commuter-compartment population sizes
pop
Nji
= Sji + Iji + Rji are assumed to be proportional to the edge-specific
outflux ratio of location i as
P
pop
Nji
= Nipop Fji / k Fki . Full details are given in the
Appendix section D.
As stated in the main text, we incorporate two different variations of lockdown mechanisms into the model,
to account for different interpretations of the influence
of mobility reduction on the average number of contacts.
In the “distancing” scenario, we assume that a mobility
reduction by a factor κi in a location i leads to a linear
reduction in 0the transmission rate βi throughout the epidemic, i.e. βi = κi × β. The assumption here is that the
reduced mobility uniformly translates into reduced contacts between individuals. In the other, stricter scenario
“isolation”, we instead assume that the reduced mobility means that individuals stop their commuting and are
effectively removed from the system. We implement this
by assuming that initially, a fraction 1 − κi0 is removed
from the transmission process such that Sji (t = 0) =
0
κi Sji (t = 0) and Rji (t = 0) = (1 − κi )Sji (t = 0). Both
scenarios lead to a reduction of the basic reproduction
number that is proportional to a reduction of mobility.
In section E of the Appendix, we argue that such a linear
relationship corresponds to an upper bound of transmissibility reduction induced by mobility reduction.
Recent meta-reviews estimate the basic reproduction
number R0 for COVID-19 in the range of 2-3 and the
infectious period as roughly 7 days [36–38]. Accordingly,
we use R0 = 3 and a recovery rate of µ = 1/(8d), close
to values previously used for the analysis of the disease’s
spread in Germany [14].

G.

Data availability

The mobile phone dataset is deposited in the Open
Science Framework (OSF) data collection (https://os
f.io/n53cz/) in an anonymized form, which will enable
readers to replicate the main results of this paper (see SI
for a description of the anonymization process). All other
datasets used are publicly available: The ACAPS dataset
on government policies, population data and county-level

10
geodata for Germany. Their sources are listed in the
Appendix section A 1. The Python code used for the
SIR simulation is available at https://github.com/fra
nksh/EpiCommute and included in the OSF repository.

[1] A. Wilder-Smith and D. O. Freedman, Isolation, quarantine, social distancing and community containment: Pivotal role for old-style public health measures in the novel
coronavirus (2019-nCoV) outbreak, Journal of Travel
Medicine 27, 10.1093/jtm/taaa020 (2020).
[2] C. Sohrabi, Z. Alsafi, N. O’Neill, M. Khan, A. Kerwan,
A. Al-Jabir, C. Iosifidis, and R. Agha, World Health Organization declares global emergency: A review of the
2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19), International Journal of Surgery (London, England) 76, 71 (2020).
[3] S. Zhang, Z. Wang, R. Chang, H. Wang, C. Xu, X. Yu,
L. Tsamlag, Y. Dong, H. Wang, and Y. Cai, COVID-19
containment: China provides important lessons for global
response, Frontiers of Medicine 14, 215 (2020).
[4] D. Fisher and A. Wilder-Smith, The global community
needs to swiftly ramp up the response to contain COVID19, The Lancet 395, 1109 (2020).
[5] Q. Li, X. Guan, P. Wu, X. Wang, L. Zhou, Y. Tong,
R. Ren, K. S. Leung, E. H. Lau, J. Y. Wong, X. Xing,
N. Xiang, Y. Wu, C. Li, Q. Chen, D. Li, T. Liu, J. Zhao,
M. Liu, W. Tu, C. Chen, L. Jin, R. Yang, Q. Wang,
S. Zhou, R. Wang, H. Liu, Y. Luo, Y. Liu, G. Shao, H. Li,
Z. Tao, Y. Yang, Z. Deng, B. Liu, Z. Ma, Y. Zhang,
G. Shi, T. T. Lam, J. T. Wu, G. F. Gao, B. J. Cowling, B. Yang, G. M. Leung, and Z. Feng, Early Transmission Dynamics in Wuhan, China, of Novel Coronavirus–Infected Pneumonia, New England Journal of
Medicine 382, 1199 (2020).
[6] COVID19 Government Measures Dataset, available at ht
tps://www.acaps.org/covid19-government-measure
s-dataset (accessed on 2020-06-12).
[7] N. Oliver, B. Lepri, H. Sterly, R. Lambiotte, S. Deletaille,
M. De Nadai, E. Letouzé, A. A. Salah, R. Benjamins,
C. Cattuto, V. Colizza, N. de Cordes, S. P. Fraiberger,
T. Koebe, S. Lehmann, J. Murillo, A. Pentland, P. N.
Pham, F. Pivetta, J. Saramäki, S. V. Scarpino, M. Tizzoni, S. Verhulst, and P. Vinck, Mobile phone data for informing public health actions across the COVID-19 pandemic life cycle, Science Advances 6, eabc0764 (2020).
[8] B. Klein, T. Larock, S. Mccabe, L. Torres, F. Privitera,
B. Lake, M. U. G. Kraemer, S. John, D. Lazer, T. Eliassirad, S. V. Scarpino, M. Chinazzi, and A. Vespignani,
Assessing changes in commuting and individual mobility
in major metropolitan areas in the United States during
the COVID-19 outbreak (2020), preprint on webpage at
https://www.networkscienceinstitute.org/publicat
ions/assessing-changes-in-commuting-and-indivi
dual-mobility-in-major-metropolitan-areas-in-t
he-united-states-during-the-covid-19-outbreak.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to thank Luciano Franceschina, Ilya
Boyandin, and Teralytics for help regarding the mobile phone data. We also thank Vedran Sekara, Manuel
Garcia-Herranz, and Annika Hope Rose for helpful comments regarding the analyses. B.F.M. is financially supported as an Add-on Fellow for Interdisciplinary Life Science by the Joachim Herz Stiftung.

[9] M. Lee, J. Zhao, Q. Sun, Y. Pan, W. Zhou, C. Xiong, and
L. Zhang, Human Mobility Trends during the COVID19 Pandemic in the United States, arXiv:2005.01215 (04
May 2020), arXiv:2005.01215.
[10] E. Pepe, P. Bajardi, L. Gauvin, F. Privitera, B. Lake,
C. Cattuto, and M. Tizzoni, COVID-19 outbreak response: a first assessment of mobility changes in
Italy following national lockdown (07 April 2020),
medRxiv:10.1101/2020.03.22.20039933.
[11] S. Gao, J. Rao, Y. Kang, Y. Liang, and J. Kruse,
Mapping County-Level Mobility Pattern Changes
in the United States in Response to COVID-19,
SSRN Electronic Journal 10.2139/ssrn.3570145 (2020),
arXiv:2004.04544.
[12] G. Pullano, E. Valdano, N. Scarpa, S. Rubrichi,
and V. Colizza, Population mobility reductions during
COVID-19 epidemic in France under lockdown (01 June
2020), medRxiv:10.1101/2020.05.29.20097097v1.
[13] S. Flaxman, S. Mishra, A. Gandy, H. J. T. Unwin, T. A.
Mellan, H. Coupland, C. Whittaker, H. Zhu, T. Berah,
J. W. Eaton, M. Monod, Imperial College COVID-19
Response Team, A. C. Ghani, C. A. Donnelly, S. M. Riley, M. A. C. Vollmer, N. M. Ferguson, L. C. Okell, and
S. Bhatt, Estimating the effects of non-pharmaceutical
interventions on COVID-19 in Europe., Nature , 1 (2020).
[14] J. Dehning, J. Zierenberg, F. P. Spitzner, M. Wibral,
J. P. Neto, M. Wilczek, and V. Priesemann, Inferring change points in the spread of COVID-19 reveals
the effectiveness of interventions, Science 10.1126/SCIENCE.ABB9789 (2020).
[15] T. Yabe, K. Tsubouchi, N. Fujiwara, T. Wada, Y. Sekimoto, and S. V. Ukkusuri, Non-Compulsory Measures
Sufficiently Reduced Human Mobility in Japan during the COVID-19 Epidemic, arXiv:2005.09423 (18 May
2020), arXiv:2005.09423.
[16] J. C. Lemaitre, J. Perez-Saez, A. Azman, A. Rinaldo, and J. Fellay, Assessing the impact of
non-pharmaceutical interventions on SARS-CoV2 transmission in Switzerland (08 May 2020),
medRxiv:10.1101/2020.05.04.20090639v1.
[17] J. S. Jia, X. Lu, Y. Yuan, G. Xu, J. Jia, and N. A. Christakis, Population flow drives spatio-temporal distribution
of COVID-19 in China, Nature , 1 (2020).
[18] B. F. Maier and D. Brockmann, Effective containment explains subexponential growth in recent confirmed
COVID-19 cases in China, Science 4557, eabb4557
(2020).
[19] A. Arenas, W. Cota, J. Gomez-Gardenes, S. Gómez,
C. Granell, J. T. Matamalas, D. Soriano-Panos, and

11

[20]

[21]

[22]
[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]
[28]
[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]
[33]

[34]
[35]

[36]

[37]

B. Steinegger, A mathematical model for the spatiotemporal epidemic spreading of COVID19 (23 March 2020),
medRxiv:10.1101/2020.03.21.20040022v1.
M. Chinazzi, J. T. Davis, M. Ajelli, C. Gioannini,
M. Litvinova, S. Merler, A. Pastore Y Piontti, K. Mu,
L. Rossi, K. Sun, C. Viboud, X. Xiong, H. Yu, M. E.
Halloran, I. M. Longini, and A. Vespignani, The effect of
travel restrictions on the spread of the 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak, Science 400, 395 (2020).
A. Galeazzi, M. Cinelli, G. Bonaccorsi, F. Pierri, A. L.
Schmidt, A. Scala, F. Pammolli, and W. Quattrociocchi, Human Mobility in Response to COVID-19 in
France, Italy and UK, arXiv:2005.06341 (13 May 2020),
arXiv:2005.06341.
D. J. Watts and S. H. Strogatz, Collective dynamics of
’small-world’ networks, Nature , 440 (1998).
D. Brockmann and D. Helbing, The Hidden Geometry
of Complex, Network-Driven Contagion Phenomena, Science 342, 1337 (2013).
Telefonica Company Fact Sheet, available at https://
www.telefonica.de/unternehmen/zahlen-fakten.html
(accessed on 2020-06-12).
Robert Koch-Institute, Current situation report by the
Robert Koch-Institute on COVID-19 (with archive) (accessed 12 June 2020), available at https://www.rki.de
/DE/Content/InfAZ/N/Neuartiges Coronavirus/Situa
tionsberichte/Gesamt.html.
R. Pastor-Satorras, C. Castellano, P. Van Mieghem, and
A. Vespignani, Epidemic processes in complex networks,
Reviews of Modern Physics 87, 925 (2015).
M. E. Newman, Spread of epidemic disease on networks,
Phys. Rev. E 66, 10.1103/PhysRevE.66.016128 (2002).
M. Barthélemy, Spatial networks, Physics Reports 499,
1 (2011), arXiv:arXiv:1010.0302v2.
C. F. Moukarzel, Spreading and shortest paths in systems
with sparse long-range connections, Phys. Rev. E 60,
10.1103/physreve.60.r6263 (1999), arXiv:9905322 [condmat].
V. Colizza and A. Vespignani, Epidemic modeling in
metapopulation systems with heterogeneous coupling
pattern: Theory and simulations, Journal of Theoretical
Biology 251, 450 (2008), arXiv:0706.3647.
C. Ray, M. Hoopes, I. Hanski, and M. E. Gilpin,
Metapopulation Biology: Ecology, Genetics, and Evolution., Ecology 78, 2270 (1997).
M. J. Keeling and P. Rohani, Modeling Infectious Diseases (Princeton University Press, 2011).
M. Tizzoni, P. Bajardi, A. Decuyper, G. Kon Kam
King, C. M. Schneider, V. Blondel, Z. Smoreda, M. C.
González, and V. Colizza, On the Use of Human Mobility Proxies for Modeling Epidemics, PLoS Computational
Biology 10, e1003716 (2014).
E. W. Dijkstra, A note on two problems in connexion
with graphs, Numerische mathematik 1, 269 (1959).
G. Fagiolo, Clustering in complex directed networks,
Phys. Rev. E 76, 10.1103/PhysRevE.76.026107 (2007),
arXiv:0612169 [physics].
Y. Alimohamadi, M. Taghdir, and M. Sepandi, The Estimate of the Basic Reproduction Number for Novel
Coronavirus disease (COVID-19): A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis, J. Prev. Med. and Pub. Health
10.3961/jpmph.20.076 (2020).
M. Park, A. R. Cook, J. T. Lim, Y. Sun, and B. L. Dickens, A Systematic Review of COVID-19 Epidemiology

[38]

[39]

[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46]

Based on Current Evidence, Journal of Clinical Medicine
9, 967 (2020).
K. K.-W. To, O. T.-Y. Tsang, W.-S. Leung, A. R. Tam,
T.-C. Wu, D. C. Lung, C. C.-Y. Yip, J.-P. Cai, J. M.-C.
Chan, T. S.-H. Chik, D. P.-L. Lau, C. Y.-C. Choi, L.L. Chen, W.-M. Chan, K.-H. Chan, J. D. Ip, A. C.-K.
Ng, R. W.-S. Poon, C.-T. Luo, V. C.-C. Cheng, J. F.-W.
Chan, I. F.-N. Hung, Z. Chen, H. Chen, and K.-Y. Yuen,
Temporal profiles of viral load in posterior oropharyngeal
saliva samples and serum antibody responses during infection by SARS-CoV-2: an observational cohort study.,
The Lancet. Infectious diseases 20, 565 (2020).
H. Barbosa, M. Barthelemy, G. Ghoshal, C. R. James,
M. Lenormand, T. Louail, R. Menezes, J. J. Ramasco,
F. Simini, and M. Tomasini, Human mobility: Models and applications, Physics Reports 734, 1 (2018),
arXiv:1710.00004.
J. Saramäki, M. Kivelä, J. P. Onnela, K. Kaski, and
J. Kertész, Generalizations of the clustering coefficient
to weighted complex networks, Phys. Rev. E 75, 027105
(2007), arXiv:0608670 [cond-mat].
M. E. Newman, Scientific collaboration networks. II.
Shortest paths, weighted networks, and centrality, Phys.
Rev. E 64, 7 (2001).
S. F. Muldoon, E. W. Bridgeford, and D. S. Bassett,
Small-world propensity and weighted brain networks, Scientific Reports 6, 1 (2016).
N. Masuda, M. A. Porter, and R. Lambiotte, Random
walks and diffusion on networks, Physics Reports 716717, 1 (2017), arXiv:1612.03281.
B. Mohar, Some applications of Laplace eigenvalues of
graphs, in Graph Symmetry (Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht, 1997) pp. 225–275.
C. Cattuto, W. Van den Broeck, A. Barrat, V. Colizza,
J.-F. Pinton, and A. Vespignani, Dynamics of person-toperson interactions from distributed rfid sensor networks,
PloS one 5 (2010).
A. Stopczynski, V. Sekara, P. Sapiezynski, A. Cuttone,
M. M. Madsen, J. E. Larsen, and S. Lehmann, Measuring
large-scale social networks with high resolution., PloS one
9, e95978 (2014).

Appendix A: Mobility dataset
1.

Mobility data availability

An anonymized version of the dataset publicly available in the Open Science Framework (https://osf.io
/n53cz/). The anonymized dataset enables readers to
replicate the main results of our work. The anonymization is described in section A 4.

2.

Data collection and basic description

The mobility dataset we study here is gathered from
mobile phone logs from Telefónica, a mobile phone
provider with around 43.6 million customers in Germany
in 2019 [24], and aggregated by the company Teralytics. The resulting dataset contains mobility flows in

12
Germany, namely the number of trips across and within
counties on a given date. We use data recorded in the
period of January 1 2020 up to June 10 2020, as well
as data from March 2019, which we use as a comparison baseline for mobility changes during the COVID-19
pandemic. This study is the first to use this mobility
dataset.
Trips are recorded from cell tower logs in the following
way: A trip is started whenever a device leaves its current
cell tower area A. The device might then pass through
one or multiple other cell towers, until it becomes stationary again in cell tower area B. ”Stationary” means
that no further movement is recorded for approximately
15 minutes. The start- and end-towers A and B can be
the same, such that self-loops are also recorded. Note
that determining the actual location of a device from cell
tower logs can be error-prone, for example due to fluctuations in signal strength, uneven spatial signal coverage,
or the considerable variability in the size of cell tower
coverage areas [39].
All movements are then spatially aggregated on the
level of the 401 counties in Germany (corresponding to
NUTS 3), and temporally aggregated daily. The end
result is the mobility matrix ((Fij )(t), which contains
the number of movements between all pairs of counties
on that given day.
There is a thresholding applied to the data in the preprocessing: Flows Fij with less than 5 trips on a given
day are not included in the data, due to data privacy
reasons. This has some effects on the data, which we
discuss in the main text.

3.

Data processing

Here we describe some further processing of the mobility dataset we undertook. In the main text, we consider
the distance of trips in multiple analysis. We estimate the
geographical distance dgeo
ij of a trip i → j as the distance
between the centroids of the counties i and j. We want
to point out that this proxy of distance is quite coarse,
and we expect a significant stochastic error especially on
small length scales. In addition, the centroid distance
likely leads to a systematic underestimation of the trip
length between counties that are subsumed within other
counties for trips to and from the surrounding county.
However, we expect both errors to have a small influence on medium and long distances, which is where our
analysis is most focused on.
Furthermore, we have excluded dates with federal holidays in the period of observation from the data. We
do this because federal holidays show a clearly abnormal
mobility, which is generally very low when compared to
the same average weekday from the baseline. In fact,
the comparison to an average weekday does not reflect
whether the mobility is actually higher or lower ”than
usual” on this holiday. In consequence, we omitted holidays to avoid a distortion of the data.

Finally, we have excluded the small county of Brandenburg an der Havel from the spatial maps in Fig. 1C and
depict it in neutral white on the map. We have identified
it as an outlier in the data with abnormally high mobility, which could for example be caused by changes in data
collection by the mobile phone provider in that area. In
the maps, it is very visible and distorts the perception of
the image, focusing the attention on what we consider to
be a statistical anomaly, which is why excluded it in the
maps.

4.

Anonymization details

The mobility dataset described above is publicly available in an anonymized form, which still enables readers
to reproduce our main results.
First, we anonymized the identity of the 401 counties by replacing its NUTS3 designation with an integer
ID, which remains fixed throughout the dataset. This
anonymization leaves the structure of the network and
all derived properties unchanged. As additional information we provide the centroid distance between each pair
of counties, and the category of each county as shown in
Fig. 1B of the manuscript (city, border, other).
Second, to hinder de-anonymization of the identities of
the counties, we apply a small multiplicative noise to the
centroid distances between the counties. For each pair of
counties with non-zero distance, we multiply the centroid
distance by a random number drawn from a normal distribution with µ = 1 and σ = 0.02. We expect that this
noise adds a negligible statistical error to the results.
We expect that all our results are reproducible with the
anonymized dataset, with the exception of the geographic
depictions of mobility in Fig. 1C and Fig. 3A.

Appendix B: Other datasets
1.

Data on policy measures and interventions

For structured information about non-pharmaceutical
interventions, we use data aggregated by ACAPS [6],
which can be downloaded at: https://www.acaps.org/
covid19-government-measures-dataset. The dataset
contains worldwide governmental policies that are issued
in response to the COVID-19 epidemic, including policies affecting mobility for Germany. To collect only relevant policies that likely affect mobility, we analyzed the
listed policies qualitatively and filtered for measures from
these categories: limitations of public gatherings, border checks, border closures, school closures, partial lockdowns, and public services closures. For each measure it
is listed whether it is an introduction of new measure or
the phase-out of an existing measure.

13
2.

Population data

Census population data for Germany on a county level
(as used in the SIR model) was downloaded from https:
//www.destatis.de/DE/Themen/Laender-Regionen/R
egionales/Gemeindeverzeichnis/Administrativ/04
-kreise.html.

3.

Geo-information

County-level shapefiles for Germany, used to create
graphics containing maps and to calculate distances between the centroids of counties as a proxy for trip distances, were downloaded at https://ec.europa.eu/e
urostat/de/web/gisco/geodata/reference-data/ad
ministrative-units-statistical-units/nuts.

Appendix C: Small-world observables
1.

Clustering

We use a definition of local clustering for weighted and
directed networks as given by Eq. (10) of [35]. For undirected binary networks of size m, the local clustering coefficient Ci of a node i is defined as the probability that
two neighbors of a focal node are connected to each other,
as well. For undirected weighted networks, this concept
is extended to include triangle intensity
Iijk = (ŵij ŵjk ŵki )1/3
where ŵij = wij /maxk` {wk` } is the weight of edge (j, i)
normalized by the maximum weight of the network. This
implies that every existing triangle is compared to the
maximally possible triangle intensity for which each contributing edge weight is equal to the maximum edge
weight, in which case Iijk = 1. The weighted local
clustering coefficient is therefore proportional to the unweighted local clustering coefficient, modulated by the
focal node’s average triangle intensity as
Ciweighted = Ii Ci ,
see ref. [40]. For directed networks, the number of triangles that can possibly exist for a triplet of nodes increases:
Every triplet of nodes has a maximum possible number of
eight triangles that can be formed (two options per node
pair). Yet, considering a focal node i, only those edges
that point to i from other nodes or point from i to other
nodes can possibly form triangles. The weighted clustering coefficient therefore measures the existence probability and average intensity of triangles that can be spanned
given a focal node’s in- and outgoing connections.

2.

Shortest path lengths and other measures of
temporal distance

In unweighted networks, the shortest path length Lji
quantifies the minimum number of steps necessary to traverse from node i to node j along the edges of the network
[22]. While this quantity is often viewed as a metric of
spatial distance, it can also be interpreted as a metric of
temporal distance, namely the minimal duration it takes
a walker to traverse from node i to node j along the edges
of the network.
In weighted networks, it is not straight-forward to define a distance between two nodes based on the weight
wji between them. Usually, as larger weights are associated with smaller distances, researchers choose a distance
definition of `ji = 1/wji (see e.g. [41, 42]). In our case,
the edge weight wji represents a flow by counting the
number of people on a particular day that traverse from
i to j. It can therefore be interpreted as an activation
rate for traversal from i to j in units of 1/d. Further following this picture, the distance `ji = 1/wji represents
the average waiting time for a i → j traversal event to
occur. Assuming maximally random traversal processes,
the average shortest path length
X
L ≡ [m(m − 1)]−1
Lji ,
i6=j

therefore represents the average minimal mean first passage time between any nodes i and j in an edge-centered
random walk on a network with of m nodes [43]. We
can illustrate this point by additionally investigating how
other network-wide time-scales of networks with weights
wji change. The propagator of an edge-centered random
walk is given by the unnormalized graph Laplacian
X
Lji = δji
wki − wji .
k

The eigenvalues of this operator are real and non-negative
with an ordering of 0 = λ1 < λ2 ≤ ... ≤ λN for a network consisting of a single component. The so-called
relaxation time trlx = 1/λ2 quantifies the time scale with
which an edge-centered random walk approaches its uniform equilibrium distribution [43]. Note that both the
average shortest path length L as well as the relaxation
time trlx are sensitive to changes in the global flow.
In contrast, we can also investigate time scales of
discrete-time node-centered random walks, where the
propagator
is given by the transition matrix pji =
P
wji / k wki . Note that for this process, time represents
the number of traversals (i.e. steps) between nodes. The
operator pji is a stochastic matrix with largest eigenvalues πm = 1 and second-largest eigenvalue πm−1 . The
so-called mixing time tmix = 1/(1 − πm−1 ) quantifies the
time-scale with which a node-centered random walk process approaches its non-uniform equilibrium [44]. Since
entries of this matrix represent transition probabilities
and are therefore normalized by a node’s total outflow,

14
the mixing time is not as sensitive to changes in the global
flow as the relaxation time.

3.

Additional small-world analyses

We want to investigate how the temporal observables
discussed above (i) behave for the mobility networks averaged over calendar weeks and (ii) behave for networks
G∗10 (T ) that are topologically equal to the network G10
of calendar week T0 = 10, but where edge weights have
been rescaled to sum to the total average flow observed
in the corresponding week T (see the main manuscript,
where this procedure was used to create the rescaled
network G∗10 (T = 13) for calendar week 13). The first
exercise should show to what extent the shortest path
length scales similarly to other network-wide spreading
time scales in order to justify our choice of distance metric `ji = 1/wji . Regarding the second point, we are interested in how much the reduction of the system’s smallworld property can be explained by a global reduction of
trips.
We present our results in Fig. 6. As expected, the relaxation time trlx behaves similarly to the average shortest path length (compare Fig. 6A). Furthermore, the
mixing time tmix shows a relative increase of similar order during lockdown and subsequent transition to normal flow numbers, albeit of qualitatively different shape
(compare Fig. 6A). As stated before, the mixing time is
less sensitive to global flow modulations which indicates
that the observed effect is indeed of topological nature.
Investigating the observables on rescaled networks, we
find that part of their increase during lockdown can be
explained due to a global reduction in flow, but topological contributions cannot be neglected (compare Fig. 6B).
Regarding the mixing time, almost all of its relative increase is explained by topological changes, as expected.
In order to investigate how strong our results are influenced by the thresholding procedure, we repeat the
analyses for all networks after applying a higher threshold of wc = 100 (see Fig. 6C and Fig. 6D). We find that
all relative observables but the mixing time remain virtually unchanged by an increased threshold, indicating
that these results are rather stable. We do find a small
increase for the mixing time, indicating that a small relative increase in this observable during lockdown might
emerge due to thresholding effects.

4.

Additional visualizations of shortest path trees

Here we provide additional visualizations of the shortest path trees of the weekly mobility networks GT .
The shortest path tree originating from Berlin (DE300),
which is shown in Fig. 4A of the main text, is shown
here for additional weeks, see Fig. 7. In addition, we
calculated the shortest path trees for other sources than
Berlin, see Fig. 8.

In the pre-lockdown network originating in Berlin,
paths are relatively short. The initial jumps in the paths
are to only a few “hub” nodes, which act as gates to
the other nodes. We find that these “hub” nodes are
high-population counties with high traffic infrastructure
(airports, train stations) that are geographically distant
from Berlin, such as Munich, Frankfurt am Main, Hamburg or Cologne. These hubs then act as the entry gates
to their regions. Using these hubs allows for quick travel
over long distances, followed by short local paths.
We find that the greatest structural change occurs
during weeks 10 and 13. During lockdown, paths become overall longer, and the hubs disappear, most likely
due to the severe decline of train and airport and thus
long-distance travel. Travel through the network occurs
mostly along neighboring counties, which increases the
lengths of paths. In the following weeks and months,
the network slowly returns to its pre-lockdown state, although there are still structural differences persisting,
both in that the paths remain longer and in that the
hubs not yet regain the importance they had in the prelockdown network.
For the shortest path trees starting at other origins,
we found their dynamics to be qualitatively similar to
the ones starting in Berlin, see Fig. 8. All sources show
an increase in their shortest path length during lockdown,
a diminished importance of hubs and a more branching
path tree.

Appendix D: Details on the SIR Model

We implement a metapopulation SIR-model [31, 32]
with commuter dynamics based on the model from [33].
An implementation of the model in Python is available
in the Github repository https://github.com/frank
sh/EpiCommute and also stored in the OSF repository
(https://osf.io/n53cz/). Our system is divided into
(pop)
m counties with population Ni
, which we set to census population. Each counties’ population is split into
the compartments susceptibles Si , infecteds Ii , and re(pop)
covereds Ri , such that Ni
= Si + Ii + Ri .

1.

Commuter mobility

We assume that each individual has both a home location and a work location they commute to (which can
also be the same county). The commuting patterns are
measured by the mobility flow matrix Fji . To compute
the number of commuters for each pair of counties, we
first construct the commute probability matrix pji by
normalizing the outgoing flows for each source district i,
Fji
pji = P
,
j Fji

15

relative change

2.25

A

2.00

2.25
2.00

( )/ ( )
( )/ ( )
( )/ ( )
( )/ ( )

1.75
1.50
1.25

B

1.75
1.50
1.25

1.00

1.00
threshold = 5/d
threshold = 5/d
empirical networks
week 10 rescaled
0.75
0.75
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
T [calendar weeks]
T [calendar weeks]

relative change

2.25

C

2.25

2.00

2.00

1.75

1.75

1.50

1.50

1.25

1.25

D

1.00

1.00
threshold = 100/d
threshold = 100/d
empirical networks
week 10 rescaled
0.75
0.75
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
T [calendar weeks]
T [calendar weeks]

FIG. 6. Reduction of the small-world effect over time as illustrated by different global network observables. (A) The average
clustering coefficient C, the average shortest path length L, the edge-centric random walk relaxation time trlx , and the nodecentric random walk mixing time tmix all increase during lockdown. (B) Here, we show the same network observables for
networks G∗10 (T ) that are topologically equal to the reference network G10 of calendar week T0 = 10 but where edge weights
have been rescaled to sum to the total average flow observed in the corresponding calendar week T (see Materials and Methods).
We find that the relative increase of all network observables during lockdown cannot only be explained by a decreased total flow.
In particular, the relative increase of the mixing time is heavily influenced by topological changes. (C) Network observables for
networks that have been thresholded with wc = 100. (D) Observables for rescaled networks that have been thresholded with
wc = 100.

such that
X

pji = 1.

j

(pop)

Further, we define
(pop)

Nji

(pop)

= pji Ni

as a sub-population of location i that lives in i and comP
(pop)
(pop)
mutes to j for work, such that Ni
= j Nji
at all
times.
2.

origin county i∗ (chosen uniform at random from the set
of all locations), in which we distributed I(t = 0) =
100 infecteds among the compartments Iji∗ proportional
(pop)
(pop)
to their relative sizes Nji∗ /Ni∗
(such that Sji∗ (t =

Infection dynamics

We seed an initial infection by setting all individuals
(pop)
to be susceptible Sji = Nji , except for an infection

0) = Nji∗ − Iji∗ ).
There are two ways in which a susceptible of compartment Sji can get infected:
1. while being at home in compartment i, induced by
all the infecteds present in i (this includes commuters of locations k to location i), and
2. while commuting at compartment j, by all the infecteds present in j (this includes commuters of locations k to location j).
We assume that people spend half the time at home and
half the time commuting. The dynamics for the com-

16

Week 7
Feb 10-16

Week 8
Feb 17-23

Week 9
Feb 24 - Mar 1

Lockdown

Pre-Lockdown
Week 10
March 2-8

Week 11
March 9-15

Week 12
March 16-22

Week 13
March 23-29

0
1
2
3

Week 14
Mar 30 - Apr 5

Week 16
Apr 13-19

Week 18
Apr 27 - May 3

Week 20
May 11 - May 17

Week 22
May 25-31

Week 24
June 8-14

Week 26
June 22-28

Week 28
July 6-12

Distance (in L(T0 ))

Week 6
Feb 3-9

FIG. 7. Shortest path trees for the weekly networks GT , originating from Berlin. Structural changes can be observed starting
in week T = 10. Before the lockdown, shortest paths are relatively small and characterized by few jumps. During lockdown,
shortest paths are longer and involve more. Grey circles show the maximum shortest path length Lmax in week 10. The distance
scale is in multiples of the average shortest path length L(T0 ) in the mobility network in week T0 = 10.

partment Sji are consequently given as

dSji
=−Sji λhome
+ λwork
i
j
dt
!
Pm
Pm
β
β
k Iki
k Ijk
+ Pm (pop) ,(D1)
=−Sji
P
2 m N (pop)
2
k
k Njk
ki
where the first term λhome
represents the force of infeci
tion while at home (where transmission can occur from
all the infected at home in i), the second term λwork
is the
j
force of infection while commuting (where transmission
can occur from all the infected commuting to j). The
dynamics for Iji follow analogously with an additional

recovery term, i.e.

dIji
= −µIji + Sji λhome
+ λwork
.
i
j
dt

(D2)

Since the population size is constant, the third equation
follows as dRji /dt = µIji .

3.

Stochastic simulation

We use a stochastic binomial sampling algorithm to
perform numerical simulations of the model. Given the
above equations, the probability that an individual in

17
Pre-Lockdown
Week 10
March 2-8

Lockdown
Week 11
March 9-15

Week 12
March 16-22

Week 13
March 23-29

Munich (DE212)

0
1
2
3

Hamburg (DE600)

0
1
2
3

0
1
2
3

Harz (DEE09)

Distance (in L(T0 ))

Cologne (DEA23)

0
1
2
3

Vorpommern-Rügen (DE80L)

0
1
2
3

FIG. 8. Shortest path trees starting from different origins. We find the changes in the shortest path trees to be qualitatively
similar irregardless of origin. Grey circles denote the maximum shortest path length Lmax for the source Berlin in week 10, for
comparison. The distance scale is in multiples of the average shortest path length L(T0 ) in week T0 = 10 for all sources.

compartment Sji becomes infected in the time interval
[t, t + ∆t] due to the total force of transmission λji =
λhome
+ λwork
is
i
j
P (∆t; λji ) = 1 − e−λji ∆t .
For this to be valid we have to choose ∆t small enough
such that the time-dependent λij can be assumed as constant during ∆t.

Then, the number of individuals in compartment Sji
that become infected during [t, t + ∆t] is drawn from a
binomial distribution with the probability P (∆t; λji ),

∆ (Sji → Iji ) ∼ Binom(Sji (t), P (∆t; λji )).
Similarly, the amount of infected in Iji that recover
during this time is given by

18

∆ (Iji → Rji ) ∼ Binom(Iji (t), P (∆t; µ)).
4.

Extension to include changes in mobility

The base model does not account for changes in mobility patterns as observed in reality, namely that the total
number of trips decreases substantially (note that only
relative changes in the flow are considered due to the use
of the commute probability matrix instead of the flow
matrix). It is important to consider the trip reduction
κ = N (TL )/N (T0 ) in the model because one can expect
that a reduction in trips directly influences the average
number of close-proximity contacts k, which in turn affects the basic reproduction number
R0 = β̃k/µ,
where µ is the recovery rate per infected and β̃ is the
infection rate per contact between a single infected and
a single susceptible (note that in our description above,
β = β̃k).
However, finding the precise relation between the trip
reduction κ and the number of close-proximity contacts
k is an open problem. In section E, we provide arguments that a relative change in the total number of trips
κ results in at least a corresponding linear decrease in
the basic reproduction number and at most a quadratic
decrease. In the following, we decide to implement lockdown scenarios with linear scaling, that can therefore be
seen as upper bounds or “pessimistic” interpretations of
the influence that mobility reduction has on mitigation.
We model a decrease of the total number of trips as
two distinct scenarios, both of which are based on the
assumption that each individual of a population of size
(pop)
Nji
contributes a constant average number of trips fji
(pop)

to the total trip count, such that Fji = Nji fji .
In the first scenario (“isolation”) we assume that a fraction κi of individuals at location i isolates entirely, where
κi is the change in the total amount of in- and outgoing
trips from location i,
P
(Fki (TL ) + Fik (TL ))
κi = Pk
.
(D3)
k (Fki (T0 ) + Fik (T0 ))
The total number of trips is then determined only
from individuals who do not isolate Fji (TL ) =
(pop)
(pop)
[κi Nji (TL )]fji . In contrast, a fraction 1 − κi of Nji
contributes individual trip counts of fji = 0 in this picture. As these individuals are considered to be in isolation, they are effectively removed from the transmission
process, which we model by assigning them to the Ri
compartment initially using the adjusted initial conditions of
0
Sji
(t = 0) = κi × Sji (t = 0)
0
Iji
(t = 0) = Iji (t = 0)
0
Rji
(t = 0) = (1 − κi ) × Sji (t = 0).

Note that from Eq. (D1) it follows that the initial spreading rate (the initial effective reproduction number, respectively) therefore scales linearly with κi (as motivated
in the following section).
In the second scenario (“distancing”), we instead implement a mechanism where a reduction in mobility leads
to a reduction in the transmission rate β. As the reduction in mobility κi is location-specific (as defined in
Eq. D3), this results in a location-specific transmission
rate βi = κi β, which we add in Eqs. (D1) and (D2) by
setting
Pm
βi
home
k Iki
λi
=
Pm (pop)
2
k Nki
P
m
βj
k Ijk
λwork
=
Pm (pop) .
j
2
k Njk
To motivate this definition, we assume that a reduction
in mobility in the commuter-compartment i → j translates into a homogeneous reduction of the individual trip
(pop)
count fji (such that Fji (TL ) = Nji (TL )[κi fji ]). If
we further assume that an individual has, on average,
cji close-proximity contacts per trip and zero contacts if
they do not move, the average close-proximity contact
number per individual scales as kji ∝ cji fji . A reduction in the individual trip count directly translates into
a proportional reduction in contacts. Note that this is a
conservative assumption, though—realistically, the number cji of close-proximity contacts per trip would not
remain constant: When fji decreases, we expect cji to
decrease, too, because the density of people that can encounter each other during a trip is reduced. We therefore
consider the linear relationship to be a “pessimistic” assumption. A more elaborate argumentation concerning
this point is given in Appendix section E.
Note that both scenarios yield the same effective reproduction number Reff = R0 κ at t = 0. For a wellmixed system, this implies that I (iso) (t) = κI (dist) (t) and
R(iso) (t → ∞) = κR(dist) (t → ∞), since both have the
same reproduction number but differ in effective population size by a factor of κ.
Appendix E: Relationship between mobility change
and average number of contacts

In the following, we provide arguments that the average number of close-proximity contacts ki for week T
(and therefore the basic reproduction number) decreases
at least linearly with the total number of observed trips
Fi (T ) (and thus with the trip reduction κi (T )), which
we use as an assumption for the “distancing” scenario in
Section 4D 4. Note that in the following, observables refer to a single sub-population i in calendar week T in the
sense of the SIR model discussed in Section 4, yet, to enhance readability, we abstain from using subscripts and
use time-dependence only when necessary, which implies
that e.g. F ≡ Fi (T ), k ≡ ki etc.

19
We are interested in the relative change of the average
number of close-proximity contacts x = kL /k0 in dependence of the relative change in total number of recorded
trips κ = F (TL )/F (T0 ) when lockdown measures are introduced. To this end, we develop a simple model.
First, we assume that individuals are in either of two
states, active (A) or inactive (X), and that they transition
between being active and being inactive with activity rate
α and inactivity rate ξ. This implies that on average,
an individual stays active for time τa = 1/ξ (remains
inactive for time τx = 1/α, respectively) and that in
equilibrium, the expected number of active individuals is
given as
A∗ =

α
N (pop) .
α+ξ

We further assume that individuals can only be in contact
with each other if they are active. Inactive individuals
are considered to always be isolated.
Assuming that only contacts between active individuals exist and that the process is in equilibrium, the
average total number of contacts in the system can be
approximated as
E=

p ∗ ∗
p
A (A − 1) ≈ (A∗ )2 .
2
2

where p is the probability with which each single possible
pair of contacts exists. Given the handshaking theorem
k = 2E/N , we find that the average number of contacts
per person scales as
 ∗ 2
kL
AL
x=
.
≈
k0
A∗0
Note that isolation of an individual does not imply inactivity: A person can be in an active state but still have
no contacts (if p is sufficiently small).
Regarding the number of observed trips, we assume
that it is proportional to the temporal integral of every
individual’s activity rate

Furthermore, we assume that the average time an individual is active is independent of the implementation of
lockdown measures, which is motivated by the fact that
necessary trips such as grocery shopping and commuting
to and from the work place do not decrease in duration;
rather, we expect the total number of such trips to decrease. This implies that τa = 1/ξ = const. while the
duration of inactivity τx = 1/α can change, i.e. increase
during lockdown. This implies that the change of the
average number of contacts is given as

x=

αL
α0

2 

ξ + α0
ξ + αL

κ=

F (TL )
αL
=
.
F (T0 )
α0

.

Note that A∗ < N (pop) /2 if α < ξ, i.e. if the average
time of being active is lower than the average time of
being inactive, less than half of the population is in an
active state. Mirroring real systems, we can assume that
this inequality holds when averaged over a single day,
because (i) most individuals are isolated at night and (ii)
many individuals are not in contact with other people
for the majority of the day [45, 46]. Thus, we normalize
activity rates by the constant inactivity rate as y0 = α0 /ξ
and yL = αL /ξ such that y0 , yL ∈ [0, 1] and yL = y0 κ.
In total, we find
2



x=κ

1 + y0
1 + κy0

2
.

From this relationship, we see that a linear reduction
xu = κ is an upper bound of the true reduction and a
quadratic reduction xl = κ2 is a lower bound of the true
reduction, i.e.


F (TL )
F (T0 )

2
≤

R0,L
F (TL )
≤
,
R0,0
F (T0 )

where we used R0 ∝ k.
The proofs are straightforward. We begin with assumption

F ∝ N (pop) α,
which is motivated as follows: An individual becomes
active when they move, at which time they may come
in contact with other individuals. When the individual becomes inactive, they likely stopped their movement
(they may have stopped their movement before), which
concludes the trip that is consequently counted as an increase in the number of trips F . Hence, movements are
only recorded as soon as an individual becomes active
and two consecutive trips have to be considered as being
intersected by an inactive period. The total number of
events at which an individual becomes active is therefore
proportional to the temporal integral of the activity rate,
T α. From this assumption we conclude that

2

2

κ≥κ



1 + y0
1 + κy0

2
.

(E1)

This inequality is met for κ = 0. For κ > 0, we find

1≥κ

1 + y0
1 + κy0

2

1 + 2κy0 + κ2 y02 ≥ κ + 2κyL + κy02
1 − κ ≥ κ(1 −

κ)y02

(E2)
(E3)
(E4)

This inequality is met for κ = 1. For κ < 1 we find
1 ≥ κy02 .

(E5)

which is met for 0 < κ < 1 and y0 ∈ [0, 1], therefore the
initial assumption holds true, q.e.d.

20
The inequality
κ2 ≤ κ2



1 + y0
1 + κy0

2
(E6)

is met for κ = 0. For κ > 0 we find
1 + 2κy0 + κ2 y02 ≤ 1 + 2y0 + y02 .
2κy0 +

κ2 y02

≤ 2y0 +

y02

(E7)
(E8)

This inequality is met if both κy0 ≤ y0 and κ2 y02 ≤ y02 .
These are both met for κ ≤ 1 and 0 ≤ y0 ≤ 1, therefore
the assumption holds true, q.e.d.

