In Response to COVID-19: Configuration Model of the Epidemic Spreading
Alexander I. Nesterov∗ and Pablo Héctor Mata Villafuerte†
Departamento de Fı́sica, CUCEI, Universidad de Guadalajara, Guadalajara, CP 44420, Jalisco, México

Gennady P Berman‡
Theoretical Division, T-4, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA
(Dated: July 13, 2020)

arXiv:2007.05496v1 [physics.soc-ph] 8 Jul 2020

A configuration model for epidemic spread, based on a scale-free network, is introduced. We obtain
the analytical solutions describing both unstable and stable dynamics of the epidemic spreading,
and demonstrate how these regimes can interchange during the epidemic. We apply the model to
the COVID-19 case and demonstrate the predictive features of our model.
Keywords: COVID-19; epidemic spreading; scale-free networks; statistical mechanics; hidden variables

INTRODUCTION

According to the World Health Organization (WHO),
the COVID-19 epidemic started in the Chinese city of
Wuhan on December 31, 2019. The speed of the epidemic
spread is very high, and on March 11, 2020, the WHO declared the COVID-19 outbreak a pandemic. Now, more
than 200 countries in the world are affected by the coronavirus epidemic. COVID-19 presents an immense challenge for the scientific community. The advances in understanding of the disease’s properties and the mechanisms of its spreading will allow scientists to better predict the dynamics of the epidemic and the characteristic
time of recovery. They will also help to make the right
decisions for overcoming the pandemic [1–3].
Network science has contributed to diverse fields in
both the natural and human sciences. We hope that,
due to its intrinsic interdisciplinary nature, the network
approach will be useful for understanding the dynamics
of the COVID-19 pandemic. One of the reasons for employing network science in the study of this phenomenon
is the analogy between the spread of information in social
networks and the spread of disease by contact between
individuals. For instance, the spread of news, rumors,
or gossip through a population has features in common
with disease spread. The ideas and models for dissemination of information in networks can help us to better
understand the propagation of disease [4–11].
A critical issue in mathematical modeling of the epidemic is a choice of the adequate mathematical tools
and a suitable network model, reflecting the features of
real networks. The fascinating discovery of contemporary network science is the universality of network topology. Many real networks, such as social networks, airline networks, the World Wide Web, computer networks,
the Internet, urban networks, and others, exhibit scaleinvariance, so they can be treated as scale-free networks
[12]. Their scale-free nature, and other features, make
them an excellent candidate for the mathematical modeling of the epidemic spreading [11–16].
The idea that a statistical approach is adequate to

study complex networks is a natural one since networks
are large complex systems, and a deterministic approach
cannot describe their collective behavior. Nowadays, the
methods of statistical mechanics have become powerful
tools for the study and explanation of real-world network
properties [8, 11, 14, 16–21].
In this paper we study the connection between network structure and the epidemic spreading using statistical physics methods, and propose a mathematical model
based on scale-free networks which allows us to extrapolate the dynamics of an epidemic. We obtain the analytical solutions that describe both unstable and stable dynamics, and demonstrate how these regimes interchange
during the process of evolution of the epidemic. We apply the model to the COVID-19 case and demonstrate
the predictive features of our approach. To conclude,
we discuss the existing issues of our approach and possible future developments. In the Supplemental Material
(SM), we present the results of the application of our
approach for COVID-19.

STATISTICAL DESCRIPTION OF NETWORKS

A network is a set of N nodes (or vertices) connected
by L links (or edges). One can describe the network by
an adjacency matrix, aij , where each existing (or nonexisting) link between pairs of nodes (ij) is indicated by
1 or 0 in the i, j entry. Individual nodes
P possess local
properties such as node degree, ki = j aij , and clustering coefficient [16, 22–24]. The whole network can be
described quantitatively by its degree distribution, Pk ,
and its connectivity. The latter is characterized by the
connection probability pij , i.e., the probability that a pair
of nodes (ij) is connected.
The most general statistical description of an undirected network in equilibrium, with a fixed number of
vertices, N , and a varying number of links, L, is given
by the grand canonical ensemble. The probability of obtaining a graph, A, with the energy, EA , and the number

2
of links, LA =

P

ij

aij , can be written as [19–21, 25, 26],

1
exp β(µLA − EA ) ,
Z

PA =

(1)

where β = 1/T , with T being the network temperature,
and µ is the chemical potential. The partition function
reads
X

Z=
exp β(µLA − EA ) .
(2)

1)eβc (γ−1)i , where 0 ≤ i ≤ 0 and 0 = Tc ln k0 [25].
Due to the scale invariance of the network’s topological
properties, the parameter βc is a dummy parameter and
can be chosen arbitrarily.
In the continuous limit, we have ρ(i ) → ρ(), where
ρ() = Ceαβ and α = βc (γ − 1)/β. The constant C
R0
is defined by the normalization condition ρ()d = 1.
0

This yields

A

The temperature is a parameter that controls clustering
in the network, and the chemical potential controls the
link density and the connection probability.
Let us assign to each edge hi, ji the link energy, εij .
Then,
the energy of the graph can be written as EA =
P
ε
i<j ij aij , and the partition function and the graph
probability are given by [25]
Y

Z=
1 + eβ(µ−εij ) ,
(3)
i<j

PA =

Y

a

pijij (1 − pij )

1−aij

.

(4)

i<j

Here, pij is the connection probability between nodes i
and j, and has the usual form of the Fermi-Dirac distribution [19, 20, 25],
pij =

1
eβ(εij −µ)

+1

.

(5)

To obtain the thermodynamical potentials, we use the
partition function and the usual definitions from statistical physics. For instance, the Landau free energy (grand
canonical potential) is given by Ω = −β −1 ln Z. We can
recover the Helmholtz free energy, F , and internal energy,
E, using the relations F = Ω+µL and E = F +β∂F /∂β.
Finally, having the Landau free energy, one can obtain
the equation of state by writing L = −∂Ω/∂µ, where L
is the expected number of links.
Let us assume that the link energy in Eq. (5) is the
sum of the contributions from each node, εij = i + j .
Then
graph, A, can be written as EA =
P the energy of theP

k
,
where
k
=
i
i
i
i
j aij . Thus, all graphs A with
equal degrees have the same energy, EA . This model is a
particular case of the so-called Configuration Model, i.e.,
a model of a random network with given degree sequence,
rather than with a degree distribution [19, 25].
We will focus now on the configuration model based on
scale-free networks. A scale-free network is characterized
by a power-law degree distribution, ρ(ki ) ∼ (γ − 1)ki−γ ,
where 1 ≤ ki ≤ k0 , and the exponent of the distribution
is γ > 1. Let us assign to each node a hidden variable
i as follows: ki = e−βc i , where βc is a constant with
dimension of inverse temperature. As above, the link
energy of the edge hiji is given by εij = i + j . The
quantities i are distributed according to ρ(i ) ∼ βc (γ −

ρ() =

αβeαβ(−0 /2)
.
2 sinh(αβ0 /2)

(6)

CONFIGURATION MODEL OF THE EPIDEMIC
SPREADING

In our model, each node in the network is identified
with an individual. The probability of an individual being infected by an infected individual depends on the
connection degree, susceptibility of the population, and
the connection probability. Since the transmission of the
epidemic depends on the edge between two nodes being
occupied or not, the connectivity is essential for the epidemic spread. We assume that the disease spreading does
not take the network out of the thermodynamic equilibrium.
The assumption that the disease may propagate only
along the links in the network is usual for the models
dealing with the spread of epidemics on networks (see,
i. e. [11]). We assume that the probability of contact
between pairs of individuals leading to disease can vary,
just as in Ref. [5]. Thus, some pairs can have a higher
probability of disease transmission than others. However,
the “connection” (or existing link) does not guarantee the
disease-causing contact. Therefore, we distinguish infective individuals, who may infect others, and susceptible
individuals, who can be infected. Note that there are a
tiny number of infectious individuals at the beginning of
a disease outbreak. Since the transmission of infection
is a stochastic process, depending on the pattern of contacts between individuals, a description should take this
arrangement into account [27].
Consider a pair of nodes, (i, j), where one node, i, is
infective, and the other one, j, is susceptible to infection.
Suppose that the transmission rate of disease between
nodes is rij . Then, P
the average number of infected nodes
is given by Nc =
pij rij . In the continuous limit
RR hiji
0 00
this yields Nc =
p( ,  )r(0 , 00 )ρ(0 )ρ(00 )d0 d00 .
We divide the population into classes with a fixed link
energy of pairs, ε = i + j , and consider only the pairs
of individuals in which one is infective, and the other one
is susceptible. We assume that the transmission rate of
disease depends only on the link energy, and present this
rate in the simplest form: rij = Cδ(i + j − ε), where
C is a constant. Now, the average number of infectious

3
nodes, Nc (ε), with a given energy, ε, is given by
Z Z 0
ρ(0 )ρ(00 )δ(0 + 00 − ε)d0 d00
.
Nc (ε) = C
eβ(0 +00 −µ) + 1
0

(7)

Performing the integration, we obtain
Nc (ε) =

Aeαβ(ε−µ)
.
eβ(ε−µ) + 1

(8)

Here the constant A accumulates all constants that the
integral (7) includes.
The number of infected nodes, ∆Nt , inside the interval β∆ε can be written as ∆Nt = Nc β∆ε. (The inverse
temperature, β, is introduced to keep the right
R dimensionality.) Performing the integral, Nt = β Nc (ε)dε,
we obtain

Nt = Aeαβ(ε−µ) Φ − eβ(ε−µ) , 1, α + B,
(9)
where B is a constant of integration, and Φ(z, s, a) is the
Lerch Transcendent [28].
Now we consider the epidemic spreading. We assume
that the link energy is an increasing function of time.
Then from Eq. (9) it follows
dNt
= Ni ,
dt

(10)

where Ni = κNc is the number of infectious individuals
(incidence) per unit of time (usually daily), and κ(t) =
β ε̇(t) is the transmission rate of the epidemic disease.
The rate, κ, determines the expected number of people
that an infected person infects per time, as the SIR model
defines it [27, 29, 30].
To understand the impact of the parameter α, consider the asymptotic solution of Eq. (10). In the limit of
ε(t)  µ, we have Ni ∼ e(α−1)β(ε(t)−µ) . Substituting Ni
in Eq. (10), we obtain

 1 − e(α−1)βε(t) α < 1
α=1
Nt ∼ βε(t),
(11)
 (α−1)βε(t)
e
,
α>1
It follows that, for α ≥ 1, the total number of infected
nodes Nt → ∞ when t → ∞. For any choice of α, the
obvious condition Nt ≤ N should be imposed.
Thus, α is a crucial parameter for the epidemic spreading, a critical spreading parameter. It determines the
threshold of the outbreak. When α ≥ 1, the system has
lost stability, and the process of the epidemic spreading
becomes uncontrollable.
Dynamical system beyond the network model

Here we present our configuration network model as
the system of ordinary differential equations, and compare it with the well-known SIR model [27, 31].

From Eq. (10) it follows that Nc satisfies the following
differential equation:

Nc 
dNc
,
(12)
= aNc 1 −
dt
K
where a = ακ, and K = αAe(α−1)β(ε−µ) is the carrying
capacity. As one can see, Eq. (12) is just the modified logistic equation, widely used for description of population
growth (see, i.e., [27, 31]). When κ = const and α = 1,
we have K = const, and (12) becomes the standard logistic equation.
Adding to Eqs. (10) and (12) the equation for the
carrying capacity, we obtain the decoupled system of ordinary differential equations that describe our configuration model:
dNt
=Nc ,
(13)
dτ
dK
=(α − 1)K,
(14)
dτ


Nc
dNc
=αNc 1 −
,
(15)
dτ
K
R
where τ = κ(t)dt is a dimensionless time. The system
of Eqs. (13)-(15) is completely equivalent to Eqs. (9) and
(10). The parameter α now is interpreted as the intrinsic
growth rate. In Eqs. (13) – (15), Nt is the total number
of infected individuals, Nc is the number of new infective
individuals, and K denotes the carrying capacity of the
infective population. The number of infected individuals per unit of time can be obtained from the relation
Ni = κNc . The solutions of Eqs. (13) – (15) should be
considered for Nt ≤ N , where N is the total population.
The most commonly used models for epidemic transmission are the Susceptible-Infected-Susceptible (SIS)
and the Susceptible-Infected-Removed (SIR). While in
the SIS model recovered individuals could again be infected, the SIR model assumes that those recovered from
the disease have immunity, and therefore each individual
can only be infected once [27, 29, 30].
The SIR model divides the population into the following three classes. Susceptible (S): individuals in the
susceptible state may be infected when they encounter
an infected individual. Infectious (I): the individuals
with the disease, meaning they have the disease and can
spread disease by infecting others. Removed (R): those
who have recovered from the disease (or deceased) or have
immunity. The sum of the three numbers is a constant,
S + I + R = N , where N is the population. The SIR
system is described by the following system of ordinary
differential equations [27, 31]:
dS
νIS
=−
,
dt
N
dI
νIS
=
− λI,
dt
N
dR
= λI.
dt

(16)
(17)
(18)

4
Here νIS/N is the number of new individuals infected
per unit of time, with ν being the infection rate.
Comparison of Eqs. (13) – (15) with Eqs. (16) – (18)
of the SIR model shows that Nt = I + R, Nc should
be identified with IS/N and κ with ν. After this identification, one can show that Eq. (13) can be written
as a combination of Eqs. (16) and (17). Thus, in our
approach only one equation can be matched to the SIR
model. Other equations, Eqs. (14) and (15), are new.
The SIR model assumes that the population is thoroughly mixed, the individuals have the same number of
contacts per day, and that transmission of the disease
by contacts among individuals takes place with the same
probability. None of these assumptions is realistic [5].
Our model takes into account that the probability of
an individual being infected may depend on the features
of each pair of individuals, where one is infective and
the other is susceptible, for instance, with a weak/strong
immune system, and so forth. Besides, we omit the assumption that the population is mixed.

but available empirical data allow us to predict the epidemic end. Group III: The countries with a high-value
of the critical parameter, α ≥ 1, or with high-level fluctuations in the daily number of infected individuals. The
insets show the number of daily new cases.
In Fig. 1, we compare the theoretical solutions of our
model (solid blue curves) with the empirical data (red
diamonds) for each of the groups. The insets show the
number of daily new cases. Shadow cyan bands show the
95% confidence interval. In Fig. 2, we demonstrate the
forecasting features of our model for the UK. When the
time trial domain increases (curves from 1 through 5),
the unstable regime of our solution (α > 1) changes to
a stable regime (α < 1). Thus, during the forecasting
period, the UK moves from the third group (α > 1) to
the first one (α < 0.9).
TABLE I: The essential parameters of the configuration
model
Country

APPLICATION TO THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC

To relate the time-dependent solution (9) to the dynamics of the epidemic spreading, and extrapolate its future development, one should adjust the parameters A,
B, α, β and µ with the data available for the known time
trial domain. Besides, we have to specify the dependence
of ε(t) on time. To proceed, we take a simple but reasonable choice of a linear function, ε(t) = κt. This choice
provides a reasonable agreement of our results with most
of the actual data. However, for the description of the
epidemic spreading with a second epidemic wave, as has
occurred for example with Iran, one can make a mre sophisticated choice of ε(t). We will show how to deal with
this case below.
The COVID-19 data for this analysis are obtained from
a publicly available database [32, 33]. We made a comparison of our model with coronavirus data extracted for
213 countries from the database [33]. The detailed account of the comparison of our findings with the empirical
data is presented in the Supplementary Material (SM).
For convenience, we define new variables: βε = κt and
b = βµ. Then, Eq.(9) can be recast as
Nt = Aeα(κt−b) Φ(−eκt−b , 1, α) + B.

(19)

For each country, the constants A and B are obtained
from the initial and final conditions. We understand the
final condition as the total number of infected individuals
at a cut-off date contained in the Coronavirus Pandemic
(COVID-19) database [33].
We divide all countries into three groups. Group I:
The countries where the epidemic is over or almost over.
Group II: The countries where the epidemic is in progress,

Transmission rate Critical spreading
of epidemic κ
parameter α
Bangladesh
0.072
1.026
Belgium
0.214
0.787
Brazil
0.075
1.108
Canada
0.135
0.787
Chile
0.226
0.229
Colombia
0.1
1.39
France
0.371
0.9
Germany
0.335
0.901
India
0.079
1.366
Iran
0.05
0.646
Italy
0.207
0.8
Mexico
0.072
1.15
Pakistan
0.202
0.229
Peru
0.094
0.746
Russia
0.152
0.946
South Africa
0.04
2.094
Spain
0.25
0.8
Turkey
0.386
0.946
UK
0.157
0.827
USA
0.883
1.004
World
0.285
1.04

In Table 1, we present the essential parameters for the
countries from the top 20: the transmission rate of epidemic κ and the critical spreading parameter α with a
cut-off date of 4 July 2020.
Second wave of COVID-19

As mentioned above, the linear dependence of ε on
time can not describe the epidemic spreading with mul-

5

FIG. 1: Theoretical outcomes of the configuration model: solid blue curves. Shadow cyan bands show the 95%
confidence interval. Actual data: red diamonds. Insets show the number of daily new cases.

dictions should be based on the dynamics of the epidemic
spreading and changes in the real-world scenarios.
The main problem of forecasting is the absence of reliable and accurate data on daily and total cases reported.
It is important to stress that analytical solutions could be
misleading for long-term forecasting because the parameters are going to change in the long run. Therefore the
extrapolation and prediction should be taken with much
care and, in most cases, only for a short period (see SM
for details).

FIG. 2: Example of the country migration from one
group to another during the epidemic spreading. Actual
data: red diamonds.

tiple waves. In order to describe this process,
we propose
P
the following modification: ε = κt + n cn eiωn t , where
cn and ωn are additional fitting parameters. In Fig. 3,
we compare the theoretical outcomes of our configuration
model with the empirical data for Iran, the United States
and Saudi Arabia, with the choice of ε(t) as
ε = κt +

2
X

cn eiωn t .

(20)

n=−2

One can see that this choice of modulation of ε(t) approximates the second wave effect well.

CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSIONS

The accurate forecast procedures and predictive protocols for the COVID-19 pandemic spread require the
knowledge of many factors, such as human behavior, reliable tests, and government regulations. In this situation,
the importance of the mathematical models is in their
“predictive monitoring” [34]. This implies that the pre-

The mathematical models that describe the epidemic
spreading can be divided into two main groups: the
stochastic and the deterministic models, written for timedependent average variables. Our model is an intermediate one — it is based on a set of differential equations
obtained from the statistical physics of networks. We
used the following assumptions in the derivation of our
model: 1) the probability of an individual being infected
through the disease-causing contact depends on the individual’s features; 2) the epidemic spreads across the
complex network in thermodynamical equilibrium.
We have obtained analytical solutions which interpolate the daily and total numbers of infected individuals,
and forecast the future epidemic development. These solutions describe both the stable epidemic development
and the dynamics close to instability. This method, as
applied to COVID-19, gives a reasonable picture for the
pandemic development. Our approach can help to better
understand the network’s role in the epidemic spreading. Further progress in this direction will require to use
of more advanced approaches, including those based on
non-equilibrium statistical physics.
The work by G.P.B. was done at Los Alamos National Laboratory managed by Triad National Security,
LLC, for the National Nuclear Security Administration
of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No.
89233218CNA000001.

6

FIG. 3: Second wave COVID-19.Theoretical outcomes of the configuration model: solid blue curves. Shadow cyan
bands show the 95% confidence interval. Actual data: red diamonds. Insets show the number of daily new cases.

∗
†
‡

[1]

[2]

[3]
[4]

[5]
[6]

[7]

[8]
[9]

[10]

[11]
[12]

[13]
[14]

nesterov@cencar.udg.mx
themata@hotmail.com
gpb@lanl.gov
David Adam, “Special report: The simulations driving
the world’s response to COVID-19.” Nature 580, 316–
318 (2020).
B. Ivorra, M.R. Ferrández, M. Vela-Pérez, and A.M.
Ramos, “Mathematical modeling of the spread of the
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) taking into account the undetected infections. The case of China,”
Communications in Nonlinear Science and Numerical
Simulation 88, 105303 (2020).
Sarah Cobey, “Modeling infectious disease dynamics,”
Science 368, 713–714 (2020).
Béla Bollobás, Random Graphs, 2nd ed., Cambridge studies in advanced mathematics 73 (Cambridge University
Press, 2001).
M. E. J. Newman, “Spread of epidemic disease on networks,” Phys. Rev. E 66, 016128 (2002).
Sam Moore and Tim Rogers, “Predicting the Speed of
Epidemics Spreading in Networks,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 124,
068301 (2020).
Alun L. Lloyd and Robert M. May, “How Viruses Spread
among Computers and People,” Science 292, 1316–1317
(2001).
Albert-Laszlo Barabasi, Network Science (Cambridge
University Press, 2016).
S. N. Dorogovtsev and J. F. F. Mendes , Evolution of Networks: From Biological Nets to the Internet and WWW
(Oxford University Press, 2003).
A. Barrat, M. Barthelemy, and A. Vespignani, Dynamical Processes on Complex Networks (Cambridge University Press, 2008).
Mark Newman, Networks (Oxford University Press,
2018).
Guido Caldarelli, Scale-free networks: complex webs in
nature and technology (Oxford University Press, USA,
2007).
Robert M. May and Alun L. Lloyd, “Infection dynamics
on scale-free networks,” Phys. Rev. E 64, 066112 (2001).
Albert-László Barabási, “Scale-Free Networks: A Decade
and Beyond,” Science 325, 412–413 (2009).

[15] M. Girvan and M. E. J. Newman, “Community structure in social and biological networks,” Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 99, 7821–7826 (2002).
[16] Réka Albert and Albert-László Barabási, “Statistical mechanics of complex networks,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 47–97
(2002).
[17] M. E. J. Newman, “The structure and function of complex networks,” SIAM Review 45, 167–256 (2003).
[18] Albert Diaz-Guilera (eds.) Romualdo Pastor-Satorras,
Miguel Rubi, Statistical Mechanics of Complex Networks,
Lecture Notes in Physics 625 (Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2003).
[19] Juyong Park and M. E. J. Newman, “Statistical mechanics of networks,” Phys. Rev. E 70, 066117 (2004).
[20] Diego Garlaschelli and Maria I. Loffredo, “Multispecies
grand-canonical models for networks with reciprocity,”
Phys. Rev. E 73, 015101 (2006).
[21] Giulio Cimini, Tiziano Squartini, Fabio Saracco, Diego
Garlaschelli, Andrea Gabrielli, and Guido Caldarelli,
“The statistical physics of real-world networks,” Nature
Reviews Physics 1, 58–71 (2019).
[22] Duncan J. Watts and Steven H. Strogatz, “Collective dynamics of ‘small-world’ networks,” Nature 393, 440 – 442
(1998).
[23] M. E. J. Newman, S. H. Strogatz, and D. J. Watts,
“Random graphs with arbitrary degree distributions and
their applications,” Phys. Rev. E 64, 026118 (2001).
[24] S. Boccaletti, V. Latora, Y. Moreno, M. Chavez, and
D.-U. Hwang, “Complex networks: Structure and dynamics,” Physics Reports 424, 175 – 308 (2006).
[25] Diego Garlaschelli, Sebastian E. Ahnert, Thomas M. A.
Fink, and Guido Caldarelli, “Low-temperature behaviour of social and economic networks,” Entropy 15,
3148–3169 (2013).
[26] Jianjia Wang, Richard C Wilson, and Edwin R Hancock, “Spin statistics, partition functions and network entropy,” Journal of Complex Networks 5, 858–883 (2017).
[27] Carlos Castillo-Chavez (auth.) Fred Brauer, Mathematical models in population biology and epidemiology
(Springer-Verlag New York, 2012).
[28] Frank W. J. Olver, Daniel W. Lozier, Ronald F. Boisvert,
Charles W. Clark, NIST Handbook of Mathematical
Functions (Cambridge University Press, 2010).
[29] Maia Martcheva, An Introduction to Mathematical Epidemiology, Texts in Applied Mathematics 61 (Springer

7
US, 2015).
[30] Robert A. Meyers, Encyclopedia of Complexity and Systems Science (Springer, 2009).
[31] Fred Brauer, Mathematical Models in Epidemiology
(Springer, 2019).
[32] https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus, COVID-19
Coronavirus Pandemic.
[33] Max Roser,
Hannah Ritchie,
Esteban OrtizOspina,
and Joe Hasell, “Coronavirus Pandemic (COVID-19) ,” Our World in Data (2020),
https://ourworldindata.org/coronavirus.
[34] Jianxi Luo, “Predictive Monitoring of COVID-19,” DataDriven Innovation Lab: https://people.sutd.edu.sg/
(2020).

SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL

In this Supplemental Material we explain the calculations, approximations, and intermediate steps of the
main text. The total number of infected individuals in
our model is described by the the Lerch Transcendent:

Nt = Aeαβ(ε(t)−µ) Φ − eβ(ε(t)−µ) , 1, α + B,
(21)
and the daily number of infected individuals, Ni , is obtained by taking the derivative of Nt ,
Ni =

dNt
.
dt

(22)

When the epidemic does not generate multiple waves, a
linear dependence of ε on time yields good results. It
is convenient to define new variables: βε = κt and b =
βµ. (Note that in the SM we consider only the linear
dependence of ε on t.) Then, Eq.(21) can be recast as
Nt = Aeα(κt−b) Φ(−eκt−b , 1, α) + B.

(23)

For each country, the constants A and B are obtained
from the initial and final conditions. We understand the
final condition as the total number of infected individuals at a cut-off date within the Coronavirus Pandemic
(COVID-19) database [33].
A numerical best-fit algorithm has been used to fit the
model to the data by adjusting parameters α, κ, and
b above for each country. In principle, both the total

case data and the daily case data should yield the same
parameter values, but the former is usually less noisy.
The data should begin at the first non-zero case count
(i.e., Nt > 0), so we removed any leading zeroes before
this in the data for each country.

COVID-19 forecast

The accurate prediction of the COVID-19 pandemic
spread requires the knowledge of many factors, such as
human behavior, reliable tests, and government regulations. The forecast’s main problem is the absence of reliable and accurate data on daily and total cases reported.
Therefore the prediction should be taken with much care
and, in most cases, only for a short period.
Our model is deterministic by nature, and therefore the
prediction also is deterministic. To introduce the forecast’s uncertainty in case numbers, we use the residual
standard deviation (Sres ), available in Maple and Mathematica. We define the 95% confidence interval in the trial
time-domain as ∆Nc = 1.96Sres . To obtain the plume
diagram, we use the probe function Nt ± ∆Nc and fit it
to the empirical data in the trial interval.
In Figs. 4, 5, we demonstrate the forecasting features
of our model for China and the United Kingdom. Shadow
bands show the 95% confidence interval. Insets show the
number of daily new cases. In our estimates, we assume
that current interventions will continue indefinitely.
In the following pages, we show the algorithmically
determined curves and parameters for each country.
Though we analyzed the complete dataset for 213 countries, plus the worldwide aggregate, for practical purposes, we include here only countries with 50000 total
cases or more, and also exclude some with very volatile
or irregular data. As mentioned in the main text, some
countries have begun a second wave of contagions, and
they should be considered in the same way as Iran, Saudi
Arabia, and the United States.
Countries appear in alphabetical order by country code (i.e., GBR for Great Britain, not UK for
United Kingdom), except for Worldwide data (code
OWID WRL) which is shown last.

8

FIG. 4: Forecast: China. Shadow bands show the 95% confidence interval. Actual data: red diamonds. Insets show
the number of daily new cases.

FIG. 5: Forecast: United Kingdom. Shadow bands show the 95% confidence interval. Actual data: red diamonds.
Insets show the number of daily new cases.

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

