arXiv:2007.09353v3 [physics.soc-ph] 30 Nov 2020

The Rhythms of the Night: increase in online
night activity and emotional resilience during the
Spring 2020 Covid-19 lockdown
Maria Castaldo1,2 , Tommaso Venturini2 , Paolo Frasca1 , and
Floriana Gargiulo∗3
1

Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP, GIPSA-lab, 11 rue des
Mathématiques, F-38000, Grenoble, France
2
CNRS, CIS-lab, 59 rue Pouchet, F-75017, Paris, France
3
CNRS, Université Paris-Sorbonne - Paris IV, GEMASS, 59 rue Pouchet, F-75017,
Paris, France

Abstract
Context. The lockdown orders established in multiple countries in response to the Covid-19 pandemics are arguably one of the most widespread
and deepest shock experienced by societies in recent years. Studying their
impact trough the lens of social media offers an unprecedented opportunity to understand the susceptibility and the resilience of human activity patterns to large-scale exogenous shocks. Firstly, we investigate the
changes that this upheaval has caused in online activity in terms of time
spent online, themes and emotion shared on the platforms, and rhythms
of content consumption. Secondly, we examine the resilience of certain
platform characteristics, such as the daily rhythms of emotion expression.
Data. Two independent datasets about the French cyberspace: a finegrained temporal record of almost 100 thousand YouTube videos and a
collection of 8 million Tweets between February 17 and April 14, 2020.
Findings. In both datasets we observe a reshaping of the circadian
rhythms with an increase of night activity during the lockdown. The
analysis of the videos and tweets published during lockdown shows a general decrease in emotional contents and a shift from themes like work and
money to themes like death and safety. However, the daily patterns of
emotions remain mostly unchanged, thereby suggesting that emotional
cycles are resilient to exogenous shocks.
∗ Correspondence:

floriana.gargiulo@cnrs.fr

1

Introduction
The lockdown established in France from March 17th to May 11th as a response
to the Covid-19 pandemic created a sudden and severe transformation of daily
routines. This disruption represents a textbook case of exogenous shock on
human behaviors, which can, by comparison, reveal features of normal social
life. In this paper we carry out this comparative analysis, focusing on online
behaviors and leveraging a unique YouTube dataset. A few weeks before the
lockdown, we had started following a corpus of more than one thousand French
political YouTube channels with an exceptional temporal granularity – recording
hour by hour the number of views of all of their videos. This collection provided
us with a unique dataset to study how the lockdown transformed the circadian
rhythms of online activities. To make sure our findings are not platform specific,
we compare the results obtained on YouTube with a Twitter dataset of 8 million
tweets in French.
In this paper, we investigate changes in the daily rhythm of online activities
and address two related research questions: what are the changes produced
by the lockdown and how resilient are online circadian rhythms. The analysis
of such a exceptional period allows us to distinguish the dynamics due to the
Covid-19 crisis from stable features of the social media we investigate. We focus
our research on a single country, France, in order to identify precisely the start
and end dates of the lockdown and to work on a (relatively) uniform population
sample that excludes national differences.
Our analysis shows, for both platforms, an increase of online activities, likely
a consequence of the decrease of real-life interactions. The growth in online
participation and content consumption is not uniform across the 24 hours, but
it is more salient during the night. Besides this variation in volume, we register
changes in the kind of content shared from an emotional and thematic point of
view. In both platforms, the lockdown is marked by an unexpected decrease in
emotional contents and by a more predictable thematic shift from topics like
”social life” and ”leisure”, before the lockdown, to matters related to ”house” or
”death” during the lockdown. Against these lockdown-induced changes, some
constants of YouTube and Twitter stand out. Despite its quantitative change,
the shape of the daily cycle of different emotions (i.e. their prevalence by hour)
is not impacted by the lockdown: this finding confirms the results of previous
studies that showed a stability of emotional rhythms across seasons and cultures
[1, 2, 3]. The resilience of these patterns, despite the disruption of the lockdown,
may be due to biological origins of the emotional expression, which seems to be
more influenced by the biological clock than by exogenous factors.

Related Work
The patterns of activity in different social media vary according to the characteristics and the scope of the different platforms and to the composition of its
user pool. Several papers in the literature have studied circadian fingerprints

2

in different social media. In YouTube, scholars have investigated the rhythms
of content creation (i.e. video posting) [4] and of content fruition (i.e. videos
watching) [5]. Daily and a weekly use of Twitter has been analyzed in various
countries [6]. Among other platforms, Foursquare has attracted researchers’
attention for its circadian and geographic patterns [7] and its similarities with
Twitter [8], while Wikipedia editing patterns have been studied in [9] with an
interesting focus on inter-cultural variations. Moreover, slightly deviating from
the social media framework, mobile phones and instant messaging activities have
been frequently analyzed in [10, 11]. Despite their differences, all platforms unsurprisingly show a substantial decrease of activity during the night.
The realm of night owls is characterized not only by a general quiet but also
by typical emotional markers. Emotional content of Twitter activity has been
studied in several papers with different approaches [1, 2, 3]. Despite the variety
of data considered, all these papers share the same finding: digital nights are
consistently characterized by a low level of shared emotions (both positive and
negative).
Covid-19 lockdown partially disrupted these rhythms, by drastically changing people’s habits and daily routines: from physical commuting to telecommuting, from school classes to distance learning, from in-person meetings to
video calls. Within few days whole populations had to re-adapt their behaviors
into a new life scenario characterized by deep health and professional concerns.
Such unpredictable situation strongly impacted peoples’ sleep-wake cycles, as
reported in several studies based on surveys like [12]. With our study, therefore,
we create a link between the literature on circadian online rhythms and the one
on the stress experienced by many societies in recent months.

1

Data and Methods

Since circadian patterns of online activity are strongly dependent on users’ demography and on platforms’ scope, as mentioned in the introduction, we conducted our study across two different platforms: YouTube and Twitter. This
comparative framework will be central to distinguish platform-specific findings
from more general trends.

1.1

The YouTube dataset

As mentioned in the introduction, the YouTube dataset is particularly interesting because of its temporal granularity. Indeed, historical data about the
number of views can no longer be retrieve from the YouTube application programming interface (API), which only returns the views at the moment of querying and not their temporal evolution. Therefore, studies like the ones by [13]
and [14] involving time series of engagement metrics are not longer possible,
unless constantly querying the API all along the period of interest, as we did.
The dataset covers 1031 popular French channels that (according to the
experts we consulted) are particularly influential in the French public debate.

3

These channels, with their description, are listed in the Supplementary Material.
The channels have been selected through a qualitative analysis of the French
YouTube, aiming to identify a relevant actors that diffuse political opinions
through the platform. The selected channels belong to the following categories:
local and national media; influential Youtubers discussing political topics; militant associations; politicians; candidates for the European elections; political
party; Yellow Vests groups; associations devoted to public causes; large public or
private institutions. YouTube provides no information about the location from
which videos are viewed, but since the channels of our corpus focus on French
public debate, we can assume most of their viewers to be based in France. In collaboration with the Qatar Computing Research Institute (QCRI), we recorded
hour by hour the evolution of views of each videos published after February 17,
for an entire week after the publication. Between February 17 and April 14,
we collected the views time series for 99.992 videos. For every video, we also
collected the title, the description and other metadata available through the
official YouTube API.
Before being able to perform our analysis, some preprocessing turned out to
be necessary. Contrarily to what one might expect, the total number of views
of a given video are not always increasing. Occasionally, YouTube removes from
its counting earlier views that it deems to be fake because likely produced by
bots, click-farming or through other illegitimate tricks, since YouTube wants ”to
make sure that videos are viewed by actual humans and not computer programs”
[15], as per the official support web-page. Since the corrections of these views are
made after their recording, our dataset contain hours with a negative number of
views. To correct such negative views, we have preprocessed our data in order
to uniformly redistribute the corrections made at a given time on the previous
hours. More precisely, if we call vh the views collected by a generic video at hour
h after publication and Th the total number of views at hour h, if Th+1 < Th ,
we correct the time series as follows:
T̂j = (1 − p) Tj

j = 1, . . . , h

where T̂j is the corrected time series until hour h and p =
age of correction.

1.2

Th −Th+1
Th

is a percent-

The Twitter dataset

The Twitter dataset comprises about 8 millions tweets, retrieved through the
official Twitter API, posted by 5161 active but non-professional users from
February 17 to April 14. These non-professional users have been identified
within a wider dataset of about 33 millions tweets containing Covid-19-related
content. This corpus of tweets was collected by Science–Po MediaLab in Paris,
by using the python based scraper Gazouilloire [16], a tool developed by Dime
Web for systematic and configurable Twitter data collection through Twitter’s
official API. The data were collected based on a query of Covid-19-related words

4

in French. All twitting and re-twitting times were collected in European Central Timezone (UTC +1). Being Covid-19 the most trending communication
topic in France (as we can observe for example from Google Trends), since its
first diffusion in Europe and even more around the lockdown decision, we can
assume that a relevant part of the French Twittosphere is potentially present in
this database.
Differently from the YouTube database, which does not allow extracting
information on the users, for the Twitter database we can define precise profiles
of the users we are interested to study, in order to have a more homogeneous,
even if reduced, population. Since we are interested in the activity of common
Twitter users, we decided to exclude newspapers, bloggers, radios, associations,
etc. and only consider non-professional users. Moreover, recalling that the aim
of this work is to provide robust cross-platform results, we needed the Twitter
dataset to be comparable to the YouTube one: we hence had to restrict the
content production on Twitter to the sole production taking place in France.
The requirements listed above, together with the filtering they set off, can be
clarified as follows:
• facing the need to exclude professional users, we only considered those (1)
whose profile did not contain keywords associated to professional use of
the platform (e.g. ”media”, ”blog”, ”official”, etc.); (2) with a number of
followers lower than the median of the whole dataset; (3) with an activity
lower than the median activity (∼400 tweets by week);
• targeting a significant statistical analysis, we discarded users who published less than 100 tweets in the whole period;
• focusing on France, we filtered the sole users who explicitly declared their
location to be in France, searching in the location descriptions multiple
translations of ”France”, the name of all the cities in France with a population larger than 10000 inhabitants (with eventual translations), the
French regions and departments.
This filtering left us with 5161 users: their Twitter profiles’ descriptions have
been manually checked to be sure that the non-professional selection mechanism
was effective. Finally, in order to construct the dataset of tweets, the entire
timelines of the selected users have been collected through the Twitter API,
including tweets not related to Covid-19. Even though this sample is not meant
to be representative of the full French Twittosphere, it provides a complete
perspective of a sizable and homogeneous set of active non-professional users of
the platform over the relevant time frame.

1.3

The tool for emotion and topic mining

To analyze the emotional and thematic contents of tweets and YouTube videos,
we used a very well-known and tested tool: the LIWC dictionary [17]. The
LIWC dictionary classifies words on more than 70 emotional, stylistic and thematic dimensions and has been used in several analogous studies such as [1, 2].
5

More precisely, the LIWC dictionary provides a list of words associated to each
of the dimensions (for example, the category ”Positive emotions” contains words
like: happy, pretty, and good. Since the texts we analyze are written in French,
we used the French version of the LIWC dictionary [18].

2

Results

The first major habit change generated by the 2020 spring lockdown in France
is a considerable increase in the online activity. Recalling that the French first
lockdown was announced on March 15 and enforced on the 17th, we can better
understand the time series for Twitter posting, YouTube posting and YouTube
views displayed in Fig. 1. All three time series show weekly and daily fluctuations. The average daily signals, smoothed by a moving average over a 7 day
rolling window, reveal an increase of activity for Twitter posting and YouTube
watching around the beginning of the lockdown. Notice that on both platforms the increase of activity started from the very moment the lockdown was
announced (which itself sparked much debate).
As for the posting of videos on YouTube, such an activity is less casual and
more stable than tweeting (particularly for the high-visibility channels that we
monitored) and therefore conserved the same weekly and daily rhythms during
the lockdown. Since the video production is hardly affected by the lockdown,
we will not consider this dimension in the rest of the paper.

2.1

The rhythm of the night

To highlight the effects of the lockdown, in the following we analyze thematic
and emotional changes before and after the start of the lockdown (March 17).
We refer to the period before the lockdown as to the three weeks from February
17 to March 9. At the same time we will refer to the period after the lockdown
enforcement as to the three weeks from March 23 to April 14. To exclude the
transient effects of the transition phase, we discard the data about the two weeks
around the lockdown onset (from the 9th to the 22nd of March). Preliminarly,
we calculated the normalized daily activity profiles before and during lockdown
for each hour of the day by
P
Ntweets (d, h)
d∈days
Twitter
P
(1)
f
(h) = P
Ntweets (d, h)
d∈days h∈{0,...,23}

and

P
f

YouTube

(h) =

Nviews (h)

d∈days

P

P

d∈days h∈{0,...,23}

6

Nviews (d, h),

(2)

where h ∈ {0, . . . , 23} are the hours of day, d are the days considered, and
Ntweets (d, h) and Nviews (d, t) are respectively the number of tweets and of YouTube
views at hour h of day d. The results are reported in the left plots of Fig. 2.
We first observe that the profiles for Twitter and YouTube are quite different:
while Twitter is mostly used during the day, with a strong activity decrease after
midnight, YouTube is characterized by a higher night activity. While Twitter
is an active media, characterized by a debating and prosuming culture [19] that
encourages participation at the time of the day when engagement is maximum,
videos watching on YouTube is, for many users, a more passive activity [20]
which can easily fit the more relaxed late hours.
To quantify the differences between profiles before and during the lockdown,
we calculated the relative differences of the normalized profiles:
δ(h) =

f after (h) − f before (h)
f after (h) + f before (h)

(3)

This quantity is reported in the right plots of Fig. 2. Both YouTube and Twitter experienced an activity increase during the night and a smaller decrease
of the activity in the early morning (6am-9am for Twitter and 9am-12am for
YouTube). We observe that the morning decrease in Twitter is much smaller
than the night increase. This suggests that, with the lockdown, people stayed
longer awake during the night but without oversleeping in the morning.
To appraise the variations in the activity during lockdown nights, we compare this variation with another factor known to impact online circadian patterns: the weekly cycle of weekends and working days. We aggregate the data at
the level of day and night: based on the shapes of the curves in Fig. 2, we consider night on Twitter the hours between 11PM and 6AM of the following day
and on YouTube the hours between 1AM and 8AM. We decompose the aggregated activity into weekends and working days. To obtain comparable measures
we divide the activity counts by the number of hours of the corresponding time
period (night=7, day=17) and by the number of days of week parts (weekend=2, working days=5). The average number of tweets/views in the different
categories are represented in Fig. 3, together with the relative changes among
the classes. As we already observed, the night variations are the largest changes,
both in weekends and working days. The activity increments due to lockdown
are significantly larger than the variations associated with the normal the week
cycle. In YouTube the variations also have opposite signs: while the activity
normally decreases during weekend, it increases for lockdown. For both the
platforms, and both for day and night, the most significant difference concerns
the working days: the augmented social media usage seems to be replacing the
time previously dedicated to daily routines (like commuting to work, going to
sleep early, etc.) more than the time of recreational activities.
To confirm the hypothesis of reduced sleep during the lockdown, we analyze
the situation at the individual level. For each Twitter user, we calculate the
average time lag between two consecutive Tweets. Fig. 4 shows the hourly
average of this measure colorred (and the boxplots to appreciate its variability)

7

before and during the lockdown. While, in normal times, the average interevent times are much higher during the night (because of sleeping breaks), the
lockdown flattened the curve, thereby suggesting a shortening of sleep intervals
[12]. In the right plot of Fig. 4 we display, for each hour of the night, the
probability that the subsequent tweet is posted the following morning (between
7 AM and 12AM) rather than during the same night. This quantity represents
the probability to ”go to sleep” after an event at t0 . For this analysis we only
considered the inter-events that are longer than 1 hour, in order to get the last
action only in a potential activity burst and reduce the noise. We also excluded
all the inter-events finishing after the next morning. We see that, until 4AM,
the probability to get asleep is lower during lockdown. These findings are based
on an aggregated statistical study of the inter-events. Unfortunately, the short
time span of our data collection (2 months) does not allow a more sophisticated
analysis, for example, of the users chronotypes, which, as shown by [21, 22] can
be extremely important for understanding the individual sleep behavior.

2.2

What is night?

In this paragraph we analyze whether the quantitative changes observed in the
previous paragraph correspond to differences in terms of contents. For Twitter,
we build the sets K(d, h) containing all the hashtags posted in day d at hour
h. For YouTube, we build the sets K(d, h) containing all the videos visualized
in day d at hour h. We define the time similarity matrix, Θ, between two day’s
hours h1 , h2 , based on the Jaccard similarity between the sets K(d, h1 ) and
K(d, h2 ) as:
Θ(h1 , h2 ) =

1
Ndays

X

J(K(d, h1 ), K(d, h2 ))

(4)

d∈days

1 )∩K(d,h2 )|
where J(K(d, h1 ), K(d, h2 )) = |K(d,h
|K(d,h1 )∪K(d,h2 )| is the Jaccard similarity. Matrix
Θ, represented in Fig. 5, indicates how the content shared or viewed at a certain hour is similar to the content in all the other hours. We perform a k-mean
clustering procedure on this matrix to better identify the relationships between
the hours of the day.
The results of the clustering are represented by the
colors of the hours on the left of the plots of Fig. 5. Remarkably, these clusters
identify different periods of the day, thereby showing that contents evolve along
the day and different periods of the day are characterized by specific contents.
Both for Twitter and YouTube, and both before and during lockdown, night
hours (0am-5am) are characterized by contents distinctively different from the
rest of the day. Before the lockdown, morning hours (6am-10am for Twitter
and 6am-8am for YouTube) were the most different from night-time and constitute a well definite cluster. For Youtube before the lockdown, the late morning
hours 9am-10am showed a return of the night contents. For both platforms
before the lockdown, we observe a lunch-afternoon cluster and an evening cluster. Lockdown affected the morning cluster, though in opposite ways for the
two platforms. In Twitter, the morning cluster extended to first hours of the

8

afternoon cluster (lunch hours), while in YouTube the night vibe extended into
the morning (until 11am). In Twitter, the lockdown shifted the afternoon cluster after lunch time (3pm-9pm) and consequently reduced the evening hours
(10pm-11pm). In YouTube, we observe the emergence of contents dedicated
to the lunch hours (12am-2pm) and a second uniform block until covering the
afternoon and the evening (3pm-11pm).

2.3

A significant change of content

We proceed with the analyses of the emotional and thematic content of Twitter
and YouTube activities, before and during the lockdown. Using the categories
of the LIWC dictionary we will consider three separated analytic dimensions:
• General Affects: Positive Affect, Negative Affect;
• Specific Emotions: Sadness, Anger, Anxiety and Accomplishment:
• Thematic contents: Work, Social life, Religion, Death, Fun, Exclusion,
Biology, Money.
We first assign the tweets and YouTube videos (based on the words contained in
their titles and descriptions) to one category for each dimension. To do so, we
count how many terms from each category are contained in each tweet/video,
and we assign the content to the prevalent category. For example, for the
dimension ”General Affect” each content is categorized as either Positive or
Negative Affect or not classified if the items contains no categorical words or
similar proportions of positive and negative terms. We also consider the global
emotional level (”Affect”) of the items, by counting together the positive and
negative words. For each dimension, we compute the fraction of tweets and
retweets in each category during the lockdown and the difference compared to
the previous period. In the same way, for YouTube, we evaluate the fraction
of visualization of videos in each category over the total number of views. The
results are reported in the left plot of Fig. 6.
Comparing the two platforms, we first observe that YouTube is more ”emotional” than Twitter and is generally populated by more positive content. Both
platforms experience a decrease of the emotional sphere during the lockdown,
but on YouTube in particular we observe an increase of emotionally negative
contents. Regarding specific emotions, we notice that expressions of accomplishment decline in both platforms. Instead, while Twitter experienced a decrease
of all specific emotions, YouTube, which was already characterized by a higher
level of anger, sadness and anxiety before the lockdown, goes through an important increase of these sentiments. From a thematic point of view we observe,
unsurprisingly, a decrease of the contents related to social life and leisure and
an increase of contents related to death and house. On Twitter we also have
a significant increase of religion-related contents. All differences in distribution
of contents before and during the lockdown have been tested statistically with
Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) tests. For both platforms before and during the lockdown an hourly aggregation has been performed in order to get two different
9

samples of emotion distribution. The results of the KS test over those distributions are reported in Table 1 and Table 2. and most of the times support the
statistical relevance of differences in content distribution before and during the
lockdown.

2.4

Because the night belongs to...

Drawing on our previous hour clustering, we divide the day according to five time
periods: [0am-5am],[6am-9am],[10am-2pm],[3pm-6pm],[7pm-12pm] to identify a
circadian profile for each of our categories (right plot of Fig. 6). For several categories related to emotions, we can first notice an interesting Twitter/YouTube
difference: what peaks in the early morning on Twitter [6am-9am] tends to
peak in the following interval in YouTube [10am-2pm], thereby suggesting that
YouTube content is consumed later in the day. Going into more detail, in agreement with the findings of [1, 2, 3] we observe that nights are characterized by
low emotional levels, especially positive ones, while both positivity and negativity tend to peak at the moment of the awakening. This pattern is more evident
on Twitter also at the level of specific emotions, while on YouTube a significant
portion of negative contents is consumed during the night.
An interesting observation, again in phase with the precedent findings of
[1, 2, 3], is that the daily emotional patterns seem to be resilient to the Covid-19
disruption: even if the volumes of some emotions changed during the lockdown,
their daily distribution generally maintained the same shape, as demonstrated
by a rough parallelism of the lines before and during the lockdown (with some
exceptions regarding anger and anxiety on YouTube). This fact confirms the
observation made in [1] that external factors, even as important as the Covid19 lockdown, influence the emotional patterns less than the sleep-wake cycles.
Interestingly, this is not the case for the distribution of topics which has been
more significantly influenced by the lockdown.

3

Discussion

The Covid-19 pandemic and the ensuing lockdown have deeply and widely disrupted people’s daily routines. Our research exposed some of these changes
through the lens of social media. By highlighting what has changed during
the lockdown and what has resisted the Covid-19 shock, our research proves
that certain online habits are more resilient to external disruption than others,
thereby suggesting which human behaviors are more influenced by exogenous
factors and which are, on the contrary, constant even in exceptional situations.
Circadian rhythms of activity proved to be strongly related to lifestyle and
working hours: the change observed in the lockdown rhythms suggests in particular that in the absence of external constraints such as school and office hours,
the boundaries between night and day become more flexible.

10

Perhaps surprisingly, we found out that the emotional charge of tweets and
YouTube videos decreased with the lockdown, arguably leaving space to less
emotional contents. However, this general finding is tempered by the fact that
on YouTube (which is inherently a more emotional medium than Twitter) negative sentiments like anger and anxiety did increase, thus revealing the stressful
situation for the population. As topics are concerned, online discussions proved
to follow real world events and, unsurprisingly in a global epidemic that forced
people at home, shifted towards questions connected to biology, house, and
death.
As an even more interesting result, we pointed out the resilience of emotional
patterns in online activities. While the general emotional charge of online contents decreased during the lockdown, it maintained its normal daily distribution.
After March 17th, nightlife continues to be characterized by less emotional content despite the stress caused by the Covid-19 crisis. Even if the circadian
rhythms change and people stay awake longer, at night, they seem to continue
to share and consume the same type of contents.
In future research, we would like to investigate more in depth the nature
of this low-emotional nighttime space, in order to reveal weather it consists
of more informative and impartial contents and it gives rise to positive and
constructive forms of debate or, on the contrary, whether it is more markedly
affected by fake news and other types of misinformation. The LIWC dictionary
used so far allowed us to distinguish emotional from unemotional contents: more
specific dictionaries could lead to deeper insights about nighttime activity and to
better understand the relationship between information and emotion in different
medias. Broadly speaking, we hope that noticing the resilience of some online
patterns during the lockdown might encourage future research in emotional
rhythms and their reaction to external shocks.
Before concluding, we would like to briefly discuss two limitations of our
study. In this research, we analyzed two different platforms, therefore providing
insights on two different types of public . However, we should remind that
these two viewpoints are not sufficient to completely represent the French social
media and, even less, French society. A comparison with other type of data,
not available to our team, like phone call datasets or mobile usage information
would be useful to confirm and refine our findings.
As a second limitation, our analysis is limited to a single country and on the
period of the first lockdown. The continued and worldwide impact of the Covid19 crisis call for a comparison with similar analyses in other countries and in
other phases of the pandemics.

Availability of data and material
Authors agree to make their data available upon request. The list of the
YouTube channels is reported in the Supplementary Material.

11

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Author’s contributions
M.C. and F.G. collected the missing data and analyzed the data. All authors
conceived the research, discussed the results and wrote the manuscript.

Funding
This research has been supported by the French national science foundation
(Agence Nationale de la Recherche) through project TRACTRUST and by
CNRS through the 80 PRIME MITI project “Disorders of Online Media” (DOOM).

Acknowledgments
F.G. thanks Jeremy Ward for the useful discussions. A note of thanks and
major acknowledgment goes to Yoan Dinkov and Preslav Nakov of the Qatar
Computing Research Institute (QCRI) for their help in collecting YouTube data.
A special thanks goes to Bilel Benbouzid for the precious discussions on the
French YouTube landscape.

References
[1] Golder, S.A., Macy, M.W.: Diurnal and seasonal mood vary with work, sleep,
and daylength across diverse cultures. Science 333(6051), 1878–1881 (2011)
[2] Dzogang, F., Lightman, S., Cristianini, N.: Circadian mood variations in Twitter
content. Brain and neuroscience advances 1, 2398212817744501 (2017)
[3] Lampos, V., Lansdall-Welfare, T., Araya, R., Cristianini, N.: Analysing mood
patterns in the United Kingdom through Twitter content. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1304.5507 (2013)
[4] Szabo, G., Huberman, B.A.: Predicting the popularity of online content. Communications of the ACM 53(8), 80–88 (2010)
[5] Gill, P., Arlitt, M., Li, Z., Mahanti, A.: Youtube traffic characterization: a
view from the edge. In: Proceedings of the 7th ACM SIGCOMM Conference on
Internet Measurement, pp. 15–28 (2007)
[6] Ten Thij, M., Bhulai, S., Kampstra, P.: Circadian patterns in Twitter. Data
Analytics, 12–17 (2014)
[7] Noulas, A., Scellato, S., Mascolo, C., Pontil, M.: An empirical study of geographic
user activity patterns in Foursquare. In: Fifth International AAAI Conference on
Weblogs and Social Media (2011)

12

[8] Grinberg, N., Naaman, M., Shaw, B., Lotan, G.: Extracting diurnal patterns of
real world activity from social media. In: Seventh International AAAI Conference
on Weblogs and Social Media (2013)
[9] Yasseri, T., Sumi, R., Kertész, J.: Circadian patterns of Wikipedia editorial
activity: A demographic analysis. PloS one 7(1) (2012)
[10] Pozdnoukhov, A., Walsh, F.: Exploratory novelty identification in human activity
data streams. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGSPATIAL International Workshop
on GeoStreaming, pp. 59–62 (2010)
[11] Jo, H.-H., Karsai, M., Kertész, J., Kaski, K.: Circadian pattern and burstiness
in human communication activity. New. J. Phys 14, 013055 (2012)
[12] Beck, F., Léger, D., Fressard, L., Peretti-Watel, P., Verger, P., The Coconel
Group: Covid-19 health crisis and lockdown associated with high level of sleep
complaints and hypnotic uptake at the population level. Journal of Sleep Research
n/a(n/a), 13119 (2020)
[13] Pinto, H., Almeida, J., Gonçalves, M.: Using early view patterns to predict the popularity of YouTube videos. WSDM 2013 - Proceedings of the
6th ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining (2013).
doi:10.1145/2433396.2433443
[14] Nguyen, M.-T., Nakajima, T., Yoshimi, M., Thoai, N.: Analyzing and Predicting
the Popularity of Online Contents, (2019). doi:10.1145/3366030.3366047
[15] Google:
How engagement metrics are counted - YouTube Help. Accessed: 2020-11-24. https://support.google.com/youtube/answer/2991785?
hl=en%5C%E2%5C%80%5C%8B
[16] MediaLab: Gazouilloire. https://github.com/medialab/gazouilloire. Accessed: 2020-11-24
[17] Tausczik, Y.R., Pennebaker, J.W.: The psychological meaning of words: LIWC
and computerized text analysis methods. Journal of language and social psychology 29(1), 24–54 (2010)
[18] Piolat, A., Booth, R.J., Chung, C.K., Davids, M., Pennebaker, J.W.: La version
française du dictionnaire pour le LIWC: modalités de construction et exemples
d’utilisation. Psychologie française 56(3), 145–159 (2011)
[19] Ritzer, G., Dean, P., Jurgenson, N.: The coming of age of the prosumer. American
Behavioral Scientist 56, 379–398 (2012)
[20] Khan, M.L.: Social media engagement: What motivates user participation and
consumption on youtube? Computers in Human Behavior 66, 236–247 (2017)
[21] Aledavood, T., Lehmann, S., Saramäki, J.: Social network differences of chronotypes identified from mobile phone data. EPJ Data Science 7(1), 1–13 (2018)
[22] Aledavood, T., López, E., Roberts, S.G., Reed-Tsochas, F., Moro, E., Dunbar,
R.I., Saramäki, J.: Daily rhythms in mobile telephone communication. PloS one
10(9), 0138098 (2015)

13

Tables
Table 1: p-values of Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests for YouTube content differences
displayed by Fig. 6, i.e. content differences before and during the lockdown
Avg Before Avg During
Category
KS p-value
Lockdown
Lockdown
Negative Affect
0.187
0.202
2.29 · 10−9
0.693
0.647
∼0
Positive Affect
Affect
0.961
0.938
∼0
Sadness
0.118
0.127
7.56 · 10−8
5.17 · 10−2
5.78 · 10−2
3.16 · 10−12
Anger
Anxiety
2.15 · 10−2
2.88 · 10−2
2.31 · 10−7
Accomplishment 0.575
0.571
0.075
0.278
0.285
0.0025
Work
Social Life
0.419
0.341
∼0
Religion
1.91 · 10−3
1.67 · 10−3
1.29 · 10−4
1.96 · 10−3
5.64 · 10−3
∼0
Death
Leisure
3.95 · 10−2
3.77 · 10−2
1.52 · 10−10
Exclusion
2.35 · 10−2
2.85 · 10−2
1.82 · 10−14
Biology
9.70 · 10−2
0.14
∼0
Money
0.109
0.123
2.22 · 10−16

Table 2: p-values of Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests for Twitter content differences
displayed by Fig. 6, i.e. content differences before and during the lockdown
Avg Before Avg During
KS p-value
Category
Lockdown
Lockdown
Negative Affect
0.275
0.261
3.11 · 10−15
Positive Affect
0.268
0.256
3.11 · 10−15
Affect
0.659
0.628
3.11 · 10−15
−2
−2
Sadness
5.55 · 10
5.54 · 10
0.984
Anger
3.92 · 10−2
3.50 · 10−2
3.11 · 10−12
−2
−3
Anxiety
1.15 · 10
9.39 · 10
3.11 · 10−12
−1
−1
Accomplishment 1.46 · 10
1.32 · 10
3.11 · 10−12
Work
6.96 · 10−2 5.58 · 10−2
0.0025
Social Life
0.119
0.117
1.46 · 10−6
Religion
6.87 · 10−3
7.14 · 10−3
3.85 · 10−3
−3
−3
Death
5.51 · 10
5.90 · 10
1.03 · 10−3
−2
−2
Leisure
5.34 · 10
4.57 · 10
3.11 · 10−15
−1
−1
Exclusion
1.37 · 10
1.34 · 10
1.73 · 10−8
−1
−1
Biology
1.06 · 10
1.03 · 10
4.20 · 10−8
−2
−2
Money
5.91 · 10
4.51 · 10
3.11 · 10−15

14

Figures

Figure 1: Increase of platforms activity after the lockdown. (top) Evolution of
number of visualizations by day on YouTube. (middle) Evolution of number of
new published videos on YouTube. (bottom) Evolution of number of Covid-19
related tweets or re-tweets

15

TWITTER
Normalized frequencies

Relative difference by hour

BEFORE LOCKDOWN
DURING LOCKDOWN

YOUTUBE
Normalized frequencies

Relative difference by hour

BEFORE LOCKDOWN
DURING LOCKDOWN

Figure 2: Circadian Rhythm Changes. On the left, Twitter and YouTube circadian rhythms before and during the lockdown. On the right, we explicitly
evaluate the relative differences between rhythms before and during the lockdown

16

TWITTER: Average number of tweets by hour
BEFORE LOCKDOWN
Working days
Day

Night
+0.06

+0.09

Weekends
Night

+0.38

Day
+0.28

DURING LOCKDOWN
Working days
Night

Day

+0.29

+0.13

Weekends

Night

Day

YOUTUBE: Average number of views by hour
BEFORE LOCKDOWN
Working days

Day

Night
-0.06

-0.08

Weekends

Night

+0.18

Day

+0.11

DURING LOCKDOWN
Working days
Night

Day

+0.11

+0.02

Weekends
Night

Day

Figure 3: Night-vs-day and working day-vs-weekend patterns. Average number
of Tweets (upper plot) or YouTube views (lower plot) by hour, during day
and night, working days and weekends. The numbers next to the dotted lines
represent the relative increment between the related quantities.

17

Mean of the inter-events times, after a tweet at t0
Before lockdown
During lockdown

Probability that after a tweet at t0,
the next one is in the next morning
BEFORE LOCKDOWN
DURING LOCKDOWN

Boxplot of the inter-events times, after a tweet at t0
Before lockdown
During lockdown

Figure 4: Interevents. Left plots: Average inter-event distance for an event
starting at time t0 and boxplot of the interevents starting at t0 . Right plot:
Probability that a tweet following a tweet at t0 is posted on the following morning (dashed=before lockdown, solid=during lockdown).

18

TWITTER - BEFORE LOCKDOWN

TWITTER - DURING LOCKDOWN

YOUTUBE - BEFORE LOCKDOWN

YOUTUBE - DURING LOCKDOWN

Figure 5: Hours Correlation. Heat-maps of the content hour similarity before
and during the lockdown for Twitter and YouTube. The colors of the hours on
the left of the graph represent the partition of the k-means clustering.

19

Fraction of Videos/Tweets with a content
and relative change during lockdown

Fraction of Videos/Tweets with a content by hour
Youtube during LD
Youtube before LD
Twitter during LD
Twitter before LD

YOUTUBE

TWITTER

Figure 6: Themes and Emotions before and during lock-down. Left plot: Fraction of videos/Tweets with a content and relative change with lockdown. The
size of the points is proportional to the fractions (quantified by the upper numbers). The orientation of the line indicates if there was an increase (orientation
toward right) or decrease (toward left) with the lockdown. The length of the line
is proportional to the percentage increase/decrease with the lockdown. Right
plot: Fraction of videos/Tweets with a content by hour. The continuous line
indicates the fractions after the lockdown, the dotted lines before. An arrow
starts from the before to the after line for each hour period: if the arrow is
oriented towards the top, the lockdown increased the content fraction in the
selected hours and viceversa. In both plots YouTube is in red, Twitter is in
20
blue.

