arXiv:2007.15807v1 [cs.CY] 31 Jul 2020

Seating preference analysis for hybrid workplaces
Mohammad Saiedur Rahaman

Shaw Kudo

Tim Rawling

RMIT University
Melbourne, VIC, Australia
saiedur.rahaman@rmit.edu.au

Arup
Melbourne, VIC, Australia
shaw.kudo@arup.com

Arup
Melbourne, VIC, Australia
tim.rawling@arup.com

Yongli Ren

Flora D. Salim

RMIT University
Melbourne, VIC, Australia
yongli.ren@rmit.edu.au

RMIT University
Melbourne, VIC, Australia
flora.salim@rmit.edu.au

ABSTRACT
Due to the increasing nature of flexible work and the recent requirements from COVID-19 restrictions, workplaces are becoming more
hybrid (i.e. allowing workers to work between traditional office
spaces and elsewhere including from home). Since workplaces are
different in design, layout and available facilities, many workers
find it difficult to adjust accordingly. Eventually, this impacts negatively towards work productivity and other related parameters
including concentration, stress, and mood while at work. One of
the key factors that causes this negative work experience is directly linked to the available seating arrangements. In this paper,
we conduct an analysis to understand various seating preferences
of 37 workers with varying demographics, using the data collected
pre-COVID-19, and analyse the findings in the context of hybrid
workplace settings. We also discuss a list of implications illustrating
how our findings can be adapted across wider hybrid work settings.

KEYWORDS
Hybrid workplace, seating preference, work from home, work productivity
ACM Reference Format:
Mohammad Saiedur Rahaman, Shaw Kudo, Tim Rawling, Yongli Ren, and Flora
D. Salim. 2020. Seating preference analysis for hybrid workplaces. In NFW
’20: Symposium on New Future of Work, August 03–05, 2020, Online. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 4 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/1122445.1122456

1

INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND

The concept of hybrid workplace is to remove physical barriers
among teams by allowing employees to choose to work however
and wherever they feel most productive. Workers in a hybrid setting are a mix between co-located and remote workers, (i.e., they
spend part of their time working in the traditional office and part
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
NFW ’20, August 03–05, 2020, Online
© 2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/18/06. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/1122445.1122456

of their time working elsewhere) [5]. This trend shift in work arrangements is typically associated with a drive towards business efficiency: saving space, reducing costs and accommodating growing
teams [19]. At the same time, prior research highlights additional
employee-focused benefits associated with hybrid work settings
when workers share their office spaces. This includes greater worker
satisfaction [4, 11, 22] and more flexibility in the way they perform
their work [6, 15]. The shared workplace also has the potential
to enable the exchange of knowledge more effectively among colleagues [11, 12, 16], which can enrich their respective skills and
potentially lead to greater work productivity [4]. However, it must
be acknowledged that several studies have identified a number of
problems [9, 17] associated with shared offices such as increased
distrust, distractions, and uncooperative behavior. To measure the
success of hybrid workplaces, both active and passive sensing have
been used to monitor employees’ organizational behavior [18] and
workplace interactions [2, 3, 8, 13, 14]. The outcomes of this research can help better understand the emotions, productivity and
team dynamics of employees, which could lead towards overall
organizational success.
The majority of previous research primarily investigated various
pros and cons of workplaces, but the factors linked to potential
limitations of hybrid work settings caused by the real-world work
conditions remains under-explored. For instance, due to the current
COVID-19 crisis, workers may need to move between home offices
and their traditional places of work maintaining staggered timing
and social distancing rule imposed by many countries. This new
normal forces workers to adjust to different workplace designs,
layouts and facilities available which may incur a trade-off with
workers’ preferences such as preferred seating arrangement which
is very crucial for many workers. In our recent research, we characterised concentration during work based on physical and ambient
sensor data including air quality, temperature, humidity, movement,
and noise [19]. We also found that the unavailability of preferred
seating arrangement at workplace can increase perceived stress
and reduce concentration levels of workers while at work. But what
preferred seats look like to different people was not characterised.
Also, the meaning of preferred seating arrangement is not heavily
investigated by recent literature. Therefore, the identification and
implications of seating preferences when people choose to work
in a hybrid work setting due to COVID-19 crisis is very timely to
analyse.

NFW ’20, August 03–05, 2020, Online

Rahaman, et al.

Figure 1: Participant statistics
In this study, we investigate what a ‘preferred seating’ might
look like and discuss a set of constraints associated with work
productivity, by analyzing a dataset collected pre-COVID-19 from
participants with diverse job roles. We present a list of implications
leveraging our learning from the past. We also discuss how modern
hybrid workplaces would be challenged and could overcome some
of the key challenges while meeting these seating preferences and
productivity constraints at work, especially given the current and
post-COVID-19 crisis situations.
The organization of this paper is as follows: Section 2 discusses
the dataset and analyses seating preferences along with constraints
of work productivity; Implications of our research are discussed in
Section 3; Finally, the paper concludes in Section 4.

2

2.2

Analyzing seating preferences

A list of seating preferences is given to the participant to select,
and they are also allowed to specify their preferences if it was not
in the list.

SEATING AND PRODUCTIVITY AT WORK

In this section, we discuss a diverse set of seating preferences and
several constraints that could influence workers’ productivity. To
analyse seating preference and productivity constraints, we built
a dataset of 37 volunteer participants at Arup, Melbourne. The
dataset was collected in May 2019. This research was approved by
Human Research Ethics Committee of RMIT university, Australia.
For data collection, we designed a survey in consultation with
professional behavioural scientists. We logged responses by asking
participants about their preferences related to seating arrangements
while performing their work-related tasks. The participants also
reported what influenced their perceived work productivity. The
participant statistics and responses are analysed in the following
subsections. Note that the pilot site is a traditional open-plan office
who practices activity-based working. Since this is not a cubicle or
room based office, there is no boundary among seats. Hence, many
of the analysis could potentially be applicable to the home office
setting as well.

2.1

Figure 1(a), they are aged between 18 and 65 years, with a major
portion of participants from 26-35 years age group. The length of
service as a professional was also captured. As illustrated in Figure 1(b), the service length of a large proportion of participants (i.e.
59.46%) is under three years. A proportion of 21.6% participants
reported that they have worked for more than 10 years in this
organization.

Participant statistics

The participants in our collected dataset are from a diverse professional backgrounds including mechanical engineers, structural
engineers, building scientists, electrical engineers, acoustics and
lighting professionals. In our participant cohort, the male and female proportions are 56.75% and 43.24%, respectively. As shown in

Figure 2: Distribution of seating preferences
As shown in Figure 2, all participants indicated that they have
at least one preference, as “no preference" contributes 0%. We found
that 83.78% of participants wanted to sit close to their team members. This is likely due to the fact that these workers need to interact
with their team members while performing their tasks on specific
projects. Many organisations allocate specific zones for the workers from same team. However, organizations and governments in
many countries have imposed several restrictions to stop the spread
of COVID-19 and to ensure safe-work for all employees. For instance, staggered start and finish times for businesses including

Seating preference analysis for hybrid workplaces

schools have been in place in Australia to avoid crowding situations
on public transport and workplaces [21]. If employees need to do
hot-desking or share common spaces, frequent cleaning needs to
be carried out along with allowing only one person in every 4m 2
space1 . Given the decreased room capacity due to social distancing
and staggered timing requirement caused by COVID-19 crisis, having the all team member being present in the room or nearby would
be much more challenging. To support staggered times of entry and
exit to/from the workplaces, future research could develop solutions
by formulating this problem as a new combinatorial optimisation
problem. Another direction of research is to develop personalised
recommender systems for suggesting a group of workers requiring
entry to the workplaces based on their specific work requirements.
Next, “close to the window" and “in an open area" followed in
preference, which accounted for more than 70.27% and 32.43% of
responses, respectively. This is likely driven by the preference that
many workers prefer to have some amount of natural lights during their working hours [7]. Many modern offices are designed to
provide its occupants with enough open areas. However, offices
may find it challenging to arrange seating near the windows if the
number of people with such preference is very large. In our dataset,
a significant proportion of workers preferred to sit close to their
managers or close friends. This may be important for some workers,
however, it is not always easy to allocate workers with such seating
arrangements due to the similar reasons as stated above. If someone needs to work from home, this closeness with team members
may not be possible physically, however, could be replaced with
technologies such as online chatroom.
A small proportion of participants (16.22%) chose to specify their
preferences, which is called as “Other". These includes adjustable
sit/stand desk, desks with one or more large screens, and desks with
good/clean keyboard and mouse. These may indicate the variable
nature of preferences that could be very important to conduct some
specific tasks as part of the nature of their job, or a requirement
from an occupational health and safety point of view. For instance,
one engineer specified seats “wider/multiple screens", which might
be because they need to perform extensive drafting and analysis
and feel comfortable with wider screens or a seating that provides
multiple screens. Participants might also have pre-existing medical
conditions that mean that height adjustable desks are required to
ensure they don’t get injured, or worsen their existing conditions.

2.3

Analyzing productivity constraints

Figure 3 shows the participants’ identification of constraints to
their work productivity. It is found that seating arrangements can
influence the work productivity of workers. Specifically, 18.92% of
our participant workers reported that preferred seating arrangements effect their productivity at work. Another important point
which could directly be linked to seating arrangement is the face
to face communication with colleagues during work hours. In our
participant cohort, 78.38% reported that there is a direct association
between face to face communication with colleagues and their work
productivity.

1 https://www.safeworkaustralia.gov.au/collection/workplace-checklists-covid-19

NFW ’20, August 03–05, 2020, Online

Figure 3: Distribution of productivity constraints

In hybrid workplaces, noise can have a negative impact towards
work productivity. Open-plan offices are usually noisier than traditional office arrangements as reported by previous literature [10].
Surrounding noise can cause distractions, and have an impact on
the overall perceived concentration abilities of people [1, 20]. In
a “working from home" context, it is reasonable to assume that distractions with kids playing around, or family members doing other
activities would have the same impacts on concentration. Figure 3
shows that 64.86% participants in our study reported this issue as a
constraint to their work-related productivity.

3

CURRENT AND FUTURE IMPLICATIONS

Seating arrangements and open plan offices have a direct impact
on workers’ productivity at work. Given the cost of decreased
productivity and benefits of improved productivity, it is important
to investigate how future workplaces can better manage constraints
and enable drivers of concentration and productivity.
From a behavioural point of view, the collected dataset highlights
the overwhelming importance of proximity to team members and
remaining connected to teammates as well as being located close
to windows. This suggests that the success of workplace design
relies on improving natural light intake and perimeter zone seating,
as well as an operational management strategy to ensure desks
are allocated appropriately for teams within an organisation. In
other words, an open plan office arrangement whereby anyone can
sit anywhere as they please, has potentially negative impacts on
productivity by not controlling team arrangements.
Multiple distributed factors that do not represent a majority
indicate the importance of designing workplaces that have varied
environments to meet individual demands. For example, although
only 8% of participants highlighted the importance of sitting close to
the entry/door, it is important to cater for this minority, to ensure
an inclusive workplace that aims to maximise ideal conditions
for all workers and not disadvantage minority preference groups.
Similarly, work spaces should be designed to cater for the 2.7% of
participants that prefer to sit alone.
Future workplaces must also consider and design for limiting
productivity constraints. The dataset shows that in general, environmental factors - apart from noise - are not as significant as
operational and work-life balance factors. That is, productivity

NFW ’20, August 03–05, 2020, Online

constraints are more associated to how meetings and project resourcing are managed, rather than comfort factors. In addition to
these design factors, the dataset suggests the importance of human
resource management and developing structures and systems to
limit project numbers and meetings for each worker.
In a post-COVID-19 society, it is likely that working from home
will become more commonplace. Ensuring home-based seating configurations are optimised for each employee will become critical for
managing productivity despite employers having limited control
over these arrangements. This research has identified factors related to seating preferences and productivity at work using a dataset
collected in pre-COVID-19 times that can be actively considered
to address this issue. Regular team meetings via video conference
for connectivity and human resource/project management have
been identified as critical enablers and barriers to productivity. Ultimately, working from home arrangements can create the flexibility
and opportunity for employees to tailor their spaces beyond normal levels. Therefore, hybrid workplaces where more people will
continue working from in the future can presents an opportunity
for employers to improve their workersâĂŹ concentration and
productivity levels beyond what is possible in a commercial office.
Individual workers can track their own constraints using latest
technologies such as pervasive sensing based data collection and
machine learning of their physical work environments [19].
Moreover, the research presented in this paper will direct to
future research in the areas of workplace recommender systems,
constraint-based optimisation of work related preferences, and
human-computer interactions which would lead the development
of new interfaces for digital and physical workplaces.

4

CONCLUSION

This paper discusses various seating preferences and highlighted
how it can impact the work related productivity of workers in a preCOVID-19 workplace. From the analysis of our dataset collected
from 37 participant workers, we found that everyone had at least
one seating preference. A majority of the participants reported that
a lack of seating arrangement of their preference can directly affect
their work experience and overall productivity. We also discussed a
list of current and future implications of our findings including the
need for adaptation to home-based seating arrangements through
seating configuration optimisation as working from home will be
more common during and post-COVID-19 society.
We also discussed directions to future research by developing
combinatorial optimisation solutions for staggered entry and exit
to/from workplaces. This solution could be leveraged to develop efficient group recommendations for staggered entry to the workplaces.
Future research also could investigate the effectiveness of adaptive
seating preferences through the identification of employees’ concentration, stress and productivity to provide better work support.
To better understand individual requirements and enhanced work
productivity, pervasive sensing and machine learning technologies
developed for traditional workplaces could be transferred to work
from home settings.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by Arup and RMIT Enabling Capability
Platform through the provision of an ’Opportunity Funding’ scheme
(no. 17073).

Rahaman, et al.

REFERENCES
[1] SP Banbury and DC Berry. 2005. Office noise and employee concentration:
Identifying causes of disruption and potential improvements. Ergonomics 48, 1
(2005), 25–37. https://doi.org/10.1080/00140130412331311390
[2] Chloë Brown, Christos Efstratiou, Ilias Leontiadis, Daniele Quercia, and Cecilia
Mascolo. 2014. Tracking Serendipitous Interactions: How Individual Cultures
Shape the Office. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work & Social Computing (Baltimore, Maryland, USA). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 1072–1081. https://doi.org/10.1145/2531602.2531641
[3] Chloë Brown, Christos Efstratiou, Ilias Leontiadis, Daniele Quercia, Cecilia Mascolo, James Scott, and Peter Key. 2014. The Architecture of Innovation: Tracking
Face-to-face Interactions with Ubicomp Technologies. In Proceedings of the 2014
ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing (Seattle, Washington) (UbiComp ’14). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 811–822.
[4] Raymond J. Cole, Audrey Bild, and Amy Oliver. 2012. The changing context of
knowledge-based work: consequences for comfort, satisfaction and productivity.
Intelligent Buildings International 4, 3 (2012), 182–196.
[5] Colin Duff. 2020. How to Set Up Your Workplace for Remote and Hybrid Employees. https://robinpowered.com/blog/workplace-remote-hybrid-employees/.
Accessed: 2020-06-26.
[6] Kimberly D. Elsbach. 2003. Relating Physical Environment to Self-Categorizations:
Identity Threat and Affirmation in a Non-Territorial Office Space. Administrative
Science Quarterly 48, 4 (2003), 622–654. https://doi.org/10.2307/3556639
[7] Anca D. Galasiu and Jennifer A. Veitch. 2006. Occupant preferences and satisfaction with the luminous environment and control systems in daylit offices: a literature review. Energy and Buildings 38, 7 (2006), 728 – 742. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2006.03.001 Special Issue on Daylighting Buildings.
[8] Ali Ghahramani, Jovan Pantelic, Casey Lindberg, Matthias Mehl, Karthik Srinivasan, Brian Gilligan, and Edward Arens. 2018. Learning occupantsâĂŹ workplace interactions from wearable and stationary ambient sensing systems. Applied
Energy 230 (2018), 42 – 51.
[9] Jan Gerard Hoendervanger, Anja F. Ernst, Casper J. Albers, Mark P. Mobach, and
Nico W. Van Yperen. 2018. Individual differences in satisfaction with activitybased work environments. PLOS ONE 13, 3 (03 2018), 1–15.
[10] Helena Jahncke, Staffan Hygge, Niklas Halin, Anne Marie Green, and Kenth
Dimberg. 2011. Open-plan office noise: Cognitive performance and restoration.
Journal of Environmental Psychology 31, 4 (2011), 373 – 382.
[11] Jungsoo Kim and Richard de Dear. 2013. Workspace satisfaction: The privacycommunication trade-off in open-plan offices. Journal of Environmental Psychology 36 (2013), 18 – 26.
[12] Ashkanasy Neal M., Ayoko Oluremi B., and Jehn Karen A. 2014. Understanding
the physical environment of work and employee behavior: An affective events
perspective. Journal of Organizational Behavior 35, 8 (2014), 1169–1184.
[13] Gloria Mark, Shamsi Iqbal, Mary Czerwinski, and Paul Johns. 2014. Capturing the
Mood: Facebook and Face-to-face Encounters in the Workplace. In Proceedings
of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social
Computing (Baltimore, Maryland, USA). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1082–1094.
[14] Afra Mashhadi, Akhil Mathur, Marc Van Den Broeck, Geert Vanderhulst, Marc
Godon, and Fahim Kawsar. 2016. A Case Study on Capturing and Visualising Faceto-face Interactions in the Workplace. In Proceedings of the 18th International
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services
Adjunct (Florence, Italy) (MobileHCI ’16). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 575–584.
[15] James C McElroy and Paula C Morrow. 2010. Employee reactions to office
redesign: A naturally occurring quasi-field experiment in a multi-generational
setting. Human Relations 63, 5 (2010), 609–636.
[16] Sluiter JK Meijer EM, Frings-Dresen MH. 2012. Effects of office innovation on
office workers’ health and performance. Intelligent Buildings International 4, 3
(2012), 182–196. https://doi.org/10.1080/17508975.2012.695950
[17] Rachel L. Morrison and Keith A. Macky. 2017. The demands and resources arising
from shared office spaces. Applied Ergonomics 60 (2017), 103 – 115.
[18] D. Olguin Olguin, B. N. Waber, T. Kim, A. Mohan, K. Ara, and A. Pentland.
2009. Sensible Organizations: Technology and Methodology for Automatically
Measuring Organizational Behavior. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics, Part B (Cybernetics) 39, 1 (Feb 2009), 43–55.
[19] M. S. Rahaman, J. Liono, Y. Ren, J. Chan, S. Kudo, T. Rawling, and F. D. Salim. 2020.
An Ambient-Physical System to Infer Concentration in Open-plan Workplace.
IEEE Internet of Things Journal (2020), 1–1.
[20] Michael Rugg and Mark AW Andrews. 2010. How does background noise affect
our concentration. Scientific American (2010).
[21] State Gov. of Victoria. 2020. School operations. https://www.education.vic.gov.
au/school/Pages/coronavirus_schools_operations.aspx. Accessed: 2020-07-01.
[22] Eric Sundstrom, Robert E. Burt, and Douglas Kamp. 1980. Privacy at Work:
Architectural Correlates of Job Satisfaction and Job Performance. The Academy
of Management Journal 23, 1 (1980), 101–117.

