COVID-19 Remote Patient Monitoring:
Social Impact of AI
Ashlesha Nesarikar1

Waqas Haque,

Suchith Vuppala,

Abhijit Nesarikar

University of Texas at Dallas
Plano Intelligence

UT Southwestern

UT Southwestern

Plano Intelligence

May 2020

Abstract
A primary indicator of success in the fight against COVID-19 is avoiding stress on critical care
infrastructure and services (CCIS). However, CCIS will likely remain stressed until sustained
herd immunity is built, either in due course or by vaccination on mass scale. There are also
secondary considerations for success: mitigating economic damage; curbing the spread of
misinformation, improving morale, and preserving a sense of control; building global trust for
diplomacy, trade and travel; and restoring reliability and normalcy to day-to-day life, among
others. We envision technology plays a pivotal role. Here, we focus on the effective use of
readily available technology to improve the primary and secondary success criteria for the fight
against SARS-CoV-2. In a multifaceted technology approach, in this Part I, we start with
effective technology use for remote patient monitoring (RPM) of COVID-19 with the following
objectives:
1. Deploying readily available technology for continuous real-time remote monitoring
of patient vitals with the help of biosensors on a large scale.
2. Effective and safe remote large-scale communitywide care (mass health monitoring
with a cognitive AI platform) of low-severity cases as a buffer against surges in
COVID-19 hospitalizations to reduce strain on critical care services and emergency
hospitals.
3. Improving the patient, their family, and their community’s sense of control and
morale.
4. Proposing a clear technology and medical definition of remote patient monitoring for
COVID-19 to address an urgent technology need; address obfuscated, narrow, and
erroneous information and provide examples; and urge publishers to be clear and
complete in their disclosures.
5. Leveraging the cloud-based distributed cognitive RPM platform for community
leaders and decision makers to enable planning and resource management, pandemic
research, damage prevention and containment, and receiving feedback on their
strategies and executions. More details to follow on this in Part II.

1

Corresponding author: ashlesha.nesarikar@utdallas.edu
URL: https://www.planointelligence.com

Page 1 of 21

I. Introduction
Social distancing and coordinated community action appear to slow the exponential increase in
new COVID-19 cases1, 2 for the first wave of the pandemic. However, COVID-19 poses pressing
challenges not seen with recent pandemics3, 4. The mortality rate and contagiousness of COVID19 is likely to be higher than that seen in the H1N1 pandemic in 20091, 2. The current pandemic
is also compared to the 1918 Pandemic Influenza, which occurred in three waves across the
spring, fall, and winter of 19183, 5. Moreover, the 1918 Pandemic Influenza spread over a year,
while COVID-19 reached a global scope within weeks. As of May 15, 2020, earlier strain on
critical care infrastructure and services (CCIS) appears reduced to some degree; on the other
hand, the inherent weakness of an in-person-care (also referred to as brick-and-mortar) model is
apparent. The current standard of care, financial incentive structure6, and infrastructure relies
heavily on brick-and-mortar based health services. In waiting rooms, patients and non-patients
are vulnerable to potential exposure to COVID-19. Patients with other chronic illnesses and
conditions susceptible to COVID-19 complications are especially at risk. COVID-19 has
upended earlier best practices. The critical care system is especially strained, leaving many
traditionally high-risk patients without care6. Moreover, the pandemic has pushed health services
at all levels to strained conditions not seen before. In extreme cases, some communities have
seen their health and social care system brought to their breaking point as localities run out of
personal protective equipment (PPE), ICU beds, and ventilators, among others. For some
communities, rationing health services may be unavoidable7.
Even in the most optimistic scenario—if pandemic history is any guide—the worst may be yet to
come; the crisis may continue for up to the next 18 months1, 3, 4, 8. It is time to utilize the success
of first wave containment—the accumulated time, experience, and community spirit—to prepare
for a likely second wave9. Technology has the capability and readiness to make a social impact
not only within local communities, but globally. Raztan et al. report communication and data
voids due to uncertainty around the trajectory of COVID-19; this uncertainly is one of the causes
of fear and misinformation9.
COVID-19 is evolving, and presents new, perplexing symptoms that are the subject of ongoing
investigations10, 11, 12. Tang et al. found that blood coagulation abnormalities (increased D-dimer
and fibrin degradation product) were markers for COVID-19 mortality11. Thachil et al. in their
guidance for COVID-19 coagulopathy, report a 3-fold increase in D-dimer values (among other
coagulopathy markers) indicates a significant need for hospital care even if there are no other
concerns12. They recognize that their guidance will change with evolving knowledge. Such a
rapidly changing disease, healthcare guidelines, and community response requires a modular and
scalable system for remote patient monitoring (RPM). Our cognitive RPM system is up to the
task as it is component- and cloud-based, and may be readily deployed in the cloud on demand.
We propose remote patient monitoring (RPM) on a mass-scale (communitywide care) as one way
to prepare for possible subsequent waves of rapid increase in SARS-CoV-2 infections; we refer
to these rapid increases in COVID-19 cases as surges. The primary objective of RPM is to
counter the uncertainties associated with COVID-19 and its surges. We propose gathering
Page 2 of 21

community wide continuous real-time COVID-19 patient data for all patients. This data may
help with understanding the progression of COVID-19 in individuals, the spread of it
community wide, containment effectiveness for the community, and the community’s pandemic
role 9. We recognize that progression, spread, containment, and pandemic role are topics of
investigation in their own right. Our approach is to use a cloud-based AI platform (cognitive
RPM system) to generate data and intelligence that may further the respective investigations.
Besides the data and intelligence derived from it, we offer a unified and common source of data
that may be cross referenced across different research disciplines related to progression, spread,
containment, and pandemic role. The referential integrity and traceability of the data across
disciplines, we believe, is one effective tool in combating surges and uncertainty surrounding
COVID-19. In Part I, we primarily focus on progression and spread. We hope to learn from the
community and peer feedback on Part I, which may help us cover containment and pandemic
role in Part II. Our systems approach—in this Part I and the proposed Part II—to counter
COVID-19 is an approach called for by Ratzan et al. 9 in being prepared and proactive in
preventing, managing, and mitigating COVID-19 surges. The systems approach may not only
subdue adversities against health, health workers, and health infrastructure, but also challenges
(covered in Part II) faced by businesses, civic planning, economic forecasting, and broader
societal responses to the pandemic.

II. COVID-19 Symptoms and Severity
Remote patient monitoring (RPM) is proposed to care for patients with various diseases13, 14, 15, 16,
17
. In this paper, we focus on COVID-19.We divide patients into two categories based on their
symptoms10:




Low-severity: Symptoms include fever, fatigue, myalgia, cough, sore throat, runny nose,
sneezing, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and diarrhea (these are associated with acute
respiratory tract infection and digestive distress) 10. We also include high-risk (due to key
mortality markers including high blood pressure, diabetes, blood coagulation
abnormalities, COPD, etc.) patients suspected to have or tested positive for COVID-19,
but who show no symptoms.
High-severity: Symptoms include pneumonia with hypoxemia,
< 92%. Acute
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), shock, encephalopathy, myocardial injury, heart
failure, coagulation dysfunction, and kidney injury10. We also include a three or more
fold increase in D-dimer values based on current reports and guidance11,12.

A low-severity COVID-19 patient may be referred for home based real-time monitoring with the
cognitive RPM system. The AI-based cognitive RPM system monitors the patient for their
propensity to a potential turn to high-severity. If high-severity COVID-19 is expected or
detected, patients, doctors, paramedics, hospitals, resource managers, and other city officials may
be notified. A patient may be transferred directly to a hospital bed.

III.

Real-time vs On Demand Monitoring

Real-time monitoring offers several benefits over on-demand monitoring. Real-time is used to
mean many things in literature depending on context. In an engineering sense, a real-time
Page 3 of 21

observation of an event indicates an inconsequentially small time lag (e.g., to maximize
resolution) between the event and its observation, while maintaining continuity of observation
over the duration of the event. Traditionally, engineers have accepted a tradeoff between
resolution and sampling continuity. On demand monitoring sacrifices both sampling continuity
and resolution to allow human consumption of the raw data. If we take 12 days18 as the
progression duration of COVID-19, a typical real-time observation of the patient symptoms (e.g.,
with biosensors) may involve taking observations every second for the 12-day duration. A tenminute reading of sensors on each of the ten days whether at home, online, or in a clinical
setting, is not a real-time observation. Sporadic observation of symptoms over the 12-day period
are considered on-demand observations.
An on-demand observation of an event that is valid over a given set of time intervals
(representing fractions of the event’s duration) is time dependent. On the other hand, a
continuous real-time observation over the event’s entire duration is time independent. Real-time
and on-demand are context-sensitive concepts that depend on data variability of the process as a
function of time. For a chronic disease like Type II diabetes, 12 evenly spaced blood sugar
measurements in a day over a period of a month (e.g., the time between doctor’s office visits)
may be regarded as real-time, taking into account a patient’s daily activities and
metabolic/activity cycles in aggregate. On the other hand, COVID-19 is a fast progressing
disease that is fraught with uncertainties; ideally, we may want to emulate data collection
frequencies used in an ER environment and collect readings continuously for almost every
second. The need for such continuous real-time readings is validated by reports of rapid onset of
life-threatening conditions in previously symptom-free patients10, 19. Therefore, real-time data
collection for COVID-19 may involve recording each relevant vital on the order of a second for
about two weeks or until the infection is cleared. We name a set of relevant vitals along with its
concurrently collected date-and-time stamp a data-point. A data-point is collected about every
second, and it represents a snapshot of the patient’s condition that may allow a doctor to arrive at
a diagnostic with reasonable confidence. We use these definitions of real-time and data-point in
the COVID-19 monitoring and diagnostic context.
Typically, physicians are accustomed to on-demand measurements; the average doctor may find
it adequate to collect one sample of SpO2 every hour to monitor a COVID-19 patient. Real-time
data in its raw form may be overwhelming and counterproductive for the doctor. Therefore,
systems that collect real-time data need to include modules for analysis, proactive intelligence
generation, and visualization so that the doctor’s productivity and effectiveness are improved.
Real-time measurement and the large amount of data generated in the process is a prerequisite
for machine learning and AI approaches to COVID-19 monitoring. Unlike a doctor, the AI of
the RPM system proposed here can monitor COVID-19 patients continuously without fatigue, in
large volumes, with short notice, and without consuming critical ER (CCIS) resources. Such a
system can be part of the preparation for anticipated COVID-19 surges. In practical scenarios,
(see Appendix B: COVID-19 Case Studies and Use Cases), real-time data gathering is subject to
disruptions. A patient monitored by a real-time device may—knowingly or unknowingly—
disconnect the device; the device may experience outages or misuse; or connectivity from the
patient’s home to the RPM server may suffer. These contingences may be addressed
Page 4 of 21

technologically; moreover, similar contingencies may affect patients currently in ERs and
hospitals. New challenges for such a real-time RPM system exist, and we address and overcome
them with the cognitive AI platform.
1. Privacy: Patients and doctors alike should raise privacy concerns in any large scale
monitoring system. As part of our cognitive AI system, we continue to comply with
existing privacy laws and IRB approval (an independent expert review to ensure ethical
methods).
2. Data deluge: Data collection for direct human consumption increases productivity only
up to a certain level; after that, human productivity plummets due to excess data. We
solve this challenge by generating cognitive intelligence from the data and provisioning
the intelligence just in time, to the right individual (or collaborating system), in the right
format, and to the extent desired by the individual. With cognitive RPM, a doctor
responsible for oversight of a large number of COVID-19 patients would be notified only
after certain high-severity alarm conditions are met. Then the doctor may ask for
justification related to the alarm condition. Subsequently, the doctor may choose to
remotely contact the patient in an on-demand session, or the doctor may direct
paramedics to transport the patient to an ER.
3. False positives or other inundation of information: Not all AI systems are the same.
Tactically collected sensor data is not enough; doctors want generated tactical AI
consolidated with other known facts to deliver actionable intelligence—also referred to as
cognitive intelligence. Performance considerations for the cognitive RPM system’s alarm
condition (transition from low- to high-severity symptoms) are provided in the
Communitywide Care Performance Measurements section. The system may be
configured to collect feedback from doctors and generate an evaluation of its own
intelligence generation.
4. Security: The cognitive AI platform employs contemporary security (e.g., securing of
data per HIPAA, PCI, or custom client needs). Security along with privacy and
performance are a core part of the platform’s design; they may be verified and improved
during major release cycles.

IV.

RPM for COVID-19

We propose a generic use case for self-administered RPM using biosensors (see Biosensors for
COVID-19 Remote Monitoring) based on published criteria for determining COVID-19
progression (see Diagnostics, Disease Progression, and Health Predictors) in real-time on the
cognitive AI platform (see Appendix A: Real-Time Monitoring, Intelligence Generation, and
Notification Distribution). We insist on real-time monitoring over on-demand monitoring due to
uncertainties regarding COVID-19 progression, unexpected turn of symptoms to high-severity
(e.g., due to hypoxia), and the potential inability of patients to notice a sudden turn for the worse;
for example, silent hypoxia as reported by Levitan19. While high-severity patients need
hospitalization and potentially ER monitoring, low-severity patients’ use of hospital resources
may exert undue strain on CCIS3. Real-time differentiation and identification of high-severity
Page 5 of 21

patients from a pool of COVID-19 cases in a community under surge is the differentiating
benefit of our proposal and use of the cognitive AI platform. In our proposal, we:
1. Monitor all positively tested COVID-19 cases with low-severity indicators in a
community.
2. Predict and identify—in real-time—inflection points from low- to high-severity;
generate notifications of the inflection points as alarm conditions; deliver the
notifications and the relevant supporting evidence to health-practitioners, paramedics,
and authorized individuals; and make the relevant data and its analytics available on
demand.
3. Support critical care infrastructure and services (CCIS) in its existing format (there
may not be enough time to modify, test, and validate the already efficient functions of
CCIS; e.g. ER procedures may already be optimal). For example, feedback from
hospitals, ER professionals, and paramedics may be utilized to derive alarm
conditions; deliver them as real-time notifications; and provision supporting data to
justify the alarm conditions to the notification recipients.
4. Collect, analyze, and distribute the data—within regulatory compliance guidelines
(e.g., HIPAA, security, role-based access, IRB review and its guidelines, FDA and
CDC recommendations and guidelines, etc.)—to pandemic research; resource
management; planning, prevention, and containment efforts; and community
awareness and education efforts; among others. More details on this will be covered
in Part II.

A. COVID-19 remote-healthcare: On-Demand vs. Real-Time
Both on-demand and real-time tools may be used for remote-health provisioning. The scope of
this paper is limited to remote monitoring of patients experiencing symptoms of low-severity
COVID-19. A patient diagnosed with or suspected to have worsening hypoxia or other medical
complications needs care in a clinical or hospital setting. For remote monitoring of low-severity
COVID-19 patients, we describe two approaches to remote-healthcare and their cost benefits:
Approach I is on-demand remote monitoring of patients by their doctor, and Approach II is realtime monitoring of patients by an AI system.

B. Approach I: On-demand monitoring
On-demand monitoring is widely covered in the literature and this is the only option currently
available for remote monitoring. Real-time monitoring is not addressed in otherwise
comprehensive guidelines of on-demand telehealth provided by HHS20. Some on-demand
monitoring solutions are referred or implied in their disclosures to be real-time, though in reality,
they are at best episodic-care approaches. At a scheduled time—at the request of the patient or
the doctor—a doctor on a video or audio conference with a patient may gather symptoms and
results of patient self-administered tests. The patient may use a measurement device at the
discretion of the doctor to gather health data. Successful implementation, cost-benefit, and
challenges of on-demand monitoring are subject to:

Page 6 of 21

a) The patient’s ability to follow the doctor’s directions in gathering diagnostic data.
Typically, a doctor’s ability may be limited in guiding a patient to collect, note, and
convey a meaningful data sample during the on-demand session. Several studies have
reported varying degrees of success rates13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Patient training, ease of use of
devices, intuitiveness of interfaces, and in-home support for the patients may be
influencing factors for success of on-demand monitoring.
b) Rapid symptom progression. For example, in the case of COVID-19, on-demand
monitoring may miss rapid progression to high-severity symptoms. The doctor may
primarily rely on and be limited by the episodic data collection strategy of the ondemand session for diagnosis; potential red flags may be delayed or even missed. The
success of this approach is primarily dependent on cooperation, communication, and
joint understanding between the patient and doctor.
c) User familiarity with the system. On-demand monitoring is a natural extension of
medicine as it is practiced today. A phone call or a video call that the patients and the
doctors are already familiar with may not differ significantly from on-demand
monitoring (for example, a doctor asking for a patient to take his temperature during a
video call). In real-time AI monitoring, the possible involvement of a potentially
opaque system—for real-time data collection, data analysis, and decision making—
may be perceived by both the patients and the doctors as novel and may need some
getting used to.
d) Availability and scalability. On-demand solutions and their technology variations are
readily available from several vendors. Though on-demand monitoring is promoted as
a solution to remote monitoring of COVID-19, it is neither real-time continuous
monitoring nor scalable. Patients may not be monitored continuously, and at any one
time, only one patient can be monitored by one health care professional.

On-demand—a dedicated limited-time communication link. An example of episodic monitoring
as opposed to real-time monitoring.

Page 7 of 21

C. Approach II: Real-time monitoring
Continuous real-time patient monitoring by scalable, distributed, artificial intelligence based
systems are, to the best of our knowledge, not in use or otherwise proposed in the literature.
Based on reported COVID-19 spread2, 5, 8, 10 characteristics, we envision a need for massmonitoring of vitals that can be scaled up on short notice. Most positive cases are expected to
recover without leading to high-severity or life-threatening symptoms2, 5, 10; however, almost all
low-severity cases would need continuous monitoring on a large scale (also referred to as
communitywide care). Though aggravation of symptoms may be sudden and unexpected, only a
small fraction of COVID-19 cases is expected to exhibit life threatening conditions and need for
ER care. As an illustration, we present typical communitywide care scenarios (see Appendix B:
COVID-19 Case Studies and Use Cases) with the platform. We draw on our previous experience
(see Appendix A: Real-Time Monitoring, Intelligence Generation, and Notification Distribution)
in our proposal to design, implement, and test real-time data collection, intelligent screening, and
notification in combating COVID-19.
For the purposes of this paper, we consider home-based vitals monitoring scenarios (see
Appendix B: COVID-19 Case Studies and Use Cases). This RPM scenario may be extended to
emergency non-hospital quarantine locations in the event of a rapid surge in positive COVID-19
cases. We identify typical vitals, their thresholds, and alarm conditions that need monitoring,
emphasizing rapid identification of patients with deteriorating conditions. Our objective is to
identify patients that may need hospitalization and potentially ER care before their condition
deteriorates to high severity. The success of communitywide care may be measured in terms of
false positives and false negatives (see Communitywide Care Performance Measurements).
Successful implementation of real-time monitoring, especially as compared to on-demand
monitoring, depends on:
a) Ability to emulate ER-like (continuous real-time) monitoring in non-hospital settings. For
our home-based monitoring scenario, we need to collect data frequently and
continuously. In this context, we differentiate the cognitive RPM system from a generic
continuous data collection system with smart phone app, graphs, and numerical displays.
Our system can generate cognitive intelligence and deliver it just in time, to the right end
users, in a format suited to the end user, with the extent of detail (e.g., metadata)
specified by the end user. The deluge of information generated by the generic app is often
detrimental to the cognitive productivity of the end user (e.g., doctor responsible for
overseeing RPM for several patients). As an example, for a multi-tasking doctor, the
cognitive RPM system shields the doctor from the data deluge, generates actionable
intelligence, and delivers it to enhance the doctor’s cognitive productivity, induce
intelligent insights, and reduce multi-tasking fatigue.
b) Real-time analysis of and intelligence generation from the collected data to project the
need for patient hospitalization to prevent life threatening conditions. Our initial
approach is for the cognitive RPM system to identify alarm conditions and generate and
deliver real-time notification of the alarm conditions (e.g., to PCP, ER physicians, or
paramedics) and, if needed, patient vitals history and PCP (primary care physician) notes.
Page 8 of 21

We expect the availability of a patient’s vitals history and PCP notes at the time of ER
admittance will reduce wait, processing and diagnosis time.
c) Shifting COVID-19 patient screening burden from ERs and hospital waiting rooms to
patient homes (or other designated quarantine locations). The patient’s PCP may monitor
non-emergency progression of the disease or evaluate the need for hospitalization. This
may also allow PCPs to see their non-COVID-19 patients in their regular practice.
d) Bringing greater predictability to the progression of COVID-19 cases in a community by
allowing the community and its administrators to monitor the progression of COVID-19
in real-time, generate high-confidence projections, manage resources effectively, and take
proactive steps to prevent expected future adversities. Details of this functionality will be
provided in Part II.

Continuous real-time patient monitoring by a scalable, distributed, AI-based system. Multiple
patients can be accommodated simultaneously. The doctor is proactively alerted to patients who
may require attention.

V. Diagnostics, Disease Progression, and Health Predictors
Rapid progression of COVID-19 and the resulting unprecedented pandemic motivated us to
compile symptoms, severity and morbidity indicators, and related health features of the disease.
The information in this paper is not health advice, a diagnostic indicator, or patient guidance.
A patient’s COVID-19 health predictors may be divided into two categories: the patient’s vitals
and the patient’s medical history. Vitals are measured in real-time to track progression and
pinpoint potential deterioration to high-severity symptoms. Real-time measurements of vitals is
at the core of the cognitive RPM system. We propose a list of vitals that may need monitoring
for effective real-time RPM.

Page 9 of 21

A. Patient Vitals
1. Respiratory Rate: This is the number of breaths per minute. A normal range for adults is
12 to 20 breaths per minute, with a lower number for individuals with better
cardiovascular fitness. During COVID-19 progression, an increased respiratory rate over
a short period of time may indicate a transition from low-severity to high-severity; this
may be accompanied by shortness of breath. Breathlessness typically develops between
day 521 and 822 of symptoms. A review of risk factors for progression of COVID-19
found that shortness of breath (dyspnea) is more significantly associated with mortality
than presence of a fever23; dyspnea was reported in between 40 and 87% of patients23.
Note that our objective is to generate an alarm condition in the cognitive RPM system
well before the patient develops breathlessness or silent respiratory distress (such as the
occurrence of silent hypoxia19)
2. Blood Oxygen Saturation (SpO2): This measures the percentage of oxygen saturation in
the blood. Normal range is 95 to 100, and an alarm condition may be met for levels
persistently below 92. This is likely the most important vital for COVID-19 patients.
3. Heart Rate: Elevated heart rate (above 100 beats per minute) is believed to be one of the
signs of worsening condition. However, no published research linking elevated heart rate
to COVID-19 was found.
4. Blood Pressure: Numerous studies have found that patients diagnosed with hypertension
have an increased risk of severe COVID-19 presentation and mortality24
5. Temperature: Shi et al. report lack of positive correlation between fever and severity of
COVID-1923.
A patient’s continuous self-assessment of clinical symptoms is an important tool for determining
alarm condition. This is a subjective measure of symptom severity that depends on patient
characteristics, behavior, and daily routine, along with their evaluation by the patient’s physician.

B. Patient History
Patient history guides predictors of mortality, propensity for high-severity symptoms, and
expectations of outcomes in general. The current understanding of severity and mortality
predictors may change due to uncertainty and lack of evidence-based guidelines from peer
reviewed data on COVID-19. Currently, long-term effects of severe COVID-19 presentation or
resulting damage to lungs or other organs are not known. We propose to account for
comorbidities24 (e.g., diabetes, hypertension, COPD or other respiratory diseases, underlying
vascular disease, etc.) and other adverse factors (e.g., smoking, tobacco use, age over 65, history
of lung or other cancer, etc.) from patient history in formulating an RPM alarm condition in Part
I. We plan to cover community impact, use of data (e.g., for research, planning, communication,
education, etc.), and potential use of the cognitive RPM system for studying the COVID-19
pandemic in Part II.

VI.

Biosensors for COVID-19 Remote Monitoring

Various telehealth and on-demand remote monitoring proposals have been reported—for
example, RPM for management of chronic diseases14 including COPD15, 16 and diabetes6, and
RPM as a part of mobile healthcare in rural and remote regions13. Though a wide variety of
Page 10 of 21

devices are reported, not all devices are suitable for real-time monitoring; reporting on usability,
efficacy, and reliability is in its early stages13. On the other hand, consumer wearables to selfmonitor and track personal fitness and health habits have been successful over the last decade.
In the US, one in six fitness and health enthusiasts have used at least one device to self-monitor
with a smart phone or smart watch26. Unlike clinical devices, consumer devices may lack key
requirements for real-time RPM, including complete disclosure of technical specifications and
supporting medical and efficacy data.
Unlike for consumer devices, the rapid response needed for COVID-19 remote monitoring needs
to account for accuracy and reliability of the self-administered devices. Consider, for example,
oximeters as essential devices for monitoring COVID-19. We find that the marketplace lacks a
clear demarcation between clinical and consumer grade oximeters. PCP and ER doctors need to
rely on the real-time and historic data to make potentially critical patient health decisions. A
myriad of cheap devices is available from global suppliers that are not subject to US regulatory
supervision or approval. In 2016, Lipnick et al. 25 reported four of six considered oximeters have
subpar accuracy and reliability. For hypoxia scenarios, four of the six reported errors for blood
oxygen saturation (SpO2) levels < 80% and three of the six had errors for SpO2 levels
between 80 − 90%. Even FDA approved devices for use in clinical settings may not meet the
World Federation of Societies of Anaesthesiologists standards25.
Self-administration of remote devices may pose further challenges and is subject to erroneous
readings due to an oximeter on a patient’s finger being susceptible to: hypoperfusion of the
finger and its hand that is unrelated to patient health (e.g., reduction in natural blood flow due to
the hand being relatively cold or due to vasoconstriction); the patient’s movements; and
calloused skin on the finger. Erroneous readings might also result from inability to follow
instructions (e.g., in application, reading, and maintenance of the oximeter); operation of the
oximeter outside its design specification (e.g., subjecting the oximeter to excess temperature or
excess pressure—for example, by sleeping on it); and unexpected patient activity (e.g., physical
exertion of a patient who is prescribed bed rest). We include the errors and potential
misadministration of devices as a key factor in measuring effectiveness and efficacy of the
cognitive RPM system (see Communitywide Care Performance Measurements).
The cognitive AI platform is designed to generate intelligence from multiple IoT devices. It can
consume data from scientific (e.g., clinical grade for COVID-19 monitoring), commercial
wearable, and commodity AV (audio video) devices concurrently to derive actionable
intelligence. Cognitive intelligence generated by the platform may compensate for heterogeneity
of IoT devices, an erroneous device reading, and patient-induced anomalies in measurements.

Page 11 of 21

Cognitive RPM architecture: the cloud-based cognitive AI system can process various data from
multiple devices and derive intelligence for the use of the PCP and other COVID-19 pandemic
response.

VII.

Communitywide Care Performance Measurements

The cognitive RPM system and its servers may be evaluated with functional and non-functional
performance measures. Functional performance measures achievement of application-specific
functionality. Non-functional performance accounts for general efficiencies and compliance of
the platform. Appendix A: Real-Time Monitoring, Intelligence Generation, and Notification
Distribution describes the core cognitive AI platform and its key non-functional performance
indicators including bandwidth, CPU vs GPU usage, and computability in general.
Here, we focus on functional performance measures for remote monitoring of COVID-19
patients in their homes. While cognitive RPM functionality may be greatly influenced by the
community, its jurisdictions, and its doctors, we present functional performance measures for a
generic use case (see Appendix B: COVID-19 Case Studies and Use Cases). The functionality
represents intelligent abilities (a human equivalent) of the cognitive RPM system to meet target
expectations. Three target tasks for the system are:
1. Detect patient non-compliance: This is regarded as a challenge to real-time monitoring
that may be overcome by patient training and regular (remote) oversight by health
professionals. Patient non-compliance includes:
a. Intentional or unintentional removal of sensors. For example, the system needs to
detect removal of the sensors by the patient for a shower, bathroom break,
unintentional removal of sensors, etc.
b. Performing activities (e.g., exercise) which may alter sensor data against the
advice of the doctor.
Page 12 of 21

2. Detect faults in monitoring devices: Monitoring devices may generate faulty data or stop
entirely due to:
a. Low battery or lack or power.
b. Adverse environmental conditions, e.g., high temperature, humidity, water
immersion, etc.
c. Loss of optimal device calibration.
3. Diagnostics for COVID-19 symptoms: With patient compliance and fault-free devices,
cognitive AI can process the generated data-points to deliver intelligent diagnostics and
an alarm (if warranted based on alarm conditions). Accuracy and time-to-delivery are
important performance measures.

A. Performance Criteria for Project Execution and Delivery
Surges (of COVID-19 cases) are expected to continue into the next year1,3, 4. Rapid deployment
of COVID-19 remote monitoring depends on several civic, healthcare, organizational, and
technical criteria; some of the important ones are listed below:
1. Multidisciplinary Execution Synergy: Rapid deployment and efficient execution may
depend heavily on team members and stakeholders from healthcare, first responders,
public policy, jurisdictional governance, civic planning, and technology. Execution plans
need to account for efficient communication, go-no-go and milestones, and resource
allocation, among others. A fast and effective delivery hinges on proactive initiative and
participation from all areas of the team.
2. User Adoption: User acceptance is key. Regardless of a jurisdictional mandate, a broader
and informed community adoption of the technology solution hinges on training and
familiarity. Frequent user feedback may dictate the efficacy of a remote monitoring
solution. Findings, successes, and lessons learned need to be published in reproducible
detail.
3. Findings Transparency: Findings and lessons learned need to be published with clear
definitions of success criteria, the extent to which the success criteria were met, and
lessons learned. Urgency for a COVID-19 solution based on a scientific approach should
not compromise reporting quality and detail; a political declaration in a research
publication17 is counterproductive.
4. Thoroughness of Disclosure: Promoters of COVID-19 technologies need to be aware of
the unusual and urgent nature of the need. Devices and monitoring technologies implied
to be COVID-19 ready need to meet the minimum criteria for technology readiness; e.g.,
clinical accuracy of devices need to be clearly stated and readily available25. A device
that does not reliably generate continuous data streams in real-time is not (and should not
be promoted as) ready for real-time time COVID-19 monitoring.
5. Execution Details: Rapid planning, resource procurement, and execution are challenges
for COVID-19 monitoring in their own right. Project management experts may have this

Page 13 of 21

capability; however, they need to go beyond high-level objectives and goals and work out
the finer project details; they need to expect and effectively execute pivots where needed.
6. Funding Criteria:
a. Project Funding: Traditional project funding sources need to look beyond “safe
bets” but well short of “moon shots”. The execution plan and its capability are
keys. Capable teams need to be proactively reached out to, and approval cycles
need to be shortened.
b. Health services payments: Healthcare systems are intertwined with a variety of
payment models. Though a simple fee for service model is typically envisioned
for remote monitoring services, challenges to other payments models remain6, 27.
For digital services—and advanced remote monitoring—needs exist for
reimbursement models, regulatory alignment, and feedback or evaluation criteria
for efficacy and evaluation, among others.
7. Uniqueness of Community Need: Frontline communities and their leaders are already on
their toes. They need to participate early and guide the effort to maintain the rapid pace
of delivery for their own communities. Every community is unique and needs unique
adaptation of a common execution plan.

VIII.

Conclusions

COVID-19, as a highly contagious disease with a prolonged incubation period and possibility of
sudden turn to life threatening conditions, has challenged the traditional healthcare approach.
Currently, patients self-assess symptom severity and go to a hospital or ER waiting room for
help. Even with increased testing, patient self-monitoring, self-assessment, and initiative are
determining factors for visiting a hospital or ER waiting room. The cognitive RPM system
addresses some of the key shortfalls of the traditional approach, which include:
1. In brick-and-mortar (traditional) COVID-19 care, the time between the onset of highseverity symptoms and a patient’s reporting to an ER, waiting for service, diagnosis,
and eventual admission to the ER may span hours or longer; this time may be critical
to COVID-19 care and recovery. Cognitive RPM is designed to identify the first
signs of high-severity symptoms and generate supporting diagnostic data for hospitals
or ERs so that patients may avoid the waiting room.
2. Waiting rooms are overwhelmed with patients with COVID-19 symptoms, causing
stress on the health system, spread of COVID-19, and delayed care for patients in
critical condition, among others. Cognitive RPM may significantly reduce head
count and time-to-care in waiting rooms; our goal is to eliminate COVID-19 cases
from waiting rooms to avoid waiting room related pandemic spread.
3. COVID-19 patient anxiety is centered on inability to get PCP care, self-monitor the
disease, and stay informed of the progression. Cognitive RPM allows PCP to get
involved in the early or low-severity symptoms stage of COVID-19 without
disrupting care to non-COVID-19 patients. The patients informed by cognitive AI
notifications and their own PCP may be more likely to follow social distancing and
Page 14 of 21

other community guidelines to counter the pandemic. We plan to cover the wide
effects of cognitive RPM on community pandemic response, healthcare planning, and
ER resource management in Part II.
4. Rural and sparsely populated communities where hospitals may not be nearby to
handle COVID-19 surges face particular hardship in traditional healthcare settings.
Cognitive RPM may provide not only in-home monitoring, but also PCP care from
doctors in urban areas or available doctors in geographically distant communities.
The ability to anticipate and plan for COVID-19 ER cases may reduce healthcare,
economic, and resource strain on rural communities.
Challenges to rapid COVID-19 pandemic community response include difficulty in rapidly
forming multidisciplinary teams of doctors, community leaders, and locally available
technologists; lack of readily available funding; transparency and completeness of disclosures on
devices, projects, and community initiatives; inability to address unique needs of individual
communities; lack of execution guidelines and historic precedent; and slow pace of user adoption
for pandemic related policies, technology solutions, and altered way of life due to the pandemic.
We tackle some of these challenges in designing cognitive RPM, bringing together a
multidisciplinary team, community involvement, and disclosure of information. Some others—
deploying and testing to create execution guidelines and assessing user adoption—remain due to
their dependence on funding availability.

IX.

Comments and Disclosures

The contributors and authors of this publication contributed their time and resources to this
publication without any financial compensation. The cognitive RPM system proposed here and
other systems built using information in this paper are subject to jurisdictional approvals (e.g.,
regarding security, privacy, HIPAA, IRB review, etc.), and consent from patients and their
doctors. Our hope is to quickly bring community leaders, technologists, academics, and business
leaders up to speed. For example, technologists, system builders, and developers may get a quick
start in building prototypes, demonstrations, and POCs (proof of concept) from this publication.

X. Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Ann-Cathrin Guertler for providing editing assistance and comments
throughout the process, and Anika Nesarikar for initial concept discussions and subsequent
conversion of the concepts to diagrams.

Page 15 of 21

XI.

References

1. Hickock, Kimberly. “How does the COVID-19 pandemic compare to the last pandemic?”
Live Science (2020). https://www.livescience.com/covid-19-pandemic-vs-swine-flu.html
2. WHO, “WHO Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Dashboard”. Last accessed May 29, 2020
(https://covid19.who.int).
3. Kissler, Stephen M., Christine Tedijanto, Edward Goldstein, Yonatan H. Grad, and Marc
Lipsitch. "Projecting the transmission dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 through the postpandemic
period." Science 368, no. 6493 (2020): 860-868.
4. Korber, Bette, Will Fischer, S. Gnana Gnanakaran, Heyjin Yoon, James Theiler, Werner
Abfalterer, Brian Foley et al. "Spike mutation pipeline reveals the emergence of a more
transmissible form of SARS-CoV-2." bioRxiv (2020).
5. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “1918 Pandemic Influenza: Three Waves.”
(2018). https://www.cdc.gov/flu/pandemic-resources/1918-commemoration/three-waves.htm
6. Rogers, Lee C., et al. "All Feet On Deck—The Role of Podiatry During the COVID-19
Pandemic: Preventing hospitalizations in an overburdened healthcare system, reducing
amputation and death in people with diabetes." Journal of the American Podiatric Medical
Association (2020).
7. Cha, A. E. "Spiking US coronavirus cases could force rationing decisions similar to those
made in Italy, China." Washington Post (2020).
8. Baker, Peter, and E. U. S. Sullivan. "Virus Plan Anticipates 18-Month Pandemic and
Widespread Shortages." (2020). https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/17/us/politics/trumpcoronavirus-plan.html.
9. Ratzan, Scott C., Lawrence O. Gostin, Najmedin Meshkati, Kenneth Rabin, and Ruth M.
Parker. "COVID-19: An Urgent Call for Coordinated, Trusted Sources to Tell Everyone
What they Need to Know and Do." NAM Perspectives (2020).
10. Yuki, Koichi, Miho Fujiogi, and Sophia Koutsogiannaki. "COVID-19 pathophysiology: A
review." Clinical Immunology (2020): 108427.
11. Tang, Ning, Dengju Li, Xiong Wang, and Ziyong Sun. "Abnormal coagulation parameters
are associated with poor prognosis in patients with novel coronavirus pneumonia." Journal of
Thrombosis and Haemostasis 18, no. 4 (2020): 844-847.
12. Thachil, Jecko, Ning Tang, Satoshi Gando, Anna Falanga, Marco Cattaneo, Marcel Levi,
Cary Clark, and Toshiaki Iba. "ISTH interim guidance on recognition and management of
coagulopathy in COVID‐19." Journal of Thrombosis and Haemostasis 18, no. 5 (2020):
1023-1026. Keesara, Sirina, Andrea Jonas, and Kevin Schulman. "Covid-19 and health care’s
digital revolution." New England Journal of Medicine (2020).
13. Schweitzer M., Huber, L., Gorfer, T., Hörbst, A. “Experiences With Developing and Using
Vital Sign Telemonitoring to Support Mobile Nursing in Rural Regions: Feasibility and
Usability Study” JMIR Nursing (2020). 3(1): e17113. doi: 10.2196/17113

Page 16 of 21

14. Sultan, Mehwish, Kerry Kuluski, Warren J. McIsaac, Joseph A. Cafazzo, and Emily Seto.
"Turning challenges into design principles: Telemonitoring systems for patients with
multiple chronic conditions." Health informatics journal 25, no. 4 (2019): 1188-1200.
15. Tsai, Ling Ling Y., Renae J. McNamara, Chloe Moddel, Jennifer A. Alison, David K.
McKenzie, and Zoe J. McKeough. "Home‐based telerehabilitation via real‐time
videoconferencing improves endurance exercise capacity in patients with COPD: The
randomized controlled TeleR Study." Respirology 22, no. 4 (2017): 699-707.
16. Hansen, Henrik, Theresa Bieler, Nina Beyer, Thomas Kallemose, Jon Torgny Wilcke,
Lisbeth Marie Østergaard, Helle Frost Andeassen et al. "Supervised pulmonary telerehabilitation versus pulmonary rehabilitation in severe COPD: a randomised multicentre
trial." Thorax 75, no. 5 (2020): 413-421.
17. Zhai, Yunkai, Yichuan Wang, Minhao Zhang, Jody Hoffer Gittell, Shuai Jiang, Baozhan
Chen, Fangfang Cui, Xianying He, Jie Zhao, and Xiaojun Wang. "From Isolation to
Coordination: How Can Telemedicine Help Combat the COVID-19 Outbreak?." medRxiv
(2020).
18. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. "Discontinuation of Transmission-Based
Precautions and Disposition of Patients with COVID-19 in Healthcare Settings (Interim
Guidance)." Retrieved on May 01, 2020.
19. Levitan, Richard. "The infection that’s silently killing coronavirus patients." The New York
Times 20 (2020).
20. HHS (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services). “Telehealth: Health care from the
safety of our homes”. Accessed May, 28, 2020; https://telehealth.hhs.gov.
21. Wang, Dawei, Bo Hu, Chang Hu, Fangfang Zhu, Xing Liu, Jing Zhang, Binbin Wang, Hui
Xiang, Zhenshun Cheng, Yong Xiong, Yan Zhao, Yirong Li, Xinghuan Wang, and Zhiyong
Peng. “Clinical Characteristics of 138 Hospitalized Patients With 2019 Novel Coronavirus–
Infected Pneumonia in Wuhan, China.” JAMA. 2020; 323 (11): 1061-1069.
22. Huang, Chaolin, Yeming Wang, Xingwang Li, Lili Ren, Jianping Zhao, Yi Hu, Li Zhang,
Guohui Fan, Jiuyang Xu, Xiaoying Gu, Zhenshun Cheng, Ting Yu, Jiaan Xia, Yuan Wei,
Wenjuan Wu, Xuelei Xie, Wen Yin, Hui Li, Min Liu, Yan Xiao, Hong Gao, Li Guo, Jungang
Xie, Guangfa Wang, Rongmeng Jiang, Zhancheng Gao, Qi Jin, Jianwei Wang, and Bin Cao.
“Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China.” The
Lancet 395 (2020).
23. Shi, Li, Ying Wang, Yadong Wang, Guangcai Duan, and Haiyan Yang. “Dyspnea rather than
fever is a risk factor for predicting mortality in patients with COVID-19.” Journal of
Infection (2020).
24. Singh, Awadhesh Kumar, Ritesh Gupta, and Anoop Misra. "Comorbidities in COVID-19:
Outcomes in hypertensive cohort and controversies with renin angiotensin system blockers."
Diabetes & metabolic syndrome: Clinical Research & Reviews (2020).
25. Lipnick, Michael S., Feiner, John R., Au, Paul, Bernstein, Michael, and Bickler, Philip E.
"The accuracy of 6 inexpensive pulse oximeters not cleared by the Food and Drug
Administration: the possible global public health implications." Anesthesia & Analgesia 123,
no. 2 (2016): 338-345.

Page 17 of 21

26. Piwek, L, Ellis, DA, Andrews, S, Joinson, A. “The Rise of Consumer Health Wearables:
Promises and Barriers”. PLoS Med 13(2): e1001953. (2016)
doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1001953
27. Hollander, Judd E., and Brendan G. Carr. "Virtually perfect? Telemedicine for COVID-19."
New England Journal of Medicine 382, no. 18 (2020): 1679-1681.

Page 18 of 21

Appendix A: Real-Time Monitoring, Intelligence Generation, and
Notification Distribution
Cognitive RPM is supported by a privacy and security centric cognitive AI platform. It derives
intelligence from deluges of real-time data collected from many heterogeneous IoT devices. The
intelligence is delivered in real-time to the intended recipients, in their suitable format, exactly
when needed. The system is a reusable, plug & play, versatile foundation for existing and future
AI systems (for example, see the public safety application below). We bring three different
innovations together to construct the cognitive AI platform.
•

•

•

It is a distributed, redundant, scalable, and fault tolerant pluggable framework of
servers, networks, and bi-directional real-time asynchronous communication.
Backward compatibility considerably simplifies interfacing with standards-based
third-party systems regardless of their age. Our standards-based (e.g., XML and
JSON) framework will allow us to grow without significant redesign, keeping up with
future technology changes.
A variety of AI (as well as filter, analytics, and probabilistic) components may be
plugged into the framework to achieve a range of design objectives. We have had
success with deep neural networks (DNNs) optimized for specific tasks.
A suite of UI allows easy consumption of the generated intelligence and other
messages. UI designs for all device form factors (smart phones, tablets, and
desktops), major operating systems, and system types are ready. Further UI work is
intended to bring more uniformity and intuitiveness to the system.

Users can interface with AI systems supported by the cognitive AI platform through its
Command and Control Console (C&CC). The C&CC is a real time cloud-based interface for
administrators or a dashboard for decision makers. It presents a unified view of relevant media
and aggregated intelligence. Users can collaborate remotely through the console from anywhere
in the world in real time (a low latency high-bandwidth underlying infrastructure is assumed).
Collaborators may form groups and teams on the fly to consume, exchange, and deliver their
expertise, which may be shared or added to the primary intelligence stream. It is secured by
encryption, authentication, and authorization.
We created a public safety application as a pluggable component of the cognitive AI platform.
Among its numerous features is the ability to detect and locate wielded firearms. It achieves this
by real-time monitoring of multiple video feeds simultaneously. Upon detection of a wielded
firearm, the system immediately sends authorized end users notifications or alarms containing
information needed to respond to the event. Notable advantages over traditional video
surveillance include 1) live video analysis (with critical event information automatically reaching
recipients within seconds, if not less) over a reactive approach, and 2) scalable automated
monitoring of multiple feeds simultaneously (whereas humans lose monitoring ability with each
additional screen).

Page 19 of 21

In a test of the prototype, we utilized a high-bandwidth (10 Gbps locally and 1 Gbps between
datacenters) and low-latency (1 to 10 ms) geographically distributed network between Texas and
Illinois. Ping time between the server and the C&CC console was about 150 ms and reflected
instantaneous network performance. In a public demonstration, we used two simultaneous live
video streams, with a video processing backend to generate person, age, gender, and gun
detection signals. In the demonstration, we were restricted to the use of available CPU servers
(32-CPU, 96 G Mem Ubuntu 16.04 LTS), which as expected, were the rate limiting steps. Use of
CPUs (as opposed to GPUs), required reducing the video quality to 720p from 2K. Adjustments
to framerate, consistency of network status, and uniformity of server load proved to be critical
factors to maintaining the steady state of the process. We maintained the steady state for about a
month with average end-to-end system processing (SP) time between a wielded gun appearing in
front of the camera to a notification of it appearing in the geographically separated admin
console of about 400 ms. The gun notification was delivered to the end-user on their own
handheld devices within about 450 ms. In the public demonstration, the application exceeded the
design goal, which was to send gun notifications within seconds.
We conducted tests using mid to low-end GPUs for AI processing, which reduced the SP time to
under 30 ms; notifications were delivered in less than 100 ms. We anticipate that use of highend GPUs may eliminate AI processing as the rate-limiting step in its entirety. We also
successfully tested concurrent processing using multiple AI back ends.

AI-based gun detection for a public safety application supported by our cognitive AI platform.

Page 20 of 21

Appendix B: COVID-19 RPM Case Studies and Use Cases
We use the following example case studies as basis for cognitive RPM use cases. The case
studies are intended to provide sample scenarios of COVID-19 remote monitoring for the benefit
of non-medical collaborators—for example, community leaders and technologists. The diversity
of and details in the case studies indicate a need for cognitive AI over tactical AI.
Case Example 1:
A doctor sees a 60-year-old man with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) with a
long history of smoking, diabetes and hypertension. This individual has had COPD exacerbations
requiring hospitalization in the past, and tested positive for COVID-19. After three days of inhospital observation, the patient’s clinical status was stable (respiratory rate of 12 with an
oxygen saturation of 95 on room air). The patient wanted to go home on the condition he would
continue to self-isolate. Hospital staff educated and sent the man home with cognitive RPM
technology. Since the patient has multiple health conditions, the physician set a lower alarm
threshold for the patient’s oxygen status; the physician set the trigger at below 95% SpO2 instead
of below 92% as for his younger patients without other significant health conditions.

Case Example 2:
A 30-year-old patient seeing a psychiatrist for a recent diagnosis of anxiety and history of panic
attacks tests COVID-19 positive. The patient agrees to use cognitive RPM. On the third day of
monitoring, the patient’s vitals become unstable (heart rate rises to 130 beats per minute, blood
pressure of 150/90, and respiratory rate of 35 breaths per minute) for 5 minutes before returning
to normal. This triggers the alarm and the physician is notified. The physician reviews the
transient episode (associated data-points, intelligence, and metadata), calls the patient, confirms
the patient was having an anxiety attack, and reassures the patient. This helped the patient avoid
an emergency department visit.

Case Example 3:
A 75-year-old woman with heart failure with increasing work of breathing tests COVID-19
positive and is monitored from home. The cognitive RPM technology alerted the doctor, who
notified the ER and advised the patient to get right to the emergency department when her
oxygen status began to gradually deteriorate. This prevented her having to wait in the hospital
waiting room, and from potentially infecting individuals around her. She received medical care
in the intensive care unit and was given a ventilator. An effective triage policy, social distancing
in the community, and the RPM technology allowed the hospital to keep a steady supply of
ventilators available.

Page 21 of 21

