TeleVital: Enhancing the quality of contactless health assessment

Jithin Sunny 1 Joel Jogy 1 Rohan Rout 1 Rakshit Naidu 1

arXiv:2007.00762v1 [cs.HC] 26 Jun 2020

Abstract
In the midst of rising positive cases of COVID19, the hospitals face a newfound difficulty to prioritize on their patients and accommodate them.
Moreover, crowding of patients at hospitals pose
a threat to the healthcare workers and other patients at the hospital. With that in mind, a noncontact method of measuring the necessary vitals
such as heart rate, respiratory rate and SPO2 will
prove highly beneficial for the hospitals to tackle
this issue. This paper discusses our approach in
achieving the non-contact measurement of vitals
with the sole help of a webcam and further our
design of an e-hospital platform for doctors and
patients to attend appointments virtually. The
platform also provides the doctor with an option
to provide with voice-based prescriptions or digital prescriptions, to simplify the daily, exhausting
routine of a doctor.

1. Introduction
COVID-19 has taken the whole world by the storm.
COVID-19(CoronaVirus Disease-19) is a disease caused
by a new strain of the family of CoronaVirus. Most patients
experience mild to moderate respiratory illness who recover without the need of any external treatment, although
older individuals are likely to experience extreme illness,
if they suffer from prevalent conditions like asthma or any
other chronic respiratory disease. Testing patients for this
disease has been a major issue as there is a dearth of testing
kits. As there is no cure yet, the best way to slow down
the transmission of the virus is to practice social distancing, although, this practice may have serious repercussions
towards mental and physical health in the future.
Food shortage, unemployment crisis and the scarcity of
healthcare professionals are just a few problems to name in
these difficult times. Patients checking into hospitals regularly not only risk the infections to themselves, but also
to the people around them. There is a need to reduce the
burden on the healthcare systems around the world in order
to match for the low number of healthcare workers. As
the rate of the affected is growing exponentially, by the
day, the hospital systems are now more overwhelmed than

ever, which increases the liability of these machines. For
the efficient management of this situation, it is necessary
to prioritize who needs care and who does not. Today, its
very difficult to do this because there are a lot of patients
and not enough doctors. And this leads to overcrowding
of hospitals and clinics and brings about an imbalance in
the healthcare system. Therefore, it is necessary to handle this situation by analyzing the health of the patient at
their homes itself (Gastel et al., 2018; Iozzia et al., 2017;
J. Ben-Ari, 2010; Malasinghe et al., 2017; Massaroni et al.,
2018). This also prevents healthcare professionals from being directly exposed to the virus, which is a huge advantage
in itself, because if the doctors and nurses get sick, then our
first line of defense is lost.
A report(ano, 2020) from the Economic Times dated April
3rd stated that CRPF helpline gets 91 percent calls regarding coronavirus, lockdown information and relatively fewer
for rations and healthcare. Public health organizations, hospitals and others on the frontlines of the COVID-19 response need to be able to respond to inquiries, cater to
the public with up-to-date outbreak information, track exposure and quickly triage new cases. In a crisis like the
COVID-19 pandemic, its not only important to deliver medical care but to also provide information to help people
make decisions and prevent health systems from being overwhelmed. The healthcare workers are our first line of defence and we can’t afford to lose them. Even with access to
capable health care and social services, those afflicted with
mental health conditions hesitate to avail the treatment due
to the stigma surrounding the illness. Ultimately, the greatest lesson that COVID-19 can teach humanity is that we are
all in this together and it is clear that a remote vital tracking
system and online consultation and therapy is the need of
the hour(J. Ben-Ari, 2010).
Our product, TeleVital, is one step ahead in this pandemic
situation by ensuring a clean, complete and contactless
health assessment at the comfort of the patient’s home.
TeleVital is an AI-driven Chatbot tool designed to help people do preliminary analysis on various parameters right at
their fingertips. This chatbot can also be accessed via premier social media platforms like Whatsapp and Facebook
Messenger in their local languages to enhance the User Experience.

TeleVital: Enhancing the quality of contactless health assessment

We built a website that can help the patients to classify
themselves as low risk, medium risk and high-risk category during these unprecedented times. If the patient is
classified as a medium risk or a high-risk patient the application would suggest a line of therapy and medications
based on Government of Indias Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare(MoHFW) and Indian Council of Medical
Research(ICMR) guidelines. An additional feature of a
quick vitals analysis can be accessed through our platform.
If the health of the patient deteriorates, the website is automated to alert the concerned authorities regarding the same.
As we target the issue of monitoring patients’ vitals in a
hospital, TeleVital performs the preliminary analysis on
various parameters of the patient’s health, prioritizing the
user’s comfort. Therefore, after consulting a few medical professionals, who are toiling hard to contain COVID19 patients and after trying to understand the problem the
doctors currently face, the experienced health workers suggested that the vitals play a major role in determining
whether a patient needs hospitalization or not. The doctors recommended capturing vitals such as heart rate, respiratory rate, SpO2 concentration in the blood and body
temperature without any contact-based measurement tools
such as a Pulse Oximeter which would potentially increase
the spread of contact-based infections/diseases.

2. Components
The TeleVital platform consists of many features to facilitate both the patients as well as the healthcare professionals.

ments online and through video calling. Here, the patients
are able to clearly explain their symptoms to the doctor,
and the doctor is able to use our TeleVital platform to measure the patients vitals and diagnose the patients in a remote manner. For the implementation of the video calling,
we used WebRTC which enables real-time communication
(voice, video) through a web browser.
In order for WebRTC technologies to work, a request for
your public-facing IP address is first made to a STUN
server.The server then responds with your public-facing IP
address which is communicated to the peer. These peers
are also able to do the same thing using a STUN or TURN
server and can tell you what address to contact them at as
well. Signaling data channels are then dynamically created
to detect peers and support peer-to-peer negotiations and
session establishment. Once two or more peers are connected to the same channel, the peers are able to communicate and negotiate session information. This process is
similar to the publish/subscribe pattern. Once the answer
is received, a process occurs to determine and negotiate the
best of the ICE candidates gathered by each peer. Once the
optimal ICE candidates are chosen, essentially all of the
required metadata, network routing (IP address and port),
and media information used to communicate for each peer
is agreed upon. The network socket session between the
peers is then fully established and active. Next, local data
streams and data channel endpoints are created by each
peer, and multimedia data is finally transmitted both ways
using whatever bidirectional communication technology is
employed.
2.3. Vitals Measurement

2.1. Chatbot
The chatbot employed by the software uses a conditional
approach to decision making. It is comprised of nodes
containing information which is visible to the user and
links them to other nodes. The links are decided either by
choices made by the user while interacting with the chatbot
or in cases where there are no choices, they are decided by
a default case. This gives the option to the user to navigate
through the chatbot as they wish to. They get an option to
return to certain checkpoints while journeying through the
chatbot in case of a change in mind. The chatbot is also an
interactive shortcut for the user to explore different features
that the app provides.
2.2. Video Calling Platform
Due to the spread of COVID-19 disease, it has been evident for needs to be able to take your regular visits to doctor from home and avoid visiting hospitals unless it is an
emergency or advised by a doctor. For this very purpose,
we built a platform for patients to have a 1-on-1 apppoint-

For the measurement of vitals, the frames are captured via
the web camera and these frames are sent to a real-time
database hosted on Firebase in base64 format, which are
later converted back to PIL image format and manipulated
accordingly to calculate Heart Rate, Respiratory Rate and
SpO2 levels in the blood.
Heart Rate(HR)
Heart rate is one of the most important vitals for studying a
persons physiological state and can help in realizing a persons aerobic capacity or their risk in getting a heart attack.
Apart from these, ones heart rate plays a key role in estimating early symptoms of COVID-19, it has been proved.
In standard conventions such as at hospitals or at home, an
electrocardiogram (ECG) or a pulse oximeter can be used
to measure ones heart rate but in cases of non-contact measurement, it is also possible to have it measured using a
webcam or a mobile phone camera. In our approach, we
were able to measure heart rate with an error rate of 3.1
± 0.3 bpm in still video and 2.2 ± 1.8 bpm in video with
movement(Bush).

TeleVital: Enhancing the quality of contactless health assessment

Heart Rate is defined as the number of a persons heart beats
per minute (bpm). A normal heart rate of an adult ranges
from 60 to 100 bpm. To determine the heart rate, image
frames containing the persons face are read. A monitoring
algorithm for face detection is applied to select the Region
of Interest (ROI). Classifiers are used on the frame to detect
the coordinates of boundary for ROI selection and hence
the region of interest is acquired. An RGB signal extraction is carried out on the frame for accurate computations.
Then the ROI is put under an algorithm of signal detrending
to remove drifts and noise. On the resulting frame, some filtering and normalisation are carried out along with matrix
calculations. These calculations result in heart rate in beats
per minute (bpm).

and the Standard deviations of red and blue components are
calculated for each image(Kanva et al., 2014). The mean
values correspond to the DC components and standard deviations correspond to the AC components.
Then SpO2 is calculated as
SpO2 = A − (B × ((Sred /Mred )/(Sblue /Mblue )))
where Sx stands for Standard Deviation of channel x and
Mx stands for Mean of channel x.
Normal SpO2 levels of an adult ranges from 95 to 100 percent.

Respiratory Rate(RR)

2.4. Digital Prescription

The number of breaths taken by a person in a minute is
termed as the Respiratory Rate for the person. A normal
respiratory rate of an adult ranges from 12 to 20 breaths
per minute. For the calculation of respiratory rate, the oscillations of the face while inhaling and exhaling are studied
for relative displacement. The first step in this process is
capturing frames of the face of the person to be tested. The
frames are sampled to get a clear picture of the change in
pixel intensities. Then the frames are preprocessed to find
the required template which has the least noise and sharper
features. The region of interest (ROI) is determined from
the template. Then basic signal processing techniques are
applied on to the ROI to extract the frequency of the change
in intensity of pixel. The most dominant frequency is selected as the respiratory rate and is displayed in frequency
per minute.

To ease doctors with providing patients hand-written prescriptions and also evading the normal contact-based prescription methods, the digital prescription portal enables
the doctors to voice record prescription for patients. When
the doctor visits the website, they can record their voice
by clicking on the record button and record all necessary
details like name, age, gender of the patient, their symptoms, the diagnosis, the prescription and also suggest professional medical advice. This audio file is converted into
text, which is filtered and displayed in text boxes namely
Age, Name, Sex, Symptoms, Diagnosis, Prescription, and
Advice. If the doctor needs to edit or add something, they
can do it here manually and then finally they can generate
the pdf of the report by clicking on the generate PDF button
which can be viewed, downloaded or mailed to the patients
mail ID.

Traditional methods record the maximum change in frequency. Our novel approach keeps track of both, the mean
and the maximum change of frequency over a certain number of frames. These values are then reduced to a single
value by calculating the mean. The results have suggested
our approach to be more accurate than the previous approaches.

2.5. Patient Prioritizer

SpO2 Levels
Peripheral capillary oxygen saturation (SpO2 ), which is an
estimate of the amount of oxygen in the blood is one of
the key vitals to be monitored. For SpO2 calculation, the
behaviour of components of white light is monitored when
a finger is placed between a source of white light and the
camera. The captured frame is preprocessed by splitting it
into red and blue color channels. Then specific numerical
computations involving the mean and standard deviations
are carried out on these channels. These give out the concentration of oxygen in blood in percentage.
Firstly, the image is resized to 320x240 and split into its red
and blue channels. The Mean of red and blue components

Understanding the rapid increase in the cases of COVID-19,
the Patient Prioritizer page enables hospitals in identifying
the high risk patients and triaging the patients accordingly.
The comparison between the patients is done based on 14
parameters namely: Age, Gender, Height, Weight, Heart
rate, Respiratory rate, SpO2 levels, Body temperature,
Cough, Sore throat, Breathing difficulty, Tiredness/Fatigue,
Pre-existing medical conditions like asthma and Pregnancy.
Weights are assigned to every parameter(adhering to the
WHO guidelines) which are used to calculate the final score
of the patients. The doctor can view the patients’ name and
their corresponding scores. The list is arranged in a descending order so that the professionals can also search for
the patient by their name. The patient with the highest score
requires the maximum amount of medical attention. The
doctor can edit the already registered patients details and
searching the patients by name and age would retrieve all
of the patient’s previous records. These records displayed
on the screen can be modified or deleted by the doctor accordingly.

TeleVital: Enhancing the quality of contactless health assessment

Table 1. Pulse Oximeter Readings
HR
P ERSON 1:
92
95
90
P ERSON 2:
100
86
81
P ERSON 3:
82
86
84

RR

S P O2

15
19.5
15.3

96
97
96

19
18
12

92
93
97

12
17.4
14.6

90
95
94

Table 2. TeleVital readings
HR
P ERSON 1:
83
86
85
P ERSON 2:
91
86
85
P ERSON 3:
78
85
79

RR

S P O2

17.78
17.89
17.53

95.24
95.1
94.97

19.09
18.5
16.9

94.92
94.12
95.06

14.3
17.48
19.23

94.05
96.47
93.56

3. Experiments
We tabulated readings using both, a Pulse Oximeter(Table
1) and our TeleVital portal(Table 2) to compare the efficiency of our product. This experiment was conducted
on three volunteers and the following parameters were
recorded: Heart Rate(HR), Respiratory Rate(RR) and
SpO2 concentration.

4. Conclusions
Through our webcam-based vital measurement approach,
we have clearly proved that a person can take the vital test
from the comfort of their homes and understand if they
show symptoms of COVID-19. This will enable the hospitals to focus and prioritise on the patients showing critical vitals. While the accuracy of the results depend directly
on quality of the camera feed, we have been able to understand from the webcams we have tried for various laptop brands, the accuracy still proved to be comparable to
the reading from the respective instruments for measuring
the vitals. We also found that as bounding box noise is increased, choosing an ROI by segmenting out facial pixels

helped to diminish the noise effects and keep the outliers
low.
Future studies could involve taking video in low-light and
with a cluttered background or with occlusions or multiple
subjects in the frame to quantify how much bounding box
noise is realistically present in such situations. This could
help to determine if segmentation is necessary.
A side feature that we are working on is a Dialogflow
chatbot(Shah et al., 2018) that revolutionizes the contactless health measurement with a voice-based response to assist the needy and the disabled.
Another aspect is enhancing the User Interface(UI) and
User Experience(UX) of the TeleVital platform. Given that
a majority of the users will be patients or doctors, improving the UI could help in enriching the moods of the users.
We also plan to integrate facilities for measurement of different parameters like height and weight [through Augmented Reality] so that the reach of this application goes
beyond the COVID pandemic.

Another future scope of this project could be to develop
this platform as a kiosk to be used at office at the entry
stops being employees enter their offices. The cameras
on the kiosk could first identify if the employee is
wearing a fask mask, then proceed to take a vital test
and finally take their attendance using a face recognition system before they are let into the offices. These
kiosks or hardware robots could be stationed at public
places also, like airports or malls to perform contactless
health assessments. Source code for implementations of
the algorithms discussed in this paper may be found at
https://github.com/jithinsunnyofficial/TeleVital-Mi

References
CRPF helpline gets 91 percent calls for coronavirus, lockdown information; few for rations, healthcare, 2020.
Bush, I. Measuring heart rate from video.
Gastel, M. V., Stuijk, S., and Haan, G. D. Camera-based
pulse-oximetry - validated risks and opportunities from
theoretical analysis. Biomedical Opt Express, pp. 102–
119, 2018.
Iozzia, L., Lzaro, J., Gil, E., Cerina, L., Mainardi, L., and
Laguna, P. Respiratory rate detection using a camera
as contactless sensor. In 2017 Computing in Cardiology
(CinC), pp. 1–4, 2017.
J. Ben-Ari, E. Zimlichman, N. A. P. S. Contactless respiratory and heart rate monitoring: Validation of an innovative tool. In Journal of Medical Engineering and
Technology, volume 34, pp. 393–398, 2010.

TeleVital: Enhancing the quality of contactless health assessment

Kanva, A. K., Sharma, C. J., and Deb, S. Determination
of spo2 and heart-rate using smartphone camera. In
Proceedings of The 2014 International Conference on
Control, Instrumentation, Energy and Communication
(CIEC), pp. 237–241, 2014.
Malasinghe, L., Ramzan, N., and Dahal, K. Remote patient
monitoring: a comprehensive study. Journal of Ambient
Intelligence and Humanized Computing, 10 2017. doi:
10.1007/s12652-017-0598-x.
Massaroni, C., Lopes, D. S., Presti, D. L., Schena, E., and
Silvestri, S. Contactless monitoring of breathing patterns
and respiratory rate at the pit of the neck: A single camera approach. Journal of Sensors, 18(11):1–13, 2018.
Shah, P., Hakkani-Tur, D., Tr, G., Rastogi, A., Bapna, A.,
Nayak, N., and Heck, L. Building a conversational agent
overnight with dialogue self-play. 01 2018.

Number of Accepted Papers
160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

Itaca, NY
Austin, TX
Evanston, IL
Aberdeen, Scotland
Amherst, MA
New Brunswick, NJ
Tahoe, CA
Bari, Italy
Nashville, TN
Madison, WI
Bled, Slovenia
Stanford, CA
Williamstown, CA
Sydney, Australia
Washington, DC
Banff, Canada
Bonn, Germany
Pittsburgh, PA
Corvalis, OR
Helsinki, Finland (estimated)

Historial ICML Locations and Numbers of Accepted Papers

88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08
Conference/Workshop Year

Ann Arbor, MI

