A study of COVID-19 data from African countries
Kétévi A. Assamagana,∗, Somiéalo Azoteb,∗, Simon H. Connellc , Cyrille E.
Haliyad , Toivo S. Mabotee , Kondwani C. C. Mwalef , Ebode F. Onyieg , George
Zimbah

arXiv:2007.10927v4 [q-bio.PE] 30 Jul 2020

a Brookhaven

National Laboratory, Physics Department, Upton, New York, USA
de Lomé, Département de Physique, Lomé, Togo
c University of Johannesburg, Johannesburg, South Africa
d University of Abomey-Calavi, International Chair in Mathematical Physics and
Applications, Cotonou, Benin
e Universidade Eduardo Mondlane, Grupo de Astrofsica e Ciências Espaciais, Maputo,
Mozambique
f University of Rwanda, African Center of Excellence for Innovative Teaching and Learning
Mathematics and Science, Kigali, Rwanda
g University of Yaounde I, Department of Physics,Yaounde, Cameroon
h University of Jyväskylä, Department of Physics, Jyväskylä, Finland
b Université

Abstract
COVID-19 is a new pandemic disease that is affecting almost every country with
a negative impact on social life and economic activities. The number of infected
and deceased patients continues to increase globally. Mathematical models can
help in developing better strategies to contain a pandemic. Considering multiple measures taken by African governments and challenging socio-economic
factors, simple models cannot fit the data. We studied the dynamical evolution of COVID-19 in selected African countries. We derived a time-dependent
reproduction number for each country studied to offer further insights into the
spread of COVID-19 in Africa.
Keywords: COVID-19, SIDARTHE, Africa, Benin, Mozambique, Rwanda,
Togo, Zambia

∗ Corresponding

Authors
Email addresses: ketevi@bnl.gov (Kétévi A. Assamagan),
somialo.azote@aims-senegal.org (Somiéalo Azote)

Preprint submitted to Scientific African

July 31, 2020

1. Introduction
COVID-19 has spread to the entire world within a few months [1]. The World
Health Organization (WHO) predicts that 29 to 44 million Africans could be
infected with SARS-CoV-2 during the first year of the pandemic and 83 to 190
thousand Africans could die if they don’t uphold containment measures [2, 3].
This grim prediction suggests that most African countries have a lower transmission rate than the other regions of the world such as Europe, the United
States of America, and China [2]. However, the low transmission rate may prolong the outbreak over several years, putting pressure on economic resources.
Most African countries are struggling because of lack of essential medical resources such as test kits, personal protective equipments and ventilators. The
containment measures such as frequent hand washing, isolation, contact tracing, and social distance are a challenge in Africa—around 60% of the African
population lives below the poverty line [4] and cannot afford the basic hygienic
amenities. The densely populated slums of Africa make social distancing impossible and burdens the isolation centers. In Africa, the outbreak of COVID-19
has already claimed thousands of lives, rendered millions jobless, increased insecurity and poverty level. A number of studies have been performed on the
evolution and impact of COVID-19 in Africa, and on the African responses to
the pandemic [5–12].
Models for pandemics are necessary for understanding the cause, source,
spread, and planning outbreak containment [13–22]. The simplest of these
models is the SIR; it describes disease transmission and propagation in three
categories, namely the susceptible, infected and recovered fractions of a population [23]. An improved version of the SIR is the SEIR model which proposes four
stages: susceptible, exposed, infectious, and removed population densities [24].
Simple models for COVID-19 do not offer reliable insights or predictions to
inform African policymakers [23]. The models become complex when one includes more socio-economic factors. One such model is the SIDARTHE [25]
which considers eight stages of epidemic evolution.

2

In this paper, we analyzed COVID-19 data from Benin, Mozambique, Rwanda,
Togo and Zambia. We tested the SIDARTHE model on these data and estimated
basic reproduction numbers. This may improve our understanding of the spread
of COVID-19 in Africa, although the numbers of tests are small relative to the
sizes of the populations. We offer suggestions to keep the basic reproduction
number below one, to slow and contain the spread. In Section 2, we present
the mathematical model used in the studies reported in this paper. In Section 3, we discuss the analysis strategy and results. In Section 4, we discuss the
implications of the results, and we offer concluding remarks in Section 5

2. Model
To have confidence in a model, one needs suitable fits to existing data and
verifiable predictions. Here, we describe the SIDARTHE dynamical model, developed to study the spread of COVID-19 in Italy [25]. The strength of this
model comes from the fact that it considers the various measures taken by
Italian government to contain the disease [25]. It is a mean-field epidemiological model with eight time-dependent compartments, namely ”Susceptible”,
”Infected”, ”Diagnosed”, ”Ailing”, ”Recognized”, ”Threatened”, ”Healed” and
”Extinct”, as shown in Figure 1. This model describes the dynamic spread of
the disease when social distancing, lockdown, testing, contact tracing, treatment, curfew, and/or quarantine are implemented as containment strategies in
a population.
The following mathematical system of eight differential equations describes

3

Healing ρ

Susceptible Contagion
𝛼, 𝛽,γ,δ
(S)

Infected (I)

ξ

λ

Healed (H)

Extinct (E)

SIDARTHE Parameters:
▪ 𝛂, γ: Transmission rate due to contact with
▪
▪
▪

▪
▪
▪

▪
▪

▪

Symptoms
UNDETECTED asymptomatic, symptomatic
κ
ζ
infected, respectively.
ε
𝛃, δ : Transmission rate due to contacts with
DETECTED asymptomatic, symptomatic infected,
respectively.
𝛆: Detection rate for ASYMPTOMATIC
Ailing (A)
𝛉: Detection rate for SYMPTOMATIC
𝛇: Worsening rate, UNDETECTED asymptomatic
infected becomes symptomatic
Diagnosis
𝛈: Worsening rate , DETECTED asymptomatic infected becomes
Symptomatic
𝛍: Worsening rate, UNDETECTED symptomatic infected develop
life−threatening symptoms.
𝛎: Worsening rate, DETECTED symptomatic infected develop life threatening symptoms.
Diagnosed
𝛕: Mortality rate for infected with life-threatening symptoms
𝛋, 𝛌: Recovery rate for undetected asymptomatic, symptomatic
(D)
infected, respectively.

σ

Death

τ
Critical

μ

θ

Threatened
(T)
Critical ν

Diagnosis
Symptoms

η

Recognized
(R)

▪ 𝛏, 𝛒: Recovery rate for detected asymptomatic,
symptomatic infected, respectively.

Figure 1: Graphical representation of different compartments of the SIDARTHE model [25]:
S stands for susceptible, the total population of the case study region or country; I, infected
(asymptomatic infected undetected); D, diagnosed (asymptomatic infected detected); A, ailing
(symptomatic infected undetected); R, recognized (symptomatic infected, detected); T, threatened (infected with life-threatening symptoms, detected); H, healed (recovered); E, extinct
(dead).

the SIDARTHE model [25]:

dS(t)
dt
dI(t)
dt
dD(t)
dt
dA(t)
dt
dR(t)
dt
dT (t)
dt
dH(t)
dt
dE(t)
dt

= −S(t) (αI(t) + βD(t) + γA(t) + δR(t)) ,
= S(t) (αI(t) + βD(t) + γA(t) + δR(t)) − (λ + ε + ζ) I(t),
= εI(t) − (η + ρ) D(t),
= ζI(t) − (θ + µ + κ)A(t),

(1)

= ηD(t) + θA(t) − (ν + ξ)R(t),
= µA(t) + νR(t) − (σ + τ )T (t),
= λI(t) + ρD(t) + κA(t) + ξR(t) + σT (t),
= τ T (t).

The basic reproduction number, R0 , is an epidemiological parameter to describe the contagiousness or transmissibility of infections [25]. Biological, socioeconomic, environmental and behavioral factors affect R0 . It is a parameter used
4

to study the dynamics of an infectious disease. An outbreak ends if R0 < 1 and
continues if R0 > 1. R0 indicates of the potential magnitude of an outbreak,
and can be used to estimate the fraction of the population to be vaccinated to
stop the spread. However, because of its complex dependence on many factors,
R0 is often modeled and, as a result, depends on model parameters and assumptions. Therefore, one must apply R0 with great caution. The SIDARTHE
model defines R0 as follows [25]:
R0 =

α
β×
γ×ζ
δ×η×
δ×ζ ×θ
+
+
+
+
,
r1
r1 × r2
r1 × r3
r1 × r2 × r4
r1 × r3 × r4

(2)

with
r1

=  + ζ + λ,

r2

= η + ρ,

r3

= θ + µ + κ,

r4

= ν + ξ,

r5

= σ + τ.

(3)

We adapted the SIDARTHE model to consider the containment measures taken
by African countries and the impact of socio-economic conditions in Africa. In
Section 3, we discuss the analyses of data from Benin, Mozambique, Rwanda,
Togo and Zambia, and the application of the SIDARTHE model to these data.

3. Analysis
We collected the first three months of the official data on COVID-19 from Benin,
Mozambique, Rwanda, Togo and Zambia. We got the data from the official
website of each country. One team member who is a resident (or is a native) of
a country was in charge to compile and follow the measures taken. The same
team member was also responsible to understand the tests performed in that
country. The data came in categories of active, recovered, dead and total cases.
Compared to the SIDARTHE stages of pandemic evolution, it is straightforward
to establish the following associations: the recovered cases correspond to the
5

”Healed” and the dead cases to ”Extinct” shown in Figure 1. The active cases
do not have a direct correspondence in the model. One needs to understand
the tests to define an association of the active cases to the model. From the
eight stages in the SIDARTHE, the active cases in the data should, at the bare
minimum, map to the sum of the ”Recognized and Threatened”. However,
depending on whether asymptomatic or ailing persons were tested and counted,
the active cases might contain some of them. To compare data to the model,
we defined the active cases as the sum of the ”Recognized, ”Threatened” and
”Ailing” (or ”Diagnosed”)—this is not an exact correspondence because of the
complexity of the testing and counting procedures. In addition, the total cases
also do not map directly to any stage of the model. In the data, the total cases
are the sum of the active, recovered and dead cases. In the model, we built
the total cases as the sum of the model active cases and healed and extinct
compartments shown in Figure 1.
After we defined the mapping of the data onto the model compartments or
stages, we matched the model to the data by adjusting the model parameters
depending on whether the active, recovered and/or dead cases were increasing
or decreasing. We solved the eight differential equations in Eq. (1) by Euler
discretization to estimate the parameters from best match between model and
data. Subsequently, we computed R0 according to Eq. (2). The result is an extraction of a time-dependent R0 from the estimated parameters. In the following
subsections, we will discuss each country, one-by-one.
3.1. Case of Benin
They identified the first case on March 16, 2020, and the government took immediate containment measures such as limitation in border crossings, compulsory
quarantine of people entering the country by air, suspension of government and
business missions outside the country, suspension of all demonstrations and nonessential sporting, cultural, religious or political events, closure of mosques and
churches, social distance, hygiene and wearing of masks requirements. From
March 30 to May 11, 2020, schools and universities were closed. They imposed
6

a total lockdown on the regions—Cotonou, Abomey-Calavi, Allada, Ouidah,
Sm-Podji, Porto-Novo, Akpro-Missrt and Adjarra—most exposed to the pandemic. The government engaged in an awareness campaign through the media
and the police force. They encouraged people to inform the authorities about
anyone who returned to the country and did not self-isolate. From May 11,
the government lifted the lockdown of the aforementioned regions and by June
2, and activities resumed with mandatory social distance and the wearing of
masks. We collected the official data compiled by the government and modeled
it as shown in Figure 2 where one sees that there is a period between Day 54
and Day 61 where they posted no data. In the top panel of Figure 2, there is
a systematic shift in the data before Day 54 compared to after Day 61. This
is because of the difference in the reporting of the test results. Before May 19,
the government reported results of both the rapid diagnostic and polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) tests. After May 19, following the WHO guidelines, the
government started reporting only the PCR test results, although they continued to perform the rapid diagnostic tests. We see a good match between the
SIDARTHE model and the data. The bottom panel of Figure 2 shows the resulting time-dependent R0 from the modeling. We find that the basic reproduction
number rarely exceed two; however, it fluctuates. After May 19, R0 rarely exceeds one because only the PCR test results were being reported; however, it
may also be because of the effectiveness of the measures implemented by the
government.
3.2. Case of Mozambique
In Mozambique, they detected the first case on March 22, 2020. The individual
was a Mozambican national who had traveled to the United Kingdom. The
patient showed mild symptoms. The health authorities placed him in isolation
at home and under clinical supervision. The government closed schools and
universities on March 23, suspended the issuance of entry visas, and cancelled
the ones already issued. They also suspended social events with over 50 people.
They required travelers to self-quarantine. The country went into a state of
7

Figure 2: In the top plot, we show the official data compiled by the government of Benin.
Day 0 is March 16, 2020. The uncertainties shown on the data points are statistical only.
We normalized the data to a population of 11.5 million. Superimposed is the SIDARTHE
model applied to the data. The bottom plot shows the resulting R0 for Benin as a function of
time.

emergency on April 1. They extended the state of emergency successively:
on April 29 until May 30; then until the end of June; on June 28 until July
29. On May 12, they suspended international flights until May 30, except for
humanitarian, cargo or state flights. However, they did not impose a lockdown.
At the time of writing this article, the government and local authorities were
studying schools re-opening strategies. Figure 3 shows the COVID-19 data

8

Figure 3: In the top plot, we show the official data compiled by the government of Mozambique,
normalized to a population of 29 million. The uncertainties shown on the data points are
statistical. Superimposed is the SIDARTHE model applied to the data. Day 0 is March 22,
2020. The bottom plot shows the resulting R0 for Mozambique as a function of time.

of Mozambique with the modeling of the SIDARTHE; in the top panel, we
see good agreement between the model and the data for all the cases of the
dead, recovered and active fractions of the population. As a result, the total
cumulative cases are also well modeled. In the bottom panel of Figure 3, we
show the extracted R0 which remains below two for the entire period shown.
The R0 for Mozambique fluctuates. Between Day 40 and Day 45, it dropped
significantly. After Day 45, it stays slightly above one.

9

3.3. Case of Rwanda
On March 14, 2020, Rwanda confirmed its first case of COVID-19. It was a
foreign national who arrived in the country on March 8. The individual showed
no symptoms upon arrival; however, he reported to a health facility on March 13
and tested positive. They started testing symptomatic cases right away, before
they identified the first case. Contact tracing and testing of asymptomatic cases
started on March 14. From March 15, they postponed schools, religious activities, weddings until further notice and implemented social distance measures.
Because of an increase in the number of cases, the authorities took additional
safety measures on March 21: they imposed a lockdown by closing of bars,
boarders, airports and markets, except for those selling food and hygienic essentials. They required masks in all public places and provided markets and
shops with sanitizers. Figure 4 shows the Rwanda COVID-19 data on the top
panel; we superimpose the modeling of the data and see good agreement in the
dead, recovered and active cases. As a result, the total cases are also well modeled. From the modeling, we derived R0 for Rwanda as shown in the bottom
panel of Figure 4. The initial R0 is above three, but drops well below one after
about a week because of the swift reaction of the government and the public.
After a few weeks, the R0 rose above one, most likely because of the difficulties
to observe the measures imposed. We see another reduction in R0 around Day
47; around Day 64, it went up to about 1.5.
3.4. Case of Togo
Togo recorded its first case of COVID-19 on March 6, 2020; the individual was
a Togolese national who had traveled abroad. The government implemented
containment measures right away, such as contact tracing, monitoring of persons under quarantine, testing of symptomatic cases, and surveillance at points
of entry, borders and airports. After an extraordinary meeting of the council
of ministers on March 16, the government established the following measures:
suspension flights from Italy, France, Germany, and Spain; cancellation of all

10

Figure 4: In the top plot, we show the official data compiled by the government of Rwanda,
normalized to a population of 12 million. The uncertainties shown are statistical. Day 0 is
March 14, 2020. Superimposed on the data is the SIDARTHE model applied to the data. The
bottom plot shows the resulting R0 for Rwanda as a function of time.

international events for three weeks; self-isolation of people coming from highrisk countries; border closure; and prohibition of events with over 100 people
effective from March 19. For at least two-and-a-half months, schools, universities, churches, saloons, bars, etc., were closed. They imposed a curfew from
9:00pm to 6:00am. They tested truck drivers crossing the borders; then they
allowed the trucks to proceed to their destinations under surveillance. If the
drivers had been in contact with confirmed cases, they placed them under quar-

11

Figure 5: In the top plot left, we show the official data compiled by the government of
Togo. The uncertainties shown are statistical. Day 0 is March 6, 2020. Superimposed
is the SIDARTHE model applied to the data. The top right plot shows the details of the
SIDARTHE model for Togo with the time evolution of the eight stages of the pandemic. The
embedded picture in the top right panel shows the distribution of the susceptible population.
We normalized the top plots to a population of 8 million. The bottom left plot shows the
R0 for Togo as a function of time. The bottom right plot shows the number of active cases
superimposed onto the number of the daily tests done in Togo.

antine. On April 7, the government started massive tests of both symptomatic
and asymptomatic persons in cities with over ten cases. From June 9, they lifted
the curfew. However, the government made the wearing of masks compulsory;
also, they required hand washing before access to public or private services or

12

markets.
We used the containment measures to tune the model parameters as a function of time. Figure 5 shows the data and the model; on the top left panel,
we see good agreement in the dead and recovered cases. For the active cases,
the agreement is good in the earlier and later time periods. The mis-modeling
observed in the middle time period is likely related to the difficulty in defining accurately the active cases in the model as mentioned in Section 3. For
the total cases, the model agrees with the data in the entire period shown. In
the top right panel, we show the time evolutions of all the eight stages of the
SIDARTHE model for Togo. The bottom left panel of Figure 5 shows the R0
for Togo. We see that in first 2 weeks, R0 was about three. It dropped in the
subsequent few weeks because of the effectiveness of the containment measures
and the social awareness campaign. However, after Day 40, the R0 rose; this is
because between May 5–20, the number of cases sharply increased when neighboring countries re-opened their borders. This led to an influx of imported cases
from Togolese nationals that returned to Togo. The bottom right plot shows
the number of daily tests and the active cases—the same active cases shown
on the top left plot. The active cases show structures the distribution where,
periodically, the cases increased or dropped. To model the data accurately, we
tried to understand whether these structures were correlated with the number of
daily tests or related to the dynamical evolution of the pandemic. As shown in
the bottom right plot of Figure 5, we found no corrections between the number
of daily tests and the active cases. Until Day 30, Togo reported only the total
number of tests done, not the daily test numbers. In the bottom right panel of
Figure 5, we see a flat distribution up to Day 30we took an average by dividing
the total number tests over the number of days. After Day 30, the histogram
in the bottom right plot of Figure 5 shows the reported daily test numbers.
3.5. Case of Zambia
On March 18, 2020, Zambia reported its first two cases of COVID-19. Zambia
hosts the Southern Africa Regional Collaborating Center of the Africa CDC
13

(Center for Disease Control) and has been coordinating the response at the regional level. The government has put in place a contingency plan that outlines
the country’s preparedness. The government continues to enforce the measures
and interventions to control the spread countrywide. The public health safety
measures implemented include the closure of schools and higher learning institutions; wearing of a mask while out in public; continued screening of travelers
into Zambia; redirection of all international flights to land and depart from
Kenneth Kaunda International Airport only; suspension of non-essential travels
to countries with confirmed COVID-19 cases; restriction of public gatherings;
restaurants to operate only on take away and delivery basis; and closure of all
bars, nightclubs, cinemas, gyms and casinos. On May 8, the control measures
were further reviewed: restaurants may revert to their normal operation; cinemas, gyms and casinos may also reopen; they made an appeal to proprietors of
hotels, lodges, tour operators, event management companies and others—who
voluntarily closed their business to ensure the safety of their staff and clientele—
to consider reopening; bars and taverns remained closed pending further review
of the measures, depending on the evolution of the pandemic; they allowed
only examination classes in primary and secondary schools to reopen. The first
classes reopened on June 1 with enforced public health guidelines in place: the
reopening of business premises and schools is subject to adherence to public
health regulations, guidelines and certifications. The government continues to
update response activities on a regular basis.
Figure 6 shows the COVID-19 data of Zambia and its SIDARTHE modeling.
The death rate and the total cases are well modeled. The trends of the recovered
and active cases are fairly well modeled. The R0 for Zambia started close to
three but dropped below one within a few weeks. It rose again, and around Day
50 it rose to about eight until Day 55. This is because of a significant increase in
the reported numbers of daily cases around Day 50. On May 8, the government
dispatched a team of health workers to Nakonde—a town next to Tanzania—to
provide technical support and enhance port health services, community surveillance and disinfection of public places. They tested truck drivers, community
14

Figure 6: In the top plot, we show the official data compiled by the government of Zambia,
normalized to a population of 17.5 million. We show only statistical uncertainties. Day 0
is March 18, 2020. Superimposed is the SIDARTHE model applied to the data. The bottom
plot shows the resulting R0 for Zambia as a function of time.

members, health care workers, staff of lodges and the Immigration Department.
The prior number of total cases was 167 and on May 9, they had 85 cases, almost a 50% increase. Seventy-six of the 85 cases were from Nakonde. Between
May 9 and 16, they reported high daily cases of 174 and 208. One hundred
twenty-six of the 174 cases were from Nakonde and 196 of the 208 cases were
also from Nakonde. These increases in the daily cases, concentrated around
Nakonde, explain the high R0 in Day 50-55. The R0 dropped again around Day

15

55 until about Day 70 when it increased above one.

4. Discussion
For the all the countries studied, R0 started above one with a few imported
cases. Within a few weeks, R0 dropped below one because of the swift and
decisive reactions of the governments and the awareness campaigns. The people
reacted well initially and followed the authorities’ directives. Unfortunately, R0
did not stay below one for a long period; in all the cases studied, the basic
reproduction number rose again above one after a few weeks—because of difficulties in adhering to the measures when the people face other socio-economic
challenges. The rise of R0 after it had fallen initially may also because of
complacency, fake news, and misinformation—as mentioned in Section 1, some
believe that COVID-19 is a scam, Africans are immune, and/or the disease
has no impact in tropical climates. That the initial responses were effective to
bring R0 below one is an encouragement that African countries can contain the
spread. The challenge is to maintain the containment measures long enough
to bring R0 permanently below one. A continuous campaign of community engagement with regular briefings is important; so are an active combat against
fake news and misinformation. They should maintain the lockdown and social
distance measures notwithstanding the socio-economic adversities. Economic
relief is necessary for the people with hardships exacerbated by these measures;
this will motivate adherence to the containment plans and that will stop the
pandemic [26–29].
A comment on the studies reported in this paper is their validity, given the
numbers of limited tests performed. We show in Figure 5 that the number of
cases are not correlated with the limited number of tests. The statistical samples
used are significant; therefore, the conclusions are valid. One may extrapolate
these results to the larger populations of the countries studied to determine, for
example, the number of people to vaccinate. However, from the limited tests,
we cannot extrapolate to infer the total number of infections in the country. We

16

also caution extrapolating to the future to make predictions; this is because, as
we have shown in Figures 2–6, the basic reproduction number fluctuates. Only
detailed modeling from first principles in biology, medicine, physics, epidemiology and sociology may offer a framework for viable predictions.

5. Conclusion
We have studied COVID-19 data from Benin, Mozambique, Rwanda, Togo and
Zambia. We modeled the data from these countries with the SIDARTHE, and
extracted a time-dependent basic reproduction number for each country studied. Our studies show that the initial reactions of African governments and
populations were effective to bring the basic reproduction number below one.
However, relaxation and difficulties to maintain the measures over time drive
the basic reproduction number in a time-dependent cyclic pattern of rises and
falls. We suggest that African countries find satisfactory economic supports for
their most disadvantaged populations. This will encourage adherence to the
containment plans.

Acknowledgements
We thank Professor John Ellis (University of London) for useful discussions.
Toivo S. Mabote would like to thank Professor Doutor Cláudio Moisés Paulo
(Universidade Eduardo Mondlane) for academic advice and mentorship. We
acknowledge support and mentorship from ASP—the African School of Fundamental Physics and Applications. We received no financial support for this
work.

References
[1] Report of the World Health Organization-China joint mission on coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), https://www.who.int/docs/defaultsource/coronaviruse/who-china-joint-mission-on-covid-19final-report.pdf (2020).
17

[2] New World Health Organization estimates:

up to 190000 peo-

ple could die of COVID-19 in Africa if not controlled, https:
//www.afro.who.int/news/new-who-estimates-190-000-peoplecould-die-covid-19-africa-if-not-controlled (2020).
[3] COVID-19 Situation update for the World Health Organization
African Region,

External Situation Report 17 (24 June 2020),

https://reliefweb.int/report/south-africa/covid-19-situationupdate-who-african-region-external-situation-report-17-24
(2020).
[4] The World Bank Group, Poverty, https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/
poverty (2020).
[5] M. Massinga Loembé, A. Tshangela, S. J. Salyer, J. K. Varma, A. E. Ogwell Ouma, J. N. Nkengasong, COVID-19 in Africa: the spread and response, Nat Med 26 (2020) 999–1003. doi:10.1038/s41591-020-0961-x.
[6] M. Martinez-Alvarez, A. Jarde, E. Usuf, H. Brotherton, M. Bittaye, A. L.
Samateh, A. Roca, COVID-19 pandemic in West Africa, The Lancet Global
Health 8(5) (2020) e631–e632. doi:10.1016/S2214-109X(20)30123-6.
[7] S. H. Ebrahim, Q. A. Ahmed, E. Gozzer, P. Schlagenhauf, Z. A. Memish,
COVID-19 and community mitigation strategies in a pandemic, BMJ 368.
doi:10.1136/bmj.m1066.
[8] S. N. Etkind, A. E. Bone, N. Lovell, R. L. Cripps, R. Harding, I. J. Higginson, K. E. Sleeman, The role and response of palliative care and hospice
services in epidemics and pandemics: a rapid review to inform practice during the COVID-19 pandemic, Journal of Pain and Symptom Managemen
60 (2020) e31–e40. doi:10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2020.03.029.
[9] O. A. Adegboye, O. O. Adesiyun, M. A. N. Adeboye, Double Sides of
COVID-19 Pandemic: African Countries should Break Grounds or be Per-

18

manently Broken, West J Med & Biomed Sci 1(1) (2020) 110–114.
URL https://wjmbs.com.ng/index.php/wjmbs/article/view/15/17
[10] MO Ibrahim Foundation, COVID-19 in Africa:
dinated governance,

A call for coor-

improved health structures and better data,

https://mo.ibrahim.foundation/news/2020/covid-19-africa-acall-coordinated-governance-improved-health-structures-andbetter-data (2020).
[11] African Union, Impact of the Coronavirus COVID-19 on the African Economy, https://www.tralac.org/documents/resources/covid-19/3218impact-of-the-coronavirus-covid-19-on-the-african-economyafrican-union-report-april-2020/file.html (2020).
[12] S. A. Lone, A. Ahmad, COVID-19 pandemic–An African perspective,
Emerging Microbes and Infections 9 (2020) 1300–1308.

doi:10.1080/

22221751.2020.1775132.
[13] K. van Zandvoort, C. I. Jarvis, C. Pearson, N. G. Davies, T. W. Russell, A.
J. Kucharski, M. J. Jit, S. Flasche, R. M. Eggo, F. Checchi, and CMMID
COVID-19 working group, Response strategies for covid-19 epidemics in
african settings: a mathematical modeling study, medRxiv . doi:10.1101/
2020.04.27.20081711.
[14] Z. Zhao, X. Li, G. Liu, F.and Zhu, C. Ma, L. Wang, African countries and
implications for prevention and controls: A case study in South Africa,
Egypt, Algeria, Nigeria, Senegal and Kenya, Science of the Total Environment (2020) 138959. doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.138959.
[15] D. B. Abila, A. Yusuff Adebayo, D. E. Ekpenyong, A.and Lucero-Prisno III,
S. Aggrey, M. Britha, P. Bugingo, The First Eighty-Four (84) Days of
COVID-19 in Africa: Analysis of Incidence and Deaths Associated with
COVID-19, SSRN (2020) 1–23. doi:10.2139/ssrn.3621372.

19

[16] H. Bendaif, B. Hammouti, I. Stiane, Y. Bendaif, M. A. El Ouadi,
Y. El Ouadi, Investigation of spread of novel coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic in MOROCCO and estimated confinement duration to overcome the
danger phase, Caspian Journal of Environmental Sciences 18(2) (2020) 149–
156. doi:10.22124/cjes.2020.4070.
URL https://cjes.guilan.ac.ir/article 4070.html
[17] A. Medinilla, B. Byiers, P. Apiko, African regional responses to COVID19, https://ecdpm.org/publications/african-regional-responsescovid-19/ (2020).
[18] M. Dahab, K. van Zandvoort, S. Flasche, A. Warsame, P. B. Spiegel,
R. J. Waldman, F. Checchi, COVID-19 control in low-income settings and displaced populations:

what can realistically be done?,

https://www.lshtm.ac.uk/newsevents/news/2020/covid-19-controllow-income-settings-and-displaced-populations-what-can (2020).
[19] E. S. McBryde, M. T. Meehan, O. A. Adegboye, A. I. Adekunle, J. M. Caldwell, A. Pak, J. M. Trauer, Role of modeling in COVID-19 policy development, Pediatric Respiratory Reviews . doi:10.1016/j.prrv.2020.06.013.
[20] S. A. Lauer, K. H. Grantz, Q. Bi, F. K. Jones, Q. Zheng, H. R. Meredith,
J. Lessler, The incubation period of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
from publicly reported confirmed cases: estimation and application, Annals
of Internal Medicine 172(9) (2020) 577–582. doi:10.7326/M20-0504.
[21] M. T. Meehan, D. P. Rojas, A. I. Adekunle, O. A. Adegboye, J. M. Caldwell, E. Turek, E. S. McBryde, Modeling insights into the COVID-19 pandemic, Pediatric Respiratory Reviews . doi:10.1016/j.prrv.2020.06.014.
[22] J. K. K. Asamoah, M. A. Owusu, Z. Jin, F. T. Oduro, A. Abidemi, E. O.
Gyasi, Global stability and cost-effectiveness analysis of COVID-19 considering the impact of the environment: using data from Ghana, Chaos,
Solitons and Fractals 110103. doi:10.1016/j.chaos.2020.110103.

20

[23] M. Sinkala, P. Nkhoma, M. Zulu, D. Kafita, R. Tembo, V. Daka, The
covid-19 pandemic in africa: Predictions using the sir model indicate the
cases are falling, medRxiv

(2020) 2020.06.01.20118893. doi:10.1101/

2020.06.01.20118893.
[24] J. B. Nachega, A. Grimwood, H. Mahomed, G. Fatti, W. Preiser,
O. Kallay, D. Ngamije, From easing lockdowns to scaling-up communitybased COVID-19 screening, testing, and contact tracing in Africa: shared
approaches, innovations, and challenges to minimize morbidity and mortality, Clinical Infectious Diseases ciaa695. doi:10.1093/cid/ciaa695.
[25] G. Giordano, F. Blanchini, R. Bruno, P. Colaneri, A. Di Filippo, A. Di Matteo, M. Colaneri, Modeling the COVID-19 epidemic and implementation of
population-wide interventions in Italy, Nature Medicine 26 (2020) 855–860.
arXiv:2003.09861[q-bio.PE], doi:10.1038/s41591-020-0883-7.
[26] A. Otu, B. Ebenso, R. Labonte, S. Yaya, Tackling COVID-19: Can the
African continent play the long game?, Journal of Global Health 10(1).
doi:10.7189/jogh.10.010339.
[27] S. Mehtar, W. Preiser, N. A. Lakhe, A. Bousso, J.-J. M. TamFum,
O. Kallay, M. Seydi, A. Zumla, J. B. Nachega, Limiting the spread of
COVID-19 in Africa: one size mitigation strategies do not fit all countries,
The Lancet Global Health 8(7) (2020) e881e883. doi:10.1016/S2214109X(20)30212-6.
[28] C. Ihekweazu, E. Agogo, Africas response to COVID-19, BMC Medicine
18 (2020) 1–3. doi:https://doi.org/10.1186/s12916-020-01622-w.
[29] P. J. Rosenthal, J. G. Breman, A. A. Djimde, C. C. John, M. R. Kamya,
R. G. Leke, M. R. Moeti, J. Nkengasong, D. G. Bausch, COVID-19: shining the light on Africa, The American Journal of Tropical Medicine and
Hygiene 102(6) (1145) 1–28. doi:10.4269/ajtmh.20-0380.

21

