From Fear to Hate: How the Covid-19 Pandemic Sparks Racial Animus in the
United States
Runjing Lu and Yanying Sheng1
July 2, 2020
Click Here for the Latest Version

Abstract
We estimate the effect of the Coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic on racial animus, as measured by
Google searches and Twitter posts including a commonly used anti-Asian racial slur. Our empirical
strategy exploits the plausibly exogenous variation in the timing of the first Covid-19 diagnosis across
regions in the United States. We find that the first local diagnosis leads to an immediate increase in racist
Google searches and Twitter posts, with the latter mainly coming from existing Twitter users posting the
slur for the first time. This increase could indicate a rise in future hate crimes, as we document a strong
correlation between the use of the slur and anti-Asian hate crimes using historic data. Moreover, we find
that the rise in the animosity is directed at Asians rather than other minority groups and is stronger on
days when the connection between the disease and Asians is more salient, as proxied by President
Trump's tweets mentioning China and Covid-19 at the same time. In contrast, the negative economic
impact of the pandemic plays little role in the initial increase in racial animus. Our results suggest that deemphasizing the connection between the disease and a particular racial group can be effective in curbing
current and future racial animus.
Keywords: Covid-19, Racial animus, Salience effect
JEL classification: J15, I18

1

Runjing Lu: University of Alberta (runjing1@ualberta.ca); Yanying Sheng: University of California San Diego
(yas107@ucsd.edu). We are grateful for the support and guidance from Eli Berman, Julie Cullen, Gordon Dahl. We
would also like to thank Ruixue Jia, William Mullins, Jacob Shapiro and participants at the UCSD applied lunch
seminar for their constructive feedback.

1. Introduction
Racial animus can affect welfare in measurable ways, as economists have pointed out since the
seminal work of Becker (1957). Recent papers have shown that racial animus can hinder economic
development, affect political institutions, and induce social unrest. 2 To prevent further fueling of racial
animus and reduce its damage on the society, it is fundamental to rigorously identify how racial animus
forms and spreads.
The coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic provides a natural experiment allowing us to study why and
how racial animus against certain groups can rise rapidly. It has long been argued that infection risk can
foster xenophobia (Schaller and Neuberg, 2012). While Covid-19 may originate from China, the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has emphasized that people of Asian descent are at no greater risk of
spreading the virus than are other Americans. Nonetheless, since the outbreak of the virus, multiple incidents
of Asian Americans being verbally or physically attacked have been reported by major news outlets. 3 ,
Hundreds more have been recorded by organizations that track hate incidents (Mullis and Glenn, 2020).
These are telltale signs that the current pandemic could have sparked racial animus against Asians. The
challenge is to measure and understand this phenomenon rigorously and expediently.
In this paper, we exploit variation in the timing of the first local Covid-19 diagnosis across regions
in the United States to causally identify how infectious diseases can trigger racial animus against Asians. We
focus on the timing of the first Covid-19 diagnosis for two reasons. First, the first diagnosis in an area
represents a salient increase in the infection risk. Lab experiments have shown that more salient threat of
infectious diseases leads to stronger xenophobia (Faulkner et al., 2004). Second, the exact timing of the first
diagnosis is plausibly exogenous --- whether an area has its first diagnosis this week or the next is largely
unpredictable and is unlikely to be correlated with other factors simultaneously changing local racial
animus.4
To proxy for an area's racial animus against Asians, we use the percentage of Google searches and Twitter
posts (tweets) that include the word “chink” or “chinks”. The proxy based on Google searches was ﬁrst used
by Stephens-Davidowitz (2014), who shows a negative relationship between an area’s Google search rate of
the word “nigger” or “niggers” and the vote share for Barack Obama in 2008, even after controlling for a
number of demographic, economic and political variables. This proxy can capture hidden racial animus as

2

For example, from the well-documented racial wage gap, residential racial segregation, costs of being minority
political candidates, to the death of Gorge Floyd and the resulting protests across the United States --- these can all find
their roots more or less in racism or racial animus (Charles and Guryan, 2008; Card et al., 2008; Stephens-Davidowitz,
2014; BBC, 2020).
3
For example, NBC News (https://www.nbcnews.com/news/asian-america/video-shows-passenger-defending-asianwoman-facing-racism-new-york-n1162296), New York Times (https://nyti.ms/3ccvHzO), and USA Today
(https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2020/05/20/coronavirus-hate-crimes-against-asian-americans-continuerise/5212123002).
4
Since the timing of the first diagnosis is generally earlier in areas with higher population size or better medical
system, we include area fixed effects in all regressions to control for these time-invariant characteristics.

2

searches are mostly private and unlikely to suffer from social-censoring. It has since been used to measure
racial animus in papers like Anderson et al. (2020) and Depetris-Chauvin (2015) and been shown to have a
positive relationship with economic downturn and anti-African American hate crimes (Anderson et al.,
2020). To capture public display of racial animus, we use a proxy based on public tweets, which has been
used by Nguyen et al. (2018) among others to measure sentiment towards minorities.
We focus on the use of the c-word, because this is the most salient racial slur against people of
Asian descent and is unambiguously pejorative.5 Indeed, Google searches and tweets including the epithet
are mostly negative. “Chinked eye” and “chink virus” are common terms in racially charged Google queries,
and over 53.4 percent of racially charged tweets are categorized as showing “anger” or “disgust” between
November 2019 and April 2020. Moreover, an area's monthly Google searches for the epithet is positively
correlated with monthly anti-Asian hate crimes between 2014 and 2018 and negatively correlated with
monthly visits to Chinese restaurants between 2018 and 2019, even after controlling for area fixed effects
and year-month fixed effects.
Our first main finding is that the Covid-19 pandemic leads to a surge in racial animus against
Asians. In the week after the first local Covid-19 diagnosis, racially charged Google search rate increases by
22.6 percent of the area’s maximum search rate over the sample period, and racially charged Twitter post
rate increases by 100 percent of its average over the sample period. The result is robust to excluding earlyand hard-hit states and to controlling for area fixed effects, year-month fixed effects, the severity of local
Covid-19 infection, and an area’s use of terms that are related to the c-word but are neutral in connotation,
such as “Asian(s)”, “Asia”, or “China”.
Analysis using unique Twitter user identifiers reveals that the increase in racially charged tweets
mainly comes from existing Twitter users who post the racial epithet for the first time rather than those who
have previously used the term. In the four weeks after the first local diagnosis, 2,064 Twitter users, who are
not newly registered, tweet the epithet for the first time, potentially exposing their four million followers to
racially charged content. This can create an multiplier effect on racial animus via persuasion (DellaVigna
and Gentzkow, 2010) or by changing the social norms of publicly expressing anti-Asian sentiment (Bursztyn
et al. 2020; Müller and Schwarz, 2019). Our findings also broadly relate to a growing literature on the role
of social media in propagating animosity against minorities (Bursztyn et al. 2019; Müller and Schwarz,
2020).
Next, we turn our attention to the factors fueling racial animus. First, fear of infectious diseases could

According to Philadelphia Bar Association (2014), the racial slur “originated in the 19th Century as a racial slur
against people of Chinese descent”, yet “is now widely used throughout the United States as a racial slur against people
of Asian descent.” The racial slur is as racist and hurtful to Asian Americans as the n-word is to African Americans
(Richburg, 2008). Importantly, this racial slur has not been reclaimed by the Asian American community, as
exemplified by the 2018 incident when TBS analyst Ron Darling, who himself is of partial Chinese descent, had to
quickly issue a public apology after receiving criticism over his use of “chink in the armor” when referring to the
performance of a Japanese pitcher playing for New York Yankees.
5

3

motivate racial animus. Evolutionary psychologists have argued that the desire to avoid harmful
communicable diseases contributes to contemporary prejudices against subjective outgroups (Schaller and
Neuberg, 2012). Surveys by Binder (2020) and Gallup (Saad, 2020) document that most Americans were
worried about contracting Covid-19, suggesting that fear of the disease indeed exists in the United States.
Second, the salience of the connection between Covid-19 and the Asian population is also a key factor. We
find that the increase in animus is directed at Asians rather than other minority groups. Moreover, this racial
animus is stronger on days when the connection is more salient, as proxied by President Trump's tweets
mention China and Covid-19 at the same time. That time series relationship remains robust, even after we
control for the severity of the pandemic and for general attention to Asians. Third, we find little evidence
that the negative economic impact of the pandemic motivates the initial increase in racial animus. Areas
bearing more severe economic impact of the pandemic do not exhibit a higher increase in racial animus than
do those bearing less. This finding is consistent with surveys administered in early March and April 2020
which show that Americans are more worried about the effect of Covid-19 on their health than on their
personal finances (Binder, 2020; Saad, 2020). Individuals may not fully comprehend the potential economic
impact of Covid-19 at its onset.
This paper builds on and contributes to the literature on the origin of racial animus. Past papers have
documented that the deterioration of economic conditions can lead to animosity towards minorities. For
example, Anderson et al. (2017) show that colder temperatures reduce agricultural production and intensify
the persecution of Jewish people in Europe. Anderson et al. (2020) document that states hit harder by the
Great Recession experience larger increases in racist Google searches and hate crimes against African
Americans. In addition, evolutionary psychologists argue that fear of and desire to avoid health threats can
motivate racial bias (Schaller and Neuberg, 2012). Earlier studies are mostly correlational based on surveys
(e.g., Kim et al., 2016) or are established only in lab settings (Faulkner et al., 2004; O’Shea et al. 2020). We
contribute by providing casual evidence that fear of infectious diseases and its link to a certain group lead to
animus against the group while the economic impact of the disease plays a weaker role.
Our paper also contributes to the emerging literature on the relationship between Covid-19 and
racial attitudes online and offline. Most papers are descriptive or correlational. For instance, Schild et al.
(2020) characterize the evolution and emergence of Sinophobic slurs in the wake of the Covid-19 pandemic
while Lyu et al. (2020) compares the characteristics of Twitter users who use versus do not use controversial
terms when talking about the pandemic. One exception is the paper by Bartoš et al. (2020). They use a
controlled money-burning task among subjects in the Czech Republic to show that elevating the salience of
Covid-related thoughts magnifies hostility against foreigners living in Asia. We use a different empirical
strategy and complement their paper by showing that infection risk gives rise to racial animus outside the lab
as well. The fact that Covid-19 induces racial animus in both the United States and the Czech Republic
suggests that the phenomenon documented in our papers is likely generalizable globally.
4

Finally, our work speaks to the literature on the role of political rhetoric. Political rhetoric has been
shown to influence public opinions and behavior, such as presidential approval (Druckman and Homes,
2004) and public perception of a foreign country (Silver, 2016). In particular, Müller and Schwarz (2019)
find that President Trump's tweets about Islam leads to anti-Muslim hate crimes. Our findings add to theirs
by showing that the President's tweets also relate to anti-Asian sentiment, implying the generalizability of
such a relationship to other racial attitudes.
Animosity between racial groups at an international level could severely hinder global initiatives to
tackle the current pandemic and slow the economic recovery. Our results suggest that educating the public
about the dissemination of Covid-19 and de-emphasizing the connection between the disease and a
particular racial group can be an effective way to curb the current and future racial animus.

2. Data and Sample
2.1. Google and Twitter Proxy for Racial Animus
We use two measures to proxy for an area’s racial animus against Asians --- the percentage of
Google searches and Twitter posts that include the word “chink” or “chinks”. The c-word is not uncommon
in Google searches or in tweets. Between June 2019 and June 2020, the racial epithet was included in over a
quarter million Google searches and 60 thousand tweets.6 This is about the same number of Google searches
as the word “democrat” and 3 percent of tweets as the word “economists”.
We obtain the data from two sources. First, Google search data are obtained using Google Trends.
We download weekly Google search data for the c-word at the media market level between July 2019 and
April 2020. The data are not the raw number of searches, but the weekly percentage of searches including
the term over all searches in a media market search rate, scaled by the highest weekly search rate in the
same market during the whole time period that one extracts the data for --- in our case, between July 2019
and April 2020. In particular, racially charged Google search index for media market m at time t extracted
over period T is approximately:

This metric is able to capture the timing of a change in an area's racially charged search index but not the
absolute level of the change. In Appendix A, we re-scale the search index so that the index in different
media markets is normalized using the same base. However, doing so leaves us with only 60 percent of the
original sample. Therefore, we focus on the timing of the change in the main results and report the results
using the re-scaled version in the appendix.
6

The number of Google searches are approximations from https://searchvolume.io/, a free of charge substitute to
Google AdWords. The data are only available for the 12-month period before our query on June 8th, 2020.

5

We are able to extract racially charged Google search index for 60 over 210 media markets,
covering around 40 percent of the U.S. population in 33 states. We are not able to extract the data for other
media markets because Google does not report the data when the search index for a given area and time is
below an unreported threshold. Compared to media markets with no racially charged search index, those in
our sample have higher population and exhibit a quadratic relationship with the percentage of Asian
population but do not differ in other measurable dimensions, such as local unemployment rate or support for
democratic versus republican party (Table A1).7 Analyses using Google data are done at the media market
level.
Second, Twitter data are obtained from Crimson Hexagon, which houses all public tweets through a
direct partnership with Twitter. We download all geo-located tweets that include the c-word between
November 2019 and April 2020. Crimson Hexagon does not provide data on the total number of tweets
posted in a given area and time. We thus extract the number of all public tweets including “the”, the most
common word on Twitter, to approximate the total Twitter activity in each county on each day. The
assumption is that the proportion of tweets including “the” is stable across areas, and the number of tweets
including “the” can approximate total activity on Twitter. We define racially charged Twitter post index for
a given county and time as the number of tweets that include the c-word per 100,000 tweets including “the”.
We have valid Twitter post index in 612 counties across 51 states, encompassing roughly 59.5
percent of the U.S. population. Counties are not in the sample because their residents do not use Twitter, do
not disclose geo-identifiers on Twitter, or do not post any tweets including “the” in the sample period.8
Counties with valid Twitter post index on average have a larger population, more educated residents, and
slightly higher support for democratic party than do counties without the data (Table A1). Analyses using
Twitter data are done at the county level unless noted otherwise.
Admittedly, Google and Twitter data suffer from sample selection either due to low search activities
or missing geo-identifiers. But given that areas with Google data and those with Twitter data are not highly
correlated (correlation=0.053 at county level), using both data sources can alleviate the concern about the
external validity of our findings.

2.2. Relationship between Racial Animus, Hate Crimes, and Consumer Decisions
For racially charged Google search index and Twitter post index to be meaningful proxies for racial
animus, the only assumption we need is that an increase in racial animus makes one more likely to use the cword. Under this assumption, higher racial animus will result in a higher percentage of Google searches and
7

The quadratic relationship between the percentage of Asian population and racial animus is consistent with the theory
of racial threat (Glaser, 1994). In communities with zero Asians, race is not salient and racial animus is less likely to
form. In communities where Asians account for almost 100 percent, there are very few white individuals and those with
racial animus are unlikely to choose such a community.
8
Geo-identifier is voluntarily provided when users sign up for Twitter. Roughly 50 percent of tweets have valid geocodes in our sample.

6

tweets that include the racial epithet. Existing papers that use a similar proxy for racial animus suggest that
the assumption is likely to hold in reality (Anderson et al., 2020; Depetris-Chauvin, 2015; StephensDavidowitz, 2014). Common terms in racially charged Google searches and tweets also support the
assumption. During our sample period, some most common terms in these searches are “chinked eye” and
“chink virus”; common terms in these tweets are phrases like “chink virus", or directly addressing another
individual as a “chink". Furthermore, over 67 percent of these tweets are tagged with emotion of “anger” or
“disgust”.9
We benchmark our proxies with common measurement of racial animus and consumer
discrimination. We begin by presenting the relationship between the proxies and anti-Asian hate crimes.
Hate crime data come from the FBI Uniform Crime Reports (UCR) Hate Crime Statistics and are available
up to 2018.10 A majority of these hate crimes are personal crimes, including simple or aggravated assault (30
percent) and in-person intimidation (34 percent). Table 1 panel A columns (1) through (4) report the
correlation between the monthly racially charged search index and monthly anti-Asian hate crime rate in
each media market between January 2014 and December 2018. On average, a one standard deviation
increase
(

in

racially

charged

search

index

(i.e.,

29.6)

link

to

around

15

percent

increase in the average monthly anti-Asian hate crime rate in each media

market each month, controlling for media market and year-month fixed effects. The correlation is robust to
controlling for the search index for “Asian(s)”, which are related to the c-word but neutral in connotation.
The relationship between racially charged search index and hate crimes is mainly contemporaneous as the
coefficient on the last month's search index is small and insignificant.
Next, we change the dependent variable to monthly visits to Chinese restaurants in the local area
between January 2018 and December 2019. Restaurant visit data are from Safegraph and available starting
in 2018.11 As shown in Table 1 panel A columns (7) and (8), a one standard deviation increase in racially
charged search index links to roughly 160 to 190 fewer visits to Chinese restaurants per one million
population in each media market each month, controlling for media market and year month fixed effects as
well as search index for “Asian(s)”. This decrease equals to about 0.6 to 0.7 percent of the average monthly
visit rate. The relationship between search index and visit rate is also mainly contemporaneous.
We replicate the above correlations using Twitter data in Table 1 panel B. We aggregate hate crimes
to the media market level due to low occurrence at the county level. To maintain consistency, we also
aggregate restaurant visits to the media market level. Overall, racially charged Twitter post index does not
9

Crimson Hexagon assigns each tweet one or more emotion tag(s) generated via natural language processing
algorithm. The algorithms can distinguish the difference in emotions between tweets even when the words included are
similar, for instance, the difference between “I want a burrito so bad” and “I just had a burrito. It was so bad.”. For a
detailed description, please refer to https://www.brandwatch.com/blog/understanding-sentiment-analysis.
10
Over 80 percent of the U.S. population is covered by police agencies that voluntarily report hate crime data to UCR
(Ryan and Leeson, 2011).
11
Safegraph partners with mobile applications and collects anonymous user location data to calculate the foot traffic to
around 4.1 million points of interest in the United States.

7

correlate with anti-Asian hate crimes or visits to Chinese restaurants. One potential explanation is that
Twitter data represent the public display of racial animus and undergo higher social censoring. We may only
see a change on Twitter when the shift in racial animus is substantially large.

2.3. The Covid-19 Pandemic in the United States
Our empirical strategy relies on the plausibly exogenous variation in the timing of the first Covid-19
diagnosis across regions in the United States. We download the data on all Covid-19 cases and deaths in
the United States between Jan 21st and April 26th, 2020 from John Hopkins University Covronavirus
Resource Center. We match the date of the first Covid-19 diagnosis in each county and media market to
those with valid Google and Twitter data. All media markets have their first diagnosis in the sample period
and have at least six weeks after the first diagnosis. We exclude seven counties that do not have diagnoses
in the sample period and 18 counties whose first diagnosis is after March 29th 2020 to ensure that all
counties have at least four weeks after the first diagnosis. The remaining counties and media markets
constitute our main regression sample. The county- and media-market-level predictors of being in the main
sample are presented in Table A1. Figure A1 plots the location of the regions included in the main sample
by the timing of their first Covid-19 diagnoses. Overall, coastal and large metropolitan areas, such as
Orange county in California and Cook county in Illinois, are the earliest hit while those in the middle of the
country, such as Adams county in Colorado, are among the last hit. We formally show the relationship
between local characteristics and the timing of first local Covid-19 diagnosis in Table A2. Areas with
higher population and more males tend to have their first cases earlier but, interestingly, areas with more
Asians do not.
In Figure 1 panel A, we plot the number of counties and media markets by the week of their first
Covid-19 diagnoses. The week of the first diagnosis is as early as the week of January 19 2020 and as late as
the week of March 29 2020.12 To visually gauge the relationship between the timing of the first diagnosis
and the use of the c-word on Google and Twitter, we plot the U.S. weekly racially charged Google search
index and Twitter post index in Figure 1 panel B. The sharp rise in the search index around early March and
the rise in post index around mid-March correspond well with the waves of first Covid-19 diagnoses at the
media market and the county level.

12

There is more variation in the timing of the first Covid-19 diagnosis measured in day, as shown in Figure A2. The
daily search and the daily post index are much noisier than the weekly version. We thus present the weekly version as
the main results and the daily version as robustness check in the appendix.

8

3. Strategy and Results
3.1 Empirical Strategy
Our main strategy is a difference-in-differences event study where the first Covid-19 diagnosis in
a county or a media market is the event of interest. The specification is as follows:

where
week .

is racially charged Google search index or Twitter post index in county or media market in
is the week when has its first Covid-19 diagnosis.

refers to event dummies

indicating the number of weeks before or after the first local diagnosis. We omit the dummy for the week
before the first diagnosis due to perfect collinearity. We include six weeks of post-period for Google data
and four weeks for Twitter data because longer post-period will result in unbalanced sample in event
time.

is a vector of area-specific controls such as the number of diagnoses or deaths related to Covid-

19, an indicator for state-level stay-at-home order, and search index or post index for “Asian(s)”. We
include area fixed effects ( ) and year-month fixed effects (

) to control for an area's average level of

racially charged search index and post index as well as the national trend in the indices. 13

is the error

term. Standard errors are clustered by media market for Google data and county for Twitter data. For a
media market that crosses state border, we assign it the state where the highest fraction of its population
reside. To understand how immediately the first local Covid-19 diagnosis has an effect on local racial
animus, we run regression 2 at the daily level and additionally control for day-of-week fixed effects.
The coefficients of interest are

's when

, which indicate the dynamic effect of an area's

first Covid-19 diagnosis on racially charged search index and post index. The identifying assumption is
that the progression of racially charged search index and post index in areas that have and not yet have the
first Covid-19 diagnosis share parallel trends in the absence of the Covid-19 pandemic. This assumption
is inherently untestable, but we can assess its plausibility by testing for parallel pre-trends. We provide
evidence that the assumption is likely to hold in the next section.

3.2. The Effects of Covid-19 on Local Racial Animus
We start by examining how an area's search of the c-word on Google respond to the first local
Covid-19 diagnosis. Figure 2 panel A plots the estimates of the coefficients on the event dummies from
regression 2 using an area's racially charged Google search index as the outcome. The search index
reaches the peak in the week after the first local diagnosis and decreases slightly in later weeks. Table A3
13

Although the Google search rate is normalized so that the maximum rate is 100 for each area, there is still
considerable variation in the sample mean, i.e.., the average actual search rate over the actual maximum rate,
ranging between 8 and 50.

9

panel A report the regression results. Given the construction of the search index, the estimates should be
interpreted as a percentage of an area’s maximum search rate in the sample period. Therefore, compared
to the week before the first Covid-19 diagnosis, racially charged search rate increases by 22.6 percent of
the area’s maximum search rate over the sample period in the first week after the first diagnosis and
remains at least 15 percent till six weeks afterward.14 Given what we find in Table 1, the increase in
search index in the four weeks after the first Covid-19 diagnosis corresponds to an increase of 0.0033
(

) anti-Asian hate crimes per million residents, or 10 percent

of the average monthly anti-Asian hate crime rate.
We also present the estimates using the search index scaled by the same maximum of FresnoVisalia in California in Figure A3 as a robustness check. This is because the estimates using the original
search index do not map to an increase over a national base, as the maximum search rate is different
across areas. The overall pattern is similar whether we use the rescaled or the original index, but the
magnitude of the former is about one-third to two-thirds of the latter because the maximum of FresnoVisalia is larger than that of most media markets. The confidence intervals are also larger because 40
percent of the sample are lost when we re-scale.15
To better interpret the effects and understand how public expression of the c-word changes, we
turn our attention to Twitter. Similar to Google search index, racially charged Twitter index also peaks in
the week after the first local Covid-19 diagnosis and slowly decreases afterwards, as plotted in Figure 2
panel B. Table A4 panel B further shows that, relative to the week before the first diagnosis, racially
charged tweets increase by 1 and 0.6 per 100,000 “the” tweets in the first and second week after the first
diagnosis. The increase amounts to roughly 100 and 66 percent of the outcome mean. In columns (2)
through (4) in in Table A3 and A4, we control for the number of confirmed cases and deaths, whether a
state-level stay-at-home order is in place, general interest in terms like “Asian(s)”, and excluding earlyand hard-hit state, such as New York, Washington, and California. The estimated effects increase slightly
after controlling for the covariates.
To get at the exact timing when the usage of the c-word starts to change, we run regression 2
using the daily search and post index as outcomes, additionally controlling for day-of-week fixed effects.
Regression estimates are plotted in Figure A4. The effects start to appear around two to three days after
the first local diagnosis. The local residents indeed pay attention to the Covid-19 situation in their
neighborhood and respond quickly to the first diagnosis.
One may concern that the increase in the usage of the c-word is driven by reasons other than
higher animosity against Asians, such as an increase in online activities due to blanket stay-at-home
14
15

The increase during the week of the diagnosis is small because the diagnosis may occur late in the week.
The detailed re-scaling procedure is in Appendix A.

10

orders, a rise in benign attention to China or Asia, seasonality in racist online activities, or “Twitter bots”.
These factors are unlikely to explain our findings. First, the search and the post index are normalized by
the total searches or tweets in a given area and time and thus already account for overall change in online
activities. Second, Table A3 column (3) shows that our results are robust to controlling for the search and
the post index for terms which capture general attention to China or Asia but are neutral in connotation,
such as “Asian(s)”, “China”, or “Asia”. 16 Third, to test the seasonality in racist online activities, we
generate a “fake” Covid-19 diagnosis date for each area using the same calendar day and month of its
actual diagnosis date but change the year to 2019. Reassuringly, we find no increase in racially charged
search and post index surrounding the “fake” dates, as shown in Figure A5. Finally, some may worry that
“Twitter bots” rather than local residents contribute to the increase in racially charged tweets. Twitter
proactively identifies and removes automation generated content which can alleviate this concern to some
extent (Roth and Pickles, 2020). In addition, our results do not quantitatively change when we drop
frequent c-word users who are subject to suspicion of to be bots, defined as those who used the epithet
more than five times (99 percentile) during the sample period. Results are available upon request.
So far, we have shown that the Covid-19 pandemic raises both individuals' hidden animosity
against Asians and their public display of the animosity. A natural next question is who contributes to the
rise. Do more individuals start to harbor the animus or do a few existing racists increase their animosity?
Taking advantage of unique Twitter user identifiers, we can breakdown the increase in racially charged
tweets by whether their authors are first-time or existing c-word users. We define existing c-word users as
those who tweeted the c-word at least once between 2014 and the sixth week before the first local Covid19 diagnosis. We define new c-word users as those who never tweeted the c-word between 2014 and the
sixth week before the first local diagnosis and who had at least 10 tweets before their first c-word tweets.
Importantly, this definition can avoid counting newly registered Twitter users as new c-word users. Figure
3 plots the breakdown. The increase in racially charged tweets is mainly driven by new c-word users
rather than pre-existing ones. This breakdown suggests that the Covid-19 pandemic induces more existing
Twitter users to start publicly expressing animus against Asians. To be specific, in the four weeks after
the first local diagnosis, 2,064 Twitter users started to use the racial epithet, which could expose their four
million followers to racially charged content induced by the Covid-19 pandemic. This can create an
multiplier effect by persuading more individuals to hold such racial attitudes via an increase in exposure
to anti-Asian sentiment (DellaVigna and Gentzkow, 2010) or by changing the social norms of publicly
using the racial epithet (Bursztyn et al. 2020; Müller and Schwarz, 2019).

We only tabulate results controlling for “Asian(s)”. Results controlling for other relevant terms are quantitatively
similar and available upon request.
16

11

3.3. Factors Fueling Local Racial Animus
In this section, we discuss several non-mutuality exclusive explanations as why the Covid-19
pandemic spurs animosity against Asians.
Fear of infectious diseases. Evolutionary psychologists have long argued that desire to avoid
harmful communicable diseases contributes to contemporary prejudices against subjective outgroups
(Schaller and Neuberg, 2012). Lab experiments also show that xenophobia toward unfamiliar immigrant
groups is stronger when the threat of infectious diseases is more salient (Faulkner et al., 2004). Moreover,
surveys administered in March and April 2020 document that around 60 to 80 percent of Americans are
worried about contracting Covid-19, suggesting that fear of the disease indeed exists among the locals
(Binder, 2020; Saad, 2020). In our main analysis, we also show that local racial animus responds to a
salient increases of infection risk.
Connection between Covid-19 and Asians. The salience of the connection between Covid-19
and the Asian population could also play a key role in fueling the animosity against Asians. First, if the
salient connection is not a main driving force, the disease-avoidance theory would predict rising animus
against all minorities, not just Asians. We construct Google search index and Twitter post index for
common racial epithets against major minority groups in the United States, such as “nigger(s)” against
African Americans, “wetback(s)” against Hispanics, and “kike(s)” against the Jewish population.17 We
run regression 2 using racially charged searches and tweets against other minorities as outcomes. We
include an indicator for the week of January 26 2020 when using the n-word as the outcome, because
Kobe Bryant's death together with MSNBC Anchor using the n-word when broadcasting the news of the
death leads to a spike in its use. We also include an indicator for the week of February 23 2020 when
using the k-word as the outcome, because Los Angeles Dodges player Enrique ("Kiké") Hernandez's
performance in that week leads to spike in the use of the k-word. Coefficients on the event dummies are
plotted in Figure A6. None of the examined racial epithets experience increase in Google searches
following the first local diagnosis; if anything, searches for the n-word see a slight decrease. Similar
pattern is found for the w-word and the k-word on Twitter.18 These findings suggest that the connection
We do not use “spic(s)” as the racial epithet against Hispanics, because the term is included in “Spic and Span”,
the name of an all-purpose household cleaner brand, which experienced growing interest since the start of the
Covid-19 outbreak. Breakout Google queries and a substantial number of tweets including the term are about the
brand and not the slur. In addition, we do not include “redskin(s)”, a common racial epithet against Native
Americans, because the term is included in the name of a professional American football team “The Washington
Redskins”. Google queries and tweets including the term are mostly about the football team, such as, “chase young
redskins” and “redskins draft”.
18
We present Twitter post index for the n-word separately in Figure A7 due to the seasonality in the use of the nword on Twitter. The seasonality is evident when comparing the n-word usage between 2019 and 2020 in panel A.
The seasonality may arise from a combination of Black History Month taking place in February and the n-word
being reclaimed by African Americans (Croom 2011). These factors may invalidate the use of the term on Twitter as
a proxy for racial animus. Note that we additionally include an indicator for the week of February 9 2020 in panel A,
17

12

between Covid-19 and the Asian population, not just fear of contracting Covid-19 from unfamiliar
outgroups, drives the rising animus against Asians.
Second, we can examine how racial animus against Asians varies with the salience of the
connection between Covid-19 and the Asian population. We proxy for the salience of this connection
using President Trump's tweets mentioning Covid-19 and China at the same time.19 President Trump has
82.4 million followers on Twitter, and his tweets have been shown to affect public behavior like hate
crimes (Müller and Schwarz, 2019). We expect to see higher racially charged searches and tweets on days
when the connection is more salient. This is exactly what we find. Table 2 columns (1) through (3) show
that there are five more racially charged tweet per million “the” tweets in a day when President Trump
mentions China and Covid-19 together in roughly six more tweets (

). The increase

amounts to 12 percent of the average rate of racially charged tweets (

). Columns (4)

through (6) display a similar but weaker relationship between President Trump's tweets and racially
charged searches on Google. The weaker relationship may be because not all Google users have Twitter
accounts and may not respond to viral events on Twitter.
Importantly, the rate of racially charged tweets and searches do not correlate with the President's
tweets mentioning only China or only Covid-19, controlling for county and time fixed effects. Moreover,
the findings remain quantitatively similar after we control for the daily number of new Covid-19
diagnoses and deaths in the United States and the daily rate of tweets about “Asian(s)”. Therefore, an
increase in the severity of Covid-19 pandemic or benign attention to the racial group could not explain
our findings. In sum, the salience of the connection between the disease and Asians propagates racial
animus in the current pandemic.
Economic Downturn. Researchers have documented that the deterioration of economic
conditions can fuel animus towards minorities (Sharma, 2015; Anderson et al., 2017, 2018). The Covid19 pandemic imposes risks on both lives and livelihoods. To understand this channel, we study the
heterogeneity in response to the Covid-19 pandemic by the level of its negative impact on the local
economy. We define an area to be more (less) susceptible to the negative impact if the proportion of the
area’s annual average employment in “Leisure and Hospitality" and “Education and Health Services", the
two hardest-hit industries in employment according to Bureau of Labor Statistics, is above (below) the
sample median (i.e., 32 percent in the Google sample and 35 percent in the Twitter sample). Figure A9
because a video tweet unrelated to Covid-19 but with n-word in the description went extremely viral on February
10th and contributed to 95 percent of the n-word tweets on that day.
19
We define a tweet to be related to China if it contains any of "China", "Chinese", "Huawei", or "Xi" and a tweet to
be related to Covid-19 if it contains any of "covid", "covid-19", "corona", "coronavirus", "virus", “epidemic", or
"pandemic". Table A5 presents examples of Trump's tweets in each category, and Figure A8 plots the daily
frequency of such tweets. We only include data after January 1st 2020 because Trump did not tweet about Covid-19
until late January 2020.

13

shows areas experiencing high versus low negative economic impact do not respond differently to the
first local Covid-19 diagnosis. One potential reason is that the impact of the pandemic on local economy
was not well understood at the onset of the first Covid-19 diagnosis. According to surveys administered in
early March and April 2020 (Binder, 2020; Saad, 2020), Americans were more worried about the effect of
Covid-19 on their health than on their personal finances.
Taken together, our findings imply that the pressing infection risk and the salience of the
connection between the disease and the Asian population play a bigger part than future economic impact
in motivating the initial racial animus.

4. Conclusion
In this paper, we estimate the eﬀect of the Covid-19 pandemic on racial animus, as measured by
Google searches and Twitter posts including the c-word. Our main finding is that the Covid-19 pandemic
sparks racial animus against Asians. Shortly after the first Covid-19 diagnosis in an area, the locals start
to search for and tweet the c-word more often. Fear of contracting Covid-19 and the salient connection
between the disease and the Asian population is a main driving force for the rising animosity against
Asians. This increase could indicate a rise in future hate crimes, as we document a strong correlation
between the use of the slur and anti-Asian hate crimes using historic data. Moreover, the rise in racially
charged tweets mainly comes from existing Twitter users posting the slur for the first time. This can
create an multiplier effect on racial animus via persuasion (DellaVigna and Gentzkow, 2010) or by
changing the social norms of publicly expressing the anti-Asian sentiment (Bursztyn et al. 2020; Müller
and Schwarz, 2019).
Animosity between racial groups could severely hinder global initiatives to tackle the current
pandemic and slow economic recovery. Our results suggest that educating the public about the
dissemination of Covid-19 and de-emphasizing the connection between the disease and a particular racial
group can be an effective way to curb the current and future racial animus.

14

5. References
[1] Acemoglu, Acemoglu, D., Autor, D., Dorn, D., Hanson, G. H., & Price, B. (2016). Import competition
and the great US employment sag of the 2000s. Journal of Labor Economics, 34(S1), S141-S198.
[2] Anderson, R. W., Johnson, N. D., & Koyama, M. (2017). Jewish persecutions and weather shocks:
1100–1800. The Economic Journal, 127(602), 924-958.
[3] Anderson, D. M., Crost, B., & Rees, D. I. (2020). Do economic downturns fuel racial animus?.
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 175, 9-18.
[4] Baker, S. R., & Fradkin, A. (2017). The impact of unemployment insurance on job search: Evidence
from Google search data. Review of Economics and Statistics, 99(5), 756-768.
[5] Bartoš, V., Bauer, M., Cahlíková, J., & Chytilová, J. (2020). Covid-19 Crisis Fuels Hostility against
Foreigners. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3618833
[6] Becker, G. S. (2010). The economics of discrimination. University of Chicago press.
[7] Bieler, D. (2018 October 9). MLB analyst Ron Darling is offended that Red Sox kept trying in a
playoff game. Washington Post. https://www.washingtonpost.com/sports/2018/10/10/mlb-analyst-rondarling-is-offended-that-red-sox-kept-trying-playoff-game
[8] Binder, C. (2020). Coronavirus fears and macroeconomic expectations. Review of Economics and
Statistics, 1-27.
[9] Bot or not? The facts about platform manipulation on Twitter. (2020). Blog.
https://blog.twitter.com/en-us/topics/company/2020/bot-or-not.html
[10] Bursztyn, L., Egorov, G., Enikolopov, R., & Petrova, M. (2019). Social media and xenophobia:
evidence from Russia (No. w26567). National Bureau of Economic Research.
[11] Bursztyn, L., Egorov, G., & Fiorin, S. (2019). From extreme to mainstream: The erosion of social
norms. University of Chicago mimeo.
[12] Card, D., Mas, A., & Rothstein, J. (2008). Tipping and the Dynamics of Segregation. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 123(1), 177-218.
[13] Croom, A. M. (2011). Slurs. Language Sciences, 33(3), 343-358.
[14] DellaVigna, S., & Gentzkow, M. (2010). Persuasion: empirical evidence. Annu. Rev. Econ., 2(1),
643-669.
[15] Charles, K. K., & Guryan, J. (2008). Prejudice and wages: an empirical assessment of Becker’s The
Economics of Discrimination. Journal of political economy, 116(5), 773-809.
[16] Chetty, R., Looney, A., & Kroft, K. (2009). Salience and taxation: Theory and evidence. American
economic review, 99(4), 1145-77.
[17] Coleman, A. (2020, Jun 5). Black bodies are still treated as expendable. Vox.
https://www.vox.com/2020/6/5/21277938/ahmaud-arbery-george-floyd-breonna-taylor-covid
[18] Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). (2020, July 2). Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
https://www.cdc.gov/COVID-19/2019-ncov/daily-life-coping/reducing-stigma.html
[19] Depetris-Chauvin, E. (2015). Fear of Obama: An empirical study of the demand for guns and the US
2008 presidential election. Journal of Public Economics, 130, 66-79.
[20] Druckman, J. N., & Holmes, J. W. (2004). Does presidential rhetoric matter? Priming and
presidential approval. Presidential Studies Quarterly, 34(4), 755-778

15

[21] Employment situation summary. (n.d.). U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.
https://www.bls.gov/news.release/empsit.nr0.htm
[22] Faulkner, J., Schaller, M., Park, J. H., & Duncan, L. A. (2004). Evolved disease-avoidance
mechanisms and contemporary xenophobic attitudes. Group Processes & Intergroup Relations, 7(4), 333353.
[23] Gallup. (2020, April 16). In U.S., more fear COVID-19 illness than financial harm. Gallup.com.
https://news.gallup.com/poll/308504/fear-covid-illness-financial-harm.aspx
[24] Glaser, J. M. (1994). Back to the black belt: Racial environment and white racial attitudes in the
South. The Journal of Politics, 56(1), 21-41.
[25] Hong, C. P. (2020, April 16). The Slur I Never Expected to Hear in 2020. Retrieved from
https://nyti.ms/3ccvHzO
[26] Keith B. Richburg, Asian Groups Fight to Change Eatery’s Name, Washington Post, April 15, 2008
at A2.
[27] Kim, H. S., Sherman, D. K. & Updegraff, J. A. Fear of Ebola : The Influence of Collectivism on
Xenophobic Threat Responses. Psychol. Sci. 27, 935–944 (2016).
[28] Lyu, H., Chen, L., Wang, Y., & Luo, J. (2020). Sense and sensibility: Characterizing social media
users regarding the use of controversial terms for covid-19. IEEE Transactions on Big Data.
[29] Müller, K., & Schwarz, C. (2019). From hashtag to hate crime: Twitter and anti-minority sentiment.
Available here: https://ssrn. com/abstract, 3149103.
[30] Müller, K., & Schwarz, C. (2020). Fanning the Flames of Hate: Social Media and Hate Crime.
Available here: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3082972
[31] New site collects reports of racism against Asian Americans amid coronavirus pandemic. (2020,
March 27). NPR.org. https://www.npr.org/sections/coronavirus-live-updates/2020/03/27/822187627/newsite-collects-reports-of-anti-asian-american-sentiment-amid-coronavirus-pand
[32] Nguyen, T. T., Meng, H. W., Sandeep, S., McCullough, M., Yu, W., Lau, Y., ... & Nguyen, Q. C.
(2018). Twitter-derived measures of sentiment towards minorities (2015–2016) and associations with low
birth weight and preterm birth in the United States. Computers in human behavior, 89, 308-315.
[33] O’Shea, B. A., Watson, D. G., Brown, G. D. A. & Fincher, C. L. Infectious Disease Prevalence, Not
Race Exposure , Predicts Both Implicit and Explicit Racial Prejudice Across the United States. Soc.
Psychol. Personal. Sci. 11, 345–355 (2020).
[34] 'Pandemic of racism' led to George Floyd death. (2020, June 5). BBC News.
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-52928304
[35] Resolution opposing use of racial slurs in business names. (2014). Philadelphia Bar Association.
https://www.philadelphiabar.org/page/ResolutionOpposingRacialSlurs?appNum=2
[36] Schaller, M., & Neuberg, S. L. (2012). Danger, disease, and the nature of prejudice (s). In Advances
in experimental social psychology (Vol. 46, pp. 1-54). Academic Press.
[37] Schild, L., Ling, C., Blackburn, J., Stringhini, G., Zhang, Y., & Zannettou, S. (2020). " go eat a bat,
chang!": An early look on the emergence of sinophobic behavior on web communities in the face of
covid-19. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.04046.
[38] Silver, L. R. (2016). China in the Media: Effects on American Opinion.
[39] Stephens-Davidowitz, S. (2014). The cost of racial animus on a black candidate: Evidence using
Google search data. Journal of Public Economics, 118, 26-40.

16

[40] Video shows passenger defending Asian woman facing racism on New York subway. (2020, March
17). NBC News. https://www.nbcnews.com/news/asian-america/video-shows-passenger-defending-asianwoman-facing-racism-new-york-n1162296
[41] 'We just want to be safe': Hate crimes, harassment of Asian Americans rise amid coronavirus
pandemic. (2020, May 20). USA TODAY.
https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2020/05/20/coronavirus-hate-crimes-against-asianamericans-continue-rise/5212123002/

17

18

19

20

21

22

Appendix A. Construction of Comparable Google Search Index
Google Trends only reports search index in either a time series format or a cross-sectional format. To
construct a panel data set consisting of time series search index in all possible media markets, we need to
extract the search index in media market separately. However, the search index reported by Google
Trends is not the level of search rate but the search rate normalized by the maximum search rate
appearing in that extraction. As a result, search indices from two extractions do not share the same base.
To build a panel of search indices that are normalized by the same value, we can scale the search index
using the following method.
In a time series extraction of search index in media market
market

over period , the search index in media

at time is approximately:

Meanwhile, in a cross-sectional extraction of search index at time for all media markets
search index in media market

, the

at time is approximately:

If we assume that the numerators in equations 3 and 4 are the same and both search indices are non-zero,
we can calculate the ratio of the two denominators as:

We can then scale the time series search index over period
it with its corresponding

in each media market

by multiplying

. The resulting time series will be normalized by the same
.

The practical obstacle for the above re-scaling is that Google trends returns zero if the absolute level of
search for a given media market and time is below an unreported threshold. The re-scaling does not work
if either
indices on all possible

or

is zero. After extracting cross-sectional search

, we can at best back out the comparable search index for 35 out of 60 media

markets normalized by the maximum search rate of Fresno-Visalia media market in California over the
sample period, using the cross-sectional search index on March 15th, 2020 with all search index. Given
the small sample size, we only report the results using the comparable search index in the appendix.

23

Appendix B. Additional Figures & Tables

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

