Visual analytics of COVID-19 dissemination in São Paulo state, Brazil
Wilson E. Marcı́lio-Jr*, Danilo M. Eler, Rogério E. Garcia, Ronaldo C. M. Correia, Rafael M. B. Rodrigues
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
São Paulo State University (UNESP)
Presidente Prudente - SP, Brazil

Abstract

arXiv:2007.04299v2 [cs.HC] 4 Jan 2021

Visualization techniques have proven to be useful tools to support decision-making and to cope with an increasing amount of data.
To help analyzing the progression of the number of COVID-19 cases, we propose a new visual analytic tool. We use k-nearest
neighbors of cities to mimic neighboring cities and allow the analysis of COVID-19 dissemination based on the comparison of
a city under consideration and its neighborhood, moreover, such analysis is performed based on periods, which facilitates the
assessment of isolation policies. We validate our tool by analyzing the progression of COVID-19 in neighboring cities of São Paulo
state, Brazil.
Keywords: COVID-19, Visual Analytics, Risk Assessment

1. Introduction
The novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2), or simply COVID19, has already infected more than 37.8 million people around
the world and caused over one million deaths by October 13th,
2020. While understanding the biological aspects of such a
virus is essential [1, 2, 3], it is necessary to monitor the evolution in the number of cases in cities and their neighborhoods
to provide information to decision-makers to think about strategies of isolation policies according to the risk of dissemination.
Moreover, cities must be aware of how the isolation policies
are affecting the dissemination by COVID-19, as well as to be
aware of the growth in the number of cases after leaving isolation.
To monitor COVID-19 dissemination, we propose a visual
analytics tool to help the analysis of the growth in the number of confirmed cases in the cities of São Paulo state, Brazil.
The main contribution of our approach consists of its ability to
perform local and regional analysis of the cities by inspecting
periods of analysis defined in days. We argue that analyzing

a period allows one to follow the evolution of the number of
confirmed cases more easily since one can observe the number of cases accumulated for a period and not since the first
day of notification. Besides defining a period, our perspective
about the regional analysis (a city neighborhood) could be fundamental for decision-making due to disease dissemination patterns, that normally follows a hierarchy spreading from greater
cities to their neighborhoods. So, besides presenting the number of cases in a city, we also present the number of cases in its
neighborhood. The comparison between a city and its neighborhood allows verifying if a neighborhood has the main focus of COVID-19 dissemination or if there are various points
of dissemination. For example, if a city under consideration
has a bigger number of cases than its neighborhood, it stands
out in the influence of the neighborhood; on the other hand, if
the neighborhood stands out over the city under consideration,
the neighborhood can have one or more cities that could influence cities with fewer confirmed cases. Finally, if the number
of cases of the city in the analysis is too close to the number
of cases of the neighborhood and such a number is considered

∗ wilson.marcilio@unesp.br

Preprint submitted to Journal of Biomedical Informatics

high, such neighborhood could be interpreted as a neighborJanuary 5, 2021

fying patterns in the data. HealthMap [5], on the other hand,

hood with high dissemination of COVID-19.
To validate our methodology, we provide several case stud-

uses geolocation of media reports to integrate outbreak textual

ies by analyzing cities in the São Paulo state, Brazil. Besides

data in a single resource. The system is designed to help at ex-

highlighting the cities on the map, our tool also summarizes the

tracting useful information and to summarize unstructured data

risk of dissemination by using a radial visualization. The risk

of disease reports, facilitating analysis by decision-makers. An-

of dissemination is interpreted by the slope of the curve of the

other interesting approach is to use what-if strategies and visu-

number of cases in a time window. Note that we are focusing

alize the outcomes depending on the decision alternatives ap-

on the dissemination risk rather than the number of cases itself.

plied when dealing with disease outbreaks [6]. Other strate-

In the radial visualization, the city in analysis is mapped to a

gies employing visualization tools are using heatmaps to ana-

circle while a donut chart is used to map the neighboring cities.

lyze patterns of hand-foot-mouth disease [7], employing intelli-

We use color saturation to indicate the risk of dissemination,

gent graph visualizations and reordered matrices to understand

that is, darker colors will represent cities with a higher risk of

influenza dissemination paths [8], or visualizing the effect of

dissemination.

decision measures implemented during a simulated pandemic
influenza scenario [9].

This paper is organized as follows: in Section 2 we briefly
delineate some relate works; Section 3 presents the hierarchi-

From the data mining perspective, it is usually interesting to

cal spreading of COVID-19, from which our methodology in

contrast social network posts related to diseases with officially

based; Section 4 shows the proposed visual analytics tool; ana-

reported cases. These approaches are based on the strength

lyzes using the tool are presented in Section 5; in Section 6 we

of the relationship between officially reported cases and the

discuss some aspects of the technique; we conclude our work

searches on the web or post on social media using words re-

in Section 7.

lated to the diseases [10, 11, 12, 13]. For instance, the majority
of the works use the web and social media to detect events of

2. Related Works

Influenza-like Illness [10, 14, 15]. A good example of using
Using data to detect and quantify health events is a useful

data-mining techniques to detect disease outbreaks in the dutch

strategy to understand disease outbreaks. Usually, the strategies

system Coosto [16], which uses Google Trends and social me-

use data mining or visualization techniques to monitor events

dia data to detect outbreaks based on a cut-off criterion. Other

related to a disease of interest.

works also have shown that Twitter data is highly correlated to

Visualization-based strategies for monitoring the dissemina-

disease activity [17, 18], such as predicting Dengue cases [19]

tion of diseases account for the fact that graphical representa-

or using Twitter-based data to automatically monitor avian in-

tions can enhance the ability to identify patterns and tenden-

fluenza outbreaks, showing that one-third of outbreak notifica-

cies of data. In this case, it is better to look at visual variables,

tions were reported on Twitter earlier than official reports [20].

such as position, color, or area, than tables or reports to identify
tendencies of growth and many other patterns. The literature

In this work, we provide a visual analytics approach to mon-

presents many examples of systems using visualization tech-

itor the evolution of dissemination of COVID-19 to facilitate

niques to enhance the analysis of disease dissemination, such

analysis of dissemination during and post isolation. We use vi-

as the work of Hafen et al. [4], where they delineate a strategy

sualization techniques and analysis based on time windows to

to detect outbreaks based on monitoring pre-diagnostic data of

help analysts to monitor how the situation of neighboring cities

emergency department chief complaints. Although using sim-

and can affect the dissemination of COVID-19 to a city in the

ple line curves, the visualization components helped at identi-

analysis.
2

3. Background

A in their k nearest cities set. In this way, we simulate better the
interaction between a city and its neighborhood. Finally, it is

In this section, we explain the hierarchical spreading behav-

important to mention that a few cities in the neighborhood of a

ior of COVID-19 which we use to define the neighborhoods of

city of interest do not have confirmed cases, in this case, these

each city.

cities are omitted in the visualization tool (see Section 4).

The basic idea of the hierarchical spreading of COVID-19 is
that cities with confirmed cases disseminate infection to their

4. Visualization Design

neighboring cities. In this case, the neighboring cities are the
Our visual analytics approach has the main objective to help

cities with confirmed cases inside the k nearest cities to the city

decision-makers in analyzing the situation of a city based on

in the analysis. Note that regional cities (greater cities) are most

disease dissemination. So that, besides information of a city in

likely to disseminate COVID-19 to their neighborhoods due to

interest, our tool provides information about the situation of its

the greater number of inhabitants, more job opportunities, more

neighborhood. To monitor the dissemination curves and help

cultural access, and other social aspects that could attract people

analysis based on the number of infections by COVID-19, we

from neighboring cities. Figure 1 illustrates the hierarchical

delineate the following requirements for our visual analytics ap-

spreading, where a city with a confirmed case is represented by

proach:

an orange circle and the arrows indicate potential dissemination
paths due to location proximity.

R1: facilitate comparison of the situation between a city
and its neighborhood;
R2: visualize evolution of number of cases as users change
a time window, as well as contrasting it with accumulated
number of cases since the notification of the first confirmed case;
R3: visualize the dissemination curve to check if it is in-

Figure 1: The neighborhood of a city (represented by an orange circle) con-

creasing or if it is flattening;

sists of the nearest cities according to the distances computed by latitude and
longitude coordinates.

R4: quickly understand the situation of a neighborhood in
analysis.

To formalize the definition of a neighborhood for city A, the
Algorithm 1 shows the computation of the k nearest cities of

First, it is necessary to define the neighborhood of a city un-

each city in the São Paulo state based on the latitude and longi-

der consideration. Our strategy to define the neighborhood fol-

tude coordinates.

lows the hierarchical spreading scheme of COVID-19, as explained in Section 3, which states that a city with confirmed

Algorithm 1 Computing k nearest cities.

cases influence (i.e., can disseminate) its neighboring cities.

1: procedure k nearest cities(cities, k)
2:

latlong coords ← get latlong(cities);

These neighboring cities are retrieved using the k nearest neigh-

3:

knn sets ← KNN(latlong coords, k);

bors algorithm. In our case, the neighborhood of a city A will

4:

return knn sets;

be the union of the k nearest cities to A and the cities that have
A in their k nearest cities set. Given that, we can analyze a city
based on its dissemination as well as its neighborhood. In the

To augment the neighborhood of city A, besides the k nearest

following, we present how we accomplish each requirement.

cities of A, we also add to the neighborhood the cities that have
3

Figure 2 shows the tool used to monitor the evolution of

city influencing its neighborhood, both in the time window and

COVID-19 in the São Paulo state, Brazil, as well as the dis-

the total number of cases is illustrated in Figure 3, note that the

semination risk based on city neighborhoods. The tool has a

number of cases in Presidente Prudente is by far greater than in

few components. First, the evolution of the number of cases

its neighborhood.

for the whole period starting from February 27th is provided
at the top left (a). Second, we provide a visual representation
of the dissemination risk by summarizing the neighborhood of

R2: Visualize the evolution in a time window. Using a time

the analyzed city at the top center of the visualization (b). The

window, i.e., focusing analysis in a specified number of days

dissemination risk is depicted by the color saturation – darker

helps at monitoring the evolution of dissemination in chunks

colors represent cities with more critical situations –, which are

of time, as well as facilitates the comparison among cities. In

mapped from the angle formed by the slope of the curve of

this case, questions such as which city respond better to isola-

COVID-19 cases. That is, the color saturation maps the angle

tion policies and how the isolation policy in a certain period af-

below the line segment formed by the point (a, na ) and (b, nb ),

fected the dissemination of a posterior period can be answered.

where na is the number of cases in the first day of the time win-

Figure 4 illustrates how using the time window for analyzing

dow (a) and nb is the accumulated number of cases in the period

only the confirmed cases inside the period helps us to visualize

(from a to b). Third, we provide the curves of the number of

flattening the curve of the Birigui city.

cases in the central area of the component. The first line of
curves indicate the number of cases for the whole period since
R3: Visualize the increasing and flattening of the curves. Al-

the first notification of confirmed cases ((c) and (d)) while the

though the curves with the total number of notification are suffi-

second line of curves indicates the number of cases only inside

cient to communicate how a city or neighborhood is performed

the time window ((e) and (f)), which could be useful to assess

on a period, the curves consisting of only reported cases in a

how isolation policies are affecting the dissemination in a pe-

period of analysis help users at focusing only on the increasing

riod – note that the graph is generated based on the number

or flattering aspects of the curve, as shown for the requirement

of cases in the first day of the period (a) and the accumulated

R2 and the example presented in Figure 4. Such an approach

number of cases for the period (from a to b). Finally, the rep-

is also useful when contrasting the curve slope with isolation

resentation of the time window (period of analysis) is shown at

indices in previous periods.

the bottom of the visualization. We also provide a map of the
São Paulo state (g) to visualize how the neighborhood in the
analysis.

R4: Quickly understanding the situation of a neighborhood.
To promptly visualize the situation of a neighborhood, we de-

R1: Facilitate comparison between city and its neighborhood.

signed a glyph to encode the slope of the dissemination curves

To facilitate comparison between a city and its neighborhood,

in a period. In our visualization, the neighboring cities are rep-

users can use the curves of infection for the city itself and the

resented by a donut chart, and the analyzed city is represented

neighborhood. With such visualization, it is possible to under-

by a concentric circle, as shown in Figure 5. We use color to

stand if the city is being influenced by its neighborhood when

represent the angle formed by the slope of the dissemination

the number of confirmed cases is greater for the neighborhood,

curves. That is, the greater the increase in the number of cases,

or if the city is influencing the neighborhood when the num-

the darker the color. Notice that, the colors encode the increase,

ber of confirmed cases is greater for the city. An example of a

not the number of cases.
4

Figure 2: Visual analytics of COVID-19 confirmed cases. (A) The number of cases for the whole period. (B) The visual representation of the analyzed neighborhood
with color saturation encoding a high slope of new cases. The accumulated number of cases for a period in the neighborhood (C) and the city in the analysis is
based on the total number of cases (D). The accumulated number of cases for a period in the neighborhood (E) and in the city (F) based only on the number of cases
inside the time window. (G) São Paulo state map showing the selected city and its neighborhood.

Figure 4: Using a sliding time window allows analyzing the evolution of the
number of cases in periods. Such an approach facilitates the inspection of curve
patterns.

4.1. Data Source
To monitor the evolution of confirmed cases, we use the data

Figure 3: Curves for accumulated number of cases analysis (on top) and analy-

provided by the São Paulo government at SEADE1 . The data

sis based on the time window (on bottom).

consists of daily updated cases in each city with a confirmed
1 https://www.seade.gov.br/coronavirus/

5

5.1. Regional city presents risk of dissemination to its neighbors

Presidente Prudente. Fig. 6 shows the evolution of the confirmed cases of Presidente Prudente. Up to May 16th, PresiFigure 5: Donut chart encoding neighborhood information. The color of the

dente Prudente has 89 confirmed cases as shown on the left of

inner circle encodes the angle formed by the dissemination curve of the city in

the figure. However, it is interesting to note how was the accel-

analysis while segment colors encode the angles formed by the dissemination

eration of confirmed new cases in the city in the period of April

curves of neighboring cities.

19th to May 9th, April 21th to May 11th, and April 26th to May
16th. This city in particular has been giving the lowest isolation
case. To create the visualization tool, we only use the city

indices in the São Paulo state – we highlight in red the mean of

name, daily confirmed cases, and the date attributes – the lati-

the isolation indices in the period.

tude and longitude coordinates of each city are retrieved using
the geopy2 library. Further, the isolation index is also provided
by the São Paulo government3 for only a few cities. The isolation index consists of the percentage of inhabitants in isolation.
Given the daily updated data, we can use a time window to investigate the progression and dissemination of COVID-19 since
the first notification in São Paulo state, which was in the capital
São Paulo. Notice that, while using a time window of seven
days (without loss of generalization), we could investigate the
progression of disease in the next few days in the neighborhood
of São Paulo. So, it is not the concern of our tool to select cities
hypothesizing that they will disseminate the virus. Instead, investigators select a city of interest and then use the time window
to visualize and to understand the first notification and the proFigure 6: Evolution of the number of cases in three different periods. There is

gression of confirmed cases in comparison with its neighbors.

an increasing pattern in the number of cases, which could be explained by the
low isolation indices.

5. Results
It is worth noticing that besides presenting a critical situation in the city itself, Presidente Prudente influence a lot in its

In this section, we inspect the dissemination evolution of var-

neighborhood. Fig. 7 shows how the number of cases in the

ious cities in the São Paulo state, Brazil. We used a time win-

city grows as the time window moves (observe the circle in the

dow of 20 days to assess the following periods: from April 19th

center of the donut chart), besides the number of different cities

to May 9th, from April 21th to May 11th, and from April 26th

presenting confirmed cases. For instance, the increasing num-

to May 16th.

ber of cases in the neighborhood can be seen by looking at the
curves in the period. Finally, see how Caiabu maintains the risk

2 https://geopy.readthedocs.io/
3 https://www.saopaulo.sp.gov.br/coronavirus/isolamento/

of dissemination lower than the other cities as time pass by.
6

not present any confirmed cases by the time of analysis. However, being inserted in such a complicated area, the city government could use such information to the aware population of the
risk around the city.
5.2. Neighboring cities with different isolation indices show
different risk of dissemination
In this section, we analyze the number of cases and the risk of
dissemination by comparing two neighboring cities, Araçatuba
and Birigui. Here, we also use the isolation indices of these
cities to hypothesize about their relation to the number of cases,
although we would need statistical analysis to make hard conFigure 7: Assessing the evolution of confirmed cases in the neighborhood of

clusions.

Presidente Prudente. Based on the donut charts, Presidente Prudente is the

Fig. 10 shows the curves for the city of Birigui. From con-

most influential city (higher number of cases).

trasting the curves in the bottom with the isolation index, we
Martinópolis. After inspecting Presidente Prudente, we could

can see how it affects the dissemination of the COVID-19.

notice that such a regional city plays a great influence on its

From the second to the third period, the curve of cases start

neighborhood according to the risk of dissemination. In this

to present a plateau.

case, given the low isolation index of Presidente Prudente, it

Similarly as for the city of Birigui, in Fig. 11 we show the

could be useful to understand how neighboring cities can re-

dissemination curves and the isolation indices for Araçatuba.

spond to such risk. Taking the city of Martinópolis as an ex-

In this case, low isolation indices might be the reason for the

ample, we can see from Fig. 7 in the radial representation that

increasing in the number of cases. Araçatuba has a more critical

social distancing policies might help the city to maintain the

dissemination curve, which could be explained – together with

number of cases by decreasing interaction with Presidente Pru-

other reasons – by the low isolation index, which was 44% +/-

dente – see how in the first period (from April 19th to May 9th)

0.05 from April 17th to May 7th. Finally, due to the augment to

the city was the second in the risk of dissemination while in the

48% +/- 0.055 from April 19th to May 9th, it is possible to see

last period of analysis (from April 26th to May 16th) the city

a little flattening in the curve from April 21th to May 11th.

lost position to many others.
5.3. The effect of the isolation index

Fig. 8 illustrates the evolution of confirmed cases for the city
of Martinópolis. While in the three different period the number

In this section, we aim to analyze cities in neighborhoods

of aggregated cases for the neighborhood grows larger, mainly

with a rapidly increasing number of cases, besides making re-

due to the increase in the number of cases in Presidente Pru-

lations to isolation indices for hypothesis generation. For this

dente, the number of cases in Martinópolis only increases by

purpose, we analyze three periods: from March 23h to April

one confirmed cases in the period between April 26th to May

12th, from April 13th to May 3rd, and from May 1st to May

16th, reaching only four confirmed cases.

21th.
Fig. 12 shows how was the situation in the period from March

Alfredo Marcondes. Unlike the majority of the cities in the

23th to April 12th. We can see that among all neighboring

neighborhood of Presidente Prudente, Alfredo Marcondes did

cities, only five cities presented confirmed cases – 16 confirmed
7

Figure 8: Comparing Martinópolis and its neighborhood in terms of dissemination curve. The city seems to cope well with the increase in cases in the neighborhood.

cases in total. On the right, it is possible to see how these cities

the isolation index of an earlier period, i.e., from March 23th to

are arranged on the map.

April 12th. In this case, we see that although the isolation index of Americana was greater than Limeira’s, the city presented

The situation in the neighborhoods takes a real change in the

more cases in the period, even with a lower population – Amer-

period from April 13th to May 3th, as seen in Fig. 13. In this

icana has approximately 230 hundred inhabitants while Limeira

case, we see a lot of cities presenting confirmed cases, led by

has approximately 300 hundred inhabitants. The answer to this

the cities of Americana and Limeira. The city of Americana,

question can be found by analyzing the neighborhoods of both

for example, was only the penultimate city with the highest risk

Limeira and Americana.

of dissemination from March 23th to April 12th (see Fig. 12).
For instance, this period was responsible for an increase in 122

Fig. 15 explains why Americana shows more number of

(of 140) by May 3rd.

cases from April 13th to May 3rd. Firstly, the accumulated

To understand why the cities of Americana and Limeira

number of cases in the neighborhood is greater for Americana.

present such an increasing number of confirmed cases, Fig. 14

Second, we can notice from the donut chart that Americana is

shows their curves for the period in the analysis together with

inserted in a riskier neighborhood, i.e., the number of cities in8

Figure 11: Evolution of number of cases in Araçatuba. The increasing curve of
confirmed cases of Araçatuba could be explained by the low isolation indices
in all of the periods of analysis.

Figure 9: Dissemination curves for the city of Alfredo Marcondes in the period
from April 26th to May 16th. In the neighborhood, Presidente Prudente seems
to influence the others by presenting high increase in the number of cases.

Figure 10: Visualizing the evolution of number of cases in Birigui. By contrasting the curves of cases and the isolation indices, it can be noticed the effect of
isolation indices in latter periods of time.

fluencing Americana is greater, as well as the risk of contamination of these cities (darker colors).
Backing to the Santa Gertrudes’s neighborhood, we finish by
analyzing the last period, from May 1st to May 21th. Fig. 16
Figure 12: Situation in the city of Santa Gertrudes and its neighborhood in

shows the situation of the neighborhood up to May 21th. The

period of March 23th to April 12th.

first thing to notice is the curve inclination of the cases in the
period, where it is possible to see the exponential pattern of

that the risk of the neighborhood plays in these cities.

COVID-19. Then, we can see that two other cities (Araras and
Cordenópolis) notified almost the total of their number of cases

Finally, the higher isolation index for both earlier period of

in this period. Such a pattern can be explained by the influence

analysis for Americana, made it possible to present a lower
9

Figure 13: The situation in the city of Santa Gertrudes and its neighborhood in
the period of April 13th to May 3th. The number of confirmed cases and the
number of neighboring cities with confirmed cases start to increase.

Figure 16: Cities in the neighborhood of Santa Gertrudes showing increase
patterns in the number of confirmed cases. In the third period of analysis (from
May 1st to May 21th), new cities start to present fast increase.

Figure 14: Although the city of Americana presented a higher isolation index
for an earlier period, Limeira reported fewer cases for the period from April
13th to May 3th.

Figure 17: Dissemination curves for Americana and Limeira. In the third period
of analysis, Americana shows lower dissemination, although a increase in the
last few days would require attention to the next periods.

In this case, for earlier periods, readers will see that the curves
seem flattened, however, this is due to the scale used to convey the number of cases. Earlier periods are influential by the
number of cases reported by the analyzed neighborhoods in this
Figure 15: Comparing the neighborhoods of Americana and Limeira. For ear-

section. For instance, analysts can recall the donut charts to vi-

lier periods, Americana showed higher isolation indices than Limeira, however,

sually investigate the evolution of the number of cases.

it is inserted in a more critical neighborhood.

Santos. By March 29th, the city of Santos did not present any

number of infections in this critical period, as shown in Fig. 17.

confirmed cases, besides that, its neighborhood was not pre5.4. Analysis of bigger and regional cities

senting a critical situation if we look at the number of confirmed
cases in Fig. 18.

In this section, we aim to analyze cities that are closer to the

Although the situation was not very critical at such a mo-

São Paulo state capital (São Paulo) and other regional cities.
10

change in the reported number of cases. First, 191 of the 194
cases were reported in this period, in which the city of Santos
reported 72 cases only in six days, as indicated in Fig 19, in
contrast for a greater period for Santo André.

Figure 19: The situation of Santos’ neighborhood from March 16th to April
5th. The curve of the number of cases seems flattened due to the scale – for
later periods, the number of cases is much greater.

Fig. 20 shows the situation of Santos’ neighborhood through
the days. The donut chart and the color code reveals that the
number of cases reported in the periods of analysis (20 days)
shows an increasing pattern, which configures that such neighborhood does not reach the curve maxima. This important inFigure 18: Situation of Santos’ neighborhood. For this period of time, the curve

formation could be used to guide decision-makers on isolation

seems flattened due to the scale of the graph, that is, this pattern is shown due

policies since it seems that the applied isolation policy up to

to the greater number of confirmed cases.

now is not being effective enough.
ment, the isolation indices in Table 1 could indicate difficult
periods ahead. The low isolation indices are even more serious
if according to the geolocation of these cities, which are very
close to the capital, São Paulo.
City

Isolation index

Santos

45% ± 0.115

Suzano

49% ± 0.092

Ribeirão Pires

53% ± 0.107

Mauá

46% ± 0.104

Santo André

46% ± 0.123

São Bernardo do Campo

45% ± 0.112

Figure 20: Situation of Santos’ neighborhood in different days. By inspecting
the neighborhood using the color scale and donut chart representation, there is
increasing pattern in the number of confirmed cases.

Table 1: Isolation indices in Santos’ neighborhood.

Ribeirão Preto. Fig. 21 shows the number of cases curves and
Moving the time window seven days further, i.e., analyzing

the donut chart encoding the increase of the curves in the neigh-

the period from March 16th to April 5th, we can note a lot of

borhood of Ribeirão Preto for the neighborhood from March
11

23th to April 12th. This is an example where the city in the
analysis influences its neighborhood, i.e., while Ribeirão Preto
presents 43 cases in the period, each one of the other cities
present only two confirmed cases.

Figure 23: Situation of Ribeirão Preto’s neighborhood from May 3th to May
Figure 21: Situation of Ribeirão Preto’s neighborhood from March 13th to

23th. Besides more cities presenting confirmed cases, an increase in the number

April 12th. Ribeirão Preto, being the most influential city in the neighborhood,

of cases can be noticed.

dominates the number o cases.

Finally, Fig. 24 shows that the COVID-19 dissemination for
The situation was different by May 3th, in which the neigh-

Ribeirão Preto has not presented a decrease. Instead, the num-

boring cities with confirmed cases jumped from four to eight.

ber of cases seems to be increasing rapidly, which can be dan-

However, even with a lot of neighboring cities with confirmed

gerous due to low isolation indices presented by the cities with

cases, Rio Preto still present a higher number of infections than

more critical curves – see Table 2 the isolation indices for

the cities in its neighborhood combined. Additionally, the in-

Ribeirão Preto and Sertãozinho.

crease in the number of cases seems to have a slow pace until
May 3th, which cannot be said for further periods, as we will
see in the following.

Figure 22: Situation of Ribeirão Preto’s neighborhood from April 13th to May
3th. The neighboring cities start to show increase in number of cases.

Figure 24: Situation of Ribeirão Preto’s neighborhood from May 20th to June

Fig. 23 shows the situation in the neighborhood by May 23th.

8th. Rio Preto dominates the number of cases while other cities also show

Notice a big step in the number of cases reported in May 7th and

increase pattern for their curves.

an apparent increasing in the number of cases reported both for
the city of Ribeirão Preto and its neighborhood. This can also
be noticed by the darkening of the donut chart the boundaries

São José do Rio Preto. Fig. 25 shows how the overall curve

in the map.

of the number of cases is similar between Ribeirão Preto (dis12

City

May 5th to May 22th. Here, besides the rapid increase in the

Isolation index

number of cases in the following days from May 5th in the
Ribeirão Preto

47% ± 0.026

Sertãozinho

47% ± 0.017

city of São José de Rio Preto, we can note a rapid increase
in the number of cases in the neighborhood as well. While
such a pattern can be explained by the interaction between the

Table 2: Isolation indices in Ribeirão Preto and Sertãozinho.

cities and consequently the dissemination of COVID-19 from
cussed in the previous section) and São José do Rio Preto are

São José do Rio Preto to its neighborhood – see how the in-

similar. In both situations, we can see a sudden increase in the

crease in the neighborhood occurs latter than in São José do

number of cases indicated by a red line segment.

Rio Preto –, other explanations could be accumulated the number of COVID-19 tests that were delayed and reported in such
period. Fig. 27 also suggest that the neighborhood would maintain the contamination low, however, it is not what happens in
the following days.

Figure 25: Although different number of confirmed cases, Rio Preto and São
José do Rio Preto show the same rapid increase pattern, as indicated by a dashed
red line.

As for Ribeirão Preto, the city of São José do Rio Preto is
the most influential in its neighborhood, as shown in Fig. 26 for
the period from April 16th to May 5th. The image shows that
the cases in the period for São José do Rio Preto are three times
greater than the accumulated cases for all the cities presenting
confirmed cases.
Figure 27: Situation of São José do Rio Preto’s neighborhood from May 5th to
May 22th. Various cities reported confirmed cases in this period, in addition,
an abnormal number of cases was reported for both cases.

Fig. 28 shows our last period of analysis, from May 22th to
June 10th. The curves suggest that for both the city and its
neighborhood there is an increase in the number of cases, and
we cannot realize any plateau in the aggregated number of cases
of the neighborhood. However, it is important to emphasize
how the city of Jaci went from presenting the most critical curve
Figure 26: Situation of São José do Rio Preto’s neighborhood from April 16th
to May 5th. For this period of time, the number of cases was concentrated

in the neighborhood (see the donut chart in Fig. 27) to only

mainly in three cities: São José do Rio Preto, Jaci, and Mirassol.

four cases in this period – such a pattern could be the result
of isolation policies but unfortunately, we do not have data to

Advancing the time window, Fig. 27 shows the situation from

confirm.
13

Figure 28: Situation of São José do Rio Preto’s neighborhood from May 22th
to June 10th. The curves and donut charts show how the number of cases are
rapidly increasing. The city of Jaci, on the other hand, went from a critical
situation to only confirming four cases in this period.

São Paulo. Finally, we analyze the evolution in the number of
cases of São Paulo (capital) and its neighborhood. By June
10th, São Paulo has already reported 80457 cases of COVID19, which is the most critical situation in the whole state (even
in the whole country of Brazil). Here, we summarize the evolu-

Figure 29: Comparison of São Paulo’s neighborhood in the periods of February

tion of the number of cases for São Paulo and its neighborhood

26th to March 16th and from March 14th to April 2th.

for various periods. Firstly, Fig. 29 shows the situation for São
the dissemination of COVID-19 continues at a rapid pace in the

Paulo and its neighborhood from February 26th to March 16th.

neighborhood of São Paulo.

Note that only five cities in the neighborhood presented confirmed cases, with one case notified for each one. Advancing

The cities in the donut chart of Fig. 30a are very populous,

for the period from March 14th to April 2th, a few more cities

besides having a lot of interaction with themselves. On top of

in the neighborhood start to present confirmed cases with the

that, the isolation indexes are not good, as seen in Fig. 31 which

rapid increase (see Table 3), as shown in the donut chart.

could aggregate even more the situation.

City

6. Discussion

Cases in the period

Osasco

57

Throughout the results section, we could demonstrate the

Santo André

70

usefulness of our visual analytics tool to understand the dis-

São Bernando do Campo

70

semination of COVID-19 in cities of interest by analyzing the
influence of cities on their neighborhood and vice-versa. It is

Table 3: Number of cases in period from March 14th to April 2nd for cities in

important to emphasize that our tool helps at analyzing the evo-

the São Paulo’s neighborhood.

lution while is not mainly focused on the number of cases a city
From this period until June 10th, the situation in São Paulo

or a neighborhood may present. In this case, our tool acts more

and its neighborhood do not change according to the increase

as a mechanism to draw attention to cities or neighborhoods

in the number of reported cases. Fig. 30a and 30b show how

that present an increasing number of confirmed cases, so that,
14

we believe that it could be employed even after infection by

situation of its neighborhood. We showed that our methodology

COVID-19 is controlled, as well as to be employed to monitor

was able to emphasize how the isolation index benefit cities re-

the dissemination of other diseases.

garding the dissemination, even when these cities are inserted

While we defined the neighborhood of a city as cities with

in critical neighborhoods in the sense of the number of cases.

spatial proximity, it is important to stress out that this may not

We hope that our methodology can be used by decision-

reflect the reality in some cases. For example, for a regional

makers to monitor the evaluation of the number of cases in cities

city, a neighborhood may be defined as the set of cities that

and neighborhoods to quickly respond to dissemination risks.

are influenced by or influence cities according to some aspects,
such as citizens that commute from smaller cities to greater

Acknowledgements

ones to work.
This work was supported by Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa

Other indicators. Although we use the absolute case number

do Estado de São Paulo (FAPESP) grants 18/17881-3 and

to monitor the progression of COVID-19 dissemination, other

18/25755-8.

indicators could be employed, such as a relation between the
number of confirmed cases and the number of performed tests

References

or total population. We choose the absolute number of cases in
this work since it is the most simple approach to visualize the

[1] C. Huang, Y. Wang, X. Li, L. Ren, J. Zhao, Y. Hu, L. Zhang, G. Fan,

progression in addition to be a well-known metric and easier

J. Xu, X. Gu, Z. Cheng, T. Yu, J. Xia, Y. Wei, W. Wu, X. Xie, W. Yin,

to understand by a citizen not involving in academia. In future

H. Li, M. Liu, Y. Xiao, H. Gao, L. Guo, J. Xie, G. Wang, R. Jiang, Z. Gao,

works, we plan to add new metrics to monitor COVID-19 and

Q. Jin, J. Wang, B. Cao, Clinical features of patients infected with 2019
novel coronavirus in wuhan, china, The Lancet 395 (10223) (2020) 497 –

other diseases.

506. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30183-5.
[2] F. Qi, S. Qian, S. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Single cell rna sequencing

Visualization tool. The visualization tool is available at

of 13 human tissues identify cell types and receptors of human

RADAR4 .

coronaviruses, Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communicationsdoi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2020.03.044.
URL

7. Conclusions

http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/

S0006291X20305234
[3] H. Xu, L. Zhong, J. Deng, J. Peng, H. Dan, X. Zeng, T. Li, Q. Chen,

Visualization techniques can help at discovering patterns that

High expression of ace2 receptor of 2019-ncov on the epithelial cells

sometimes would be difficult to perceive by looking only at raw

of oral mucosa, International Journal of Oral Sciencedoi:10.1038/

data. In this work, we employed visualization metaphors to an-

s41368-020-0074-x.

alyze the evolution of the number of cases of COVID-19 in the

[4] R. Hafen, D. Anderson, W. Cleveland, R. MacIejewski, D. Ebert,

São Paulo state, Brazil. Our methodology consisted of visual-

A. Abusalah, M. Yakout, M. Ouzzani, S. Grannis, Syndromic surveillance: Stl for modeling, visualizing, and monitoring disease counts,

izing the dissemination based on time windows and contrasting

BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 9 (1). doi:10.1186/

the evolution of the number of cases in the periods of analyzes

1472-6947-9-21.

with the isolation indices of the cities.

[5] C. C. Freifeld, K. D. Mandl, B. Y. Reis, J. S. Brownstein,
HealthMap: Global Infectious Disease Monitoring through Automated

Throughout a few analyzes, we showed how our visualiza-

Classification and Visualization of Internet Media Reports, Journal of

tion design can help to analyze the situation of a city according

the American Medical Informatics Association 15 (2) (2008) 150–

to the number of cases in a time window and relation with the

157.

arXiv:https://academic.oup.com/jamia/article-pdf/

15/2/150/2086063/15-2-150.pdf, doi:10.1197/jamia.M2544.
4 https://covid19.fct.unesp.br/analise-regional/en/

URL https://doi.org/10.1197/jamia.M2544

15

[6] R. Brigantic, D. Ebert, C. Corley, R. Maciejewski, G. Muller, A. Taylor,

raz, M. Teixeira, Dengue surveillance based on a computational model

Development of a quick look pandemic influenza modeling and visual-

of spatio-temporal locality of twitter, in: Proceedings of the 3rd Inter-

ization tool, in: ISCRAM 2010 - 7th International Conference on Infor-

national Web Science Conference, WebSci ’11, Association for Comput-

mation Systems for Crisis Response and Management: Defining Crisis

ing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2011. doi:10.1145/2527031.

Management 3.0, Proceedings, Information Systems for Crisis Response

2527049.

and Management, ISCRAM, 2010, 7th International Conference on In-

URL https://doi.org/10.1145/2527031.2527049

formation Systems for Crisis Response and Management, ISCRAM 2010

[18] G. E. Coelho, P. L. Leal, M. de Paula Cerroni, A. C. R. Simplicio, J. B.

; Conference date: 02-05-2010 Through 05-05-2010.

de Siqueira, Sensitivity of the dengue surveillance system in brazil for

[7] J.-X. Huang, J.-F. Wang, Z.-J. Li, Y. Wang, S.-J. Lai, W.-Z. Yang, Vi-

detecting hospitalized cases, PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases 10.

sualized exploratory spatiotemporal analysis of hand-foot-mouth disease

[19] C. Marques-Toledo, C. M. Degener, L. C. Vinhal, G. E. Coelho, W. Meira,

in southern china, PloS one 10 (11) (2015) e0143411. doi:10.1371/

C. T. Codeço, M. M. Teixeira, Dengue prediction by the web: Tweets are

journal.pone.0143411.

a useful tool for estimating and forecasting dengue at country and city

URL https://europepmc.org/articles/PMC4659604

level, PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases 11 (2017) 1747 – 1757.

[8] D. Guo, Visual analytics of spatial interaction patterns for pandemic deci-

[20] S. Yousefinaghani, R. Dara, Z. Poljak, T. M. Bernardo, S. Sharif, The

sion support, International Journal of Geographical Information Science

assessment of twitter’s potential for outbreak detection: Avian influenza

21 (2007) 859 – 877.

case study, Sci Rep.

[9] R. Maciejewski, P. Livengood, S. Rudolph, T. F. Collins, D. S. Ebert,
R. T. Brigantic, C. D. Corley, G. A. Muller, S. W. Sanders, A pandemic
influenza modeling and visualization tool, J. Vis. Lang. Comput. 22 (4)
(2011) 268–278. doi:10.1016/j.jvlc.2011.04.002.
URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jvlc.2011.04.002
[10] M. J. Paul, M. Dredze, D. Broniatowski, Twitter improves influenza
forecasting,

PLOS

Currents

Outbreaksdoi:10.1371/currents.

outbreaks.90b9ed0f59bae4ccaa683a39865d9117.
[11] A. Culotta, Towards detecting influenza epidemics by analyzing twitter
messages, in: SOMA ’10, 2010.
[12] h. Achrekar, A. Gandhe, R. Lazarus, Ssu-Hsin Yu, B. Liu, Predicting flu
trends using twitter data, in: IEEE Conf. on Computer Communications
Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), 2011.
[13] D. A. Broniatowski, M. J. Paul, M. Dredze, National and local influenza
surveillance through twitter: an analysis of the 2012-2013 influenza epidemic, PLoS ONE.
[14] M. Santillana, A. T. Nguyen, M. Dredze, M. J. Paul, E. O. Nsoesie,
J. S. Brownstein, Combining search, social media, and traditional data
sources to improve influenza surveillance, PLoS Comput Bioldoi:10.
1371/journal.pcbi.1004513.
[15] J. Astill, R. A. Dara, E. D. G. Fraser, S. Sharif, Detecting and predicting
emerging disease in poultry with the implementation of new technologies
and big data: A focus on avian influenza virus, Frontiers in Veterinary
Science 5 (2018) 263. doi:10.3389/fvets.2018.00263.
URL https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fvets.
2018.00263
[16] T. H. van de Belt, P. T. van Stockum, L. J. Engelen, J. Lancee, R. S. Schrijver, J. Rodrı́guez-Baño, E. Tacconelli, K. Saris, M. M. H. J. van Gelder,
A. Voss, Social media posts and online search behaviour as early-warning
system for mrsa outbreaks, in: Antimicrobial Resistance & Infection Control, 2018.
[17] J. Gomide, A. Veloso, W. Meira, V. Almeida, F. Benevenuto, F. Fer-

16

(a) Donut chart showing rapid increase in number of cases.

Figure 31: Social isolation of the cities in the neighborhood of São Paulo.

(b) Curves of confirmed cases for two periods of time.
Figure 30: Rapid increasing in number of cases can be seen though donut chart
and curves of confirmed cases in time windows.

17

