How different age groups responded to the COVID-19 pandemic in terms of mobility
behaviors: a case study of the United States
Aliakbar Kabiri 1, Aref Darzi 2, Weiyi Zhou 3, Qianqian Sun 4, Lei Zhang 5, *

Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering 1
University of Maryland
1173 Glenn Martin Hall, College Park, MD 20742
United States
kabiri@umd.edu
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering 2
University of Maryland
1173 Glenn Martin Hall, College Park, MD 20742
United States
adarzi@umd.edu
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering 3
University of Maryland
1173 Glenn Martin Hall, College Park, MD 20742
United States
qsun12@umd.edu
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering 4
University of Maryland
1173 Glenn Martin Hall, College Park, MD 20742
United States
wyzhou93@umd.edu
Corresponding Author 5, *
Lei Zhang, Ph.D.
Herbert Rabin Distinguished Professor
Director, Maryland Transportation Institute
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
University of Maryland
1173 Glenn Martin Hall, College Park, MD 20742
United States
Email: lei@umd.edu
Phone: +1 (301) 405-2881

1

Abstract
The rapid spread of COVID-19 has affected thousands of people from different socio-demographic
groups all over the country. A decisive step in preventing or slowing the outbreak is the use of
mobility interventions, such as government stay-at-home orders. However, different sociodemographic groups might have different responses to these orders and regulations. In this paper,
we attempt to fill the current gap in the literature by examining how different communities with
different age groups performed social distancing by following orders such as the national
emergency declaration on March 13, as well as how fast they started changing their behavior after
the regulations were imposed. For this purpose, we calculated the behavior changes of people in
different mobility metrics, such as percentage of people staying home during the study period
(March, April, and May 2020), in different age groups in comparison to the days before the
pandemic (January and February 2020), by utilizing anonymized and privacy-protected mobile
device data. Our study indicates that senior communities outperformed younger communities in
terms of their behavior change. Senior communities not only had a faster response to the outbreak
in comparison to young communities, they also had better performance consistency during the
pandemic.
Keywords
COVID-19; Mobile Device Location Data; Mobility Pattern; Social Distancing

2

1. Introduction
In December 2019, a novel coronavirus (COVID-19) began spreading across the world. As of May
18, there have been more than 1,560,000 confirmed cases and more than 94,000 have lost their
lives to disease. Non-Pharmaceutical Interventions (NPI) have been considered one of the most
effective strategies in fighting against this outbreak in the absence of vaccinations. Therefore, on
March 13, the U.S. government declared a national emergency followed by the Coronavirus
Guidelines for Americans on March 16, which highlighted the importance of the social distancing
practices. In addition to the national emergency, 42 states across the U.S. instituted stay-at-home
orders by mid-April 2020 to reinforce the preventive measures. Despite all the efforts conducted
to flatten the curve, COVID-19 continues to spread at an alarming pace, which indicates the
importance of appropriate NPI planning, especially during the reopening phase.
Earlier studies revealed the linkage between the transmission of COVID-19 and sociodemographic characteristics at both the community and individual level. With a specific focus on
the work status variable by difference age groups, a study carried out by Papageorge et al. found
that younger workers were more likely to begin teleworking while older workers tend to not work
instead (Papageorge, et al., 2020). In another study, which leveraged novel GPS location data,
Engle’s team analyzed the influence of COVID-19 and social distancing restrictions on individual
mobility behavior. The results suggested that counties with larger shares of population over 65 are
more responsive to pandemic prevalence and restriction orders (Engle et al., 2020). Some research
discussed the differences in social distancing behavior between different sociodemographic groups (Fang, et al., 2020; Lee, et al., 2020; Sun, et al., 2020). A preliminary analysis
indicated that states in the U.S. differ in mobility metrics, such as percentage of staying home,
miles traveled per person, and percentage of out-of-county trips, when grouped by income levels
or population density (Lee, et al., 2020). A more detailed analysis by zooming in on different
communities in the United States was conducted by the authors, which showed notable disparities
between the mobility patterns of people from different income levels (Sun, et al., 2020). Many
studies have shown that being elderly is one of the high-risk phenotypes of COVID-19 (Raifman
M and Raifman J, 2020; Covid, C. D. C., & Team, R., 2020; Liu, 2020, Yancy, 2020; Lewnard
and Lo, 2020) and age structure is closely related to the progression of the pandemic (Dowd, et
al., 2020). Therefore, we aim to investigate the mobility behavior by age group during the
pandemic. Related research shows that elderly people have fewer close contacts with nonhousehold members based on an online survey (Canning, et al, 2020). A second study analyzed
the connection between age, social distancing behavior, and the progression of the pandemic
(Zhang, et al., 2020). Another study treated age as an important consideration when analyzing
social contact behavior (Block, et al., 2020).
This research explored the disparities in response to mobility-related, non-pharmaceutical
interventions between communities of different age groups. Several aspects of mobility patterns
including percentage of people staying at home and social distancing index, have been investigated
in this paper to illustrate how different age groups behave during the pandemic. Emergence of
mobile device location data has helped many researchers to study the mobility behavior of
individuals across the world. In this study, we utilized a panel mobile device location data
integrated from several data vendors. This integrated dataset consists of more than 100 million
devices across the U.S. and enabled us to calculate several mobility metrics at census tract level
using previously developed algorithms (Zhang, et al, 2020). We performed statistical methods,
3

including pairwise t-test and post-hoc analysis, to investigate the differences in temporal mobility
behavior patterns between different age groups, which are derived from the mobile device location
data. In the following sections, we first describe the datasets used for our study and explain the
methodology used for our analysis (Section 2); then, we illustrate findings from our analysis
(Section 3); and finally, we discuss conclusions and future directions (Section 4).
2. Material and Method
2.1.Data Description
2.1.1. Socio-demographic data
We collected age and population data from the American Community Survey (ACS) 5-year
estimate (2014-2018) at census tract level across the United States. This data was indirectly
downloaded from the NHGIS website, cited in the reference section.
2.1.2. Mobility metrics
Mobility metrics are the key feature in this study. The research team created a robust and
representative data panel by integrating multiple mobile device location data sources, which
capture the person and vehicle movements. After creating the data panel, we went through
comprehensive data cleaning steps considering consistency, accuracy, completeness, and
timeliness of the observations in the data panel. We then identified activity locations using the
spatio-temporal clustering of raw location data. This step of identifying activity location mainly
helps infer the residential and work location of anonymized devices at the census block group level
with privacy protection taken into account. After home and work identification, we extracted trips
from raw location points using a previously developed recursive algorithm (Zhang, et al, 2020).
The trip identification algorithm provides trip-related information, including trip origin and
destination, departure time and arrival time, and travel distance of each trip. To estimate the
percentage of people staying at home, we considered all anonymized devices with no trips made
longer than one mile from their designated residential location as devices staying at home for that
calendar day. The last step was to employ a multi-level weighting algorithm to expand the sample
observed in our mobile device data to the population level. The final results of our computational
algorithms were extensively validated using several independent data sources, including the
National Household Travel Survey (NHTS) and American Community Survey. Additionally, the
algorithms were peer-reviewed by an external expert panel (Zhang, et al, 2020).
Basic mobility metrics, including percentage of people staying at home, number of trips per person
per day, number of work trips and non-work trips per person per day, miles traveled per person
per day, and percentage of out-of-county trips per day, were calculated using the aforementioned
method. It is worth mentioning that the percentage of people staying home is defined as the number
of people without any trip longer than one mile in a day. However, as none of these metrics could
represent the different aspects of human mobility patterns, a single metric is introduced to portray
the extent of social distancing practices for each census region. The social distancing index (SDI)
was calculated as a score-based index to measure the accordance of both residents and visitors to
social distancing guidelines (Pan, et al., 2020). A score between 0 and 100 has been assigned to
each region by considering the temporal changes in five basic mobility metrics, e.g., percent of
staying at home, daily work trips, daily non-work trips, trip distance, and percent of out-of-county
compared to baseline days before the start of the COVID-19 pandemic. The research team
designed a weighting scheme for integrating the five metrics by considering the importance of
4

each metric based on both conceptual guidelines of social distancing definition and real-world
observations.
Table 1 shows the descriptive statistics of the metrics used in this paper.
Metric

Min Median Mean Max

% Staying home

0

24.32

26.67 100

Trips/person

0

3.11

3.11

6.52

Work trips/person

0

0.45

0.48

1.81

Non-work trips/ person 0

2.63

2.63

5.45

Miles travelled/person

0

27.15

30.30 102.79

% Out-of-county trips

0

16.25

19.26 100

32.5

34.71 100

Social distancing index 0

Table 1. Descriptive statistics of the mobility metrics.
2.2.Methodology
In this study, the community categories are defined based on the median age of census tracts. We
first sorted the census tracts by median age in ascending order and then picked the top and bottom
20% as young and senior communities, respectively. The performance of following social
distancing for both groups are quantified as the percentage change of mobility metrics between the
study period (weekdays from March 1 to May 15, 2020) and predefined baseline (weekdays in
January and February 2020). The base value of each mobility metric of each census tract will be
the mean value of the metric in the baseline period. Utilizing the daily percentage changes for both
groups, a t-test was conducted to evaluate the significant difference between two communities,
and consequently reveals the mobility difference between different age groups toward the outbreak
of the pandemic. Communities have different inherent characteristics that lead to distinct mobility
patterns, thus comparing the absolute value of mobility metrics does not fully illustrate their
response to the pandemic. Therefore, as we were most interested in capturing the changes in
behavior among different age groups during the pandemic, we examined the temporal changes of
the mobility metrics compared to the pre pandemic baseline. As an example, young people may
have a higher rate of work trips in comparison to the elderly, and this is their internal characteristic.
On the other hand, if we only consider the percentage changes of each parameter, it shows the
exact effort that each group exerts to prevent the pandemic. In other words, percentage changes
can help us capture the exact performance that each group has, regardless of the characteristics of
each group. These values are completely comparable.
In addition to the aforementioned day-to-day comparison, similar to the research conducted by
Maryland Transportation Institute (MTI), we contrasted the differences in five significant time
intervals named ‘Pre-Pandemic’ (March 1 to March 13), ‘Behavior Change’ (March 14 to March
23), ‘Government Orders and Holding Steady’ (March 24 to April 13), ‘Quarantine Fatigue’ (April
5

14 to April 24), and ‘Partial Reopening’ (April 25 to May 15); we then evaluated the potential
differences in social distancing performance of two senior and young communities in these time
intervals. Moreover, understanding the reaction time to mobility interventions such as the national
emergency declaration in different groups, as well as how well they maintain social distancing
during the pandemic, are some important questions that need to be addressed. We utilized a posthoc, pairwise t-test to capture the rate of changes within the groups on different days.
3. Results
3.1.Temporal change in percentage changes of mobility metrics
In this section, we analyzed the temporal changes in percentage changes of two mobility metrics,
namely, percentage of people staying home and the social distancing index from March 1 to May
18, 2020. We calculated the percentage changes in each weekday of the study period in comparison
to a baseline before the pandemic, when everything was as usual without any external treatment
related to the pandemic, such as the national emergency declaration or stay-at-home order. The
baseline is defined as all the weekdays in January and February 2020. It is worth mentioning that
only the values of weekdays are considered. The value of mobility metrics of each age group is
the daily mean value of all the census tracts in that group, while for the baseline, it is the mean of
all weekdays in January and February.
Based on the daily percentage changes of each mobility metric, two graphs (Figure 1) are produced
to show the temporal changes of each age group.

6

Figure 1. Temporal trend of daily percentage change for two mobility metrics. (A) Social
Distancing Index (B) and Percentage of People Staying Home in comparison to the baseline
(January and February 2020). The red lines represent the boundary between each study period,
which is defined in the figure and is discussed in Section 3 and 4.2.
Based on Figure 1, after the national emergency declaration by the federal government on March
13, both senior and young communities began performing social distancing in both aspects of
mobility. They continued improving their performance until mid-April 2020 and then stopped
enhancing their behavior. This phenomenon is called social distancing inertia (Ghader, et al.,
2020). After this time, the trend shifts backwards, indicating that people—no matter what group
they belong to—stop improving and even violate social distancing.

7

By digging more into each age group, we saw that in terms of percentage changes of people staying
home, senior communities have higher values in all days (Figure 1.a). In other words, the senior
communities outperform the younger communities in staying at home. This finding is crucial,
since the literature indicates that older people are more likely to get sick by COVID-19 in
comparison to younger people. Considering these two points, we will have a good gauge for
moderating the harsh sequences of the outbreak of COVID-19. The same pattern was observed for
the social distancing index (Figure 1.b), which also supports that senior communities contribute
more in performing social distancing.
3.2.Differences between percentage changes in different study periods
In addition to the temporal change of mobility metrics, a t-test method is adopted in this section to
statistically analyze the significance of difference between two groups. Based on a day-to-day
comparison of the mean values of both metrics, we have found that in almost half of the days
before the national emergency declaration the difference is not that significant, as shown in Figure
1. On the other hand, in the days after March 13, the difference between young and old groups is
statistically significant. This test confirms that there is a difference between the behavior of senior
communities and young communities against the pandemic. Older people are more likely to take
better actions in this situation.
In addition, in each time period discussed in Section 3, a t-test is conducted to show whether there
is any statistically significant difference between the behavior changes of the young and senior
groups, of which the null hypothesis of the t-test is defined as no significant difference (Table 2).
As indicated by the results, in all time periods, there are significant differences between both young
and senior groups.
Metric

Study Period

Mean
Young
Group

of Mean
Senior
Group

of tvalue

-6.048

-4.597

12.73

YES

36.465

44.164

33.21

YES

Government Orders 68.047
and Holding Steady

74.198

35.63

YES

Quarantine Fatigue

57.272

63.681

27.44

YES

Partial Reopening

37.744

41.777

23.10

YES

Percentage
of Pre-Pandemic
People
Staying
Home
Behavior Change

8

Significant?
(P-value
<0.05)

Social Distancing Pre-Pandemic
Index

-8.355

-7.033

11.06

YES

43.856

57.176

55.44

YES

Government Orders 85.193
and Holding Steady

100.701

91.62

YES

Quarantine Fatigue

74.292

89.686

70.58

YES

Partial Reopening

52.646

63.145

64.83

YES

Behavior Change

Table 2. T-test results of each study period. This table shows how people in different groups
behave over time and demonstrates the effort that each age group puts on performing social
distancing in comparison to each other.
Furthermore, Figure 2 shows the distribution of social distancing index of the two age groups in
each time period and how it changes over time. It is obvious that in the Pre-Pandemic period, the
two groups are similar to each other, yet later, a significant gap appears between the groups.
Moreover, they differ in spread. Older people have a more dispersed distribution towards higher
values, meaning that overall, they outperform the younger group.

9

Figure 2. Distribution of percentage changes in Social Distancing Index (SDI) of the elderly
and young tracts in different time periods.
3.3.Post-hoc analysis within each age group
In this section, we investigated the within group changes in young and senior communities over
time. We employed pairwise two-sample t-tests to compare the metrics' value day by day. To offer
a more detailed look into the differences, we chose the top 150 and bottom 150 census tracts in
terms of median age and performed a post-hoc analysis on each pair of the days within each group
on both metrics discussed in the previous section—the percentage of people staying home and
social distancing index—to see where the difference comes from. Our results indicated significant
differences in clusters of consecutive days. Figure 2 shows the results of these census tracts.

Figure 3. Pairwise t-test results for two different metrics within each age group. The p-values
of each pair of days are shown. Green cells show no significant difference (P-value greater than
0.05), and red cells show significant differences. (P-value less than 0.05 and even most of them
almost near zero.)
Based on Figure 2, the percentage of people staying at home were similar among the two groups
from March 1 to March 13. However, a sudden shift was observed in the following days for the
10

older age group. This observation indicates quicker response to the pandemic and national
emergency declaration in the elderly group compared to the young group. This indicates that this
group is responding to the pandemic and national emergency declaration very fast. On the contrary,
in the younger group we saw that even until March 20, the pandemic and the executive order were
not significantly considered. Still, until March 20 there are a lot of green cells, which indicates that
there is not that much difference between the younger group’s behavior before and after the
national emergency declaration. Therefore, we can conclude that senior communities were more
responsive to the mobility interventions. Furthermore, our analysis revealed that senior groups
were more consistent in terms of changing their behavior and practicing social distancing. We
observed continuous red cells for the elderly group, which indicates a significant change to their
pre-pandemic behavior, while several fluctuations were noticed by the young group. Thus, it
concludes that senior communities maintain social distancing better than younger communities.
The next two graphs (Figure 2.C and 2.D) also confirm that there is a difference between the
response time of the older group and the younger group. It is worth mentioning that the SDI value
is made up of many mobility metrics that are discussed in the data description. Therefore, its value
is very important and considers mobility behavior of different regions from many different aspects,
and this makes it more trustworthy.
4. Discussion and Conclusion
The COVID-19 pandemic crisis has affected the daily lives of almost all people. In order to prevent
the rapid transmission of the disease, people began changing their mobility patterns by staying
home and having less trips voluntarily, or through different restrictions imposed by state and
federal governments. Because different people have different characteristics and consequently
different behaviors, communities might have distinctive responses to the pandemic. In this paper,
we quantitatively investigated the differences between the mobility patterns of senior communities
and young communities using privacy-protected, anonymized mobile device location data by
comparing the percentage change of mobility metrics, such as social distancing index (SDI) and
percentage of people staying home, during the pandemic in comparison to the days before the
pandemic to capture the different behaviors of these two groups. The results show that after the
national emergency declaration started, both younger and older communities performed social
distancing until mid-April, but that as time goes by, they do not maintain their previous social
distancing efforts as they did in the first days of the pandemic. Furthermore, our analysis shows
that elderly groups reacted to the pandemic faster than young groups. As soon as the national
emergency declaration was deployed, these people changed their behavior by staying home and
maintaining a higher value of social distancing index. Also, elderly people had a constant
performance and kept up their efforts in almost all days. On the other hand, young communities
show a disparity in how they behave on different days during the pandemic. Furthermore, we
analyzed the overall performance of both groups by using a day-by-day analysis and also through
five different critical time intervals such as pre-pandemic, behavior change, etc., and found that in
all of these time intervals, there is a significant difference in how these two groups perform social
distancing in order to control the spread of the COVID-19.
Future research can shed light on the evolution of the pandemic and how different age groups
would return to their normal mobility patterns. The impact of current practices by age group is
another future direction that is worth further analysis to understand whether the effort that each
group is implementing is enough to prevent the outbreak, or if it is still inadequate. Moreover, this
11

paper can be improved and expanded in many directions. For instance, the current definition of
people staying home could be biased towards high-density urban areas. People in urban areas can
access shopping in a shorter distance compared to people living in rural areas; thus, it is possible
to capture more people staying home in urban areas. Therefore, we can divide each age group into
two sub-groups—urban and rural areas—and capture the effect of this factor on age groups.
Finally, this paper reveals that the orders and regulations imposed by policymakers do not result
in the same behavior changes in different communities with dissimilar socio-demographic
characteristics. For instance, as the results of this paper reveals, stay-at-home orders and travel
restrictions have different implications on young and senior communities in terms of mobility
behavior shifts. Elderly groups were more agile in adapting to the new guidelines and the changes
in their behavior showed a higher compliance rate. Therefore, such data-driven insights from
human behaviors are of paramount importance for decision makers to better understand different
aspects of their decisions.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank and acknowledge our partners and data sources in this effort: (1) Amazon
Web Service and its Senior Solutions Architect, Jianjun Xu, for providing cloud computing and
technical support; (2) computational algorithms developed and validated in a previous USDOT
Federal Highway Administration’s Exploratory Advanced Research Program project; (3) mobile
device location data provider partners; and (4) partial financial support from the U.S. Department
of Transportation’s Bureau of Transportation Statistics and the National Science Foundation’s
RAPID Program.
Funding Sources
This research received partial financial support from the U.S. Department of Transportation’s
Bureau of Transportation Statistics and the National Science Foundation’s RAPID Program.
CRediT Author Statement
Aliakbar Kabiri: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal Analysis, Writing – Original Draft,
Visualization, Project Administration, Validation, Investigation; Aref Darzi: Writing – Original
Draft, Data Curation, Investigation, Methodology; Weiyi Zhou: Writing – Original Draft, Formal
Analysis; Qianqian Sun: Writing – Original Draft, Formal Analysis; Lei Zhang:
Conceptualization, Supervision, Writing – Original Draft, Resources, Funding Acquisition
References
1. Block, Per, et al. "Social network-based distancing strategies to flatten the COVID-19
curve in a post-lockdown world." Nature Human Behaviour (2020): 1-9.
2. Canning, David, et al. "The association between age, COVID-19 symptoms, and social
distancing behavior in the United States." medRxiv (2020).
3. COVID, C. D. C., and Response Team. "Severe outcomes among patients with coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19)—United States, February 12–March 16, 2020." MMWR Morb
Mortal Wkly Rep 69.12 (2020): 343-346.

12

4. Dowd, Jennifer Beam, et al. "Demographic science aids in understanding the spread and
fatality rates of COVID-19." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117.18
(2020): 9696-9698.
5. Engle, Samuel, John Stromme, and Anson Zhou. "Staying at home: mobility effects of
covid-19." Available at SSRN (2020).
6. Fang, Hanming, Long Wang, and Yang Yang. Human mobility restrictions and the spread
of the novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) in china. No. w26906. National Bureau of Economic
Research, 2020.
7. Ghader, Sepehr, et al. "Observed mobility behavior data reveal social distancing inertia."
arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.14748 (2020).
8. Lee, Minha, et al. "Human Mobility Trends during the COVID-19 Pandemic in the United
States." arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.01215 (2020).
9. Lewnard, Joseph A., and Nathan C. Lo. "Scientific and ethical basis for social-distancing
interventions against COVID-19." The Lancet. Infectious diseases 20.6 (2020): 631.
10. Liu, Kai, et al. "Clinical features of COVID-19 in elderly patients: A comparison with
young and middle-aged patients." Journal of Infection (2020).
11. Manson, Steven, et al. "IPUMS National Historical Geographic Information System:
Version 12.0 [Database]." Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 39 (2017).
12. Maryland Transportation Institute (2020). University of Maryland COVID-19 Impact
Analysis Platform, https://data.covid.umd.edu, accessed on [June 2020, 1st], University of
Maryland, College Park, USA.
13. Pan, Yixuan, et al. "Quantifying human mobility behavior changes in response to nonpharmaceutical interventions during the COVID-19 outbreak in the United States." arXiv
preprint arXiv:2005.01224 (2020).
14. Papageorge, Nicholas W., et al. Socio-Demographic Factors Associated with SelfProtecting Behavior during the COVID-19 Pandemic. No. 13333. Institute of Labor
Economics (IZA), 2020.
15. Raifman, Matthew A., and Julia R. Raifman. "Disparities in the population at risk of severe
illness from covid-19 by race/ethnicity and income." American journal of preventive
medicine (2020).
16. Sun, Qianqian, et al. "COVID-19 and Income Profile: How People in Different Income
Groups Responded to Disease Outbreak, Case Study of the United States." arXiv preprint
arXiv:2007.02160 (2020).
17. Yancy, Clyde W. "COVID-19 and African Americans." Jama (2020).
18. Zhang, Juanjuan, et al. "Changes in contact patterns shape the dynamics of the COVID-19
outbreak in China." Science (2020).
19. Zhang, L., S. Ghader, and A. Darzi. "Data Analytics and Modeling Methods for Tracking
and Predicting Origin-Destination Travel Trends Based on Mobile Device Data." Federal
Highway Administration Exploratory Advanced Research Program (2020).
20. Zhang, Lei, et al. "An interactive COVID-19 mobility impact and social distancing analysis
platform." medRxiv (2020).

13

