Bridging the Covid-19 Data and the Epidemiological Model
using Time-Varying Parameter SIRD Model
Cem Çakmaklı

∗ ,1

and Yasin Şimşek

†,2

1

arXiv:2007.02726v2 [q-bio.PE] 10 Feb 2021

2

Koç University
Duke University

February 11, 2021

Abstract
This paper extends the canonical model of epidemiology, the SIRD model, to allow
for time-varying parameters for real-time measurement and prediction of the trajectory
of the Covid-19 pandemic. Time variation in model parameters is captured using the
generalized autoregressive score modeling structure designed for the typical daily count
data related to the pandemic. The resulting specification permits a flexible yet parsimonious model with a low computational cost. The model is extended to allow for
unreported cases as well. Results suggest that these cases’ effects on the parameter
estimates diminish with the increasing number of testing. Full sample results show
that the flexible framework captures the successive waves of the pandemic accurately.
A real-time exercise indicates that the proposed structure delivers timely and precise
information on the pandemic’s current stance. This superior performance, in turn,
transforms into accurate predictions of the confirmed cases.

Keywords: Covid-19, SIRD, Observation driven models, Score models, Count data, Timevarying parameters
JEL Classification: C13, C32, C51, I19

∗
Correspondence to: Cem Çakmaklı, Koç University, Rumelifeneri Yolu 34450 Sarıyer Istanbul Turkey,
e–mail: ccakmakli@ku.edu.tr.
†
e–mail: yasin.simsek@duke.edu

1

1

Introduction

The outbreak of the new coronavirus, Covid-19, pandemic is one of the most severe health
crises the world has encountered in the last decades. Since the onset of the pandemic in
early January of 2020, it exhibits a varying pattern for many reasons. First, countries
have repeatedly taken various measures to reduce the transmission rate of the virus. These
measures involve complete lockdown such as full closure of business and curfew, and partial
lockdown that implies a partial closure of daily routines. These seem to mitigate the spread
of the virus at various stages of the pandemic. Second, mutations of the virus might lead to
changes in its main characteristics. Furthermore, with the increasing medical knowledge and
ongoing research on the virus, the death rate seems to be partially lowered. The recovery
rate has increased compared to the initial phases of the pandemic.
While the pandemic evolves rapidly with successive waves of infections, efficient and
timely monitoring of the pandemic is crucial. Making prompt and effective decisions of imposing or relaxation of lockdown measures for policymakers and taking timely precautions
for individuals critically rely on the knowledge about the pandemic. Therefore, epidemiological models for estimating, and perhaps even more crucially, for predicting the pandemic’s
trajectory come to the forefront. Conventional statistical models of epidemiology mostly
involve structural parameters that remain constant throughout the pandemic. However,
suppose these interventions turn out to be effective and cause changes in the pandemic’s
natural course. In that case, this implies that the parameters of the epidemiological models alter to comply with this changing trajectory. Besides, the virus might undergo some
mutations which alter the contagiousness and fatality of the virus. Hence, these mutations
translate into changes in the key structural parameters of the model. These observations
are the departure point of this paper. Specifically, we develop a computationally simple
and statistically coherent model that allows for time variation in the epidemiological model
parameters.
We start our analysis by confronting a simple version of the workhorse epidemiological
model with the existing data. From the perspective of econometrics, we specify a counting
process for modeling the course of the Covid-19 pandemic for a selected set of countries
based on the SIRD model. The SIRD model identifies the pandemic’s four states as Susceptible, Infected, Recovered, and Death. It depicts these states’ evolution depending on the
total number of infected individuals, see Kermack and McKendrick (1927); Allen (2008);

1

Avery et al. (2020). Using these four variables of daily counts of susceptible, infected, recovered, and death cases, the model is well-identified conditional on the infected cases’ initial
value. The pandemic’s course is determined by the contestation of these forces, i.e. the
structural parameters governing infection and resolution (either recovery or death) rates.
As a result, if the infection rate is larger than the resolution rate, the number of infections
evolves according to a nonstationary process representing the virus’s increasing spread. In
contrast, the opposite case results in a stationary process. Therefore, we opt for a Bayesian
estimation strategy of the parameters for computing reliable credible intervals for inference
conditional on the available data rather than utilizing asymptotic analysis. Equipped with
these tools, we extend the econometric model by allowing for time variation in the structural
parameters resorting to the Generalized Autoregressive Score (henceforth GAS) modeling
framework that is a class of observation-driven models. The proposed model permits a
flexible yet feasible framework to track structural parameters’ evolution timely and accurately. A relevant aspect of our specification is its relatively low computational cost. The
computational cost might be crucial, especially at the beginning of the pandemic, when the
data is scarce and the uncertainty is overwhelming. Finally, we extend the model taking
undocumented cases (as these infected individuals do not show symptoms) into consideration by exploiting the information on testing for infection following Grewelle and De Leo
(2020).
We construct a set of countries with distinct experiences related to the pandemic to
demonstrate the proposed framework’s efficacy. These include countries that can mitigate
the pandemic but with differential momentum, countries where the pandemic starts relatively late, and countries experiencing the second wave of the pandemic fiercely. These
distinct experiences provide us with a testing ground with various patterns to examine the
proposed model’s efficacy. Our results indicate that for a majority of countries, the structural parameters change over time. The infection rate typically starts at a high level at
the onset of the pandemic, but it decreases at differential degrees depending on the success
in containing the virus’s transmission. In some countries, we observe recurring increases
in the infection rate that boost the pandemic’s second wave. Contrarily, the recovery rate
starts at a low level, and it gets stabilized after an increase from these low values reflecting
the increasing performance of health systems in handling the active cases. Consequently,
the reproduction rate starts at high levels, often exceeding the value of 5, but it diminishes at differential rates. For many countries, the reproduction rate exhibits an increasing
2

pattern towards the end of the sample, reflecting the pandemic’s second wave in line with
the stylized facts. Two crucial findings emerge from the outcomes of the proposed model
with time-varying parameters. First, the US still cannot tackle the pandemic as the reproduction rates have almost never fallen below the value of 2. Second, Germany and Italy
experience the second wave of the pandemic intensively, with the reproduction rates well
above 1. Results are very similar when we take unobserved cases also into account.
We further examine the model performance in real-time by conducting a real-time
recursive estimation and forecasting exercise. Results indicate that the proposed model
with time-varying parameters provides timely information on the pandemic’s current stance
ahead of the competing models. Moreover, it yields superior forecasting performance up to
2 weeks horizon. Therefore, it provides crucial information, especially for decision-makers
planning potential lockdown measures to contain the pandemic and efficient allocation of
the resources to combat the pandemic.
The literature on estimating the SIRD model (with fixed parameters) and variants to
evaluate the current stance of the Covid-19 pandemic has exploded since the outbreak of the
pandemic. Relatively earlier analysis include Read et al. (2020), and Lourenco et al. (2020)
who estimate a SIRD based model with the data from China for the former and from the UK
and Italy for the latter using a likelihood-based inference strategy. Wu et al. (2020) blend
data related to the Covid-19 for China with mobility data and estimate the epidemiological
model using Bayesian inference to predict the spread of the infection domestically and
internationally. Li et al. (2020) conduct a similar analysis employing a modified SIR model
together with a network structure and mobility data to uncover the size of the undocumented
cases, see also Hortaçsu et al. (2020). Zhang et al. (2020) extend the standard SIR model
with many additional compartments and estimate a part of parameters using Bayesian
inference. The identification of the model parameters in these models hinges upon the
data availability for each compartment. Otherwise, parameter values are set based on the
pandemic’s stylized facts, see Manski and Molinari (2020); Atkeson (2020); Korolev (2020).
Several factors might lead to the time variation in the parameters of the epidemiological
model. On the one hand, lockdown measures implemented by the policymakers isolate the
infected from the susceptible individuals. Therefore, the parameter governing the infection
rate, that is, the average number of contacts of an individual, is likely to alter with lockdown
conduct, see Hale et al. (2020) for example. On the other hand, advancements in the fight
against Covid-19 such as the recovery of drugs and vaccination could effectively mitigate the
3

course of the disease. In addition, the installment or the lack of the medical equipment such
as ventilators might alter the rate of recovery or in other words, the duration of the state
of being infected, see for example Greenhalgh and Day (2017) on time variation in recovery
rates. Accordingly, Anastassopoulou et al. (2020) use a least-squares based approach on a
rolling window of daily observations. They document the time variation of parameters in the
SIRD based model using Chinese data. Tan and Chen (2020) also employ a similar but more
articulated rolling window strategy to capture the time variation in the model parameters.
Other frameworks with time-varying model parameters almost exclusively allow for the time
variation only in the infection rate. An application before the Covid-19 outbreak includes,
for example, Xu et al. (2016) among others, who utilize a Gaussian process prior for the
incidence rate involving the rate of infection using a Bayesian nonparametric structure. In
the context of the Covid-19 pandemic, Kucharski et al. (2020) estimate a modified SIR model
using a parameter-driven model framework allowing the infection rate to follow a geometric
random walk with the remaining parameters kept as constant; see Marioli et al. (2020) for a
similar approach. Similarly, Yang et al. (2020), and Fernández-Villaverde and Jones (2020)
allow for time variation in the rate of infection, keeping the remaining parameters constant.
Liu et al. (2020) provides an econometric specification where the growth rate of infections
follow an autoregressive process around a deterministic trend with a structural break.
In this paper, we propose an alternative modeling strategy to capture the time variation in the structural parameters of the SIRD model. On the one hand, our modeling
framework is statistically consistent with the typical count data structure related to the
pandemic, unlike the models that either employ least-squares or likelihood-based inference
using Gaussian distribution, that is, the Kalman filter. On the other hand, our framework is
computationally inexpensive, unlike the models that are statistically consistent but computationally costly such as the particle filter. This computational efficiency might be crucial,
most notably, when the data is scarce and uncertainty about the pandemic is abounding at
the start of the pandemic. Our framework belongs to the class of observation-driven models,
specifically to the GAS models proposed by Creal et al. (2013). GAS models involve many
of the celebrated econometric models like the Generalized Autoregressive Heteroskedasticity
(GARCH) model and various variants as a specific case, and thus, they proved to be useful
in both model fitting as well as prediction. Koopman et al. (2016) provide a comprehensive
analysis of these models’ predictive power compared to parameter-driven models in many
settings, including models with count data.
4

Observation-driven models for count data are considered in many different cases independent of the analysis of the Covid-19 pandemic. Davis et al. (2003) provide a comprehensive
analysis of observation-driven models with a particular focus on data with (conditional)
Poisson distributions. Ferland et al. (2006) derive an integer-valued analog of the GARCH
model (IN-GARCH) using Poisson distribution instead of Gaussian distribution. Fokianos
et al. (2009) consider the Poisson autoregression of linear and nonlinear form like the INGARCH model as a specific case. Chen and Lee (2016) extend the Poisson autoregression
to allow for smooth regime switches in parameters. Our framework naturally extends these
approaches to the epidemiological model framework for each of the core compartments of
the SIRD model using a multivariate structure.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the canonical
SIRD model and introduce the SIRD model with time-varying parameters. In Section 3, we
discuss econometric issues, including identification of model parameters and how to account
for sample selection. In this section, we further elaborate on our estimation strategy and
the resulting simulation scheme. Section 4 presents estimation results using full sample data
from various countries. In Section 5, we evaluate the real-time performance of our model
framework in capturing the current stance of the pandemic and in short-term forecasting
compared to frequently used competitors. Finally, we conclude in Section 6.

2
2.1

Model specification
The canonical model of pandemic, SIRD model

We start our analysis by discussing the epidemiological model denoted as the SIRD model
of Kermack and McKendrick (1927). Specifically, the SIRD model categorizes a population into four classes of individuals representing four distinct states of the pandemic as
Susceptible (S(t)), Infected (I(t)), Recovered (Rc(t)) and Death (D(t)) in period t. The
susceptible group does not yet have immunity to disease, and individuals in this group have
the possibility of getting infected. On the other hand, the recovered group consists of individuals who are immune to the disease, and finally, D(t) represents individuals who have
succumbed to the disease. The Susceptible-Infected-Recovered-Death (SIRD) model builds
on the principle that a fraction of the infected individuals in the population,

I(t)
N ,

can trans-

mit the disease to susceptible ones, S(t), with a (structural) infection rate of β by assuming
a quadratic matching in the spirit of gravity law, see Acemoglu et al. (2020) for details on
5

alternative matching structures. Therefore, the number of newly infected individuals in the
current period is βS(t) I(t)
N . The newly infected individuals, that is, confirmed cases, C(t),
should be deducted from the susceptible individuals in the current period. Meanwhile, in
each period, a fraction γ of the infected people recover from the disease, which reduces
the number of actively infected individuals. Similarly, a fraction ν of the infected people
have succumbed to the disease, further reducing the number of actively infected individuals.
Hence, a fraction γ + ν of the infections are ‘resolved’ in total. This leads to the following
sets of equations:

Ṡ(t) = −βS(t) I(t)
N
Ṙc(t) = γI(t)

(1)

Ḋ(t) = νI(t)
˙
I(t)
= Ṡ(t) + Ṙc(t) + Ḋ(t)
where ẋ corresponds to dx/dt and we assume that the population remains constant.1

2.2

Econometric analysis of the SIRD model with fixed parameters

The parameters of interest are the structural parameters β, γ, and ν that provide information on the transmission and resolution rates of the Covid-19 pandemic. A central metric
that characterizes the course of the pandemic is the reproduction number, R0 . The reproduction number refers to the speed of the diffusion which can be computed by the ratio of
newly confirmed cases, denoted as Ċ(t), to the resolved cases, that is Ċ(t)/(Ṙc(t) + Ḋ(t)).
Therefore, it serves as a threshold parameter of many epidemiological models for disease
extinction or spread. Assuming that S(t)/N ≈ 1, R0 can be approximated by β/(γ + ν)
in (1) and it holds exactly when t = 0, referred as the basic reproduction rate. In this
sense, a value of R0 being less than unity indicates that the pandemic is contained, and if it
exceeds unity, this implies that the spread of the pandemic continues. Our main motivation
for employing the model from the econometrics perspective is to conform to this canonical
epidemiological model with the existing datasets and pinpoint the pandemic’s stance timely.
For that purpose, we first discretize (1) as the typical Covid-19 dataset involves daily observations on the counts of individuals belonging to these states of health. Motivated by this,
we specify a counting process for the states using the Poisson distribution conditional on
past cases of active infections implying a nonhomogenous Poisson process for all the counts
1
In fact, the number of deaths reduces the total population. We assume that the total number of deaths
is negligible compared to the population for the sake of tractability of the resulting SIRD model.

6

see for example Allen (2008); Yan (2008); Rizoiu et al. (2018) for earlier examples and Li
et al. (2020) in the Covid-19 context for a similar approach. We specify the following for
the stochastic evolution of the counts of these states;
∆Ct |Ωt−1 ∼ P oisson(β St−1
N It−1 )
∆Rct |Ωt−1 ∼ P oisson(γIt−1 )

(2)

∆Dt |Ωt−1 ∼ P oisson(νIt−1 )
∆It = ∆Ct − ∆Rct − ∆Dt ,
where Ωt stands for information set that is available up to time t. We assume that ∆Ct ,
∆Rct and ∆Dt , representing the daily counts of the pandemic states, are independent conditional on Ωt−1 . Considering the fact that

St−1
N

≈ 1 the final identity leads an autoregressive

process for the number of active infections, It . The resulting distribution for the number
of active infections is a Skellam distribution (conditional on Ωt−1 ) with the mean πIt−1 ,
where π = (1 + β(1 − R0−1 )) and the variance as β(1 + R0−1 )It−1 . Here, we use the identity
in the last equation of (2) together with the definition of R0 . Therefore, stationarity of
the resulting process depends on whether R0 < 1 or R0 ≥ 1, i.e., whether the pandemic is
taken under control or not. In addition, the first and second unconditional moments are as
follows,
E[It ] = π t I0
V ar(It ) = β(1 + R0−1 ) π

t−1 (1−π t )

1−π

(3)
I0 ,

where we assume that the initial condition, I0 , is known. If the initial condition is considered
a parameter to be estimated, then the variance is further amplified with a factor in terms of
the initial condition’s variance. Accordingly, the unconditional moments of the pandemic
states are linear functions of these unconditional moments of It . We refer to Appendix A
for details.

2.3

SIRD model with time-varying parameters - the TVP-SIRD model

In this section, we put forward the SIRD model with time-varying parameters. We use the
framework of the Generalized Autoregressive Score model for modeling the time variation
in parameters. This framework encompasses a wide range of celebrated models in econometrics, including the GARCH model and its variants. Briefly, the GAS model relies on
the intuitive principle of modeling the time variation in key parameters in an autoregressive

7

manner which evolves in the direction implied by the score function and thereby improving
the (local) likelihood; see Creal et al. (2013) for a detailed analysis of the GAS model. As
in the case of the GARCH model, it effectively captures the time dependence in long lags
in a parsimonious yet quite flexible structure. Perhaps more importantly, since it admits
a recursive deterministic structure, the resulting observation-driven time variation in parameters is computationally inexpensive to estimate. This computational efficiency might
be crucial, given that these flexible models are evaluated throughout the pandemic when
data is often scarce, especially at its onset. Consider the SIRD model with time-varying
parameters as βt , γt and νt . We first transform these parameters into logarithmic terms
to ensure the positivity of these parameters and, thereby, the positivity of the predicted
counts every period. Let the parameter with a tilde denote the logarithmic transformations
as β̃t = ln(βt ), γ̃t = ln(γt ) and ν̃t = ln(νt ). The resulting Time-Varying Parameters - SIRD
(TVP-SIRD) model is as follows
∆Ct |Ωt−1 ∼ P oisson(βt St−1
N It−1 )
∆Rct |Ωt−1 ∼ P oisson(γt It−1 )
∆Dt |Ωt−1 ∼ P oisson(νt It−1 )
β̃t = α0 + α1 β̃t−1 + α2 s1,t

(4)

γ˜t = φ0 + φ1 γ̃t−1 + φ2 s2,t
ν˜t = ψ0 + ψ1 ν̃t−1 + ψ2 s3,t
∆It = ∆Ct − ∆Rct − ∆Dt ,
where s1,t , s2,t and s3,t are the (scaled) score functions of the joint likelihood. Since the
SIRD model’s likelihood function is constituted by the (conditionally) independent Poisson
processes, each score function is derived using the corresponding compartment. Specifically,
let ∇1,t =

∂L(∆Ct ;β̃t )
,
∂ β̃t

∇2,t =

∂L(∆Rct ;γ˜t )
∂ γ˜t

and ∇3,t =

∂L(∆Dt ;ν˜t )
∂ ν˜t

denote the score functions

for period t observation. We specify si,t such that the score functions are scaled by their
variance as si,t =

∇i,t
Var(∇i,t )

for i = 1, 2, 3.2 In the specific case of the SIRD model, this

modeling strategy leads to the following specification for the (scaled score functions) in
2

Alternative approaches for scaling the score function include the standard deviation rather than the
variance and the score function without scaling. Our findings suggest that using the variance as the scaling
function leads to smoother and more robust evolution of parameters over time.

8

terms of the logarithmic link function
s1,t =
s2,t =
s3,t =

∆Ct−1 −λ1,t−1
λ1,t−1
∆Rct−1 −λ2,t−1
λ2,t−1
∆Dt−1 −λ3,t−1
λ3,t−1

(5)

where λ1,t = βt It−1NSt−1 , λ2,t = γt It−1 and λ3,t = νt It−1 . The resulting specification implies
an intuitive updating rule because the parameters (in the logarithmic form) are updated
using a combination of the previous parameter value and the previous percentage deviation
from the mean. We refer to Appendix B for the details on derivation of (5). The specification
in (4) together with (5) lead to quite rich dynamics both in terms of mean and the variance
of the resulting process. These rich dynamics enable us to accurately capture the pandemic’s
evolution reflected as the timely and prompt response of the parameters to the pandemic
states’ data changes. An appealing feature of the TVP-SIRD model is that it encompasses
the SIRD model with fixed parameters. For example, when α1 = 1 together with α0 and
α2 to be zero, then the rate of infection, βt , remains fixed throughout the pandemic. These
restrictions would indicate that the lockdown measures are ineffective as it does not lead
to a systematic change in the infection rate. Similar reasoning also applies to γt and νt .
Therefore, it provides a solid framework for statistically testing the efficiency of measures
to take the pandemic under control.
To elaborate further, we discuss the implied moments of the resulting process. Consider
the general form of equations in (4) as Yt |Ωt−1 ∼ P oisson(λt ) together with λt = Ψt Kt−1
where Ψt = βt , γt , and νt , Kt =

It−1 St−1
, It−1
N

and It−1 for Yt = ∆Ct , ∆Rt and ∆Dt ,

respectively. The following heavily draws on the demonstration in Davis et al. (2003). We
consider Wt = log(λt ) = log(Ψt ) + log(Kt−1 ) = θt + Xt−1 . Considering the updating rules
in (4) and (5), we can describe the evolution of the model parameters as
(6)

θt = ω0 + ω1 θt−1 + ω2 et−1 ,
where et−1 =

Yt−1 −λt−1
λt−1

and ωi = αi , φi and ψi for i = 0, 1, 2. Assuming stationarity

conditions, θt can be solved as

θt =

ω0
1−ω1

+

Pt−1
i=1

ω1i ω2 et−i = ζ0 +

9

P∞

i=1 ζi et−i .

(7)

For et , given the initial conditions es = 0 for s ≤ 0, the mean of et
E[et |Ωt−1 ] = 0 for s > 0, hence

(8)

E[et ] = E[E[et |Ωt−1 ]] = 0,
and the variance could be computed as,
E[e2t ] = E[E[e2t |λt ]] = E[λ−1
t ] for s > 0.

(9)

Moreover, Cov(et , es ) = 0 for t 6= s. This suggests that et series can be considered as
innovations that are uncorrelated. Therefore, unconditional moments of θt follow as

E[θt ] = ζ0 =

ω0
1−ω1 ,

(10)

and
V ar(θt ) =

P∞

Cov(θt , θt−h ) =

P∞

−1
2
i=1 ζi E[λt−i ]

−1
i=1 ζi ζi+h E[λt−i ].

(11)

Considering the evolution of the active infected cases, we can write the following

It = (1 + βt − γt − νt )It−1 = πt It−1 .

(12)

Therefore, using (10) unconditional moments can be written as
E[It ] =



1+

α0
1−α1

= π̄ t I0

α0
V ar(It ) =
1−α1 +
Accordingly, we can write Wt = ζ0 +

−

φ0
1−φ1

−

ψ0
1−ψ1

t
(13)

φ0
1−φ1

P∞

i=1 ζi et−i

+

ψ0
1−ψ1



π̄ t−1 (1−π̄ t )
I0 ,
1−π̄

+ Xt−1 and the mean of Wt

E[Wt ] = ζ0 + E[Xt−1 ]
= ζ0 + E[log(It−1 )]

(14)

≈ ζ0 + log(E[It−1 ])
For the variance term, we can write

V ar(Wt ) =

P∞

−1
2
i=1 ζi E[λt−i ]

10

+ V ar(Xt−1 )

(15)

Following Davis et al. (2003), for deriving the expectations of the variables representing the
pandemic states, we use an approximation to Gaussian distribution, and we can write
E[Yt ] = E[E[Yt |λt ]] = E[λt ] = E[exp(Wt )]

P∞ 2
−1
≈ exp ζ0 + E[Xt−1 ] + 12
i=1 ζi E[λt−i ] + V ar(Xt−1 )

(16)

For the variance of Yt , using the law of total variance, it follows that
V ar(Yt ) = E[λt ] + V ar(λt )
≈ E[λt ] + V ar(exp(Wt ))

P∞ 2
−1
= E[λt ] + exp
i=1 ζi E[λt−i ] + V ar(Xt−1 ) − 1 ×

P∞ 2
−1
exp 2(ζ0 + E[Xt−1 ]) +
i=1 ζi E[λt−i ] + V ar(Xt−1 ) )

(17)

The expectation in (16) demonstrates the efficacy of the underlying process. Specifically,
the expectation of Yt is driven by two forces. First, as in the SIRD model with fixed parameters, one of the main drivers is the E[Xt−1 ]. Second, unlike the SIRD model with fixed
parameters, it is characterized by the past score functions’ variances with a diminishing
effect for longer lags. This structure is also valid for the variance process. This flexible
dependence structure for both the first and second moments provides considerably rich dynamics for capturing the pandemic’s evolution, reflected as the timely and prompt response
of the parameters to the data changes, which we discuss in the next sections.

3

Econometric inference

3.1

Identification of model parameters

The pandemic’s course in terms of the evolution of active cases depends on the structural
parameters, β, γ and ν that are used to construct π in (3). Additionally, the initial condition I0 is required because the process might be nonstationary if the pandemic is not
contained. We estimate the models starting from the period when the number of cumulative confirmed cases exceeds 1000, and we use this first observation in our sample as
the initial condition.3 The structural parameters are representing the compartments of the
SIRD model. Therefore, if the specific compartments’ data, including the counts of recovery
and deaths, are available, these structural parameters are well identified. Still, extensions
3

Different starting points (such as the periods when the number of cumulative confirmed cases exceeds
10000) yield very similar results. Results are available upon request by the authors.

11

of the model with additional compartments such as cases that are ‘exposed to the virus’
or ‘quarantined’ require additional parameters to be estimated, see Lourenco et al. (2020)
for example. Therefore, while these additional compartments provide further refinements
to the SIRD model, these refinements plague identification of the structural parameters if
additional data is missing, see, for example, the broader discussion in Manski and Molinari
(2020) independent of the SIRD model. Atkeson (2020) discusses the identification of the
structural parameters regarding the SIRD model. He demonstrates how different parameter
setups might result in very similar initial phases of the pandemic but result in divergent
patterns in the long-run absence of the data on the model’s compartments. Similarly, Korolev (2020) discusses identification problems of the structural parameters regarding the
SIRD model with an additional compartment of ‘exposed’ case.

3.2

Accounting for sample selection

A fundamental underlying assumption of the model specification in previous sections is that
the variables of the infected, recovered, and succumbed individuals represent the aggregate
numbers. However, one of the stylized facts related to the Covid-19 pandemic is the presence
of the infected individuals who do not have any symptoms, denoted as asymptomatic. These
hard to detect cases complicate the analysis as it leads to a selection bias in econometric
inference, among other factors, see Manski and Molinari (2020). These unreported infection
cases prohibit the tests to be randomly assigned plaguing econometric inference. This
section provides results on the total number of individuals based on some assumptions on
the model structure to capture asymptomatic infected individuals. Specifically, let Pt denote
an indicator function that takes the value one if an individual is infected in period t, and
0 otherwise. Further, let Tt denote another indicator function, which takes the value one if
an individual is tested for the infection in period t and 0 otherwise. Using the Bayes rule,
we can show that
P (Pt = 1) =

P (Pt = 1|Tt = 1)P (Tt = 1)
,
P (Tt = 1|Pt = 1)

(18)

see also Stock (2020). In case the assignment for testing of an individual is carried out
randomly, then P (Tt = 1) = P (Tt = 1|Pt = 1) and there is no identification problem due
to sample selection. Neither P (Pt = 1) nor P (Tt = 1|Pt = 1) are observed. Nevertheless,
P (Tt = 1) could be computed as the fraction of tested individuals in the population in
period t. Furthermore, P (Pt = 1|Tt = 1) could be considered as the daily positive test

12

rate. Equipped with these, identification of P (Tt = 1|Pt = 1) boils down to identification
of P (Pt = 1), the true prevalence of the infection including asymptomatic cases. Departing
from Grewelle and De Leo (2020), we make use of a parametric identification strategy for
approximation of P (Tt = 1|Pt = 1),
P (Tt = 1|Pt = 1) = exp(−kρt )

(19)

where ρt is the fraction of positives in the tested individuals in period t, and k is a positive
constant. Briefly, the underlying idea stems from the fact that detecting infections, including
asymptomatic individuals, would improve with the increasing number of testing. In that
sense, the fraction of tested individuals among the population should be related to the
ratio of reported infections to the total number of infections. With the increasing number
of testing on the population, this fraction approaches 1. On the other hand, if testing
is concentrated only on symptomatic individuals, this fraction approaches a lower bound,
captured by the parameter exp(−k), where the functional form admits exponential decay.
Let It∗ be the number of infected individuals involving both asymptomatic and symptomatic
cases and let St∗ and Rc∗t denote the total number of susceptible and recovered individuals,
respectively. Let δt = 1 − exp(−kρt ) denotes the fraction of the unreported infection cases
among all infection cases. Using (19), these could be computed as
∆Ct∗ =
∆Rc∗t =

∆Ct
1−δt
∆Rct
1−δt .

(20)

Finally, the TVP-SIRD model in terms of the total numbers can be written as
∗
St−1
∗
N It−1 )
∗ )
P oisson(γt It−1
∗ )
P oisson(νt It−1

∆Ct∗ |Ωt−1 ∼ P oisson(βt
∆Rc∗t |Ωt−1 ∼
∆Dt |Ωt−1 ∼

β̃t = α0 + α1 β̃t−1 + α2 s1,t
γ˜t = φ0 + φ1 γ̃t−1 + φ2 s2,t
ν˜t = ψ0 + ψ1 ν̃t−1 + ψ2 s3,t
∆Ct∗ = −∆St∗ = ∆It∗ + ∆Rc∗t + ∆Dt

13

(21)

The new set of equations exploits two sources of information for dealing with potential
sample selection bias. First, the fact that the observed number of deaths covers the total
number facilitates identifying the infection’s true prevalence. Second, the information on
testing further provides a distinct source of information for the prevalence.

3.3
3.3.1

Estimation strategy and the simulation algorithm
Bayesian inference

We use simulation-based Bayesian estimation techniques for inference on model parameters.
Bayesian inference involves updating the prior distributions of model parameters with the
data likelihood to form the parameters’ posterior distributions. Considering the SIRD
model, Bayesian inference is especially appealing, since the inference is conditional on the
data at hand and does not require relying on asymptotic analysis. Therefore, we can
compute the credible intervals when the underlying process of the number of infected cases,
It , is nonstationary. This property is especially reassuring in our case since obviously,
nonstationarity, or in other words, basic reproduction rate being larger than 1, R0t > 1, is
an inevitable feature of the pandemic.
Here we demonstrate the likelihood function and prior specifications for only the TVPSIRD model, because the SIRD model with fixed model boils down to a special case of this
model. The likelihood function is based on the model in (4) where we specify conditionally
independent Poisson distributions for each of the components of the SIRD model. Let yt =
(∆Ct , ∆Rct , ∆Dt )0 be the vector of observations. Notice that It = It−1 +∆Ct −∆Rct −∆Dt ,
and thus the number of active infections can be computed using the information set Ωt =
(yt0 , It−1 )0 . Accordingly, we have the following likelihood function
∆C

f (yt |Ωt−1 ) =

∆Rc

∆D

λ1,t t exp(−λ1,t ) λ2,t t exp(−λ2,t ) λ3,t t exp(−λ3,t )
,
Γ(∆Ct +1)
Γ(∆Rct +1)
Γ(∆Dt +1)

(22)

where λ1,t = βt St−1NIt−1 , λ2,t = γt It−1 and λ3,t = νt It−1 and Γ(.) is the Gamma function.
Note that the time varying parameters follow the recursion as

γ̃t =
ν̃t =





∆Ct−1 −λ1,t−1
λ1,t−1


∆Rct−1 −λ2,t−1
φ0 + φ1 γ̃t−1 + φ2
λ2,t−1


∆Dt−1 −λ3,t−1
ψ0 + ψ1 ν̃t−1 + ψ2
λ3,t−1

β̃t = α0 + α1 β̃t−1 + α2

14

(23)

where β̃t = log(βt ), γ̃t = log(γt ) and ν̃t = log(νt ).
We would like to obtain posterior results that are driven by the data rather than by the
prior distributions. Therefore, we impose rather diffuse prior specifications for the model
parameters. Let ω = (ω0 , ω1 , ω2 )0 for ωi = αi , φi and ψi for i = 0, 1, 2, we specify the
following improper prior specifications
(24)

f (ω) ∝ 1
when the process described in (23) is stationary and 0 otherwise.
3.3.2

Simulation scheme

For the SIRD model with fixed parameters, the likelihood with Poisson distributions as in
(22) with fixed parameters and noninformative or conjugate priors in the form of Gamma
distribution lead to a Gamma distribution for the posterior distributions of the model
parameters. Therefore, these can be sampled using plain Gibbs sampler. For the TVPSIRD model, the fact that we have time-varying parameters with deterministic recursions
leads to posterior distributions that are nonstandard. Therefore, we cannot use standard
distributions that we can easily simulate from for the inference, as is the case for the
Gibbs sampler. Instead, we resort to the (adaptive) random walk Metropolis-Hastings
(MH) algorithm within the Gibbs sampler, see Robert and Casella (2013) for details. The
algorithm is as follows
1. Sample α = (α0 , α1 , α2 )0 from f (α|S T , I T ) using MH step
2. Sample φ = (φ0 , φ1 , φ2 )0 from f (φ|RcT , I T ) using MH step
3. Sample ψ = (ψ0 , ψ1 , ψ2 )0 from f (ψ|DT , I T ) using MH step
Here Y T = (Y1 , Y2 , . . . , YT )0 for Y = S, I, Rc, D indicating the full sample of the count data
regarding to the states of the pandemic, respectively. For the MH steps, the candidate
generating density is constructed using the random walk specification as
1/2

ωm = ωm−1 + Σω m

(25)

where ωm = αm , φm and ψm depending on the step at the iteration m and m follows a
standard multivariate t−distribution with degrees of freedom 15. For the initial value of
15

parameters, ω0 , and for the covariance matrix Σω , we use the maximum likelihood estimate
of the model parameters. Therefore, we use the mode and the inverse Hessian of the
likelihood function at the mode in (25). For improving the performance of the sampler, we
follow the adaptive scheme described in Haario et al. (2001). This involves replacing Σω
with τ Sm + I, once we obtain a sufficient number of draws to replace the inverse Hessian
of the likelihood function with the simulated curvature of the posterior distribution. Here
Sm corresponds to the empirical covariance matrix computed using the draws up to step
M , I indicates identity matrix and  is a small number. I ensures a nonsingular empirical
covariance matrix. In addition, we use τ for optimizing the sampler’s performance for
the candidate generating density to be efficient enough to cover the tails of the posterior
distribution. Let ω cand ∼ q(ω cand |ωm−1 ) be a draw from the candidate generating density
in iteration m of the sampler, the candidate is accepted with probability
n
o
cand )p(ω cand |Y T )
m−1 |ω
α(θm−1 |ω cand ) = min 1, q(ω
.
cand
T
q(ω
|ωm−1 )p(ωm−1 |Y )

(26)

Here p(ωm−1 |Y T ) refers to the posterior distribution. Note that, due to the symmetry of
the random walk specification, q(ωm−1 |ω cand ) and q(ω cand |ωm−1 ) are equivalent, hence they
are of no use in (26).

4

Empirical results

4.1

Dataset

We use the data for a selected set of countries starting from the early days of the pandemic
until the mid of December. Since daily data involves noise due to problems in timely
announcements and many other reasons, we use a 7-day moving average of daily data
following convention, see Fernández-Villaverde and Jones (2020) for example. We display
the details on the dataset in Table 1. We, further, display the evolution of the cumulative
active cases in these countries in Figure 1.
[Insert Table 1 and Figure 1 about here]
These countries exhibit extensive heterogeneity in terms of their experience related to
the pandemic, as shown in Figure 1. Some countries in this set impose strict measures
of full lockdown and successful testing and tracing policies at the onset of the pandemic,

16

including South Korea. In contrast, other countries, including Italy, have imposed these
immense measures after a certain threshold regarding the number of infected individuals.
Some others opt for imposing mixed strategies involving partial lockdowns and voluntary
quarantine, such as the US. We also include other interesting cases such as Brazil and India.
These countries could not contain the pandemic below 300,000 active cases so far, and they
have been experiencing differential phases with large swings since the start of the pandemic.
Hence, this relatively rich and heterogeneous dataset involving countries with all sorts of
pandemic experience enables us to examine the econometric model’s success in tracking the
changes in the structural parameters as a response to policy implementations and changes
in the virus’s characteristics.

4.2

Full sample results

This section discusses the full sample estimates of the parameters for the models with fixed
and time-varying parameters as described in (2) and (4), respectively. We further evaluate
the model’s parameter estimates with time-varying parameters when asymptomatic cases
are explicitly considered, as shown in (21). We start our analysis with the full sample
estimates of the model parameters for the SIRD model with fixed parameters described in
(2). These are displayed in Table 2.
[Insert Table 2 about here]
The basic reproduction rate, R0 , as the main summary statistics on the course of the
pandemic, is displayed in the last column of Table 2. For all countries, R0 exceeds the
threshold of 1. When the full sample of several days is taken into account, estimation
results show that the pandemic could not be taken under control in these countries. For
the US, which has been experiencing relatively prolonged earlier phases of the pandemic,
we estimate an R0 exceeding 2 departing from the rest of the countries in the sample.
This large reproduction rate is due to the almost exceptional low recovery rate for the US.
For Italy and Germany, R0 is around 1.5, reflecting sizable swings with many infections
when successive waves of the pandemic hit these countries. On the contrary, these waves
are interrupted with periods of a much lower number of active cases. From a time-series
perspective, these large swings lead to an explosive process with the R0 well above the
critical threshold of 1. This pattern also applies to South Korea, albeit to a milder extent.
As for the structural parameters, for Germany, the rate of infection, β is larger than those for
17

Italy and South Korea. This larger rate of infection might be related to tighter lockdown
restrictions imposed by these countries relative to Germany.4 Finally, India and Brazil
constitute another cluster with lower R0 , nevertheless still larger than 1. These results are
driven by the fact that these countries exhibit little variation during the pandemic, but it
does not imply that they successfully could contain the pandemic. On the contrary, while
India experienced a single wave that could barely be contained, Brazil had only a minor
relief between the pandemic waves.
The estimation results in Table 2 indicate that the SIRD model with fixed parameters
might yield R0 estimates that might not match with the stylized facts of countries with
different experiences on the pandemic. These inconsistencies might stem from the rapid
pace of infectiousness, captured by β, at the onset of the pandemic, brought under control
due to swiftly imposed measures. Moreover, increasing knowledge about the SARS-Cov-2
virus, availability of the medical care facilities such as ICU’s and more effective treatment
of the infection potentially lead to changes in the recovery rate γ and the death rate ν.5
Besides, mutations of the virus might also lead to changes in the structural parameters
reflecting the virus’s key features. Therefore, it is crucial to efficiently model this time
variation to monitor the pandemic’s stance timely.
Next, we display the parameter estimates of the TVP-SIRD model as described in (4)
in Table 3.
[Insert Table 3 about here]
These parameters govern the time variation in the structural parameters of the SIRD model.
Therefore, it provides a testing tool for the potential time variation of these structural
parameters. The parameter estimates in Table 3 indicate that the structural parameters
governing the diffusion of the infection indeed exhibit time-varying behavior. The 95%
credible intervals constructed using posterior joint distribution exclude the set of α0 =
α2 = 0 together with α1 = 1, implying that βt indeed varies over time for all countries.
Similar conclusions can be drawn for the recovery and death rates, γt and νt , respectively.
4

The stringency index reflecting governments’ responses for containing pandemic was 79.63 for Italy
versus 67.59 for Germany as of December 13, 2020. Larger values imply relatively tighter measures. See https://ourworldindata.org/grapher/covid-stringency-index?stackMode=absolute&time=
2020-12-13&region=World for details.
5
We note the difference between the term death rate and the terms case fatality ratio or mortality rate.
While the case fatality ratio refers to the ratio of (cumulative) number of the deaths to the (cumulative)
number of the infected individuals, the mortality rate measures the proportion of deaths due to a certain
disease among the entire population for a given period. On the other hand, the death rate, νt , measures the
portion of actively infected population who succumbed to the Covid-19 for a given period.

18

We display the evolution of the underlying structural parameters, βt , γt , νt and the
resulting R0,t over time in Figure 2.
[Insert Figure 2 about here]
We first consider βt , which is the rate of infection. We observe a generic spike at the onset
of the pandemic, which dampens rapidly. Several measures imposed by these countries to
contain the pandemic have weakened the virus’s transmission throughout society. For most
countries, we observe increases in the transmission rate, reflecting the spread’s successive
waves. These waves seem to be quite fierce for countries including Germany, Italy, and
South Korea, while Brazil, India, and the US follow a milder pattern of fluctuations. On
the one hand, the first group of countries exhibits sizable waves interrupted by calm periods
with relatively fewer infections. On the other hand, the second group of countries could
not contain the pandemic successfully, and thus, they have a relatively stable path of active
infections with large numbers. The results show that the flexible model’s dynamic structure
could capture many types of infection rate patterns affected by the countries’ containment
measures.
The recovery rate exhibits some variation for a majority of countries, albeit at a muchlimited scale compared to the fluctuations of infection rate. We observe a typical path for
the recovery rate, which usually starts with low levels as still the first wave of recoveries
is limited. Over time it gets stabilized. For most countries, the mean recovery rate is
around 0.07, indicating 14 days, on average, of recovery time from the infection in line with
the WHO’s official statistics. For Italy and the US, the recovery rate is particularly low,
around values of 0.02-0.03. These low rates might be related to misreporting of the cases
or recoveries. As a matter of fact, when asymptomatic cases or cases with relatively milder
symptoms are excluded from the sample of infected cases, then only the recoveries of the
severe cases are observed. These cases take much longer than the mild cases to recover: 2-8
weeks for severe cases according to the Report of the WHO-China Joint Mission on Coronavirus Disease 2019 (WHO (2020)). Other underlying reasons include the demographic
differences across countries and the health system’s capacity leading to bottlenecks during
the brunt of the pandemic. The pace of the recovery rate in India is rather unusual. It
exhibits a gradual increase reflecting the gradual but constant improvement in the disease’s
treatment throughout the year, see also Lancet (2020) on this.
When we consider the death rate, an impressive structure emerges. For all countries,
19

except for South Korea, the value of death rate is smoothly stabilized around a fixed value.
While this fixed value is 0.001 for most countries, it is lower for South Korea, reflecting
the varying capability of these countries’ health systems in coping with the pandemic. For
South Korea, the pandemic’s death rate is relatively low, and the seemingly volatile nature
of the death rate might be due to these minuscule rates prone to fluctuations over time.
The course of the reproduction rate, R0,t is of central importance for tracing the efficacy
of the pandemic’s containment efforts. The last column of the Figure 2 displays the evolution
of the pandemic throughout 2020. The evolution of the reproduction rate closely follows
the trace of the infection rate. First, for all countries, very high values of the reproduction
rate at the onset of the pandemic are replaced by values around 2 for Brazil, the US, and
India following the first wave. On the contrary, South Korea and Germany reduced the
reproduction rate below 1 swiftly, thanks to intensive measures containing the pandemic.
Second, the successive waves of increases in reproduction rates come into view for almost all
countries except Brazil and India. For the US, the reproduction rate rose to values around
4 in July, but South Korea and Italy had experienced a spike in August and September.
Although there are sizeable fluctuations in the US’s reproduction rate, the rates could be
reduced to only values around 2. Hence, the pandemic is far from being contained, and
it continues to diffuse rapidly. Finally, for almost all countries, increasing reproduction
rates in fall and winter 2020 can be traced quite explicitly except Brazil and India. The
persistence pattern with many active infections and limited volatility make these countries
suffer from reproduction rates continually fluctuating around threshold 1.

4.3

Accounting for unreported cases

The results discussed in previous sections are computed using official statistics that include
reported cases. In this section, we present our findings when we account for this selection
bias using the information on the number of deaths and the number of tests together with
these tests’ positivity rate. We display the evolution of the model parameters estimated
using (21) in Figure 3 for selected countries. Compared to previous sections, countries,
including Brazil, Germany, and India, are excluded from the sample due to limited testing
data.6
6

We use the database provided by https://ourworldindata.org/coronavirus-testing for the information on testing, see Hasell et al. (2020) for details. For Germany and Brazil, data on Covid-19 testing is
only available at a weekly frequency. We exclude India due to the high share of antigens tests among the
total number of tests subject to discussions on these tests’ low sensitivity. Results for India are available

20

[Insert Figure 3 about here]
As can be seen from the graphs in the first row of Figure 3, we observe a sizable fraction
of the infected individuals that do not show symptoms, δt , at the onset of the pandemic
for Italy and the US. The fraction is smallest for South Korea, starting from 5% at the
beginning of the sample, decreasing to lower values. This fraction is most considerable for
the US, starting from well above 50% of all infected individuals decreasing to 30% in June.
For Italy, the fraction is about 20%, and it declines to about 1-5% in June. Strikingly,
the fraction of asymptomatic cases increases with the high number of infections during the
pandemic waves. The number of tests might fall short of the number of total cases during
these periods when the number of cases surges rapidly.
We can see the impact of the relatively sizable fraction of the US’s asymptomatic individuals from the remaining rows of the last column of Figure 3. While the parameters’
pattern remains unaffected, some level shifts in all rates seem to diminish towards the sample’s end. The largest shifts are in the death rate, especially at the pandemic’s onset when
the fraction of the asymptomatic cases is highest. For Italy, the level shift is relatively more
marked for the recovery rate compared to other countries. This downward shift is caused
by the larger increase in the number of total infected cases compared to increase in the
number of recovered cases. We observe similar level shifts of parameters for other countries,
albeit limited compared to the US case. It turns out that the level shifts observed in some
structural parameters are offsetting each other throughout the pandemic. Therefore, after
the first wave, they do not lead to significant changes in the reproduction rate, R0,t which is
the ratio of the infection rate over the resolution rate. In this case, for the US and Italy, R0,t
differs considerably from the earlier estimates computed using the reported numbers at the
onset of the pandemic. The parameter values converge as the cumulative figures mount, and
they have a little effect after the first half of the samples. Therefore, we conclude that the
R0,t computed using official statistics reflects progressively more and more the pandemic’s
actual stance.

5

Real-time performance of the models

The results in the previous section display our findings based on the estimates using the
full sample dataset. These results indicate that our flexible modeling structure can acupon request.

21

commodate various forms of parameter changes reflecting the pandemic’s course. However,
exploring the model’s real-time performance would uncover whether this additional flexibility brought by the time-varying parameters could provide timely and accurate information
on the pandemic’s real-time stance. Therefore, in this section, we discuss the model parameters’ estimation results in real-time using the model with fixed parameters and using the
model with time-varying parameters. We use a moving window for performing the SIRD
model’s estimations with fixed parameters in addition to the expanding window, as the evidence in previous sections shows that the values at different stages of the pandemic could
drive the findings intensively. Specifically, using the dataset from t − M, t − M + 1, . . . , t, we
estimate the SIRD model, and the resulting parameter estimates are those for the period t.
We repeat this process by adding one more observation (and dropping one observation at
the beginning of the sample for the moving window) recursively. We consider three cases
by setting M = 10, 20, and 30, i.e., starting from ten days of data up to one month of data.
For the TVP-SIRD model, we use the data up to period t using an expanding window
rather than a rolling window as the parameters, in this case, are time-varying. We display
the evolution of the structural parameters, βt , γt , νt and the resulting R0,t over time in
Figure 4.
[Insert Figure 4 about here]
Considering the rolling window estimates using the SIRD model with fixed parameters, we
observe a trade-off between the speed of reaction to the evolution of pandemic and the
window size. The parameters evolve smoothly for the window size with 30 days but cannot
promptly react to the rapid changes. On the contrary, using a window size of 10 days,
parameters adjust to the new conditions more quickly. When we focus on the time-varying
parameters SIRD model, we observe that the parameters can swiftly accommodate the
newly changing conditions, ahead of the SIRD model with fixed parameters regardless of
the window size. Besides, they can also react to the abrupt changes in the data. Specifically,
the TVP model’s parameter estimates lead the fixed-parameter model’s estimates with 10
days of window size by almost two weeks ahead. This lead time increases when we consider
wider rolling window sizes. While the lead time is more extensive when the pandemic
waves hit fiercely, it decreases when the pandemic is stabilized, and thus, the variation in
parameters is limited. This finding indicates that the TVP model is most useful when there
are abrupt changes in the pattern of the data and the uncertainty about the course of the
22

pandemic is at the highest level. For example, consider Brazil. In this case, the relatively
mild increases in the number of active cases after 10th of April is instantly reflected in the
rate of infection with the TVP model, whereas this process takes longer for the SIRD model
for 10 days of window size for estimation. We could observe a similar pattern at the end of
July and August during the peak of the first wave for Brazil. In this case, the downturn is
captured by the TVP-SIRD model earlier than the competing models. Finally, the pattern
observed in April is repeated at the end of October, when the number of active cases starts
to soar once again. Therefore, we conclude that the TVP-SIRD model can anticipate the
turning points earlier than the competing models in real-time.
In addition, the jump in recoveries’ number on April 14 is instantly reflected in the
recovery rate with the release of the first set of data on recoveries.7 For the SIRD model
with 10 days of window size in inference, this process takes almost two weeks to reflect
these changes. A reverse pattern is observed at the end of October when the number of
recoveries was low for a couple of days. For these periods, while the fixed-parameter model
estimates with 10 days of rolling window shrink towards minuscule values, the TVP-SIRD
model seems to keep a balance between these unusual realizations and earlier observations.
The fixed parameter model with 10 days of moving window is overly sensitive to extreme
data realization, unlike the TVP-SIRD model. These unusual realizations often stem from
the misreporting of the cases. This finding shows that the TVP-SIRD is robust because it
can rapidly accommodate the changes, but it is not overly sensitive to extreme observations.
This robustness stems from the flexible modeling structure that exploits all available information. As a combination of these two opposing forces of infection and resolution rates,
the reproduction rate immediately fell to the levels around 1 in mid-April, which bounced
back again to values around 2 in about two weeks. It exceeds the values of 2 at the end of
October due to low recovery rates, but it quickly reverted to values slightly above 1. Here,
we do not discuss the fixed-parameter SIRD model results with the rolling window size of
20 and 30 days intensively as these perform worse than the model with 10 days of window
size used for inference.
During a severe pandemic like the current one, these lead times might be crucial in predicting the pandemic’s short-term trajectory. Therefore, we explore whether this capability
of the TVP-SIRD model in reflecting the pandemic’s stance promptly proved to be useful
7
Here, we do not take a stance on the official statistics’ quality as all competing models are estimated
using the same data.

23

in forecasting the number of daily confirmed cases. We, therefore, perform a real-time forecasting exercise where using our recursive estimations of the models in (2) and (4) based
on the information available in time period t, we perform h = 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 14−day ahead
predictions of daily confirmed cases, i.e. ∆Ct+h . We use the first one-third of the full sample as the estimation sample, and we expand the window by adding one more observation
and repeat the procedure. This ratio roughly provides us at least 180 days of evaluation
period for each country. We display the results involving RMSFEs of the competing models
relative to the TVP-SIRD model in Table 4.
[Insert Table 4 about here]
Table 4 reveals that the TVP-SIRD model outperforms the SIRD models with fixed parameters estimated using an expanding window (EW) or using a rolling window regardless
of the size of the window. First, fixed parameter models estimated using an expanding
window or rolling windows with more than 10 days of observations perform inferior relative to the SIRD model with fixed parameters using 10 days of observations in the sense
that the relative RMSFE increases monotonically with the use of more data. Second, the
TVP-SIRD model that uses all available data outperforms competing models. Therefore,
the closest competitor to the TVP-SIRD model is the SIRD model using 10 days of rolling
window (RW-10). In this case, for 1-day ahead predictions of confirmed cases, the TVPSIRD model provides much better predictions than the RW-10. However, for all the models,
the forecasting performance deteriorates with the increasing prediction horizon. Therefore,
the models’ relative RMSFEs monotonically approach values closer to 1 for most models
when the forecast horizon is as long as two weeks. These results show that while for the
short horizons, the correction in the bias overcomes the reduction in the variance for the
SIRD models, the reduction in the variance is more effective in the longer horizons. Still,
the TVP-SIRD model outperforms the competing models for longer horizons for all countries except South Korea, where the two models perform quite close. TVP-SIRD model
surpasses all competing models reflecting the flexible structure’s ability to accommodate
the pandemic’s changing behavior rapidly.

6

Conclusion

Countries have been imposing various measures to fight the pandemic ranging from partial
curfew to full lockdown to lower the pandemic’s transmission. These measures presumably
24

pave the way for the normalization of economies and reopening policies. Health systems
with overloaded intensive care units lead to substantial variation in the number of recoveries
and daily death tolls throughout the pandemic. Additionally, mutations of the virus seem
to alter the pandemic’s essential features, such as infection rate. Therefore, the workhorse
epidemiological SIRD model’s parameters change over time due to these changes.
This paper extends the SIRD model, allowing for time-varying structural parameters
for timely and accurate measurement of the pandemic’s current stance and an accurate prediction of its future trajectory. Our modeling framework falls into the class of ‘generalized
autoregressive score models’. These models involve parameters evolving deterministically
according to an autoregressive process in the direction implied by the score function. Therefore, the resulting approach permits a flexible yet parsimonious and statistically coherent
framework to efficiently operate in scarce data environments due to low computational cost.
We demonstrate the proposed model’s potential using daily data from a set of countries
ranging from the US to South Korea with distinct pandemic dynamics since the pandemic
outbreak.
Our results show that the proposed framework can nicely track the stance of the pandemic in real-time. Our findings suggest that there is considerable fluctuation in the rate of
infection and recovery and death rates. For most countries, the reproduction rate is above
the critical level of 1, implying that they cannot contain the pandemic yet. We further
extend the model to include the infected individuals who do not show symptoms and are
therefore not diagnosed. This sample selection might have a sizable impact on the estimated
level of reproduction rate at the onset of the sample, but the rates converge to similar levels
towards the end of the sample.

25

References
Acemoglu D, Chernozhukov V, Werning I, Whinston MD. 2020. A multi-risk SIR model
with optimally targeted lockdown. Working Paper 27102, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Allen LJS. 2008. An Introduction to Stochastic Epidemic Models. Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 81–130.
Anastassopoulou C, Russo L, Tsakris A, Siettos C. 2020. Data-based analysis, modelling
and forecasting of the covid-19 outbreak. PloS one 15: e0230405.
Atkeson A. 2020. How deadly is covid-19? understanding the difficulties with estimation of
its fatality rate. Working Paper 26965, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Avery C, Bossert W, Clark A, Ellison G, Ellison SF. 2020. An economist’s guide to epidemiology models of infectious disease. Journal of Economic Perspectives 34: 79–104.
Chen CW, Lee S. 2016. Generalized poisson autoregressive models for time series of counts.
Computational Statistics & Data Analysis 99: 51 – 67.
Creal D, Koopman SJ, Lucas A. 2013. Generalized autoregressive score models with applications. Journal of Applied Econometrics 28: 777–795.
Davis RA, Dunsmuir WTM, Streett SB. 2003. Observation-driven models for poisson counts.
Biometrika 90: 777–790.
Ferland R, Latour A, Oraichi D. 2006. Integer-valued garch process. Journal of Time Series
Analysis 27: 923–942.
Fernández-Villaverde J, Jones CI. 2020. Estimating and simulating a sird model of covid19 for many countries, states, and cities. Working Paper 27128, National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Fokianos K, Rahbek A, Tjøstheim D. 2009. Poisson autoregression. Journal of the American
Statistical Association 104: 1430–1439.
Greenhalgh S, Day T. 2017. Time-varying and state-dependent recovery rates in epidemiological models. Infectious Disease Modelling 2: 419 – 430.
Grewelle R, De Leo G. 2020. Estimating the global infection fatality rate of covid-19.
medRxiv .
URL https://www.medrxiv.org/content/early/2020/05/18/2020.05.11.20098780
Haario H, Saksman E, Tamminen J, et al. 2001. An adaptive metropolis algorithm. Bernoulli
7: 223–242.
Hale T, Petherick A, Phillips T, Webster S. 2020. Variation in government responses to
covid-19. Blavatnik school of government working paper 31.
Hasell J, Mathieu E, Beltekian D, Macdonald B, Giattino C, Ortiz-Ospina E, Roser M,
Ritchie H. 2020. A cross-country database of covid-19 testing. Scientific data 7: 1–7.

26

Hortaçsu A, Liu J, Schwieg T. 2020. Estimating the fraction of unreported infections in
epidemics with a known epicenter: an application to covid-19. Technical report, National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Kermack WO, McKendrick AG. 1927. A contribution to the mathematical theory of epidemics. Proceedings of the royal society of london. Series A, Containing papers of a
mathematical and physical character 115: 700–721.
Koopman SJ, Lucas A, Scharth M. 2016. Predicting time-varying parameters with
parameter-driven and observation-driven models. Review of Economics and Statistics
98: 97–110.
Korolev I. 2020. Identification and estimation of the seird epidemic model for covid-19.
Journal of Econometrics .
Kucharski AJ, Russell TW, Diamond C, Liu Y, Edmunds J, Funk S, Eggo RM, Sun F, Jit
M, Munday JD, Davies N, Gimma A, [van Zandvoort] K, Gibbs H, Hellewell J, Jarvis
CI, Clifford S, Quilty BJ, Bosse NI, Abbott S, Klepac P, Flasche S. 2020. Early dynamics
of transmission and control of covid-19: a mathematical modelling study. The Lancet
Infectious Diseases 20: 553 – 558. ISSN 1473-3099.
Lancet T. 2020. Covid-19 in india: the dangers of false optimism. Lancet (London, England)
396: 867.
Li R, Pei S, Chen B, Song Y, Zhang T, Yang W, Shaman J. 2020. Substantial undocumented
infection facilitates the rapid dissemination of novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2). Science 368:
489–493.
Liu L, Moon HR, Schorfheide F. 2020. Panel forecasts of country-level covid-19 infections.
Journal of Econometrics .
Lourenco J, Paton R, Ghafari M, Kraemer M, Thompson C, Simmonds P, Klenerman P,
Gupta S. 2020. Fundamental principles of epidemic spread highlight the immediate need
for large-scale serological surveys to assess the stage of the sars-cov-2 epidemic. MedRxiv
.
Manski CF, Molinari F. 2020. Estimating the covid-19 infection rate: Anatomy of an
inference problem. Journal of Econometrics .
Marioli FA, Bullano F, Kučinskas S, Rondón-Moreno C. 2020. Tracking r of covid-19: A
new real-time estimation using the kalman filter. medRxiv .
Read JM, Bridgen JR, Cummings DA, Ho A, Jewell CP. 2020. Novel coronavirus 2019-ncov:
early estimation of epidemiological parameters and epidemic predictions .
Rizoiu MA, Mishra S, Kong Q, Carman M, Xie L. 2018. Sir-hawkes: linking epidemic
models and hawkes processes to model diffusions in finite populations. In Proceedings of
the 2018 World Wide Web Conference. 419–428.
Robert C, Casella G. 2013. Monte Carlo statistical methods. Springer Science & Business
Media.
Stock JH. 2020. Data gaps and the policy response to the novel coronavirus. Technical
report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
27

Tan SX, Chen L. 2020. Real-time differential epidemic analysis and prediction for COVID19 pandemic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.06888 .
WHO. 2020. Report of the who-china joint mission on coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19).
URL
https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/report-of-the-who-china-\
joint-mission-on-coronavirus-disease-2019-(covid-19)
Wu JT, Leung K, Leung GM. 2020. Nowcasting and forecasting the potential domestic and
international spread of the 2019-ncov outbreak originating in wuhan, china: a modelling
study. The Lancet 395: 689–697.
Xu X, Kypraios T, O’Neill PD. 2016. Bayesian non-parametric inference for stochastic
epidemic models using gaussian processes. Biostatistics 17: 619–633.
Yan P. 2008. Distribution Theory, Stochastic Processes and Infectious Disease Modelling.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 229–293.
Yang Q, Yi C, Vajdi A, Cohnstaedt LW, Wu H, Guo X, Scoglio CM. 2020. Short-term forecasts and long-term mitigation evaluations for the covid-19 epidemic in hubei province,
china. medRxiv .
Zhang Y, You C, Cai Z, Sun J, Hu W, Zhou XH. 2020. Prediction of the covid-19 outbreak
based on a realistic stochastic model. medRxiv .

28

Tables and Figures
Table 1: The dataset
Country
Brazil
Germany
India
Italy
S. Korea
US

Time span
March 08 - Dec 13
March 08 - Dec 13
March 23 - Dec 13
March 29 - Dec 13
Feb. 26 - Dec 13
March 11 - Dec 13

Note: The data is obtained from GitHub,
Covid-19 Data Repository by the Center for
Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE) at
Johns Hopkins University.

Table 2: Estimation results of the SIRD model with fixed parameters

Brazil
Germany
India
Italy
S. Korea
US

0.072
0.074
0.090
0.046
0.053
0.020

β
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.001)

0.063
0.054
0.085
0.025
0.042
0.007

γ
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)

0.002
0.001
0.001
0.002
0.001
0.000

ν
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)

R0
1.111 (0.001)
1.340 (0.001)
1.044 (0.000)
1.707 (0.002)
1.253 (0.009)
2.555 (0.001)

Note: The table displays the estimation results of the model in (2). We display the posterior
means and posterior standard deviations (in parenthesis) of the corresponding parameter
shown in the first row and the country shown in the first column.

Table 3: Estimation results of the TVP-SIRD model parameters

α0
α1
α2
φ0
φ1
φ2
ψ0
ψ1
ψ2

Brazil
-0.093 (0.004)
0.965 (0.001)
0.823 (0.006)
-0.703 (0.003)
0.745 (0.001)
0.392 (0.001)
-0.106 (0.020)
0.985 (0.003)
0.810 (0.037)

Germany
-0.101 (0.006)
0.966 (0.002)
0.848 (0.011)
-0.293 (0.012)
0.897 (0.004)
0.453 (0.007)
-0.051 (0.053)
0.990 (0.008)
0.834 (0.077)

India
-0.042 (0.009)
0.983 (0.004)
1.218 (0.016)
-0.056 (0.006)
0.976 (0.003)
1.102 (0.016)
-0.156 (0.046)
0.977 (0.007)
0.846 (0.039)

Italy
-0.031 (0.005)
0.999 (0.002)
1.204 (0.017)
-0.057 (0.011)
0.980 (0.003)
0.921 (0.016)
-0.117 (0.015)
0.983 (0.002)
0.662 (0.030)

S. Korea
-0.145 (0.024)
0.961 (0.009)
1.111 (0.036)
-0.281 (0.031)
0.904 (0.010)
0.684 (0.025)
-0.870 (0.671)
0.878 (0.094)
0.760 (0.138)

US
-0.102 (0.002)
0.974 (0.001)
1.220 (0.006)
-0.461 (0.005)
0.905 (0.001)
0.698 (0.003)
-0.107 (0.014)
0.988 (0.002)
1.223 (0.045)

Note: The table displays the estimation results of the model in (4). We display the posterior means and
posterior standard deviations (in parenthesis) of the corresponding parameter shown in the first column and
the country shown in the first row.

29

Table 4: Relative RMSFEs of the competing models relative to the TVP-SIRD model

Brazil

Germany

India

Italy

S. Korea

US

EW
RW-10
RW-20
RW-30
EW
RW-10
RW-20
RW-30
EW
RW-10
RW-20
RW-30
EW
RW-10
RW-20
RW-30
EW
RW-10
RW-20
RW-30
EW
RW-10
RW-20
RW-30

h=1
2.24
1.74
2.24
2.76
4.56
2.30
3.83
4.87
9.48
3.71
5.63
7.07
22.53
9.95
18.17
24.16
7.19
3.53
5.39
5.55
13.09
3.41
5.40
7.16

h=3
1.72
1.42
1.72
2.03
3.46
2.25
3.36
4.11
4.43
2.02
2.76
3.30
8.48
4.99
8.03
10.13
2.69
2.02
2.62
2.51
5.36
1.81
2.55
3.21

h=5
1.43
1.23
1.43
1.64
2.86
2.24
3.16
3.74
3.30
1.63
2.11
2.44
5.47
3.98
5.94
7.20
1.83
1.90
2.20
1.99
3.52
1.42
1.86
2.27

h=7
1.32
1.17
1.32
1.48
2.41
2.21
2.97
3.44
2.83
1.47
1.84
2.07
4.12
3.57
5.05
5.93
1.45
1.98
2.09
1.80
2.75
1.26
1.58
1.88

h=9
1.36
1.24
1.36
1.51
2.22
2.34
3.05
3.45
2.59
1.40
1.71
1.89
3.34
3.38
4.59
5.25
1.26
2.19
2.12
1.75
2.38
1.19
1.46
1.71

h = 11
1.38
1.28
1.38
1.52
2.04
2.44
3.11
3.45
2.44
1.36
1.62
1.77
2.83
3.30
4.32
4.84
1.14
2.49
2.24
1.77
2.17
1.17
1.41
1.62

h = 14
1.41
1.33
1.41
1.54
1.87
2.70
3.33
3.59
2.29
1.33
1.54
1.65
2.30
3.29
4.15
4.49
1.02
3.08
2.51
1.87
1.99
1.18
1.38
1.56

Note: The table displays the Root Mean Squared Forecast Errors (RMSFE) of the competing models
relative to the TVP-SIRD model introduced in (4) for the country shown in the first column. EW stands
for the Expanding Window. RW-M stands Rolling Window with M observations as the sample size for
M = 10, 20, 30.

30

Figure 1: The evolution of the cumulative active cases in selected countries
Brazil

Germany

India

Italy

S. Korea

US

Note: The graphs show the evolution of the cumulative active infection cases in Brazil, Germany, India,
Italy, S. Korea, and the US.

31

Figure 2: The evolution of βt , γt , νt and R0,t estimated using the TVP-SIRD model
γt

νt

R0,t

US

S. Korea

Italy

India

Germany

Brazil

βt

Note: The graphs show the evolution of the time-varying parameters, βt , the rate of infection, γt , the
rate of recovery, νt , the death rate, and the resulting reproduction rate, R0,t estimated using the TVP-SIRD
model introduced in (4) for the countries shown in the first column. We also include 95% credible intervals
around the posterior means with darker blue areas.

32

Figure 3: The evolution of δt , βt , γt , νt and R0,t when asymptomatic infected individuals
are also considered in the sample
Italy

S. Korea

US

δt

βt

γt

νt

R0,t
Note: The graphs show the evolution of the time-varying parameters, δt , the fraction of asymptomatic
cases in total cases, βt , the rate of infection, γt , the rate of recovery, νt , the death rate, and the resulting
reproduction rate, R0,t . The parameters estimated using the TVP-SIRD model introduced in (4) are displayed with the blue line, and those for the TVP-SIRD model also takes the unreported cases into account
introduced in (21) displayed with the red line.

33

Figure 4: Comparison of the real-time estimates of parameters for competing models
γt

νt

R0,t

US

S. Korea

Italy

India

Germany

Brazil

βt

Note: The graphs show the evolution of the time-varying parameters in real-time, i.e., estimated using
the sample up to the period t for the TVP-SIRD model (the blue line), estimated using the last M observations up to the period t for the SIRD model shown using the red, yellow and purple lines for M = 10, 20
and 30 respectively. See Figure 2 for further details.

34

Appendix A

Implied Moments of the SIRD model with fixed
parameters

We assume that states’ initial values, S0 , I0 , R0 and D0 are known. For the sake of simplicity, we assume that St ≈ N . We focus on the general form of equations as Yt |Ωt−1 ∼
P oisson(λIt−1 ) where λ = β, γ and ν for Yt = ∆Ct , ∆Rt and ∆Dt , respectively. The
conditional mean and the variance for the Poisson distributed variables are
E[Yt |Ωt−1 ] = λIt−1

(A.1)

V ar(Yt |Ωt−1 ) = λIt−1 .
The resulting process is stationary if the underlying process for It is stationary. It ’s stationarity, in turn, depends on the basic reproduction rate, R0 . To see this, we first start with
∆It and use the fact that E[∆It ] = E[∆Ct ] − E[∆Rt ] − E[∆Dt ]. Therefore, the difference
equation governing It takes the form of
It = It−1 + ∆Ct − ∆Rt − ∆Dt
E[It |Ωt−1 ] = It−1 + βIt−1 − γIt−1 − νIt−1

(A.2)

= (1 + β − γ − ν)It−1
E[It ] = (1 + β(1 − R0−1 ))E[It−1 ].
where the last equation uses the definition of the basic reproduction rate, R0 , as the ratio
of the infection rate to the resolution rate. If R0 exceeds unity, as β is positive, the process
is explosive, i.e., the pandemic progress exponentially. On the other hand, if R0 falls below
unity, the process becomes stationary. We can track down the process conditional on the
starting value for I0 . Let π = (1 + β(1 − R0−1 )).
E[It ] = π t I0 ,

(A.3)

in case the initial condition is known; otherwise, it is replaced by E[I0 ]. For the variance,
we can use a similar recursion. We start with computing V ar(It |Ωt−1 ).
V ar(It |Ωt−1 ) = V ar[∆Ct − ∆Rt − ∆Dt |It−1 ]
= V ar[∆Ct |It−1 ] + V ar[∆Rt |It−1 ] + V ar[∆Dt |It−1 ]
= (β + γ + v)It−1
= β(1 + R0−1 )It−1
35

(A.4)

By the law of total variance and using forward iteration, the unconditional variance can be
computed as
V ar(It ) = β(1 + R0−1 )E[It−1 ] + π 2 V ar(It−1 )
..
.
P
i t−1 E[I ] + π 2t V ar(I )
= β(1 + R0−1 )( t−1
0
0
i=0 π )π
= β(1 + R0−1 ) π

t−1 (1−π t )

1−π

E[I0 ] + π 2t V ar(I0 )

In case the initial condition is known the second term drops.

36

(A.5)

Appendix B

Derivation of updating rules

Let f1 (∆Ct |Ωt−1 ), f2 (∆Rt |Ωt−1 ) and f3 (∆Dt |Ωt−1 ) denote the conditional probability density functions for ∆Ct , ∆Rt and ∆Dt conditional on the information set at time period
t − 1, Ωt−1 , respectively. Assuming (conditional) independence among these variables, the
conditional joint probability density function could be written as f (∆Ct , ∆Rt , ∆Dt |Ωt−1 ) =
f1 (∆Ct |Ωt−1 )f2 (∆Rt |Ωt−1 )f3 (∆Dt |Ωt−1 ). We assume that these marginal distributions are
Poisson distribution with arrival rates specified in SIRD model in equation (2). Thus, the
joint density is as follows,
∆C

f (∆Ct , ∆Rct , ∆Dt |Ωt−1 ) =

∆R

∆D

λ1,t t exp(−λ1,t ) λ2,t t exp(−λ2,t ) λ3,t t exp(−λ3,t )
,
Γ(∆Ct +1)
Γ(∆Rct +1)
Γ(∆Dt +1)

(B.6)

where λ1,t = βt St−1NIt−1 , λ2,t = γt It−1 and λ3,t = νt It−1 . The score functions, denoted as
∇1,t , ∇2,t and ∇3,t , can be written as


∇1,t =



∆Ct
λ1,t

−1

∇2,t =



∆Rct
λ2,t

∇3,t =



∆Dt
λ3,t


− 1 It−1

− 1 It−1

It−1 St−1
N


(B.7)

We use the variance of the score functions for the scaling parameter. Variance of the score
function for ∇1,t , for example, can be computed as
V ar(∇1,t |Ωt−1 ) = E[∇1,t ∇01,t |Ωt−1 ]
 I 2 S2 
h
t−1 t−1
2 Ω
t
= E ( ∆C
−
1)
]
t−1
2
λ1,t
 2 S 2N 
E[(∆Ct −λ1,t )2 |Ωt−1 ] It−1
t−1
=
.
N2
λ2

(B.8)

1,t

As E[(∆Ct − λ1,t )2 ] refers to the variance of Poisson distributed random variable ∆Ct , it is
identical to λ1,t . Hence, the resulting expression is,
V

ar(∇1t |Ωt−1 )


=

1
λ1,t



2 S2
It−1
t−1
2
N


(B.9)

Similar computations lead to the variances of score functions for ∆Rct and ∆Dt as
V ar(∇2,t |Ωt−1 ) =
V ar(∇3,t |Ωt−1 ) =

37

2
It−1
λ2,t
2
It−1
λ3,t

(B.10)

Scaling (B.7) together with (B.9) and (B.10), the scaled score functions can be written as
follows,
s1,t = (∆Ct − λ1,t )
s2,t =
s3,t =



N
It−1 St−1



∆Rct −λ2,t
It−1
∆Dt −λ3,t
It−1

(B.11)

The final step includes the division of the scaled score functions by βt , γt and νt , respectively,
to obtain the scaled score function in terms of parameters with logarithmic transformations
applying the chain rule. The resulting time evolution for β̃t = log(βt ), γ̃t = log(γt ) and
ν̃t = log(νt ) is

γ̃t =
ν̃t =





∆Ct−1 −λ1,t−1
λ1,t−1


∆Rt−1 −λ2,t−1
φ0 + φ1 γ̃t−1 + φ2
 λ2,t−1

∆Dt−1 −λ3,t−1
ψ0 + ψ1 ν̃t−1 + ψ2
λ3,t−1

β̃t = α0 + α1 β̃t−1 + α2

(B.12)

Combining (B.12) together with the SIRD equations, the final model becomes as follows
∆Ct |Ωt−1 ∼ P oisson(βt St−1
N It−1 )
∆Rt |Ωt−1 ∼ P oisson(γt It−1 )
∆Dt |Ωt−1 ∼ P oisson(νt It−1 )
β̃t = α0 + α1 β̃t−1 + α2 s1,t
γ˜t = φ0 + φ1 γ̃t−1 + φ2 s2,t
ν˜t = ψ0 + ψ1 ν̃t−1 + ψ2 s3,t
∆Ct = −∆St = ∆It + ∆Rt + ∆Dt

38

(B.13)

