1

Detecting Community Depression Dynamics Due to
COVID-19 Pandemic in Australia

arXiv:2007.02325v1 [cs.SI] 5 Jul 2020

Jianlong Zhou∗ , Senior Member, IEEE, Hamad Zogan, Shuiqiao Yang, Shoaib Jameel, Guandong Xu∗ , Fang Chen

Abstract—The recent COVID-19 pandemic has caused unprecedented impact across the globe. We have also witnessed
millions of people with increased mental health issues, such
as depression, stress, worry, fear, disgust, sadness, and anxiety,
which have become one of the major public health concerns
during this severe health crisis. For instance, depression is one of
the most common mental health issues according to the findings
made by the World Health Organisation (WHO). Depression can
cause serious emotional, behavioural and physical health problems with significant consequences, both personal and social costs
included. This paper studies community depression dynamics
due to COVID-19 pandemic through user-generated content on
Twitter. A new approach based on multi-modal features from
tweets and Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency (TFIDF) is proposed to build depression classification models. Multimodal features capture depression cues from emotion, topic
and domain-specific perspectives. We study the problem using
recently scraped tweets from Twitter users emanating from the
state of New South Wales in Australia. Our novel classification
model is capable of extracting depression polarities which may
be affected by COVID-19 and related events during the COVID19 period. The results found that people became more depressed
after the outbreak of COVID-19. The measures implemented
by the government such as the state lockdown also increased
depression levels. Further analysis in the Local Government
Area (LGA) level found that the community depression level was
different across different LGAs. In an LGA, the severe health
emergencies but not the confirmed cases of COVID-19 in the LGA
may make people more depressed. Such granular level analysis
of depression dynamics not only can help authorities such as
governmental departments to take corresponding actions more
objectively in specific regions if necessary but also allows users
to perceive the dynamics of depression over the time to learn
the effectiveness of measures implemented by the government or
negative effects of any big events for emergency management.
Index Terms—Depression, Multi-modal features, COVID-19,
Twitter, Australia.

I. I NTRODUCTION

T

HE outbreak of the novel Coronavirus Infectious Disease
2019 (COVID-19) has caused an unprecedented impact
on people’s daily lives around the world [1]. People’s lives
are at risk because the virus can easily spread from person to
person [2] either by coming in close contact with the infected
person or sometimes may even spread through community
J. Zhou, S. Yang, and F. Chen are with Data Science Institute, University of Technology Sydney, Australia, e-mails: Jianlong.Zhou@uts.edu.au,
Shuiqiao.Yang@uts.edu.au, Fang.Chen@uts.edu.au
H. Zogan and G. Xu are with Advanced Analytics Institute, University of
Technology Sydney, Australia, e-mails: Hamad.A.Zogan@student.uts.edu.au,
Guandong.Xu@uts.edu.au
S.
Jameel
is
with
University
of
Essex,
UK,
email:
Shoaib.Jameel@essex.ac.uk
∗ Corresponding authors

transmission1 , which then becomes extremely challenging to
contain. The infection has now rapidly spread across the
world and there have been more than 10.3 million confirmed
cases and more than 505,000 people have died because of
the infection until 30 June 20202 . Almost every country in
the world is battling against COVID-19 to prevent it from
spreading as much as possible. While some countries such
as New Zealand has been very successful in containing the
spread, others such as Brazil and India have not. As a result,
this outbreak has caused immense distress among individuals
either through infection or through increased mental health
issues, such as depression, stress, worry, fear, disgust, sadness,
anxiety (a fear for one’s health, and a fear of infecting others),
and perceived stigmatisation [3], [4], [5]. These mental health
issues can even occur in people, not at high risk of getting
infected. There could be even several people who are exposed
to the virus may be unfamiliar with it as they may not follow
the news, or are completely disconnected with the general
population. [3].
Consider depression as an example, which is the most
common mental health issue among other mental health issues
according to the World Health Organisation (WHO), with
more than 264 million people suffering from the depression
worldwide [6]. Australia is one of the top countries where
mental health disorders have high proportions over the total
disease burden (see Fig. 1). Depression can cause severe emotional, behavioural and physical health problems. For example,
people with depression may experience symptoms amounting
to their inability to focus on anything, they constantly go
through the feeling of guilt and irritation, they suffer from
low self-worth, and experience sleep problems. Depression
can, therefore, cause serious consequences, at both personal
and social costs [7].
A person can experience several complications as a result of
depression. Complications linked to mental health especially
depression include: unhappiness and decreased enjoyment of
life, family conflicts, relationship difficulties, social isolation,
problems with tobacco, alcohol and other drugs, self-harm
and harm to others (such as suicide or homicide), weakened
immune system. Furthermore, the consequence of depression
goes beyond functioning and quality of life and extends to
somatic health. Depression has been shown to subsequently
increase the risk of, for example, cardiovascular, stroke, diabetes and obesity morbidity [8]. However, the past epidemics
1 https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/preparing-for-large-scalecommunity-transmission-of-covid-19
2 https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/

2

Fig. 1. The world mental health disorders in 20163 .

can suggest some cues of what to look out for after COVID-19
in the next few months and years. For example, when patients
with SARS and MERS were assessed a few months later,
14.9% had depression and 14.8% had an anxiety disorder [5].
Meanwhile, to reduce the risk of the virus spreading among
people and communities, different countries have taken strict
measures such as locking down the whole city and practising
rigorous social-distancing among people. For example, countries such as China, Italy, Spain, and Australia are fighting
the COVID-19 pandemic through nation-wide lockdown or
by cordoning off the areas that were suspected of having
risks of community spread throughout the pandemic, expecting
to “flatten the curve”. However, the long-term social activity
restriction policies adopted during the pandemic period may
further amplify the mental health issues of people. Therefore,
it is important to examine people’s mental health states as
a result of COVID-19 and related policies, which can help
governments and related agencies to take appropriate measures
more objectively if necessary.
On the other hand, we have witnessed increased usage of
online social media such as Twitter during the lockdown4 .
For instance, 40% consumers have spent longer than usual on
messaging services and social media during the lockdown. It
is mainly because people are eager to publicly express their
feelings online given an unprecedented time that they are going
through both physically and emotionally. The social media
platforms represent a relatively real-time large-scale snapshot
of activities, thoughts, and feelings of people’s daily lives
and thereby reflect their emotional well-being. Every tweet
represents a signal of the users’ state of mind and state of
being at that moment [9]. Aggregation of such digital traces
may make it possible to monitor health behaviours at a largescale, which has become a new growing area of interest in
public health and health care research [10], [11].
Since social media is social by its nature, and social patterns
can be consequently found in Twitter feeds, for instance,
3 https://ourworldindata.org/
4 https://www.statista.com/statistics/1106498/home-media-consumptioncoronavirus-worldwide-by-country/

thereby revealing key aspects of mental and emotional disorders [12]. As a result, Twitter recently has been increasingly
used as a viable approach to detect mental disorders of depression in different regions of the world [13], [14], [15], [16],
[17]. For example, the research found that the depressed users
were less active in posting tweets, doing it more frequently
between 23:00 and 6:00. The use of vocabularies could also be
an indicator of depression in Twitter, for example, it was found
that the use of verbs was more common by depressed users,
and the first-person singular pronoun was by far the most used
by depressed users [15]. Hence, many research work has been
done to extract features like user’s social activity behaviours,
user profiles, texts from their social media posts for depression
detection using machine learning techniques [18], [19], [20],
[21], [22]. For example, De Choudhury [18] et al., proposed
to predict depression for social media users based on Twitter
using support vector machine (SVM) for prediction based on
manually labelled training data.
The most recent work using Twitter to analyse mental health
issues due to COVID-19 are [23], [4], [24]. These work focus
more on public sentiment analysis. Furthermore, little work
such as Li et al., [25] classify each tweet into the emotions
of anger, anticipation, disgust, fear, joy, sadness, surprise and
trust. The two emotions of sadness and fear are more related to
severe negative sentiments like depression due to COVID-19.
However, little work is done to detect depression dynamics at
the state level or even more granular level such as suburb level.
Such granular level analysis of depression dynamics not only
can help authorities such as governmental departments to take
corresponding actions more objectively in specific regions if
necessary but also allows users to perceive the dynamics of
depression over the time to learn the effectiveness of policies
implemented by the government or negative effects of any big
events. The answers to the questions that we wish to find are:
•
•
•

•
•

How people’s depression is affected by COVID-19 in the
time dimension in the state level?
How people’s depression is affected by COVID-19 in the
time dimension in local government areas?
Can we detect the effects of policies/measures implemented by the government during the pandemic on depression?
Can we detect the effects of big events on depression
during the pandemic?
How effective is the model in detecting people’s depression dynamics?

This paper aims to examine community depression dynamics due to COVID-19 pandemic in Australia. A new
approach based on multi-modal features from tweets and term
frequency-inverse document frequency (TF-IDF) is proposed
to build a depression classification model. Multi-modal features aim to capture depression cues from emotion, topic and
domain-specific perspectives. TF-IDF is simple, scalable, and
has proven to be very effective to model a wide-range of
lexical datasets including large and small datasets. In contrast,
recent computationally demanding frameworks such as deep
learning, which are usually generated rely upon large datasets
because that helps give them faithful co-occurrence statistics

3

might not be obtained from sparse and short texts from usergenerated content such as tweets. Our approach uses the TFIDF model can generalise well in various situations where
both small and large datasets can be used leading to a reliable
and scalable model. After building the model for depression
classification, Twitter data in the state of New South Wales
in Australia are then collected and input to our depression
classification model to extract depression polarities which
may be affected by COVID-19 and related events during the
COVID-19 period. The contributions of this paper primarily
include:
• Novel multi-modal features including emotion, topic and
domain-specific features are extracted to describe depression in a comprehensive approach;
• A faithful depression classification model based on TFIDF, which is simple and scalable in generalisation, is
proposed to detect depressions in short texts such as
tweets;
• Instead of the depression examination of the whole
country, a fine-grained analysis of depression in local
government areas of a state in Australia is investigated;
• The links between the community depression and measures implemented by the government during the COVID19 pandemic are examined.
To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first work
to investigate the community depression dynamics across the
COVID-19 pandemic, as well as to conduct the fine-grained
analysis of depression and demonstrate the links of depression
dynamics with measures implemented by the government and
the COVID-19 itself during the pandemic.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. We
firstly review the related work in Section II and introduce
the collected real-world dataset in Section III. After that, we
demonstrate our proposed method for COVID-19 depression
analysis in section IV and present the experiments and verify
the performance of the proposed model in Section V. The
proposed novel model is then used to detect community
depressions in New South Wales in Australia in Section VI.
Finally, this work is concluded with an outlook on future work
in Section VII.
II. R ELATED W ORK
In this section, we review the related work for depression
detection. We also highlight how our work differs from these
existing approaches.
A. Machine learning based depression detection
Social media has long been used as the data source for
depression detection due to the largely available user-generated
text data [26], [27]. The shared text data and the social
behaviour of the social network users are assumed to contain
clues for identifying depressed users. To find the depression
pattern for social media users, many works have been done
to adopt traditional machine learning models such as Support
Vector Machine (SVM) and J48 for depression classification
and detection based on different feature engineering techniques. For example, Wang et al. [28] have proposed a binary

depression detection model for Chinese Sina micro-blogs to
classify the posts as depressed or non-depressed. Based on
the features extracted from the content of the micro-blog such
as the sentiment polarity of sub-sentences, the users’ online
interactions with others and the user behaviours, they have
trained J48 tree, Bayes network, and rule-based decision table
as classifiers for depression detection.
De Choudhury [18] et al. have investigated to predict depression for social media users based on Twitter and found that
social media contain meaningful indicators for predicting the
onset of depressions among individual users. To get the ground
truth of users’ suffered depression history, De Choudhury et
al. adopted the crowdsourcing to collect Twitter users who
have been diagnosed with clinical (Major Depressive Disorder)
MDD based on the CES-D2 (Center for Epidemiologic Studies
Depression Scale) screening test. Then, to link the depression
symptoms with the social media data, they extracted several
measures such as user engagement and emotion, egocentric
social graph, linguistic style, depressive language user, and
the mentions of antidepressant medications from users’ social
media history for one year. Finally, they trained SVM as the
depression classifier base on the ground truth and the extracted
features for the tested Twitter users with prediction accuracy
around 70%. Similarly, Tsugawa et al. [19] have investigated
in recognizing depression from the Twitter activities. To get
the ground truth data of users’ depression degree record, they
chose the web-based questionnaire for facts collection. Then,
similar features such as topic features extracted using topic
modelling like Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LD), polarities of
words and tweet frequency are extracted from the Twitter
users’ activity histories for training an SVM classifier.
Later, Yang et al. [20] have proposed to analyse the spatial
patterns of depressed Twitter users based on Geographic Information Systems (GIS) technologies. They firstly adopted Nonnegative Matrix Factorization (NMF) to identify the depressed
tweets from online users. Then, they exploited the geo-tagged
information as the indicator of users’ geographical location
and analyzed the spatial patterns of depressed users. Shen et al.
[22] have made efforts to explore comprehensive multi-modal
features for depression detection. They adopted six groups
of discriminant depression-oriented features extracted from
users’ social network, profile, visual content, tweets’ emotions,
tweets’ topics and domain-specific knowledge are used as
representations for Twitter users. Then, a dictionary learning
model is used to learn from the features and capture the jointly
cross-modality relatedness for a fused sparse representation
and train a classifier to predict the depressed users.
Different from these work in feature extraction which may
be either impractical like using crowdsourcing to manually
label each user or too customized like extracting different
kinds of social behaviours of users, we propose to combine
the robust and simple text feature representation method: Term
Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF) with other
multi-modal features such as topics and emotions to represent
the text data.

4

B. Deep learning based depression detection
More recently, the rapidly developed deep learning techniques have also been used for depression detection. For
example, Shen et al. [29] have proposed a cross-domain deep
neural network with feature transformation and combination
strategy for transfer learning of depressive features from different domains. They have argued that the two major challenges
regarding cross-domain learning are defined as isomerism and
divergence and proposed DNN-FATC which includes Feature
Normalization & Alignment (FNA) and Divergent Feature
Conversion (DFC) to better transfer learning. Orabi et al.
[21] have proposed to explore the word embedding techniques
where they used pre-trained Skip-Gram (SG) and Continuous
Bag-of-Words (CBOW) models currently implemented in the
word2vec [30] package for better textual feature extraction
to train a neural network-based classifier. We have also seen
researchers using deep reinforcement learning to depression
detection on Twitter. For instance, Gui et al. [31] have proposed a cooperative multi-agent model to jointly learn the
textual and visual information for accurate depression inference. In their proposed method, the text feature is extracted
using a Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) and the visual feature is
extracted using Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN). The
selection for useful features from GRU and CNN is designed
as policy gradient agents and trained by a centralized critic
that implements difference rewards.
Even though deep learning has become the dominated
method for many classifications or prediction tasks, it cannot guarantee that deep learning is feasible on any tasks.
For example, [32] compared a bunch of methods including
different conventional methods and deep learning methods for
information extraction tasks from a text corpus. We are not
surprised to find that deep learning did not outperform the
conventional methods as expected. Furthermore, deep learning
techniques are usually dependent on large datasets with faithful
co-occurrence statistics which might not be obtained from
sparse and short texts especially online user-generated content
such as tweets which is characterised by relatively limited
labelled text in the depression study. While TF-IDF is simple
and scalable, it has proven to model a wide-range of datasets
including large and small datasets. Therefore, in our study, we
propose to adopt the traditional classification methods with
TF-IDF for depression detection to obtain a faithful model
with a strong generalisation ability in various situations of
small and large datasets. Most importantly, even non-experts
such as those from the government and NGOs could easily
understand the intricacies of the model and apply our model
on their data to detect community dynamics in their region
and make further decisions accordingly.
C. Depression detection due to COVID-19
The impact of COVID-19 on people’s mental health has
been recently reported in various research. For instance, Galea
et al. [33] have pointed out that the mental health consequences
due to this pandemic are applicable in both the short and long
term. They have appealed to develop ways to intervene with
the inevitability of loneliness and its consequence as people

are physically and socially isolated. Huang et al. [34] have
exploited a web-based cross-sectional survey based on the
National Internet Survey on Emotional and Mental Health
(NISEMH) to investigate people’s mental health status in
China by spreading the questionnaire on Wechat (a popular
social media platform in China). To infer the depression
symptoms for the anonymous participants, they have adopted
a predefined Epidemiology Scale to identify whether participants had depressive symptoms. Similarly, Ni et al. [35] have
conducted a survey on the online platform to investigate the
mental health of 1577 community-based adults and 214 health
professionals during the epidemic and lockdown. The results
show that around one-fifth of respondents reported probable
anxiety and probable depression. These works are mainly
based on questionnaires and pre-defined mental heath scale
models for inference. In contrast, our proposed work relies
on detecting depression from social media data automatically
which shows advantages in monitoring a large number of
people’s mental health states.
III. DATA
A. Study location
In this study, a case study for analysing depression dynamics
during the COVID-19 pandemic in the state of New South
Wales (NSW) in Australia is conducted. NSW has a large
population of around 8.1 million people according to the census in September 2019 from Australian Bureau of Statistics5 .
The NSW’s capital city Sydney is Australia’s most populated
city with a population of over 5.3 million people. The Local
Government Areas (LGAs) are the third tier of government in
the Australian state (the three tiers are federal, state, and local
government).
B. Data collection
To analyse the dynamics of depression during the COVID19 pandemic period at a fine-grained level, we collected tweets
from Twitter users who live in different LGAs of NSW in
Australia. The time span of the collected tweets is from 1
January 2020 to 22 May 2020 which covers dates that the
first confirmed case of coronavirus was reported in NSW
(25 January 2020) and the first time that the NSW premier
announced the relaxing for the lockdown policy (10 Mary
2020). There are 128 LGAs in NSW. In this study, Twitter data
were collected for each LGA separately so that the depression
dynamics can be analysed and compared for LGAs. Twitter
data were collected through the user timeline crawling API
user timeline6 in Tweepy which is a python wrapper for the
official Twitter API 7 . Table I shows the summary of the
collected tweet dataset. In summary, 94,707,264 tweets were
collected with averagely 739,901 tweets for each LGA during
the study period. Datasets of COVID-19 tests and confirmed
cases in NSW during the study period were collected from
DATA.NSW 8 .
5 https://www.abs.gov.au/
6 http://docs.tweepy.org/en/latest/api.html#api-reference
7 https://developer.twitter.com/en/docs/api-reference-index
8 https://data.nsw.gov.au/

5

Fig. 2. The tests and confirmed cases of COVID-19 in NSW until 22 May 2020.

TABLE I
S UMMARY OF THE COLLECTED T WITTER DATASET.
Description
Total Twitter users
Average Twitter user per LGA
Average tweets per LGA
Total tweets

Size
183,104
1,430.5
739,900.5
94,707,264

Fig. 2 shows the overview of the number of tests (polylines
with dots) and confirmed cases (bars) of COVID-19 in NSW
over the study period. It demonstrates that there usually had
test peaks at the beginning of each week and had fewer
numbers at the weekend, which well aligns with the people’s
living habits in Australia. It shows that the outbreak peak
of COVID-19 in NSW was on 26 March 2020 and tests
were significantly increased after 13 April 2020. It also shows
that most of the confirmed cases were originally related to
overseas.
C. Dataset for depression model training
In order to detect depression at the tweet level, we created
two labelled datasets for both depressed and non-depressed
tweets:
• Positive tweets (depressed): we used a previous work
dataset from [22]. Shen et al. [22] published around
300K tweets with 1400 depressed users. In order to
have a better performance, we increased the number
of positive tweets by crawling additional 600K tweets
from the Twitter keyword streaming API. We adopted
the same keywords search that selected by [22] where
users identified themselves as depressed, and we also
used a regular expression to find positive tweets (e.g. I’m
depressed AND suicide).
• Negative tweets (non-depressed): In order to balance the
negative tweets with the positive tweets, we randomly selected 900K tweets which were not labelled as depressed
from the collected tweets. Table II shows the summary
of labelled data used to train the depression model.
After the collection of experimental data, features need to
be extracted from social media text. However, because of the
free-style nature of social media text, it is hard to extract

TABLE II
S UMMARY OF LABELLED DATA USED TO TRAIN DEPRESSION MODEL .
Description
Depressed tweets
Non-Depressed tweets

Size
∼ 900K
∼ 900K

useful features directly from raw text data and apply them
to a classifier. The raw text data also affect the efficiency of
extracting reliable features, and it makes it difficult to find
word similarities and apply semantic analysis. Therefore, raw
data must be pre-processed before feature extraction, in order
to clean and filter data and ensure the data quality for feature
extraction. Pre-processing may also involve other procedures
such as text normalization.
Natural Language Processing (NLP) toolkit has been widely
used for text pre-processing due to its high-quality processing
capabilities such as processing sentimental analysis datasets
[36]. Natural Language Processing Toolkit (NLTK) library
is considered as one of the most powerful NLP libraries in
Python programming. NLTK contains packages that make
data processing with human language easily and is used
widely by various researchers for text data pre-processing.
Therefore, before feeding our data to the model, we used
NLTK to remove user mentions, URL links and punctuation
from tweets. Furthermore, we removed common words from
each tweet such as “the”, “an”, etc.). There are various reasons
which have been mentioned in the literature where removing
the stop words has had a positive impact on the model’s
quantitative performance, for instance, sometimes stop words
deteriorate the classifications performance, sometimes they
also have a huge impact on the model efficiency because these
stop words increase the parameter space of the model, among
various other reasons. NLTK has a set of stop words which
enable removing them from any text data easily. Finally, we
stem tweets using NLTK using the Porter Stemmer.
IV. O UR M ODEL
A. Proposed method
In this study, two sets of features are extracted from raw
text and used to represent tweet. Since extracting features
would be challenging due to the short length of the tweets and

6

single tweet does not provide sufficient word occurrences, we,
therefore, combine multi-modal feature with Term FrequencyInverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF) feature to analyze
depressed tweets. Our proposed framework is shown in Fig.
3.
B. Multi-modal features
User behaviours at the tweet level could be modelled by
the linguistic features of tweets posted by the user. Inspired by
[22], we defined a set of features consisting of three modalities.
These three modalities of features are as follows:
• Emotional features: The emotion of depressed people
is usually different from non-depressed people, which
influences their posts on social media. In this work, we
studied user positive and negative emoji in each tweet to
represent emotional features. Furthermore, users in social
media often use a lot of slang and short words, which also
convey positive and negative emotions [37]. In this study,
positive and negative emotion features are also extracted
based on those slang and short words.
• Topic-level features: We adopted Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) [38] to extract topic-level features since
LDA is the most popular method used in the topic
modelling to extract topics from text, which could be
considered as a high-level latent structure of content. The
idea of LDA is based on the assumption of a mixture of
topics forms documents, each of which generates words
based on their Dirichlet distribution of probability. Given
the scope of the tweet content, we defined 25 latent topics
in this study, which topic number is often adopted in
other studies. We have also found that this number of
topics gives satisfactory results in our experiments. we
implemented LDA in Python with Scikit-Learn.
• Domain specific features: Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders 4th Edition (also called
DSM-IV) is a manual published by the American Psychiatric Association (APA) that includes almost all currently
recognized mental health disorder symptoms [39]. We,
therefore, chose the DSM-IV Criteria for Major Depressive Disorder to describe keywords related to the nine
depressive symptoms. Pre-trained word2vec (Gensim pretrained model based on Wikipedia corpus) was used in
this study to extend our keywords that are similar to
these symptoms. We also extracted “Antidepressant” by
creating a complete list of clinically approved prescription
antidepressants in the world.
1) Depressed mood.
2) Loss of interest
3) Weight or appetite change
4) Sleep disturbance
5) Psychomotor changes
6) Fatigue or loss of energy
7) Feel Worthlessness
8) Reduced concentration
9) Suicidal ideation
For a given sample of tweet, the multi-modal features are
represented as Xt1 , Xt2 , Xt3 , . . . , Xtn , where Xti ∈ Rd is

the d-dimensional feature for the i-th modality for each tweet
and n is the size of the combined feature space, which is 21
in this study.
C. TF-IDF
We first review the definitions of Term Frequency and
Inverse Document Frequency below.
Definition 1. Term Frequency (TF): consider the tweets
in Bag-of-Word model (BoW), where each tweet is modeled
as a sequence of words without order info. Apparently in BoW
scheme, a word in a tweet with occurrence frequency of 10
is more important than a term with that frequency of 1, but
not proportional to the frequency. Here we use the log term
frequency ltf as defined by:
ltf(t,d) = 1 + log(1 + tf(t,d) )

(1)

where tf(t,d) represents occurrence number of the term t in a
tweet d.
Definition 2. Inverse Document Frequency (IDF): It
uses the frequency of the term in the whole collection for
weighting the significance of the term in light of inverse effect.
Therefore under this scheme, the IDF value of a rare word
is higher, whereas lower for a frequent term, i.e. weighting
more on the distinct words. The log IDF which measures the
informativeness of a term is defined as:
N
(2)
idft = log10
dft
where N represents the total number of tweets in the tweet
corpus, and dft the number of tweets containing the term t.
Therefore, TF-IDF is calculated by combining TF and IDF
as represented in Eq.3.
tf idft = tft ∗ idft

(3)

In order to extract relevant information from each tweet and
reduce the amount of redundant data without losing important
information, we combined multi-modalities with TF-IDF. TFIDF is a numerical statistic metric to reflect the importance
of a word in a list or corpus, which is widely studied in
relevant work. Choudhury et al. [18] applied TF-IDF to words
in Wikipedia to remove extremely frequent terms and then
used the top words with high TF-IDF. The approach helped
them to assess the frequency of uses of depression terms that
appear on each user’s Twitter posts on a given day. In [40]
the authors have used TF-IDF in their model to compare
the difference of performance by feeding TF-IDF into five
machine learning models. It was found that all of them can
achieve very good performance. However, one weakness of
BoW is unable to consider the word position in the text,
semantics, co-occurrences in different documents. Therefore,
TF-IDF is only useful as a lexical level feature.
D. Modeling depression in tweets
Two labelled datasets as introduced in the previous section
are used to train the depression classification model for tweets.
Here we only use English tweets to train the model, and all
non-English tweets are excluded. We also exclude any tweets

7

Fig. 3. The proposed framework to detect depressed tweets during the COVID-19

with a length shorter than five words since these tweets could
only introduce noise and influence the effectiveness of the
model negatively. Three mainstream classification methods are
used in this study to compare their performance, namely Logistic Regression (LR), Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA),
and Gaussian Naive Bayes (GNB) .We used scikit-learn libraries to import the three classification methods. The classification performance by these three methods were evaluated by
5-fold cross-validation. The experiments are conducted using
Python 3.6.3 with 16-cores CPU.
We evaluate the classification models by using measure of
Accuracy (ACC.), Recall (Rec.), Macro-averaged Precision
(Prec.), and Macro-averaged F1-Measure (F1).

TABLE III
T HE PERFORMANCE OF TWEET DEPRESSION DETECTION BASED ON
MULTI - MODALTIES ONLY.
Features
Multi-Modal

Method
LR
LDA
GNB

Precision
0.842
0.843
0.873

Recall
0.828
0.816
0.814

F1-Score
0.832
0.820
0.818

Accuracy
0.833
0.824
0.825

TABLE IV
T HE PERFORMANCE OF TWEET DEPRESSION DETECTION BASED ON
TF-IDF ONLY.
Features
TF-IDF

Method
LR
LDA
GNB

Precision
0.908
0.906
0.891

Recall
0.896
0.893
0.873

F1-Score
0.900
0.897
0.877

Accuracy
0.901
0.898
0.879

V. C LASSIFICATION E VALUATION R ESULTS
We firstly evaluate how well the existing models can detect
depressed tweets. After extracting the feature representations
of each tweet, three different classification models are trained
with the labelled data. We adopted a ratio of 75:25 to split
the labelled data into training and testing data. We performed
experiments by using TF-IDF, multi-modality, and combined
features under three different classification models.
We compare the performance of models using only MultiModalities (MM) features with the three different classifiers as
shown in Table III. We found that Gaussian Naive Bayes for
MM features obtained the highest Precision score compared
to other classifiers, and Logistic Regression performs better
than the other two classifiers in terms of Recall, F1-Score,
and Accuracy.
Furthermore, in order to see how different features impact
the classification performance, we use the TF-IDF standalone
with three classifiers for comparison and the results are as
shown in Table IV. It shows that all three classifiers can
achieve satisfactory classification results. LR and LDA shared
the highest Precision and F1-Score. LR competes with the
other two classifiers according to the Recall and Accuracy.

Table V shows the model performance when we concatenate
both MM and TF-IDF features, and we can see that the model
has improved the performance further slightly. One conclusion
we can draw here is that TF-IDF textual feature can make main
satisfactory contribution to detect depression tweets, while
other modality can provide additional support. This could be
attributed to the lexical importance to depressed-related tweets.
Another reason why the overall combination of multi-modal
features did not give us a big lift in the results could be
because, as mentioned earlier, tweets are highly sparse, poorly
phrased, short texts, and noisy content. Therefore, deriving
semantic content from tweets, for instance, using the LDA
model would always be very challenging to get a huge boost
in the results. This is mainly because any statistical model
relies on the co-occurrence statistics which might be poor
in our case. However, we still see an improvement in the
overall recall result, which is important in this case, because
we are noticing a reduction in the number of false negative
detection. This is mainly because of the interplay between all
three features which suggest that these features are important
and cannot be ignored.

8

Fig. 4. The community depression dynamics in NSW between 1 January 2020 and 22 May 2020.

TABLE V
T HE PERFORMANCE OF TWEET DEPRESSION DETECTION BASED ON
M ULTI -M ODALTIES + TF-IDF.
Features
MM+TF-IDF

Method
LR
LDA
GNB

Precision
0.908
0.912
0.891

Recall
0.899
0.899
0.874

F1-Score
0.902
0.903
0.878

Accuracy
0.903
0.904
0.879

VI. D ETECTING D EPRESSION DUE TO COVID-19
After having testified our classification model, we utilise
our approach to detect depressed tweets from different LGAs
of NSW, Australia. Since our model deals only with English
tweets, we had to exclude tweets in all other languages and
input English tweets only into our model to predict depression.
We ended up with 49 million tweets from 128 LGAs in
NSW. We fed the LR with (MM + TF-IDF) model with these
tweets, and the model found that nearly 2 million tweets were
classified as depressed tweets. In this section, we show the
depression dynamics in NSW during the study period between
1 January 2020 and 22 May 2020. The depression dynamics
in different LGAs in NSW are also analysed to demonstrate
how COVID-19 pandemic may affect people’s mental health.
A. Depression dynamics in NSW
Fig. 4 presents the overall community depression dynamics
in NSW with the confirmed cases of COVID-19 together
during the study period between 1 January 2020 and 22
May 2020. “Depression level” refers to the proportion of the
number of depressed tweets over the whole number of tweets
each day. From this figure, we can find that people showed a
low level of depression during the period before the significant
increase in the confirmed cases of COVID-19 until 8 March
2020 in NSW. People’s depression level was significantly
increased with a significant increase in confirmed cases of
COVID-19. The depression level reached to the peak during
the peak outbreak period of COVID-19 on 26 March 2020.
After that, people’s depression level decreased significantly for
a short period and then kept relatively stable with some short

fluctuations. Overall, the analysis clearly shows that people
became more depressed after the outbreak of COVID-19 on 8
March 2020 in NSW.
When we drill down into details of Fig. 4, it was found
that people’s depression was much sensitive to sharp changes
of confirmed cases of COVID-19 on that day or after. For
example, people’s depression level had sharp changes around
days of 10 March, 25 March, 30 March, and 14 April 2020
(there were sharp changes of confirmed cases of COVID19 on these days). The sharp increase of confirmed cases of
COVID-19 usually resulted in the sharp increase of depression
levels (i.e. people became more depressed because of the sharp
increase of confirmed cases of COVID-19).
B. Depression under implemented government measures and
big events
This subsection investigates the links between people’s depression and implemented government measures for COVID19 (such as lockdown) as well as big events during the
pandemic.
By investigating the labelled topics with the hashtag in the
collected Twitter data, it was found that the topics of “lockdown” and “social-distancing” were started to be discussed
actively from 9 March when the government encouraged
people to increase social-distancing in the life, and the NSW
government officially announced the state lockdown on 30
March and the restrictions were begun from 31 March9 . The
NSW government announced the ease of restrictions on 10
May10 . When we link these dates with depression levels as
shown in Fig. 4, it was found that people felt significantly more
depressed when they started to actively discuss the lockdown
restriction on 9 March. People were slightly more depressed
after the official implementation of the state lockdown in NSW.
The results revealed that the lockdown measure may make
people more depressed. However, people still became more
depressed even if after the relaxation of lockdown. This is
9 https://gazette.legislation.nsw.gov.au/so/download.w3p?id=Gazette 2020
2020-65.pdf
10 https://www.nsw.gov.au/media-releases/nsw-to-ease-restrictions-week-0

9

Fig. 5. The choropleth maps of community depression in LGAs in NSW in March 2020 (left) and April 2020 (right).

maybe because people still worried about the spread of this
severe virus due to the increased community activities.
We are also interested in whether people’s depression was
affected by big events during the COVID-19 period. For
example, the Ruby Princess Cruise docked in Sydney Harbour
on 18 March 2020. About 2700 passengers were allowed to
disembark on 19 March without isolation or other measures
although some passengers had COVID-19 symptoms at that
time, which was considered to create a coronavirus hotbed
in Australia. The Ruby Princess Cruise has been reported to
be linked to at least 662 confirmed cases and 22 deaths of
COVID-1911 .
We link the depression dynamics as shown in Fig. 4 with the
important dates of the Ruby Princess Cruise (e.g. docking date,
disembarking date) and actual timeline of the public reporting
of confirmed cases and deaths as well as other events (e.g.
police in NSW announced a criminal investigation into the
Ruby Princess Cruise debacle on 5 April) related to the Ruby
Princess 11 . We have not found significant changes in people’s
depression on those dates. This may imply that the big events
did not cause people’s depression changes significantly.
C. Depression dynamics in LGAs
We further analysed community depression dynamics in
LGAs in NSW. Fig. 5 shows examples of choropleth maps
of community depression dynamics in LGAs in NSW for two
different months which are March 2020 and April 2020. We
can observe from the maps that the community depression
level was different across different LGAs in each month.
Furthermore, the community depression of each LGA changed
in different months. On average, people in LGAs were more
depressed in March than in April. This is maybe because
the number of daily confirmed cases of COVID-19 was
significantly increased to a peak and it was gradually decreased
in April.
11 https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/may/02/australias-coronaviruslockdown-the-first-50-days

We also dig into more details of depression changes of
LGAs around Sydney City areas. For example, Ryde, North
Sydney, and Willoughby are three neighbouring LGAs in
Northern Sydney. Their community depression dynamics and
corresponding confirmed cases of COVID-19 are shown in
Fig. 6, respectively. When comparing the dynamics in this
figure, we can see that different LGAs showed different
depression dynamics maybe because some events specifically
related to that LGA. For example, in an aged care centre
in Ryde LGA, a nurse and an 82-year-old elderly resident
were first tested positive for coronavirus at the beginning of
March12 . After that, a number of elderly residents in this aged
care centre were tested positive for COVID-19 or even died.
At the same time, a childcare centre and a hospital in this LGA
have been reported positive COVID-19 cases in March. Many
staff from the childcare centre and the hospital were asked to
test the virus and conduct home isolation for 14 days. All these
may result in the significant community depression changes in
March 2020 as shown in Fig. 6. For example, the depression
level in Ryde LGA was changed significantly to a very high
level on 10 March 2020 and 16 March 2020 respectively.
However, it was not found that the community depression
dynamics in an LGA showed close relations with the dynamics
of confirmed cases of COVID-19 in that LGA as we found
in the state level. Maybe this is because the community
depression dynamics in an LGA was affected largely by
the confirmed cases in the overall state but not the local
government area. This aligns with our common sense during
the COVID-19 pandemic: even if our family is currently safe
from COVID-19, we are still worrying about the life because
of the continuing significant increases of COVID-19 all over
the world especially in big countries.

12 https://www.smh.com.au/national/woman-catches-coronavirus-inaustralia-40-sydney-hospital-staff-quarantined-20200304-p546lf.html

10

Fig. 6. The community depression dynamics in Ryde, North Sydney, and Willoughby in Northern Sydney between 1 January 2020 and 22 May 2020.

D. Discussion
COVID-19 pandemic has affected people’s lives all over the
world. Due to social-distancing measures and other restrictions
implemented by the government, people often use social media
such as Twitter for socialising.
The results of this study showed that our novel depression
classification model can successfully detect community depression dynamics in NSW state level during the COVID-19
pandemic. It was found that people became more depressed
after the outbreak of COVID-19 in NSW. People’s depression
level was much sensitive to sharp changes in confirmed cases
of COVID-19, and the sharp increase of confirmed cases made
people more depressed. When we conducted a fine-grained
analysis of depression dynamics in LGAs in NSW, our novel
model can also detect the differences of people’s depression
in LGAs as well as depression changes in each LGA at a
different period.
The study found that the policies/measures implemented by
the government such as the state lockdown has had obvious
impact on community depression. The implementation of the
state lockdown made people more depressed; however, the
relaxation of restriction also made people more depressed. This

could be primarily because people are still worried about the
spread of COVID-19 due to the increased community activities
after the relaxation of restrictions.
This study did not find the significant effects of big events
such as the Ruby Princess Cruise ship coronavirus disaster in
Sydney on the community depression. This is maybe because
the data related to the disaster is small and passengers were
also from other Australian states and even overseas besides
NSW.
VII. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
This paper conducted a comprehensive examination of the
community depression dynamics in the state of NSW in
Australia due to the COVID-19 pandemic. A novel depression
classification model based on multi-modal features and TFIDF was proposed to detect depression polarities from the
Twitter text. By using Twitter data collected from each LGAs
of NSW from 1 January 2020 until 22 May 2020 as input
to our novel model, this paper investigated the fine-grained
analysis of community depression dynamics in NSW. The
results showed that people became more depressed after the
outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic. People’s depression

11

was also affected by the sharp changes in confirmed cases
of COVID-19. Our model successfully detected depression
dynamics because of the implementations of measures by the
government. When we drilled down into LGAs, it was found
that different LGAs showed different depression polarities
during the timeframe of the tweets used in our study, and
each LGA may have different depression polarity on different
days. It was observed that the big health emergencies in
an LGA had a significant impact on people’s depression.
However, we did not find significant effects of the confirmed
cases of COVID-19 in an LGA on people’s depressions in
that LGA as we observed in the state level. These findings
could help authorities such as governmental departments to
manage community mental health disorders more objectively.
The proposed approach can also help government authorities
to learn the effectiveness of policies implemented.
In this special period of the COVID-19 pandemic, we
focused on the effects of COVID-19 on people’s depression
dynamics. However, other factors such as unemployment,
poverty, family relationship, personal health, and various others may also lead people to be depressed. Our future work will
investigate how these factors may affect community depression
dynamics. Furthermore, community depression will also be
investigated using the topics over time model and using the
temporal topics as multi-modal features. More recent and
advanced classification models will be investigated to classify
people’s depression polarities.

[12]

[13]

[14]
[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]
[19]

[20]
[21]

R EFERENCES
[1] World Health Organization, “Coronavirus disease (covid-19) pandemic,”
2020, [Online; accessed 2020-05-15]. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019
[2] V. Surveillances, “The epidemiological characteristics of an outbreak of
2019 novel coronavirus diseases (covid-19)china, 2020,” China CDC
Weekly, vol. 2, no. 8, pp. 113–122, 2020.
[3] N. Montemurro, “The emotional impact of COVID-19: From medical
staff to common people,” Brain, Behavior, and Immunity, March 2020.
[4] M. Bhat, M. Qadri, N.-u.-A. Beg, M. Kundroo, N. Ahanger, and
B. Agarwal, “Sentiment analysis of social media response on the covid19
outbreak,” Brain, Behavior, and Immunity, May 2020.
[5] J. P. Rogers, E. Chesney, D. Oliver, T. A. Pollak, P. McGuire, P. FusarPoli, M. S. Zandi, G. Lewis, and A. S. David, “Psychiatric and neuropsychiatric presentations associated with severe coronavirus infections: a
systematic review and meta-analysis with comparison to the COVID-19
pandemic,” The Lancet Psychiatry, May 2020.
[6] World Health Organization, “Depression,” 2020, [Online; accessed
2020-06-15]. [Online]. Available: https://www.who.int/news-room/factsheets/detail/depression
[7] D. Vigo, G. Thornicroft, and R. Atun, “Estimating the true global burden
of mental illness,” The Lancet Psychiatry, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 171–178,
February 2016.
[8] B. W. Penninx, Y. Milaneschi, F. Lamers, and N. Vogelzangs, “Understanding the somatic consequences of depression: biological mechanisms
and the role of depression symptom profile,” BMC Medicine, vol. 11, p.
129, May 2013.
[9] J. Gibbons, R. Malouf, B. Spitzberg, L. Martinez, B. Appleyard,
C. Thompson, A. Nara, and M.-H. Tsou, “Twitter-based measures of
neighborhood sentiment as predictors of residential population health,”
PLoS ONE, vol. 14, no. 7, July 2019.
[10] P. A. Cavazos-Rehg, M. J. Krauss, S. Sowles, S. Connolly, C. Rosas,
M. Bharadwaj, and L. J. Bierut, “A content analysis of depression-related
tweets,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 54, pp. 351–357, January
2016.
[11] K. Jaidka, S. Giorgi, H. A. Schwartz, M. L. Kern, L. H. Ungar, and
J. C. Eichstaedt, “Estimating geographic subjective well-being from
twitter: A comparison of dictionary and data-driven language methods,”

[22]

[23]
[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]
[30]

[31]

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 117, no. 19, pp.
10 165–10 171, 2020.
G. Coppersmith, M. Dredze, and C. Harman, “Quantifying mental health
signals in twitter,” in Proceedings of the Workshop on Computational
Linguistics and Clinical Psychology: From Linguistic Signal to Clinical
Reality, June 2014, pp. 51–60.
A. G. Reece, A. J. Reagan, K. L. M. Lix, P. S. Dodds, C. M. Danforth,
and E. J. Langer, “Forecasting the onset and course of mental illness
with twitter data,” Scientific Reports, vol. 7, no. 1, p. 13006, October
2017.
S. Almouzini, M. khemakhem, and A. Alageel, “Detecting arabic
depressed users from twitter data,” Procedia Computer Science, vol.
163, pp. 257–265, January 2019.
A. Leis, F. Ronzano, M. A. Mayer, L. I. Furlong, and F. Sanz, “Detecting
signs of depression in tweets in spanish: Behavioral and linguistic
analysis,” Journal of Medical Internet Research, vol. 21, no. 6, June
2019.
C. S. A. Razak, M. A. Zulkarnain, S. H. A. Hamid, N. B. Anuar, M. Z.
Jali, and H. Meon, “Tweep: A system development to detect depression
in twitter posts,” in Computational Science and Technology, ser. Lecture
Notes in Electrical Engineering, R. Alfred, Y. Lim, H. Haviluddin, and
C. K. On, Eds. Springer, 2020, pp. 543–552.
C. McClellan, M. M. Ali, R. Mutter, L. Kroutil, and J. Landwehr,
“Using social media to monitor mental health discussions- evidence
from twitter,” Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association,
vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 496–502, 2017.
M. De Choudhury, M. Gamon, S. Counts, and E. Horvitz, “Predicting
depression via social media,” in Seventh international AAAI conference
on weblogs and social media, 2013.
S. Tsugawa, Y. Kikuchi, F. Kishino, K. Nakajima, Y. Itoh, and H. Ohsaki,
“Recognizing depression from twitter activity,” in Proceedings of the
33rd annual ACM conference on human factors in computing systems,
2015, pp. 3187–3196.
W. Yang and L. Mu, “Gis analysis of depression among twitter users,”
Applied Geography, vol. 60, pp. 217–223, 2015.
A. Husseini Orabi, P. Buddhitha, M. Husseini Orabi, and D. Inkpen,
“Deep learning for depression detection of twitter users,” in Proceedings of the Fifth Workshop on Computational Linguistics and Clinical
Psychology: From Keyboard to Clinic, New Orleans, LA, Jun. 2018, pp.
88–97.
G. Shen, J. Jia, L. Nie, F. Feng, C. Zhang, T. Hu, T.-S. Chua,
and W. Zhu, “Depression detection via harvesting social media: A
multimodal dictionary learning solution,” in Proceedings of IJCAI, 2017,
pp. 3838–3844.
G. Barkur, Vibha, and G. B. Kamath, “Sentiment analysis of nationwide
lockdown due to COVID 19 outbreak: Evidence from india,” Asian
Journal of Psychiatry, April 2020.
J. Zhou, S. Yang, C. Xiao, and F. Chen, “Examination of community
sentiment dynamics due to covid-19 pandemic: a case study from
australia,” arXiv:2006.12185 [cs], June 2020. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2006.12185
I. Li, Y. Li, T. Li, S. Alvarez-Napagao, D. Garcia-Gasulla, and
T. Suzumura, “What are we depressed about when we talk about
COVID19: Mental health analysis on tweets using natural language
processing,” arXiv:2004.10899 [cs], June 2020. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2004.10899
F. Sadeque, D. Xu, and S. Bethard, “Measuring the latency of depression detection in social media,” in Proceedings of the Eleventh ACM
International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, 2018, pp.
495–503.
A. Kolliakou, I. Bakolis, D. Chandran, L. Derczynski, N. Werbeloff,
D. P. Osborn, K. Bontcheva, and R. Stewart, “Mental health-related conversations on social media and crisis episodes: a time-series regression
analysis,” Scientific reports, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 1–7, 2020.
X. Wang, C. Zhang, Y. Ji, L. Sun, L. Wu, and Z. Bao, “A depression
detection model based on sentiment analysis in micro-blog social
network,” in Pacific-Asia Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining. Springer, 2013, pp. 201–213.
T. Shen, J. Jia, G. Shen, F. Feng, X. He, H. Luan, J. Tang, T. Tiropanis,
T. S. Chua, and W. Hall, “Cross-domain depression detection via
harvesting social media,” in Proceedings of IJCAI, 2018.
T. Mikolov, I. Sutskever, K. Chen, G. S. Corrado, and J. Dean,
“Distributed representations of words and phrases and their compositionality,” in Advances in neural information processing systems, 2013,
pp. 3111–3119.
T. Gui, L. Zhu, Q. Zhang, M. Peng, X. Zhou, K. Ding, and Z. Chen,
“Cooperative multimodal approach to depression detection in twitter,” in

12

[32]

[33]

[34]
[35]

[36]

[37]
[38]
[39]

[40]

Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 33,
2019, pp. 110–117.
T. H. Nguyen and R. Grishman, “Relation extraction: Perspective from
convolutional neural networks,” in Proceedings of the 1st Workshop
on Vector Space Modeling for Natural Language Processing. Denver,
Colorado: Association for Computational Linguistics, Jun. 2015, pp. 39–
48. [Online]. Available: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W15-1506
S. Galea, R. M. Merchant, and N. Lurie, “The mental health consequences of covid-19 and physical distancing: The need for prevention
and early intervention,” JAMA internal medicine, vol. 180, no. 6, pp.
817–818, 2020.
Y. Huang and N. Zhao, “Generalized anxiety disorder, depressive
symptoms and sleep quality during covid-19 outbreak in china: a webbased cross-sectional survey,” Psychiatry research, p. 112954, 2020.
M. Y. Ni, L. Yang, C. M. Leung, N. Li, X. I. Yao, Y. Wang, G. M.
Leung, B. J. Cowling, and Q. Liao, “Mental health, risk factors, and
social media use during the covid-19 epidemic and cordon sanitaire
among the community and health professionals in wuhan, china: Crosssectional survey,” JMIR mental health, vol. 7, no. 5, p. e19009, 2020.
K. Horecki and J. Mazurkiewicz, “Natural language processing methods
used for automatic prediction mechanism of related phenomenon,” in
International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing.
Springer, 2015, pp. 13–24.
P. K. Novak, J. Smailović, B. Sluban, and I. Mozetič, “Sentiment of
emojis,” PloS one, vol. 10, no. 12, 2015.
D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan, “Latent dirichlet allocation,”
Journal of machine Learning research, vol. 3, no. Jan, pp. 993–1022,
2003.
E. A. O’Connor, E. P. Whitlock, B. Gaynes, and T. L. Beil, “Screening
for depression in adults and older adults in primary care: An updated
systematic review,” Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(US), Evidence Syntheses 75, December 2009. [Online]. Available:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK36406/table/ch1.t1/
R. Singh, J. Du, Y. Zhang, H. Wang, Y. Miao, O. A. Sianaki, and
A. Ulhaq, “A framework for early detection of antisocial behavior on
twitter using natural language processing,” in Conference on Complex,
Intelligent, and Software Intensive Systems. Springer, 2019, pp. 484–
495.

