1

IoTrace: A Flexible, Efficient, and
Privacy-Preserving IoT-enabled Architecture for
Contact Tracing

arXiv:2007.11928v4 [cs.NI] 2 Jan 2021

Pietro Tedeschi, Spiridon Bakiras, and Roberto Di Pietro
Division of Information and Computing Technology
College of Science and Engineering
Hamad Bin Khalifa University, Doha - Qatar
Email: {ptedeschi, sbakiras, rdipietro}@hbku.edu.qa

Abstract—Contact tracing promises to help fight the spread of
C OVID -19 via an early detection of possible contagion events. To
this end, most existing solutions share the following architecture:
smartphones continuously broadcast random beacons that are
intercepted by nearby devices and stored into their local contact
logs. In this paper, we propose an IoT-enabled architecture for
contact tracing that relaxes the smartphone-centric assumption,
and provide a solution that enjoys the following features: (i) it
reduces the overhead on the end-user to the bare minimum—the
mobile device only broadcasts its beacons; (ii) it provides the user
with a degree of privacy not achieved by competing solutions—
even in the most privacy adverse scenario, the solution provides
𝑘-anonymity; and, (iii) it is flexible: the same architecture can
be configured to support several models—ranging from the
fully decentralized to the fully centralized ones—and the system
parameters can be tuned to support the tracing of several social
interaction models. What is more, our proposal can also be
adopted to tackle future human-proximity transmissible diseases.
Finally, we also highlight open issues and discuss a number of
future research directions at the intersection of IoT and contact
tracing.

I. I NTRODUCTION
One thing is clear about the C OVID -19 pandemic declared
in March 2020: despite the release of few vaccines, the fight
against the virus could still last for years—due to the required
global mass production, untested efficacy at scale, expected
delays in distribution, and the very same virus polymorphic
capabilities. Indeed, the initial battles gained against the virus
have been later lost, with the “second wave” ravaging the
world as of November 2020 [1].
The initial, dramatic spread of C OVID -19 prompted individual states and international organizations to implement
drastic measures to “flatten the curve” of the pandemic [2],
[3]. Digital contact tracing is one of the most promising
technological solutions, and its premise is quite intuitive:
leverage the user’s smartphone to keep track of other users
nearby (called contacts) [4]. Then, if a contact has a positive
diagnosis for the coronavirus, the user is notified to take
precautionary measures, such as testing or self-quarantine.
The most prominent approach to contact tracing is to have
each mobile device broadcast pseudo-random beacons via
its Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) interface. These beacons
are then received and recorded by other users within the

BLE transmission range. Alternatively, solutions like Israel’s
Hamagen [5] adopt the Global Navigation Satellite System
(GNSS) for localization and proximity tracing.
A watershed difference in contact tracing applications lies in
the reconciliation process, i.e., the identification of “infected”
beacons inside a user’s contact list that signal possible contagion events. To one extreme, centralized solutions require
all users to share their beacons and/or contact lists with the
health authorities, who perform the reconciliation process and
notify the exposed users. To the other extreme, decentralized
solutions do not collect any information from the mobile
devices. Instead, when a user is diagnosed as positive, the app
releases the user’s beacons to the authorities, which are then
distributed to all the other users in the system. As such, the
app is responsible for the reconciliation process, by matching
the released beacons against the stored contact logs.
This generic contact tracing framework raises some concerns about the usability of the solution, and opens up the
Pandora’s box of privacy and security issues. The cited dimensions, other than being critical on their own, could also
thwart the widespread adoption of contact tracing, making it
irrelevant in fighting the pandemic. Indeed, Oxford researchers
have calculated that, to be effective, contact tracing apps must
be actively used by at least 60% of the population [6]. To
reach the above goal, a more usable and privacy-preserving
solution would have the potential to attract more active users,
thus increasing the effectiveness of contact tracing.
In terms of usability, the main challenges are related to the
energy efficiency and computational cost of the contact tracing
app. For example, one of the common criticisms against
existing applications is the diminished smartphone battery life.
While some energy is consumed on the periodic transmission
of the device’s beacon, the main factor behind battery drain is
the continuous scanning of the Bluetooth channel for beacons
transmitted by the surrounding devices.
When it comes to privacy and security, the scientific community has started debating the issue from the very beginning [7]. The most recurrent threats are user de-identification
and user tracking. In particular, an eavesdropper can identify
a user as positive to the disease, by cross-referencing the “infected” beacons published by the authorities with the beacons
acquired via eavesdropping. The same data may also allow

2

an adversary to track the locations that a positively diagnosed
individual has visited. This is a clear violation of the General
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) laws in the EU and, in
any case, a serious threat that could hinder the adoption of the
contact tracing application.
Contributions. Motivated by the above observations, we
introduce IoTrace, a contact tracing solution that relies on a
distributed, flexible, and lightweight IoT-based infrastructure.
IoTrace imposes minimal overhead on the user’s smartphone,
while providing strong privacy guarantees not available in
competing proposals. Specifically, IoTrace relaxes the requirement for smartphones to receive the beacons issued by other
devices in their proximity. This translates into considerable
savings in energy consumption and computational/storage
costs. Further advantages are that the IoT infrastructure is fully
distributed, heterogeneous, and pervasive. Distribution and
heterogeneity do help security [8], while pervasiveness would
assure efficient and accurate contact tracing. The reconciliation
mechanism is fully tunable and could range from a completely
decentralized solution to a centralized one. Finally, it is
worth noting that the proposed solution would work for any
type of human2human transmissible disease—just tailoring the
application parameters, such as the time of exposure needed
to trigger the precautionary measures.
II. R ELATED W ORK
Several contact tracing applications have been developed in
the last few months. In the following paragraphs, we provide
a brief introduction of the state-of-the-art approaches and also
present a quantitative comparison in terms of user privacy and
performance.
BlueTrace [9]. BlueTrace is an open-source protocol that
is utilized in Singapore’s TraceTogether app. It adopts the
BLE technology, where devices exchange their ephemeral IDs
(i.e., beacons) via broadcast and log all encounters in their
history logs. When a user is diagnosed as positive, his/her
history logs are sent to a central authority, using a secure connection. Even though BlueTrace leverages the decentralized
architecture, the ephemeral IDs are generated by the central
authority and distributed to the individual devices. As such, the
reconciliation function and exposure notification are performed
at a centralized location, i.e., BlueTrace is considered a hybrid
solution. The main cryptographic primitive involved in the
computation of the ephemeral IDs is AES-256-GCM.
DP-3T [10]. A large consortium of European researchers,
comprising numerous universities and institutions, proposed
the Decentralized Privacy-Preserving Proximity Tracing protocol that leverages BLE technology to track and log encounters
with other users. The contact logs are never transmitted to
a central authority, but they are stored only on the client’s
device. When a user tests positive, his/her ephemeral IDs are
transmitted to the central authority. The IDs are generated with
symmetric key protocols, such as HMAC-SHA-256 and AES128-CTR. Finally, the project is completely open-source.
Apple/Google [11]. Similar to DP-3T, Apple and Google
agreed on a decentralized protocol for contact tracing, based
on BLE technology. The contact tracing logs do not contain

any private information, and ephemeral IDs are only stored
on the user’s device. From the cryptographic perspective,
they adopt HMAC-SHA-256 and AES-128. Note that, Apple/Google is not a complete contact tracing solution; instead,
the companies released the exposure notification API as opensource to allow public health authorities to develop their own
mobile applications. For example, Immuni [13] is the Italian
State-sponsored official contact tracing app that leverages the
Apple/Google framework.
Hamagen [5]. Hamagen was developed by Israel’s Ministry
of Health to monitor the C OVID -19 pandemic. It allows
the identification of positive patients and people who came
in contact with them. Hamagen continuously monitors and
logs the user’s GPS coordinates on the device (requiring no
interaction with other devices). After a user tests positive, and
if he/she gives prior consent, their location data is transmitted
to the Ministry of Health. All devices periodically download
the up-to-date location data and compare them against their
own GPS history logs.
PEPP-PT [12]. The Pan-European Privacy-Preserving
Proximity Tracing protocol adopts BLE to discover and store
locally the ephemeral IDs of devices that are in proximity.
Similar to BlueTrace, it uses the hybrid architecture by having
the health authorities generate the users’ beacons. As such, a
centralized server collects and processes the contact logs from
infected users, and performs the reconciliation process in a
centralized manner. The main cryptographic algorithm they
employ is AES. This approach also adopts the open-source
paradigm.
Solutions Comparison. Table I presents a quantitative comparison of these state-of-the-art protocols for a variety of metrics, such as privacy and operational cost. In our analysis, we
consider the health authorities as trusted entities. Otherwise,
centralized and hybrid protocols cannot offer any meaningful
level of privacy. In terms of health status privacy, decentralized
protocols fail to protect the identity of the infected users,
which is a violation of numerous health privacy acts, such
as HIPAA and GDPR. Specifically, DP-3T and Apple/Google
disclose all the ephemeral IDs that belong to the infected users,
which allows an adversary to infer with certainty whether
a known ID (i.e., person) has contracted the virus. As for
hybrid solutions (BlueTrace and PEPP-PT), they only reveal
the user’s contact logs and are, thus, more privacy-preserving.
However, the ephemeral ID of the infected individual might
be inferred from its absence within a cluster of IDs with the
same time/location tags. Hamagen is a GPS-based solution, so
it reveals the infected user’s entire location history. While the
identity of the user may not be immediately clear, background
knowledge can be applied to link the published trajectories to
a specific individual.
Regarding location privacy, both the decentralized and
hybrid protocols offer excellent privacy to the users who
never test positive. This is due to the unidirectional flow of
information, i.e., the devices only download data from the
central authority’s server without ever uploading any data of
their own. However, a user who tests positive has to disclose
some relevant information to the central server. Usually, the
cited disclosure involves publishing ephemeral IDs, contact

3

Table I
C OMPARISON OF STATE - OF - THE - ART REPRESENTATIVE SOLUTIONS . 𝑛: CONTACT LIST SIZE , 𝑙: NUMBER OF STORED LOCATIONS , 𝑓 : TX FREQUENCY,
N ONE : −, L OW: ★, M EDIUM : ★★, H IGH : ★ ★ ★. F OR I OT RACE , SOME METRICS INCLUDE TWO RATINGS THAT CORRESPOND TO THE BASIC : N AND
P RIVACY-E NHANCED :  VERSIONS .
Features
Wireless Technology
Open-Source
Architecture (C/D/H)
RF Energy Consumption (mJ/min)
Security Level (Crypto)
Health Status Privacy
Location Privacy (w.r.t Positive)
Location Privacy (w.r.t Negative)
Device Storage Requirements (B)
Crypto Computational Cost (ms)
Broadcast TX Overhead (B)

BlueTrace [9]
Bluetooth
Yes
H
≈ 1.23 · 103
★★★
★
−
★★★
≈ 𝑛 · 140
0
𝑓 · 140

DP-3T [10]
Bluetooth
Yes
D
≈ 1.21 · 103
★★★
−
−
★★★
≈ 𝑛 · 24
≈ 24.8973
𝑓 · 24

logs, or GPS coordinates, unfortunately leading, among others,
to a complete compromise of the geographic locations that the
user has visited in the near past.
To assess the performance of the discussed solutions in
a quantitative manner, we considered the Bluetooth SoC
nRF51822 and the GPS SiP nRF9160 (for Hamagen) hardware
platforms. We first estimated the energy consumption related
to the RF operations (TX and RX), using the platforms’
operational specifications, such as voltage and current consumption. For the BLE-based protocols, we assumed a beacon
broadcast interval of 500 ms, and a duty cycle of 50% for the
scanning function. The energy consumption of each approach
is computed as the integral of power over time. For Hamagen,
we assumed continuous scanning in low-power mode. As
presented in Table I, IoTrace is orders of magnitude more
efficient than the competing approaches, because it does not
need to scan the Bluetooth channel for broadcasted beacons.
As per the crypto operations for generating the ephemeral IDs,
they are very cheap for all protocols, necessitating ≈ 30 ms
to generate the IDs for an entire day (on a Cortex M0 CPU).
However, IoTrace is considerably more lightweight, as it does
not need to store and actively update a contact list. For the
same reason, IoTrace sports the lowest storage requirement.
III. T HREAT M ODEL
In this work, we consider a powerful eavesdropping adversary that is capable of collecting all beacons transmitted by
the users. The adversary is equipped with a powerful antenna,
which can be either a regular Bluetooth handheld device or
a Software Defined Radio (SDR) that is operated through a
laptop/smartphone running an SDR-compatible software tool.
Additionally, the attacker tags every beacon with a timestamp
and the geographic location where it was recorded. As a result,
the adversary has a global view of all communications and can
pinpoint every beacon to a unique point in space and time,
although the beacon cannot be linked to a specific user. We
also consider a more involved eavesdropping adversary that is
able to get close to a target victim, in order to record beacons
that belong to the victim with a very high probability (i.e.,
there are no other devices in the vicinity, or the adversary uses
a directional antenna). Such an adversary is only interested

Apple/Google [11]
Bluetooth
Yes
D
≈ 1.21 · 103
★★★
−
−
★★★
≈ 𝑛 · 16
≈ 30.2039
𝑓 · 31

Hamagen [5]
GPS
Yes
D
≈ 2.19 · 103
N/A
★
−
★★★
≈ 𝑙 · 10
0
0

PEPP-PT [12]
Bluetooth
Yes
H
≈ 1.21 · 103
★★★
★
−
★★★
≈ 𝑛 · 30
0
𝑓 · 30

IoTrace
Bluetooth
Yes
CN
D
≈ 3.2760
★★★
★★
★★★
−
★★★
★★★
0
≈ 23.3652
𝑓 · 16

in identifying beacons that are associated with one or more
unique individuals.
Finally, we embrace a standard assumption in the literature:
the adversary runs in polynomial time and is unable to break
the cryptographic protocols (such as symmetric encryption and
hashing) that generate the pseudo-random beacons. Based on
the aforementioned adversarial model, we consider two types
of privacy attacks against the contact tracing system:
• Location privacy attack: In this attack, the adversary’s
objective is to track the movements of one or more users
through the collected beacons.
• Health status privacy attack: Here, the objective is to
correctly infer whether one or more known users have
contracted the C OVID -19 virus.
IV. E DGE C ONTACT T RACING WITH I OT D EVICES
The novelty of IoTrace lies in the deployment of IoT
devices that support the contact tracing tasks at the network’s
edge, complementing the individual mobile devices. In what
follows, Section IV-A introduces the IoTrace architecture, and
Section IV-B describes the contact tracing protocol and the
corresponding message flow in the context of a centralized
architecture. Section IV-C discusses an alternative fully distributed approach that also provides a high level of privacy
with the use of public-key cryptography.
A. System Architecture
The entities involved in the IoTrace architecture are the
following:
• User. A user carrying a smartphone device that runs
our contact tracing app. The app simply transmits BLE
beacons (pseudo-random ephemeral IDs) that are received
by the deployed IoT devices. The transmitted beacons are
also stored locally on the device for verifying proximity
to other users. Unlike existing approaches, the app only
operates in transmit-mode, i.e., it does not collect BLE
beacons from other devices.
• Totem. This is an IoT smart device, equipped with a BLE
transceiver that collects the beacons transmitted from the
users’ devices. We also assume that the totem maintains
a secure intranet connection to the central authority,

4

where it forwards all the received beacons—in a fashion
that could span from batch mode to real-time. In our
terminology, we call these beacons negative, i.e., they
belong to users who have not tested positive. From a
practical perspective, a totem could be a simple low-end
device, like a Raspberry Pi.
• Hospital. This is a medical center that tests users who
may possibly have a C OVID -19 infection. If a user tests
positive, the health professionals are permitted to access
his/her mobile device and forward the stored beacons to
the central authority. We call these beacons positive.
• Central authority. This is a trusted party, whose role is
to collect the positive and negative beacons sent by the
corresponding hospitals and totems. It is assumed to be
always online and ready to provide an updated list of
beacons that belong to users who had a close contact
with an infected user. In a real scenario, this role can be
played by the Ministry of Health.
As shown in Fig. 1, the proposed architecture can be
adopted in open spaces, like parks, or in closed spaces, like
shopping malls and offices.

(a) Open space: Park.

B. Protocol Message Flow
IoTrace’s protocol is illustrated in Fig. 2 and summarized
below:
• Let us assume a generic time-slot 𝑡 𝑖 . At the beginning
of the time-slot, the transmitting user (Alice) generates a
pseudo-random BLE beacon, according to some cryptographic primitive, such as AES-128 encryption.
• After collecting all beacon(s) within time-slot 𝑡 𝑖 , the
totem forwards them to the central authority. The authority stores each beacon as a tuple <totem-ID, time-slot,
beacon> on its long-term memory.
• Let us assume Alice is diagnosed as positive at an authorized hospital. An authorized health official will access
Alice’s mobile application to send her recent beacons
(e.g., from the last two weeks) to the central authority.
• Consider one of Alice’s positive beacons that was transmitted at time-slot 𝜏. The central authority will identify
all the negative beacons within time-slots 𝜏 ± 𝜖 (at that
particular totem), where 𝜖 is a time window that depends
on the broadcast frequency of the beacons. The list of all
negative and positive beacons is published online.
• Finally, Bob downloads from the central authority the list
published at the previous step and checks whether his
own beacons are in the list. If there is a match, and it
is sustained for an amount of time sufficient to declare
a potential contagion risk (set by the health authorities),
Bob is notified by the app of this possibility.
The data flow that summarizes the above described operations
is depicted in Fig. 3.
Compared to previous approaches in the literature, this basic
version of IoTrace already provides better protection of the
users’ health status privacy, since both the positive and the
negative beacons are disclosed by the central authority. As a
result, IoTrace provides 𝑘-anonymity [14] in terms of health
status privacy. That is, if 𝑘 beacons are published on behalf

(b) Closed space: Shopping mall.

(c) Closed space: Office.
Figure 1. IoTrace infrastructure in different environments: open and closed
spaces. A totem is represented by the Bluetooth icon. BLE beacons are
transmitted from the smartphones to the IoT totems.

of a single totem, each beacon has a 1/𝑘 chance of being the
positive one. As per the location privacy guarantees, they are
identical to existing decentralized solutions, such as DP-3T
and Apple/Google. However, IoTrace has a clear advantage in
terms of operational cost for mobile devices.

5

ALICE
ti

ti ,BEACONi

BOB

TOTEMj

ti+1 , BEACONi+1

ti+1

HOSPITAL
TOTEMj, ti ,BEACONi

AUTHORITY

TOTEMj, ti+1 , BEACONi+1

ti ,BEACONi

<TOTEMj ,ti
,BEACONi>

✓

BEACON i, i+1 ,ti, i+1
BEACONi, i+1 ,ti, i+1
Potential Contagion Risk

V. C HALLENGES AND ROAD A HEAD

Figure 2. Sequence diagram of the IoTrace protocol. The authority marks
Alice as infected by reporting an alert of Potential Contagion Risk to Bob.

Users

cleartext, the mobile devices will first exchange a symmetric
key with the totem using the locally stored certificate, and then
send their beacons encrypted with that key. The totem will
locally decrypt the beacons, and the protocol will continue as
described. Consequently, when the positive/negative beacons
are published by the central authority, an eavesdropper cannot
link them to a particular totem and time-slot. Overall, this latter
solution is very flexible, allowing individual users to trade off
more privacy with a higher computing cost.

Totem

Hospital

Authority

Contact tracing is, in essence, a surveillance-type application. As such, the security and privacy of the entire system
are of paramount importance. In the following sections, we
describe the challenges that must be addressed, to make edge
contact tracing a secure and privacy-preserving solution.

5
Contact Tracing Beacon
ct29

EphID

FB7C6956-D7AD4F45A9EB767301663FB6

Timestamp

2020-06-22
T14:01:58+00:00

A. Security Considerations
1

Store
Beacon

2
3

5

Contact Tracing Beacon

!

Advertisement

ar58

EphID

FB859673-C8BA5F31A2FC94321000F2AA

Timestamp

2020-06-22
T14:01:59+00:00

1

Store
Beacon

2

Store
Beacon

2

5

Contact Tracing Beacon
Advertisement

dr87

EphID

AB7FEF47-D7F45F47A9EB76730134CBB6

Timestamp

2020-06-22
T14:30:07+00:00

Infected User
Exposed User
Healthy User

1

Verify
Beacon

4

Timestamp
Comparison

Advertisement

Downloading Positive & Negative-Beacon List
Beacon Transmission Flow
Diagnosis of a User (offline)

Figure 3. The IoTrace protocol data flow diagram. An exposed user becomes
yellow if he/she is close to an infected user based on the BLE beacon’s
timestamp.

C. A Privacy-Enhanced Solution
We will now show how to significantly enhance the privacy
under IoTrace, while leveraging the same architecture. The
first improvement is related to the centralized storage of
all beacons. To this end, IoTrace can operate in a fully
decentralized mode, i.e., the totems will store the received
beacons locally, without sending them to the central authority.
When a user tests positive for C OVID -19, the central authority
will forward the positive beacons to all totems and, in turn,
the totems will send back to the central authority all negative
beacons that fall within the predetermined time window from
a positive one. This approach preserves the privacy guarantees
and operational costs for mobile devices while removing the
inherent risks of centralized storage.
Our second improvement comes with increased computational and power consumption costs for the mobile devices,
but results in a contact tracing solution which is secure against
eavesdropping adversaries. The key observation is that the IoT
infrastructure is relatively static, so it is easy to store on each
mobile device the list of all totem IDs, along with their publickey certificates. Then, instead of transmitting their beacons in

Edge Security. In the proposed architecture, an IoT device
(totem) represents the edge component between the mobile
devices and the hospital/authority. Hence, a research direction
relevant to our solution, but also of general interest to the
IoT domain, arises from the need to reduce the required
computations, for instance, adopting lightweight cryptographic
protocols to meet the intended security and privacy goals.
The most obvious concern with regards to the security of the
proposed architecture is the exposure of the totems to physical
attacks, due to their being unattended. As a result, no sensitive
information, such as user beacons or private keys, should be
stored in plaintext format. To solve the cited issue, data at rest
could be encrypted with the public key of the central authority.
Furthermore, the totem should utilize a secure enclave to perform the necessary cryptographic operations, and all beacons
(even when encrypted, as suggested above) should be erased
as soon as they are received by the trusted authority. For the
case of the fully distributed architecture where the data are
stored locally at the totems, additional measures should be
implemented to harden their security.
Replay and Relay Attacks. These are active attacks where
the adversary eavesdrops on the broadcast beacons and then
replays those beacons to many other (even far away) totems.
The objective of these attacks is to generate a large number
of false contacts such that, if one individual tests positive, the
disclosure of his/her beacons will trigger many false positive
alerts. Such attacks can be addressed in two different ways.
First, the beacon generation protocol may incorporate certain
cryptographic protocols to thwart replay attacks. Second, the
trusted authority can analyze the collected data and identify
fraudulent beacons, e.g., the same beacon appearing in two
distant locations in a not time-congruent manner.
B. Privacy Considerations
Linkage and Profiling. Contact tracing protocols and applications bring with them several privacy concerns, e.g., the
misuse of the collected data at the trusted authority, under
the centralized and hybrid models. Indeed, a malicious insider

6

with access to all beacons, locations, timestamps, and contact
lists, can extract sensitive information about the underlying
individuals (such as locations visited, routes, social contacts,
etc.). Our proposed architecture makes such attacks less feasible by design, since users do not submit their own contact
lists. Instead, all the beacons are aggregated at the distributed
totems, which makes it much harder for an adversary to track
individuals. Still, an interesting research direction would be to
quantify the privacy leakage under the centralized edge contact
tracing architecture.
Eavesdropping. Eavesdropping is a passive attack where
an adversary with the ability to eavesdrop at a large scale
can simply record most beacons that are broadcast by the
users. When the list of positive/negative beacons is published,
the adversary can identify all the locations that the infected
user has visited. This is an attack that none of the existing
contact tracing protocols can defend against. To this end, a
possible research direction would be to design secure twoparty protocols (between the trusted authority and a user) that
allow users to blindly match their beacons against the server’s
beacon list (which will not be published). Note, however, that
our proposal is able to thwart such attacks when the user
employs the public-key of the totem to bootstrap a secure
channel with the totem itself—as described in Section IV-C.
C. Technology Considerations
Localization Accuracy. Most technologies adopted for
contact tracing rely on the Received Signal Strength Indicator
(RSSI). With the help of a radio-propagation model, this
feature is useful in estimating the distance between the transmitter and the receiver nodes. Unfortunately, several factors
can affect the accuracy of distance estimation, including radio
noise, obstacles, multipath reflection and shadowing effects,
or environmental factors like rain, temperature, and humidity.
Therefore, Bluetooth RSSI may produce a large number of
false positives and false negatives. To this end, alternative
features like Angle-of-Arrival, Time Difference of Arrival, and
Time of Arrival should be investigated. Furthermore, thanks
to the vast amount of available data, AI algorithms could be
employed on the edge devices to improve the localization
accuracy of the Bluetooth technology.
Communication Technologies. While BLE is the de facto
choice for all contact tracing solutions in the literature, we believe that more research is needed on different communication
technologies. In particular, Ultra-wideband (UWB) carriers as
well as acoustic channels and ultrasonic sound waves could
be employed to improve the accuracy, privacy, and reliability
of proximity tracing [15].

Usability. The usability of existing solutions is primarily
hindered by the shortened battery life that users experience.
We have shown that energy consumption under IoTrace is
reduced by multiple orders of magnitude. Additionally, the
reconciliation process is mostly performed at the health authorities and/or IoT devices. As such, we argue that IoTrace’s
mobile app would be extremely lightweight, and therefore,
would not affect the user’s experience—hence increasing the
chance of adoption.
Trust. In addition to usability, trust (or the lack of) is the
deciding factor that discourages people from actively using
existing contact tracing apps. To this end, IoTrace’s superior
privacy guarantees could motivate more users to install and
actively use the app. Furthermore, by releasing the app’s code
as open-source, we can further ease the public’s concern with
respect to privacy and security.

E. Limitations
The major limitation of IoTrace is the cost to deploy,
operate, and maintain the IoT infrastructure. Indeed, the IoT
devices must be connected to a fixed power supply and have
access to a cellular/cable network infrastructure, in order
to communicate with the health authorities. As such, we
envision that a practical implementation would employ cheap,
Raspberry Pi like devices, that would cost somewhere between
$10–$20 each. For 100, 000 devices, the cost would rise to
a couple of million dollars, which is very reasonable for a
large city. We should emphasize that IoTrace would only be
deployed in crowded areas, such as shopping malls, public
transportation venues, airports, stadiums, parks, etc. Additionally, the government may offer incentives to individual
business owners to install and maintain their own IoT devices,
thus expanding the range of IoTrace’s network.
Despite the cited costs, IoTrace has the following advantages that make it a very attractive solution for contact
tracing: (i) significant energy savings for the mobile devices,
as they can operate in transmit-only mode; (ii) superior privacy
guarantees; (iii) better proximity tracing accuracy stemming
from a moderately dense deployment of IoT sensors (improved
localization with techniques like triangulation and trilateration); (iv) reduced computational and storage requirements
for the mobile devices, allowing the app to work seamlessly
on cheap devices; (v) flexibility on behalf of the health
authorities, because IoTrace does not enforce any constraint
on the distance (or duration) that qualifies a digital encounter
as a legitimate contact.
VI. C ONCLUSION

D. Social Considerations
Accessibility. IoTrace shifts a significant portion of the
energetic and computational costs of contact tracing to the
IoT edge devices and/or the centralized server. As a result, the
corresponding mobile application can be easily deployed on
low-cost devices that would otherwise be unable to participate
in the contact tracing network. This will increase considerably
the accessibility of the solution to the general public.

In this paper, we proposed IoTrace, a novel IoT-based
architecture for contact tracing, that addresses some of the
most important limitations of existing solutions: it provides a
balance between the level of privacy for the different user
categories; it reduces the overhead on the end-user device
in terms of energy consumption and computational cost; it
enhances location privacy; and, it is scalable and flexible—
allowing to accommodate different contact tracing models,

7

from the purely decentralized to the centralized one. We
believe that the novelty of the proposal, as well as its striking
properties and flexibility, has the potential to pave the way for
further research.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Pietro Tedeschi is PhD Student at HBKU-CSE.
He received his Master’s degree with honors in
Computer Engineering at Politecnico di Bari, Italy.
He worked as Security Researcher at CNIT, Italy,
for the EU H2020 SymbIoTe. His research interests
cover security issues in UAVs, Wireless, IoT, and
Cyber-Physical Systems.

The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers,
that helped improving the quality of the paper. This publication
was partially supported by awards NPRP 11S-0109-180242
from the QNRF-Qatar National Research Fund, a member of
The Qatar Foundation. The information and views set out in
this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the official opinion of the QNRF.
R EFERENCES
[1] John Hopkins University, “Coronavirus Resource Center,” https://
coronavirus.jhu.edu/, November 2020, (Accessed: 2021-1-1).
[2] D. Shu Wei Ting et al., “Digital technology and COVID-19,” Nature
Medicine, vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 459–461, Mar. 2020.
[3] J. M. Cecilia et al., “Mobile crowdsensing approaches to address the
COVID-19 pandemic in Spain,” IET Smart Cities, vol. 2, no. 2, pp.
58–63, 2020.
[4] L. Garg et al., “Anonymity Preserving IoT-Based COVID-19 and Other
Infectious Disease Contact Tracing Model,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp.
159 402–159 414, 2020.
[5] Israeli Health Ministry. (2020) Hamagen. (Accessed: 20211-1). [Online]. Available: https://govextra.gov.il/ministry-of-health/
hamagen-app/download-en/
[6] Q. Tang, “Privacy-Preserving Contact Tracing: current solutions and
open questions,” IACR Cryptol. ePrint Arch., vol. 2020, p. 426, 2020.
[7] L. Baumgärtner et al., “Mind the GAP: Security & Privacy Risks of
Contact Tracing Apps,” arXiv e-prints, Jun. 2020.
[8] Y. Lu et al., “Internet of Things (IoT) Cybersecurity Research: A Review
of Current Research Topics,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6,
no. 2, pp. 2103–2115, 2019.
[9] J. Bay et al., “BlueTrace: A privacy-preserving protocol for communitydriven contact tracing across borders,” Government Technology AgencySingapore, Tech. Rep, 2020.
[10] “Decentralized Privacy-Preserving Proximity Tracing: Overview of
Data Protection and Security,” https://github.com/DP-3T/documents/
blob/master/DP3T%20White%20Paper.pdf, 2020, (Accessed: 2021-1-1).
[11] Apple Google. (2020) Privacy-Preserving Contact Tracing.
(Accessed: 2021-1-1). [Online]. Available: https://www.apple.com/
covid19/contacttracing
[12] PEPP-PT Team. (2020) Pan-European Privacy-Preserving Proximity
Tracing. (Accessed: 2021-1-1). [Online]. Available: https://www.
pepp-pt.org/
[13] Italian Ministry of Health, “Immuni,” https://www.immuni.italia.it/, June
2020, (Accessed: 2021-1-1).
[14] J. Wang et al., “Achieving Personalized 𝑘-Anonymity-Based Content
Privacy for Autonomous Vehicles in CPS,” IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Informatics, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 4242–4251, 2020.
[15] M. Caprolu et al., “Short-Range Audio Channels Security: Survey of
Mechanisms, Applications, and Research Challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, pp. 1–1, 2020.

B IOGRAPHIES

Spiridon Bakiras is associate professor of cybersecurity at HBKU-CSE. His research interests include
Security and Privacy, Applied Cryptography, and
Spatiotemporal Databases. He held teaching and research positions at Michigan Technological University, the City University of New York, the University
of Hong Kong, and the Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology. He is a recipient of the
U.S. National Science Foundation CAREER award.

Roberto Di Pietro, ACM Distinguished Scientist, is
full professor of Cybersecurity at HBKU-CSE. His
research interests include Distributed Systems Security, Wireless Security, OSN Security, and Intrusion
Detection. In 2011-2012 he was awarded a Chair
of Excellence from University Carlos III, Madrid.
In 2020 he received the Jean-Claude Laprie Award
for having significantly influenced the theory and
practice of Dependable Computing.

