Note: This work is currently under submission. This version of the manuscript has not been peer-reviewed.
Cite as: Aymerich-Franch, L., & Ferrer, I. (2020). The implementation of social robots during the COVID-19
pandemic. ArXiv preprint. ArXiv:2007.03941.

The implementation of social robots during the COVID-19 pandemic
Laura Aymerich-Franch
Ramón y Cajal Senior Research Fellow
Pompeu Fabra University
laura.aymerich@gmail.com
Iliana Ferrer
Postdoctoral Research Fellow
Pompeu Fabra University
iliferrer@gmail.com

Abstract
The present study examines the implementation of social robots in real settings during the COVID19 pandemic. In particular, we analyze the areas in which social robots are being adopted, the roles
and tasks being fulfilled, and the robot models being implemented. For that, we traced back and
analyzed 195 experiences with 66 different social robots worldwide that have been adopted during
the coronavirus outbreak. We identified a clear resurgence and expansion of social robots during
the crisis. The social robots’ capacity to perform the roles of liaison in tasks that require humanhuman interaction, to act as a safeguard to ensure contagion risk-free environments, and to act as
well-being coaches by providing therapeutic and entertaining functions for quarantined patients,
which are directly associated with the needs of facilitating physical distance and palliate the effects
of isolation, have been key to the renaissance of these robots during the pandemic.

1. Introduction
Physical distancing and isolation measures adopted worldwide to contain the spread of the
COVID-19 pandemic [1] provide an unprecedented opportunity for social robots to be
implemented in real settings. The critical role that robots could play in public health during disaster
situations has long been highlighted [2], [3]. Noticeably, applying physical distancing is not always
a valid option and, when it cannot be guaranteed, it can lead to devastating consequences. This is
particularly problematic in the healthcare sector. It is estimated that healthcare workers represent
higher than 25% of all diagnosed cases of COVID-19 in some countries[4]. Social robots can act
safely in an environment that has become momentarily hazardous to human beings. These robots
could be decisive to minimize intrahospital transmissions by performing functions of monitoring
or facilitating teleoperation to connect doctors with patients [5]. Additionally, there is empirical
evidence that isolation measures, quarantines, and lockdowns have a serious impact on mental
health and psychological well-being [6], [7]. Social robots could also contribute to palliate mental
health issues and promote well-being during this period [3], [5].

Note: This work is currently under submission. This version of the manuscript has not been peer-reviewed.
Cite as: Aymerich-Franch, L., & Ferrer, I. (2020). The implementation of social robots during the COVID-19
pandemic. ArXiv preprint. ArXiv:2007.03941.

The present study examines the implementation of social robots in real settings during the COVID19 pandemic. Social robots are those that interact with humans by following the behavioral norms
expected by the people with whom they intended to interact [8]. For a robot to be social, it needs
to present specific communicative capabilities and provide social cues towards its human
interaction partners to support social interaction [9]. While there is ample debate regarding what
characteristics should define specifically a social robot, for the purposes of the present study, the
most relevant aspect to characterize a social robot is the consideration of it being specifically
designed to interact with humans and in human physical environments [10].
The aim of the study is to provide an in-depth picture of social robot implementation in the society
during the pandemic. Specifically, the study examines the areas and sectors where social robots
are being implemented, the roles being fulfilled, the specific tasks being performed, and the robot
models being adopted. For that, we traced back and analyzed 195 experiences with social robots
worldwide that have been implemented during the COVID-19 pandemic in real settings.
Following [11] we propose three strategic roles that social robots can fulfill to facilitate physical
distancing as well as to reduce the drawbacks of isolation during the pandemic. First, to act as a
liaison in tasks that require human-human interaction. Second, to act as a safeguard to ensure
contagion risk-free environments. Third, to act as well-being coaches by providing therapeutic and
entertaining functions for quarantined patients.
2. Method
Data collection was performed through documentary research, following the method used in [12].
A strategic non-probabilistic sample was used due to the large amount of experiences and the
impossibility to quantify all of them on a global scale [12]. The data was obtained between March
and June 2020.
Documentary sources were consulted to extract the largest number possible of experiences. The
main sources included mainstream and specialized media outlets, technology blogs, robot
developers’ and robot suppliers’ official websites and social media accounts, research papers and
reports, study cases published on corporative websites, and national and international robotics
organizations websites and reports. For each experience that was identified, as many sources as
possible were further localized to contrast information. In total, more than 1.000 documentary
sources were examined. In order to include a case in the study, the following criteria were
considered:
•
•

•
•
•

Temporality: Only experiences that specifically mentioned being implemented in response
to the COVID-19 pandemic were included.
Sociability: Only robots specifically designed to interact with humans and in human
physical environments were considered. Non-social robots implemented for COVID-19
related activities were excluded.
Embodiment: Only robots with a physical body were included.
Communication: Only robots that exhibited at least a minimum capability to interact with
humans using verbal and/or non-verbal communication, and/or social cues were included.
Autonomy: Only autonomous and semi-autonomous robots were included.

Note: This work is currently under submission. This version of the manuscript has not been peer-reviewed.
Cite as: Aymerich-Franch, L., & Ferrer, I. (2020). The implementation of social robots during the COVID-19
pandemic. ArXiv preprint. ArXiv:2007.03941.
• Movement and navigation: Only robots with movement capacity through gesturing or/and
•

autonomous navigation were included.
Geography: Worldwide

A database was created with all the experiences that met the inclusion criteria. Each experience
was classified according to the following variables: social robot name, manufacturer, sector/area
of implementation, country where the experience took or is taking place, specific tasks performed
by the social robot, and institution that implemented the social robot.
3. Results
The final database contained 195 experiences of social robot implementations in real settings that
met the inclusion criteria. Some exceptions to the communication, autonomy, and movement and
navigation criteria were made to include some teleoperated machines with robotic appearances
identified as robots in the documentary sources. These exceptions were made when the robot
represented the only experience that we were able to localize in a country or when the robot
performed a function that was not previously included in the database through other robots.
In total, 66 different social robots were identified among the 195 experiences analyzed. The robots
that were most recurrent in these experiences were Temi – Robotemi (27), James – Zorabots (13),
Pepper – Softbank (10), Greetbot – OrionStar (8), Cruzr – Ubtech (7), and Starship – Starship (7).
The experiences retained in the database were from 35 different countries. The countries in which
we identified a major number of experiences were China (56), USA (24), Thailand (20), Belgium
(14), Hong Kong (13), India (10), and The Netherlands (5).
By sector and area, the experiences were implemented in hospitals (104), nursing homes (24),
transportation (13), schools and universities (9), airports (8), hotels (8), public sector, in places
such as parks or streets (8), restaurants (6), office buildings (5), shopping malls (6), stores (3), and
highway checkpoints (1).
The specific functions performed by the robots were classified within the three main roles of
liaison, safeguard, and well-being coaches proposed in [11]. In most experiences (151), the robots
performed multiple functions. Also, the capacity of verbally greet people, which generally
complemented other functions, was identified in 94 cases.
The robots that were able to perform the largest number of functions were Cruzr (Ubtech), Pepper
(Softbank), Temi (Robotemi), Greetbot (OrionStar), Sanbot (Qihan Technology), and Promobot
(Promobot). Only 10 robots were used for a single function, which was either delivery or
disinfection.
3.1 Liaison
The liaison role included all functions related to using social robots to act as a link between humans
with the aim of minimizing human-human direct contact. Functions associated with the liaison
role have become particularly widespread as a result of the pandemic. In particular, 162 of the 195

Note: This work is currently under submission. This version of the manuscript has not been peer-reviewed.
Cite as: Aymerich-Franch, L., & Ferrer, I. (2020). The implementation of social robots during the COVID-19
pandemic. ArXiv preprint. ArXiv:2007.03941.

experiences we analyzed implemented social robots to perform at least one function that can be
related to the liaison role. Interestingly, functions that were not particularly valued before such as
the possibility to bring food to patients have now become of major importance as they facilitate
physical distancing between patients and staff. The following functions were identified in relation
to this role:
3.1.1 Receptionist
A total of 42 experiences utilized social robots for receptionist-related tasks. In particular,
receptionist social robots develop tasks related to patient or customer registration upon arrival,
contactless check-ins/outs, book appointments, providing indications, prepare and print
prescriptions, or translate information in different languages. Receptionist robots tend to present
anthropomorphic features, humanoid or semi-humanoid shapes, and verbal interaction capabilities.
Examples of robots that are used for these functions are Cruzr (Ubtech), Pepper (Softbank), Mitra
and Mitri (Invento Robotics), Mini Ada (Akin Robotics), and GreetBot (OrionStar). Most of these
robots are found at the reception of hospitals. Some experiences were also in hotels, to checkin/out patients in isolation, or in airports, restaurants, stores, office buildings, and shopping malls,
to provide indications and guide visitors and customers to specific areas.
3.1.2 Pre-Diagnosis
Robots that perform COVID-19 pre-diagnosis functions in hospitals represented a total of 18
experiences. The robots are able to make pre-diagnosis assessing patient symptoms through
questionnaires and thermal screenings. If the patients exhibit some coronavirus related symptoms,
the robot redirects them towards a telepresence consultation or medical staff equipped with
personal protective equipment. We also identified three cases of robots that perform COVID-19
pre-diagnosis in a public space (Times Square), a shopping mall, and an airport. The social robots
in these spaces also conduct pre-diagnosis through temperature checks and questionnaires. This
function works in combination with the function of personalized advice (see Safety Advice).
Examples of robots used for this task are Mitri and Mitra (Invento Robotics), Promobot
(Promobot), and GreetBot (OrionStar). Most experiences (11) of robots habilitated for prediagnosis functions were located in China.
3.1.3 Providing Information
Providing information was a function available in 37 of the experiences analyzed. The information
the robots offer can either be general or personalized. As an example of general information, robots
can inform about schedules or offer promotions in shops. When the patient or customer interacts
with the robot and asks for a specific question, the robot can offer personalized information such
as the specific room where to go for taking a test in a hospital or finding the boarding gate for
travelers in airports and accompany them. Robots develop this function in hospitals, but also in
stores, hotels, restaurants, universities, airports, and nursing homes. Examples include Medical
Service Robot (TMI Robotics), Smart Service Robot (Xiaoben Intelligence), and Pari 2.0 (Paaila
Technology).
3.1.4 Telepresence

Note: This work is currently under submission. This version of the manuscript has not been peer-reviewed.
Cite as: Aymerich-Franch, L., & Ferrer, I. (2020). The implementation of social robots during the COVID-19
pandemic. ArXiv preprint. ArXiv:2007.03941.

One of the most widespread functions during the COVID-19 crisis is telepresence (83
experiences). Robots are equipped with a camera and a screen that communicates patients in
hospitals or residents in nursing homes with medical staff and relatives. Through this function,
patients can get a remote diagnosis after interacting with a doctor or request medical assistance.
Telepresence robots are found mostly in hospitals and nursing homes. They have occasionally
been used by schools and universities during the pandemic as well, for functions such as graduation
ceremonies. Some examples of robots with telepresence functions are James (Zorabots), Temi
(Robotemi), Vita (InTouch Health), Cutii (Careclever), and Ninja (Chulalongkorn University).
3.1.5 Monitoring
In 49 of the experiences, robots performed patient monitoring functions. This function is mostly
found in hospitals and, occasionally, in nursing homes or private homes. Monitoring functions
include measuring body temperature, blood pressure, oxygen saturation, observe patients’ routines
and report exceptional changes to caregivers. Some of these robots are also equipped with cameras
and sensors that allow families or caregivers to remotely monitor the patient, transmit information
and images to nurse stations and store this information into the patient medical record, or keep
track of medical adherence. Examples include Sanbot (Quihan Technology), Cruzr (Ubtech),
James (Zorabots), Cutii (Careclever), Vita (InTouch Health), and Ninja (Chulalongkorn
University).
3.1.6 Delivery
Transportation and delivery is one of the functions that has shown a largest spread as a result of
the pandemic. Ninety-four experiences and 36 different types of robots were identified to carry out
this function either exclusively or in combination with other functions. The delivery function is
also widespread among robots that do not present social features, which were not included in the
sample. There are two main groups of delivery robots: those utilized outdoors and those that
perform their activity indoors.
Delivery robots in outdoor scenarios have experienced a notable expansion during the lockdown
periods. Some specific areas in California [13] and China [14] eased circulation regulations for
these robots during the pandemic, which facilitated their adoption. These robots present mostly a
functional design. Some social features are included to facilitate communication with pedestrians
and package receivers. For instance, lights that suggest eyes are used as a form to indicate that the
robot will change direction (Serve by Postmates) or a thumbs-up can be used to order the robot to
open or close its doors (R2 by Nuro). Some delivery robots have additionally been equipped with
disinfection functions during the pandemic. These robots are used by e-commerce platforms,
delivery companies, restaurants and grocery stores in particular neighborhoods and in university
campuses as well as to deliver sanitary supplies to healthcare facilities. Kiwibot (Kiwibot),
Starship (Starship), RoboPony (Zhen Robotics), R2 (Nuro), and Neolix ADV (Neolix) are
examples of outdoor delivery robots.
We identify two main types of robots that perform indoor object delivery. One, robots with an
essentially functional design, such as Pudu (Pudu Robotics), Peanut (Keenon Robotics), TUG
(Aethon), Hospi (Panasonic), or Run (Yunji Technology). These robots are implemented in

Note: This work is currently under submission. This version of the manuscript has not been peer-reviewed.
Cite as: Aymerich-Franch, L., & Ferrer, I. (2020). The implementation of social robots during the COVID-19
pandemic. ArXiv preprint. ArXiv:2007.03941.

hospitals and hotels with quarantined guests to transport medication, linens, meals, medical
supplies, and documents. Some can also open and close doors, take elevators, transport heavy
objects, store medical waste, or disinfect themselves. Two, robots that present more social features
and humanoid or semi-humanoid shapes. These robots are utilized in reception areas of hospitals,
nursing homes, office buildings, shopping malls, and airports to distribute masks and sanitizer to
visitors. Some of these robots were initially designed for other functions, such as waiter robots,
and some have just been added a tray and are now utilized to deliver objects to patients as an
additional function. Examples include Ani (Asimov Robotics), Amy (Pangolin Robotics), Zafi
(Propeller Technologies), Sona 2.5 (Club First), Temi (Robotemi), or Sunbot (Siasun Robot and
Automation).
3.2 Safeguard
The safeguard role includes all functions related to ensuring risk-free environments. Safeguard
functions specifically adapted to the situation of the pandemic have appeared during this period.
Of 195 experiences, 118 have implemented social robots to perform at least one function that can
be related to the safeguard role. The following functions were identified in relation to this role:
3.2.1. Safety Advice
Of the sample, 66 experiences use robots to provide safety advice during the pandemic. We
distinguish two sub-types of functions within this group: general (47 cases) and personalized (19
cases) advice. General advice includes promoting safety measures, recalling guidelines and
making recommendations about how to behave in specific places. This function works essentially
as a public announcement. Robots offering general advice are found in hospitals, and to a lesser
extent, also in airports, public places, shopping malls, schools and universities, office buildings,
grocery stores, highways, and hotels. Examples include Sanbot (Qihan Technology), Smart
Service Robot (Xiaoben Intelligence), and Ani (Asimov Robotics). Personalized advice can be
offered by the robot after completing a pre-diagnosis function (see Pre-diagnosis). If symptoms
are identified, the robot advises to seek for medical assistance. These robots are principally located
in hospitals, but some experiences are also found in public places. Cruzr (Ubtech), Promobot
(Promobot), Mitra and Mitri (Invento Robotics), Medical Service Robot (TMI Robotics), and
Pepper (Softbank) are some examples of robots that can offer personalized advice.
3.2.2. Protective Measure Enforcement
Tasks related to enforcing COVID-19 protective measures were identified in 51 experiences.
Rather than informing, these robots are particularly deployed to enforce safety measures either in
one to one security scans or among crowds. These robots are able to detect if people wear masks,
measure body temperature to identify if someone might have a fever or detect if physical distance
is maintained. When there is a safety concern regarding these aspects, the robot can take actions
such as asking the person to wear a mask, keep physical distancing, or ban entrance to an indoor
space. These robots are principally found at the entrance door of hospitals, but also at the entrance
of nursing homes, shopping malls, grocery stores, hotels, restaurants, schools and universities, and
office buildings. They can also be found patrolling airports, outdoor public spaces, or in highway
checkpoints. Examples include Cruzr (Ubtech), Spot (Boston Dynamics), Dinsow (CT Asia

Note: This work is currently under submission. This version of the manuscript has not been peer-reviewed.
Cite as: Aymerich-Franch, L., & Ferrer, I. (2020). The implementation of social robots during the COVID-19
pandemic. ArXiv preprint. ArXiv:2007.03941.

Robotics), Aimbot (Ubtech), Temi (Robotemi), Promobot (Promobot), or 5G Huawei robot
(Huawei/LIWEST).
3.2.3 Surveillance and Patrolling
Surveillance functions aimed at preventing the spread of the virus were identified in 42
experiences. Robots can be equipped with regular and thermal cameras, lights, speakers,
microphones, real-time transmission, and camera recording. These robots can be found patrolling
outdoors or indoors. They are either connected to security staff who can communicate through it
or programmed to take action when a risk is detected (see Protective Measure Enforcement). In
public places, they can be found in parks, parking lots, and busy areas in cities. Robots typically
deployed in outdoor spaces are ASR (KnightScope), O-R3 (Otsaw Digital), Atris (Ubtech),
PGuard (Enova Robotics), Outdoor Inspection Robot (Hangzhou Guochen Robot Technology), or
Spot (Boston Dynamics). Indoors, they can be found in hospitals, schools and universities,
shopping malls, airports, nursing homes, restaurants, and office buildings, with robots such as
Ainbot (Ubtech) or Temi (Robotemi).
3.2.4. Disinfection
Disinfection robots have experienced a notable expansion during the pandemic. Most of these
robots tend to be industrial (and therefore were excluded). Thirty-seven experiences of disinfection
robots that present at least a minimal social component were identified. We distinguish two subtypes. One (12 cases), disinfection robots specifically built for this purpose. They have a functional
design and present only minimal social features, such as verbal warnings. These robots are mostly
found in hospitals and some also in airports. Examples are the UVD Robot (Blue Ocean) and the
Intelligent Disinfection Robot (TMI Robotics). Two (25 cases), robots that have added this
function during the pandemic and also develop other functions (e.g. surveillance, transportation).
Principally, they incorporate a spray to potentially disinfect during navigation. These robots are
found in hospitals, schools and universities, restaurants, public places, and office buildings.
Examples are Temi (Robotemi), Atris and Aimbot (Ubtech), KiwiBot (KiwiBot), and Neolix ADV
(Neolix).
3.3 Well-being Coach
The well-being coach role includes all functions related to preserving physical and psychological
well-being. A total of 63 experiences included at least one function related to this role. Overall,
the potential of social robots to act as well-being coaches during the pandemic remains
underdeveloped as the functions belonging to this role have rarely been specifically adapted to the
situation of the pandemic. The following functions were identified in relation to the well-being
coach role:
3.3.1 Companion
Thirty-eight experiences used robots to offer company and comfort to isolated persons. Robots
provide verbal interaction to give basic and motivational conversation. Robots can also express
and interpret emotions, have physical contact with the patient, or walk with them. These

Note: This work is currently under submission. This version of the manuscript has not been peer-reviewed.
Cite as: Aymerich-Franch, L., & Ferrer, I. (2020). The implementation of social robots during the COVID-19
pandemic. ArXiv preprint. ArXiv:2007.03941.

interactions contribute to emotional support and can also help reduce anxiety during the isolation
period. More than half of these experiences were found in hospitals and a significant number also
in nursing homes. There were a few experiences in hotels with quarantined guests and at
universities to emotionally support students during the outbreak. Examples are Sanbot (Qihan
Technology), XR-1 (INNFOS), Pepper (Softbank), Temi (Robotemi), ElliQ (Intuition Robotics),
Cutii (Careclever), and Dinsow (CT Asia Robotics).
3.3.2. Entertainment and Edutainment
Robots for entertainment (45 experiences) and edutainment (8 cases) present a strong social
component and are generally humanoid or semi-humanoid. Entertainment functions include
dancing, singing, playing games, taking and sharing photos with contacts, navigating on the
internet, reading news, displaying photos and videos on screen, telling jokes and stories.
Edutainment functions involve brain-training exercises like dictation, reading, or playing memory
games. Most experiences are deployed in nursing homes and hospitals. Some scattered experiences
were located in shopping malls, airports, hotels, office buildings, and restaurants. Examples of
robots deployed for these purposes are Cruzr (Ubtech), Sanbot (Qihan Technology), Pepper
(Softbank), ElliQ (Intuition Robotics), and Temi (Robotemi).
3.3.3 Medical and Wellbeing Adherence
Robots that perform medical and wellbeing adherence functions by reminding about taking the
prescribed medication, appointments, or engaging in healthy habits were identified in eight
experiences. These robots generally perform other functions such as monitoring, entertainment,
providing general information like news or weather, or telepresence (see these functions above).
Experiences are found principally in nursing homes and, to a lesser extent, also in hospitals.
Examples of robots used for adherence are Pepper (Softbank), Temi (Robotemi), ElliQ (Intuition
Robotics), Dasomi (Wonderful Platform), and Dinsow (CT Asia Robotics).
3.3.4. Promotion of Physical Exercise
Social robots that instruct physical exercise, relaxation techniques, dancing, and yoga to patients,
residents, or staff in hospitals and nursing homes during the coronavirus outbreak were identified
in eight experiences. These robots either perform the movements with their own body or show
them on a screen. Examples of robots used for this function are Sanbot (Qihan Technology), XR1 (INNFOS), Pepper (Softbank), Temi (Robotemi), and Cutii (Careclever).

4. Discussion
Overall, we identified a clear resurgence and expansion of social robots in real settings as a result
of the pandemic. The social robots’ capacity to perform the roles of liaison, safeguard, and
wellbeing coach, directly associated with the needs of facilitating physical distance and palliate
the effects of isolation, have been key to the renaissance of these robots during this period.

Note: This work is currently under submission. This version of the manuscript has not been peer-reviewed.
Cite as: Aymerich-Franch, L., & Ferrer, I. (2020). The implementation of social robots during the COVID-19
pandemic. ArXiv preprint. ArXiv:2007.03941.

Social robots are developing a particularly outstanding role in hospitals supporting staff, where
they contribute to reduce the workload and ensure the safety of the healthcare personnel
performing functions associated with receptionist, pre-diagnosis, food delivery, telepresence, or
monitoring, among others. They have also gained acceptance as social companions to palliate the
effects of isolation, especially in nursing homes. In outdoor and public spaces, these robots have
also found an opportunity to develop functions aimed at minimizing the spread of the virus, such
as disinfection, delivery, surveillance, or protective measure enforcement.
The companies that develop social robots have quickly spotted the opportunity presented to this
industry as a result of the sanitary crisis and have implemented marketing strategies to promote
their robots accordingly. Several companies have also offered their robots at zero cost to hospitals,
nursing homes, and to elderly people living alone to help fight the pandemic and promote their
robots for this purpose. These actions have contributed to generate publicity. Additionally, some
public research initiatives, especially in developing countries where robotization is still not largely
implemented, have also developed their own robots ad hoc to support healthcare workers during
the coronavirus outbreak. In general, press releases tend to be positive towards initiatives of social
robot implementation for fighting the pandemic and suggest that social robots have gained larger
social acceptance during the pandemic as well.
An aspect to highlight is that most functions that we identified were technically available before
the pandemic. However, the relevance of these functions is now boosted due to the needs brought
by the sanitary crisis and are now specifically adapted to a situation that demands physical
distancing and isolation. This adaptation is particularly visible in the functions associated with the
roles of liaison and safeguard. Robots are specifically programmed to detect aspects such as
whether people wear masks or keep physical distance. Robots have also been equipped with
technologies that are particularly meaningful during the outbreak such as temperature
measurement or surface disinfection. Some functions such as being able to transport food in
hospitals, which were previously not particularly regarded as crucial, have now gained more
relevance as they help minimize human-human contact. Finally, the functions associated with
well-being coach have not experienced a major adaptation to the situation and there is clear room
for improvement in the field of social robots that can provide phycological aid to support more
effectively patients under isolation during the pandemic.

5. References
[1]
[2]

[3]
[4]
[5]

WHO World Health Organization, “Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): situation
report, 72.,” 2020.
S. Tadokoro, “Special Project on Development of Advanced Robots for Disaster Response
(DDT Project),” in 2005 IEEE Workshop on Advanced Robotics and its Social Impacts,
2005.
G.-Z. Yang et al., “Combating COVID-19—The role of robotics in managing public
health and infectious diseases,” Sci. Robot., 2020.
ECDC - European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, “Coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) in the EU/EEA and the UK – eighth update, 8 April,” 2020.
M. Tavakoli, J. Carriere, and A. Torabi, “Robotics, Smart Wearable Technologies, and

Note: This work is currently under submission. This version of the manuscript has not been peer-reviewed.
Cite as: Aymerich-Franch, L., & Ferrer, I. (2020). The implementation of social robots during the COVID-19
pandemic. ArXiv preprint. ArXiv:2007.03941.

[6]
[7]
[8]

[9]

[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]

Autonomous Intelligent Systems for Healthcare During the COVID‐19 Pandemic: An
Analysis of the State of the Art and Future Vision,” Adv. Intell. Syst., 2020.
L. Aymerich-Franch, “COVID-19 lockdown : impact on psychological well-being and
relationship to habit and routine modifications,” 2020.
S. K. Brooks et al., “The psychological impact of quarantine and how to reduce it: rapid
review of the evidence,” The Lancet. 2020.
C. Bartneck and J. Forlizzi, “A design-centred framework for social human-robot
interaction,” RO-MAN 2004. 13th IEEE Int. Work. Robot Hum. Interact. Commun. (IEEE
Cat. No.04TH8759), pp. 591–594, 2004.
F. Hegel, C. Muhl, B. Wrede, M. Hielscher-Fastabend, and G. Sagerer, “Understanding
social robots,” in Proceedings of the 2nd International Conferences on Advances in
Computer-Human Interactions, ACHI 2009, 2009.
P. Salvini, C. Laschi, and P. Dario, “Design for acceptability: Improving robots’
coexistence in human society,” Int. J. Soc. Robot., vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 451–460, 2010.
L. Aymerich-Franch, “Why it is time to stop ostracizing social robots,” Nat. Mach. Intell.,
2020.
L. Aymerich-Franch and I. Ferrer, “Social Robots as a Brand Strategy,” in Innovation in
Branding and Advertising Communication, Routledge.
DMV, “DMV Authorizes Nuro to Test Driverless Delivery Vehicles in Portion of Bay
Area,” 2020.
Synced, “China’s Autonomous Delivery Vehicles Navigate the Coronavirus Outbreak,”
2020.

