Future Smart Connected Communities to Fight
COVID-19 Outbreak
Deepti Gupta∗1 , Smriti Bhatt †2 , Maanak Gupta ‡3 , and Ali Saman Tosun §1

arXiv:2007.10477v2 [cs.CY] 27 Nov 2020

1 Department

of Computer Science, University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas
78249, USA
2 Department of Computing and Cyber Security, Texas A & M University-San Antonio, San
Antonio, Texas 78224, USA
3 Department of Computer Science, Tennessee Technological University, Cookeville,
Tennessee 38505, USA

Abstract
Internet of Things (IoT) has grown rapidly in the last decade and continue to develop in terms of dimension
and complexity, offering wide range of devices to support diverse set of applications. With ubiquitous Internet,
connected sensors and actuators, networking and communication technology along with artificial intelligence
(AI), smart cyber-physical systems (CPS) provide services rendering assistance and convenience to humans in
their daily lives. However, the recent outbreak of COVID-19 (also known as coronavirus) pandemic has exposed
and highlighted the limitations of contemporary technological deployments especially to contain the wide spread
of this disease. IoT and smart connected technologies together with data-driven applications can play a crucial
role not only in the prevention, mitigation or continuous remote monitoring of patients, but also enable prompt
enforcement of guidelines, rules and administrative orders to contain such future outbreaks.
In this paper, we envision an IoT and data supported connected ecosystem designed for intelligent monitoring,
pro-active prevention and control, and mitigation of COVID-19 and similar epidemics. We propose a gamut of
synergistic applications and technology systems for various smart infrastructures including E-Health, smart home,
supply chain management, transportation, and city, which will work in convergence to develop ‘pandemic-proof’
future smart communities. We also present a generalized cloud-enabled IoT implementation framework along
with scientific solutions, which can be adapted and extended to deploy smart connected ecosystem scenarios using
widely used Amazon Web Services (AWS) cloud infrastructures. In addition, we also implement an E-Health
RPM use case scenario to demonstrate the need and practicality for smart connected communities. Finally, we
highlight challenges and research directions which need thoughtful consideration and across the board cooperation
among stakeholders to build resilient communities against future pandemics.
∗ deepti.mrt@gmail.com
† sbhatt@tamusa.edu

‡ mgupta@tntech.edu
§ ali.tosun@utsa.edu

1

Keywords: COVID-19; Coronavirus; Internet of Things; Cloud Computing; Edge Computing; Artificial
Intelligence (AI); Machine Learning; Smart Communities; Multi-layered Architecture; Security; Privacy.

1

Introduction and Motivation

COVID-19 is an infectious disease caused by a newly discovered coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) and is rapidly
spreading around the world. According to World Health Organization (WHO), COVID-19 has already affected
2151 countries and territories around the world and continue to spread rapidly across other regions. The highly
contagious coronavirus outbreak was declared a “pandemic” on March 11, 2020. WHO reports2 that the number
of positive cases has dramatically surged, with nearly 34.5 Million reported cases and 1.03 Million fatalities as of
October 01, 2020. In order to control the spread the pandemic, lockdowns, quarantines and stay home orders have
been issued by several nations across the globe, which have crippled national and world economy with critical
consequences to workers, employers and investors. In addition, the industries, businesses and travel restrictions
restrain the supply of goods and services, and the economic disruptions will continue to have a long-term impact
on global supply chains and economy. In the United States, unemployment rates3 spiked to 14.7% in April 2020
– its highest level since the Great Depression, in addition to fear of stronger second wave of the disease looming
during the fall season.
Currently, with no cure or vaccine for this disease, the first line of defense to fight against this pandemic is
a combination of preventative measures and mitigation strategies. As suggested by the WHO, the U.S Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC4) and several other federal organizations suggest social distancing,
environmental surface cleaning, self-isolation, travel restrictions, local and national lockdowns, quarantine, limits
on large gatherings, restrictions on opening businesses, and school closures, as some of the preventive measures
that are needed to limit the spread of the disease. However, these guidelines impose restrictions which hinder the
way of normal life for humans. It has become a big challenge to swiftly implement and enforce such measures
on a large scale across cities, nations, and around the world. We believe that to effectively enforce and monitor
the preventive controls and mitigation strategies for COVID-19, IoT together with its key enabling computing
technologies including cloud, AI and data-driven applications can play a pivotal role.
There are several existing examples of the use of technology to control the spread of COVID-19. Solutions have
been proposed to manage large gatherings of individuals to limit the infected cases. The U.S. CDC has introduced
a self-checker5 application enabled with cloud platform, which helps a patient to make decision to find appropriate
healthcare service through questionnaires. However, most people do not have any symptoms who are known as
1https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019
2https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html
3https://www.usnews.com/news/economy/articles/2020-05-08/second-wave-of-coronavirus-joblessness-prompts-comparisons-to-greatdepression
4https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/index.html
5https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/symptoms-testing/testing.html

2

the silent spreaders/asymptomatic carriers. Therefore, conducting large scale testing for everyone is paramount to
slow the spread. The US is conducting nearly 1 Million6 tests everyday (as on Oct 01, 2020) to early determine
and isolate patients which also helps in treatment. Taiwan7 leveraged database from national health insurance and
integrated it with its immigration and customs database to begin the creation of big data for analytic, and generated
real-time alerts during a clinical visit based on travel history and clinical symptoms to aid case identification.
In April, New York City8 reported 13% positive cases of COVID-19. The fatality rate of this city is 11%
as of May 10, and 0.5% of fatalities have been in nursing homes. Nursing homes are the most vulnerable spot
in terms of health risks. Technology can assist in enforcing the prevention measures and mitigation strategies
in nursing homes to flatten the curve of fatality rate. Some states Iowa, Minnesota, Tennessee, and Texas have
partially reopened, and the models9 have predicted that the number of cases and fatalities will increase as the
country moves towards reopening businesses and cities. These evidences show that communities are not prepared
to reopen, operate, and handle such pandemics. There are several requirements to assist in tracking and monitoring
COVID-19 patients, such as to enforce wearing masks in public area, proper sanitizing, social distancing, mass
quarantine for mild-symptoms people, and testing at large scale. According to Harvard Global Health Institute10,
31 states in United States have insufficient testing levels, and 10 states would need at least 10,000 more tests a day
to begin a gradual reopening. For instance, in April 2020, New York, the state with the largest number of cases,
needed to increase testing by more than 10,000 per day. Due to lack of enough testing kits, an antibody test online
is offered for those people who recently got sick and think that they might have COVID-19.
In today’s world, not having network capability in a device limits the market potential for that device. As a
result, there are large number and various types of network connected IoT devices providing convenience and ease
of life to humans. With new technological advancements, this trend is expected to continue and grow in the future.
IoT market11 is currently valued at $267 billion per year and is expected to reach $520 billion by 2021. Another
recent article12 predicted more than 100 billion devices to be internet-connected by 2025. IoT comprises large
number of novel consumer devices including HDMI sticks, IP cameras, smartwatches, connected light bulbs, smart
thermostats, health and fitness trackers, smart locks, connected sprinkler systems, garage connectivity kits, window
and door sensors, smart light switch, home security systems, smart ovens, smart baby monitors, and blood pressure
monitors. However, mostly these IoT devices are used in a distributed manner based on users’ requirements. IoT
including smart sensors, actuators, and devices and data driven applications can enable future smart connected
communities to strengthen the health and economical postures of the nations to fight against the current COVID-19
situation and other future pandemics efficiently. These smart devices have the potential to be a major breakthrough
6https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/testing/individual-states
7https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/article-abstract/2762689
8https://www1.nyc.gov/site/doh/covid/covid-19-data.page
9https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/04/us/coronavirus-live-updates.html
10https://globalepidemics.org/2020/04/27/states-that-fall-short-on-testing/
11https://www.forbes.com/sites/louiscolumbus/2018/08/16/iot-market-predicted-to-double-by-2021-reaching-520b/#82674f91f948
12https://www.cisco.com/c/dam/en/us/products/collateral/se/internet-of-things/at-a-glance-c45-731471.pdf

3

Smart City

E-Health

Ø Smart Tracking
Ø Smart Testing Vehicle

Ø Smart Hospital
Ø Remote Patient Monitoring
Ø Smart Testing Booth

Smart
Connected
Ecosystem

Smart Locality

Ø Smart Neighborhood
Ø Smart Child Care and
Smart Nursing Home

Smart Home

Ø Patient Home Isolation
Ø Smart Sanitize

Smart Supply Chain Management
Ø Smart Inventory
Ø Smart Grocery Store
Ø Smart Testing Booth

Figure 1: An Overview of Converging Smart Connected Ecosystem
in efforts to control and fight against the current pandemic situation. IoT is an emerging field of research, along with
the ubiquitous availability of smart technologies, as well as increased risks of infectious disease spread through
the globalization and interconnection of the world necessitates its use for predicting, monitoring and tracking to
prevent from COVID-19.
In this paper, we present a holistic vision of IoT-enabled smart communities utilizing various IoT devices,
applications, and relevant technologies (e.g., AI, Machine Learning (ML), Blockchain etc.). Figure 1 shows an
overview of smart connected ecosystem with real-world scenarios in diverse applications domains focusing on
detection, prevention and mitigation of COVID-19 and similar outbreaks. The major contributions of this paper
are as follows.
• We present an extensive review of IoT along with emerging technologies currently used (and proposed) to
control pandemic crisis, and enlists the focus, contributions and weaknesses of relevant research works. We
outline some of COVID-19 symptoms, preventive measures, mitigation strategies, and current problems,
challenges to understand the needs of proposed connected ecosystem.
• We present an overview of adaptable multi-layered IoT architecture supporting edge, virtual objects and
cloud layer, and reflect interactions between them to focus on data driven and connected smart applications
catering to limit the COVID-19 outbreak.
4

• We design a smart connected ecosystem by developing multiple synergistic IoT application frameworks
including E-Health, Smart Home, Supply Chain Management, Transportation, and Smart City. We introduce
the convergence of these domains and offer novel use cases and application scenarios for early COVID-19
detection, prevention and mitigation.
• We present a general implementation framework that can be used for adapted and extended to enable smart
communities use case scenarios utilizing a real-world cloud-enabled IoT platform, Amazon Web Services
(AWS). We also design specific algorithms which can be used in different scenarios as required. In addition,
we also implement a Remote Patient Monitoring (RPM) use case within E-Health domain very relevant to
COVID-19 patients in home isolation and enforcing quarantine.
• Lastly, we identify and highlight current challenges and interdisciplinary research directions, including security and privacy, performance efficiency, interoperability and IoT federation, implementation challenges,
policy and guidelines, ML and big data analytics, to enable and empower future smart connected communities.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the literature review on role of computing
and data driven technologies with IoT to control COVID-19. Section 3 discusses the essential characteristics to
diagnose, prevent and mitigate COVID-19 disease. Section 4 presents a multi-layered architecture for IoT enabled
future smart and resilient communities, whereas Section 5 discusses convergence of connected ecosystem scenarios
in various IoT application domains. Section 6 discusses a general implementation framework of smart connected
communities using real-world cloud-enabled IoT platform and deploys a proof of concept test bed for Remote
Patient Monitoring (RPM) use case. Section 7 highlights open research challenges and future directions, followed
by conclusion in Section 8.

2

Related Work and Relevant Background Study

Extending the use of IoT along with emerging technologies can play a significant role in dealing with COVID-19.
This work justifies that IoT has influenced healthcare and other areas of our lives significantly. In current situation,
hospital practitioners are working hard to help infected patients, and we are living a new normal with new rules,
such as state leaders’ mandate rules to maintain six feet distance and wear masks in public places. Broaden use
of IoT technology enables us to deal with COVID-19 or any future pandemic situation. For instance, Chinese
government13 installed CCTV cameras at home or apartment door of those under a quarantine period to monitor
the patient activity. Human activities also measured through a linear model [1] based on the state-space method.
Drones are used to notify people to wear their masks, and digital barcodes on mobile apps highlight the health
13https://www.cnbc.com/2020/03/27/coronavirus-surveillance-used-by-governments-to-fight-pandemic-privacy-concerns.html

5

status of individuals. Researchers at the University of Michigan together with the team at Voxel5114 have presented
the Physical Distancing Index (PDI) to help track how COVID-19 news or events impact human activity around the
globe in real-time. The free AI powered interactive tool enables users to explore a day-by-day timeline of social
activity in some of the world’s most populated areas to track social distancing. Currently, Voxel51 gathers and
analyzes historical and real-time video streams from public street cameras in Ann Arbor, Detroit, Times Square;
Abbey Road in London; Fremont Street in downtown Las Vegas; Seaside Heights in New Jersey; a beach in Ft.
Lauderdale; and intersections in Dublin and Prague.
Table 1 summarizes prior research along with their challenges and contributions to prevent and mitigate
COVID-19 using specific technologies, such as IoT, ML, and Blockchain. In existing literature [2–15], various
IoT-based solutions along with other technologies are proposed for smart healthcare. Various frameworks and
systems are discussed in the context of healthcare for handling COVID-19. Here, critical analysis of current IoT
based research shows that most of them are focused on a single use case; however, we need holistic smart ecosystem
comprising multiple entities and different stakeholders to handle current or similar future pandemic situations.
Therefore, we present future smart connected communities to fight COVID-19 and appropriately handle future
pandemic situations.
Table 1: Current projects and research on IoT based solutions to mitigate COVID-19.
Paper Title

Focus/Objective

Contribution

Limitations

Chinese experts’ consensus on the Internet
of Things-aided diagnosis and treatment
of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID19) [2]

Enables different levels of COVID-19 diagnosis and treatment
among different doctors from different
hospitals through the
intelligent assistance
of the nCapp system.

• Develops COVID-19 Intelligent
Diagnosis and Treatment Assistant Program (nCapp) based on
the Internet of Things.
• Designs 15 easy-to-use questionnaires for intelligent processing.

• The data is based on questionnaires and is filled
manually.
• Security and privacy issues related to patient’s
personal data have not
been discussed.

Artificial Intelligence
(AI) applications for
COVID-19 pandemic
[3]

The role of AI as a decisive technology to
analyze and prepare
us for prevention and
fight with COVID-19

• Identifies seven significant AI assisted applications for fight with
COVID-19.
• Detects the cluster of positive
cases and predicts where this
virus will affect in future by collecting and analyzing all previous
data.

• Tools are missing to implement each application.
The answer of "How will
author extract the data?" is
missing.
• The flow of each application has not been explained.

Industry 4.0 technologies and their applications in fighting
COVID-19 pandemic
[4]

Explores
several
useful technologies
of Industry 4.0 to
control and manage of COVID-19
pandemic.

• Presents ten technologies- Artificial intelligence, Big data, Internet of Things, Virtual reality, Holography, Cloud computing, Autonomous robot, 3D Scanning, 3D Printing and Biosensor.

• Only medical concern has
been discussed here, transportation and other topics
related to industry have not
been discussed.

14https://pdi.voxel51.com/

6

Table 1. (Continued.) Current projects and research on IoT based solutions to mitigate COVID-19.
Paper Title

Focus/Objective

Role of IoT to avoid
spreading of COVID19 [5]

Presents available literature on COVID-19
regarding monitoring
techniques, and suggests an IoT based architecture, which can
be used to minimize the spreading of
COVID-19.

Data science and the
role of Artificial Intelligence in achieving the fast diagnosis
of Covid-19 [6]

Due to less number of COVID-19 test
kits, presents image classification approach on chest X-ray
to predict COVID-19
test result.

An IoT-based Framework for Early Identification and Monitoring of COVID-19
Cases [7]

Identification
potential cases
COVID-19.

Internet of Things
and
Blockchainbased framework for
Coronavirus (Covid19) Disease. [14]

Aims to assist infected people online
using the Internet
of Things (IoT) and
Blockchain technologies through smart
devices.

A drone-based networked system and
methods for combating coronavirus
disease (COVID-19)
pandemic [8]

Investigates dronebased systems, which
are used to handle
pandemic
situations in real-world
scenarios.

of
of

Contribution

Limitations

• Presents IoT architecture to avoid
COVID-19, the use of IoT with
smart sensors to measure and
record the body temperature of individuals, which can help to identify infected individuals.

• The number of sensors to
develop particular application are limited.
• Only one application is
used for per scenario, complete framework is missing.
• The upcoming challenges
to build these applications
have not been discussed
here.

• Elaborates a methodology that
helps identify COVID-19 infected
people among the individuals by
utilizing CT scan and chest X-ray
images using AI.
• Experiment on a dataset of
COVID-19 and normal chest Xray images.
• Calculates accuracy of an image
using decision tree classifier.

• False positive rate can be
high in allergy case.
• The data is not categorized
by age.
• No discussion on security
and privacy challenges to
collect and store the patients’ health data.

• Presents a novel IoT framework,
which consists of five major components.
• Uses eight classification algorithms on a real COVID-19 symptom dataset using IoT framework
to identify COVID-19 cases.

• The generated data can be
bias, if number of COVID19 cases are less than
other type of diseases then
the model can send false
alarm.

• Presents four-layer architecture:
hardware layer, shared ladger
layer, communication layer, Application layer.
• Develops IoT and Blockchainbased framework for healthcare.

• Raise security concerns
with shared ladger layer to
store health records of patient.
• Challenges to build the
framework have not been
explained.

• Presents an artificial intelligencebased system that collects data
through drones.
• Develops a multi-layered architecture that collects information
from drones.
• Implements a real-time dronebased system for sanitization,
monitoring, and other applications.

• No user’s data privacy solutions.
• Limited scope on data security.

7

Table 1. (Continued.) Current projects and research on IoT based solutions to mitigate COVID-19.
Paper Title

Focus/Objective

Applications of machine learning and
artificial intelligence
for Covid-19 (SARSCoV-2) pandemic: A
review [9]

Presents review of
AI and ML as one
significant method in
the arena of screening, predicting, forecasting, contact tracing, and drug development for SARSCoV-2 and its related
epidemic.

Internet of things
(IoT) applications to
fight against COVID19 pandemic [10]

Enables
Internet
of Things (IoT)
based
healthcare
system, which helps
to increase patient
satisfaction
and
reduces re-admission
rate in the hospital.

Application of cognitive Internet of
Medical
Things
for
COVID-19
pandemic [11]

Cognitive Internet
of Medical Things
(CIoMT) is best
suited to handle
COVID-19.

Restructured society
and environment: A
review on potential
technological strategies to control the
COVID-19 pandemic
[12]

Investigates
various
implemented
technologies
that
assists the healthcare
systems, government
and public in diverse
aspects for fighting
against COVID-19.

Emerging Technologies for Use in the
Study, Diagnosis, and
Treatment of Patients
with COVID-19. [13]

Focuses on analyzing possible opportunities and challenges of integrating
emerging technologies into COVID-19
contact tracing.

Role of biological
Data Mining and Machine Learning Techniques in Detecting and Diagnosing
the Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19):
A Systematic Review
[15]

Aims to address the
limitations of utilizing data mining and
ML algorithms to
mitigate this virus,
and provides health
sector with the benefits of techniques.

Contribution

Limitations

• Discusses recent studies that apply ML and AI technologies
towards augmenting current research works from multiple angles.
• This study also addresses a few
errors and challenges while using such algorithms in real-world
problems.

• AI and ML based algorithms have not been discussed.
• A complete framework is
not shown, which can
bring all small applications together.

• IoT provides an extensive integrated network for healthcare
providers to fight with COVID-19
pandemic.
• Presents twelve major applications of IoT for COVID-19 pandemic.

• Any healthcare related IoT
device has not been presented.
• A novel implementation of
any application has not
been described.
• Challenges to design these
twelve applications are
also missing in this paper.

• Presents the CIoMT platform,
which enables real-time tracking, remote health monitoring and
other applications to reduce the
workload on the medical industry.
• Identifies some challenges and future research directions.

• No implementation details
of any application is discussed.
• The details of other major challenges like interoperability, data biasing are
missing.

• Presents prospective viable technologies that can be used in the
current or future epidemic situation.
• Discusses the technological
changes that the environment and
the society have undergone in
tackling COVID-19.

• Limited technological solutions for COVID-19 risk.
• Based on the survey, any
novel idea is not presented.

• Designs the contact tracing application using emerging technologies to mitigate the coronavirus.
• Observes various challenges like
the security and privacy of people
while using contact tracing application.

• It is not clear how effective
the current contact tracing
application would be using
emerging technologies.
• Lack of implementation
details.

• Reviews eight articles, which
show data mining and ML based
applications.
• Analyzes several database, and
performs various AI algorithms
for detection, and classification of
adaptive CoV.

• Analyzes only MERS,
SARS disease datasets
(2013-2016).

8

3

Essential Characteristics to Diagnose, Prevent and Mitigate COVID-19

Coronavirus transmits mainly by the infected person’s saliva and nasal drips which spread during coughing and
sneezing around anybody in close contact. Another source of infection is contaminated surfaces in surrounding and
high-risk areas, such as door handles, railings, elevators, and public restrooms. COVID-19 is a highly contagious
virus with the incubation period stretched from 2 days to 2 weeks after exposure. Symptoms of COVID-19
range from mild symptoms including fever, coughing and shortness of breath to severe symptoms including organ
failure, such as kidney failure, and pneumonia. Researchers are still studying the virus to fully understand the
characteristics and new symptoms of this disease. Recently, the U.S. CDC15 added six new possible symptoms
including chills, muscle pain, headache, sore throat and new loss of taste or smell. New York City16 reported 73
cases of children with rare coronavirus inflammatory illness on May 7, 2020.
At this time, any specific treatment is not recommended for disease caused by the novel coronavirus, and no
vaccine is currently available in the market. The treatment is subjective and depends on a case-by-case basis, where
oxygen therapy shows positive affects as the treatment intervention for patients with severe infection. Mechanical
ventilation may be necessary in cases of respiratory failure refractory to oxygen therapy. The U.S. CDC17 and
other resources explained early signs and symptoms, some preventive measures, and mitigation strategies. On
March 19, 2020, the WHO18 released the first edition of interim guidance on Infection Prevention and Control
(IPC) strategies for identifying the coronavirus infection.
On March 28, 2020, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA19) provided emergency use authorization
for hydroxychloroquine medicine to treat the people who are suffering from this virus in hospitals. Later, on April
24, 2020 FDA20 warned against use of hydroxychloroquine to treat this disease outside of the hospital setting or
a clinical trial due to risk of heart rhythm problems. People can protect themselves by following some protective
measures and help to slow the spread using mitigation strategies. Table 2 provides a comprehensive overview of
the symptoms, preventive measures, mitigation strategies and some challenges fighting COVID-19 disease.
One of the easiest preventive measure is to wash your hands frequently and thoroughly with soap and water
for at least 20 seconds or use hand sanitizer or an alcohol-based hand rub when soap and water are not available.
People should keep social distancing (six feet distance) from others especially from people who are coughing or
sneezing. It is suggested to wear mask and gloves in public setting, and avoid touching the face and surfaces
such as the button at a traffic light, a keypad to add a tip for the restaurant take-out order, elevator buttons, etc.
Many surfaces are touched by hands accidentally and virus can be potentially picked up and then transmitted to
15https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/symptoms-testing/symptoms.html
16https://www.nbcnewyork.com/news/local/73-ny-children-sick-with-rare-covid-related-illness-state-finds-with-one-death/2408285/
17https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-nCoV/index.html
18https://www.who.int/publications-detail/infection-prevention-and-control-during-health-care-when-novel-coronavirus-(ncov)-infectionis-suspected-20200125
19https://www.fda.gov/media/136537/download
20https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/fda-cautions-against-use-hydroxychloroquine-or-chloroquine-COVID-19outside-hospital-setting-or

9

other surfaces and locations. Once the hands are contaminated, the virus can be transferred through eyes, nose
or mouth, thus, it enters human body. Respiratory Hygiene/Cough Etiquette is a term used to describe infection
prevention measures to decrease the transmission of virus. There is a need to avoid cough or sneeze into the hands,
and to cover mouth and nose with a tissue and throw away the tissue immediately. Groceries and packets can be
contaminated from coronavirus, and it is recommended to wash grocery items carefully and wipe packets using
disinfectant spray. Local public health administrations regularly issue health guidelines, which people should
follow.
Table 2: COVID-19 Symptoms21, Prevention22, Mitigation and Challenges.
(Items within the same row are unrelated)
Early Symptoms

Preventive Measures

Mitigation Strategies

Common symptoms include fever, dry cough
and myalgia or fatigue.

Clean hands often for
at least 20 seconds with
soap and water or use of
alcohol-based hand sanitizer.

If sick stay in a single
room for 14 days, avoid
sharing personal household items.

Coping with anxiety disorder, depression issues,
and mental health problems.

Shortness of breath or
cannot breathe deeply
enough to fill your lungs
with air, chills.

Avoid face-to-face meetings, practice social distance from other people
outside of the home.

Monitor symptoms regularly, wear a cloth covering or N-95 mask over
nose and mouth.

Knowledge gaps to understand virus transmission, no specific antiviral treatment, and no vaccine available.

Loss of the sense of smell
is most likely to occur by
the third day of infection
and some patients also
have experience a loss of
the sense of taste.

Cover mouth and nose
with a cloth or wear
mask when around others, wear gloves and discard them properly.

Manufacturers use of
all cleaning and disinfection products, follow
the workplace protocol23
and provide PPE to their
employee.

Lack of testing and essential resources such as
ventilators, masks, beds,
and health staffs, cancel
elective surgery.

Diarrhea and nausea a
few days prior to fever,
sudden confusion or an
inability to wake up and
be alert may be a serious
sign.

Cover your mouth and
nose with a tissue when
you cough or sneeze;
Throw used tissues in the
trash.

Hospital task force such
as increase the number of
testing, available the PPE
for their staff members,
and increase the incentive care.

Privacy issues:
contact tracing,
health
data/medical
records,
virtual meeting, remote
workforce.

A small number of patients can have headache
or hemoptysis and even
relatively asymptomatic.

Maintain proper hygiene,
clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces,
and wash grocery items
properly.

City/state government
task force such as limited
to 25% capacity at retail/restaurants, close the
playground, and restrict
or limit visitor access to
nursing homes.

Reopening the country
phases in highly contagious environment without data analytic, unified
decision-making frameworks and some policies
that span the country.

Pneumonia, kidney failure and dyspnea more
frequent in most severe
cases.

Follow travel restrictions
(domestic flights only for
essential services, No
sail order)

Individuals limit community movement and
adapt to disruptions in
routine activities (school
and/or work closures) according to guidance from
local officials.

Due to novelty of the
virus, projection of the
model is unpredictable to
identify number of positive cases and fatalities,
and evolving symptoms
such as COVID toes and
rashes.

Normal or low white
blood cell count or reduced lymphocyte in
early onset.

Update periodically to
follow WHO, and country guidelines.

Use existing technologies to mitigate the risk
of virus.

No strict and defined
guidelines from agencies
due to ever changing dynamics of the virus.

23https://www.osha.gov/Publications/OSHA3990.pdf

10

Problems and Challenges

Network
Communication
Layer

Application Layer
Computation Layer
Cloud Layer

VO2

Virtual Object Layer
VO1

VO4
VO3

VO5

Gateway

Edge Layer

Object Layer

Figure 2: Adaptable Multi-Layered Smart Communities Architecture.
The WHO, governments, and healthcare workers are all urging people to stay home if they can. On top of basic
illness prevention, experts said that the best (and only real) defense against disease is a strong immune system. In
addition to the physical health, taking care of mental health is also necessary. High stress levels can take a toll
on human’s immune system, which is the opposite of what people want in this situation. In addition, mitigation
strategies are a set of actions applied by the people and communities (hospitals, grocery stores, and cities) to help
slow the spread of respiratory virus infections. These actions can be scaled up or down depending on the evolving
local situation. At individual level, if a person is infected with coronavirus, then he/she should self-isolate and
follow the guidelines of quarantine provided by hospital. The hospitals must support healthcare workforce, increase
testing and intensive care capacity, and availability of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE). City governments can
appoint task force, open shelters for homeless people, and maintain availability of resources to implement preventive
and mitigation strategies for this disease. While each community is unique, appropriate mitigation strategies vary
based on the level of community transmission, characteristics of the community and their populations, and the local
capacity to implement strategies. Nonetheless, it is crucial to understand the characteristics of this novel virus,
spread awareness and up-to-date information across communities through appropriate technologies. Consequently,
it is essential to address the challenges with significant research and implementation of strategies as shown in the
Table 2.

11

4

Multi-Layered Smart Communities Architecture

In this section, we explain an integrated multi-layer IoT architecture which can fundamentally change the infrastructure and underlying technologies for smart communities including hospital, grocery retail store, transportation,
and city etc. as shown in Figure 2. Our proposed architecture extends and adapts echinaxisting IoT and CPS
architectures [16–22], and focuses on the need of swift enforcement of policies, laws and public guidelines, in order
to curtail the widespread of such disease. The architecture integrates a hybrid cloud and edge computing nodes
together with IoT and smart sensor devices, to enable real-time and data-driven services and applications needed
in COVID-19 pandemic. Overall, the architecture consists of six layers: Object layer, Edge layer, Virtual Object
layer, Cloud layer, Network Communication, and Application layer. The object layer is a rich set of IoT devices
including sensors, actuators, embedded devices, road side infrastructures, vehicles, etc. These physical objects
are spread across and implemented in smart communities, such as hospitals, retail-stores, homes, parking lots.
The edge layer provides local real-time computation and analysis needed for smart resource constrained physical
objects. This layer incorporates edge gateways and cloudlets [23] which can enable local computation at this layer
overcoming limited bandwidth and latency requirements, and also impacts the usability of the IoT applications.
This multi-layer architecture has integrated the concept of Virtual Objects (VOs) [24], which are the digital
delineation of physical IoT devices. VOs show the current state of corresponding physical objects in the digital
space when they are connected, and can also store a future state for these devices when they are offline. The cloud
layer provides various services like remote storage, computation, big data analysis, and data-driven AI applications
etc. for huge amount of information generated by billions of IoT devices connected to the cloud. We define a
computation layer which comprises of edge layer, virtual object layer, and cloud layer. Computation, data analytic
and processing services are performed in this layer. Network communication layer run among different layers to
establish the interaction. It is responsible for connecting physical sensors, smart devices, edge compute nodes or
cloudlets, and cloud services with different technologies, and is also used for transmitting and processing sensor
data. Application layer delivers specific services to end users through different IoT applications. Task scheduling
algorithms [25] can be applied on this layer to manage the resources in order to deliver the optimal Quality of
Services (QoS). In the multi-layered smart communities’ architecture, this application integrates mobile phones,
edge computing, cloud computing, AI based analytic, and data-driven services.
This architecture can incorporate the IoT application frameworks within different domains as discussed in the
Section 5, and different use case scenarios can be mapped and implemented using relevant technologies associated
with each layer of the architecture.

12

5

Future Smart Connected Ecosystem and Technological Solutions

We propose IoT use case scenarios by deploying novel smart devices, data-driven applications and technologies to
present a holistic view of IoT-enabled smart architectures for fighting COVID-19 outbreaks. We have divided our
scenarios into five broader categories: E-Health, Smart Home, Smart Supply Chain, Smart Locality and Smart
City, as described in the following subsections.

5.1

E-Health

It is expected that the global Internet of Medical Things (IoMT) market24 will grow to a 136.8 billion in year
2022. As of 2020, 3.7 million medical devices are in use today, which are used to monitoring patients’ conditions
and sending data to hospital practitioners in real-time. E-Health helps to mitigate fast-spreading COVID-19
that has taken over the entire healthcare ecosystem including hospitals, testing booth, vaccine developing labs,
pharmaceutical companies, and health insurers. Data-driven applications such as ML for drug discovery, RPM,
predictive analytic for hospital resource optimization and interactive medicine deliver the right information at the
right time in healthcare system. Improving the efficiency of healthcare services and keep healthcare costs under
control have been an important and critical challenge during the COVID-19 pandemic time. To overcome these
limitations, we discuss three important application scenarios: smart hospital, RPM, and smart testing booth, which
are shown in Figure 3.

5.1.1

Smart Hospital

Today, smart hospitals are still facing several challenges including shortages of materials such as PPE and items
that support a patient room, more specifically ventilator, thermometers, disinfectants, cleaning supplies, including
hospital practitioners’ shortage in responding to the COVID-19 pandemic. To overcome these problems, we
propose a smart hospital use case scenario which employs IoT technology to extend existing infrastructure to
enable coordinated actions for coronavirus patients. Various components of smart hospital concept have also been
studied in the literature [26–29]. Within a smart hospital, RFID sensors can be an ideal way to keep track PPE,
cleaning supplies, medical supplies, smart beds, ventilators, and patients. While RFID sensor is used to track the
location of materials and patients within the hospital, other IoT sensors along with technologies including AI, big
data analytics, and Blockchain can provide multiple benefits to patients and facilities.
More specifically, hospital practitioners, staff members and patients can wear smart bracelets (e.g., iHealth
smart watch) or smart rings (e.g., oura ring) to capture early symptoms of COVID-19 by collecting their data
including body temperature, heart rate and blood oxygen levels and store at edge data centers, which avoids
24https://www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2018/01/25/why-the-internet-of-medical-things-iomt-will-start-to-transform-healthcare-in2018/#57b39d4f4a3c

13

Mask sensor
Glucose
sensor
Oxygen
level
sensor

Temperature
sensor
Microphone
Drug delivery
Smart device

IoT applications
Mask sensor Glucose

Glove sensor

Oxygen
level
sensor

RFID sensor
Insulin pump

Heart beat
sensor

sensor
Smart device

Family members

Microphone
RFID sensor
Hospital room-1
Covid-19 Patient

Hospital room-2

Smart Ambulance and
Smart Parking

Hospital
practitioner

Gateway

Temperature
sensor
RFID sensor

Remote Patient Monitoring
Centralized Cloud

Gateway
Temperature
sensor

Disinfected robot

IoT applications

Mask sensor
Smart
device

Healthcare supply
Sensor
Actuator

Glove
sensor

Medicine
Two way communication
One way communication

Ventilator

Laundry

Oxygen
level
sensor

Covid-19 patient in
Smart car
Patient

Smart Testing Booth

Smart Hospital

Smart Pharmacy

Figure 3: Conceptual Overview of Connected Smart E-health Ecosystem.
latency and security issues. This data can be used for training purpose to build models using Deep Learning
(DL) or federated learning as presented in Algorithm 1 (as discussed in Section 6). These models will increase
the intelligence of data-assisted applications that can be used to predict early symptoms of coronavirus infection
for hospital practitioners and staff members. Using IoT sensors and wearable devices, hospital practitioners can
not only collect useful data with minimal in-person contact, but can also reduce the risk of cross-infection from
the patients. Typically, due to limited storage on the edge, data can be sent to centralized cloud through secure
data sharing tunnel. This tunnel is an encrypted link between edge device or gateway and centralized cloud. The
searchable encryption scheme [30] can be replaced with simple adoption of encryption scheme to enhance the
privacy of IoMT data and also supports multi-clients.
The connected devices can communicate and operate autonomously. For example, smart ventilators can
communicate through patient’s smart bracelets with embedded sensors and can respond according to patient’s
body parameters. Health practitioners can also monitor patients and take decisions based on a combination of
IoMT and Augmented-Reality (AR) technology. AR technology can provide additional benefits (e.g., breathing
exercises) for patients. Autonomous robots can also help in healthcare systems as virtual clinic, smart guard
and provide food service. Similarly, smart cameras can be employed for continuous monitoring of patients itself
including hospital inventory, hospital resources, peak hours, etc. An autonomous mobile UV-C (ultraviolet-C) or
UVD disinfection robot can disinfect rooms and equipment with ultraviolet light and Hydrogen Peroxide Vapor
(HPV) and will traverse in hospital using random path planning algorithm to disinfect areas in swiftly.

14

5.1.2

Remote Patient Monitoring (RPM)

RPM allows health practitioners to monitor COVID-19 patients remotely and provides care for recovering patients
at home. Most popular companies, such as Gyant, Chronisense Medical, Ejenta, and iHealth, can enable RPM
and provide a platform for physicians and hospitals to monitor patients outside of the hospital setting, where the
technology can provide 24/7 data communication between patients and health practitioners. Patient-Generated
Health Data (PGHD) including body temperature, SpO2 percentage, BP level, pulse rate, coughing frequency, and
ECG can be collected using wearable devices together with Internet-Enabled medical devices. This data will be
sent to the web-server through Message Queuing Telemetry Transport (MQTT) protocol or Hypertext Transfer
Protocol (HTTP) where it will be stored securely in patient’s private cloud or a specific medical cloud. PGHD can
be retrieved for analysis by hospital practitioners enabling early detection of COVID-19 and identifying critical
conditions of the patient using ML and DL algorithms. For example, if SpO2 level of the patient is less than 85%,
hospital practitioners will receive alerts through data-driven application and then send extra care services to patient.
Patient can also receive in-build corrective recommendations regarding medicines and extra precautions to be taken
at home through IoT applications. He/she can also add his/her family members or friends to share his/her PGHD
with different levels of access control due to security and privacy concerns. In general, due to privacy concerns,
a patient might not agree to share his/her data, and in such cases, health devices will send data on a gateway
device (e.g., patient’s phone). The patient can also receive alerts based on threshold values through applications,
especially when his/her health condition is critical. However, some alerts can be false positives, and to address
such errors, dense sensor networks along with medical devices can help to reduce false positives. Furthermore,
classification techniques such as Hidden Markov Model (HMM) [31] can be used to classify anomalies in PGHD.
This model can be deployed on cloud or gateway to detect false alerts.

5.1.3

Smart Testing Booth

Boston hospital25 developed an innovative coronavirus testing booth to keep healthcare workers safe while swabbing
possibly infected patients and conserve PPEs. A smart testing booth can include multiple sensors like infrared
large-scale body temperature sensor, no contact oxygen level sensors with Red, Green, and Blue (RGB) camera,
RFID scanners and AI assisted smart cameras. Single person at a time can enter one side of the glass-walled testing
booth and will be identified through RFID tag based wearable device or optimized face recognition algorithm [32].
In-built sensors in the booth can record person’s body temperature and oxygen level including other PGHD which
will be stored in medical cloud. An individual can receive the result of COVID-19 test through a phone application
and also set an alert on his/her wearable device for test results.
Some other IoT applications and services in the context of E-Health are discussed here. Smart ambulance can
25https://whdh.com/news/boston-hospital-creates-coronavirus-testing-booth-designed-to-keep-healthcare-workers-safe-conserveprotective-equipment/

15

IoT applications

Two way communication
One way communication

Local healthcare staff

Microphone
Smart
device

Temperature
sensor
Mask sensor

Temperature
sensor
Microphone

Mask sensor
Glucose
sensor
Oxygen
level
sensor

IoT applications

Smart device
Glove sensor

Heart beat
sensor

Glove sensor

IoT applications
Covid-19
patient room

Family member

Home Isolation

Family Room

Gateway
Voice controller
hand wash

Centralized Cloud

RFID sensor
Covid-19 Patient

Family member

Disinfected robot

Smart doorbell

Disinfected phone case

Temperature
sensor
Oxygen
level
sensor

Microphone

Smart laundry

IoT applications

Disinfected doormat

Voice controller smart
lock

Mask sensor
Microphone
Smart device

Glove sensor

RFID sensor
Covid-19 Patient

Smart Sanitize

Home Isolation

Figure 4: Conceptual Overview of Connected Smart Home Environment.
provide virtual on-board assistants to help patients and find optimal paths [33], using ML services to the hospital,
in case of emergency. The hospital smart parking system can scan license plate of driver to identify COVID-19
patient using patient’s data and can also assign special spot to park his/her car. However, the patient’s personal
data can be stored on multiple storage to avoid centralization, which could lead to hacking, loss and mishandling
of patient data due to centralization. Blockchain technology can be used to secure patient’s personal data and can
deliver decentralized attack detection model [34] to mitigate the single point of failure. In the above scenarios, data
and information collected from smart devices are sent to edge gateways, services, or cloud. Due to high security
and privacy concerns in health domain, it is important to understand that these edge gateways and cloud-IoT
platforms will be owned only by authorized entities, such as hospitals or other highly trusted entities through some
private cloud. We elaborate some of the challenges to enable these scenarios in Section 7.

5.2

Smart Home

Today, smart homes make our lives easier and provide convenience in our daily activities from automatically
turning on thermostat from smartphone to opening the smart garage door remotely. However, we can also utilize
smart devices to keep our homes healthy and sanitized. In real-world, it is nearly impossible to keep everything
around you virus or germs free. However, individuals must employ precaution measures to keep their homes clean
and disinfected. In order to prevent the spread of COVID-19, the first step is to sanitize our homes. Currently, smart
lights and temperature control with their compatible sensors have become ubiquitous in smart home environments

16

enabled by Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN) [35]. According to global tech market advisory firm26, voice control
device based orders and shipments will grow globally by close to 30% over 2019. Using voice control allows people
to avoid touching commonly touched surfaces around the home, such as smartphones, TV remotes, light switches,
thermostats, door handles, and others. In this subsection, we elaborate three different scenarios within the context
of smart homes which can offer a more connected ecosystem to mitigate contagious disease spread, as shown in
Figure 4. Moreover, various aspects of smart home for health have been investigated in the literature [21, 36–49].

5.2.1

Home Isolation

Some COVID-19 patients have high-risk enough to warrant quarantine but not serious enough to warrant smart
hospital care. They should follow self-quarantine protocol and stay at their home; however, it will be a challenge
to other family members to protect themselves in same home environment. In this scenario, it is expected
that the patient should easily be monitored by hospital practitioners, family members and local state authorities
with different level of authorization requirements. Patients’ activities can be monitored through wearable and
non-wearable devices at smart home. Non-wearable devices can be classified into three categories: visionbased devices (e.g., IR cameras, RGB cameras and depth cameras), medical devices (e.g., oximeter, scale, and
thermometer) and dense sensing network based devices (e.g., door sensor, light sensor, and motion sensor). The
patient and family members can use wearable devices (e.g., smart watch, smart mask, and microphone) to monitor
their vitals regularly. Multiple sensors including mask sensor, temperature sensor, heart rate sensor etc. can be
attached to patients body, and other smart health devices and smart home IoT devices can also be installed in the
patient room, as shown in Figure 4. PGHD will be collected from these smart devices, which are Bluetooth Low
Energy (BLE) or Wi-Fi based devices, and this data will also be shared with health practitioners for data analytics.
PGHD will be monitored by health practitioner through their private cloud or manufacturer’s cloud (e.g., iHealth’s
cloud, home automation cloud). To enable trust across multiple clouds, Blockchain technology can be used.
Additionally, Secure Data Transmission Scheme (S-DTS) [50] can also support a distributed transmission among
multiple clouds and can utilize four synchronization zones including IoT network zone, aggregation zone, mining
zone, and management zone, and these zones can be operated by the Delegated Proof of Node (DPN) mechanism.

5.2.2

Smart Sanitize

Here, we present a smart sanitizing scenario which uses IoT technology. For instance, when a user will walk up
to the home from the driveway and before he/she even reaches the front door, the door unlocks using optimize
face recognition application [32] on the edge, then user will walk inside the home. User’s phone will connect
with home Wi-Fi network, and will show the presence of the user at home. The smart home will set to the right
temperature, and turn on smart home devices without touching any surface. The user can take off his shoes on
26https://www.techrepublic.com/article/COVID-19-pandemic-impact-pushing-smart-home-voice-control-devices-to-predicted-30-growth/

17

IoT applications

Smart
parking

Smart
device

Smart car

Store manager

Retail
worker
Drone

Glove
sensor
RFID tag

Warehouse
incoming inventory

Delivery
Robot

Disinfected robot

Mask
sensor

Self checkout
Drone
Centralized Cloud
Smart packages

RFID tag

Autonomous
retail worker

Gateway

RFID sensor

Mask
sensor

Robot

Customer
Microphone

Smart shelves

Smart
cart

Temperature
sensor

Autonomous

Smart
device

IoT applications inventory worker
Delivery
Robot

Glove
sensor

Inventory manager

Customer
Two way communication
One way communication

Smart truck

Retail worker

Figure 5: Smart and Connected Supply Chain Management Scenario.
smart UV-floor, and put his keys, phone in smart UV light box that sanitizes these items. Hands-free automation
including Gaggenau’s handle-free refrigerators, faucets, door and closets can also be used at home to avoid spread
of virus. Voice-control devices such as Amazon echo, Honeywell Wi-Fi thermostat, hand sanitizer, and vocca
light can be installed at home. Another futuristic technology that can be useful is air cleaning system that sanitizes
clothing and footwear. This system can be installed in closets and laundry basket. Similarly, smart vehicles can be
sterilized with steam.

5.3

Smart Supply Chain Management

COVID-19 pandemic has created many gaps in the supply chain management, the emerging IoT technologies
can be deployed to improvise this whole system. The use case scenarios including smart inventory and smart
grocery store are discussed in this section and also shown in Figure 5. These scenarios show how IoT devices and
technologies can enable efficient supply-chain and also help in slowing the COVID-19 spread around us.

5.3.1

Smart Inventory

In the past research, smart inventory systems have been investigated in the literature [51–57]. The studies show
that mostly RFID tags have been used to identify the shortage of goods in smart inventory. Inventories are facing
an unprecedented challenge in coping with the fallout from COVID-19. However, a smart inventory system can
provide a safe and secure environment to the workers using technologies. Within the inventories, drones can be

18

used to track all the employees to check their temperature using thermal sensors, and also measure their social
distancing using Algorithm 2 (as discussed in Section 6). Inventory manager can also provide UWB/LTE-based
wearable devices that are less susceptible to interference than Bluetooth devices, and workers’ health generated
data will be store on gateway server. If an employee is infected with coronavirus, then inventory manager can
get notifications through data-driven IoT applications, given proper authorizations and privacy are enabled. In
addition, disinfectant spray can be attached to the shelves that can start spraying when associated sensor senses
the sound of sneezing. An intelligent drone can monitor inventory in real-time and send alerts in case there is
a shortage. Stereo Vision, Monocular Vision, Ultrasonic, Infrared, Time-of-Flight and Lidar sensors are being
used to detect and avoid obstacles. Sensor fusion can be used for obstacle detection, where data from different
sensors are combined to compute useful information than could not be determined by just one sensor alone. Smart
inventory will use RFID sensors and AI assisted drone to track the items, and RFID antenna/AI camera will scan
the number of units on the sales floor and will send an alert to a store manager in case of shortage. The generated
data will allow to automate product orders and also identify the popularity of a certain item.

5.3.2

Smart Grocery Store

Smart grocery store have been widely investigated in the literature [55,58–61]. IoT along with AI technologies can
help slow the spread of infection by enforcing prevention and detection mechanisms through connected sensors
in a smart grocery store. Chinese tech firm Kuang-Chi Technologies27 has developed a smart helmet attach with
thermal sensor, which is used to take body temperature at the retail store. Similarly, thermal cameras28 and
microphone sensors can also be installed at the store which can detect people who are coughing in store during
shopping. The customer can wear a RFID tag or smart bracelet at the store, which can be provided by state
government during COVID-19 testing. The customer can scan the tag/bracelet at the entrance of grocery store,
which will allow him/her to enter based on his/her health condition. From a customer’s perspective, the user can
enable alerts on his smartphone regarding his grocery list, can see the map of the store and crowded aisles, and
plan accordingly to maintain social distance while shopping. The customer can visit desired aisles and will get
items from the smart shelves that will put items in the smart cart without contact. Smart shelves will have three
common elements - an RFID tag, an RFID reader, and an antenna. The customer generated data will be collected
by smart shelves and smart cart during the day and this data will be analyzed on retail cloud. Social distancing can
be measured and enforced by AI assisted autonomous retail robots as well, who can alert the customers through
speaker. The UVD Robot can also use ultraviolet light to zap infection viruses and sanitize surfaces.
Now-a-days, most grocery stores provide contact-less drive through pickup for all customers and delivery at
their doors. However, some users, such as elderly people, may not be aware or familiar with such online options.
27https://www.yicaiglobal.com/news/chinese-tech-firm-debuts-five-meter-fever-finding-smart-helmet
28https://spectrum.ieee.org/news-from-around-ieee/the-institute/ieee-member-news/thermal-cameras-are-being-outfitted-to-detect-feverand-conduct-contact-tracing-for-covid19

19

Smart
device
Motion
sensor

Mask
sensor

Smart home

Sensor

Smart Restaurant Takeout Service
Covid-19 patient in Delivery robot
smart car
Two way
communication
One way
communication

Chef
Disinfected
robot

Internet-enabled
pill box

Temperature
sensor
Oxygen
level
sensor

Mask sensor
Microphone

Smart device

Microphone

Glove sensor

RFID sensor
Covid-19 Patient

Locality
Cloud-2

Gateway

IoT applications

Voice controller Smart
toilet
smart lock

Nursing
home
practitioner

Smart Nursing Home

Locality
Cloud-1
Mask
sensor

Temperature
sensor
6 feet

Smart
disinfected
sprinkle

Locality Cloud-3

Gateway
IoT applications

Smart
device

Gateway

Smart
Neighborhood

Disinfected
robot

Director

Smart Gym

Motion
sensor

Disinfected
robot

Temperature
sensor
Microphone

Microphone

Mask
sensor

Teacher

Smart Child Care

Figure 6: Connected Future Smart Locality.
For them, grocery store can provide smart robot delivery or smart pickup outside the store and also provide a
separate parking area to avoid long waiting lines. A restaurant takeout service can follow the same protocol for
smart pickup. Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) [62–64] can support in delivering resources to users. Gupta
et al. [65] have also elaborated how ITS and smart city infrastructures can be used to enable and enforce social
distancing community measures in COVID-19 outbreak.

5.4

Smart Locality

Smart localities have been widely investigated in the literature [66–71]. Such localities consist of various interdependent human and physical systems, where IoT represents the sensing and actuating infrastructure to estimate
the state of human and physical systems and also assist in adapting/changing these systems. Here, we discuss
two scenarios, which can help humans to adapt to the new normal in COVID-19 situation. These two scenarios
including other relevant scenarios are shown in Figure 6.

5.4.1

Smart Neighborhood

Every individual, who lives in a smart neighborhood, will receive notifications regarding allotted time for outside
activities, such as riding a bike, a walk on the trail, etc. in order to maintain the social distancing while being
outside in common areas. In a smart neighborhood, motion sensors and cameras will sense the presence of people

20

and will send the counting numbers to the locality cloud-1 as shown in Figure 6. Cloud Smart Analytics29 service
can analyze the locality data and will send notifications to users. IoT application can suggest different paths for
each individual using motion sensors and traversing algorithms, so that people can avoid meeting infected people
without knowing his/her identity. There will be disinfected sprinkler installed that can spray on the pedestrian path
and community park, when sensors will sense the presence of infected person in the area through notifications
from the locality cloud-1.

5.4.2

Smart Child Care and Nursing Home

The U.S. CDC30 have issued guidelines in order to safely open child care and schools in the locality. The child
care can use RFID tags, motion sensors, door sensors, and smart devices for children safety. The sensors can be
attached to kid’s clothes to monitor their sleep patterns, breathing patterns, body temperature, and body position
and this data can only be stored on edge server for child security purpose, while staff/teacher generated data can
store on locality cloud-3. AI assisted camera can be installed in child care rooms to measure social distancing
among children and teachers and it is shown in Algorithm 2. However, it is a challenging undertaking to maintain
physical distancing in child care. In such scenario, sensor based partitions of each room will allow a gap among
the kids and will allow only one or two kids in each partitioned area to maintain the distance among them. The
teacher and staffs will receive notifications to change their gloves and masks through attached sensors on gloves
and mask. In a smart nursing home, if an elderly person shows symptoms of COVID-19, then he/she should be
treated in an isolated room immediately. Autonomous robots can be utilized to help in disinfecting common areas,
and by following Algorithm 3 (as discussed in Section 6). Elderly health generated data and their clinical reports
can be accessed through applications and will store in locality cloud-2. The care coordinator should have access
to locality cloud-2 to monitor each elder regularly.
Similarly, a smart gym would include motion sensors, door sensors, humidity sensor, temperature control
sensors, and AI assisted cameras. The generated data will be stored on locality cloud-3, and will be analyzed by
cloud services. Gym manager/HOA can only access the analyzed information anonymously, so that he can assign
a particular time to maintain the 25% occupancy and time interval to sanitize all gym equipment and surfaces. To
enable multi-cloud secure data and information sharing and communications between locality clouds, there is a
need to build decentralized trust framework in place of using advanced technologies like Blockchain and trusted
distributed computing.
29https://cloud.google.com/solutions/smart-analytics/
30https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/community/schools-childcare/guidance-for-childcare.html

21

Infected area

IoT applications
Temperature
sensor
Mask
sensor

City Cloud-2

Mass Quarantine
Local health staff

Microphone

Smart Tracking
City Cloud-1
Mail
delivery
robot

Smart Tracking

Store
robot

Smart Office
Mask sensor
Smart
device

Smart Essential Services
City Cloud-3
Two way communication
One way communication
Disinfected Covid-19 patient
in the car
robot

Autonomous
testing vehicle Glove
sensor
Covid-19
patient

Autonomous
Vehicle Testing

Smart Tracking

Figure 7: Conceptual Futuristic Smart City Overview.

5.5

Smart City

Daegu31 has setup a novel system using large amount of data gathered from various sensors and devices, such
as surveillance camera footage and credit card transactions of confirmed coronavirus patients to recreate their
movements. The Newcastle University Urban Observatory32 developed a way of tracking of pedestrian, car parks,
traffic movement to understand how social distancing is being followed in Tyne and Wear. However, other major
cities need to prepare themselves for coronavirus future outbreak waves. Smart city can host a rich array of
technological products that can assist in early detection of coronavirus outbreaks through IoT sensors, and mitigate
infection through social distancing and mandatory masks policy. Connected sensors and data sharing through the
cloud-IoT architectures can be utilized to enforce social distancing measures around a smart city. Here, we discuss
various scenarios including smart tracking, and autonomous testing vehicles for the smart city, which are shown
in Figure 7. In the past, several research work [67, 72–79] have been done on smart city infrastructures.

5.5.1

Smart Tracking

Most of countries33 used phone data to track citizens’ movements during the pandemic. In addition, urban cities
deployed connected drones and law enforcement, which can help to track and restrict movement of individuals
in a smart city without evading citizens’ privacy. A smart city can be characterized by smart infrastructures that
31https://www.smartcitiesworld.net/news/news/south-korea-to-step-up-online-coronavirus-tracking-5109
32https://COVID.view.urbanobservatory.ac.uk/#intro
33https://www.businessinsider.com/countries-tracking-citizens-phones-coronavirus-2020-3

22

will be optimized for performance to mitigate coronavirus outbreaks and saving lives of the citizens. The smart
infrastructures need to follow the protocols defined by federal and state agencies. In Spain, Nice city34 have been
using drones controlled by police to enforce the lock down and circulate information announced messages like
"Please respect the safety distances." attached with loudspeakers. These Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) also
sprayed disinfectant at Zhengwan village, amid an outbreak of the new coronavirus, in Handan, Hebei province,
China. Savannah city35 announced plans to use drones to enforce social distancing among residents.
In smart city, AI assisted drones are being used to measure six feet distance among people using distance
measurement sensor mono/stereo. The distance measurement sensors are divided into multiple categories; however
mono/stereo are less costly, accurate, fast, and high resolution. AI assisted drones can also identify those people
who do not follow the protocols, for example, user is not wearing a mask, may receive $500 fine. In smart cities,
multiple drones monitor citizens, to avoid collision obstacle avoidance algorithm and Simultaneous Localization
And Mapping (SLAM) can be employed. These drones train their models on edge using federated learning process
before sharing its training data with an edge or city cloud-1, federated learning algorithm is discussed in Section
6. Thus, each drone can monitor its area based on individual experiences. However, aggregate value of parameters
from nearby urban area is collected at the edge computing side for collective decision making.
As shown in the Figure 7, COVID-19 test result of a patient can be stored on city cloud-1, which can be
shared with local state staff and healthcare providers. Most dominant Cloud Service Providers (CSPs) use their
own default data placement strategy to manage storage and computing of data, the CORE-Algorithm [80] can be
use to re-organizes the distributed file system by redistributing the data blocks to give an optimal data placement.
Furthermore, QR code can help the citizens using the geographic data to know about risk zones in the city.

5.5.2

Autonomous Testing Vehicle

In order to keep patients and healthcare providers safe, drive-thru coronavirus testing sites have been popping
up in the city. An autonomous testing vehicle can be used for COVID-19 testing in urban city as well as rural
areas. Multiple sensors including infrared body temperature sensor, oxygen level sensor, AI assisted camera
and microphone will be installed onto the vehicle which will also carry testing kits, PPE etc. This autonomous
vehicle can help reduce exposure of elderly and pre-existing condition people to COVID-19. A person will get
notification of autonomous vehicle’s arrival, then he/she can enter from one side of the glass-walled area in the
car. In-built sensors can record person’s body temperature, oxygen level and can store this data on local edge
device. The generated health data will be stored on local edge storage and these sensors will also publish the data
on city cloud-3 to share with healthcare practitioners. It can also provide a test kit to individuals who can test
themselves and return it through the car window. In rural areas, autonomous testing vehicles can bring awareness
34https://www.businessinsider.com/coronavirus-drones-france-COVID-19-epidemic-pandemic-outbreak-virus-containment-2020-3
35https://thehill.com/changing-america/resilience/smart-cities/492532-savannah-ga-to-enforce-social-distancing-with-drones

23

.......

Health practitioners

HTTP,
SOAP,
REST

Family member

Warehouse manager

Local state staff

Citizens

HTTP,
SOAP,
REST

AWS IoT &
other services

AWS IoT Device Management AWS Rule Engine

MQTT,
HTTP

AWS IAM

Smart Watch
cert
Policy

MQTT,
HTTP

Smart Oximeter

Motion sensor

cert
Policy

cert
Policy

Smart
Thermostat
cert
Policy

MQTT,
HTTP

AWS S3 Bucket AWS IoT Analytic

IoT Shadows
Smart Camera

Smart helmet

cert
Policy

cert
Policy

....

Smart Drone

cert
Policy

AWS IoT Gateway

AWS Lambda

AWS IoT Greengrass

BLE,
Zigbee,
Wi-Fi

BLE,
Zigbee,
Wi-Fi

Raspberry Pi

Devices/Sensors
Smart Watch
cert

Smart Oximeter
cert

Smart
Thermostat

Motion sensor
cert

Smart helmet

Smart Camera
cert

cert

cert

.....

MQTT,
HTTP

Smart Drone

cert
Communication and
data exchange between
users and applications

Figure 8: General Implementation Framework for Smart Communities utilizing AWS IoT and Cloud Services
of COVID-19, improve accessibility to testing, and can even provide free testing to underprivileged communities.
To flatten the curve of confirmed cases, smart city can provide mass quarantine for coronavirus patients, who
have mild symptoms but are higher risk individuals for spreading cross-infection to others. A smart hall or large
stadium or facilities can be setup for quarantine with installed sensors, smart devices, and robots that are connected
to cloud (as shown in Figure 7). Disinfectant robot is an autonomous robot that can sterilize floors in these large
areas as discussed in other scenarios. The large-scale disinfectant robot can also be used to clean the roads of the
city. Autonomous and self-driving vehicles can be used for delivering the post, which will also help reducing the
human contact and cutting down the number of COVID-19 cases. Smart city can also provide immunity-based
RFID tags to those people, who recover from the disease, and can allow the tag holders to return to work with
extra-precautions. In the future, once COVID-19 vaccines are available, the individual with vaccination can get
similar immunity-based RFID tags to prove their immunity. In other context, autonomous vehicles have been
extensively investigated in the literature [81–89].

6

Implementation and Enforcement

In this section, we present a general implementation and enforcement framework for smart community use case
scenarios discussed in Section 5 utilizing AWS cloud and IoT platform. We also discuss a family of algorithms
that can be used in the context of different use case scenarios. To further demonstrate the applicability and benefits
of smart connected communities, we also implement a RPM use case along with proof of concept deployment

24

setup, configurations for physical devices, and cloud services used for enforcing this scenario. This prototype
implementation can be considered as a baseline which can be extended and customized to wide geographic and
large scale connected communities. It must be noted that AWS is one of the cloud providers that can support this
general framework. Similarly, other architectures can also be supported using different cloud and IoT providers,
such as Google IoT36, Microsoft Azure37, Openstack38 etc.

6.1

Generalized Implementation Framework in AWS

The smart connected ecosystem with specific use case scenarios can be implemented using real-world cloudenabled IoT architecture, such as supported by AWS cloud and IoT platform. Figure 8 illustrates our proposed
implementation architecture, which can be used as a general framework for the use case scenarios discussed in
Section 5. This framework consists of smart devices per use case requirements, virtual things/objects, AWS cloud
and its IoT and other services. Figure 8 shows a set of devices at object layer and their corresponding virtual objects
at VO layer (as discussed in multi-layered architecture in Section 4). However, other types of devices and their
VOs can be created based on use case scenarios. More specifically, this proposed implementation includes AWS
IoT core39 in cloud, AWS Greengrass40 running on edge gateways (e.g., Raspberry Pi enabled gateway), and IoT
devices/things. The edge gateway can be enabled using Raspberry Pi41 that host the AWS Greengrass deployment,
and customized lambda42 functions that can run on the gateway for edge communication and computation, sending
notifications, or enforcing access control and privacy policies. After setting up AWS Greengrass gateway, data
collection from smart devices can be processed locally to enhance the real-time intelligence of IoT applications and
devices, critical in health related scenarios, such as RPM. For instance, a COVID-19 patient’s body temperature and
oximeter data need to be monitored regularly, and if there are any complexities (e.g., high temperature, breathing
issue), then a notification would be sent to a connected ambulance. The patient can also define more restrictive
policies for data security and privacy, for example, only hospital doctor can access his/her health data.
AWS Greengrass can enable edge communication between devices and gateways. As shown in Figure 8,
AWS Greengrass allows users to securely connect their devices to gather data and communicate with gateway
(where Greengrass is deployed) which allows to take intelligent actions locally even when the internet connectivity
is down. When connectivity is re-established, the data will synchronize with other cloud based IoT services
including AWS IoT core, AWS IoT device management, AWS S343 bucket etc. Data collected by smart devices can
also be forwarded to AWS IoT cloud using MQTT/HTTP protocols. For enabling a secure architecture, AWS IoT
36https://cloud.google.com/iot-core
37https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/
38https://www.openstack.org/
39https://docs.aws.amazon.com/iot/latest/developerguide/what-is-aws-iot.html
40https://aws.amazon.com/greengrass/
41https://www.raspberrypi.org/
42https://aws.amazon.com/lambda/
43https://aws.amazon.com/s3/

25

core provides mutual authentication and encryption for secure data transfer and at rest. The mutual authentication
mechanism is based on X.509 certificate to ensure proper secure device provision and authorization for data
exchange between devices and AWS IoT core. AWS IoT will generate certificates signed by certificate authority,
which can be assigned authorization policies to secure user devices and data, and also to enable different access
levels (full control/view only) to individuals (e.g., family members, friends, and health practitioners). In AWS
IoT, device management service allows users to quickly on board their large and diverse fleets of devices and store
the data while keeping their fleets secure. Some other services on top of them like AWS IoT analytic can also be
used to analyze large amount of data collected from these devices. For instance, health practitioners can analyze
patient’s health data using AWS IoT analytic service. It can also integrate seamlessly with other AWS services,
such as amazon quick site for visualization of IoT data and AWS sage maker hosted by ML service which is used
for predictive analytics. In this proposed framework, the smart devices (e.g., smart watch, oximeter etc.) must be
compatible with AWS cloud to use its services.
Algorithm 1 Federated Learning on Smart Edge Gateway Device i for Monitoring
1:
2:
3:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:

Define initial parameters 𝑤 𝑖 , learning rate 𝛼 and number of local epochs H.
Repeat all the steps until minimum error is obtained:
Download parameters 𝑤 𝑔𝑙𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑙 from Parameter Server to learn the symptoms of COVID-19.
Collect user health data from wearable devices including smart bracelets, smart rings and non-wearable devices
including thermal scanner, oximeter and send the data to edge devices including mobile phone, Raspberry Pi.
LocalTraining (i,𝑤 𝑖 ): Train user health data on each device to build own ML model for monitoring.
Split local dataset 𝐷 𝑖 to minibatches of size K which are included into the set 𝐾𝑖 .
for each local epoch j from 1 to H do
for each k ∈ 𝐾𝑖 do
Δ𝑤 𝑖 = Δ𝑤 𝑖 − 𝛼

10:
11:
12:
13:

𝜕𝐸 𝑖
𝜕𝑤 𝑖

end for
end for
Each edge device uploads local gradients Δ𝑤 𝑖 to Parameter Server.
Parameter Server also aggregates these local gradients Δ𝑤 𝑖 asynchronously.
𝑤 global = 𝑤 global + Δ𝑤 𝑖

14:

(1)

(2)

Each edge device downloads updated parameters 𝑤 𝑔𝑙𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑙 .
We have proposed three algorithms which can be adapted and aligned based on the needs of different smart

community use-cases. Algorithm 1 outlines a wearable and non-wearable device’s federated learning process on
the edge including mobile phone and Raspberry Pi before sharing its training data with cloud. We assume local
vector of neural-network parameters 𝑤 𝑖 to learn a model to predict the symptoms of COVID-19. Parameter Server
(PS) maintains a separate parameter vector 𝑤 𝑔𝑙𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑙 . The model on edge device will initialize parameters (weights)
𝑤 𝑖 , where i=1,2,3,..N, randomly or by downloading their latest values from PS. Each edge device or Raspberry pi
trains a local model and optimize the loss value using Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD). This process continues

26

until SGD converges to a local optimum. Let E be the error or loss value, i.e., the difference between the true
value of the objective function and the computed output of the network, and it can be based on 𝐿 2 norm or cross
entropy. The back-propagation algorithm computes the partial derivative of E with respect to each parameter in 𝑤 𝑘
and updates the parameter so as to reduce its gradient. We refer to one full iteration over all available input data
as an epoch. Thus, the mobile device and Raspberry Pi train user’s data on edge. Algorithm 2 outlines that smart
assistant camera, attached with distance measure sensors including mono/stereo, measure the distance 𝛿 between
two users at any smart community to enforce social distancing. The user will receive alert, if his distance from
other user is less than a certain threshold value (e.g., 6 feet).
Algorithm 2 Social Distancing through Smart Assistant Camera i
1:
2:
3:
4:
5:
6:

for each smart assistant camera i do
Measure 𝛿 using mono/stereo distance sensors attached in smart assistant camera
if 𝛿 < predefined threshold then
Send alert to maintain distance
end if
end for

Algorithm 3 Traversing Strategy for Smart Sanitizing Device i
1:
2:
3:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
1:
2:
3:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
14:
15:

Divide any infrastructure into three different zones: Isolation Zone (IZ), Living Zone (LZ), and Staff Zone
(SZ)
Call count_person()
for each smart sanitizing device i do
if number_IZ ≥ max-threshold-1 then
sanitize IZ
end if
𝛼 = max(number_LZ, number_SZ)
if 𝛼 ≥ max-threshold-2 then
sanitize that zone
end if
end for
count_person()
set number_IZ= 0, number_LZ = 0, number_SZ = 0
for each motion sensor j do
if mono/stereo, ultrasound and motion sensors detect presence of person in IZ at any infrastructure then
number_IZ = number_IZ + 1
else
if mono/stereo, ultrasound and motion sensors calculate number of person at LZ at any infrastructure
then
number_LZ = number_LZ + 1
end if
else
if mono/stereo, ultrasound and motion sensors detect the persons in SZ at any infrastructure then
number_SZ = number_SZ + 1
end if
end if
end for
Similarly, Algorithm 3 presents a general traversing strategy that can be followed by any smart sanitizing device

within any smart infrastructure including smart hospital, smart nursing home, and smart home etc. We assume
27

Motion sensor-1
Sensor tag manager

Motion sensor-2

Gateway Router

Smart blood
pressure machine

Smart oximeter

Patient phone

Internet

Wi-Fi/Bluetooth/Zigbee
Ethernet cable

Smart thermometer

Figure 9: Set up of Remote Patient Monitoring in a Smart Home
that smart infrastructure can be divided into three different zones: Isolation Zone (IZ), Living Zone (LZ), and Staff
Zone (SZ), where COVID-19 patients live in IZ, the presence of visitors and working staffs represent by LZ and
SZ respectively. The threshold value of IZ will be different form LZ and SZ. The motion sensors will count the
number of person at a particular zone. The max-threshold-1 is assigned for IZ, while max-threshold-2 is assigned
for LZ and SZ. Smart sanitizing devices including autonomous robots will communicate with motion sensors and
will traverse accordingly as per the algorithm. Here, we present generic algorithms that can be adopted in different
scenarios as well as can be customized as per the needs of specific application scenarios. Discussed use case
scenarios can implement any of the defined algorithms on AWS cloud based implementation and enforcement
architecture with other technologies.

6.2

Proof of Concept Implementation of Remote Patient Monitoring Use Case

E-Health use case consists of various scenarios including smart hospital, RPM, and smart testing. This section
presents implementation of a RPM scenario in real-world. We consider Bob, who is 34 years old and lives alone at
his home, has been diagnosed with coronavirus. He is monitored by his health practitioners continuously through
RPM system. His family members, who live in a different state, also monitor him through RPM system. We
set up and configure the RPM system with smart health and smart home devices at his home setting as shown in
Figure 9. For implementation of RPM, we set up a wireless network at Bob’s home using ARRIS SB6121 modem,
TP-Link AC1200 wireless router, and smart devices including Ethernet Tag Manager, wireless sensor tags, and

28

Bob
1.1 Send health sensor
data to the gateway

Smart Blood
Pressure (SB)

2.1 Forward patient
data to the cloud

4.1 Analyze Bob’s
health parameters and
3.1 Bob health status analyze prescribe medicine,
recommendations
by health practitioners

SB
SO
ST

Database
Bob’s data

Remote monitoring Health practitioners
patient’s app
4.2 If emergency, send
5. Send update
medical help to Bob and
send alert to Bob and family
members

10.1 Send updated device
data from virtual objects
Smart Oximeter (SO)

Smart
Thermometer (ST)

Gateway
11.2 Change
individual
device
status

Bedroom Door
Sensor (BD)

Hospital’s cloud

11.1 Deliver
Individual
device alerts

6. Request to view
Bob’s health
parameters

8. Operate home devices
3.2 Status of home device are based on Bob’s health
managed by family members
condition

2.2 Forward home data
to home automation
cloud
Database

1.2 Send home sensor
data to the gateway
10.2 Send updated device
data from virtual objects

Main Door
Sensor (MD)

7. Receive alerts regarding
Bob’s health

BD
MD

Home automation
device data

Home automation’s cloud

Home automation's app
9. Send update

Family members
Data Flow
Bidirectional
communication

Figure 10: Sequential View of Remote Patient Monitoring in a Smart Home
various BLE based health devices (e.g., iHealth smart oximeter, iHealth smart blood pressure monitor, and iHealth
smart thermometer). These health devices are suggested by Bob’s health practitioners. Ethernet tag manager is
connected to router through CAT 5 Ethernet cable, it is linked with two wireless sensor tags installed at bedroom
door and main door. This entire test bed set up is deployed around 8-10 days.
Figure 10 shows a sequential view of RPM for COVID-19 patient Bob at his smart home and his health
conditions are continuously being monitored by health practitioners and his family members. The data generated
from these devices is stored at their corresponding manufacturer’s clouds (e.g., iHealth cloud, Wireless sensor
cloud) and analyzed by their cloud services. At his smart home, motion sensors are attached at doors with 30◦
angle. If the angle of door is more than 30◦ , the sensor sends the notification "open-door" to gateway device
(e.g., Bob’s smart phone). The generated data is pushed onto home automation’s cloud, and his family members
will also receive notification through IoT applications. Both motion sensors communicate through Ethernet tag
manager, which has a connected light. When light turns ON it means that it is connected to the cloud based
web service, when update light flashes it means that it is forwarding door sensor state (Open/Close) to the web
service. Bob checks his body temperature, oxygen level, and blood pressure in every 3 hours, and connected
health devices at object layer communicate to a gateway device (i.e., Bob’s smart phone) which allows interaction
with the upper layers of the architecture. During 15 days of monitoring, The range of Bob’s body parameters
are - SpO2 (88% - 98%), blood pressure readings (110/65 mm Hg - 130/70 mm Hg), and body temperature (98◦
- 103◦ ). When Bob’s body temperature reached at 103◦ , the health practitioners prescribed medicine and also
informed his family members to watch him continuously. Bob was not able to sleep at night coughing, then his
29

family members received notification from bedroom door sensor through home automation cloud service. They
then communicated with him and asked him to check his oxygen level, which should not be less than 80%. Figure
10 shows an overall sequential view of RPM at home along with data flow and interactions among entities and
components of the system.
This setup is an implementation of one of the smart communities’ scenario, i.e., RPM. Similarly, other use case
scenarios can be implemented using same technologies and solutions along with various IoT devices and utilizing
our proposed implementation architecture. While we discuss an existing cloud-enabled IoT implementation
architecture and relevant technologies, there are several challenges to scale it for enabling future smart communities
with various such smart application scenarios. Therefore, enabling such highly distributed, autonomous, and
interdisciplinary architecture in real-world environment demands future research to overcome current challenges
and make smart communities a reality in the future.

7

Open Challenges and Future Directions

The development of the proposed smart connected ecosystem requires to address several challenges and needs
inter-disciplinary research from an integrated perspective involving different domains and stakeholders that we
learned from proposed implementation of smart communities and implemented RPM system. In this section,
we will discuss these challenges and required future research in detail with examples from each of the proposed
scenarios, as illustrated in Figure 11.

7.1

Security and Privacy

One of the major challenges in the deployment of the smart infrastructures is the security and privacy concerns
pertaining to IoT and CPS [90] users, smart devices, data, and applications in different application domains like
healthcare, smart home, supply chain management, transportation, and smart city. In health care industry, it is still
a challenge to secure connected medical devices and ensure user privacy.
In E-health scenario, for instance, a user visits smart testing booth for COVID-19 testing, and his/her data will
transmit and store on smart hospital private cloud. Hospitals then share this data with state healthcare staff or
city government for tracking and monitoring the user activities. To secure the identity of user and ensure privacy,
differential privacy [91] and data masking techniques [92] (pseudonymize [93], anonymize [94]) can be used.
However, there are limitations intrinsic to these solutions. In pseudonymize technique, data can be traced back into
its original state with high risk of compromising user privacy, whereas it becomes impossible to return data into its
original state in anonymize. It is critical to ensure user privacy while deploying IoT and data-driven applications
for their wide-adoption in preventing, monitoring, and mitigating COVID-19.
Secure authentication mechanisms including access control and communication control models are necessary
30

for cloud-enabled IoT platforms to defend against unauthorized access and securing data, both at rest [95–99] and
in motion. Several IoT access control models have been developed in the literature [100], with cloud-assisted IoT
access control models for AWS [48], Google [42], and Azure [101]. Traditional access control models are not
adequate in addressing dynamic and evolving access control requirements in IoT. Attribute-Based Access Control
(ABAC) [102–105], offers a flexible and dynamic access control model, which fits more into distributed IoT
environments, such as smart home [49], connected vehicles [88, 106], and wearable IoT devices [21, 107].
In addition to access control, communications in terms of data flow between various components in cloudenabled IoT platform need to be secured from unauthorized data access and modifications. Thus, Attribute-Based
Communication Control (ABCC) [108] has been introduced. A novel lightweight authentication protocol [109] has
been proposed to protect password, which is based on smart card and biometric identification. Moreover, for multicloud interaction and collaboration across several connected communities, there needs distributed computing
enabled by dynamic trust frameworks. Further research on Blockchain technology [110] to enable a trusted
framework among different cloud based platforms is necessary. Advanced access control techniques with a hybrid
approach (including benefits of several access control models) need to be designed to give access to users at
different levels. For example, in a smart connected community, users will have different levels of access on smart
devices, data, and applications. With recent surge in contact tracing applications, user data privacy concerns are
surfacing and will continue to arise in the future. Recent article44 have suggested the need to ensure privacy and
develop privacy aware contact tracing solutions to balance public health and personal privacy of the users. A
pertaining risk to these and other AI assisted system and applications is adversarial machine learning [111], using
which adversaries compromise user data and privacy. In order to protect the data sets, differential privacy [91,112]
can be applied to add noise. Cloud based medical data storage and the upfront challenges have been extensively
addressed in the literature [113, 114]. Study [115] conducted semi-structured interviews with fifteen people living
in smart homes to learn about how they use their smart homes, and to understand their security and privacy
concerns, expectations, and actions.
Various supervised ML algorithm are used for security such as classification of IoT data as "attack" or "normal",
however these algorithms have not succeed to produce significant results due to distinct requirements of IoT devices
including scalability, distribution, resource limitations, and low latency. This study [116] introduced a fog-based
attack detection framework and a ELM-based Semi-supervised Fuzzy C-Means (ESFCM) method, which are the
extension of cloud computing, fog computing based framework enables attack detection at the network edge and
ESFCM method uses a semi-supervised fuzzy c-means algorithm to handle the labeled data issue.
In future research, there are requirements to conduct interviews of health practitioners to understand the security
and privacy concerns while developing the smart hospital, and need to apply similar approach involving community residents, infrastructure developers and stakeholders to develop other components of the smart connected
44https://spectrum.ieee.org/telecom/security/tracking-covid19-with-the-iot-may-put-your-privacy-at-risk

31

Challenges:
Ø User privacy issues
Ø Adversarial Learning
Ø Trust issues and data integrity
Ø Communication control
Future directions:
Ø Differential Privacy
Ø Collaborative Deep Learning or
Federated Deep Learning
Ø Hybrid Access and Communication
Control mechanisms
Ø Blockchain Trust Framework

Challenges:
Ø Lack of high quality/quantity data
Ø Biased learning
Ø Data volume and storage Issue
Future directions:
Ø Avoid data Duplication
Ø Research on ML techniques
Ø Distributed Learning

Challenges:
Ø Privatization
Ø Lack of IoT standards

Security
and Privacy
ML and
Big Data Analytic

Policy
and
Guidelines

Future directions:
Ø Update privacy/security policies
Ø Collaboration across government
and non-government organizations

Open
Challenges
and Future
Directions
Implementation
Challenges

Performance
Efficiency

Interoperability
and
IoT Federation

Challenges:
Ø Distributed computing
Ø Different stakeholders
Ø Maintenance and management
Ø Low power and low cost IoT devices
Ø Infrastructure cost

Challenges:
Ø High Latency, low bandwidth
Ø Trade off between security, privacy
and efficiency
Ø Scalability
Ø Limited resources and capabilities
Future directions:
Ø Edge devices and cloudlets
Ø High speed network
Ø Advanced IoT devices
Ø Distributed Edge Computing

Challenges:
Ø Redundant smart devices
Ø Heterogeneous networking and
communication protocols
Future directions:
Ø Federated IoT architecture
Ø Synergize between different
manufactures/stakeholders

Future directions:
Ø Interdisciplinary research
Ø Benefit Cost Analysis
Ø Technical workforce

Figure 11: Open Challenges and Future Directions in Smart Communities Deployment
ecosystem. Privacy preserving deep learning [117, 118] approaches such as collaborative deep learning or federated learning also need to be explored to train and deploy local models at the edge devices. A Blockchain-based
secure DL [119] that combines DL and Blockchain to support secure collaborative DL in IoT. Collaborative DL
approach is performed at the edge device level to avoid the third party, whereas Blockchain is engaged to verify
the confidentiality and integrity of collaborative DL in IoT.

7.2

Performance Efficiency

Within a connected ecosystem, users are constantly interacting with numerous smart devices and applications.
One of main challenges in such an environment with billions of smart devices is performance efficiency and QoS.
High latency, response time, packet loss, and low bandwidth are various parameters in a network system that affect
the usability and feasibility of IoT systems. These devices generate large volumes of data which results in surge in
data traffic that causes network congestion and latency.
Due to high latency, it is not recommended to perform any computation on centralized cloud for critical
healthcare services in an emergency situation. End-users and front-line workers prefer computation on edge
devices and cloudlets to lower the wait and offer real-time analytics. This study [33] shows various approaches
to improve accuracy and efficiency of applications. Research and advancements in distributed edge computing
technologies, low latency networking and communication protocols are essential to enable continued success of

32

IoT-enabled smart environments. Data can be stored on multiple edge devices to improve processing efficiency
and response time. Typically, high energy consumption required by mobile communications is a serious hurdle to
large scale IoT deployments of use case scenarios. In near future, we expect to witness IoT applications expand in
a world of 5G, with the proliferation of high speed networks with low latency applications, such as RPM, real-time
Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V) and Vehicle-to-Infrastructure (V2I) communication.

7.3

Interoperability and IoT Federation

Recently, there have been many smart devices introduced by various manufactures in the market. For example,
there are several smart home assistants (e.g., Google Home, Alexa) that users can choose, however these devices
use different communication protocols and also have connection with their corresponding cloud services. Interoperability among IoT devices has been an issue since the beginning of smart ecosystem deployments. The
heterogeneity among billions of IoT devices adds to the challenge of developing smart connected communities.
While in computer systems, TCP/IP is a standard suite of protocols that enable any system to communicate with
other systems, such standards are still lacking in IoT domain.
Another critical issue is how to reduce redundant smart devices. An effective solution to this problem would
be to develop federated IoT and cloud architectures that can communicate with any type of sensors and devices.
For instance, in different smart domains, a user received multiple wearable smart bracelets in smart communities.
It will be challenging to keep track all alerts through their corresponding IoT applications. Therefore, there is a
need to develop federated IoT architectures to enable federation across multiple smart devices and applications
which can allow access and data communication across multiple IoT platforms. The research [120] suggested that
IoT cloud provider allowed all devices belonging to the same private/public owner to participate in the federation
process. However, many devices do not support other manufacturer’s application platforms. For instance, in
a smart home, all sensors and devices are connected through home assistant, and AI assisted application sends
notification to home assistant. Due to interoperability or compatibility issue, home assistant could not receive the
notifications from all devices. For future research, IoT software engineers, manufacturers and stakeholders should
create synergies together to build smart devices and federated IoT architectures.

7.4

Policy and Guidelines

IoT is an emerging technology that is being adopted by several nations across the world. Countries45 have different
guidelines and policies for preserving privacy of users and their personal data [121–123], which are still evolving.
Australian Privacy Principles (APP) [124] designed their own guidelines, procedures and standards to protect
individual privacy associated with data collection through IoT. The U.S. Department of Transportation (USDOT)
45http://smartcities.gov.in/content/innerpage/guidelines.php

33

has similarly issued smart city challenge46 and policy initiative in this direction. The U.S. government has
committed approximately $160 million47 over the next five years to support smart city initiatives smart connected
communities with hospitals, homes, cities or transportation demand new constitutions and policies for preserving
user data privacy and misuse of data and information. Such policies should maintain privacy of user and address
another issue including accuracy, property and accessibility, together with infrastructure design to facilitate swift
implementation of guidelines and public orders in COVID-19 and other similar situations.
One reason for the lack of constitutions and policies may be because the IoT differs from other network
technologies and there is a lack of specific IoT standards. The research on constitution and policy, including
engagement on public policy development debates, and IoT standards is necessary to successfully integrate privacy,
accuracy, property and accessibility solutions in the smart communities. To develop effective constitutional policies
and standards, collaboration across governmental, non-governmental organizations and industry partners as cloud
providers, IoT manufacturers, would be beneficial.

7.5

Implementation Challenges

Enabling a smart community requires thousands of low-power and low-cost embedded devices, which work
together with large scale data analytics and applications. There are several implementation challenges involved
in developing such large scale smart infrastructure. Fault tolerance and resilience are the challenges for reliable
delivery of sensor data from smart devices to distributed cloud service. IoT applications need to fault tolerance
since there can be various issues in applications or systems including face recognition, community infrastructure
management, and emergency response in smart infrastructure. GEOgraphically Correlated Resilient Overlay
Networks (GeoCRON) [125] is developed to capture the localized nature of community IoT deployments in the
context of small failures. Research [126] proposed a new fault-tolerant routing technique for hierarchical sensor
networks. Cloud service providers can be maximised their revenue using an optimal pricing scheme [127].
Another challenge for constant running and managing these IoT devices is costs related to energy, communication,
computation, infrastructure, and operation. There is generally a trade-off between benefit and cost for IoT
applications [128], however in the scenario of COVID-19 pandemic, expected benefits (saving lives, economic
growth) should outweigh the operational and deployment costs. For instance, to build RPM platform with various
vendors - intel technologies, iHealth labs etc., which provide pre-validated platforms for faster and lower cost
development. Combined implementation cost includes smart devices cost, servicing and monitoring cost for RPM
platform, which can be range from $275 – $2300 per patient per year. As we setup test bed of RPM use case at
home, the total cost of this test bed is $310 and spent 8-10 days to setup this use case.
Another challenge is to build prediction model by paying minimum cost, which may effect the accuracy of
46https://www.transportation.gov/smartcity
47https://www.govtech.com/opinion/If-Only-One-US-City-Wins-the-Smart-City-Race-the-Whole-Nation-Loses.html

34

the model. This study [129] proposed a game theoretical analysis to allocate more storage capacity in a costeffective manner, which achieves to maximize the benefits. For the future directions, game theoretical approach
can be used to analyze the smart infrastructures in terms of cost-benefit analysis. Furthermore, interdisciplinary
research collaboration is inevitable to implement a smart connected ecosystem. There are several areas of research
and engineering aspects, as machine-to-machine technology, artificial intelligence [130, 131], ML, predictive
analysis, security and privacy, and others need to be merged and collaborative research approach is necessary in
implementing, deploying, and managing a smart connected ecosystem.

7.6

ML and Big Data Analytic

IoT generates tremendous amount of data, and this raw data is converted into valuable knowledge using AI and
ML technologies. The "6V" (Value, Velocity, Volume, Variety, Variability, and Veracity) big data challenges for
IoT applications are discussed in [132, 133]. The volume of data from IoT devices overwhelms storage capacities.
There is not only storage issue, but data needs to be organized properly so that it can be retrieved and processed.
Data duplication is an issue when an organization has multiple copies of the same data source. For example, a
user has multiple wearable smart bracelets (smart hospital bracelet, smart grocery bracelet, and RFID antibody tag
bracelet), these wearable devices will collect similar kind of data, which can create an issue of data duplication.
ML based applications require a large amount of valuable data for correct prediction, however, complicated and
insufficient data can be an issue to the accuracy of the learning and predictive models. In addition, ML approaches
need further research and development to deal with such heterogeneous and constantly evolving sensory data inputs.
For instance, a locality-based COVID-19 patient detection model can predict early symptoms, which will be based
on the collaboration of smart nursing home data sets and smart child care data sets. The prediction model can
be biased towards elderly people if the number of patients in smart nursing home are more than smart child care.
To overcome this problem, both models can learn at their edge networks using collaborative deep learning [134].
Research on these open challenges will help early development and deployment of future smart communities.

8

Conclusion

In this paper, we propose future smart connected community scenarios, which are blueprints to develop smart
and intelligent infrastructures against COVID-19 to stop pandemic outbreaks in the future. The autonomous
operations with low human intervention in smart communities enable safe environment and enforce preventive
measures for controlling the spread of infection in community. Data-driven and AI assisted applications facilitate
increased testing, monitoring and tracking of COVID-19 patients, and help to enforce social distancing measures,
predict possible infections based on symptoms and human activities, optimize the delivery of essential services and
resources in a swift and efficient manner. This paper discussed different scenarios to reflect smart applications and
35

connected ecosystem. Further, it proposed IoT enabled big data collection and analysis in different sectors including
healthcare, home, supply chain management, transportation, environment, and city. A general implementation
framework of smart communities is discussed on AWS cloud service. In addition, a proof of concept implementation
of a RPM use case is presented. Furthermore, wider implementation of proposed smart connected communities
faces many challenges, such as legislation and policy, deployment cost, time, security and privacy, which have also
been discussed in the paper. We believe that our vision of future smart communities will ignite interdisciplinary
research and development of connected ecosystem to prepare our world against future pandemic outbreaks.

References
[1] M Humayun Kabir, Keshav Thapa, Jae-Young Yang, and Sung-Hyun Yang. State-space based linear modeling for human activity
recognition in smart space. INTELLIGENT AUTOMATION AND SOFT COMPUTING, 25(4):673–681, 2019.
[2] Li Bai et al. Chinese experts’ consensus on the internet of things-aided diagnosis and treatment of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19).
Clinical eHealth, 3:7–15, 2020.
[3] Raju Vaishya, Mohd Javaid, Ibrahim Haleem Khan, and Abid Haleem. Artificial intelligence (ai) applications for covid-19 pandemic.
Diabetes & Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research & Reviews, 2020.
[4] Mohd Javaid, Abid Haleem, Raju Vaishya, Shashi Bahl, Rajiv Suman, and Abhishek Vaish. Industry 4.0 technologies and their
applications in fighting covid-19 pandemic. Diabetes & Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research & Reviews, 2020.
[5] Krishna Kumar, Narendra Kumar, and Rachna Shah. Role of iot to avoid spreading of covid-19. International Journal of Intelligent
Networks, 1:32–35, 2020.
[6] Dasari Naga Vinod and SRS Prabaharan. Data science and the role of artificial intelligence in achieving the fast diagnosis of covid-19.
Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, page 110182, 2020.
[7] Mwaffaq Otoom, Nesreen Otoum, Mohammad A Alzubaidi, Yousef Etoom, and Rudaina Banihani. An iot-based framework for early
identification and monitoring of covid-19 cases. Biomedical Signal Processing and Control, page 102149, 2020.
[8] Adarsh Kumar, Kriti Sharma, Harvinder Singh, Sagar Gupta Naugriya, Sukhpal Singh Gill, and Rajkumar Buyya. A drone-based
networked system and methods for combating coronavirus disease (covid-19) pandemic. Future Generation Computer Systems, 2020.
[9] Samuel Lalmuanawma, Jamal Hussain, and Lalrinfela Chhakchhuak. Applications of machine learning and artificial intelligence for
covid-19 (sars-cov-2) pandemic: A review. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, page 110059, 2020.
[10] Ravi Pratap Singh, Mohd Javaid, Abid Haleem, and Rajiv Suman. Internet of things (iot) applications to fight against covid-19 pandemic.
Diabetes & Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research & Reviews, 2020.
[11] Swati Swayamsiddha and Chandana Mohanty. Application of cognitive internet of medical things for covid-19 pandemic. Diabetes &
Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research & Reviews, 2020.
[12] Rajvikram Madurai Elavarasan and Rishi Pugazhendhi. Restructured society and environment: A review on potential technological
strategies to control the covid-19 pandemic. Science of The Total Environment, page 138858, 2020.
[13] Maria Tsikala Vafea et al. Emerging technologies for use in the study, diagnosis, and treatment of patients with covid-19. Cellular and
molecular bioengineering, pages 1–9, 2020.
[14] Tanweer Alam. Internet of things and blockchain-based framework for coronavirus (covid-19) disease. Available at SSRN 3660503,
2020.

36

[15] AS Albahri, Rula A Hamid, et al. Role of biological data mining and machine learning techniques in detecting and diagnosing the novel
coronavirus (covid-19): A systematic review. Journal of Medical Systems, 44(7), 2020.
[16] Vladimir Stantchev, Ahmed Barnawi, Sarfaraz Ghulam, Johannes Schubert, and Gerrit Tamm. Smart items, fog and cloud computing
as enablers of servitization in healthcare. Sensors & Transducers, 185(2):121, 2015.
[17] Yang Li, Li Guo, and Yike Guo. Enabling health monitoring as a service in the cloud. In 2014 IEEE/ACM 7th International Conference
on Utility and Cloud Computing, pages 127–136. IEEE, 2014.
[18] Felipe Fernandez and George C Pallis. Opportunities and challenges of the internet of things for healthcare: Systems engineering
perspective. In IEEE International Conference on Wireless Mobile Communication and Healthcare-Transforming Healthcare Through
Innovations in Mobile and Wireless Technologies (MOBIHEALTH), pages 263–266, 2014.
[19] Maanak Gupta, Mahmoud Abdelsalam, Sajad Khorsandroo, and Sudip Mittal. Security and Privacy in Smart Farming: Challenges and
Opportunities. IEEE Access, 8:34564–34584, 2020.
[20] M Shamim Hossain and Ghulam Muhammad. Cloud-assisted industrial internet of things (IIoT)–enabled framework for health monitoring. Computer Networks, 101:192–202, 2016.
[21] Smriti Bhatt, Farhan Patwa, and Ravi Sandhu. An access control framework for cloud-enabled wearable internet of things. In 2017
IEEE 3rd International Conference on Collaboration and Internet Computing (CIC), pages 328–338. IEEE, 2017.
[22] Anuj Kumar Yadav, ML Garg, et al. Docker containers versus virtual machine-based virtualization. In Emerging Technologies in Data
Mining and Information Security, pages 141–150. Springer, 2019.
[23] Mahadev Satyanarayanan, Paramvir Bahl, Ramón Caceres, and Nigel Davies. The case for vm-based cloudlets in mobile computing.
IEEE pervasive Computing, 8(4):14–23, 2009.
[24] Michele Nitti, Virginia Pilloni, Giuseppe Colistra, and Luigi Atzori. The virtual object as a major element of the internet of things: a
survey. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 18(2):1228–1240, 2015.
[25] Vaibhav Pandey and Poonam Saini. Application layer scheduling in cloud: Fundamentals, review and research directions. COMPUTER
SYSTEMS SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, 34(6):357–376, 2019.
[26] Luca Catarinucci et al. An IoT-aware architecture for smart healthcare systems. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2(6):515–526, 2015.
[27] Sungmee Park and S. Jayaraman. Enhancing the quality of life through wearable technology. IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology
Magazine, 22(3):41–48, 2003.
[28] L. Catarinucci, D. de Donno, L. Mainetti, L. Palano, L. Patrono, M. L. Stefanizzi, and L. Tarricone. An IoT-Aware Architecture for
Smart Healthcare Systems. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2015.
[29] Fabrice Axisa, P. M. Schmitt, C. Gehin, G. Delhomme, E. McAdams, and A. Dittmar. Flexible technologies and smart clothing for citizen
medicine, home healthcare, and disease prevention. IEEE Transactions on Information Technology in Biomedicine, 9(3):325–336, 2005.
[30] Lei Xu, Chungen Xu, Zhongyi Liu, Yunling Wang, and Jianfeng Wang. Enabling comparable search over encrypted data for iot with
privacy-preserving. CMC-COMPUTERS MATERIALS & CONTINUA, 60(2):675–690, 2019.
[31] Samundra Deep, Xi Zheng, Chandan Karmakar, Dongjin Yu, Leonard GC Hamey, and Jiong Jin. A survey on anomalous behavior
detection for elderly care using dense-sensing networks. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 22(1):352–370, 2019.
[32] Shen Li, Fang Liu, Jiayue Liang, Zhenhua Cai, and Zhiyao Liang. Optimization of face recognition system based on azure iot edge.
CMC-COMPUTERS MATERIALS & CONTINUA, 61(3):1377–1389, 2019.
[33] Ying Li, Honghao Gao, and Yueshen Xu. Special section on big data and service computing, 2019.
[34] Shailendra Rathore et al. Blockseciotnet: Blockchain-based decentralized security architecture for iot network. Journal of Network and
Computer Applications, 143:167–177, 2019.

37

[35] Paolo Bellavista, Giuseppe Cardone, Antonio Corradi, and Luca Foschini. Convergence of MANET and WSN in IoT urban scenarios.
IEEE Sensors Journal, 13(10):3558–3567, 2013.
[36] D. J. Freitas, T. B. Marcondes, L. H. V. Nakamura, and R. I. Meneguette. A health smart home system to report incidents for disabled
people. In 2015 International Conference on Distributed Computing in Sensor Systems, pages 210–211, 2015.
[37] N. Hamlil and M. Benabdellah. Study and implementation of a network point health smart home electrocardiographic. In International
Conference on Advances in Biomedical Engineering, pages 109–112, 2013.
[38] G. Sprint, D. Cook, R. Fritz, and M. Schmitter-Edgecombe. Detecting Health and Behavior Change by Analyzing Smart Home Sensor
Data. In 2016 IEEE International Conference on Smart Computing (SMARTCOMP), pages 1–3, 2016.
[39] M. S. Hossain. Patient status monitoring for smart home healthcare. In 2016 IEEE International Conference on Multimedia Expo
Workshops (ICMEW), pages 1–6, 2016.
[40] P. N. Dawadi, D. J. Cook, and M. Schmitter-Edgecombe. Automated Cognitive Health Assessment From Smart Home-Based Behavior
Data. IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics, 2016.
[41] Olumide Kayode, Deepti Gupta, and Ali Saman Tosun. Towards a Distributed Estimator in Smart Home Environment. IEEE 6th World
Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT), 2020.
[42] Deepti Gupta, Smriti Bhatt, Maanak Gupta, Olumide Kayode, and Ali Saman Tosun. Access control model for google cloud iot. In 2020
IEEE 6th Intl Conference on Big Data Security on Cloud (BigDataSecurity), IEEE Intl Conference on High Performance and Smart
Computing,(HPSC) and IEEE Intl Conference on Intelligent Data and Security (IDS), pages 198–208. IEEE, 2020.
[43] Ali Tekeoglu and Ali Şaman Tosun. A Closer Look into Privacy and Security of Chromecast Multimedia Cloud Communications. In
Multimedia Cloud Communication Workshop, Held in conjunction with INFOCOM 2015, Hong Kong, China, April 2015.
[44] Ali Tekeoglu and Ali Şaman Tosun. Investigating Security and Privacy of a Cloud-based Wireless IP Camera: NetCam. In Workshop
on Privacy, Security and Trust in Mobile and Wireless Systems (MobiPST 2015), Held in conjunction with ICCCN 2015, Las Vegas,
USA, August 2015.
[45] A. Tekeoglu and A. S. Tosun. A Testbed for Privacy and Security of IoT Devices. In IEEE International Workshop on Data Science for
Internet of Things, MASS 2016, pages 1–6, Oct 2016.
[46] Ali Tekeoglu and Ali Şaman Tosun. An Experimental Framework for Investigating Security and Privacy of IoT Devices. In International
Conference on Intelligent, Secure, and Dependable Systems in Distributed and Cloud Environments, Vancouver, CA, October 2017.
[47] O. Kayode and A. S. Tosun. Analysis of IoT Traffic using HTTP Proxy. In ICC 2019 - 2019 IEEE International Conference on
Communications (ICC), pages 1–7, May 2019.
[48] Smriti Bhatt, Farhan Patwa, and Ravi Sandhu. Access control model for aws internet of things. In International Conference on Network
and System Security, pages 721–736. Springer, 2017.
[49] Smriti Bhatt, A Tawalbeh Lo’ai, Pankaj Chhetri, and Paras Bhatt. Authorizations in cloud-based Internet of Things: current trends and
use cases. In 2019 Fourth International Conference on Fog and Mobile Edge Computing (FMEC), pages 241–246. IEEE, 2019.
[50] Dae-Young Kim, Se Dong Min, and Seokhoon Kim. A dpn (delegated proof of node) mechanism for secure data transmission in iot
services. CMC Comput. Mater. Cont, 60:1–14, 2019.
[51] Yong Liang et al. A method to make accurate inventory of smart meters in multi-tags group-reading environment. In 2016 IEEE
International Conference on RFID Technology and Applications (RFID-TA), pages 123–128, 2016.
[52] J. Lin, M. Zheng, J. Chen, K. He, and E. Pan. Smart Spare Part Inventory Management System with Sensor Data Updating. In 2019
IEEE International Conference on Industrial Cyber Physical Systems (ICPS), pages 597–602, 2019.

38

[53] L. Zhang, N. Alharbe, and A. S. Atkins. An IoT Application for Inventory Management with a Self-Adaptive Decision Model. In 2016
IEEE International Conference on Internet of Things (iThings) and IEEE Green Computing and Communications (GreenCom) and
IEEE Cyber, Physical and Social Computing (CPSCom) and IEEE Smart Data (SmartData), pages 317–322, 2016.
[54] W. Raad, M. Bueno-Delgado, M. Deriche, and W. Suliman. An IoT Based Inventory System for High Value Laboratory Equipment. In
2019 Sixth International Conference on Internet of Things: Systems, Management and Security (IOTSMS), pages 314–319, 2019.
[55] R. Li, T. Song, N. Capurso, J. Yu, J. Couture, and X. Cheng. IoT Applications on Secure Smart Shopping System. IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, 4(6):1945–1954, 2017.
[56] A. Oplas, M. H. Rabago, C. L. Tormes, C. L. S. Romana, and R. Laviste. Aeon: A Smart Medicine Delivery and Inventory System
for Cebu City Government’s Long Life Medical Assistance Program. In 2018 IEEE 10th International Conference on Humanoid,
Nanotechnology, Information Technology,Communication and Control, Environment and Management (HNICEM), pages 1–6, 2018.
[57] Wen Ding. Study of smart warehouse management system based on the IoT. In Intelligence computation and evolutionary computation,
pages 203–207. Springer, 2013.
[58] S. V. Hove, A. All, and L. D. Marez. Short on Time? Context-Aware Shopping Lists to the Rescue: an Experimental Evaluation of a
Smart Shopping Cart. In 2019 Eleventh International Conference on Quality of Multimedia Experience (QoMEX), pages 1–6, 2019.
[59] S. Mekruksavanich. The Smart Shopping Basket Based on IoT Applications. In 2019 IEEE 10th International Conference on Software
Engineering and Service Science (ICSESS), pages 714–717, 2019.
[60] Omar Raad, Majd Makdessi, Yazan Mohamad, and Issam Damaj. Sysmart indoor services: A system of smart and connected
supermarkets. In 2018 IEEE Canadian Conference on Electrical & Computer Engineering (CCECE), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2018.
[61] G. Roussos. Enabling rfid in retail. Computer, 39(3):25–30, 2006.
[62] Maanak Gupta, James Benson, Farhan Patwa, and Ravi Sandhu. Secure V2V and V2I Communication in Intelligent Transportation
using Cloudlets. IEEE Transactions on Services Computing, 2020.
[63] M. Gupta, F. M. Awaysheh, J. Benson, M. Al Azab, F. Patwa, and R. Sandhu. An attribute-based access control for cloud-enabled
industrial smart vehicles. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, pages 1–1, 2020.
[64] Maanak Gupta, James Benson, Farhan Patwa, and Ravi Sandhu. Secure cloud assisted smart cars using dynamic groups and attribute
based access control. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.08112, 2019.
[65] Maanak Gupta et al. Enabling and Enforcing Social Distancing Measures using Smart City and ITS Infrastructures: A COVID-19 Use
Case. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.09246, 2020.
[66] X. Li, R. Lu, X. Liang, X. Shen, J. Chen, and X. Lin. Smart community: an internet of things application. IEEE Communications
Magazine, 49(11):68–75, 2011.
[67] Y. Sun, H. Song, A. J. Jara, and R. Bie. Internet of Things and Big Data Analytics for Smart and Connected Communities. IEEE Access,
4:766–773, 2016.
[68] P. A. Catherwood, D. Steele, M. Little, S. Mccomb, and J. Mclaughlin. A Community-Based IoT Personalized Wireless Healthcare
Solution Trial. IEEE Journal of Translational Engineering in Health and Medicine, 6:1–13, 2018.
[69] Y. Lee, W. Hsiao, C. Huang, and S. T. Chou. An integrated cloud-based smart home management system with community hierarchy.
IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics, 62(1):1–9, 2016.
[70] K. Axel and I. S. Khayal. Modeling ‘Thriving Communities’ using a Systems Architecture to Improve Smart Cities Technology
Approaches. In IEEE International Smart Cities Conference (ISC2), pages 1–2, 2018.
[71] H. Yan and D. Long. Research on Key Technology for Data Storage in Smart Community Based on Big Data. In International Conference
on Intelligent Transportation, Big Data and Smart City, 2015.

39

[72] Olga B Mora et al. A use case in cybersecurity based in blockchain to deal with the security and privacy of citizens and smart cities
cyberinfrastructures. In 2018 IEEE International Smart Cities Conference (ISC2), pages 1–4. IEEE, 2018.
[73] A. Zanella et al. Internet of Things for Smart Cities. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2014.
[74] J. Jin, J. Gubbi, S. Marusic, and M. Palaniswami. An Information Framework for Creating a Smart City Through Internet of Things.
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 1(2):112–121, 2014.
[75] M. Centenaro, L. Vangelista, A. Zanella, and M. Zorzi. Long-range communications in unlicensed bands: the rising stars in the IoT and
smart city scenarios. IEEE Wireless Communications, 23(5):60–67, 2016.
[76] A. Solanas, C. Patsakis, M. Conti, I. S. Vlachos, V. Ramos, et al. Smart health: A context-aware health paradigm within smart cities.
IEEE Communications Magazine, 52(8):74–81, 2014.
[77] H. Menouar, I. Guvenc, K. Akkaya, A. S. Uluagac, A. Kadri, and A. Tuncer. UAV-Enabled Intelligent Transportation Systems for the
Smart City: Applications and Challenges. IEEE Communications Magazine, 55(3):22–28, 2017.
[78] X. Zheng, L. Tian, G. Luo, and Z. Cai. A Collaborative Mechanism for Private Data Publication in Smart Cities. IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, pages 1–1, 2020.
[79] A. Meslin, N. Rodriguez, and M. Endler. Scalable Mobile Sensing for Smart Cities: The MUSANet Experience. IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, pages 1–1, 2020.
[80] Vengadeswaran and Balasundaram. Core-an optimal data placement strategy in hadoop for data intensive applications based on cohesion
relation. COMPUTER SYSTEMS SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, 34(1):47–60, 2019.
[81] James Llinas and David L Hall. An introduction to multi-sensor data fusion. In Proceedings of IEEE International Symposium on
Circuits and Systems, volume 6, pages 537–540, 1998.
[82] P. Varaiya. Smart cars on smart roads: problems of control. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 38(2):195–207, 1993.
[83] J. P. Hubaux, S. Capkun, and Jun Luo. The security and privacy of smart vehicles. IEEE Security Privacy, 2(3):49–55, 2004.
[84] D. M. Gavrila and V. Philomin. Real-time object detection for "smart" vehicles. In Proceedings of the Seventh IEEE International
Conference on Computer Vision, volume 1, pages 87–93 vol.1, 1999.
[85] P. Falcone, F. Borrelli, J. Asgari, H. E. Tseng, and D. Hrovat. Predictive Active Steering Control for Autonomous Vehicle Systems.
IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology, 15(3):566–580, 2007.
[86] J. Funke, M. Brown, S. M. Erlien, and J. C. Gerdes. Collision Avoidance and Stabilization for Autonomous Vehicles in Emergency
Scenarios. IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology, 2017.
[87] M. Kuderer, S. Gulati, and W. Burgard. Learning driving styles for autonomous vehicles from demonstration. In IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 2641–2646, 2015.
[88] Maanak Gupta, James Benson, Farhan Patwa, and Ravi Sandhu. Dynamic groups and attribute-based access control for next-generation
smart cars. In Proceedings of the Ninth ACM Conference on Data and Application Security and Privacy, pages 61–72, 2019.
[89] Maanak Gupta, James Benson, Farhan Patwa, and Ravinderpal Sandhu. Dynamic groups and attribute-based access control for
next-generation smart cars, September 10 2020. US Patent App. 16/811,165.
[90] Sina Sontowski, Maanak Gupta, Sai Sree Laya Chukkapalli, Mahmoud Abdelsalam, Sudip Mittal, Anupam Joshi, and Ravi Sandhu.
Cyber attacks on smart farming infrastructure. UMBC Student Collection, 2020.
[91] Cynthia Dwork, Aaron Roth, et al. The algorithmic foundations of differential privacy. Foundations and Trends® in Theoretical
Computer Science, 9(3–4):211–407, 2014.

40

[92] Emmanouil Vasilomanolakis et al. On the security and privacy of Internet of Things architectures and systems. In 2015 International
Workshop on Secure Internet of Things (SIoT), pages 49–57. IEEE, 2015.
[93] Alfred Kobsa and Jörg Schreck. Privacy through pseudonymity in user-adaptive systems. ACM Transactions on Internet Technology
(TOIT), 3(2):149–183, 2003.
[94] Traian Marius Truta and Bindu Vinay. Privacy protection: p-sensitive k-anonymity property. In 22nd International Conference on Data
Engineering Workshops (ICDEW’06), pages 94–94. IEEE, 2006.
[95] Maanak Gupta, Farhan Patwa, and Ravi Sandhu. An attribute-based access control model for secure big data processing in hadoop
ecosystem. In Proceedings of the Third ACM Workshop on Attribute-Based Access Control, pages 13–24, 2018.
[96] Maanak Gupta et al. Multi-layer authorization framework for a representative hadoop ecosystem deployment. In Proceedings of the
22nd ACM on Symposium on Access Control Models and Technologies, pages 183–190, 2017.
[97] Maanak Gupta, Farhan Patwa, and Ravi Sandhu. Object-tagged rbac model for the hadoop ecosystem. In IFIP Annual Conference on
Data and Applications Security and Privacy, pages 63–81. Springer, 2017.
[98] Maanak Gupta, Farhan Patwa, and Ravi Sandhu. Poster: Access control model for the hadoop ecosystem. In Proceedings of the 22nd
ACM on Symposium on Access Control Models and Technologies, pages 125–127, 2017.
[99] Feras M Awaysheh, Mamoun Alazab, Maanak Gupta, Tomás F Pena, and José C Cabaleiro. Next-generation big data federation access
control: A reference model. Future Generation Computer Systems, 2020.
[100] Aafaf Ouaddah, Hajar Mousannif, Anas Abou Elkalam, and Abdellah Ait Ouahman. Access control in the Internet of Things: Big
challenges and new opportunities. Computer Networks, 112:237–262, 2017.
[101] Abhĳeet Thakare, Euĳong Lee, Ajay Kumar, Valmik B Nikam, and Young-Gab Kim. PARBAC: Priority-Attribute-Based RBAC Model
for Azure IoT Cloud. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 7(4):2890–2900, 2020.
[102] Vincent C Hu et al. Guide to attribute based access control (abac) definition and considerations (draft). NIST special publication,
800(162), 2013.
[103] Xin Jin, Ram Krishnan, and Ravi Sandhu. A unified attribute-based access control model covering DAC, MAC and RBAC. In IFIP
Annual Conference on Data and Applications Security and Privacy, pages 41–55. Springer, 2012.
[104] Maanak Gupta and Ravi Sandhu. The GURAG administrative model for user and group attribute assignment. In International Conference
on Network and System Security, pages 318–332. Springer, 2016.
[105] Maanak Gupta. Secure Cloud Assisted Smart Cars and Big Data: Access Control Models and Implementation. PhD thesis, The
University of Texas at San Antonio, 2018.
[106] Maanak Gupta and Ravi Sandhu. Authorization framework for secure cloud assisted connected cars and vehicular internet of things. In
Proceedings of the 23nd ACM on Symposium on Access Control Models and Technologies, pages 193–204, 2018.
[107] Paras Bhatt, Smriti Bhatt, and Myung Ko. Poster: IoT SENTINEL-An ABAC Approach Against Cyber-Warfare In Organizations. In
Proceedings of the 25th ACM Symposium on Access Control Models and Technologies, pages 223–225, 2020.
[108] Smriti Bhatt and Ravi Sandhu. ABAC-CC: Attribute-Based Access Control and Communication Control for Internet of Things. In
Proceedings of the 25th ACM Symposium on Access Control Models and Technologies, pages 203–212, 2020.
[109] Liang Kou, Yiqi Shi, Liguo Zhang, Duo Liu, and Qing Yang. A lightweight three-factor user authentication protocol for the information
perception of iot. Computers Materials & Continua, 58(2):545–565, 2019.
[110] Bo Tang, Hongjuan Kang, Jingwen Fan, Qi Li, and Ravi Sandhu. Iot passport: a blockchain-based trust framework for collaborative
internet-of-things. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM Symposium on Access Control Models and Technologies, pages 83–92, 2019.

41

[111] Samuel G Finlayson, John D Bowers, Joichi Ito, Jonathan L Zittrain, Andrew L Beam, and Isaac S Kohane. Adversarial attacks on
medical machine learning. Science, 363(6433):1287–1289, 2019.
[112] Ajeet Kumar Gautam, Vidushi Sharma, Shiv Prakash, and Maanak Gupta. Improved hybrid intrusion detection system (hids): mitigating
false alarm in cloud computing. BL Joshi, page 101, 2012.
[113] Ahmad Fadzil M Hani et al. Development of private cloud storage for medical image research data. In IEEE International Conference
on Computer and Information Sciences, pages 1–6, 2014.
[114] G Nalinipriya and R Aswin Kumar. Extensive medical data storage with prominent symmetric algorithms on cloud-a protected
framework. In INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON SMART STRUCTURES AND SYSTEMS-ICSSS’13, pages 171–177. IEEE, 2013.
[115] Eric Zeng, Shrirang Mare, and Franziska Roesner. End user security and privacy concerns with smart homes. In Thirteenth Symposium
on Usable Privacy and Security ({SOUPS} 2017), pages 65–80, 2017.
[116] Shailendra Rathore and Jong Hyuk Park. Semi-supervised learning based distributed attack detection framework for iot. Applied Soft
Computing, 72:79–89, 2018.
[117] Andrew McDole, Mahmoud Abdelsalam, Maanak Gupta, and Sudip Mittal. Analyzing CNN Based Behavioural Malware Detection
Techniques on Cloud IaaS. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.06383, 2020.
[118] Aritran Piplai, Sudip Mittal, Mahmoud Abdelsalam, Maanak Gupta, Anupam Joshi, Tim Finin, et al. Knowledge enrichment by fusing
representations for malware threat intelligence and behavior. 2020.
[119] Shailendra Rathore et al. Blockdeepnet: a blockchain-based secure deep learning for iot network. Sustainability, 11(14):3974, 2019.
[120] Ivan Farris, Leonardo Militano, Michele Nitti, Luigi Atzori, and Antonio Iera. MIFaaS: A mobile-IoT-federation-as-a-service model for
dynamic cooperation of IoT cloud providers. Future Generation Computer Systems, 70:126–137, 2017.
[121] Rolf H Weber. Internet of Things-New security and privacy challenges. Computer law & security review, 26(1):23–30, 2010.
[122] Akemi Takeoka Chatfield and Christopher G Reddick. A framework for Internet of Things-enabled smart government: A case of IoT
cybersecurity policies and use cases in US federal government. Government Information Quarterly, 36(2):346–357, 2019.
[123] Leonie Tanczer, Irina Brass, Miles Elsden, Madeline Carr, and Jason J Blackstock. The United Kingdom’s Emerging Internet of Things
(IoT) Policy Landscape. Tanczer, LM, Brass, I., Elsden, M., Carr, M., & Blackstock, J.(2019). The United Kingdom’s Emerging Internet
of Things (IoT) Policy Landscape. In R. Ellis & V. Mohan (Eds.), Rewired: Cybersecurity Governance, pages 37–56, 2019.
[124] Xavier Caron et al. The Internet of Things (IoT) and its impact on individual privacy: An Australian perspective. Computer Law &
Security Review, 32(1):4–15, 2016.
[125] Kyle E Benson, Qing Han, Kyungbaek Kim, Phu Nguyen, and Nalini Venkatasubramanian. Resilient overlays for IoT-based community
infrastructure communications. In IEEE International Conference on Internet-of-Things Design and Implementation (IoTDI), 2016.
[126] Thaha Muhammed, Rashid Mehmood, and Aiiad Albeshri. Enabling reliable and resilient IoT based smart city applications. In
International Conference on Smart Cities, Infrastructure, Technologies and Applications, pages 169–184. Springer, 2017.
[127] Haiyang Zhang, Guolong Chen, and Xianwei Li. Resource management in cloud computing with optimal pricing policies. COMPUTER
SYSTEMS SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, 34(4):249–254, 2019.
[128] M Jeroen Van Der Donckt, Danny Weyns, M Usman Iftikhar, and Ritesh Kumar Singh. Cost-Benefit Analysis at Runtime for Self-adaptive
Systems Applied to an Internet of Things Application. In ENASE, pages 478–490, 2018.
[129] Georgios Skourletopoulos et al. Cost-benefit analysis game for efficient storage allocation in cloud-centric internet of things systems: a
game theoretic perspective. In IFIP/IEEE Symposium on Integrated Network and Service Management (IM), pages 1149–1154, 2017.
[130] Sai Sree Laya Chukkapalli, Sudip Mittal, Maanak Gupta, Mahmoud Abdelsalam, Anupam Joshi, Ravi Sandhu, Karuna Pande Joshi,
et al. Ontologies and artificial intelligence systems for the cooperative smart farming ecosystem. IEEE Access, 8:164045–164064, 2020.

42

[131] Sai Sree Laya Chukkapalli, Aritran Piplai, Sudip Mittal, Maanak Gupta, Anupam Joshi, et al. A smart-farming ontology for attribute
based access control. In 6th IEEE International Conference on Big Data Security on Cloud (BigDataSecurity 2020), 2020.
[132] Laith Farhan and Rupak Kharel. Internet of things: Vision, future directions and opportunities. In Modern Sensing Technologies, pages
331–347. Springer, 2019.
[133] Mehdi Mohammadi, Ala Al-Fuqaha, Sameh Sorour, and Mohsen Guizani. Deep learning for IoT big data and streaming analytics: A
survey. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 2018.
[134] Deepti Gupta, Olumide Kayode, Smriti Bhatt, Maanak Gupta, and Ali Saman Tosun. Learner’s Dilemma: IoT Devices Training
Strategies in Collaborative Deep Learning. IEEE 6th World Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT), 2020.

43

