M OBILITY PATTERNS OF THE P ORTUGUESE POPULATION
DURING THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC

arXiv:2007.06506v2 [physics.soc-ph] 3 Sep 2020

A PREPRINT SUBMITTED FOR PROCEEDINGS OF THE 2021 I NTERNATIONAL C ONFERENCE ON I NFORMATION
T ECHNOLOGY & S YSTEMS
Tiago Tamagusko
Department of Civil Engineering
University of Coimbra
Coimbra, Portugal

Adelino Ferreira∗
Research Center for Territory, Transports and Environment
Department of Civil Engineering
University of Coimbra
Coimbra, Portugal

September 4, 2020

A BSTRACT
SARS-CoV-2 emerged in late 2019. Since then, it has spread to several countries, becoming classified
as a pandemic. So far, there is no definitive treatment or vaccine, so the best solution is to prevent
transmission between individuals through social distancing. However, it is difficult to measure the
effectiveness of these distance measures. Therefore, this study uses data from Google COVID-19
Community Mobility Reports to try to understand the mobility patterns of the Portuguese population
during the COVID-19 pandemic. In this study, the Rt value was modeled for Portugal. Also, the
changepoint was calculated for the population mobility patterns. Thus, the change in the mobility
pattern was used to understand the impact of social distance measures on the dissemination of
COVID-19. As a result, it can be stated that the initial Rt value in Portugal was very close to 3, falling
to values close to 1 after 25 days. Social isolation measures were adopted quickly. Furthermore, it
was observed that public transport was avoided during the pandemic. Finally, until the emergence
of a vaccine or an effective treatment, this is the new normal, and it must be understood that new
patterns of mobility, social interaction, and hygiene must be adapted to this reality.
Keywords COVID-19 · Mobility Patterns · Rt · Changepoint · Modeling

1

Introduction

At the end of 2019, the new Coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) appeared in the province of Wuhan (China) [1], causing a
disease named COVID-19 [2]. As a measure to combat COVID-19, China adopted the lockdown of this province on
January 23rd [3]. This disease spread rapidly to other countries, with the first cases reported in Europe in the second
half of January [4]. Concerning Portugal, the first confirmed case of COVID-19 was on March 3rd , 2020 [5], since the
Portuguese government has adopted a series of measures to control the pandemic. To date, there are no vaccines for this
disease, so the best strategy to combat COVID-19 is to prevent its transmission through social distancing. However, this
is not a simple task, since a large part of the social activities are based on contact people and mobility. In the specific
case of the transmission of COVID-19, the ideal scenario would be to monitor people’s contacts. Initiatives in this
direction have been developed, but they face some concerns related to privacy. Another possibility is to measure the
likelihood of contacts; this approach can be made by measuring the concentration of people in certain places. Thus, the
population’s mobility patterns may indicate the degree of adoption of measures for social distancing [6]. Nevertheless,
effectively monitoring population mobility is a difficult task for governments. Google recently released the global
time-limited sharing of mobility data [7]. This report presents several statistics and aims to promote studies that can
help combat COVID-19. Mobility data is divided into six categories: retail and recreation; grocery and pharmacy;
parks; transit stations; workplace; and residential. The values presented are percentage changes to normal (baseline)
∗

adelino@dec.uc.pt

Mobility patterns of the Portuguese population during the COVID-19 pandemic

PREPRINT

Table 1: Main public policies to mitigate the spread of COVID-19 in Portuga[5, 8]
Intervention

Description

Date (Y-m-d)

Public events
Social distancing

Gatherings with more than 100 people forbidden.
Capacity restrictions in bars and restaurants, closed night clubs, limiting
people in closed spaces are recommended.
Schools and universities closed.
Decrease in capacity to 1/3 and maintenance of a minimum distance of
1 m (ideally 2 m) in public services.
Isolation is mandatory for sick people or being monitored by health
authorities.
Official start of the lockdown in Portugal.
Gatherings of more than five people prohibited (except for large families).
Official end of the lockdown in Portugal.

2020-03-12
2020-03-12

Schools and universities
Social distancing
Self-isolating of ill people
Lockdown start
Public gatherings
Lockdown end

2020-03-14
2020-03-17
2020-03-19
2020-03-22
2020-04-02
2020-05-03

Table 2: Report categories [7]
Category

Subcategories

Retail and recreation
Grocery and pharmacy

Restaurants, cafes, shopping centers, theme parks, museums, libraries, and movie theaters.
Grocery markets, food warehouses, farmers markets, specialty food shops, drug stores,
and pharmacies.
National parks, public beaches, marinas, dog parks, plazas, and public gardens.
Public transport hubs such as subway, bus, and train stations.
Places of work.
Places of residence.

Parks
Transit stations
Workplace
Residential

mobility patterns. Currently, most European countries face the challenge of reactivating their economies; this task is
linked to the gradual re-opening of services, public communal areas, and public transport. However, it is still not fully
understood how the population has adopted the lockdown measures. In this sense, this paper finds relationships between
the mobility patterns, the social distancing measures adopted, and the spread of the disease in Portugal.

2
2.1

Materials and Methods
Events

During the COVID-19 crisis in Portugal, the government adopted several measures to mitigate the spread of the disease.
The main measures are grouped in Table 1. Other measures were adopted, but these events were considered more
relevant.
2.2

Data

To develop this study, we used mobility data [7] and the cases of COVID-19 in Portugal [9, 10]. The mobility report,
called Google COVID-19 Community Mobility Reports, is data collected from mobile devices to quantify the movement
of people during the pandemic. These values are anonymous and are aggregated based on the algorithm developed by
Google, and the artificial noise sample is added to ensure that no individual can be identified based on their location
information [11]. The report shows how the population moves and how long they stay in different locations (Table 2).
The values presented for the categories are related to a baseline, which corresponds to the days of the week (from
January 3rd to February 6th , 2020). With these parameters, it is possible to assess the population’s adherence to the
social isolation measures enacted by the government. The daily variation of values over time in Portugal, from February
15th to August 16th , is shown in Fig. 1.
In this graph, the vertical axis represents the distance to the baseline. Also, the area between red dashed lines represents
the lockdown period in Portugal (started on March 22nd and finished on May 3rd ). According to the data provided even
before the lockdown, the values for the first five categories show falls. There was growth only in the residential category.
In the days before the lockdown, there are peaks in the items Grocery and Pharmacy; this can be explained by the
general rush to get supplies. The park-related peaks do not have a simple explanation. However, after this brief initial
2

Mobility patterns of the Portuguese population during the COVID-19 pandemic

PREPRINT

Figure 1: Mobility trends for Portugal.

Figure 2: Cases of COVID-19 in Portugal.

period, the population followed the imposed recommendations avoiding these locations during the lockdown. After the
softening of the measures, there is an increasing demand (over 100% at the end of August) for parks. It is assumed that
influence of the adaptation of the population’s routines to outdoor activities. It should also be noted that before March
22nd , schools and universities were closed, and several companies started to operate in teleworking. After lockdown,
the values remained historically low. As expected, the tendency to stay at home is highly related to the workplace, in an
approximately reversed trend. In addition to the mobility data, values related to the cases of COVID-19 in Portugal
were used between March 3rd (first confirmed case) and August 20th (Fig. 2).
It is observed that the notification of the number of new cases is somewhat irregular. On weekends and holidays, the
notifications are lower, and the following notifications are “inflated”. Another problem observed is that the number of
3

Mobility patterns of the Portuguese population during the COVID-19 pandemic

PREPRINT

Table 3: Changepoint for mobility categories in Portugal1
Category

Changepoint (Y-m-d)

Retail and recreation
Grocery and pharmacy
Parks
Transit stations
Workplace
Residential

2020-03-12
2020-03-13
2020-05-20
2020-03-13
2020-03-14
2020-03-13

confirmed cases is proportional to the number of tests performed. Therefore, the procedures adopted for testing the
population influence the results of Rt in this study.
2.3

Methods

The idea of this study is that Rt can be influenced by the number of contacts between infected and susceptible individuals.
Therefore, the social distancing measures adopted by the public authorities can influence this risk factor. In this study,
the contact rate is approximated by the population’s mobility patterns during the pandemic period. Thus, it is considered
that if the population decreases its presence in parks, restaurants, transportation stations, among others, the number of
contacts decreases. Supported by the R programming language [12, 13], the Changepoint framework [14] was used to
detect changing values for mobility over time. Thus, it was possible to determine (approximately) the day when the
mobility values changed their trend. Therefore, the goal is to detect the changepoint from the time series of mobility
data provided. In this study, the mean approach was used, which uses the AMOC (at most one change) method [15] by
default to detect a changepoints from the mobility patterns sample. Another objective of this study is to calculate the Rt
in Portugal, a task that was developed with support from the R, and from the EpiEstim framework [16]. Rt is considered
as to be the average number of secondary cases that each infected individual would infect if conditions remained as they
were at time t. Thus, the value of Rt is determined according to Equation 1 [16].

R(t) =

t
X

It−s ws

(1)

s=1

Where I is the number of people infected at any given time, and ws corresponds to the probability of distribution of
infections. This distribution depends on the characteristics of the disease. So, to determine the ws, the method adopted
was Non-Parametric SI. We used the serial interval (SI) parameters presented by Nishiura et al. [17], with µ = 4.6 days
(median serial interval) and σ = 2.9 days (standard deviation). Therefore, according to the study mentioned before
[17], the average time for infected people to generate a second infection is 4.6 days. However, COVID-19 does not
present itself equally in all infected individuals, they can be infectious over a period (serial interval). Consequently, it is
expected that an individual exposed to COVID-19 may be infected and have an infectious window that lasts up to 14
days. This is the concept that endorses the WHO’s 14-day quarantine recommendation [18]. Finally, Rt is an important
indicator, as it can identify the stage of an infectious disease. For example, an Rt of 2 means that each infected person,
on average, transmits the disease to two other people. On the other hand, an Rt less than 1 indicates that the spread of
the disease is controlled, and it tends to disappear [19].

3

Results

The first result to be presented is the estimated day for a change in the behavior of the Portuguese population (Table 3).
As presented before, these values were calculated using the Changepoint framework [14] and based on the daily values
for mobility data in Portugal [7].
The approximate changepoint is between the 12th and the 14th of March. Still, it is observed that the most significant
drop occurs from March 12th , which is the date when the first public measures of social distancing were adopted. Thus,
from the moment the government recommended people to stay at home, avoid public places, and maintain social
distance, the population’s mobility pattern fell rapidly. Also, due to the characteristics of COVID-19, the number of new
cases took time to slow down. The first case of Covid-19 in Portugal was on March 3rd , however, the first calculated Rt
value is for March 10th . Therefore, these first seven days are used by EpiEstim to calculate R0 . Another observation
1

Graphical representation in the appendix B.

4

Mobility patterns of the Portuguese population during the COVID-19 pandemic

PREPRINT

Figure 3: Estimated Rt for Portugal
is that the 95% confidence interval (a grey area in the graph) is wide at the beginning of the pandemic in Portugal.
The result of the Rt value, based on epidemiological modeling2 developed for the COVID-19 pandemic in Portugal,
calculated between March 10th and 20th August, is shown in Fig. 3.
It is possible to see that the measures adopted between March and April managed to bring the Rt value from a level
close to 3 for values below 1. However, after the end of the lockdown (May 3rd ), the values have been close to 1, which
means that the COVID-19 pandemic in Portugal has not yet been overcome. Likewise, in other European countries,
measures of social distancing and lockdown were adopted, with similar Rt results or even lower than those observed in
Portugal [20].

4

Discussion

Considering a Rt less than 1 to be an indicator of “control” of the pandemic, it can be seen that this value was reached
only on April 8th in Portugal, i.e., 25 days after the consolidation of the change in the behavior of the mobility patterns
of the Portuguese population. Even after this date, the Rt value was very close to 1, yet in some moments, it was above
this threshold. Also, the change in the population’s behavior (changepoint) happened before the lockdown. Therefore,
this indicator may point out that even without the end of normal activities, people’s mobility is altered to adapt to
the existing pandemic situation. Still, the places with the lowest flow of people during the monitored period are the
transport stations. Nevertheless, this behavior of avoiding public transport creates a challenge for cities at this moment
in the resumption of the economy. Likewise, it must be understood that COVID-19 has not been eradicated in Portugal,
and the second wave of contagions remains on the radar in Europe [21]. Based on the values in Portugal, there is
such a possibility since the number of confirmed cases so far is not likely to protect a population with herd immunity.
Currently, it is essential to define red lines for the number of new daily cases. Similarly, successful measures used
in other countries must be adopted. Another critical point is that the Rt value was obtained based on the number of
infected individuals confirmed daily. These numbers may not correspond to the reality of the disease, because the
number of confirmed infected depends on the number of tests performed, and the criteria adopted to test the population
was not well explained.

5

Conclusions

As the main result of this study, it was observed that the Portuguese population reacted quickly, adopting social
distancing, and changing their mobility pattern, even be-fore the government decreed restrictive measures. Still, it took
2

Result of the modeling developed in the appendix C.

5

Mobility patterns of the Portuguese population during the COVID-19 pandemic

PREPRINT

25 days for a Rt value close to 3 to reach values near to 1. Now, it is expected that after the first wave of COVID-19,
countries are better prepared for a probable second wave. Notwithstanding, observing the behavior adopted by the
Portuguese population during that first lockdown, a second intervention of this type to be effective should last between
two to four weeks. It was also possible to observe that the sharpest drop occurred in public transport stations. Probably
for fear of crowded locations, people sought individualized alternatives. A significant part of the population most
likely used the car on their travels. With the re-opening of cities and the economy, this alternative may quickly prove
unfeasible. Therefore, there is now a small window to co-opt users for active transport. Another observation was the
significant increase in mobility in parks after the softening of lockdown measures. This trend of outdoor activities
shows the importance of these spaces for cities. Finally, we must understand that, for now, life cannot be as it was
before the pandemic. Hence, until the discovery of a vaccine, the population, and the governments must be prepared for
this new normal.

References
[1] Chaolin Huang, Yeming Wang, Xingwang Li, Lili Ren, Jianping Zhao, Yi Hu, Li Zhang, Guohui Fan, Jiuyang
Xu, Xiaoying Gu, Zhenshun Cheng, Ting Yu, Jiaan Xia, Yuan Wei, Wenjuan Wu, Xuelei Xie, Wen Yin, Hui Li,
Min Liu, Yan Xiao, Hong Gao, Li Guo, Jungang Xie, Guangfa Wang, Rongmeng Jiang, Zhancheng Gao, Qi Jin,
Jianwei Wang, and Bin Cao. Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China.
The Lancet, 395(10223):497–506, 2020.
[2] World Health Organization. Novel coronavirus - China 11-fev 2020. WHO Bulletin, (February), 2020.
[3] Qun Li, Xuhua Guan, Peng Wu, Xiaoye Wang, Lei Zhou, Yeqing Tong, Ruiqi Ren, Kathy S.M. Leung, Eric H.Y.
Lau, Jessica Y. Wong, Xuesen Xing, Nijuan Xiang, Yang Wu, Chao Li, Qi Chen, Dan Li, Tian Liu, Jing Zhao,
Man Liu, Wenxiao Tu, Chuding Chen, Lianmei Jin, Rui Yang, Qi Wang, Suhua Zhou, Rui Wang, Hui Liu, Yinbo
Luo, Yuan Liu, Ge Shao, Huan Li, Zhongfa Tao, Yang Yang, Zhiqiang Deng, Boxi Liu, Zhitao Ma, Yanping
Zhang, Guoqing Shi, Tommy T.Y. Lam, Joseph T. Wu, George F. Gao, Benjamin J. Cowling, Bo Yang, Gabriel M.
Leung, and Zijian Feng. Early transmission dynamics in Wuhan, China, of novel coronavirus-infected pneumonia.
New England Journal of Medicine, 382(13):1199–1207, 2020.
[4] Gianfranco Spiteri, James Fielding, Michaela Diercke, Christine Campese, Vincent Enouf, Alexandre Gaymard,
Antonino Bella, Paola Sognamiglio, Maria José Sierra Moros, Antonio Nicolau Riutort, Yulia V. Demina, Romain
Mahieu, Markku Broas, Malin Bengnér, Silke Buda, Julia Schilling, Laurent Filleul, Agnès Lepoutre, Christine
Saura, Alexandra Mailles, Daniel Levy-Bruhl, Bruno Coignard, Sibylle Bernard-Stoecklin, Sylvie Behillil, Sylvie
Van Der Werf, Martine Valette, Bruno Lina, Flavia Riccardo, Emanuele Nicastri, Inmaculada Casas, Amparo
Larrauri, Magdalena Salom Castell, Francisco Pozol, Rinat A. Maksyutov, Charlotte Martin, Marc Van Ranst,
Nathalie Bossuyt, Lotta Siira, Jussi Sane, Karin Tegmark-Wisell, Maria Palmérus, Eeva K. Broberg, Julien Beauté,
Pernille Jorgensen, Nick Bundle, Dmitriy Pereyaslov, Cornelia Adlhoch, Jukka Pukkila, Richard Pebody, Sonja
Olsen, and Bruno Christian Ciancio. First cases of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in the WHO European
Region, 24 January to 21 February 2020. Eurosurveillance, 25(9), 2020.
[5] Portugal. Estamos On: Resposta de Portugal à COVID-19, 2020.
[6] Matteo Chinazzi, Jessica T. Davis, Marco Ajelli, Corrado Gioannini, Maria Litvinova, Stefano Merler, Ana Pastore
Y Piontti, Kunpeng Mu, Luca Rossi, Kaiyuan Sun, Cécile Viboud, Xinyue Xiong, Hongjie Yu, M. Elizabeth
Halloran, Ira M. Longini, and Alessandro Vespignani. The effect of travel restrictions on the spread of the 2019
novel coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak. Science (New York, N.Y.), 400(April):395–400, 2020.
[7] Google LLC. Google COVID-19 Community Mobility Reports, 2020.
[8] Portugal. Governo da República Portuguesa, 2020.
[9] Ensheng Dong, Hongru Du, and Lauren Gardner. An interactive web-based dashboard to track COVID-19 in real
time. The Lancet Infectious Diseases, 20(5):533–534, 2020.
[10] Max Roser, Hannah Ritchie, Esteban Ortiz-Ospina, and Joe Hasell. Coronavirus Pandemic (COVID-19) - Statistics
and Research, 2020.
[11] Ahmet Aktay, Shailesh Bavadekar, Gwen Cossoul, John Davis, Damien Desfontaines, Alex Fabrikant, Evgeniy
Gabrilovich, Krishna Gadepalli, Bryant Gipson, Miguel Guevara, Chaitanya Kamath, Mansi Kansal, Ali Lange,
Chinmoy Mandayam, Andrew Oplinger, Christopher Pluntke, Thomas Roessler, Arran Schlosberg, Tomer Shekel,
Swapnil Vispute, Mia Vu, Gregory Wellenius, Brian Williams, and Royce J Wilson. Google COVID-19 Community
Mobility Reports: Anonymization Process Description (version 1.0). pages 1–5, 2020.
[12] R Core Team. R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing,
2017.
6

Mobility patterns of the Portuguese population during the COVID-19 pandemic

PREPRINT

[13] RStudio Team. RStudio: Integrated Development for R, 2020.
[14] Rebecca Killick and Idris A. Eckley. changepoint: An R Package for Changepoint Analysis. Journal of Statistical
Software, 58(3), 2014.
[15] David Hinkley. Inference about the change-point in a sequence of random variables. Biometrika, 57(1):1–17,
1970.
[16] Anne Cori, Neil M. Ferguson, Christophe Fraser, and Simon Cauchemez. A new framework and software to
estimate time-varying reproduction numbers during epidemics. American Journal of Epidemiology, 178(9):1505–
1512, 2013.
[17] Hiroshi Nishiura, Natalie M. Linton, and Andrei R. Akhmetzhanov. Serial interval of novel coronavirus (COVID19) infections. International Journal of Infectious Diseases, 93:284–286, 2020.
[18] WHO. Considerations for quarantine of individuals in the context of containment for coronavirus disease (
COVID-19 ). Who, (February):3–5, 2020.
[19] Jacco Wallinga and Peter Teunis. Different epidemic curves for severe acute respiratory syndrome reveal similar
impacts of control measures. American Journal of Epidemiology, 160(6):509–516, 2004.
[20] Seth Flaxman, Swapnil Mishra, Axel Gandy, H. Juliette T. Unwin, Thomas A. Mellan, Helen Coupland, Charles
Whittaker, Harrison Zhu, Tresnia Berah, Jeffrey W. Eaton, Mélodie Monod, Pablo N. Perez-Guzman, Nora Schmit,
Lucia Cilloni, Kylie E.C. Ainslie, Marc Baguelin, Adhiratha Boonyasiri, Olivia Boyd, Lorenzo Cattarino, Laura V.
Cooper, Zulma Cucunubá, Gina Cuomo-Dannenburg, Amy Dighe, Bimandra Djaafara, Ilaria Dorigatti, Sabine L.
van Elsland, Richard G. FitzJohn, Katy A.M. Gaythorpe, Lily Geidelberg, Nicholas C. Grassly, William D.
Green, Timothy Hallett, Arran Hamlet, Wes Hinsley, Ben Jeffrey, Edward Knock, Daniel J. Laydon, Gemma
Nedjati-Gilani, Pierre Nouvellet, Kris V. Parag, Igor Siveroni, Hayley A. Thompson, Robert Verity, Erik Volz,
Caroline E. Walters, Haowei Wang, Yuanrong Wang, Oliver J. Watson, Peter Winskill, Xiaoyue Xi, Patrick Gt
Walker, Azra C. Ghani, Christl A. Donnelly, Steven M. Riley, Michaela A.C. Vollmer, Neil M. Ferguson, Lucy C.
Okell, and Samir Bhatt. Estimating the effects of non-pharmaceutical interventions on COVID-19 in Europe.
Nature, 2020.
[21] Jacqui Wise. Covid-19: Risk of second wave is very real, say researchers. Bmj, 369(June):m2294, 2020.

Appendix A

Data and reproducibility

The raw data used for the development of this study are [7, 9, 10], the processed data and generated images can be
accessed at github.com/tamagusko/icts21. The codes developed in R are available by request.

Appendix B

Graphical representation of the changepoint

These graphs (Fig. B.1) support the interpretation of the data presented in Table 3. The approximate changepoint is on
March 13th (day 28) for most categories (excluding parks). Still, it is observed that the most significant drop occurs
since March 12th , this being the day of the first measures of social distance in Portugal.

Appendix C

Result of epidemiological modeling

Epidemic curve, estimated Rt value, and serial distribution (Fig. C.1) developed with support from the [16].

7

Mobility patterns of the Portuguese population during the COVID-19 pandemic

Figure B.1: Changepoint in mobility trends for Portugal

Figure C.1: Result of epidemiological modeling

8

PREPRINT

