Understanding the dynamics emerging from infodemics: A call
to action for interdisciplinary research
Stephan Leitner
University of Klagenfurt
Department of Management
Control and Strategic
Management

Bartosz Gula
University of Klagenfurt
Cognitive Psychology Unit
bartosz.gula@aau.at

Dietmar Jannach
University of Klagenfurt
Department of Applied
Informatics
dietmar.jannach@aau.at

stephan.leitner@aau.at
Ulrike Krieg-Holz
University of Klagenfurt
Department of German
Studies

Friederike Wall
University of Klagenfurt
Department of Management
Control and Strategic
Management

ulrike.krieg-holz@aau.at

friederike.wall@aau.at
Abstract
Research on infodemics, i.e., the rapid spread of (mis)information related to a hazardous event, such
as the COVID-19 pandemic, requires the integration of a multiplicity of scientific disciplines. The
dynamics emerging from infodemics have the potential to generate complex behavioral patterns. In
order to react appropriately, it is of ultimate importance for the fields of Business and Economics to
understand the dynamics emerging from it. In the short run, dynamics might lead to an adaptation in
household spending or to a shift in buying behavior towards online providers. In the long run, changes
in investments, consumer behavior, and markets are to be expected. We argue that the dynamics
emerge from complex interactions among multiple factors, such as information and misinformation
accessible for individuals and the formation and revision of beliefs. (Mis)information accessible to
individuals is, amongst others, affected by algorithms specifically designed to provide personalized
information, while automated fact-checking algorithms can help reduce the amount of circulating
misinformation. The formation and revision of individual (and probably false) beliefs and individual factchecking and interpretation of information are heavily affected by linguistic patterns inherent to
information during pandemics and infodemics and further factors, such as affect, intuition and motives.
We argue that, in order to get a deep(er) understanding of the dynamics emerging from infodemics, the
fields of Business and Economics should integrate the perspectives of Computer Science and
Information Systems, (Computational) Linguistics, and Cognitive Science into the wider context of
economic systems (e.g., organizations, markets or industries) and propose a way to do so. As research
on infodemics is a strongly interdisciplinary field and the integration of the above-mentioned disciplines
is a first step towards a holistic approach, we conclude with a call to action which should encourage
researchers to collaborate across scientific disciplines and unfold collective creativity which will push
forward research on infodemics substantially.

Keywords
Infodemics - Complex Systems - Computer Science and Information Systems – Linguistics and
Computational Linguistics - Cognitive Psychology and Cognitive Science - Recommender Systems Language Signals - False Beliefs - Guided Self-Organization

1

1. Introduction
In the past few months, we have all witnessed the short-term responses to the COVID-19
pandemic, such as extensive lockdowns in both the private and the professional spheres. We
have experienced a multiplicity of near-term consequences of such a hazardous event, for
example, the enormous costs in lives and the substantial increase in uncertainty related to the
capacity of healthcare systems. Alongside the COVID-19 pandemic, we can also observe an
accompanying infodemic. Infodemics are referred to as the rapid spread of information and
misinformation that accompanies a pandemic, which makes it difficult for decision-makers to
find reliable sources of information (Vaezi and Javanmard 2020; Zarocostas 2020).
Infodemiology (i.e., the research area related to infodemics) is concerned with the
determinants and the distribution of information and misinformation among decision makers,
with the transition of information in terms of potential knowledge gaps between best evidence
(e.g., expert knowledge) and what most people do or believe, and markers for what can be
regarded high-quality information (Eysenbach 2002; Zannettou et al. 2019). Recently, it can
be observed that the field of Infodemiology not only focuses on the supply side of information,
in terms of what sort of information is available, but also takes into account the demand side,
in terms of what kind of information is searched for by decision makers (Eysenbach 2020).
In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, we can observe that infodemics often have negative
effects on individual behavior and on the efficiency of counter-measures deployed by policymakers (World Health Organization 2018): A prominent example for the rapid spread of
(mis)information is the extensive promotion of hydroxychloroquine as treatment for the SARSCoV-2 virus in social media without reliable evidence of its efficacy and secondary effects,
which was followed by an emergency use authorization by the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) and a significant increase in prescriptions (Baker et al. 2020a; Lenzer
2020). Later, this authorization was revoked by the FDA as no benefit for decreasing the
likelihood of death or recovery by treating patients with hydroxychloroquine could be observed,
whereas serious side effects such as heart rhythm problems, kidney injuries, and liver
problems were reported (U.S. Food & Drug 2020). Interestingly, the extensive promotion of
hydroxychloroquine was state-sponsored misinformation which has a tendency to propagate
faster and further than other types of misinformation (Zannettou et al. 2019). In the context of
the COVID-19 pandemic, we can, however, observe that non-state-sponsored information
also leads to adaptations in individual behavior (Kim et al. 2019): Rumors about a possible
lockdown in the region of the Lombardy (before the lockdown was officially announced by the
government), for example, led to overcrowded trains and airports in order to escape this region
(Cinelli et al. 2020). Illyas (2020) and Ahmad and Murad (2020) report that the misinformation
disseminated in social media has increased panic and fear significantly, which resulted in a
shift in household spending. Their finding is in line with Hall et al. (2020), who argue that
spending in some sectors has increased as a response to COVID-19 (e.g., stockpiling of
needed home goods), while other sectors experience a sharp decline in spending, such as
the hospitality sector and the retail industry, which might also be caused by a tendency to
postpone purchases and consumption of discretionary products (see also Baker et al. 2020c;
Sheth 2020). Addo et al. (2020) and Chaudhary (2020) further argue that the increased panic
and fear have also led to a paradigm shift of buying behavior towards online shopping. These
short-term changes in individual behavior are likely to have a tight connection with issues of
personal protection, such as social-distancing, the obligation to wear face-masks in (selected)
public areas, and further protective measures (Funk et al. 2009).

2

Aside from these short-term consequences, long-term effects can be expected in the future
(Donthu and Gustafsson 2020). These long-term effects include major impacts on
organizations and markets which might, for example, be caused by adaptations in consumer
and travel behavior (Fernandes 2020; Nicola et al. 2020; Leitner 2020). As the pandemic and
the infodemic are still ongoing, the scale of the effects, however, is difficult to estimate (Baker
et al. 2020b; Goodell 2020). Gillingham et al. (2020) and Donthu and Gustafsson (2020)
analyze potential long-term effects of the COVID-19 pandemic for the fields of Business and
Economics and expect such effects in (i) investments, (ii) consumer behavior, and (iii) markets.
Related to (i) investments, Jordà et al. (2020) take a historical perspective and conclude that
in the aftermath of past pandemics, returns on assets have dropped and reduced economic
growth could be observed as a consequence of reduced investments. Contrary to Gillingham
et al. (2020) they argue that it is not at all certain that we will observe similar long-term effects
of the COVID-19 pandemic since the underlying conditions are different. Avoiding investments
and saving capital instead, for example, means (almost) negative returns nowadays. With
respect to (ii) consumer behavior, Sheth (2020) argues that some habits will fall back to what
was regarded to be normal before the recent pandemic, but also adds that it is inevitable that
some habits related to consumption will change. Gillingham et al. (2020) provide an illustrative
example of changing habits: They argue that – also in the long run – individuals might switch
to modes of private transport, if they remain fearful of taking public transportation which, as a
consequence, might result in new framework conditions for the entire transportation sector.
Regarding the effect of the pandemic for (iii) markets, Donthu and Gustafsson (2020) presume
that many industries will be affected in the long run, such as the travel industry which already
struggles with empty hotel rooms and airlines which already cut workforce by significant
numbers. They also argue that organizations will rethink their supply chains and move them
closer where they are needed, which is likely to have serious consequences for the fields of
Business and Economics as well.1
Previous studies suggest that some shifts in both short- and long-term behavior, as outlined
above, are driven by false beliefs (Bernstein et al. 2005; Geraerts et al. 2008), i.e., by an
individual belief or representation about the world which does not match reality (BaumingerZviely 2013). Infodemics play an important role in this context as they substantially contribute
to the formation and propagation of false beliefs: It is well known that repeating information
increases its subjective truth (Hasher et al. 1977; Unkelbach and Rom 2017). The frequent
sharing of misinformation about COVID-19 and the multiplication of this information via social
media are, for example, likely to produce false beliefs (see also Unkelbach et al. 2019).
Previous studies also show that language plays an important role in the development of false
beliefs: For instance, Farrar and Maag (2002) elaborate on the importance of receptive
vocabulary in the context of false belief formation, and Slade and Ruffman (2005) find that
over-all language comprehension rather than any specific aspect (e.g., linguistic complexity)
impacts on false beliefs. With respect to complementation and false beliefs, De Villiers and
Pyers (2002) argue that sentential complement structures have a unique role in false-belief
understanding; the mental state verb “think”, for example, allows to embed one proposition
into another and, as a consequence, to distinguish between what a person thinks and what is
1

For a detailed discussion of potential effects of the ongoing pandemic for different areas of Business
and Economics, the reader is also referred to the thematic collection on “COVID-19 impact on
business and research” published in volume 117 of the Journal of Business and Research.

3

true (see also Farrar et al. 2013). Loftus (2005) highlights the severe effect of infodemics when
beliefs are formed: She shows that misinformation can even lead to the creation of recollection
of past events that have never occurred. What makes false beliefs particularly challenging is
that they are not only likely to have immediate behavioral (short-term) consequences, but may
also trigger long-term behavioral consequences, as they tend to last (Laney et al. 2008). Once
formed, false beliefs might also be difficult to convert into true beliefs: Niiniluoto (1977, 2011)
shows that even true information can lead to faulty belief revision, so that the revised belief is
even farther from the truth than the unrevised one.
In order to react appropriately to the current situation, it is of ultimate importance for the fields
of Business and Economics to understand the dynamics which emerge from infodemics: First,
from a short-term perspective, the interactions between policy measures taken in order to
contain the pandemic, the rapid spread of information and misinformation, the formation of
beliefs and their immediate behavioral implications are widely unknown. Second, from a longterm perspective, research on the interaction between infodemics, belief formation and
revision and long-term behavioral implications is required. Third, as the pandemic is still
ongoing, the interaction of behavioral implications on different timescales cannot be ignored:
It is, for example, widely unknown, how interactions between concurrently emerging shortand long-term consequences caused (or enforced) by infodemics are shaped. Fourth, from a
macroscopic point of view, it is of ultimate interest to understand how all these consequences
of infodemics accumulate to behavioral patterns of organizations, markets, industries,
economies, or societies. The ongoing digitalization adds additional complexity to infodemicsrelated research, as the popular use of digital communication technologies and social media
accelerates the diffusion of information substantially: This trend is also reflected in the spread
of (mis)information related to the COVID-19 pandemic (Pulido et al. 2020; Rovetta and
Bhagavathula 2020); it has led to significantly more worldwide fear, panic, and uncertainty
when compared to infodemics that emerged from previous pandemics (Cinelli et al. 2020;
Vaezi and Javanmard 2020). These observations highlight the need for the fields of Business
and Economics to develop a deep(er) understanding of the dynamics related to infodemics.
We should make an effort to learn from the current pandemic and infodemic in order to be
well-prepared for future outbreaks (Donthu and Gustafsson 2020).
Dealing with infodemics requires a highly interdisciplinary approach and this position paper is
a call to action for such kind of research on infodemics. As already mentioned, according to
Eysenbach (2002, 2020), the field of Infodemiology is concerned with both, the supply- and
the demand-side of information. In order to give credit to the importance of interdisciplinary
collaboration on this topic, we particularly take into account four disciplinary perspectives
which we consider particularly important for representing the perspectives on information
supply and demand, and which, not at least through their interplay, are very promising to
substantially contribute to gaining a deep(er) understanding of the dynamics emerging from
infodemics. First, through the lens of Computer Science and Information Systems, the
information accessible to individuals is central, whereby the way information spreads in a
society is strongly affected by the employed algorithms for information provision and by the
way information provision is aligned with personal interests. The applied algorithms are often
designed to react to the demand of specific pieces of information, which is why Computer
Science and Information Systems is not only concerned with information supply but also
connects the perspectives of supply to demand (see Sec. 2.1). Second, from the perspective
of (Computational) Linguistics, specific language signals in social communication which
4

emerge during pandemics need in-depth investigation (e.g., emotion-related words, avoidance
of causal terms). Incorporating linguistic patterns in the context of infodemics is highly relevant
since these patterns strongly affect the way information is packaged, interpreted, factchecked, made sense of by non-expert persons, and how misinformation is automatically
detected. The field of (Computational) Linguistics puts strong emphasis on the supply side of
information and contributes to accurate translation of knowledge to socially spread
(mis)information, thus allowing (automated) fact-checking and the identification of linguistic
patterns which might distort the message contained in the information (see Sec. 2.2). Third,
from a Cognitive Psychology point of view, the focus is on the assessment of how available
information (e.g., driven by algorithms and by personalization) and the language signals affect
the way pandemics and policies are perceived (e.g., in the form of false beliefs) and on how
they influence individual behavior. This field, therefore, is mainly concerned with the demand
side of information (see Sec. 2.3). Fourth, while the Cognitive Psychology viewpoint mainly
focuses on the level of the individual, the perspective of Business and Economics allows for
integrating the aforementioned perspectives into the wider context of economic systems by
analyzing how individual behavioral implications (which probably materialize on multiple timescales) interact with rapidly spreading (mis)information and with each other, and how they
accumulate to macroscopic patterns of organizations, markets, industries, economies or
societies (see Sec. 2.4). By doing so, the holistic and integrated perspective resulting from the
collaboration of the fields mentioned above, prepares the ground for gaining fundamental
insights into the dynamics emerging from infodemics.
2.

Selected disciplinary perspectives on infodemics and the potential of their
integration

2.1. Computer Science and Information Systems: Algorithm-controlled information
dissemination and personalization
In the last two decades, we have observed disruptive changes in terms of how information is
spread in societies. While traditional mass media channels continue to exist, the Web and in
particular Social Media have become the main source of information for the majority of people
in today’s digital society. These developments have made information not only more easily
accessible for consumers but have also led to the rise of digital businesses like Google,
Facebook, or Twitter, which have an enormous, global-scale reach. As a result, information
that is spread via such channels is often viewed by millions of people within short periods of
time.
Unlike traditional media, such online information channels do no longer rely on classical
gatekeepers, such as journalists or editors, to ensure the quality or reliability of the information
that is spread. This makes such channels generally vulnerable of being used for the
dissemination of misinformation in the form of an infodemic. A particular problem that can
additionally contribute to the rapid spread of misinformation on such channels is grounded in
the fact that the selection of the content provided through these channels is determined by
algorithms. These algorithms are usually optimized to identify, in a personalized way, those
pieces of content that are most likely viewed by an individual consumer. The underlying reason
for trying to optimize the number of ‘clicks’ instead of finding the most relevant pieces of
content for a user lies in the advertisement-based business model of many online services.
5

The algorithms that select and rank the contents for the individual users, e.g., in the form of
recommender systems (Jannach et al. 2010), are in most cases based on statistics and
machine learning. As such, they learn over time which pieces of content, e.g., news articles
or videos, are likely to be clicked on by users. As a result of using such learning strategies, a
reinforcement (“blockbuster”) effect can often be observed (Fleder and Hosanagar 2009)
where the rich get richer: Content that has reached a certain level of popularity continues to
be recommended to even more users, which, in turn, can propagate the formation of false
beliefs.
But this reinforcement bias is not the only problem of today’s algorithm-controlled
dissemination of information. The increased levels of personalization can also lead to filter
bubbles (Pariser 2011) and echo chambers (Celis et al. 2019). The reason is that modern
algorithms learn over time which type of content a certain user likes or dislikes. Again, to
optimize their business, the algorithms will try to focus on content that the user is likely to click
on. In the context of an infodemic, this can lead to the effect that users at some stage are
presented only with one of several existing theories, e.g., regarding the appropriateness of
certain measures taken by policymakers to contain the pandemic. This one-sided information
state, as a result, can further reinforce the spread of misinformation and strengthen false
beliefs.
In the academic literature in the fields of Computer Science and Information Systems, these
potentially negative effects of personalization and algorithm-driven content recommendations
have recently attracted increased research interest. Correspondingly, questions of algorithmic
“fairness” and how to provide users with understandable explanations why certain items were
recommended moved into the focus of researchers. These problems are, however, far from
being solved. Besides algorithmic challenges, a fundamental problem usually lies in defining
what being fair actually means in a given context (Friedler et al. 2016; Burke 2017;
Abdollahpouri et al. 2020).
2.2. Linguistics: Signals and patterns of (mis)information in social communication
While Computer Science algorithms distribute containers of information fitting systematic
behavioral patterns (e.g., counting clicks as indicators of content-preferences and
recommending “similar” containers), the study of language (Linguistics) is directly concerned
with the contents of these information containers – at the lexical level of words, at the
compositional level of utterances (assertions, claims, stipulations, etc.) and at the pragmatic
level of social language use (e.g., information exchange, stance taking or persuasion in
debates, deceptive, aggressive and other kinds of “toxic” speech). Hence, from a linguistic
viewpoint, the analysis of infodemic utterances (including fake news, propaganda, troll
messages, etc.) focuses primarily on linguistic signals indicating their factuality, claim, opinion,
trust, or believability status. Early work on distinguishing liars from truth-tellers tried to identify
such cues directly, e.g., liars using fewer self-references and more other-references, avoiding
causal terms, using more negative emotion words, and revealing characteristic syntactic
patterns (Burgoon et al. 2003; Newman et al. 2003; Hancock et al. 2007; Lee et al. 2009). Yet,
a recent survey by Gröndahl & Asokan (2019) provides ample evidence that the search for
general stylistic traces of deception, i.e., linguistic markers carrying high emotional load, a high

6

degree of generality/abstractness, high/low use of first-person pronouns, high use of verbs
and certainty-related words, might miss significant portions of such biased language.
An alternative avenue of research on testing the believability of assertions does not focus on
direct linguistic cues but has its roots in ancient rhetorics (e.g., considering syllogisms) and
concentrates on discourse pragmatics. This approach is based on the seminal work of
Stephen E. Toulmin (1958). He introduced the so-called Toulmin schema which distinguishes
three fundamental and three auxiliary components of coherent argumentative discourse.
According to Toulmin, a claim (thesis, conclusion) can be derived from a piece of information
(data) by making use of inference rules (warrants). This standard deductive reasoning
scheme, well-known from standard formal logics, can be further complemented by supporting
evidence (backing, typically general norms, value sets, moral standards, etc.) adding
additional evidence mostly to warrants but also to data. The strength or certainty of information
can further be adjusted by modal qualifiers at any stage (such as ”mostly’’, ”probably’’),
whereas exclusive conditions (rebuttals) can be expressed to indicate exceptions to general
rules. Due to its high degree of idealization, the Toulmin schema has stimulated research in
many fields – from formal logics and artificial intelligence (Verheij 2009; Caminada 2018) to
pragmatics-focused linguistics (van Eemeren and Grootendorst 2004) and computational
linguistics (Cabrio and Villata 2012; Hidey et al. 2017). In particular, the automatic recognition
of (im)proper argumentation structure has recently received enormous attention as a side
effect from argumentation mining (Lippi and Torroni 2016; Habernal and Gurevych 2017).
There are also strong links of argumentation process modeling to the fields of software agents
(Parsons et al. 1998) and multi-agent decision making (Karacapilidis and Papadias 1998).
Rather than explicitly enumerating specific linguistic cues, current work in the field of automatic
natural language processing investigates the potential of automatic classification methods to
distinguish between truth-friendly and -unfriendly language use (for a recent survey, cf.
Fitzpatrick et al. 2015), employing deep learning architectures, in particular (Popat et al. 2018;
Liu and Wu 2020). Especially, the areas of fake news detection (Popat et al. 2018; Liu and
Wu 2020) and fact/claim checking (Rashkin et al. 2017; Volkova et al. 2017; Thorne and
Vlachos 2018) have recently generated substantial insights into tracking the truth status of
verbal statements.
However, unlike the vast majority of language understanding tasks, (non-expert) persons face
substantial problems in discerning deceptive from non-deceptive language. Actually, their
accuracy – when it comes to detecting textual deception – is approximately on a chance level,
or even worse (Bond and DePaulo 2006) so that valid ground truth is hard to attain. Hence,
besides testing the performance of deception/fake classifiers the creation of reliable test data
sets (gold standards) is a major challenge in current language-focused infodemics research
and covers a broad range of topics: deception and lies (Fitzpatrick and Bachenko 2019), fake
news, and fact checking of claims (Augenstein et al. 2019). They form the benchmarks
underlying specialized challenge competitions, e.g., aiming at fact checking in social media
(Barrón-Cedeño et al. 2020).
2.3. Cognitive Psychology: Risk perception, false beliefs, and individual behavior
The Cognitive Psychology perspective switches the focus from the way information is
designed and disseminated to how pandemics and infodemics are perceived and how beliefs
are formed and revised. Research on decision-making and thinking distinguishes between two

7

modes of thinking: One more deliberate and analytic, the other more intuitive and heuristic
(Kahneman 2003; Evans and Stanovich 2013). Intuitive thinking, though often accurate, may
lead to systematic biases that appear even more likely in the case of information of low quality
or systematic misinformation spreading through social media. For example, people prefer to
search for information that supports rather than challenges prior beliefs (confirmation bias)
and are overly reliant on the believability of conclusions when assessing the quality of
arguments (belief bias). Also, the extent to which one’s own opinions are shared by others is
frequently overestimated (false consensus effect), as is the impression of how widespread
beliefs of others are in specific social network structures (majority illusion; Lerman et al. 2016).
Various cognitive tools have been tested in recent years that aim to increase individuals’ ability
to judge the quality of information and the credibility of sources, and to empower autonomous
decision-making in general (Lorenz-Spreen et al. 2020).
Despite these organized efforts of misinformation containment and public fact checking, false
beliefs tend to persist. Belief updating and revision occurs rather slowly, following the principle
of minimal change that does not question the wider belief system or more fundamental core
beliefs (Gärdenfors 1992). Lewandowsky et al. (2012) give an overview of the causal
mechanisms which help explain why people often do not change their beliefs and behavior
even if the information on which their beliefs are based has been shown to be false and
retracted. When seeking information, people appear to accept the truthfulness of speakers by
default and tend to question the quality of information mostly if it is inconsistent with their
beliefs, produces an incoherent narrative, or overt cues or significant others question the
credibility of the source. Information is usually part of broader narratives used by everyone to
extract meaning from unfolding events. Mere fact checking is more likely to be effective, if it
also offers verified alternative narratives for both, the original false and the verified information
(Lewandowsky et al. 2012).
In a digital environment that develops at a fast pace, risk and digital information literacy are
more important than ever. Research shows that risk perception may be distorted if
explanations are missing, when actually accurate information is presented in a format that is
not well-tuned to the cognitive system of recipients, or when the risks involve low-probability
events with particularly threatening consequences (Slovic 2010; Gigerenzer 2015). For
instance, people have difficulties in understanding what it actually means when today’s
weather report announces a 30% chance of rain, or when a public health organization posts
that the relative risk of thrombosis increases by 100% when taking a contraceptive pill. Serious
incidents such as the terrorist attacks on September 11 and perhaps COVID-19 incite strong
emotions and increase perceived risks way beyond their actual probability. Gigerenzer (2004)
showed that in the three months following September 11, American citizens reduced air travel
which in turn led to a substantial increase in fatal car accidents. In order to reduce such
hazards, public policy making seems to face the difficult task to not only consider direct,
objective risks but also to take factors into account that influence public risk perception and to
predict the corresponding behavioral consequences.
In order to increase risk and digital information literacy and autonomous decision-making in
general, a number of cognitive tools have been introduced in recent years. Kozyreva,
Lewandowsky, and Hertwig (2019) distinguish nudging and boosting. Whereas nudges
typically target the design of the choice environment and require little activity from users,
boosts address lasting changes in competences of users and require active cooperation. As

8

an example for boosts, the procedure used by professional fact-checkers was translated into
training interventions and decision aids that guide users in how to evaluate the credibility of
the source, the evidence in arguments and how to read laterally, i.e., cross-check information
on other sites (Wineburg and McGrew 2019). Another type of boost has been termed
knowledge-based, deliberate ignorance (Hertwig and Engel 2016). With an overwhelming
amount of easily available information, we routinely decide which information to pick up and
which to ignore. Tools supporting deliberate ignorance make use of ratings or other cues to
source quality. People seek information to satisfy basic needs such as the need for
competence, the need for autonomy and the need to belong (Deci and Ryan 2000). Both public
policies to cope with the infodemic and cognitive tools designed to improve decision-making
autonomy, appear most promising the more they consider all three needs together.
2.4. Business and Economics: Integrating micro- and macro-perspectives on
infodemics and coordination of individual behavior
From the perspective of Business and Economics, the three views discussed before can be
integrated into the wider context of entire economic systems, such as organizations, markets,
industries, economies or societies. From a macroscopic perspective, such systems can be
regarded as complex and adaptive social systems from which some peculiar properties can
be abstracted (Thurner et al. 2018): First, at the micro-level, such systems consist many
entities with often complex interactions between them. These entities can, for example,
represent consumers in a market, individuals who communicate information in their social
networks, firms within an economy, entities which provide, personalize and disseminate
information, institutions which provide automated fact-checking of information, policymakers,
and the government. The interactions between the parts of a complex and adaptive system
are driven by specific laws and channels of interaction. Moreover, interactions may be subject
to adjustments and emergence shaped by the entities’ actions and interactions. Against the
background of infodemics, fundamental channels of interactions are, for example, social
media platforms, further means of digital communication, personal interaction and other
entities which provide individuals with personalized information.
Second, all entities of the micro-level of such a system have individual characteristics which
cover, for example, roles to play in the society, states of information, linguistic patterns in
communication, cognitive capacities to form and revise beliefs, the capabilities to fact-check
information, and algorithms to automatically detect misinformation. Together with the laws and
channels of interactions, the individual characteristics infer the macro-properties of the entire
system. In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, resilience to misinformation and information
literacy, or specific types of herd behavior in terms of opinion (or belief) dynamics could be
among such properties at the macroscopic level. From the fields of Business and Economics,
short- and long-term behavioral implications of infodemics, such as adaptations in travel or
buying behavior, changes in consumption patterns or adaptation of investment behavior could
be of ultimate interest.
Third, the society adapts to its environment over time, whereby the adaptive change is
substantially governed by the system’s environment and the information accessible to the
parts of the system (Simon 1990; Thurner et al. 2018). In the context of hazardous situations
such as the COVID-19 pandemic, the system’s environment is - in large parts - structured by
policy-decisions: Enforceable (behavioral) rules such as compulsory face masks, travel bans,

9

and lockdowns of entire industries shape the limits of a society’s room for adaptivity
substantially and might govern individual behavior into a specific direction. Previous research
has indicated that these features of the environment tend to shape the short-term behavioral
implications (Funk et al. 2009). In addition to the structure of the environment, such a system’s
behavior is affected by the states of information of its members, which can be interpreted as
a function of the infodemics, their capabilities to collect, decipher, fact-check and make use of
this information, and the resulting (false) beliefs which, in turn, are regarded to be a main
consequence for long-term behavioral implications.
Integrating the perspectives of Computer Science and Information Systems, (Computational)
Linguistics, Cognitive Psychology, and Business and Economics using a complex and
adaptive system approach, as proposed in this paper, appears to be particularly fruitful:
• First, characteristics of (human) entities at the micro-level are in large parts shaped by
factors which are fed by insights from these fields; such individual characteristics
include cognitive capacities to form beliefs, fact-checking skills, and mandatory rules
but also a wide range of communication strategies to properly situate linguistic
behavior in a given discourse context. Further, non-human entities at the micro-level
can, for example, represent algorithms to automatically fact-check information or
recommend information to human entities. There might be complex dynamics at the
micro-level: Non-human entities, on the one hand, usually acquire and adapt their
capabilities over time, i.e., automated fact-checking might be carried out by intelligent
software which autonomously learns to classify information, and information filtering
algorithms collect personalized information, whereby characteristics of information
recipients (such as personal interests) are to be learned over time. Humans, on the
other hand, acquire and adapt their skills to efficiently fact-check information over time,
they develop individual and situation-specific verbal communication routines, and form
and revise (false) beliefs which induce long-term behavioral implications. Individuals
might also self-organize themselves according to accessible information and their
beliefs: Previous research, for example, shows that a collective identity (e.g., in the
form of shared beliefs) facilitates the formation of groups (Van Dyke and Amos 2017),
which might affect the behavioral implications induced by infodemics. At the microlevel, the consequences of interactions among these factors are still widely unknown.
Integrating them in the framework of a complex and adaptive system promises to
provide substantial insights into the behavioral dynamics of infodemics.
• Second, since pandemics and infodemics are continuous processes, effects on
different timescales might be effective concurrently. For example, long-term behavioral
implications such as the change in consumption habits or a shift in investment behavior
might endogenously emerge, while new short-term behavioral adaptation due to issues
of personal protection materializes. It is currently widely unknown how responses to
pandemics and infodemics on different timescales interact and how the resulting
behavioral implications for the fields of Business and Economics are shaped.
• Third, we can observe that the perception of the current pandemic and (individual)
responses to it in both the long and the short run tend to be rather diverse (Dryhurst et
al. 2020; Shefrin 2020), with diverse, heterogeneous and possibly dynamic behavioral
implications at the level of the individual. The integration of the disciplinary
perspectives considered in this position paper into a holistic approach can help us
understand which macroscopic patterns emerge from the microscopic dynamics

10

exemplified above. Understanding both the micro- and the macro patterns will provide
the fields of Business and Economics substantial insights and will aid in efficiently and
effectively responding not only to the current but also to future infodemics.
One particularly interesting question in this context is, how individuals can be guided in their
adaptive behavior so that both the micro- and the macro-properties resemble required
characteristics, such as information literacy or specific types of behavior to mitigate negative
effects of the pandemic for organizations or the economy.2 The behavioral dynamics emerging
from infodemics might add additional complexity to this question as coordination requires
communication, and the efficiency of the communication might be affected by infodemics.
Infodemics and coordination of individual and collective behavior towards a specific set of
objectives are interrelated in a multiplicity of ways. First, one may argue that infodemics hinder
coordination of behavior towards a specific objective: misinformation might unfold in unwanted
behavioral dynamics as it might provide individuals with reasons for not adhering to specific
policy decisions or for behaving so that specific objectives cannot be achieved. Believers in
conspiracy theories, for example, may regard the actions taken by authorities as evidence for
their theory and, thus, refuse even more to comply with policies. Through the lens of Business
and Economics, such adverse behavior might be of ultimate interest: Understanding the
behavioral dynamics which emerge from infodemics are, for example, of high importance in a
planning context; understanding the dynamics allows for better anticipating the behavior of an
organization's stakeholders, which might help avoiding a substantial amplification of
uncertainty in the aftermath of COVID-19.
Second, certain efforts towards coordination may be made to mitigate infodemics. In the short
term, such counter measures could be the design of algorithms for information provision,
personalization of provided information, public fact-checking of information or the automated
detection of misinformation by the means of computational linguistics. In the long term,
coordination efforts could, for example, cover issues of education in order to increase risk and
digital information literacy (e.g., in terms of boosting). In addition to gaining a mere
understanding of the dynamics emerging from an infodemic (as discussed above), efficient
coordination enables guiding the behavior. In order to do so, it is utterly important to
understand the dynamics emerging from infodemics in terms of how individuals and collectives
respond to coordination efforts. Policies to strengthen the economy in the aftermath of COVID19, for example, need to be carefully tested before being launched in order to avoid adverse
effects triggered by unprecedented dynamics emerging from the COVID-19 pandemic and the
accompanying infodemic.
Third, as coordination involves communication, the question whether communication in the
course of coordination could accidentally or deliberately also be part of the infodemic is
particularly difficult. Therefore, it is of ultimate importance to understand the dynamics which
an infodemic unfolds so that the communication in the course of coordination does not fuel
unwanted behavioral, social and economic dynamics but contributes to the guided selforganization of a society so that intended patterns (e.g., in terms of achieved objectives)
emerge (Wall 2019; Leitner and Wall 2020; Reinwald et al. 2020).

2

In a broad sense of meaning, coordination can be referred to as the manifold of
mechanisms to guide self-organization which aim at aligning the behavior of individuals to
specific objectives (Baldassari 2009).
11

3. Summary and outlook
In this position paper, we particularly focus on the phenomenon of infodemics, i.e., on
information and misinformation which spreads rapidly in developed societies and makes it
difficult for decision-makers to find reliable, trustworthy sources of information. The dynamics
emerging from infodemics can be complex, result in adverse individual behavior and might
render policies to contain the effects of hazardous events inefficient. Such an infodemic can
be observed in the context of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. We argue that it is of ultimate
importance for the field of Business and Economics to gain a deep(er) and substantial
understanding of the dynamics emerging from the current infodemic. We propose to employ
powerful techniques like agent-based modelling which could be a valuable approach for
predicting the effects of actions taken in a crisis situation such as the COVID-19 pandemic in
conjunction with the human behavior within the crisis (Adam 2020; Squazzoni et al. 2020)
Research on infodemics is a strongly interdisciplinary endeavor: It requires the integration of
a multiplicity of disciplines. In this position paper, we put a particular focus on the fields of
Computer Science and Information Systems, (Computational) Linguistics, Cognitive
Psychology, and Business and Economics. The field of Business and Economics has the
potential to integrate the views of these disciplines into a holistic research perspective. We
argue that this can be done by taking a complex and self-adaptive system approach: Other
disciplines often focus on the level of the individual, for example in terms of individual
characteristics such as cognitive capacities, information search behavior, or
mandatory/optional use of verbal communication rules and strategies. The integration into a
complex system allows for inferring the dynamics which emerge from such individual
characteristics at the level of an economic system, such as organizations or the society.
Understanding these dynamics is of ultimate importance for the fields of Business and
Economics, as it supports organizations and policymakers in anticipating and coordinating
behavior and, thereby, helps reduce the amplification of uncertainty potentially resulting from
the COVID-19 pandemic.
This position paper almost exclusively focuses on the above-mentioned fields of Computer
Science and Information Systems, (Computational) Linguistics, Cognitive Psychology, and
Business and Economics. In order to get a full(er) and deep(er) understanding of the dynamics
emerging from infodemics, the integration of further scientific fields, such as Sociology, Ethics,
Cultural Studies, and the Legal Sciences is strongly needed. Thus, aside from highlighting the
importance of the fields currently in focus for research on infodemics, we conclude with a call
to action for strongly interdisciplinary research on this topic involving related fields as well.
Such exceptional times require us to look beyond the horizon of our own discipline and to join
forces in order to unfold collective creativity.
References
Abdollahpouri H, Adomavicius G, Burke R, et al (2020) Multistakeholder recommendation:
Survey and research directions. User Model User-adapt Interact 30:127–158
Adam D (2020) Modelling the pandemic: The simulations driving the world’s response to
COVID-19. Nature 580:316–318
Addo PC, Jiaming F, Kulbo NB, Liangqiang L (2020) COVID-19: fear appeal favoring
purchase behavior towards personal protective equipment. Serv Ind J 40:471–490
Ahmad AR, Murad HR (2020) The impact of social media on panic during the COVID-19

12

pandemic in Iraqi Kurdistan: online questionnaire study. J Med Internet Res 22:e19556
Augenstein I, Lioma C, Wang D, et al (2019) MultiFC: A real-world multi-domain dataset for
evidence-based fact checking of claims. In: EMNLP-IJCNLP 2019 – Proceedings of the
2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing & 9th
International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing. Hong Kong, China, pp
4685–4697
Baker P, Rogers K, Enrich D, Haberman M (2020a) Trump’s aggressive advocacy of malaria
drug for treating coronavirus divides medical community. New York Times 6
Baker SR, Bloom N, Davis SJ, Terry SJ (2020b) Covid-induced economic uncertainty. NBER
Work Pap No. 26983:1–16
Baker SR, Farrokhnia RA, Meyer S, et al (2020c) How does household spending respond to
an epidemic? consumption during the 2020 covid-19 pandemic. National Bureau of
Economic Research
Baldassari D (2009) Collective Action. In: Handbook of Analytical Sociology. pp 316–332
Barrón-Cedeño A, Elsayed T, Nakov PI, et al (2020) CheckThat! at CLEF 2020: Enabling the
Automatic Identification and Verification of Claims in Social Media. In: Advances in
Information Retrieval. ECIR 2020 – Proceedings of the 42nd European Conference on
Information Retrieval Research. Springer, Lisbon, Portugal, pp 499–507
Bauminger-Zviely N (2013) False-Belief Task. In: Volkmar FR (ed) Encyclopedia of Autism
Spectrum Disorders. Springer New York, New York, NY, p 1249
Bernstein DM, Laney C, Morris EK, Loftus EF (2005) False memories about food can lead to
food avoidance. Soc Cogn 23:11–34
Bond CF, DePaulo BM (2006) Accuracy of deception judgments. Personal Soc Psychol Rev
10:214–234
Burgoon JK, Blair JP, Qin T, Nunamaker Jr. JF (2003) Detecting deception through linguistic
analysis. In: Intelligence and Security Informatics. ISI 2003 – Proceedings of the 1st
NSF/NIJ Symposium on Intelligence and Security Informatics. Springer, Tucson,
Arizona, pp 91–101
Burke R (2017) Multisided fairness for recommendation. arXiv Prepr arXiv170700093
Cabrio E, Villata S (2012) Combining textual entailment and argumentation theory for
supporting online debates interactions. In: ACL 2012 – Proceedings of the 50th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Jeju Island, Korea, pp 208–
212
Caminada M (2018) Rationality postulates: applying argumentation theory for non-monotonic
reasoning. In: Handbook of Formal Argumentation. pp 771–795
Celis LE, Kapoor S, Salehi F, Vishnoi N (2019) Controlling polarization in personalization: An
algorithmic framework. In: Proceedings of the conference on fairness, accountability,
and transparency. pp 160–169
Chaudhary H (2020) Analyzing the Paradigm Shift of Consumer Behavior Towards ECommerce During Pandemic Lockdown. Available SSRN 3664668
Cinelli M, Quattrociocchi W, Galeazzi A, et al (2020) The covid-19 social media infodemic.
arXiv Prepr arXiv200305004
De Villiers JG, Pyers JE (2002) Complements to cognition: A longitudinal study of the
relationship between complex syntax and false-belief-understanding. Cogn Dev
17:1037–1060
Deci EL, Ryan RM (2000) The “what” and “why” of goal pursuits: Human needs and the selfdetermination of behavior. Psychol Inq 11:227–268
Donthu N, Gustafsson A (2020) Effects of COVID-19 on business and research. J Bus Res
117:284
Dryhurst S, Schneider CR, Kerr J, et al (2020) Risk perceptions of COVID-19 around the
world. J Risk Res 1–13
Evans JSBT, Stanovich KE (2013) Dual-process theories of higher cognition: Advancing the
debate. Perspect Psychol Sci 8:223–241
Eysenbach G (2002) Infodemiology: The epidemiology of (mis) information. Am J Med
113:763–765

13

Eysenbach G (2020) How to fight an infodemic: the four pillars of infodemic management. J
Med Internet Res 22:e21820
Farrar MJ, Lee H, Cho Y-H, et al (2013) Language and false belief in Korean-speaking and
English-speaking children. Cogn Dev 28:209–221
Farrar MJ, Maag L (2002) Early language development and the emergence of a theory of
mind. First Lang 22:197–213
Fernandes N (2020) Economic effects of coronavirus outbreak (COVID-19) on the world
economy. Available SSRN 3557504
Fitzpatrick E, Bachenko J (2019) Building a forensic corpus to test language-based
indicators of deception. Lang Comput 71:183–196
Fitzpatrick E, Bachenko J, Fornaciari T (2015) Automatic detection of verbal deception.
Morgan & Claypool
Fleder D, Hosanagar K (2009) Blockbuster culture’s next rise or fall: The impact of
recommender systems on sales diversity. Manage Sci 55:697–712
Friedler SA, Scheidegger C, Venkatasubramanian S (2016) On the (im)possibility of
fairness. arXiv Prepr arXiv160907236
Funk S, Gilad E, Watkins C, Jansen VAA (2009) The spread of awareness and its impact on
epidemic outbreaks. Proc Natl Acad Sci 106:6872–6877
Gärdenfors P (1992) Belief revision: An introduction. In: Belief Revision. Cambridge
University Press, pp 1–28
Geraerts E, Bernstein DM, Merckelbach H, et al (2008) Lasting false beliefs and their
behavioral consequences. Psychol Sci 19:749–753
Gigerenzer G (2015) Risk savvy: How to make good decisions. Penguin Books, New York
Gigerenzer G (2004) Dread risk, September 11, and fatal traffic accidents. Psychol Sci
15:286–287
Gillingham KT, Knittel CR, Li J, et al (2020) The Short-run and Long-run Effects of Covid-19
on Energy and the Environment. Joule 4:1337–1341
Goodell JW (2020) COVID-19 and finance: Agendas for future research. Financ Res Lett
101512
Gröndahl T, Asokan N (2019) Text analysis in adversarial settings: Does deception leave a
stylistic trace? ACM Comput Surv 52:#45
Habernal I, Gurevych I (2017) Argumentation mining in user-generated web discourse.
Comput Linguist 43:125–179
Hall MC, Prayag G, Fieger P, Dyason D (2020) Beyond panic buying: consumption
displacement and COVID-19. J Serv Manag
Hancock JT, Curry LE, Goorha S, Woodworth M (2007) On lying and being lied to: A
linguistic analysis of deception in computer-mediated communication. Discourse
Process 45:1–23
Hasher L, Goldstein D, Toppino T (1977) Frequency and the conference of referential
validity. J Verbal Learning Verbal Behav 16:107–112
Hertwig R, Engel C (2016) Homo ignorans: Deliberately choosing not to know. Perspect
Psychol Sci 11:359–372
Hidey C, Musi E, Hwang A, et al (2017) Analyzing the semantic types of claims and
premises in an online persuasive forum. In: Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on
Argument Mining. pp 11–21
Ilyas U (2020) Infodemic vs Pandemic: Role of social media. Rawal Med J 45:500–501
Jannach D, Zanker M, Felfernig A, Friedrich G (2010) Recommender systems: an
introduction. Cambridge University Press
Jordà Ò, Singh SR, Taylor AM (2020) Longer-run economic consequences of pandemics.
National Bureau of Economic Research
Kahneman D (2003) A perspective on judgment and choice: mapping bounded rationality.
Am Psychol 58:697–720
Karacapilidis N, Papadias D (1998) Hermes: Supporting argumentative discourse in multi
agent decision making. In: AAAI-IAAI ’98 – Proceedings of the 15th National
Conference on Artificial Intelligence & 10th Conference on Innovative Applications of

14

Artificial Intelligence. AAAI/MIT Press, Madison, Wisconsin, USA, pp 827–832
Kim L, Fast SM, Markuzon N (2019) Incorporating media data into a model of infectious
disease transmission. PLoS One 14:e0197646
Kozyreva A, Lewandowsky S, Hertwig R (2019) Citizens versus the internet: Confronting
digital challenges with cognitive tools. Prepr PsyArXiv
Laney C, Fowler NB, Nelson KJ, et al (2008) The persistence of false beliefs. Acta Psychol
(Amst) 129:190–197
Lee C, Welker RB, Odom MD (2009) Features of computer‐mediated, text‐based messages
that support automatable, linguistics‐based indicators for deception detection. J Inf Syst
23:5–24
Leitner S (2020) On the dynamics emerging from pandemics and infodemics. Mind Soc 1–7
Leitner S, Wall F (2020) Decision-facilitating information in hidden-action setups: An agentbased approach. J Econ Interact Coord in press:
Lenzer J (2020) Covid-19: US gives emergency approval to hydroxychloroquine despite lack
of evidence. bmj 369:m1335
Lerman K, Yan X, Wu X-Z (2016) The" majority illusion" in social networks. PLoS One
11:e0147617
Lewandowsky S, Ecker UKH, Seifert CM, et al (2012) Misinformation and its correction:
Continued influence and successful debiasing. Psychol Sci Public Interes 13:106–131
Lippi M, Torroni P (2016) Argumentation mining: State of the art and emerging trends. ACM
Trans Internet Technol 16:#10
Liu Y, Wu Y-FB (2020) FNED: A deep network for fake news early detection on social
media. ACM Trans Inf Syst 38:#25
Loftus EF (2005) Planting misinformation in the human mind: A 30-year investigation of the
malleability of memory. Learn Mem 12:361–366
Lorenz-Spreen P, Lewandowsky S, Sunstein CR, Hertwig R (2020) How behavioural
sciences can promote truth, autonomy and democratic discourse online. Nat Hum
Behav 1–8
Newman ML, Pennebaker JW, Berry DS, Richards JM (2003) Lying words: Predicting
deception from linguistic styles. Personal Soc Psychol Bull 29:665–675
Nicola M, Alsafi Z, Sohrabi C, et al (2020) The socio-economic implications of the
coronavirus and COVID-19 pandemic: a review. Int J Surg
Niiniluoto I (1977) On the truthlikeness of generalizations. In: Basic problems in methodology
and linguistics. Springer, pp 121–147
Niiniluoto I (2011) Revising beliefs towards the truth. Erkenntnis 75:165
Pariser E (2011) The filter bubble: What the Internet is hiding from you. Penguin UK
Parsons S, Sierra C, Jennings N (1998) Agents that reason and negotiate by arguing. J Log
Comput 8:261–292
Popat K, Mukherjee S, Yates A, Weikum G (2018) DeClarE: Debunking fake news and false
claims using evidence-aware deep learning. In: EMNLP 2018 – Proceedings of the
2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Brussels,
Belgium, pp 22–32
Pulido CM, Villarejo-Carballido B, Redondo-Sama G, Gómez A (2020) COVID-19 infodemic:
More retweets for science-based information on coronavirus than for false information.
Int Sociol 0268580920914755
Rashkin H, Choi E, Jang JY, et al (2017) Truth of varying shades: Analyzing language in
fake news and political fact-checking. In: EMNLP 2017 – Proceedings of the 2017
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Copenhagen,
Denmark, pp 2931–2937
Reinwald P, Leitner S, Wall F (2020) On Heterogeneous Memory in Hidden-Action Setups:
An Agent-Based Approach. arXiv Prepr arXiv200907124
Rovetta A, Bhagavathula AS (2020) Covid-19-related web search behaviors and infodemic
attitudes in italy: Infodemiological study. JMIR public Heal Surveill 6:e19374
Shefrin H (2020) Some reflections about diverse responses to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Mind Soc 1–5
15

Sheth J (2020) Impact of Covid-19 on Consumer Behavior: Will the Old Habits Return or
Die? J Bus Res
Simon HA (1990) Invariants of human behavior. Annu Rev Psychol 41:1–20
Slade L, Ruffman T (2005) How language does (and does not) relate to theory of mind: A
longitudinal study of syntax, semantics, working memory and false belief. Br J Dev
Psychol 23:117–141
Slovic P (2010) The feeling of risk: New perspectives on risk perception. Routledge, New
York
Squazzoni F, Polhill JG, Edmonds B, et al (2020) Computational Models That Matter During
a Global Pandemic Outbreak: A Call to Action. J Artif Soc Soc Simul 23:1–10
Stephen T (1958) The uses of argument
Thorne J, Vlachos A (2018) Automated fact checking: Task formulations, methods and future
directions. In: COLING 2018 – Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics: Main Conference. Santa Fe, New Mexico, pp 3346–3359
Thurner S, Hanel R, Klimek P (2018) Introduction to the theory of complex systems. Oxford
Univ. Press, Oxford
U.S. Food & Drug (2020) FDA cautions against use of hydroxychloroquine or chloroquine for
COVID-19 outside the hospital setting or a clinical trial due to risk of heart rhythm
problems. https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/fda-cautions-againstuse-hydroxychloroquine-or-chloroquine-covid-19-outside-hospital-setting-or
Unkelbach C, Koch A, Cologne SCC (2019) Gullible but functional: Information repetition
and the formation of beliefs. In: The Social Psychology of Gullibility. Routledge, pp 42–
60
Unkelbach C, Rom SC (2017) A referential theory of the repetition-induced truth effect.
Cognition 160:110–126
Vaezi A, Javanmard SH (2020) Infodemic and risk communication in the era of CoV-19. Adv
Biomed Res 9:10
Van Dyke N, Amos B (2017) Social movement coalitions: Formation, longevity, and success.
Sociol Compass 11:e12489
van Eemeren FH, Grootendorst R (2004) A systematic theory of argumentation: The
pragma-dialectical approach. Cambridge University Press
Verheij B (2009) The Toulmin argument model in artificial intelligence. In: Argumentation in
Artificial Intelligence. Springer, pp 219–238
Volkova S, Shaffer K, Jang JY, Hodas N (2017) Separating facts from fiction: Linguistic
models to classify suspicious and trusted news posts on twitter. In: ACL 2017 –
Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics. Vancouver, British Columbia, pp 647–653
Wall F (2019) Coordination with erroneous communication: results of an agent-based
simulation. Knowl Inf Syst 61:161–195
Wineburg S, McGrew S (2019) Lateral reading and the nature of expertise: Reading less and
learning more when evaluating digital information. Teach Coll Rec 121:1–40
World Health Organization (2018) Managing epidemics: key facts about major deadly
diseases. World Health Organization
Zannettou S, Sirivianos M, Blackburn J, Kourtellis N (2019) The web of false information:
Rumors, fake news, hoaxes, clickbait, and various other shenanigans. J Data Inf Qual
11:1–37
Zarocostas J (2020) How to fight an infodemic. Lancet 395:676

16

