P RESERVATION OF DNA P RIVACY D URING THE L ARGE S CALE
D ETECTION OF COVID -19
Marcel Hollenstein4 , David Naccache1,3 , Peter B. Rønne2 , Peter Y A Ryan2 , Robert Weil5 , and
Ofer Yifrach-Stav1

arXiv:2007.09085v2 [cs.CR] 1 Aug 2020

1

5

ÉNS (DI), Information Security Group, CNRS, PSL Research University, Paris, France
david.naccache@ens.fr , ofer.friedman@ens.fr
2 SnT & University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg.
peter.roenne@uni.lu , peter.ryan@uni.lu
3 School of Cyber Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an, 710071, PR China
david@xidian.edu.cn
4 Institut Pasteur, Laboratory for Bio-organic Chemistry of Nucleic Acids
Department of Chemistry and Structural Biology, Paris, France.
marcel.hollenstein@pasteur.fr
Sorbonne University, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (UMR1135), CNRS (ERL8255), Centre
d’Immunologie et de Maladies Ifectueuses CIMI, Paris, France
robert.weil@upmc.fr

Abstract As humanity struggles to contain the global COVID -19 pandemic, privacy concerns are emerging
regarding confinement, tracing and testing. The scientific debate concerning privacy of the COVID -19 tracing
efforts has been intense, especially focusing on the choice between centralised and decentralised tracing apps.
The privacy concerns regarding COVID -19 testing, however, have not received as much attention even though
the privacy at stake is arguably even higher. COVID -19 tests require the collection of samples. Those samples
possibly contain viral material but inevitably also human DNA. Patient DNA is not necessary for the test but it is
technically impossible to avoid collecting it. The unlawful preservation, or misuse, of such samples at a massive
scale may hence disclose patient DNA information with far-reaching privacy consequences.
Inspired by the cryptographic concept of “Indistinguishability under Chosen Plaintext Attack”, this paper poses
the blueprint of novel types of tests allowing to detect viral presence without leaving persisting traces of the
patient’s DNA.
Authors are listed in alphabetical order.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Luxembourg National Research Fund (FNR) project SmartExit (14729565).
The authors thank Thibaut Heckmann, Head of Data Extraction Unit, and Audrey Gouello, DNA Expert, of the
IRCGN (Institut de recherche criminelle de la gendarmerie nationale) for their enriching remarks.

1
1.1

Introduction and motivation
Privacy issues related to COVID -19

The current COVID -19 (Coronavirus Disease 2019) pandemic is rapidly spreading, significantly impacting
healthcare systems. The disease is caused by the novel corona virus, also called SARS - COV-2 [Gor20].
SARS - COV-2 is a positive-sense single-stranded RNA virus. Stay-at-home and social distancing orders
enforced in many countries are supporting the control of the disease’s spread, while causing turmoil in
the economic balance and in social structures [BBD+ 20]. Recently, we witness trends of resistance to
abiding by lock-down policies, and particularly to obligatory mask-wearing in public [Pra20]. While in
the United States some citizens claim that mandatory mask wearing is a violation of civil rights [And20],
more than 70 countries have declared a “State of Emergency”, increasing the governments’ power. In
some countries, such as Thailand [TNT20], Spain [KMG20] and Canada [Wil20] the state of emergency
has been extended. In the attempt to control the virus’ spread, mobile software applications (tracing apps)
have been developed. These apps use digital tracking that monitor contact between individuals, so as to
easily identify possible exposure to the virus. Some of these apps are based on tracking the geographical
location of app users, thus raising privacy concerns.

The scientific debate concerning privacy of the COVID -19 tracing efforts has been intense, especially
regarding the choice between centralised and decentralised tracing apps [Vau20], and it has had political
implications, such as Germany changing to a decentralised approach [Sch20b]. Oddly, the privacy concerns
regarding COVID -19 testing, however, .have not received as much attention even though the privacy at
stake is arguably even higher, potentially compromising the privacy of one’s DNA.
1.2

Testing for COVID -19 Infection

Rapid detection of cases and contacts is an essential component in controlling the pandemic’s spread. In
the US, the current estimation is that at least 500,000 COVID -19 tests will need to be performed daily to
successfully reopen the economy [LVLM20].
There are currently two types of COVID -19 tests:
– Molecular diagnostic tests that detect the presence of SARS - COV-2 nucleic acids in human samples:
A sample is taken using a narrow swab that is placed in the patient’s nose or mouth. It is generally
recommended to collect upper respiratory samples (nasopharyngeal swabs, oropharyngeal swabs,
nasopharyngeal washes, and nasal aspirates), but when the patient exhibits productive cough, lower
respiratory samples (sputum, BAL fluid, and tracheal aspirates) are sometimes used [UKK+ 20].
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a process that causes a very small well-defined segment of DNA
to be amplified, or multiplied many hundreds of thousands of times, so that there is enough of it to be
detected and analyzed. Since the SARS - COV-2 virus does not contain DNA but only RNA, reverse
transcription is used to convert the extracted RNA into DNA. The resulting DNA product is then
subjected to a real-time PCR to determine whether sequences corresponding to the SARS - COV-2 RNA
are present in the sample. The amplification of DNA is monitored in real time as the PCR reaction
progresses using a fluorescent dye or a sequence-specific DNA probe labeled with a fluorescent
molecule and a quencher molecule. The process is repeated for about 40 cycles until the viral cDNA
can be detected [CGS+ 20].
– Serological diagnostic tests that identify antibodies to SARS - COV-2 in clinical specimens [WKLT20].
The current standard test for COVID -19 detection, qPCR is quick, sensitive and reliable, but can only
tell if a person is currently infected. Detecting antibodies to SARS - COV-2 can tell a clinician if a
patient has been infected with COVID -19 either currently, or in the past, depending on the type of
immunoglobulins detected (IgM, IgG or both), and if the patient is immunized and thus protected
against a second infection. In addition, identifying populations who have antibodies can facilitate
research on the use of convalescent plasma in the development of a cure for COVID -19 [FA20].
1.3

The DNA Privacy Problem

In both types of tests, the collected specimen contains the tested person’s DNA. DNA is the molecule
that carries the genetic instructions of all living organisms. Screening of vast populations for the presence
of the virus, inevitably means providing the testing agencies (clinics, governments, airlines, etc.) with
sensitive genetic information on a considerable number of individuals. Even if the sample contains a very
small amount of DNA, PCR can be used to amplify the DNA and reveal the genome [KYK+ 11]. A USB
portable device, the MinION, developed by Zaaijer et al. [ZGS+ 17] can accurately identify human cells
(“DNA re-identification”) by comparing an unknown DNA sample to a collection of known DNA profiles,
with 99.9% confidence, within three minutes of DNA sequencing.
DNA samples collected as part of COVID -19 tests are not supposed to be analyzed, and in any case,
sensitive medical information is expected to be kept confidential. However, it is common practice to
preserve medical samples to be used in further research or for prognosis monitoring.
Often times, tested individuals do not know how these samples will be used in the future. For example,
in 2009, it was discovered that Texas had been collecting and storing blood and DNA samples taken from
millions of newborns without the parents’ knowledge or consent. These samples were used by the state
for genetic experiments and for the set up of a database [Wal10].
2

DNA databases, or biobanks, are being maintained in many countries in the world [Wil18] and they
are being used for forensic [KDK11] and research purposes. An analysis from 2012 indicates that there is
no consensus on the the need for consent to use information in biobanks [MNMC12]. Despite the matter’s
sensitivity, the information can be accessed. In a research conducted in 2016, 95.7% of 46 biobanks
surveyed by [CAD+ 16] gave other researchers permission to access their samples. Despite laws and
regulations intended to prohibit the re-identification of anonymized data, such as Privacy Rule from
HIPAA (Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996), the Common Rule from the DHHS
(Department of Health and Human Services), and the Human Subject Protection Regulations and 21st
Century Cures Act from the FDA [Lee00], there have been numerous incidents of data breaches (including
database hacks and ransomware attacks) in healthcare systems [Pec17, Mon17, CBC16].
DNA samples stored in databases are usually coded so as to reduce their identifiability. However, it is
not impossible to track down the individual “behind” the DNA. For example, Malin and Sweeney (2000,
2001) [MS00, MS01] demonstrated that even if kept confidential, and without being linked to identifying
personal or demographic details, DNA information can be traced to the tested patients using inferences
drawn from the DNA information.
The fact that stored DNA can be linked to the person is especially problematic given the possible use
there could be for this information. Knowing a person’s DNA provides information about racial features,
potential diseases or life span expectancy. This information can attribute to genetic discrimination. For
example, an employer may refuse to hire someone based on the likelihood that they will become ill.
Similarly, exposing one’s genetic information may impact their eligibility to life or health insurance, or
to increase their premia [BC+ 98]. In this sense, the potential transfer of sensitive genetic information
to a third party raises significant ethical and legal issues [CT04]. Moreover, the collection of DNA into
databases can “raise human rights concerns, including potential misuse of government surveillance (for
example, identification of relatives and non-paternity) and the risk of miscarriages of justice” [Can16].
Beyond the discrimination against individuals based on their genetic profiles, human rights activists
have been protesting against the mass collection of DNA samples from citizens by governments. In
the past years, China has been collecting DNA samples from citizens as part of mandatory medical
examinations [Fen17]. Human Rights Watch activists are worried about the use of this information for
“surveillance of persons because of ethnicity, religion, opinion or other protected exercise of rights like free
speech” [Haa17].
The gathering of DNA information by countries has raised concern regarding the way this information
can be used to impact populations based on genetic characteristics. Moreover, this information may be
deployed not only domestically, but internationally [Mos19a]. DNA information can be used to attack
strategically identified persons, such as diplomats, politicians, high-ranking federal officials, or military
leadership, or even to bio-engineer a disease that would be fatal to some races but not to others [Mos19b].
Refusal to undergo medical tests or procedures because of the fear of exposing genetic information
to hostile entities may hinder medical and scientific attempts to treat diseases and learn about them
for the sake of mankind. Recently, for example, it has been reported that Israel revoked a deal with
a company selling COVID -19 testing equipment out of concern about granting the company access to
Israelis’ genetic information [Sch20a]. Especially now, when COVID -19 tests are prevalent and may
become mandatory in different settings (e.g. at airports) [Cri20], the need to find a way to conduct these
tests without compromising our genetic information’s safety arises. The fact that test samples are often
sent to be analyzed in another country, e.g. [BBC20], reinforces the need to form a testing method that
ensures that the samples sent do not contain identifiable DNA traces.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in the next section, we describe a theoretical safety
model inspired by the cryptographic notion of Indistinguishability under Chosen Plaintext Attack. In
Section 3, we describe a testing scheme applying the theoretical safety model to create privacy preserving
medical tests, and elaborate on different approaches that could be applied. Finally, Section 4 concludes
the paper.
3

2

Suggested Solution - Theoretical Model

Before describing the solution, let us provide the intuition behind our idea.
We aim to develop a DNA privacy-preserving test, or in other words, a test method that would yield
the same results, but that the DNA in the specimen tested, or in any residue of the specimen collected,
will be undetectable. We hence wish to develop a test procedure T such that:
T (DNA ] V ) = {positive, respositive (DNA,V )} and T (DNA) = {negative, resnegative (DNA)}
The positive and negative denote the virus’ presence or absence, respectively (the test’s result). ]
denotes mixing substances6 . res denotes the test’s residue, i.e. whatever is left after the test procedure has
been completed. While some protocols may require this residue to be treated as bio-hazardous waste and
be destroyed, residues are often preserved for future research or other purposes. Therefore, res is where
unwanted DNA may be present, and is our main concern.
In COVID -19 tests, the sequence of operations is independent of the virus’ presence. However, in
other types of tests, the virus’ presence may influence the sequence of operations done during the test,
hence in all generality we distinguish two types of residues in our model. In any case, the residue will
differ by the remains of the virus (or lack thereof).
The attacker’s definition (A ) is inspired by the cryptographic notion of Indistinguishability under
chosen-plaintext attack (IND-CPA):
A selects two DNA samples DNA0 and DNA1 and submits them to a challenger C . C picks a random
b ∈ {0, 1} and manufactures the samples:
σb,positive = DNAb ] V and σb,negative = DNAb
C runs T on σb,positive , σb,negative and gets:
T (σb,positive ) = {positive, respositive } and T (σb,negative ) = {negative, resnegative }
A gets {positive, respositive }, {negative, resnegative }, performs any state of the art analyses and outputs
a guess b0 .
A ’s advantage is defined as:
1
Adv = 2| Pr[b = b0 ] − |
2
When A has no advantage in learning DNA information, his only strategy is to guess b0 at random. In
that case, Pr[b0 = b] = 12 and hence Adv = 0.
When A always correctly determines b0 , we have Pr[b0 = b] = 1, i.e. Adv = 1.
Note that when A is always wrong, we have Pr[b0 = b] = 0 and hence Adv = 1. Such an A is
effectively as powerful as an A who always finds the correct answer as it suffices to negate his response
to get a perfect adversary.
In other words, 0 ≤ Adv ≤ 1. The higher the advantage, the more powerful A is.
We define T as IND-C.DNA.A7 secure8 if Adv < 10−3 .

3

How to Build IND-C.DNA.A Tests?

We assume that the test procedure needs to be built in such a way that the tested person can trust that
once the specimen is collected, the DNA will not be identifiable. Therefore, we suggest to add a testing
procedure, step T0 , which will be performed in the patient’s presence. We suggest two approaches in
which this step can be done: Mixing and Destroying.
6
7
8

e.g. water ] CO2 = soda
Indistinguishable under Chosen DNA Attack.
The limit can be changed according to the test’s acceptable level.

4

3.1

DNA Mixtures

We suggest to use a testing kit containing a mixture m of DNA samples, thus making it more difficult to
analyze, or profile.
The complexity of a DNA mixture is determined by the number of people who contributed DNA
to the mixture, the amount of DNA that each of them contributed, and the level of DNA degradation.
More contributors make a mixture more complex, and therefore, more difficult to interpret [Pre19]. DNA
profiling requires the comparison of short segments of DNA, called alleles, which vary from person to
person. As part of the DNA profiling process, the DNA is amplified and the alleles are represented on a
graph showing peaks. The positions of those peaks indicate which alleles are present, and thus the graph
is a visual representation of the DNA in question. The DNA profiling task is based on the comparison of
the pattern of those peaks. Small amounts of DNA derived from various contributors add “noise”, called
drop-in, which makes the comparison process more complicated. The greater the number of contributors
is, the more complicated the task of identifying which peaks go with which contributor. In addition, the
PCR process during copying reaction by the DNA polymerase creates small peaks, called stutter products,
which are sometimes the same lengths as PCR products. This can make the determination of whether a
small peak is a real peak from a minor contributor or a stutter products.
We propose, therefore, to increase this complexity by adding a DNA mixture to the specimen collected.
Any analysis performed will be done on the mixture, and not on the individual DNA sample, thus making
it more difficult to profile the DNA.
There are four possible scenarios in attempting to identify the DNA in the mixture:
A The DNA of the victim x is known, and the composition of the mixture m is also known. The challenge
is to determine if x is in the mixture m ] x or not.
B The DNA of the victim x is known, but the composition of the mixture m is unknown. The challenge
is to determine if x is in the mixture m ] x or not.
C The DNA of the victim x is unknown, but the composition of the mixture m is known. The challenge
is to isolate the DNA of the victim, x.
D The DNA of the victim x is unknown, and the composition of the mixture m is also unknown. The
challenge is to profile (separate) all the kmk + 1 DNAs in the mixture m ] x so as to learn the DNA of
1
.
the victim x with probability kmk+1
As is the case in cryptology, the above scenarii could be generalized and refined. For instance, one
may consider a scenario where A is allowed to perform v (potentially adaptive) experiments with different
mixtures m0 , . . . , mv−1 and an identical target DNA x etc. Whilst interesting in theory, we did not consider
such extensions very relevant to “real world” settings.
scenario
A
B
C
D

victim DNA x

hiding mixture m

attacker’s goal

known
known
confirm x
known
unknown
confirm x
unknown
known
learn x
unknown
unknown
learn9 x
Table 1. Attack and protection scenarii.

Scenarios A and B represent a situation where the DNA of the individual is already known, and
the challenge is to authenticate its presence in the mixture. Authentication methods are commonly used
in the forensics field, where DNA found in a crime scene is compared to that of a suspect. For example,
Homer et. al [HSR+ 08] have demonstrated that it is possible to identify the presence of genomic DNA of
specific individuals within a series of highly complex genomic mixtures, including mixtures where an
individual contributes less than 0.1% of the total genomic DNA.
9

with probability

1
kmk+1 .

5

In this paper, we address the option of attempting to identify the DNA of the individuals in the mixture
when they are unknown to the attacker (scenarii C and D ). Identification methods are intended to reveal
the identity of one contributor in a mixture. Currently, these methods are achieved by comparing DNA
samples to known profiles in a database. We propose solutions to prevent the possibility of identifying the
genetic profile of an individual by an attacker.
Before we proceed, we would like to introduce a subtle distinction between the equality relationship
(=) in mathematics and the chemical relationship ' consisting in comparing two molecular mixtures.
We denote by a = b an exact equality between the chemical components a and b. However, a ' b will
denote the fact that a cannot be distinguished from b using current laboratory equipment with very high
probability (e.g. 99%).
Dilution (scenario C ): The idea behind this technique is to add the sample into a pre-prepared mixture
containing other samples or other DNAs, thus making DNA less identifiable: mislead A by reducing his
advantage, exploiting the difference between = and '. The most plausible way to do so consists in adding
to T , a fixed mixture of k (e.g. k = 20) human DNAs taken from existing DNA samples, or animal DNA.
Adding the DNA sample to a fixed mixture of DNA would make the process of identification significantly
more complicated. However, using a fixed mixture of DNA grants a few possible advantages to A . First,
if the composition of the mixture is known to A , identification of the added sample would be a relatively
simple task. Second, even without being familiar with the mixture’s composition, the characteristics of the
contributors need to be taken into consideration to avoid easy identification. For example, race factors can
influence the ease with which a sample can be identified. Thus, using a fixed DNA mixture will make the
distinguishing of the DNA of the victim x more complicated, but not impossible.
Randomizing (scenario D ): Another workaround, frequently used in cryptology, consists in adding
randomness to T . The idea behind randomizing is using a random mixture of DNA into which the
sample is added. By doing so, any fixed DNA defines the distributions of residues Dpositive,DNA =
{respositive (DNA,V )} and Dnegative,DNA = {resnegative (DNA)} obtained by testing this specific fixed DNA
over and over again using T .
We design T in such a way that ∀ DNA, the following distributions are indistinguishable:
respositive (DNA,V ) ∼ respositive and resnegative (DNA) ∼ resnegative
This mixture is not known to A , and even the number of contributors comprising the mixtures varies.
This prevents A from learning through repeated experimentation. Randomizing makes the profiling task
more complicated, because A will have no prior knowledge about the DNA characteristics. In DNA
profiling, this is referred to as lack of Framework of Circumstances, [FSR18], which is one of the factors
that hinder DNA profiling.
The model here assumes that when m is manufactured, each individual test kit is randomized (e.g. by
the addition of a different random assortment of DNA material) so that different tests of the same patient
will yield residues that do not leak information about the patient’s DNA.
Current profiling methods in use in forensics allow analyzing a mixture of DNA and determining the
number of DNA samples mixed into the mixture. However, separating an individual DNA from a mixture
of an unknown number of contributors of unknown DNA profiles is a much more complicated task. In
order to profile complex DNA mixtures, a software is used for computing the probability distribution
for the number of contributors [TBB14]. If the number of contributors is unknown, the computational
load will be considerably higher. Therefore, the Randomizing method could be applied to mask DNA and
achieve our goal.
Another way of masking the DNA in question by adding randomization to the solution is to add an
allelic ladder directly to the sample solution. An allelic ladder is an artificial mixture of the common
alleles present in the human population, and it is commonly used to identify alleles in genetic profiles by
comparison with peaks.
6

3.2

Destruction (all scenarii):

Another way to ensure that an attacker cannot access the DNA is to destroy it, thus making it unidentifiable.
We start by observing that IND-C.DNA.A cannot exist if ∃DNA0 , DNA1 such that:
respositive (DNA0 ,V ) 6' respositive (DNA1 ,V ) or resnegative (DNA0 ) 6' resnegative (DNA1 )
Simply because A can run the test by himself and compare the resulting residue to the challenger’s
residue, it follows that T0 must destroy human DNA while allowing subsequent testing of V .
To ensure that no DNA traces remain in the sample we suggest to destroy the DNA, leaving the RNA
intact for the test. We propose, therefore, a model in which all human DNA is destroyed before the rt-PCR
amplification. This can be done by treating the samples with DNase, an enzyme that selectively degrades
DNA [ST14]. DNase eliminates DNA from RNA preparations prior to sensitive applications, such as
rt-PCR. Within 10 to 20 minutes [HFK96, Bio20] there will be no identifiable DNA. To ensure that viral
RNA remains intact, the DNase then needs to be inactivated by inclusion of removal reagents [Amb] or by
using heat inactivation [WRSS00].
Following this process, we suggest a verification of the DNase’s effectiveness. This verification
process can be done by inducing reaction causing a colour change which could be visible by the patient.
One way of doing so could be by applying gold nano-particles (AuNPs) interconnected by DNA duplexes.
Without DNase activity, the AuNPs tend to cluster, displaying a blue colour. When DNase is present,
it cleaves these duplexes, causing them to spread, which leads to a colour change from blue to red
[HCPT17, BPE+ 08, XHM07]. Another method that could be applied is using a fluorophore-quencher
system [SZZ+ 13]. In the absence of DNase, the fluorophore is in close proximity of the quencher and
hence no fluorescence is visible. In the presence of DNase, DNA is hydrolyzed and the fluorophore is free
to circulate in the solution, creating a fluroscentic reaction which can be easily monitored and detected as
an output signal. The patient can witness the change in colour and be convinced that all DNA has been
removed. Once this step is complete, the patient is free to go, and the sample is ready for testing.
Before we conclude, we have to consider the case of mutually distrusting parties. In this scenario, the
tester wants to ensure that the test provides accurate information (i.e. that the virus will be detected, if
present), while the patient may not trust the tester or the test kit. Theoretically speaking, we could have
the patients provide their own DNase. Putting aside the practical logistic difficulties and unlikelihood of
this solution, this solution poses a risk of a patient intentionally using a chemical killing both DNA and
virus (for example, in a scenario of being virus-free as a condition to board a flight or enter a country).
On the other hand, if the DNase is provided by the testing agency, the patient may suspect that another
chemical is used that simply emulates the colour change. To solve this dilemma, we can have the patient be
sampled twice using a classical “cut-&-choose” approach. To both samples the DNase and supplementary
chemicals are added. The tested person then chooses one of the samples randomly, and adds his own
chemical to verify the presence of DNase. The other sample is then used for testing. This allows the
tested person to detect a maliciously generated test kit with probability 12 , and of course these odds can be
improved, but at the cost of multiplying the number of samples used.
To ensure the integrity of the process, a positive process control method could be integrated. This
could be done, for example, by identifying, at the end of the process, a specific reagent or a a known
human target which will be deposited at the beginning of the analytical process. The presence of the target
at the end of the process will allow concluding that a negative result obtained is stemming from absence
of the virus, and not from a malfunction in the the reaction or process.
Note that we could also audit test kits in general, but this relies on trusted third parties, or a public
procedure.

4

Discussion

This paper described a methodology in which biological specimens containing DNA taken from patients
can be processed while securing the safety and confidentiality of the DNA information contained in the
specimen. Our model relieves the patient of the expectation to trust the testing entity.
7

Figure 1. Testing following DNA destruction: 1 Sample is taken from the patient using swab ⇒ 2 DNase is applied to the
sample, destroying DNA ⇒ 3 A colourimetric method is applied ⇒ 4 This demonstrates that no DNA traces are present
(Blue indicates DNA traces, red means that DNA was properly destroyed) ⇒ 5 The patient is now convinced that the sample
can be analyzed without risk of exposing his DNA.

While the medical system is still based on the patients’ confidence and trust in the clinician, in the
past years there has been a shift towards more informed patients expecting to have more involvement and
control over processes and decision-making [RC06].
Mass COVID -19 testing performed all over the world nowadays highlights the needs for more secure
types of tests. The model proposed in this paper can be applied not only for COVID -19 , but for other
types of tests where DNA is extracted but not necessary to obtain test results. As DNA is present in any
specimen collected from the human body, every lab test has the potential of exposing one’s sensitive
genetic information. The idea described in this paper will need to be adapted so as to provide protection to
other types of tests.
While public awareness regarding the need to protect genetic information grows, the ability to perform
successful profiling using smaller amounts of DNA increases. The recent developments in the field of
DNA profiling now allows to analyze even minute amounts of DNA, called trace DNA or touch DNA.
Small amounts of DNA can be found on any surface; people shed DNA on any object or surface they touch.
In this sense, one may claim that protecting DNA information is impossible. However, it is important to
note the difference between analyzing trace amounts of DNA, and analyzing the content of a test tube
containing body fluids or mucosa. Let us consider a hypothetical case in which an attacker is interested in
the DNA of a specific person. An attacker could try to retrieve trace DNA from objects touched by that
person, a cup the person drank from etc., but the amount of DNA retrieved would be much smaller, and
the process of analyzing this DNA would be significantly more difficult. In addition, it is important to
note that since, in the case of medical tests, the specimen is sent for analysis in a lab, the likelihood of the
DNA to be profiled increases, thus increasing the risk.
8

At this stage, we only offer a theoretical blueprint. Future work will include laboratory experiments
demonstrating that the validity of the test is not negatively impacted by the added security phase T0 (i.e.
DNA mixture or DNA destruction).

References
Amb.
And20.
BBC20.
BBD+ 20.
BC+ 98.
Bio20.
BPE+ 08.

CAD+ 16.

Can16.
CBC16.
CGS+ 20.

Cri20.
CT04.
FA20.
Fen17.
FSR18.
Gor20.
Haa17.
HCPT17.
HFK96.
HSR+ 08.

KDK11.
KMG20.
KYK+ 11.
Lee00.
LVLM20.
MNMC12.

ThermoFisher Scientific Ambion. Now it’s easy to make your RNA free of genomic DNA contamination and ready
for RT-PCR. https://tinyurl.com/COVID19-Amb (accessed June 10, 2020).
Scottie Andrew. The psychology behind why some people won’t wear masks, 2020. https://tinyurl.com/
COVID19-And20 (accessed June 18, 2020).
BBC. Coronavirus: UK sent 50,000 Covid-19 samples to US for testing, 2020. https://www.bbc.com/news/
uk-52603566 (accessed June 10, 2020).
Scott Baker, Nicholas Bloom, Steven J Davis, Kyle Kost, Marco Sammon, and Tasaneeya Viratyosin. The
unprecedented stock market reaction to COVID -19. COVID Economics: Vetted and Real-Time Papers, 1(3), 2020.
Space Studies Board, National Research Council, et al. Privacy Issues in Biomedical and Clinical Research. In: A
strategy for research in space biology and medicine in the new century. National Academies Press, 1998.
New-England Biolabs. A Typical DNase I Reaction Protocol (M0303), 2020. https://tinyurl.com/
COVID19-BIO20 (accessed June 2, 2020).
Pedro Baptista, Eulália Pereira, Peter Eaton, Gonçalo Doria, Adelaide Miranda, Inês Gomes, Pedro Quaresma, and
Ricardo Franco. Gold nanoparticles for the development of clinical diagnosis methods. Analytical and bioanalytical
chemistry, 391(3):943–950, 2008.
Marco Capocasa, Paolo Anagnostou, Flavio D’Abramo, Giulia Matteucci, Valentina Dominici, Giovanni Destro
Bisol, and Fabrizio Rufo. Samples and data accessibility in research biobanks: an explorative survey. PeerJ, 4:e1613,
2016.
Joseph A Cannataci. Report of the special rapporteur on the right to privacy. Human Rights Council, 2016.
CBC. [Alberta Health Services notifies almost 13,000 patients of privacy breach, 2016. https://tinyurl.com/
COVID19-CBC16 (accessed May 16, 2020),.
Linda J Carter, Linda V Garner, Jeffrey W Smoot, Yingzhu Li, Qiongqiong Zhou, Catherine J Saveson, Janet M
Sasso, Anne C Gregg, Divya J Soares, Tiffany R Beskid, et al. Assay techniques and test development for covid-19
diagnosis, 2020.
Karla Cripps. [Airline passengers undergo Covid-19 blood tests before boarding, 2020. https://tinyurl.com/
COVID19-Cri20 (accessed April 24, 2020).
Anne Cambon-Thomsen. The social and ethical issues of post-genomic human biobanks. Nature Reviews Genetics,
5(11):866–873, 2004.
Food and Drug Administration. Coronavirus (COVID -19) Update: serological test validation and education efforts,
2020 (accessed April 23, 2020). https://tinyurl.com/COVID19-FA20.
Emily Feng. [China authorities mandated to collect DNA from Xinjiang residents, 2017. https://tinyurl.com/
COVID19-FEN17 (accessed May 16, 2020).
UK Government Publications Forensic-Science-Regulator. DNA mixture interpretation, FSR-G-222, 2018. https:
//tinyurl.com/COVID19-FSR2018 (accessed June 23, 2020).
Alexander E Gorbalenya. Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus–the species and its viruses, a
statement of the coronavirus study group. BioRxiv, 2020.
Benjamin Haas. [Chinese authorities collecting DNA from all residents of Xinjiang, 2017. https://tinyurl.
com/COVID19-HAA17 (accessed May 16, 2020).
Yue He, Fen Cheng, Dai-Wen Pang, and Hong-Wu Tang. Colorimetric and visual determination of dnase i activity
using gold nanoparticles as an indicator. Microchimica Acta, 184(1):101–106, 2017.
Zeqi Huang, Michael J Fasco, and Laurence S Kaminsky. Optimization of dnase i removal of contaminating dna
from rna for use in quantitative rna-pcr. Biotechniques, 20(6):1012–1020, 1996.
Nils Homer, Szabolcs Szelinger, Margot Redman, David Duggan, Waibhav Tembe, Jill Muehling, John V Pearson,
Dietrich A Stephan, Stanley F Nelson, and David W Craig. Resolving individuals contributing trace amounts of dna
to highly complex mixtures using high-density snp genotyping microarrays. PLoS genetics, 4(8), 2008.
Manfred Kayser and Peter De Knijff. Improving human forensics through advances in genetics, genomics and
molecular biology. Nature Reviews Genetics, 12(3):179, 2011.
Elizabeth Melimopoulos Kate Mayberry and Mersiha Gadzo. Spain extends coronavirus emergency until June 21:
Live updates, 2020. https://tinyurl.com/COVID19-KMG20 (accessed June 18, 2020).
Min-Jung Kang, Hannah Yu, Sook-Kyung Kim, Sang-Ryoul Park, and Inchul Yang. Quantification of trace-level
dna by real-time whole genome amplification. PloS one, 6(12), 2011.
Bonnie M. Lee. [Comparison of FDA and HHS Human Subject Protection Regulations, 2000. https://tinyurl.
com/COVID19-LEE00 (accessed May 16, 2020).
By Ethan Lee and The Harvard Crimson Virginia L. Ma. [At Least 500,000 Tests Needed Per Day to Reopen
Economy, Harvard Researchers Say, 2020. https://tinyurl.com/COVID19-LVLM20 (accessed April 27, 2020).
Zubin Master, Erin Nelson, Blake Murdoch, and Timothy Caulfield. Biobanks, consent and claims of consensus.
Nature Methods, 9(9):885, 2012.

9

Mon17.

Kate Monica. [79K Patients Affected by Emory Healthcare Data Breach., 2017. https://tinyurl.com/
COVID19-MON17 (accessed May 16, 2020),.
Mos19a.
Steven W Mosher. [China’s Ploy to Establish a Global DNA Database The first in a 3-part series on the regime’s
DNA collection project, 2019. https://tinyurl.com/COVID19-MOS19a (accessed May 16, 2020).
Mos19b.
Steven W Mosher. [What Will China Do With Your DNA? China’s Fourth Magic Weapon, Part III: Bioweapons,
2019. https://tinyurl.com/COVID19-MOS19b (accessed May 16, 2020).
MS00.
Bradley Malin and Latanya Sweeney. Determining the identifiability of dna database entries. In Proceedings of the
AMIA Symposium, page 537. American Medical Informatics Association, 2000.
Bradley Malin and Latanya Sweeney. Re-identification of dna through an automated linkage process. In Proceedings
MS01.
of the AMIA Symposium, page 423. American Medical Informatics Association, 2001.
Pec17.
Alexandra Wilson Pecci. [Healthcare Data Breaches Up 40% Since 2015, 2017. https://tinyurl.com/
COVID19-Pec17/ (accessed May 16, 2020).
Pra20.
Ritu Prasad. Coronavirus: Why is there a US backlash to masks?, 2020. https://tinyurl.com/COVID19-Pra20
(accessed June 18, 2020).
Pre19.
Rich Press. DNA Mixtures: A Forensic Science Explainer, NIST US Government Publications, 2019. https:
//tinyurl.com/COVID19-Pre19 (accessed June 24, 2020).
RC06.
Rosemary Rowe and Michael Calnan. Trust relations in health care—the new agenda. The European Journal of
Public Health, 16(1):4–6, 2006.
Sch20a.
Julia Schulman. Israel Renegotiates COVID-19 Testing Lab Deal With China, 2020. https://tinyurl.com/
COVID19-Sch20 (accessed May 15, 2020).
Sch20b.
Matthew S. Schwartz. Germany Backs Away From Compiling Coronavirus Contacts In A Central Database, 2020.
https://tinyurl.com/COVID19-Sch20b (accessed June 18, 2020).
ST14.
Shinobu Sato and Shigeori Takenaka. Highly sensitive nuclease assays based on chemically modified dna or rna.
Sensors, 14(7):12437–12450, 2014.
SZZ+ 13. Xin Su, Chen Zhang, Xiaocui Zhu, Simin Fang, Rui Weng, Xianjin Xiao, and Meiping Zhao. Simultaneous
fluorescence imaging of the activities of dnases and 3’ exonucleases in living cells with chimeric oligonucleotide
probes. Analytical chemistry, 85(20):9939–9946, 2013.
Duncan Taylor, Jo-Anne Bright, and John Buckleton. Interpreting forensic dna profiling evidence without specifying
TBB14.
the number of contributors. Forensic Science International: Genetics, 13:269–280, 2014.
The-National-Thailand. Country under state of emergency until June 30, 2020. https://https://tinyurl.
TNT20.
com/COVID19-TNT20 (accessed June 18, 2020).
UKK+ 20. Buddhisha Udugama, Pranav Kadhiresan, Hannah N Kozlowski, Ayden Malekjahani, Matthew Osborne, Vanessa YC
Li, Hongmin Chen, Samira Mubareka, Jonathan B Gubbay, and Warren CW Chan. Diagnosing covid-19: the disease
and tools for detection. ACS nano, 14(4):3822–3835, 2020.
Vau20.
Serge Vaudenay. Centralized or decentralized. The contact tracing dilemma, 2020.
Ann Waldo. The texas newborn bloodspot saga has reached a sad—and preventable—conclusion. Genomics Law
Wal10.
Report, 16:1–45, 2010.
Wil18.
Jane Williams. [Exploring The World’s Largest Biobanks, 2018. https://tinyurl.com/COVID19-WIL18/
(accessed May 16, 2020).
Codi Wilson. Ontario plans to extend state of emergency until middle of July, 2020. https://tinyurl.com/
Wil20.
COVID19-Wil20 (accessed June 18, 2020).
WKLT20. Yishan Wang, Hanyujie Kang, Xuefeng Liu, and Zhaohui Tong. Combination of RT-qPCR testing and clinical
features for diagnosis of COVID -19 facilitates management of SARS - COV-2 outbreak. Journal of medical virology,
2020.
WRSS00. Ilse Wiame, Serge Remy, Rony Swennen, and László Sági. Irreversible heat inactivation of dnase i without rna
degradation. Biotechniques, 29(2):252–256, 2000.
XHM07. Xiaoyang Xu, Min Su Han, and Chad A Mirkin. A gold-nanoparticle-based real-time colorimetric screening method
for endonuclease activity and inhibition. Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 46(19):3468–3470, 2007.
ZGS+ 17. Sophie Zaaijer, Assaf Gordon, Daniel Speyer, Robert Piccone, Simon Cornelis Groen, and Yaniv Erlich. Rapid
re-identification of human samples using portable dna sequencing. Elife, 6:e27798, 2017.

10

