An India-specific Compartmental Model for Covid-19:
Projections and Intervention Strategies by Incorporating Geographical,
Infrastructural and Response Heterogeneity
Sanit Gupta​[1]​, Sahil Shah​[2]​, Sumit Chaturvedi​[2]​, Pranav Thakkar​[3]​, Parvinder Solanki​[4]​, Soham
Dibyachintan​[5]​, Sandeepan Roy​[6]​, M. B. Sushma​[6]​, Adwait Godbole​[2]​, Noufal Jaseem​[4]​, Pradumn
Kumar​[4]​, Sucheta Ravikanti​[7]​, Aritra Das​[8]​, Giridhara R Babu​[9]​, Tarun Bhatnagar​[10]​, Avijit Maji​[6]​,
Mithun K. Mitra​[4,*,a]​, and Sai Vinjanampathy​[4,11,*,b]
[1] Department of Mechanical Engineering, IIT Bombay.
[2] Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Bombay.
[3] Department of Aerospace Engineering, IIT Bombay.
[4] Department of Physics, IIT Bombay.
[5] Department of Chemical Engineering, IIT Bombay.
[6] Department of Civil Engineering, IIT Bombay.
[7] Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT Bombay.
[8] Epidemiology and Outcome Research, Real World Solutions, IQVIA.
[9] Indian Institute of Public Health-Bengaluru, Public Health Foundation of India.
[10] ICMR - National Institute of Epidemiology, Chennai.
[11] Centre for Quantum Technologies, National University of Singapore.

* Corresponding authors:
(a) mithun@phy.iitb.ac.in
(b) sai@phy.iitb.ac.in

Abstract
We present a compartmental meta-population model for the spread of Covid-19 in
India. Our model simulates populations at a district or state level using an
epidemiological model that is appropriate to Covid-19. Different districts are connected
by a transportation matrix developed using available census data. We introduce
uncertainties in the testing rates into the model that takes into account the disparate
responses of the different states to the epidemic and also factors in the state of the
public healthcare system. Our model allows us to generate qualitative projections of
Covid-19 spread in India, and further allows us to investigate the effects of different
proposed interventions. By building in heterogeneity at geographical and infrastructural
levels and in local responses, our model aims to capture some of the complexity of
epidemiological modeling appropriate to a diverse country such as India.
Keywords: C
​ ovid-19, India, District-level modeling, Transportation Matrix

Introduction
Epidemiological compartmental models of the Susceptible-Infected-Recovered (SIR) category and its
generalizations ​[1-7] have proven to be an invaluable tool in modeling the population-level spread of
infectious diseases. These models can often serve to study various prevention, mitigation and
preparedness strategies - and can help inform the public health response to the pandemic.
The limitations of such modelling often arise from the underlying set of assumptions. One common
issue in theoretical models is the inherent uncertainty of the datasets from which model predictions are
derived. This issue is amplified in the Indian context by economic constraints, cultural norms and
other factors that might delay or avoid seeking care. It is in this context that we construct an
India-centric model to understand the qualitative features of the spread of COVID-19 and the impact
of intervention policies. Our model, summarised in the section below, is a generalized SEIR model
with additional compartments representing pre-symptomatic and asymptomatic populations in
addition to symptomatic infected individuals. In order to explicitly model uncertainties in testing
rates, we introduce a new compartment which accounts for infected populations who have been tested
and found to be positive. This, in conjunction with estimates of true infection numbers, allows us to
forecast the spread of the epidemic with a greater degree of accuracy. Furthermore, we incorporate
methods from estimation theory to mitigate the uncertainty in the initial data and the uncertainty in
the fitted parameters of the model.
One of the major drawbacks of the SIR class of models lies in the assumption of well-mixed
populations. In the context of a large and heterogeneous country such as India, such assumptions are
clearly not valid at a national scale. Our meta-population model assumes a well-mixed population at a
district or state scale and then uses a novel technique to construct a district/state level transportation
matrix that connects different districts or states. The transportation matrix is constructed using
available Census data ​[53] and allows for the generation of district-wide predictions for the entire
country. These models can be used in conjunction with agent-based models at a finer scale such as
ward or city level modeling in order to build a comprehensive picture of disease spread.
Compartmental models can help project the qualitative features of epidemic spread. We note that the
quantitative projections depend on the choice of parameters, and hence should be interpreted with
caution. The value of this model lies in understanding the effect of different proposed interventions
and how local heterogeneous responses to the epidemic, realistic measures of transport connectivity,
and infrastructural and healthcare status of different states, can affect the spread of the disease at a
national scale. In the rest of this section, we briefly summarize important related work related to
compartmental models.

Extended SIR models of COVID-19 disease transmission in different countries in the world including
India have been studied previously [​16-48​]. In [​16​], a modified SIR model with a new additional
compartment that quantifies the symptomatic quarantined infected people is considered to study the
COVID-19 outbreak in Mainland China. The references [​17​] and [​18​] study the impact of
COVID-19 in Australia and India respectively by an age-stratified transmission model. The role of the
health care system and clinical capacity in reducing the COVID-19 morbidity and mortality rates are
analyzed in [​17​]. The authors of [​18​] explore an extended SEIR model to study the effect of mitigation
strategies such as social distancing and testing-quarantine and show that the testing-quarantine
strategy yields better results compared to the implementation of social distancing alone, and also the
testing-quarantine strategy is more sustainable than a prolonged lockdown. As there are a large
number of asymptomatic carriers, the authors have introduced a separate compartment for them.
However, their model assumes instantaneous implementation of the lockdown which is generally not
practical. In our paper, we have incorporated a more realistic scenario, a gradual implementation of the
containment or lockdown.

Summary of Model
The basic model structure is summarized in Fig. 1(a). One of the major difficulties in the detection and
treatment of Covid-19 is that a large proportion of those tested positive seem to be asymptomatic
[8-11]​, with studies claiming up to 50-75% of the population is asymptomatic. However, since the
disease has a long incubation period (5.1 days ​[8-9]​), these asymptomatic infected can spread the
disease to the susceptible population even when they show no symptoms of the disease [​17​]. Further,
existing studies suggest that some proportion of the infected population may never develop symptoms
over the course of progression of the disease. While there is some debate over whether these true

Fig. 1: Panel (a) shows the basic structure of the model. The compartments correspond to the Susceptible (S),
Asymptomatic Infected (E), Pre-symptomatic Infected (A), Symptomatic Infected (I), and their corresponding lockdown
counterparts (X​S​, X​E​, X​A​, X​I​). In addition, we introduce a compartment for the population which has been tested positive
(P). People can move from the disease compartments (E, A, I, X​E​, X​A​, X​I​, P) to the recovered (R) compartment. The
associated rates for each of the transitions are also indicated. Panel (b) shows how this basic building block is replicated for
three age groups (<20, 20-60, >60) at each state or district level. States and districts are connected by a transportation
matrix for the working population (20-60 age compartment).

asymptomatics can act as carriers for the infection, studies have suggested that they may still act as
carriers albeit with lower infectivity [​12,23​]. In order to model this significant proportion of
asymptomatic infected population, we introduce two new compartments - True Asymptomatics (E)
who never develop symptoms over the course of progression of the disease; and Pre-symptomatics (A)
who are currently asymptomatic but will develop symptoms after some incubation period. The
pre-symptomatic population become symptomatic infected (I) with some rate σ (where σ is the
inverse of the mean incubation period, taken in this study to be 5.1 days).
One of the major interventions that had been undertaken in India is the imposition of an
unprecedented national lockdown since the 26th of March, 2020 to 31st May, 2020 in stages.
Following that, there has been a heterogenous lockdown imposed in various parts of the country by
state agencies. Any modeling effort to predict, even qualitatively, the future time course of the
epidemic in India, must take into account the effect of this lockdown. We introduce shadow
compartments for the population in lockdown corresponding to the Susceptible (​XS​​ ), Asymptomatics
(​XE​​ ), Pre-symptomatics (​XA​​ ), and the Symptomatic Infected (​X​I​) categories. On the date of imposition
of the lockdown, the population starts moving from their normal compartments into the
corresponding lockdown compartment with a rate κ0 . Similarly, on lifting lockdown, people move
back from the lockdown compartments to their normal compartment with a rate μ . In this study we
have assumed the timescales for this population movement from the normal to the lockdown
compartments to be one week in both cases ( κ0 and μ are the inverse of this timescale).
We introduce a new compartment for people who have been tested positive for Covid-19 (P). One of
the major public health challenges in India (and indeed, worldwide) has been possibly low numbers of
people who have been tested, in comparison to projected estimates of “true” infected numbers. Since
the accurate estimation of the real magnitude of the infected population critically affects transmission
and hence disease progression, we introduce this new P compartment to reflect shortcomings in the
testing criteria as well as testing kit availability and the overall healthcare infrastructure. People who
have been diagnosed as positive for Covid-19 and hence quarantined in isolation or a medical facility
are removed from the general population and hence contain the spread of infection. This population
can only infect the healthcare providers, which is incorporated in our model by a term proportional to
the fraction of the population who are healthcare workers ​[12]​. The ratio of the number of people
who have been tested positive to the “true” number of the infected population gives a measure of the
testing fraction f test , which then influences the rates at which people travel from the disease
compartments (​E, A, I, X​E​, X​A​, X​I​) to the tested positive compartment. As such this testing fraction is a
critical component of our model as it determines the fraction of the population moving to the P
compartment and hence disease progression at a population level. Unfortunately, systematic and
accurate estimates of the testing fraction is a complex problem in its own right and is beyond the scope
of this paper. Instead we use a combination of statistical inference and empirical methods to arrive at
plausible values of the testing fraction for each state. We assume that Kerala, as the state with the best

healthcare indicator in the union, has an accurate reporting of Covid-19 related mortality. We then use
estimates of the mortality to recovery ratio [​54​] to arrive at a projected value of the testing fraction for
Kerala, given by f test KL = 0.4 , which implies that Kerala identifies 1 in every 2.5 infected people. We
then assign a testing fraction to the individual states by benchmarking their testing performance and
healthcare index from the National Health Mission to Kerala’s according to the empirical formula.
The details of this procedure and the implications for the testing numbers of each state are detailed in
the Appendix.
In order to account for different social and economic constraints on different age groups, as well as the
well documented age-based differential Covid-19 mortality and severity, we consider a coarse
age-stratification within our model where this basic model structure is replicated across three age
groups - (i) 0-20 years, (ii) 20-60 years, (iii) >60 years. Such a coarse graining reflects three qualitatively
different groups, namely young children and school going adults, working age adults and adults who
are more likely to be retired and/or who stay at home. The contact matrices are aggregated according
to a weighted average using the age distribution of the Indian population. The contact matrices
between these three age groups are obtained from literature and sub-divided into contact matrices
corresponding to home, school, work, and other interactions ​[13]​. This stratification of contact
matrices allows for exploration of different intervention strategies.
The susceptible population is infected when it comes into contact with the population in any of the
disease compartments, with an inherent state-specific transmission rate 𝛽. Within the lockdown
period, the home contact matrix is unaffected, while the school contact matrix is completely switched
off. However transmission between the population in lockdown and population not in lockdown
(essential workers and other partially open sectors) continues via the contact matrices corresponding to
work and other interactions, albeit by a reduced factor of 1 (0 ≤ 1 ≤ 1) . Likewise interactions between
two individuals (work and other interactions) in lockdown is reduced by a factor of 1 2 . This
parameter 1 models the leakiness of the lockdown, with 1 = 0 indicating a perfect lockdown, whereas
1 = 1 indicates a completely leaky lockdown. Thus in lockdown, disease transmission is not
completely halted, but rather continues with a reduced contact matrix, which reflects the realities of a
complex Indian society.
Infected people can move from the disease compartments either directly to the recovered (and
removed) compartment, or they can first move to the tested positive compartment (P) and thereafter
to the recovered (R) compartment. We extract mortality projections from the R compartment by
using previously determined estimates of age-stratified mortality for Covid-19.
The meta-populations at a district or state level were allowed to come into contact with each other by
estimating the number of people commuting across district boundaries. For this, an inter-district
transportation matrix representing the expected number of people commuting across the district

border was developed. During biological disasters like COVID-19, the home to work commutes
would prevail. Though the comprehensive mobility plan for major Indian cities are readily available,
transportation planning studies for the rural districts are hard to find. So, to estimate the number of
workers commuting across a district boundary, we used the surrogate measures such as the district
level aggregated home to work trip length, worker population density and geographic features. The
home to work trip length and worker population details were obtained from the 2011 census data
[​53​], and the geographic features of districts were assimilated in GIS from various sources [​56​] and
verified with available information [​57​]. Suitable traffic analysis zones (TAZ) were developed by
concentric segmentation of the district GIS maps [​60​]. A trip length frequency distribution developed
from the home to work trip length details was used to estimate the trips across the district boundary
from each TAZ. Such trips for all the TAZs of a district were added to represent the worker
population expected to commute beyond the district boundary. We assumed the work-related
commute not to be beyond the adjoining districts and hence, used the relative density of worker
population of the adjoining districts to estimate the number of workers commuting to that district.
For this estimation, the GDP (at purchasing power parity) per capita of the districts is a better choice
of parameter, but was not readily available for all the Indian districts at the time of this study. A
detailed description of the process is available in the Appendix E.
There are two “measurements” that must be matched with our model to make predictions about the
future of the disease progression. The first of these is the rate associated with mortality, which happens
on average about 17 days [14] after the onset of the disease and the second is the number of people
that test positive on any given day. Since these two measurements are inherently unreliable, owing to
(among other things) socio-economic reasons which might delay seeking care, the data must be treated
as inherently noisy. This noisy signal would then lead to variations in the projections of the model. We
incorporate this into our model by using an extended Kalman filter (EKF) ​[15] to estimate the future
trajectory by extending the simulation. The EKF is a Bayesian update method that incorporates the
measurement errors and allows us to make predictions consistent with the uncertainty in the data. We
used the age dependent mortality data available in literature to model the mortality predictions used in
the EKF.

Results
State-level simulations:
While our model can simulate a variety of intervention strategies, we propose and investigate two
intervention strategies in addition to the base (control) scenario for India. We detail these intervention
strategies below:
● Base scenario: We used the initial date for the national level lockdown in India which was the
3rd of May, 2020 as the baseline scenario. As a control simulation, we assumed that lockdown

ends on this date, and subsequent to this period, all activities return to normal throughout the
nation. The predictions for this scenario can then be used to assess the effectiveness of
different proposed interventions.
● Intervention 1 - Enhanced testing: In this scenario, the national lockdown ends on the 3rd of
May, 2020. Preparatory to this, all states undertake efforts to enhance testing capabilities and
criteria on an emergency basis. We divide states into three categories based on their Health
index score by the National Health Mission. This supplies a ranking of the states based on
their health care preparedness and infrastructure. We then propose a differential target for
each state by benchmarking to the testing performance of Kerala, to be achieved by the 3rd of
May. The top third of the states achieve Kerala’s testing fraction, the middle third achieves
50% of Kerala’s testing rate, while the bottom third achieves 25% of Kerala’s testing rate. The
increase in the testing fraction is assumed to be linear. The details of the categorization of states
and hence their proposed target testing rates are provided in the Appendix.
● Intervention 2 - Heterogenous lockdown: In this scenario, the national lockdown ends on the
3rd of May, 2020. Subsequent to this, schools and colleges remain closed until the end of June,
and hence their contribution in the age-stratified contact matrix is switched off. The contact
matrices corresponding to work and other interactions are switched on at 50% of their base
value, corresponding to continued and stringent enhanced physical distancing measures,
public health precautions and enhanced work-from-home situations, wherever possible. The
transport matrix is switched on at 50% of its base value, again reflecting a reduction in
non-essential travel. If despite these measures, the total tested positive numbers in any state
crosses 0.01% of the state’s population, the state goes into immediate lockdown. Transport
between this affected state and others are completely switched off, the contact matrices
corresponding to work and other interactions drop to 20% of their base value within the state.
These restrictions continue until the end of June, and testing fractions continue to hold at
their currently determined levels.
Though the two proposed interventions are simulated assuming only the first lockdown till March 03,
2020, the purpose of studying the results is to ascertain the effect of transportation and heterogeneity
in managing the cases of COVID-19 across the country while minimizing economic impact, which
disproportionately affects those whose contact matrices cannot be reduced due to economic necessity.
Subsequent to this India went through differing lockdown protocols, which were not simulated in this
work. This choice is in part due to the ongoing national and state-level interventions that are evolving
rather dynamically even at the time of this writing. The predictions of these interventions should thus
be interpreted in a qualitative fashion, taking into account the various assumptions and limitations of
the model we have detailed.

Fig. 2: National level projections of (a) total infected numbers, and (b) predicted mortality estimates from the three
scenarios described in the text. Note that the predicted mortality figures show the cumulative numbers. The enhanced
testing intervention, where states proportionately improve their testing performance in line with their respective Health
index scores provides a measurable improvement in the total infected numbers, and almost a 30-35% improvement in
projected mortality. The heterogenous lockdown situation, flattens the curve even further, given that the proposed
measures are extremely stringent. Also note that this intervention pushes the peak later in time, beyond the current
simulated timeframe.

We first present the results of the base scenario and the two proposed interventions from a state-level
national simulation. Figure 2 shows the aggregate national results to provide a comparison of the
efficacy of the different interventions. The first intervention - corresponding to enhanced testing with
a differential target for each state based on its health index scores - provides a measurable improvement
in the total infected numbers, bringing it down from 35% at peak to around 25% at peak. The
cumulative number of projected deaths drops from around 6 million to around 4.2 million. While
testing at higher rates would yield even better results, for example if all states attempted to measure up
to the Kerala rates, this intervention is proposed as an achievable target given the current state of the
healthcare infrastructure. The heterogeneous intervention - with reduced contacts and reduced
transportation - achieves a major two-fold improvement. On the one hand, it brings down the total
number of infected numbers and the total mortality projections because of stringent restrictions. At
the same time, it shifts the peak of the curve significantly to the right, delaying the onset of peak, and
thus allows the healthcare infrastructure of the country time to set in place better testing and other
health infrastructure to manage the pandemic. Under this scenario, the cumulative mortality is at 1
million at the end of August, an almost six-fold improvement on the no-intervention scenario. Note
however, that the peak of the infection curve is yet to manifest at this point, which implies that
mortality would continue to rise in the absence of any other medical or social interventions.
We now show results from these interventions at the level of an individual state. We show results from
six states, chosen as illustrative examples. These states are - Kerala, Maharashtra, West Bengal,
Karnataka, NCT of Delhi and Uttar Pradesh. The results for the total infected numbers, the number
of diagnosed individuals, and the mortality projections for these states are shown in Figs. 3-8. The
corresponding curves for other states are presented in the appendix. The corresponding health indices
and testing rates for these six states are - Kerala (70.88; 0.4), Maharashtra (60.58; 0.298), West Bengal
(58.06; 0.026), Karnataka (59.22; 0.144), NCT of Delhi (49.04; 0.594), Uttar Pradesh (30.92; 0.036).

These statistics can help interpret the differential effects of the different states under the proposed
interventions.

Fig. 3: Comparison of projected infected and mortality numbers for ​Kerala under different proposed scenarios. Panel (a)
shows the infected numbers no-intervention scenario, while panel (b) and panel (c) shows the results for interventions 1
and 2 respectively. A comparative analysis of the projected mortality figures for the three situations is shown in panel (d).
The inset in panel (a) shows a zoomed in view of the reported number of cases till 3rd May (red dots).

Fig 4: Comparison of projected infected and mortality numbers for ​West Bengal ​under different proposed scenarios.
Panel (a) shows the infected numbers no-intervention scenario, while panel (b) and panel (c) shows the results for
interventions 1 and 2 respectively. A comparative analysis of the projected mortality figures for the three situations is
shown in panel (d). The inset in panel (a) shows a zoomed in view of the reported number of cases till 3rd May (red dots).

Fig 5: Comparison of projected infected and mortality numbers for ​Maharashtra under different proposed scenarios.
Panel (a) shows the infected numbers no-intervention scenario, while panel (b) and panel (c) shows the results for
interventions 1 and 2 respectively. A comparative analysis of the projected mortality figures for the three situations is
shown in panel (d). The inset in panel (a) shows a zoomed in view of the reported number of cases till 3rd May (red dots).

Fig 6: Comparison of projected infected and mortality numbers for the ​National Capital Territory of Delhi ​under
different proposed scenarios. Panel (a) shows the infected numbers no-intervention scenario, while panel (b) and panel (c)
shows the results for interventions 1 and 2 respectively. A comparative analysis of the projected mortality figures for the
three situations is shown in panel (d). The inset in panel (a) shows a zoomed in view of the reported number of cases till 3rd
May (red dots).

Fig 7: Comparison of projected infected and mortality numbers for ​Karnataka ​under different proposed scenarios. Panel
(a) shows the infected numbers no-intervention scenario, while panel (b) and panel (c) shows the results for interventions 1
and 2 respectively. A comparative analysis of the projected mortality figures for the three situations is shown in panel (d).
The inset in panel (a) shows a zoomed in view of the reported number of cases till 3rd May (red dots).

Fig 8: Comparison of projected infected and mortality numbers for ​Uttar Pradesh ​under different proposed scenarios.
Panel (a) shows the infected numbers no-intervention scenario, while panel (b) and panel (c) shows the results for
interventions 1 and 2 respectively. A comparative analysis of the projected mortality figures for the three situations is
shown in panel (d). The inset in panel (a) shows a zoomed in view of the reported number of cases till 3rd May (red dots).

First, we discuss the baseline no-intervention scenario. Kerala has some of India’s best healthcare and
socioeconomic indicators alongside a robust public healthcare system. The large testing rates observed
thus far in Kerala are reflected in the large testing fraction chosen in our model. This causes all three
scenarios to have modest increases in disease progression (in % population) in comparison with other
states. For instance, in the no-intervention scenario, the peak infected numbers are about 6%. This is
contrasted against the no-intervention scenarios of West Bengal, which peaks at 60% (note also the
much larger population of West Bengal). Likewise, states such as NCT Delhi show more favourable
disease progressions than neighbors such as Uttar Pradesh which have lower healthcare indices and
fewer tests per million.
To compare interventions, we will use the peak simulated infection as a percentage of the population
of the states. Since India has on average about 0.50 beds per thousand people [​59​], this is a good
measure of the potential load on the healthcare system. This is important given that cities such as
Mumbai and Delhi have already seen a scarcity in available hospital beds. Other measures of interest
such as total infecteds and total mortality track the peak infected percentage and can be inferred from
the figures in the main text and appendix. Both our proposed interventions do well in lowering
simulated infection rates and lowering the infections, though their effectiveness strongly depends on
the state. For instance, under intervention 1, Kerala’s peak infection rate sees a reduction from 6% to
approximately 3.5% whereas West Bengal sees a reduction from 60% to 35%. Gujarat’s peak infections
reduce from 40% to approximately 25%, once again, an overall reduction by a factor of 1.6. Karnataka
on the other hand shows a dramatic improvement from 26% to 2% , which is a reduction in peak
infections by a factor of 13. To understand this, we look at the testing rates and health care indices of
these states. Kerala has one of the highest testing rates in the country at 0.4 in comparison with Gujarat
which has a testing rate of 0.235, and both states are in the upper tertile of the health index rankings.
In contrast, Karnataka has a relatively high health index ranking putting it in the upper tertile as well,
though its current testing rate is quite low at approximately 0.144. Under intervention 1, Karnataka’s
testing rate was moved up to Kerala’s value at 0.4. We believe this alongside the reduction in contact
matrices explains the rapid reduction seen in Karnataka’s case. To further inspect this, we look at two
other states with proximate testing rates, namely Punjab and Himachal Pradesh. Himachal Pradesh has
a relatively high health index score, and hence moves to Kerala’s testing rate, causing the peak infection
to come down from 12% to approximately 2%. In contrast to this, Punjab has a high Health index
putting it in the upper tertile, and hence its simulated results should resemble Karnataka and
Himachal Pradesh in showing large reductions in infection rates. We only see approximately a 2 fold
decrease in the disease progression as measured by the aforementioned ratio. We believe that this
discrepancy might be due to differences in the transport rate between these states.
In comparison to the baseline scenario and intervention 1, our proposed intervention 2 is far more
severe, where a heterogenous lockdown is imposed on a strict threshold set at 0.01% of the state’s
population. This period of heterogeneous lockdown is represented in the figures as the shaded region.

Such a serious intervention clearly produces drastic results, reducing the simulated peak infections to a
manageable 0.02% population for Gujarat and 0.001% of the population in Kerala. Likewise several
other states show a dramatic reduction in the number of infections under intervention 2. The state of
West Bengal is an exception to this trend, where under the strict intervention 2 there is no abetment of
the spread of the infections. This is likely due to the fact that the low (existing) testing rate of West
Bengal is insufficient to curb the growth of the infections. This yet again highlights the importance of
testing.
District level simulations:
A major feature of our model is that capability to generate district level predictions for the entire
country. As a demonstration of this level of granularity, we simulate the time course of the pandemic
at a district level for the whole of India until the end of May. The data for the reported cases, recovery
and mortality data was obtained till the 3rd of May, and the simulations were run until 26th of May
assuming that lockdown was lifted post 3rd May, and normal life and transportation resumed to
pre-lockdown levels. The results are shown in Fig. 9. Note that, as with all the results of the model,
these predictions depend on the various model assumptions and parameter values, and should only be
interpreted in a qualitative sense. Note that these projections are not meant to simulate reality since the
nation went through various levels of lockdown or varying heterogenous severity during this period.
Our simulation aims to show that national and even state-level predictions can often mask a wide
range of performances depending on the level of granularity, and therefore accurate models aiming to
predict the pandemic should take this granularity into account. In addition, improved parameter
estimates can help provide more accurate predictions. Also, note that for districts which have not
reported any cases, one can in principle adopt two approaches to these “silent” districts - one can trust
the reporting of the data, and assume there have been no cases in these districts; or one could assume
that the reporting itself is uncertain, and the true numbers in these districts are unknown. We show in
Fig. 9 the results corresponding to the first assumption, where we trust the data reporting. The colour
map corresponds to the total number of pre-symptomatic and symptomatic infected people, as well as
all diagnosed cases ( A + I + X A + X I + P ).
Note that the country as a whole presents a very heterogeneous status of disease progression at a given
point of time. The testing rates introduce an immediate source of variability, while the transportation
matrix ensures a disparate spread of the disease once lockdown is lifted, even within districts of the
same state. Note that since this full lifting of lockdown and a return to pre-lockdown contact rates is
not reflective of the true situation, the model projects numbers which are much higher than the true
reported number of infections. A faithful prediction would involve incorporating time-varying
heterogenous interventions for different districts, as was done. While our model is capable of
incorporating such heterogeneous interventions, we do not choose to attempt to simulate this since
the

Fig. 9: District level predictions of the projected number of cases at the end of May. The total number of infections are
reported as the sum of the Presymptomatic (A), Symptomatic Infected (I), the corresponding lockdown compartments
(X​A and X​I​), and the diagnosed population (P). We do not show the true Asymptomatic population (E and X​E​) since they
never display symptoms and hence would not be a burden on the healthcare infrastructure.

policy for individual states was often unclear. Another simplification we have made in the current
model is that the transmission rate is assumed to be the same for all districts within a given state, and
was determined by fitting the state data to the model. For accurate projections, the data for each
district needs to be fitted individually. We choose not to do this since many districts have very few
cases such that an accurate determination of the transmission rate is not feasible.

Effect of transportation
We now turn to quantifying the effect of our mobility matrix on the spread of infection in the
country. We simulate the country at a district level using input data until the 3rd of May, and then run
our simulations until the 26th of May, under two scenarios - with the transportation matrix switched
on, and with the transportation switched off. All other conditions, including resumption of all
contacts to pre-lockdown levels were kept constant between the two simulations. The comparative
district wide plots on the 5th of May and 26th of May are shown in Fig. 10. For the 5th of May, since
this is immediately after lockdown, the differences in the transportation vs no. transportation scenarios
is minimal, as can be seen in Fig. 10(a). However, with time, the unequal mixing due to resumed
mobility of the population kicks in, leading to drastic differences in infected numbers, shown in Fig.
10(b).

Fig. 10: Difference in infection numbers with and without transportation at a district level. The difference is shown for
two dates - (a) May 5th, soon after lifting of lockdown, and (b) May 26th, around 3 weeks after lifting of lockdown. The
mixing due to transportation causes major surges in infection numbers in select areas, as can be seen in the 26th May plot.

We wish to highlight two important features that can be attributed to the effect of transportation.
Firstly, there is an overall rise in the number of cases due to mixing of the susceptible and infected
populations due to transportation - as is expected. More interestingly, there are emergence of clusters
with very high infection numbers when the transportation matrix is switched on. Some such sample
clusters are marked in the figure. This highlights how transportation can bring in new infections and
cause a growth of cases in areas that would otherwise have the epidemic under control. Note that this
effect is heterogeneous - there are areas in the country where the infection stays within control even
with transportation. This highlights the inherent disparity in transportation patterns, and suggests that
there are more effective methods of epidemic control instead of blanket bans of travel. Transportation
may be allowed in different areas at different rates while still keeping the spread of the epidemic in
check.

Comparison of predicted and observed trends
Our model aims to provide a framework within which to incorporate multiple levels of heterogeneity
appropriate to a country such as India. Accurate quantitative projections require dynamic updating of
the model to take into account time variations of parameters such as testing rates, higher quality and
more reliable data, and clarity regarding heterogeneous policy implementations at the district and state
levels. Nevertheless, in order to benchmark the basic accuracy of our model, we show a comparison of
the predicted trends under the base scenario and the two proposed interventions in this manuscript
with the actual reported data for the number of diagnosed Covid-19 cases. Note that for our
simulations, the reported data for positive population and the Covid-19 associated mortality were
incorporated until the 3rd of May, and the simulations were then run until the end of August. The

Fig. 11: Comparison of the reported number of positive cases with the three intervention scenarios proposed and studied
here. The data is till 15th July, 2020, while the predictions were generated using a dataset till 3rd May, 2020.

reported data was considered until the 15th of July. The comparison between the different scenarios is
shown in Fig. 11. The data qualitatively agrees with the predicted trend under intervention 2, which
corresponds to a heterogeneous lockdown scenario with reduced contacts due to stringent physical
distancing and public health measures, reduced nationwide transportation, and local lockdowns
depending on the severity of the outbreak. We note that this is the scenario which agrees strongly with
the actual policies implemented in India post the end of the national lockdown on the 3rd of May.
The base scenario considers the situation where post-May 3rd, the nation returned completely to
pre-lockdown levels of contacts and transportation. This was evidently not the case, as India went
through varying levels of lockdown post May 3rd, and varying levels of unlock protocol as well, post
June 8th. The first intervention - again corresponding to resumption of normal life post May 3rd, with
the addition of health-performance based enhanced testing, also does not correspond to the real-life
situation for similar reasons. Thus it is expected that the base scenario and intervention 1 predicts
much higher infection numbers compared to the actual data. The broad qualitative agreement
between the predictions of the second intervention with the actual data serves as a strong consistency
check on the background assumptions and methodology of the model, even in the absence of
implementation of granular district level intervention policies and testing rates. Incorporation of these
granular details in the model can be used to generate more accurate quantitative predictions to guide
future policy.

Discussion
We use a simple age stratified model in order to capture differential disease outcomes, intervention
strategies, and transportation effects. We use three age categories - people under 20 years, people
between 20 to 60 years and people above 60 years. While a finer stratification is available, we chose
these three coarse grained age stratifications in order to minimize the number of compartments, and
hence parameters in the model, while at the same time ensuring that one can test different India
specific interventions. One common strategy is to ensure closure of schools and colleges across the
country for an extended period of time, which affects the 0-20 age bracket. Further, the inter-district
transportation rates were computed for the worker population of a particular district, and hence these
were incorporated only in the 20-60 year age bracket. Further, projected mortalities were estimated
using an age-dependent mortality rate, as is relevant for Covid-19.
An important ingredient in our model is a state-wide identification of testing rates. This is important
because it allows us to build in a state-level heterogeneity that incorporates - (i) the Health Index and
(ii) the number of covid tests per million population. The Health index provides a measure of the
public health infrastructure of states, including hospital bed availability, number of ASHA and ANM
personnel and other relevant health indicators. This is important because the state of the public health
infrastructure constrains the response of a specific state. Contact tracing and other measures depend

on the state of health preparedness of the state and hence is an important metric that must be taken
into account. The second metric, of the number of Covid-19 tests depends on the testing policy and
on availability of testing kits and also affects identification and quarantine efforts. It should be
emphasized that the numbers for the testing rates may not be the “true” numbers, however, this
empirical estimate helps capture the heterogeneous response in different states of the country and
hence critically affects outcomes and projections at a national level. Finally, we note that the testing
rates are taken as (static) numbers in our model, whereas they are perhaps more accurately described as
time series. Incorporating the time series as a determinant of the testing rates can help provide more
quantitative prediction for the progression of the epidemic. However, we note that there have been
consistent concerns about the accuracy of the data reporting, and further, that accurate quantitative
projections require granular details of local intervention policies, which are currently not available for
the nation as whole. Since our aim was to provide a framework of incorporating heterogeneity in
testing rates, we choose to restrict the model to static rates for the purposes of the current analysis.
An important contribution of the model is to estimate and construct a national transportation matrix
at a district-level from available census data. Our model simulations show the importance of
transportation in the spread of the epidemic and underscores the importance of incorporating this in
any theoretical study. Although the transport network in this paper is constructed by inference, as
described in the methods section, future work should focus on building real data-driven mobility
networks for the entire country at a granular level. We also note that the national level lockdown also
set in motion an unprecedented large scale movement of migrant labourers throughout the country.
Similar large scale migration also happened with the onset of the unlock protocols. The transportation
matrix proposed in this work builds on mobility patterns in normal times and does not take into
account this large scale migration. Quantitative estimates of the patterns of this migration can help in
improving the model and producing better quantitative predictions.
The limitations of our model should be emphasised to interpret the results in the appropriate context.
The first limitation of our model is the fact that compartmental models are built on the assumption
that the underlying population is well mixed. Though this is somewhat mitigated by the fact that our
model has structure (age structure and geographic specificity), the mixing assumption still implies that
we have fluctuations not captured by our model. Furthermore, the aggregation of the contact
matrices into three age bins is an approximation to the true dynamics. We also include the health
indices of each state into our model by the assumptions detailed in the description of the
interventions. The separation of all states into three groups assigned to execute intervention policies is
a further approximation that allows us to incorporate the health indices in a straightforward fashion.
Simplifying assumptions were also made about the infection rates. The district infection rates are
pegged to the state infection rates and the coefficient
that models the inefficiencies in the
lockdown are pegged to the national/state level in the appropriate simulation. Another assumption of
our model is that the testing rates are not functions of time.

Besides this, our model is built on simplifying assumptions about modelling various parameters via
their median values, though this can be generalized easily. For instance, we match model predictions
against reported mortality by assigning 2% of the simulated infections to become fatal in a median of
17 days. Both these numbers are better approximated as probability distributions. These distributions
are often long-tailed, and hence a mean parameter value may provide poor projections. A stochastic
version of this model which incorporates these underlying probability distributions would be more
relevant from a predictive approach. Finally, we made the simplifying assumption that the noise
model for the measurement and state errors in the extended Kalman filter are Gaussian as described in
the methods section. We presume that this is adequate for large populations but highlight it here for
the sake of completeness.
Our model presents a comprehensive compartmental model that is relevant in the context of India. We
take into account a detailed generalization of an SEIR model that accurately reflects the disease
dynamics of Covid-19. In addition, we use state level health metrics and Covid-19 responses to model
the heterogeneous spread, which is essential for a country of the scale of India. Further, our
district-level transportation matrix uses Census data to project the number of people coming into and
moving out of a particular district and hence builds in a geographical heterogeneity. Our proposed
interventions must then be interpreted against the background of this realistic national model. We
show how a combination of various strategies may be utilised to emerge from this pandemic while
minimizing the human and economic costs of the pandemic.
We hope that our model is relevant in the context of organising a more comprehensive solution to the
ongoing pandemic in India. Our model, which is documented with open source code made available
online [​50​] can be modified to qualitatively model both the spread of the disease and the economic
cost of interventions. Furthermore, in addition to age and district level stratification our model may
be generalized to include income groups. Such a generalised model would potentially address how
different socio-economic groups are affected by the pandemic and the onset of the loss of income due
to lockdown. It is generally accepted that the optimal strategy to control the pandemic in any region
with an active lockdown is to use that time to reinforce testing facilities, hospital beds and personal
protective equipment. We hope that our model plays some role in assessing the risks relative to the
rewards in combating COVID-19.
In conclusion, we would like to end with a caveat. For a country of the scale and complexity of India,
it is impossible for any single model to predict accurately the course of an epidemic. Local responses,
super-spreader events, time varying strategies and interventions, and other spatio-temporal
fluctuations, all play an important role in the final trajectory of the epidemic. Models such as these and
others, can only serve as a guiding tool to policy-makers. However, a holistic approach to the pandemic
requires a combination of expertise from public health officials, health-care workers, epidemiologists,

sociologists, and economists, in addition to modelers, to come together to determine the most effective
response, contingent on the available data. This present work should be taken in the spirit of being
only one component in this multi-faceted approach, and should not be considered in isolation.

Acknowledgements​:
MKM and SV acknowledge discussions with S Gupta and D Manjunath. SV acknowledges a cluster
funded by an IITB-IRCC grant number 16IRCCSG019 and a DST-SERB Early Career Research
Award (ECR/2018/000957) used for the simulations.

References​:
[1]. Kermack, William Ogilvy, and Anderson G. McKendrick. “A contribution to the mathematical theory of
epidemics.” Proceedings of the royal society of london. Series A, Containing papers of a mathematical
and physical character 115, no. 772: 700-721, 1927. [​Google Scholar​]
[2]. Brauer, Fred. "Compartmental models in epidemiology." In Mathematical epidemiology, pp. 19-79.
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2008. [​Google Scholar​]
[3]. Hethcote, Herbert W. "The mathematics of infectious diseases." SIAM review 42, no. 4: 599-653,
2000. [​Google Scholar​]
[4]. Ledder, Glenn. “Scaling for dynamical systems in biology.” Bulletin of mathematical biology 79, no. 11:
2747-2772, 2017. [​Google Scholar​]
[5]. Capasso, V., Serio, G.: “A generalization of the Kermack–McKendrick deterministic epidemic model.”
Math. Biosci. 42: 41–61, 1978. [​Google Scholar​]
[6]. Vynnycky, Emilia, and Richard White. “An introduction to infectious disease modelling.” OUP oxford,
2010. [​Google Scholar​]
[7]. Blackwood, Julie C., and Lauren M. Childs. “An introduction to compartmental modeling for the
budding infectious disease modeler.” Letters in Biomathematics 5, no. 1: 195-221, 2018. [​Google Scholar​]
[8]. Lauer, Stephen A., Kyra H. Grantz, Qifang Bi, Forrest K. Jones, Qulu Zheng, Hannah R. Meredith,
Andrew S. Azman, Nicholas G. Reich, and Justin Lessler. “The incubation period of coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19) from publicly reported confirmed cases: estimation and application.” Annals of internal
medicine 172, no. 9: 577-582, 2020. [​Google Scholar​]
[9]. Li Q, Guan X, Wu P, Wang X, Zhou L, Tong Y, et al. “Early Transmission Dynamics
in Wuhan, China, of Novel Coronavirus-Infected Pneumonia.” N Engl J Med., 382(13):1199-207, 2020.
[​Google Scholar​]

[10]. Mizumoto, Kenji, Katsushi Kagaya, Alexander Zarebski, and Gerardo Chowell. “Estimating the
asymptomatic proportion of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) cases on board the Diamond Princess
cruise ship, Yokohama, Japan, 2020.” Eurosurveillance 25, no.10: 2000180, 2020. [​Google Scholar​]
[11]. Nishiura, Hiroshi, Tetsuro Kobayashi, Takeshi Miyama, Ayako Suzuki, Sungmok Jung, Katsuma
Hayashi, Ryo Kinoshita et al. “Estimation of the asymptomatic ratio of novel coronavirus infections
(COVID-19).” medRxiv, 2020. [​Google Scholar​]
[12]. Qiu, Jane. “Covert coronavirus infections could be seeding new outbreaks.” Nature, 2020. [​Google
Scholar​]
[12]. Rao, Krishna D. “Situation analysis of the health workforce in India.” Human Resources Background
Paper 1, 2014. [​Google Scholar​]
[13]. Rajesh Singh and R. Adhikari. “Age-structured impact of social distancing on the COVID-19
epidemic in India”. arXiv e-prints, page arXiv:2003.12055, March 2020. [​Google Scholar​]
[14]. ​Report of the WHO-China Joint Mission on Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)
https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/who-china-joint-mission-on-covid-19-final-report.pdf
(2020), Accessed 10th April 2020.
[15]. ​Smith, Gerald L., Stanley F. Schmidt, and Leonard A. McGee. “Application of statistical filter theory
to the optimal estimation of position and velocity on board a circumlunar vehicle.” National Aeronautics
and Space Administration, 1962. [​Google Scholar​]
[16] Maier, Benjamin F., and Dirk Brockmann. “Effective containment explains sub-exponential growth in
confirmed cases of recent COVID-19 outbreak in Mainland China”. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.07572, 2020.
[​Google Scholar​]
[17] Moss, Robert, James Wood, Damien Brown, Freya Shearer, Andrew J. Black, Allen Cheng, James
M. McCaw, and Jodie McVernon. “Modelling the impact of COVID-19 in Australia to inform transmission
reducing measures and health system preparedness.” medRxiv (2020). [​Google Scholar​]
[18] Das, Arghya, Abhishek Dhar, Anupam Kundu, and Srashti Goyal. “Covid-19: analysis of a modified
SEIR model, a comparison of different intervention strategies and projections for India.” medRxiv (2020).
[​Google Scholar​]

[19] Martin Enserink and Kai Kupferschmidt. “With COVID-19, modeling takes on life and death
importance”. 367(6485):1414–1415, 2020. [​Google Scholar​]
[20] Fernando E Alvarez, David Argente, and Francesco Lippi. “A simple planning problem for COVID-19
lockdown”. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2020. [​Google Scholar​]
[21] Facundo Piguillem and Liyan Shi. “Optimal COVID-19 quarantine and testing policies”. 2020.
[​Google Scholar​]

[22] Giulia Giordano, Franco Blanchini, Raffaele Bruno, Patrizio Colaneri, Alessandro Di Filippo, Angela
Di Matteo, and Marta Colaneri. “Modelling the COVID-19 epidemic and implementation of populationwide interventions in Italy”. Nature Medicine, pages 1–6, 2020. [​Google Scholar​]
[23] Neil Ferguson, Daniel Laydon, Gemma Nedjati Gilani, Natsuko Imai, Kylie Ainslie, Marc Baguelin,
Sangeeta Bhatia, Adhiratha Boonyasiri, ZULMA Cucunuba Perez, Gina Cuomo-Dannenburg, et al.
“Report 9: Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) to reduce COVID-19 mortality and
healthcare demand”. 2020. [​Google Scholar​]
[24] Callum J Jones, Thomas Philippon, and Venky Venkateswaran. “Optimal mitigation policies in a
pandemic: Social distancing and working from home”. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
Research, 2020. [​Google Scholar​]
[25] Weston C Roda, Marie B Varughese, Donglin Han, and Michael Y Li. “Why is it difficult to accurately
predict the COVID-19 epidemic? Infectious Disease Modelling”, 2020. [​Google Scholar​]
[26] Giuseppe C Calafiore, Carlo Novara, and Corrado Possieri. “A modified sir model for the COVID-19
contagion in italy”. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.14391, 2020. [​Google Scholar​]
[27] Nuno Crokidakis. “Data analysis and modeling of the evolution of COVID-19 in Brazil”. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.12150, 2020. [​Google Scholar​]
[28] Sheryl Le Chang, Nathan Harding, Cameron Zachreson, Oliver M. Cliff, and Mikhail Prokopenko.
“Modelling transmission and control of the COVID-19 pandemic in Australia”. ArXiv, abs/2003.10218,
2020. [​Google Scholar​]
[29] Rajesh Singh and R. Adhikari. “Age-structured impact of social distancing on the COVID-19
epidemic in India”. arXiv e-prints, page arXiv:2003.12055, March 2020. [​Google Scholar​]
[30]
M.K. Arti and K. Bhatnagar. “Modeling and predictions for COVID-19 spread in India”.
ResearchGate, 2020. [​Google Scholar​]
[31] Chatterjee, Kaustuv, Kaushik Chatterjee, Arun Kumar, and Subramanian Shankar. “Healthcare
impact of COVID-19 epidemic in India: A stochastic mathematical model”. Medical Journal Armed Forces
India (2020). [​Google Scholar​]
[32] Pujari, Bhalchandra S., and Snehal M. Shekatkar. “Multi-city modeling of epidemics using spatial
networks: Application to 2019-nCov (COVID-19) coronavirus in India”. medRxiv (2020). [​Google Scholar​]
[33] Mandal, Sandip, Tarun Bhatnagar, Nimalan Arinaminpathy, Anup Agarwal, Amartya Chowdhury,
Manoj Murhekar, Raman R. Gangakhedkar, and Swarup Sarkar. “Prudent public health intervention
strategies to control the coronavirus disease 2019 transmission in India: A mathematical model-based
approach”. Indian Journal of Medical Research 151, no. 2: 190, 2020. [​Google Scholar​]
[34] M.R. Bhatnagar. “COVID-19: Mathematical modeling and predictions”. ResearchGate, 2020.
[​Google Scholar​]
[35] Sheng Zhang, MengYuan Diao, Wenbo Yu, Lei Pei, Zhaofen Lin, and Dechang Chen. “Estimation of
the reproductive number of novel coronavirus (covid-19) and the probable outbreak size on the diamond
princess cruise ship: A data-driven analysis”. International Journal of Infectious Diseases, 93:201 – 204,
2020. [​Google Scholar​]

[36] Laure Wynants, Ben Van Calster, Marc M J Bonten, Gary S Collins, Thomas P A Debray, Maarten
De Vos, Maria C Haller, Georg Heinze, Karel G M Moons, Richard D Riley, Ewoud Schuit, Luc J M Smits,
Kym I E Snell, Ewout W Steyerberg, Christine Wallisch, and Maarten van Smeden. “Prediction models for
diagnosis and prognosis of COVID-19 infection: systematic review and critical appraisal”. British Medical
Journal, 369, 2020. [​Google Scholar​]
[37] Jomar F. Rabajante. “Insights from early mathematical models of 2019-NCoV acute respiratory
disease (COVID-19) dynamics”. arXiv: Populations and Evolution, 2020. [​Google Scholar​]
[38] Verity, Robert, Lucy C. Okell, Ilaria Dorigatti, Peter Winskill, Charles Whittaker, Natsuko Imai, Gina
Cuomo-Dannenburg et al. “Estimates of the severity of coronavirus disease 2019: a model-based
analysis”. The Lancet Infectious Diseases, 2020. [​Google Scholar​]
[39] Song, Peter X., Lili Wang, Yiwang Zhou, Jie He, Bin Zhu, Fei Wang, Lu Tang, and Marisa Eisenberg.
“An epidemiological forecast model and software assessing interventions on COVID-19 epidemic in
China”. medRxiv, 2020. [​Google Scholar​]
[40] Kucharski, Adam J., Timothy W. Russell, Charlie Diamond, Yang Liu, John Edmunds, Sebastian
Funk, Rosalind M. Eggo et al. “Early dynamics of transmission and control of COVID-19: a mathematical
modelling study”. The Lancet Infectious Diseases, 2020. [​Google Scholar​]
[41]. Tang, Biao, Nicola Luigi Bragazzi, Qian Li, Sanyi Tang, Yanni Xiao, and Jianhong Wu. “An updated
estimation of the risk of transmission of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCov).” Infectious disease modelling
5: 248-255, 2020. [​Google Scholar​]
[42]. Gatto, Marino, Enrico Bertuzzo, Lorenzo Mari, Stefano Miccoli, Luca Carraro, Renato Casagrandi,
and Andrea Rinaldo. “Spread and dynamics of the COVID-19 epidemic in Italy: Effects of emergency
containment measures.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117, no. 19: 10484-10491,
2020. [​Google Scholar​]
[43]. Ray, Debashree, Maxwell Salvatore, Rupam Bhattacharyya, Lili Wang, Shariq Mohammed, Soumik
Purkayastha, Aritra Halder et al. “Predictions, role of interventions and effects of a historic national
lockdown in India's response to the COVID-19 pandemic: data science call to arms.” medRxiv, 2020.
[​Google Scholar​]
[44]. K. Sarkar and S. Khajanchi, Modeling and forecasting of the COVID-19 pandemic in India,
arXiv:2005.07071, 2020.
[45]. Shekatkar, Snehal, Bhalchandra Pujari, Mihir Arjunwadkar, Dhiraj Kumar Hazra, Pinaki Chaudhuri,
Sitabhra Sinha, Gautam I. Menon, Anupama Sharma, and Vishwesha Guttal. "INDSCI-SIM A state-level
epidemiological model. for India.” [​Google Scholar​]
[46]. Agrawal et al., COVID-19 Epidemic: Unlocking the lockdown in India (working paper), IISc-TIFR
Technical
Report,
https:
//Covid-19.iisc.ac.in/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/
Report-1-20200419-UnlockingTheLockdownInIndia. pdf [​PDF​]
[47]. Venkateswaran, Jayendran, and Om Damani. “Effectiveness of Testing, Tracing, Social Distancing
and Hygiene in Tackling Covid-19 in India: A System Dynamics Model.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.08859,
2020. [​Google Scholar​]

[48]. Meidan, Dror, Reuven Cohen, Simcha Haber, and Baruch Barzel. "An alternating lock-down strategy
for sustainable mitigation of COVID-19." arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.01453, 2020. [​PDF​]
[49]. Prem, Kiesha, Alex R. Cook, and Mark Jit. “Projecting social contact matrices in 152 countries using
contact surveys and demographic data.” PLoS computational biology 13, no. 9: e1005697, 2017.[​Google
Scholar​]
[50].
​An
India-specific
compartmental
model
for
Covid-19​.
https://vinjanampathy.github.io/Heterogenous_Covid-19_India_Model/​. Accessed 15th July 2020.
[51]. Lan Lan, Dan Xu, Guangming Ye, Chen Xia, Shaokang Wang, Yirong Li, and Haibo Xu. Positive
RT-PCR test results in patients recovered from covid-19. Jama, 2020.
[52]. Report of the who-china joint mission on coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19).
https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/who-china-joint-mission-on-covid-19-final-report.pdf
. Accessed 10th April 2020.
[53]. Census data 2011: ​https://censusindia.gov.in/2011-common/censusdata2011.html​. Accessed 12th
July 2020.
[54]. COVID-19 Coronavirus Pandemic: ​https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/#countries​. Accessed
12th July 2020.
[55]. The Novel Coronavirus Pneumonia Emergency Response Epidemiology Team. “The
Epidemiological Characteristics of an Outbreak of 2019 Novel Coronavirus Diseases (COVID-19) —
China, 2020[J]”. China CDC Weekly, 2(8): 113-122, 2020. [​Google Scholar​]
[56]. Geographic features of districts: ​https://www.igismap.com/​,
http://hub.arcgis.com/​ . Accessed ​15th July 2020.

​https://www.diva-gis.org/

and

[57]. Districts of India: ​http://districts.nic.in/index.php​. ​Accessed ​15th July 2020.
[58]. ​Gupta, Sourendu, and R. Shankar. “Estimating the number of COVID-19 infections in Indian
hot-spots using fatality data.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.04025, 2020. [​Google Scholar​]
[59]. ​OECD (2020), Hospital beds (indicator). ​doi: 10.1787/0191328e-en​. Accessed on 21 July 2020
[60]. Castiglione, Joe, Mark Bradley, and John Gliebe. “Activity-based travel demand models: a primer”.
No. SHRP 2 Report S2-C46-RR-1. 2015. ​[​Google Scholar​]

Supplementary Methods and Materials
A. Model equations
The meta-population model presented in this manuscript can be simulated at a district or state
level. Let, S αi denote the susceptible population in the age group α in the ith district/state.
Similarly, E αi , Aαi , I αi denote the true asymptomatic, pre-symptomatic, and symptomatic
infected population in the age group α in the ith district/state, while X E αi , X A αi , X I αi denote
their counterparts under lockdown respectively. Finally, P αi denotes the number of people
tested positive, and Rαi the number of recovered and removed people in the age group α in
the ith district/state. Since we use three age brackets, α = 1, 2, 3 denotes the age groups
< 20, 20 − 60, and > 60 respectively, while i = 1, ..., N d/s , where N d = 720 is the total
number of districts in India, and N s = 36 is the total number of states and union territories in
India.
The dynamics of the susceptible population is given by,

The susceptible population becomes infected on contact with infected individuals
(asymptomatic, presymptomatic, and symptomatic) across all age groups. i denotes the
inherent infectivity for the ith district. We assume that the true asymptomatics infect with a
lower infectivity ( b1 < 1 ) than presymptomatic or symptomatic individuals. The diagnosed
population can only infect healthcare workers and this lower infectivity is captured by the
parameter b2 (≪ 1) . The contacts between different age groups were decomposed into home,
school, work, and “others” and were calculated using the data in Prem et. al. [​49​]. For the three
tiered age structuring in our model, the contact matrices are (3 × 3) matrices and are given by,

The total contact matrix is the sum of all four of these constituent matrices,
C = C home + C school + C work + C others
Since all lockdowns are imperfect, the susceptible population can come into contact with the
infected compartments in lockdown as well. This contact is however reduced from the
non-lockdown contact matrix C for work and other contacts by a factor 1 , which then
indicates the leakiness of lockdown. We set the school contact matrix to zero since schools are
completely closed during this period. This lockdown contact matrix is then given by,
C L = C home + 1 (C work + C others ) .
The second term models the mobility of the working population into and out of a particular
district. This transport term is effective only if lockdown is not active, which is implemented
by the (1 − Ξ(t, T L , T E )) prefactor where Ξ(t, T L , T E ) = 1 if T L ≤ t ≤ T E and zero
otherwise, and T L and T E denotes the start and end dates for the national lockdown.The
mobility or transportation matrix M α ij denotes the number of people in age group α who
leave from district j to arrive at district i per day. Our transportation matrix, as detailed
subsequently, is calculated for the working age population, and hence M 1 ij = M 3 ij = 0 .
The final two terms in the time evolution of the susceptible population equation models the
rate (k 0 ) at which susceptible population locks down. The lockdown is effective from time
T L to T E . After the lockdown is lifted at time T E , the population returns to a susceptible
state at a rate μ , where Θ represents the usual Heaviside function.
Now, of the susceptible population who become infected, we assume that a fraction f are the
true asymptomatics (E), i.e. people who will never show any symptoms over the entire
progression of the disease. The time evolution of this compartment is given by,

Note that this equation closely mirrors the dynamics of the susceptible population, with a
fraction f of the newly infected arriving in the E compartment. The transportation matrix
accounts for inter-district/state travel, and the k 0 and μ terms reflect the imposition and
lifting of lockdown. The penultimate term models the rate t ′ at which these true
asymptomatic people are detected. This can be achieved by contact tracing of known infected
individuals. The final term models the recovery of these individuals at a rate γ 1 which is the
inverse of the recovery time for the asymptomatic population.
The remaining fraction 1 − f of the population transitions into the presymptomatic (A)
category. The time evolution of this compartment is given by

Note the testing of presymptomatic individuals is achieved at a rate of t ′′ and these
presymptomatic individuals progress to the symptomatic stage at a rate σ which is the inverse
of the mean incubation period of the disease.
The presymptomatic people develop symptoms and move to the symptomatic infected (I)
compartment. The infected population can be diagnosed via positive tests at a rate t or they

may recover directly without having been diagnosed at a rate γ 2 . In addition they transition to
the lockdown compartments and vice versa, and also travel from other districts or states, as in
the previous cases. The time evolution of this compartment is then described by,

We now turn to the time evolution of the shadow compartments corresponding to the
lockdown population. Since lockdowns are leaky, as discussed previously, the susceptible
population in lockdown can come into contact with the non-lockdown population with the
contact matrix C L and with other lockdown population with a further reduced contact matrix
C LL given by C L = C home + 1 2 (C work + C others ) . Note that the lockdown is assumed not to
impact home contact matrices at all.

Note that for the population under lockdown, the mobility terms do not appear in the time
evolution equations, since this population, by definition cannot travel between districts.
Analogously, we can write down the evolution equations for the X E , X A , and X I
compartments as follow,

Finally, we turn to the compartments for those people who have been diagnosed as positive for
Covid-19 (P) and the recovered/removed (R) compartment. For the P compartment, the total
number of positive cases is the sum of all people who have tested positive from the E , A, I
compartments and their lockdown counterparts X E , X A , X I . These people recover at a rate
given by γ 3 . Thus, we have,
People can recover either from this diagnosed compartment (P) or directly from the
symptomatic and true asymptomatic compartments ( I , X I , E , X E ) without having been
detected over the course of progression of the disease. This recovery compartment then evolves
according to the equation,
This set of equations completely define the time evolution of the model. At each
meta-population level (district or state), there are 30 compartments - 10 population
compartments, times 3 age stratifications for each of them. In subsequent appendices, we will
discuss the choice of parameters for which this model was simulated.

B. Parameter estimation
The model presented here is necessarily complicated, given the complex disease trajectory of
SARS-CoV-2 as well as the complex societal and geographical realities of India. The
parameters of the model sensitively determine the disease trajectory and the geographical
spread of the disease. We have used accepted parameters for the disease progression from the
literature, while India-specific parameters have been estimated by a variety of methods as
detailed below.
Note that different parameter choices will lead to different projections from the model. Hence
the numbers reported in this analysis should be interpreted as qualitative trends only, in order

to gauge effectiveness of different interventions and the qualitative projected severity of the
disease. This model will be continuously updated as and when better estimates of the
parameters become available.

Disease progression parameters
Fit

The basic infectivity parameter.
This was determined individually for each state by fitting
the available data. The full list of the parameter for each
state is listed in the subsequent Table

σ

1/5

The rate of progression from pre-symptomatic to
symptomatic individuals. This is the inverse of the mean
incubation time of the disease and is taken to be 5 days.
[8,9]

b1

0.1

Reduced infectivity of the true asymptomatic population.
This is taken to be 10% of the basic infectivity

f

0.2

Fraction of true asymptomatics. Assumed to be 20% of the
total infected population [​ 10]

ϕ

0.5

Fraction of population who are asymptomatic at the time
of testing. Assumed to be 50% of the total diagnosed
individuals [​23​]

γ1

1/19

Recovery rate of true asymptomatics. This is the inverse of
the typical recovery time for this population. Since accurate
data is not available for true asymptomatics, we use the
mean recovery time for mild infections in this case [​14​]

γ2

1/22

Recovery rate of symptomatic infected. This is the inverse
of the recovery time post onset of symptoms. This is
assumed to be 22 days [​51,52​]

γ3

1/22

Recovery rate of diagnosed population. While the
diagnosed or tested positive compartment has influx from
different stages of the disease, we use an average recovery
time equal to that from the I compartment, since they
comprise the largest fraction of people who are tested.
India specific parameters

1

Fit

The leakiness of lockdown. Indicates the reduction in the

workplace and others contact matrices under lockdown.
This was determined individually for each state by fitting
the available data. The full list of the 1 parameter for each
state is listed in the subsequent Table.
b2

0.002

The confirmed positive people (P) can only infect
health-care workers, since they will be in strict
quaran-tine/hospitalization. As a proxy for this
parameter then,we can use the estimate of the number of
healthcare work-ers in India, which is 20 per 10000
population [​12​]

k0

1/7

This represents the rate at which the general
population goes into lockdown. In the absence of concrete
data, we assume a timescale of one week. Note that
different values of this rate will not affect the disease
progression, but will only shift the projected curves. [See
A.Dhar [​18​]]

μ

1/7

This represents the rate at which the population exits
lockdown. Again in the absence of data, we assume a
timescale of one week.

rtest

Estimated

The testing rate for each state is estimated using a
semi-empirical method. We detail the calculation of this
testing rate below. The testing rate was then used to obtain
estimates of t , ′t and ′′t .

Testing rates:

In order to compute the testing rates, we follow the procedure outlined in Ref. [​58​]. The case
N umber of deaths
fatality ratio is defined as C F R = N umber of deaths
. Let, D(t) denote the
+ N umber of recovered
number of deaths at time t, and, r(t) denote the number of recovered people at time t
Let us define the ratio, ρ = D(t)
. The CFR can then be estimated from this ratio as
r(t)
CF R =

ρ
1+ρ

. However, because of under-reporting and testing criteria, if the true number of

infected I(t) is uncertain, then the true number of recoveries is also uncertain. An analysis for
various countries shows that ρ is likely to be a biased statistical estimator for the CFR.
If we assume that the reporting of deaths is error-free, and that the true number of recoveries is
D(t)
ρ
R
R(t) = ξ r(t) , then C F R = D(t)+R(t)
= ρ+ξ
⇒
ξ = ρ( 1−CF
)
CF R

If we assume a CFR of 0.023 (2.3%) [2], we can use
the reported data for ρ to estimate the testing
fraction ξ . We do this analysis for Kerala only,
since KL occupies the top spot in the country on
the Health Index and hence may be assumed to
have accurate mortality reporting. This analysis is
meaningful only in the initial stages of the
epidemic, and hence we plot this ratio ρ for one
week after the first reported death in KL.
Assuming a mean value of ρmean = 0.06 , we obtain, ξ = 0.06 ( 1−0.023
) ≃ 2.5
0.023
This means that for every 2.5 infected people in Kerala, one is identified by the testing
regimen.
1
The testing rate for Kerala is then rtest = 2.5
≃ 0.4
We now use this testing fraction for Kerala to obtain estimates for testing fractions of all other
states, assuming testing performances for different states correlate with states performances on
two metrics - (i) the Health preparedness score of a particular state according to the National
Health Mission [3], and (ii) the number of Covid-19 tests per million population for a state
[4]. We scale the testing rate for an individual state according to the following empirical
formula:
TPM
HI
rST AT E test = rKL test × T P Mstate × HIstate
KL

KL

We note that while testing rates is not obtained from the data for each state, it builds in a
heterogeneity in the relative response of states based on the long-term health indices, and the
number of covid tests conducted by each state, and hence can be assumed to be a accurate
metric of the relative performance of different states. For the district level simulation, we
assume all the districts for a particular state have the same testing rate.

Fig. : (a) The Health Index values and (b) the number of covid tests per million conducted by individual states,
used to determine testing fractions.

State/UT

1

rtest

0.029

0.56

0.18

0.03

0.45

0.265

0.029

0.56

0.081

ASSAM

0.03

0.56

0.062

BIHAR

0.03

0.15

0.036

CHANDIGARH

0.015

0.65

0.190

CHHATTISGARH

0.025

0.6

0.118

DADRA & NAGAR HAVELI

0.029

0.56

0.036

DAMAN & DIU

0.029

0.56

0.077

GOA

0.029

0.56

0.226

GUJARAT

0.025

0.95

0.235

HARYANA

0.005

0.56

0.182

HIMACHALPRADESH

0.01

0.56

0.156

JAMMU & KASHMIR

0.02

0.95

0.286

JHARKHAND

0.03

0.05

0.041

KARNATAKA

0.015

0.75

0.144

ANDAMAN & NICOBAR IS.

ANDHRAPRADESH
ARUNACHALPRADESH

KERALA

0.015

0.56

0.400

LADAKH

0.029

0.56

0.285

LAKSHADWEEP

0.029

0.56

0.15

MADHYAPRADESH

0.03

0.55

0.104

MAHARASHTRA

0.02

0.9

0.298

0.029

0.56

0.109

0.03

0.56

0.109

MIZORAM

0.029

0.56

0.067

NAGALAND

0.029

0.56

0.042

NCT OF DELHI

0.03

0.95

0.594

ODISHA

0.02

0.4

0.077

PUDUCHERRY

0.029

0.56

0.13

PUNJAB

0.025

0.25

0.137

0.03

0.6

0.230

0.029

0.56

0.109

TAMILNADU

0.03

0.56

0.247

TELANGANA

0.03

0.3

0.109

TRIPURA

0.029

0.56

0.130

UTTARAKHAND

0.015

0.65

0.126

UTTARPRADESH

0.015

0.95

0.036

0.03

0.05

0.026

MANIPUR
MEGHALAYA

RAJASTHAN
SIKKIM

WESTBENGAL

Mortality rates:
In order to calculate the mortality rates, we first determine the population distribution of each
state into ten-year bins. The mortality rates of each of these 10-year bins are taken from the
literature [​55​] and are listed in the table below. We then appropriately weigh the population

distribution of each state in order to determine a state-specific mortality rate for each of the
three age groups in our model (0-20, 20-60, >60).

Age
group

0-9

10-19

20-29

30-39

40-49

50-59

60-69

70-79

>80

Mortality
rate

0.0

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.4

1.3

3.6

8.0

14.8

C. Equilibrium and model reproduction number
We will consider the disease compartments of the model described above without the
lockdown compartments to calculate the basic reproduction rate using the next generation
matrix method. The evolution of the disease compartments are given by

The usual procedure follows by evaluating the Jacobian of the sub-model evolution separated into
three parts. This yields the two matrices

and

Basic Reproduction Number R0 = Spectral Radius ( F V −1 )

For completeness, we note two limits of the evaluated R0 .
Reduction to SEIR model for f = 1 and t ′ = 0 : ​This model reduces to the basic SIR model if we
have f = 1 and t ′ = 0 . ​ ​E bin of this model is the I bin of the SIR model. For such a case:

where 2 is the infection rate and γ 1 is the recovery rate.
Reduction to SEIR model for f = 0, t = 0, t " = 0, and b3 = 0 : ​For these given values of
parameters our model reduces to the SEIR model and A bin of our model is the E bin of SEIR model.
Buth the basic difference in the SEIR model and our special case is that the infection rate for their
model is (I) = I/N while for our case it becomes (I, A) = (I + A)/N . Hence R0 for our case is slightly
different from the original SEIR model and is given as:

D. Extended Kalman Filter
For a given model, the process of estimating the true state of the model, given the equations for
state dynamics and measurements, is a standard problem in estimation theory. The state vector
of our system can be written as ψ = (S, X S , A, X A , E , X E , I , X I , P , R) for the fundamental
unit cell of our model (which we use to outline the estimation theory). The problem can now

be stated as estimating ψi ∈ R, ψi ≥ 0 given the two noisy measurements namely P (ti ) and
mortality m(ti ) for each day ti .
The state equations for a generic state vector x for a nonlinear state space model, can be
expressed as:

where uk represents the control input to the system. ηk and v k represent the process noise
and measurement noise respectively.
For our system model, several modelling assumptions can be made that make the system
amenable for Kalman filtering while preserving its stochastic properties. The evolution of ψ is
not governed by any control inputs. We assume that ηk and v k are additive noises to the
respective equations. The state transition equation is further discretized and the cumulative
effect of the process noises is incorporated within an additive noise wk . Hence, the state
equations of the discrete-time nonlinear system described by ψ is:

where

The disturbances wk and v k are assumed to be Gaussian, that is,

The function f (ψ(τ)) , τ ∈ {tk , tk+1 } is obtained from the time evolutions of each
compartment provided earlier in Section A. We obtain F (ψk ) by numerically integrating the
differential equation in real time.
The measurements are composed of the compartment that tested positive as well as the
mortality. The latter is calculated heuristically based on the compartments of symptomatic
people, and on the mortality rate which depends on the age bin and the state. Hence h(ψ(τ))
can be expressed as:

We define the observer
, which is the estimate of the state vector ψk at time instant tk ,
with the following state dynamics and measurement model:

Where,

The observer state vector
is a multivariate random variable, as is the case with every kind
of optimal estimator. For this system, it is of multivariate Gaussian form and has a covariance
matrix Σk|k .
The prediction step of the Extended Kalman Filter (henceforth referred to as the EKF) consists
of the following steps:

This prediction is updated based on the measurements obtained. The equations for the update
step are as follows:

The dataset has measurements upto 3rd May, hence for further dates, we use the predictions in
the following manner:

E. Transport matrix

The process to develop the inter-district transportation matrix representing the population
commuting between adjoining districts is shown in Figure D1. For this, the trip length
frequency distribution, obtained from the worker population trip length recorded during the
2011 census data collection, was used to estimate the probability density function of trip
length. Worker population ( W P ) residing at DDB distance from the district boundary may
either commute towards the district boundary or in directions not leading to the district
boundary. We assumed half of them would travel toward the district boundary. When
commuting towards the district boundary, workers would cross the boundary if their trip
length ( T L ) exceeds the DDB . Hence, workers expected to commute across the district
boundary can be obtained from

W P ×P (T L>DDB)
2

.

Figure D1: Flowchart to develop the inter-district transportation matrix
The GIS map of each district was segmented as shown in Figure D2 to discretize the DDB .
Each of the segmented zones represents the traffic analysis zone (TAZ). The DDB adopted
for each TAZ were 1 km, 5 km, 10, km, 20, km, 30 km and 50 km and the total worker
population ( T P i ) expected to commute across the district boundary was estimated from
Equation D1.

Figure D2: Segmentation of a typical district map for traffic analysis zones
N

TPi =
where,

∑ W P S ×P (T L>DDB Savg )

S=1

2

D1

TPi

= Total worker population of district i expected to cross the district
boundary

WPS

= Worker population in segment S

DDB Savg

= Average distance to district boundary from segment S

N

= Total number of segments

The adjoining districts would attract the commuting workers based on its economic status. A
district level GDP (at purchasing power parity) per capita can be a good economic status
indicator. However, in absence of that we adopted the relative worker population density as a
surrogate measure to estimate the workers commuting to a particular adjoining district.
Equation D2 is used for the purpose. This process is repeated for all the districts of India to
come up with the inter-district transportation or mobility matrix.
P Dj

M ij = T P i AD

D2

∑ P Dj

j=1

where,
M ij

=

Worker population expected to commute from district i to j

P Dj =
AD

=

Worker population density of district j
Total number of adjoining districts

