J
our
nal
Name

arXiv:2007.02127v2 [cond-mat.soft] 28 Aug 2020

Soft matter science and the COVID-19 pandemic
Wilson C K Poon,∗a Aidan T Brown,a Susana O. L. Direito,a Daniel J M Hodgson,a Lucas
Le Nagard,a Alex Lips,a Cait E MacPhee,a Davide Marenduzzo,a John R Royer,a Andreia
F Silva,a Job H J Thijssen,a and Simon Titmuss,a

Much of the science underpinning the global response to the COVID-19 pandemic lies in the soft
matter domain. Coronaviruses are composite particles with a core of nucleic acids complexed to
proteins surrounded by a protein-studded lipid bilayer shell. A dominant route for transmission
is via air-borne aerosols and droplets. Viral interaction with polymeric body fluids, particularly
mucus, and cell membranes control their infectivity, while their interaction with skin and artificial
surfaces underpins cleaning and disinfection and the efficacy of masks and other personal protective equipment. The global response to COVID-19 has highlighted gaps in the soft matter
knowledge base. We survey these gaps, especially as pertaining to the transmission of the disease, and suggest questions that can (and need to) be tackled, both in response to COVID-19
and to better prepare for future viral pandemics.
The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic caused by
the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV2) 1 has focussed unprecedented attention on science and technology. Fighting a pandemic is, at first sight, a challenge principally
for biotechnology and the biomedical sciences, which have indeed
responded rapidly: witness, for example, the speed at which candidate vaccines have been brought to clinical trial. However, the
reality is that effort from many disciplines is needed to respond
adequately to the pandemic. Thus, the sudden need for extra ventilators has brought innovative solutions from engineering design
and manufacturing. Ventilation is only one aspect of the fluid
dynamics needed to confront COVID-19. Other fluid dynamical
aspects of the disease, such as the aerodynamics of aerosol transport, have been reviewed. 2
Coronaviruses belong to the family of ‘enveloped viruses’. An
enveloped virus has a lipid bilayer ‘shell’ with embedded proteins
enclosing a ‘core’ consisting of nucleic acids complexed with proteins. 3 It is therefore a ‘quintessential soft matter object’: a composite colloid made up of surfactants and polymers. Respiratory
coronaviruses such as SARS-CoV-2 are transmitted 4 by another
kind of soft matter object, aerosols in which the liquid phase is
rich in mucin and other biopolymers. Here, we survey some of
the soft matter science that is relevant to COVID-19, paying particular attention to gaps in the knowledge base. In doing so, we
also want to provide entry points into a diverse literature, but
with no claim to completeness. The review already cited 2 , a criti-

a

Edinburgh Complex Fluids Partnership (ECFP), SUPA and School of Physics & Astronomy, The University of Edinburgh, Peter Guthrie Tait Road, Edinburgh EH9 3FD, United
Kingdom. E-mail: w.poon@ed.ac.uk

cal compilation of numerical data, 5 an overview of the challenges
presented to physical scientists and engineers by COVID-19, 6 and
a survey of nanotechnological responses to the pandemic 7 are
also useful sources of references, as is a very recent paper emphasizing the multi-scale nature of the response needed. 8 A web site
updated every 24 hours provides an efficient way to keep up to
date with a burgeoning literature, 9 while an interdisciplinary text
provides a useful panoramic introduction to viral biophysics. 10
The soft matter science of SARS-CoV-2 falls naturally under two
headings: how the virus invades the body, and how infection is
spread. Both stories start with a virus on the surface of the respiratory tract, Fig. 1(a). The epithelia of our respiratory, 11 gastrointestinal and reproductive tracts are covered by viscoelastic mucus.
Its composition varies with site, time and state of health, but the
most important macromolecular components are high molecular
weight mucin proteins and DNA shed from cell debris. 12,13

1

The ‘inside’ story

The ‘inside’ story of viral transmission starts with a virus landing on a mucosal surface. 14 The system of beating cilia on mucosa may clear viruses away. 15 The emergent field of ‘active matter’ has contributed much to understanding the coarse-grained
physics of cilia dynamics, e.g., the role of hydrodynamic interactions in the generation of collective beating. 16 However, the
study of the physics of ‘mucociliary clearance’ 17 – how propagating ‘metachronal waves’ transport mucus and convey trapped
pathogens out of the body – is only just beginning. 18
Viruses not expelled by the mucociliary clearance apparatus
then have to diffuse through 19–22 a highly heterogeneous viscoelastic porous medium. 12,20 This involves the generic physics of
J
our
na
l
Na
me,
[
y
ea
r
]
,
[
vol
.
]
,1–15 | 1

nanoparticle diffusion in soft porous media 23 and the more specific physics of adhesive receptor-ligand binding, both of which
are also relevant for designing synthetic nanoparticles for drug
delivery. 24 As far as adhesion is concerned, bacteria behave as
colloids with sticky patches, and show significant phenotypic heterogeneity. 25 On statistical grounds, it seems likely that the distribution of sticky moieties is also patchy on enveloped viruses,
so that considering them as patchy nanoparticles 26 may provide new insights, e.g. concerning wettability, 27 which may influence mucosal penetration. Virions that succeed in diffusing
through the mucus then face an osmotic permeability barrier due
to mucins tethered to epithelial cells. 28
Beyond this first stage of mucosal penetration, the ‘inside’ story
rapidly becomes dominated by specific virus-cell interactions. The
literature here is itself dominated by a fine-grained approach focussing on molecular details. However, a more coarse-grained,
soft matter approach can also make important contributions. One
particularly important area for our purposes in which this is undoubtedly true is the process in which enveloped viruses gain
entry to host cells. (See Chapter 16 in Mateu’s text 10 by Más
and Melero for a general introduction, and Hoffmann et al. 29 for
SARS-CoV-2.) For example, the proteins embedded in the outer
lipid bilayer envelope play a crucial part in altering membrane
curvature to facilitate fusion. 30 Moieties that can change the local
curvature therefore have potential to be antiviral drugs. 31 Softmatter-inspired approaches that neglect much of the atomic details can also contribute to the identification of potential binding
sites in viral proteins. Thus, e.g., a recent computational study of
the dynamics and thermodynamics of the main protease of SARSCoV-2 from the perspective of the biophysics of fluctuation elasticity in globular proteins 32 has identified new candidate sites for
the binding of inhibitors, with clear pharmacological implications.
Much more can be said about the soft matter science of the
‘inside story’; but that will require a full essay of its own. For
the rest of this essay, we will focus instead on the ‘outside’ story
of SARS-CoV-2, where biologically specific interactions play less
of a role (but see a recent paper on multi-scale modelling 8 for
additional references on the ‘inside’ story). We will first discuss
the soft matter science of SARS-CoV-2 transmission and of protecting ourselves against the virus, Fig. 1. Two briefer sections
then survey how the virus or infection can be detected and the
sustainability issues raised by COVID-19. We end with a general
discussion and some concluding remarks.

2

Transmission

Airborne transmission is the dominant route for the spread of
COVID-19. 4 A simplified schematic of some of the components of
airborne transmission is shown in Fig. 1. What is immediately obvious is that a challenging range of length scales is involved. 8 Soft
matter scientists deal regularly with such multi-scale problems,
because soft matter inhabits the ‘middle world’ that bridges the
microscopic and the macroscopic. 33 In terms of the average diam-

2|

J
our
na
l
Na
me,
[
y
ea
r
]
,
[
vol
.
]
,
1–15

eter of a coronavirus∗ D ≈ 100 nm, the relevant length scales span
from ∼ 10−2 D (individual coat proteins) through 102 D (fabric microstructure) to 107 D (macroscopic air flow). More implicit, but
no less challenging, is the range of relevant time scales, spanning
from the Brownian time of a single virus in water (time taken to
diffuse its own diameter), τB . 1 ms, through the ∼ 104 τB needed
for 0.1 mm droplets to evaporate completely in air 35,36 and the
. 105 τB for virus-cell fusion processes, 37 to the & 109 τB (weeks)
taken by COVID-19 to run its course in humans. 38
2.1

Air-borne droplets

Respiratory viruses are transmitted from human to human either
via the air or via contact, the latter either directly via an infected
individual or indirectly via a contaminated surface. 39 Virusbearing mucus is brought up and expelled as smaller ‘aerosols’
or larger ‘droplets’ when an individual exhales, speaks, coughs
or sneezes, Fig. 1(a,b). The distinction between aerosols and
droplets† originated with W. F. Wells’ 1934 work that studied the
fate of water drops in air. He proposed a crossover diameter below which a drop would completely evaporate before it fell to
the ground, while a bigger drop would hit the ground before it
had completely evaporated. 35 This crossover clearly depends on
the initial height at which the drop is released, its initial motion,
and the relative humidity of the air. The original estimate 35 of
. 200 µm has been revised down, 36 and in the current virology
literature is often taken to be ≈ 5 µm (see, e.g., Zhou et al. 41 ).
We will see shortly that this ‘one-body’ picture does not capture
the complexity of the real situation. We will therefore not make
the aerosol/droplet distinction, and use the word ‘droplet’ as a
generic term covering all sizes, mentioning the diameter explicitly if it is relevant. Using the term in this sense, we learn from a
study of the droplets produced by coughing 42 that the size distribution spans a wide range, from ≈ 0.6 to ≈ 16 µm, with a mode of
around 6 µm.
Respiratory droplets expelled by infectious individuals can be
directly inhaled by another person or deposited on surfaces, either on another person or on environmental objects (which, insofar as they carry infection, are known as ‘fomites’); anyone touching fomites and then the mucous membranes of their own eyes,
noses or mouths may become infected.
The droplets ejected by sneezing, etc. 2,43,44 contain mature
viral particles, or virions, dispersed in a solution of inorganic
salts (NaCl, etc.), surfactants (lipids), mucins, and probably other
biopolymers, 45 Fig. 1(c). This compositional complexity is important. For example, the presence of mucin is known to improve
the survivability of the H1N1 flu virus in aerosols and droplets, 46
rendering it more or less independent of the relative humidity of
the environment. 47 To underline this compositional complexity,
we will speak of biopolymer-lipid-salt-virion (BLSV, pronounced
‘BiLi-SaVi’) droplets and deposits on surfaces.

∗ The size and shape of viruses is phenotypically heterogeneous, especially among
enveloped viruses; such ‘pleomorphism’ may be an adaptive trait. 34
† In some aerosol science literature, what we call ‘aerosols’ here are called ‘droplet
nuclei’, and both droplets and droplet nuclei are known as aerosols. 40

(c)

∼50μm

∼100nm

(f)

∼μm
(b)
(g)
(a)

(d)

(e)

Fig. 1 Schematic of some of the soft matter science in virus transmission (not to scale!). (a) Virus particles (black) are presented on or in the mucus
lining of internal epithelia (red). (b) Droplets of virus-bearing mucus are ejected via coughing, sneezing, breathing or talking. (c) A coronavirus with
RNA surrounded by a lipid bilayer in which are embedded various proteins. (d) Droplets landing on surfaces will dry while exposed to air. (e) The
final result is adsorbed viral particles, individual or clustered, each presumably with residual mucosal biopolymers, lipids and salts. Hands touching
such surfaces may pick up virions and spread infection. (f) A droplet impinges onto a face mask, whose microstructure is a network of polymer fibres;
these trap droplets, which then dry to leave adsorbed viruses, again complexed with biopolymers, lipids and salts. (g) Air flow (breathing) or liquid flow
(e.g. washing) through this complex porous medium determines its effectiveness and susceptibility to cleaning.

Intuitively, one may imagine that virus bearing material is
ejected by infected individuals as already-formed droplets – indeed, we have seen that this ‘one-body’ picture lies behind the distinction between ‘aerosols’ and ‘droplets’. However, recent fluid
dynamical work 2,43,44 shows that at least in sneezing, respiratory
droplets are not primarily ejected ‘as formed’, but are the result
of multiple fragmentation processes post-ejection. It is known
that in Newtonian fluids, particles, even when present at low dilution, can decisively influence the kinetics of jet and sheet fragmentation (see Lindner et al. 48 and references therein for jets and
Raux et al. 49 for sheets), although the distribution of particles in
the resulting population of droplets has not, to our knowledge,
been studied. Moreover, threadlike structures observed in sneeze
ejecta 44 implicate high-molecular-weight mucins, because such
threads are characteristic of fluids with significant elasticity. 50
Importantly, it is not so much the ‘single-body’ motion of isolated
droplets but the collective motion of a propelled turbulent cloud
of droplets that controls subsequent deposition on surfaces. 2,43,44

distribution of virus numbers in aerosols artificially generated by
nebulisation 51 finds concentrations that extrapolate to about one
virion per ∼ 1 µm droplet.‡ Other studies have found that the
majority of droplets carrying influenza viruses may be . 5 µm in
diameter (see Bischoff et al. 52 and references therein), while a
study of SARS-CoV-2 in hospital environments 53 reports a more
variable picture, even though in some cases, the viral load is still
concentrated in small (in this case . 1 µm) droplets.
However, there appears to be no measurement of viral titre
in individual human respiratory droplets. Nevertheless, the figure of ‘100,000 to 1,000,000 virions per droplet’ for the flu virus
is widely quoted. 54 As we will see shortly, this figure is wildly
unlikely. It possibly originated as an estimated upper bound
based on maximum packing: 55 a 10 µm droplet can contain up
to ∼ (10/0.1)3 = 106 particles of 0.1 µm diameter, corresponding
to a viral volume fraction of φv ∼ 1.
For an evidence-based estimate, we turn to a recent measurement of the concentration of the viral load in the sputum of

A recent article entitled ‘COVID-19 by the numbers’ 5 has highlighted the importance of quantification. A good first question
for a quantitative soft-matter approach to SARS-CoV-2 transmission is: how many viruses are there per droplet? A study of the

‡ However, this and similar studies involve nebulising virions using Newtonian aqueous solutions and therefore do not reproduce the mucoidal ejecta from which reallife droplets are generated.

J
our
na
l
Na
me,
[
y
ea
r
]
,
[
vol
.
]
,1–15 | 3

hospitalised patients with COVID-19. 38 This study found that
the average viral titre was ≈ 7 × 106 ml−1 , with a maximum of
≈ 2 × 109 ml−1 . Another recent study of the saliva of COVID-19
patients found loads of . 106 ml−1 within a week of onset of symptoms, and a peak load of . 109 ml−1 in a number of patients in
their early 60s. 56 Using a virion diameter of 100 nm, the maximum load from the sputum study translates to φv ≈ 10−6 . If such
sputum is entirely turned into 5 µm droplets and the viral load is
distributed uniformly, then we expect the mean number of virions
per droplet to be ∼ 0.1. If a Poisson distribution applies, then the
number of 5 µm droplets with 0, 1, and 2 virions will be in the
ratio 200:20:1, so that ≈ 1% of 5 µm droplets will contain (single)
virions, and only 0.55% of the droplets will have ≥ 3 virions.§
A method for measuring the viral titre in respiratory droplets
in situ will clearly enable more precision in this matter. Meanwhile, we should put our estimates in the context of two other
statistics. First, a cough or talking for 5 minutes can generate
∼ 3 × 103 droplets,¶ while a sneeze can generate . 4 × 104 (see
the review by Cole and Cook 58 and references therein). Secondly,
the (strain-dependent) minimum infective dose (MID)k of the flu
virus is typically a few thousand virions for influenza. 59
The next soft matter question is: where are the virions in the
respiratory droplets? The answer is poorly known at present. 45 A
100 nm virus takes only ≈ 1 s to diffuse from the centre of a 10 µm
water droplet to its surface. A virus or indeed any other particle
approaching an air-water interface may become bound to the interface, with or without breaching it. The outcome depends on
the salt concentration and the details of the particle surface. 60,61
The observation of non-monotonic dependence of both the magnitude and sign of the particle-interface interaction on salt concentration 60 is particularly interesting, because this variable continuously increases as the droplet evaporates in transit and on
surfaces. If virions do breach the air-water interface, then they
may be subjected to strong interfacial forces (see Section 2.3.2).
The final cluster of questions is about evaporation. BLSV
droplets start to evaporate immediately upon release into the air.
A study using environmental chambers finds that the viability of
bacteriophages suspended in droplets of growth media (salts +
small molecule metabolites) shows a non-monotonic dependence
on the relative humidity, displaying a pronounced minimum in
viability at intermediate relative humidity. 62 The authors suggest
that this is because viral survival depends on the product of solute
concentration and time. In other words, the evaporation kinetics
of droplets matters.
The evaporation kinetics of droplets of 300 nm silica particles
in salt solution deposited on porous superhydrophobic surfaces
(to mimic airborne droplet conditions 63 ) was found to depend
strongly on both salt and colloid concentration. 64 The latter is

§ This calculation assumes that the distribution of particles in droplets is simply that
obtained from the average particle concentration in the starting mucosal material.
This assumption may not be valid because particles affect ejecta fragmentation, so
that droplet size and particle concentration may be coupled.
¶ However, note that there exists a subgroup in the population who are ‘speech superemitters’ who can emit an order or magnitude more droplets than their peers. 57 .
k The minimum dose needed to cause infection in 50% of individuals.

4|

J
our
na
l
Na
me,
[
y
ea
r
]
,
[
vol
.
]
,
1–15

likely very low in respiratory droplets according to our previous
discussion of viral titre, so it is the biopolymer-lipid-salt solutes
that will determine the evaporative kinetics of such droplets. A
recent study of model BLSV droplets suggests that concentration and pH changes during in-transit evaporation may lead to
a core-shell structure and/or induce mucin gelation. 45 The development of such structure will undoubtedly affect drying kinetics, as well as how such droplets impact environmental surfaces
(see next section). It will also control, ultimately, the structure of
the encrusted virions – composite BLSV particles – left behind on
fomites, which, in turn, may affect viral survival.
2.2

Droplet-surface interaction

After expulsion from the body, BLSV droplets eventually impact
a variety of surfaces, which become potential sites for transmitting infection, 39 Fig. 1(e). The relevant questions for soft matter science in fomite transmission can be discussed under three
headings: impact, drying and removal. First, there is a need to
understand the initial impact of the droplets on surfaces. Secondly, after impact, the droplets dry to leave a deposit of virions;
so the kinetics of the drying process and the structure of the composite BLSV particles left behind need to be elucidated and their
relevance for viral viability explored. Thirdly, these BLSV particles
can be removed by cleaning or picked up on skin. The underlying
mechanisms of these processes need to be understood.
The impact of Newtonian liquid droplets on hard surfaces has
been well studied. 65 The effect of viscoelasticity in the droplet
has attracted recent attention, partly because of the ‘anti-rebound’
effect of high-molecular-weight polymeric additives. 66,67 It is
clearly of interest to know if the mucus in respiratory droplets
bearing viruses also confers this property, and the possible effects
of mucin gelation. The possibility of structuring at the air-liquid
interface 45 further complicates the likely behaviour at impact.
Post impact, droplets dry to leave BLSV particles on the surface, Fig. 1(e). The drying of a dilute droplet of spherical colloids
in a Newtonian fluid on a featureless hard substrate is well understood: it gives rise to a ‘coffee ring’ in which all the particles
are deposited at the rim. 68 Gelation of the evaporating droplet 69
or surface-driven flows induced by the presence of surfactants 70
can inhibit coffee ring formation and lead to a more uniform deposit of particles. Mucin gelation and/or the presence of lipids
in respiratory viral droplets 45 may have this effect. However, the
small size of virions may mean that they can diffuse in a mucin gel
network, and nullify the expected effect of gelation. Respiratory
droplets also contain salts. The drying of salt solution droplets
differs significantly from the drying of colloidal suspensions. 71
How this is modified by the presence of lipids and biopolymers is
unknown. Note that there is a growing literature on the drying of
blood droplets aimed at forensic science and personal health applications. 72,73 Since blood is a complex fluid of biological origin,
this literature may give additional insight into the drying of BLSV
droplets (e.g. the role of proteins).
The environmental surfaces that mucoidal viral droplets may
land on range from relative simple – a glass table top – to very
complex, such as a fabric mask surface, Fig. 1(f), or human skin,

where a network of microchannels controls surface fluid transport. 74 The study of drying on such patterned and/or ‘soft’ surfaces is an active area of soft matter research. 75 Given the cocktail
of solutes, the final deposit on these simple or complex surfaces
after drying is complete will not be individual bare viruses, but
composite BLSV particles. The drying kinetics will determine the
structure of these composites.
Unsurprisingly, there exist many measurements of viral viability on fomite surfaces 76,77 If we look behind reported survival times to the raw data, 78,79 we repeatedly see that, once
deposited, the number of viable viruses decreases according to
n (t) = n0 exp [−t/t0 ], but with wide variations in the actual value
of t0 for different virus-surface combinations. Currently, this time
scale is simply accepted as a ‘brute fact’ to be determined experimentally. So, for example, for SARS-CoV-2, t0 ≈ 1 to 2 h on copper
and ≈ 7 to 8 h on plastics. 79 However, the fact that there seems always to be a well-defined, characteristic time scale irrespective of
the specific virus and surface is immediately striking for the physicist, suggesting an (unknown) generic underlying mechanism.
Surface viability studies typically do not specify explicitly what
kind of droplets are being deposited. For example, in one description of experimental method, we read that viral aerosols ‘were
generated by passing air at a flow rate of 7.5 L/min through a
3-jet Collison nebulizer’. 80 One can only assume that this generated droplets of viruses in aqueous (probably isotonic saline)
solutions. It is not obvious that such studies should be relevant to
the survival of viruses encrusted in biopolymers, lipids and salts,
either as individuals or in clusters. The presence of these moieties
will affect viral survival for a number of reasons.
First, ions are integrated into the structure of viral capsids, and
it is known that such ‘structural ions’ are important for preventing capsid collapse during the desiccation of the Triatoma virus
(TrV). 81 Presumably the same applies more generally to other
viruses. Secondly, we may expect that biopolymers, lipids and
salts could help retain residual moisture and therefore change
the local absolute humidity (mass of water per unit volume of
air). Both the absolute 82 and relative 76,77 humidity are known
to affect viral survival. Much more work is clearly needed, e.g., to
clarify the putative role 83–85 of osmotic effects (see section 2.3.3
below) in the observed dependence of viability on humidity.
To complete the transmission cycle, we need, finally, to consider surface-to-surface transfer. 46 Many recent studies have measured the transfer of a variety of bacteria and viruses between
fomites and hands or cleaning cloths (see Zhao et al. 86 and references therein). Of the wide range of environmental factors studied, a few have very strong effects, e.g., for some bacteriophages,
humidity increases the rate of surface-to-hand transfer approximately threefold, 87 perhaps pointing to a role for capillarity. Surface roughness and porosity, the contact force, the direction of
transfer (hand to surface or vice versa), and the type of microorganism are all also significant. 86
Studies to date of the transference of particulate matter between surfaces have been largely empirical, producing parameters such as the transference efficiency between different types of
surfaces 88–90 as inputs for numerical modelling of the transference process. 90 There are therefore significant opportunities for

soft matter science to contribute towards determining the mechanistic basis of surface to surface transfer. The study of single particle detachment from solid 91 or liquid surfaces 92 using AFM is
one possible avenue; probing the role of tackiness 93 in the transference of respiratory droplets is another. In this context, note
that some of the relevant soft matter science should also be applicable to the transference of trace evidence in forensic science, 94
so that fundamental advances here will benefit multiple fields.
2.3

Forces

During transmission, virions are subjected to forces of many
kinds. We now consider the origins and measurement of these
forces, which in the right circumstances may lead to viral inactivation.
2.3.1

Electrical

Both nucleic acids and proteins are charged, so that electrostatics
is important in viral physics. 95 For example, it needs to be accounted for to understand genome packaging, 96 and controls the
osmotic pressure differential between the virion interior and the
external medium. 97 A simple estimate of the electrostatic selfenergy of a viral capsid, viewed as a protein shell of uniform
charge density (which can be as large as one electron per nm2 ),
shows that this scales as σ 2 (ε0 ε)−1 R2 λ ; 96 here R and σ are the
capsid radius and surface charge density respectively, λ is the Debye length, and ε0 and ε are the permittivity of vacuum and the
dielectric constant of the medium. Using realistic numbers for
RNA virions, we find self-energies of ∼ 104 kB T in physiological
buffers (i.e., 150 mM monovalent salts such as NaCl), but the
exact number is sensitive, for instance, to the salt concentration
in the local viral environment. As virions self assemble, this selfenergy needs to be balanced by hydrophobic or van der Waals
interactions, and varying salt concentration may be a way to tilt
the balance towards assembly or disassembly. 96 These considerations suggest that a systematic probing of the role of electrostatics
in BLSV droplets should be fruitful.
2.3.2

Interfacial

There are at least two generic reasons why interfacial forces may
be important. First, large capillary forces operate on the particles
in the final stages of the drying of a colloidal suspension when
particles poke out of the air-liquid interface, possibly in a liquid
film of thickness comparable to the particle diameter. 98 These
lead to the deformation and coalescence of latex particles, 99
which, in paint, gives rise to a (desirable) continuous film. The
stresses involved are of order σdry ∼ γ/R, where γ . 70 mN m−1
is the surface tension of aqueous solutions while R . 100 nm is
a typical viral dimension, giving σdry . MPa. A study has found
that similar or larger forces operate when air ingresses into the
capsid of bacteriophages in the final stages of desiccation, which
may break the capsids and/or eject the genetic material. 100 Two
caveats, however, are in order. First, bacteriophages are not enveloped, so this result cannot be applied directly to coronaviruses.
Secondly, the numerical modelling in this study neglects electrical
forces, which, as we have seen, are non-negligible.
The second reason why interfacial forces may be important
J
our
na
l
Na
me,
[
y
ea
r
]
,
[
vol
.
]
,1–15 | 5

is somewhat less obvious, and arises from flows. Direct viscous
forces are likely negligible in viral biophysics. Typical shear rates
in, say, a shaking incubator 101 lie in the range γ̇ ≈ 10 to 103 s−1 .
The maximum viscous stress on a virion suspended in an aqueous medium with viscosity η ≈ 1 mPa s is therefore of order 1 Pa,
which is of the same order as the thermal stresses experienced by
a particle of diameter D ≈ 100 nm, i.e., ∼ kB T /D3 ≈ 1 Pa, too small
to generate any direct mechanical effect.
However, flow may be important indirectly. Intriguingly, it has
long been known that when gases are bubbled through a viral solution, 102 or the solution is tumbled in a test tube 103 or flowed
through a packed bed, 104 viral deactivation ensues. Generically,
colloids may partially or completely aggregate under mechanical
agitation (stirring, etc.). 105 However, coagulation per se does not
need to affect viability, although it can decrease the viral titre. 106
Moreover, the tumbling inactivation of bacteriophages did not apparently involve coagulation. 103 Instead, early experiments show
conclusively that the effect is due to viral particles becoming adsorbed at the air-water interface. 107 Importantly, since there is
in general a significant energy barrier to such adsorption, again
possibly due to electrostatics, 108 adsorption in each of the abovementioned experimental configurations is likely flow-assisted.
A 1948 paper suggests that once a virus is adsorbed at an
air-water interface, ‘it is subjected to such forces that it may
very rapidly be deprived of the property of infectivity’. 102 The
nature of these interfacial forces has so far remained obscure,
but two well known areas of phenomenology may be relevant.
First, there are interfacial electrical forces 108–110 , and as we have
seen, electrostatics is generically important for viruses. Secondly,
and particularly relevant for enveloped viruses, it has long been
known 111,112 that bilayer and multilayer lipid vesicles disrupt
spontaneously on contact with air-water interfaces and spread
out as a monolayer. Importantly, this process still occurs in unilamellar vesicles that include membrane proteins. 113 The possibility that an enveloped virus may similarly disrupt spontaneously
on contact with an air-water interface is intriguing and deserves
further investigation, e.g., by studying virions in a Langmuir
trough, which has been done for a non-enveloped virus 114 but
not, as far as we know, for enveloped viruses. In this context, as
well as more generally, we should also mention that nanoparticles covered by unilamellar lipid bilayers 115 may be useful model
systems for aspects of the biophysics of enveloped viruses.
2.3.3

Osmotic

There are also osmotic effects due to the presence of chemical
potential gradients, which exert ‘generalised forces’ that drive
material fluxes. 116 How a virus responds to changes to its external osmotic environment therefore depends on the ease with
which water and osmolytes can diffuse across its shell. Thus, it
has been known for half a century that the response of different
non-enveloped viruses incubated at high salt concentration and
then subjected to rapid dilution can be explained by the differing
permeabilities of their capsids to water and ions. Low permeability to ions leads to a net, rapid influx of water and the bursting of
capsids. 117 . The response of these viruses to such osmotic down
shock can be used to infer their mechanical strength. 118

6|

J
our
na
l
Na
me,
[
y
ea
r
]
,
[
vol
.
]
,
1–15

Turning to enveloped viruses, recall first that water and many
other small molecules can diffuse relatively easily across lipid bilayers, which are, however, far less penetrable to ions. 119 We
know of only one relevant in-depth study. Choi et al. have investigated the effect of osmotic up shock on live as well as whole
inactivated influenza viruses, 120 the latter being the ingredient of
some vaccines. Importantly, the effect of chemical inactivation for
vaccine preparation are subtle, 121 pertaining to modifications of
amino and nucleic acids, and not expected to affect significantly
the osmotic response.
Choi et al. report that the internal osmotic pressure of influenza
viruses, ≈ 300 mOsm, is essentially that of physiological saline.
When such a virus is suddenly placed in sugar or salt (NaCl) solutions of higher osmolarity, static light scattering shows that it
shrinks, due to water efflux. In all cases, there is an immediate
shrinkage over . 5 s. This is comparable to the time scale for
droplet evaporation in air, 35,36 so that virions in air-borne respiratory droplets should show a similar shrinkage response.
Choi et al. infer the permeability coefficient∗∗ of water
through the viral membrane from their shrinkage kinetics data;
the values obtained, in the range 1 to 6 × 10−4 cm s−1 depending on the osmotic pressure differential, are, interestingly, systematically lower than the value of 3.4 × 10−3 cm s−1 for water permeating through artificial egg phosphatidylcholine (PC)
membranes. 119 Water permeability through lipid membranes increases with the area occupied per lipid irrespective of chain
length, saturation or headgroup. 122 Influenza virus membranes
have a lower amount of PC relative to phosphatidylethanolamine
(PE) than in mammalian cells (average PE to PC ratio ≈ 7 compared to ≈ 1 in human cells 123 ), and lipids with the PE headgroup
[−PO3 – CH2 CH2 N+ H3 ] may generically be expected to occupy
a smaller area per molecule than those with the PC headgroup
[−PO3 – CH2 CH2 N+ (CH3 )3 ].
In the case of hyperosmotic shock using sugar solutions, Choi
et al. observe a second, more gradual, stage of shrinkage after
many tens of seconds. The final light scattering signal is erratic
and noisy when the osmotic pressure differential is & 500 mOsm,
which the authors take as evidence of membrane destabilisation,
correlating well with loss of the ability of inactivated virions to
cause immunogenic response. The second stage of shrinkage is
absent when viruses are shocked by hypertonic NaCl solutions,
suggesting ionic leakage through the membrane. The permeability coefficient of Na+ through artificial phospholipid membranes is & 10−14 cm s−1 , 119 so that any significant leakage must
be due to ion channels in the viral envelop, almost certainly selfassembled homo-oligomers of ‘protein E’ in the influenza virus
membrane, which is also present in SARS-CoV-2. 124,125 Interestingly, protein E ion channels have a marked preference for cations
over anions, 124 so that leakage of NaCl may be limited by Cl –
transport.
Intriguingly, Choi et al. find that the addition of carboxymethylcellulose as a viscosity modifier attenuates the osmotic shock response. However, their explanation that increased viscosity di-

∗∗ Defined as the flux normalised by concentration gradient and membrane thickness.

rectly lowers the osmotic pressure seems unlikely.
A number of mysteries therefore remain from this fascinating
study. Further work of this kind from a soft-matter perspective should give much relevant insights on the life cycle of such
viruses. For example, it would be useful to know the role of osmotic up shock during the drying of BLSV droplets.†† Related to
this, Quan et al. has reported that coating the fibres of a mask
with salt can inactivate trapped viruses; they attribute this to the
effect of osmotic up shock as aerosol droplets come into contact
with and dissolve the deposited salt. 126 On the other hand, the
possible role of osmotic down shock also deserves investigation.
Enveloped viruses are found to be inactivated significantly faster
in water than non-enveloped human enteric viruses. 127 This correlates well with the lipid envelope of influenza viruses being
an order of magnitude softer than a typical viral protein capsid
coat, 128 so that they should be more vulnerable to water influx.
2.3.4

Measurement

The effect of forces can be studied directly using various kinds
of atomic force microscopy (AFM). This has been done for both
non-enveloped viruses such as the brome mosaic virus 129 and the
cowpea chlorotic mottle virus 130 , and for enveloped viruses such
as the influenza virus 128 and the murine leukemia virus. 131 Interestingly, the mechanical properties of vesicles made from influenza virus envelope lipids have also been measured. 132 However, the results may not be directly applicable to understanding
real enveloped viruses, because proteins expressed in the lipid
bilayer envelope play vital roles in determining membrane mechanics. 128 Such ‘mechanical virology’ is a very active area of
research 133,134 in which soft matter scientists should be able to
make a strong contribution. Progress in viral mechanics, coupled
with an understanding of what forces operate on viruses, especially at interfaces, should suggest strategies by which virions may
be mechanically inactivated.
2.4

Re-entry

For completeness, we mention that virus-bearing droplets deposited on fomite surfaces must gain entry to and infect a susceptible individual to complete the infection cycle. This is mostly
part of the ‘inside’ story, so that we will not discuss the matter
in detail. Suffice it to say that the rehydration of a substantially
desiccated BLSV composite particle and its wetting kinetics on a
mucus-covered epithelial surface will involve complex, and fascinating, soft matter science and biological physics, such as various
osmotic effects (Section 2.3.3).

3
3.1

Protection and disinfection
Face masks

The wearing of face masks for health and safety has a long history. Pliny the Younger (died 79 C.E.) describes how ‘[p]ersons
polishing cinnabar in workshops tie on their face loose masks

†† A theoretical suggestion 83 that it is water influx in a hypoosmotic environment that
matters in drying is unlikely to be correct – the author has neglected to take into
account the considerable amount of salt in real respiratory droplets. 45

of bladder-skin, to prevent their inhaling the dust in breathing,
which is very pernicious, and nevertheless to allow them to see
over the bladders’. 135 The mask made from bladder – soft matter of living origin – evidently covered the whole face, but was
translucent enough for the wearer to retain adequate vision.
According to both field surveys 136 and theoretical epidemiological modelling 137 published since the start of the current epidemic, the wearing of face masks may offer protection against
COVID-19 infection. The extent to which this is because the wearing of masks reduces the release of respiratory droplets into the
air by infected individuals and/or reduces the inhalation of such
droplets by susceptible individuals is not clear. A recent Schlieren
imaging study does, however, make it clear that wearing various
face coverings can significantly reduce the spatial extent of the
frontal air flow ejected by a person while breathing or coughing. 138,139 Different mask designs and materials clearly affect the
efficacy of reducing emission, 140 and the extent of such reduction
during speech can be quantified by a new low-cost method. 141 We
focus our discussion on fabric face masks.
These masks work by filtering out virus-bearing droplets,
Fig. 1(f). In America, the Center for Disease Control (CDC)
recommends the use of N95 grade masks for protecting against
SARS-CoV-2. N95 filter fabrics are certified according to a protocol set out by the CDC’s National Institute for Occupational Safety
and Health (NIOSH Document 42 CFR Part 84). 142,143 NIOSH
specifies that mask fabrics should be tested for their ability to filter
out, at an air flow rate of 85 litres per minute, NaCl aerosols (median diameter 75 ± 20 nm, which presumably evaporate rapidly).
To qualify as N95 filter fabric, the aerosol concentration downstream must be 5% of that upstream. The recommendation of
N95 grade masks in the current pandemic is presumably based
on the fact that the specified median NaCl aerosol size (75 nm) is
somewhat smaller than the virion diameter (100 nm). (See also
related discussion and further references in Bar-On et al. 5 )
An important issue that has emerged as the pandemic crisis progresses is whether face masks could be washed and reused. 144
The potential soft matter science contribution to this issue is to
understand what happens when a BLSV droplet lands on a network of (possibly charged) synthetic polymer fibres and subjected
first to humid air flow (wearer inhalation/exhalation) and then
to liquid flow and heat (washing), Fig. 1(g). To arrive at such an
understanding, we need progress on practically all of the areas
reviewed in Sections 2.2 and 2.3, and more. ‘More’ because, now,
there is a complex fibrous network to contend with. To take just
one of the new issues raised by this complex environment, the
study of liquid drops deposited on flexible fibre arrays is only in
its infancy. 145 The combined action of heat and soaps on natural
or synthetic fibre structures also needs to be studied. Note in this
context that humidity has an important effect on the permeability of fabric. 146 The new physics of why fabric networks actually
hold together 147 may also prove relevant here. The soft matter
science of mask cleaning is therefore wide open.
J
our
na
l
Na
me,
[
y
ea
r
]
,
[
vol
.
]
,1–15 | 7

3.2

Sanitising

‘Every nurse ought to be careful to wash her hands very frequently
during the day. If her face too, so much the better,’ so says Florence Nightingale in her pioneering text published in 1859 based
on field experience during the Crimean War. 148 Her prescient remarks, made just as Louis Pasteur was beginning his experiments
that led to the germ theory of infectious disease, 149 are as relevant today as they were one and a half centuries ago. A 1999
British Medical Journal editorial was entitled: ‘Hand Washing: A
modest measure – with big effects’, 150 while a recent letter to
the editor of another journal during the COVID-19 crisis is entitled ‘Revisiting Nightingale’s legacy’. 151 The World Health Organisation (WHO) agrees; one of their COVID-19 pamphlets 152
is headlined ‘SAVE LIVES: CLEAN YOUR HANDS’, explaining that
‘COVID-19 virus primarily spreads through droplet and contact
transmission. Contact transmission means by touching infected
people and/or contaminated objects or surfaces. Thus, your
hands can spread virus to other surfaces and/or to your mouth,
nose or eyes if you touch them.’
Many aspects of the physical science of hand washing is unknown. In fluid dynamics, for example, the authors of a recent
review 2 article say, ‘Amazingly, despite the 170+ year history of
hand washing in medical hygiene, we were unable to find a single published research article on the flow physics of hand washing.’ The ignorance is less stark when it comes to the soft matter science underpinning hand hygiene: there is a large relevant
background literature to form the basis of research specifically
targeted at SARS-CoV-2 and other respiratory viruses.
Hands can be sanitised against such viruses using different
chemical agents, 76 the most common being surfactants and alcohols. A 2009 study found that, although both are efficacious to
varying degrees, washing hands with soap and water was superior against the H1N1 influenza virus. 153 Based on results from
studies of sanitising hands against bacterial pathogens, 154 the
CDC suggests 155 that soap should also be more effective against
SARS-CoV-2 in non-clinical settings. The advantage may not,
however, be intrinsic. Outside the clinic, hands are more likely
to be soiled. Washing with soap is effective in removimg grease
and other forms of dirt, which can trap pathogens.
There are many studies of the action of surfactants on model
lipid bilayer systems such as giant unilamellar vesicles (GUVs),
some of which are directly inspired by the use of surfactants
as agents against enveloped viruses (e.g., in vaginal microbiocides 156 ). A preprint 157 lists previous publications on the antiviral action of commercial surfactant products, but these and other
studies report measurements of efficacy with little to say about
mechanism. Significantly, one study 158 of the inactivation of enveloped viruses by surfactin, a potent biosurfactant from Bacillus
subtilis, claims that ‘the antiviral action . . . seems to be due to
a physicochemical interaction of the membrane-active surfactant
with the virus lipid membrane.’ The words we have italicised
point to soft matter rather than molecular biology.
One interesting example of a mechanistic study is of the inactivation of human (H3N2) and avian (H5N3) influenza viruses
by potassium oleate (C18:1), sodium laureth sulfate (LES) and

8|

J
our
na
l
Na
me,
[
y
ea
r
]
,
[
vol
.
]
,
1–15

sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS) using isothermal titration (ITC). 159
It found that surfactant-virus interaction was exothermic for LES
but endothermic for the other two, with LES being the least effective inactivation agent, and C18:1 being the most effective. The
authors speculated on molecular mechanisms, suggesting, for example, that there is strong electrostatic interaction between the
negative head group of C18:1 and the positively-charged hemagglutinin proteins embedded in the viral lipid envelope. 124 Much
more work is needed, e.g., paying attention to the aggregation
state of the surfactants, to test these suggestions.
It is convenient to discuss another observation under the
heading of surfactants. Unsaturated fatty acids are known
to be effective in inactivating enveloped viruses (flu, SARS,
COVID-19, . . . ). 160 However, the pKa of the moieties studied are
all around 9.5, 161 so that at or around neutrality, these molecules
are fatty acid oils and not surfactants. Their action must be more
subtle, and not understood at present.
Surfactants are generally not ‘kind’ to skin; but the long history of using them in personal care products means that there
is substantial knowhow in dermatological alleviation. 162 Another
disadvantage of surfactants – formulated as solid or liquid soaps
– is that they require washing by water. In many situations, such
as typically occurring in healthcare, this is either unavailable or
at least inconvenient. Here, alcohol-based hand sanitisers come
into their own.
The WHO has a longstanding recommendation for alcoholbased hand sanitisers. 163 The mechanism of alcohol inactivation
of enveloped viruses is no better elucidated than is the case for
surfactants. Moreover, a recent preprint studying the drying of
mixed alcohol-water films finds instabilities 164 that can lead to
the formation of holes in the film and therefore patchy, heterogeneous disinfection. On the other hand, hole formation gives rise
to air-liquid interfaces, which can, if coupled with flow, be advantageous for viral inactivation (see Section 2.3.2). The matter
deserves further study.
The WHO formulations, which contain 80% (v/v) ethanol or
75% (v/v) isopropyl alcohol and . 2% glycerol in water, are lowviscosity Newtonian liquids. Pouring and rubbing these on hands
is inconvenient due to rapid runoff; this presumably underlies the
WHO’s recommendation to surgeons that ‘a minimum of three
applications are used, if not more, for a period of 3-5 minutes’.
The solution to this problem is to gel the sanitising liquid. Many
polymers are available that will gel aqueous solutions at typically
. 1% w/v, but high alcohol content is a challenge, because under
these conditions, many if not most of the usual gelling agents are
poorly soluble. Some products specifically marketed for solubility
at high alcohol concentrations require careful pH adjustment for
dissolution, and dissolution is a difficult subject that is far from
fully understood. 165 Furthermore, at least in the early phase of
the COVID-19 crisis, the hand sanitiser industry faced a shortage
of the common polymers used in hydro-alcoholic hand gels, exposing the desirability of finding new polymers that can be used
as alternatives. There is knowledge on some of the basic soft matter science here, e.g. in the food literature. 166 Note further that
the effect of these gelling agents on virus inactivation is unknown.
Alcohols also have their own disadvantage: they dissolve lipids

from the stratum corneum, the outmost layer of skin. This leads
to cracking. Discomfort apart, cracking opens up routes for the
entry of (non-respiratory!) pathogens. Repeated use over a long
period, necessary for many frontline workers, is therefore a problem. The soft matter science for alleviating this problem has
hardly started to develop. Previous work on the microfluidics
of skin 74 and more recent advances in understanding stratum
corneum physics 167 and elastocapillarity 168 should form a good
basis for advances.
We should mention that nanoparticles are also possible antiviral agents. One recent paper using designer binding ligands
on the surface of particles reports the generation of large forces
when viruses bind, leading to irreversible deformation. 169 This
and other uses of nanotechnology-enabled approaches to combating COVID-19 have recently been reviewed. 7 .
Our focus here is on the ‘outside’ story of respiratory viruses.
However, one aspect of the ‘inside’ story of such viruses should
be mentioned here, because it suggests a novel soft-matter-based
strategy for sanitising. It is known that moieties that promote
positive membrane curvature inhibit the fusion of viruses with
their host cells. 170 This principle has been used to design potential new antiviral drugs. 31 Perhaps such ‘fusion inhibitors’ may
also be used to decrease the infectivity of virions on fomite surfaces if a suitable means of application can be devised.
So far we have discussed hand sanitising. Many of the issues
raised are, however, also relevant to the disinfecting and cleaning of inanimate surfaces. For such surfaces, of course, a broader
range of chemical agents may be acceptable than for use on skin,
so that novel antiviral mechanisms may operate. The use of ultraviolet (UV) radiation also becomes possible for fomite sanitising.
The recommendation 171 is to use the UVC band (below 280 nm).
Here, it is important to note that both NaCl and proteins absorb
strongly below 300 nm, so that viruses encrusted in salt and mucin
are likely somewhat protected against UVC.

4

Detection

Detecting infection has been at the forefront of public attention
since the beginning of the COVID-19 crisis. The topic can conveniently be discussed under the three headings of detecting genetic
material, whole viruses, and antibodies/antigens.
Much of the science of genetic material detection lies in the domain of molecular biology. Soft matter science may, however, still
make critical contributions. Thus, soft matter researchers have
long studied the microfluidics of complex fluids, which is used,
e.g., in making nucleic-acid or antibody based tests available as
‘point-of-care’ personal devices. 172 Soft matter physics-inspired
approaches can also help improve nucleic acid-based methods
for detecting viruses. For example, a recent paper shows that
designing oligonucleotide probes to bind multivalently to target
bacterial DNA sequences should give better sensitivity and selectivity, 173 with potential application to RNA and SARS-CoV-2.
Detecting whole viruses can be done in many ways. Imaging
by electron microscopy is perhaps the most unambiguous, but relies on perhaps the most expensive equipment. Another way to
proceed is by detecting the binding of virions to suitably functionalised colloids by measuring the diffusive dynamics of the latter.

Thus, flu viruses can be detected under ideal laboratory conditions through their binding to gold nanoparticles by monitoring
the latter’s diffusion using dynamic light scattering. 174 However,
discriminating against false positives when virus hunting in complex body fluids in a clinical setting will be more challenging.
Many other novel soft-matter based methods for the efficient detection of whole viruses are possible, e.g., through their binding
with pre-stretched DNA bundles embedded in hydrogels and the
resulting bulk mechanical deformation. 175
Alteration in particle dynamics can also be used to detect the
binding of viral proteins (antigens) or antibodies produced by
infected individuals. However, these being small molecules, a
highly sensitive method is required. Holographic microscopy has
recently been demonstrated as being sensitive enough for this
task. 176 One of the inventors of the technique has suggested that
it can be used for detecting antibodies from COVID-19 infection
or whole virions of SARS-CoV-2. 177
For completeness, we mention the state of aggregation of
viruses, which must be known, e.g., in order to understand the
meaning of viral titre measurements in terms of plague forming
units. The state of viral aggregation can be characterised in a variety of ways, some of which are familiar in soft matter science. 178

5

Sustainability

The COVID-19 pandemic has many direct and indirect environmental consequences. 179,180 Some of these impacts are positive,
such as dramatically reduced NO2 pollution. 181 The COVID-19
pandemic can be seen as an involuntary experiment to measure
the effect of global behavioural change on CO2 emission. 182 The
results show that ‘social responses alone . . . would not drive the
deep and sustained reductions needed to reach net-zero emissions’, but that ‘structural changes in the economic, transport or
energy systems’ will be needed.
Other impacts are negative. 179,180 Of direct concern to soft
matter science is the increase in plastic waste associated with the
rise in hand sanitiser and one-off PPE usage. These trends, together with the sudden rise in consumer demand for take-away
and individually-packaged food products, mean that the COVID19 pandemic contributes to the worsening of a parallel ‘plastic
pandemic’. The dramatic increase in the use of hand wipes has
also increased non-biodegradable and non-recyclable waste. Soft
matter science is a key player in the continued drive to find more
biodegradable plastics and other green materials 183 for all of
these applications. On a related note, we have mentioned the
potential use of various nanotechnologies in the global response
to the COVID-19 (and future) pandemics. As these technologies are being developed, their environmental impact 184 must be
carefully evaluated, for example, within a ‘responsible innovation’
framework. 185,186

6

Discussion and conclusions

As the authors of a recent review 2 have remarked in their conclusion, ‘[t]he COVID-19 pandemic has exposed significant scientific gaps in our understanding of critical issues, ranging from the
transmission pathways of such respiratory diseases, to the strategies to use for mitigating these transmissions.’ They have given
J
our
na
l
Na
me,
[
y
ea
r
]
,
[
vol
.
]
,1–15 | 9

‘a fluid dynamicist’s perspective on important aspects of the problem.’ In this article, we have given a soft matter scientist’s perspective on the knowledge gaps revealed by COVID-19, some of
which are closely related to issues discussed in the fluid dynamics essay. Given the importance of airborne transmission in the
spread of influenza, SARS-CoV-1, Middle East Respiratory Syndrome coronavirus and SARS-CoV-2 (see Zhang et al. 4 and references therein), progress in many of the areas we have identified
must be seen as urgent, not only for responding to the current
crisis, but also to anticipate future respiratory viral pandemics.
In some cases, progress in the soft matter science of COVID19 will depend on advances in other, allied, areas. For example,
much of soft matter research on mucin to date has used solutions of reconstituted, purified proteins, 13 which do not mimic
the complex microstructure of ‘the real thing’; neither do they reproduce in vivo compositions, e.g., due to the absence of DNA.
Until recently, the only solution was to rely on ex vivo mucus samples obtained from relevant tissues. 12 The availability of mucussecreting organs-on-a-chip 187,188 therefore may offer new opportunities for soft matter work on viruses embedded in realistic mucus droplets and films.
SARS-CoV-2 and other enveloped respiratory viruses are highly
infectious. In the UK’s list of approved classification of pathogens,
all members of the family Coronavirinae listed are classified into
Hazard Group (HG) 3, with the single exception of the human
coronavirus 229E, which is in HG 2. Most soft matter scientists
are unlikely to have access to their own HG 2 or 3 facilities.‡‡
However, in the spirit of much soft matter science applied to biology, it is possible to make progress on many of the research problems we have identified using model systems. The way a low concentration of nanoparticles may affect the fragmentation of viscoelastic liquid jets and sheets 48,49 is a good example – it is likely
that results obtained using 100 nm negatively-charged synthetic
colloids should be applicable for understanding infected sneeze
ejecta; the more important issue here is likely the non-Newtonian
properties of the liquid matrix rather than realistic virions. Another area where model systems work may have high impact is
the study of bespoke nanoparticles modified, e.g. by patchiness 26
or lipid bilayer coating, 115 to mimic enveloped viruses. Interestingly, nanoliposomes 189 have long been suggested as credible
mimics of such viruses, 190 but we know of little, if any, subsequent work taking this up.
Translating advances in the areas we have described to practical solutions will require collaboration between soft matter scientists and specialists from many disciplines. In particular, work
with virologists, epidemiologists and others in the medical com-

‡‡ At the time of writing, the UK’s Advisory Committee on Harmful Pathogens has provisionally classified SARS-CoV-2 into HG 3, so that all laboratory activities must
be carried out under Containment Level 3 rules. The CDC’s interim guidance
is consistent with this, but allows certain procedures (such as diagnostic tests)
to be carried out in Containment Level 2 laboratories. These are interim classifications. The reader who needs up to date information should consult the
websites of the respective agencies. The complete list of approved classification
of various pathogens are available in the UK from the Health and Safety Executive, https://www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/misc208.pdf, and corresponding
agencies in other countries.

our
na
l
Na
me,
[
y
ea
r
]
,
[
vol
.
]
,1–15
10 | J

munity is needed to verify efficacy. On a purely practical level,
soft matter scientists who want to work on respiratory coronavirus will probably need to access Containment Level 3 laboratory facilities operated by their microbiology colleagues. Moreover, engagement and collaboration with industry will ensure that
solutions can be scaled up to make a significant impact rapidly,
particularly for applications to the current pandemic.
Before offering some concluding remarks, we should emphasise that we have not aimed to survey the areas that we have
covered with any degree of comprehensiveness – each area deserves a critical review of its own. There are also areas of soft
matter science relevant to the ‘outside’ story of the SARS-CoV-2
virus that we have not been able to touch on; and we have quite
deliberately left out most of the ‘inside’ story. But what we have
been able to cover should hopefully be enough to convince the
reader that there are many immediate opportunities for applying soft matter science to help the global effort in combating the
COVID-19 pandemic.
We offer two final remarks to conclude. First, scientific issues
thrown up by COVID-19 will not quickly disappear. On the contrary, they are here to stay. We do not know how long SARS-CoV2 will remain troublesome, but there are now already ‘second
waves’ in many places around the world, or even ‘third waves’,
and countries in the Northern hemisphere are being urged to prepare for fresh outbreak in the coming winter. 191 In any case, there
is now heightened global awareness of a state of affairs that has in
fact existed for some time: that the world is ill prepared for pandemics in general. 192 In particular, the world was and remains ill
prepared against corona viruses. The prescient review by Cheng
et al. in 2007 193 ended with these words:
The presence of a large reservoir of SARS-CoV-like
viruses in horseshoe bats, together with the culture of
eating exotic mammals in southern China, is a time
bomb. The possibility of the reemergence of SARS and
other novel viruses from animals or laboratories and
therefore the need for preparedness should not be ignored.
These words were largely ignored in the wake of the 2003 SARS
outbreak that did not become a pandemic. There is now a global
effort to ‘catch up’, not only to defeat SARS-CoV-2, but also to
prepare for a next ‘Disease X’∗ caused by another coronavirus or
some other enveloped virus. Research to fill the scientific gaps we
have identified will therefore remain timely for the foreseeable
future (and beyond).
Secondly, and finally, we note that making progress in solving
many of the problems we have highlighted will yield new fundamental soft matter science. This direction of ‘knowledge transfer’,
from applications to basics, is not often emphasised in either political rhetoric or academic discourse, 195 but is becoming increasingly relevant, especially, perhaps, in the ‘new normal’ that will
emerge after the pandemic has run its course.

∗ This is the WHO’s terminology for the next serious international pandemic’. 194

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.

Acknowledgements
We thank Rosalind Allen, Daan Frenkel and Rebecca Poon for
helpful comments on the manuscript, two anonymous referees
for pointing out a number of highly-pertinent references and suggesting additional fruitful areas for discussion, and Aidan Poon
for designing an earlier version of Fig. 1. ATB is funded by an EPSRC Innovation Fellowship (EP/S001255/1) and LLN is funded
by EPSRC SOFI CDT (EP/L015536/1). ATB, SOLD, CEM, and
WCKP are funded by the BBSRC National Biofilm Innovation Centre (BB/R012415/1).

Notes and references
1 R. Rabadan, Understanding Coronavirus, Cambridge University Press, 2020.
2 R. Mittal, R. Ni and J.-H. Seo, J. Fluid Mech., 2020, 894,
F2:1–14.
3 J. H. STRAUSS and E. G. STRAUSS, Viruses and Human Disease (Second Edition), Academic Press, London, Second Edition edn, 2008, pp. 45–58.
4 R. Zhang, Y. Li, A. L. Zhang, Y. Wang and
M. J. Molina, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (USA), 2020,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2009637117.
5 Y. M. Bar-On, A. Flamholz, R. Phillips and R. Milo, eLife,
2020, 9, e57309.
6 H. Huang, C. Fan, M. Li, H.-L. Nie, F.-B. Wang, H. Wang,
R. Wang, J. Xia, X. Zheng, X. Zuo and J. Huang, ACS Nano,
2020, 14, 3747–3754.
7 C. Weiss, M. Carriere, L. Fusco, I. Capua, J. A. Regla-Nava,
M. Pasquali, J. A. Scott, F. Vitale, M. A. Unal, C. Mattevi, D. Bedognetti, A. Merkoçi, E. Tasciotti, A. Yilmazer,
Y. Gogotsi, F. Stellacci and L. G. Delogu, ACS Nano, 2020,
14, 6383–6406.
8 N. Bellomo, R. Bingham, M. A. J. Chaplain, G. Dosi, G. Forni,
D. A. Knopoff, J. Lowengrub, R. Twarock and M. E. Virgillito,
Mathematical Models and Methods in Applied Sciences, 2020,
0, 1–61.
9 COVID-19 Primer,
https://covid19primer.com/
dashboard, last accessed 27/08/20.
10 M. Mateu, Structure and Physics of Viruses: An Integrated
Textbook, Springer Netherlands, 2013.
11 D. J. Thornton, K. Rousseau and M. A. McGuckin, Ann. Rev.
Physiol., 2008, 70, 459–486.
12 A. Macierzanka, A. R. Mackie, B. H. Bajka, N. M. Rigby,
F. Nau and D. Dupont, PLoS ONE, 2014, 9, 1–11.
13 R. Bansil and B. S. Turner, Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev., 2018, 124,
3–15.
14 S. Sato and H. Kiyono, Curr. Op. Virology, 2012, 2, 225–232.
15 M. Zanin, P. Baviskar, R. Webster and R. Webby, Cell Host
Microbe, 2016, 19, 159–168.
16 W. Gilpin, M. S. Bull and M. Prakash, Nature Rev. Phys.,
2020, 2, 74–88.

17 X. M. Bustamante-Marin and L. E. Ostrowski, Cold Spring
Harb. Perspect. Biol., 2017, 9, a028241.
18 S. Chateau, J. Favier, S. Poncet and U. D’Ortona, Phys. Rev.
E, 2019, 100, 042405.
19 S. S. Olmsted, J. L. Padgett, A. I. Yudin, K. J. Whaley, T. R.
Moench and R. A. Cone, Biophys. J., 2001, 81, 1930–1937.
20 S. K. Lai, Y.-Y. Wang, K. Hida, R. Cone and J. Hanes, Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. (USA), 2010, 107, 598–603.
21 Y.-Y. Wang, D. Harit, D. B. Subramani, H. Arora, P. A. Kumar
and S. K. Lai, Eur. Respir. J., 2017, 49, 1601709.
22 A. G. Cherstvy, S. Thapa, C. E. Wagner and R. Metzler, Soft
Matter, 2019, 15, 2526–2551.
23 M. Abdulkarim, N. Agulló, B. Cattoz, P. Griffiths, A. BernkopSchnürch, S. Borros and M. Gumbleton, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm., 2015, 97, 230–238.
24 M. Liu, J. Zhang, W. Shan and Y. Huang, Asian J. Pharm.
Sci., 2015, 10, 275–282.
25 T. Vissers, A. T. Brown, N. Koumakis, A. Dawson, M. Hermes,
J. Schwarz-Linek, A. B. Schofield, J. M. French, V. Koutsos,
J. Arlt, V. A. Martinez and W. C. K. Poon, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4,
eaao1170.
26 J.-M. Rabanel, V. Adibnia, S. F. Tehrani, S. Sanche, P. Hildgen, X. Banquy and C. Ramassamy, Nanoscale, 2019, 11,
383–406.
27 E. Blanco, S. K. Smoukov, O. D. Velev and K. P. Velikov, Faraday Discuss., 2016, 191, 73–88.
28 B. Button, L.-H. Cai, C. Ehre, M. Kesimer, D. B. Hill, J. K.
Sheehan, R. C. Boucher and M. Rubinstein, Science, 2012,
337, 937–41.
29 M. Hoffmann, H. Kleine-Weber, S. Schroeder, N. KrÃijger,
T. Herrler, S. Erichsen, T. S. Schiergens, G. Herrler, N.-H.
Wu, A. Nitsche, M. A. MÃijller, C. Drosten and S. PÃűhlmann,
Cell, 2020, 181, 271–280.e8.
30 L. G. M. Basso, E. F. Vicente, E. Crusca, Jr., E. M. Cilli and
A. J. Costa-Filho, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 37131.
31 M. R. St. Vincent, C. C. Colpitts, A. V. Ustinov, M. Muqadas,
M. A. Joyce, N. L. Barsby, R. F. Epand, R. M. Epand, S. A.
Khramyshev, O. A. Valueva, V. A. Korshun, D. L. J. Tyrrell
and L. M. Schang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 2010, 107, 17339–
17344.
32 I. Dubanevics and T. C. McLeish, bioRxiv, 2020,
2020.05.21.105965.
33 M. Haw, Middle World, Palgrave Macmillan US, 2016.
34 T. Li, Z. Li, E. E. Deans, E. Mittler, M. Liu, K. Chandran and
T. Ivanovic, bioRxiv, 2020, 843177.
35 W. F. Wells, Am. J. Epidemiol., 1934, 20, 611–618.
36 X. Xie, Y. Li, A. T. Y. Chwang, P. L. Ho and W. H. Seto, Indoor
Air, 2007, 17, 211–225.
37 D. L. Floyd, J. R. Ragains, J. J. Skehel, S. C. Harrison and
A. M. van Oijen, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (USA), 2008, 105,
15382–15387.
38 R. Wölfel, V. M. Corman, W. Guggemos, M. Seilmaier,
S. Zange, M. A. Müller, D. Niemeyer, T. C. Jones, P. Vollmar,
C. Rothe, M. Hoelscher, T. Bleicker, S. Brünink, J. Schneider,

J
our
na
l
Na
me,
[
y
ea
r
]
,
[
vol
.
]
,
1–15 | 11

39
40
41

42
43
44
45
46
47

48
49
50

51

52
53

54
55
56

57
58
59

R. Ehmann, K. Zwirglmaier, C. Drosten and C. Wendtner, Nature, 2020, 581, 465–469.
J. S. Kutter, M. I. Spronken, P. L. Fraaij, R. A. Fouchier and
S. Herfst, Curr. Opin. Virol., 2018, 28, 142–151.
T.-C. Hsiao, H.-C. Chuang, S. M. Griffith, S.-J. Chen and L.H. Young, Aerosol Air Qual. Res., 2020, 905–910.
J. Zhou, J. Wei, K.-T. Choy, S. F. Sia, D. K. Rowlands, D. Yu,
C.-Y. Wu, W. G. Lindsley, B. J. Cowling, J. McDevitt, M. Peiris,
Y. Li and H.-L. Yen, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (USA), 2018, 115,
E2386–E2392.
S. Yang, G. W. Lee, C.-M. Chen, C.-C. Wu and K.-P. Yu, J.
Aerosol Med., 2007, 20, 484–494.
L. Bourouiba, E. Dehandschoewercker and J. Bush, J. Fluid
Mech., 2014, 745, 537–563.
B. E. Scharfman, A. H. Techet, J. W. M. Bush and
L. Bourouiba, Exp. Fluids, 2016, 57, 24.
E. P. Vejerano and L. C. Marr, J. Royal Soc. Interface, 2018,
15, 20170939.
J. A. Otter, C. Donskey, S. Yezli, S. Douthwaite, S. D. Goldenberg and D. J. Weber, J. Hosp. Infect., 2016, 92, 235–250.
K. A. Kormuth, K. Lin, I. Prussin, Aaron J, E. P. Vejerano, A. J.
Tiwari, S. S. Cox, M. M. Myerburg, S. S. Lakdawala and L. C.
Marr, J. Infect. Dis., 2018, 218, 739–747.
A. Lindner, J. E. Fiscina and C. Wagner, EPL (Europhysics
Letters), 2015, 110, 64002.
P. S. Raux, A. Troger, P. Jop and A. Sauret, Phys. Rev. Fluids,
2020, 5, 044004.
P. P. Bhat, S. Appathurai, M. T. Harris, M. Pasquali, G. H.
McKinley and O. A. Basaran, Nature Phys., 2010, 6, 625–
631.
Z. Zuo, T. H. Kuehn, H. Verma, S. Kumar, S. M. Goyal, J. Appert, P. C. Raynor, S. Ge and D. Y. H. Pui, Aerosol Sci. Tech.,
2013, 47, 373–382.
W. E. Bischoff, K. Swett, I. Leng and T. R. Peters, J. Infect.
Dis., 2013, 207, 1037–1046.
Y. Liu, Z. Ning, Y. Chen, M. Guo, Y. Liu, N. K. Gali, L. Sun,
Y. Duan, J. Cai, D. Westerdahl, X. Liu, K. Xu, K.-f. Ho, H. Kan,
Q. Fu and K. Lan, Nature, 2020, 582, 557–560.
T. Shors, Understanding Viruses, Jones and Bartlett Publishers, 3rd edn, 2017, p. 396.
T. P. Weber and N. I. Stilianakis, J. Infect., 2008, 57, 361–
373.
K. K.-W. To, O. T.-Y. Tsang, W.-S. Leung, A. R. Tam, T.-C.
Wu, D. C. Lung, C. C.-Y. Yip, J.-P. Cai, J. M.-C. Chan, T. S.H. Chik, D. P.-L. Lau, C. Y.-C. Choi, L.-L. Chen, W.-M. Chan,
K.-H. Chan, J. D. Ip, A. C.-K. Ng, R. W.-S. Poon, C.-T. Luo,
V. C.-C. Cheng, J. F.-W. Chan, I. F.-N. Hung, Z. Chen, H. Chen
and K.-Y. Yuen, Lancet Infect. Dis., 2020, 20, 565–574.
S. Asadi, A. S. Wexler, C. D. Cappa, S. Barreda, N. M. Bouvier
and W. D. Ristenpart, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 2348.
E. C. Cole and C. E. Cook, Am. J. Infect. Control, 1998, 26,
453–464.
N. Nikitin, E. Petrova, E. Trifonova and O. Karpova, Adv. Virol., 2014, 2014, 859090.

our
na
l
Na
me,
[
y
ea
r
]
,
[
vol
.
]
,1–15
12 | J

60 A. Wang, J. W. Zwanikken, D. M. Kaz, R. McGorty, A. M.
Goldfain, W. B. Rogers and V. N. Manoharan, Phys. Rev. E,
2019, 100, 042605.
61 S. Villa, A. Stocco, C. Blanc and M. Nobili, Soft Matter, 2020,
16, 960–969.
62 K. Lin and L. C. Marr, Environ. Sci. Tech., 2020, 54, 1024–
1032.
63 W. Liu, J. Midya, M. Kappl, H.-J. Butt and A. Nikoubashman,
ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 4972–4979.
64 M. Sperling, O. D. Velev and M. Gradzielski, Angew. Chem.
Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 586–590.
65 C. Josserand and S. Thoroddsen, Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech.,
2016, 48, 365–391.
66 V. Bertola, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 193-194, 1–11.
67 D. Izbassarov and M. Muradoglu, Phys. Rev. Fluids, 2016, 1,
023302.
68 H. Hu and R. Larson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 1334–
1344.
69 M. D. Haw, M. Gillie and W. C. K. Poon, Langmuir, 2002, 18,
1626–1633.
70 H. Kim, F. m. c. Boulogne, E. Um, I. Jacobi, E. Button and
H. A. Stone, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2016, 116, 124501.
71 N. Shahidzadeh, M. F. L. Schut, J. Desarnaud, M. Prat and
D. Bonn, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10335.
72 D. Brutin, B. Sobac, B. Loquer and J. Sampol, J. Fluid Mech.,
2011, 667, 85?95.
73 R. Chen, L. Zhang, D. Zang and W. Shen, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 231, 1–14.
74 A. D. Dussaud, P. M. Adler and A. Lips, Langmuir, 2003, 19,
7341–7345.
75 J. Gerber, T. Lendenmann, H. Eghlidi, T. M. Schutzius and
D. Poulikakos, Nature Comm., 2019, 10, 4776.
76 G. Kampf, D. Todt, S. Pfaender and E. Steinmann, J. Hosp.
Infect., 2020, 104, 246–251.
77 S. Ren, W. Wang, Y. Hao, H. Zhang, Z. Wang, Y. Chen and
R. Gao, World J. Clin. Cases, 2020, 8, 1391–1399.
78 M. Y. Y. Lai, P. K. C. Cheng and W. W. L. Lim, Clinical Infectious Diseases, 2005, 41, e67–e71.
79 N. van Doremalen, T. Bushmaker, D. Morris, M. Holbrook,
A. Gamble, B. Williamson, A. Tamin, J. Harcourt, N. Thornburg, S. Gerber, J. Lloyd-Smith, E. de Wit and V. Munster,
New Engl. J. Med., 2020, 382, 1564–1567.
80 R. J. Fischer, T. Bushmaker, S. Judson and V. J. Munster, J.
Infect. Dis., 2016, 214, S290–S293.
81 N. Martín-González, S. M. G. Darvas, A. Durana, G. A. Marti,
D. M. A. Guérin and P. J. de Pablo, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter,
2018, 30, 104001.
82 J. Shaman and M. Kohn, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (USA), 2009,
106, 3243–3248.
83 S. Minhaz Ud-Dean, J. Theor. Biol., 2010, 264, 822–829.
84 B. Hanley and B. Borup, Virol. J., 7, 98.
85 L. C. Marr, J. W. Tang, J. Van Mullekom and S. S. Lakdawala,
J. Royal Soc. Interface, 2019, 16, 20180298.
86 P. Zhao, P.-T. Chan, Y. Gao, H.-W. Lai, T. Zhang and Y. Li,

87

88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97

98
99
100

101

102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112

Build. Environ., 2019, 158, 28–38.
G. U. Lopez, C. P. Gerba, A. H. Tamimi, M. Kitajima, S. L.
Maxwell and J. B. Rose, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2013, 79,
5728–5734.
C. E. Rodes, J. R. Newsome, R. W. Vanderpool, J. T. Antley
and R. G. Lewis, J. Expo. Sci. Env. Epid., 2001, 11, 123–139.
A. McDonagh, R. Sextro and M. Byrne, J. Hazard. Mater.,
2012, 227-228, 370–377.
P. Zhao, Y. Li, T.-L. Tsang and P.-T. Chan, Build. Environ.,
2018, 143, 461–472.
A. M. Freitas and M. M. Sharma, J. Colloid Interface Sci.,
2001, 233, 73–82.
H. J. Butt, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1994, 166, 109–117.
Physics Today, 1999, 52, 48–52.
S. D. McDermott, in Trace Evidence: Transfer, Persistence, and
Value, American Cancer Society, 2009.
R. Zandi, B. Dragnea, A. Travesset and R. Podgornik, Phys.
Rep., 2020, 847, 1–102.
A. Šiber, A. L. Božič and R. Podgornik, Phys. Chem. Chem.
Phys., 2012, 14, 3746–3765.
R. F. Garmann, M. Comas-Garcia, M. S. T. Koay, J. J. L. M.
Cornelissen, C. M. Knobler and W. M. Gelbart, J. Virol.,
2014, 88, 10472–10479.
P. A. Kralchevsky and K. Nagayama, Langmuir, 1994, 10,
23–36.
H. M. van der Kooij, G. T. van de Kerkhof and J. Sprakel, Soft
Matter, 2016, 12, 2858–2867.
C. Carrasco, M. Douas, R. Miranda, M. Castellanos, P. A.
Serena, J. L. Carrascosa, M. G. Mateu, M. I. Marqués and
P. J. de Pablo, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (USA), 2009, 106, 5475–
5480.
H. Giese, W. KlÃűckner, C. PeÃśa, E. Galindo, S. Lotter,
K. Wetzel, L. Meissner, C. P. Peter and J. BÃijchs, Chem. Eng.
Sci., 2014, 118, 102–113.
M. H. Adams, J. Gen. Physiol., 1948, 31, 417–431.
T. Trouwborst, S. Kuyper and J. S. Teppema, J. Gen. Virol.,
1974, 25, 75–81.
S. S. Thompson and M. V. Yates, Appl. Environ. Microbiol.,
1999, 65, 1186–1190.
W. Heller, in Mechanical and Surface Coagulation, American
Chemical Society, 1975, ch. 3, pp. 40–63.
J. Langlet, F. Gaboriaud and C. Gantzer, J. Appl, Microbiol.,
2007, 103, 1632–1638.
C. V. Seastone, J. Gen. Physiol., 1938, 21, 621–629.
N. Ballard, A. D. Law and S. A. F. Bon, Soft Matter, 2019, 15,
1186–1199.
P. A. Kralchevsky and K. Nagayama, Adv. Colloid Interface
Sci., 2000, 85, 145–192.
B. P. Binks, Curr. Op. Colloid Interface Sci., 2002, 7, 21–41.
R. Verger and F. Pattus, Chem. Phys. Lipids, 1976, 16, 285–
291.
F. Pattus, P. Desnuelle and R. Verger, Biochim. Biophys. Acta.
Biomembr., 1978, 507, 62–70.

113 K. Nag, J. Perez-Gil, A. Cruz, N. Rich and K. Keough, Biophys.
J., 1996, 71, 1356–1363.
114 J. F. Torres-Salgado, M. Comas-Garcia, M. V. VillagranaEscareño, A. L. Durán-Meza, J. Ruiz-García and R. D.
Cadena-Nava, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2016, 120, 5864–5873.
115 A. Luchini and G. Vitiello, Front. Chem., 2019, 7, 343.
116 I. Prigogine, Introduction to Thermodynamics of Irreversible
Processes, Wiley, 2nd edn, 1961.
117 T. Anderson, C. Rappaport and N. Muscatine, Ann. Inst. Pasteur (Paris), 84, 5–14.
118 A. Cordova, M. Deserno, W. M. Gelbart and A. Ben-Shaul,
Biophys. J., 2003, 85, 70–74.
119 N. J. Yang and M. J. Hinner, Methods Mol. Biol., 2015, 1266,
29–53.
120 H.-J. Choi, J.-M. Song, B. J. Bondy, R. W. Compans, S.-M.
Kang and M. R. Prausnitz, PLOS One, 2015, 10, 1–22.
121 I. Delrue, D. Verzele, A. Madder and H. J. Nauwynck, Expert
Rev. Vaccines, 2012, 11, 695–719.
122 J. C. Mathai, S. Tristram-Nagle, J. F. Nagle and M. L. Zeidel,
J. Gen. Physiol., 2007, 131, 69–76.
123 P. T. Ivanova, D. S. Myers, S. B. Milne, J. L. McClaren, P. G.
Thomas and H. A. Brown, ACS Infect. Dis., 2015, 1, 399–452.
124 D. Schoeman and B. C. Fielding, Virol. J., 2019, 16, 69.
125 P. P. Singh Tomar and I. T. Arkin, Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Comm., 2020, 530, 10–14.
126 F.-S. Quan, I. Rubino, S.-H. Lee, B. Koch and H.-J. Choi, Sci.
Rep., 2017, 7, 39956.
127 G. La Rosa, L. Bonadonna, L. Lucentini, S. Kenmoe and
E. Suffredini, Water Res., 2020, 179, 115899.
128 I. A. T. Schaap, F. Eghiaian, A. des Georges and C. Veigel, J.
Biol. Chem., 2012, 287, 41078–41088.
129 C. Zeng, M. Hernando-Pérez, B. Dragnea, X. Ma, P. van der
Schoot and R. Zandi, Phys Rev Lett, 2017, 119, 038102.
130 W. S. Klug, R. F. Bruinsma, J.-P. Michel, C. M. Knobler, I. L.
Ivanovska, C. F. Schmidt and G. J. L. Wuite, Phys. Rev. Lett.,
2006, 97, 228101.
131 N. Kol, M. Gladnikoff, D. Barlam, R. Z. Shneck, A. Rein and
I. Rousso, Biophys. J., 2006, 91, 767–774.
132 S. Li, F. Eghiaian, C. Sieben, A. Herrmann and I. A. T.
Schaap, Biophys. J., 2011, 100, 637–645.
133 M. G. Mateu, Virus Res., 2012, 168, 1–22.
134 P. Buzón, S. Maity and W. H. Roos, WIREs Nanomed. Nanobi.,
2020, 12, e1613.
135 Pliny, in Natural History, Volume IX: Books 33-35, Harvard
University Press, 1952, ch. XXXIII.XL.
136 C. R. MacIntyre and A. A. Chughtai, Int. J. Nurs. Stud., 2020,
108, 103629.
137 R. O. J. H. Stutt, R. Retkute, M. Bradley, C. A. Gilligan and
J. Colvin, Proc. Royal Soc. A, 2020, 476, 20200376.
138 I. M. Viola, B. Peterson, G. Pisetta, G. Pavar, H. Akhtar,
F. Menoloascina, E. Mangano, K. E. Dunn, R. Gabl, A. Nila,
E. Molinari, C. Cummins, G. Thompson, C. M. McDougall,
T. Y. M. Lo, F. C. Denison, P. Digard, O. Malik, M. J. G. Dunn
and F. Mehendale, arXiv, 2020, 2005.10720.
J
our
na
l
Na
me,
[
y
ea
r
]
,
[
vol
.
]
,
1–15 | 13

139 L. Bandiera, G. Pavar, G. Pisetta, S. Otomo, E. Mangano, J. R.
Seckl, P. Digard, E. Molinari, F. Menolascina and I. M. Viola,
medRxiv, 2020, 10.1101/2020.08.11.20145086.
140 S. Verma, M. Dhanak and J. Frankenfield, Phys. Fluids, 2020,
32, 061708.
141 E. P. Fischer, M. C. Fischer, D. Grass, I. Henrion, W. S. Warren
and E. Westman, Sci. Adv., 2020, eabd3083.
142 Document 42 CFR Part 84, https://tinyurl.com/
y5d8vdtd, last accessed 27/08/20.
143 R. M. Eninger, T. Honda, T. Reponen, R. McKay and S. A.
Grinshpun, J. Occup. Environ. Hyg., 2008, 5, 286–295.
144 L. Liao, W. Xiao, M. Zhao, X. Yu, H. Wang, Q. Wang, S. Chu
and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 6348–6356.
145 C. Duprat, S. Protière, A. Y. Beebe and H. A. Stone, Nature,
2012, 482, 510–513.
146 P. Gibson, D. Rivin, C. Kendrick and H. Schreuder-Gibson,
Textile Res. J., 1999, 69, 311–317.
147 P. B. Warren, R. C. Ball and R. E. Goldstein, Phys. Rev. Lett.,
2018, 120, 158001.
148 F. Nightingale, Notes on Nursing: What it Is, and What it is
Not, Harrison, 1859.
149 P. Berche, Clin. Microbiol. Infect., 2012, 18, 1 – 6.
150 Handwashing Liaison Group, Br. Med. J., 1999, 318, 686.
151 S. Dancer, J. Hosp. Infect., 2020, 105, 344–345.
152 The World Health Organisation, https://tinyurl.com/
yca5schc, last accessed 27/08/20.
153 M. L. Grayson, S. Melvani, J. Druce, I. G. Barr, S. A. Ballard,
P. D. R. Johnson, T. Mastorakos and C. Birch, Clin. Infect.
Dis., 2009, 48, 285–291.
154 E. Todd, B. Michaels, J. Holah, D. Smith, J. Greig and
C. Bartleson, J. Food Prot., 2010, 73, 2128–2140.
155 Center for Disease Control, https://tinyurl.com/
y22pnqw2, last accessed 27/08/20.
156 M. Apel-Paz, G. F. Doncel and T. K. Vanderlick, Langmuir,
2003, 19, 591–597.
157 N. Chaudhary, N. Chaudhary, M. Dahal, B. Guragain,
S. Rai, R. Chaudhary, K. Sachin, R. Lamichhane-Khadka and
A. Bhattarai, Preprints, 2020, 2020050060.
158 D. Vollenbroich, M. ÃŰzel, J. Vater, R. M. Kamp and G. Pauli,
Biologicals, 1997, 25, 289–297.
159 T. Kawahara, I. Akiba, M. Sakou, T. Sakaguchi and
H. Taniguchi, PLoS ONE, 2018, 13, 1–9.
160 A. Kohn, J. Gitelman and M. Inbar, Arch. Virol., 1980, 66,
301–307.
161 J. R. Kanicky and D. O. Shah, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2002,
256, 201–207.
162 R. M. Walters, G. Mao, E. T. Gunn and S. Hornby, Dermatol.
Res. Pract., 2012, 2012, 495917.
163 The World Health Organisation, https://tinyurl.com/
wojctpy, last accessed 27/08/20.
164 R. K. Nazareth, G. Karapetsas, K. Sefiane, O. Matar and
P. Valluri, arXiv, 2020, 2008.10478.
165 B. A. Miller-Chou and J. L. Koenig, Prog. Polymer Sci., 2003,
28, 1223–1270.
our
na
l
Na
me,
[
y
ea
r
]
,
[
vol
.
]
,1–15
14 | J

166 M. Cassanelli, I. Norton and T. Mills, Food Structure, 2017,
14, 112–120.
167 C. Das and P. D. Olmsted, Phil. Trans. Royal Soc. A, 2016,
374, 20150126.
168 R. W. Style, A. Jagota, C.-Y. Hui and E. R. Dufresne, Ann.
Rev. Condens. Matter Phys., 2017, 8, 99–118.
169 V. Cagno, P. Andreozzi, M. D’Alicarnasso, P. Jacob Silva,
M. Mueller, M. Galloux, R. Le Goffic, S. T. Jones, M. Vallino,
J. Hodek, J. Weber, S. Sen, E.-R. Janeček, A. Bekdemir,
B. Sanavio, C. Martinelli, M. Donalisio, M.-A. Rameix Welti,
J.-F. Eleouet, Y. Han, L. Kaiser, L. Vukovic, C. Tapparel,
P. Král, S. Krol, D. Lembo and F. Stellacci, Nature Mater.,
2018, 17, 195–203.
170 J. J. Cheetham, S. Nir, E. Johnson, T. D. Flanagan and R. M.
Epand, J. Biol. Chem., 1994, 269, 5467–5472.
171 J. G. B. Derraik, W. A. Anderson, E. A. Connelly and Y. C.
Anderson, medRxiv, 2020, 10.1101/2020.04.02.20051409.
172 L. Zhang, B. Ding, Q. Chen, Q. Feng, L. Lin and J. Sun, Trends
Analyt. Chem., 2017, 94, 106–116.
173 T. Curk, C. A. Brackley, J. D. Farrell, Z. Xing, D. Joshi, S. Direito, U. Bren, S. Angioletti-Uberti, J. Dobnikar, E. Eiser,
D. Frenkel and R. J. Allen, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (USA), 2020,
117, 8719–8726.
174 J. D. Driskell, C. A. Jones, S. M. Tompkins and R. A. Tripp,
Analyst, 2011, 136, 3083–3090.
175 J. Shin, A. G. Cherstvy and R. Metzler, Phys. Rev. X, 2014, 4,
021002.
176 Y. Zagzag, M. F. Soddu, A. D. Hollingsworth and D. G. Grier,
Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 1932.
177 APS, Online Physics Magazine, https://physics.aps.
org/articles/v13/59, last accessed 27/08/20.
178 Z. Wei, M. Mcevoy, V. Razinkov, A. Polozova, E. Li, J. CasasFinet, G. I. Tous, P. Balu, A. A. Pan, H. Mehta and M. A.
Schenerman, J. Virol. Meth., 2007, 144, 122 – 132.
179 S. Saadat, D. Rawtani and C. M. Hussain, Sci. Total Environ.,
2020, 728, 138870.
180 M. A. Zambrano-Monserrate, M. A. Ruano and L. SanchezAlcalde, Sci. Total Environ., 2020, 728, 138813.
181 S. Muhammad, X. Long and M. Salman, Sci. Total Environ.,
2020, 728, 138820.
182 C. Le Quéré, R. B. Jackson, M. W. Jones, A. J. P.
Smith, S. Abernethy, R. M. Andrew, A. J. De-Gol,
D. R. Willis, Y. Shan, J. G. Canadell, P. Friedlingstein,
F. Creutzig and G. P. Peters, Nat. Clim. Chang., 2020,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558–020–0797–x.
183 M. Hong and E. Y.-X. Chen, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 3692–
3706.
184 N. Wilson, BioScience, 2018, 68, 241–246.
185 E. Fisher, J. Responsible Innov., 2020, 7, 1–5.
186 The Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council, UK,
https://epsrc.ukri.org/index.cfm/research/
framework/, last accessed 27/08/20.
187 S. N. Bhatia and D. E. Ingber, Nature Biotech., 2014, 32, 760–
772.

188 J. Nawroth, C. Lucchesi, D. Cheng, A. Shukla, J. Ngyuen,
T. Shroff, K. Karalis, H.-H. Lee, S. Alves, G. A.
Hamilton, M. Salmon and R. Villenave, bioRxiv, 2020,
2020.02.02.931055.
189 M. R. Mozafari, Liposomes. Methods in Molecular Biology
(Methods and Protocols), Humana Press, 2010, vol. 605,
ch. 2, pp. 29–50.
190 F. Martin and R. Macdonald, Nature, 1974, 252, 161–163.
191 Preparing for a chalenging winter 2020/21, The Academy of
Medical Sciences technical report, 2020.

192 L. Garrett, The Coming Plague: Newly Emerging Diseases in a
World Out of Balance, Penguin Books, 1995.
193 V. C. C. Cheng, S. K. P. Lau, P. C. Y. Woo and K. Y. Yuen, Clin.
Microbiol. Rev., 2007, 20, 660–694.
194 The World Health Organisation, https://tinyurl.com/
yynxh25x, last accessed 27/08/20.
195 N. J. Brooks, M. E. Cates, P. S. Clegg, A. Lips, W. C. K.
Poon and J. M. Seddon, Phil. Trans. Royal Soc. A, 2016, 374,
20150135.

J
our
na
l
Na
me,
[
y
ea
r
]
,
[
vol
.
]
,
1–15 | 15

