Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

Predictors of Well-being and Productivity among
Software Professionals during the COVID-19
Pandemic – A Longitudinal Study
Daniel Russo? · Paul H. P. Hanel∗ ·
Seraphina Altnickel · Niels van Berkel

arXiv:2007.12580v4 [cs.CY] 24 Jan 2021

Received: DD Month YEAR / Accepted: DD Month YEAR

Abstract The COVID-19 pandemic has forced governments worldwide to
impose movement restrictions on their citizens. Although critical to reducing
the virus’ reproduction rate, these restrictions come with far-reaching social
and economic consequences. In this paper, we investigate the impact of these
restrictions on an individual level among software engineers who were working from home. Although software professionals are accustomed to working
with digital tools, but not all of them remotely, in their day-to-day work, the
abrupt and enforced work-from-home context has resulted in an unprecedented
scenario for the software engineering community. In a two-wave longitudinal
study (N = 192), we covered over 50 psychological, social, situational, and
physiological factors that have previously been associated with well-being or
productivity. Examples include anxiety, distractions, coping strategies, psychological and physical needs, office set-up, stress, and work motivation. This
design allowed us to identify the variables that explained unique variance in
well-being and productivity. Results include (1) the quality of social contacts
predicted positively, and stress predicted an individual’s well-being negatively
when controlling for other variables consistently across both waves; (2) boredom
and distractions predicted productivity negatively; (3) productivity was less
?

These authors contributed equally.

D. Russo
Corresponding author.
Aalborg University, Department of Computer Science, Aalborg, Denmark
Tel.: (+45) 9940 7765
E-mail: daniel.russo@cs.aau.dk
P. H. P. Hanel
University of Essex, Department of Psychology, Colchester, UK
S. Altnickel
mia raeumerei GmbH, Berlin, Germany
N. van Berkel
Aalborg University, Department of Computer Science, Aalborg, Denmark

2

Daniel Russo?? et al.

strongly associated with all predictor variables at time two compared to time
one, suggesting that software engineers adapted to the lockdown situation over
time; and (4) longitudinal analyses did not provide evidence that any predictor
variable causal explained variance in well-being and productivity. Overall, we
conclude that working from home was per se not a significant challenge for
software engineers. Finally, our study can assess the effectiveness of current
work-from-home and general well-being and productivity support guidelines
and provides tailored insights for software professionals.
Keywords Pandemic · COVID-19 · Productivity · Well-being · Longitudinal
Study · Remote Work
1 Introduction
The mobility restrictions imposed on billions of people during the COVID-19
pandemic in the first half of 2020 successfully decreased the reproduction
rate of the virus [111,140]. However, quarantine and isolation also come with
tremendous costs on people’s well-being [15] and productivity [87].
While prior research [15] identified numerous factors either positively or
negatively associated with people’s well-being during disastrous events, most
of this research was cross-sectional and included a limited set of predictors.
Further, whether productivity is affected by disastrous events and, if so, why
precisely, has not yet been investigated in a peer-reviewed article to the best
of our knowledge. This is especially relevant since many companies, including
tech companies, have instructed their employees to work from home [40] at an
unprecedented scope. Thus, it is unclear whether previous research on remote
work [39] still holds during a global pandemic while schools are closed, and
professionals often have to work in non-work dedicated areas of their homes.
It is particularly interesting to study the effect of quarantine on software
engineers as they are often already experienced in working remotely, which
might help mitigate the adverse effects of the lockdown on their well-being
and productivity. Therefore, there is a compelling need for longitudinal applied
research that draws on theories and findings from various scientific fields to
identify variables that uniquely predict the well-being and productivity of
software professionals during the first 2020 quarantine, for both the current
and potential future lockdowns.
In the present research, we build on the literature discussed above to identify
predictors of well-being and productivity. Additionally, we also include variables
that were identified as relevant by other lines of research. Furthermore, we
chose a different setting, sampling strategy, and research design than most of
the prior literature. This is important for several reasons.
First, many previous studies included only one or a few variables, thus
masking whether other variables primarily drive the identified effects. For
example, while boredom is negatively associated with well-being [42], it might
be that this effect is mainly driven by loneliness, as lonely people report
higher levels of boredom [42] — or vice versa. Only by including a range

Well-being and Productivity among Software Professionals during a Pandemic

3

of relevant variables it is possible to identify the primary variables, which
can subsequently be used to write or update guidelines to maintain one’s
well-being and productivity while working from home. Second, this approach
simultaneously allows us to test whether models developed in an organizational
context such as the two-factor theory [62] can also predict people’s well-being
in general and whether variables that were associated with well-being for
people being quarantined also explain productivity. Third, while previous
research on the (psychological) impact of being quarantined [15] is relevant, it
is unclear whether this research is generalizable and applicable to the COVID-19
pandemic. In contrast to previous pandemics, during which only some people
were quarantined or isolated, the COVID-19 pandemic strongly impacted
billions globally. For example, previous research found that quarantined people
were stigmatized, shunned, and rejected [83]; this is unlikely to repeat as
the majority of people are now quarantined. Fourth, research suggests [69]
that pandemics become increasingly likely due to a range of factors (e.g.,
climate change, human population growth) which make it more probable that
pathogens such as viruses are transmitted to humans. This implies that it
would be beneficial to prepare ourselves for future pandemics that involve
lockdowns. Fifth, the trend to remote work has been accelerated through the
COVID-19 pandemic [97], which makes it timely to investigate which factors
predict well-being and productivity while working from home. The possibility
to study this under extreme conditions (i.e., during quarantine) is especially
interesting as it allows us to include more potential stressors and distractors
of productivity. This is critical. As outlined above, previous research on the
advantages and challenges of remote work can presumably not be generalized
to the population because mainly people from certain professions and specific
living and working conditions might have chosen to work remotely. Sixth and
finally, a longitudinal design allowed us to test for causal inferences. Specifically,
in wave 1, we identified variables that explain unique variance in well-being and
productivity, which we measured again in waves 2. This is important because it
is possible that, for example, the amount of physical activity predicts well-being
or that well-being predicts physical activity. Additionally, we are able to test
whether well-being predicts productivity or vice versa — previous research
found that they are interrelated [80, 21].
The software engineering community has never before faced such a wide-scale
lockdown and quarantine scenario during the global spread of the COVID-19
virus. As a result, we can not build on pre-existing literature to provide tailored
recommendations for software professionals. Accordingly, in the present research,
we integrate theories from the organizational [62] and psychological [95,117]
literature, as well as findings from research on remote work [81,2,13] and
recommendations by health [100,31] and work [27] authorities targeted at
the general population, from where we derived our independent variables (or
predictors). This longitudinal investigation provides the following contributions:
– First, by including a range of variables relevant to well-being and productivity, we are able to identify those variables that are uniquely associated

4

Daniel Russo?? et al.

with these two dependent variables for software professionals and thus help
improve guidelines and tailor recommendations.
– Second, a longitudinal design allows us to explore which variables predict
(rather than are predicted by) well-being and productivity of software
professionals.
– Third, due to the current mobility restrictions imposed on billions of people
we provided a unique study to understand the effects of working remotely
on people’s well-being and productivity.
Our results are relevant to the software community because the number of
knowledge workers who are at least partly working remotely is increasing [49],
yet the impact of working remotely on people’s health and productivity is not
well understood yet [92]. So far, we have only evidence regarding to the working
activity distribution of developers working from home during the lockdown,
compared to a typical office day, which seems to be the same [114]. We focus
on well-being and productivity as dependent variables because both are crucial
for our way of living. According to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
well-being is a fundamental human right, and productivity allows us to maintain
a certain standard of living and affect our overall well-being. For this reason,
we investigated which are the most relevant factors associated with our two
dependent variables. To do so, we started with those factors suggested by the
literature (e.g., boredom, anxiety, routines) and validated those associations
through multiple statistical analyses [115]. Thus, our research question is:
Research Question: What are the relevant predictors of well-being and productivity for software engineers working remotely during a pandemic?
In the remainder of this paper, we describe the related work about wellbeing in quarantine and productivity in remote work in Section 2, followed by
a discussion about the research design of this longitudinal study in Section 3.
The analysis is described in Section 4, and results are discussed in Section 5.
Implications and recommendations for software engineers, companies, and
any remote-work interested parties is then outlined in Section 6. Finally, we
conclude this paper by outlying future research directions in Section 7.
2 Related Work
2.1 Well-Being in Quarantine
To slow down the spread of pandemics, it is often necessary to quarantine a
large number of people [111,140] and enforce social distancing to limit the
spread of the infection [3]. This typically implies that only people working in
essential professions such as healthcare, police, pharmacies, or food chains, such
as supermarkets, are allowed to leave their homes for work. If possible, people
are asked to work remotely from home. However, such measures are perceived
as drastic and can have severe consequences on people’s well-being [15, 90].

Well-being and Productivity among Software Professionals during a Pandemic

5

Previous research has found that being quarantined can lead to anger,
depression, emotional exhaustion, fear of infecting others or getting infected,
insomnia, irritability, loneliness, low mood, post-traumatic stress disorders, and
stress [124,60,83,93,110,5]. The fear of getting infected and infecting others,
in turn, can become a substantial psychological burden [74,108]. Also, a lack
of necessary supplies such as food or water [137] and insufficient information
from public health authorities adds on to increased stress levels [18]. The
severity of the psychological symptoms correlated positively with the duration
of being quarantined and symptoms can still appear years after quarantine
has ended [15]. This makes it essential to understand what differentiates those
whose mental health is more negatively affected by being quarantined from
those who are less strongly affected. However, a recent review found that no
demographic variable was conclusive in predicting whether someone would
develop psychological issues while being quarantined [15]. Moreover, prior
studies investigating such predictors focused solely on demographic factors
(e.g., age or number of children [60,127]). This suggests that additional research
is needed to identify psychological and demographic predictors of well-being.
For example, prior research suggested that a lack of autonomy, which is an
innate psychological need [117], negatively affects people’s well-being and
motivation [19], yet evidence to support this claim in the context of a quarantine
is missing.
To ease the intense pressure on people while being quarantined or in
isolation, research and guidelines from health authorities provide a range of
solutions on how an individual’s well-being can be improved. Some of these
factors lie outside of the control for individuals, such as the duration of the
quarantine, or the information provided by public authorities [15]. In this study,
we therefor focus on those factors that are within the control of individuals.
However, investigating such factors independently might make little sense since
they are interlinked. For example, studying the relations between anxiety and
stress with well-being in isolation is less informative, as both anxiety and stress
are negatively associated with well-being [33,123]. However, knowing which
of the two has a more substantial impact on people’s well-being above and
beyond the other is crucial, as it allows inter alia policymakers, employers,
and mental health support organizations to provide more targeted information,
create programs that are aimed to reduce people’s anxiety or stress levels,
and improve people’s well-being, since anxiety and stress are conceptually
independent constructs. For example, stress has usually a more specific cause,
is temporary, and easier to treat (e.g., by working less). In contrast, anxiety
is more unspecific, longer-lasting, and can require professional attention [68].
Thus, it is essential to study these variables together rather than separately.

2.2 Productivity in Remote Work
The containment measures not only come at a cost for people’s well-being but
they also negatively impact their productivity. For example, the International

6

Daniel Russo?? et al.

Monetary Fund (IMF) estimated in October 2020 that the World GDP would
drop by 4.4% as a result of the containment measures taken to reduce the
spread of COVID-19 – with countries particularly hit by the virus, such as Italy,
would experience a drop of over 10% [65]. This expected drop in GDP would
be significantly larger if many people were unable to work remotely from home.
However, previous research on the impact of quarantine typically focused on
people’s mental and physiological health, thus providing little evidence on the
effect on productivity of those who are still working. Luckily, the literature on
remote work, also known as telework, allows us to get a broad understanding
of the factors that improve and hinder people’s productivity during quarantine.
The number of people working remotely has been growing in most countries
already before the COVID-19 pandemic [103,49]. Of those working remotely,
57% do so for all of their working time. The vast majority of remote workers, 97%
would recommend others to do the same [17], suggesting that the advantages
of remote work outweigh the disadvantages. The majority of people who work
remotely do so from the location of their home [17].
Working remotely has been associated with a better work-life balance,
increased creativity, positive affect, higher productivity, reduced stress, and
fewer carbon emissions because remote workers commute less [103,17,2,13,130,
7,25]. However, working remotely also comes with its challenges. For example,
challenges faced by remote workers include collaboration and communication
(named by 20% of 3, 500 surveyed remote workers), loneliness (20%), not being
able to unplug after work (18%), distractions at home (12%), and staying
motivated (7%) [17]. While these findings are informative, it is unclear whether
they can be generalized. For instance, if mainly those with a long commute or
those who feel comfortable working from home might prefer to work remotely,
it would not be possible to generalize to the general working population.
A pandemic such as the one caused by COVID-19 in 2020 forces many people
to work remotely from home. Being in a frameless and previously unknown work
situation without preparation intensifies common difficulties in remote work.
Adapting to the new environment itself and dealing with additional challenges
adds on to the difficulties already previously identified and experienced by
remote workers, and could intensify an individual’s stress and anxiety and
negatively affect their working ability. The advantages of remote work might,
therefore, be reduced or even be reversed. Substantial research is needed to
understand further what enables people to work effectively from home while
being quarantined [78]. The current situation shows how important research
in this field is already. Forecasts indicate that remote work will grow on an
even larger scale than it did over the past years [103,49], therefore research
results on predictors of productivity while working remotely will increase
in importance. Some guidelines have been developed to improve people’s
productivity, such as the guidelines proposed by the Chartered Institute of
Personnel and Development, an association of human resource management
experts [27]. Examples include designating a specific work area, wearing working
clothes, asking for support when needed, and taking breaks. However, while

Well-being and Productivity among Software Professionals during a Pandemic

7

potentially intuitive, empirical support for those particular recommendations
is still missing.
Adding to the complexity, the measurement of productivity, especially in
software engineering, is a debated issue, with some authors suggesting not
to consider it at all [76]. Nevertheless, individual developer’s productivity
has a long investigation tradition [118]. Prior work on developer productivity
primarily focused on developing software tools to improve professionals’ productivity [71] or identifying the most relevant predictors, such as task-specific
measurements and years of experience [37]. Similarly, understanding relevant
skillsets of developers that are relevant for productivity has also been a typical
line of research [85]. Eventually, as La Toza et al. pointed out, measuring
productivity in software engineering is not just about using tools; instead, it is
about how they are used and what is measured [82].

3 Research Design
There are dozens of definitions and operationalizations of well-being [86]. In the
present research, we adopt a common broad and global definition of subjective
well-being, following Diener [36] who defined well-being as “the fact that the
person subjectively believes his or her life is desirable, pleasant, and good”
(p. 1). In other words, well-being can be understood as whether a person is
overall satisfied with their lives and believes the conditions of their lives are
excellent [35]. Psychological variables such as anxiety, loneliness, or stress can
be understood as parts of general well-being or as determinants thereof [73].
We consider those variables as determinants and assess the degree with which
variables play a role in software engineers’ overall well-being.
The variables we plan to measure in the present two-wave longitudinal study
are displayed in Figure 1. To facilitate its interpretation, we categorized the
variables into four broad sets of predictors, partly overlapping. To summarize,
while the initial selection of predictors is theory-driven, based on previous
research, or recent guidelines, the selection of predictors included in the second
wave is data-driven. In other words, we used a two-step approach to select
our variables: First, the initial selection of 51 predictors as based on existing
theory, which we then reduced based on how strongly they are associated with
well-being and productivity for an initial multiple regression analysis and the
subsequent longitudinal analysis. This approach helped us to focus on the most
relevant predictors while keeping their amount manageable.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, many governments and organizations
have called for volunteers to support self-isolation (see, for example, [101,28]).
While also relevant to the community at large, research suggests that acts of
kindness positively affect people’s well-being [16]. Additionally, volunteering
has the benefit of leaving one’s home for a legitimate reason and reducing cabin
fever. We, therefore, decided to include volunteering as a potential predictor
for well-being.

8

Daniel Russo?? et al.

Fig. 1 Overview of the independent and dependent variables

Coping strategies such as making plans or reappraising the situation are,
in general, effective for one’s well-being [134,24]. For example, altruistic acceptance — accepting restrictions because it is serving a greater good — while
being quarantined was negatively associated with depression rates three years
later [88]. Conversely, believing that the quarantine measures are redundant
because COVID-19 is nothing but ordinary flu or was intentionally released by
the Chinese government (i.e., beliefs in conspiracy theories) will likely lead to
dissatisfaction because of greater feelings of non-autonomy. Indeed, beliefs in
conspiracy theories are associated with lower well-being [47].
We further propose that three needs are relevant to people’s well-being and
productivity [117]. Specifically, we propose that the need for autonomy and
competence are deprived of many people who are quarantined, which negatively
affects well-being and motivation [19]. Further, we propose that the need for
competence was deprived, mainly for the people who cannot maintain their
productivity-level. This might especially be the case for those living with their
families. In contrast, the need for relatedness might be over satisfied for those
living with their family.
Another important factor associated with one’s well-being is the quality of
one’s social relationships [12]. As people have fewer opportunities to engage
with others they know less well, such as colleagues in the office or their sports

Well-being and Productivity among Software Professionals during a Pandemic

9

teammates, the quality of existing relationships becomes more important, as
having more good friends facilitates social interactions either in person (e.g.,
with their partner in the same household) or online (e.g., video chats with
friends).
Moreover, we expect that extraversion is linked to well-being and productivity. For example, extraverted people prefer more sensory input than introverted
people [89], which is why they might struggle more with being quarantined.
Extraversion correlated negatively with support for social distancing measures [22], which is a proxy of stimulation (e.g., being closer to other people,
will more likely result in sensory stimulation). Finally, research on productivity
predictors while working from home can be theoretically grounded in models
of job satisfaction and productivity, such as Herzberg’s two-factor theory [62].
This theory states that causes of job satisfaction can be clustered in motivators
and hygiene factors. Motivators are intrinsic and include advancement, recognition, work itself, growth, and responsibilities. Hygiene factors are extrinsic
and include the relationship with peers and supervisor, supervision, policy
and administration, salary, working conditions, status, personal link, and job
security. Both factors are positively associated with productivity [8]. As there
are little differences between remote and on-site workers in terms of motivators
and hygiene factors [55], the two-factor theory provides a good theoretical
predictor of productivity of people working remotely.
3.1 Participants
Our two-wave study covers an extensive set of 51 predictors, as identified
above. Based on the literature mentioned earlier, we expected the strength
of the association between the predictors and the outcomes’ well-being and
productivity to vary between medium to large. Therefore, we assumed for our
power analysis a medium-to-large effect size of f 2 = .20 and a power of .80.
Power analysis with G*Power 3.1.9.4 [43] revealed that we would need a sample
size of 190 participants.
To collect our responses, we used Prolific,1 a data collection platform,
commonly used in Computer Science (see e.g., [63]). We opted for this solution
because of the high reliability, replicability, and data quality of dedicated
platforms, especially as compared with e.g. mailing lists [106, 104].
Specifically, the use of crowdsourcing platforms allows us to (i) avoid
overloading members of mailing lists or groups on social media (e.g., LinkedIn,
Discord) with unsolicited participation requests; (ii) recruit participants of the
target population (e.g., only software engineers) using automatic screening
option, or by running ad hoc screening studies; (iii) recruit only participants
who are interested in the research; (iv) have a high degree of control with
regards to data quality since participants can get reputed without paying them
and lowering their acceptance rate, which will influence future recruitment;
(v) compensate participants for their time so that they will take care of the
1

www.prolific.co

Daniel Russo?? et al.

10

responses due to a contractual obligation; and (vi) minimize self-selection bias,
since potential candidates are randomly assigned to each study (if they meet
the inclusion criteria), lowering the probability that opinionated individuals
take part to the survey. In sum, it is a convenient, fair, and efficient way to
recruit survey informants [11]. For these reasons, crowdsourcing platforms are
commonly used in studies published in top-tier outlets [4, 79, 10].
To administer the surveys, we used Qualtrics2 and shared it on the Prolific
platform. In order to ensure data quality and consistency, and to account for
potential dropout of participants between the two waves, we invited almost 500
participants who were identified as software engineers in a previous study [116]
to participate in a screening study in April 2020. The 483 candidates already
passed a multi-stage screening process, as described by Russo & Stol, to ensure
the highest possible data quality through cluster sampling [6].
To run a coherent and reliable investigation, we only recruited software
engineers who were living similar experiences both from a professional and
personal perspective (i.e., working remotely during a lockdown). Thus, we
performed a screening study completed by 305 software professionals who agreed
to participate in a multi-wave study. From the 305 candidates, we excluded
those living in countries with unclear, mixed policies or early reopening (e.g.,
Denmark, Germany, Sweden) and professionals working from home during the
lockdown less than 20h a week (i.e., excluding unemployed, or developers which
had to work in their offices). In both waves, all participants stated that they
were working from home during the lockdown (a negative answer of one of
these two conditions would have resulted in discarding the delivered responses
from our data set).
As a result of this screening, in the first wave of data collection, which took
place in the week of April 20 - 26 2020, 192 participants completed the first
survey. Participation in the second wave (May 4 - 10) was high (96%), with 184
completed surveys. Participants have been uniquely identified through their
Prolific ID, which was essential to run the longitudinal analysis while allowing
participants to remain anonymous.
Additionally, to enhance our responses’ reliability, in each survey we included
three test items (e.g., “Please select response option ‘slightly disagree”’). As
none of our participants failed at least two of the three test items, all participants
reported working remotely and answered the survey in an appropriate time
frame, and we did not exclude anyone.
The 192 participants’ mean age was 36.65 years (SD = 10.77, range=
19–63; 154 men, 38 women). Participants were compensated in line with the
current US minimum wage (average completion time 1202 seconds, SD =
795.41). Out of our sample of 192 participants, 63 were based in the UK, 52
were based in the USA, 19 from Portugal, 10 from Poland, 7 from Italy, 6 from
Canada, and the remaining 35 participants from other countries in Europe.
A minority of 30 participants reported living alone, with most participants
(162) reported living together with others – including babies, children, and
2

www.qualtrics.com

Well-being and Productivity among Software Professionals during a Pandemic

11

adults. Our participants are employed primarily at private companies (156),
followed by 30 participants employed at a public institution. Six participants
indicated to work either for a different type of company or were unsure how to
categorize their employer. When asked in our screening study what percentage
of their time participants were working remotely (i.e., not physically in their
office) over the past 12 months, 54.7% reported 25% or less of their time, 15.6%
between 25% – 50%, 2.1% between 50% – 75%, and 27.1% of the participants
to work remotely for at least 75% of their time.

3.2 Longitudinal design
We employed a longitudinal design, with two waves set two-weeks apart from
each other towards the end of the lockdown, which allowed us to test for
internal replication. Also, running this study towards the end of the lockdowns
in the vast majority of countries allowed participants to provide a more reliable
interpretation of lockdown conditions. We chose a period of two weeks because
we wanted to balance change in our variables over time with the end of a
stricter lockdown that was discussed across many countries when we run wave
2. Many of our variables are thought to be stable over time. That is, a person’s
scores on X at time 1 is strongly predictive of a person’s scores on X at time 2
(indeed, the test-retest reliabilities we found support this assumption, see Table
1). The closer the temporal distance between wave 1 and 2, the higher the
stability of a variable. In other words, if we had measured the same variables
again after only one or two days, there would not have been much variance that
could have been explained by any other variable, because X measured at time
1 already explains almost all variance of X measured at time 2. In contrast, we
aimed to collect data for wave 2 while people were still quarantined. If at time
1 of the data collection people would still be in lockdown and at time 2 the
lockdown would have been eased, this would have included a major confounding
factor. Thus, to balance those two conflicting design requirements, we opted
for a two weeks break in between the two waves.
We describe the measures of the two dependent (or outcome) variables in
Subsection 3.3. Predictors (or independent variables) are explained in Subsections 3.4, 3.5, 3.6, and 3.7. Wherever possible, we relied on validated scales. If
this was not possible (e.g., COVID-19 specific conspiracy beliefs), we created
a scale. In those cases, we followed scale development guidelines, including
avoiding negatives and especially double-negatives, two-statements within one
item, and less common expressions [14]. The questionnaires are reported in the
Supplemental Materials, while the summary of the measurement instruments
with their readabilities are listed in Table 9. Test score reliability has been
measured using Cronbach’s alpha and reported for each instrument. If the
instrument was used in wave 1 and wave 2, we report both Cronbach’s alpha
values (i.e., αtime1 , αtime2 ); if we used it only in the first wave, we reported
only the result for wave 1 (α1 )) Additionally, we also explore whether there
are any mean changes in the variables we measured at both times (e.g., has

12

Daniel Russo?? et al.

people’s well-being changed?), and mean differences between gender and people
based on different countries.

3.3 Measurement of the dependent variables
Well-being was measured with an adapted version of the 5-item Satisfaction
with Life Scale [35]. We adapted the items to measure satisfaction with life in
the past week, which is in line with recommendations that the scale can be
adapted to different time frames [105]. Example items include “The conditions
of my life in the past week were excellent” and “I was satisfied with my life in
the past week”. Responses were given on a 7-point Likert scale ranging from 1
(Strongly disagree) to 7 (Strongly agree, αtime1 = .90, αtime2 = .90).
Productivity was measured relative to the expected productivity. We
contrasted productivity in the past week with the participant’s expected
productivity (i.e., productivity level without the lockdown). As we recruited
participants working in different positions, including freelancers, we can neither
use objective measures of productivity nor supervisor assessments and rely on
self-reports. We expect limited effects of socially desirable responses as the
survey was anonymous. We operationalized productivity as a function of time
spent working and efficiency per hour, compared to a normal week. Specifically,
we asked participants: “How many hours have you been working approximately
in the past week?” (Item P1) and “How many hours were you expecting to
work over the past week assuming there would be no global pandemic and
lockdown?” (Item P2). Finally, to measure perceived efficiency, we asked: “If
you rate your productivity (i.e., outcome) per hour, has it been more or less
over the past week compared to a normal week?” (Item P3). Responses to
the last item were given on a bipolar slider measure ranging from ‘100% less
productive’ to ‘0%: as productive as normal’ to ‘≥ 100% more productive’
(coded as -100, 0, and 100). To compute an overall score of productivity for
each participant, we used the following formula: productivity = (P1/P2) ×
((P3 + 100)/100). Values between 0 and .99 would reflect that people were
less productive than normal, and values above 1 would indicate that they were
more productive than usual. For example, if one person worked only 50% of
their normal time in the past week but would be twice as efficient, the total
productivity was considered the same compared to a normal week.
We preferred this approach over the use of other self-report instruments,
such as the WHO’s Health at Work Performance Questionnaire [72], because
we were interested in the change of productivity while being quarantined
as compared to ‘normal’ conditions. The WHO’s questionnaire, for example,
assesses productivity also in comparison to other workers. We deemed this
unfit for our purpose as it is unclear to what extent software engineers who
work remotely are aware of other workers’ productivity. Also, our measure
consists of only three items and showed good test-retest reliability (Table 1).
Test-retest reliability is the agreement or stability of a measure across two
or more time-points. A coefficient of 0 would indicate that responses at time

Well-being and Productivity among Software Professionals during a Pandemic

13

1 would not be linearly associated with those at time 2, which is typically
undesired. Higher coefficients are an additional indicator of the reliability of
the measures, although they can be influenced by a range of factors such as
the internal consistency of the measure itself and external factors. For example,
the test-retest reliability for productivity is r = .50 lower than for most other
variables such as needs or well-being, but this is because the latter constructs
are operationalized as stable over time. In contrast, productivity can vary
more extensively due to external factors such as the number of projects or the
reliability of one’s internet connection.3
3.4 Psychological factors
Self-discipline was measured with 3-items of the Brief Self-Control Scale [126].
Example items include “I am good at resisting temptation” and “I wish I had
more self-discipline” (recoded). Responses were registered on a 5-point scale
ranging from 1 (Not at all) to 5 (Very; α = .64).
Coping strategies were measured using the 28-item Brief COPE scale,
which measures 14 coping dimensions [23]. Example items include “I’ve been
trying to come up with a strategy about what to do” (Planning) and “I’ve
been making fun of the situation” (Humor). Responses were on a 5-point
scale ranging from 0 (I have not been doing this at all) to 4 (I have been
doing this a lot). The internal consistencies were satisfactory to very good for
two-item scales: Self-distraction (α = .65), active coping (α = .61), Denial
(α = .66), Substance use (α = .96), Use of emotional support (α = .77),
Use of instrumental support (α = .75), Behavioral disengagement (α1 = .76,
α2 = .71), Venting (α = .65), Positive reframing (α = .72), Planning
(α = .76), Humor (α = .83), Acceptance (α = .61), Religion (α = .83),
and Self-blame (α1 = .75, α2 = .71).
3 We measured productivity differently from well-being and the other psychological variables. Productivity was measured as a change score whereas well-being, for example, as how
people felt over the past week. Measuring productivity in the same way as well-being – e.g.,
“how productive have you been in the past week” – would have been confounded with likely
different reference groups (e.g., are those working part-time comparing their productivity
with someone working full-time or the odd colleague who has been working 100h in the
past week?). To address this methodological limitation, we also measured productivity in a
more comparable way to the other constructs by asking “How many tasks that you were
supposed to complete last week did you effectively manage to complete?” Responses were
given on a slider measure ranging from 0 to 100%. This item correlated with r = .34, p < .001
with our main productivity measure (the change-score measure, an additional reliability
evaluation which aims to remove the measurement error from the two observed measures
[102]), further supporting the reliability of our measure. More importantly, however, the
correlations of the task-completed item with the other variables were very similar to the
change-score measure. For example, change-score productivity correlated at r = .18, p = .01
with well-being (Table 1), whereas the task-completed item correlated also positively with
well-being, r = .15, p = .04. Other correlations with variables we discuss in more detail
below of the change-score and the task-completed measured of productivity were r = −.33
and −.25 with boredom, r = .37 and .38 with need for competence, r = .30 and .24 with
quality and quantity of communication, and with r = −.34 and −.39 with distractions (all
ps < .001). Together, this suggests that both ways of measuring productivity are reliable.

14

Daniel Russo?? et al.

Loneliness was measured using the 6-item version of the De Jong Gierveld
Loneliness Scale [51]. The items are equally distributed among two factors,
emotional; α1 = .68, α2 = .69) (e.g., “I often feel rejected”) and social;
α1 = .84, α2 = .87 (e.g., “There are plenty of people I can rely on when I
have problems”). Participants indicated how lonely they felt during the past
week. Responses were given on a 5-point scale ranging from 1 (Not at all) to 5
(Every day).
Compliance with official recommendations was measured using three items
of a compliance scale [138]. The items are ‘Washing hands thoroughly with
soap’, ‘Staying at home (except for groceries and 1x exercise per day)’ and
‘Keeping a 2m (6 feet) distance to others when outside.’ Responses were given
on a 7-point scale ranging from 1 (never complying to this guideline) to 7
(always complying to this guideline, α = .71).
Anxiety was measured using an adapted version of the 7-item Generalized
Anxiety Disorder scale [123]. Participants indicate how often they have experienced anxiety over the past week to different situations. Example questions
are “Feeling nervous, anxious, or on edge” and “Not being able to stop or
control worrying”. Responses were given on a 5-point scale ranging from 1 (Not
at all) to 5 (Every day, α1 = .93, α2 = .93). Additionally, we measured
specific COVID-19 and future pandemic related concerns with two items “How
concerned do you feel about COVID-19?” and “How concerned to you about
future pandemics?” Responses on this were given by a 5-point scale ranging
from 1 (Not at all concerned) to 5 (Extremely concerned; α = .82) [99].
Stress was measured using a four-item version of the Perceived Stress
Scale [30]. Participants indicate how often they experienced stressful situations
in the past week. Example items include “In the last week, how often have
you felt that you were unable to control the important things in your life?”
and “In the last week, how often have you felt confident about your ability to
handle your personal problems?”. Responses were registered on a 4-point scale
ranging from 1 (Never) to 4 (Very often; α1 = .80, α2 = .77).
Boredom was measured using the 8-item version [125] of the Boredom
Proneness Scale [42]. Example items include “It is easy for me to concentrate on
my activities” and “Many things I have to do are repetitive and monotonous”.
Responses were on a 4-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (Strongly disagree) to
7 (Strongly agree; α1 = .87, α2 = .87).
Daily Routines was measured with five items: “I am planning a daily
schedule and follow it”, “I follow certain tasks regularly (such as meditating,
going for walks, working in timeslots, etc.)”, “I am getting up and going to bed
roughly at the same time every day during the past week”, “I am exercising
roughly at the same time (e.g., going for a walk every day at noon)”, and “I
am eating roughly at the same time every day”. Responses were taken on a
7-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (Does not apply at all) to 7 (Fully applies;
α1 = .75, α2 = .78).
Conspiracy beliefs was measured with a 5-item scale as designed by
ourselves for this study. The first two items were adapted from the Flexible
Inventory of Conspiracy Suspicions [139], whereas the latter three are based on

Well-being and Productivity among Software Professionals during a Pandemic

15

more specific conspiracy beliefs: “The real truth about Coronavirus is being kept
from the public.”, “The facts about Coronavirus simply do not match what we
have been told by ‘experts’ and the mainstream media”, “Coronavirus is a bioweapon designed by the Chinese government because they are benefiting from
the pandemic most”, “Coronavirus is a bio-weapon designed by environmental
activists because the environment is benefiting from the virus most”, and
“Coronavirus is just like a normal flu”. Responses were collected on a 7-point
Likert scale ranging from 1 (Totally disagree) to 7 (Totally agree, α = .83).
Extraversion was measured using the 4-item extraversion subscale of the
Brief HEXACO Inventory [131]. Responses were given on a 5-point Likert
scale ranging from 1 (Strongly disagree) to 5 (Strongly agree; α1 = .71,
α2 = .69). Low scores on extraversion are an indication of introversion. Since
we found at wave 1 that extraversion and well-being were positively correlated
contrary to our hypothesis (see below), and, in our view, contrary to widespread
expectations, we decided to measure in wave 2 what participants’ views are
regarding the association between extraversion and well-being. We measured
expectations with one item: “Who do you think struggles more with the current
pandemic, introverts or extraverts?” Response options were ‘Introverts’, ‘Both
around the same’, and ‘extraverts’.
Autonomy, competence, and relatedness needs of the self-determination
theory [117] was measured using the 18-item balanced measure of psychological
needs scale [119]. Example items include “I was free to do things my own way’
(need for autonomy; α1 = .72, α2 = .76), “I did well even at the hard things”
(competence; α1 = .77, α2 = .77), and “I felt unappreciated by one or more
important people” (recoded; relatedness; α1 = .79, α2 = .78). Participants
were asked to report how true each statement was for them in the past week.
Responses were given on a 5-point scale ranging from 1 (no agreement) to 5
(much agreement).
Extrinsic and intrinsic work motivation was measured with the 6item extrinsic regulation 3-item and intrinsic motivation subscales of the
Multidimensional Work Motivation Scale [48]. The extrinsic regulation subscale
measures social and material regulations. Specifically, participants were asked
to answer some questions about why they put effort into their current job.
Example items include “To get others’ approval (e.g., supervisor, colleagues,
family, clients ...)” (social extrinsic regulation; α = .85), “Because others will
reward me financially only if I put enough effort in my job (e.g., employer,
supervisor...)” (material extrinsic regulation; α = .71) and “Because I have
fun doing my job” (intrinsic motivation; α = .94). Responses were given on a
7-point scale ranging from 1 (not at all) to 7 (completely).
Mental exercise was measured with two items: “I did a lot to keep
my brain active” and “I performed mental exercises (e.g., Sudokus, riddles,
crosswords)”. Participants indicated the extent to which the items were true
for them in the past week on a 7-point scale ranging from 1 (Not at all) to 7
(Very; α = .56).

16

Daniel Russo?? et al.

Technical skills was measured with one item: “How well do your technological skills equip you for working remotely from home?” Responses were
given on a 7-point scale ranging from 1 (Far too little) to 7 (Perfectly).

3.5 Physiological factors
Diet was measured with two items [41]: “How often do you eat fruit, excluding
drinking juice?” and “How often do you eat vegetables or salad, excluding
potatoes?”. Responses were given on a 7-point scale ranging from 1 (Never) to
7 (Three times or more a day; α = .60)
Quality of sleep was measured with one item: “How has the quality of
your sleep overall been in the past week?” Responses were given on a 7-point
scale ranging from 1 (very low) to 7 (perfectly).
Physical activity was measured with an adapted version of the 3-item
Leisure Time Exercise Questionnaire [54]. Participants were be asked to report
how many hours in the past they have been mildly, moderately, and strenuously
exercising. The overall score was computed as followed [54]: 3× mild + 5×
moderate + 9× strenuously. Missing responses for one or more of the exercise
types were be treated as 0.

3.6 Social factors
Quality and quantity of social contacts outside of work were measured
with three items. We adapted two items from the social relationship quality
scale [12] and added one item to measure the quantity: “I feel that the people
with whom I have been in contact over the past week support me”, “I feel that
the people with whom I have been in contact over the past week believe in
me”, and “I am happy with the amount of social contact I had in the past
week.” Responses were given on a 6-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (Strongly
disagree) to 6 (Strongly agree; α1 = .73, α2 = .77).
Volunteering was measured with three items that measure people’s behavior over the past week: “I have been volunteering in my community (e.g.,
supported elderly or other people in high-risk groups)”, “I have been supporting
my family (e.g., homeschooling my children)” and “I have been supporting
friends, and family members (e.g., listened to the worries of my friends)”.
Responses were given on a 7-point scale ranging from 1 (Not at all) to 7 (Very
often; α = .45).
Quality and quantity of communication with colleagues and line
managers was measured with three items: “I feel that my colleagues and
line manager have been supporting me over the past week”, “I feel that my
colleagues and line manager believed in me over the past week”, and “Overall,
I am happy with the interactions with my colleagues and line managers over
the past week.” Responses were given on a 6-point Likert scale ranging from 1
(Strongly disagree) to 6 (Strongly agree; α1 = .88, α2 = .92).

Well-being and Productivity among Software Professionals during a Pandemic

17

3.7 Situational factors and demographics
Distractions at home was measured with two items: “I am often distracted
from my work (e.g., noisy neighbors, children who need my attention)” and “I
am able to focus on my work for longer time periods” (recoded). Responses
were given on a 5-point scale ranging from 1 (Not at all) to 5 (Very often;
α1 = .64, α2 = .63).
Whether participants lived alone or with other people was assessed by
asking them how many Babies, Toddlers, Children, Teenagers, and Adults
participants were currently living with. We asked for the specific five groups
separately because it allowed us to explore whether, for example, toddlers had
a different impact on well-being and productivity than teenagers. However, the
number of babies, toddlers, children, teenagers, and adults the participants
were living with was uncorrelated to their well-being and productivity, rs ≤ .19.
Therefore, we summed them up into one variable, which we called people (i.e.,
the number of people the participant was living with).
Financial security was measured with two items that reflect the current
but also the expected financial situation [53]: “Using a scale from 0 to 10
where 0 means ‘the worst possible financial situation’ and 10 means ‘the best
possible financial situation’, how would you rate your financial situation these
days?” and “Looking ahead six months into the future, what do you expect
your financial situation will be like at that time?”. Responses were given on a
11-point scale ranging from 0 (the worst possible financial situation) to 10 (the
best possible financial situation; α = .81).
Office set-up was measured with three items: “In my home office, I do
have the technical equipment to do the work I need to do (e.g., appropriate
PC, printer, stable and fast internet connection)”, “On the computer or laptop
I use while working from home I do have the software and access rights I need”,
and ‘My office chair and desk are comfortable and designed to prevent back
pain or other related issues”. Responses were given on a 7-point Likert scale
ranging from 1 (Strongly disagree) to 7 (Strongly agree; α = .65).
Demographic information were assessed with the following items: “What
is your gender?”, “How old are you?” “What type of organization do you
work in” (public, private, unsure, other), “What is your yearly gross income?”
(US$<20, 000, US$20 − 40, 000, US$40.001 − 60, 000, US$60, 001 − 80, 000,
US$80, 001 − 100, 000, >US$100, 000; converted to the participant’s local currency), “In which country are you based?”, “What percentage of your time
have you been working remotely (i.e., not physically in your office) over the
past 12 months?”, “In which region/state and country are you living?”, “Is
there still a lockdown where you are living?”.

4 Analysis
The data analysis consists of two parts. First, we used the data from time
1 to identify the variables that explain variance in participant well-being

18

Daniel Russo?? et al.

and productivity beyond the other variables. Second, we used the Pearson
product-moment correlation coefficient (r) to identify which variables were
correlated with at least r = .30 with well-being and productivity, to test
whether they predict our two outcomes over time. r is an effect size which
expresses the strength of the linear relation between two variables. We used .30
as a threshold as we are interested in identifying variables correlated with at
least a medium-sized magnitude [29] with one or both of our outcome variables.
Also, a correlation of ≥ .30 indicates that the effect is among the top 25%
in individual difference research [52]. Finally, selecting an effect size of this
magnitude provides an effective type-I error control, as in total, we performed
103 correlation tests at time 1 alone (51 independent variables correlated with
the two dependent variables, which were also correlated among each other).
Given a sample size of 192, this effectively changes our alpha level to .0001,
which is conservative. This means that it is improbable that we erroneously
find an effect in our sample even though there is no effect in the population
(i.e., commit the type-I or false-positive error)
We neither transformed the data for any analysis nor added any control
variables4 Unless otherwise indicated above, scales were formed by averaging the
items. The collected dataset is publicly available to support other researchers
in understanding the impact of (enforced) work-from-home policies.

4.1 Analysis of time 1 data
To test which of the variables listed in Figure 1 explains unique variance in
well-being and productivity, we performed two multiple regression analyses with
all variables that were correlated with the two outcome variables with ≥ .30. In
the first analysis, well-being is the dependent variable; in the second analysis,
we use productivity as the dependent variable. This allows us to identify
the variables that explain unique variance in the two dependent variables.
However, one potential issue of including many partly correlated predictors is
multicollinearity, which can lead to skewed results. If the Variance Inflation
Factor (VIF) is larger than 10, multicollinearity is an issue [26]. Therefore, we
tested whether the variance inflation factor would exceed 10 before performing
any multiple regression analysis.

4.2 Analysis of longitudinal data
To analyze the data from both time-points, we performed a series of structural
equation modeling analyses with one predictor variable and one outcome
variable using the R-package lavaan [113]. Unlike many other types of analyses,
4 Adding control variables without a good justification can increase the type-I error rate
[120]. However, we run additional analyses on the following demographic information: age,
gender, and country. They were not associated with any of the two outcome variables and
only correlated with one of the predictor variables (see Tables 1, 12, 13, and 14).

Well-being and Productivity among Software Professionals during a Pandemic

19

structural equation modeling adjusts for reliability [136]. Specifically, models
were designed with one predictor (e.g., stress) and one outcome (e.g., well-being)
both as measured at time 1 and at time 2. We allowed autocorrelations (e.g.,
between well-being at time 1 and at time 2) and cross-paths (e.g., between stress
at time 1 and well-being at time 2). Autocorrelations are essential because,
without them, we might erroneously conclude that, for example, stress at time
1 predicts well-being at time 2, although it is the part of stress which overlaps
with well-being, which predicts well-being at time 2 [112]. To put it simply,
we can only conclude that X1 predicts Y2 if we control for Y1. No items or
errors were allowed to correlate. This is usually done to improve the model
fit but has also been criticized as atheoretical: To determine which items and
errors should be allowed to correlate to improve model fit can only be done
after the initial model is computed. Therefore, it is a data-driven approach
which emphasizes too much on the model fit [50,61,91]. The regression (or
path) coefficients and associated p-values were not affected by the estimator
type. We compared in our analyses the standard maximum likelihood (ML),
the robust maximum likelihood (MLR), and the multi-level (MLM) estimator.
As fit indices, we report the CFI, RMSEA, and SRMR. To assess whether the
fit indices are sufficient (i.e., from which point onward the data fits well to
the model), we relied on the following cut-off values [58,75]: CFI ≥ .90, and
RMSEA and SRMR ≤ .08.

5 Results
5.1 Correlations
The pattern of correlations was overall consistent with the literature. At time
1, 16 variables were correlated with well-being at r ≥ .30 (Tables 1 and 14)5
predicting well-being (the independent variable or outcome) is −.60. This
indicates that a person who has a well-being level of 6 has a stress level that
is of −.60 units lower than a person who has a well-being level of 5.. Stress,
r = −.58, quality of social contacts, r = .49, and need for autonomy, r = .48
were strongest associated with well-being (all p < .0001). The pattern of results
from the 14 coping strategies was also in line with the literature [24]: self-blame,
r = − .36, p < .001, behavioral disengagement, r = − .31, p < .001,
and venting r = − .28, p < .001 were negatively correlated with well-being.
Interestingly, generalized anxiety was more strongly associated with well-being
than COVID-19 related anxiety (r = − .46 vs. −.25), which might suggest
that specific worries have a less negative impact on well-being6 . This also
5 The Pearson’s correlation coefficient (r) represents the strength of a linear association
between two variables and can range between −1 (perfect negative linear association), 0 (no
linear association), to 1 (perfect positive linear association). The regression coefficient B
indicates how much the outcome changes if the predictor increases by one unit. For example,
the B of stress (the dependent variable or predictor)
6 A multiple regression with generalized anxiety and COVID-19 related anxiety supports
this interpretation: Only generalized anxiety, B = − .58, SE = .10, p < .001, but not

20

Daniel Russo?? et al.

suggests that our findings are at least partly COVID-19 independent; namely,
if people were terrified by this virus, COVID-19 related anxiety would have
been a stronger predictor than generalized anxiety.
Contrary to our expectations, extraversion was positively correlated with
well-being, both at waves 1 and 2. The pattern of the associations was similar at
time 2. A reason for participants’ misinterpretation of the intensity to struggle
with working from home for introverts could be explained by introverts usually
having to avoid unwanted social interactions, and due to being quarantined,
they now have to put effort into having social interactions actively. The added
challenge to contribute more energy than usual to not being too lonely and
changing their usual behavioral pattern demands much more from introverts
than extraverts [32, 135].
At time 1, four variables were correlated with productivity at r ≥ .30 (Tables 1
and 14: Need for competence, r = − .37, distractions, r = − .34, boredom,
r = − .33, and communication with colleagues and line-managers r = .30.
Surprisingly, work motivations were uncorrelated with well-being at α = .001.
At time 2, only distraction was still correlated with productivity, r = −
.26, p < .001 (see also Table 15). The strength of association of most variables
with productivity dropped between time 1 and 2, which means that those
variables associated with productivity at wave 1 were no longer or less strongly
associated with productivity at wave 2. The strengths of correlations remained
the same when we computed Spearman’s rank correlation coefficients rather
than Pearson’s correlations (Spearman’s coefficient is a non-parametric version
of Pearson’s r and ranges also between −1 and 1, see Tables 14 and 15).

5.1.1 Additional analysis regarding extraversion
The counter-intuitive finding that well-being and extraversion are positively
correlated surprised us. Thus, we added additional questions at time 2 to better
understand this phenomenon. The purpose of this further investigation is only
to provide a more nuanced interpretation of the results of our quantitative
analysis; it is not a stand-alone research about extraversion during the lockdown.
Interestingly, the finding that extraversion is positively correlated with
well-being during lockdown is contrary to most participants’ expectations.
When asked whether introverts or extraverts struggle more with the COVID-19
pandemic, only 2 participants correctly predicted introverts, where 136 stated
extraverts, with 46 participants believing that both groups struggle equally.
This highlights the value of our research because people’s intuition can be
blatantly wrong.
The explanation became more articulated through an analysis of the participants’ statements about the informant’s (I) choice. We now report selected
COVID-19 related anxiety, B = − .11, SE = .09, p = .21. This suggests that whether
people are worried about COVID-19 specifically has little impact on their well-being. Their
general level of anxiety matters substantially.

Well-being and Productivity among Software Professionals during a Pandemic

21

quotes from participants, including their level of extraversion, in wave 17 .
Some informants reported their direct experience supporting the feeling that
extraverts struggle more than introverts.
“I’m introverted, and I don’t feel the pandemic has affected me at all.
Rules aren’t hard to follow and haven’t feel bad. I feel for extraverts; they
would struggle a bit with the rules.” [I-101, extraversion score=2.75]
“I’m an extravert; my wife is an introvert. I’m really struggling. She’s
fine.” [I-92, extraversion score = 5.00]
Nonetheless, a minority of participants also provide alternative interpretations. According to those, both introverts and extraverts have difficulties in
reaching out to people, although in different ways. The motivation for such
answers is that both personality types struggle with different challenges.
“Both types need company, just that each needs company on their own
terms. Introverts prefer deeper contact with fewer people and extraverts
less deep contact with a greater number of people.” [I-80, extraversion
score = 3.75]
“Extraverts miss human contact; introverts find it even harder to mark
their presence online (e.g., in meetings).” [I-160, extraversion score =
3.50]
Interestingly, there is one informant which provide an insightful interpretation, aligned with our results.
“Introverts usually have more difficulty communicating with others, and
confinement worsens the situation because they will not try to talk to
others through video conferences.” [I-136, extraversion score = 2.75]
The lack of a structured working setting, where introvert are routinely
involved, causes further isolation. Being ‘forced’ to work remotely significantly
increased difficulty in engaging with social contacts. This means that introverts
have to put much more effort into interacting with others instead of their
typical behavior of reduced interaction in office-based environments. Whereas
extraverts have it easier to find some way to maintain their social contacts,
introverts might struggle more. Thus, the lockdown had a more negative impact
on the well-being of introverts than of extraverts, as shown in Table 1.

5.2 Unique influence — Multiple regression analyses
To test which of the predictors had a unique influence on well-being and
productivity, we included all variables that were correlated with either outcome
with at least .30 at time 1. This is a conservative test because many predictors
7 Scores close to 1 are indicative of an introverted personality trait, while 5 of an extraverted
one.

Daniel Russo?? et al.

22

Table 1 Correlations r at time 1 and 2, unstandardized regression coefficients B, and
test-retest reliabilities rit
rWB1

BWB1

rPR1

BPR1

rWB2

BWB2

rPR2

BPR2

rit

Well-being (WB)

1.00

0.18**

1.00

0.20**

0.72***

Productivity (PR)

0.18*

1.00

0.20**

1.00

0.50***

Boredom

−0.42***

−0.05

−0.33***

0.14

Behavioral-disengagement

−0.31***

0.12

−0.15*

−0.33***

−0.05

−0.41***

−0.03

−0.15*
−0.08

0.54***

Self-blame

0.61***

−0.36***

0.01

−0.21**

−0.40***

−0.08

−0.07

Relatedness

0.47***

0.03

0.22**

0.48***

−0.04

0.05

Competence

0.41***

−0.20

0.38***

−0.33*

0.22**

Autonomy

0.48***

0.20

0.54***

0.35*

Communication

0.41***
−0.58***

Stress
Daily-routines

0.37***

0.37***

0.09

0.17*

0.07

0.30***

−0.60***

0.04

−0.27***

0.12*

0.39***
−0.54***

0.25***

0.03
−0.34*

−0.02

0.71***
0.07

0.09
0.19**

0.69***

0.65***
0.76***

0.02

−0.08

0.67***
0.73***

0.42***

0.05

−0.33***

0.00

−0.21**

−0.53***

−0.07

−0.09

−0.23**

−0.45***

−0.14

−0.16*

0.72***

−0.13

−0.47***

−0.01

−0.08

0.69***

Distractions

−0.23**

0.06

−0.34***

Generalized-anxiety

−0.46***

0.01

Emotional-loneliness

−0.41***

−0.13

Social-loneliness

−0.37***

0.08

−0.06

0.11
−0.26***

0.73***
−0.08

0.63***
0.76***

Quality of social contacts

0.49***

0.22*

0.24***

0.53***

0.30**

0.12

0.66***

Extraversion

0.32***

0.22

0.24***

0.28***

0.00

0.08

0.74***

Quality-of-Sleep

0.42***

0.05

0.27***

0.48***

0.14*

0.14

0.76***

Conspiracy

−0.04

Self-distraction

−0.12

Active-coping

0.01
0.06

0.22**

0.05

Denial

−0.12

0.00

Substance-use

−0.08

−0.11

0.10

−0.04

Instrumental-support

−0.09

−0.11

Venting

−0.28***

−0.15*

0.19**

−0.06

Emotional-support

Positive-reframing

−0.09

−0.09

Humor

0.07

−0.13

Acceptance

0.20**

Planning

0.01

−0.12

Religion

−0.18*

Office-setup

0.14

0.10

Self-Control

0.26***

0.17*

Volunteering

0.07

0.01

Diet

0.17*

0.16*

Exercising-overall

0.10

0.00

Financial-situation

0.27***

0.19**

−0.25***

Covid19-anxiety
Mental-exercise

0.13

0.25***

0.18*

Extrinsic-social

−0.10

−0.04

Extrinsic-material

−0.22**

−0.13

Intrinsic-motivation

0.26***

0.22**

People

0.03

0.09

Compliance

0.05

0.13

Technological-Skills

0.24***

0.19**

Time-remote

−0.06

−0.04

Age

−0.06

0.07

Note. r: correlation, B: unstandardized regression estimate, rit : test-retest correlation,
WB1: Well-being at time 1 (e.g., correlations for well-being with other variables), PR2:
Productivity at time 2 (e.g., unstandardized regression estimate of the four variables
predicting productivity in a linear multiple regression). 95%-confidence intervals, 99.9%
confidence intervals, and Spearman’s rho correlation are displayed in Tables 14 and 15.
Signif. codes:

∗∗∗

< .001,

∗∗

< 0.01,

∗

< 0.05, . < 0.1

Well-being and Productivity among Software Professionals during a Pandemic

23

are correlated among each other and thus taking variance from each other.
Also, it allowed us to repeat the same analysis at time 2 because all predictors
which correlated with either well-being or productivity at time 1 with r ≥ .30
were included at time 2. In a first step, we tested whether multicollinearity was
an issue. This was not the case, with VIF < 4.1 for all four regression models
and thus clearly below the often-used threshold of 10 [26].
Sixteen variables correlated with well-being r ≥ .30 (Table 1). Together,
they explained a substantial amount of variance in well-being at time 1,
R2 = .44, adj.R2 = .39, F (16, 167) = 8.21, p < .0001, and at time
2, R2 = .47, adj.R2 = .42, F (16, 162) = 8.90, p < .0001. At time 1, stress
(negatively), social contacts, and daily routines uniquely predicted well-being
at α = .05 (see Table 1, column 3, and Table 2). At time 2, need for competence and autonomy, stress, quality of social contacts, and quality of sleep
uniquely predicted well-being at α = .05 (see Table 1, column 7, and Table 4).
Together, stress and quality of social contacts predicted at both time points
significantly well-being. Four variables correlated with productivity r ≥ .30
(Table 1). Together, they explained 16% of variance in productivity at time
1, R2 = .18, adj.R2 = .16, F (4, 179) = 9.60, p < .0001, and 8% at time
2, R2 = .08, adj.R2 = .06, F (4, 173) = 4.02, p = .004. At both time
points, none of the four variables explained variance in productivity beyond the
other three variables, suggesting that they all are associated with productivity
but we lack statistical power to disentangle the effects (Tables 3 and 5). We
also visualized the regression coefficients alongside their respective confidence
intervals (see Figures 5, 6, 7, and 8 in the Appendix)
There is an ostensible discrepancy between some correlations and the
estimates of the regression analyses which requires further explanations. An
especially large discrepancy appeared for the variable need for competence,
which correlated positively with well-being at time 1 and 2, r = .41 with p < .001,
and r = .38 with p < .001, but was negatively associated with well-being when
controlling for other variables in both regression analyses, B = −.20, p = .24,
and B = −.33, p = .04. This suggests that including a range of other variables,
which serve as control variables, impact the results. Indeed, exploratory analyses
revealed that need for competence was no longer associated with well-being
when we included need for autonomy. That is, when we performed a multiple
regression with the needs for autonomy and competence as the only predictors,
need for competence became non-significant. Need for competence also includes
an autonomy competent, which might explain this. It is easier to fulfill one’s
need for competence while being at least somewhat autonomous [117]. Further,
including generalized anxiety and boredom reversed the sign of the association:
Need for competence became negatively associated with well-being. Including
those two variables remove the variance that is associated with enthusiasm
(boredom reversed) and courage (generalized anxiety reversed), which might
explain the shift to negative association with well-being. Together, controlling
for need for autonomy, generalized anxiety, and boredom, takes away positive
aspects of need for competence, leaving a potentially cold side that might

Daniel Russo?? et al.

24

be closely related to materialism, which is negatively associated with wellbeing [38].

Table 2 Predictors of well-being wave 1
Estimate

Std. Error

t value

Pr(> |t|)

−0.047

0.100

−0.474

0.636

Behavioral disengagement

0.120

0.112

1.073

0.285

Self blame

0.013

0.113

0.116

0.908

Relatedness

0.025

0.173

0.147

0.884

Competence

Boredom

−0.201

0.169

−1.186

0.237

Autonomy

0.203

0.171

1.188

0.237

Communication

0.073

0.106

0.690

0.491

−0.605

0.178

−3.393

Daily routines

0.125

0.061

2.038

0.043*

Distractions

0.061

0.105

0.580

0.563

Generalized anxiety

0.010

0.146

0.071

0.944

−0.126

0.133

−0.948

0.344

Social loneliness

0.082

0.108

0.761

0.447

Social contacts

0.224

0.106

2.125

0.035*

Extraversion

0.223

0.127

1.757

0.081.

Quality of Sleep

0.053

0.058

0.918

0.360

Std. Error

t value

Pr(> |t|)

−0.053

0.031

−1.675

0.096.

Competence

0.088

0.053

1.650

0.101

Communication

0.043

0.034

1.256

0.211

−0.065

0.036

−1.795

0.074.

Stress

Emotional loneliness

Signif. codes:

∗∗∗

< .001,

∗∗

< 0.01,

∗

0.001***

< 0.05, . < 0.1

Table 3 Predictors of productivity wave 1
Estimate
Boredom

Distractions
Signif. codes:

∗∗∗

< .001,

∗∗

< 0.01,

∗

< 0.05, . < 0.1

5.3 Longitudinal analysis
After identifying the independent variables that are more strongly related to
well-being and productivity, we are now performing our longitudinal analysis,
which will allow us to assess whether any of our sixteen predictors or independent variables predict one of our dependent variables at time 2 or is predicted

Well-being and Productivity among Software Professionals during a Pandemic

25

Table 4 Predictors of well-being wave 2
Estimate
Boredom

Std. Error

t value

Pr((> |t|)

0.144

0.094

1.529

0.128

Behavioral disengagement

−0.035

0.140

−0.249

0.804

Self blame

−0.075

0.145

−0.518

0.605

Relatedness

−0.036

0.156

−0.228

0.820

Competence

−0.329

0.159

−2.068

0.040*

Autonomy

0.347

0.146

2.380

0.018*

Communication

0.033

0.087

0.382

0.703

−0.337

0.157

−2.153

Daily routines

0.046

0.064

0.728

0.467

Distractions

0.005

0.108

0.046

0.963

Generalized anxiety

−0.073

0.134

−0.549

0.583

Emotional loneliness

−0.136

0.126

−1.076

0.283

Social loneliness

−0.011

0.126

−0.085

0.932

0.304

0.114

2.676

−0.001

0.114

−0.011

0.144

0.056

2.576

0.011*

Std. Error

t value

Pr((> |t|)

Stress

Social contacts
Extraversion
Quality of Sleep
Signif. codes:

∗∗∗

< .001,

∗∗

< 0.01,

∗

0.033*

0.008**
0.991

< 0.05, . < 0.1

Table 5 Predictors of productivity wave 2
Estimate
−0.015

0.032

−0.479

0.632

Competence

0.065

0.060

1.089

0.278

Communication

0.021

0.032

0.662

0.509

−0.077

0.041

−1.874

0.063.

Boredom

Distractions
Signif. codes:

∗∗∗

< .001,

∗∗

< 0.01,

∗

< 0.05, . < 0.1

by it. Test-retest reliabilities were satisfactory for all variables, supporting our
data’s quality (last column of Table 1).
5.3.1 Structural Equation Modeling
In total, we performed 20 structural equation modeling (SEM) analyses to
test whether well-being and productivity are predicted by or predict any of
the 16 independent variables for well-being, including one model in which we
tested whether well-being predicts productivity or vice versa, and four models
for productivity. Since the probability of a false positive is very high, due to
the high number of models analyzed, we used a conservative error rate of .005.
We are using a different threshold for the longitudinal analysis than for the

26

Daniel Russo?? et al.

correlation analyses since we did a different number of tests for the latter.
Occasionally, the model fit indices indicated that the data did not fit well to
the models (cf. Table 10, last three columns). This was especially the case for
the models, including the need for autonomy, competence, and relatedness,
which we do not discuss further.8
One example of our SEM analyses is presented in Figure 2, where we looked
at the causal relations between stress and well-being in waves 1 and 2. The
boxes represent the items and the circles the variables (e.g., stress). The arrows
between the items and the variables represent the loadings, that is, how strongly
each of the items contributes to the overall variable score (e.g., item 3 of the
stress scale contributes least and item 4 most to the overall score at both time
points). The circular arrows represent errors. The bidirectional arrows between
the variables represent the covariances, which are comparable to correlations.
The one-handed arrows show causal impacts over time. The arrows between
the same variables (e.g., well-being 1, and well-being 2) show how strongly
they impact each other and are comparable to the test-retest correlations. The
most critical arrows are those between well-being 1 and stress 2 and between
stress 1 and well-being 2. They show whether one variable causally predicts
the other.
To provide a better understanding of our SEM analyses, we will guide
the reader through the example shown in Figure 2. The values (of this and
all SEM analyses) are displayed in Table 10. Columns 2-4 of Table 10 show
that stress and well-being were significantly associated at time 1, B = −0.75,
SE = .13, p < .001. This association was mirrored at time 2, B = −0.15,
SE = .05, p = .001 (columns 5-7). Columns 8-10 show that stress at time
1 did not significantly predict well-being at time 2, B = −0.00, SE = .16,
p = .99. Columns 8-10 of the second part of Table 10 also show that well-being
at time 1 did not predict stress at time 2, B = 0.03, SE = .05, p = .55.
Columns 2-4 of the second part show the autocorrelation of well-being, that
is how strongly well-being at time 1 predicts well-being at time 2, B = 0.71,
SE = .09, p < .001. Autocorrelations can be broadly understood as the
unstandardized version of the test-retest correlations (reliability) reported in
Table 1. Columns 5-7 of the second part show the autocorrelation of stress,
which are also significant B = .99, SE = .16, p < .001. The last three
columns indicate that the data fit reasonably well to the proposed model,
CF I = .93, RM SEA = .07, SRM R = .07. It is worth noting that at time 1
(t1), the coefficient between well-being — stress is −.75, at time 2 (t2) only
−.15. This is likely an SEM artifact because the variances of both well-being
8 As noted above, we did not use the modification indices to increase the model fit (e.g.,
allow items to correlate). Nevertheless, we explored the impact of improving the model fit
based on the modification indices for the model, including well-being and social loneliness. We
chose this model because it contained the smallest p − value (B = .124, p = .006, which was
just above our .005 threshold). Allowing three well-being items to covary between t1 and t2
increased unsurprisingly the model fit substantially (e.g., CFI = .969 → .992, RMSEA = .057
→ .029). However, the coefficient B decreased slightly to .120, and the p − value increased
to .009. Together, this suggests that improving the model fit does not impact the regression
coefficients, and therefore not impact our conclusion not to reject the null-hypothesis.

Well-being and Productivity among Software Professionals during a Pandemic

27

and stress are larger at t1 than at t2: 2.17 and 0.55 at t1 vs. 0.65 and 0.08 at
t2 (see the double-headed arrows in Figure 2). Because the standard errors
also differ for the two coefficients, .13 at t1 vs .05 at t2 (cf. Table 10), both
coefficients are significant, p ≤ .001. The correlation analysis supports this
view, since well-being and stress are correlated with r = −.58 at t1, and with
r = −.54 at t2 (cf. Table 1), suggesting clearly that the relations between the
two variables are very similar across both time points.
We conclude our SEM analyses by acknowledging that no model revealed
any significant associations at α = .005. Thus, no variable at time 1 (e.g.,
stress) is able to explain a significant amount of variance in another variable
(e.g., well-being) at time 2. We only found a negative tendency regarding
Distraction → P roductivity with B = −.154, p = .006.

Fig. 2 SEM analysis of stress and well-being in wave 1 and 2

5.3.2 Mixed Effects Modeling
Additionally, we explored whether there are any mean changes between time 1
and 2, separately for all 18 variables using mixed effects modeling. For example,
has the well-being increased over time? This would suggest that people adapted
further within a relatively short period of two weeks to the threat from COVID19. Table 6 shows that the arithmetic mean (M ) of well-being has indeed
slightly increased between time 1 and 2, M = 4.14 vs. M = 4.34. A closer look

28

Daniel Russo?? et al.

revealed that 91 participants reported higher well-being at time 2 compared
to time 1, 23 reported the same level of well-being, and 70 a lower level of
well-being. Further, on average, people’s score of behavioral disengagement
and quality of social contacts increased, whereas emotional loneliness and the
quality of communication with line managers and coworkers decreased.
5.4 Exploratory between Gender and Country Analyses
Further, we tested for gender mean differences by comparing women and men
across 65 variables (cf. Tab. 12). Because of the large number of comparisons,
we set our significance threshold to .001. With this threshold, only the coping
strategy self-distraction resulted in significant differences with women reporting
higher levels of it (e.g., ”I’ve been turning to work or other activities to take
my mind off things”). Other comparisons were in the expected direction but
not statistically significant. For example, women tended to score higher on
anxiety on average, which is in line with the literature [44].
Finally, we explored whether there would be any mean differences between
participants based in the United Kingdom (n = 63) and the United States of
America (n = 52). We only selected those two countries because there were
only 19 or fewer participants in each of the other countries. We again used
a threshold of .001. With this threshold, only the work motivation materialextrinsic resulted in significant differences with people based in the USA
reporting higher levels of it on average. This means that Americans are more
driven by materialistic motivation (e.g., promotions, money) compared to UK
professionals.

5.5 Conceptual replication analysis
Our finding that office-setup is not significantly related to well-being and
productivity seems to contradict a recent cross-sectional study by Ralph et
al. [109] that investigated how the fear of bioevents, disaster preparedness, and
home office ergonomics predict well-being and productivity among software
developers. In that study, ergonomics was positively related to both wellbeing and productivity. To measure ergonomics, the authors created six items
concerning distractions, noise, lighting, temperature, chair comfort, and overall
ergonomics. The first two items are closely related to our measure of distraction,
which was negatively associated with well-being in wave 1 of our sample, r = .23, and productivity, r= −.34. In contrast, the following four items are more
closely associated with office-setup in our survey, which was positive but not
significantly associated with well-being, r = .14, and productivity, r = .10.
To better understand such inconsistency with our result, we run a replication
analysis using Ralph et al.’s data. To test whether ergonomics’ effect is mainly
driven by distraction and noise, we combined the first two items into variable
ergonomics-distractions (recoded, higher scores indicate less distraction) and

Well-being and Productivity among Software Professionals during a Pandemic

29

Table 6 Within-subject comparisons to analyze mean changes over time
Time 1

Time 2

M

SD

M

SD

t

Cohen’s d

Higher

Smaller

Equal

Well-being

4.140

1.367

4.340

1.289

−2.329

p
0.021

−0.129

91

70

23

Productivity

0.990

0.419

1.032

0.436

−1.575

0.117

−0.116

87

77

19

Boredom

2.936

1.136

2.927

1.158

−0.330

0.742

−0.019

91

79

14

Behavioral-disengagement

1.805

0.936

2.062

1.030

−3.621

<0.001

−0.256

82

40

62

Self-blame

1.812

0.990

1.880

1.013

−0.962

0.337

−0.062

60

52

72

Need for Relatedness

3.497

0.830

3.559

0.803

−1.130

0.260

−0.063

86

73

25

Need for Competence

3.572

0.735

3.582

0.731

−0.040

0.968

−0.002

82

82

20
29

Need for Autonomy

3.483

0.688

3.511

0.732

−0.572

0.568

−0.029

88

67

Communication

4.534

0.996

4.292

1.185

3.244

0.001

0.199

57

81

38

Stress

2.501

0.807

2.520

0.797

−0.593

0.554

−0.032

81

64

39

Daily routines

4.681

1.561

4.717

1.533

−0.108

0.914

−0.006

71

72

41

Distractions

2.466

0.934

2.443

0.895

0.188

0.851

0.012

58

64

62

Generalized anxiety

2.245

1

2.174

1.010

1.246

0.214

0.064

69

90

25

Emotional loneliness

2.111

0.903

2.007

0.871

2.077

0.039

0.114

54

79

51

Social loneliness

2.641

1.004

2.563

1.017

0.807

0.421

0.047

65

79

40

Quality of social contacts

4.109

1.093

4.312

1.077

−2.612

0.010

−0.159

91

54

39

Extraversion

3.448

0.786

3.457

0.778

−0.195

0.846

−0.009

73

59

52

Quality of Sleep

4.130

1.754

4.174

1.686

0.310

0.757

0.016

54

51

79

Note. t: t-value of a paired sample t-test; Higher: Absolute number of people who scored higher
on a variable at time 2 compared to time 1; Smaller: Number of people who scored lower at time
2; Equal: People whose score has not changed over time.

the other four items into ergonomics-others. Indeed, ergonomics distractions
was more strongly correlated with well-being, r = .25, and productivity, r = .29,
than was ergonomics-other, rs = .19 and .19, respectively. This suggests that
our findings replicate those of Ralph et al. and emphasize the importance of
distinguishing between distraction and office set-up.

6 Discussion
6.1 Implications and recommendations
The COVID-19 pandemic and the subsequent lockdown have been a major
professional change for many software engineers. In the present research, we
investigated how a range of relevant variables are associated with and predict
software engineers’ well-being and productivity. The first significant outcome
of this research is that many variables are associated with well-being and
productivity. The strength of the association ranges from small to large [29].
Also, well-being and productivity were positively associated. This implies
that neglecting people’s well-being might also negatively impact productivity. Together, our findings support Ralph et al.’s [109] recommendation that
pressuring employees to keep the average productivity level without taking
care of their well-being will likely lower productivity. However, we would also
like to present an alternative interpretation that having productive employees
will strengthen their sense of achievement and improve their well-being. This
alternative interpretation follows from that we did not find any causal relations.

30

Daniel Russo?? et al.

This is partly driven by most variables’ high stability over time, which leaves
little variance to be explained by any other variable. However, it can also imply
that many variables influence each other, such as well-being and productivity.
Further, some of our predictors can likely be hierarchically organized. For
example, introversion can lead to loneliness, resulting in more anxiety, which
can cause lower levels of well-being. It will be interesting for future research
to develop hierarchical models of emotions and other variables we used as
predictors. This would further improve our understanding of the predictors of
well-being and productivity. Since we started this investigation only after the
pandemic, we could not contrast our results with non-remote pre-pandemic
settings. Instead, we are providing evidence-based findings to help software
engineers and organizations to work remotely.
In the following, we focus on practical recommendations based on the most
reliable predictors of well-being and productivity that we identified through
our longitudinal design: the need for autonomy, stress, daily routines, social
contacts, need for competence, extraversion, and quality of sleep as predictors
of well-being, in Table 7. Distractions and boredom related to productivity are
discussed in Table 8.
Persistent high-stress levels are related to adverse outcomes in the workplace [9] and people’s well-being. To reduce stress, it could be helpful for some
people to practice mindfulness-based stress reduction training and practices as
Bazarko et al. [9] recommend. They can be performed at home, and participating in such a program can lead to lower stress levels and a lower risk of work
burnout. Grossman et al. recommended other stress reduction methods [57].
Moreover, Naik et al. [98], who found that mindfulness meditation practices,
slow breathing exercises, mindful awareness during yoga postures, and mindfulness during stressful situations and social interactions can reduce stress levels.
Together, the results of these studies suggest that mindfulness practices, even
when performed at home, can reduce stress, which could also improve software
engineers’ well-being while being quarantined. While mindfulness practices
seem to be effective methods to impact peoples’ well-being positively; they
might not work for everyone. For some individuals, getting physically active by
exercising or going for a run, taking time to disconnect and reading a book,
letting loose while dancing, or even getting creative and paint might have
the same or a similar effect. For example, our exploratory analysis revealed
that the coping strategy self-distraction (e.g., reading or watching a movie to
unwind from work) was more frequently used by women, which is in line with
the literature [122]. This indicates that self-distraction as a coping strategy is
more effective for women than men. So, more research is needed to find out
adequate coping strategies also for men.
As part of the overall quality of life, the quality of social contacts has
a significant impact on people’s well-being. Therefore, employers should be
interested in enabling their employees to spend time with people they value
and encourage them to build strong, meaningful relationships within their
work environment. Creating a virtual office (e.g., using an online working
environment such as ‘Wurkr’) allows people to work with the impression of

Well-being and Productivity among Software Professionals during a Pandemic

31

sharing a physical workspace online to communicate more comfortably and
work together from anywhere. For example, to simplify conversations, the Slack
plugin ‘Donut’ [121] randomly connects employees for coffee breaks to get to
know each other better by spending some time chatting virtually. Besides,
our finding that quality of social contact, but not living alone is associated
with well-being, is in line with the literature. Quality of contact with one’s
partner and family independently predicted depression negatively, whereas the
frequency of these contact did not [128]. Together, this suggests that findings
from the literature can overall be generalized to people being quarantined.
Organizing the day in a structured way at home appears to be beneficial
for software professionals’ well-being. People tend to overwork when working
remotely [17]. This could be further magnified during quarantine where usual
daily routines are disrupted, and thus working might become the only meaningful activity to do. Therefore, it is essential to develop new daily routines not
to be entirely absorbed by work and prevent burnout [15]. Hence, scheduling
meetings and designating time specifically for hobbies or spending time with
family and friends is helpful while working from home and helps to satisfy
employees’ needs for social contacts.
To fulfill people’s need for autonomy, it is necessary to allow employees to act
on their values and interests [133]. While coordinating collaborative workflows
and managing projects remotely comes with its challenges [17]. It is crucial for
remote workers to have flexibility in how they structure, organize, and perform
their tasks [133]. It is, therefore, helpful to delegate work packages instead of
individual tasks. This makes it easier for individuals to work self-directedly
and thus to fulfill their need for autonomy.
To fulfill employees’ need for competence, it is necessary to provide them
with the opportunity to grow personally and advance their skill set [84]. Two of
the mainly required and highly demanded skills in remote work environments
are communication skills and the ability to use virtual tools, such as presentation
tools or collaborative project planning tools [17]. Raising awareness of the
unique requirements of virtual communication is crucial for a smooth working
process. Thus, working remotely requires specific communication skills, such
as mindful listening [96] or asynchronous communication, which allows people
to work more efficiently [67]. Collaborative tools such as GitHub, Trello, Jira,
Google Docs, Klaxoon, Mural, or Slack can simplify work processes and enable
interactive workflows. Besides the training and development of employees’
specific virtual skill set, it is also recommended to invest in employees’ personal
development within the company. Taking action and offering employees the
opportunity to grow will evolve their role and strengthen their loyalty towards
the employer and, therefore, employee retention [77].
Introverted software professionals seem to be more negatively affected
by the lockdown than their more extraverted peers. This finding is counterintuitive since extraverted people prefer more direct contacts than introverted
people [89]. Our interpretation of these results is that it is even more challenging
for introverts to reach out to colleagues and friends when contact opportunities
are more limited. This is because being introverted does not mean that there

32

Daniel Russo?? et al.

is no need for social contacts at all. While in the office, they had opportunities
to be involved with colleagues both in a structured or unstructured fashion, at
home, it is much more difficult as they have to be more proactive to reach out
to colleagues in a more formalized setting, such as online collaboration platform
(e.g., MS Teams). Accordingly, software organizations should regularly organize
both formal and informal online meeting occasions, where introverted software
engineers feel a lower entry barrier to participate.
Quality of sleep is also a relevant predictor for well-being. Although it might
sound obvious, there is a robust association between sleep, well-being, and
mindfulness [64]. In particular, Howell et al. found that mindfulness predicts
sleep quality, and quality of sleep and mindfulness predict well-being.
Distractions at home are a challenging obstacle to overcome while working
remotely. Designating a specific work area in the home and communicating
non-disturbing times with other household members are easy and quick first
steps to minimize distractions at the workplace at home. Another obstacle that
distracts remote workers more frequently is cyberslacking, which is understood
as spending time on the internet for non-work-related reasons during working
hours [34]. Cyberslacking and its contribution to distractions at home for
remote workers were not included in this study but would be worth exploring
in future research.
When people experience, boredom it makes them feel “[...] unchallenged
while they think that the situation and their actions are meaningless” [129, p.
181]. Especially people who thrive in a social setting at work are in danger
of being bored quickly while working in isolation from their homes. The
enumerated recommendations above, such as assigning interesting, personally
tailored, and challenging work packages, using collaborative tools to hold
yourself accountable, and having social interactions while working remotely,
also help reduce boredom at work. Ideally, employees are intrinsically motivated
and feel fulfilled by what they do. If this is not the case over a more extended
period, and the experienced boredom is not a negative side effect of being
overwhelmed while being quarantined, it might be reasonable to discuss a new
field of action and area of responsibility with the employee.
To conclude, working from home certainly comes with its challenges, of
which we have addressed several in this study. However, at least software
engineers appear to adapt to the lockdown over time, as people’s well-being
increased, and their social contacts’ perceived quality improved. Similar results
have also been confirmed by a survey study of 2, 595 New Zealanders’ remote
workers [132]. Walton et al. found that productivity was similar or higher than
pre-lockdown, and 89% of professionals would like to continue to work from
home, at least one day per month. This study also reveals that the most critical
challenges were switching off, collaborating with colleagues, and setting up a
home office. On the other hand, working from home led to a drastic saving of
time otherwise allocated to daily commuting, a higher degree of flexibility, and
increased savings. A range of further recommendations of effective self-guided
interventions to tackle anxiety, depression, and stress, are summarized by
Fischer et al. [46].

Well-being and Productivity among Software Professionals during a Pandemic

33

Table 7 Summary of key findings & recommendations for Well-Being
Findings

Recommended Actions

Significant positive predictor in
wave 2 (BW 2 = .347).

Organizations should trust their
software engineers about how to
reach agreed goals, leaving them a
high degree of freedom about how
to schedule the day which can result
in higher performance [1].

Stress

Significant negative predictor in
both waves (BW 1 = −.605, BW 2 =
−.337).

Practice mindfulness-based stress
reduction training such as meditation [9], yoga, sport and the Wim
Hof breathing method [57]. Women
are better to self-distracting themselves and coping with stress compared to men.

Daily routines

Significant positive predictor in
wave 1 (BW 1 = .125).

Establish new routines, dedicating
time to work, individual hobbies,
and social contacts.

Social contacts

Significant positive predictor in
both waves (BW 1 = .224, BW 2 =
.304).

Support at a company level occasions for informal meetings (e.g.,
online coffee breaks) during working hours. [103]

Competence

Significant positive associations between competence and well-being
in both waves.

Companies train software engineers
to work in a remote setting. Similarly, software engineers should
choose which kind of competencies
and training they think to help
their careers.

Extraversion

Positive predictor
(BW 1 = .223)

Organizations and peers should
proactively reach out to introverted
software engineers by involving
them in work or non-work-related
activities (based on our findings).

Quality of sleep

Significant positive predictor in
wave 2 (BW 2 = .144)

Autonomy

in

wave

1

Schedule enough sleeping time per
night and practice mindfulness for
sleep transition [107].

6.2 Threats to validity
Limitations are discussed using Gren’s five-facets framework [56].
Reliability. This study used a two-wave longitudinal study, where 96% of
the initial participants, identified through a multi-stage selection process, also
participated in the second wave. Further, the test-retest reliabilities were high,

Daniel Russo?? et al.

34

Table 8 Summary of significant key findings & recommendations for Productivity

Boredom

Distractions

Findings

Recommended Actions

Negative predictor in wave 1
(BW 1 = −.053).

Organizations should redesign employees goals by letting them choose
tasks as much as possible and diversify activities [129].

Negative predictor in both waves
(BW 1 = −.065, BW 2 = −.077)

Organizations should support software engineers to set up a dedicate
home office. Routines and agreements with family members about
working times also help to be more
focused [20, 94].

and the internal consistencies (Cronbach’s α) ranged from satisfactory to very
good.
Construct validity. We identified 51 variables drawn from the literature, and
a suitable measurement instrument measured each. Where possible, we used
validated instruments. Otherwise, we developed and reported the instruments
used. To measure the construct validity, we also reported the Cronbach’s alpha
of all variables across both waves. Regarding the two dependent variables, we
used a validated scale for well-being and developed a new one for productivity.
We made this choice since it related well to the lockdown environment our
participants were facing. Thus, we chose the Satisfaction with Life Scale for
well-being, and productivity was operationalized as a proportion of time spent
working and efficiency per hour, compared to the estimated regular productivity
without the pandemic. However, we note that despite many variables in our
study, we still might have missed one or more relevant variables, which would
have been relevant to our analysis.
Conclusion validity. To draw our conclusions, we used multiple statistical
analyses such as correlations, between-subject t-tests, multiple linear regressions,
and structural equation modeling. To ensure reliable conclusions, we used
conservative thresholds to reduce the risk of false-positive results. The thresholds
depended on the number of comparisons for each test. Additionally, we did not
include covariates, nor did we stop the data collection based on the results,
or performed any other practice associated with increasing the likelihood
of finding a positive result and increasing the probability of false-positive
results [120]. However, we could not make any causal conclusion since all 20
SEM analyses provided non-significant results, using a threshold of significance
that reduces the risk of false-positive findings. Also, we have not measured
participants’ perception of the severity of the lockdown measures. Thus, we
cannot test whether they moderate the associations we found. However, it is
unlikely they would have impacted our findings, as depression and worries were
found to be only weakly associated with perceptions of how the government
and public reacted to the lockdown measures in spring 2020 [45]. Further,

Well-being and Productivity among Software Professionals during a Pandemic

35

we do not have sufficient participants from different countries in our sample
to test whether objective government responses (i.e., the strictness of the
lockdown [59]) moderates the associations we found. With our data, we can
only provide indirect evidence that this is unlikely to be the case: When
comparing participants from the UK and USA – the lockdown was stricter in
the UK by the time we collected the data [59] – we found little between-country
mean differences. Nevertheless, we acknowledge that this is an open research
question that we cannot fully answer with our data. Finally, we made both raw
data and R analysis code openly available on Zenodo.
Internal validity. This study did not lead to any causal conclusion, which
was the present study’s primary aim. We can not say that the analyzed
variables influence well-being or productivity or vice versa. We are also aware
that our study relies on self-reports, limiting the study’s validity. Further, we
adjusted some measures (e.g., productivity). Participants were not supposed
to report their perceived productivity but to make a comparison, which has
been computed independently afterward in our analysis. We also underwent
an extensive screening process, selecting over 190 software engineers of the
initial 483 initial suitable subjects, identified by a previous study of Russo &
Stol, through a multi-stage cluster sampling strategy [6]. Typical problems
related to longitudinal studies (e.g., attrition of the subjects over a longterm period) do not apply. The dropout rate between the two waves has
been low (4%). We run this study towards the end of the lockdown of the
Covid-19 pandemic in the spring 2020. In this way, participants were able
to report rooted judgments of their conditions. Waves were set at two weeks
distance, which ensured that lockdowns had not been lifted yet during the data
collection of wave 2, but was also not close enough so that variability in each
of the variables would already be sufficiently high between the two-time points.
Since this was a pandemic, the surveyed countries’ lockdown conditions have
been similar (due to standardized WHO’s recommendations). However, we
did not consider region-specific conditions (e.g., severity of virus spread) and
recommendations. Also, lockdown timing differed among countries. To control
these potential differences, we asked participants at each of the two waves if
lockdown measures were still in place and if they were still working from home.
Since all our participants reported positively to both these conditions, we did
not exclude anyone from the study.
External validity. An a priori power analysis has determined our sample size.
As with any longitudinal study, we designed this study to maximize internal
validity [70]. Accordingly, we focused on finding significant effects, rather than
working with a representative sample of the software engineering population
(with N ≈ 500, such as Russo and Stol [116] did, where the research goal
focused on the generalizability of results). Additionally, we made an effort to
be able to estimate to what extent our findings depend on the current situation
and whether they would also be useful to inform researchers and practitioners
interested in remote work in general, beyond exceptional circumstances and
potentially beyond software engineers (i.e., knowledge workers in general). First,
we also measured participants’ previous remote work experience in the past 12

36

Daniel Russo?? et al.

months. This was uncorrelated with well-being and productivity, indicating
that the extent to which people were working remotely before the lockdown was
irrelevant. Second, we measured both generalized anxiety and Covid-19 specific
anxiety. As we now clarified in the subsection “Correlations”, generalized
anxiety is more relevant for people’s well-being than Covid-19 specific anxiety.
This suggests that our findings are at least partly COVID-19 independent: If
people were terrified by COVID-19, it would have been a stronger predictor
than generalized anxiety. Third, many of our findings relate to the findings
reported in the psychological literature. This study demonstrates that those
findings also hold in a sample of professional software engineers while expanding
the literature substantially through our design, including a large set of relevant
variables.

7 Conclusion
The COVID-19 pandemic disrupted software engineers in several ways. Abruptly,
lockdown and quarantine measures changed the way of working and relating to
other people. Software engineers, in line with most knowledge workers, started
to work from home with unprecedented challenges. Most notably, our research
shows that high-stress levels, the absence of daily routines, and social contacts
are some of the variables most related to well-being. Similarly, low productivity
is related to boredom and distractions at home.
We base our results on a longitudinal study, which involved 192 software
professionals. After identifying 51 relevant variables related to well-being or
productivity during a quarantine from literature, we run a correlation study
based on the results gathered in our first wave. For the second wave, we
selected only the variables correlated with at least a medium effect size with
well-being or productivity. Afterward, we run 20 structural equation modeling
analyses, testing for causal relations. We could not find any significant relation,
concluding that we do not know if the dependent variables are caused by
independent ones or vice versa. Accordingly, we ran several multiple regression
analyses to identify unique predictors of well-being and productivity, where we
found several significant results.
This paper confirms that, on average, software engineers’ well-being increased during the pandemic. Also, there is a correlation between well-being
and productivity. Out of 51 factors, nine were reliably associated with wellbeing and productivity. Based on our findings, we proposed some actionable
recommendations that might be useful to deal with potential future pandemics.
Software organizations might start to experimentally ascertain whether
adopting these recommendations will increase professionals’ productivity and
well-being. Our research findings indicate that granting a higher degree of autonomy to employees might be beneficial, on average. However, while extended
autonomy might be perceived positively experienced by those with a high need
for autonomy, it might be perceived as stressful for those who prefer structure.
It is unlikely that any intervention will have the same effect on all people

Well-being and Productivity among Software Professionals during a Pandemic

37

(since there is a substantial variation for most variables); it is essential to have
individual differences in mind when exploring any interventions’ effects. Thus,
adopting incremental intervention, based on our findings, where organizations
can get feedback from their employees, is recommended.
Future work will explore several directions. Cross-sectional studies with
representative samples will test whether our findings are generalizable and
get a better understanding of underlying mechanisms between the variables.
We will also investigate the effectiveness of specific software tools and their
effect on software engineering professionals’ well-being and productivity with
particular regard to the relevant variables.

Supplementary Materials
The full survey, raw data, and R analysis scripts are openly available under a CC
BY 4.0 license on Zenodo, DOI: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3959131.

Acknowledgment
We thank the Editors-in-Chief for fast-tracking our manuscript and the anonymous reviewers for the supportive constructive feedback. The authors would
also like to thank Gabriel Lins de Holanda Coelho for initial feedback on this
project. This work was supported, in part, by the Carlsberg Foundation under
grant agreement number CF20-0322 (PanTra — Pandemic Transformation).

References
1. Anand, G., Chhajed, D., Delfin, L.: Job autonomy, trust in leadership, and continuous
improvement: An empirical study in health care. Operations Management Research
5(3-4), 70–80 (2012). DOI 10.1007/s12063-012-0068-8
2. Anderson, A.J., Kaplan, S.A., Vega, R.P.: The impact of telework on emotional experience: When, and for whom, does telework improve daily affective well-being?
European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology 24(6), 882–897 (2015).
DOI 10.1080/1359432X.2014.966086
3. Anderson, R.M., Heesterbeek, H., Klinkenberg, D., Hollingsworth, T.D.: How will
country-based mitigation measures influence the course of the covid-19 epidemic? The
Lancet 395(10228), 931–934 (2020)
4. Anumanchipalli, G.K., Chartier, J., Chang, E.F.: Speech synthesis from neural decoding
of spoken sentences. Nature 568(7753), 493–498 (2019)
5. Bai, Y., Lin, C.C., Lin, C.Y., Chen, J.Y., Chue, C.M., Chou, P.: Survey of stress
reactions among health care workers involved with the sars outbreak. Psychiatric
Services 55(9), 1055–1057 (2004). DOI 10.1176/appi.ps.55.9.1055
6. Baltes, S., Ralph, P.: Sampling in software engineering research: A critical review and
guidelines. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.07764 (2020)
7. Baruch, Y.: Teleworking: benefits and pitfalls as perceived by professionals and managers.
New Technology, Work and Employment 15(1), 34–49 (2000)
8. Bassett-Jones, N., Lloyd, G.C.: Does herzberg’s motivation theory have staying
power? Journal of management development 24(10), 929–943 (2005). DOI
10.1108/02621710510627064

38

Daniel Russo?? et al.

9. Bazarko, D., Cate, R.A., Azocar, F., Kreitzer, M.J.: The impact of an innovative
mindfulness-based stress reduction program on the health and well-being of nurses
employed in a corporate setting. Journal of workplace behavioral health 28(2), 107–133
(2013)
10. Berens, S.C., Richards, B.A., Horner, A.J.: Dissociating memory accessibility and
precision in forgetting. Nature Human Behaviour pp. 1–12 (2020)
11. Bethlehem, J.: Selection bias in web surveys. International Statistical Review 78(2),
161–188 (2010)
12. Birditt, K.S., Antonucci, T.C.: Relationship quality profiles and well-being among
married adults. Journal of Family Psychology 21(4), 595–604 (2007). DOI 10.1037/
0893-3200.21.4.595
13. Bloom, N., Liang, J., Roberts, J., Ying, Z.J.: Does working from home work? evidence
from a chinese experiment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 130(1), 165–218
(2015). DOI 10.1093/qje/qju032
14. Boateng, G.O., Neilands, T.B., Frongillo, E.A., Melgar-Quiñonez, H.R., Young, S.L.:
Best practices for developing and validating scales for health, social, and behavioral
research: a primer. Frontiers in Public Health 6, 149 (2018)
15. Brooks, S.K., Webster, R.K., Smith, L.E., Woodland, L., Wessely, S., Greenberg, N.,
Rubin, G.J.: The psychological impact of quarantine and how to reduce it: rapid review
of the evidence. The Lancet 395 (2020). DOI 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30460-8
16. Buchanan, K.E., Bardi, A.: Acts of kindness and acts of novelty affect life satisfaction. The Journal of Social Psychology 150(3), 235–237 (2010). DOI 10.1080/
00224540903365554
17. Buffer: The 2020 state of remote work (2020). URL https://lp.buffer.com/
state-of-remote-work-2020
18. Caleo, G., Duncombe, J., Jephcott, F., Lokuge, K., Mills, C., Looijen, E., Theoharaki, F.,
Kremer, R., Kleijer, K., Squire, J., et al.: The factors affecting household transmission
dynamics and community compliance with ebola control measures: a mixed-methods
study in a rural village in sierra leone. BMC Public Health 18(248) (2018). DOI
10.1186/s12889-018-5158-6
19. Calvo, R.A., Deterding, S., Ryan, R.M.: Health surveillance during Covid-19 pandemic
(2020). DOI 10.1136/bmj.m1373
20. Cardenas, R.A., Major, D.A., Bernas, K.H.: Exploring work and family distractions:
Antecedents and outcomes. International Journal of Stress Management 11(4), 346
(2004). DOI 10.1037/1072-5245.11.4.346
21. Carolan, S., Harris, P.R., Cavanagh, K.: Improving employee well-being and effectiveness:
systematic review and meta-analysis of web-based psychological interventions delivered
in the workplace. Journal of Medical Internet Research 19(7), e271 (2017)
22. Carvalho, L.d.F., Pianowski, G., Gonçalves, A.P.: Personality differences and COVID-19:
are extroversion and conscientiousness personality traits associated with engagement
with containment measures? Trends in Psychiatry and Psychotherapy (2020). DOI
10.1590/2237-6089-2020-0029
23. Carver, C.S.: You want to measure coping but your protocol’s too long: Consider the
brief COPE. International Journal of Behavioral Medicine 4(1), 92 (1997)
24. Carver, C.S., Scheier, M.F., Weintraub, J.K.: Assessing coping strategies: a theoretically
based approach. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 56(2), 267–283 (1989).
DOI 10.1037/0022-3514.56.2.267
25. Cascio, W.F.: Managing a virtual workplace. Academy of Management Perspectives
14(3), 81–90 (2000)
26. Chatterjee, S., Price, B.: Regression analysis by example. New York, NY: Wiley (1991)
27. CIPD: Getting the most from remote working. https://www.cipd.co.uk/knowledge/
fundamentals/relations/flexible-working/remote-working-top-tips#73289
(2020)
28. City of New York: Help now NYC. https://www1.nyc.gov/site/helpnownyc/index.
page (2020)
29. Cohen, J.: A power primer. Psychological bulletin 112(1), 155–159 (1992). DOI
10.1037/0033-2909.112.1.155
30. Cohen, S.: Perceived stress in a probability sample of the United States. (1988)

Well-being and Productivity among Software Professionals during a Pandemic

39

31. Danish Health Authority: Questions and answers on novel coronavirus.
https://www.sst.dk/da/Viden/Smitsomme-sygdomme/Smitsomme-sygdomme-A-AA/
Coronavirus/Spoergsmaal-og-svar/Questions-and-answers (2020)
32. Davidson, B., Gillies, R.A., Pelletier, A.L.: Introversion and medical student education:
Challenges for both students and educators. Teaching and learning in medicine 27(1),
99–104 (2015). DOI 10.1080/10401334.2014.979183
33. De Castella, K., Goldin, P., Jazaieri, H., Ziv, M., Heimberg, R.G., Gross, J.J.: Emotion
beliefs in social anxiety disorder: Associations with stress, anxiety, and well-being.
Australian Journal of Psychology 66(2), 139–148 (2014). DOI 10.1111/ajpy.1205
34. Dictionary, C.: Getting the most from remote working. https://dictionary.cambridge.
org/de/worterbuch/englisch/cyberslacking (2020)
35. Diener, E., Emmons, R.A., Larsen, R.J., Griffin, S.: The satisfaction with life scale.
Journal of personality assessment 49(1), 71–75 (1985). DOI 10.1207/s15327752jpa4901
13
36. Diener, E., Lucas, R.E., Scollon, C.N.: Beyond the hedonic treadmill: Revising the
adaptation theory of well-being. In: E. Diener (ed.) The Science of Well-Being: The
Collected Works of Ed Diener, Social Indicators Research Series. Springer. DOI
10.1007/978-90-481-2350-6 5. URL 10.1007/978-90-481-2350-6_5
37. Dieste, O., Aranda, A.M., Uyaguari, F., Turhan, B., Tosun, A., Fucci, D., Oivo, M.,
Juristo, N.: Empirical evaluation of the effects of experience on code quality and
programmer productivity: an exploratory study. Empirical Software Engineering 22(5),
2457–2542 (2017)
38. Dittmar, H., Bond, R., Hurst, M., Kasser, T.: The relationship between materialism
and personal well-being: A meta-analysis. Journal of personality and social psychology
107(5), 879–924 (2014). DOI 10.1037/a0037409
39. Donnelly, N., Proctor-Thomson, S.B.: Disrupted work: home-based teleworking (hbtw)
in the aftermath of a natural disaster. New Technology, Work and Employment 30(1),
47–61 (2015)
40. Duffy, C.: Big tech firms ramp up remote working orders to prevent coronavirus spread.
Tech. rep., CNN (2020)
41. European Social Survey: ESS round 7: European social survey round 7 data (2014).
data file edition 2.1. Norwegian Centre for Research Data, Norway (2014). DOI
10.21338/NSD-ESS7-2014
42. Farmer, R., Sundberg, N.D.: Boredom proneness–the development and correlates of
a new scale. Journal of Personality Assessment 50(1), 4–17 (1986). DOI 10.1207/
s15327752jpa5001 2
43. Faul, F., Erdfelder, E., Buchner, A., Lang, A.G.: Statistical power analyses using g*
power 3.1: Tests for correlation and regression analyses. Behavior research methods
41(4), 1149–1160 (2009). DOI 10.3758/BRM.41.4.1149
44. Feingold, A.: Gender differences in personality: a meta-analysis. Psychological bulletin
116(3), 429 (1994). DOI 10.1037/0033-2909.116.3.429
45. Fetzer, T., Witte, M., Hensel, L., Jachimowicz, J., Haushofer, J., Ivchenko, A., Caria,
S., Reutskaja, E., Roth, C., Fiorin, S., et al.: Global behaviors and perceptions in the
covid-19 pandemic (2020). DOI 10.31234/osf.io/3kfmh
46. Fischer, R., et al.: Rapid review and meta-meta-analysis of self-guided interventions to
address anxiety, depression, and stress during covid-19 social distancing. Frontiers in
Psychology 11, 2795 (2020)
47. Freeman, D., Bentall, R.P.: The concomitants of conspiracy concerns. Social psychiatry
and psychiatric epidemiology 52(5), 595–604 (2017). DOI 10.1007/s00127-017-1354-4
48. Gagné, M., Forest, J., Vansteenkiste, M., Crevier-Braud, L., Van den Broeck, A.,
Aspeli, A.K., Bellerose, J., Benabou, C., Chemolli, E., Güntert, S.T., et al.: The
multidimensional work motivation scale: Validation evidence in seven languages and
nine countries. European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology 24(2),
178–196 (2015). DOI https://doi.org/10.1080/1359432X.2013.877892
49. Gallup:
Is
working
remotely
effective?
Gallup
research
says
yes
(2020).
URL
https://www.gallup.com/workplace/283985/
working-remotely-effective-gallup-research-says-yes.aspx
50. Gana, K., Broc, G.: Structural equation modeling with lavaan. John Wiley & Sons,
Hoboken, NJ (2019)

40

Daniel Russo?? et al.

51. Gierveld, J.D.J., Tilburg, T.V.: A 6-item scale for overall, emotional, and social loneliness: Confirmatory tests on survey data. Research on Aging 28(5), 582–598 (2006).
DOI 10.1177/0164027506289723
52. Gignac, G.E., Szodorai, E.T.: Effect size guidelines for individual differences researchers.
Personality and individual differences 102, 74–78 (2016). DOI https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.paid.2016.06.069
53. Glei, D.A., Goldman, N., Weinstein, M.: A growing socioeconomic divide: Effects of
the great recession on perceived economic distress in the United States. PloS one 14(4)
(2019). DOI 10.1371/journal.pone.0214947
54. Godin, G., Shephard, R.: A simple method to assess exercise behavior in the community.
Canadian Journal of Applied Sport sciences 10(3), 141–146 (1985)
55. Green, J.W.: Exploring the needs of teleworkers using herzberg’s two factor theory.
Ph.D. thesis, Northcentral University (2009)
56. Gren, L.: Standards of validity and the validity of standards in behavioral software
engineering research: the perspective of psychological test theory. In: 12th ACM/IEEE
International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement, p. 55.
ACM (2018)
57. Grossman, P., Niemann, L., Schmidt, S., Walach, H.: Mindfulness-based stress reduction
and health benefits: A meta-analysis. Journal of Psychosomatic Research 57(1), 35–43
(2004). DOI 10.1016/S0022-3999(03)00573-7
58. Hair, J.F., Black, W.C., Babin, B.J., Anderson, R.E., Tatham, R.: Multivariate data
analysis (2006)
59. Hale, T., Petherick, A., Phillips, T., Webster, S.: Variation in government responses to
covid-19. Blavatnik school of government working paper 31 (2020)
60. Hawryluck, L., Gold, W.L., Robinson, S., Pogorski, S., Galea, S., Styra, R.: Sars control
and psychological effects of quarantine, toronto, canada. Emerging Infectious Diseases
10(7), 1206–1212 (2004). DOI 10.3201/eid1007.030703
61. Hermida, R., et al.: The problem of allowing correlated errors in structural equation
modeling: concerns and considerations. Computational Methods in Social Sciences 3(1),
5–17 (2015)
62. Herzberg, F., Mausner, B., Snyderman, B.B.: Motivation to work. Transaction Publishers, London (2017)
63. Hosio, S., van Berkel, N., Oppenlaender, J., Goncalves, J.: Crowdsourcing personalized
weight loss diets. IEEE Computer 53(1), 63–71 (2020)
64. Howell, A.J., Digdon, N.L., Buro, K., Sheptycki, A.R.: Relations among mindfulness,
well-being, and sleep. Personality and Individual Differences 45(8), 773–777 (2008)
65. IMF: World economic outlook: October 2020. URL https://www.imf.org/en/
Publications/WEO/Issues/2020/09/30/world-economic-outlook-october-2020
(2020)
66. Inman, H.F., Bradley Jr, E.L.: The overlapping coefficient as a measure of agreement
between probability distributions and point estimation of the overlap of two normal
densities. Communications in Statistics-Theory and Methods 18(10), 3851–3874 (1989).
DOI 10.1080/03610928908830127
67. Järvelä, S., Häkkinen, P.: Web-based cases in teaching and learning–the quality of
discussions and a stage of perspective taking in asynchronous communication. Interactive
learning environments 10(1), 1–22 (2002). DOI 10.1076/ilee.10.1.1.3613
68. Johnston, J.: Stress and anxiety. Veterinary Nursing Journal 35(8), 217–217 (2020).
DOI 10.1080/17415349.2020.1850798
69. Karesh, W.B., Dobson, A., Lloyd-Smith, J.O., Lubroth, J., Dixon, M.A., Bennett,
M., Aldrich, S., Harrington, T., Formenty, P., Loh, E.H., et al.: Ecology of zoonoses:
natural and unnatural histories. The Lancet 380(9857), 1936–1945 (2012). DOI
10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61678-X
70. Kehr, F., Kowatsch, T.: Quantitative longitudinal research: A review of is literature,
and a set of methodological guidelines. In: Proceedings of the 2European Conference
on Information Systems. Association for Information Systems (2015)
71. Kersten, M., Murphy, G.C.: Using task context to improve programmer productivity.
In: Proceedings of the 14th ACM SIGSOFT international symposium on Foundations
of software engineering, pp. 1–11 (2006)

Well-being and Productivity among Software Professionals during a Pandemic

41

72. Kessler, R.C., Barber, C., Beck, A., Berglund, P., Cleary, P.D., McKenas, D., Pronk,
N., Simon, G., Stang, P., Ustun, T.B., et al.: The world health organization health and
work performance questionnaire (hpq). Journal of Occupational and Environmental
Medicine 45(2), 156–174 (2003)
73. Keyes, C.L., Waterman, M.B.: Dimensions of well-being and mental health in adulthood.
In: M.H. Bornstein, L. Davidson, C.L.M. Keyes, K.A. Moore (eds.) Crosscurrents in
contemporary psychology. Well-being: Positive development across the life course, p.
477–497. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers (2003)
74. Kim, Y., Zhong, W., Jehn, M., Walsh, L.: Public risk perceptions and preventive
behaviors during the 2009 h1n1 influenza pandemic. Disaster Medicine and Public
Health Preparedness 9(2), 145–154 (2015)
75. Kline, R.B.: Principles and practice of structural equation modeling. Guilford Press
(2015)
76. Ko, A.J.: Why We Should Not Measure Productivity, pp. 21–26. Apress (2019)
77. Kossivi, B., Xu, M., Kalgora, B., et al.: Study on determining factors of employee
retention. Open Journal of Social Sciences 4(05), 261 (2016). DOI 10.4236/jss.2016.
45029
78. Kotera, Y., Correa Vione, K.: Psychological impacts of the new ways of working (nww):
A systematic review. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public
Health 17(14), 1–13 (2020). DOI 10.3390/ijerph17145080
79. Kraft-Todd, G.T., Bollinger, B., Gillingham, K., Lamp, S., Rand, D.G.: Credibilityenhancing displays promote the provision of non-normative public goods. Nature
563(7730), 245–248 (2018)
80. Krekel, C., Ward, G., De Neve, J.E.: Employee wellbeing, productivity, and firm
performance. Saı̈d Business School WP 4 (2019). URL http://eureka.sbs.ox.ac.uk/
7348/1/2019-04.pdf
81. Lascau, L., Gould, S.J.J., Cox, A.L., Karmannaya, E., Brumby, D.P.: Monotasking or
multitasking: Designing for crowdworkers’ preferences. In: Proceedings of the 2019 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’19. New York, NY, USA
(2019). DOI 10.1145/3290605.3300649
82. LaToza, T.D., Arab, M., Loksa, D., Ko, A.J.: Explicit programming strategies. Empirical
Software Engineering pp. 1–34 (2020)
83. Lee, S., Chan, L.Y., Chau, A.M., Kwok, K.P., Kleinman, A.: The experience of sarsrelated stigma at amoy gardens. Social science & medicine 61(9), 2038–2046 (2005).
DOI 10.1016/j.socscimed.2005.04.010
84. Legault, L., Green-Demers, I., Pelletier, L.: Why do high school students lack motivation
in the classroom? toward an understanding of academic amotivation and the role of
social support. Journal of educational psychology 98(3), 567 (2006). DOI 10.1037/
0022-0663.98.3.567
85. Li, P.L., Ko, A.J., Zhu, J.: What makes a great software engineer? In: Proceedings
of the 37th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering, vol. 1, pp.
700–710 (2015)
86. Linton, M.J., Dieppe, P., Medina-Lara, A.: Review of 99 self-report measures for
assessing well-being in adults: exploring dimensions of well-being and developments
over time. BMJ open 6(7) (2016). DOI 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010641
87. Lipsitch, M., Swerdlow, D.L., Finelli, L.: Defining the epidemiology of Covid-19 —
studies needed. New England Journal of Medicine 382(13), 1194–1196 (2020). DOI
10.1056/NEJMp2002125
88. Liu, X., Kakade, M., Fuller, C.J., Fan, B., Fang, Y., Kong, J., Guan, Z., Wu, P.:
Depression after exposure to stressful events: lessons learned from the severe acute
respiratory syndrome epidemic. Comprehensive Psychiatry 53(1), 15–23 (2012). DOI
10.1016/j.comppsych.2011.02.003
89. Ludvigh, E.J., Happ, D.: Extraversion and preferred level of sensory stimulation. British
Journal of Psychology 65(3), 359–365 (1974). DOI 10.1111/j.2044-8295.1974.tb01410.x
90. Lunn, P.D., Belton, C.A., Lavin, C., McGowan, F.P., Timmons, S., Robertson, D.A.:
Using behavioral science to help fight the coronavirus. Journal of Behavioral Public
Administration 3(1) (2020). DOI 10.30636/jbpa.31.147

42

Daniel Russo?? et al.

91. MacCallum, R.C., Roznowski, M., Necowitz, L.B.: Model modifications in covariance
structure analysis: the problem of capitalization on chance. Psychological bulletin
111(3), 490 (1992). DOI 10.1037/0033-2909.111.3.490
92. Mann, S., Holdsworth, L.: The psychological impact of teleworking: stress, emotions
and health. New Technology, Work and Employment 18(3), 196–211 (2003). DOI
10.1111/1468-005X.00121
93. Marjanovic, Z., Greenglass, E.R., Coffey, S.: The relevance of psychosocial variables
and working conditions in predicting nurses’ coping strategies during the sars crisis: an
online questionnaire survey. International journal of nursing studies 44(6), 991–998
(2007). DOI 10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2006.02.012
94. Mark, G., Czerwinski, M., Iqbal, S.T.: Effects of individual differences in blocking
workplace distractions. In: Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems, pp. 1–12 (2018). DOI 10.1145/3173574.3173666
95. Masi, C.M., Chen, H.Y., Hawkley, L.C., Cacioppo, J.T.: A meta-analysis of interventions
to reduce loneliness. Personality and Social Psychology Review 15(3), 219–266 (2011).
DOI 10.1177/1088868310377394
96. McManus, T., Holtzman, Y., Lazarus, H., Anderberg, J., Ucok, O.: Transparency,
communication and mindfulness. Journal of Management Development (2006). DOI
10.1108/02621710610708676
97. Meister, J.: The impact of the coronavirus on hr and the new normal of work.
Forbes (2020).
URL https://www.forbes.com/sites/jeannemeister/2020/
03/31/the-impact-of-the-coronavirus-on-hr-and-the-new-normal-of-work/
#33672d7a2b60
98. Naik, G.S., Gaur, G., Pal, G.: Effect of modified slow breathing exercise on perceived
stress and basal cardiovascular parameters. International journal of yoga 11(1), 53–58
(2018)
99. Nelson, B.W., Pettritt, A., E, F.J., B, A.N.: Psychological and epidemiological predictors
of COVID-19 concern and health-related behaviors. Pre-print (2020). URL https:
//psyarxiv.com/jftze
100. NHS: Mental wellbeing while staying at home. https://www.nhs.uk/oneyou/everymind-matters/coronavirus-covid-19-staying-at-home-tips/ (2020)
101. NHS: ‘Your NHS needs you’ – NHS call for volunteer army. https://www.england.nhs.
uk/2020/03/your-nhs-needs-you-nhs-call-for-volunteer-army/ (2020)
102. Oakes, J.M., Feldman, H.A.: Statistical power for nonequivalent pretest-posttest designs:
The impact of change-score versus ancova models. Evaluation Review 25(1), 3–28
(2001)
103. Owl Labs: State of remote work 2019. Report (2019). URL https://www.owllabs.com/
state-of-remote-work/2019
104. Palan, S., Schitter, C.: Prolific.ac—-a subject pool for online experiments. Journal of
Behavioral and Experimental Finance 17, 22–27 (2018)
105. Pavot, W., Diener, E.: Review of the satisfaction with life scale. In: E. Diener (ed.)
Assessing well-being, pp. 101–117. Springer (2009)
106. Peer, E., Brandimarte, L., Samat, S., Acquisti, A.: Beyond the turk: Alternative
platforms for crowdsourcing behavioral research. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology 70, 153–163 (2017)
107. Pilcher, J.J., Ginter, D.R., Sadowsky, B.: Sleep quality versus sleep quantity: relationships between sleep and measures of health, well-being and sleepiness in college students. Journal of psychosomatic research 42(6), 583–596 (1997). DOI
10.1016/S0022-3999(97)00004-4
108. Prati, G., Pietrantoni, L., Zani, B.: A social-cognitive model of pandemic influenza h1n1
risk perception and recommended behaviors in italy. Risk Analysis: An International
Journal 31(4), 645–656 (2011)
109. Ralph, P., Baltes, S., Adisaputri, G., Torkar, R., Kovalenko, V., Kalinowski, M., Novielli,
N., Yoo, S., Devroey, X., Tan, X., Zhou, M., Turhan, B., Hoda, R., Hata, H., Robles,
G., Fard, A.M., Alkadhi, R.: Pandemic programming: How COVID-19 affects software
developers and how their organizations can help. Empirical SOftware Engineering 25,
4927–4961 (2020). DOI 10.1007/s10664-020-09875-y

Well-being and Productivity among Software Professionals during a Pandemic

43

110. Reynolds, D., Garay, J., Deamond, S., Moran, M., Gold, W., Styra, R.: Understanding,
compliance and psychological impact of the sars quarantine experience. Epidemiology
& Infection 136(7), 997–1007 (2008). DOI 10.1017/S0950268807009156
111. Rocklöv, J., Sjödin, H., Wilder-Smith, A.: COVID-19 outbreak on the diamond princess
cruise ship: estimating the epidemic potential and effectiveness of public health countermeasures. Journal of Travel Medicine (2020). DOI 10.1093/jtm/taaa030
112. Rogosa, D.: A critique of cross-lagged correlation. Psychological Bulletin 88(2), 245
(1980). DOI 10.1037/0033-2909.88.2.245
113. Rosseel, Y.: Lavaan: An R package for structural equation modeling and more. version
0.5–12 (beta). Journal of statistical software 48(2), 1–36 (2012)
114. Russo, D., Hanel, P., Altnickel, S., van Berkel, N.: The daily life of software engineers
during the covid-19 pandemic. In: Proceedings of the 43th IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Software Engineering (2021)
115. Russo, D., Stol, K.J.: Soft theory: a pragmatic alternative to conduct quantitative
empirical studies. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM Joint 7th International Workshop
on Conducting Empirical Studies in Industry (CESI) and 6th International Workshop
on Software Engineering Research and Industrial Practice (SER&IP), pp. 30–33. IEEE
(2019)
116. Russo, D., Stol, K.J.: Gender differences in personality traits of software engineers. IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering In Press (2020). DOI 10.1109/TSE.2020.3003413
117. Ryan, R.M., Deci, E.L.: Self-determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic
motivation, social development, and well-being. American Psychologist 55(1), 68–78
(2000)
118. Sackman, H., Erikson, W.J., Grant, E.E.: Exploratory experimental studies comparing
online and offline programming performance. Communications of the ACM 11(1), 3–11
(1968)
119. Sheldon, K.M., Hilpert, J.C.: The balanced measure of psychological needs (bmpn)
scale: An alternative domain general measure of need satisfaction. Motivation and
Emotion 36(4), 439–451 (2012). DOI 10.1007/s11031-012-9279-4
120. Simmons, J.P., Nelson, L.D., Simonsohn, U.: False-positive psychology: Undisclosed
flexibility in data collection and analysis allows presenting anything as significant.
Psychological science 22(11), 1359–1366 (2011). DOI 10.1177/0956797611417632
121. slack: Grab a remote donut or coffee. URL https://slack.com/apps/A11MJ51SR-donut
(2020)
122. Solomon, Z., Gelkopf, M., Bleich, A.: Is terror gender-blind? gender differences in
reaction to terror events. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology 40(12),
947–954 (2005). DOI 10.1007/s00127-005-0973-3
123. Spitzer, R.L., Kroenke, K., Williams, J.B., Löwe, B.: A brief measure for assessing
generalized anxiety disorder: the gad-7. Archives of internal medicine 166(10), 1092–
1097 (2006)
124. Sprang, G., Silman, M.: Posttraumatic stress disorder in parents and youth after healthrelated disasters. Disaster medicine and public health preparedness 7(1), 105–110
(2013). DOI 10.1017/dmp.2013.22
125. Struk, A.A., Carriere, J.S., Cheyne, J.A., Danckert, J.: A short boredom proneness
scale: Development and psychometric properties. Assessment 24(3), 346–359 (2017).
DOI 10.1177/1073191115609996
126. Tangney, J.P., Baumeister, R.F., Boone, A.L.: High self-control predicts good adjustment, less pathology, better grades, and interpersonal success. Journal of Personality
72(2), 271–322 (2004). DOI 10.1111/j.0022-3506.2004.00263.x
127. Taylor, M.R., Agho, K.E., Stevens, G.J., Raphael, B.: Factors influencing psychological
distress during a disease epidemic: data from australia’s first outbreak of equine influenza.
BMC public health 8(1), 347 (2008). DOI 10.1186/1471-2458-8-347
128. Teo, A.R., Choi, H., Valenstein, M.: Social relationships and depression: ten-year
follow-up from a nationally representative study. PloS one 25(4), e62,396 (2013).
DOI 10.1371/journal.pone.0062396
129. Van Tilburg, W.A., Igou, E.R.: On boredom: Lack of challenge and meaning as distinct
boredom experiences. Motivation and Emotion 36(2), 181–194 (2012). DOI 110.1007/
s11031-011-9234-9

44

Daniel Russo?? et al.

130. Vega, R.P., Anderson, A.J., Kaplan, S.A.: A within-person examination of the effects
of telework. Journal of Business and Psychology 30(2), 313–323 (2015). DOI 10.1007/
s10869-014-9359-4
131. de Vries, R.E.: The 24-item brief HEXACO inventory (BHI). Journal of Research in
Personality 47(6), 871 – 880 (2013). DOI 10.1016/j.jrp.2013.09.003
132. Walton, S., O’Kane, P., Ruwhiu, D.: New zealanders’ attitudes towards working from
home. Tech. rep., University of Otago (2020)
133. Wang, J.C.K., Ng, B.L.L., Liu, W.C., Ryan, R.M.: Can being autonomy-supportive
in teaching improve students’ self-regulation and performance? In: W.C. Liu, J.C.K.
Wang, R.M. Ryan (eds.) Building Autonomous Learners: Perspectives from Research
and Practice using Self-Determination Theory, pp. 227–243. Springer. DOI 10.1007/
978-981-287-630-0 12. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-287-630-0_12
134. Webb, T.L., Miles, E., Sheeran, P.: Dealing with feeling: a meta-analysis of the effectiveness of strategies derived from the process model of emotion regulation. Psychological
Bulletin 138(4), 775–808 (2012). DOI 10.1037/a0027600
135. Wei, M.: Social distancing and lockdown–an introvert’s paradise? an empirical investigation on the association between introversion and the psychological impact of
covid19-related circumstantial changes. Frontiers in Psychology 11, 2440 (2020). DOI
10.3389/fpsyg.2020.561609
136. Westfall, J., Yarkoni, T.: Statistically controlling for confounding constructs is harder
than you think. PloS one 11(3), e0152,719 (2016). DOI 10.1371/journal.pone.0152719
137. Wilken, J.A., Pordell, P., Goode, B., Jarteh, R., Miller, Z., Saygar, B.G., Maximore, L.,
Borbor, W.M., Carmue, M., Walker, G.W., et al.: Knowledge, attitudes, and practices
among members of households actively monitored or quarantined to prevent transmission
of ebola virus disease — Margibi County, Liberia: February-March 2015. Prehospital
and Disaster Medicine 32(6), 673–678 (2017). DOI 10.1017/S1049023X17006720
138. Wolf, L.J., Maio, G.R.: The importance of shared values in societal crises: Compliance
with Covid-19 guidelines. Manuscript submitted for publication (2020)
139. Wood, M.J.: Conspiracy suspicions as a proxy for beliefs in conspiracy theories: Implications for theory and measurement. British Journal of Psychology 108(3), 507–527
(2017). DOI 10.1111/bjop.12231
140. World Health Organization: Considerations for quarantine of individuals in the context
of containment for coronavirus disease (COVID-19): interim guidance, 19 march 2020.
Tech. rep., World Health Organization (2020)

Well-being and Productivity among Software Professionals during a Pandemic

A Appendix

Fig. 3 Distributions of within-subject comparisons at time 1

45

46

Fig. 4 Distributions of within-subject comparisons at wave 2

Daniel Russo?? et al.

Well-being and Productivity among Software Professionals during a Pandemic

Fig. 5 Regression coefficients of variables predicting well-being at time 1

47

48

Daniel Russo?? et al.

Fig. 6 Regression coefficients of variables predicting well-being at time 2

Well-being and Productivity among Software Professionals during a Pandemic

Fig. 7 Regression coefficients of variables predicting productivity at time 1

49

50

Daniel Russo?? et al.

Fig. 8 Regression coefficients of variables predicting productivity at time 2

Well-being and Productivity among Software Professionals during a Pandemic

51

Table 9 Summary of constructs, instruments, reliability, and changes to instruments
Construct

Instrument

Reliability

Changes to instrument

Well-being

Satisfaction with Life
Scale [35]
Custom scale, selfreport in comparison
to normal week
Brief
Self-Control
Scale [126]
Brief COPE scale [23]

α1 = .90, α2 = .90
NA

Reworded to focus on
past week
-

α = .64

None

Self-distraction
α = .65, active coping, α = .61, denial
α = .66, substance
use α = .96, use
of emotional support
α
=
.77, use of
instrumental support
α
=
.75, behavioral disengagement
α1 = .76, α2 = .71,
venting α
=
.65,
positive
reframing
α = .72, planning
α
=
.76, humor
α = .83, acceptance
α = .61, religion
α = .83, self-blame
α1 = .75, α2 = .71
α1 = .68, α2 = .69

Reworded to focus on
past week

Productivity

Self-discipline
Coping strategies

Emotional loneliness
Social loneliness
Compliance
Anxiety
Anxiety (COVID-19)
Stress
Boredom

Daily Routines
Conspiracy beliefs

Extraversion

Autonomy,
competence, and relatedness
Extrinsic and intrinsic work motivation

Mental exercise
Technical skills
Diet
Quality of sleep
Physical activity

Quality and quantity
of social contacts outside of work
Volunteering
Quality and quantity
of
communication
with colleagues and
line managers
Distractions at home
Financial security
Office set-up

De Jong Gierveld
Loneliness Scale [51]
De Jong Gierveld
Loneliness Scale [51]
Compliance
scale [138]
Generalized Anxiety
Disorder scale [123]
[99]
Perceived
Stress
Scale [30]
8-item
Boredom
Proneness Scale [125,
42]
Custom scale
Custom
scale,
partially
adapted
from [139]
4-item
extraversion
subscale of the Brief
HEXACO
Inventory [131]
Psychological needs
scale [119]
6-item extrinsic regulation 3-item and
intrinsic motivation
subscales of the Multidimensional Work
Motivation Scale [48]
Custom scale
Custom scale
European Social Survey Scale [41]
Custom scale
Adapted version of
the 3-item Leisure
Time Exercise Questionnaire [54]
Partially
adapted
from the social relationship
quality
scale [12]
Custom scale
Custom scale

Custom scale
Glei Scale [53]
Custom scale

α1 = .84, α2 = .87
α = .71
α1 = .93, α2 = .93
α = .82
α1 = .80, α2 = .77
α1 = .87, α2 = .87

Reworded to focus on
past week
Reworded to focus on
past week
Three most relevant
items selected
Reworded to focus on
past week
None
Reworded to focus on
past week
None

α1 = .75, α2 = .78
α = .83

Partially adapted to
focus on Covid-19

α1 = .71, α2 = .69

None

α1 = .79, α2 = .78

Reworded to focus on
past week
None

Social extrinsic regulation α
=
.85,
material
extrinsic
regulation α = .71,
intrinsic motivation
α = .94
α = .56
NA
α = .60

None

NA
NA

Reworded to focus on
past week

α1 = .73, α2 = .77

One
custom
added

α = .45
α1 = .88, α2 = .92

-

α1 = .64, α2 = .63
α = .81
α = .65

-

item

Note. NA: For some measures it is not possible to compute Cronbach’s α (e.g., for one item measures). Test-retest
correlation, another measure of reliability, can be found in Table 1.

Daniel Russo?? et al.

52
Table 10 Structural Equation Modeling analyses
IV1 – DV1
Independent variable (IV) - Dependent variable (DV)

B

Well-being – Productivity

SE

IV1 → DV2

IV2 – DV2

p

B

0.127

0.048

0.009

Boredom – Well-being

−0.729

0.155

<0.001

Behavioral-disengagement – Well-being

−0.484

0.126

<0.001

SE
0.062

p

B

SE

p

0.001

0.020

0.968

0.720

0.011

0.075

0.880

0.007

−0.013

0.100

0.898

0.027

0.024

0.023

0.064

−0.158

0.059

Self-blame – Well-being

−0.629

0.147

<0.001

−0.167

0.049

0.001

0.072

0.088

0.416

Distractions – Well-being

−0.342

0.117

0.004

−0.107

0.051

0.036

0.015

0.118

0.900

Generalized anxiety – Well-being

−0.698

0.137

<0.001

−0.187

0.050

<0.001

−0.020

0.086

0.816

Emotional loneliness – Well-being

−0.735

0.143

<0.001

−0.166

0.057

0.004

−0.064

0.104

0.535

Social loneliness – Well-being

0.583

0.131

<0.001

0.116

0.056

0.037

0.105

0.086

0.222

Need for Relatedness – Well-being

0.665

0.124

<0.001

0.111

0.049

0.022

0.119

0.107

0.266

Need for Competence – Well-being

0.499

0.108

<0.001

0.084

0.044

0.055

0.121

0.111

0.274

Need for Autonomy – Well-being

0.566

0.109

<0.001

0.142

0.046

0.002

0.352

0.177

0.047

Social contacts – Well-being

0.816

0.151

<0.001

0.162

0.064

0.011

0.059

0.076

0.441

Communication – Well-being

0.641

0.142

<0.001

0.168

0.067

0.013

0.054

0.082

0.506

−0.749

0.127

<0.001

−0.148

0.046

0.001

−0.001

0.164

0.993

Daily-routines – Well-being

0.840

0.195

<0.001

0.112

0.072

0.120

0.100

0.069

0.148

Extraversion – Well-being

0.308

0.090

0.001

−0.001

0.030

0.972

−0.027

0.142

0.851
0.259

Stress – Well-being

−0.170

0.040

<0.001

0.013

0.025

0.595

−0.032

0.028

Competence – Productivity

0.139

0.028

<0.001

0.020

0.018

0.264

0.045

0.044

0.306

Communication – Productivity

0.148

0.037

<0.001

−0.007

0.026

0.770

0.030

0.030

0.315

−0.121

0.030

<0.001

0.022

0.020

0.278

−0.154

0.056

0.006

Boredom – Productivity

Distraction – Productivity

DV1 → DV2
Independent variable (IV) - Dependent variable (DV)

B

SE

IV1 → IV2
p

B

SE

p

DV1 → IV2
B

SE

p

Well-being – Productivity

0.529

0.070

<0.001

0.698

0.067

<0.001

0.112

0.179

0.531

Boredom – Well-being

0.711

0.072

<0.001

0.753

0.096

<0.001

−0.076

0.054

0.156

Behavioral-disengagement – Well-being

0.700

0.070

<0.001

0.632

0.101

<0.001

−0.092

0.046

0.046

Self-blame – Well-being

0.724

0.073

<0.001

0.533

0.088

<0.001

−0.041

0.037

0.276

Distractions – Well-being

0.705

0.069

<0.001

0.827

0.133

<0.001

−0.056

0.041

0.17

Generalized anxiety – Well-being

0.711

0.075

<0.001

0.730

0.072

<0.001

−0.100

0.010

0.011

Emotional loneliness – Well-being

0.677

0.075

<0.001

0.976

0.114

<0.001

−0.011

0.053

0.840

Social loneliness – Well-being

0.675

0.069

<0.001

0.744

0.080

<0.001

0.124

0.045

0.006

Need for Relatedness – Well-being

0.667

0.073

<0.001

0.712

0.096

<0.001

0.013

0.042

0.759

Need for Competence – Well-being

0.675

0.070

<0.001

0.602

0.092

<0.001

0.031

0.036

0.390

Need for Autonomy – Well-being

0.612

0.078

<0.001

1.193

0.185

<0.001

−0.061

0.047

0.192

Social contacts – Well-being

0.681

0.072

<0.001

0.659

0.077

<0.001

0.097

0.054

0.071

Communication – Well-being

0.685

0.072

<0.001

0.751

0.089

<0.001

0.057

0.054

0.285

Stress – Well-being

0.709

0.091

<0.001

0.987

0.155

<0.001

0.031

0.052

0.547

Daily-routines – Well-being

0.664

0.070

<0.001

0.866

0.116

<0.001

0.039

0.061

0.523

Extraversion – Well-being

0.706

0.069

<0.001

1.024

0.138

<0.001

0.017

0.025

0.486

Boredom – Productivity

0.498

0.073

<0.001

0.843

0.100

<0.001

0.306

0.178

0.087

Competence – Productivity

0.493

0.077

<0.001

0.677

0.096

<0.001

−0.095

0.129

0.461

Communication – Productivity

0.471

0.074

<0.001

0.760

0.085

<0.001

0.149

0.181

0.412

Distraction – Productivity

0.419

0.078

<0.001

0.915

0.161

<0.001

0.084

0.161

0.602

RMSEA

SRMR

Independent variable (IV) - Dependent variable (DV)

CFI

Well-being – Productivity

0.953

0.079

0.042

Boredom – Well-being

0.901

0.071

0.075

Behavioral-disengagement – Well-being

0.957

0.069

0.054

Self-blame – Well-being

0.951

0.074

0.052

Distractions – Well-being

0.950

0.073

0.046

Generalized anxiety – Well-being

0.937

0.070

0.062

Emotional loneliness – Well-being

0.912

0.090

0.061

Social loneliness – Well-being

0.969

0.057

0.047

Need for Relatedness – Well-being

0.837

0.100

0.098

Need for Competence – Well-being

0.818

0.104

0.104

Need for Autonomy – Well-being

0.885

0.078

0.078

Social contacts – Well-being

0.939

0.078

0.092

Communication – Well-being

0.964

0.061

0.057

Stress – Well-being

0.926

0.075

0.070

Daily-routines – Well-being

0.903

0.097

0.068

Extraversion – Well-being

0.822

0.122

0.094

Boredom – Productivity

0.887

0.085

0.073

Competence – Productivity

0.681

0.151

0.142

Communication – Productivity

0.993

0.039

0.032

Distraction – Productivity

0.934

0.129

0.051

Note. B: unstandardized regression estimate, SE: Standard Error, p: p − value, CFI: Comparative Fit Index,
RMSEA: Root Mean Square Error of Approximation, SRMR: Standardized Root Mean Square Residual. Variable1
is measured in the first wave, and Variable2 in the second wave.

Well-being and Productivity among Software Professionals during a Pandemic

53

Table 11 Within-subject comparisons (mixed-effects model): Are there any mean changes
over time?
Time 1

Well-being

Time 2

M

SD

M

SD

4.140

1.367

4.340

1.289

B
0.180

SE

95%-CI

.074

.035, .325

p
0.015

Higher

Smaller

Equal

91

70

23

Productivity

0.990

0.419

1.032

0.436

0.046

.031

-.016, .107

0.147

87

77

19

Boredom

2.936

1.136

2.927

1.158

0.013

.066

-0.117, 0.142

0.848

91

79

14
62

Behavioral-disengagement

1.805

0.936

2.062

1.030

0.255

.069

.119, .391

82

40

Self-blame

1.812

0.990

1.880

1.013

0.065

.065

-.063, .192

<.001
0.319

60

52

72

Need for Relatedness

3.497

0.830

3.559

0.803

0.054

.046

-.035, .144

0.233

86

73

25

Need for Competence

3.572

0.735

3.582

0.731

0.005

.045

-.084 .094

0.915

82

82

20

Need for Autonomy

3.483

0.688

3.511

0.732

0.023

.036

-.049, .094

0.535

88

67

29
38

Communication

4.534

0.996

4.292

1.185

−0.223

.067

-.360 -.095

57

81

Stress

2.501

0.807

2.520

0.797

0.024

.043

-.061, .109

0.581

81

64

39

Daily routines

4.681

1.561

4.717

1.533

0.017

.083

-.147, .180

0.843

71

72

41

<.001

Distractions

2.466

0.934

2.443

0.895

−0.015

.058

-.128, .098

0.789

58

64

62

Generalized anxiety

2.245

1.000

2.174

1.010

−0.065

.051

-.166, .035

0.202

69

90

25

Emotional loneliness

2.111

0.903

2.007

0.871

−0.102

.049

-.198, -.006

0.037

54

79

51

Social loneliness

2.641

1.004

2.563

1.017

−0.056

.058

-.171, .058

0.334

65

79

40

Quality of social contacts

4.109

1.093

4.312

1.077

0.182

.066

.053, .312

0.006

91

54

39

Extraversion

3.448

0.786

3.457

0.778

0.007

.035

-.061, .076

0.838

73

59

52

Quality of Sleep

4.130

1.754

4.174

1.686

−0.010

.088

-.182, .162

0.906

54

51

79

Note. B: fixed effects estimates, SE: standard error, CI: confidence interval; Higher: Absolute
number of people who scored higher on a variable at time 2 compared to time 1; Lower: Number of people who scored lower at time 2; Equal: People whose score has not changed over time.

Daniel Russo?? et al.

54
Table 12 Comparison of women and men
Men
M
Well-being

4.109

Women
SD
1.336

M
4.263

SD

t

p

d

1.495

−0.581

0.5639

−0.113 95.494

OVL

Well-beingt2

4.388

1.258

4.151

1.407

0.933

0.3553

0.183 92.710

Productivity

1.008

0.416

0.917

0.430

1.180

0.2430

0.218 91.320
−0.033 98.684

Productivityt2

1.029

0.433

1.043

0.452

−0.175

0.8620

Boredom

2.942

1.130

2.908

1.179

0.163

0.8713

0.030 98.803

Boredomt2

2.923

1.122

2.943

1.309

−0.082

0.9353

−0.016 99.362

Behavioral-disengagement

1.799

0.935

1.829

0.953

−0.176

0.8611

−0.032 98.723

Behavioral-disengagementt2

1.997

0.957

2.324

1.259

−1.479

0.1458

−0.320 87.288

Self-blame

1.753

0.957

2.053

1.095

−1.546

0.1283

−0.304 87.919

Self-blamet2

1.830

0.955

2.081

1.211

−1.173

0.2465

−0.248 90.132
−0.089 96.451

Relatedness

3.483

0.801

3.557

0.948

−0.446

0.6577

Relatednesst2

3.560

0.748

3.554

1.004

0.034

0.9728

0.008 99.681

Competence

3.566

0.704

3.596

0.862

−0.202

0.8407

−0.041 98.364

Competencet2

3.605

0.692

3.491

0.874

0.740

0.4628

0.156 93.783

Autonomy

3.476

0.668

3.509

0.771

−0.239

0.8119

−0.047 98.125

Autonomyt2

3.526

0.698

3.45

0.863

0.494

0.6236

0.103 95.893

Communication

4.511

1.004

4.623

0.972

−0.625

0.5343

−0.112 95.534

Communicationt2

4.293

1.118

4.288

1.434

0.020

0.9839

0.004 99.840

Stress

2.468

0.744

2.638

1.025

−0.966

0.3391

−0.212 91.558
−0.223 91.122

Stresst2

2.485

0.748

2.662

0.965

−1.042

0.3025

Daily routines

4.758

1.469

4.368

1.877

1.191

0.2394

0.250 90.052

Daily routinest2

4.902

1.439

3.982

1.689

3.049

0.0037

0.617 75.770

Distractions

2.481

0.884

2.408

1.126

0.370

0.7127

0.078 96.889

Distractionst2

2.459

0.869

2.378

1.003

0.449

0.6550

0.090 96.411

Generalized anxiety

2.123

0.916

2.738

1.175

−3.007

0.0042

−0.632 75.200

Generalized anxietyt2

2.098

0.963

2.475

1.144

−1.844

0.0712

−0.376 85.088

Emotional loneliness

2.022

0.848

2.474

1.033

−2.498

0.0158

−0.510 79.872

Emotional lonelinesst2

1.975

0.837

2.135

0.998

−0.899

0.3730

−0.184 92.670

Social loneliness

2.667

0.969

2.535

1.146

0.653

0.5169

0.131 94.778

Social lonelinesst2

2.560

0.985

2.577

1.151

−0.080

0.9365

−0.016 99.362

Social contacts

4.032

1.068

4.421

1.149

−1.893

0.0637

−0.358 85.794

Social contactst2

4.281

1.055

4.432

1.165

−0.719

0.4754

−0.140 94.419

Extraversion

3.401

0.786

3.638

0.766

−1.700

0.0944

−0.303 87.958

Extraversiont2

3.405

0.775

3.662

0.769

−1.817

0.0745

−0.333 86.776

Quality of sleep

4.221

1.746

3.763

1.762

1.436

0.1564

0.262 89.578

Quality of sleept2

4.299

1.673

3.676

1.668

2.032

0.0469

0.373 85.205
−0.319 87.328

Compliance

7.190

1.093

7.518

0.700

−2.278

0.0251

Belief in conspiracies

2.379

1.244

2.316

1.205

0.289

0.7738

0.051 97.966

Self-distraction

3.182

1.040

3.750

0.86

−3.491

0.0009

−0.564 77.794
−0.283 88.748

Active coping

3.188

0.922

3.447

0.884

−1.604

0.1140

Denial

1.425

0.725

1.355

0.603

0.615

0.5407

0.100 96.012

Substance use

1.682

1.087

1.855

1.330

−0.745

0.4599

−0.152 93.942

Emotional support

2.643

1.032

3.039

1.042

−2.105

0.0398

−0.384 84.774

Instrumental support

2.162

0.967

2.250

0.957

−0.505

0.6157

−0.091 96.371

Venting

2.338

1.018

2.408

0.965

−0.398

0.6924

−0.070 97.208

Positive reframing

3.081

1.019

3.566

1.067

−2.531

0.0143

−0.471 81.382

Planning

2.984

1.044

3.289

1.125

−1.521

0.1340

−0.288 88.550

Humor

2.503

1.174

2.855

1.330

−1.494

0.1411

−0.292 88.392

Acceptance

3.935

0.768

4.276

0.742

−2.522

0.0144

−0.447 82.315

Religion

1.662

0.925

1.934

1.439

−1.110

0.2731

−0.260 89.657

Office setup

15.729

1.108

15.474

1.239

1.163

0.2501

0.225 91.043

Self-control

3.338

0.834

3.246

0.919

0.563

0.5760

0.108 95.694

Volunteering

3.346

1.147

3.904

1.257

−2.489

0.0160

−0.477 81.149

Diet

9.916

3.413

9.618

3.791

0.441

0.6609

0.085 96.610

Exercising overall

10.078

8.542

10.776

17.730

−0.236

0.8144

−0.064 97.447

Financial situation

7.260

1.648

7.079

2.110

0.492

0.6247

0.103 95.893

COVID-19 anxiety

3.244

1.036

3.395

1.158

−0.736

0.4650

−0.143 94.300

Mental exercise

4.497

1.377

4.750

1.478

−0.958

0.3422

−0.181 92.789

Extrinsic-social

3.591

1.311

3.763

1.518

−0.643

0.5233

−0.127 94.937

Extrinsic-materialistic

4.264

1.324

4.623

1.387

−1.441

0.1553

−0.268 89.340

Intrinsic motivation

4.468

1.421

5.018

1.427

−2.130

0.0375

−0.387 84.657

2.221

2.789

1.579

1.703

1.802

0.0748

0.246 90.211

Technological skills

People living in the same household

27.240

0.776

27.211

1.069

0.161

0.8726

0.035 98.604

Previous remote work experience

40.890

36.340

39.947

37.649

0.139

0.8899

0.026 98.963

0.714

1.008

0.421

0.826

1.871

0.0657

0.301 88.037

Children at home
0

Note. d: Cohen’s d (standardized mean difference), OVL: Overlapping coefficient [66], which
estimates the amount of similarities between women and men (OVL of 100 indicates the
groups are identical, a OVL of 50 suggests that 50% of the responses given by women are
mirrored by men).

Well-being and Productivity among Software Professionals during a Pandemic

55

Table 13 Comparison between UK and USA-based participants
UK
M

USA
SD

M

SD

t

p

d

OVL

Well-being

4.248

1.302

4.288

1.448

−0.158

0.8752

−0.030 98.803

Well-beingt2

4.294

1.220

4.392

1.461

−0.381

0.7039

−0.074 97.049

Productivity

1.018

0.453

0.936

0.385

1.047

0.2975

0.193 92.312

Productivityt2

0.977

0.414

1.076

0.472

−1.162

0.2480

−0.225 91.043

Boredom

2.857

1.072

2.889

1.194

−0.151

0.8802

−0.029 98.843

Boredomt2

2.960

1.159

2.740

1.166

0.994

0.3226

0.189 92.471

Behavioral-disengagement

1.865

0.885

1.683

0.852

1.123

0.2641

0.210 91.638

Behavioral-disengagementt2

2.089

0.952

1.910

1.024

0.948

0.3456

0.182 92.749

Self-blame

1.786

0.932

1.740

1.059

0.241

0.8100

0.046 98.165

Self-blamet2

1.944

1.025

1.680

0.896

1.451

0.1498

0.272 89.182

Relatedness

3.521

0.772

3.545

0.827

−0.158

0.8750

−0.030 98.803

Relatednesst2

3.538

0.711

3.593

0.847

−0.372

0.7111

−0.072 97.128

Competence

3.569

0.734

3.593

0.873

−0.159

0.8742

−0.030 98.803

Competencet2

3.605

0.670

3.650

0.815

−0.315

0.7534

−0.061 97.567

Autonomy

3.503

0.700

3.516

0.754

−0.098

0.9223

−0.018 99.282

Autonomyt2

3.565

0.751

3.443

0.818

0.808

0.4210

0.155 93.823

Communication

4.472

1.031

4.593

1.000

−0.624

0.5341

−0.119 95.255

Communicationt2

4.383

1.237

4.245

1.263

0.573

0.5678

0.110 95.614

Stress

2.528

0.713

2.312

0.871

1.430

0.1560

0.273 89.143

Stresst2

2.573

0.690

2.340

0.890

1.516

0.1330

0.296 88.234

Daily routines

4.889

1.409

4.474

1.738

1.385

0.1693

0.265 89.459
0.108 95.694

Daily routinest2

4.817

1.531

4.647

1.646

0.562

0.5752

Distractions

2.532

0.920

2.385

1.018

0.806

0.4222

0.152 93.942

Distractionst2

2.540

0.816

2.500

0.985

0.232

0.8168

0.045 98.205

Generalized anxiety

2.265

0.942

2.134

1.075

0.689

0.4926

0.131 94.778

Generalized anxietyt2

2.219

0.965

1.989

0.962

1.257

0.2114

0.239 90.488
0.010 99.601

Emotional loneliness

2.048

0.956

2.038

0.802

0.056

0.9555

Emotional lonelinesst2

2.059

0.938

1.887

0.796

1.052

0.2949

0.197 92.154

Social loneliness

2.619

0.912

2.583

1.074

0.190

0.8498

0.036 98.564

Social lonelinesst2

2.527

0.942

2.493

1.135

0.168

0.8673

0.032 98.723

Social contacts

4.053

1.091

4.218

1.064

−0.818

0.4150

−0.153 93.902
−0.046 98.165

Social contactst2

4.274

1.120

4.327

1.189

−0.238

0.8121

Extraversion

3.552

0.728

3.486

0.799

0.459

0.6473

0.087 96.530

Extraversiont2

3.516

0.742

3.530

0.798

−0.094

0.9250

−0.018 99.282

Quality of sleep

4.111

1.752

3.981

1.686

0.405

0.6860

0.076 96.969

Quality of sleept2

3.968

1.599

4.440

1.704

−1.499

0.1371

−0.287 88.590
0.385 84.735

Compliance

7.450

0.672

7.065

1.291

1.925

0.0582

Belief in conspiracies

2.263

1.210

2.258

1.262

0.025

0.9801

0.005 99.801

Self-distraction

3.167

1.063

3.365

0.966

−1.049

0.2962

−0.195 92.233

Active coping

3.246

0.847

3.183

1.029

0.356

0.7230

0.068 97.288

Denial

1.365

0.624

1.404

0.700

−0.310

0.7569

−0.059 97.647

Substance use

1.968

1.167

1.683

1.221

1.274

0.2056

0.240 90.448

Emotional support

2.659

0.962

3.010

1.096

−1.805

0.0740

−0.342 86.422

Instrumental support

2.206

0.923

2.365

1.039

−0.859

0.3924

−0.163 93.504

Venting

2.254

0.962

2.404

1.039

−0.796

0.4278

−0.150 94.021

Positive reframing

3.230

0.897

2.981

1.142

1.282

0.2030

0.246 90.211

Planning

2.976

1.014

3.077

1.095

−0.508

0.6128

−0.096 96.172

Humor

2.706

1.275

2.327

1.184

1.652

0.1013

0.307 87.800

Acceptance

4.032

0.772

4.019

0.671

0.093

0.9261

0.017 99.322
−0.384 84.774

1.571

0.946

1.971

1.148

−2.010

0.0471

Office setup

15.714

0.991

15.609

1.290

0.483

0.6303

0.093 96.291

Self-control

3.159

0.762

3.442

0.769

−1.977

0.0506

−0.371 85.284
−0.172 93.147

Religion

3.413

1.132

3.615

1.232

−0.911

0.3646

Diet

10.627

3.217

9.740

3.448

1.415

0.1601

0.267 89.380

Exercising overall

13.830

14.415

9.493

7.935

2.043

0.0437

0.363 85.598

Volunteering

Financial situation

7.302

1.950

7.135

1.858

0.469

0.6400

0.087 96.530

Covid-19 anxiety

3.397

1.013

3.067

1.129

1.632

0.1058

0.309 87.722

Mental exercise

4.516

1.459

4.423

1.330

0.356

0.7222

0.066 97.367

Extrinsic-social

3.476

1.257

3.564

1.515

−0.334

0.7389

−0.064 97.447

Extrinsic-materialistic

3.915

1.214

4.776

1.310

−3.623

0.0004

−0.684 73.235

Intrinsic motivation

4.344

1.444

4.442

1.418

−0.367

0.7142

−0.069 97.248

1.921

1.559

1.962

1.441

−0.146

0.8842

−0.027 98.923

Technological skills

27.111

0.863

27.327

0.760

−1.425

0.1569

−0.264 89.498

Previous remote work experience

38.063

33.773

42.846

38.185

−0.704

0.4830

−0.133 94.698

0.762

1.132

0.712

1.035

0.249

0.8039

0.046 98.165

People living in the same household

Children at home

Note. d: Cohen’s d (standardized mean difference), OVL: Overlapping coefficient [66],
which estimates the amount of similarities between British and US-American participants (OVL of 100 indicates the groups are identical, a OVL of 50 suggests that
50% of the responses given by British participants are mirrored by US-American participants).

0.180

0.209
0.005
0.106
0

−0.091
0.069
0.202
−0.117
−0.363
0.470

Planning

Humor

Acceptance

Religion

Self-blame

Relatedness

0
0

0.142
0.408
−0.580

Communication

0.021
0.001

0.067
0.167
−0.231
0.102

Diet

Distractions

Exercising

0.190
0.002

0.001
0.389
0.413

−0.225
0.260
0.490
0.026
0.040
0.323
0.424
0.237
−0.063
−0.059

Extrinsic material

Intrinsic motivation

Social contacts

People

Flights

Extraversion

Quality of sleep

Technological skills

Remote work experience

Age

0.191

−0.112

−0.199

−0.202

0.099

0.300

0.083

0.080

0.366

0.534

0.444

0.167

−0.116
0.19

0.590

0.387

−0.086

0.047

0.377

−0.243

−0.284

−0.114

−0.336

0.374

0.123

−0.355

−0.234

0.111

−0.487

−0.521

−0.379

−0.561

0.399

0.240

−0.040
0.136

−0.092

−0.361

0.301

0.207

0.026

0.384

0.119

0.488

−0.477

0.522

0.278

0.578

0.519

0.573

−0.234

0.025

−0.075

0.244

−0.667

0.280

0.001

0.358

0.282

0.351

−0.480

−0.254

0.334

0.209

−0.073
0.062

0.051

0.322

−0.146

−0.181

−0.230

0.048

−0.407

−0.437

0.051

0.242

−0.038
−0.230

0.065

0.022

0.348

−0.217

−0.257

0.078

0.021

0.100

0.195

−0.258

−0.182

−0.088

0.313
−0.298

0.039

-

−0.532

0.398

−0.290

−0.293

0.002

0.210

0.095

−0.213

−0.21

0.288

0.026

−0.436

−0.323

0.015

−0.558

−0.588

−0.459

−0.624

0.040

−0.136

0.178

0.175

0.447

0.599

0.518

0.289

0.259

0.650

0.466

0.011

0.143

0.457

−0.150

−0.193

−0.017

−0.248

0.477

0.329

0.004

0.386

−0.071
−0.442

0.297

0.463

0.559

−0.399

−0.171

0.022

0.151

−0.717

0.590

0.365

−0.096
0.186

0.639

0.586

0.635

−0.140

0.271

0.191

0.264

−0.551

0.121

0.417

−0.035
−0.342

0.299

−0.168

0.147

0.405

−0.048
−0.319

−0.051

−0.086

0.147

0.331

0.160

−0.485

−0.512

−0.319

−0.134

−0.307

0.118

0.430

−0.018
−0.345

0.117

0.195

0.286

−0.208

-

−0.346

−0.274

−0.183

−0.598

−0.058

-

99.9UL

−0.052

−0.054

0.204

0.420

0.325

−0.025

−0.076

0.496

0.261

−0.222

−0.089

0.250

−0.363

−0.415

−0.226

−0.475

0.257

0.168

−0.259

0.190

0.045

0.236

0.380

−0.552

0.412

0.152

0.482

0.401

0.481

−0.355

−0.134

0.224

0.077

−0.057

0.190

−0.289

−0.354

−0.105

0.091

−0.036

−0.122

0.227

−0.097

−0.098

0.035

−0.438

0.255

1

0.475

0.453

0.005

0

0

0.753

0.294

0

0

0.002

0.217

0

0

0

0.002

0

0

0.020

0

0.008

0.531

0.001

0

0

0

0.035

0

0

0

0

0.064

0.002

0.291

0.436

0.008

0

0

0.148

0.209

0.619

0.092

0.002

0.179

0.175

0.632

0

0

-

p

0.117

−0.192

−0.195

0.064

0.296

0.192

−0.176

−0.215

0.381

0.124

−0.353

−0.228

0.113

−0.480

−0.526

−0.356

−0.578

0.120

0.027

−0.386

0.050

−0.097

0.098

0.252

−0.644

0.284

0.011

0.365

0.275

0.364

−0.473

−0.270

0.085

−0.066

−0.197

0.049

−0.414

−0.472

−0.243

−0.051

−0.177

−0.259

0.088

−0.236

−0.237

−0.108

−0.546

-

95LL

0.383

0.090

0.088

0.336

0.530

0.446

0.128

0.066

0.595

0.388

−0.083

0.053

0.379

−0.234

−0.291

−0.087

−0.358

0.385

0.302

−0.121

0.323

0.186

0.365

0.495

−0.445

0.525

0.287

0.583

0.513

0.583

−0.224

0.008

0.354

0.216

0.086

0.323

−0.154

−0.223

0.037

0.230

0.106

0.020

0.357

0.045

0.044

0.176

−0.316

-

95UL

0.021

0.462

−0.283

0.185

0.183

0.419

−0.032
−0.286

0.596

0.52

0.228

0.162

0.654

0.467

0.013

0.149

0.458

−0.141

−0.200

0.009

−0.271

0.464

0.387

−0.025

0.407

0.277

0.446

0.564

−0.365

0.593

0.373

0.644

0.581

0.643

−0.131

0.104

0.436

0.306

0.181

0.406

−0.058

−0.130

0.133

0.319

0.200

0.116

0.438

0.141

0.140

0.268

−0.227

-

99.9UL

0.205

0.097

−0.274

−0.306

0.295

0.027

−0.435

−0.318

0.016

−0.551

−0.592

−0.438

−0.639

0.024

−0.070

−0.465

−0.046

−0.191

0.001

0.159

−0.697

0.191

−0.086

0.278

0.183

0.278

−0.544

−0.358

−0.011

−0.161

−0.288

−0.047

−0.491

−0.544

−0.331

−0.147

−0.269

−0.347

−0.009

−0.325

−0.326

−0.202

−0.610

-

99.9LL

1

0.18

0.070

−0.038

0.187

0.268

0.235

0.150

0.090

0.240

0.219

−0.133

−0.044

0.177

−0.131

−0.229

0.133

−0.207

0.187

0.002

−0.344

0.161

0.007

0.169

0.247

−0.266

0.297

0.104

0.166

0.373

0.223

−0.212

−0.183

0.012

−0.134

−0.087

−0.062

−0.150

−0.146

−0.113

−0.041

−0.112

0.003

0.053

0.064

0.015

0.13

−0.325

r

0.337

0.602

0.009

0

0.001

0.053

0.212

0.001

0.002

0.066

0.544

0.014

0.070

0.001

0.066

0.004

0.010

0.981

0

0.026

0.922

0.019

0.001

0

0

0.152

0.021

0

0.002

0.003

0.011

0.865

0.064

0.230

0.393

0.037

0.043

0.119

0.576

0.121

0.965

0.468

0.379

0.841

0.072

0

-

0.013

p

-

−0.073

−0.179

0.047

0.131

0.097

−0.002

−0.052

0.102

0.080

−0.269

−0.185

0.037

−0.267

−0.359

−0.009

−0.338

0.046

−0.140

−0.463

0.020

−0.135

0.028

0.109

−0.393

0.159

−0.038

0.025

0.244

0.084

−0.343

−0.317

−0.129

−0.270

−0.226

−0.202

−0.286

−0.282

−0.251

−0.181

−0.250

−0.138

−0.090

−0.078

−0.127

−0.012

−0.446

0.039

95LL

-

0.209

0.104

0.320

0.395

0.365

0.295

0.229

0.369

0.350

0.009

0.098

0.311

0.011

−0.090

0.269

−0.067

0.320

0.143

−0.212

0.296

0.149

0.303

0.376

−0.129

0.424

0.242

0.301

0.488

0.353

−0.073

−0.043

0.154

0.008

0.055

0.08

−0.009

−0.005

0.029

0.102

0.030

0.145

0.193

0.204

0.156

0.267

−0.192

0.313

95UL

Productivity (Pearson’s r)

0.062

0.501

0.388

−0.168

−0.270

−0.050

0.035

0.001

−0.106

−0.148

0.300

0.199

0.404

0.473

0.446

0.387

0.319

0.449

0.432

−0.016
0.005

0.105

−0.356

0.193

0.396

−0.060
−0.276

0.107

0.007

0.356
−0.355

−0.440

−0.105

0.030

0.404

−0.050
−0.421

0.236

−0.118

0.381

−0.233

−0.535

−0.077

0.242

0.456

−0.228

0.013

−0.033

−0.069

−0.471

0.331

0.386

−0.134

0.559

0.151

0.435

−0.013
−0.071

0.024

0.054

0.247

0.104

0.151

0.175

0.088

0.092

0.125

0.196

0.126

0.238

0.284

0.294

0.249

0.355

−0.098

−0.426

−0.401

−0.223

−0.358

−0.316

−0.293

−0.372

−0.369

−0.339

−0.273

−0.338

−0.232

−0.184

−0.174

−0.221

−0.108

−0.520

-

0.398

−0.058
-

99.9UL

99.9LL

0.093

0.024

0.190

0.294

0.229

0.152

0.048

0.223

0.236

−0.180

−0.038

0.220

−0.111

−0.249

0.102

−0.198

0.190

0.054

−0.364

0.202

0.04

0.207

0.267

−0.250

0.351

0.105

0.196

0.421

0.242

−0.280

−0.157

0.026

−0.118

−0.078

−0.047

−0.161

−0.149

−0.115

−0.056

−0.117

0.005

0.075

0.079

−0.026

0.103

−0.342

1

0.255

r s

0.198

0.745

0.008

0

0.001

0.050

0.512

0.002

0.001

0.013

0.605

0.002

0.126

0.001

0.157

0.006

0.008

0.459

0

0.005

0.578

0.004

0

0

0

0.147

0.007

0

0.001

0

0.029

0.716

0.104

0.280

0.521

0.026

0.039

0.113

0.440

0.105

0.941

0.303

0.278

0.724

0.157

0

-

0

p

-

−0.049

−0.118

0.049

0.159

0.090

0

−0.095

0.084

0.098

−0.313

−0.178

0.081

−0.249

−0.377

−0.040

−0.331

0.049

−0.089

−0.481

0.062

−0.102

0.067

0.130

−0.379

0.217

−0.037

0.055

0.297

0.104

−0.405

−0.293

−0.116

−0.255

−0.218

−0.187

−0.296

−0.285

−0.252

−0.196

−0.255

−0.136

−0.068

−0.064

−0.167

−0.040

−0.462

0.117

95LL

0.232

0.165

0.323

0.418

0.359

0.297

0.188

0.353

0.366

−0.039

0.105

0.351

0.031

−0.111

0.241

−0.058

0.323

0.194

−0.234

0.334

0.181

0.339

0.393

−0.113

0.471

0.243

0.328

0.531

0.371

−0.144

−0.016

0.167

0.024

0.064

0.096

−0.020

−0.008

0.027

0.086

0.025

0.147

0.214

0.218

0.116

0.241

−0.211

-

0.383

95UL

Productivity (Spearman’s rho)

0.462

0.435

0.440

−0.145

−0.212

−0.047

0.321

0.257

0.406

0.494

0.388
−0.006
0.063

−0.104

0.279

0.446
−0.189

−0.013

0.058

0.199

0.433

0.127

−0.014

0.329

0.038

0.406

0.285

−0.141

0.417

0.273

0.421

0.472

−0.017

0.545

0.332

0.412

0.597

0.451

−0.048

0.080

0.260

0.120

0.160

0.190

0.077

0.089

0.123

0.181

0.121

0.240

0.304

0.308

0.211

0.330

−0.117

-

99.9UL

0.001

−0.398

−0.270

−0.015

−0.337

−0.457

−0.136

−0.414

−0.047

−0.183

−0.552

−0.035

−0.196

−0.029

0.034

−0.458

0.121

−0.133

−0.041

0.207

0.008

−0.483

−0.378

−0.210

−0.343

−0.308

−0.278

−0.381

−0.371

−0.341

−0.287

−0.343

−0.230

−0.163

−0.159

−0.259

−0.136

−0.534

-

0.021

99.9LL

Note. r : Pearson correlation coefficient, rs : Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient (Spearman’s rho), p: p − value (a p − value of 0 indicates p < .001), 95LL: lower limit of the 95%-confidence interval, 95UL: upper limit of the 95%-confidence interval, 99.9LL: lower limit of the 99.9%-confidence interval (corrected for multiple comparisons, corresponds to an α-threshold of .001), 99.9UL: upper limit of the 99.9%-confidence interval.

0

0

0.606

0.722

0

0

0.001

0

−0.371

Social loneliness
0.249

0

−0.409

Emotional loneliness

−0.095

0

−0.251

Covid19 anxiety

Extrinsic social

0

Generalized anxiety

Mental exercise

0

0.273
−0.456

Financial situation

0.158

0.356

0

0.256

Volunteering

0

0.373

Self-control

0.049

Daily routines

Stress

Office setup

0

Autonomy

0

0.407
0.476

Competence

0

0.341

0.009

0

−0.282

Venting
0.189

0

−0.315

Behavioral disengagement

Positive reframing

0.208

0.284

−0.078

Substance use
−0.091

0.098

−0.120

Denial

Instrumental support

0.002

0.217

Active coping

0.150

0.095

0.104

0.564

Emotional support

0.453

0.055
−0.042
−0.121

Conspiracy

0

0.0130

-

Self-distraction

Compliance

−0.422

Productivity (PR)

Boredom

1

Well-being (WB)

99.9LL

r s

95UL

Well-being (Spearman’s rho)

95LL

r

p

Well-being (Pearson’s r)

Table 14 Correlations of well-being and productivity with all predictors at time 1

56
Daniel Russo?? et al.

0
0

0.375
0.543
0.386
−0.540

Need for Autonomy

Communication

0.020

0

0
−0.308

0.361

0.137

0.421

−0.575

−0.557

−0.623

−0.453

0.298

−0.635

0.254

0.432

0.244

0.357

−0.511

−0.522

−0.454

0.059

-

95LL

−0.027

0.585

0.405

0.629

−0.348

−0.325

−0.413

−0.195

0.536

−0.429

0.504

0.637

0.493

0.582

−0.267

−0.280

−0.195

0.338

-

95UL

−0.394

0.272

0.039

0.336

−0.637

−0.622

−0.680

−0.528

0.206

−0.691

0.158

0.348

0.149

0.268

−0.581

−0.590

−0.529

−0.040

-

99.9LL

0.072

0.646

0.484

0.685

−0.259

−0.234

−0.328

−0.098

0.603

−0.345

0.575

0.692

0.564

0.644

−0.173

−0.187

−0.099

0.423

-

99.9UL

−0.156

0.486

0.257

0.531

−0.480

−0.477

−0.541

−0.342

0.417

−0.522

0.374

0.546

0.365

0.463

−0.381

−0.404

−0.335

0.273

1

-

0.035

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

p

−0.294

0.367

0.116

0.419

−0.584

−0.581

−0.636

−0.464

0.290

−0.62

0.241

0.436

0.233

0.341

−0.498

−0.518

−0.457

0.133

-

95LL

−0.011

0.589

0.387

0.628

−0.361

−0.356

−0.430

−0.208

0.530

−0.408

0.494

0.640

0.484

0.569

−0.25

−0.275

−0.200

0.402

-

95UL

−0.381

0.278

0.018

0.334

−0.646

−0.643

−0.691

−0.538

0.197

−0.677

0.144

0.353

0.137

0.250

−0.569

−0.587

−0.532

0.035

-

99.9LL

0.087

0.650

0.468

0.684

−0.272

−0.267

−0.346

−0.112

0.597

−0.323

0.566

0.695

0.556

0.632

−0.156

−0.182

−0.103

0.482

-

99.9UL

1

0.203

0.026

0.142

0.077

0.123

−0.079

−0.162

−0.091

−0.258

0.111

−0.081

0.187

0.095

0.216

0.048

−0.067

−0.078

−0.145

r

0.729

0.054

0.303

0.097

0.286

0.028

0.222

0

0.136

0.273

0.012

0.202

0.003

0.523

0.370

0.294

0.050

-

0.006

p

0.219
0.282

−0.069
−0.003
0.170

0.263

−0.023

−0.120

0.067

−0.018

0.055

−0.118

−0.222

−0.300

−0.233

−0.389

0.064
0.252

−0.224

0.325

−0.035

0.041

0.237

−0.051

0.079
0.191
0.350

0.073

−0.210

0.068

0

-

0.338

95UL

−0.098

−0.221

−0.284

-

0.059

95LL

Productivity (Pearson’s r)

−0.216

−0.101

−0.167

−0.121

−0.314

−0.388

−0.324

−0.470

−0.134

0.265

0.370

0.311

0.353

0.164

0.081

0.153

−0.019

0.342

0.162

0.412

−0.059
−0.316

0.328

−0.149

0.285
0.434

−0.195

0.177

0.166

0.099

−0.026

−0.302

−0.313

−0.373

-

0.423

−0.040
-

99.9UL

99.9LL

−0.008

0.138

0.074

0.157

−0.118

−0.169

−0.124

−0.301

0.162

−0.092

0.252

0.139

0.255

0.135

−0.129

−0.111

−0.172

1

0.273

r s

-

0.910

0.062

0.319

0.034

0.111

0.022

0.095

0

0.028

0.217

0.001

0.060

0

0.069

0.082

0.136

0.020

0

p

−0.153

−0.007

−0.072

0.012

−0.259

−0.307

−0.264

−0.427

0.018

−0.234

0.109

−0.006

0.114

−0.011

−0.269

−0.252

−0.309

-

0.133

95LL

0.137

0.278

0.217

0.295

0.027

−0.025

0.022

−0.163

0.300

0.054

0.385

0.279

0.386

0.274

0.017

0.035

−0.027

-

0.402

95UL

Productivity (Spearman’s rho)

−0.248

−0.105

−0.169

−0.087

−0.349

−0.393

−0.354

−0.505

−0.081

−0.325

0.009

−0.105

0.015

−0.109

−0.358

−0.342

−0.396

-

0.035

99.9LL

0.233

0.367

0.309

0.383

0.126

0.075

0.120

−0.065

0.388

0.152

0.467

0.367

0.467

0.363

0.115

0.133

0.072

-

0.482

99.9UL

Note. r : Pearson correlation coefficient, rs : Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient (Spearman’s rho), p: p − value (a p − value of 0 indicates p ¡ .001), 95LL: lower limit of the 95%-confidence interval, 95UL: upper limit of the 95%-confidence interval, 99.9LL: lower limit of the 99.9%-confidence interval (corrected for multiple comparisons, corresponds to an α-threshold of .001), 99.9UL: upper limit of the 99.9%-confidence interval.

−0.171

0.481

Quality of Sleep

Age

0.276

0

−0.469

Social loneliness

Extraversion

0

−0.449

Emotional loneliness
0

0

−0.526

Generalized anxiety

0.533

0

−0.330

Distractions

Quality of social contacts

0

0.425

0

Daily routines

Stress

0

0.477
0

0

−0.396

Self-blame

Need for Relatedness

0

−0.408

Behavioral-disengagement

Need for Competence

0

−0.331

0.006

Boredom

0.203

Productivity

-

Well-being (Spearman’s rho)

p

r s

1

r

Well-being

Well-being (Pearson’s r)

Table 15 Correlations of well-being and productivity with all predictors at time 2

Well-being and Productivity among Software Professionals during a Pandemic
57

