CareCall: a Call-Based Active Monitoring Dialog Agent
for Managing COVID-19 Pandemic

arXiv:2007.02642v2 [cs.HC] 25 Aug 2020

Sang-Woo Lee * 1 Hyunhoon Jung * 1 SukHyun Ko 1 Sunyoung Kim 1 Hyewon Kim 1 Kyoungtae Doh 1
Hyunjung Park 1 Joseph Yeo 1 Sang-Houn Ok 1 Joonhaeng Lee 1 Sungsoon Lim 1 Minyoung Jeong 1
Seongjae Choi 1 SeungTae Hwang 1 Eun-Young Park 2 Gwang-Ja Ma 2 Seok-Joo Han 2 Kwang-Seung Cha 2
Nako Sung 1 Jung-Woo Ha 1

Abstract
Tracking suspected cases of COVID-19 is crucial
to suppressing the spread of COVID-19 pandemic.
Active monitoring and proactive inspection are indispensable to mitigate COVID-19 spread, though
these require considerable social and economic
expense. To address this issue, we introduce CareCall, a call-based dialog agent which is deployed
for active monitoring in Korea and Japan. We describe our system with a case study with statistics
to show how the system works. Finally, we discuss a simple idea which uses CareCall to support
proactive inspection.

1. Introduction
The situation of COVID-19 pandemic has been so serious
that there exist more than 7.5M patients and 420k dead
people by early June. Under this serious situation, tracking
patient spread is crucial to mitigate COVID-19 pandemic.
In particular, individual quarantine and large-scale active
monitoring are known to be significantly effective in the
pandemic mitigation (Organization et al., 2020; Weissleder
et al., 2020). To maintain social quarantine and gather symptoms in real-time, however, enormous social and economic
expenses are required due to the considerable cost of testing performed by a restricted number of medical staff with
limited infection testing kits. Furthermore, continuous monitoring by humans might harm the medical staffs’ mental
health (Greenberg et al., 2020).
Mobile applications (apps) are a prevalent solution for active
monitoring and individual quarantine for large-scale potential patients in most countries (Peak et al., 2020). Although
mobile app-based monitoring is effective, it has some limi*

Equal contribution 1 NAVER Corp. 2 Seongnam City. Correspondence to: Nako Sung <nako.sung@navercorp.com>, JungWoo Ha <jungwoo.ha@navercorp.com>.

tations. App-based monitoring assumes that the monitoring
subjects are familiar with using apps on mobile devices.
However, considering that the fatality rate is much higher in
older people who are likely to be less familiar with mobile
devices (Shim et al., 2020). It is also noticeable that only
37.8% over-70s in Korea have smartphones according to the
survey in 2018. Thus, the assumption of familiarity on app
might hinder the efficacy of the app-based solutions.
To address this issue, we design a call-based artificial intelligence (AI) dialog agent system for monitoring people
who contacted injected patients. i.e., CareCall. CareCall
consists of three main modules including phone-based automatic speech recognition (ASR) (Chan et al., 2016; Ha et al.,
2020), natural language understanding (NLU), and speech
synthesis (Song et al., 2019), thus calling active monitoring
subjects twice per day to check and gather the core symptoms of whether they feel fever and respiratory pains with
simple yes or no questions. Because the user experience
of CareCall is similar to the human phone-based conversation, our system can track the status of the potential patients
more effectively. For enhancing the success ratio, we employ a human-in-the-loop approach in operating our system
by monitoring the conversations and adjusting uncertain
utterance cases.
We have operated our CareCall system to track active monitoring subjects who contacted the COVID-19 patients in
Korea and Japan for three months. In this paper, we introduce a case-study in Seongnam-si, Korea, to show how the
system works. In the case-study, CareCall shows 0.9% as
false positive and one case as a false negative. In addition,
our human-in-the-loop process remarkably reduces the false
positive rate from 1.95% to 0.72% when comparing between
call cases of the first month and the next two months. Furthermore, we discuss some ideas on how to measure the
spreading of the pandemic in the local community based on
our system and describe the remaining or newly emerging
technical challenges that we are facing, in aspects of the
functionalities of call-based AI dialog systems to improve
our system.

CareCall: a Call-Based Active Monitoring Dialog Agent for Managing COVID-19 Pandemic

Figure 1. Schematic flow of CareCall system for active monitoring of self-quarantining people.

2. Related Work

2.2. Call-based AI Dialog Agents

2.1. COVID-19

User experiences of call-based tracking systems are different
from app-based solutions. Even if the gathered data via appbased systems are likely to be less noisy, call-based system
can cover more target subjects who do not use smart devices
which are necessary for app operation. In particular, this
situation is more serious for older people. Also, a call-based
communication is much easier than using apps. However, a
call-based system requires more expensive operation costs
due to hiring human communicators. Under the pandemic
where the monitored people dramatically increase, the cost
exponentially increases to track all the subjects. Recent advancement of deep learning has remarkably enhanced the
performances of automatic speech recognition (Nassif et al.,
2019), natural language processing (Devlin et al., 2019; Adiwardana et al., 2020), and speech synthesis (Anumanchipalli
et al., 2019), thus resulting in commercializing call-based
AI system (Leviathan & Matias, 2018). This call-based AI
system can deal with many subjects in practical time as an
alternative to an app-based solution.

COVID-19 pandemic has been a critical issue to significantly affect political, social, and economic situations
beyond health area around the world. Basically, because
COVID-19 is a variant of Corona virus, it is not trivial to
distinguish its symptom from respiratory diseases such as a
cold. It is frequently reported that the COVID-19 patients
suffer from loss of taste and smell functions, which alleviates the difficulty of finding COVID-19 infected patients
(Gane et al., 2020; Sungnak et al., 2020). However, while
65% of positive cases on COVID-19 show loss of taste or
smell function, 22% of negative cases also suffer from the
same symptom (Sungnak et al., 2020).
Since infectious disease pandemic leads to enormous loss
of various areas, medical scientists have tried to predict
epidemic and pandemic for several tens of years. Recent
advancement of IT also has enabled to predict diseases
without medical equipment such as forecasting flu epidemic
from Google search data (Helft, 2008; Dugas et al., 2012).
However, we cannot assure that keyword search action itself
means that they are injected by a disease.
Recently, some apps based on mobile devices are prevalent
to track people who contacted COVID-19 patients, who are
subjects of social quarantine or active monitoring (Menni
et al., 2020). This work made the app to log health status of
individuals, and used 2.6 million people in the UK and the
US had been regularly logged their health status. Among
these, 18 thousand people reported having had a test for
coronavirus, with 7 thousand testings positive. This appbased tracking approach is more effective than conventional
search-based methods because the report via app is an explicit action on the disease. However, app-based systems
might be ineffective for older people who are not familiar
with using mobile devices. Whereas, CareCall uses phonebased communication incorporating speech-based AI dialog
models, thus providing more accessibility to older people.

3. CareCall
3.1. Dialog System
Our system is a relatively simple task-oriented dialog (TOD)
system. Our natural language understanding (NLU) model
directly classifies binary slot, and the result corresponds to
the system act of the system. There are two explicit slots in
our dialog. One is whether the callee has a fever, the other
is whether the callee has any respiratory disease. The agent
also asks the type of specific symptoms when the callee
reported any respiratory disease. However, in this case, the
dialog system does not explicitly extract the slot, and just
send a dialog log to public servants of the public health
center. We use the method similar to the M2M approach to
gather data to train our NLU model (Shah et al., 2018).
Why is it sufficient despite our dialog system is simple?
There are four reasons. First, the core information we need

CareCall: a Call-Based Active Monitoring Dialog Agent for Managing COVID-19 Pandemic
Table 1. Turn-level false negative and false positive from rates

False negative
False positive
Total turns

March
Count
Ratio
0
0.00%
88
1.95%
4,508 100.00%

April-June
Count
Ratio
1
0.00%
169
0.72%
23,300 100.00%

Table 2. Conversation examples between CareCall and subjects.
U1 refers to cooperative people. U2 refers to people who is hard
to interact in the monitoring conversation.
Speakers
System
U1
User

U2

System
U1
U2
System
U1
User
U2
User

to extract is simple. The primary goal of our agent is to
check the cases where the callee has no symptoms related to
COVID-19. Second, in our service situations, if the callee
reports any symptoms, the human inspector should read the
automatic speech recognition (ASR) dialog log or call again
to the callee to ask symptoms again and guide when and
where he should go to medical check. Third, the system
was required to be made as soon as possible. We are requested to make the whole system within three days. Lastly,
it is required to make the number of false positive cases
to be minimized. It is critical that the callee reported the
symptoms but the dialog system did not catch.

System
User

U1
U2

System

Utterances
Hello. I’m calling to check your symptoms regarding to COVID-19 today. Have you got a
minute to talk?
Hello?
Yeah, oh, you have already called me earlier
today, huh? Yes, go ahead.
Hello again. Is this a good time to talk?
Yes.
Yes.
Do you have a fever now?
No.
Yeah. Nothing like that. I’ll let you know if
there’s anything like that. Oh. Too stressful.
Okay. Do you have a cough or symptoms like
shortness of breath now? Please answer yes or
no.
No. I don’t
I am totally fine. Please do not worry.
Okay. Got it. When you want to go outside, be
sure to wear your mask. If you think you have
any suspect symptoms, please contact the public
health center. Thank you.

4. CareCall Operation Analysis
3.2. Active Monitoring
Figure 1 describes active monitoring using CareCall. Unlike
other TOD systems, it is extremely important to minimize
false negative cases. In addition to the recognized reports of
symptoms, we also use top-1 softmax value and the number
of dialog turn as features, and utilize an additional rulebased uncertainty detector with a threshold. In other words,
not only the system recognizes the callee report symptoms,
but also the system think the inference of the system itself
is uncertain, CareCall send a log to public servants. The log
is kept for one month before being discarded.
3.3. Human-in-the-loop
It is challenging to make an extremely accurate dialog system using a handful of dataset prepared in the system building phase. For example, older people have different speech
pattern and pronunciation to other groups, with make speech
recognition and language recognition challenging.
We can quickly boost the performance of our system using
the failed ASR and NLU results by human-in-the-loop. The
concept of active learning can be used. Similar to active
monitoring, uncertainty for the utterance, like top-1 softmax
probability (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2016) of Bayesian-style
uncertainty (Siddhant & Lipton, 2018), and uncertainty in
the dialog-level can be used to find data to be labeled. By
labeling a small amount of data active learning suggested,
We can easily decrease the error of ASR and NLU module.

We have released CareCall to monitor the citizens whose
symptoms related to COVID-19 are needed to be checked.
CareCall has been operating in Seongnam-si, Korea, since
March 2020. Our system helps reduce the burden of monitoring work on nearly one-thirty of the total monitoring needs.
Figure 2 shows the actual confirmed cases of COVID-19 in
Seongnam-si. Since March 9th, 142 confirmed cases have
been reported and one patient has died among them. We
analyzed data from CareCall to improve the performance of
our dialog system.
All data including quantitative data and call logs from CareCall were analyzed to understand the interaction between the
subjects and our system. Call hang-up rate by the subjects
before completing the conversation is 14.6%, and connection failure rate is 7.3%. Those two rates are relatively low
because monitored subjects are responsible for receiving the
monitoring call.
We also investigated turn-level errors in the entire monitoring cases. Our target data were logs from a total of 13,904
calls. We analyzed each turn-level false negative (FN) and
false positive (FP) cases (see Table 1). The false negative
case means that monitored subjects report the COVID-19
symptoms but CareCall does not confirm it, and this case
could be critical but only one case occurred for three months.
This case was escalated to human monitor of COVID-19
in Seongnam-si. On the contrary, the false positive means
CareCall detects the symptoms of monitored subjects al-

CareCall: a Call-Based Active Monitoring Dialog Agent for Managing COVID-19 Pandemic

Figure 2. Confirmed cases in Seongnam-si until Jun 15th. March
9th was the critical period for monitoring subjects in Seongnamsi. CareCall released at the right timing to reduce the burden of
monitoring case.

though they have no symptom; the false positive rate (FPR)
is 0.92%, which is very low as well. Based on the data analysis, we could improve the performance of CareCall (see
Table 1). Remarkable improvement of performance from
April results from NLU and speech synthesis model update
and data refinement by our human-in-the-loop process.
CareCall asks polar questions to monitored subjects, and
they need to answer simply ‘yes’ or ‘no’ to the questions.
Most of the monitored subjects could easily interact with
the voice agent of CareCall. However, since older people
tended to respond more freely, it was difficult for the dialog
system to classify the utterances of older people. This is a
challenging technology issue we need to tackle. Firstly, a
voice-based dialog system is required to be able to understand unexpected type of user utterances. Therefore NLU
module could be crucial in this voice-based interface. Furthermore, handling utterances of older people could be challenging because they easily expressed their emotion against
the system although the voice agent of CareCall was not
a real human (Leviathan & Matias, 2018). However, older
people is an important group in COVID-19 monitoring. In
the statistics in Korea until early June, over-60s accounts for
more than 23% of confirmed cases and 92% of death cases.
Therefore, it is crucial to monitor older people and it should
not be excluded from the investigation as an exceptional
case.

5. Discussion
5.1. Pandemic Spread Prediction Models
We discuss an idea on how to measure spreading of the
pandemic based on our system in terms of simple probabilistic modeling. It is important to prevent community
spread by tracking, and some countries are successfully

Figure 3. An example of PGM for modeling a infection rate q and
an individual infection zn

preventing a serious situation. In the situation where local
community spread is suspected, tracking and estimating the
spread status makes some advantageous for deciding to extend self-quarantine policy or execute other helpful actions.
Specifically, a statistically significant infection rate and the
number of estimated infected patients would be helpful. To
evaluate the individual infection, a previous work uses linear
regression with the person’s symptoms as a feature (Menni
et al., 2020). However, the local community’s infection rate
is also a critical factor in evaluating individual infection. To
this end, our idea is to ask the symptoms to not only selfcontainer but also other random people in the community to
estimate how severe the spread in the community is.
To aggregate the reported symptoms from callees, a
Bayesian approach can be used for modeling spread degrees
in a local community. The Bayesian approach utilizes the
information from statistics of previous COVID-19 spread as
the prior to estimate the posterior probability of community
infection rate by using the symptoms of people investigated.
Figure 3 presents a simple example of Bayesian modeling.
T is defined as binary value where 1 denotes infection case
exists, whereas 0 denotes it does not exist. 0 ≤ q ≤ 1 is
a continuous value, which denote infection probability. q
and T are modeled as separated random variables because
we want to model p(q = 0) like delta-function. Otherwise,
p(q=0)
p(q>0) = 0. Prior of T and q (i.e., p(T ) and p(q|T )) can
be characterized by the statistics of previous COVID-19
spread.
Individual infection zn is a binary value, which denotes
whether individual n is infected or not. A confirmed case
can be considered as zn = 1. fn,v is the n-th individual’s feature v. For example, a feature can be loss of
smell and taste. F = {F1 , · · · , Fn , · · · , FN }, and Fn =
{fn,1 , · · · , fn,v , · Q
· · , fn,V }. We can also define p(zn |q) = q
and p(Fn |zn ) = i p(fn,i |zn ). In this formulation, calculating the posterior of infection rate p(q|F ) or an individual
infection p(zn |F ) would be one of primary interests.

CareCall: a Call-Based Active Monitoring Dialog Agent for Managing COVID-19 Pandemic

5.2. Extension to General Healthcare Recommender
Systems
Extending our CareCall system to more general healthcare
domains is natural because the system flow is not specific
to COVID-19 only. First, our system can be extended to
making a call-based examination for cold or flu without
heavy additional efforts. By the examination results, our
system can recommend whether users should go to see a
doctor or which department they need to go to. Furthermore,
we can also extend this system to cover more diseases by
customizing the graph definition of dialog state and action
corresponding to intents, slots, human-to-human dialog utterances, and disease-question-answering data. In particular,
CareCall might be effective for managing chronic diseases
such as diabetes, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia which
many elderly people not familiar with mobile applications
suffer from. Our system can help the elderly patients by
monitoring the status of patients and recommending the
actions corresponding to the patient state.

6. Conclusion
We introduced CareCall, a call-based AI dialog agent system for monitoring people who contacted injected patients,
and showed how this system is built and works robustly. We
also discussed the idea of applying our system to measure
the spreading of the pandemic in the local community with
simple probabilistic modeling. We hope this kind of investigation actively plays a role in tracking and preventing the
COVID-19 spread.

Acknowledgements
The authors thank all members of Clova CIC for supporting
this work. Also, the authors appreciate all the medical staffs
around the world for their devoted efforts to prevent COVID19.

References
Adiwardana, D., Luong, M.-T., So, D. R., Hall, J., Fiedel,
N., Thoppilan, R., Yang, Z., Kulshreshtha, A., Nemade,
G., Lu, Y., et al. Towards a human-like open-domain
chatbot. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.09977, 2020.
Anumanchipalli, G. K., Chartier, J., and Chang, E. F. Speech
synthesis from neural decoding of spoken sentences. Nature, 568(7753):493–498, 2019.
Chan, W., Jaitly, N., Le, Q., and Vinyals, O. Listen, attend
and spell: A neural network for large vocabulary conversational speech recognition. In 2016 IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), pp. 4960–4964. IEEE, 2016.

Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., and Toutanova, K. Bert:
Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4171–4186,
2019.
Dugas, A. F., Hsieh, Y.-H., Levin, S. R., Pines, J. M.,
Mareiniss, D. P., Mohareb, A., Gaydos, C. A., Perl, T. M.,
and Rothman, R. E. Google flu trends: correlation with
emergency department influenza rates and crowding metrics. Clinical infectious diseases, 54(4):463–469, 2012.
Gane, S. B., Kelly, C., and Hopkins, C. Isolated sudden
onset anosmia in covid-19 infection. a novel syndrome.
Rhinology, 10, 2020.
Greenberg, N., Docherty, M., Gnanapragasam, S., and Wessely, S. Managing mental health challenges faced by
healthcare workers during covid-19 pandemic. bmj, 368,
2020.
Ha, J.-W., Nam, K., Kang, J. G., Lee, S.-W., Yang, S., Jung,
H., Kim, E., Kim, H., Kim, S., Kim, H. A., et al. Clovacall:
Korean goal-oriented dialog speech corpus for automatic
speech recognition of contact centers. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.09367, 2020.
Helft, M.
Google uses searches to track flu’s
spread.
The New York Times, 2008.
URL
https://www.nytimes.com/2008/11/12/
technology/internet/12flu.html.
Hendrycks, D. and Gimpel, K. A baseline for detecting
misclassified and out-of-distribution examples in neural
networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.02136, 2016.
Leviathan, Y. and Matias, Y. Google duplex: An ai system for accomplishing real-world tasks over the phone.
Technical report, 2018.
Menni, C., Valdes, A. M., Freidin, M. B., Sudre, C. H.,
Nguyen, L. H., Drew, D. A., Ganesh, S., Varsavsky, T.,
Cardoso, M. J., Moustafa, J. S. E.-S., et al. Real-time
tracking of self-reported symptoms to predict potential
covid-19. Nature medicine, pp. 1–4, 2020.
Nassif, A. B., Shahin, I., Attili, I., Azzeh, M., and Shaalan,
K. Speech recognition using deep neural networks: A
systematic review. IEEE Access, 7:19143–19165, 2019.
Organization, W. H. et al. Critical preparedness, readiness
and response actions for covid-19: interim guidance, 22
march 2020. Technical report, World Health Organization,
2020.

CareCall: a Call-Based Active Monitoring Dialog Agent for Managing COVID-19 Pandemic

Peak, C. M., Kahn, R., Grad, Y. H., Childs, L. M., Li, R.,
Lipsitch, M., and Buckee, C. O. Individual quarantine
versus active monitoring of contacts for the mitigation
of covid-19: a modelling study. The Lancet Infectious
Diseases, 2020.
Shah, P., Hakkani-Tür, D., Tür, G., Rastogi, A., Bapna,
A., Nayak, N., and Heck, L. Building a conversational
agent overnight with dialogue self-play. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1801.04871, 2018.
Shim, E., Tariq, A., Choi, W., Lee, Y., and Chowell, G.
Transmission potential and severity of covid-19 in south
korea. International Journal of Infectious Diseases, 2020.
Siddhant, A. and Lipton, Z. C. Deep bayesian active learning
for natural language processing: Results of a large-scale
empirical study. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.05697, 2018.
Song, E., Byun, K., and Kang, H.-G. Excitnet vocoder:
A neural excitation model for parametric speech synthesis systems. In 2019 27th European Signal Processing
Conference (EUSIPCO), pp. 1–5. IEEE, 2019.
Sungnak, W., Huang, N., Bécavin, C., Berg, M., Queen, R.,
Litvinukova, M., Talavera-López, C., Maatz, H., Reichart,
D., Sampaziotis, F., et al. Sars-cov-2 entry factors are
highly expressed in nasal epithelial cells together with
innate immune genes. Nature medicine, 26(5):681–687,
2020.
Weissleder, R., Lee, H., Ko, J., and Pittet, M. J. Covid-19
diagnostics in context. Science Translational Medicine,
12(546), 2020.

