Covid-19

Booß-Bavnbek &Krickeberg, 17 august 2020

1

Dynamics and Control of Covid-19:
Comments by Two Mathematicians
by Bernhelm Booß-Bavnbek (Roskilde, Denmark) and Klaus
Krickeberg (Manglieu, France and Bielefeld, Germany)

Since the Covid-19 pandemic is not over it may appear to be
premature to draw some conclusions. However, it may be, as well,
just in time to recapitulate some lessons we as mathematicians
should have learned and are urged to apply now. Thus we are
asking: why are the dynamics and control of Covid-19 most
interesting for mathematicians and why are mathematicians
urgently needed for controlling the pandemic?
We shall first present our comments in a Bottom-up approach, i.e.,
following the events from their beginning as they evolved through
time. They happened differently in different countries, and the
main objective of this first part is to compare these evolutions in a
few selected countries with each other.
Still, there are some general features, which we present separately
as we are used to do in mathematics. They include the history of
certain epidemics which have influenced the reactions of people in
many countries, and some basic mathematical tools. In addition
there is a common factor, which one of the present authors (KK)
has defined on the 12th March 2020 in an e-mail to a German
health office:
"The extension and evolution of Covid-19 in various countries and
regions reflects the state of their health systems. This was for
instance already very obvious in the case of Ebola."
It is in fact the Public Health component of the health system that
plays a crucial role.
The second part of the article is not "country-oriented" but
"problem-oriented". From a given problem we go "Top-down" to
its solutions and their applications in concrete situations. We have
organized this part by the mathematical methods that play a role
in their solution. Here is an example where specially much

Covid-19

Booß-Bavnbek &Krickeberg, 17 august 2020

mathematics is needed: to develop a vaccine and the strategy for
applying it without loosing sight of basic ethical principles.

2

Covid-19

Booß-Bavnbek &Krickeberg, 17 august 2020

3

BOTTOM-UP
1. Prehistory
In the following the gentle reader may consult when necessary the
book [KPP] for the basic concepts of epidemiology.
Demography as a mathematical subject area was already
developed centuries ago well beyond its elementary beginnings.
For a long time it remained the only mathematical tool in the study
of the evolution of infectious diseases. Here is a famous early
example. In China, India and Europe one tried to confer immunity
against smallpox by infecting individuals slightly so they would
contract a mild form of the disease and be immune afterwards.
Some of them died by this procedure but in 1766 the Swiss
mathematician Daniel Bernoulli showed by a demographical
approach that the procedure would increase life expectancy if
applied to everybody [DI1]. Nowadays evaluating the costeffectiveness of a public health measure is being done widely; it is
based on methods of mathematical economy.
The 19th Century saw the discovery of microorganisms as
pathogens of many diseases and their study by mainly
microbiological methods. The mathematical tools for following up
an epidemic remained essentially demographical well into the 20th
Century. A few physicians suggested that every epidemic ends
because there are finally not enough people left to be infected,
which is a naïve predecessor to the mathematical-epidemiologic
concept of Herd Immunity (see Sect. 8). Nevertheless even the
abundant literature on the influenza pandemic of 1918-19, wrongly
called Spanish Flu, discusses only two possible ways for its ending:
better clinical treatment and mutations of the pathogen.
Seen from a virological viewpoint the Spanish Flu was an extreme
form of the so-called seasonal influenza. The virus which causes
them can be one of a large variety, its genus being denoted by A,
B, C or D, where some of them include several species. A is the
most serious one; is has subtypes A(HxNy), x = 1,...,18 and y =
1,...,11, where x and y represent proteins on the surface of the
virus. The strategy for controlling the "normal" seasonal influenza
epidemic is widely known even among laymen: identify the strain

Covid-19

Booß-Bavnbek &Krickeberg, 17 august 2020

4

of the virus in autumn, develop a vaccine as fast as possible, and
vaccinate people thought to be at risk. Nevertheless the number of
infections and of deaths by a seasonal influenza can be as high as
those by some of the pandemics to be described now.
The Spanish flu was due to A(H1N1). Pictures from that time show
people wearing masks that resembled those used now. In the
years 1957-58 another "digression" from seasonal influenza
occurred, called the Asian Flu and caused by A(H2N2). It started in
China and then became a pandemic, passing from neighbouring
states through the UK and the USA. Estimations of the number of
cases vary around 500 millions and of the number of deaths
around 3 millions. Its beginnings looked much like those of the
Spanish Flu but towards the end a vaccine became available, a
predecessor to the ones being used now routinely against the
seasonal flu.
The Hong Kong influenza of 1968-69, generated by the virus
A(H3N2), had similar characteristics and will not be described
further.
Parallel to the entering the scene of these and other epidemics,
and partly motivated by them, basically new mathematical tools of
public health emerged in the first part of the 20th Century,
preceded by a few studies in the late 19th. They were twofold. The
first tool was called a "statistical-mathematical model". Its aim is
the study of the influence of factors, also called determinants, on
the health of people. Such factors may for instance be a lack of
hygiene or a polluted environment. A factor can also be a
preventive or curative treatment by an immunization or a drug,
respectively; in that case the main objective of a study is to
estimate the efficacy of the treatment. Sampling plans are
statistical-mathematical models of a different but related kind.
They form the basis of sample surveys, which are being done in
profusion about Covid-19, too, and not always very illuminating.
The second tool is called "mathematical modelling of the evolution
of an epidemic", or briefly "mathematical modelling". There are
two kinds of it. First, one may aim at the epidemic curve, which is
the cumulated number of cases up to a moment t as a function of

Covid-19

Booß-Bavnbek &Krickeberg, 17 august 2020

5

t . In that case mathematical modelling serves to estimate or

predict this curve under various assumptions on the infectivity of
infected subjects. Early predecessors are presented in [FIN], see
Figure 1; the question whether the infectivity remains constant or
decreases played already a role. Refined versions are still being
used, in particular for Covid-19 (Sect. 7).

Fig. 1 Early numerical simulation of an epidemic curve by J. Brownlee, 1907,
discussed in [FIN]

Second, one may build so-called compartmental models (Sect. 8).
The first one, for measles, was published in 1889 by P.D. En'ko;
see [DI2]. Around the year 1900 compartmental models for
malaria appeared. Then in the 1920s new models for the evolution
of measles in closed populations were defined and intensively
studied. They became very influential because they displayed
already many basic features that reappeared later in mathematical
models of epidemics in other and more complex settings.
Such tools found many applications. Dealing with large epidemics
mathematically was no longer a matter of demography alone,
although that continued to be the main tool for estimating number
of cases and deaths. Statistical-mathematical models were
employed to estimate the efficacy of antiviral drugs, for instance
against HIV-infections, and the efficacy of various immunizations

Covid-19

Booß-Bavnbek &Krickeberg, 17 august 2020

6

including those against forms of influenza. Mathematical modelling
of epidemics was used in planning strategies to eradicate
smallpox, poliomyelitis, measles and perhaps others. The first
articles on modelling influenza epidemics appeared in the scientific
literature. Planning a vaccination strategy involves both statisticalmathematical and mathematical models [HAl].
These roads to progress may have produced a general feeling of
success in dealing with epidemics. Then in the period from 2002 to
2019 a few events occurred that evoked memories of previous
pandemics and undermined such believes.
2. Unexpected Events 2002-2018
In November 2002 the first SARS (Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome) epidemic broke out. It was a zoonosis generated by
the virus SARS-CoV-1, a strain of the species SARS-CoV. It was
first identified in China and never spread much beyond the
surrounding countries and Canada. In July 2003 it was declared
eradicated after having caused 8,096 cases and 774 deaths.
Similarly the Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS), due to the
corona virus MERS-CoV, lead to around 2,500 cases and 870
deaths between 2012 and 2020. It was essentially concentrated on
Saudi Arabia and, to a minor degree, on South Korea, with most
infections happening around the years 2014 to 2015. Being a
zonoosis carried largely by camels, it is also called the Camel Flu.
Moreover a pandemic influenza invaded the world that resembled
the Spanish Flu in several respects. Its pathogen was a new strain
called A(H1N1)09 of the H1N1 influenza virus. Its origin is being
debated; a likely hypothesis says that, being a zoonosis carried by
pigs, it infected a human on a Mexican pig farm around January
2009. It was therefore called Swine Flu or Mexican Flu. It spread
from North America to the whole world and was declared
"extinguished" in August 2010. Estimations of the number of
infections and deaths vary enormously but there were apparently
more cases and fewer deaths than by the Spanish flu. Accusations
against WHO were raised about its handling of vaccines against
the Swine Flu.

Covid-19

Booß-Bavnbek &Krickeberg, 17 august 2020

7

Finally another zoonotic influenza appeared, popularly called Bird
Flu and in scientific language Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza
(HPAI). The main pathogen was an A(H5N1) influenza virus. It had
been known long ago but reached a peak in the years 2013-2017.
Whether there existed an airborne transmission from poultry to
humans was a hotly debated question with obvious economic
consequences. The Bird Flu spread widely over the whole world
but the number of known human cases remained small, just over
70.
In addition to various forms of influenza and the epidemics
generated by the corona virus SARS-CoV-1, SARS-CoV-2 or MERSCoV, other epidemics occurred. It is instructive to compare them
with those just mentioned, applying in addition mathematical
yardsticks. We shall restrict ourselves to Ebola epidemics. Their
most widespread outbreak was the Western African Ebola virus
epidemic from 2013 to 2016, which caused 28,646 cases and
11,323 deaths. There is a fundamental difference in the evolution
of a case of influenza or SARS-CoV-1 or SARS-CoV-2 on the one
hand and of an Ebola case on the other, which leads to a basic
difference in their mathematical modelling (Sects. 4 and 8). A
carrier of an influenza or corona virus can transmit it to other
persons well before the first symptoms appear, that is well before
the end of the incubation period. A subject infected by Ebola will
become infective only around the end of the incubation period. He
(if it is a man) could then be immediately isolated together with
his latest contacts in order to avoid further extension of the
infection, provided that there is a health service nearby to do it.
Therefore Ebola did not spread to countries that have a sufficiently
dense primary health care network but it caused much suffering in
countries that do not have it. The strategy of WHO to control the
epidemic was wrong. It insisted on drugs and the search for a
vaccine (which became available only in December 2019) but
neglected primary health care. For the present purpose it would
even have been most useful to rapidly train village health workers
and "barefoot doctors" as it had been done decades ago.

Covid-19

Booß-Bavnbek &Krickeberg, 17 august 2020

8

3. Looking at some Countries
Only very few countries profited from the experiences of these
premonitory 18 years to prepare much in advance for a possible,
and probable, new outbreak of an epidemic. Some others took
appropriate measures only at the first signs of Covid-19, and many
started planning when the epidemic had almost reached its zenith.
We shall sketch some examples. For simplicity we shall always
describe the result of the strategy of a country by indicating its
cumulated numbers of confirmed cases and deaths around the 1st
June 2020. Regarding the reliability of these data see Sects. 5 and
6.
We begin with those that had planned early.
Taiwan: Already in 2004, the year after the SARS-epidemic
outbreak, the government established the National Health
Command Center (NHCC), which was to prepare the country for a
possible new epidemic. From 2017 on it was headed by the
popular Minister of Health, Chen Shih-chung, who had studied
dentistry at the Taipei Medical College. The Vice-President of
Taiwan from 2016 to 2020, Chen Chien-jen, had been Minister of
Health from 2003 to 2005 after having studied human genetics,
public health, and epidemiology at the National Taiwan University
and the Johns Hopkins University in the USA, followed by
research. Thus decisions about the control of Covid-19 were taken
by politicians competent in matters of health including Public
Health.
Taiwan counts 23 million inhabitants and many of them travelled
from and to China. From the 31st December 2019 on when WHO
was notified of the epidemic in Wuhan all incoming flights from
there were checked, followed by controls of passengers arriving
from anywhere. An "Action Table" was produced in the period
20th January to 24th February 2020, which listed 124 measures to
be taken. The public obtained daily revised clear information by all
existing means. "Contact tracing", which means repeated followup of symptomatic persons, of confirmed cases and of all of their
contacts, was rapidly established on the basis of the electronic
health insurance card that everybody has. The virological PCR-

Covid-19

Booß-Bavnbek &Krickeberg, 17 august 2020

9

tests used (Sect. 4) were already available and quarantines well
organised. In late January rules about the wearing of masks were
edited; a sufficient supply existed already.
As a result 442 confirmed cases had been found and 7 deaths
recorded up to the 1st June.
Vietnam: The Vietnamese strategy resembles the Taiwanese one
in almost all aspects, with the exception of contact tracing. A
Steering Committee to deal with new epidemics existed within the
Ministry of Health. It put into effect its plan right after the 23rd
January when the first infected persons arrived at Vietnamese
airports, among them a Vietnamese returning from the UK. All
schools were closed on the 25th January, and since the 1st
February everybody entering Vietnam must spend two weeks in
quarantine.
Other measures were imposed or relieved in accordance with the
evolution of the epidemic, for instance a limited confinement or
the wearing of masks. The Ministry of Health issued regular
precise and clear information for the entire population by all
available means including smartphones. In addition there is a
personalized information system by so-called "Survival Guides"
given to everybody. Every survival guide defines three categories
of persons: F0: a confirmed case; F1: suspected to be infected or
having had contact with an infected person; F2: having had
contact with a person in F1. Each person is expected to find the
category to which it belongs. The survival guide then provides
printed information about what she or he must do as a function of
her or his category, for example to submit to a test. Only PCRtests are being used.
In contrast to Taiwan contact tracing does not use electronic tools.
It is being done by the population itself, aided by the survival
guides, together with a large number of well-trained members of
the health services, for example university lecturers.
At the end of 2019 Vietnam had 98,257,747 inhabitants. On the
1st of June there had been 328 confirmed cases and 0 deaths.
These data are based on a strong demographic section of the

Covid-19

Booß-Bavnbek &Krickeberg, 17 august 2020

10

"General Statistical Office" and on several Health Information
Systems [KKR] and can hardly be contested.
The preceding sketch of control measures in Taiwan and Vietnam
has shown us the three main components of their epidemiologic
side: contact tracing; lock-down, that is physical, or social,
distancing in the wide sense including quarantine and border
controls; wearing of masks. We may call this the "surveillancecontainment strategy". In addition there is the medical-clinical
side, from primary health care such as general practitioners up to
large hospitals. Its state is crucial to the number of deaths caused
by the virus SARS-CoV-2.
In contrast to Taiwan and Vietnam it seems that all other countries
of the world were unprepared at the end of December 2019. A few
of them took fairly systematic and strict measures that covered the
entire population as soon as the first cases had declared
themselves. For a quick overview see Figure 2. This was for
example true for China at the end of January 2020, for Slovakia
and Greece on the 27th and 28th February, for Austria on the
10th March and for Denmark on the 12th March. An alternative
Danish strategy, based on rigorous contact tracing and quarantine,
but not implemented until now was argued for in [SIA].
Regarding the results the turbulent evolution in China is well
known. In Denmark, with a population of 5.806 million, about
12,000 cases had been confirmed and 593 deaths recorded, and
the corresponding figures for Austria are 8.86 million people,
16,979 cases and 672 deaths.
The confrontation of Slovakia, a country of around 5.5 million
inhabitants, with Greece, which counts 10.72 million people, is
particularly striking because it makes visible the role of their
physicians and hospitals. In Slovakia there were 1,528 confirmed
cases and 28 deaths. The corresponding data for Greece are 3,058
and 183. The relatively much higher number of fatalities in Greece,
in spite of equally early reaction and almost the same number of
cases per number of inhabitants, is no doubt due to the
catastrophic state of its medical-clinical system caused mainly by
the debt crisis from 2010 on.

Covid-19

Booß-Bavnbek &Krickeberg, 17 august 2020

11

Next we pass to a group of countries that reacted late and not
systematically, applying the various measures in a haphazard way
and only to part of the population. Here are some of them with
their numbers of inhabitants in million, cumulated numbers of
confirmed cases and numbers of fatalities:
Table 1. Countries that reacted late and not systematically (numbers pr. 1
June 2020)

Country
Belgium
Spain
Italy
France
Germany

Inhabitants (mio) Confirmed cases Fatalities
11.46
59,348
9,606
46.94
289,046
27,136
60.36
235,561
34,043
66.99
154,591
29,296
83.02
187,000
8,831

The relatively low number of deaths in Germany reflects mainly a
sufficient medical-clinical system that could readily adapt itself to
the epidemic. The opposite was true in France. There, about
100,000 hospital beds had been eliminated in the period between
1993 and 2018. An arbitrary strict "confinement" not determined
by epidemiologic reasoning was imposed on the 17th March.
Finally there are countries that decided to do nothing, at least for
a long while. Their motivation, or pretext, was above all a belief in
herd immunity (Sects. 1 and 8) according to which the epidemic
would stop by itself. This was the strategy of Sweden, a country
counting 10.23 million persons, which resulted in 37,814 cases and
4,403 deaths. In the United Kingdom there were, among 66.65
million inhabitants, around 290,000 cases and 41,128 fatalities,
and in the USA these data were 328.2 million, 2.04 million,
115,000 deaths.
This overview of strategies confirms that, as said in the
introduction, the results depend indeed heavily on the state of
Public Health. Note that nowadays in every language of the world
the concept "Public Health" is designated by a literal translation or
a slight modification of this expression. For instance in Danish it is
"folkesundhed", that is, "Health of the People".

Covid-19

Booß-Bavnbek &Krickeberg, 17 august 2020

12

TOP-DOWN
In this second part we shall sketch the scientific and in particular
mathematical principles involved in the study of successive stages
of the pandemics. In short: Sect. 4: Discovery of the new virus,
basic properties, testing for its presence in a person. 5 and 6: Data
on the evolution of Covid-19 in a population. 7: Attempts at
analysing mathematically and predicting such an evolution by
representing it by an epidemic curve. 8: The analogous for a
representation by a compartmental model. 9: Trying to stop the
epidemic by a vaccine. 10: What to learn and what to do?
4. The New Virus SARS-CoV-2
After the often-depicted outbreak in late December 2019 of cases
of pneumonia of unknown aetiology around Wuhan, in the course
of January 2020 Chinese scientists identified a new virus as the
pathogen. They followed the usual procedures, i.e., they
determined the load of 26 common respiratory pathogens in the
patients. They found none of them in abundance. They suspected
SARS-CoV but could not find it either. Then they investigated all
kinds of viral load that had a slight similarity (coincidence in a
number of genomes) with SARS-CoV and detected a novel virus
which displayed abundant virions in respiratory specimens from
patients. Electron microscopy and mathematical pattern analysis
[MUM, PEV] showed that it belongs to the same species as SARSCoV-1 and MERS-CoV (Sect. 2); hence the name SARS-CoV-2.
Starting with this work in China a large number of publications
about the peculiar properties of the pathogen and the ways it is
acting have appeared. On the virological side its genetic sequence
was determined. The new virus is believed to have zoonotic origins
but human to human infection was rapidly established. The
combination of SARS and Influenza features, that is intensive
respiratory inhibition of patients and rapid transmission, make
Covid-19, the disease caused by SARS-CoV-2, particularly
dangerous. For further work see [AND].
In the clinical context, several periods in the evolution of a case
were determined (see their definition in [KPP, Sect. 5.2]): The
median incubation period is 5.2 days; the mean latency period is
4.6 days, i.e., in general the infectious period starts indeed before
the prodromal phase. We have discussed the implications in Sect.

Covid-19

Booß-Bavnbek &Krickeberg, 17 august 2020

13

2 by comparison with Ebola. The mean length of the infectious
period is 6 days for mild and asymptomatic cases; for severe and
critical cases this period lasts on the average 22 days and ends
only by recovery or death.
The manifold applications to the control of the pandemic of both
their virological and their clinical characteristics will appear in
Sects. 7, 8, 9 and 10. Their study is still active and may even
reverse former results; this happened for example recently about
so-called cross-immunities. However, in this article we shall only
treat applications to the basic element of well-designed control
strategies, namely testing for infections.
The first step of a test programme is to define the target
population. Who will be tested? Subjects who had a contact with
infected people? Or those who complain about symptoms? Or
everybody coming from a region where cases exist? See the
example of Vietnam in Sect. 3.
Next, what will be the objective? To discover the presence of the
virus or that of some kind of antibodies? Depending on the
objective there exist virological and serological tests. The usual
virological test is called the PCR-(Polymerase Chain Reaction) Test.
Dozens of serologic tests of varying quality have been and still are
developed and even offered in some countries to the general
public. Recall that the characterization of a test with a given target
population and a given objective is a classical subject of clinical
epidemiology [KPP, Sect. 19.2].
Coming back to the fundamental role of testing in control
strategies we only remark that in poor countries or in rich
countries with inattentive public health officials, the target
population was often determined by the shortage of test kits and
by the influence of institutions that required them for themselves.
5. Demography: Descriptive Epidemiology
This is classical medical statistics, which gives for a specific disease
the number of cases and deaths together with the when and
where and a few additional data such as sex, age and sometimes
profession of the subjects.

Covid-19

Booß-Bavnbek &Krickeberg, 17 august 2020

14

In principle the methods for finding the number of confirmed
cases and of fatalities by Covid-19 are the same as for any other
disease. They fluctuate widely between countries. Both the
diagnosis of a case of a disease and the description of the cause of
a death may be relatively correct or most unreliable. In particular
finding a correct diagnosis for somebody who complains about
acute health problems depends very much on the local contact
tracing methods and on the state of the clinical-medical system.
An additional difficulty arises form the existence of asymptomatic
forms of the disease, that is, subjects infected by SARS-CoV-2 who
display no symptoms.
In Sect. 3 we have mentioned Vietnam, which uses its normal
demographic and health information systems [KKR]. It includes in
its statistics asymptomatic cases found by contact tracing. Other
countries obtain their morbidity and mortality data from a "Health
Reporting System". Such a system is partly based on sampling
methods from various sources, for example hospitals and local
health offices. In Germany the Robert Koch-Institute, a central
institute mainly devoted to infectious diseases, reports on the
results for Covid-19. In the USA the Johns Hopkins University plays
a similar role. Still other countries use data from health insurance
offices.
However, many countries have neither a health information
system nor a health reporting system, or they do not use it for
Covid-19. A host of alternative methods is being employed. For
example France counts only hospitalized confirmed cases and only
deaths which happen in a hospital or in a retirement home that is
connected with a medical structure.
Summing up we may say that morbidity data and to a lesser
degree mortality data for Covid-19 that one finds in various
periodic publications are fairly unreliable, with very few exceptions.
The sources are not always clearly indicated.
An important alternative idea is to compare the present situation
with that in years past. Speaking again naïvely we assume that the
present higher case frequencies and death tolls, and only these,
are the result of Covid-19. Given the diagnostic difficulties
mentioned above this idea is mainly applied to fatalities and hardly

Covid-19

Booß-Bavnbek &Krickeberg, 17 august 2020

15

to nonlethal cases. Thus in the method of "excess mortality" we
only measure how many more deaths by any cause happened this
year than in the corresponding period in the past. For the UK we
have for instance quoted in Sect. 3 the figure of 41,128 deaths up
to the 1st June as supplied by the National Health Service. By
contrast the National Statistical Office advanced about 62,000
deaths as excess mortality!

Fig. 2 Estimated number of infections on lock-down day and excess mortality
for 16 selected countries. Reproduced from [FIT], permission granted by

Financial Times Syndication

Finally, here is an interesting idea based on the most classical form
of a statistical-mathematical model. A graphic in the paper [FIT]
(see Figure 2) shows for every one of 16 selected countries the
point in the plane whose coordinates are, respectively, the
estimated number of infections per million inhabitants on lockdown day and the excess mortality. A short glance convinces us
that they are positively correlated. A simple regression analysis
based on this graphic would allow us to estimate one of these
values by the other one for any other country, too.

Covid-19

Booß-Bavnbek &Krickeberg, 17 august 2020

16

6. Advanced Demography
It goes in several directions beyond classical health statistics, all of
them relevant to Covid-19, too. Firstly, sample surveys are
conducted instead of using the data from the entire "target
population". They have for example been used to study the
influence of social factors on the evolution of various aspects of
the disease. In particular the factor "to be an immigrant or to
descend from them" was thoroughly investigated in some
countries. Secondly, more types of data about cases and deaths
are collected, for example about morbidity and mortality by age
groups. Thirdly, data sets are not only being registered and
perhaps published but also transformed and interpreted in various
ways. Here, standardization is the best-known procedure. A
fictitious example would be the number of fatalities by Covid-19 in
Denmark if Denmark had the same age structure as Vietnam and
in each age group it had the same Covid-19 mortality as in the
same age group in Vietnam.
In Sect. 9 we shall meet statistical-mathematical models as a basic
mathematical tool in developing a preventive treatment of Covid19. With their help one studies in a clinical trial the influence of
various factors on some outcome variable E of interest. Here the
idea of "controlling" for the influence of another factor, which
might be a "confounder" in the study of the action of E , plays a
role. It looks as if most demographers on the one hand, and most
clinical epidemiologists on the other, ignore that the mathematical
procedure of standardizing is the same as that of controlling for a
confounder [KPP, Lesson 21]. A mathematician will not be
astonished, though!
7. Modelling the Epidemic Curve
We have mentioned this classical concept in Sect. 1; see [KPP,
Sect. 4.6]. Let C be an epidemic, V a geographical region, t0 a
moment of time which may be that of the first case of C in V , and
f(t) for t ≥ t0 the number of observed and reported cases of C that
had declared themselves in V before or at the instant t . Then f is
called the epidemic curve of C in V . In particular it needs to be
said whether unconfirmed cases are included or not. Measuring
f(t) as the time t goes along is the task of the relevant

Covid-19

Booß-Bavnbek &Krickeberg, 17 august 2020

17

demographic services (Sects. 5 and 6). This process is therefore
subject to all the deficiencies listed there.
To get some knowledge about f for various regions V is of course
one of the main concerns of the population of a country invaded
by C . Such knowledge is equally vital for health authorities who
attempt to control C . However, much more knowledge is
desirable. What can we learn about the mechanism of C by
observing f(t) ? This was already the subject of the papers
described in [FIN]; see Sect. 1. In particular, is there a way to
predict aspects of the future evolution of f , having observed the
values f(t) for a while?
Answers to these questions are generally given by modelling f ,
that is by making certain assumptions about its shape and by
estimating certain parameters in it. A very large number of papers
was published about this issue. Some of them use extrapolation
methods known from mathematical economy. A recent survey on
basic ideas and techniques can be found in [KRM] where a model
is described in terms of an integro-differential equation.
We shall restrict ourselves to a discussion of an application,
namely the so-called basic reproduction number R0 . It appears
constantly in popular publications. To define it let us look at a
subject s that is infected at a time t* ≥ t0 . Let µ(s, t*) be the
number of all subjects infected by s after t* in the form of
secondary, tertiary etc. infections. Then R0 is the average of µ(s,
t*) over all s . Thus it depends on t*. It is precisely this
dependence in which people are interested: a value less than 1 is
looked upon as predictor of the extinction of C after t*. In the case
C = Covid-19, values as high as 5.7 had been estimated in the
beginning, that is, for t* close to the time of the first outbreak of
C. The article [SIA] presents an interesting factorisation of R0 in
order to compare different approaches to control the size of it.
8. Compartmental Models
We have sketched their historical origin in Sect. 1. We
distinguished between two ways of mathematically modelling the
evolution of an epidemic. Models of the first kind (Sect. 7)
represent the temporal evolution of the number of subjects in a

Covid-19

Booß-Bavnbek &Krickeberg, 17 august 2020

18

certain state, for instance the state "to be infected". By contrast,
compartmental models also represent changes of this state at
some moments in the form of transitions of a subject from one
compartment to another one.
The SIR-model, which we designated in Sect. 1 as "intensively
studied in the 1920s", is particularly simple and has served as a
paragon for many others, in particular for those applied to Covid19. It involves three compartments: S are the susceptible, not yet
infected subjects, I the infected ones, and R consists of subjects
removed by recovery with immunity or death. The transitions
between compartments are described by differential equations for
the numbers S(t), I(t) and R(t) of subjects in the compartments as
a function of time t . They involve certain parameters such as
transition probabilities from one compartment to another one.
Under various assumptions the resulting system of differential
equations for S , I and R can be solved explicitly or numerically.
A first important application is to estimate the basic reproduction
number R0 defined in Sect. 7. It can be expressed by the basic
parameters.
Secondly, it turns out that the limit S∞ of S(t) for t →∞ is strictly
positive, which means that a certain part of the population will
never be infected. This led to the concept of herd immunity,
which, however, gave rise to much confusion among people who
thought they had something to say about the matter.
After the outbreak of Covid-19 many more involved
compartmental models were defined and analysed. Their
parameters represented among other features the underlying
control strategy to be used. There was for instance the "do
nothing" strategy and also the "mitigation" strategy, which
consisted of the less stringent components of the "surveillancecontainment strategy" defined in Sect. 3. In the much discussed
paper [FER] Neil Ferguson and collaborators described the shape
of the function I, that is the number of infected subjects, for the
"do nothing" strategy. From the value 0 on it increases, reaches a
maximum, decreases and finally reaches 0 at a certain moment
thappy . This had apparently motivated the countries UK, USA,
Sweden and Brazil to adopt this strategy for too long, ignoring that

Covid-19

Booß-Bavnbek &Krickeberg, 17 august 2020

19

Ferguson predicted (see Figure 3) about 500,000 deaths caused
by the epidemic in the UK and 2.2 million in the USA before
extinction at the moment thappy.

Fig. 3 Expected deaths caused by the epidemic for the do-nothing strategy,
reproduced from [FER] with permission of School of Public Health, Imperial
College London

At present compartmental models play hardly any practical role,
mainly because they contain too many unknown parameters.
Some parameters such as infectivity are estimated with the help of
a model of the epidemic curve, which seems to be a not very
successful detour.
9. Preventive and Curative Treatments
It will hardly surprise that several pharmacological companies have
started a run for developing curative and preventive treatments of
various ailments, which SARS-CoV-2 may inflict on a person. Up to
now no curative treatment was found. There are only the wellknown methods to be used in the treatment of non-specific
aspects of a case such as reducing pain, facilitate breathing or
shorten the time to recovery by a antiviral drug. We shall therefore
restrict ourselves to preventive treatments, that is, to
immunizations.
The objective of an immunization by a vaccine against a Covid-19
connected health deficiency needs to be defined in the same way

Covid-19

Booß-Bavnbek &Krickeberg, 17 august 2020

20

as for any other infectious disease. First the target population
needs to be determined: whom do we intend to protect? Next,
what are the health deficiencies we want to prevent? For how long
is the preventive effect to last? This is a particularly important
aspect of the vaccine but is usually suppressed when a new one is
announced. For instance the measles vaccination remains lifelong
active in most subjects. For Covid-19 the company which tries to
develop the vaccine may be satisfied with a few months, hoping
that SARS-CoV-2 will have disappeared after that. Finally the
efficacy needs to be found, which represents the part of the target
population actually protected. It may also be defined in
epidemiologic terms by regarding as "exposed" all subjects that
had not obtained the treatment. Then the efficacy is the
"aetiological fraction among the exposed subjects".
Nowadays there is general agreement that the process of
developing a vaccine against an infectious disease needs to run
along a well-defined common line [KPP, Lesson 18, and HAL]. This
ought to hold for Covid-19, too, and we shall therefore recall it
here.
First, one or several substances are selected which, for some
reasons whatsoever, usually virological ones, look like possible
candidates for a vaccine. Each of them needs to be submitted to a
"clinical trial" in order to explore its most important properties.
Such a clinical trial consists of three "phases" I, II and III. Phase I
deals with various mainly pharmacologic aspects such as side
effects for various possible dosages.
Statistical-mathematical models are the essential tools of the
phases II and III. Phase II aims at providing a first idea of the
efficacy of the selected vaccine. Thus a relatively small target
population is built artificially. Here two basic problems arise. The
first is the definition of the outcome variable of interest. Often only
the "immunogenicity" is being studied, which means the formation
of antibodies, but not protection against the disease. It is a
particularly complex and manifold problem in the case of Covid-19.
Secondly, the target population needs to include among the
vaccinated subjects a sufficient number of people who would
attract the disease when not vaccinated. Since Covid-19 morbidity

Covid-19

Booß-Bavnbek &Krickeberg, 17 august 2020

21

in the entire population of a country is small, such a group must
be constructed by "challenge", that is, by infecting its members
artificially. They are usually volunteers and their risk of dying is
small except in the age groups where the lethality by the disease
is high, that is, in the case of Covid-19, for old people. Faced with
this ethical problem the USA used, for various previous infectious
diseases, prison inmates whose terms were shortened as a
reward. There was a time when Vietnam, while developing a
certain vaccine, sent its samples for the Phase II trial to the USA
to be tested in this way because Vietnamese ethical standards
forbade all kinds of challenge.
There are usually several phase II trials in order to select the
potential vaccine to be finally studied in a phase III trial. This is a
field trial in the sense that a sample of subjects is drawn from the
entire population of interest, for instance from among all
inhabitants of a country within a certain age group. The outcome
variable is not immunogenicity but protection against the disease
in the sense of the desired efficacy. The size of the sample is
determined beforehand by the precision of the intended estimate
of the efficacy. As noted above the decision about the duration of
the trial is a crucial element. If high efficacy during the first two
weeks after vaccination is considered sufficient, the trial may be
stopped after two weeks; this philosophy underlies the
vaccinations against the seasonal influenza. If we are interested in
its efficacy during the first ten years after vaccination, it must last
ten years. This has, in addition to other problems, caused the long
delay in developing an Ebola vaccine (end of Sect. 2). We hope
that it will not be glossed over by those who are trying to sell a
Covid-19 vaccine very soon.
10. Outlook
The pandemic has functioned like a magnifying glass. In some
places, it showed a basically well-functioning society. In other
places it revealed scandals and intolerable social inequalities. In
particular it reflected the state of a country’s public health system.
The present article aimed at describing the role of mathematics in
the pandemic. As said above there are two parts to this "outlook".
Let us take up the first one, namely: What can be learnt from the

Covid-19

Booß-Bavnbek &Krickeberg, 17 august 2020

22

epidemic? In Sect. 1 we gave an overview of the main branches of
mathematics that play a role. Then the Sects. 4 - 9 sketched the
most frequent applications; their titles and their order correspond
vaguely to the branches of mathematics concerned. Thus there
were mathematical pattern analysis in laboratory work and
statistical-mathematical models in judging the quality of tests;
demographic methods in the collection of data; different ways to
model the evolution of the pandemic mathematically; and clinical
epidemiology in attempts to develop a vaccine.
In this way the article aimed at clarifying the potential role of
mathematics in making decisions. On the one hand it turned out
that in practise the role of epidemic curve or compartmental
models is much more restricted than advertised in many
publications. Decisions based on them may even have disastrous
consequences, for instance those based on the mathematical
concept of herd immunity. Thus blind trust in mathematical
arguments is unjustified.
On the other hand denying the existence of a valid mathematicalscientific foundation for a control strategy is just as detrimental. It
was done in Denmark with the "tracing and lock-down" strategy
by a report of an "expert group" of health academics and officials,
which reflected the interests of medical, industrial and
governmental circles.
This comment leads us to the second part of our "outlook",
namely: What to do in the future? The authors of the present
article started it in early May by "Since the Covid-19 pandemic is
not over ...". While we are finally finishing our work in the middle
of July, it is still not over! It is even very active but has taken a
largely different form. Hence it seems natural to analyse its
present characteristics in the light of the facts we have described
in the Sections 4 - 9 above and to ask ourselves: which lessons
can we draw regarding the control strategies to be applied now?
Covid-19 does no longer surge from a single source. It reappears
in small or large regions of many parts of the world, which may be
of various forms and extensions: a single home for the elderly in
France, two districts in Germany, a large city like Beijing, an entire
province in Spain, or a whole country like New Zealand. We shall

Covid-19

Booß-Bavnbek &Krickeberg, 17 august 2020

23

call them "nests" to distinguish them from "clusters", which denote
certain discrete sets of people. A precise follow-up of the evolution
of cases in these nests meets with the manifold difficulties
explained in Sects. 5 and 6 and will not be repeated here.
A first natural question to ask is, then: why do "active" nests
persist and reappear? Sect. 3 presented three components of
successful control strategies: contact tracing; lock-down; masks.
While contact tracing continues reluctantly, lock-down and wearing
masks were widely abandoned, often as a result of governmental
policies seeking popularity.
Next, what should be done? In the Sections 7, 8 and 9 we have
explained, using in particular mathematical arguments, in how far
the strategies of control treated there suffer from serious
drawbacks. This leaves us with the combination of two measures:
inside a nest a rigorous lock-down such as social distancing and
preventing larger assemblies of people; at its borders: closing
them or only allowing passage when combined with quarantine.
For example New Zealand regarded as a single nest has taken
such rigorous measures. As a result there are now no new cases,
except two cases around the 14th July in "managed isolation
facilities". Other nests will act similarly, we hope.
References
[AND] Andersen, K.G. et al. 17 March 2020. The proximal origin of
SARS-CoV-2. Nature Medicine 26, 450–452, doi: 10.1038/s41591020-0820-9
[DI1] Dietz, K. 1988. The first epidemic model: a historical note on
P.D. En'ko. Austral. J. Statist. 30A, 56-65
[DI2] Dietz, K., Heesterbeek, J.A.P. 2002. Daniel Bernoulli’s
epidemiological model revisited. Mathematical Biosciences 180, 1–
21
[FER] Ferguson, N. et al. 16 March 2020. Report 9: Impact of nonpharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) to reduce COVID-19 mortality
and healthcare demand. MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease
Analysis, Imperial College London, UK, doi: 10.25561/77482.
https://www.imperial.ac.uk/mrc-global-infectious-diseaseanalysis/covid-19/report-9-impact-of-npis-on-covid-19/

Covid-19

Booß-Bavnbek &Krickeberg, 17 august 2020

24

[FIN] Fine, P.E.M. 1979. John Brownlee and the measurement of
infectiousness: an historical study in epidemic theory. J. R. Statist.
Soc. A 142, Part 3, 347-362

[FIT] FT analysis of mortality data, from Wolf, M. 4 June 2020.
The risks of lifting lockdowns prematurely are very large.
Financial Times. https://www.ft.com/content/2a6cd7c2-a5b511ea-92e2-cbd9b7e28ee6
[HAL] Halloran, M.E., Longini Jr., Ira M., Struchiner, C.J.
2010. Design and Analysis of Vaccine Studies. Springer, Series:
Statistics for Biology and Health. XVIII+357 pages
[KKR] Krickeberg, K. 2007. Principles of health information
systems in developing countries. Health Information Management
J. 36 (3), 8-20
[KPP] Krickeberg, K., Pham, V.T., Pham, T.M.H. 2019.
Epidemiology. Key to Public Health. Springer, Series: Statistics for
Biology and Health. XVII+264 pages
[KRM] Koehler-Rieper, F., Roehl, C.H.F., De Micheli, E. 2020. A
novel deterministic forecast model for COVID-19 epidemic based
on a single ordinary integro-differential equation. European
Journal of Physics PLUS 135, 599, doi:10.1140/epjp/s13360-02000608-0, 19 pages
[MUM] Mumford, D., Desolneux, A. 2010. Pattern Theory. The
Stochastic Analysis of Real-world Signals. A K Peters, Ltd., Natick,
MA., Series: Applying Mathematics. XII+407 pages. ISBN: 978-156881-579-4 MR2723182
[PEV] Jones, N.C., Pevzner, P.A. 2004. An Introduction to
Bioinformatics Algorithms. MIT Press, Series on Computational
Molecular Biology. 435 pages. ISBN: 0262101068, 9780262101066
[SIA] Simonsen, L., Andreasen, V. 23 April 2020. Alternative
corona strategy: we can beat the infection down for the count with
quarantine and tracing of infectors (in Danish). Videnskab.dk.
https://videnskab.dk/kultur-samfund/alternativ-corona-strategi-vikan-banke-smitten-helt-i-bund-med-karantaene-og, 14 pages

Covid-19

Booß-Bavnbek &Krickeberg, 17 august 2020

25

Acknowledgements:
Didier Dacunha-Castelle (Palaiseau, France),
Klaus Dietz (Tübingen, Germany)
The authors:

Bernhelm Booß-Bavnbek (booss@ruc.dk):
Born in 1941, studied mathematics from 1960 to 1965 at Bonn
University. Research, teaching and practical work first in
econometrics and operations research and then in geometric
analysis and membrane processes of cell physiology. Affiliated to
Roskilde University since 1977.

Klaus Krickeberg (krik@ideenwelt.de):
Born in 1929, studied mathematics from 1946 to 1951 at the
Humboldt-University Berlin. Professor at several universities in
Europe and outside; research, teaching and practical work first in
mathematics and then in epidemiology and public health. Much of
this was done in developing countries. Retired since 1998.

