ICAS 052/20

arXiv:2008.12636v1 [physics.soc-ph] 28 Aug 2020

Containing COVID-19 outbreaks using a firewall
Ezequiel Alvarez(a)† , Leandro Da Rold(b)? ,
Federico Lamagna(b)‡ , Manuel Szewc(a)
(a)

International Center for Advanced Studies (ICAS), UNSAM and CONICET,
Campus Miguelete, 25 de Mayo y Francia, (1650) Buenos Aires, Argentina
(b)

Centro Atómico Bariloche, Instituto Balseiro and CONICET
Av. Bustillo 9500, 8400, S. C. de Bariloche, Argentina

Abstract
COVID-19 outbreaks have proven to be very difficult to isolate and extinguish before
they spread out. An important reason behind this might be that epidemiological barriers
consisting in stopping symptomatic people are likely to fail because of the contagion
time before onset, mild cases and/or asymptomatics carriers. Motivated by these special
COVID-19 features, we study a scheme for containing an outbreak in a city that consists
in adding an extra firewall block between the outbreak and the rest of the city. We
implement a coupled compartment model with stochastic noise to simulate a localized
outbreak that is partially isolated and analyze its evolution with and without firewall
for different plausible model parameters. We explore how further improvements could
be achieved if the epidemic evolution would trigger policy changes for the flux and/or
lock-down in the different blocks. Our results show that a substantial improvement is
obtained by merely adding an extra block between the outbreak and the bulk of the
city.

E-mail: † sequi@unsam.edu.ar, ? daroldl@cab.cnea.gov.ar, ‡ federico.lamagna@cab.cnea.gov.ar,
 mszewc@unsam.edu.ar

1

Introduction

The outbreak of COVID-19 by the end of 2019 in Asia has spread all over the world in a
few months, generating a worldwide crisis with yet unknown consequences. Currently the
number of detected cases in the world is of order 24 million, with more than 800 thousand
reported deaths. Many Asian and European countries have passed the first wave and are
currently receiving second waves of the epidemic, whereas most of the other countries are

passing the first wave. Given the lack of a vaccine most of the national governments have
adopted non-pharmaceutical measures to decrease the speed of contagion and protect vulnerable populations, as restriction of mobility of the populations, prohibition of crowded events
and isolation of populations with localized outbreaks, while the capacity of health systems
are increased.
A huge effort of the scientific community is devoted to characterize the disease. There
has also been a lot of effort on modeling the dynamics of the epidemic. See for example
Refs. [1–6] or the helpful reviews of Refs. [7, 8] and references therein. Nevertheless, many
authors have pointed that forecasts must be considered with great care.
There have also been many proposals to contain and mitigate the epidemic [1, 4, 6, 9, 10].
One of the important strategies for mitigating the epidemic has been the implementation of
different levels of barriers around a region with an outbreak of COVID-19. The barriers are
expected to contain the expansion of the epidemic, while avoiding a hard quarantine in the
whole city.
This article is devoted to model barriers and to propose some strategies that could be
useful to mitigate the propagation of the epidemic from a localized outbreak on a city to the
rest of it. Since in general a population can not be fully isolated, either because elementary
services must be delivered to it, or because for any reason individuals could leave it, we include
the possibility of permeable barriers, modeling the flux between the different partially isolated
sectors of the city. Then we explore, for given fluxes of individuals crossing the barriers, the
probability that the epidemic is transmitted from one sector to the other. We consider two
particular cases: first a barrier separating a region with an outbreak from the rest of the
city, and second the presence of two barriers surrounding the outbreak, with an intermediate
region that plays the role of a firewall. We discuss the differences between both situations.
We show that the firewall can be used either to reduce the probability of an outbreak in the
larger region by fixing the flux, or to allow a slightly larger population flux without increasing
the probability of an outbreak in the larger region. We do not attempt to give a quantitative
description of the dynamics of the populations, instead we show some qualitative and generic
effects, that perhaps could help to mitigate the transmission of an outbreak. Finally, it is
worth noticing that we do not consider social and political effects of the barriers, which should
be addressed separately if these strategies would be implemented.
The article is organized as follows: in Sec. 2 we define our model and the values of the
relevant parameters; in Sec. 3 we implement this model with and without the firewall between
an outbreak and a large region and in Sec. 4 we conclude. We leave the more technical details
to the Appendix, dealing with both the stochastic model implementation in Appendix A and
the equations of the coupled model in Appendix B.

2

2

The Model

In this section we define the model we use to study the effects of implementing a firewall
strategy. We assume that every city block behaves according to the same underlying model
which are then coupled through population fluxes. We work with a SIR-like model [11], that
can accommodate the particular COVID-19 characteristics within some degree of approximation, see for example Refs. [1, 2, 4–6] for similar descriptions. In particular, we define
epidemiological barriers as those that allow to pass only people showing no symptoms, and
we discriminate between the population that develop symptoms and the one that do not,
since the latter can pass between the blocks.

2.1

Compartment model

On each block, we split our fixed population of N individuals into seven compartments
0
which we call S, E, P, M, C, C , H, R. These compartments stand for Susceptible, Exposed,
Pre-symptomatic, Mildly symptomatic/asymptomatic, Contagious, C’ontagious and avoiding
hospitalization/quarantine, Hospitalized/quarantined and Recovered/dead, respectively. For
the purposes and methods of this work, we consider the group M as those whose level of
symptoms is below the threshold to be stopped in an epidemiological barrier. The population
splitting and its interactions are depicted in a flowchart in Fig. 1.
Interactions between populations are parameterized by βP,M,C,C 0 , that encode the disease
interactions between a susceptible individual and an infectious one. They depend both on
biological and societal factors. For simplicity, we set βC = βC 0 , meaning that the diagnosed
individuals do not change their behavior if they do not to get hospitalized/quarantined.

Figure 1: Flow diagram.
Once an individual is infected, it advances through one of the possible paths of Fig. 1.
3

The κE,P,M,C,C 0 ,H parameters can be thought of as decay rates, meaning that they are the
inverse of the characteristic transition times. These characteristic decay rates control the
disease duration but do not impose any constraints on the path election. The path choices
are controlled through the φM,C parameters, which are the fraction of individuals that go from
0
P to M and from C to C . In a certain way, these parameters help to encode the different
dangers of the COVID-19 epidemic: undiagnosed patients who unknowingly continue to
spread the disease and diagnosed individuals who, for whatever reason, continue to spread
the disease.
Taking S, E, P, . . . as the number of people in each compartment, the equations describing
the evolution of the populations are: 1
dS
dt
dE
dt
dP
dt
dC
dt
dC 0
dt

S
(βP P + βC (C + C 0 ) + βM M ) ,
N −H
S
=
(βP P + βC (C + C 0 ) + βM M ) − κE E ,
N −H

=−

dM
= κP φM P − κM M ,
dt

= κE E − κP P ,

(1)

dH
= (1 − φC )κC C − κH H ,
dt
dR
= κM M + κC 0 C 0 + κH H .
dt

= κP (1 − φM )P − κC C ,
= φC κC C − κC 0 C 0 ,

We do not include injection and extraction of individuals from outside the city, they can be
included straightforward but, as described in next section, for the situation we are interested
in they are not needed.
During the evolution of the epidemic the β parameters are expected to change, responding
to the different policies, as well as to societal dynamics. Therefore, we do not expect the
model with a set of constant parameters to be able to describe the whole epidemic in a given
city. However, since we do not aim to make a forecast, this simple model can accommodate
a reasonable qualitative description of the epidemic during a given fraction of time, that
captures the core of our proposal.
To solve Eqs. (1) we implement a numerical method which introduces a daily time-step.
Moreover, we treat this model not as deterministic but as a stochastic model by introducing
different sources of noise. We detail our implementation in Appendix A.
As can be done for SIR models, we define a reproduction number R0 that captures the
expected new infections per infected individual at initial time:
R0 = βP /κP + φM βM /κM + (1 − φM )[βC /κC + φC βC /κH ] .
R0 is then a weighted average over the three possible paths connecting S and R.
1

By choosing suitable values for the parameters, it is possible to recover a SIR model.

4

(2)

The values of the parameters κ are taken from [5], in units of inverse days:
κE = 1/(3.1d) ,
κC = 1/(2d) ,

κP = 1/(2d) ,
κC 0 = 1/(11d) ,

κM = 1/(13d) ,
κH = 1/(11d) ,

(3)

we elaborate more on these times in Appendix A.
We select two benchmark points which exemplify admissible combinations of parameters:
BP1 : φM = 0.5,
BP2 : φM = 0.5,

φC = 0.3,
φC = 0.3,

βP = βM = 2βC
βP = 4βM = 2βC .

(4)

Refs. [5, 6] have shown that these are plausible values that can describe the epidemics in
different countries. When considering these benchmark points, the values of βP,M,C vary to
describe different levels of lock-down, but the ratios are kept fixed. In addition to the above,
as a simplified pedagogical example we also include a benchmark point with φM = 0 and
φC = 0
BP0 : φM = 0,
φC = 0,
βP = βM = 2βC
(5)

2.2

Coupled model in a many blocks system

We implement the model in a system of N blocks that are connected by fluxes. The details
can be found in Appendix B. The population flux can accommodate relevant features of the
COVID-19 epidemic, such as for instance a second wave, which is not present in a single
isolated block. A similar treatment has been implemented in [2].
We consider that a fraction of the population of each block travels during the day to other
blocks and returns. We make the approximation that the traveling population only interact
in the visiting block before returning to their original block. By interaction we mean that
each person has the health conditions of their original block, and interacts with persons in the
visiting block according to the health policies in it. This approximation of interacting only in
the visiting block is made in order to simplify the flux matrix. Relaxing this approximation
is no more complicated than defining an smaller time step and a flux matrix for each time of
the day considered. As we treat the population on an statistical level, this approximation is
not too important to the qualitative behavior of the epidemic. An important implementation
we make when coupling the blocks together is that of an epidemiological barrier, where only
non symptomatic people can travel between blocks. Taking this into account, we implement
a flux between the N blocks as a matrix of dimension N xN where the matrix element Fij
is the amount of people from the S, E, P, M, R populations of block j spending their day in
block i.
When considering N blocks, each block has its own set of parameters β, κ, φ, however, the
purely biological parameters κ do not change between blocks. The main difference between
blocks will be on the parameters which depend on societal factors. In particular, we encode
5

all these societal differences in the infection parameters βP,M,C and set φM and φC to be the
same over all N blocks. This is equivalent to saying that we expect the testing capabilities
and the individual responsibility to be mostly the same in all the blocks. When an individual
from block j travels to block i, it adopts the relevant local βi to interact with the current
population of block i.
With this approximation, we have a N block system with N (N − 1) parameters for the
population flux and 3N + 8 parameters for the disease modeling. These are implemented in
a generalized set of equations which take into account the movement of interacting subjects.
The algorithm is the following:
• At the beginning of the day, a given fraction of the S, E, P, M, R compartment populations move from their own block to others.
• The new populations in each block evolve according to Eqs. (1) and the stochastic
method described in Appendix A.
• The changed populations travel back to their own block.
Technical details of the description of N blocks individually obeying Eqs. (1) and coupled
through a flux matrix can be found in Appendix B.

3

The firewall block

The goal of this work is to show that surrounding a COVID-19 outbreak in a city with a
firewall block, yields a strong suppression in the probability of spreading the epidemic to
the rest of the city. For the sake of posing the problem, we first consider the configuration
where there are only two blocks without a firewall: one for the outbreak and another for
the rest of the city. We then study the configuration with and without firewall and compare
the probabilities of having a widespread phase in the bulk of the city as a function of the
variables of the problem.
The setup for a city divided in two blocks consists in having an outbreak in a small block
(S) and none infected nor exposed people in the large block (L). For the sake of concreteness
we consider a 1M people city divided as follows:
small block (S) ←→ large block (L)
50k
950k
We assume that people crossing the border between these two blocks is controlled in number
and that only asymptomatic persons are allowed to cross in any direction. The model that we
have defined has many parameters, however we find that two of them have the largest impact
(i)
on the evolution of the system: Fij and R0 , where i, j = S, L. For the sake of simplicity
we take along this section symmetric fluxes Fij = Fji . Since we want to study the impact of
6

(S)

an outbreak on the rest of the population, from now on we fix R0 = 0.9, assuming that a
lock-down is active on block S, and we take ES = 500 and EL = 0 at t = 0. We simulate the
(L)
evolution of the system while varying FSL and βP , by considering the benchmark points of
Eq. (4).
As stated in Section 2, the evolution is not deterministic due to the introduction of noise,
thus the same initial conditions and parameters may yield different outcomes of the system.
In particular, considering the above setup there are two well distinguishable phases for the
outcome of block L: widespread (WS) and fade out (FO). We can visualize this by analyzing
the time evolution of the system in Fig. 2, where we plot the total number of infected people
on each block as function of time: Ii = Ei + Pi + Ci + Ci0 + Mi + Hi , for two simulations
with the same parameters and initial conditions, taking BP0. In the first simulation, plotted
with dashed lines, only a small number of people is infected on block L. In that case we
obtain PL (t) + CL (t) . O(10) at all times, with the city evolving to the FO phase. On the
other hand, in the second simulation plotted with continuous lines, a large number of people
is infected on block L, leading to the WS phase. Both simulations have been run with the
same parameters and the different results are only due to the implemented stochastic noise
(L)
and to the fact that R0 & 1. If the flux is large, such that several people are infected on
block L, the epidemic is triggered, if the flux is very small, such that in average no infected
people enters on block L, the epidemic is not transmitted. In the middle there is a region of
transition, where there is a given probability that the epidemic is triggered on block L.
By running a large number of simulations, NSIM , with the same parameters and initial
conditions, one can approximate the probability for the W S phase as: pWS = NW S /NSIM ,
with NW S the number of simulations leading to phase W S. We have determined the 10%
probability contours of triggering the epidemic on block L: pWS = 0.1. We show this proba(L)
bility with dotted lines in Fig. 3 as function of the flux on the vertical axis and βC on the
horizontal axis. The different dotted curves correspond to different benchmark points and the
(L)
vertical dotted lines show R0 = 1. The large dots are the calculated points, the oscillations
and discontinuities in the derivative of the curves are likely due to limited CPU computation
time. On the upper right region of the curves the epidemic is triggered and widely spread on
(L)
block L, whereas on the lower left region it is not. As expected, for fixed βC , the effect of
φM and φC is to lower the critical flux, with a stronger dependence on φM .
(L)

As it can be seen from these results, unless the value of R0 is small, the flux has to be
extremely reduced to avoid the transmission of the disease. This might be one of the reasons
why there is practically no success in controlling the epidemic from being transmitted from
an outbreak with permeable barriers.
Once the epidemic is triggered on block L by transmission from block S, since NL  NS
(S)
(L)
and R0 < 1, block L evolves driven by its own dynamics, that is mostly captured by R0 .
In particular, if all the parameters remain constant in time, the duration and total number
of infected people can be understood by studying one block with these parameters.
Given the above results for a configuration of two blocks, we study in the following a

7

(a)

Figure 2: Time evolution of infected populations for a configuration of two blocks, one small
(S) with 50k people and an outbreak of 500, the other large (L) with 950k people and neither
infected at t = 0, and a flux between them of FSL = FLS = 500. The plot shows IS and IL
as function of time for two simulations with the same parameters and initial conditions, with
(L)
R0 = 1.1, slightly larger than the critical value of 1. In the first simulation (dashed) the
epidemic is fade-out (FO), whereas in the second one (continuous) the epidemic is widespread
(WS) in block L.
setup consisting in three blocks connected in series as a way of suppressing the transmission
of the epidemic:
small block (S) ←→ firewall block (F) ←→ large block (L)
50k
50k
900k
Analogously to the previous configuration, we set the initial condition of an outbreak going
on in block S with ES = 500 and no exposed in blocks F and L. The rules of the system are
such that people can only cross one border and return to their original block, people can not
cross two borders connecting blocks S and L. In comparison to the previous configuration, we
can visualize that we have added block F surrounding block S to control the infection spread
from S to L.
The main idea in this setup is to explore qualitatively whether adding a firewall block
around an outbreak can help to control the propagation to the rest of the city. The objective
is to study if this could happen while the rest of the city is having a more relaxed behavior
(L)
(larger βC ) than the small (S) and firewall (F) blocks. We first study how block F with a
fixed setup affects the dynamics of the system by just acting as a buffer. We then explore
8

different scenarios in which the evolution in the number of infected could trigger modifications
in the system setup to control the propagation in the large block.

Figure 3: Contour curves for 10% probability of widespread phase on the large block (L) for
two blocks setup (dashed lines) and three blocks setup (solid lines). In both cases there is
a small block (S) with an outbreak of 500 infected people, and a large block (L) with no
infected, but in the three blocks setup there is in addition a firewall block (F) in the middle
that acts as a buffer. Vertical lines correspond to R0 = 1 for each benchmark point and
(L)
the βC in the horizontal axis. The comparison of both curves shows the convenience of
introducing the firewall block F. More details in the text.
In the first scenario, we implement the firewall block F and study upon which conditions
there would be a probability larger than 10% of having a widespread phase in block L. This is
similar to the previous calculation, but with the new firewall block in between the outbreak
(L)
in block S and block L. We perform this study as a function of βC in block L and the
symmetric flux allowed between blocks S ↔ F and F ↔ L which, for simplicity, we consider
all equal. Results for the three Benchmark Points BP0, BP1 and BP2, and reproduction
(S)
(F )
numbers R0 = 0.9 and R0 = 1.05, are shown in Fig. 3 as continuous lines. As it can be
(L)
seen, for the same βC conditions in the large block, the firewall acting as a buffer has a
threshold flux which is one to two orders of magnitude larger than the case with no firewall.
This is the main result in this work. One could also read Fig. 3 as follows: for the same flux
(L)
and βC conditions, the firewall reduces the probability of a widespread phase in the large
block.
The reason for this behavior is that since only asymptomatic persons are allowed to cross
the borders, and people can only spend the day in their contiguous block, then it is less likely
9

that exposed people reach block L. The implementation of this firewall block in a real world
scenario would require, for instance, that supplies carried in a transport from block L to block
S switch driver in block F after correctly sanitizing the transport. The reason behind this
is that objects can be instantaneously sanitized, whereas there is no way of instantaneously
sanitizing people even if they do not show symptoms.
In a second stage, we study how this scenario could be improved if, by taking advantage of
the firewall block, the city can trigger special policies upon the evolution of the system. There
are many possible triggers to study, for the sake of concreteness we focus on two of them. In
a first case, we consider that if the number of infected people in the firewall block exceeds a
given threshold, then all fluxes are reduced to a given minimum. In Fig. 4a we show for this
setup the same 10% probability of widespread phase contour curves as in Fig. 3, while varying
the triggering conditions for BP0 and keeping the previous reproduction numbers. This case,
shows the clear convenience of having a triggering firewall for this benchmark point. However,
in other benchmark points with φM = 0.5 the improvement is negligible. The reason is that
even if the flux is restricted, the people with mild symptoms would be still crossing and
then would be equally likely to have the widespread phase in block L. In a second case, we
explore different initial conditions, trigger and change of rules. We analyze a case in which
(S)
(F )
(L)
reproduction numbers before triggering are R0 = 0.9, R0 = 1.1 and R0 = 1.5. We define
to trigger the change in rules when the number of infected in block L surpasses the number
of infected in the firewall block F. This is an important trigger because in this setup block L
has a considerable larger reproduction number than the firewall block F. The change of rules
(L)
upon triggering conditions is to reduce all fluxes to 100 people/day and R0 → 0.9, which is
a drastic change in behavior for the large block. In Fig. 4b we show the time evolution for
this setup with BP1.

4

Conclusion

We have studied the spread of an epidemic as COVID-19 for a city divided in blocks, between
which only a controlled flux of non-symptomatic people is allowed. In this proposed scenario
blocks are artificial divisions which may be based on existing natural or artificial separations,
or created ad-hoc.
We have considered a compartment model to describe the evolution of the epidemic and
we have added noise to the system to include stochastic processes. As a result, for R0 & 1
the outcome of the differential equations is well divided into two phases, namely fade-out and
widespread phases. Given the difficulty to make quantitative predictions, we have studied
some generic properties at a qualitative level.
In particular we have investigated the case of an outbreak in a specific neighborhood, which
is then separated from the rest of the city by a epidemiological barrier. We have estimated
the probability of having a widespread phase in the bulk of the city as function of the flux
between the blocks, the compartment contagion factors and the reproduction number. We
10

(a)

(b)

Figure 4: Two particular cases of a configuration with three blocks and firewall setup in
which a given condition triggers a change in the rules. In the left plot, when the number
of infected people in the firewall block (F) surpasses a given threshold, then all fluxes are
reduced as stated in legend box, in this case we show only BP0. In the right plot, using
(L)
BP1, we explore a scenario in which the large block (L) has a relaxed situation (R0 = 1.5)
until the number of infected in block L surpasses those in block F. This condition triggers a
(L)
reduction in the reproduction number R0 → 0.9 and all fluxes to 100 people/day. Dashed
lines show the evolution if the change of rules would have not been triggered. As expected, a
drastic reduction in the reproduction number in block L below 1 controls the widespread of
the epidemic.
obtained that, above the critical value R0 = 1, the 10% probability of a widespread reaches
very small fluxes with mild changes of R0 .
We have also considered the addition of an intermediate firewall block between the other
two, forbidding individuals to pass from the outbreak to the bulk. We found a considerable
improvement in controlling the epidemic by just using it as a buffer, allowing fluxes of one to
two orders of magnitude larger than in the case of no firewall. We have also studied options
of looking at specific variables which trigger flux and lock-down modifications in the system,
but we did not found relevant improvements beyond the firewall as a buffer. Further studies
in this direction may be fruitful.
The implementation of barriers has many complex social and logistic counterparts, which
are very important, that we have not considered. The aim of this work was to provide the
mathematical side of the modeling, as well as qualitative results of the proposed scenario, as
one of the necessary tools for an eventual political decision.
At last, it is worth observing that there are equivalent situations to which the results
obtained in this work could be translated. One of them is that, instead of considering blocks
within a city, one could apply these results to a set of regions, countries, or towns, as long
11

as similar conditions hold. In a similar manner it could happen that, instead of having an
outbreak, one has a specific region with no infected people in it. In such a case, implementing
a firewall around it would also result in an enhanced protection from the surrounding regions.

Acknowledgments
We thank Marcelo Kuperman for very fruitful discussions and for reading an early version of
this article, L.D. also thanks Fabiana Laguna and Damián Zanette for discussions and Centro
de Estudios Patagónicos for support.

Appendices
A

Stochastic implementation of the model

In this appendix we detail how Eqs. (1) are solved in a stochastic manner by introducing
several sources of fluctuations.
The system of Eqs. (1) is deterministic when the populations are continuous functions
of time and when the values of the parameters β, κ, φ have determined values. This is valid
when treating the disease as a population-level phenomenon, where individual cases do not
matter. However, in some cases the individual behavior can be important, particularly at the
onset of the disease, where most of the compartments are scarcely inhabited. This indicates
that, to reflect more accurately the evolution of the disease, some degree of non-deterministic
behavior must be incorporated into the model. In particular, given the same initial conditions,
it should be possible to reach different final states, especially in cases where the disease will
most likely stop propagating before infecting a large fraction of the susceptible population.
We incorporate this probabilistic aspect in a two-fold way. The first step is incorporated
naturally when solving the differential equations numerically. There, as detailed in sec. 2, we
set a time-step of one day and compute the change of the different populations according to
a discretized version of Eqs. (1). When discretizing the set of equations, besides discretizing
the time step, we take into account that the populations must be integer numbers and so the
changes, often non-integer real numbers, must be transformed into integers. This can be done
in a deterministic way by rounding or flooring. This transformation, although deterministic,
can prevent a change in a given population which would happen otherwise, as we need the
population change to be at least 0.5 (1.0) in magnitude when rounding (flooring) for it to
survive. To avoid this, we introduce here a stochastic rounding, which acts as a source of
fluctuations to the population change. This stochastic rounding acts on a quantity n+x, with
x its decimal part and n its integer part, as follows. By drawing a real number y distributed
uniformly between 0 and 1, if y ≤ x, the result of rounding n + x is n + 1, else the result is
12

n. This essentially means that the decimal part of the number acts as the probability for the
result of the rounding to be one plus the integer part of the number.
The second source of stochastic behavior appears when calculating the population changes
for each compartment. For a well defined set of parameters β and κ, the change is deterministic, however these parameters are statistical in nature and are misleading when applied
to individuals. Instead we use these statistical parameters to sample from probability distributions, where the number of samples is equal to the size of each compartment, and we
consider the average of these samples. This procedure makes small samples more prone to
fluctuations and large samples more deterministic, as we intend to. For the β parameters,
0
instead of calculating βX X with a fixed value for βX , we sample βX ∼ Norm(βX
,√
σX ), X
0
times. The sum of all these numbers is distributed around βX X, with a dispersion of XσX .
By doing this we allow for increments to have different values, especially in the limit of small
numbers. The other set of parameters that appear in the equations are the decay rates κY
for each species. For each term of the form κY Y , we sample Y values from an exponential
distribution with scale parameter τY :
− τt

tY ∼

e

Y

τY

(6)

And take the mean of these values as the inverse of the decay rate, that is κY = <t1Y > . The
scale of these fluctuations is constrained by the exponential distribution having the same
deviation.
Doing the above amounts to having noise added to central values of the parameters, thus
having a different set of values at each step of the time evolution. Along this work we take
σX to be sufficiently small for the β fluctuations not to play any significant role.
The addition of stochastic fluctuations in the model allows for extinctions of the disease
to occur, in cases where in a deterministic model they do not. For instance, for a basic
reproduction number larger than 1, in a deterministic model there is always an exponential
growth of the epidemic. However, for a stochastic model, there can be realizations in which
the disease fades out before being able to infect a sizeable part of the population. This is
usually referred to as noise-induced phase transitions.
The code is implemented in Python 3 and can be made available upon request.

B

Interconnected blocks

In this appendix we describe how the extension of the model to include movement between
different blocks is done. We consider that a population is divided into several locations,
each one being described by the quantities of Eqs. (1), that we refer to with a block index,
Si , Pi , etc. Now we want to modify this set of equations to take into account how individuals
can move from one block to another during the day and in this way infect people from places
13

different than those they reside in. This represents people commuting to work in a part of
the city that is different from the one they live in. Doing this would amount to allowing the
β coefficients in the above model to have two sets of indices, representing both initial and
final blocks, i.e. β ij . However, we wish to also account for healthy individuals, traveling away
from their own block, that may get infected at a different block. It is for this reason that we
find better to parameterize new contagions in the following way. We consider having infection
i
rates at each block, of each kind βPi , βM
, βCi . In addition, we parameterize the movement of
people between different blocks by using a Flux matrix Fij . This matrix has certain properties
and constraints to obey. Fij represents people from block j that are currently at block i. For
this reason, for a specific moment, the sum over a certain column of this matrix has to be
equal to the total amount of “available people“ originating from that block. This means
X
Fji = Ni − Hi
(7)
j

Here we discretize the time evolution in the equations, into day-long steps. This means that
rates are measured in units of day−1 . This is done in order to have a well defined meaning for
the flux matrix, and to calculate the new infected per day as a function of the flux matrix,
and the rates of infection per block. We consider then, that the flux matrix represents on a
single day the amount of people from each of the blocks that spend the day in another block.
We can thus calculate, for a specific target block i, how many people are present on a single
day, as the sum over a row of the flux matrix,
X
Fil
(8)
N̂i =
l

In the same way, we can use this matrix to calculate how many contagious and susceptible
people from every block can be present at target block i on a given day. As we are assuming
that there are epidemiological barriers between blocks, these keep contagious people from
traveling between blocks. Basically, we do not allow for people from compartments C and C 0
to leave their own blocks. With these restrictions, the way the disease can go from one block
with the disease to another block is either with the travel of pre-symptomatic individuals
P , people with a mild or asymptomatic version of the disease M , or with susceptible people
acquiring the disease and bringing it back to their original block. These restrictions on travel
translate into constraints on the allowed values in the flux matrix. We can see this acts as a
bound on the maximum amount of people leaving a certain block into different ones
!
X
max
Fji = Si + Ei + Pi + Ri + Mi = Ni − Hi − Ci − Ci0
(9)
j6=i

or as a bound on the minimum value that the diagonal element can have, that is the amount
of people remaining in their block of origin:
min (Fii ) = Ci + Ci0
14

(10)

Now, with this in mind we can calculate the amount of pre-symptomatic individuals coming
into target block i from different blocks as
X
Fik Pk
(11)
Nk − Hk − Ck − Ck0
k6=i
Whereas the number of pre-symptomatic individuals remaining in their block of origin i has a
different expression, that can be found by requiring that the total number of pre-symptomatic
leaving from block i add up to Pi . That is,
X
Fji Pi
Piremain = Pi − Pileave = Pi −
Ni − Hi − Ci − Ci0
j6=i
P


Fii − (Ci + Ci0 )
j Fji − Fii
= Pi 1 −
=
P
(12)
i
Ni − Hi − Ci − Ci0
Ni − Hi − Ci − Ci0
Which can be shortened by writing Ci + Ci0 = min (Fii ). Using this, we can express the total
amount of pre-symptomatic individuals at a given block as


min(F )
X Fik Pk 1 − δik Fii ii
N̂Pi =
(13)
0
N
k − Hk − Ck − Ck
k
A similar expression gives the amount of susceptible and of mild individuals at target block
i. The number of individuals from compartments C and C 0 are simply Ci and Ci0 , as they
cannot travel between blocks. The number of new infections happening at this block is then
calculated as the first equation Eqs. (1).

N̂ i 
i
i
∆N̂Ei = S βPi N̂Pi + βM
N̂M
+ βCi (Ci + Ci0 )
(14)
N̂ i
This gives the number of new infections occurring at this block i. This, however, does not
correspond directly to the number that must be added to Ei . We have to distribute these
infections over all the blocks that contributed with susceptible individuals to this block, and
we do so following the proportions of susceptible from each block over the total susceptible
at target block. That is, the contribution of new infected to block n happening at block i is


ii )
Fin Sn 1 − δin min(F
Fii
∆N̂Ei
i
(15)
∆En =
Nn − Hn − Cn − Cn0 N̂Si
If we now add over the block where the infections are happening (i), we get the total number
of daily new infections for people of block n as



min(F )
X
X Fin Fik Sn 1 − δin Fii ii


P
∆En =
∆Eni =
0
F
N
−
H
−
C
−
C
il
n
n
n
n
l
i
ik


( P
)
ii )
(βi Pk + βiM Mk ) 1 − δik min(F
Fii
δik βiC (Ci + Ci0 )
×
+
(16)
Nk − Hk − Ck − Ck0
Fii
15

References
[1] G. Giordano, F. Blanchini, R. Bruno, P. Colaneri, A. Di Filippo, A. Di Matteo et al.,
Modelling the covid-19 epidemic and implementation of population-wide interventions
in italy, Nature Medicine 26 (Apr, 2020) 855–860.
[2] S. Contreras, H. A. Villavicencio, D. Medina-Ortiz, J. P. Biron-Lattes and Álvaro
Olivera-Nappa, A multi-group seira model for the spread of covid-19 among
heterogeneous populations, Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 136 (2020) 109925.
[3] A. F. Siegenfeld and Y. Bar-Yam, Eliminating covid-19: The impact of travel and
timing, arXiv (2020) .
[4] E. Tagliazucchi, P. Balenzuela, M. Travizano, G. Mindlin and P. Mininni, Lessons from
being challenged by covid-19, Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 137 (2020) 109923.
[5] A. Mahajan, R. Solanki and N. Sivadas, Estimation of undetected symptomatic and
asymptomatic cases of covid-19 infection and prediction of its spread in usa, medRxiv
(2020) .
[6] S. Flaxman, S. Mishra, A. Gandy, H. Unwin, T. Mellan, H. Coupland et al., Estimating
the effects of non-pharmaceutical interventions on covid-19 in europe, Nature 584 (08,
2020) .
[7] G. R. Shinde, A. B. Kalamkar, P. N. Mahalle, N. Dey, J. Chaki and A. E. Hassanien,
Forecasting models for coronavirus disease (covid-19): A survey of the state-of-the-art,
SN Computer Science 1 (Jun, 2020) 197.
[8] J. Friedman, P. Liu and E. Gakidou, Predictive performance of international covid-19
mortality forecasting models, medRxiv (2020) .
[9] N. Ferguson, D. Laydon, G. Nedjati-Gilani, N. Imai, K. Ainslie, M. Baguelin et al.,
Report 9: Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (npis) to reduce covid-19
mortality and healthcare demand, Imperial College COVID-19 Response Team (03,
2020) .
[10] S. I. Hay, Covid-19 scenarios for the united states, medRxiv (2020) .
[11] M. N. Kuperman, Invited review: Epidemics on social networks, Papers in Physics 5
(Jun, 2013) .

16

