Visualizing droplet dispersal for face shields and masks with exhalation
valves
Siddhartha Verma,1, a) Manhar Dhanak,1, b) and John Frankenfield1, c)
Department of Ocean and Mechanical Engineering, Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton,
FL 33431, USA

arXiv:2008.00125v1 [physics.flu-dyn] 31 Jul 2020

(Dated: 4 August 2020)

Several places across the world are experiencing a steep surge in COVID-19 infections. Face masks have become
increasingly accepted as one of the most effective means for combating the spread of the disease, when used in combination with social-distancing and frequent hand-washing. However, there is an increasing trend of people substituting
regular cloth or surgical masks with clear plastic face shields, and with masks equipped with exhalation valves. One
of the factors driving this increased adoption is improved comfort compared to regular masks. However, there is a
possibility that widespread public use of these alternatives to regular masks could have an adverse effect on mitigation
efforts. To help increase public awareness regarding the effectiveness of these alternative options, we use qualitative
visualizations to examine the performance of face shields and exhalation valves in impeding the spread of aerosol-sized
droplets. The visualizations indicate that although face shields block the initial forward motion of the jet, the expelled
droplets can move around the visor with relative ease and spread out over a large area depending on light ambient
disturbances. Visualizations for a mask equipped with an exhalation port indicate that a large number of droplets pass
through the exhale valve unfiltered, which significantly reduces its effectiveness as a means of source control. Our
observations suggest that to minimize the community spread of COVID-19, it may be preferable to use high quality
cloth or surgical masks that are of a plain design, instead of face shields and masks equipped with exhale valves.
The COVID-19 pandemic has deeply affected every aspect
of daily life worldwide. Several places across the world, including the United States, Brazil, and India, are experiencing
a steep surge in infections. Healthcare systems in the most
severely affected locations have been stretched to capacity,
which also tends to impact urgent care for cases unrelated to
COVID-191,2 . Researchers have reported steady progress in
the development of potential treatments and vaccines, however, it is estimated that widespread inoculation will not be
available until sometime in the year 2021. It appears that
the likelihood of vulnerable individuals struggling with severe
health issues, and debilitating socio-economic ramifications
of the pandemic, will continue in the foreseeable future. Furthermore, widespread uncertainty regarding the re-opening of
schools and universities for in-person instruction has created
additional cause for concern, since these institutions have the
potential to become focal points for unchecked community
spread of the disease. In light of the acute circumstances, it
has become crucial to establish clear and specific guidelines
that can help mitigate the disease’s spread, especially given
the high prevalence of asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic
spread3 . A number of recent studies have contributed to this
effort, by significantly improving our understanding of various physical mechanisms involved in the disease’s transmission4–7 .
Face masks have become increasingly accepted as one of
the most effective means for source control (i.e., protecting
others from a potentially infected wearer), and can help curb

a) Electronic

mail: vermas@fau.edu; http://www.computation.fau.edu; Also
at Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institute, Florida Atlantic University, Fort
Pierce, FL 34946, USA
b) Electronic mail: dhanak@fau.edu
c) Electronic mail: jfranken@fau.edu

the community spread of the disease when used in combination with social-distancing and frequent hand-washing8–12 .
Widespread mask-use by the general population has now been
recommended or mandated in various places and communities around the world. Several private businesses have also
adopted requirements for customers to use face coverings.
Importantly, certain cloth-based masks have been shown to
be effective in blocking the forward spread of aerosolized
droplets13 (Supplementary Movie 1). Although they are
somewhat less capable than well-fitted medical grade masks,
homemade masks constructed using certain materials can filter out a large proportion of respiratory droplets and particles14–19 . Moreover, cloth masks have the advantage of being
readily available to the wider public, in addition to being costeffective, comfortable, and reusable when washed and disinfected properly. Additionally, they do not divert away from
the supply of medical grade masks for healthcare workers.
While broad acceptance regarding the need for face coverings has risen steadily, there is an increasing trend of people
substituting regular cloth or surgical masks with clear plastic
face shields, and with masks equipped with exhalation valves
(Figure 1). Face shields tend to have noticeable gaps along the
bottom and the sides, and are used in the medical community
primarily for protecting the wearer against incoming sprays
and splashes while in close proximity to patients20 . Moreover,
they tend to be used in conjunction with respirators, surgical
masks, or other protective equipment. Masks with exhalation
ports include a one-way valve which restricts airflow when
breathing in, but allows free outflow of air. The inhaled air
gets filtered through the mask material, however, the exhaled
breath passes through the valve unfiltered. There has been
limited research on how effective face shields and masks with
exhalation valves are as a means of source control21,22 .
One of the factors driving the increased adoption of shields
and exhalation valves is improved comfort compared to regu-

2

(a)

(b)

FIG. 1: (a) A face shield, which is similar in design to those
used by healthcare workers in conjunction with masks and
other protective equipment. The vertical laser sheet used for
visualizing the expelled droplets is visible in this panel. (b)
An N95 mask with an exhalation valve located at the front.
Both cloth-based and N95 masks can be found equipped with
such exhalation ports.

lar surgical or cloth masks. Exhale valves allow for improved
breathability, and reduce humidity and fogging when wearing
prescription glasses. Face shields also offer these benefits, in
addition to protecting the eyes from splashes and sprays of
infected droplets20,23 . Shields have also been credited with
other advantages such as ease of cleaning and disinfecting,
long-term reusability (which is also true for well-constructed
cloth masks), and allowing visual communication of facial expressions for people who may be hearing-impaired20,24 .
Notably, a recent opinion-based article by Perencevich et
al.24 suggested that shields may be a better alternative to regular masks for combating the COVID-19 crisis. The authors’
opinion is based on the premise that ejecta from the mouth
and nose hit the visor, and their forward motion is arrested
completely. While this is true for relatively large respiratory
droplets, the effect on the smaller aerosol-sized droplets (diameter less than approximately 5µm−10µm) is markedly different, since they act as tracers and have a higher tendency to
follow airflow patterns more faithfully. We note that one of
the primary studies cited by Perencevich et al. expressly indicates that face shields did not serve as primary respiratory protection for the wearer in experimental tests, since suspended
aerosols could flow around the visor and enter the respiratory tract23 . Over an exposure duration of 1 to 30 minutes,
the shield was only 23% effective in reducing inhalation of
droplets that were 3.4µm on average. Although this study by
Lidsley et al.23 did not consider face shields as source control methods, they are likely to suffer the same disadvantage
in this role, since smaller outgoing droplets will flow around
the bottom and the sides of the visor. While the opinion article
by Perencevich et al.24 is based on the presumption that trans-

mission of COVID-19 occurs primarily through larger respiratory droplets, recent studies support the possibility of airborne
transmission via aerosol-sized droplets25–28 .
Current CDC guidelines discourage the use of face shields
as a sole means of source control29 , and mention that masks
equipped with exhalation valves should not be used when a
sterile environment is required30 . At the same time, there
are broad variations in recommendations made by states and
counties across the US, with some allowing the use of face
shields as alternatives to masks31,32 , whereas many others
do not address the issue at all. There is a possibility that
widespread public adoption of these alternatives to regular
masks could have an adverse effect on mitigation efforts. To
help increase public awareness regarding the effectiveness of
these alternative options, we use qualitative visualizations to
examine the performance of face shields and exhale valves in
impeding droplet spread.
The visualization setup used here is similar to the arrangement used in a prior study13 which examined the effectiveness of various facemasks in stopping the spread of respiratory jets. The setup consists of a hollow manikin head, where
a cough/sneeze is emulated via a pressure impulse applied using a manual pump. The air capacity of the pump is 500ml,
which is comparable to the lower end of the total volume expelled during a cough33 . Tracers composed of droplets of
distilled water and glycerin are expelled through the mouth
opening, and are visualized using laser sheets to observe the
spatial and temporal development of the ejected flow. Up to
two laser sheets are used in the visualizations presented here,
to provide a better indication of the volumetric spread of the
expelled jet. The tracer droplets’ diameter was estimated to
be less than 10µm, based on Stokes’ law and the observation
that they could remained suspended in a quiescent environment for between 2 to 3 minutes without significant settling.
The settling velocity for spheres in Stokes flow (i.e., at very
low Reynolds numbers) is given as follows:
v=

(ρ p − ρ f )gd 2
,
18µ

(1)

where ρ p is the density of the spherical particle, ρ f is the density of the ambient fluid (air), µ is the dynamic viscosity, g
is acceleration due to gravity, and d is the diameter of the
sphere. Using the density of water as an approximation for
ρ p , and d = 1e − 5m, we get a settling speed of 0.003m/s.
Thus, a droplet of diameter 10µm would fall a distance of
0.45m in 150s, i.e., in 2.5 minutes. From our observations in a
minimally disturbed environment, the droplets did not display
significant downward gravity-driven settling within this timeframe. The droplets eventually disappeared from view, either
because they moved laterally off the laser sheet, or because
they experienced further evaporation. Additional details regarding the visualization setup may be found in ref.13 . We remark that the all of the flows described in this work are inherently three-dimensional in nature, but the visualizations only
depict plane two-dimensional cross-sections. For instance, the
uncovered emulated cough shown in Supplementary Movie
1 displays three-dimensional behavior, such as the motion of
the leading plume which resembles the formation of a vortex

3
ring. The lateral (sideways) motion of the jets is also evident at
times when the visible droplet patches disappear or re-appear
in the laser sheet.
Figure 2 (Multimedia View) shows the evolution of a
cough/sneeze when a face shield is used to impede the expelled jet. As expected, the visor initially deflects the expelled
droplets downward (Figure 2b). However, the aerosol-sized
droplets do not fall to the ground, but stay suspended beneath
the bottom opening of the shield (Figure 2c). These droplets
rise upward after a few seconds since they are warmer than
the ambient air owing to the vaporized glycerin-water mixture, and also because they might undergo further evaporation
once released into the environment. A horizontal laser sheet
has been used in addition to a vertical sheet, and the lateral
spread of the droplets becomes visible as they cross the horizontal plane in Figures 2c and 2d. Although the case depicted
here shows droplets spreading in the forward direction, slight
variations in ambient disturbances were observed to reverse
the direction of spread, i.e., towards the manikin’s back. The
time evolution of droplet spread from an additional run with a
faceshield can be seen in Supplementary Movie 2.
To observe the lateral and longitudinal spread of the suspended droplets over a large area, we examine a far-field view
in Figure 3 (Multimedia View). The manikin’s position is
shown as an overlay in Figure 3a, where the ejected droplets
are visible in a horizontal and a vertical laser sheet, which
help convey the spread of the droplets in the lateral and longitudinal directions. The positioning of the laser planes is depicted in Figure 3b. After 10 seconds (Figure 3c), the droplets
were observed to have spread approximately 3 feet in both
the forward and lateral directions. We note that the intensity
of the scattered light has decreased noticeably by this point,
which is indicative of a decrease in droplet concentration due
to spreading over a large volume. Most of the droplets visible in Figure 3c are illuminated by the horizontal sheet shown
in Figure 3b, which is aligned with the bottom opening of
the face shield. Very few droplets are visible in the vertical
laser sheet, since most of them have advected forward of the
sheet’s position by this time. We remark that both the longitudinal and lateral spread depend on a combination of the initial
momentum of the cough and advection by very light ambient
disturbances. While the specific case discussed here depicts
forward spread, we observed that it was equally likely that
the droplets could spread in the reverse direction, i.e., behind
the manikin. We do not expect diffusion to play a dominant
role at the time scales discussed here. Overall, we can surmise that the face shield blocks the initial forward motion of
the jet, however the aerosolized droplets that are expelled can
disperse over a wide area over time, albeit with decreasing
droplet concentration.
We now consider the effectiveness of masks equipped
with exhalation valves in restricting the spread of respiratory
droplets. Figure 4 (Multimedia View) shows the spatial and
temporal evolution of the jets that emerge from an N95 mask
which has a single exhalation port located at the front. Apart
from the design used here, certain cloth-based masks that are
available commercially also come equipped with one to two
exhale ports, located on either side of the facemask. In Fig-

ures 4b and 4c, we observe that a small amount of the exhaled
droplets escape from the gap between the top of the mask and
the bridge of the nose. However, a majority of the exhaled air
passes through the exhale port unhindered. The resulting jet is
deflected downward in the current case, which reduces the initial forward spread of the droplets. However, the aerosolized
droplets will eventually disperse over a large area depending
on the ambient disturbances and airflow patterns, as in the case
of the face shield (Figure 3).
We now examine the droplet dispersal pattern when using a regular N95-rated mask in Figure 5 (Multimedia View).
Once again, we observe droplets escaping from the gap between the mask and the nose, however, the intensity of light
scattered by the escaped droplets is lower than that for the
valved N95 mask (Figure 4d). We note that the droplets that
escape from the regular mask will also get dispersed by ambient disturbances, however, the extent of exposure will be
lower compared to that for either face shields or masks with
valves. While the two masks shown in Figures 4 and 5 are
N95-rated, we expect the observations described here (with
regard to valves) to hold true even for cloth/surgical masks
that are of a plain functional design versus those equipped
with exhale valves.
In order to determine the performance of plain ‘surgical’
masks in comparison to the N95-rated masks, we examine two
different commercially available face masks in Figure 6 (Multimedia View) and Figure 7 (Multimedia View). We note that
neither of the two ‘surgical’ masks tested here were recommended for medical use by the manufacturers. Such masks are
becoming increasingly available commercially from a wide
range of manufacturers, and they are seeing widespread adoption by the general population for regular use. We observe in
Figure 6 that the first surgical mask tested (brand ‘A’) is very
effective in stopping the forward progression of the jet. As expected, there is some leakage from the gap along the top of the
mask, however it is not excessive, and it is comparable qualitatively to leakage from the regular N95-rated mask shown in
Figure 5. On the other hand, the second surgical mask (brand
‘B’) which is shown in Figure 7 displays significantly higher
leakage of droplets through the mask material, and does not
appear to be as effective as the first surgical mask (brand ‘A’)
in restricting droplet spread. This indicates that even among
commercially available masks which may appear to be similar
superficially, there can be significant underlying differences in
the quality and type of materials used for manufacturing the
masks.
To summarize, we have examined the effectiveness of face
shields and masks equipped with exhalation ports in mitigating the spread of exhaled respiratory droplets. The aim of
the qualitative visualizations presented here is to help increase
public awareness regarding the effectiveness of these alternatives to regular masks. We observe that face shields are able
to block the initial forward motion of the exhaled jet, however, aerosolized droplets expelled with the jet are able to
move around the visor with relative ease. Over time, these
droplets can disperse over a wide area in both the lateral and
longitudinal directions, albeit with decreasing droplet concentration. We have also compared droplet dispersal from a

4

(a)

(b)

Horizontal
sheet

Ve r t i c a l
sheet

(c)

(d)

FIG. 2: Near-field view of droplet spread when a face shield is used to impede the emerging jet. (a) Prior to emulating a
cough/sneeze. (b) 0.57 seconds after the initiation of the emulated cough. (c) 3.83 seconds. (d) 16.57 seconds. The ejected
plume is illuminated by both a vertical and a horizontal laser sheet. Droplets illuminated by the horizontal laser sheet can be
observed in (c) and (d). (Multimedia View)

regular N95-rated face mask to one equipped with an exhale
valve. As expected, the exhalation port significantly reduces
the effectiveness of the mask as a means of source control,
as a large number of droplets pass through the valve unfiltered. Notably, shields impede forward motion of the exhaled droplets to some extent, and masks with valves do so
to an even lesser extent. However, once released into the environment, the aerosol-sized droplets get dispersed widely depending on light ambient disturbances. Overall, the visuals
presented here indicate that face shields and masks with exhale valves may not be as effective as regular face masks in
restricting the spread of aerosolized droplets. Thus, despite
the increased comfort that these alternatives offer, it may be
preferable to use well-constructed plain masks. There is a possibility that widespread public adoption of the alternatives, in
lieu of regular masks, could have an adverse effect on ongoing
mitigation efforts against COVID-19.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL

Please see supplementary material for additional videos regarding the effectiveness of various types of facemasks and a
face shield.
DATA AVAILABILITY

The data that supports the findings of this study is available
within the article.
1 E.

J. Emanuel, G. Persad, R. Upshur, B. Thome, M. Parker, A. Glickman, C. Zhang, C. Boyle, M. Smith, and J. P. Phillips, “Fair Allocation
of Scarce Medical Resources in the Time of Covid-19,” New England Journal of Medicine 382, 2049–2055 (2020).
2 K. Søreide, J. Hallet, J. B. Matthews, A. A. Schnitzbauer, P. D. Line, P. B. S.
Lai, J. Otero, D. Callegaro, S. G. Warner, N. N. Baxter, C. S. C. Teh, J. NgKamstra, J. G. Meara, L. Hagander, and L. Lorenzon, “Immediate and

5

(a)

(b)

3 ft

3 ft

(c)

FIG. 3: Far-field view of droplet spread when a face shield is used to impede the jet. (a) 2.97 seconds after the initiation of the
emulated cough. (b) 6.98 seconds. (c) 10.77 seconds. (Multimedia view)

long-term impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on delivery of surgical services,” The British Journal of Surgery (2020), 10.1002/bjs.11670.
3 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “COVID-19 Pandemic Planning Scenarios,” https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-

ncov/hcp/planning-scenarios.html (May, 2020).
Dbouk and D. Drikakis, “On coughing and airborne droplet transmission
to humans,” Physics of Fluids 32, 053310 (2020).

4 T.

6

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

FIG. 4: Visualization of droplet spread when an N95 mask equipped with an exhalation port is used to impede the emerging
jet. (a) Prior to emulating a cough/sneeze. (b) 0.2 seconds after the initiation of the emulated cough. (c) 0.63 seconds. (d) 1.67
seconds. (Multimedia View)

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

FIG. 5: Visualization of droplet spread when a regular N95-rated mask is used to impede the jet. (a) Prior to emulating a
cough/sneeze. (b) 0.13 seconds after the initiation of the emulated cough. (c) 0.33 seconds. (d) 0.83 seconds. (Multimedia
View)

5 R.

Bhardwaj and A. Agrawal, “Likelihood of survival of coronavirus in
a respiratory droplet deposited on a solid surface,” Physics of Fluids 32,

061704 (2020).

7

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

FIG. 6: Visualization of droplet spread when a surgical mask (brand ‘A’) is used to block the jet. (a) Prior to emulating a
cough/sneeze. (b) 0.37 seconds after the initiation of the emulated cough. (c) 0.62 seconds. (d) 2.33 seconds. (Multimedia
View)

6 G.

Busco, S. R. Yang, J. Seo, and Y. A. Hassan, “Sneezing and asymptomatic virus transmission,” Physics of Fluids 32, 073309 (2020).
7 S. Chaudhuri, S. Basu, P. Kabi, V. R. Unni, and A. Saha, “Modeling the
role of respiratory droplets in Covid-19 type pandemics,” Physics of Fluids
32, 063309 (2020).
8 K. K. Cheng, T. H. Lam, and C. C. Leung, “Wearing face masks in the
community during the COVID-19 pandemic: altruism and solidarity,” The
Lancet (2020), 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30918-1.
9 C. M. Clase, E. L. Fu, M. Joseph, R. C. L. Beale, M. B. Dolovich,
M. Jardine, J. F. E. Mann, R. Pecoits-Filho, W. C. Winkelmayer, and
J. J. Carrero, “Cloth Masks May Prevent Transmission of COVID-19:
An Evidence-Based, Risk-Based Approach,” Annals of Internal Medicine
(2020), 10.7326/M20-2567.
10 J. T. Brooks, J. C. Butler, and R. R. Redfield, “Universal Masking to Prevent SARS-CoV-2 Transmission—The Time Is Now,” JAMA - Journal of
the American Medical Association (2020), 10.1001/jama.2020.13107.
11 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Social Distancing, Quarantine, and Isolation,” https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/preventgetting-sick/social-distancing.html (May, 2020).
12 T. Dbouk and D. Drikakis, “On respiratory droplets and face masks,”
Physics of Fluids 32, 063303 (2020).
13 S. Verma, M. Dhanak, and J. Frankenfield, “Visualizing the effectiveness
of face masks in obstructing respiratory jets,” Physics of Fluids 32, 061708
(2020).
14 S. Rengasamy, B. Eimer, and R. E. Shaffer, “Simple Respiratory Protection—Evaluation of the Filtration Performance of Cloth Masks and Common Fabric Materials Against 20–1000 nm Size Particles,” The Annals of
Occupational Hygiene 54, 789–798 (2010).
15 A. Davies, K.-A. Thompson, K. Giri, G. Kafatos, J. Walker, and A. Bennett, “Testing the efficacy of homemade masks: Would they protect in an

influenza pandemic?” Disaster Medicine and Public Health Preparedness 7,
413–418 (2013).
16 S. Bae, M.-C. Kim, J. Y. Kim, H.-H. Cha, J. S. Lim, J. Jung, M.-J. Kim,
D. K. Oh, M.-K. Lee, S.-H. Choi, M. Sung, S.-B. Hong, J.-W. Chung,
and S.-H. Kim, “Effectiveness of Surgical and Cotton Masks in Blocking
SARS-CoV-2: A Controlled Comparison in 4 Patients,” Annals of internal
medicine , M20–1342 (2020).
17 A. Konda, A. Prakash, G. A. Moss, M. Schmoldt, G. D. Grant, and S. Guha,
“Aerosol Filtration Efficiency of Common Fabrics Used in Respiratory
Cloth Masks,” ACS Nano 14, 6339–6347 (2020).
18 S. R. Lustig, J. J. H. Biswakarma, D. Rana, S. H. Tilford, W. Hu, M. Su,
and M. S. Rosenblatt, “Effectiveness of Common Fabrics to Block Aqueous
Aerosols of Virus-like Nanoparticles,” ACS Nano 14, 7651–7658 (2020).
19 Q.-X. Ma, H. Shan, H.-L. Zhang, G.-M. Li, R.-M. Yang, and J.-M. Chen,
“Potential utilities of mask-wearing and instant hand hygiene for fighting
SARS-CoV-2,” Journal of Medical Virology n/a, 10.1002/jmv.25805.
20 R. J. Roberge, “Face shields for infection control: A review,” Journal
of Occupational and Environmental Hygiene 13, 235–242 (2016), pMID:
26558413.
21 M. Ippolito, P. Iozzo, C. Gregoretti, G. Grasselli, and A. Cortegiani, “Facepiece filtering respirators with exhalation valve should not be used in the
community to limit sars-cov-2 diffusion,” Infection Control & Hospital Epidemiology , 1–2 (2020).
22 I. M. Viola, B. Peterson, G. Pisetta, G. Pavar, H. Akhtar, F. Menoloascina,
E. Mangano, K. E. Dunn, R. Gabl, A. Nila, E. Molinari, C. Cummins,
G. Thompson, C. M. McDougall, T. Y. M. Lo, F. C. Denison, P. Digard, O. Malik, M. J. G. Dunn, and F. Mehendale, “Face coverings,
aerosol dispersion and mitigation of virus transmission risk,” (2020),
arXiv:2005.10720 [physics.med-ph].

8

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

FIG. 7: Visualization of droplet spread when a surgical mask (brand ‘B’) is used to block the jet. (a) Prior to emulating a
cough/sneeze. (b) 0.5 seconds after the initiation of the emulated cough. (c) 0.83 seconds. (d) 3.13 seconds. (Multimedia View)

23 W.

G. Lindsley, J. D. Noti, F. M. Blachere, J. V. Szalajda, and D. H.
Beezhold, “Efficacy of face shields against cough aerosol droplets from a
cough simulator,” Journal of Occupational and Environmental Hygiene 11,
509–518 (2014).
24 E. N. Perencevich, D. J. Diekema, and M. B. Edmond, “Moving Personal
Protective Equipment Into the Community: Face Shields and Containment
of COVID-19,” JAMA - Journal of the American Medical Association 323,
2252–2253 (2020).
25 L. Morawska and D. K. Milton, “It is Time to Address Airborne
Transmission of COVID-19,” Clinical Infectious Diseases (2020),
10.1093/cid/ciaa939.
26 Y. Liu, Z. Ning, Y. Chen, M. Guo, Y. Liu, N. K. Gali, L. Sun, Y. Duan,
J. Cai, D. Westerdahl, X. Liu, K. Xu, K.-f. Ho, H. Kan, Q. Fu, and K. Lan,
“Aerodynamic analysis of SARS-CoV-2 in two Wuhan hospitals,” Nature
(2020).
27 S. W. X. Ong, Y. K. Tan, P. Y. Chia, T. H. Lee, O. T. Ng, M. S. Y. Wong,
and K. Marimuthu, “Air, Surface Environmental, and Personal Protective
Equipment Contamination by Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) From a Symptomatic Patient,” JAMA - Journal of

the American Medical Association 323, 1610–1612 (2020).
Cai, W. Sun, J. Huang, M. Gamber, J. Wu, and G. He, “Indirect Virus
Transmission in Cluster of COVID-19 Cases, Wenzhou, China, 2020,”
Emerging infectious diseases 26, 1343–1345 (2020).
29 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “COVID-19: Considerations
for Wearing Cloth Face Coverings,” (2020).
30 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Personal Protective Equipment: Questions and Answers,” (2020).
31 Oregon
Health
Authority,
“Statewide
Mask,
Face
Shield,
Face
Covering
Guidance,”
https://sharedsystems.dhsoha.state.or.us/DHSForms/Served/le2288k.pdf
(2020).
32 State of North Carolina, “Extension of phase 2 order and
new measures to save lives in the COVID-19 pandemic,”
https://files.nc.gov/governor/documents/files/EO147-Phase-2Extension.pdf (2020).
33 J. K. Gupta, C.-H. Lin, and Q. Chen, “Flow dynamics and characterization
of a cough,” Indoor Air 19, 517–525 (2009).

28 J.

