Cui and Kertész

REGULAR ARTICLE

arXiv:2008.04418v1 [physics.soc-ph] 10 Aug 2020

Attention dynamics on the Chinese social media
Sina Weibo during the COVID-19 pandemic
Hao Cui and János Kertész*
*Correspondence: kerteszj@ceu.edu
Department of Network and Data Science, Central European University, Quellenstrasse 51, A-1100, Vienna, Austria

Abstract
COVID-19 was first detected in Hubei province of China and has had severe
impact on the life in the country since then. We investigate how this epidemic
has influenced attention dynamics on the biggest Chinese microblogging website
Sina Weibo in the period December 16, 2019 – April 17, 2020. We focus on the
real-time Hot Search List (HSL), which provides the ranking of the most popular
50 hashtags based on the amount of Sina Weibo searches on them. We show, how
the specific events, measures and developments during the epidemic affected the
emergence of new hashtags and the ranking on the HSL. A significant increase of
COVID-19 related hashtags started to occur on HSL around January 20, 2020,
when the transmission of the disease between humans was announced. Then very
rapidly a situation was reached, where the participation of the COVID-related
hashtags occupied 30-70% of the HSL, however, with changing content. We give
an analysis of how the hashtag topics changed during the investigated time span
and conclude that there are three periods separated by February 12 and March
12. In period 1, we see strong topical correlations and clustering of hashtags; in
period 2, the correlations are weakened, without clustering pattern; in period 3,
we see potential of clustering while not as strong as in period 1. To quantify the
dynamics of HSL we measured the lifetimes of hashtags on the list and the rank
diversity at given ranks. Our observations indicate attention diversification since
the COVID-19 outbreak in Mainland China and a higher rank diversity at the top
15 ranks on HSL due to the COVID-19 related hashtags, a drastic attention
decay shortly after the outburst and a slower decay for a longer period.
Keywords: Public Attention Dynamics; COVID-19; Social Media; Ranking

1 Introduction
In our times of information deluge the dynamics of public attention is of eminent
importance from many aspects, including education, politics, marketing and governance. On the new media the flow of information has dramatically accelerated,
leading often to rapidly changing public attention. At the same time these media provide unprecedented possibilities to study attention dynamics [1, 2] as they
produce Big Data open for investigation. The microblogging service Twitter [3] is
particularly suited to provide the basis for quantitative studies on the dynamics of
public attention as the content of the messages is available [4]. Accordingly, Twitter data have been used to identify classes of dynamical collective attention [5],
investigate party-related activity and its predictive power for elections [6] as well as

Cui and Kertész

Page 2 of 22

modeling of the related attention dynamics [7] or study the relationship of public
attention and social emotions [8].
Public attention becomes a focal issue in times of crises like pandemics. As early
as 2010, four years after it was launched, Twitter was shown to be an adequate, realtime content, sentiment, and public attention trend-tracking tool [9] and was used
to study rapidly-evolving public sentiment with respect to the epidemic H1N1 [10].
The analysis of tweets enabled to quantify the difference between attention and
fear and their distance-dependence in the case of the Ebola epidemic [11]. Even for
the present pandemic COVID-19, the first Twitter studies on public attention have
occurred [12, 13] mainly focusing on the perception of policies by the public.
During a critical time of the Spring Festival travel rush, Wuhan, the capital city
of Hubei province was reported to be the first COVID-19 epicenter. The service of
Twitter is blocked in China, but its local substitute, Sina Weibo is very popular [14],
therefore it is natural to use data from Weibo for similar purposes as was introduced
earlier for Twitter in other countries. Posts on Sina Weibo are predominantly in
Chinese, which causes a language barrier, however, scientists have already recognized that this microblogging service provides important insight into the function
of the Chinese society [15, 16]. Recently some studies have appeared dealing with
the reaction of Sina Weibo on the COVID-19 analyzing, e.g., the propagation of
situational information [17].
In this study we focus on the attention dynamics in the period of COVID-19
using the Hot Search List (HSL) of Sina Weibo. This is a ranking of hashtags
updated on the minute basis, created according to an algorithm in which the number
of searches on the hashtags is dominant. This ranking provides a proxy for the
attention preferences of the Weibo users enabling the quantification of the dynamics
thereof, which reflects the changes in the attention due to events and measures.
Ranking is present in many fields of today’s world from sports to universities,
from wealthy individuals to purchasable goods. Recently, ranking dynamics has been
studied widely from sports [18, 19, 20] to scientists, journals or companies [18]. There
are stable rankings (like word frequencies) with little or no changes in the ranks
and there are volatile ones with vivid dynamics (mentions of Twitter hashtags) [18].
Clearly, Weibo HSL belongs to the latter with rich dynamic properties, which gives
insight into the changes in the attention of the Weibo users.
The Weibo HSL provides rich data about the public attention and its dynamics
in China. Based on that data, we have been able to identify different periods in the
pandemics and could follow how the attention of the population shifted from one
group of topics to another.
The paper is organized as follows: in Section 2, we provide background information
on Sina Weibo real-time Hot Search List (HSL) and methodologies on quantifying
attention dynamics. In Section 3, we present our results on attention dynamics,
correlations between different types of hashtags, and attention decay. In Section 4,
we discuss and summarize the results.

2 Materials and methods
2.1 Sina Weibo real-time Hot Search List (HSL)
Sina Weibo is the biggest Chinese microblogging website, with MAU (monthly active users) reaching 550 millon and DAU (daily active users) 241 million in March

Cui and Kertész

Page 3 of 22

2020 [21]. Instead of using one hashtag at the beginning like Twitter, topics on
Weibo are confined in double hashtags one at the beginning and one at the end
of the topic description, for example, #Pneumonia of unknown cause detected in
Wuhan#. In this paper, we use hashtag as the synonym of topic, we refer a hashtag as the content contained within the double #s. A hashtag becomes popular
at a given time as it is used in many tweets, gains a large number of searches,
likes and discussions by the users. The Hot Search List on Weibo is a section that
displays the 50 most popular hashtags in real-time. The hashtags on the HSL, together with their ranks and search volume indexes are updated every minute [22]
and new popular hashtags may emerge and others vanish. The search volume index
is a comprehensive measure which takes into account multiple dimensions such as
the number of searches in Sina Weibo and the quality of the user accounts involved
in the search, for the aim of preventing manipulated fake popularity [23]. The third
and sixth ranks on the HSL are sometimes occupied by promoted advertisements
labeled with the character ”荐” [24] (meaning recommendation).
2.2 Data
We took data from Weibo HSL to study attention dynamics as it captures vibrant
real-time change of public attention. Due to the random existence of one or two commercial advertisements at the third and the sixth ranks, in order to get a constant
length of non-advertisement hashtags on the HSL at each timestamp, we removed
all the hashtags labeled with ”荐”, re-ranked the original HSL and took the top 48
hashtags for each timestamp. All the HSL we mentioned later in this paper mean
the re-ranked HSL with 48 ranks. We collected the data on the HSL with a frequency of every 5 minutes from December 16, 2019 to April 17, 2020. There are in
total 26022 hashtags and 9120 of them are related to the aspects of COVID-19. To
relate social media contents with real-life pandemic situation in Mainland China,
we collected the daily number of infections, deaths, and recoveries from the official
website of National Health Commission of China [25]. In the following subsection
we explain how we identified the different categories of hashtags.
2.3 Topical classification and correlations
Fig. 1 shows the number of daily infections, deaths and recoveries in Mainland
China. The number of daily infections and deaths have a sharp peak on February
12 due to the adoption of new diagnostic criteria [26]. The decreasing trend of daily
infections since the peak turned to increasing after March 13, as a result of the
rising number of imported coronavirus cases from abroad [27]. We will argue that
there are three periods to be distinguished after the outburst of COVID-19 around
January 19, separated by the maximum and local minimum of the daily number of
infections on February 12 and March 12, respectively.
The public attention towards COVID-19 is believed to change with the real world
pandemic situation. To study the public attention towards COVID-related information, we first extracted hashtags which encompass all aspects of COVID-19 and
classified them based on geographic regions and the exposure order under the pandemic into three categories: Mainland China, East Asia outside of Mainland China
and Other Countries outside of East Asia. With a focus on COVID-hashtags related

Cui and Kertész

Page 4 of 22

Figure 1 COVID-19 daily infection, death and recovery in Mainland China. The inset enlarges the
tail of the infection curve. Three periods after the outbreak on January 19 are separated by the
highlighted peak and local minimum.

to Mainland China, we manually classified them based on semantic meanings into
the following seven sub-categories. The Bad News category comprises hashtags on
confirmed infections and deaths in different regions of Mainland China as well as
shortages of essential supplies. The Good News category consists of news on cases of
recovery, sufficiency of supplies, and decrease in daily infections or deaths. The Regulations category consists of authority responses of national, regional, institutional
laws, rules and regulations associated with public behavior during the pandemic.
The Life Influence category contains hashtags that reflect the pandemic influence
on the aspects of citizen lives. The Front Lines category includes hashtags related
to the lives of front line workers (mainly doctors and nurses) and their interactions
with patients in hospitals. The Science category incorporates scientific understandings of the virus properties, vaccine development, and ways for public protection
given by authoritative doctors. The Supports category takes into account hashtags
on worldwide donations and emotional supports. All the classifications were made
by human decisions due to the syntactic-semantic complexity of Chinese language.
For ambiguous cases which contain information of more than one category, our
classifications were based on the focus of the main subject. The Mainland China
sub-categories are summarized in Table 1 together with examples. The full list of
COVID-related hashtags is available in the dataset, which we have made public (see
declaration at the end of the paper).
To further understand how the Mainland China related COVID-hashtags are correlated with each other and with the daily number of infections/deaths/recoveries in
the three separated time periods, we measured the Pearson’s correlations between
the seven series of daily number of new hashtags in each of the sub-categories defined
above, together with the three series of daily number of infections/deaths/recoveries.
The correlation of these ten time series are calculated using the percentage change
between the current and the prior element instead of the actual value in order
to reduce the effect of the trend which can cause spurious correlations. For time

Cui and Kertész

Page 5 of 22

series category X = {Xti : ti ∈ T, i = 1, 2, ...n} and category Y = {Yti : ti ∈
T, i = 1, 2, ...n}, where T is the time index set, the Pearson’s correlation is calcuXt
−Xti
lated using the percentage change series X̃ = { i+1
, ti ∈ T, i = 1, 2, ...n} and
Xt
Ỹ = {

Yti+1 −Yti
Y ti

i

, ti ∈ T, i = 1, 2, ...n}.

Table 1 Mainland China COVID-hashtag details. A summary of the example hashtags in each
sub-category of Mainland China category and the number of hashtags in different time periods.
Category

Bad News

Good News

Regulations

Life Influence

Front Lines

Science

Supports

Examples
#全国累计确诊新冠肺炎66492例#
(#National cumulative confirmed COVID-19
cases reach 66492#)
#黑龙江聚集性疫情共48起发病194人#
(#Heilongjiang in total 48 clustered epidemic
194 infected cases#)
#武汉多家医院物资紧张#
(#Wuhan many hospitals supplies in shortage#)
#火神山医院累计治愈患者破千#
(#Huoshenshan Hospital has cured over a thousand patients#)
#7省区现有确诊病例清零#
(#7 provinces current infected cases down to zero#)
#疫情形势出现3个积极变化#
(#Epidemic situation shows 3 positive changes#)
#上海地铁不戴口罩不得进站#
(#Shanghai metro station not allowed to
enter without wearing a mask#)
#疫情影响严重的地区可增发生活补助#
(#Additional living allowances can be issued in areas
severely affected by the epidemic#)
#非疫情严重国家进京者居家观察14天#
(#Home observation for 14 days for visitors to enter Beijing
from non-severe epidemic countries#)
#武汉市民江滩唱起国歌#
(#Wuhan citizens sing national anthem at the River Beach#)
#疫情期间点外卖指南#
(#Guide to ordering takeout during the epidemic#)
#一季度民航业亏损398亿#
(#Civil aviation industry suffered a loss
of 39.8 billion in the first quarter#)
#钟南山等专家连线武汉ICU团队#
(#Zhong Nanshan and other experts connected
to the Wuhan ICU team#)
#护士握手呼唤79岁新冠患者#
(#Nurse shakes hands and calls 79-year-old COVID-19 patient#)
#方舱医院收治第一批患者现场#
(#Site of Fangcang shelter hospital taking the first batch of patients#)
#各年龄段人群普遍易感新冠病毒#
(#People of all ages are generally susceptible to coronavirus#)
#口罩的正确使用方法#
(#The correct use of masks#)
#如何区分感冒流感和新冠肺炎#
(#How to distinguish between flu and COVID-19#)
#汶川村民自发支援武汉100吨蔬菜#
(#Wenchuan villagers spontaneously
support Wuhan 100 tons of vegetables#)
#欧盟对华运送12吨急需物资#
(#EU sends 12 tons of urgently needed supplies to China#)
#武汉给援汉医疗队全员的感谢信#
(#Thank you letter from Wuhan to all
members of the medical aid team#)

Period 1

Period 2

Period 3

451

193

272

145

257

121

318

325

633

310

371

649

251

329

347

180

170

123

151

144

116

2.4 Attention dynamics
One natural measure of social media attention towards a topic category is the
quantity of the related hashtags. The growing pattern of the cumulative number of
hashtags on the HSL with time reflects the dynamics of the public attention. We
separately measured the growth of the cumulative number of all hashtags and all
COVID-related hashtags that ever appeared on the HSL in our observation period.
To understand how much COVID-information occupies the HSL at each timestamp,
we constructed the historical ratio trajectory of the COVID-related hashtags on the
HSL since the first COVID-hashtag #武汉发现不明原因肺炎# (#Pneumonia of
unknown cause detected in Wuhan#) appeared on December 31, 2019.

Cui and Kertész

Page 6 of 22

2.4.1 Lifetime duration
The lifetime duration of a hashtag on the HSL indicates the ability of obtaining persistent attention from the public. We quantified the duration (continuous existence
on the HSL) of a hashtag with τ:
τ = τ1 − τ0 ,
where τ0 is the timestamp of the first and τ1 is the timestamp of the last appearance
of a hashtag on the HSL.
We compared the duration of the hashtags across various categories and different
time scopes. We compared the duration of the hashtags before the outbreak on January 19, all COVID-related hashtags, and non-COVID hashtags after the outbreak.
To ensure complete life cycles of the hashtags, we took all hashtags whose first
arrivals on the HSL are between December 19, 2019 and January 18, 2020 as the
sample for hashtags before the pandemic, which includes 6161 in total. Similarly, we
took all COVID-hashtags whose first arrivals are no later than April 14, with a total
number of 8808. For the non-COVID hashtags after the outbreak, we took a random sample of all non-COVID hashtags with the same size as the COVID sample.
Hashtags that reappeared after disappearing from the HSL were excluded from our
calculation. To understand the overall attention variation towards COVID-hashtags
with time, we investigated the daily value of their cumulative average duration. We
denote Dj as the cumulative average of duration from December 31, 2019 (day 0)
until day j. Dj is calculated as follows:

Dj =

j
1 X X α
di
|S(j)| i=0

(1)

α∈S(j)

where dα
i is the duration of hashtag α whose first appearance was on day i. S(j) is
the set of all the hashtags whose first appearance is in the interval [0, j].
2.4.2 Ranking
The changes in the ranking patterns of the hashtags at different time periods reflect the general public attention dynamics. Rank diversity [20], which measures the
number of different hashtags occupying a given rank over a given length of time,
gives overall information on the total dynamical trend of the hashtags on the HSL.
Rank diversity is known to give characteristic profiles for different types of systems;
e.g., in open systems (where only the top part of the competing items is ranked)
behaves differently from closed systems (where all the items are ranked). We compared the rank diversity at the 48 ranks on the HSL before the outbreak and during
the different periods after the outbreak, with and without COVID-19 hashtags.
The public attention towards a hashtag can also be indicated by its highest rank
during the lifetime on the HSL. The highest rank of a hashtag reveals its highest
ability and achievement when competing for attention with the other hashtags. We
studied the highest rank distribution of the classified COVID-hashtags and compared the results with the hashtags before the outbreak as well as the non-COVID
hashtags after the outbreak (SI). To understand the overall highest rank variation

Cui and Kertész

Page 7 of 22

towards COVID-hashtags with time, we investigated the daily value trajectory of
their cumulative average highest rank. We denote Hj as the cumulative average of
highest rank from December 31 (day 0), 2019 until day j. Hj is calculated as follows:

Hj =

j
1 X X α
hi
|S(j)| i=0

(2)

α∈S(j)

where hα
i is the highest rank of hashtag α whose first appearance was on day i. S(j)
is the set of all the hashtags whose first appearance is in the interval [0, j].

3 Results
3.1 Statistics and categorization of hashtags
The cumulative number of new hashtags on HSL grows approximately linearly (see
Fig. 2 (A)), indicating a nearly constant attention capacity and need for news of
the users. Closer inspection tells, however, that the rate of new hashtags decreases
between January 10 and February 12 followed by an increased rate until March 28
after which the original slope of 225 ± 4 new hashtags/day sets in. We attribute this
change in the slope to the effect of COVID-related hashtags.
The first COVID-related hashtag appeared on the HSL on December 31, 2019,
followed by only a few ones in the following week. As the first death case occurred
on January 11, second one occurred on HSL on January 16 and more infected cases
detected in other cities in China as well as in the surrounding Asian countries,
rumours and scared emotions about the unknown pneumonia were permeating in
the society and the number of daily COVID-related hashtags started to increase
rapidly on January 19. On January 20, Chinese authorities announced to the public
that the new coronavirus is transmissible between humans.
From our point of view the period until January 19 can be considered as preCOVID. During that time at most three COVID-related hashtags per day have
occurred on the HSL and the cumulative number of different hashtags on HSL has
grown approximately linearly with an unaltered slope (see Fig. 2 (A)). Around
January 19 the number of COVID-related hashtags started growing and, at the
same time, the overall growth of the total number of hashtags slightly decreased,
indicating that the new COVID-related hashtags stay longer on HSL as compared
with those before the outbreak. This results in a decrease of the total number of new
hashtags per unit time on HSL. After January 19, a rapid increase can be observed
in the number of COVID-hashtags (see the inset of Fig. 2 (A)). This has, finally,
also an effect on the total cumulative number of hashtags resulting in an increased
slope in Fig. 2 (A).
Fig. 2 (B) shows the cumulative number of geographically categorized COVIDhashtags with Mainland China, East Asia outside of Mainland China, and Other
Countries outside of East Asia as categories. The Mainland China category starts
to rise rapidly from January 19, reaches a peak in the following week, and then
gradually drops with a few rebounds. The second peak and the decline of Mainland
China category is intertwined with the trajectory of the Other Countries category
in mid-March. The East Asia category remains at a relatively low level throughout
the pandemic.

Cui and Kertész

Page 8 of 22

Figure 2 Overview of COVID-hashtags on Weibo re-ranked Hot Search List (HSL) throughout
the pandemic. (A) Cumulative number of all hashtags and all COVID-hashtags with time. The
inset indicates rapid increase in COVID-related hashtags starting from January 19 marked by a
vertical red line. (B) Daily new COVID-hashtags on Mainland China, East Asia outside of
Mainland China and Other Countries outside of East Asia. (C) Ratio of COVID-hashtags on the
HSL at each timestamp. (D) Distribution of all COVID-hashtags by categories.

Cui and Kertész

Page 9 of 22

COVID-19 was first observed in east Asia, with Mainland China being the hardeststricken region, followed by places with growing infections such as South Korea,
Diamond Princess cruise ship and Japan. The epicenter of COVID-19 later shifted to
Europe and the rest of the world as the situation mitigated in east Asia. The results
depicted in Fig. 2 (B) follow these events closely, confirming the role of the realtime HSL on Weibo as a reflection of the real world. Unsurprisingly, the upward and
downward trend periods of Mainland China and Other Countries coincide with Fig.
2 (C), where the ratio of COVID-related hashtags on the HSL at each timestamp
is displayed. The swift third peak on April 4 in Fig. 2 (C) is due to the national
Qingming Festival (also known as the Tomb-Sweeping Day), where the victims who
died in the COVID-19 pandemic were mourned. The dynamics of the COVIDrelated hashtags on the HSL demonstrates vibrant generations of newly created
COVID-19 hashtags about the relevant up-to-date events around the world. Fig.
2 (D) shows the distribution of the hashtags in the sub-categories of Mainland
China category along with East Asia and Other Countries. Among the seven subcategories that belong to Mainland China, Support, Science, and Good News have
relatively fewer hashtags, compared with Front lines, Life Influence, Bad News, and
Regulations.
3.2 Periodization and correlations
Fig. 3 illustrates the attention dynamics of the sub-categories of Mainland China by
showing the quantity variations in Fig. 3 (A) (C) (E), paired with their correlation
matrices with daily infections, deaths, and recoveries in Fig. 3 (B) (D) (F). As noted
above, we have identified three periods in the investigated time interval: The first
period is January 19 – February 11, separated by the huge peak in Fig. 1 from the
the second one (February 12 – March 12). The third period (March 13 – April 17)
is separated from period 2 by the second vertical line where the number of new
infections has a local minimum (Fig. 1 inset).
In Table 1, we show the number of hashtags related to Mainland China in the
different categories for the three periods. In Fig. 3, we show that the daily emergence
of the categorized COVID-hashtags is dominated in the first two periods by Bad
News, with increasing and decreasing trends in period 1 and period 2, respectively.
In period 3, the categories Regulations, Life Influence, and Front Lines receive more
attention as compared to the rest of the categories. Here the consistently high values
in Regulations and Life Influence could result from the worsening world pandemic
situation along with the rise of the imported infected cases in Mainland China,
necessitating the establishment of measures to handle it. The categories of the
Mainland China COVID-hashtags move with the number of infections and deaths
in the world.
The patterns of the Pearson’s correlation matrix of the ten time series reflect temporal structure with the three periods. Fig. 3 (B) shows a positive correlation block
structure. There are strong correlations between New Death, Regulations, Science,
and Bad News (upper left block) as well as between Supports, Good news and Front
Lines (lower right block) and there is considerable anti-correlation between the two
blocks. Fig. 3 (D) (period 2) exhibits much weaker correlations, in fact, very few
elements of the matrix reach values beyond the noise level (see SI). Exceptions are

Cui and Kertész

Page 10 of 22

Figure 3 Time series of daily new hashtags from the sub-categories of Mainland China
COVID-hashtags and their correlation matrices with daily new infections, deaths, and recoveries,
in the three periods after the outbreak.

Cui and Kertész

Page 11 of 22

new strong correlations between New Death and Front Lines, as well as Bad News
and Front Lines. In the third period (Fig. 3 (F)) the block structure gets again
more pronounced, though not as pronounced as in the first period. Note that the
categories had to be rearranged in order to achieve this structure. The major change
is that Supports/Front Lines and Life influence/Regulations have exchanged positions. In period 1, the Bad News (mainly infections and deaths) of domestic cases in
Mainland China were flooding, this lead to the urgent establishment of regulations,
which caused life influences. In period 3, the domestic situation was under control,
therefore, the Bad News in Mainland China were mainly caused by the worsening
international situation (infections/deaths and Chinese coming back from abroad).
Then the Regulations and corresponding Life Influences towards these issues were
not anymore strongly associated with domestic deaths. In period 3, the assisting
front line doctors were gradually going back home after finishing their work, people
expressed their gratitude to them, so that Front Lines and Supports were moving
together.
3.3 Rank diversity and hashtag dynamics
What is the effect of COVID-19 on the ranking dynamics? Fig. 4 shows a comparison
of the rank diversity at the top 48 ranks taking non-COVID and COVID hashtags in
different periods. Striking differences are observed between the rank diversity plots
before and after the outbreak. As Fig. 4 (A) suggests, the rank diversity plot before
the outbreak was approximately linear with moderate fluctuations. A clear gap
emerges in the rank diversity after rank 15 in Fig. 4 (B) during the COVID period.
We recognize resemblances in the rank diversity plots before the outbreak and after
the outbreak considering only non-COVID hashtags, except for the strange drops
at ranks 29 and 34 in Fig. 4 (C). Comparing Fig. 4 (D) with Fig. 4 (B), the gap
after rank 15 is larger in the rank diversity plot considering only COVID-related
hashtags. The rank diversity plots for hashtags in period 1 surpass period 2 and
period 3 with both non-COVID and COVID hashtags as depicted in Fig. 4 (C) and
(D), while the difference is much higher in the latter case.
Fig. 4 gives evidence that the COVID-hashtags cause the gap in the rank diversity
plot after the outbreak. Taking the normalized rank diversity plot before the outbreak as a reference, a higher normalized rank diversity at a certain rank position
represents a higher number of unique occurrences within the observation period, so
that the COVID-related hashtags in the top 15 ranks change faster (with higher
frequency) than normal. One possible explanation is that the COVID-hashtags kept
emerging with higher frequency than before the outbreak and people payed much
attention to these new hashtags. Additionally, when the flooding hashtags contained similar information such as the new infections and deaths in different cities
or provinces of China, the public interest towards individual hashtags could drop
quickly, resulting in a higher number of unique hashtags at certain ranks in unit time
on HSL. This effect of higher rank diversity for higher ranks seems to be amplified
by the algorithm leading to the observed gap.
Strange drops of rank diversity at ranks 29 and 34 can also be seen on our plots
in Fig. 4. As provided in SI, there are hashtags that stay at the ranks 29 and 34 for
an unusually long time and then disappear from the HSL, indicating algorithmic

Cui and Kertész

Page 12 of 22

Figure 4 Rank diversity of the 48 ranks on the HSL before and after COVID-19 outbreak. (A)
Rank diversity taking all hashtags in our observation period before the outbreak, approximately
linear except the head and tail parts, with small fluctuations. (B) Rank diversity taking all
hashtags after the outbreak, with strange points colored in red. A large gap occurs after the top
15th rank. (C) Rank diversity taking all non-COVID hashtags in the three periods after the
outbreak, strong resemblances with (A). (D) Rank diversity taking all COVID-hashtags in the
three periods after the outbreak. The result in period 1 is higher than period 2 and period 3,
revealing a more dynamic change of the hashtags appeared on the HSL. The gap after rank 15 is
more severe compared to (B).

Cui and Kertész

Page 13 of 22

intervention from Weibo. As one of the most popular and influential social media
in China, Weibo might shoulder the responsibility during the global public health
emergency to keep people informed about related news in China and around the
globe, by means of changing the algorithm towards COVID-hashtags to promote
crucial news and keep them updating in the top 15 positions and leave the list
at rank 29 or 34. Our methods are sensitive enough to demonstrate this type of
interventions. Therefore our observations reflect a combination of both spontaneous
attention dynamics from the public and the controlled effects from Sina Weibo.

Figure 5 Attention decay. (A) Cumulative average highest rank of COVID-hashtags whose first
appearance was in the time interval since December 31, 2019. (B) Cumulative average duration
(hours). The inset shows a three-parameter exponential fit (α = 4.13h, β = 0.31h/day, γ = 5.72h)
for the cumulative average duration decay after January 22, 2020.

Rank diversity captures attention dynamics from the point of view of the overall
dynamical rank movements of the hashtags on the HSL. It is interesting to follow the
dynamics also from the aspect of the individual hashtags. The average highest rank
of a category of hashtags on a given day is characteristic to the attention paid to that
category. (Note, of course, that getting to the HSL expresses already considerable
attention.) Similarly, the average duration is another measure of attention. However,
in the latter case it should be mentioned that short duration can be caused by
decaying attention to the general topic (in this case the hashtag is likely to be
replaced by another from a different topic) or because of the heavy stream of new
hashtags of the same topic.
How do the average highest rank and average duration accumulate with time?
As Fig. 5 (A) shows, the cumulative average highest rank, Hj is initially at a top
rank, indicating that the first few hashtags about the unknown pneumonia received
a huge amount of attention from the public. As more COVID-related hashtags
occurred, Hj becomes lower, with a rapid change at the beginning and a slower
change later, separated by around January 30. This is due to the rapidly increasing
number of COVID-related hashtags and the limited number of ranks on HSL. In
Fig. 5 (B), the first peak of the cumulative average duration, Dj is on January 8,
when the hashtag that eight patients infected by the unknown pneumonia recovered
from hospital. Then the Dj decreases first and then increases again, reaching the
second peak on January 22, after which the increasing daily new hashtags with short
durations started to play a greater role than the few hashtags with long durations.

Cui and Kertész

Page 14 of 22

The fast decay of Dj in the period between January 22 and February 18 (see the
inset in Fig. 5 (B)) was fitted by an exponential function:
f (t) = αe−β.t + γ,

(3)

with α = 4.13h, β = 0.31h/day, γ = 5.72h. On February 18, hashtags of positive
changes in the COVID situation started to appear on HSL. After that, the Dj
exhibits a slower and longer decay.

4 Discussion and summary
In this work, we have studied the public attention dynamics on the biggest Chinese
microblogging website Sina Weibo under the influence of the COVID-19 pandemic.
We provide a novel approach to study and quantify the attention dynamics in terms
of ranking dynamics, taking advantage of the real-time Hot Search List on Weibo.
We have identified three periods within the investigated time interval and analyzed
the attention dynamics on different COVID-related categories within them. We
have compared the behavior of the hashtags before the outbreak with COVIDrelated and non-COVID hashtags after the outbreak. We have observed differences
in the attention dynamics on Weibo HSL in the different periods. First, the public
attention is mainly driven by the infection and death situations in Mainland China,
with mainly domestic cases at the beginning, and internationally imported cases
later. The attention variation follows worldwide major events. Second, the public
attention on Weibo towards COVID-19 is diversified into different sub-categories
after the outbreak on January 19, 2020, with varying correlation patterns in the
three phases. Third, the attention decays as the situation in China gets better. The
cumulative average duration follows exponential decay since the attention peak in
the pandemic beginning phase. The situation in China is interrelated with the world
pandemic situation which keeps changing, so that the decay of public attention on
the Chinese social media Weibo is not a clear-cut case. Fourth, the rank diversity
at the top 15 ranks are higher than normal due to COVID-hashtags. The reason
can be that Weibo has different algorithms towards COVID-hashtags from normal
ones, or possibly a combined influence of both Weibo algorithm and the spontaneous
preference from the public towards COVID-related information.
Besides exploring the attention dynamics on the Chinese social media Sina Weibo,
we also studied the cumulative growth of all topics and all the COVID-topics on
Twitter trending list in the United States. As is shown in the supplementary material Fig. SI1 (A), the cumulative number of all the Twitter trending topics in the
United States is almost perfectly linear. The time period that the cumulative number of all COVID-topics on Twitter trending list increases is in accordance with the
rising period of the number of hashtags in the Other Countries category in Fig. 2
(B). The similarity of results on Sina Weibo HSL and Twitter trending is a reflection
that both platforms are influenced similarly by the major events worldwide during
the COVID-19 pandemic. Though having more daily new topics on Twitter trending list than Weibo HSL, the number of COVID-topics on Twitter is much fewer.
The topics on Twitter are generally shorter and have broader meaning, for example, #QuarantineLife, while the hashtags on Weibo are more detailed, for example,

Cui and Kertész

Page 15 of 22

#小区窗台演唱会庆祝解除隔离# (#Community windowsill concert to celebrate
the lifting of quarantine#), contributing to the rich number of diverse hashtags on
Weibo. It should be emphasized that both for Sina Weibo and Twitter the lists
are produced by unknown algorithms and in the case of Sina Weibo we have been
able to pinpoint direct interventions from the side of the provider into the ranking.
However, the detailedness of Weibo HSL, its fixed length and the fact that HSL is
the same for all users seem to make Weibo HSL more suitable to study attention
dynamics through ranking than Twitter, as Twitter trending lists are without fixed
length and can be personalized.

Supplementary information
Additional file 1. Supplementary information (PDF 2.4 MB)
Availability of data and materials
The datasets supporting the conclusions of this article are available in the
Attention Dynamics Sina Weibo COVID19 repository,
https://github.com/cuihaosabrina/Attention_Dynamics_Sina_Weibo_COVID19
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Funding
JK acknowledges partial support from the H2020 project SoBigData++ (ID: 871042).
Author’s contributions
HC and JK conceived the idea and designed the study. HC carried out the data collection, HC and JK did the data
analysis. Both authors drafted the manuscript, read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
Thanks are due to Márton Karsai and Tiago Peixoto for suggestions.
References
1. Wu, F., Huberman, B.A.: Novelty and collective attention. Proc. Nat. Aca. Sci. 104, 17599–17601 (2007)
2. Russell Neuman, W., Guggenheim, L., Mo Jang, S., Bae, S.Y.: The dynamics of public attention:
Agenda-setting theory meets big data. Journal of Communication 64, 193–214 (2014)
3. Twitter Micoroblog and Social Network Service. https://about.twitter.com/. Accessed August 8, 2020.
4. Twitter: Research and Experiments.
https://help.twitter.com/en/rules-and-policies#research-and-experiments. Accessed August 8,
2020.
5. Lehmann, J., Gonçalves, B., Ramasco, J.J., Cattuto, C.: Dynamical Classes of Collective Attention in Twitter.
In: Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on World Wide Web (WWW), pp. 251–260 (2007)
6. Eom, Y.-H., Puliga, M., Smailovič, J., Mozetič, I., Caldarelli, G.: Twitter-based analysis of the dynamics of
collective attention to political parties. PLoS ONE 10, 0131184 (2015)
7. Ko, J., Kwon, H.W., Kim, H.S., Lee, K., Choi, M.Y.: Model for twitter dynamics: Public attention and time
series of tweeting. Physica A 404, 141–149 (2014)
8. Pen, T.-Q., Sun, G., Wu, Y.: Interplay between public attention and public emotion toward multiple social
issues on twitter. PLoS ONE 12, 0167896 (2017)
9. Chew, C., Eysenbach, G.: Pandemics in the age of twitter: Content analysis of tweets during the 2009 h1n1
outbreak. PLoS ONE 5, 14118 (2010)
10. Signorini, A., Segre, A.M., Polgreen, P.M.: The use of twitter to track levels of disease activity and public
concern in the U.S. during the influenza A H1N1 pandemic. PLoS ONE 6, 19467 (2011)
11. van Lent, L.G.G., Sungur, H., Kunneman, F.A., van de Velde, B., Das, E.: Too far to care? measuring public
attention and fear for ebola using twitter. J. Med. Internet Res. 19, 193 (2017)
12. Zavarrone, E., Grassia, M.G., Marino, M., Cataldo, R., Mazza, R., Canestrari, N.: CO.ME.T.A. – COVID-19
media textual analysis. A dashboard for media monitoring. https://arxiv.org/pdf/2004.07742.pdf.
Accessed August 8, 2020.
13. Lopez, C.E., Vasu1, M., Gallemore, C.: Understanding the perception of COVID-19 policies by mining a
multilanguage Twitter dataset. https://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/2003/2003.10359.pdf. Accessed
August 8, 2020.
14. An Introduction to Sina Weibo: Background and Status Quo. https://www.whatsonweibo.com/sinaweibo/.
Accessed August 8, 2020.
15. Tong, J., Zuo, L.: Weibo communication and government legitimacy in China: a computer-assisted analysis of
Weibo messages on two ‘mass incidents’. Information, Communication and Society 17, 66–85 (2014)
16. Nip, J.Y.M., Fu, K.-w.: Networked framing between source posts and their reposts: an analysis of public
opinion on China’s microblogs. Information, Communication and Society 19, 1127–1149 (2016)

Cui and Kertész

Page 16 of 22

17. Li, L., Zhang, Q., Wang, X., Zhang, J., Wang, T., Gao, T.-L., Duan, W., Tsoi, K.K.-f., Wang, F.-Y.:
Characterizing the propagation of situational information in social media during COVID-19 epidemic: A case
study on Weibo. IEEE Transactions on Computational Social Systems 7, 556–562 (2020)
18. Blumm, N., Ghoshal, G., Forró, Z., Schich, M., Bianconi, G., Bouchaud, J.-P., Barabási, A.-L.: Dynamics of
ranking processes in complex systems. Physical Review Letters 109, 128701 (2012)
19. Criado, R., Garcia, E., Pedroche, F., Romance, M.: A new method for comparing rankings through complex
networks: Model and analysis of competitiveness of major european soccer leagues. Chaos 23, 043114 (2013)
20. Morales, J.A., Sánchez, S., Flores, J., Pineda, C., Gershenson, C., Cocho, G., Zizumbo, J., Rodrı́guez, R.F.,
Iñiguez, G.: Generic temporal features of performance rankings in sports and games. EPJ Data Science 5, 33
(2016)
21. Weibo Reports First Quarter 2020 Unaudited Financial Results. http://ir.weibo.com/news-releases/
news-release-details/weibo-reports-first-quarter-2020-unaudited-financial-results/. Accessed
August 8, 2020.
22. Wang, Y.: An Introduction to Sina Weibo for Journalists.
https://www.interhacktives.com/2018/02/22/how-to-use-sina-weibo-as-a-journalist/. Accessed
August 8, 2020.
23. Service, W.C.: Common Questions on the Rules of Real-time Hot-Search-List, Hot-Message-List and
Hot-Topic-List. https://www.weibo.com/ttarticle/p/show?id=2309404007731978739654. Accessed August
8, 2020.
24. Weibo Advertising. https://www.marketingtochina.com/weibo-advertising/. Accessed August 8, 2020.
25. National Health Commission of People’s Republic of China.
http://www.nhc.gov.cn/xcs/xxgzbd/gzbd_index.shtml. Accessed August 8, 2020.
26. China confirms 15152 new coronavirus cases, 254 additional deaths.
https://www.cnbc.com/2020/02/13/coronavirus-latest-updates-china-hubei.html. Accessed August 8,
2020.
27. Sajid, I.: China reports 99 new virus cases, majority imported. https:
//www.aa.com.tr/en/asia-pacific/china-reports-99-new-virus-cases-majority-imported/1801667.
Accessed August 8, 2020.

Cui and Kertész

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION

Attention dynamics on the Chinese social media
Sina Weibo during the COVID-19 pandemic
Hao Cui and János Kertész*
*Correspondence: kerteszj@ceu.edu
Department of Network and Data Science, Central European University, Quellenstrasse 51, A-1100, Vienna, Austria

SI1 Twitter trending COVID-topics in the United States
Sina Weibo is the largest microblogging site in China, where Twitter, the worldwide
most popular service of this kind does not operate. It is a natural idea to try to
compare our observations made on Sina Weibo with Twitter attention dynamics.
Unfortunately, there is no comparable statistics on Twitter to the HSL. Instead,
Twitter has the service to inform about most retweeted hashtags during the last
24 hours updated on the minute basis and broken down to countries [1]. We have
chosen to study the US tweets.
Categorization of tweets has been widely investigated [2, 3], including recent attempts to analyze the impact of COVID-related topics [4] on Twitter by analyzing
the sentiments to 10 words related to COVID. Twitter even created a “COVID-19
stream” [5] to promote this type of research. In spite of these, a direct comparison of our results on Sina Weibo with Twitter is hindered by a number of factors,
including the different characters of the listings, the different roles hashtags play
in these services and the differences due to the scripts. Nevertheless, we tried to
capture at least the overall trends (see Fig. SI1).

Figure SI1 Overview of the cumulative number of topics during the observation period on
Twitter trending list in the United States from January 1, 2020 to April 16, 2020. (A) Cumulative
growth of all topics. (B) Cumulative growth of COVID-related topics.

Fig. SI1 (A) shows the cumulative number of all the Twitter trending topics in the
United States is almost perfectly linear. As Fig. SI1 (B) shows, the COVID-topics
on Twitter trending list first grows very slowly at the beginning phase, and then
starts to increase dramatically from late February 2020. The rate of COVID-related
topics is, however, much smaller in the Twitter list than on that of the Sina Weibo.

Cui and Kertész

Page 18 of 22

SI2 Significance of correlations
To understand how the categories of time series of daily new hashtags move together and whether there are blocks of categories that co-move, we presented the
correlation matrices plot between the ten time series in the three periods after the
outbreak. In order to get information about the significance of the correlations we
apply a null model, which is created by shuffling the times of the individual values,
thus smearing out the correlations. Due to the finiteness of the time series, there
will be non-zero background noise level denoted by Z in the null model, defining the
background to which measured real correlations can be compared. Z is calculated
by correlating 500 shuffled time series for each of the 10 categories. We observed
that all the pairs have similar standard deviations between around 0.16 to 0.2. We
take a uniform value Z = 0.2.
In Fig. SI2 we show correlations where only those Cij correlation matrix elements
are presented for which Z < |Cij |. The figure shows the different Mainland China
topical categories and their thresholded correlations in the three pandemic phases.
In Fig. SI2 (B) most of the correlations are beyond the threshold, while in Fig. SI2
(D) very few are beyond the threshold. In Fig. SI2 (F), though some values at the
upper left and lower right corners are beyond the threshold, they are much weaker
than in Fig. SI2 (B).

SI3 Categorized Sina Weibo hashtags and properties
We showed in the main paper Fig. 4 that the gap between the top 15 ranks and
the rest of the ranks in the rank diversity plot after the outbreak is caused by
the COVID-hashtags. In order to further understand the properties of COVIDhashtags and how they influenced the HSL hashtag dynamics, we compared the
highest rank and duration distribution of different COVID-categories with the nonCOVID hashtags before and after the outbreak.
Fig. SI3 shows a detailed comparison of the highest rank and duration of the categorized Mainland China COVID-hashtags on Weibo Hot Search List (HSL), before
and after the COVID-19 outbreak. As Fig. SI3 (A) shows, most of the categories
have a median of highest rank close to 15. Science category and Bad News category
are generally higher ranked than other categories. The median highest rank of the
non-COVID hashtags after the outbreak is the same with that of the hashtags before
the outbreak (rank 19), while the median highest rank of the COVID-hashtags is
higher than both (rank 16). Fig. SI3 (B) shows the lifetime duration of the different
categories. The median duration of most of the categories is less than 3.5 hours.
Science category has the highest duration among all categories. Non-COVID hashtags after the outbreak (3.95 hours) and hashtags before the outbreak (3.80 hours)
have similar duration distributions. The COVID-hashtags generally have shorter
duration (3.21 hours) than non-COVID hashtags.

SI4 Hashtag rank trajectory examples
In the main paper, we have seen strange drops in the rank diversity plot at the
ranks 29 and 34 after the outbreak, this implies that the number of unique hashtags
occurred at these ranks in a given time interval is smaller than usual, so that there
should be hashtags staying there for unusually long time. Here we present examples

Cui and Kertész

Page 19 of 22

Figure SI2 Topical correlations of mainland China COVID-categories in three periods.
Correlations lower than 0.2 are considered as insignificant and are converted to zero.

Cui and Kertész

Page 20 of 22

Figure SI3 Boxplots of the highest rank (A) and duration (B) of the different categories. In both
plots, the purple categories are sub-categories of Mainland China category, which is colored in
blue. The blue categories are sub-categories of Total COVID category, which is colored in orange.
The dots in (B) are the outlier hashtags with long duration, e.g, the #Infection Map# in the Bad
New category and the #(District Party Secretary) Will be accountable if home-confirmed patients
found again in Wuhan# in the Regulations category.

Cui and Kertész

Page 21 of 22

of normal and abnormal hashtag rank trajectory plots, and verify there are hashtags
that stay at certain ranks such as rank 29 and 34 on the HSL for a strangely long
time without any fluctuation.

Figure SI4 Examples of rank trajectory plots of COVID-related hashtags. (A), (C), (E) Abnormal
rank trajectory plots. (B), (D), (F) Normal rank trajectory plots.

Fig. SI4 shows examples of abnormal and normal rank trajectory plots of COVIDrelated hashtags on Weibo HSL. In Fig. SI4 (A), (C), (E), the ranks of the hashtags
stay strangely long time at ranks 29 and 34, and then disappear from the HSL. Fig.
SI4 (B), (D), (F) show relatively natural fluctuations in the rank trajectory plots.
The example hashtags and their translations are shown in Table SI1. The abnormal
rank plots are likely due to the algorithm intervention from Sina Weibo.
Table SI1 Chinese original and translations of example hashtags in Figure SI4.
Example Hashtags
#企业复工要为职工配发口罩#
#中国不会出现大规模通货膨胀#
#联合国秘书长呼吁全球共同向新冠宣战#
#武汉封城#
#一图看懂新型冠状病毒肺炎#
#疫情地图#

Translation
#Enterprises must distribute masks to
employees when they return to work#
#China will not see massive inflation#
#The UN Secretary-General calls on
the world to declare war on COVID-19#
#Wuhan lockdown#
#A picture to understand
the new coronavirus pneumonia#
#Infection map#

Cui and Kertész

Page 22 of 22

References
1. Twitter Trend. https://trends24.in/about. Accessed August 8, 2020.
2. Zubiaga, A., Spina, D., Fresno, V., Martı́nez, R.: Classifying trending topics: A typology of conversation triggers
on twitter. In: Berendt, B., de Vries, A., Fan, W. (eds.) Proceedings of the 20th ACM International Conference
on Information and Knowledge Management, Glasgow, UK (2011). ACM, New York
3. Lee, K., Palsetia, D., Narayanan, R., Patwary, M.A., Agrawal, A., Choudhary, A.: Twitter trending topic
classification. In: Spiliopoulou, M., et al. (eds.) Proceedings of the 11th IEEE International Conference on Data
Mining Workshops, Vancouver, Canada, pp. 251–258 (2011). IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos
4. Tam, S., Hahm, D.: Exploring Coronavirus Twitter Trends.
https://towardsdatascience.com/coronavirus-twitter-trends-d32fed5a027e. Accessed August 8, 2020. Towards
Data Science, Inc. (2020)
5. COVID-19 stream. https://developer.twitter.com/en/docs/labs/covid19-stream/overview. Accessed August 7,
2020. Twitter, Inc. (2020)

