Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

A Deep Dive on the Impact of COVID-19 in
Software Development
Paulo Anselmo da Mota Silveira Neto ·
Umme Ayda Mannan · Eduardo Santana
de Almeida · Nachiappan Nagappan ·
David Lo · Pavneet Singh Kochhar ·
Cuiyun Gao · Iftekhar Ahmed

arXiv:2008.07048v1 [cs.SE] 17 Aug 2020

Received: date / Accepted: date

Abstract Context. COVID-19 pandemic has impacted different business
sectors around the world. Objective. This study investigates the impact
of COVID-19 on software projects and software development professionals.
Method. We conducted a mining software repository study based on 100
GitHub projects developed in Java using ten different metrics. Next, we surveyed 279 software development professionals for better understanding the
impact of COVID-19 on daily activities and wellbeing. Results. We identified
12 observations related to productivity, code quality, and wellbeing. Conclusions. Our findings highlight that the impact of COVID-19 is not binary
(reduce productivity vs. increase productivity) but rather a spectrum. For
many of our observations, substantial proportions of respondents have differing opinions from each other. We believe that more research is needed to
uncover specific conditions that cause certain outcomes to be more prevalent.
Keywords COVID-19 · Empirical Study · Survey · Mining Software
Repository (MSR)

1 Introduction
The latest threat to global health is the ongoing outbreak of the respiratory
disease that was recently given the name Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID19) [13]. COVID-19 was recognized in December 2019, in Wuhan, a large city
in central China [24]. Three months later, on March 11, 2020, the World Health
Organization (WHO) characterized COVID-19 as a pandemic1 . According to
WHO:“We have never before seen a pandemic sparked by a coronavirus. This
is the first pandemic caused by a coronavirus. And we have never before seen a
Address(es) of author(s) should be given
1 WHO characterizes COVID-19 as a pandemic. https://www.who.int/emergencies/
diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/events-as-they-happen

2

Paulo Anselmo da Mota Silveira Neto et al.

pandemic that can be controlled, at the same time.” In August 2020, COVID19 was spread out more than 200 countries with more than 500k confirmed
deaths.
The COVID-19 pandemic is considered the most crucial global health
calamity of the century and the greatest challenge humankind faced since the
2nd World War [8]. It has enormously impacted how we live and interact with
each other (social distancing, wearing masks, washing hands frequently, quarantine, etc.) Besides the health problems, the action taken by the countries
around the world to manage the COVID-19 pandemic, e.g., restricting travel,
shuttering nonessential businesses, and implementing universal social distancing policies, are having drastic economic consequences. In the United States,
for example, more than 30 million Americans have filed initial unemployment
claims since March 2020.2
Business sectors, such as travel and transportation, manufacturing, hotels,
restaurants, live entertainment and movie, and sports are strongly impacted
and they are having to adapt to this new situation. The software development
sector is not an exception. Besides the economic aspects, suddenly, companies
had to support and (in some cases) equip office workers who quickly transitioned to a work-from-home set up because of the pandemic.
Working from home is not a new reality for software development. Many
companies adopt different approaches for it, such as remote teams that have
employees in a single country or even in one city, and some/all of them work
from home without having to go to the office every day. Professional websites
such as Upwork, Linkedin, and Stack Overflow present several job offers to
work remotely. However, working from home during a pandemic is not like
regular remote work. Additional difficulties are involved due to the lack of
proper physical infrastructure, the need to care for children with school and
daycare being closed, fear and anxiety of contracting COVID-19, etc.
Previous research studies [18], [16], [7], [17] have investigated remote work
and responses for a better understanding of pandemic [9], [12], [37], [38], [40].
However, just a few studies [2], [31], [32] have started to investigate the impact of a pandemic in software development. This aspect can be justified since
COVID-19 is the first pandemic after World Wide Web development. Thus,
to gain insights into the impact of COVID-19 in software development, our
first research question (RQ1: What is the Impact of COVID-19 on Projects? )
explores how the pandemic impacts open source projects considering different
perspectives. In addition to quantitative information about the projects, it is
also important to understand the impact on developers’ wellbeing; this motivates us to investigate another research question (RQ2: What is the Impact of
COVID-19 on Developers WellBeing? ).
To answer these questions, we conducted a mining software repository
study based on 100 GitHub projects developed in Java. The Java projects
were selected according to different criteria ranging from the last update to
2 https://edition.cnn.com/2020/04/30/economy/unemployment-benefits-coronavirus/
index.html

A Deep Dive on the Impact of COVID-19 in Software Development

3

the number of commits. We collected ten metrics for analyzing the projects.
Next, we surveyed 279 software development professionals from 32 countries.
The survey asked respondents to provide feedback on the impact of COVID-19
on software projects and their wellbeing.
Overall, the paper makes the following contributions:
– We perform a large scale quantitative study to investigate the impact of
COVID-19 on software development based on ten different metrics.
– We complement this study with a survey of how software development
professionals perceive the impact of COVID-19 on daily activities.
– Based on a set of observations from the mining software repository study
and survey, we provide some recommendations for practitioners, organizations, and researchers.
– For replication and reproducible research, we make our materials available
on our project website. These include our repository mining data (project
data, including metrics and time series data) and survey instrument. Our
artifacts can be found at the accompanying website.3

2 Background and Related Work
In this section, we discuss the main work related to our study.

2.1 COVID-19 Studies
The COVID-19 pandemic originated the development of several multidisciplinary initiatives around the world. The Center for Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE) at Johns Hopkins University, created an interactive web-based
dashboard to visualize and track COVID-19 reported cases in real-time [12].
The dashboard illustrates the location and number of confirmed COVID-19
cases, deaths, and recoveries for all affected countries. Zhang et al. [40] created,
Neural Covidex, a search engine for clinicians, researchers, and other experts
trying to better understand COVID-19. The system offers access to the Allen
Institute for AIs COVID-19 Open Research Dataset (CORD-19). CORD-19
is a curated public resource of more than 40,000 scholarly articles, medical
reports, journal articles, and preprints about COVID-19 and the coronavirus
family of viruses. Researchers from MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease
Analysis, from Imperial College London, have developed a set of tools and
prediction models based on different scenarios (social distancing, shielding the
elderly, and healthcare availability) [37], [38]. Chen et al. [9] created a public
Coronavirus Twitter dataset with more than 100 million tweets. According to
the authors, the dataset can help track scientific coronavirus misinformation
and unverified rumors, and contribute towards enabling informed solutions
and prescribing targeted policy interventions.
3

https://github.com/pamsn/covid-study

4

Paulo Anselmo da Mota Silveira Neto et al.

In the software engineering area, Ralph et al. [32] conducted a survey with
2225 software developers to understand the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic
on developers’ wellbeing and productivity. They identified that developers had
lower wellbeing and productivity while working from home due to COVID-19.
In addition, disaster preparedness, fear related to the pandemic and home
office ergonomics all affect wellbeing and productivity; and women, parents,
and people with disabilities may be disproportionately affected.
Rahman and Farhana [31] conducted an empirical study with 129 open
source COVID-19 projects hosted on GitHub to identify what categories of
bugs exist in this kind of project. Initially, they identified seven categories
of COVID-19 projects (aggregation, education, medical equipment, mining,
user tracking, statistical modeling, and volunteer management). Next, applying open coding on 550 bug reports, they identified eight bug categories for
these projects (algorithm, data, dependency, documentation, performance, security, syntax, and user interface). Based on this taxonomy, user interface was
the most frequent category using the proportion of bugs across all projects,
and documentation was the least frequent category.
Bao et al. [2] collected data from a Chinese company, which contains the
development activities from 139 developers working in 8 projects over a period of 138 working days, and compared developer productivity when working
from home and working onsite. Part of records in the dataset included a period where developers worked from home due to COVID-19 pandemic. They
found that working from home has both positive and negative impacts on
developer productivity in terms of different metrics, such as the number of
builds/commits/code reviews. In addition, they identified that working from
home has different impacts on different kinds of projects. For example, working
from home has a negative impact on developer productivity for large projects.
They also found that the majority of developers’ productivity when working from home is similar to that when working onsite. For a small portion of
developers, working from home had different impacts on their productivity.

2.2 Productivity
There are a number of studies [11], [19], [28], [35], [36],that investigate developer productivity. For example, Meyer et al. [26] investigated how developer
workday looks like and the relationships between their activities and perceived
productivity. The study uncovered that productivity is a personal matter, and
factors such as emails and meetings are often considered detrimental to productivity. In another work, Murphy-Hill et al. [29] surveyed 622 developers
across 3 companies regarding self-perceived productivity and its contributing factors. They uncovered that developers perceived productivity is strongly
correlated to job enthusiasm, peer support, and reception of useful feedback.
Moreover, they reported that compared to other knowledge workers, ability to
work remotely is more strongly related to perceived productivity. Unlike the

A Deep Dive on the Impact of COVID-19 in Software Development

5

aforementioned studies, in this work, we investigate the impact of COVID-19
on software projects.
2.3 Wellbeing
Many prior works investigate wellbeing in the workplace, e.g., [4]. However,
not many investigate it in the context of software development. One such work
is by Kuutila et al. [23] that investigated the relationship between developer
wellbeing and software repository metrics. They reported that developers who
reported “high hurry” were less productive. Moreover, factors that hamper
wellbeing (such as stress, sleeping problems, etc.) are negatively related to
the number of chat messages. Another work by Graziotin et al. [15] investigated what happens when developers are happy and unhappy. They found
that unhappiness impacts the developer’s own being (in terms of low cognitive performance, mental unease, and disorder, etc.) and their work products
(in terms of low productivity, low code quality, etc.). Happiness leads to the
opposite effect (e.g., high cognitive performance, high productivity, high code
quality, etc.).
Johnson et al. [19] conducted a mixed-method study (two surveys and
interviews) with 1159 participants from Microsoft to understand the effect
of work environments on productivity and satisfaction of software engineers.
They found that personalization, social norms and signals, room composition
and atmosphere, work-related environment affordances, work area, and furniture, and productivity strategies were considered important factors for work
environments. In addition, the ability to work privately with no interruptions
and the ability to communicate with the team and leads were important factors
related to satisfaction.
Meyer et al. [25] investigated what is a good and typical workday for software developers at Microsoft. They conducted a survey with 5971 developers
and identified that on good workdays, developers make progress and value
projects they consider meaningful and spend their time efficiently, with little
randomization, administrative work, and infrastructure issues.
Fucci et al. [14] performed a quasi-experiment with 45 undergraduate students to investigate whether, and to what extent, sleep deprivation impacts
the performance of novice software developers using the agile practice of testfirst development (TFD). The students were divided into two groups, where
23 stayed awake the night before carrying out the tasks, while 22 slept normally. They identified that a single night of sleep deprivation reduced 50% in
the quality of the implementations. In addition, the study found that sleepdeprived developers make more fixes to syntactic mistakes in the source code.
3 Research Design
This section describes the research design used in our study. Firstly, a (i)
Repository Mining analysis was performed to understand the impact of COVID-

6

Paulo Anselmo da Mota Silveira Neto et al.

19 pandemic on software projects. It considered different perspectives such as
number of commits, issues, pull requests, branches, comments, time to fix a
pull request and an issue, and the number of active and new contributors.
Next, a (ii) Survey with software professionals was performed to get insights
on how the pandemic impact on their wellbeing. Figure 1 shows the overall
research design used in our study.

Fig. 1 Research Design.

3.1 Repositories Selection and Mining
Metrics. The metrics used in our analysis are presented in Table 1. For each of
the metrics, we collected information for one year and four months (2019-Jan
to 2020-May). It was important to show the behavior before and during the
pandemic period. We also want to investigate how the metrics evolve month
by month.

A Deep Dive on the Impact of COVID-19 in Software Development
Metric
N of Active Contributors
N of New Developers
N of Branches
N of Created Pull Requests
N of Closed Pull Requests
Pull Request created
closed per month

and

N of Commits
N of Created Pull Requests
Comments
N of Updated Pull Requests
Comments
N of Bug-fix commits

Description
The developers that had at least one commit
in the study date range
The developers that committed at first time
during the study date range
List of all public branches of each repository
Number of pull requests created per month
considering the study date range.
Number of pull requests updated per month
considering the study date range.
Number of pull requests created and closed in
the same month considering the study date
range.
Number of commits considering the study date
range
Number of comments created related to a previous created pull request.
Number of comments updated related to a previous created pull request.
Number of project commits related to bug fix.

7
Ref.
[11]
[11]
[3]
[29, 36]
[29, 36]
[29, 36]

[11]
[20]
[20]
[6]

Table 1 Metrics used in the analysis.

Selecting and Filtering Repositories. First, we choose GitHub repositories written in the Java language, since it is one of the most popular programming languages.4 Next, in order to detect pandemic impact on GitHub
repositories, we retrieved Java repositories created from 2019 and sorted by
their popularity [5]. In addition, as recommended by Munaiah et al. [27], we
filtered out the noise in such large repositories by applying different inclusion
and exclusion criteria, as follows:
– Inclusion Criteria 1: The repository has been updated at least once in
the last year (2019-Jan to 2020-May);
– Inclusion Criteria 2: The repository must have at least 34 commits in
the study period (2019-Jan to 2020-May); this corresponds to two commits
per month in the 17-month study period. This criteria was used to filter
out inactive repositories;
– Inclusion Criteria 3: The repository must have at least 10 contributors
in the study period (2019-Jan to 2020-May). This criteria was used in order
to eliminate irrelevant repositories, c.f., [1], [22], [30];
– Exclusion Criteria 1: Repositories that did not have their artifacts and
description in English were not considered in the study;
– Exclusion Criteria 2: Repositories corresponding to tutorials, books, and
classroom materials were also removed from our analysis.
After the filtering step, we selected the Top 100 Java repositories. As described in Figure 1, the repositories were cloned and the git log and git
branch commands were used to get all projects commits and branches. Using
the .csv file generated, a Python script was used to extract the number of
commits, time to fix a issue and pull request, the number of new contributors
4

TIOBE Index. https://www.tiobe.com/tiobe-index/

8

Paulo Anselmo da Mota Silveira Neto et al.

(i.e. those who made their first contribution in the study period (2019-Jan to
2020-May)), the number of contributors (i.e. those who collaborated in the
study period) and number of remote branches for each repository. When the
information could not be collected from local cloned repositories, we used the
GitHub API. Specifically, pull requests and their comments were retrieved by
GitHub REST API requests5 .
Next, we present how each metric was identified and measured for the
repository mining process.
3.1.1 Number of Active Contributors
Active Contributors Identification and Measurement. The number of active
contributors was identified by first cloning each repository and collecting all
commits6 in the study period. Once the commits were collected in a .csv
file, a Python script was used to identify each developer responsible for each
commit. This way, we considered an active contributor to be a developer which
has at least one commit in the study period.
3.1.2 Number of New Developers
New Developers Identification and Measuring. The number of new developers was also collected from the commits extracted from each repository. The
Python script searched for developers that had their first commit in the repository during the study period. It is important to know if most of the new
developers initiated their contribution before or during the pandemic.
3.1.3 Number of Branches
Number of Branches Identification and Measuring. The number of branches
was also collected from the cloned repositories throughout the GitHub REST
API. It is important to mention that we used an API Endpoint that retrieves
all protected and unprotected repository branches. Finally, a Python script
was used to collect the branch creation date based on its commits.
3.1.4 Number of Created and Closed Pull Requests
Number of Created, Closed Pull Requests Identification and Measuring. The
created and closed pull requests were collected using the GitHub REST API7
since this information is not available at local cloned repositories. According
to GitHub REST API documentation, both issues and pull requests should be
retrieved by the same GET /issues endpoint. In order to identify pull requests,
5

https://developer.github.com/v3/
All commits were extracted using the git command: gitlog − −all − −f ormat =
H, aE, ci > commitf ile.csv
7 https://developer.github.com/v3/
6

A Deep Dive on the Impact of COVID-19 in Software Development

9

we need to filter the results searching for the “pull request” string in each
issue occurrence. With this information, we were able to identify how many
pull requests were created and closed, considering the study date interval.
In addition, we also identified the pull requests created and closed in the
same months. With this metric, we analyze how the pandemic impacts team
productivity.
3.1.5 Number of Commits
Number of Commits Identification and Measurement. The project commits
were collected from the cloned repository using git log command. Next, the
Python script was used to group all commits by month-year in a .csv file.
This information is important to understand how the pandemic impacts on
team productivity over the months.
3.1.6 Number of Created and Updated Pull Requests Comments
Number of Created and Updated Pull Requests Comments Identification and
Measuring. The GitHub REST API 8 was also used to collect information
regarding to the pull requests comments. This metric collected both new and
updated comments related to repository pull requests. The comments show
important insights regarding to the project activity over the study interval.
3.1.7 Number of Bug-Fixing commits
Number of Bug-Fixing commits Identification and Measurement. To gather the
number of commits related to bug-fixing, we used the GitcProc Tool9 which
uses a keyword search to determine if that commits is related to a bug fixing
or not. It searches for related words such as error, bug, defect, and fix within
each commit message [6].

3.2 Survey
Protocol. We created a 20-minute survey designed to understand the impact
of COVID-19 on software development from the perspective of projects and
developers’ wellbeing. It was composed of seventeen closed questions on a Likert scale (Strongly Disagree, Disagree, Neutral, Agree, Strongly Agree, and
N/A) and three open questions. We included the option N/A to prevent respondents providing arbitrary ratings to questions that they find to be unclear.
The survey also collected demographic information from respondents. For the
design of the survey, we followed the Kitchenham and Pfleeger’s guidelines for
personal opinion surveys [21].
8
9

https://developer.github.com/v3/
https://github.com/caseycas/gitcproc

10

Paulo Anselmo da Mota Silveira Neto et al.

We piloted our survey with three researchers (2 with Ph.D. degrees and 1
Ph.D. student) with experience in the area to get feedback on the questions and
their corresponding answers; difficulties faced to answer the survey and time to
finish it. As these pilot respondents were experts in the area, we also would like
to know if we were asking the right questions. We conducted several iterations
of the survey and rephrased some questions and removed others to make the
survey easier to understand and answer. Then, we ended up with 20 questions.
Another concern in this stage was also to ensure that the participants could
finish it in 20-minutes. The pilot survey responses were used solely to improve
the questions, and these responses were not included in the final results. We
kept the survey anonymous, but in the end, the respondents could inform their
email to receive a summary of the study. The survey instrument can be seen
in the accompanying website10 .
Respondents. We followed a three steps approach to recruit survey respondents: initially, we posted survey information on personal accounts of
social media (Twitter, LinkedIn, Instagram). Next, most authors contacted
potential respondents by email (convenience sample) and asked them to share
it with other potential respondents (snowballing). Because of this process, we
were not able to track the total number of invitations. In total, we received
287 responses. We disqualified six responses without actual data (without responses to any of the survey questions of interest to the study despite responding to basic demographics questions, such as the role of the respondent) and
two repeated ones, leading to 279 valid responses that were considered.
The respondents spread out in 32 countries across four continents. The top
three countries where the respondents come from are Brazil, United States,
and Germany. The professional experience of these 279 respondents varies from
no experience to 50 years, with an average of 12.5 years and a median of 10
years.
Regarding the size of the organizations, 34% of the respondents work for
companies with 1000 to 9999 employees, 23% of the participants work for
companies with 100 to 999 employees, 16% of the respondents work for companies with 10 to 99 employees, 11% of the respondents work for companies
with 10000 to 99999 employees, 8% work for companies with 100000 or more
employees, and 8% of the respondents work for companies with 0 to 9 employees. The majority of the respondents have a Bachelor’s degree (41%) and an
advanced degree (41%), i.e., Master’s or Ph.D.
95% of the respondents were paid professional, and 5% were volunteers.
90% of the respondents work full time, and 94% had no disability. On average,
the participants live with three people (including himself/herself), and only
32% live with children under the age of 12. The home office experience of
the 279 respondents varies from no experience to 35 years, with an average
of 3.5 years and a median of 1 year. Finally, 82% of the participants were
working from office before the pandemic and switched to a home office, 17%
10

https://github.com/pamsn/covid-study

A Deep Dive on the Impact of COVID-19 in Software Development

11

were working the whole time remotely, and 1% were working at the office the
whole time.
Data Analysis. We collected the ratings that our respondents provided
for each question. Next, we converted these ratings to Likert scores from 1
(Strongly Disagree) to 5 (Strongly Agree), We computed the average Likert
score of each statement related to productivity and wellbeing perspectives
and the plot Likert scale graph. A Likert scale graph is a bar chart that
shows the number of responses corresponding to strongly disagree, disagree,
neutral, agree, strongly agree, and N/A. In addition, we used open coding [33]
to analyze the answers that the survey respondents gave to explain the open
questions related to productivity and wellbeing, and their perceptions about
how the COVID-19 pandemic has affected him/her and his/her team.
3.3 Statistical Analysis
In the mining part of the study, we calculated the number of each metric mentioned in Table 1 for each project for 17 months (for details, see section 3.1).
To investigate the impact of COVID-19 on these metrics, we partition the time
into six time-windows. As all the collected data related to project metrics are
time-series [34], we did a time series analysis for each metric in each time
frame across the projects to see the changes. We also performed a pairwise
two-sample t-test to check if there is any statistically significant difference in
the mean of each metric among the time-frames. The time series plots for each
metric for each category and for each time-frame is available at the accompanying Website 11 .
4 Results
This section presents our findings from analyzing both mining data and survey
responses. The content is organized around our two research questions.
4.1 RQ1: What is the impact of COVID-19 on projects?
Our goal is to identify the impact of COVID-19 on software projects with
the first research question. For this, we conducted a mining study of 100 Java
projects where we investigate the change of 10 different project-related metrics (defined in Table 1) during the COVID-19 period. In order to do this
comparison, we divided our dataset of 17 months into six time-windows:
1. Jan’19-May’ 20 (TW1): This time-window includes time starting from
January 2019 to May 2020.
2. Jan’19-Jun’19 (TW2): This time-window includes the time starting
from January 2019 to June 2019.
11

https://github.com/pamsn/covid-study

12

Paulo Anselmo da Mota Silveira Neto et al.

3. Jul’ 19-Dec’19 (TW3): This time-window includes the time starting
from July 2019 to December 2019. This time-window includes the initial
COVID-19 spread time.
4. Jan’20-Mar’ 20 (TW4): This time-window includes time starting from
January 2020 to March 2020. During this time-window, WHO (World
Health Organization) declared COVID-19 as a global pandemic on March
11,2020 [10]. Moreover, people started to work from home during this timewindow.
5. Apr’ 20-May’ 20 (TW5): This time-window includes the months of
April and May 2020.
6. Jan’20-May’ 20 (TW6): This time-window includes time staring from
January 2020 to May 2020.
After dividing the metrics data into six time-windows (including the window with full-time length TW1), we investigated the changes of each metric
(Table 1). We tracked the evolution of each metric for identifying their trends
in the projects during the time-windows. For this purpose, we calculated the
effect size of the month on each metric using a linear regression model, giving
us how much that metric changed for each project per month. Then, based
on the effect size, we categorized each project into one of two categories: increasing or decreasing. If the effect was positive, we marked those projects
as increasing for that metric. For a negative effect, we marked the project as
decreasing. For example, Figure 2 shows that for the metric “number of active
contributors”, project “Brave” (Figure 2.a) shows an increasing trend for the
time-window January 2020 to May 2020 and “ExoPlayer” project (Figure 2.b)
shows a decreasing trend according to our time series analysis. All the figures
generated from the analysis are provided in the accompanying website12 . In
Table 2, we report the number of projects belonging to each trend for the six
time-windows mentioned earlier.

In the following sections, we list the observations pertaining to the impact
of COVID-19 on different project activities.
4.1.1 Impact on Bug-fixing Activity
From our mining analysis, we found that in general, more projects are showing
decreasing trends in the number of bug-fix commits per month during the pandemic period. For example, time-window between Jan’20-May’20 (TW6) shows
more projects with a decreasing trend in comparison to the time-windows between Jan’19-Dec’19 (See Table 2). Next, we performed a pairwise two-sample
t-test to check if there is any statistically significant difference in the mean
between these time-windows and found that between the time-windows Jul’19Dec’19 and Jan’20-May’20, there is a statistically significant difference in their
12

https://github.com/pamsn/covid-study

A Deep Dive on the Impact of COVID-19 in Software Development

13

Fig. 2 Month wise trends for Active Contributors across all projects.
Table 2 Summary of time series analysis for each category
Metric
Active
Contributors
New
Developers
Branches
Created
Pull
Requests
Closed
Pull
Requests
Pull request
opened &
closed in
same month
Commits
Created
Pull request
Comments
Updated
Pull request
comments
Bug-fix
Commits

TW 1
↑
↓

TW 2
↑
↓

TW 3
↑
↓

TW 4
↑
↓

TW 5
↑
↓

TW 6
↑
↓

42

58

42

58

45

55

31

69

47

50

18

82

49

49

41

59

29

69

30

66

49

41

18

70

93

7

26

28

35

39

91

9

33

29

77

23

81

11

29

25

35

35

73

15

49

21

54

30

45

54

45

53

49

50

34

64

49

48

25

71

46

53

42

58

44

55

39

58

52

43

20

75

45

55

40

60

44

56

32

68

55

44

23

77

56

41

36

64

38

46

34

55

50

34

23

59

58

39

38

62

37

45

38

51

49

35

32

51

40

60

38

62

37

62

32

65

49

47

25

70

mean (p-value < 0.05). Table 3 shows the summary of the pair-wise t-test for
each metric in different time-windows. Table 3 only shows the statistically
significant results of our t-test.
In our survey, we asked respondents if they agree/disagree with the statement, “Since you began working from home, the number of bug-fixes is lower
than usual”. Among the 279 survey respondents, 44.08% disagreed, where

14

Paulo Anselmo da Mota Silveira Neto et al.

Table 3 Summary of t-test among projects between different time range.
Metric
Active Contributors
Closed Pull Requests
Created Pull Requests
New Developers
Pull Request opened &
closed in the same month
Bug-fix Commits

TW 1
Jul19-Dec19
Jan20-Mar20
Jul19-Dec19
Jan20-Mar20

TW 2
Jan20-May20
Apr20-May20
Jan20-May20
Apr20-May20

Mean1
19.13
78.79
6.79
8.88

Mean2
29.02
46.94
12.48
4.46

p-value
0.019
0.047
0.04
0.00012

Jan20-Mar20

Apr20-May20

Jul19-Dec19

Jan20-May20

62.25

35.7

0.048

69.92

32.54

0.028

15.77% agreed that the number of bug-fixes is lower than usual since they
began working from home during the pandemic. 42, 81, and 95 respondents
strongly disagree, disagree, and neutral with this statement. The average Likert score for this statement is 2.58 (i.e., between ”disagree” and ”neutral”).


Observation 1: Though the majority of projects show decreasing trends
in the number of bug-fix commits most of the survey respondents disagree
regarding decreased number of bug-fix commits during the pandemic
period.


We also asked the respondents about their view on the statement: “The number of bugs in the project has increased since they began working from home”.
39, 91, and 107 respondents strongly disagree, disagree, and neutral with this
statement. The average Likert score for this statement is 2.47 (i.e., between
”disagree” and ”neutral”). The following are some comments that refute or
confirm the statement:
7”Overall we’ve been finishing more features at a higher quality.”
3”The overall level of engagement has increased, but I feel that the quality
has suffered somewhat.”

Observation 2: 46.60% of the respondents conveyed that the number
of bugs did not increase during the pandemic period.
Figure 3 shows the summary of the survey results on the impact of COVID19 on the bug-fixing activities.

4.1.2 Impact on Discussion
From our mining part of the study, we found that in case of creating and
updating pull request comments (which is a way of discussion among developers), more projects are showing decreasing trends during the pandemic period. For example, time-windows between Jan’20-May’20 (TW6) show more
projects with a decreasing trend in comparison to the time-windows between
Jan’19-Dec’19 (See Table 2) in both creating and updating comments. Next,
we performed a pairwise two-sample t-test to check if there is any statistically

A Deep Dive on the Impact of COVID-19 in Software Development

15

Fig. 3 Summary of the survey results on the impact of COVID-19 on the bug-fixing activities.

significant difference in the mean between these time-windows and did not find
any statistically significant difference in mean between any two time-windows
(p-value > 00.5, see Table 3 for details).
We asked our survey respondents about the review activity (another form
of discussion among developers) in their projects during the pandemic. 54.83%
of the survey respondents mentioned that, in general, review activities are not
lower than usual during the pandemic period. 56, 97, and 60 respondents
strongly disagree, disagree, and are neutral with this statement, respectively.
The average Likert score for this statement is 2.41 (i.e., between ”disagree”
and ”neutral”). The following are some comments that refute the statement:
7”I having more structure timed schedule. Review with the team, coding,
review with the team.”
We also asked about the rate of discussion among team members in our
survey. 37.63% respondents did not think there is an increment in discussion
among team members since they began working from home in the pandemic
period. 19, 86, and 73 respondents strongly disagree, disagree, and are neutral
in this, respectively. The average Likert score for this statement is 3.0 (”neutral”). The following are some comments that refute or confirm the statement:
7”Normally during work days, at least on the team/office I worked with/on
we would have some time to discuss about problems that occur to us during the
development of some task. Now with everyone so distant, even though we have

16

Paulo Anselmo da Mota Silveira Neto et al.

tools to workaround that problem it still feels like you are significantly distant
from that person, both physically and mentally.”
3”On our company we have a permanent virtual room opened to attend
doubts and have discussions.”


Observation 3: Though the number of pull request comments created
and updated decreased over the pandemic period, discussion among developers related to their work and review activity did not decrease during
the pandemic.


53.04% of the respondents disagree on the quality degradation of discussion
among team members since they began working from home, while 26.16% agree
that there is a degradation in discussion quality. The average Likert score for
this statement is 2.63 (i.e., between ”disagree” and ”neutral”). The following
are some comments that refute or confirm the statement:
7”I make calls with my colleagues the whole time, to discuss and cheap
talk, this helps focus and fell like we are at the same room.”
3”In general, people are more nervous and stressed, which makes discussions less constructive and more stressful.”
Figure 4 shows the summary of the survey results on the impact of COVID19 on discussion among developers.

Fig. 4 Summary of the survey results on the impact of COVID-19 on discussions among
developers.

A Deep Dive on the Impact of COVID-19 in Software Development

17

4.1.3 Impact on Code Contribution
To investigate the impact of COVID-19 in code contribution, we analyzed the
number of pull requests created, closed each month during and before the
pandemic period.
From our mining analysis, we found that in general, more projects show
increasing trends in the number of created and closed pull requests per month
during the pandemic period. For example, time-windows between Jan’20May’20 (TW6) show more projects with an increasing trend in comparison to
the time-windows between Jan’19-Dec’19 (See Table 2). Next, we performed
a pairwise two-sample t-test to check if there is any statistically significant
difference in the mean of the number of created pull requests between these
time-windows and found that between the time-windows Jul’19-Dec’19 and
Jan’20-May’20, there is a statistically significant difference in their means (pvalue < 0.05). For the closed pull requests, we found that between the timewindows Jan’20-Mar’20 and April’20-May’20, there is a statistically significant
difference in their means (p-value < 0.05, see Table 3 for details).
We also found that the pull requests that opened and closed in the same
month show increasing trends in more projects during the pandemic compared
to the time-windows before the pandemic. We found a statistically significant
difference in mean for this metric between the time-windows Jan’20-Mar’20
and Apr’20-May’20.
In our survey, we asked our respondents about code contribution. There
are different ways of contributing code, such as adding a new feature, refactoring, etc. 58.42% of our survey respondents do not think that working from
home during pandemic results in adding fewer new features than usual time.
49, 114, and 54 respondents strongly disagree, disagree, and are neutral with
the statement: “The number of new features is lower than usual” statement,
respectively. The average Likert score for this statement is 2.41 (i.e., between
”disagree” and ”neutral”). The following are some comments that refute the
statement:
7”I am doing home office. It’s effective to keep the features delivery.”
7”Overall we’ve been finishing more features at a higher quality. However,
we have limited QA resources (we only have one full-time QA staff member),
so the fact that the developers are churning out code is probably making it
much more stressful for our QA lead.”
48.75% of our survey respondents disagree that the number of refactoring
is lower than usual since they began working from home. 36, 100, and 92
respondents strongly disagree, disagree, and are neutral with this statement,
respectively. The average Likert score for this statement is 2.50 (i.e., between
”disagree” and ”neutral”). The following are some comments that confirm the
statement:
3”Besides of interpersonal communication be affected, I perceived that long
term strategies about the quality and refactoring, for example, are depreciated

18

Paulo Anselmo da Mota Silveira Neto et al.

instead of short term tasks, such as new implementations and tests automation
related to the implementations.”

Observation 4: In general, working from home during pandemic period
does not impact code contribution.
Figure 5 shows the summary of the survey results on the impact of COVID19 on code contribution.

Fig. 5 Summary of the survey results on the impact of COVID-19 on code contribution.

In our survey, we also asked the survey respondents about task completion
time, productivity, and quality of their work during the pandemic period.
47% survey respondents disagree that it takes longer to complete the tasks
than usual since they began working from home. 58, 73, and 52 respondents
strongly disagree, disagree, and are neutral with this statement, respectively.
The average Likert score for this statement is 2.72 (i.e., between ”disagree”
and ”neutral”). The following are some comments that refute or confirm the
statement:
7”I’ve more time to study my tasks, with more attention and patience, I’ve
created step by steps before to start working and this is more effective.”
7”We scheduled more small conversations during the day and splitted more
the tasks. We are keeping the same productivity as before or even higher.”

A Deep Dive on the Impact of COVID-19 in Software Development

19

3”Tried using the Pomodoro method of time boxing tasks. Otherwise, nothing. I dont think it helped much.”
3”Work more hours to complete necessary work, try to be more organized
with tasks and time available (prioritization). Not so effective, I still have to
work more hours.”
On the overall productivity, 56% of the survey respondents disagree they
are less productive since they began working at home due to the COVID19 pandemic. 89, 67, and 39 respondents strongly disagree, disagree, and are
neutral, respectively. The average Likert score for this statement is 2.43 (i.e.,
between “disagree” and “neutral”). The following are some comments that
refute or confirm the statement:
7”My productivity at work increased a lot in this pandemic and I was even
recognized as an QA MVP (Most Valuable Player) for the last 2 months. However, I had to keep track of my working hours because I started working a lot
more than I was supposed to.”
7”My team became more productive due to the absence of office distractions.”
3”We had been working remotely for years already. However, our productivity still took a big hit - not due to working from home specifically, but due
to the cognitive overload we’re all experiencing these days. It’s hard to concentrate and be productive when we’re all worried about our families, our society
and our own health.”
3”Decreased one-on-one conversations, low internet bandwidth, irregular
power supplies and many other factors have impacted our effectiveness.”
In general, respondents disagree or are neutral considering that the quality
of their work is lower than it should have been since they began working from
home. 83, 89, and 40 respondents strongly disagree, disagree, and are neutral
with this statement, respectively. The average Likert score for this statement
is 2.33 (”i.e., between ”disagree” and ”neutral”).

Observation 5: Overall productivity and task completion time do not
decrease during the pandemic period compare to the usual time.
Figure 6 shows the summary of the survey results on the impact of COVID19 on task completion time, productivity, and quality of the work.
In general, respondents disagree or are neutral, considering that the amount
of testing is lower than usual since they began working from home during the
pandemic. 54, 110, and 69 respondents strongly disagree, disagree, and are
neutral with this statement, respectively. The average Likert score for this
statement is 2.28 (i.e., between “disagree” and “neutral”). The following is a
comment that confirms the statement:
3”Besides of interpersonal communication be affected, I perceived that long
term strategies about the quality and refactoring, for example, are depreciated

20

Paulo Anselmo da Mota Silveira Neto et al.

Fig. 6 Summary of the survey results on the impact of COVID-19 on task completion time,
productivity, and quality of the work.

instead of short term tasks, such as new implementations and tests automation
related to the implementations.”
Many respondents disagree or are neutral, considering that the code quality has decreased since they began working from home. 62, 112, and 66 respondents strongly disagree, disagree, and are neutral with this statement,
respectively. The average Likert score for this statement is 2.21 (”i.e., between
”disagree” and ”neutral”), which is the lowest among all survey questions.
Observation 6: According to our survey respondents working from
home during pandemic period does not impact code quality.



Figure 7 shows the summary of the survey results on the impact of COVID19 on code quality.

4.2 RQ2: What is the impact of COVID-19 on Developers Wellbeing?
With the second research question our goal is to identify the impact of COVID19 on developers wellbeing. To achieve this goal, we asked the survey respondents regarding their stress, emotional condition, getting help from others,
etc. In the following sections, we present our findings regarding the impact of
COVID-19 on developers wellbeing.

A Deep Dive on the Impact of COVID-19 in Software Development

21

Fig. 7 Summary of the survey results on the impact of COVID-19 on code quality.

4.2.1 Sleep Disorder
Sleep disorder could hamper developer’s productivity. In our survey, we asked
the respondents if they think their sleeping disorder increased during the pandemic period. Among 279 respondents, 39.40% of the respondents agreed that
their sleep disorder increased since they began working from home. The average Likert score for this statement is 3.0 (i.e., ”neutral”). The following are
some comments that refute or confirm the statement:
7”This situation is quite complex, especially when we perceive a complete
neglect on the part of the federal authorities in Brazil with the pandemic and at
the same time see the increasingly devastating advance of the virus in Brazilian territory. The most important action has been to control the amount of
information to maintain emotional control. Apparently just for sleep it hasn’t
been enough.”
3”I’m going to sleep at the same time. It was effectively strong.”
3”I gave sleep a priority. Discontinues some non-essential activities.”

Observation 7: 39.40% of the survey respondents agreed that sleep
disorder increased during pandemic period.
4.2.2 Level of Stress
We found that 141 out of 279 survey respondents agreed that the level of
stress increased in the pandemic period since they began working from home.

22

Paulo Anselmo da Mota Silveira Neto et al.

A substantial number of respondents choose to be neutral or disagree (44
neutral respondents, and 85 respondents who disagree or strongly disagree).
The average Likert score for this statement is 3.33 (”i.e., ”neutral”) which is
the highest among the survey questions. The following are some comments
that refute or confirm the statement:
7”Constant breaks (10minutes every 50 minutes). No overtime. When my
workday is done, I close my laptop and put in a drawer (”Out of sight, out of
mind”) and get it out only on the next working day. I feel less stressed because
I have more time overall (no commuting).”
7”The pandemic is serious, but it is far away to be my source of stress.
I have low need for social interaction. Sunbathing with the baby is enough to
relieve the ”quarantine”.”
3”Working more flexible hours to watch family more during day and shift
more at night. This has maintained work output and quality but increases
stress.”
3”In general, people are more nervous and stressed, which makes discussions less constructive and more stressful.”

Observation 8: 50.53% of survey respondents indicate that their stress
level increased since they began working from home during pandemic.
4.2.3 Happiness
Many respondents disagree or are neutral considering that the level of happiness increased since they began working from home. 27, 70, and 95 respondents
strongly disagree, disagree, and are neutral with this statement, respectively.
The average Likert score for this statement is 2.91 (”i.e., between ”disagree”
and ”neutral”). The following are some comments that refute or confirm the
statement:
7”I am depressed and taking anti-depression pills along with therapy. I
check a doctor online.”
7”Slightly increased the frequency of my panic attacks.”
7”I try to get just enough news to stay informed but other than that I try
to avoid news because the more I hear, the more depressed I get. I have a
regular schedule of zoom dates with my boyfriend on top of our impromptu
calls/facetimes to make sure that we are staying as connected as we can. That
helps to some extent because we know we’ll get through it, but it still completely
sucks that we don’t get to see each other in person. To make up for it, we
probably text more frequently during work hours than we would have before
the pandemic. At work, my team has weekly 30min meetings to just hangout
together on zoom. They were good at first to help us stay connected and sane,
but now I think we’re kind of getting bored with them. We probably don’t need
them so frequently.”
3”My overall wellbeing was not affected. Just the mood and motivation is
down due to the situation. There is not much to do about it. We just have to
get through it.”

A Deep Dive on the Impact of COVID-19 in Software Development

23


Observation 9: 34.76% of the survey respondents mentioned that the
level of happiness did not increase during the pandemic period.
Figure 8 shows the summary of the survey results on the impact of COVID19 on developer’s sleep, stress level and happiness.

Fig. 8 Summary of the survey results on the impact of COVID-19 on the developer’s
wellbeing.

4.2.4 Mentoring
101 out of 279 survey respondents agreed that the mentoring activities for
newcomers has decreased in the project since they began working from home
in pandemic. A substantial number of respondents choose to be neutral or
disagree (66 neutral respondents, and 81 respondents with disagree or strongly
disagree with this statement). The average Likert score for this statement
is 3.15 (i.e., ”neutral”). The following are some comments that confirm the
statement:
3”I think it affected the welcoming of the youngest to the team. Face-to-face
activities generate more intimacy between people.”
3”The COVID-19 has influenced the acceptance of new employees. The
efficiency of the discussion among team members was much lower than faceto-face discussion.”

24

Paulo Anselmo da Mota Silveira Neto et al.



Observation 10: 35.12% of the survey respondent mentioned that mentoring activities for newcomers have decreased during the pandemic period.


Figure 9 shows the summary of the survey results on the impact of COVID19 on the developer’s mentoring activity.

Fig. 9 Summary of the survey results on the impact of COVID-19 on the developer’s
mentoring activity.

4.2.5 Interruptions
In general, respondents disagree or are neutral considering that newly introduced interruptions along with the old ones are negatively impacting their
productivity since they began working from home. 35, 81, 64 respondents
strongly disagree, disagree, and are neutral with this statement, respectively.
The average Likert score for this statement is 2.87 (i.e., between ”disagree”
and ”neutral”). The following are some comments that refute or confirm the
statement:
7”Working remotely, others can’t interrupt my work so quickly, so this
increased my productivity in general.”

A Deep Dive on the Impact of COVID-19 in Software Development

25

7”Home office leads to much less interruptions. This helps productivity a
lot! ”
3”I had to improvise a home office in my daughter’s room so I can isolate
myself there to avoid too many interruptions or background noises. It helped a
little, but my wife and daughter still eventually interrupt me during my working
hours.”
3”We tried to schedule a series of video conferences to keep in touch with
the team. It helped a lot, but is not as good as talking directly to the persons.
The rate of interruptions did increase.”


Observation 11: 41.60% of the survey respondents do not think that
newly introduced interruptions along with the old ones are negatively
impacting their productivity during the pandemic time.


We posit that interruptions are associated with number of people living in
the household. We analyzed the results from the survey and our results show
that the average Likert score ranges from 2.9 to 3.4, indicating the perception
that the number of people living in the household is not having a major impact.
We also investigated whether interruptions are associated with number of
children below 12 years of age living in the household. We analyzed the results
from the survey and our results show that the average Likert score ranges
from 2.0 to 3.2, indicating the perception that the number of children also
does not have a major impact. On the contrary, people mostly disagree with
this perception. Figure 10 shows the summary of the survey.

Observation 12: Majority of the respondents do not perceive the number of kids and people living in the house as a source of interruption.

5 Discussion
Practitioners: From our study, we found several suggestions for the practitioners to maintain a healthy work-life balance during a pandemic. Creating
various “forms of entertainment at home” can help divert the mind away from
all the negative news. Staying at home provides opportunities for practitioners to expand their knowledge and utilize this time to study and take online
courses as several universities and platforms have their offerings. While pandemic has been tough for everyone, it has been positive for many with “better
sleep, more time with family, less travel time”. Practitioners recommend taking “more small breaks during the day to spend time with family and pets”.
Others mentioned the benefit of being disciplined in separating work time from
rest/family time; for example, one respondent mentions: “No overtime. When
my workday is done, I close my laptop and put in a drawer (“Out of sight, out
of mind”) and get it out only on the next working day.” Several respondents

26

Paulo Anselmo da Mota Silveira Neto et al.

Fig. 10 Survey Results Summary.

mention using the Pomodoro technique for time management, which uses a
timer to break down work into intervals, has helped “improve productivity”.
Organizations: Based on our analysis, we found that the COVID-19 situation
does not necessarily result in reduced productivity and inferior code quality.
Organizations can take active steps to help developers cope with COVID19 and remain productive and produce high-quality code. We received many
inputs from our respondents including the following: “On our company we have
a permanent virtual room opened to attend doubts and have discussions.”, “At
work, my team has weekly 30min meetings to just hangout together on zoom.
They were good at first to help us stay connected and sane”, “Daily meetings
during the beginning and end of the day, it allows visibility for the whole team
and visibility about what is being executed. It was too efficient that the team is
producing more”, “My team opened up a remote call which everybody should
be present during all day. This way we ’simulate’ the real-world environment
which we can talk with the other team members anytime. We noticed that
the team collaboration has not decreased”. From the above, we can note that
organizations can positively impact their developers ability to cope well with
COVID-19 in various ways to simulate their previous working environment
(before the pandemic) and facilitate more interactions between the developers.
In such a way, developers can effectively collaborate and feel less isolated in
doing their tasks.
Researchers: Our findings highlight that the impact of COVID-19 is not
binary (reduce productivity vs. increase productivity) but rather a spectrum.
For many of our observations, substantial proportions of respondents have
differing opinions from each other. For example, for Observation 3 (Though

A Deep Dive on the Impact of COVID-19 in Software Development

27

the number of pull request comments created and updated decreased over the
pandemic period, discussion among developers related to their work and review
activity did not decrease during the pandemic.), 37.63% of respondents did not
think there is an increment in discussion among team members since they
began working from home in the pandemic period, with an average Likert
score of 3.0 (”neutral”).
More research is needed to uncover specific conditions that cause certain
outcomes to be more prevalent. These conditions can correspond to personalities of different developers, their roles, their organization structure, and characteristics, their home conditions (e.g., “low internet bandwidth”, “irregular
power supplies”), etc. To illustrate the impact of these factors, one of our respondents mentions “... [I] have a low need for social interaction. Sunbathing
with the baby is enough to relieve the “quarantine” while another mentions
“decreased one-on-one conversations ... impacted our effectiveness”. Yet another mention: “Slightly increased the frequency of my panic attacks”. This
suggests that personality plays a role in the impact of COVID-19 to developers (c.f., [39] that also shows the impact of personality on the developer and
team effectiveness prior to COVID-19). Developers with some physical/mental
health conditions (e.g., panic attacks) may also be more adversely impacted
by COVID-19.
The understanding gained from further research can result in: (1) creation
of specific guidelines that can help developers or organizations adversely affected by COVID-19 to learn from other developers or organizations that have
coped well with COVID-19, (2) Organizations to adopt different strategies to
help developers of different personalities and conditions to cope with COVID19.
We do not view our study as a final definitive study, but rather one of
the many that can shed “full” light into COVID-19 (or other pandemics), its
impacts, and ways to mitigate those impacts. Some of the future studies can
consider performing a smaller scale but more in-depth and focused study on a
particular aspect (e.g., the impact of personality on how developers cope with
COVID-19).

6 Threats to Validity
Our research findings may be subject to the concerns that we list below. We
have taken all possible steps to reduce the impacts of these possible threats,
but some could not be mitigated and it’s possible that our mitigation strategies
may not have been effective.
Our samples have been from a single source (Github) and single programming language (Java). This may be a source of bias, and our findings may
be limited to open source programs from Github. However, we believe that
the large number of projects sampled more than adequately addresses this
concern.

28

Paulo Anselmo da Mota Silveira Neto et al.

The set of analyzed metrics spans across 10 different categories and widely
used in literature. However, we cannot guarantee that our set of metric are
exhaustive. We plan to expand our metric set in future work.
It is possible that there are defects in the implementation of our mining
scripts. To that end, we have extensively tested our implementation, and manually verified sampled counts of different metrics.
Finally, it is possible that the survey participants misunderstood some of
the survey questions. To mitigate this threat, we conducted a pilot study with
developers with different experience levels from both open-source community
and industry. We also conducted a pilot study with survey design experts. We
updated the survey based on the findings of these pilot studies.

7 Conclusions
The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted the whole world in different ways. As
software is still ”eating the world”, it is essential to understand COVID-19’s
impact on software projects. We conducted a mining software repository study
based on 100 GitHub projects developed in Java using ten different metrics.
Next, we surveyed 279 software development professionals from 32 countries
for gathering more insights about the impact of COVID-19 on daily activities
and wellbeing.
Based on our findings, we derived 12 observations that can be used by
practitioners, organizations, and researchers. Practitioners can use our recommendations to maintain a healthy work-life balance during a pandemic.
Organizations can learn from our survey respondents and take steps to remain
productive while creating high-quality code. The research community can explore the social and human aspects to understand the impact of developer
personality during a pandemic.
As future work, we intend to expand the analysis of the projects (considering a wider time window) to better understand the impact of a year-long
pandemic on software development.

References
1. Agrawal, A., Rahman, A., Krishna, R., Sobran, A., Menzies, T.: We dont need another hero? Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Software Engineering
Software Engineering in Practice - ICSE-SEIP 18 (2018)
2. Bao, L., Li, T., Xia, X., Zhu, K., Li, H., Yang, X.: How does working from home affect
developer productivity? – a case study of baidu during covid-19 pandemic (2020)
3. Barr, E.T., Bird, C., Rigby, P.C., Hindle, A., Germán, D.M., Devanbu, P.T.: Cohesive
and isolated development with branches. In: FASE (2012)
4. Bhutkar, G., Roto, V., Clemmensen, T., Barricelli, B.R., Abdelnour-Nocera, J.L.,
Meschtscherjakov, A., Lopes, A.G., Campos, P.F., Gonçalves, F.: User experiences and
wellbeing at work. In: Human-Computer Interaction - INTERACT 2019 - 17th IFIP
TC 13 International Conference, Paphos, Cyprus, September 2-6, 2019, Proceedings,
Part IV, pp. 754–758 (2019)

A Deep Dive on the Impact of COVID-19 in Software Development

29

5. Borges, H., Tulio Valente, M.: Whats in a github star? understanding repository starring
practices in a social coding platform. Journal of Systems and Software 146, 112129
(2018)
6. Casalnuovo, C., Suchak, Y., Ray, B., Rubio-González, C.: Gitcproc: A tool for processing and classifying github commits. In: Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGSOFT
International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis, ISSTA 2017, p. 396399.
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (2017)
7. Cataldo, M., Herbsleb, J.D.: Communication patterns in geographically distributed software development and engineers’ contributions to the development effort. In: Proceedings of the 2008 International Workshop on Cooperative and Human Aspects of Software
Engineering, CHASE 2008, Leipzig, Germany, Tuesday, May 13, 2008, pp. 25–28 (2008)
8. Chakraborty, I., Maity, P.: Covid-19 outbreak: Migration, effects on society, global environment and prevention. Science of The Total Environment 728, 138882 (2020)
9. Chen, E., Lerman, K., Ferrara, E.: Tracking social media discourse about the covid-19
pandemic: Development of a public coronavirus twitter data set. JMIR Public Health
Surveill 6(2), e19273 (2020)
10. Cucinotta, D., Vanelli, M.: Who declares covid-19 a pandemic. Acta bio-medica: Atenei
Parmensis 91(1), 157–160 (2020)
11. Delorey, D.P., Knutson, C.D., Chun, S.: Do programming languages affect productivity?
a case study using data from open source projects. In: First International Workshop on
Emerging Trends in FLOSS Research and Development (FLOSS’07: ICSE Workshops
2007), pp. 8–8 (2007)
12. Dong, E., Du, H., Gardner, L.: An interactive web-based dashboard to track covid-19
in real time. The Lancet Infectious Diseases 20 (2020)
13. Fauci, A., Lane, H., Redfield, R.: Covid-19 navigating the uncharted. New England
Journal of Medicine 382 (2020)
14. Fucci, D., Scanniello, G., Romano, S., Juristo, N.: Need for sleep: The impact of a night
of sleep deprivation on novice developers performance. IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering 46(1), 1–19 (2020)
15. Graziotin, D., Fagerholm, F., Wang, X., Abrahamsson, P.: What happens when software
developers are (un)happy. J. Syst. Softw. 140, 32–47 (2018)
16. Herbsleb, J.D.: Global software engineering: The future of socio-technical coordination.
In: 2007 Future of Software Engineering, FOSE 07, p. 188198. IEEE Computer Society,
USA (2007)
17. Herbsleb, J.D.: Technical perspective - maintaining quality in the face of distributed
development. Commun. ACM 52(8), 84 (2009)
18. Herbsleb, J.D., Mockus, A.: An empirical study of speed and communication in globally
distributed software development. IEEE Trans. Software Eng. 29(6), 481–494 (2003)
19. Johnson, B., Zimmermann, T., Bird, C.: The effect of work environments on productivity
and satisfaction of software engineers. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering (01),
1–1 (5555). DOI 10.1109/TSE.2019.2903053
20. Kalliamvakou, E., Gousios, G., Blincoe, K., Singer, L., German, D.M., Damian, D.: An
in-depth study of the promises and perils of mining github. Empirical Softw. Engg.
21(5), 20352071 (2016)
21. Kitchenham, B.A., Pfleeger, S.L.: Personal opinion surveys. In: Guide to Advanced
Empirical Software Engineering, pp. 63–92 (2008)
22. Krishna, R., Agrawal, A., Rahman, A., Sobran, A., Menzies, T.: What is the connection between issues, bugs, and enhancements? Proceedings of the 40th International
Conference on Software Engineering Software Engineering in Practice - ICSE-SEIP 18
(2018)
23. Kuutila, M., Mäntylä, M.V., Claes, M., Elovainio, M., Adams, B.: Using experience sampling to link software repositories with emotions and work well-being. In: Proceedings of
the 12th ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and
Measurement, ESEM 2018, Oulu, Finland, October 11-12, 2018, pp. 29:1–29:10 (2018)
24. Li, Q., Guan, X., Wu, P., Wang, X., Zhou, L., Tong, Y., Ren, R., Leung, K., Lau, E.,
Wong, J.Y., Xing, X., Xiang, N., Wu, Y., Li, C., Chen, Q., Li, D., Liu, T., Zhao, J., Li,
M., Feng, Z.: Early transmission dynamics in wuhan, china, of novel coronavirusinfected
pneumonia. New England Journal of Medicine 382 (2020)

30

Paulo Anselmo da Mota Silveira Neto et al.

25. Meyer, A., Barr, E.T., Bird, C., Zimmermann, T.: Today was a good day: The daily life
of software developers. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering (01), 1–1 (5555)
26. Meyer, A.N., Murphy, G.C., Zimmermann, T., Fritz, T.: Retrospecting on work and productivity: A study on self-monitoring software developers’ work. PACMHCI 1(CSCW),
79:1–79:24 (2017)
27. Munaiah, N., Kroh, S., Cabrey, C., Nagappan, M.: Curating github for engineered software projects (2016). DOI 10.7287/PEERJ.PREPRINTS.2617
28. Murphy-Hill, E., Jaspan, C., Sadowski, C., Shepherd, D.C., Phillips, M., Winter, C.,
Dolan, A.K., Smith, E.K., Jorde, M.A.: What predicts software developers productivity?
Transactions on Software Engineering (2019)
29. Murphy-Hill, E., Jaspan, C., Sadowski, C., Shepherd, D.C., Phillips, M., Winter, C.,
Dolan, A.K., Smith, E.K., Jorde, M.A.: What predicts software developers productivity?
Transactions on Software Engineering (2019)
30. Rahman, A., Agrawal, A., Krishna, R., Sobran, A.: Characterizing the influence of continuous integration: empirical results from 250+ open source and proprietary projects.
Proceedings of the 4th ACM SIGSOFT International Workshop on Software Analytics
- SWAN 2018 (2018)
31. Rahman, A., Farhana, E.: An exploratory characterization of bugs in covid-19 software
projects (2020)
32. Ralph, P., Baltes, S., Adisaputri, G., Torkar, R., Kovalenko, V., Kalinowski, M., Novielli,
N., Yoo, S., Devroey, X., Tan, X., Zhou, M., Turhan, B., Hoda, R., Hata, H., Robles,
G., Fard, A.M., Alkadhi, R.: Pandemic programming: How covid-19 affects software
developers and how their organizations can help (2020)
33. Saldana, J.: The Coding Manual for Qualitative Researchers. SAGE Publications (2015)
34. Shumway, R., Stoffer, D.: Time Series Analysis and Its Applications With R Examples,
vol. 9 (2011). DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-7865-3
35. Storey, M., Zimmermann, T., Bird, C., Czerwonka, J., Murphy, B., Kalliamvakou, E.:
Towards a theory of software developer job satisfaction and perceived productivity.
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering (01), 1–1 (5555)
36. Vasilescu, B., Yu, Y., Wang, H., Devanbu, P., Filkov, V.: Quality and productivity
outcomes relating to continuous integration in github. pp. 805–816 (2015). DOI 10.
1145/2786805.2786850
37. Verity, R., Okell, L., Dorigatti, I., Winskill, P., Whittaker, C., Imai, N., CuomoDannenburg, G., Thompson, H., Walker, P., Fu, H., Dighe, A., Griffin, J., Baguelin,
M., Bhatia, S., Boonyasiri, A., Cori, A., Cucunub, Z.M., FitzJohn, R., Gaythorpe, K.,
Ferguson, N.: Estimates of the severity of coronavirus disease 2019: a model-based analysis. The Lancet Infectious Diseases 20 (2020)
38. Walker, P.G.T., Whittaker, C., Watson, O.J., Baguelin, M., Winskill, P., Hamlet, A.,
Djafaara, B.A., Cucunubá, Z., Olivera Mesa, D., Green, W., Thompson, H., Nayagam,
S., Ainslie, K.E.C., Bhatia, S., Bhatt, S., Boonyasiri, A., Boyd, O., Brazeau, N.F.,
Cattarino, L., Cuomo-Dannenburg, G., Dighe, A., Donnelly, C.A., Dorigatti, I., van
Elsland, S.L., FitzJohn, R., Fu, H., Gaythorpe, K.A., Geidelberg, L., Grassly, N., Haw,
D., Hayes, S., Hinsley, W., Imai, N., Jorgensen, D., Knock, E., Laydon, D., Mishra,
S., Nedjati-Gilani, G., Okell, L.C., Unwin, H.J., Verity, R., Vollmer, M., Walters, C.E.,
Wang, H., Wang, Y., Xi, X., Lalloo, D.G., Ferguson, N.M., Ghani, A.C.: The impact
of covid-19 and strategies for mitigation and suppression in low- and middle-income
countries. Science (2020)
39. Xia, X., Lo, D., Bao, L., Sharma, A., Li, S.: Personality and project success: Insights
from a large-scale study with professionals. In: 2017 IEEE International Conference on
Software Maintenance and Evolution, ICSME 2017, Shanghai, China, September 17-22,
2017, pp. 318–328 (2017)
40. Zhang, E., Gupta, N., Nogueira, R., Cho, K., Lin, J.: Rapidly deploying a neural search
engine for the covid-19 open research dataset: Preliminary thoughts and lessons learned
(2020)

