Mass testing and proactiveness affect epidemic spreading
Saptarshi Sinha,1 Deep Nath,1 and Soumen Roy1, ∗

arXiv:2008.10387v2 [physics.soc-ph] 14 May 2021

1

Department of Physics, Bose Institute, 93/1 Acharya Prafulla Chandra Road, Kolkata 700009, India
The detection and management of diseases become quite complicated when pathogens contain
asymptomatic phenotypes amongst their ranks, as evident during the recent COVID-19 pandemic.
Spreading of diseases has been studied extensively under the paradigm of Susceptible - Infected Recovered - Deceased (SIRD) dynamics. Various game-theoretic approaches have also addressed
disease spread, many of which consider S, I, R, and D as strategies rather than as states. Remarkably, most studies from the above approaches do not account for the distinction between the
symptomatic or asymptomatic aspect of the disease. It is well-known that precautionary measures
like washing hands, wearing masks and social distancing significantly mitigate the spread of many
contagious diseases. Herein, we consider the adoption of such precautions as strategies and treat
S, I, R, and D as states. We also attempt to capture the differences in epidemic spreading arising
from symptomatic and asymptomatic diseases on various network topologies. Through extensive
computer simulations, we examine that the cost of maintaining precautionary measures as well as
the extent of mass testing in a population affects the final fraction of socially responsible individuals.
We observe that the lack of mass testing could potentially lead to a pandemic in case of asymptomatic diseases. Network topology also seems to play an important role. We further observe that
the final fraction of proactive individuals depends on the initial fraction of both infected as well
as proactive individuals. Additionally, edge density can significantly influence the overall outcome.
Our findings are in broad agreement with the lessons learnt from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Occasionally, an infectious disease can spread to such
an extent, that it significantly affects a vast number of
people and indeed the majority of the population. Such
a scenario is referred to as an epidemic [1]. It becomes
pandemic in nature when it affects multiple countries,
perhaps at the global level. The impact of an epidemic
can reach the height of devastation, especially if the
pathogen also causes asymptomatic carriers [2, 3]. Obviously, such asymptomatic infections present a stark contrast to symptomatic infections — wherein the symptoms
of infections are clearly manifest. Henceforth, we will refer to the former as class A infections and the latter as
class M infections. An infection with asymptomatic phenotypes presents remarkable consequences. It severely
hinders the containment of infection and the management of the infected. These unfortunate effects have
been in full display during the recent Covid-19 pandemic
[4] as well as the “Spanish influenza” [5]. Revolutionary
advances in medicine have been achieved between these
two catastrophes separated by a century. And yet, little can evidently be done to contain the spread of such
pandemics — when in full rage.
Epidemic spreading has been modelled extensively
through SIRD dynamics on networks [6–9]. It has
also been studied independently through game-theoretic
approaches, many of which involve networks [10, 11].
Herein, we adopt a game-theoretic approach towards epidemic spreading on heterogeneous networks [6, 10, 12–
15]. There are not many studies addressing the distinc-

∗

soumen@jcbose.ac.in

tion between class M and class A type infections in existing literature [16, 17]. One of our prime objectives is to
clearly demonstrate the effects arising from differences in
asymptomatic and symptomatic phenotype on epidemic
modeling.
Furthermore, in existing literature on game theoretic
modeling of epidemic spreading on networks S, I, R and
D have been predominantly considered as strategic options [10]. However, herein we consider these as states
rather than strategies. Conversion of an individual’s
condition from susceptible to infected during epidemic
spreading is not always a choice. Therefore, S, I, R and
D are perhaps more aptly considered as states of an individual. On the other hand, individuals may either cooperate or defect in being precautious. Such proactiveness
of individuals is more of a choice and could be considered
as a strategy rather than a state. This rather important
biological aspect has not been accorded sufficient attention in studies on epidemic spreading involving gametheoretic approaches on networks and SIRD dynamics.
Generally, to prevent the spread of any transmissible
disease, mass administration of vaccines – if available – is
the most desirable option. Significant research has been
conducted to scrutinize the vaccination process and its
effect on the spread of an epidemic [13, 18]. However, in
the absence of vaccines, asymptomatically infected individuals (especially in class A diseases), are likely to be
unaware of their own condition. They can unwittingly
act as spreaders or even as super-spreaders if they do not
resort to proper precautionary measures [19]. As is wellknown, precautionary measures in the form of frequently
washing one’s hands, wearing masks, and social distancing are some effective strategies to limit the spread of
many contagious diseases. In more extreme cases, lockdown may be required, which obviously presents signifi-

2
cant economic and social costs.
Susceptible-Infected-Recovered-Deceased or SIRD dynamics specifies that every member of the population
would be in one of the following four states, at any given
instant of time, t. Borrowing from the notions of set
theory, we can pool individuals in a similar state as belonging to the same set. Sets representing these states
are susceptible, S(t), infected, I(t), recovered, R(t), and
deceased, D(t) and would also be frequently referred to
hereinafter as S, I, R, and D respectively [20]. If E
is the universal set denoting the whole population, then
obviously E = I ∪ S ∪ R ∪ D.
Irrespective of their state, susceptible individuals and
infected yet undetected individuals can choose from either of the following two strategies when facing an epidemic. These individuals can either adopt precautionary
measures and act responsibly or they can remain careless
and spread the disease. Any proactive person would obviously need to pay a certain “cost” in order to sustain
these measures and act responsibly. In addition, mass
testing would surely go a long way in identifying infected
individuals. Mass testing ratio, τ , denotes the fraction of
the entire population, which has been tested for a given
disease. Its importance in class A diseases especially can
hardly be overemphasised. A prime motivation of this
work is to examine the manner in which precautionary
measures and mass testing can affect the spread of an
epidemic.
In any infection, the infected individuals definitely possess the capacity to be quite contagious during the incubation period. This is true for both class A and
class M diseases. Generally, most diseases are neither
purely symptomatic nor purely asymptomatic. However, many diseases are predominantly symptomatic or
predominantly asymptomatic. During the course of an
epidemic some infected individuals may exhibit symptoms, while many others may not. The manifestation of
symptoms may depend on the nature and severity of the
disease, the immunity of the infected individuals, and
sundry other factors. Herein, we distinguish between
class M and class A diseases by using the parameter,
σ, which is the Symptom Manifestation Ratio. Of all
infected individuals, σ is the fraction of infected individuals who clearly demonstrate the symptoms of a given
disease. σ = 0 represents the scenario, where all infected
individuals are asymptomatic. On the other hand, σ = 1
signifies that all infected individuals clearly exhibit symptoms of a given disease. Generally, 0 < σ < 1. The
estimate of σ for a given disease can be obtained from
empirical data.
The decisive role of topology is well known in networks in fields as diverse as infrastructure, image processing, optogenetics and phage-bacteria interactions[21–26].
The dependence of the outcome of games played on heterogeneous structures depends non-trivially on the underlying topology [10, 27–29]. To understand the role of
the underlying topology on the dynamics, we consider
various population structures in our simulations. We

have predominately studied the dynamics on BarabásiAlbert (BA) networks, which is known to emulate many
real-world scenarios. In addition, we have also studied
the dynamics on Watts–Strogatz small-world (SW) and
Erdös-Rényi (ER) models.

II.

MODEL

Our model is quite general and addresses both symptomatic (class M) and asymptomatic (class A) diseases.
Contagious diseases can spread through several different
mechanisms. These could range from being in the mere
proximity of an infected individual or coming in contact
with contaminated items used or even touched by the
individual. It could also spread through the bodily secretions of an infected person, through sexual or other
physical contact or through various vectors.
Proactive individuals will choose precautionary measures of their own accord. Examples of such precautionary measures are the maintenance of social distance,
wearing masks, and frequently washing hands. These
measures would surely lower the rate of the infection
spreading. However, adopting these measures comes at
the cost of a varying degree of restriction in one’s everyday life. On the other hand, a careless individual will
not choose adequate or proper protection against infection. Such individuals are not merely a danger to many
others but even to themselves. Their uncooperative and
carefree behaviour is likely to increase the rate of spread
of infection.
Thus, we observe that broadly two strategies are possible – cooperation and defection [30]. Proactive individuals are cooperators C, who act towards preventing the
spread of infection by taking proper precaution. However, this comes at a cost, c. If an individual’s neighbor
happens to be a cooperator, it automatically obtains a
benefit b. On the other hand, careless individuals can be
considered as defectors D. They will not spend any cost
and therefore, for such defectors, c = 0. In spite of their
callous behaviour – these defectors still enjoy benefit, b,
due to the accommodating behaviour of cooperators in
the population. Since this benefit comes at no cost, these
defectors effectively act like free-riders in a population.
When two cooperators, C, interact – they will be mutually benefited by each other’s proactive actions. However,
this benefit has been arrived at by expending a cost c.
Therefore, the actual reward enjoyed by these cooperators is (b − c).
The interaction between two defectors, D, will not lead
to any benefit or cost, for either of them. Thus, this
will result in zero payoffs. For the interaction between
a cooperator and a defector; D will obtain temptation
amounting to b, while C will derive the sucker’s payoff
equaling −c. True to their nature, defectors would try to
avoid paying any cost. Table I displays the payoff matrix
incorporating all the above interactions modeled on the
Prisoner’s Dilemma.

3
C
D
C b − c, b − c −c,b
D
b,−c
0,0
TABLE I. Payoff matrix, indicating the payoffs of both the
row and the column players. Here, b = 1 and 0 < c < 1. We
have considered c = 0 for SD , as they largely do not resort to
precautionary measures. Successful vaccination should lead
to c = 1, thereby implying safety from the disease. c < 1
would always entail some risk. b > c ensures that the game
being played is Prisoner’s Dilemma.

Asymptomatic individuals in class A diseases are
rather dangerous because they do not display clear symptoms of infection and unwittingly act as spreaders or even
super-spreaders. Perhaps the only way to identify such
infected individuals is through mass testing. Mass testing allows the identification of both symptomatic and
asymptomatic infected individuals – even the mild ones.
The infected individuals who have been detected by mass
testing, are kept in quarantine and denoted by IQ . Individuals in IQ do not take part in the game anymore. For
simplicity and without the loss of generalisation, we presume here that they can not harm members of the susceptible population anymore. They can either recover,
which depends on recovery rate, ρ, or die depending on
the death rate, δ. On the other hand, individuals who are
infected but remain undetected, IU , cause further infection in the population. IU can be of two types, IC and
ID . Without medical intervention, IU individuals can
also recover at a “self-recovery rate”, ρs . All the states
and the possible strategies associated with each state are
listed in Table II.
State
Susceptible (S)

Strategic choice
Susceptible but proactive (SC )
Susceptible but careless(SD )
Infected (IU )
Infected but proactive (IC )
(undetected, asymptomatic) Infected but careless (ID )
Infected (IQ )
No active strategic choice
(detected, symptomatic)
Recovered (R)
No active strategic choice
Deceased (D)
No active strategic choice
TABLE II. Different strategies associated with various states.

We consider that the rate of infection spread will depend on the strategies of individuals. In a population,
S and IU individuals are likely to interact with each
other causing the spread of infection. Both S and IU
individuals can adopt either cooperation or defection as
their strategy. SC and IC denote susceptible cooperators and infected cooperators respectively. SC and IC
are both proactive and resort to appropriate precaution
while interacting with others. On the other hand, SD
and ID denote susceptible defectors and infected defectors respectively. Cost, c, reflects the extent of precaution undertaken by an individual while the benefit obtained from another proactive individual’s precautionary

actions is reflected in b, as aforementioned. The fraction c/b indicates the extent of precaution undertaken
by an individual, where obviously b > c. We can also
define risk as r = (1 − cb ). C will resort to precaution
at some cost to lower the risk. However, c = 0 for D,
implying r = 1, i.e., high risk. Let ri and rj denote
the risk related to two interacting individuals i and j.
If one of these individuals is infected and other one is
susceptible, the probability of the susceptible individual
getting infected due to the interaction is µ = (ri × rj ).
This indicates that µ of SC due to interaction with IC
is µC,C = (1 − cb )(1 − cb ) = (1 − cb )2 . Expectedly this is
low because both of them have resorted to adequate precaution. However, the probability that an SD individual
gets infected due to an interaction with an ID individual is µD,D = 1. Again, this is expectedly high because
none of the individuals have resorted to due precaution.
Similarly, µC,D = µD,C = (1− cb ). Let us recall that individuals in the susceptible and infected state can employ
either of the two strategies – cooperation or defection.
At any time instant, if SC and IC denote the susceptible
and infected cooperators respectively, then SC ∪ IC = C.
Similarly, if SD and ID denote the susceptible and infected defectors, then SD ∪ID = D. If IC and ID denote
undetected individuals, then IC ∪ ID = IU . Obviously,
S = SC ∪ SD and I = IU ∪ IQ .
We have already discussed in detail about the importance of SMR, σ, in Section I. For class M diseases, we
have considered σ = 0.9, which is rather high. On the
other hand, σ = 0.02, has been considered for class A
diseases [31].

III.

ALGORITHM

In our simulations, a heterogeneous population structure has been considered in the form of a BarabásiAlbert (BA) network, with average degree hki. It is
well-known that BA networks possess a power-law degree distribution. Simultaneously, we have also considered small-world and random networks in the form of
Watts–Strogatz small-world (SW) and Erdös-Rényi (ER)
models. Each time step during both transient time and
counting time sequentially incorporates the events of: (a)
payoff determination, (b) strategy upgradation, and (c)
state upgradation. Initially every individual in the population is susceptible. At the start of an epidemic session, some of these individuals get infected randomly.
Thus now, we have two states – susceptible and infected.
The population has been divided into cooperators, C,
and defectors, D. If Ii represents the set of initially infected individuals, Ii remains undetected i.e., IU = Ii
and IQ = ∅. Thus, on the basis of both strategy and
state, there exist four types of individuals, namely, SC ,
SD , IC , and ID . Initially, prisoner’s dilemma is played
between C and D, irrespective of the state they belong
to. They will accumulate their payoffs by interacting
with each other. It is rather superfluous to consider any

4
strategy for recovered and dead individuals and they do
not take part in the game. After determination of payoffs,
all cooperators and defectors randomly select a neighbor
for strategy upgradation. Following Fermi’s rule of strategy upgradation – an individual, i, will adopt the strategy of a randomly chosen neighbor, j, with a probability
1
1+exp[−(Πj −Πi )] . Πj and Πi denote the total payoffs accumulated by j and i respectively [32, 33]. Strong selection
has been considered here.
After strategy upgradation, state upgradation takes
place. In the previous step, S and IU individuals decide to be either C or D. But in this step, infection will
spread in the population. It has been considered that
the infection can spread through contact. Thus, susceptible neighbors of an infected individual are vulnerable.
But depending on the strategy of both the interacting
individuals i.e., C or D, the probability of spreading of
infection will be different.
While upgrading its state, S will randomly interact
with one of its neighbors. If that randomly chosen neighbor is IU , S may get infected with a probability, µ. The
newly infected individuals may or may not manifest the
symptoms. This would depend on the symptom manifestation rate of the infection, σ. The symptomatic individuals would be quarantined and they would not interact with the rest of the population anymore. As mentioned earlier, these individuals are identified as IQ . The
asymptomatic individuals will remain in population and
would cause further infection.
All individuals would hence undergo mass testing with
probability, τ . Depending on τ , some infected individuals can also be identified as IQ . The remaining IU would
remain in the population. Since they are unaware of their
own situation they will unwittingly infect others. They
may undergo self-recovery depending on ρs or die without getting any medical help, depending on the value of
δ. On the other hand, IQ individuals may either recover,
depending on the value of ρ, or die, depending on the
value of δ. Here for simplicity, the value of δ of IQ and
IU has been considered to be the same. In our simulations, reinfection of recovered individuals has not been
considered.
In all simulations, a transient time of 104 generations
is considered. After this transient time, if NSC be the
number of susceptible cooperators, fC = NSC /N , is calculated over a counting time of 103 generations. Every
network has N nodes and the average degree is denoted
by hki. The overall simulations have been performed over
EN networks. In all simulations, a definite fraction of
nodes is initially assigned to be cooperators, at random.
If fCi denotes the initial fraction of cooperators in the
population, then fDi = (1 − fCi ) denotes the initial fraction of defectors. Apart from strategies, a definite number of nodes, i.e. individuals, are also randomly chosen
to get infected. We denote the initial number of infected
and susceptible individuals by NIi and NSi respectively.
Obviously, (NSi + NIi ) = N denotes the total number
of individuals in the population. The fraction of Ii and

Si is denoted by fIi = NIi /N and fSi = NSi /N respectively. Here, fIi = (1 − fSi ). At the very onset of
the epidemic, all initially infected individuals would be
undetected. Hence, initially NIU = NIi and NIQ = 0.
Here, NIU and NIQ denote the number of undetected
and detected individuals respectively.

IV.

RESULTS

FIG. 1. fC = SC /N , versus cost, c. The fraction of population, which was initially infected is fIi = 0. Here, the initial
fraction of cooperators, fCi = 0.5. Results are for a network
of N = 1024 nodes, hki = 4, 6, 8 and EN = 580 networks.
Evidently, in the absence of infection, all individuals are susceptible, i.e., either SC or SD . We observe that cooperation
is maintained at lower values of c, which is compromised with
increasing c. Cooperation seems to be maintained relatively
better for graphs with lower hki. The standard error is smaller
than the size of the data points.

Prisoner’s Dilemma game is played initially in the absence of any infection, i.e., between SC and SD only,
which implies fSi = 1 and fIi = 0. In that case,
fC = NSC /N , depends only on c. SC dominates at lower
values of c but decreases at higher values of c, as shown in
Fig 1. This implies that if c increases, individuals would
be quite unwilling to adopt precautionary measures and
would try to defect.

A.

Asymptomatic infections: class A

First, we have considered class A, where the symptom
manifestation ratio, σ, is very low. There are various diseases where manifestation of symptoms can not often be
observed clearly, such as infections associated with Cytomegalovirus, Rhinoviruses, Salmonella or Ebola [34–
36] infections. In the Zika virus infection, symptoms of
clinical illness were absent in more than 80% of infected
patients. These individuals played a crucial role in the
initial transmission of the Zika virus [37]. Similarly, the
asymptomatic pine trees, harbouring B. xylophilus nematodes play a vital role in the spreading of pine wilt

5
epidemic [3]. The ongoing pandemic due to COVID-19
virus is also associated with a high number of asymptomatic carriers [38]. Herein, we have considered that
initially 2% individuals have been infected. Fig. 2 is for
the asymptomatic case. It can be observed that fC decreases with the increase of c. Hence, it can be concluded
that individuals in the population will only cooperate for
low value of c. But due to the presence of infection, low
c implies higher risk.

FIG. 3. fC versus c, for a predominantly symptomatic disease
with σ = 0.9. Results are for (a) N = 1024 nodes and (b)
N = 2048 nodes. Other parameters are, fCi = 0.5, fIi =
0.02, ρ = 0.5, ρs = 0.2, τ = 0.3, δ = 0.05, hki = 4, 6, 8
and EN = 580 networks. Increasing costs lead to decreasing
cooperation. The standard error is smaller than the size of
the data points.

FIG. 2. fC versus c for a predominantly asymptomatic infection with σ = 0.02. Results are for (a) N = 1024 nodes
and (b) N = 2048 nodes. Other parameters are, fCi = 0.5,
fIi = 0.02, ρ = 0.5, ρs = 0.2, τ = 0.3, δ = 0.05, hki = 4,
6, 8 and EN = 580 networks. Cooperation is witnessed to
some extent in a limited range of c. In asymptomatic (class
A) diseases, lower c indicates a higher risk of getting infected.
On the other hand, a higher cost is naturally unaffordable to
most individuals. The standard error is smaller than the size
of the data points.

Hence, alongside defectors, these cooperators are also
likely to get infected at lower values of c. However, if
we increase c, better protection ensures higher fC . For a
BA network with hki = 4, we observe that fC is higher
when c = [0.25, 0.35]. Though a higher cost implies lower
risk, it also inhibits the lifestyle of SC individuals. Naturally, cooperation would be hindered at higher values
of c. Hence, with increasing costs, SC individuals tend
to becomes careless, implying that SD individuals would
be likely to dominate. Also SD individuals would get
infected at a higher rate due to the absence of proper
precaution on their part. In the case of high hki graphs,
as shown in Fig. 2, it has been observed the peak shifts
towards the lower value of c. Generally, the maintenance
of cooperation is lower when hki of the graph is high.

B.

Symptomatic infections: class M

Class M diseases obviously have a high symptom manifestation ratio associated with them. Infections like Vibrio cholerae and Poxviruses are examples of such symptomatic diseases [39]. This scenario has been examined
in Fig. 3. Here too, fC is observed to decrease with an

increase of c at different values of hki.

FIG. 4. fC versus τ at various values of c as quantified for:
(a) σ = 0.02 (class A), and, (b) σ = 0.9 (class M). Red
represents maintenance of cooperation and blue it’s absence.
For class A diseases, cooperation depends on both τ and c.
Higher value of τ can lead to more cooperation. Cooperation will not be maintained well enough at lower values of τ .
However, for class M diseases, maintenance of cooperation
depends more on c rather than τ . This indicates that mass
testing plays an important role for the survival of cooperators
in the case of class A diseases. Results are for fCi = 0.5,
δ = 0.05,fIi = 0.02, ρ = 0.5, ρs = 0.2, N = 1024, hki = 4,
and EN = 100.

6
C.

Comparing symptomatic and asymptomatic
infection

We study the fraction of cooperators, fC , in both
symptomatic and asymptomatic infections at fCi = 0.5
in Fig. 4 for a range of values of cost, c. In order to find
how fC varies with the initial fraction of cooperators we
measure fC for fCi = 0.7 in Fig. 5(a) and fCi = 0.3
in Fig. 5(b). We observe that the value of the initial
fraction of cooperators does affect the final fraction of
proactive individuals to an extent.

FIG. 6. fC versus fIi , as quantified for: (a) σ = 0.02 (class
A), and, (b) σ = 0.9 (class M). Results are for c = 0.3,
fCi = 0.5, ρ = 0.5, ρs = 0.2, τ = 0.3, δ = 0.05, N =
1024, hki = 4, 6, 8 and EN = 500. The fraction of proactive
individuals actually decreases with the increase of Ii at lower
hki. However, cooperation increases slightly with the increase
in Ii at higher hki. The standard error is smaller than the
size of the data points.
FIG. 5. fC versus c for predominantly symptomatic (class
M, σ = 0.9) and predominantly asymptomatic (class A, σ =
0.02) diseases. We study the effect of the initial fraction of
cooperators in the population, fCi , on the final fraction, fC ,
for: (a) fCi = 0.7 and (b) fCi = 0.3 in both class A and class
M. Results are for fIi = 0.02, ρ = 0.5, ρs = 0.2, τ = 0.3,
δ = 0.05, N = 1024 nodes, hki = 4 and EN = 500 networks.
The standard error is smaller than the size of the data points.

From Fig. 4 it is also evident that both mass testing
and cost due to precautionary measures have a significant impact on fC . At higher values of c, cooperation
will not be maintained in the population. But at lower
values of c, the maintenance of cooperation would depend on the value of τ . In class A diseases, it is difficult
to maintain cooperation at lower values of τ . This can
be intuitively inferred from the fact that it is rather difficult to identify infected individuals without mass testing.
Therefore, higher values of τ can lead to relatively higher
cooperation. On the other hand, τ does not really have
a significant impact in class M diseases.
Therefore, it is worth noting that when the mass testing ratio, τ , is low, an asymptomatic disease is likely to
infect susceptible individuals more. Naturally, if the infected individuals are not identified early on, then every
asymptomatic disease possess the potential to generate a
pandemic. On the other hand, individuals belonging to
IU in class M diseases, can be identified more easily via
clearly manifest symptoms.
The initial fraction of infected individuals, fIi , reflects
the scenario during the initial outbreak of an epidemic.
We explore the behaviour of fC with respect to fIi [40].
A fraction of the population, fIi , is infected right at the

onset of the epidemic, before consciousness has taken root
in the general population. Consciousness is expected to
increase subsequently and the general populace would
become aware and responsible. Fig. 6 implies that the
final fraction of proactive individuals would decrease in
the population at lower hki. However, at higher hki, the
scenario is not quite similar. In this regime, the final
fraction of responsible people would increase slightly in
the population. Notably, the broad behaviour is the same
for both class M and class A epidemics.

D.

Role of network topology

Thus far, we have extensively studied the dynamics on
BA networks. We would further like to ascertain the role
of network topology on the dynamics of epidemic spreading. Towards this end, we have studied the dynamics on
Watts-Strogatz small-world networks (SW) and ErdösRényi (ER) networks as demonstrated in Figs. 7(a) and
7(b) respectively. In comparison with the earlier results
on BA networks, we observe the final fraction of proactive individuals to vanish at far lower values of the cost in
both ER and SW networks for both class M and class M.
This effect is most prominent for class M diseases in ER
networks. Therefore, population structures on SW and
more so on ER networks seem vulnerable to pandemics.

7

FIG. 7. fC versus c for predominantly symptomatic (class
M, σ = 0.9) and predominantly asymptomatic (class A, σ =
0.02) diseases. Results are for (a) Watts-Strogatz network
with N = 1024 nodes, hki = 10, edge rewiring probability β =
0.001, and, (b) Erdös-Rényi network with N = 512 nodes,
p = 0.005. Here, fCi = 0.5, fIi = 0.02, ρ = 0.5, ρs = 0.2,
τ = 0.3, δ = 0.05 and EN = 500 networks. The standard
error is smaller than the size of the data points.

V.

DISCUSSION

Accurate models of epidemic spreading are essential
[41–43], as has been clearly underscored during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, which has raged for more
than a year now and caused enormous setback to life,
economy and society. Prevalence of asymptomatic carriers complicates the detection and management of any
disease to a significant extent [44–46]. Indeed, the crucial
role of asymptomatic carriers has been clearly highlighted
in the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
Models based on SIRD dynamics or game-theoretic ap-

[1] Daley DJ, Gani J (2001) Epidemic modelling: an introduction. Cambridge University Press
[2] Riggs MM, Sethi AK, Zabarsky TF, Eckstein EC, Jump
RL, Donskey CJ (2007) Asymptomatic carriers are a potential source for transmission of epidemic and nonepidemic clostridium difficile strains among long-term care
facility residents. Clinical Infectious Diseases 45(8):992–
998
[3] Futai K (2003) Role of asymptomatic carrier trees in epidemic spread of pine wilt disease. Journal of Forest Research 8(4):253–260
[4] Spinelli A, Pellino G (2020) Covid-19 pandemic: perspectives on an unfolding crisis. The British Journal of
Surgery 107(7):785–787
[5] Johnson NP, Mueller J (2002) Updating the accounts:
global mortality of the 1918-1920” spanish” influenza
pandemic. Bulletin of the History of Medicine 76:105–
115
[6] Kenah E, Miller JC (2011) Epidemic percolation networks, epidemic outcomes, and interventions. Interdisci-

proaches are not be able to capture the complete picture
as they usually do not consider the important aspect of
asymptomatic carriers [10, 47]. Our model explores the
possible effect of various factors in epidemic spreading
on various network topologies. We find that the absence
of vaccines makes individual and social proactiveness as
important factors, which can inhibit disease spreading.
Also, the fraction of the population which has undergone testing is an essential factor in diseases involving
asymptomatic phenotypes. In the absence of high enough
testing – an asymptomatic disease bears the potential to
get converted into a pandemic. We also observe that the
fraction of proactive individuals depends upon the initial
fraction of both infected as well as proactive individuals.
Additionally, edge density can significantly influence the
dynamics of epidemic spreading. Furthermore, population structures on small-world networks and more so on
Erdös-Rényi networks seem vulnerable to pandemics.
Our findings are in broad agreement with the lessons
learnt from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. Adoption
of precaution and employment of intelligent strategies to
conduct mass testing [48, 49] has indeed proven to be
of immeasurable value [50–52] towards effective management of the pandemic.

VI.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

DN acknowledges his fellowship from the Council of
Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), India. SR
thanks Tarik Hadzibeganovic of University of Graz,
Austria for helpful discussions. We are grateful to the
three anonymous reviewers of the manuscripts for their
critical comments.
DN and SS contributed equally to this work.

plinary Perspectives on Infectious Diseases 2011(543520)
[7] Wu Q, Hadzibeganovic T (2020) An individual-based
modeling framework for infectious disease spreading in
clustered complex networks. Applied Mathematical Modelling 83:1–12
[8] Hu P, Ding L, Hadzibeganovic T (2018) Individual-based
optimal weight adaptation for heterogeneous epidemic
spreading networks. Communications in Nonlinear Science and Numerical Simulation 63:339–355
[9] Wu Q, Hadzibeganovic T (2018) Pair quenched meanfield approach to epidemic spreading in multiplex networks. Applied Mathematical Modelling 60:244–254
[10] Chang SL, Piraveenan M, Pattison P, Prokopenko M
(2020) Game theoretic modelling of infectious disease dynamics and intervention methods: a review. Journal of
Biological Dynamics 14(1):57–89
[11] Adiga A, Chen J, Marathe M, Mortveit H, Venkatramanan S, Vullikanti A (2020) Data-driven modeling for
different stages of pandemic response. Journal of the Indian Institute of Science 100:901–915

8
[12] de Arruda GF, Petri G, Rodrigues FA, Moreno Y (2020)
Impact of the distribution of recovery rates on disease
spreading in complex networks. Physical Review Research 2(1):013,046
[13] Sharma A, Menon SN, Sasidevan V, Sinha S (2019) Epidemic prevalence information on social networks can mediate emergent collective outcomes in voluntary vaccine
schemes. PLoS Computational Biology 15(5):e1006,977
[14] Castellano C, Pastor-Satorras R (2020) Cumulative
merging percolation and the epidemic transition of the
susceptible-infected-susceptible model in networks. Physical Review X 10(1):011,070
[15] Li CH, Tsai CC, Yang SY (2014) Analysis of epidemic
spreading of an sirs model in complex heterogeneous networks. Communications in Nonlinear Science and Numerical Simulation 19(4):1042–1054
[16] Leung KY, Trapman P, Britton T (2018) Who is the infector? epidemic models with symptomatic and asymptomatic cases. Mathematical Biosciences 301:190–198
[17] Choi W, Shim E (2020) Optimal strategies for vaccination and social distancing in a game-theoretic epidemiologic model. Journal of Theoretical Biology 505:110,422
[18] Hoelscher M, Gangappa S, Zhong W, Jayashankar L,
Sambhara S (2008) Vaccines against epidemic and pandemic influenza. Expert Opinion on Drug Delivery
5(10):1139–1157
[19] Bai Y, Yao L, Wei T, Tian F, Jin DY, Chen L, Wang
M (2020) Presumed asymptomatic carrier transmission
of covid-19. The Journal of the American Medical Association 323(14):1406–1407
[20] Liu X, Stechlinski P (2017) Infectious Disease Modeling,
vol 19. Springer
[21] Banerjee SJ, Roy S (2012) Key to network controllability.
arXiv arXiv:1209.3737
[22] Banerjee SJ, Sinha S, Roy S (2015) Slow poisoning and
destruction of networks: Edge proximity and its implications for biological and infrastructure networks. Physical
Review E 91(2):022,807
[23] Banerjee SJ, Azharuddin M, Sen D, Savale S, Datta H,
Dasgupta AK, Roy S (2015) Using complex networks towards information retrieval and diagnostics in multidimensional imaging. Scientific Reports 5:17,271
[24] Kaur Grewal R, Mitra D, Roy S (2015) Mapping networks of light–dark transition in lov photoreceptors.
Bioinformatics 31(22):3608–3616
[25] Deb A, Grewal RK, Roy S, Mitra D (2020) Residue interaction dynamics in vaucheria aureochrome1 light-oxygenvoltage: Bridging theory and experiments. Proteins:
Structure, Function, and Bioinformatics 88(12):1660–
1674
[26] Sinha S, Samaddar S, Das Gupta SK, Roy S (2021) Network approach to mutagenesis sheds insight on phage resistance in mycobacteria. Bioinformatics 37(2):213–220
[27] Sinha S, Ghosh S, Roy S (2019) A pedestrian review of
games on structured populations. International Journal
of Advances in Engineering Sciences and Applied Mathematics 11(2):138–152
[28] Nath D, Sinha S, Roy S (2021) Scale-free networks may not necessarily witness cooperation. arXiv
arXiv:2101.01167
[29] Sinha S, Nath D, Roy S (2021) Topology dependent payoffs can lead to escape from prisoner’s dilemma. The European Physical Journal B 94(4):80
[30] Rowlett J, Karlsson CJ (2020) Decisions and disease: the

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]
[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46]

[47]

evolution of cooperation in a pandemic. Scientific Reports 10:13,113
Chen X (2020) Infectious disease modeling and epidemic
response measures analysis considering asymptomatic infection. IEEE Access 8:149,652–149,660
Liu X, He M, Kang Y, Pan Q (2017) Fixation of strategies with the moran and fermi processes in evolutionary
games. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 484:336–344
Santos FC, Pacheco JM (2005) Scale-free networks provide a unifying framework for the emergence of cooperation. Physical Review Letters 95(9):098,104
Kemper JT (1978) The effects of asymptomatic attacks
on the spread of infectious disease: a deterministic model.
Bulletin of Mathematical Biology 40(6):707–718
De la Sen M, Ibeas A, Alonso-Quesada S, Nistal R (2017)
On a new epidemic model with asymptomatic and deadinfective subpopulations with feedback controls useful for
ebola disease. Discrete Dynamics in Nature and Society
2017
Israel P (2017) Asymptomatic infections: The hidden
epidemic. International Journal of Clinical Research &
Trials 2(118)
Moghadas SM, Shoukat A, Espindola AL, Pereira RS,
Abdirizak F, Laskowski M, Viboud C, Chowell G (2017)
Asymptomatic transmission and the dynamics of zika infection. Scientific reports 7(1):1–8
Nishiura H, Kobayashi T, Miyama T, Suzuki A, Jung Sm,
Hayashi K, Kinoshita R, Yang Y, Yuan B, Akhmetzhanov
AR, et al (2020) Estimation of the asymptomatic ratio
of novel coronavirus infections (covid-19). International
Journal of Infectious Diseases 94:154
Lewis-Jones S (2004) Zoonotic poxvirus infections in humans. Current Opinion in Infectious Diseases 17(2):81–89
Sahneh FD, Chowdhury FN, Scoglio CM (2012) On the
existence of a threshold for preventive behavioral responses to suppress epidemic spreading. Scientific Reports 2:632
Liang K (2020) Mathematical model of infection kinetics
and its analysis for covid-19, sars and mers. Infection,
Genetics and Evolution 82:104,306
McBryde ES, Meehan MT, Adegboye OA, Adekunle AI,
Caldwell JM, Pak A, Rojas DP, Williams B, Trauer JM
(2020) Role of modelling in covid-19 policy development.
Paediatric Respiratory Reviews 35:57–60
Currie CS, Fowler JW, Kotiadis K, Monks T, Onggo BS,
Robertson DA, Tako AA (2020) How simulation modelling can help reduce the impact of covid-19. Journal of
Simulation 14(2):83–97
Yu X, Yang R (2020) Covid-19 transmission through
asymptomatic carriers is a challenge to containment. Influenza and Other Respiratory Viruses 14(4):474–475
Recalcati S (2020) Cutaneous manifestations in covid-19:
a first perspective. Journal of the European Academy of
Dermatology and Venereology 34(5):e212–e213
Lai CC, Liu YH, Wang CY, Wang YH, Hsueh SC, Yen
MY, Ko WC, Hsueh PR (2020) Asymptomatic carrier
state, acute respiratory disease, and pneumonia due to
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sarscov-2): Facts and myths. Journal of Microbiology, Immunology and Infection 53(3):404–412
Iwamura Y, Tanimoto J (2018) Realistic decision-making
processes in a vaccination game. Physica A: Statistical
Mechanics and its Applications 494:236–241

9
[48] Biswas S, Pathi K (2020) India’s new paper covid-19 test
could be a ‘game changer’. BBC News URL https://ww
w.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-54338864
[49] Žilinskas J, Lančinskas A, Guarracino MR (2021) Pooled
testing with replication as a mass testing strategy for the
COVID-19 pandemics. Scientific Reports 11:3459
[50] Costello A (2020) Mass testing is the only way to stop
the virus – it’s long overdue. The Guardian URL https:
//www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2020/mar/25/
mass-covid-19-testing-is-vital-but-the-data-mu

st-be-localised
[51] Gallagher J (2020) Mass testing: Can it save us from
another lockdown? BBC News URL https://www.bbc.
com/news/health-54826403
[52] Yang Q, Saldi TK, Gonzales PK, Lasda E, Decker CJ,
et al (2021) Just 2% of sars-cov-2-positive individuals
carry 90% of the virus circulating in communities. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118(21),
doi:10.1073/pnas.2104547118

