1

City-Scale Agent-Based Simulators for the
Study of Non-Pharmaceutical Interventions in
the Context of the COVID-19 Epidemic
IISc-TIFR COVID-19 City-Scale Simulation Team

arXiv:2008.04849v1 [q-bio.PE] 11 Aug 2020

∗

Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru
†

TIFR, Mumbai

11 August 2020

Abstract
We highlight the usefulness of city-scale agent-based simulators in studying various nonpharmaceutical interventions to manage an evolving pandemic. We ground our studies in the context
of the COVID-19 pandemic and demonstrate the power of the simulator via several exploratory case
studies in two metropolises, Bengaluru and Mumbai. Such tools become common-place in any city
administration’s tool kit in our march towards digital health.
Authors in alphabetical order of last names: Shubhada Agrawal† , Siddharth Bhandari† , Anirban Bhattacharjee† , Anand
Deo† , Narendra M. Dixit∗ , Prahladh Harsha† , Sandeep Juneja† , Poonam Kesarwani† , Aditya Krishna Swamy∗ , Preetam
Patil∗ , Nihesh Rathod∗ , Ramprasad Saptharishi† , Sharad Shriram∗ , Piyush Srivastava† , Rajesh Sundaresan∗ , Nidhin Koshy
Vaidhiyan∗ , Sarath Yasodharan∗
Corresponding author: Rajesh Sundaresan, rajeshs@iisc.ac.in
PP, NR, SS, NKV, SY from IISc were supported by the IISc-Cisco Centre for Networked Intelligence, Indian Institute
of Science. RSun was supported by the IISc-Cisco Centre for Networked Intelligence, the Robert Bosch Centre for CyberPhysical Systems, and the Department of Electrical Communication Engineering, Indian Institute of Science.
TIFR co-authors acknowledge support of the Department of Atomic Energy, Government of India, under project
no. RTI4001.
PH acknowledges support from the Swarnajayanti Fellowship of DST.
RSap acknowledges support from the Ramanujan Fellowship of SERB.
PS acknowledges support from the Ramanujan Fellowship of SERB, from Adobe Systems Inc. via a gift to TIFR, and
from the Infosys-Chandrasekharan virtual centre for Random Geometry supported by a grant from the Infosys Foundation.
The contents of this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the funding agencies.
Source code available at: https://github.com/cni-iisc/epidemic-simulator/releases/tag/3.0

2

Fig. 1: Timeline of COVID-19 cases, recoveries and fatalities in India taken from [2]. See [2] and [3] for
detailed information on how COVID-19 progressed in India.

I. I NTRODUCTION
COVID-19 is an ongoing pandemic that began in December 2019. The first case in India
was reported on 30 January 2020. The number of cases and fatalities have been on the rise
since then. As on 11 August 2020, there are 22,68,675 cases (of which 15,83,489 have
recovered) and 45,257 fatalities [1]; see Figure 1 for a timeline of COVID-19 cases, recoveries
and fatalities in India. While medicines/vaccines for treating the disease remained under development at the time of writing this paper, many countries implemented non-pharmaceutical
interventions such as testing, tracing, tracking and isolation, and broader approaches such
as quarantining of suspected cases, containment zones, social distancing, lockdown, etc. to
control the spread of the disease. For instance, the Government of India imposed a nationwide lockdown from 25 March 2020 to 14 April 2020, and subsequently extended it until
31 May 2020 to break the chain of transmission and also to mobilise resources (increase
healthcare facilities and streamline procedures). To evaluate various such interventions and
decide which route to take to manage the pandemic, epidemiologists resort to models that
predict the total number of cases and fatalities in both the immediate and the distant futures.
The models used should have enough features to enable the evaluation of the impact of
various kinds of non-pharmaceutical interventions.

3

Broadly three kinds of models have been used to study this epidemic. The first set of
models takes a curve-fitting approach. They rely on simple parametric function classes. The
parameters of the model are fit via regression to match observed trends. The second set of
models addresses the physical dynamics of the spread at a macroscopic level. These are meanfield ordinary differential equations (ODEs) based compartmental models (e.g. SusceptibleExposed-Infected-Recovered (SEIR) model and its extensions) based on the classical work
of Kermack and McKendrick [4]. Here the population is divided into various compartments
such as susceptible, exposed, infected, recovered, etc., based on the characteristics of the
epidemic. One then solves a system of ODEs that captures the evolution of the epidemic at
a macroscopic scale1 . Localised versions of these are spatio-temporal mean-field models that
lead to partial differential equations2 . The third set of models, and the focus of this work, are
agent-based models3 . A very detailed model of the society under consideration, with as many
agents as the population, is constructed using census and other data. The agents interact in
various interaction spaces such as households, schools, workplaces, marketplaces, transport
spaces, etc. See Figure 2 for a schematic representation of an agent-based model with the
aforementioned interaction spaces. These interaction spaces are the primary contexts for the
spread of infection. A susceptible individual can potentially get infected from an interaction
in one of these spaces upon contact with an infected individual. Once an individual is exposed
to the virus, this person goes through various stages of the disease, may infect others, and
eventually, either recovers or dies. Other models work at an intermediate level by modelling
the social network of interactions, e.g., [12], but we shall focus more on agent based models.
There are several advantages of using agent-based models. First, since modelling is performed at a microscopic level unlike the macroscopic level in compartmental models, agentbased models are well suited to capture heterogeneity at various levels. For instance, the agedependent progression of COVID-19 in individuals (severity, the need for hospital care, intensive care, etc.) can be incorporated in agent-based models. Second, individual behavioural
changes, known to be important in certain diseases such as AIDS, can be easily modelled.
Third, agent-based models are well suited to study the impact of various non-pharmaceutical
interventions, such as “lockdown for a certain number of days”, “offices operating using the
1

See [5] for a state-level epidemiological model for India and [6] for a combination of the two approaches.

2

For a paper in the Indian context see [7].

3

There are other agent-based simulators that have informed policy decisions. See [8] for UK and USA related studies

specific to COVID-19, see [9] for a COVID-19 study on Sweden, see [10] and references therein for many agent-based
models and their comparisons, and see [11] for a taxonomy of agent-based models.

4

Fig. 2: Schematic representation of an agent-based model.

(so-called) odd-even strategy”, “social distancing of the elderly”, “voluntary home quarantine”, “closure of schools and colleges”, etc. Explicit modelling of these contexts of infection
spread also enables studies of control measures targeting the interaction spaces. Fourth, there
is an important difference between the actual infected number in the population, which is
what the differential equations-based models predict, and the reported cases. The latter is
invariably based on those that come to hospitals/clinics seeking health care, or those that
are identified due to random testing, followed by contact tracing of such index cases. As
a consequence, reported cases provide a biased estimate of the actual infected number in
the population. Agent-based simulators have the capability to track such biased estimates of
prevalence.
In this work, we describe our city-scale agent-based simulator to study the epidemic spread
in two Indian cities and demonstrate how digital computational capabilities can help us assess
the impact of various interventions and manage a pandemic.
We now provide sample outcomes for Bengaluru and Mumbai for COVID-19 under various
interventions. These outcomes have been generated using our city-scale agent-based simulator.
Bengaluru and Mumbai have estimated populations of 1.23 and 1.24 crore people respec-

5

Fig. 3: A timeline of Bengaluru interventions.

tively4 , and our simulator has instantiated those many agents. The Bengaluru population is
spread over 198 administrative units called wards. Similarly the Mumbai population is spread
over similar administrative units or wards, but there are 24 such wards in Mumbai. Since these
are larger wards compared to Bengaluru’s wards, there is significant variation of population
density within each ward in Mumbai. To model higher spread in densely populated areas,
each of the 24 wards is modelled to have subareas with denser population.
1) Bengaluru: For Bengaluru, we consider the following scenario. The Government of
India implemented a 40-day lockdown starting 25 March 2020. Bengaluru and Karnataka had
already closed some interaction spaces in the form of a pre-lockdown. After the 40-day
lockdown, there was a phased opening of various activities and offices. More details are as
follows. These can also be read from Figure 3. We then provide a simulation outcome for
these interventions and compare them with the actual situation on the ground. The details:
•

Pre-lockdown from 14–24 March 2020, the first shaded region in Figures 5–6.

•

40 days of lockdown from 25 March – 03 May 2020, the second and the third shaded
regions in the figures.

•

4

14 days of phased opening from 04–17 May 2020 involving voluntary home quarantine,

The 2011 census figure for Bengaluru is 0.85 crore and for Mumbai is 1.24 crore (Mumbai city only, not the Mumbai

Urban Area whose 2011 census estimate is 1.84 crore). Bengaluru’s 2020 population is estimated to be 1.23 crore. Reliable
data is not available for Mumbai city’s 2020 population. We have used 2020 estimated population for Bengaluru and 2011
census estimate for Mumbai.

6

social distancing of the elderly, closure of schools and colleges, 50% occupancy at
workplaces, and case isolation. This is the fourth shaded region in the plots.
•

From 18 May 2020 onwards, continued contact tracing (following the Indian Council
of Medical Research (ICMR) guidelines as much as possible) and associated quarantining and case isolations, but otherwise an unlocked Bengaluru. Soft ward containment
continues to be in force. By soft ward containment, see Figure 4, we mean linearlyvarying mobility control that turns an open ward into a locked ward when the number of
hospitalised cases become 0.1% of the ward’s population; in the latter locked scenario,
only 25% mobility is allowed for essential services.

•

Past studies [13]–[16] have indicated that masks have been effective in reducing the
spread of influenza. Anecdotal evidence seems to suggest that masks are effective
for COVID-19. The Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) order of 15 April 2020 [17,
Annexure 1] made the wearing of masks in public places compulsory. This was reemphasised in the MHA order of 30 May 2020 [18]. We assume that masks are mandatory
from 09 April 2020 onwards.

•

It is often the case that when there are several restrictions in place, only a fraction of
the population complies with these restrictions. Getting the entire population to comply
is often a big challenge and requires significant and persistent messaging (including
communication, rewards, punitive measures). We assume a compliance factor of 0.7
up to 04 May 2020, which means that 70 percent of the population adheres to the
government guidelines like social distancing, wearing masks in public places, etc., and
0.6 thereafter. The reduction could be attributed to behavioural changes due to lockdown
fatigue.

•

A brief lockdown during 14–21 July 2020 was implemented in Bengaluru. We compare
two scenarios, one with this lockdown and one without this lockdown.

As one can anticipate, simulation of the above scenarios requires a significant level of
sophistication in the modelling and implementation. We describe how we do these in the
coming sections, but now focus only on the outcomes.
Figure 5 estimates the daily positive cases and Figure 6 estimates the daily fatalities directly
due to COVID-19 in Bengaluru. In both these plots, we compare our estimates with the
situation on the ground. The plots are the means of 5 runs each on two versions of synthetic
Bengaluru. The jaggedness is due to the stochasticity associated with the limited number of
runs. For greater clarity, we have not included the standard error plots.
Figure 5 and Figure 6 provide the estimates with and without this one-week lockdown.

7

Fig. 4: Wards are contained in a ‘soft’ way. The mobility is gradually decreased based on the signal of number
of hospitalised cases in the ward. When 1 in 1000 in the ward is hospitalised, a local lockdown comes into
effect.

Fig. 5: Bengaluru daily positive cases estimation. The red bars are the reported cases. The five shaded regions
between 14 March and 01 June represent the durations of the various lockdown phases. The shaded region
around 15 July represents a short one-week lockdown. For cumulative case plots, see Figure 11.

The trend for the reported cases is roughly captured, but fatalities are over-predicted. This is
surprising since the reported cases continued to be high in the third week of July. For a more
detailed study of these plots, we refer the reader to Section III-A. At this stage, we only
observe that the public health benefit of the lockdown is clear from the pictures, reduced

8

Fig. 6: Bengaluru daily fatalities estimation. For cumulative fatalities, see Figure 12 in a later case study.

peak at the expense of a brief second wave. Armed with these predicted outcomes under the
two scenarios, public health officials can now weigh the benefits of the lockdown against its
economic consequences.
2) Mumbai: For Mumbai, we simulate the following scenario.
•

A pre-lockdown similar to Bengaluru, but during 16-24 March 2020 (first shaded region
in Figure 7-8).

•

40+14 days of lockdown from 25 March – 17 May 2020, the second, third, and fourth
shaded regions in the figures.

•

Masks are mandatory from 09 April 2020.

•

Workplaces open with a small strength of 5% during 18-31 May 2020, as per Government
of Maharashtra directions. This is the fifth shaded region. During this period, social
distancing of the elderly and school and college closures remain in force.

•

Workplace strengths increase to 20% in June, to 33% in July, and to 50% in August,
with commensurate capacity increases in the local trains. Social distancing of the elderly
and school and college closures remain in force. In addition voluntary home quarantine
and case isolation come into play.

•

Throughout the simulations, soft ward containment is in force.

•

It is often difficult to comply with social distancing directives in high population density
areas, like in slums, with many common essential facilities. In Mumbai, we model

9

Fig. 7: Mumbai daily positive cases estimation. The five shaded regions between 16 March and 01 June
represent the durations of the various lockdown phases in Mumbai. For cumulative case plots, see Figure 21.

compliance to be 0.4 in high density areas and 0.6 in other areas.
•

Throughout the simulations, contact tracing, associated quarantining, testing, and further
tracing are enabled.

•

We will compare the above scenario, with local trains enabled, and will contrast it with
another hypothetical scenario having no local trains.

Figure 7 estimates the daily positive cases and Figure 8 estimates the daily fatalities. In
both these plots, we compare our estimates with the situation on the ground. Again the plots
are the means of five runs each on two synthetic versions of Mumbai.
But for a delay in the estimated cases curve, the trends for cases and fatalities are captured
well. The delay in the estimated cases is perhaps due to delayed reporting which is not
modelled in the simulator. From these figures, one can recognise the usefulness of the agentbased simulator in assessing the impact of opening of the local trains in Mumbai.
Agent-based simulator – an important intervention-planning tool: Let us summarise the
outcomes of the above two examples. We saw the public health impact of imposing a short
lockdown in Bengaluru. We also saw the impact of opening up trains vs. keeping the trains
non-operational in Mumbai. Such comparisons that can inform better on-ground decision
making are enabled by a city-scale agent-based simulator. This capability arises mainly
because of the enhanced modelling and control of the interaction spaces in the simulator. It

10

Fig. 8: Mumbai daily fatalities estimation vs. corrected fatality time series, as corrected by BMC on 18 June
2020. For cumulative fatalities, see Figure 22 in a later case study.

is our hope that such tools become common place in a city administration’s tool kit, and are
used to the fullest extent before drastic interventions with wide-scale impact, e.g., lockdown,
are imposed. With additional modelling of activity, mobility, and behaviour, and use of high
quality data on the migrant labour force in urban areas, we speculate that we could have
anticipated certain behavioural outcomes seen in India after the lockdown announcement
(e.g., migrant population movement).
II. M ETHODOLOGY: AGENT- BASED MODELLING
Broadly, the steps involved in agent-based modelling are the following: build the simulator,
calibrate it, validate it, and use it for estimating how the pandemic will evolve.
1. Simulator. The simulator itself consists of four parts.
Synthetic city. A synthetic city generator builds a synthetic city with individuals and
various interaction spaces. Individuals are assigned to various interaction spaces such as
households, schools/workplaces, communities and transport spaces. In doing this we capture
the demographics of the city, the school size distributions, the workplace size distributions,
the commute distances, the neighbourhood and friends’ interaction networks, the transport
interaction spaces, etc. These fix the “social networks” on which individuals interact and
transmit the virus.

11

Disease progression. A disease progression model that involves the biology of the disease
then indicates what is the incubation period, infective period, symptomatic period, severity
of the symptoms, viral load, virus shedding, health care and in-hospital progression, etc.
Interactions and evolution. The level of infectivity during the infective period, the duration
of the infective period, and the social network interactions in the various interaction spaces
determine how the disease evolves in the city. We start the simulator with a certain number
of infected individuals. They then interact with susceptible individuals at various interaction spaces, who in turn interact with other susceptible individuals, and thus the epidemic
progresses. The key parameters in the disease evolution are the transmission coefficients
associated with each interaction space that model the chance of meetings and disease spread
in that interaction space.
Intervention model. Various kinds of intervention policies need to be defined and their
impact on transmission coefficients should be modelled. See Table I for some examples. Many
of these involve reduction in changes in contact rates as a consequence of the interventions.
The values to set could be based on observed mobility patterns. For example, according to
the COVID-19 Community Mobility Report for India in April [19] in Table II, prepared by
Google based on data from Google Account users who have “opted-in” to location history,
there was significant reduction in mobility during the lockdown period compared to the
baseline period of 03 January 2020 to 06 February 2020. This informs the nominal contact
rate choices in the interventions’ definitions in Table I and later in other Tables.
TABLE I: Intervention modelling

Label

Policy

Description

CI

Case isolation at home

Symptomatic individuals stay at home for 7 days, non-household contacts
reduced by 90% during this period, household contacts reduce by 25%.

HQ

Voluntary home quarantine

Once a symptomatic individual has been identified, all members of the
household remain at home for 14 days. Non-household contacts reduced
by 90% during this period, household contacts reduce by 25%.

SDO

Social distancing of those

Non-household contacts reduce by 75%.

aged 65 and over
LD

Lockdown

Closure of schools and colleges. Only essential workplaces active. For a
compliant household, household contact rate doubles, community contact
rate reduces by 75%, workspace contact rate reduces by 75%. For a noncompliant household, household contact rate increases by 25%, workspace
contact rate reduces by 75%, and no change to community contact rate.

12

TABLE II: Mobility report generated on 11 April 2020, see [19].

Place

Reduction

Retail and recreation

-80%

Grocery and pharmacy

-55%

Parks and public plazas

-52%

Public transit stations

-69%

Workplaces

-64%

Residential

+30%

2. Calibration. Once the simulator is ready there are still unknown parameters that need
to be identified. These include the contact rates at various interaction spaces, the number
of infections to seed, the time at which these infections should be seeded, the compliance
parameters, etc. The purpose of the calibration step is to identify these parameters to capture
the city specific trends and contact rates. We do this by choosing the initial number to seed,
the time at which these are seeded, and the contact rates so that the initial trend of the
disease is matched. Once calibrated, we can run our simulator for a certain number of days
and understand how the epidemic spreads.
3. Validation. We next have to validate our simulator, so that we can understand the
predictive power of the simulator. For this, we look for phenomena in the real data that
have not been explicitly modelled and we check if the simulator is able to capture these
phenomena. For specific details, see Section IV.
4. Use of the simulator in an evolving pandemic. It is often the case that in evolving
pandemics, predictions do not match reality as time unfolds. Models are often gross oversimplifications of the underlying complex reality and assumptions are often wrong or may
need updating as the pandemic evolves. The purpose of models in an evolving pandemic
is not merely to predict numbers, in which task they will likely fail, but more to enable
principled decision making on intervention strategies. They enable a study of the public
health outcomes of one strategy versus another. Armed with these comparisons, public health
officials can make more informed decisions. Needless to say, these are often more complex
and involve several aspects beyond just public health, e.g. economy, psychology, education,
political climate, to name a few5 .
5

For a proposal on how to simulate economic and public-health aspects together, see [20].

13

III. D ESIGN OF INTERVENTIONS VIA CASE STUDIES
One of the powerful features of the agent-based simulator is its ability to explicitly control
various interaction spaces and study the outcomes. We demonstrate this feature via the case
studies for Bengaluru and Mumbai listed in Table III.
TABLE III: Case studies for Bengaluru and Mumbai
Case Study

Title

Section

Case Study A

No intervention (but only contact tracing-based isolation) versus

Section III-A

lockdown versus the current scenario in Bengaluru
Case Study B

Impact of opening offices at 50% capacity with higher compli-

Section III-B

ance versus lockdown at lower compliance, a Bengaluru study
Case Study C

Impact of opening trains versus not opening trains in Mumbai

Section III-C

Case Study D

Soft ward containment versus neighbourhood containment in

Section III-D

Bengaluru
Case Study E

Soft ward containment at various levels in Mumbai

Section III-E

Case Study F

Schools/colleges open from 01 September 2020 in Bengaluru

Section III-F

A. Case Study A: No intervention (but only contact tracing-based isolation) versus lockdown
versus the current scenario in Bengaluru
We compare the following three scenarios in Bengaluru:
•

No intervention other than contact tracing, testing and associated case isolation.

•

Indefinite lockdown starting from 14 March 2020 onwards. This naturally will have
enormous economic and societal cost, but we focus only on the direct COVID-19 public
health outcomes.

•

Scenario-2 in Table IV: soft ward containment, case isolation with testing and contact
tracing, and a one-week lockdown during 14–21 July 2020.

We assume a compliance of 70% until 03 May 2020 (i.e. during the initial Karnataka-wide
lockdown followed by the nation-wide lockdown) and a compliance of 60% starting 04 May
2020, for all these scenarios. That is, 70% (resp. 60%) of the population comply with the
restrictions in place until 03 May 2020 (resp. starting 04 May 2020). Under these scenarios,
we plot the following: daily cases (Figure 9), daily fatalities (Figure 10), cumulative cases
(Figure 11), cumulative fatalities (Figure 12) and estimated hospital beds and critical care
beds (Figure 13). We make the following observations.

14

TABLE IV: Simulated Bengaluru interventions
Period

Scenario-1

Scenario-2

Compliance

01 – 13 March 2020

No intervention

No intervention

NA

14 – 24 March 2020

Prelockdown

Prelockdown

70%

25 March – 03 May 2020

40 days of National lockdown

40 days of National lockdown

70%

09 April 2020 – onwards

Masks ON

Masks ON

60%

04 – 17 May 2020

Phased opening. Voluntary home

Phased opening. Voluntary home

60%

quarantine, social distancing of el-

quarantine, social distancing of el-

derly, case isolation, schools and

derly, case isolation, schools and

colleges closed, 50% occupancy at

colleges closed, 50% occupancy at

workplaces.

workplaces.

18 May – 11 July 2020

Unlocked

Bengaluru

ICMR-guideline
and

associated

with

contact

only
tracing

quarantining

and

Unlocked

Bengaluru

ICMR-guideline
and

associated

with

contact

only

60%

tracing

quarantining

and

case isolations, social distancing of

case isolations, social distancing of

elderly, case isolation, schools and

elderly, case isolation, schools and

colleges closed.

colleges closed.

12 – 13 July 2020

Same as above

Prelockdown - 50% mobility

60%

14 July – 21 July 2020

Same as above

Bengaluru lockdown

60%

22 July – 31 July 2020

Same as above

Case isolation, social distancing of

60%

elderly, school closure, workplaces at
50%
01 August 2020 – onwards

Same as above

Case isolation, social distancing of

60%

elderly, school closure, workplaces at
100%
Throughout

•

Soft ward containment enabled

Soft ward containment enabled

60%

As one would expect, the least number of cases, fatalities and hospital beds requirements
correspond to the “indefinite lockdown” scenario. However this scenario has serious
impact on the economy, livelihoods, etc.

•

In terms of the daily number of cases, the no intervention scenario had a peak around
01 June 2020 (with roughly 15,000 cases), whereas the present scenario in Bengaluru
(i.e. Scenario-2 in Table IV) had a much lower peak around 15 July 2020 (with around
2000 cases), followed by another peak around end of August. Similar trends can be
seen in the fatalities estimates as well as the hospital bed estimates. Our health care
system would have struggled with the no intervention scenario, and the present scenario
in Bengaluru helped mitigate and delay the peak of the epidemic.

•

The second predicted peak in Scenario-2 in Table IV is due to the one-week lockdown

15

Fig. 9: Case study A, subsection III-A: Bengaluru daily cases estimation. For a magnified view of the lower
part of the plot, see Figure 5. The no-intervention situation would have overwhelmed the healthcare system
many times over.

during 14–21 July 2020.
•

Towards the end of July, we overpredict the number of daily fatalities and underpredict
the number of daily cases. This could be because of two reasons:
1) The number of tests has increased significantly during mid-July due to which
there is a likely surge in the number of asymptomatic cases. As a consequence,
a reduction in the number of daily cases due to the one-week lockdown during
14–21 July is not observed in the reported number of daily cases; such a reduction
is visible in our estimates because the testing regime is assumed constant through
the period in our simulator.
2) There is a delay in reporting the fatalities. As the reported number of daily cases
follow an exponential trend during early-mid July, one would expect a similar
trend in the reported daily fatalities during end-July, as shown in our prediction of
the daily fatalities under Scenario-2. However, we see a reduction in the reported
number of daily fatalities during after 15 July 2020. This could be due to a possible
delay in reporting the daily fatalities, or an effective use of the rapid point-of-care
antigen test kits, or a combination of both. Testing of these hypotheses require
further investigation.

16

Fig. 10: Case study A, subsection III-A: Bengaluru daily fatalities estimation. For a magnified view of the
lower part of the part, see Figure 6.

Fig. 11: Case study A, subsection III-A: Bengaluru cumulative cases estimation.

17

Fig. 12: Case study A, subsection III-A: Bengaluru cumulative fatalities estimation.

Fig. 13: Case study A, subsection III-A: Bengaluru hospital beds estimation. ‘Hospital Beds’ refers to the
number of beds occupied for regular care including possibly oxygen support. ‘ICU Beds’ refers to those that
need intensive care or ventilation. The no-intervention scenario would have overwhelmed Bengaluru’s healthcare
system.

18

B. Case Study B: Impact of opening offices at 50% capacity with higher compliance versus
lockdown at lower compliance
The degree of compliance among the population to public health directions/guidelines is
an important factor that affects the epidemic. To understand the importance of compliance,
we compare the following scenarios for Bengaluru: the present Bengaluru (i.e. Scenario-2 in
Table IV), an unlocked Bengaluru (i.e. Scenario-1 in Table IV), and an unlocked Bengaluru
with a higher compliance of 90% starting 04 May 2020 (i.e. Scenario-1 in Table IV with
70% compliance during 14 March 2020 – 03 May 2020 and 90% compliance starting 04 May
2020). As before, we plot the following: daily cases (Figure 14), daily fatalities (Figure 15),
cumulative cases (Figure 16), cumulative fatalities (Figure 17) and estimated hospital beds
and critical care beds (Figure 18). We make two important observations:
•

In terms of the number of cases and fatalities, the present Bengaluru (i.e. Scenario-2
in Table IV) with 60% compliance starting 04 May 2020 is worse than an unlocked
Bengaluru with 90% compliance starting 04 May 2020 (with both scenarios having
70% compliance until 03 May 2020). While the qualitative outcome is not surprising,
the quantitative estimates suggest just how important compliance is in curbing the
spread of the disease. Armed with such comparisons, city administrations could suitably
allocate resources for communication, awareness, and other such campaigns to educate
the general populace on the public health impact of their actions, to induce more prosocial behaviour, and to ensure greater compliance. This was the approach taken by
Sweden, a country with a population of about 1 crore.

•

Comparing Scenario-1 and Scenario-2, we see that the effect of the one-week lockdown
during 14–21 July is very minimal in the long term as far as the cumulative number
of cases and fatalities are concerned. However, there is a significant difference in the
cumulative number of cases and fatalities between Scenario-2 and Scenario-1 with
a higher compliance of 90% starting 04 May 2020. This suggests that, given that
vaccines for COVID-19 are not yet available, short-term lockdowns’ benefit is restricted
to mobilising resources and preparing the healthcare system in the short term. On the
other hand, higher compliance has a greater impact in reducing cases and fatalities.

19

Fig. 14: Case study B, subsection III-B: Bengaluru daily cases estimation.

Fig. 15: Case study B, subsection III-B: Bengaluru daily fatalities estimation.

20

Fig. 16: Case study B, subsection III-B: Bengaluru cumulative cases estimation.

Fig. 17: Case study B, subsection III-B: Bengaluru cumulative fatalities estimation.

21

Fig. 18: Case study B, subsection III-B: Bengaluru hospital beds estimation.

22

C. Case Study C: Impact of opening trains versus not opening trains in Mumbai
TABLE V: Simulated Mumbai interventions
Period

Interventions

Attendance

at

workplaces

Compliance

Compliance

in

in slums

non-

slums
01 March – 15 March 2020

No Intervention

at 100% capacity

60%

40%

16 March – 08 April 2020

Lockdown

Essential services oper-

60%

40%

60%

40%

60%

40%

60%

40%

60%

40%

60%

40%

60%

40%

ate at 100% capacity,
others are closed
09 April – onwards

Masks ON

09 April – 30 April 2020

Lockdown

Essential services operate at 100% capacity,
others are closed

01 May – 17 May 2020

18 May – 31 May 2020

01 – 30 June 2020

Lockdown with social

Essential services oper-

distancing of the elderly

ate, others are closed

Social distancing of the

Essential services oper-

elderly, school closure,

ate at 100%, others op-

community factor=0.75

erate at 5% capacity

Home

Essential services oper-

quarantine,

social
the

distancing
elderly,

closure,

trains

of

school

ate at 100%, others operate at 20% capacity

ON,

community factor=0.75
01 – 31 July 2020

Same as above

Essential services operate at 100%, others operate at 33% capacity

01 August onwards

Same as above

Essential services operate at 100%, others operate at 50% capacity

Throughout

Soft ward containment
enabled

We now study the impact of opening suburban trains in Mumbai. Table V shows the timeline of various restrictions implemented in Mumbai starting from 01 March 2020. Suburban
trains were not under operation in Mumbai during 15 March – 31 May 2020. As suburban
trains are a key mode of daily commute in Mumbai, we compare the situation in Table V
under two scenarios:
•

Trains-ON: Suburban trains are operational starting 01 June 2020 in a phased manner,
similar to the opening of workplaces in a phased manner as indicated in Table V,

23

Fig. 19: Case study C, subsection III-C: Mumbai daily cases estimation.

Fig. 20: Case study C, subsection III-C: Mumbai daily fatalities estimation.

•

Trains-OFF: Suburban trains are not operational throughout.

As indicated in Table V, we assume a compliance factor of 60% in non-slums and 40% in
slums. We plot our results in Figures 19-23.
•

From the plots, we see that the phased opening of suburban trains starting 01 June 2020
gives a marginal increase in the number of cases, fatalities and hospital beds compared
to the Trains-OFF scenario. This suggests that trains can be operated with enforcement

24

Fig. 21: Case study C, subsection III-C: Mumbai cumulative cases estimation.

Fig. 22: Case study C, subsection III-C: Mumbai cumulative fatalities estimation.

of strict physical distancing (by operating at reduced passenger loads6 ) and compulsory
wearing of face masks.
6

Physical distancing under normal passenger loads in Mumbai locals is not possible given the large number of commuters

per train.

25

Fig. 23: Case study C, subsection III-C: Mumbai hospital beds estimation.

•

Although we match the daily fatalities7 curve very well, we over-predict the daily number
of cases. We believe that this is due to the limitation on the testing capacity on the ground.
Because of this, the test results of many people arrive late and cases get reported with a
certain delay. It is also worth mentioning that, although we overpredict the daily number
of cases, we correctly capture the growth rate of the daily number of cases as well as
the cumulative number of cases.

D. Case study D: Soft ward containment versus neighbourhood containment
We study the impact of two containment strategies for Bengaluru: soft ward containment
(i.e., linearly-varying mobility control that turns an open ward into a locked ward when
the number of hospitalised cases become 0.1% of the wards population; in the latter locked
scenario, only 25% mobility is allowed for essential services, see Figure 4) and neighbourhood
containment (i.e., when an individual is hospitalised, everyone living in a 100m surrounding
area undergoes home quarantine). Soft ward containment is a more feasible strategy than
strict ward containment since the average ward population in Bengaluru is about 62,000. As
7

We use a corrected version of the reported number of daily fatalities from Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC).

The initial reported daily fatalities curve from BMC had a very large peak at 16 June 2020. The corrected data adjusts
the daily fatalities curve until 15 June 2020 so that the peak on 16 June 2020 gets re-distributed to the previous days in a
suitable way.

26

Fig. 24: Case study D, subsection III-D: Bengaluru daily cases estimation.

Fig. 25: Case study D, subsection III-D: Bengaluru daily fatalities estimation.

the number of hospitalised cases in the ward increases, more public health wardens could be
deployed and help reduce mobility and interaction in the ward.
In Figures 24-28, we plot these two scenarios. We observe that neighbourhood containment
is more effective than soft ward containment, in terms of cases and fatalities.

27

Fig. 26: Case study D, subsection III-D: Bengaluru cumulative cases estimation.

Fig. 27: Case study D, subsection III-D: Bengaluru cumulative fatalities estimation.

28

Fig. 28: Case study D, subsection III-D: Bengaluru hospital beds estimation.

29

E. Case Study E: Soft ward containment at various levels in Mumbai
To compare various levels of strictness with which policies are enforced, we now consider
the opening scenario indicated in Table V and vary the containment leakage to see how this
affects the numbers. Containment leakage stands for the level of activity that is allowed in a
ward under containment. A strict enforcement would not allow more than 10% of the normal
activity. The case of ‘no enforcement’ results in activity at 100% of the original level; this
corresponds to no adaptation in containment as a function of the number of hospitalisation
cases. We explore various values of containment leakage and plot results for 10%, 25%, 50%
and 100%.
Figures 29-33 represent the (simulated) number of daily cases, cumulative cases, daily
fatalities, cumulative fatalities and daily hospital bed estimates, respectively, for the varying
containment leakages. These plots demonstrate how an effective containment policy (even as
low as 50%) can significantly reduce the number of cases, fatalities and hospital beds.
An interesting observation is that, for the 25% leakage case, our simulator matches the
linear growth trend of the daily and cumulative number of cases as well as fatalities. The
linearity is a likely consequence of the specific soft ward containment policy, triggered by the
hospitalisation cases, i.e., mobility is reduced linearly with the number of hospitalisations in
that ward. It is not clear to what extent differential equation models can capture such linear
trends.

Fig. 29: Case study E, subsection III-E: Mumbai daily cases estimation.

30

Fig. 30: Case study E, subsection III-E: Mumbai daily fatalities estimation.

Fig. 31: Case study E, subsection III-E: Mumbai cumulative cases estimation.

31

Fig. 32: Case study E, subsection III-E: Mumbai cumulative fatalities estimation.

Fig. 33: Case study E, subsection III-E: Mumbai hospital beds estimation.

32

F. Case Study F: Bengaluru with schools/colleges open from 01 September 2020
We now study the impact of opening schools. In Figures 34–38, we compare the following
two scenarios:
•

Schools-closed: The present scenario in Bengaluru, i.e., Scenario-2 in Table IV,

•

Schools-open: Scenario-2 in Table IV with schools open from 01 September 2020.

As expected, both these scenarios follow the same trend until about mid-September, after
which the disease spread increases in the latter. Around early November, we observe a
between 10-15% increase in the cumulative number of cases and the cumulative number
of fatalities due to the opening of schools. This could be weighed with other factors such
as the capacity of our healthcare system to handle the rise, the impact of mental health of
students due to extended closures, etc., while arriving at a decision on whether schools can
be opened from 01 September 2020. The proportion of additional children and adults affected
due to the opening of the schools is still under study.

Fig. 34: Case study F, subsection III-F: Bengaluru daily cases estimation.

33

Fig. 35: Case study F, subsection III-F: Bengaluru daily fatalities estimation.

Fig. 36: Case study F, subsection III-F: Bengaluru cumulative cases estimation.

34

Fig. 37: Case study F, subsection III-F: Bengaluru cumulative fatalities estimation.

Fig. 38: Case study F, subsection III-F: Bengaluru hospital beds estimation.

35

IV. S IMULATOR
A. City generation
The first step in our agent-based model is to model a synthetic city that respects the
demographics of the city that we want to study. Our city generator uses the following data
as input:
•

Geo-spatial data that provides information on the wards of a city (components) along
with boundaries. (If this is not available, one could feed in ward centre locations and
ward areas).

•

Population in each ward, with break up on those living in high density and low density
areas.

•

Age distribution in the population.

•

Household size distribution (in high and low density areas) and some information on
the age composition of the houses (e.g., generation gaps, etc.)

•

The number of employed individuals in the city.

•

Distribution of the number of students in schools and colleges.

•

Distribution of the workplace sizes.

•

Distribution of commute distances.

•

Origin-destination densities that quantify movement patterns within the city.

Taking the above data into account, individuals, households, workplaces, schools, transport
spaces, and community spaces are instantiated. Individuals are then assigned to households,
workplaces or schools, transport and community spaces, see Figure 2 for a schematic representation. The algorithms for the assignments do a coarse matching. The matching may be
refined as better data becomes available.
The interaction spaces – households, workplaces or schools, transport and community
spaces – reflect different social networks and transmission happens along their edges. There
is interaction among these graphs because the nodes are common across the graphs, see
Figure 39 for various interaction spaces and Figure 40 for a bipartite graph abstractions of
these interaction spaces. An individual of school-going age who is exposed to the infection
at school may expose others at home. This reflects an interaction between the school graph
and the household graph. Similarly other graphs interact.
We now describe how individuals are assigned to interaction spaces.
Individuals and households: N individuals are instantiated and ages are sampled according
to the age distribution in the population. Households (based on the N and the mean number

36

Fig. 39: Various interaction spaces, solid circles inside homes indicate individuals.

Fig. 40: Bipartite graph abstraction of interaction spaces.

per household) are then instantiated and assigned a random number of individuals sampled
according to the distribution of household sizes. An assignment of individuals to households
is then done to match, to the extent possible, the generational structure in typical households.
The households are then assigned to wards so that the total number of individuals in the
ward is in proportion to population density in the ward, taken from census data. A population
density map is given in Figure 41(a) for Bengaluru and in Figure 41(b) for Mumbai. The
generational gap, household distribution, and age distribution patterns are assumed to be
uniform across the wards in the city. Each household in a ward is then assigned a random

37

(a) Bengaluru.

(b) Mumbai.

Fig. 41: Population density maps of Bengaluru and Mumbai.

location in the ward, and all individuals associated with the household are assigned the same
geo-location as the household.
Based on the age and the unemployment fraction, each individual is either a student or a
worker or neither.
Assignment of schools: Children of school-going ages 5-14 and a certain fraction of the
population aged 15-19 are assigned to schools. These are taken to be students. The remaining
fraction of the population aged 15-19 and a certain fraction of the population aged 20-59,
based on information on the employed fraction8 , are all classified as workers and are assigned
workplaces. The rest of the population (nonstudent, unemployed) is not assigned to either
schools or workplaces.
In past works, given the structure of educational institutions elsewhere, educational institutions have been divided into primary schools, secondary schools, higher secondary schools,
and universities. The norm in Indian urban areas is that schools handle primary to higher
secondary students and then colleges handle undergraduates. We view all such entities as
schools.
We assign students to schools on a ward-by-ward basis. In each ward, we have a certain
number of students. We pick a school size from a given school size distribution and instantiate
8

The unemployed fraction in Bengaluru, from the census data, is just over 50%, even after taking into account employment

in the unorganised sector. Similar is the case with Mumbai. This may have some bearing on the epidemic spread.

38

a school of this size and place it randomly in that ward. Students who live in that ward are
picked randomly and assigned to this school until that school is filled to its capacity. We
repeat this procedure until all students in that ward gets assigned to a school, and then we
repeat this procedure for all wards. This procedure could lead to at most one school per ward
whose capacity is more than its sampled capacity.
Assignment of workplaces: Workplace interactions can enable the spread of an epidemic.
In principle, Bengaluru’s and Mumbai’s land-use data could be used to locate office spaces.
The assignment of individuals to workplaces is done in two steps. In the first step, for
each individual who goes to work, we decide the ward where his/her office is located. This
assignment of a “working ward” is based on an Origin-Destination (OD) matrix. An OD
matrix is a square matrix whose number of rows equals the number of wards, and its (i, j)th
entry tells us the fraction of people who travel from ward i to ward j for work. In the second
step, for each ward, we sample a workplace size from a workplace size distribution, create a
workplace of this capacity and place it uniformly-at-random in that ward. We then randomly
assign individuals who work in that ward to this workplace. Similar to assignment of schools,
we continue to create workplaces in this ward until every individual working in that ward
gets assigned to a workplace, and we repeat this procedure for all wards. For Bengaluru, the
OD matrix is obtained from the regional travel model used for Bengaluru. For Mumbai, based
on the “zone to zone” travel data from [21], an origin-destination matrix was extrapolated
based on the population of each ward.
The above assignments could be improved further in later versions of this simulator.
Community spaces: Community spaces include day care centres, clinics, hospitals, shops,
markets, banks, movie halls, marriage halls, malls, eateries, food messes, dining areas and
restaurants, public transit entities like bus stops, metro stops, bus terminals, train stations,
airports, etc. While we hope to return to model a few of the important ones explicitly at a
later time, we proceed along the route taken by [22] with two modifications.
In our current implementation, each individual sees one community that is personalised
to the individual’s location and age and one transport space personalised to the individual’s
commute distance. For ease of implementation, the personalisation of the community space
is based on ward-level common local communities and a distance-kernel based weighting.
The personalisation of the transport space is based on commute distance. Details are given
in Section IV-C.
Age-stratified interaction: The interactions across these communities could be age-stratified.

39

This may be informed by social networks studies, for e.g., as in [23] which has been used
in a recent compartmentalised SEIR model [24].
Smaller subnetworks: We create smaller subnetworks in workplaces, schools and communities, and associate certain number people to these smaller networks with the interpretation that
people in a smaller subnetwork have high contact rate among them compared to the others. In
some more detail, we create “project” networks at each workplace consisting of people in that
workplace having closer interaction, a “class” network in each school consisting of students
of the same age, a random community network among people in a given ward to model daily
random interactions, and a neighbourhood subnetwork among people living in a 178m×178m
square 9 . These subnetworks are later used for identifying and testing/quarantining individuals
based on a contact tracing protocol.
The output of all the above is our synthetic city on which infection spreads. Figure 42
provides an indication of how close our synthetic city is to the true city in terms of the
indicated statistics.
B. Disease progression
We have used a simplified model of COVID-19 progression, based on descriptions in [25]
and [8]. This will need updating as we get India specific data.
An individual may have one of the following states, see Figure 43: susceptible, exposed,
infective (pre-symptomatic or asymptomatic), recovered, symptomatic, hospitalised, critical,
or deceased.
We assume that initially the entire population is susceptible to the infection. Let τ denote
the time at which an individual is exposed to the virus, see Figure 43. The incubation period
is random with the Gamma distribution of shape 2 and scale 2.29; the mean incubation
period is then 4.58 days (4.6 days in [8] and 4.58 in [26]). Individuals are infectious
for an exponentially distributed period of mean duration 0.5 of a day. This covers both
presymptomatic transmission and possible asymptomatic transmission. We assume that a
third of the patients recover, these are the asymptomatic patients; the remaining two-third
develop symptoms. Estimates of the number of asymptomatic patients vary from 0.2 to 0.6.
Though we have explored other asymptomatic fractions, we restrict attention here to 1/3.
Symptomatic patients are assumed to be 1.5 times more infectious during the symptomatic
period than during the pre-symptomatic but infective stage. Individuals either recover or move
9

This dimension 178m comes from an approximate “squaring of a circle” of 100m radius

40

(a) Bengaluru – Age distribution

(b) Bengaluru – Household size distribution

(c) Bengaluru – School size distribution

(d) Bengaluru – Workplace size distribution

(e) Bengaluru – Commuter distance distribution

(f) Mumbai – Age distribution

(g) Mumbai – Household size distribution

(h) Mumbai – School size distribution

(i) Mumbai – Workplace size distribution

(j) Mumbai – Commuter distance distribution

Fig. 42: Validation of our synthetic Bengaluru and Mumbai. Figures 42(a)–42(e) show the validation plots
for Bengaluru and Figures 42(f)–42(j) show the validation plots for Mumbai.

41

Fig. 43: A simplified model of COVID-19 progression.

to the hospital after a random duration that is exponentially distributed with a mean of 5
days10 . The probability that an individual recovers depends on the individual’s age11 . It is
also assumed that recovered individuals are no longer infective nor susceptible to a second
infection. While hospitalised individuals may continue to be infectious, they are assumed to
be sufficiently isolated, and hence do not further contribute to the spread of the infection.
Further progression of hospitalised individuals to critical care is mainly for assessing the
need for hospital beds, intensive care unit (ICU) beds, critical care equipments, etc. This will
need to be adapted to our local hospital protocol.
Let us reiterate. Once a susceptible individual has been exposed, the trajectory in Figure 43
takes over for that individual. Further progressions are (in our current implementation) only
based on the agent’s age.
C. Disease spread
At each time t, an infection rate λn (t) is computed for each individual n based on the
prevailing conditions. In the time duration ∆t following time t, each susceptible individual
moves to the exposed state with probability 1 − exp{−λn (t) · ∆t}, independently of all other
events. Other transitions are as per the disease progression described earlier. Time is then
updated to t + ∆t, the conditions are then updated to reflect the new exposures, changes to
infectiousness, hospitalisations, recoveries, contact tracing, quarantines, tests, test outcomes,
etc., during the period t to t + ∆t. The process outlined at the beginning of this paragraph
10

This needs to be updated based on hospitalisation guidelines.

11

It is possible to add comorbidities - diabetes, hypertension, etc. – in addition to age. Mortality and prognosis appear to

depend heavily on comorbidities. We leave it for the future.

42

TABLE VI: Hospitalisation estimates taken from [8], based on studies in [25].
Age-group

% symptomatic cases

% hospitalised cases

% critical cases

(years)

requiring hospitalisation

requiring critical care

deceased

0 to 9

0.1%

5.0%

40%

10 to 19

0.3%

5.0%

40%

20 to 29

1.2%

5.0%

50%

30 to 39

3.2%

05.0%

50%

40 to 49

4.9%

6.3%

50%

50 to 59

10.2%

12.2%

50%

60 to 69

16.6%

27.4%

50%

70 to 79

24.3%

43.2%

50%

80+

27.3%

70.9%

50%

is repeated until the end of the simulation. ∆t was taken to be 6 hours in our simulator and
is configurable.
A city of N individuals, H households, S schools, W workplaces, one community space
(comprising C wards), one transport space, and associations of individuals to these entities
is the starting point for the infection spread simulator. Infection spread is then implemented
as follows.
An individual n can transmit the virus in the infective (pre-symptomatic or asymptomatic
stage) or in the symptomatic stage. At time t, this is indicated as In (t) = 1 when infective
and otherwise In (t) = 0 otherwise.
Additionally, each individual has two other parameters: a severity variable Cn and a relative
infectiousness variable ρn , see [22]. Both bring in heterogeneity to the model. Severity Cn = 1
if the individual suffers from a severe infection and Cn = 0 otherwise; this is sampled at
50% probability independently of all other events. Infectiousness ρn is a random variable that
is Gamma distributed with shape 0.25 and scale 4 (so the mean is 1). The severity variable
captures severity-related absenteeism at school/workplace, associated decrease of infection
spread at school/workplace, and the increase of infection spread at home.
If the individual gets exposed at time τn , a relative infection-stage-related infectiousness
is taken to be κ(t − τn ) at time t. For the disease progression described in the previous
section, this is 1 in the presymptomatic and asymptomatic stages, 1.5 in the symptomatic,
hospitalised, and critical stages, and 0 in the other stages.
To describe the infection spread at transport spaces, let T (n) = 1 if agent n uses public
transport and let T (n) = 0 otherwise. Let An,t = 0 if at time t agent n is either (i) compliant

43

and under quarantine, (ii) hospitalised, (iii) critical, or (iv) dead, and let An,t = 1 if none of
the above is true and agent n attends office at time t. We model the effectiveness of masks
by reducing the ability of an infectious individual to transmit the infection by 20%, if a mask
is worn (see [13]–[16]); let Mn = 0.8 if agent n wears a face mask in public transport and
Mn = 1 otherwise.
Let βh , βs , βw , βT , βc , βh∗ , βs∗ , βw∗ and βc∗ denote the transmission coefficients at home,
school, workplace, transport, community spaces, neighbourhood network, class network,
project network and random community network, respectively. These can be viewed as scaled
contact rates with members in the household, school, workplace, community, neighbourhood,
class, project and random community, respectively. More precisely, these are the expected
number of eventful (infection spreading) contact opportunities in each of these interaction
spaces. It accounts for the combined effect of frequency of meetings and the probability of
infection spread during each meeting.
For a susceptible individual, the rate of transmission is governed by the sum of product
of contact rate β and infectiousness in all the interactions spaces. To model infectiousness,
we consider three scenarios.
Interactions without age-stratification: This is the simplest model where interactions within
each network is assumed to be homogeneous. A susceptible individual n (who belongs to
home h(n), school s(n), workplace w(n), transport space T (n), and community space c(n))
sees the following infection rate at time t:

λn (t) =

1

X

nα
n0 :h(n0 )=h(n) h(n)
1

X

+

n0 :s(n0 )=s(n)

ns(n)

n0 :w(n0 )=w(n)

P
+

n0 :T (n0 )=1

P

n0

· In0 (t)βs κ(t − τn0 )ρn0 (1 + Cn0 (ωψs (t − τn ) − 1))

1

X

+

· In0 (t)βh κ(t − τn0 )ρn0 (1 + Cn0 (ω − 1))

nw(n)
An0 ,t

T (n0 )

· In0 (t)βw κ(t − τn0 )ρn0 (1 + Cn0 (ωψw (t − τn ) − 1))

×

X
n0 :T (n0 )=T (n)

d 0 0 I 0 (t)βT Mn0
Pn ,w(n ) n
n0 :T (n0 )=T (n) dn0 ,w(n0 )

!

ζ(an ) · f (dn,c ) X
f (dc,c0 )hc,c0 (t)
+ P
c0 f (dc,c0 )
0
c

(1)

where
P
hc,c0 (t) =

n0 :c(n0 )=c0

f (dn0 ,c(n0 ) ) · ζ(an0 ) · In0 (t)βc rc κ(t − τn0 )ρn0 (1 + Cn0 (ω − 1))
P
n0 f (dn0 ,c(n0 ) )

!
(2)

44

The expression (1) can be viewed as the rate at which the susceptible individual n contracts
the infection at time t. Each of the components on the right-hand side indicates the rate from
home, school, workplace, transport space, and community. The additional quantities, over
and above what we have already described, are as follows.
The parameter α determines how household transmission rate scales with household size,
a crowding-at-household factor. It increases the propensity to spread the infection by a factor
n1−α . We have taken α = 0.8, see [22].
A common parameter ω indicates how a severely infected person affects a susceptible one,
as will be clear from below. (This is to be tuned at a later stage and is set to 2 now).
The functions ψs (·) and ψw (·) account for absenteeism in case of a severe infection. It
can be time-varying and can depend on school or workplace. We take ψs (t) = 0.1 and
ψw (t) = 0.5 while infective and after one day since infectiousness. School-goers with severe
infection contribute lesser to the infection spread, due to higher absenteeism, than those that
go to workplaces; moreover, the absenteeism results in an increased spreading rate at home.
The function ζ(a) is the relative travel-related contact rate of an individual aged a. We
take this to be 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0.75, 0.5, 0.25, 0.1 for the various
age groups in steps of 5 years, with the last one being the 80+ category.
The quantity hc,c0 (t) represents the transmission rate from individuals in ward c0 to an
individual in ward c. As above, each individual contributes in a distance-weighted way in
how an individual in a ward c0 affects another individual in another ward c.
The factor rc stands for a high-density interaction multiplying factor. For Mumbai, rc = 2
for some high density areas and rc = 1 for the other areas. For Bengaluru rc = 1 for all
wards.
The function f (·) is a distance kernel that can be matched to the travel patterns in the city.
Finally, our choice of the infection rate from the community space is a little different from
the rate specified in [22], in order to enable an efficient implementation. When the distance
kernel is f (d) = 1/(1 + (d/a)b ) and d  a, i.e., the wards are small, then our specification
is close to that indicated in [22]. We take a = 10.751 km and b = 5.384, based on a fit on
data for Bengaluru.
As one can see from (1), we have one community space but with contributions from
various wards. This enables inclusion of ‘containment zones’ and the associated restriction
of interaction across such zones, as we shall soon describe.
Age-stratified interactions: If this is enabled, the home, school, workplace and community
h
s
w
interaction rates have an extra factor Mn,n
0 , Mn,n0 , and Mn,n0 in the summand which accounts

45

for age-stratified interactions. Each of these depends on n and n0 only through the ages of
agents n and n0 . The resulting contact rate for individual n at time t is then:

X

λn (t) =

n0 :h(n0 )=h(n)

+

h
Mn,n
0
· In0 (t)βh κ(t − τn0 )ρn0 (1 + Cn0 (ω − 1))
α
nh(n)

X
n0 :s(n0 )=s(n)

s
Mn,n
0
· In0 (t)βs κ(t − τn0 )ρn0 (1 + Cn0 (ωψs (t − τn ) − 1))
ns(n)

w
Mn,n
0
· In0 (t)βw κ(t − τn0 )ρn0 (1 + Cn0 (ωψw (t − τn ) − 1))
n
w(n)
n0 :w(n0 )=w(n)
!
P
X
0 ,t
A
0
0
0
0
0
0
d
I
(t)β
M
n
T
n
n :T (n )=1
P
Pn ,w(n ) n
×
+
0)
0
T
(n
d
n0
n0 :T (n0 )=T (n) n ,w(n0 )
0
0

+

X

n :T (n )=T (n)

ζ(an ) · f (dn,c ) X
+ P
f (dc,c0 )hc,c0 (t)
c0 f (dc,c0 )
0
c

(3)

where hc,c0 (t) is given in (2). Computational complexity can be reduced by focusing only on
the principal components of M h , M s , and M w .
Interactions with smaller subnetworks: In this situation, we have additional contact rate
parameters, one for each smaller subnetwork: let βh∗ , βs∗ , βw∗ and βc∗ denote the transmission
coefficients at neighbourhood network, class network, project network and random community
network respectively. Then, an agent n (who belongs to neighbourhood network H (n),
class S (n), project W (n) and random community C (n), in addition to home h(n), school
s(n), workplace w(n), transport space T (n), and community space c(n)) sees the following

46

infection rate at time t:
X
λn (t) =

1

nα
n0 :h(n0 )=h(n) h(n)

· In0 (t)βh κ(t − τn0 )ρn0 (1 + Cn0 (ω − 1))

X

1

n0 :H (n0 )=H (n)

nH (n)

+ ζ(an )

· ζ(an0 )In0 (t)βh∗ κ(t − τn0 )ρn0 (1 + Cn0 (ω − 1))
(larger neighbourhood interaction)

ζ(an )f (dn,c(n) )
n0 :C (n0 )=C (n) f (dn0 ,c(n0 ) )
X
×
f (dn0 ,c(n0 ) )ζ(an0 )In0 (t)βc∗ κ(t − τn0 )ρn0 (1 + Cn0 (ω − 1))

+ P

n0 :C (n0 )=C (n)

(close friends’ circle interaction)
1

X

+

n0 :s(n0 )=s(n)

ns(n)

· In0 (t)βs κ(t − τn0 )ρn0 (1 + Cn0 (ωψs (t − τn ) − 1))

X

1

n0 :S (n0 )=S (n)

nS (n)

+

· In0 (t)βs∗ κ(t − τn0 )ρn0 (1 + Cn0 (ωψs (t − τn ) − 1))
(class network interaction)

n0 :w(n0 )=w(n)

nw(n)

· In0 (t)βw κ(t − τn0 )ρn0 (1 + Cn0 (ωψw (t − τn ) − 1))

X

1

n0 :W (n0 )=W (n)

nW (n)

+

P
+

1

X

+

n0 :T (n0 )=1

P

n0

An0 ,t

T (n0 )

×

· In0 (t)βw∗ κ(t − τn0 )ρn0 (1 + Cn0 (ωψw (t − τn ) − 1))
(project network interaction)
!
X
dn0 ,w(n0 ) In0 (t)βT Mn0
P
n0 :T (n0 )=T (n) dn0 ,w(n0 )
0

n0 :T (n )=T (n)

ζ(an ) · f (dn,c ) X
+ P
f (dc,c0 )hc,c0 (t)
c0 f (dc,c0 )
0
c

(4)

where hc,c0 (t) is given in (2). The subnetwork interactions are stronger contexts for disease
spread. Contact tracing targets exactly these subnetworks for additional testing, case isolation
or quarantine.
D. Seeding of infection
Two methods of seeding the infection have been implemented.
•

A small number of individuals can be set to either exposed, presymptomatic/asymptomatic,
or symptomatic states, at time t = 0, to seed the infection. This can be done randomly
based either on ward-level probabilities, which could be input to the simulator, or it can
be done uniformly at random across all wards in the city.

47

•

A seeding file indicates the average number of individuals who should be seeded on each
day in the first stage of infectiousness (presymptomatic or asymptomatic). This could
be done based on data for patients with a foreign travel history who eventually visited
a hospital. A certain multiplication factor then accounts for the asymptomatic and the
symptomatic individuals that recover without the need to visit the hospital. The seeding
is done at a random time earlier in the time line, based on the disease progression.

E. Calibration
We calibrate our model by tuning the transmission coefficients at various interaction spaces
under the no-intervention scenario in order to match the cumulative fatalities to a target
curve. We assume a common upscaling factor β̃ for the transmission coefficients of smaller
subnetworks, i.e., we set βw∗ = β̃βw , βs∗ = β̃βs and βh∗ = βc∗ = β̃βc . We assume that
β̃ = 9, indicating that the subnetworks account for 90% of the overall contacts. The following
heuristic iterative algorithm inspired by stochastic approximation is then used to identify the
best choice of the free parameters.


Λh (n)
× [exp(m∗ − m(n))]1/a
βh (n + 1) = βh (n) −
a ,
n+3


Λw (n)
βw (n + 1) = βw (n) −
× [exp(m∗ − m(n))]1/a
a ,
n+3


Λc (n)
βc (n + 1) = βc (n) −
× [exp(m∗ − m(n))]1/a
a ,
n+3
1/a

where [exp(m∗ − m(n))]a

= min{max{exp(m∗ − m(n)), a}, 1/a}, Λh (n) (resp. Λw (n),

Λc (n)) is the fraction of infections from home (resp. workplace, community) in the nth
step, and m(n) is the slope of the cumulative fatalities curve in log-scale in an initial linear
region, obtained by running the simulator on a smaller city file (of 1 million population) in
the no intervention scenario. We set a = 2/3. To minimise the effect of stochasticity from
the simulator, in each step n, we run the simulator 6 times and take the average values of
Λh (n), Λw (n), Λc (n) and m(n). We stop the algorithm at time n if we meet our targets, i.e.,
if
|m(n) − m∗ | ≤ 0.01,
|Λh (n) − Λ∗h | ≤ 0.01,
|Λw (n) − Λ∗w | ≤ 0.01, and
|Λc (n) − Λ∗c | ≤ 0.01,

48

where Λ∗h = Λ∗w = Λ∗c = 1/3, and m∗ is the target slope (the target slope is similarly
computed from the cumulative fatalities data in log scale; for example, the India fatalities
curve in the range 130-199 gives a slope of m∗ = 0.1803). Once the slopes are matched,
assuming that the simulator starts on 01 March 2020, we find the delay between the fatalities
curve from the simulator and the target data. We then use the resulting contact rates and the
above calibration delay to launch our simulations.
To avoid any oscillatory behaviour of the calibration algorithm, we also set the scale factor
1/a

in each of the above update steps to be [exp((m∗ − m(n))/n)]a

whenever |Λh (n) − Λ∗h | ≤

0.02, |Λw (n) − Λ∗w | ≤ 0.02 and |Λc (n) − Λ∗c | ≤ 0.02. In addition, we set the scale factor to
1/a

be [exp((m∗ − m(n))/(n − 25))]a

if n ≥ 30.

For the simulation results presented in the case studies, we identified the m∗ as follows. We
assumed a counterfactual situation where the national level of infection, up to the date when
the lockdown’s effect is not yet likely to have been seen, estimated to be 8–10 April 2020,
is moved to the city under study. There were 199 fatalities in India up to 10 April 2020. The
India cases and fatalities data is based on daily updates compiled by the European Centre for
Disease Prevention and Control [27]. The counterfactual situation (all of India’s infections
in the isolated city under study) is to ensure that sufficient data is available for calibration
before the national lockdown’s effect is encountered. The fatalities up to this date were likely
due to contacts prior to the start of the lockdown. The slope of this curve (in the log-domain)
gives the m∗ . The calibration is further done on a smaller version of the city, with 10 lakh
population. The resulting parameters are then used on the full-scale city.
We do not calibrate βT , the transmission coefficient at transport space. For the calibration step we take this parameter to be zero while tuning the other parameters. A heuristic
justification is as follows. Bengaluru travel interactions will likely be captured through the
local community interactions, and we keep it zero throughout, even in the case studies. For
Mumbai however, local trains are a key mode of daily transportation with a population of
the order of 75 lakh travelling daily using this mode in normal times. However, trains were
stopped in Mumbai prior to the national lockdown and were running below capacity for at
least a week before that. Moreover, the initial infections were seeded by travellers that came
from abroad. The primary mode of travel for this group is unlikely to be rail transport. So
we disabled the transport space while calibrating by setting βT = 0. Subsequently for the
trains on/off case study, we used a heuristic calculation of βT ; see [28, Section IV].
The above procedures identify the contact-related parameters. Other parameters are the
distance kernel parameters, the parameter α that accounts for crowding in households, the age-

49

stratified interactions, the distribution parameters for individual infectiousness, the probability
of severity, etc. These are set as follows:
TABLE VII: Model parameters
Parameter

Symbol

Bengaluru

Mumbai

Transmission coefficient at home

βh

1.0884 (calibrated)

0.7928 (calibrated)

Transmission coefficient at school

βs

0.2548 (calibrated)

0.2834 (calibrated)

Transmission coefficient at workplace

βw

0.1274 (calibrated)

0.1417 (calibrated)

Transmission coefficient at community

βc

0.0169 (calibrated)

0.0149 (calibrated)

Subnetwork upscale factor

β̃

9

9

Transmission coefficient at transport space

βt

0

0.1506

1−α

0.2

0.2

rc

1

2

(a, b)

(10.751, 5.384)

(2.709, 1.279)

Infectiousness shape (Gamma distributed)

(shape,scale)

(0.25, 4)

(0.25, 4)

Severity probability

Pr{Cn = 1}

0.5

0.5

Age stratification

Mn,n0

Not used

Not used

Project subnetwork size range

nW (n)

3 − 10

3 − 10

no symbol

2-5 families

2-5 families

Household crowding
Community crowding
b

Distance kernel f (d) = 1/(1 + (d/a) )

Family friends’ subnetwork range

F. Interventions
The simulator has the capability to accommodate interventions and compliance. Table VIII
describes some of the interventions in [8], some adapted to suit our demographics, and
some new interventions involving the nation-wide 40-day ‘lockdown’ in India and various
scenarios of ‘unlock’. These are fairly straightforward to implement – we modulate an
individual’s contact rate with an interaction space (both into the interaction space and out
of the interaction space) by a suitable factor associated with intervention. For example, one
could easily implement and study cyclic exit strategies as done in [29]. The triggers for cyclic
controls could be based on signals such as the number of individuals that are hospitalised,
as done in our soft ward containment. Yet another one is to quarantine or case isolate based
on contact tracing, as we will describe next.
G. Contact tracing
Our simulator also includes a framework to study the impact of early contact tracing
and testing. We assume that contacts of an individual in the smaller networks such as
neighbourhood network, project network, class network and random community network

50

TABLE VIII: Interventions.

Label

Policy

Description

CI

Case isolation at home

Symptomatic individuals stay at home for 7 days, non-household contacts
reduced by 90% during this period, household contacts reduce by 25%.

HQ

Voluntary home quarantine

Once a symptomatic individual has been identified, all members of the
household remain at home for 14 days. Non-household contacts reduced
by 90% during this period, household contacts reduce by 25%.

SDO

Social distancing of those

Non-household contacts reduce by 75%.

aged 65 and over
LD

Lockdown

Closure of schools and colleges. Only essential workplaces active. For a
compliant household, household contact rate doubles, community contact
rate reduces by 75%, workspace contact rate reduces by 75%. For a noncompliant household, household contact rate increases by 25%, workspace
contact rate reduces by 75%, and no change to community contact rate.

LD40-CI

Lockdown for 40 days

Lockdown for 40 days and then normal activity, but with CI.

LD40-PE-

One particular phased emer-

Lockdown for 40 days, then CI, HQ and SDO for 14 days. Schools and

CI

gence (PE) from lockdown

colleges remain closed during this period. Normal activity resumes after
this period with reopening of schools and colleges, but with CI.

LD40-PE-

Another phased emergence

Lockdown for 40 days, then CI, HQ and SDO for 14 days. Schools and

SCCI

from lockdown

colleges remain closed during this period (SC). Normal activity resumes
after this period but schools and colleges remain closed for another 28
days (SC). CI remains in place throughout.

LD40-

A third type of phased emer-

Lockdown for 40 days, then CI, HQ and SDO for 14 days. Schools and

PEOE-CI

gence from lockdown

colleges remain closed and an odd-even workplace strategy is in place
during this period. Normal activity resumes after this period. CI remains
in force throughout.

can be identified and tested/quarantined. The current contact tracing protocol quarantines
certain primary contacts and tests a subset of these (e.g., symptomatic primary contacts). In
our implementation, based on our study of ICMR’s testing protocol, given an index case, all
household members, a fraction of the friends circle, a fraction of the inner school/workplace
circle, and a fraction of the neighbourhood community are termed as primary contacts of
this index case. All of these are quarantined, and a fraction of the symptomatic and another
fraction of the asymptomatic among these are tested. Those who test positive become new
index cases and spawn further contact tracing. The testing fractions are calibrated to match
the actual reported cases and the test-positivity rate.

51

H. Limitations
We list some limitations of our simulator.
•

We do not have activity modelling in our simulator. As a consequence, weekly and
daily patterns on interactions are not taken into account; for instance, the absence of
interaction in workplaces and schools during weekends/public holidays, an increased
interaction in public transport during morning and evening peak hours etc. are not taken
into account in our model. Instead, all these factors are abstracted into a single infection
rate for each individual prescribed by (1), (3) and (4).

•

Some of the data that we need in our simulator, such as the household size distribution,
workplace size distribution, school size distribution, commuter distance distribution etc.,
can perhaps be difficult to obtain for some cities.

•

We have too many free parameters in our model. This can lead to overfitting resulting
in high generalisation error.

•

The framework is computationally intensive.

•

Since the disease spread model has quite a bit of stochasticity (e.g., the incubation time),
we need to perform multiple runs of our simulator and take an average of the outputs.
We do not have an estimate on the variability of our outputs across multiple runs; such
an analysis will be essential to determine the number of runs we need to perform in
order for our outputs to be close to the average.
V. A LGORITHMIC ASPECTS

A. Algorithmic aspects related to city generation
Generation of a synthetic city is performed via the following steps.
1) Data gathering and data preparation involves the following.
(a) Census Data Processing: The primary data sources used to generate the synthetic
city are the 2011 decennial census data of India and the intermediate survey reports
for a city. The raw data are typically either in spreadsheets or as tables in a PDF
document. We use Python packages like pandas and tabula to clean, process and
prepare the data required for creating a synthetic city.
The data required for creating a synthetic city like the ward-wise demographics, employment status, number of households and the origin-destination matrix
are created as separate comma separated values (csv) files. Distributions like the
household size, workplace size, school size, for the city are collected as a single
JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) file.

52

(b) Geo-spatial mapping: In addition to the census data, the instantiation for the city
also requires the geographic representations for a ward like the ward centre and
ward boundaries. These are obtained from map files. Map files are mined in
different formats like shapefiles (.shp, .shx) or geoJSON (.geojson), which are
processed using Python‘s geopandas package.
2) Instantiating the city files is done by running a python script on the following inputs:
the map data (.geojson), the census data on the demographics(.csv), households(.csv)
and employment(.csv) files along with the additional parameters specified in ‘cityProfile.json’. The instantiation of a synthetic city is done in three stages namely:
(a) Processing Inputs: The script ingests the input (.csv) files using the pandas package
and computes parameters based on the input like the unemployment fraction,
fraction of population in each ward. The GeoJSON file is processed with the
geopandas package to parse the input file and the shapely package to compute
the ward centre, the ward boundaries and the neighbouring wards. Apart from
the data files, the target population for which the instantiation is to be done, the
average number of students in a school, the average number of individuals in
one workplace are input parameters specified at the start of the script. The age
distribution, household-size distribution and school-size distribution are taken as
inputs from the ‘cityProfile.json’ file.
(b) Instantiating individuals comprises of an algorithm that randomly assigns individuals to households by respecting the household-size distribution. Each household
has individuals assigned with generational gaps, yet the instantiated population’s
empirical age distribution must match the given age distribution. Individuals are
assigned to workplaces or schools or neither, based on their age and the unemployed
fraction, and are assigned the appropriate ‘workplaceType’. Once an individual is
assigned to a household, the location of the individual is mapped to the location of
the assigned household. While instantiating households, the ward number to which
the household is assigned is specified and based on the ward number the respective
ward boundaries are obtained from the map data in the GeoJSON file. The ward
boundaries are typically represented as ‘Polygons’. The location of households ,
workplaces and schools are randomly sampled as a point inside the ward boundary.
For instantiating households in high-density areas, we sample locations either from
a GeoJSON file with boundaries of the high-density areas or from a collection of

53

pre-sampled locations of households in high density areas. Common areas where
community interactions take place are instantiated at the ward centres, assumed to
be the centroids of the polygons. These tasks are accomplished using the following
python packages: numpy, random, pandas and shapely. The outputs of this stage
are collections of the instantiated individuals, their assigned households, schools,
workplaces, transport and community areas.
(c) Additional processing for generating city files: Before generating the city files,
additional processing is done on the dataframes which includes computing the
distance of the individuals to their respective ward centres. This stage uses the
pandas package for processing and generating the city files in the JSON file format
for each instantiated collection namely the individuals, households, workplaces,
schools, community centres, and distance between wards.
B. Algorithmic aspects related to disease spread
The disease progression part of the simulator is broadly implemented as follows. There
are four time steps on a given day. At each time step, we go through each susceptible agent
and find out the infection rate given by either (1), (3) or (4) depending on the interaction that
we want to model. We then update the disease progression status of that agent based on the
infection rate. Once an individual becomes exposed, this person goes through various stages
of the disease depending on age, and contributes to the infection rate of other individuals in
the individual’s interaction space as long as the individual is infectious. Eventually, the agent
recovers from the disease or dies. At the end of the simulation, we output a time series of
various quantities of interest into a file, such as the daily number of cases, cumulative number
of cases, daily number of hospitalisations, daily number of fatalities, cumulative number of
fatalities, etc.
Some of the key features of our simulator that help reduce the space and time complexity
are as follows.
•

We have a single community space per ward where individuals living in that ward
come together and interact. We then have an interaction among communities to model
community interactions among people living in different wards. With n agents and c
communities, such a model keeps the computational complexity at O(n) + O(c2 ). If we
had considered a more complex interaction between individuals, where each individual
interacts with every other individual living in the city with a certain contact rate, the
complexity would have been O(n2 ). Modelling of other interaction spaces such as

54

households, schools, workplaces and transport spaces also results in a similar reduction
in time complexity from O(n2 ) to O(n). Since the number of agents are typically of the
order of 107 , such a reduction has a huge impact on the running time of the simulator.
•

Contact tracing requires us to maintain a list of contacts made by each agent. In our
implementation, we assume that each individual has a certain number of contacts that
we can trace (which is random, but independent of n). As a result, the space complexity
becomes O(n) instead of O(n2 ).

•

In the age-stratified interaction as well as OD-matrix based distance kernel, we consider
dominant terms of the age-based contact rate matrix as well as OD-matrix by doing
a principal component analysis and by focusing on a few important components. This
helps simplify the summations in (3).

These optimisation features appear to be novel features of our simulator.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this work, we built an agent-based simulator to study the impact of various nonpharmaceutical interventions in the context of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. We demonstrated the capabilities of our simulator via various case studies for Bengaluru and Mumbai.
Some of the key features of our simulator include age-stratified interaction that captures
heterogeneity in interaction among people in a given interaction space, the ability to implement various interventions such as soft ward containment, phased opening of workplaces and
community spaces, a broad class of contact tracing based testing and case isolation protocols,
etc. These features help our simulator to capture the ground reality very well and provide
us with realistic predictions. Some future directions include bringing in movement of people
into and out of the city and studying the impact of various mobility patterns, modelling and
studying the impact on public-health oriented decisions on the economy, incorporating activity
modelling into our simulator and using the simulator to obtain district-scale or country-scale
predictions. We hope that such agent-based simulators find a regular place in every public
health official’s tool kit.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We sincerely thank Arpit Agarwal, Priyanka Agrawal, Bharadwaj Amrutur, M. S. Ashwin,
Siva Athreya, Abhijit Awadhiya, Chiranjib Bhattacharyya, Vijay Chandru, Avhishek Chatterjee, Arpan Chattopadhyay, Siddhartha Gadgil, Aditya Gopalan, K. V. S. Hari, Ramesh
Hariharan, Aniruddha Iyer, Srikanth Iyer, Shipra Jain, Subhasis Jethy, Jacob John, Shruti

55

Kakade, Navin Kashyap, Micky Kedia, DataMeet (a community of Data Science and Open
Data enthusiasts), Revanth Krishna, Vrishab Krishna, Manjunath Krishnapur, Anurag Kumar,
Rahul Lodhe, Rahul Madhavan, Madhav Marathe, Satyajit Mayor, Gautam Menon, Shiraz
Minwalla, Prem Mony, Chandra Murthy, Y. Narahari, Uma Chandra Mouli Natchu, Praneeth
Netrapalli, Abdul Pinjari, Vinod Prabhakaran, Dr. Prabhu, Rishi Prajapati, Ketan Rajawat,
G. Rangarajan, G. V. Sagar, Agrim Sharma, Abhishek Sinha, Mukund Thattai, Himanshu
Tyagi, Srinivasan Venkataramanan, V. Vinay, Anil Vullikanti, and many volunteers for their
valuable comments and help.
The SahasraT supercomputing cluster at the Supercomputer Education and Research Centre
(SERC), Indian Institute of Science, was used for most of the simulations.
R EFERENCES
[1] “Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India,” Accessed on 11 August 2020 2020. [Online].
Available: https://www.mohfw.gov.in/
[2] S. Athreya, N. Gadhiwala, and A. Mishra, “COVID-19 India-Timeline: An Understanding across States and Union
Territories,” 07 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.isibang.ac.in/∼athreya/incovid19/
[3] “Crowdsourced COVID19-India Database,” https://www.covid19india.org/, 04 2020.
[4] W. O. Kermack and A. G. McKendrick, “A contribution to the mathematical theory of epidemics,” Proceedings of the
Royal Society of London. Series A, Containing papers of a mathematical and physical character, vol. 115, no. 772,
pp. 700–721, 1927.
[5] S. Shekatkar, B. Pujari, M. Arjunwadkar, D. K. Hazra, P. Chaudhuri, S. Sinha, G. I. Menon, A. Sharma, and V. Guttal,
“INDSCI-SIM A state-level epidemiological model for India,” 2020, ongoing Study at https://indscicov.in/indscisim.
[6] M. K. Prakash, S. Kaushal, S. Bhattacharya, A. Chandran, A. Kumar, and S. Ansumali, “A minimal and adaptive
prediction strategy for critical resource planning in a pandemic,” medRxiv, 2020.
[7] S. Ganesan and D. Subramani, “Spatio-temporal predictive modeling framework for infectious disease spread,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2006.15336, 2020.
[8] N. Ferguson, D. Laydon, G. Nedjati Gilani, N. Imai, K. Ainslie, M. Baguelin, S. Bhatia, A. Boonyasiri, Z. Cucunuba Perez, G. Cuomo-Dannenburg et al., “Report 9: Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) to reduce
COVID19 mortality and healthcare demand,” Tech. Report, 2020.
[9] J. M. Gardner, L. Willem, W. van der Wijngaart, S. C. L. Kamerlin, N. Brusselaers, and P. Kasson, “Intervention
strategies against covid-19 and their estimated impact on swedish healthcare capacity,” medRxiv, 2020.
[10] M. E. Halloran, N. M. Ferguson, S. Eubank, I. M. Longini, D. A. Cummings, B. Lewis, S. Xu, C. Fraser, A. Vullikanti,
T. C. Germann et al., “Modeling targeted layered containment of an influenza pandemic in the United States,”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 105, no. 12, pp. 4639–4644, 2008.
[11] E. Hunter, B. Mac Namee, and J. D. Kelleher, “A taxonomy for agent-based models in human infectious disease
epidemiology,” Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation, vol. 20, no. 3, 2017.
[12] S. Eubank, H. Guclu, V. A. Kumar, M. V. Marathe, A. Srinivasan, Z. Toroczkai, and N. Wang, “Modelling disease
outbreaks in realistic urban social networks,” Nature, vol. 429, no. 6988, pp. 180–184, 2004.
[13] C. R. MacIntyre, S. Cauchemez, D. E. Dwyer, H. Seale, P. Cheung, G. Browne, M. Fasher, J. Wood, Z. Gao,
R. Booy, and N. Ferguson, “Face mask use and control of respiratory virus transmission in households,” Emerging
infectious diseases, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 233–241, 2009. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.3201/eid1502.081167

56

[14] A. E. Aiello, G. F. Murray, V. Perez, R. M. Coulborn, B. M. Davis, M. Uddin, D. K. Shay, S. H. Waterman, and
A. S. Monto, “Mask use, hand hygiene, and seasonal influenza-like illness among young adults: A randomized
intervention trial,” The Journal of Infectious Diseases, vol. 201, no. 4, pp. 491–498, 02 2010. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1086/650396
[15] N. Leung, D. Chu, and E. e. a. Shiu, “Respiratory virus shedding in exhaled breath and efficacy of face masks,”
Nature Medicine, vol. 26, pp. 676–680, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-020-0843-2
[16] D. Chu, E. Akl, A. El-Harakeh, A. Bognanni, T. Lotf, M. Loeb, A. Hajizadeh, A. Bak, A. Izcovich,
C. A. Cuello-Garcia et al., “Physical distancing, face masks, and eye protection to prevent person-person
covid-19 transmission: A systematic review and meta-analysis,” The Lancet, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)31142-9
[17] “Consolidated Revised Guidelines on the measures to be taken by Ministries/Departments of Government of
India, State/ UT Governments and State / UT authorities for containment of COVID-19 in the country,” 15
Apr 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.mha.gov.in/sites/default/files/MHA%20order%20dt%2015.04.2020%2C%
20with%20Revised%20Consolidated%20Guidelines compressed%20%283%29.pdf
[18] “MHA order dt. 30.5.2020 on phased re-opening (unlock 1),” 30 May 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.mha.gov.in/sites/default/files/MHAOrderDt 30052020.pdf
[19] “COVID-19 Community Mobility Report,” https://www.google.com/covid19/mobility/, 04 2020.
[20] A. Chandak, D. Dey, B. Mukhoty, and P. Kar, “Epidemiologically and socio-economically optimal policies via
Bayesian optimization,” May 2020. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.11257
[21] J. Baker, R. Basu, M. Cropper, Lall, and A. Somik Takeuchi, Urban Poverty And Transport : The Case Of Mumbai.
The World Bank, 2005. [Online]. Available: https://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/abs/10.1596/1813-9450-3693
[22] N. M. Ferguson, D. A. Cummings, S. Cauchemez, C. Fraser, S. Riley, A. Meeyai, S. Iamsirithaworn, and D. S.
Burke, “Strategies for containing an emerging influenza pandemic in Southeast Asia,” Nature, vol. 437, no. 7056, pp.
209–214, 2005.
[23] K. Prem, A. R. Cook, and M. Jit, “Projecting social contact matrices in 152 countries using contact surveys and
demographic data,” PLoS computational biology, vol. 13, no. 9, p. e1005697, 2017.
[24] R. Singh and R. Adhikari, “Age-structured impact of social distancing on the COVID-19 epidemic in India,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2003.12055, 2020.
[25] R. Verity, L. C. Okell, I. Dorigatti, P. Winskill, C. Whittaker, N. Imai, G. Cuomo-Dannenburg, H. Thompson, P. G.
Walker, H. Fu et al., “Estimates of the severity of coronavirus disease 2019: a model-based analysis,” The Lancet
Infectious Diseases, 2020.
[26] K. Prem, Y. Liu, T. W. Russell, A. J. Kucharski, R. M. Eggo, N. Davies, S. Flasche, S. Clifford, C. A. Pearson, J. D.
Munday et al., “The effect of control strategies to reduce social mixing on outcomes of the COVID-19 epidemic in
Wuhan, China: a modelling study,” The Lancet Public Health, 2020.
[27] “European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control’s COVID-19 website,” https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/
geographical-distribution-2019-ncov-cases, 04 2020.
[28] IISc-TIFR Covid-19 City-Scale Simulation Team, “COVID-19 Epidemic Study II: Phased Emergence From the
Lockdown in Mumbai,” Indian Institute of Science and Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Tech. Rep., June
2020. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2006.03375.pdf
[29] O. Karin, Y. M. Bar-On, T. Milo, I. Katzir, A. Mayo, Y. Korem, B. Dudovich, E. Yashiv, A. J. Zehavi, N. Davidovich
et al., “Adaptive cyclic exit strategies from lockdown to suppress COVID-19 and allow economic activity,” medRxiv,
2020.

