COVID, BLM, and the polarization of US politicians on Twitter
Anmol Panda

Divya Siddarth

Joyojeet Pal

Microsoft Research India
Bengaluru, India

Microsoft Research India
Bengaluru, India

Microsoft Research India
Bengaluru, India

arXiv:2008.03263v1 [cs.SI] 7 Aug 2020

ABSTRACT
We mapped the tweets of 520 US Congress members, focusing
on analyzing their engagement with two broad topics: first, the
COVID-19 pandemic, and second, the recent wave of anti-racist
protest. We find that, in discussing COVID-19, Democrats frame the
issue in terms of public health, while Republicans are more likely
to focus on small businesses and the economy. When looking at
the discourse around anti-Black violence, we find that Democrats
are far more likely to name police brutality as a specific concern.
In contrast, Republicans not only discuss the issue far less, but
also keep their terms more general, as well as criticizing perceived
protest violence.

With over 10 million followers, the @SenSanders handle of Senator
Bernie Sanders (I-VT) was the most followed account in Congress,
while @GuamCongressman, the official handle of Michael F.Q. San
Nicolas, member of the House from the US territory of Guam, was
the least followed with 628 followers at the time of the study. The
accounts of @Jim_Jordan (R-OH) and @RepAdamSchiff (D-CA)
were the most retweeted for the two parties in the study period,
with median retweet rates of 4485 and 11194 respectively.
We labelled both original and retweeted tweets for each of our
three issues of interest: Covid19, George Floyd, and Black Lives
Matter. We use the following lists of string literals to match for
topic relevance:
• Covid19: [‘ncov’, ‘covid’, ‘corona’, ‘virus’]
• George Floyd: [‘georgefloyd’, ‘george floyd’]
• Black Lives Matter: [’blm’, ’blacklivesmatter’, ’black lives
matter’, ’black lives’]

KEYWORDS
politics, twitter, united states, covid19, black lives matter

1

INTRODUCTION

For years, politicians have been using social media to communicate
directly with voters, and researchers have studied this phenomenon[6,
8, 9, 11, 12, 14]. During this time, the study of politicians’ social media use has covered a wide range of topics, with focus on partisan
messaging [7], engagement with constituents, polarization, [1, 10],
volunteer mobilization [4], targeting of opponents, and propaganda
as observed in Germany [2], Austria [15], Italy [5], France [3] and
India [13].
In the present article, we contribute to this space with an analysis
of tweets shared by the official handles of 519 members of the US
Congress (ninety-seven Senators and four hundred and twenty two
members of the House of Representatives who have active and
verifiable accounts on Twitter). The period of interest was from
Jan 1, 2020 to June 29, 2020. This period was chosen specifically
to study the politicians’ framing of the COVID-19 pandemic, and
accompanying public health and economic crises, as well to capture
discourse around the recent wave of anti-racist protest across the
country.
In this study, we intend to answer the following questions:
(1) How did the two parties frame their discussion around three
key topics: Covid-19, the George Floyd murder, and the Black
Lives Matter movement?
(2) What does this framing say about the willingness to address
or avoid specific issues?

2

DATA AND METHODOLOGY

The primary list of politicians was hand-drawn, seeding from a
list of members of Congress in late 2019 and searching for their
handles on Twitter. It was complemented with more recent data
and metadata from Github 1 . In all, we collected 310,686 tweets of
520 legislators of the US Congress using Twitter’s public Search API.
1 Link:

https://github.com/unitedstates/congress-legislators

We use two approaches for this labelling. In the first approach,
we consider occurrence of the aforementioned terms in the tweet
text of all tweets. For retweeted tweets, we extract the complete
text of the original tweet. We call this the InText category. For the
second approach, we match the terms only in hashtags of tweets.
We call this the InHashtag category. In both cases, the matching is caseless and considers substrings i.e. ‘covid’ will match to
#Covid19, #CovidPandemic, etc. in the InHashtag category, while
it will match additionally to terms like ‘Covid19’, ‘CovidCrisis’, etc.
in the InText category.

3

RESULTS

In general, Democrats tweeted more on a weekly basis. When
considering InText tweets, they tweeted more across categories,
with a greater number of mentions of Covid19, George Floyd and
BLM than Republicans. The difference in Covid19 tweet counts was
small, but significant. On the other hand, the difference in BLM and
George Floyd-related tweets was substantial. When considering
InHashtag tweets, difference in Covid19 hashtag use by the two
parties was not significant. For BLM and George Floyd, it was
significant. We controlled for the user that posted the tweet, the
week and the number of total tweets they posted in that week.
We plotted the partisan divide in framing by the US Congress on
the three key topics using two methods - by estimating how many
and which politicians posted about those topics, and by analysing
co-occurring terms in tweets about those topics. For the former,
we plot the number of tweets posted by politicians and the median
retweets they received in three interactive visualizations2 . In these
visualizations, the x-axis plots the number of tweets (for InText
category) posted by a member of US Congress, y-axis plots the median retweets they received, and the size of the bubble corresponds
2 Link to interactive visualizations: https://github.com/anmolpanda/US-CongressAnalysis/tree/master/visualizations/polarization-paper

arXiv’20, Bengaluru, India

to the number of their Twitter followers. Figures 1, 2, and 3 show
excerpts from these with the top ten most followed and top ten most
active 3 politicians from both parties represented for each topic.
We observe that, with regards to Covid19, 274 Democrats posted
43491 tweets, the 2 independent Senators posted 142 tweets, and
240 Republicans posted 27155 tweets. Looking at tweets surrounding George Floyd’s murder, 266 Democrats put out 2118 tweets,
independent Senators posted 4 tweets, and 157 Republicans posted
464 tweets. On BLM, 191 Democrats tweets 1036 times while 9
Republicans posted 21 tweets We verified every BLM tweet to remove false positives, especially tweets about the Bureau of Land
Management (@BLMNational). Prior to Floyd’s murder (May25),
Democrats posted 56 tweets about the Bureau and 21 about Black
Lives Matter, while Republicans posted 59 tweets regarding the
former and none about the latter. After the incident, Democrats
posted 1015 tweets about the movement and only 11 about the
Bureau, while the GOP posted 21 and 17 tweets respectively.
Secondly, we plot the word clouds of terms in tweets about key
topics. Figures 4, 5, and 6 display the word clouds of tweets of the
two parties for both the InText and InHashtag categories. The
results indicate the following:
On Covid19,
• The Democratic party’s framing of the Covid crisis centered
around healthcare, with terms like ‘public health’, ‘pandemic’
and ‘health care’ emerging as the most frequent phrases in
both the InText and InHashtag categories.
• Republicans, on the other hand, focused more on the economic fallout of the crisis, with ‘small businesses’ appearing
prominently in both categories. Notably, China is referenced
substantially in the InText category but is more subdued in
the InHashtag case.
• Some generic terms such as ‘thank’ appear in tweets about
Covid - typically related to thanking caregivers and first
responders.
On the issue of George Floyd’s murder,
• A number of Democratic politicians connect George Floyd’s
murder to police brutality, with the term appearing significantly in both tweet text and in hashtags. Democrats also connect his death to the killings of Breonna Taylor and Ahmaud
Arbery, suggesting a recognition of larger social patterns
at play. Lastly, they mention the party-sponsored Justice in
Policing Act passed by the House as a response to calls for
changes in policing.
• In contrast, while some Republicans addressed George Floyd’s
death, condemning it and calling for justice, there is little
discussion of ’brutality’ or talk about systemic problems with
policing. Unlike Democrats, Republicans do not connect the
Floyd case with other contemporary cases of violence against
Black Americans. Further, looking at hashtags, we see that
there are also frequent mentions of ’protest’, ’right’, and ’violence’, which suggests a different tone to the one taken by
Democrats.
• We have explored the use of therm ‘violence’ by Republicans
over time to assess how its use evolved.
3 Activity

quantified by the number of tweets posted about the given topic during the
study period

Anmol Panda, Divya Siddarth, and Joyojeet Pal

On the Black Lives Matter movement,
• Here, we see that Democrats tweet about police brutality,
Breonna Taylor and George Floyd. However, we note that
there are far less significant secondary words when looking
at the Black Lives Matter tweets.
• Pulling Republican tweets with Black Lives Matter hashtags
only yielded 6 tweets and is therefore not representative of a
wider discourse. While there were 126 tweets in the InText
category, most were posted prior to the current wave of
protests and relate to the Bureau of Land Management while
only 21 were about the Black Lives Matter movement. This
in itself is suggestive with regards to the involvement of
Republicans in the recent discourse.
• We assessed the use of the terms ‘defund’ and ‘police’ in
tweets after George Floyd’s murder on May 25.

4

DISCUSSION

The parties diverge substantially on all three issues of interest.
Firstly, on COVID-19, we see that Democrats characterize the crisis through narratives emphasizing health care and public health,
which is consistent with the party’s recent, albeit tumultuous, shift
towards prioritizing health care in their political platform. Republicans, on the other hand, highlight the effect of the shutdowns on
the economy through an emphasis on small businesses, possibly
building a narrative to justify re-opening, a recent political priority.
This can be seen in context of the Trump administration’s concerted
efforts to push state and local governments to reopen businesses
and schools. We also note that Republicans consistently mention
China in their tweets about COVID-19, which is consistent with
the party’s recent anti-China rhetoric.
On the issue of George Floyd’s murder, we observe that both
parties mention his name alongside words like justice and police.
However, while Democrats linked this murder to the killings of
other Black individuals, and specifically named police brutality, we
see that Republicans speak much more of protests and violence.
Delving into the Republican discussion around ‘violence’, we see
that, in the two weeks immediately after the murder, Republicans
posted 272 tweets that included the term ‘violence’. Seventy-three
of these referred to Floyd by name. These tweets largely included
condemnations of the murder, but would then pivot to criticizing
perceived rioting, violence and looting. In the three subsequent
weeks, there were 154 tweets about violence, but only six referred
to Floyd by name. This indicates a shift in narrative, away from
an emphasis on Floyd’s murder and towards a wider discussion of
systemic racism and American heritage, including the defacing and
removal of Confederate symbols and statues.
With regards to Black Lives Matter, we see that there are a number of Democratic tweets containing the hashtag, but no significant
co-occurrences .This may point to the lack of a clear agenda on
how to address or respond to calls for anti-racist action.While there
are insufficient Republican tweets to draw meaningful conclusions.
This in itself is suggestive, indicating that the phrase in the hashtag #BlackLivesMatter is not one with which Republicans want to
associate.
Finally, we analyzed tweets with terms ‘defund’ and ‘police’ to
examine the Republican position further. Of the 321 tweets posted

COVID, BLM, and the polarization of US politicians on Twitter

after May 25 that contained these terms, 307 were posted by Republicans, either criticizing the growing ‘#DefundThePolice’ campaign,
defending law enforcement, or criticizing Democratic opponents
for supporting police defunding. The only tweets by Democrats
that contained these terms appeared to distance themselves from
the campaign - defending themselves from allegations by Republicans that they were in favor of it, or bluntly stating that they
were against defunding the police. One exception was a tweet by
Congresswoman Rashida Tlaib in full support, made significant by
its rarity. Thus, we see that politicians at large, across both parties,
did not show support for this campaign, despite its centrality in the
anti-racist discourse.

REFERENCES
[1] Nezar AlSayyad and Muna Guvenc. 2015. Virtual uprisings: On the interaction
of new social media, traditional media coverage and urban space during the
âĂŸArab SpringâĂŹ. Urban Studies 52, 11 (2015), 2018–2034.
[2] Kai Arzheimer. 2015. The afd: Finally a successful right-wing populist eurosceptic
party for germany? West European Politics 38, 3 (2015), 535–556.
[3] Annie Benveniste and Etienne Pingaud. 2016. Far-right movements in France:
The principal role of Front National and the Rise of Islamophobia. In The Rise of
the Far Right in Europe. Springer, 55–79.
[4] Shelley Boulianne. 2015. Social media use and participation: A meta-analysis of
current research. Information, communication & society 18, 5 (2015), 524–538.

arXiv’20, Bengaluru, India

[5] Manuela Caiani and Linda Parenti. 2009. The dark side of the web: Italian rightwing extremist groups and the Internet. South European Society and Politics 14, 3
(2009), 273–294.
[6] Gunn Enli. 2017. Twitter as arena for the authentic outsider: exploring the social
media campaigns of Trump and Clinton in the 2016 US presidential election.
European journal of communication 32, 1 (2017), 50–61.
[7] Libby Hemphill, Aron Culotta, and Matthew Heston. 2013. Framing in Social
Media: How the US Congress uses Twitter hashtags to frame political issues.
Available at SSRN 2317335 (2013).
[8] Sam Graham-Felsen Hughes, Kate Allbright-Hannah, Scott Goodstein, Steve
Grove, Randi Zuckerberg, Chloe Sladden, and Brittany Bohnet. 2010. Obama
and the power of social media and technology. The European Business Review
(May-June 2010) (2010), 16–21.
[9] James Katz, Michael Barris, and Anshul Jain. 2013. The social media president:
Barack Obama and the politics of digital engagement. Springer.
[10] Habibul Haque Khondker. 2011. Role of the new media in the Arab Spring.
Globalizations 8, 5 (2011), 675–679.
[11] Daniel Kreiss. 2012. Acting in the public sphere: The 2008 Obama campaign’s
strategic use of new media to shape narratives of the presidential race. In Media,
movements, and political change. Emerald Group Publishing Limited, 195–223.
[12] Emily Metzgar and Albert Maruggi. 2009. Social media and the 2008 US presidential election. Journal of New Communications Research 4, 1 (2009).
[13] Sriram Mohan. 2015. Locating the âĂĲInternet HinduâĂİ Political Speech and
Performance in Indian Cyberspace. Television & New Media 16, 4 (2015), 339–345.
[14] David Talbot. 2008. How Obama really did it. Technology Review 111, 5 (2008),
78–83.
[15] Ruth Wodak and Michał Krzyżanowski. 2017. Right-wing populism in Europe &
USA. Journal of Language and Politics 16, 4 (2017), 471–484.

arXiv’20, Bengaluru, India

Anmol Panda, Divya Siddarth, and Joyojeet Pal

Figure 1: Tweet and retweet data of key members of US Congress on Covid19 (InText category)

Figure 2: Tweet and retweet data of key members of US Congress on George Floyd’s murder (InText category)

COVID, BLM, and the polarization of US politicians on Twitter

arXiv’20, Bengaluru, India

Figure 3: Tweet and retweet data of key members of US Congress on BLM (InText category)

arXiv’20, Bengaluru, India

Anmol Panda, Divya Siddarth, and Joyojeet Pal

Figure 4: Word clouds of tweets relating to Covid19 by the two main parties (top) and word clouds of tweets with hashtags that
relate to Covid19 (bottom)

COVID, BLM, and the polarization of US politicians on Twitter

arXiv’20, Bengaluru, India

Figure 5: Word clouds of tweets relating to George Floyd by the two main parties (top) and word clouds of tweets with hashtags
that relate to George Floyd (bottom)

arXiv’20, Bengaluru, India

Anmol Panda, Divya Siddarth, and Joyojeet Pal

Figure 6: Word clouds of tweets relating to Black Lives Matter by the two main parties (top) and word clouds of tweets with
hashtags that relate to Black Lives Matter (bottom)

