Balancing freedoms, rights and responsibilities during COVID in US:
a study of anti- and pro-restriction discourse
Centre for Democratic Engagement, University of Leeds, 4 August 2020
Gillian Bolsover
University of Leeds
g.bolsover@leeds.ac.uk
Abstract
Countries across the world have instituted unprecedented restrictions on freedom of movement,
privacy and individual rights to control the spread of COVID-19. These measures tend to have
been derived from communally orientated East Asian cultures. The way that culturally relevant
concepts of rights and freedoms underpin COVID restrictions in democratic and individually
orientated countries remains unknown. This data memo addresses this issue through analysis
of pro- and anti-restriction discourse on social media in the US. It finds that anti-social and
economic restriction discourse more frequently articulates rights and freedoms, based on ideas
of inviolable rights to freedom of movement or freedom of economic activity or a cost-benefit
analysis that places economic activity over public health. Pro-social and economic restriction
discourse less frequently mentions rights and freedoms, instead supporting restrictions as
following state and medical advice and out of deference and respect to medical professionals.
Discourse is highly polarised and divisive and articulated largely through established political
identity positions. It is suggested that more attention is paid to discussions of balancing rights
and freedoms in COVID control restrictions. To convince opposers of restrictions, supporters
of restrictions should base arguments around communal rights and positive freedoms. It is
also important to critically evaluate whether and how these perspectives need to be adapted to
be appropriate and resonant in democratic and individualistic countries.
Restricting rights and freedoms to fight
COVID
COVID-19, a pandemic with recorded cases in
almost every country, was first identified in the
Chinese city of Wuhan in December 2019. In late
January, with human-to-human transmission
confirmed and facing the Chinese New Year
travel period, China instituted an unprecedented
lockdown of Wuhan and the wider Hubei
Province (BBC, 2020a). Hubei's 60 million
residents were subject to strict lockdown
measures, with individuals forbidden to leave
their apartments without permission and
community officials delivering goods and
medication. A variety of enforcement methods
were employed across China with some localities
financially compensating those who reported
others who broke lockdown rules and many
localities using phone apps to track the movement
of citizens both within and between jurisdictions
(Feng & Chen, 2020).

As the virus has spread across the globe, many
other affected countries have instituted similar
kinds of restrictions on privacy and freedom of
movement to control the spread of the disease. In
Spain, citizens were not allowed to leave their
homes, except for work or buying essential
supplies and medicines (BBC, 2020b). For six
weeks Spanish children under the age of 14 were
not allowed out of the house (Hedgecoe, 2020). In
France, individuals had to carry a completed paper
or app-based declaration that stated one's reasons
(from an approved list) for being in public and
were subject to fines if they could not produce this
declaration (Broom, 2020). Various degrees of
restriction have been instituted in almost every
affected country.
These measures represent unprecedented tradeoffs between different kinds of rights and
freedoms, including economic v. public health
consequences, freedom of movement v. freedom
from disease, protecting vulnerable members of
society v. restricting children's access to education,

1

socialisation and play. Notably these measures
were first employed in China, where an
authoritarian state and collectively orientated
culture, would tend to lead to different ways of
balancing rights and freedoms compared to
democratic and individually orientated societies.
Different states have also made different choices
in terms of the extent to which balancing risks has
been made the responsibility of individual citizens.
Sweden initially chose not to impose restrictions,
with prime minister, Stefan Löfven arguing that
the government could not legislate and ban
everything but rather that individuals should take
responsibility for their own health and the health
of the community, using their own common sense
to regulate their behaviours (Orange, 2020).
Similarly, when the UK moved from the slogan
"Stay at Home" to "Stay Alert" some argued that
this was an attempt to shift responsibility, blame
and the burden of managing these risks and
restrictions from the state to individuals (Jones,
2020).
These debates have been particularly prominent in
the US, the country most affected by the virus with
almost 4 million cases and 145,000 deaths as of 24
July 2020 (CDC, 2020). Coronavirus responses
have been piecemeal in the US, showcasing a lack
of clarity about whether the federal or state
government is responsible and with President
Donald Trump ordering states that have imposed
restrictions to reopen their economies (Selin,
2020).
With an individualistic culture, a high proportion
of libertarian supporters and a constitution
strongly protecting individual freedoms, the US
has seen several major protests against state-level
economic and social restrictions to prevent the
spread of COVID-19. A particularly notable
protest occurred in Michigan on 30 April, when
hundreds of armed protestors entered the capitol
building during a debate over Democratic
governor Gretchen Whitmer's request to extend
the emergency powers that underpinned the state's
stay-at-home measures (Beckett, 2020). Photos of
heavily armed protestors in combat gear inside the
state capitol kicked off a discussion in the US
about how rights and freedoms were being
balanced in local and national responses to the
COVID pandemic.

Balancing rights and freedoms in political
thought and discussion
A commonly used distinction in political thought
is the difference between negative and positive
liberty, or freedom from and freedom to (Berlin,
1969). In this dichotomy, the negative concept of
liberty is understood as the freedom to act without
interference (such as freedom of assembly or
freedom of speech). In contrast, the positive
concept of liberty is understood as the freedom
from a source of control or interference (such as
freedom from discrimination or freedom from
violence)1. Heated political debates often arise
over how negative and positive freedoms are
balanced, such as between the right to bear arms
in the US and the right to be free of violence or
between the right to freedom of speech and the
right to be free from hateful attacks.
Public discussions around coronavirus responses
have also often discussed the balancing of
economic and public health (or welfare) rights,
with lockdowns to control the disease having a
negative impact on economic activity (Portes,
2020). A third pole of these debates are individual
human rights to privacy and freedom of
movement, which are also negatively impacted by
COVID-controlling measures. Commentators
have spoken out against hastily constructed
movement tracking and content tracing initiatives
that many fear will represent a permanent
encroachment on individual rights and spill over
into non-COVID uses (EFF, 2020).
This type of right's balancing has long been a
concern for scholars of Chinese politics, with
Chinese political systems seen as prioritising
welfare rights (such as freedom from hunger and
poverty) over individual human rights (such as
freedom of speech and freedom of movement)
(Perry, 2008; Zhou, 2010). China, and other East
Asian cultures, are also seen as collective, more
willing to restrict individual liberty and freedom
to protect community health (Hofstede et al.,
2010). These countries also have a much stronger
emphasis on protection of the elderly through the
Confucian concept of filial piety.
China's authoritarian state also has a political and
practical system that facilitates COVID
restrictions, with an existing infrastructure for
tracking that other countries are only now trying
2

to build to respond to COVID. There are existing
controls on freedom of movement in China
through the household registration (Hukou)
system as well as the world's most advanced
system of technological surveillance and control.
While there has been little debate about COVID
restrictions in China, the implementation of
restrictions has triggered intense debates in
democratic contexts, particularly in the US with
its individual and rights-orientated political
system and fragmented federal system. These
debates have played out across traditional media,
through numerous anti-lockdown protests and on
social media, which individuals increasingly rely
on to get their political information, express their
opinions about politics and organise collective
political action. Given how new and
unprecedented these restrictions have been, public
opinion and reaction to these initiatives (as well as
deeper opinions on how rights and freedoms
should be balanced in a global pandemic) are as
yet unknown.
Research Approach
Responding to this provocation, this data memo
will present research into how individuals are
discussing the balancing of rights and freedoms in
the context of COVID within the US. In order to
do this, the research will focus on discourse on the
social media platform Twitter. Although Twitter
is not the largest social media platform in the US,
it is the one most focused on news and current
affairs. It is also the most open major social media
platform and, therefore, an appropriate venue for
studying a public discourse ecosystem rather than
communications within delineated groups.
There has been some survey research about
people's opinions in this area, such as work from
the Pew Research Centre that found 60% of US
respondents thought that if the government
tracked people’s locations through their cellphone,
it wouldn’t make much of a difference in limiting
the spread of COVID-19 (Auxier, 2020) and
Associated Press polling that found 80% of US
respondents supported measures that advise
people to stay at home and limit social interactions
to 10 of fewer people (Rambaran, 2020). However,
while these surveys provide a quantified
assessment of opinions in the population, they
cannot encapsulate the landscape of debates nor

what articulation of a balance between different
rights and freedoms underlies the opinions people
express in these surveys. An analysis of social
media can help answer these questions.
Given the unprecedented and fast-moving nature
of COVID policies and practices, it is extremely
important to understand how members of the
public are reacting to these policies and how their
reactions are underpinned by different costbenefit analyses of how rights and freedoms
should be balanced in this circumstance. In order
to address this question and to contribute to
ongoing discussions about this issue, this data
memo will present analysis of discussion on
Twitter data in the US during the week of the 27
April through 5 May. This week-long period was
selected as it contained the 30 April Michigan
state capitol protest.
Many research projects intending to monitor
social media discourse on Twitter collect data
from within a group of pre-selected hashtags and
keywords. However, this strategy risks missing
emergent or unselected topics. It is thus severely
limited in its ability to speak to the body of online
discourse, particularly during fast-moving events,
and is subject to significant researcher bias based
on the selection of hashtags and keywords to
follow. To avoid this limitation, this project
collected a sample of data from all trending topics
within the US during the study period.
Using custom Python scripts to interface with the
Twitter API, the project collected the most recent
100 tweets associated with each of the top 50
trending topics in the 64 locations for which
Twitter collates trends (including one for the
entire country) every 15 minutes during the target
period: 27 April through 5 May 2020. This data
collection captured 3,421 unique trending topics
across the week-long period.
A content analysis was then undertaken of the 200
most popular of these trends to determine their
topical content, based on the majority of tweets
made within that trend during the time-period. The
topical coding scheme used an established coding
frame for social media posts developed by the
researcher and used in previous studies in the US
and China (Bolsover, 2017, 2018) and in previous
research about COVID in the US (Bolsover &
Tokitsu Tizon, 2020).
3

Within the top 200 trends, 38 (19%) concerned
COVID, of which 28 (14%) were political
commentary on COVID policies and practices.
Intercoder reliability tests were performed on a set
of trends collected using the same method during
a different period: 23 – 26 April (Bolsover &
Tokitsu Tizon, 2020). Percentage agreement for
being about COVID was 93.8% with a Kappa of
77.8%. Percentage agreement for being political
commentary on COVID policies and practices
was 96.7%2. These reliabilities are well within
established appropriate ranges for this type of
research (Lombard et al., 2002).
Out of these top 200 trends, only one trend
concerned anti-lockdown protests anywhere in the
US. For this reason, in addition to assessing the
most popular trending topics, we briefly
considered each of the 3,421 trends to assess
whether it concerned anti- or pro-lockdown
discourse or the protests in Michigan specifically.
We then randomly selected 100 tweets from
within each of four groups of trending topics:
• the 27 trends about COVID policies and
practices from within the top 200 trends
(excluding the one about anti-lockdown
protests);
• the five trends from within the whole dataset
that were specifically designed to express antilockdown messages;
• the three trends from within the whole dataset
that were specifically designed to express prolockdown messages;
• the three trends from within the whole dataset
that specifically concerned the Michigan state
capitol protests.
Table 1: Tweet dataset for analysis
No. of
trends
COVID
policies and
practices
Antilockdown
trends
Prolockdown
trends
Michigan
protest trends

No. of tweets
analysed

27

Total no.
tweets in
trends
467,709

5

20,413

100

3

32,382

100

3

11,691

100

100

This spread of 400 tweets across four different
groups of trends was designed to provide a picture
of the general nature of commentary on COVID
policies and practices on US Twitter, specific proand anti-lockdown discourse and discourse about
the Michigan protests. We then analyse these
posts to understand how individuals expressed
their opinions of how rights and freedoms should
be balanced, and indeed, which rights and
freedoms deserve discussion.
Overview of pro- and anti- lockdown attitudes
Firstly, it should be noted that, as shown in Table
1, there was more activity in openly pro-lockdown
trends than in openly anti-lockdown trends.
However, this activity is not necessarily
indications of actual levels of support as the
analysis of tweets from within these groups shows
significant pro-lockdown activity in antilockdown trends and vice versa.
It is also important to note that not all posts from
within these trends concerned the coronavirus.
From the general COVID policies and practices,
only 40 (out of 100) concerned COVID. From
within anti-lockdown trends this was 98; prolockdown 72 and Michigan protest 66. The fact
that irrelevant content was much more common in
the more generalised, more popular trending
topics has interesting implications for future
research using the search function of the Twitter
API to collect posts on a certain topic3.
Trends specifically about the Michigan protests
evidenced the largest number of posts articulating
ideas of rights and freedoms (59 out of 100
examined posts). Posts in anti-lockdown hashtags
also contained numerous posts articulating ideas
of rights and freedoms (41 out of 100). However,
ideas of rights and freedoms were less commonly
articulated in posts in pro-lockdown hashtags (8)
or in posts in trends concerning commentary on
COVID policies and practices (18). This suggests
that pro-lockdown messages may not be being
articulated in terms of rights and freedoms (such
as the right to a safe workplace or freedom from
dangerous disease).
Although the pro- and anti-lockdown keyword
sets clearly articulated a position, in actuality
support for restrictions to control the spread of
COVID was mixed across all the four groups
4

examined. Within the 100 posts in trends
commenting on COVID policies and practices,
support and opposition of restrictions was fairly
evenly balanced; seven posts supported
restrictions on social activity, nine restrictions on
economic activity and four restrictions on political
activity. In contrast, eight opposed restrictions on
social activity, 13 opposed restrictions on
economic activity and seven opposed restrictions
on political activity.
Within anti-lockdown hashtags, more posts
opposed restrictions, but with a significant
proportion that supported restrictions; 31 opposed
restrictions on social activity, 32 opposed
restrictions on economic activity and ten opposed
restrictions on political activity. In contrast, 14
posts supported restrictions on social activity, 15
restrictions on economic activity and one
restrictions on political activity. We see that the
focus of these discussions was on economic and
social restrictions, rather than political restrictions,
despite that fact that discussions about the right to
protest and about potential impacts on the
upcoming 2020 election have been prominent in
state and traditional media discourse.
Within pro-lockdown hashtags, there was less
balance between supportive and opposing posts,
with the bulk of posts supporting restrictions and
a few posts opposing restrictions; 30 posts
supported restrictions on social activity, 27
restrictions on economic activity and two
restrictions on political activity. In contrast, five
posts supported restrictions on social activity, five
restrictions on economic activity and one
restrictions on political activity.
Within trends concerning the Michigan protests
specifically, there was more pro-restriction than
anti-restriction content, with a sizeable minority
opposing restrictions; 17 posts supported
restrictions on social activity, 18 restrictions on
economic activity and 24 restrictions on political
activity. In contrast, seven posts supported
restrictions on social activity, nine restrictions on
economic activity and eight restrictions on
political activity. The focus on political activity
here, compared to little discussion in other trends,
was largely centred on the right to protest and
forms of legitimate protest. However, although
these data can provide a broad overview of
attitudes towards these restrictions on social

media it is necessary to look at the content of these
posts to understand how balances of rights and
freedoms were being articulated.
The meaning of freedom
Across the dataset of 400 posts, 61 were opposed
to either economic or social restrictions or both.
Of those posts that articulated this opposition in
terms of rights and freedoms, there were two clear
groups. The first group expressed these views
based on a conception of fundamental human
rights, centred around freedom of movement. The
second groups expressed these views in terms of
economic rights.
Posts in the first group expressed anti-lockdown
opinions according to an idea of inviolable
freedoms and rights, understood as a freedom of
movement. One post likened Michigan governor
Gretchen Whitmer to Hitler. This concept was
closely linked to ideas of patriotism. Pro- and antilockdown voices labelled the Michigan capitol
protestors through a similar lens, as either
Michigan patriots or Michigan terrorists, which
will be discussed in more detail later. This
approach to the virus centred around specific
definitions of America or what it means to be
American, such as:
So if you don’t do exactly as we say in #Chicago
and #StayHome you will ‘go to jail, period’ and
we will treat you like a criminal. However,
criminals are being released from jail because of
possible #COVID infections This is not the
America I remember - what has happened?
#OpenCalifornia #opencalifornianow it’s time
people of the great nation of America to open your
doors and not let a silly virus stop you!
I’m tired of pastors getting arrested for having
church services I’m sick of hard-working
Americans getting ticketed for going to a park I’m
tired of good patriots getting destroyed while
actual criminals walk freely. It’s time for Justice.
JUSTICE & TRUTH will UNITE America
Within these posts we see ideas that the responses
to control the coronavirus are un-American, unpatriotic and have targeted American values (such
as freedom of religion and freedom of movement).
These posts clearly see individual freedom of
movement as the ultimate expression of freedom
5

and rights, indeed this was what was meant by
rights and freedoms in this context.
The left is literally trying to Villainize Michigan
Protesters because they are standing up for their
rights, and are tired of their Governor nullifying
the Bill of Rights.. Anyone who's against these
people standing up to Tyranny is an Enemy to the
Republic! #MichiganProtest
In post below, #halfwhitmer is a reference to
Gretchen Whitmer the Governor of Michigan
whose attempts to extend the emergency bill that
allowed stay at home orders the Michigan capitol
protests targeted.
#halfwhitmer just doesn’t know when to stop!!
Enough is enough!! #openmichigannow She
wants to be considered for VP & doesn’t care
what she’ll destroy to get it!! Fellow
Michiganders we need to fight for our rights!!
#MichiganProtest
#MichiganPatriots
#FreeMichigan #VoteRed2020
This group of posts also exhibited ideas that the
Coronavirus was being exaggerated for political
purposes (by liberals or the Democratic Party) and
linked this in a rather unspecified way to a
Chinese political manoeuvring.
China has a plan.
#ExtendTheLockdown

Get the Liberals to

The Democrats milked this Pandemic like a cow
and got away with loading the Bills meant to help
We the People with all the PORK they couldn't get
on a stand alone Bill. If any American ever
believed they truly care about them, they certainly
shouldn't now.
Several posts exhibited polarised political
positions, such as linking the lockdown to debates
about the right to choose to terminate a pregnancy.
This suggests that debate about appropriate
coronavirus responses has been polarised into
existing political camps in the US, with opinions
becoming an identity position rather than a debate
informed by evidence and reason.
Does anyone else find it ironic that we are all on
lockdown, and businesses are closed, just to try
and save lives, yet abortion clinics are still open?
#openohionow

This identity positioning was also evidenced in
pro-lockdown tweets.
Republicans claim to be pro-life while continuing
to offer elder Americans up for sacrifice. You
cannot make this up.
Across the posts there was a high level of
divisiveness. Out of the 400 posts, 166 appeared
to be attempting to prevent others from speaking
or undermine the value of their words; 95 saw
distinct opposing groups in society (other than
political parties) and 91 directed hate against one
of these groups. Thus, 96% of posts that saw
distinct opposing groups in society (91 out of 95)
directed hate at the opposing group.
This divisiveness was similar across pro- and antilockdown content; 39% of posts that were antirestriction saw distinct opposing groups and all
but one of these posts directed hate at that group
(or groups) (23 out of 24). For pro-restriction
posts, 40% saw distinct groups and all but one of
these posts directed hate at that group (or groups)
(29 out of 30). Hate direction from one side was
much more common within the hashtags that
represent the ideas of that side; 65% of hate
direction in anti-restriction posts occurred in the
anti-restriction hashtags and 52% of hate direction
in pro-restriction posts occurred in pro-restriction
hashtags. This suggests that posters are more
likely to express hateful content when they feel
they are speaking to or within groups and topics
that support those views. Genuine discussion may,
therefore, be better found in more neutral hashtags.
However, as previously mentioned these hashtags
and keywords contained much less COVID
relevant content, which would be detrimental to
the ability to engage in cross-opinion discussion
in these spaces.
Posters also evidenced high levels of partisanship.
Out of the 61 posts that were anti-social or
economic restrictions, 48% were made by
accounts that were right-wing partisan individuals,
who post content that is overwhelmingly
dedicated to supporting right-wing parties and
policy positions and with the identity presentation
of the account obviously aligned as a partisan
supporter. Out of the 75 posts that were pro-social
or economic restrictions, 68% were made by leftwing partisan individual accounts. Interestingly,
20% of anti-social or economic restrictions posts
were made by left-wing partisan individual
6

accounts. This again suggests that a large
proportion of those who post and engage in debate
on these issues on Twitter are fighting for their
chosen partisan position rather than engaging in
genuine discussion and debate.
In sum, in this first group of posts, anti-lockdown
sentiment is expressed in terms of a negative
conception of rights and in particular an equation
of ideas of freedom and rights specifically to a
freedom of movement. These posts understand
restrictions to control the coronavirus as unpatriotic and fundamentally un-American. This
fits into established politically polarised positions,
rather than ongoing debates based on evidence
and reason. These posts included accusations of
political manoeuvring and conspiracy by liberals,
the democratic party and China. They were also
linked to pre-existing identity position debates
such as Christian identity, abortion and (as will be
discussed later) gun ownership. Posts, in general,
evidenced high levels of divisiveness and hate,
particularly within hashtags that specifically
expressed a polarised position on the debate.
Economic calculations
A second group of anti-lockdown posters
expressed their opinions through a focus on
economic and welfare rights, specifically the right
to work, to shelter and to freedom from hunger
and poverty. Although this group also evidenced
significant political polarisation and political
positioning, more posts in this group evidenced an
approach based on balance and reason, coming to
the conclusion that the economic harms of
restrictions outweighed the public health harms of
disease.
I just wanna be able to go to work man. Bein
poor sucks. #ReOpenOregon
Don’t bankrupt hospitals, dry up our food supply,
and destroy the lives and the health of Americans.
#ReOpenOregon now!
It is important, however, to place these posts
within a political context. Although there is an
unavoidable economic impact of restrictions, who
is most greatly impacted is a matter of political
policy. Some posts in this group pointed out that
large and online businesses were thriving in these

conditions, sometimes alleging conspiracy and
corruption in coronavirus restriction efforts.
Had to stop at the local Walmart today. It was
PACKED. Just goes to show you how unethical
this lockdown is. I can go to a packed Walmart to
buy art supplies but I cant go to the tiny local art
store to buy art supplies. The disproportionate
hit to small businesses is criminal.
Another post shared a headline, image and link to
the blog of conspiracy theorist David Icke: Jeff
Bezos’s Net Worth Has Increased by $24 Billion
During the alleged 'Covid-19 Pandemic.' The
image showed Amazon founder and CEO Jeff
Bezos smiling broadly with the words:
Lockdown increases Bezos wealth by tens of
billions, who would have guessed that Amazon
would benefit from hundreds of millions of other
businesses closing down worldwide – many never
to reopen? The Bezos-owned Washington Posts
says "Lockdowns must continue."
A pro-restriction voice
sentiment in another way.

expressed

similar

It’s wild to me that people think lockdowns are
corporate/government
conspiracies.
The
conspiracy you should be worried about is one
where everyone is told that it’s safe to resume
daily life as usual, when it’s not, because fucking
Walmart is worried about their bottom line.
Although there is some conspiracy content to
these posts, there is an important truth here that
some businesses have thrived and profited during
COVID restrictions. Many of these have been
large businesses that as individual entities are
tautologously more 'essential'; tend to have larger
resources to enable them to implement distancing
and hygiene restrictions; and tend to have larger
buildings that can adapt to social distancing
restrictions in a way that small operations are
much less able to. The owners and decisionmakers
in these businesses are also at a greater distance to
those who undertake practical labour and thus
(although this is clearly not true of all businesses)
may be more willing to subject employees to risk
by keeping the business open. Whether those most
able and those who have continued to grow and
profit during COVID pay more to recovery and
aid is very much an open question.
7

However, it is important to note a contradiction in
the extension of the arguments made in this group
of posts, if discussions around COVID responses
continue to adhere to polarised identity positions.
The following post demonstrates this perspective.
Sharing a link to the far right4 Gateway Pundit
with the headline 'JUST IN: Northern California
County Defies Governor Newsom, Reopens
Churches, Hair Salons, Schools and Restaurants',
the post states:
Wonderful. The people have had it with the
socialist tyrants. Revolution is brewing. But I say
FIRST we go to Supreme Court and test their
violations of US Constitution. No Governor has
right to order u or me to shut our business down.
Within polarised positions, the argument against
social and economic restrictions to fight COVID
aligns with the perspective that state aid to assist
those most affected and most unable to weather
these restrictions is unconstitutional and
unsupportable socialism. These positions are
underpinned by a strongly individualistic
interpretation of rights and freedoms and the role
of governance.
Individual vs. collective rights
Within the anti-economic restriction posts, several
posts argued that only those who advocate
restrictions should be bound by them, expressing
a wholly individualised approach.
No one who wants to prevent others from working
should be allowed to buy anything. Period.
There’s nothing magic about a grocery store or
the instacart gig worker that brings groceries to
you that’s any safer than a hundred other kinds of
work. #ReopenOregon #ReopenAmerica
If you’re saying we should #ExtendTheLockdown
will you sign this pledge? Wuhan Flu Lockdown
Supporter. To demonstrate my commitment to
suppressing the freedoms of my fellow Americans
and robbing them of the dignity of earning a day's
wage, I make the following binding unilateral
contract: (1) I pledge to quit my current job so that
someone in a "non-essential" profession can take
it over. (2) If I can still keep a roof over my head,
I pledge to abandon my home and to donate it to
a family that is losing their home. (3) If I can still

keep my car, I pledge to give that care to someone
who has lost theirs. (4) If I can still put food on my
table, I pledge to give that food to someone who is
starving.
This perspective is, perhaps, best expressed in a
clip from a video interview of the Michigan
capitol protestors shares by one poster, who states:
Michigan
Patriots
are
Awesome
!🔥
#Trump2020 #MichiganProtest
In the video shared by the poster, a woman argues:
I know there's people that are compromised
immune-wise and people that are older, weaker
and they can't take it. They are free to stay in their
homes. That's what freedom is. This isn't freedom.
Here we see a primacy of individual rather than
collective rights. This view has a limited and
negative view of social responsibility (i.e. a
responsibility not to interfere with others’
freedoms) rather than a positive view of social
responsibility as a set of actions to protect and aid
vulnerable members of the community. This is a
major reason why it is important to evaluate and
discuss COVID responses as a balance of rights
and freedoms.
Lockdown restrictions have been successfully
implemented not just in China but in other
collectively orientated countries in East Asia that
share a Confucian history that places great stock
in the protection of elder members of the
community5. Mask wearing has also been
commonplace for many years in several East
Asian countries, in particular in dense urban areas,
where people wear masks to avoid infecting others
when they are feeling unwell6.
It is notable that only one of the 75 posts that
expressed support of economic or social
restrictions or both phrased this support around
ideas of social responsibility and protection of
vulnerable members of the community.
#DoNotOpenCalifornia OR ~~~ We need to
protect our loved ones. An image attached to the
post reads: I see a lot of people being like "I would
survive the coronavirus. I'm taking my chances".
The way I see it, yeah. I'd survive it. But I might
carry it to someone who wouldn’t. And that, folks,
is the problem.
8

Instead of positive freedoms and positive ideas of
social responsibility, posts that supported
economic or social restrictions tended either to
take a politically polarised view that assumed the
validity of restrictions as a foregone conclusion
(and often took those who opposed them as idiots)
or to phrase this support as a deference or act of
respect to doctors and the medical profession.
Lack of rights
supporting posts

discourse

in

restriction

The first main group of posts that supported
economic and social restrictions did so without
evidence or reference to a discussion of a balance
of rights and freedoms. There were a large number
of these posts (22 out of the 75 restrictionsupporting posts were selected as potential
examples). Typical posts of this type were:
ya'll better stop with this #opencalifornianow
bullshit, we're not ready to open for your fucking
hiking and beach selfies, stay the fuck at home and
wash your nasty hands
If you attended the #ReOpenOregon protest today
and you align with the proud boys, QANON,
boogaloo's or other flat Earth thinking mentality.
Fuck off and unfollow me. PS tell me your leaving
so I can block you on the way out
This again demonstrates the extent to which this
issue (at least in the US) has become a politically
polarised position issue position, which is largely
not amenable to debate. It is important to note that
this kind of issue polarisation is incompatible with
the ideas of community responsibility and
communal rights that underpin the logic of
restrictions to control the spread of COVID.
Another main group of posts within restriction
supporting posts largely phrased their support
around respect for or deference to healthcare
workers.
My good friend is an emergency room nurse in
Central California. She just saw that
#opencalifornianow was trending and begged me
to ask my followers to get #DoNotOpenCalifornia
to spread. She said it’s horrific there.
stop with #opencalifornianow. just because
**only** 1,800 people DIED so far? we've spoken

to so many doctors, hospitals, the WHO, and they
are SLAMMED, working beyond overtime. do not
make this worse for your fucking pinkberry and
hiking selfies, stay in your fuckin house.
#DoNotOpenCalifornia Show some fucking
respect for the Drs, nurses, and other health care
personnel who are destroying themselves
physically and emotionally to keep COVID-19
patients alive!! Don't flood them with more sick
and dying patients. SO SELFISH!!
While it is impossible to deny that respect and
support is due to healthcare workers at this time,
the use of this as the main reason for support of
social and economic restrictions risks sidelining
some of the important rights and freedoms-based
arguments in support of these restrictions. One
important reason for these restrictions was to
prevent health services from being overwhelmed;
however, community social responsibilities and
positive freedoms (such as the right to be free
from disease and the right not to be exposed to
undue risk in the workplace) were also important
considerations. These arguments are perhaps
better counters to the individual freedom-based
arguments of freedom of movement focused
supporters. The focus in justification for these
restrictions on preventing health services from
being overwhelmed has also led to
counterarguments that posit exaggeration and
hoax in the threat and level of COVID deaths:
Better question, why have flu deaths gone
drastically down? It can’t be because hospitals
are being dishonest to get more Covid-19 money,
can it? #OpenOhioNow
California has no Covid-19 Outbreak. Out of a
Population of 38 Million only 1,800 deaths, most
are from nursing homes! #OpenCaliforniaNow
In sum, the 75 posts from the dataset that
supported economic and/or social restrictions to
control the spread of COVID in the US were less
likely to express their support as an argument
about balancing rights and freedoms, or even as
pertaining to rights and freedoms. In comparison,
the 61 posts that opposed economic and/or social
restrictions more frequently expressed their views
either according to ideas of an individual's
inviolable right to freedom of movement,
individual's inviolable right to economic activity
9

or a cost-benefit calculation that favoured
economic activity over protecting public health.
In total, 77% of the posts that opposed economic
and/or social restrictions articulated ideas of rights
and freedoms compared to 43% of posts that
supported economic and/or social restrictions.
This disparity is potentially because those who
oppose these restrictions see themselves as
fighting the state and, as such, express themselves
according to the principles that underpin
governance. In contrast, those who support the
restrictions see themselves as following the advice
or orders of states and professionals and, as such,
do not make the arguments or counterarguments
for the support of these restrictions independently.

political activity that someone could register
opposition to economic or social restrictions. If
the need for restrictions restricts protest against
those restrictions, the rational, limits and paths to
effective alternatives need to be clearly
communicated. Ideas of patriots or terrorists
present foregone conclusions to that debate.

It might be more productive for debate, however,
if supporters expressed their views using language
of rights and freedoms (with media and opinions
leaders facilitating this discussion by discussing
the issues through this lens). This is important not
just around the issue of economic restrictions
where discussions of balance have tended to
centre but even more importantly around social
restrictions and discussions of individual vs.
community rights and the rights and freedoms an
individual gains as a member of a community.

A number of posts suggested that the kind of
protest engaged in was illegitimate political
activity (and that the individuals were not
protestors but terrorists).

Another aspect of this polarisation was the fact
that essentially all opposition to the Michigan
protests was seen through the lens of two
existingly polarised issues in American politics:
gun ownership and race. (Messages of support for
the protestors have largely already been covered
in previous sections.)

Protesters should carry signs, not semiautomatics.
#MichiganProtest
#MichiganProtest Heavily armed people storming
a government building is an attack, not a protest.
It is at the very least an act of intimidation, if not
terrorism.

Political rights and restrictions: Michigan case
This data memo has thus far discussed individual
expressions of support and opposition to
economic and social restrictions on Twitter and
the way in which these were expressed in terms of
different rights and freedoms. We also looked in
the dataset at expressions of support and
opposition for political restrictions. Many of these
discussions centered around the armed Michigan
capitol protests on 30 April, with 31 posts
expressing support for restrictions on political
activity and 26 opposition.
These posts demonstrated high levels of political
polarisation. The protests were viewed through
existing political lenses, with supporters referring
to the protestors as Michigan patriots and
opposers as Michigan terrorists. As such, debate
about these positions is largely precluded. Much
more so than social or economic restrictions, ideas
of political restrictions to fight COVID or the
impact of social restrictions on political activity
are an important issue that deserves much greater
attention. This is because it is only through

Dear #MichiganTerrorists You have a 1A right to
peaceably assemble You have NO right to storm a
State building with assault weapons, threaten
peace officers or Governor Whitmer. You have
NO right to infect others with COVID19. Arrest
these terorists!
Several posts suggested that this protest activity,
which they saw as illegitimate, was instigated by
the Republican Party and/or President Trump.
One post showed a screenshot of a tweet by
Trump saying LIBERATE MICHIGAN with the
caption
Anyone
know
where
the
#MichiganTerrorists could've gotten the idea to
storm the Capitol building?
Another wrote:
#Michiganders time to kick out the GOP. They are
fomenting
civil
disorder
and
hurting
Michiganders. Stand by #GovWhitmer and dump
#GOP and #DumpTrump2020

10

Supporters countered that it was, in fact,
democrats, liberals and left-wing groups who use
illegitimate protest techniques.
This is what Democrats do to protest. Break
windows, start fires and act like reckless criminal
vigilantes. Republicans in Michigan today
protested peacefully by occupying a building &
chanting “this is the peoples house” Big
difference. #MichiganProtest

rights of some groups are more infringed on that
the rights of others. This data memo has been
primarily concerned with articulations of balances
of rights and freedoms that would underlie equally
applied policies. However, this discussion of
rights and freedoms at a more theoretical level
would likely lead to greater discussion at the
practical level of their application and the
structural level of their interaction.

The dumbest talking point is that the
#MichiganProtest people are allowed to do this
because they're white conservatives. BLM staged
riots in multiple cities, set buildings on fire, looted.
Hardly any arrests. Antifa shuts down streets, hits
people with pipes. Hardly any arrests.

Limitations and further directions

This second post refers to the very common theme
in Michigan protest opposing posts that the rights
that were afforded to the protestors to protest
during COVID, to protest in the capitol building
and to carry weapons were racially (and to a lesser
extent politically) orientated. They argued that
these rights would not have been afforded if the
protestors were not white. Many posts made these
kinds of argument, of which some examples were:
As a man who identifies as both Black and Muslim,
I can guarantee that if I walked up into a State
building armed to the teeth with a gripe, my Black
Muslim ass would be shot on site, no questions
asked. #MichiganProtest
Ask a group of African Americans to attend the
legislature with high powered firearms and storm
the house floor.....suddenly the 2nd amendment
will be...flexible... #MichiganTerrorists
Armed white men are allowed to basically hold a
Governor hostage and they're treated like they
have rights while an unarmed Black child is
brutally attacked for having a tobacco product.
This
is
America.
#MichiganProtest
#MichiganTerrorists #COVID__19
These posts discussed rights and freedoms but did
so in terms of underlying and long-term issues of
racism and police brutality in the US, without any
mention of COVID. This touches on a greater
discussion (that is outside the bounds of this short
data memo) about how rights, freedoms and
responsibilities are unequally applied and that
structures and processes exist that mean that the

This data memo has presented an initial analysis
of levels of support and opposition to social,
economic and political restrictions to control the
spread and severity of COVID and how these
arguments have been articulated in relation to
rights and freedoms. An understanding of how
individuals articulate these positions is
particularly important in assessing, evaluating and
crafting policy in this unprecedented situation.
This research found a rough balance between
supporting and opposing opinions, although in
each case posts supporting restrictions
outnumbered posts opposing. In total, 68 posts
supported social restrictions, 69 economic
restrictions and 31 political restrictions. For
opposition, these were 51, 59 and 26, respectively.
Posts that opposed social, economic and/or
political restrictions were more likely to articulate
ideas of rights and freedoms: 75% of posts
compared to 50% of those that supported.
Supporters articulated this either as with equating
ideas of freedoms and rights to an inviolable right
to freedom of movement; inviolable right to
freedom of economic activity; or as an economic
balancing act that favoured a continuation of
economic activity over protecting public health. In
contrast, when opposers mentioned rights it was
overwhelmingly in the context of an uneven
application of rights and freedoms in relation to
the Michigan capitol protests. Posts supporting
restrictions on economic or social rights tended
either to justify this based on an assumptive
correctness of the restrictions (with those who
oppose being stupid or uninformed) or through
ideas of deference and protection of medical
professionals, upon whose shoulders treatment
and care of COVID patients falls.

11

An analysis of these posts finds that, like the
previously published analysis of health
misinformation (Bolsover & Tokitsu Tizon, 2020),
COVID is being approached in the US as an
identity issue, like abortion or gun ownership. The
language and discourse used precludes debate and
the provision of new evidence, perspectives or
proposals in this unprecedented and fast evolving
issue with many remaining unknowns.
This research is, of course, not without limitations.
It is based on a single week of analysis; a single
social media platform (Twitter), whose users do
not represent the wider US population; and only a
very small sample of the huge number of posts
made in relevant trending topics during the period
under consideration. The findings of this research
should not be an end-point but can, perhaps, form
a basis for broader and more in-depth research
going forward.
However, it is hoped that the findings and analysis
herein can form some temporary guidance and
indications for those who might hope that social
media could help understand public reactions to
restriction measures and the reasons underpinning
these reactions, and help facilitate information
sharing, debate and discussion.
The first major point here concerns how these
issues are discussed, particularly by supporters.
The idea of rights, freedoms and responsibilities
as a complicated balance is being lost in this
debate. Supporters would likely be more
successful in engaging in debates if they discussed
ideas of community rights and social
responsibilities. Arguments of following state and
official guidance are lost on those who see
individual rather than community rights and
COVID as a hoax by an establishment.
We should also pay more attention to the fact that
the rights and responsibilities that underpin
COVID restrictions are fundamentally based
around a collective or socially orientated set of
rights: freedom from disease, especially for the
most vulnerable; freedom from unprecedented
health consequences in ill-equipped workplaces;
collective individual changes of action to support
vulnerable members of society. These practical
attempts to limit the spread of COVID in Western
counties have largely been undertaken based on
practices first trialled in East Asian societies, with

stronger collective values. The local lockdown
model also originated in mainland China, where
there is a very strong existing state system of
wide-spread monitoring and enforcement.
To the extent that we want to discuss these
restrictions we need both to adopt and critically
evaluate these, somewhat less familiar, although
not foreign collective rights discourses. We
should learn how these arguments and
articulations are being deployed in these contexts,
while also engaging in debates about how these
arguments and articulations might need to be
modified in systems that are based on a different
cultural interpretation of rights and freedoms7.
This brings us to the second major point:
polarisation. These debates are precluded if
approaches to COVID are polarised along existing
political identity positions that are resistant to
evidence and debate. Rather than debating about
the people who hold these opinions (patriots or
terrorists, selfish idiots or sheep) and the people
who propose opinions and policies (democrats or
republicans), we need to focus in this fast-moving
and unprecedented situation on debating the deep
underlying principles, while remaining cognizant
and open to the new information that will
inevitably emerge.
This data memo has intended to provide a starting
point for these debates by approaching this issue
through a political science framework of different
kinds of rights, freedoms and responsibilities and
the many ways that these can be balanced and
structured in different perspectives, cultures and
contexts. It is hoped that this debate can be
continued by academics, media and individuals as
part of everyday political conversation.
Many hope that the debates and difficult choices
precipitated by COVID will lead to major changes
that will result in better societies, economies and
political systems. The theoretical debates about
balances of rights and freedoms undertaken here,
as well as the practical, structural and
intersectional application of these, will be
important in setting the foundation for any
positive societal changes that might be
precipitated by this difficult situation.
1

We note that some have contested this distinction, for
instance, MacCallum who argues that all freedom is
negative (i.e freedom from constraints) (MacCallum, 1967).

12

However, a deep discussion of these debates is outside the
bounds of this short data memo.
2
Given the prevalence of political commentary on COVID
policies and practices in the dataset, expected agreement for
this code was 94.4%. With such a high expected agreement,
percentage agreement and percentage agreement exceeding
expected agreement is a better measure of intercoder
reliability than measures such as Kappa, which are too
stringent in cases of very high expected agreement.
3
In previous research we have noted three reasons for
unrelated trends collected in the dataset. Firstly, this method
collects the most recent 100 tweets that would show up in a
search for the trending topic hashtag or keyword on Twitter.
However, Twitter often will show unrelated popular or
trending content alongside a search, which would also be
collected. Secondly, some keywords take in a variety of
information. For instance, the trending keyword
"michiganders" was coded as being about the Michigan
protest based on a majority of the content in the trend but
could have been used in the context of non-political, nonCOVID discussions. Lastly, irrelevant tweets also are
collected due to the practice of using trending hashtags and
words unrelated to the content of the tweet to gain exposure.
These results suggest that for more prominent trends the
extent of focus on the topic is less than for less prominent
trends. This might suggest the third explanation is most
accurate, as fraudulent hashtag or keyword users would tend
to focus on the most popular trends to spread their unrelated
messages. However, this explanation is unsatisfactory as a
reading of the selected tweets rarely shows this practice
occurring overtly. For instance, the tweet "Being friends
with me, You gotta understand I do not wanna talk
EVERYDAY 😂" was collected when the term "capitol"
was searched. There is no use of the word capitol or any
synonyms in the tweet, nor in the usernames, profiles or
descriptions of either the posting user or retweeting user.
This finding suggests the possibility that searches for more
popular trending queries might be more likely to include
other popular but unrelated information than searches for
less popular queries. Although it is impossible to know the
inner workings of the Twitter search queries, this would not
be illogical as someone searching for the keywords amazon,
america or biden (the three largest trends across the period)
would be more likely to be tolerant, or even appreciative, of
irrelevant content in their search results than someone
searching for less popular trends such as nypd, sonic and
bollywood, each of which only occurred once in one of the
64 US locations during the period.
4
In stating media positioning, we use the definition of
AllSides, which provides an assessment of media bias based
on multiple methods including blind surveys, editorial
review, third party and independent analysis and community
feedback on bias ratings.
5
Although outside the bounds of this short data memo, the
correlation of collectively orientated cultures and trust in the
state across the world to the nature and success of COVID
restriction policies would be fertile ground for future
research.
6
This is in contrast to mainland China were until more
recently mask wearing has been largely to protect oneself
from airborne pollutants.
7
This is of course entirely precluded by the worryingly
prevalent conspiracy theory that COVID was "invented" by
China for political purposes.

Acknowledgements
I wish to thank Emma Briones, Rhian Hughes and
Janet Tokitsu Tizon for their content analysis
work on these data; the University of Leeds
Strategic Research Investment Fund for helping
pay for Emma Briones' and Rhian Hughes' work
on the project; and the Laidlaw Scholarship
program for funding and facilitating Janet Tokitsu
Tizon's work on the project. I also wish to thank
Google for providing Cloud Computing research
credits that allowed data collection and processing
to be undertaken for this research at a time when
research funding has been severely curtained due
to COVID-related financial uncertainty.
References
Auxier, B. (2020, May 4). How Americans see
digital privacy issues amid the COVID-19
outbreak. PEW Research Centre.
https://www.pewresearch.org/facttank/2020/05/04/how-americans-see-digitalprivacy-issues-amid-the-covid-19-outbreak/
BBC. (2020a, January 23). China coronavirus:
Lockdown measures rise across Hubei
province. https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/worldasia-china-51217455
BBC. (2020b, March 15). Coronavirus: Spain
and France announce sweeping restrictions.
https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe51892477
Beckett, L. (2020, April 30). Armed protesters
demonstrate against Covid-19 lockdown at
Michigan capitol. The Guardian.
https://www.theguardian.com/usnews/2020/apr/30/michigan-protestscoronavirus-lockdown-armed-capitol
Berlin, I. (1969). Two concepts of liberty. In
Four Essays On Liberty (pp. 18–172). Oxford
University Press.
Bolsover, G. (2017). Technology and political
speech: Commercialisation, authoritarianism
and the supposed death of the Internet’s
democratic potential [University of Oxford].
https://ora.ox.ac.uk/objects/uuid:f63cffba-a1864a6c-af9cdbc9ac6d35fb/download_file?file_format=pdf
&safe_filename=__Bolsover_PhD_6_for%2Bp
rinting%2Band%2Bbinding.pdf&type_of_work
=Thesis
13

Bolsover, G. (2018). Slacktivist USA and
Authoritarian China? Comparing Two Political
Public Spheres With a Random Sample of
Social Media Users: Microblog Users in the
United States and China. Policy & Internet,
10(4). https://doi.org/10.1002/poi3.186
Bolsover, G., & Tokitsu Tizon, J. (2020). Social
Media and Health Misinformation during the
US COVID Crisis. Centre for Democratic
Engagement, University of Leeds.
https://cde.leeds.ac.uk/wpcontent/uploads/sites/93/2020/08/20200722Social-Media-and-Health-Misinformationduring-the-US-COVID-Crisis.pdf
Broom, D. (2020). People in France can’t leave
home without this permit during the COVID-19
outbreak. World Economic Forum.
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2020/03/peop
le-in-france-can-t-leave-home-without-thispermit-during-the-covid-19-outbreak/
CDC, C. for D. C. and P. (2020). Coronavirus
Disease 2019: Cases in the U.S.
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019ncov/cases-updates/cases-in-us.html
EFF. (2020). COVID-19 and Digital Rights.
Electronic Frontier Foundation.
https://www.eff.org/issues/covid-19
Feng, E., & Chen, A. (2020, February 21).
Restrictions And Rewards: How China Is
Locking Down Half A Billion Citizens. NPR.
https://text.npr.org/s.php?sId=806958341
Hedgecoe, G. (2020, April 26). Coronavirus:
Spain’s children run free from lockdown—But
not all. BBC.
https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe52409407
Hofstede, G., Hofstede, G. J., & Minkov, M.
(2010). Cultures and organizations: Software of
the mind; intercultural cooperation and its
importance for survival. McGraw-Hill.
Jones, O. (2020, May 14). The real message
behind ‘stay alert’: It’ll be your fault if
coronavirus spreads. The Guardian.
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2
020/may/14/stay-alert-coronavirus-blame
Lombard, M., Snyder-Duch, J., & Bracken, C. C.
(2002). Content analysis in mass
communication: Assessment and reporting of
intercoder reliability. Human Communication
Research, 28(4), 587–604.
MacCallum, G. (1967). Negative and Positive
Liberty. The Philosophical Review, 76(3), 312–
334.

Orange, R. (2020, March 28). As the rest of
Europe lives under lockdown, Sweden keeps
calm and carries on. The Guardian.
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/mar/
28/as-the-rest-of-europe-lives-under-lockdownsweden-keeps-calm-and-carries-on
Perry, E. J. (2008). Chinese Conceptions of:
From Mencius to Mao—and Now. Perspectives
on Politics, 6(01), 37–50.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1537592708080055
Portes, J. (2020, March 25). Don’t believe the
myth that we must sacrifice lives to save the
economy. The Guardian.
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2
020/mar/25/there-is-no-trade-off-between-theeconomy-and-health
Rambaran, V. (2020, April 22). Most Americans
support extending coronavirus stay-at-home
orders, poll finds. Fox News.
https://www.foxnews.com/us/americanssupport-extending-coronavirus-stay-at-homeorders
Selin, J. (2020, April 17). Trump versus the
states: What federalism means for the
coronavirus response. The Conversation.
https://theconversation.com/trump-versus-thestates-what-federalism-means-for-thecoronavirus-response-136361
Zhou, D. X. (2010). Measuring the meaning of
political concepts in Chinese online
deliberation. Avhandling, Hämtad, 3.

14

