arXiv:2008.11147v2 [cs.SE] 6 Jul 2021

A Tale of Two Cities: Software Developers Working from
Home During the COVID-19 Pandemic
DENAE FORD, Microsoft Research
MARGARET-ANNE STOREY, University of Victoria, Canada
THOMAS ZIMMERMANN, Microsoft Research
CHRISTIAN BIRD, Microsoft Research
SONIA JAFFE, Microsoft Corp.
CHANDRA MADDILA, Microsoft Research
JENNA L. BUTLER, Microsoft Research
BRIAN HOUCK, Microsoft Corp.
NACHIAPPAN NAGAPPAN, Facebook
The COVID-19 pandemic has shaken the world to its core and has provoked an overnight exodus of developers
that normally worked in an office setting to working from home. The magnitude of this shift and the factors
that have accompanied this new unplanned work setting go beyond what the software engineering community
has previously understood to be remote work. To find out how developers and their productivity were affected,
we distributed two surveys (with a combined total of 3,634 responses that answered all required questions)
—weeks apart to understand the presence and prevalence of the benefits, challenges, and opportunities to
improve this special circumstance of remote work. From our thematic qualitative analysis and statistical
quantitative analysis, we find that there is a dichotomy of developer experiences influenced by many different
factors (that for some are a benefit, while for others a challenge). For example, a benefit for some was being
close to family members but for others having family members share their working space and interrupting
their focus, was a challenge. Our surveys led to powerful narratives from respondents and revealed the scale at
which these experiences exist to provide insights as to how the future of (pandemic) remote work can evolve.

1

INTRODUCTION
Charles Dickens’ “A Tale of Two Cities” begins, “It was the best of times, it was the worst of
times.” Adapting Dickens’ line to leading an engineering team during the global pandemic,
I’d say “We’re doing very well, we’re barely hanging in there.”
— Shane O’Flynn [1]

Software engineering is a complex technical, knowledge-based task that requires focused, uninterrupted work [2] while still coordinating and collaborating with other developers and stakeholders [3]. Despite a need for intense periods of coordination, collaboration, and communication for
managing intricate dependencies within and across systems, there are compelling success stories
of how developers can effectively develop high-quality, complex software in a distributed fashion.
Successful open source communities, globally distributed software projects and fully remote software companies are all testaments to distributed and remote work. Decades of engineering tools
(such as version control and continuous integration tools) and knowledge sharing tools (such as
email, Stack Overflow, and Wikipedia) were conceived and designed by developers for developers
to manage the collaborative and distributed nature of software engineering [4].
Authors’ addresses: Denae Ford, denae@microsoft.com; Thomas Zimmermann, tzimmer@microsoft.com; Christian Bird,
cbird@microsoft.com; Sonia Jaffe, sonia.jaffe@microsoft.com; Chandra Maddila, chmaddil@microsoft.com; Jenna L. Butler,
jennbu@microsoft.com; Brian Houck, Brian.Houck@microsoft.com, Microsoft, 1 Microsoft Way, Redmond, WA, USA, 98052;
Margaret-Anne Storey, mstorey@uvic.ca, University of Victoria, PO Box 3055, STN CSC, Victoria, BC, Canada, V8W 3P6;
Nachiappan Nagappan, nnagappan@acm.org, Facebook, 1 Hacker Way, Menlo Park, CA, USA, 94025. Margaret-Anne Storey
worked on this project while being a vendor at Microsoft. Nachiappan Nagappan worked on this project while being a
researcher at Microsoft.

2

D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C. Maddila, J. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan

Despite having rich tools to support distributed development, many software companies believe
there are significant advantages to working in a co-located fashion, with many advocating for close
proximity among developers (such as in shared team rooms) [5]. Some of the claimed benefits for
co-location are seamless coordination, increased creativity, faster learning, and projects that are
easier to manage [6, 7].
There are numerous studies that give insights about the benefits and challenges of distributed
corporate development work compared with co-located development [8–10], but these studies
tend to focus on specific teams or investigate the velocity or quality of the code developed using
quantitative analysis of system trace data. They do not capture the experiences of developers in
large companies that have had to switch (over night) from a mostly co-located mode to remote
work from home. And yet this is what happened for many developers worldwide with the pandemic
forcing technology companies to close their offices.
The COVID-19 pandemic has undoubtedly been a global human and economic disaster, but it
has also led to interesting and unexpected revelations about how we work, play and live. Although
working from home during a pandemic is not the same as working from home during “normal
times” 1 , it is nevertheless an opportunity to study the results from a “natural experiment” and
compare the benefits and challenges developers may experience in terms of their development
productivity in these two modes. Our work reveals a “tale of two cities” effect, where some
developers flourished working at home, while others did not fare as well.
The aim of this research is to understand how and why developers’ perceived productivity may
have changed over the weeks following the initial work from home directive, and to identify the
benefits and challenges they experienced. We report on the very early experiences developers
found working from home and their experiences after several weeks of working in this mode. The
paper is based on data collected through two surveys with a combined total of 3,634 responses.
The first survey was among employees working at Microsoft in Washington State (the location of
the company’s headquarters), consisted of 30 questions, and received 1,369 responses. The second
survey was among Microsoft employees in the United States, consisted of 42 questions, and received
2,265 responses. Our initial survey uncovered the main benefits and challenges they faced, and
the second survey revealed the frequency/impact of those benefits/challenges. From the second
survey, we also uncovered developers’ self-reported changes in productivity since working from
home (WFH) and how the benefits and challenges they experienced associate with those changes
in productivity. From our survey responses, we also identified improvements that can be made to
support the WFH experience.
Notably, we found dichotomous experiences of engineers (developers and program managers)
working from home (WFH) during the pandemic from the same factors. For example, for some no
commute was a benefit, but for others the lack of a commute removed a period of relaxation or
preparation from their day. These differential experiences were in some cases driven by engineers’
personal contexts (e.g., if they have school-age children or space for a home office) and the characteristics of their work (such as reliance on team members). However, some factors were experienced
as both a benefit and a challenge by some of the same participants (such as time flexibility being
both a blessing and a curse).
The main takeaways from our paper are as follows:
• Productivity, when measured using engineering system data, appears to be stable or slightly
improved, but some developers, at least initially, appeared to thrive and report being more
productive, while others face significant challenges with remote work and feel they are not
as productive.
1 https://twitter.com/shanselman/status/1252040170783641600

A Tale of Two Cities: Software Developers Working from Home During the COVID-19 Pandemic

3

• Some factors (such as schedule flexibility, proximity to family members and more time for
work) lead to dichotomous experiences across developers and even by individual developers.
• Organizations can support remote work by understanding the varied experiences of developers and the challenges their employees may face, and that there are actionable recommendations they can follow to support developers working from home now or in the future as part
of a hybrid model.
Our paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide a background of literature that
has studied developer performance and productivity. In Section 3, we describe the methodology
we followed for the two surveys we conducted over the first few months of the pandemic. In
Section 4, we discuss the changes in productivity reported across the surveys. In Section 5, we
report the main benefits encountered, and in Section 6, we report the main challenges encountered
as developers working from home. Section 7 summarizes the key recommendations that developers
suggested organizations should follow to improve the situation for developers working from
home. In Section 8, we delve into the main factors and discuss how these may play a role in the
dichotomous experiences of developers. We also discuss how engineering system output data can
help triangulate the impact of working from home and how the pandemic may shape the future of
remote work. In Section 9, we discuss research on remote work (pre-pandemic) as well as more
recent related works about programmers during the pandemic. Finally, we conclude our paper in
Section 10.
2

BACKGROUND: DEVELOPER PERFORMANCE AND PRODUCTIVITY

Understanding developer productivity in software engineering has seen great interest from research
and industry, as improving developer productivity may lead to faster development speed, higher
quality code, and also higher developer satisfaction. Some of the factors we uncovered in our study
overlap earlier research, but the abrupt change for individual developers and the entire organization
to working from home reveal new benefits and challenges of working from home, as we discuss later
in the paper. A concern during the shift to working from home during the pandemic is that both
developer productivity and well-being may have been negatively affected. Existing research has
led to insights about developer performance, productivity, satisfaction and developer well-being.
In terms of performance, system engineering activity metrics can provide important signals
about developer activity and productivity. Wagner and Ruhe’s review of the literature summarize
studies that use performance measures such as lines of code or function points as proxies to productivity [11]. However, within the area of organizational behavior, performance and productivity
are acknowledged to be related [12], with higher levels of performance leading to higher levels of
productivity, but they are also recognized as distinct concepts. Indeed, many researchers and practitioners emphasize that developer productivity cannot and should not be measured by engineering
metrics alone as development work is not mechanized work that can be assessed using a single
metric. In fact, doing so may be detrimental to overall and long-term development objectives [13].
For example, developers spend time mentoring newcomers, reviewing each other’s work informally,
and learning new skills.
Through their systematic literature review, Wagner and Ruhe [11] also identified 51 factors
that influence productivity. In addition to the identified technical factors that seem to dominate
productivity studies in software engineering, they also distilled a number of soft factors that focus
on aspects such as organizational culture and working environment.
Using a different lens, Meyer et al. [14] investigated how developers perceive and think about
their own productivity. Through a survey, observations, and interviews, their study brought to
the surface that a developer’s sense of how productive they are, may be distorted by how many

4

D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C. Maddila, J. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan

interruptions and context switches they experience. Other research about perceived developer
productivity reported that the quality of one’s work environment plays a major role [15], while the
effectiveness of a manager [16] is also an important factor on perceived productivity.
More recent research has expanded these factors to include additional elements that may influence
perceived productivity and satisfaction, or that can be used in certain contexts to predict productivity.
In an earlier study [17] we conducted with developers at Microsoft, the factors that more closely
associate with one’s satisfaction with their self-reported productivity include job satisfaction, doing
impactful work, having autonomy over one’s work, the ability to complete tasks, the quality of the
engineering system, the ability to complete tasks, personal technical skills, and their work environment.
Predictive factors [18] include job enthusiasm, peer support for new ideas, and getting job feedback,
while “use of remote work to concentrate” showed the lowest variance across three large software
companies in terms of self-reported productivity.
In our research, we build on this previous work by inquiring about factors already shown to
be important for productivity while also allowing new factors that are particular to the pandemic
(such as having children at home) to emerge from our study. We discuss our methodology and the
surveys in the next section.
3

METHODOLOGY

We investigated the experiences of software engineers at Microsoft during the height of the COVID19 pandemic in the United States using a set of online surveys. Figure 1 outlines the timeline of our
study from March–May 2020.
March 4
March 6–9

Employees in King County instructed to work from home
Design of Survey 1

March 10–13

Privacy/ethics review

March 16–20

Survey 1 sent daily over a period of five days to a total of 5,000 full-time
employees (3,500 developers, 1,500 program managers) in King County.
1,369 responses (response rate: 27%)

March 23–April 21

Analysis of Survey 1. Design of Survey 2 based on findings from Survey 1.
Privacy/ethics review.

April/early May

Most US states under stay at home orders (94% of the US population) [19]

April 22–May 9

Survey 2 sent weekly to a total of 9,000 full-time employees in the
United States (developers, program managers, data scientists).
2,265 responses (response rate: 25%)

Fig. 1. Timeline for our multi-survey study

Research Context. The first presumptive positive COVID-19 case in King County, WA (which
includes the Microsoft headquarters) was reported on February 29, 2020. In the late afternoon of
March 4, Microsoft informed its employees that “Consistent with King County guidance, we are
recommending all employees who are in a job that can be done from home should do so” [20]. On
March 11, the schools were closed in Washington State (which was made permanent for the school
year on April 8). In April, many other restrictions were introduced, and by April 27, the outbreak
has reached its peak in Washington State. Some restrictions on outdoor activities were later lifted

A Tale of Two Cities: Software Developers Working from Home During the COVID-19 Pandemic

5

but social distancing was still recommended. The pandemic also affected the rest of the US: at the
end of March, 42 states and a total of 308 million people (94% of the US population) were under stay
at home orders [19]. At the time of writing this paper, Microsoft and other large tech companies
had extended their recommendations to work from home until at least the Fall of 2020 and in some
cases even Summer 2021 [21, 22].
Research Questions. To understand the effect of WFH on software engineers through our surveys,
we answer the following research questions:
RQ1 How has engineers’ self-reported productivity changed since WFH?
RQ2 What are the benefits engineers experience when working from home? How have these
benefits affected productivity since WFH?
RQ3 What are the challenges engineers face when working from home? How have these
challenges impacted productivity since WFH?
RQ4 What recommendations should be made to companies whose engineers may wish to
work from home?
To answer these research questions, we distributed two anonymous surveys to understand the
experiences of software developers during the pandemic, their prevalence, and the effect on their
work.
3.1

Survey 1: Washington State

Our first survey was designed to understand the types of experiences software developers were
having during the pandemic. In this survey, we included a closed-answer question on how productivity has changed with a five-point scale for the responses. Through a following open-ended
question, participants were asked to explain their response.
• Compared to working in office, how has your productivity changed? (Q13) 2
(significantly less productive / less productive / about the same / more productive / significantly more
productive)

• Please share details about your answer to the previous question on how your productivity
has changed. (Q14)
Although there has been previous research to understand the factors that affect developer
productivity (as discussed above), we anticipated that different benefits and challenges may be
more relevant in this period of unexpected and mass transition to working from home for an entire
organization. Therefore, the first survey was mainly exploratory to investigate if new factors would
emerge through the following open-ended questions:
• What is good about working from home? (Q15)
• What is bad about working from home? (Q16)
• What challenges have you encountered working from home? (Q17)
• What could be improved about how we do work from home at Microsoft? (Q22)
In addition, the survey included questions about Internet connectivity, interruptions and distractions, work times, meetings, and commuting. The full survey is available as supplemental
material [23].
Survey Distribution. This survey was distributed to Microsoft employees in King County during
the week of March 16, 2020 (approximately two weeks after the advice to work from home). Each
day the survey was sent to 1,000 randomly selected employees in King County, for a total of 5,000
employees (3,500 developers, 1,500 program managers). We received 1,369 survey responses, with
2 Q13

indicates the question numbers in our survey instrument

6

D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C. Maddila, J. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan

all required questions answered, for a response rate of 27% (comparable to the response rates of
many other software engineering surveys [24, 25]). To encourage participation, survey respondents
could enter a raffle of multiple $100 Amazon.com gift certificates. No reminder emails were sent.
Data Analysis. For the open-ended responses to this first survey, we used an open-coding
approach, iterating and refining through multiple rounds of independent coding of an initial sample
of responses. We coded all of the open-ended questions listed above, Codes for positive aspects of
working from home (benefits, RQ2), negative aspects of working from home (challenges, RQ3) and
improvements (RQ4) emerged across the questions.
After several iterations coding and discussing codes, we finalized a unified coding scheme with
codes, code definitions and code categories (see Appendix A). We applied these finalized codes
to a random selection of 400 responses (see Table 7). No new codes emerged during this process.
To improve the reliability of our codes, an external researcher used our coding scheme to code a
subset of our sample (100) showing an agreement of 81.9%.
The final coding scheme contained 32 codes organized into the following six themes. (The
complete list of codes and descriptions can be found in Appendix A.)
• Beyond work – Effects of work from home on non-work aspects of respondents’ lives, such
as proximity to family, distribution of finances, and access to food.
• Collaboration – Aspects of respondents’ collaborative tasks of respondents, including challenges being creative with others, being blocked waiting on others, and a range of interactions
with co-workers.
• Communication – Work-related communication, including channels used, frequency, duration,
planned versus ad-hoc, and the result of missing communication.
• Well-being – Responses related to the welfare of respondents, including changes to flexibility
of schedule and location, and the effects of working from home on health (physical, mental,
and emotional) and personal comfort.
• Work – Responses related to a direct effect on respondents’ technical work output, including
codes related to productivity, motivation, and factors affecting focus and distraction.
• Work environment – Aspects of the setting in which the respondents accomplish their work
when working from home, including the existence or lack of reliable internet connectivity,
ergonomically sound furniture, satisfactory hardware, and dedicated space.
Note that some responses were coded with multiple codes when participants raised multiple
points. For example, the following response was assigned multiple codes :
7 1. Avoiding commute, hence more productive, save on fuel (environment friendly).

2. Comfort of home (Take a nap of about 20 mins in the noon which powers up my rest of
the day work) 3. Avoid time spent in getting ready to office (10-20 mins per day) (P1269)
Commute EcologicalImpact PersonalComfort Break
We show the frequency of the main codes from the 400 responses in Table 7 in the Appendix.
However, these counts do not represent an accurate description of which benefits or challenges may
be more important, and which ones may affect productivity more or less as these are open-ended
questions.3
3 Quantifying inherently qualitative data such as responses to open-ended questions carries some limitations. For example,
when the Pew Research Center asked about the single issue that mattered most in deciding how participants voted for
president, 35% responded the economy in an open-ended question; however, when the economy was explicitly offered in
a multiple-choice question, 58%, more than half, chose the economy. https://www.pewresearch.org/methods/u-s-surveyresearch/questionnaire-design/

A Tale of Two Cities: Software Developers Working from Home During the COVID-19 Pandemic

3.2

7

Survey 2: United States

To investigate the importance and frequency of the reported benefits and challenges from the first
survey and their association with self- reported productivity, we designed and deployed a second
survey. Rather than open-ended questions, we included closed-answer questions for the factors that
emerged from our coding of the first survey. These closed questions asked about benefits and how
important they were to the respondent, as well as challenges and the impact of those challenges. In
addition, this second survey inquired about additional benefits and challenges.4
• Compared to working in office, how has your productivity changed? (Q13)
(significantly less productive / less productive / about the same / more productive / significantly more
productive)

• What benefits have you experienced working from home and how important are these
benefits? (Q15*)
(I don’t experience this benefit / I experience this benefit but it’s *not* important to me / I experience this
benefit and it’s *important* to me / I experience this benefit and it’s *very important* to me)

• What work-related challenges have you experienced working from home and how impactful are these challenges? (Q17*)
(I don’t experience this challenge / I experience this challenge but it’s a *minor issue* for me / I experience
this challenge and it’s a *major issue* for me)

• What could be improved about working from home (WFH)? Choose up to three (3) items.
(Q22*)
As items for the questions, we identified a list of 15 benefits (B1..B15), 20 challenges (C1..C20),
and 12 improvements/suggestions (S1..S12) based on the thematic analysis of the responses to
Survey 1. The items were displayed in random order within a question. The full survey is available
as supplemental material [23].
Survey Distribution. This survey was distributed to 9,000 engineers (consisting of developers,
program managers and data scientists) across the entire US over a period of three weeks (a different
sample of 3,000 employees was selected for each week). There was no overlap between the samples
in Survey 1 and Survey 2. We received 2,265 responses for a response rate of 25%, with all required
questions answered (comparable to the response rates of many other software engineering surveys [24, 25]). To encourage participation, survey respondents could enter a raffle of multiple $100
Amazon.com gift certificates. No reminder emails were sent.
Collecting data across three weeks, and using the same question as in the first survey, allowed
us to compare the answers to the closed question about change in productivity so that we could
detect if there were any significant changes in productivity (RQ1) as people adapted to or found it
harder working from home over time.
Data Analysis. For the quantitative data in the second survey, we present descriptive statistics
about the selected benefits and their importance, and the challenges and their impact.
We also considered the association of the benefits (Q15*), challenges (Q17*), and suggested
improvements (Q22*) with the reported changes in productivity (Q13). We used Wilcoxon Mann
Whitney and Fisher Exact Value tests [26] to check for statistically significant differences. To reduce
false discoveries due to multiple hypothesis testing, p-values were adjusted with the Benjamini
Hochberg correction [27]; we recorded the original p-values for each hypothesis test and then
computed the adjusted p-values using the p.adjust() function in R.
4 If a question was identical between Survey 1 and Survey 2, we use the same question number (e.g., Q13). For a closed-answer

question in Survey 2 that was based on an open-ended question in Survey 1, we append an asterisk (*) to the question
number (e.g., Q15* is based on Q15).

8

D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C. Maddila, J. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan

To identify benefits and challenges that are most strongly related to productivity and analyze
whether there are important interactions between them, we used a least absolute shrinkage and
selection operator (Lasso) analysis [28]. Lasso is a regression analysis method designed to select the
most important explanatory variables from a set of variables. It works well in the presence of many
explanatory variables. Lasso analysis has been applied in economics and finance [29, 30] and was
found to improve prediction and interpretability of models. It was also found to select sometimes
neglected variables [31, 32].
We ran two analyses: for benefits (Q15*) and for challenges (Q17*). In both analyses, the dependent
variable was whether a participant reported that productivity stayed the same/increased/significantly
increased. Since the outcome is binary, we ran a logit analysis. For potential explanatory variables,
we included direct effects and interactions for whether a respondent reported each benefit as
important or very important (for the analysis of Q15*) or each challenge as a major issue (for Q17*).
With the interactions, we had 240 potential explanatory variables for the benefits regression (420
for challenges). Even with a relatively large survey, that is too many to meaningfully include in
a single analysis. The Lasso approach selects the most important variables by first maximizing
the likelihood with a penalty for the absolute value of the coefficients. The penalty makes it so a
variable is only given a non-zero coefficient if it explains enough of the variation in the dependent
variable to outweigh the penalty. As a standard practice, we ran the analysis with a range of penalty
parameters and used the maximum penalty parameter that gets a mean cross-validation error within
one standard error of the minimum. Then, using the variables with non-zero coefficients given that
penalty parameter,5 we ran a standard logit analysis (logistic regression) to get coefficients that
are not shrunk by the penalty procedure. We report the logit coefficients as marginal effects for
interpretability. Since all variables in the logit analysis are dichotomous, the marginal effect reports
the difference between changing the variable from 0 (absent) to 1 (present).
3.3

Limitations

We describe the threats to validity and limitations of our study.
External Validity. Single-case empirical studies have historically been shown to contribute to
scientific discovery [33] and have delivered insights in the social sciences [34, pp. 95]. The company
we studied employs tens of thousands of software engineers that work on diverse products across
many domains (operating systems, databases, cloud software, software tools, to productivity
software), and use many tools and diverse processes. By studying a single company, we were
able to control for many factors that otherwise may influence the employee experience during the
pandemic, such as the region and the company’s response to COVID-19. We do not claim that our
results are representative of the views of all software engineers and companies in general.
Likewise, we do not include the demographics of race, gender, nor age in this work. This is an
opportunity for future work to highlight the experiences of marginalized individuals who have
been disproportionately impacted by the pandemic [35–37].
It is important to keep in mind that remote work during a pandemic is not the same as regular
remote work. While some findings will be specific to the pandemic (e.g., lack of childcare as a
challenge because schools and day cares were closed), not all findings are specific to the pandemic.
We discuss implications of our work for the future of remote work in Section 8.3.
As with any survey, there may have been non-response bias, i.e., the results might not be
representative of the population because the participants disproportionately possess certain traits
5 Since there is randomness in the sample-splitting for cross-validation, this procedure can result in a different set of variables

if run with different sample splits. We ran it 50 times and used the variables that were consistently selected in at least 95%
of the runs to avoid the variable selection being affected by randomness.

A Tale of Two Cities: Software Developers Working from Home During the COVID-19 Pandemic

9

which affect the outcome. In addition, our survey was advertised as a “Work From Home Survey”
and therefore could have been subject to self-selection bias, e.g., participants might have been
more likely to participate in the survey if they were more strongly affected by work from home
(negatively or positively). To reduce non-response and self-selection bias, we kept the surveys
as short as possible, were transparent about the survey length (single-page survey), provided an
incentive to participate (raffle), and kept the surveys anonymous.
Construct Validity. Although we could have used existing surveys that inquire about developer
productivity and their experience working from home (see Section 2), we recognized from early
reports that new factors specific to the pandemic were playing a bigger role in developer productivity
and experience (such as not having child care, and the stress of the pandemic). Nothing like this has
happened before and so we used an initial open-ended survey to study the factors emerging during
this phenomenon, and then conducted a second survey to quantify the change in productivity and
frequency/impact of challenges/benefits encountered.
Measuring perceived productivity with a single question has limitations. We consider selfreported changes in their perceived productivity, as objective productivity metrics in software
development remain elusive due to the creative and collaborative nature of development work. We
chose single response items to keep the survey length reasonable because shorter questionnaires
have been found to receive higher response rates [38]. Self-rated, single-item response items for
productivity have also been found to correlate with objective productivity measures for software
engineers [18]. Later in the paper (in Section 8) we show and discuss an analysis of productivity
at the company data by by mining software data collected through the engineering systems to
triangulate our findings from the surveys.
Internal Validity. There are additional biases from our survey. Respondents may have shared
what they wanted management to hear (in terms of suggested improvements in particular, but also
for benefits and challenges), and the wording of our questions may have led to certain responses.
Furthermore, our analysis may have been biased by our own experiences (as we were also working
from home) and most of us shared the same employer as the respondents. We tried to offset these
by using additional coders and by having experts review our survey from outside our team.
Finally, our study involved a single research method (a survey). However, we tried to offset this
limitation by considering the findings from other ongoing studies at the company using different
methods (including objective quantitative analysis of system data).
There was no overlap between the samples in both surveys to reduce survey fatigue among
participants. As a result, the second survey was limited in capturing how things had changed since
the first survey (although some extrapolation is possible). To study the long-term impact of work
from home, other research designs have used diary studies [39]. The benefit of survey designs like
ours is that they require less commitment and time from participants, and as a result, have more
participants, which makes it easier to observe statistical effects.
Conclusion Validity. The Lasso approach is designed to select the variables with the strongest
relationship to the outcome and uses cross-validation to avoid over-fitting, but it is still possible to
find a statistically significant relationship when there is none (since p-values below .01 are still
greater than zero). There may also be other relationships in the data that are important but not
captured in the results because the sample size is not large enough or there is too much noise
relative to the effect size. The relationships we uncover are all correlational; we cannot distinguish
causal effects using the survey.

10

D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C. Maddila, J. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan

Table 1. Changes in self-reported productivity based on the responses to the question “Compared to working
in office, how has your productivity changed?” (Q13, Q13*) The responses to Survey 2 are further broken down
by week: April 22–25 (W1), April 26–May 2 (W2), and May 3–9 (W3).

Survey 1
Significantly more productive
More productive

8%
22%

About the same
Less productive
Significantly less productive
4

Survey 2
11%
26%

32%

32%

32%
6%

26%
6%

W1

W2

W3

13% 10% 10%
23% 28% 26%
31%

30%

34%

26% 26% 24%
7% 6% 6%

CHANGE IN PRODUCTIVITY (RQ1)

In this section, we address the research question “How has engineers’ self-reported productivity
changed since WFH?” (RQ1). In both surveys, we asked participants how their productivity has
changed compared to working in office. The results are shown in Table 1.
• In both surveys, the majority of participants reported that their productivity had not changed
or had even improved (62%-68%). However, a substantial portion of participants (32%-38%)
reported that they were less productive
• The percentage of people reporting to be less productive consistently dropped over the study
period: from 38% in Survey 1 to 30% in the last week (W3) of Survey 2. This suggests that
some (but not all) people found ways to restore their productivity to their original levels.
Ralph et al. [40] found evidence that developers have lower perceived productivity while working
from home during the COVID-19 pandemic. Our findings also support this result but offer a more
nuanced view: initially in Survey 1, more people reported lower productivity (38%) than higher
productivity (30%); however, this later changed in Survey 2, when more people reported higher
productivity ( 37% ) than lower productivity ( 32% ). Similar observations have been made by
Forsgren [41] and Bao et al. [42]. We will discuss these papers in more detail in the related work
(Section 9).
It is important to recognize that at an individual level, people are affected differently by work from
home: productivity can decrease, stay the same, or improve depending on a variety of challenges and
benefits. In the next two sections, we discuss the higher level themes in terms of the challenges and
benefits experienced that emerged from our qualitative analysis of the additional survey questions.
5

BENEFITS (RQ2)

In this section, we address the research question “What are the benefits engineers experience when
working from home? How have these benefits affected productivity since WFH?” (RQ2). To identify
the benefits, we analyzed the responses to the open-ended questions in Survey 1, and to quantify
the association with productivity, we used the responses to Survey 2.
5.1

Survey 1: Benefits Experienced Working from Home

Respondents identified a wide range of benefits working from home. In this section, we discuss
themes that were frequently mentioned in Survey 1 or later emerged as significant in the productivity
analysis based on Survey 2.
Commute. Most respondents pointed out benefits related to their well-being. In particular, over
half of the participants mentioned the lack of commute as a positive aspect of working from home.

A Tale of Two Cities: Software Developers Working from Home During the COVID-19 Pandemic

11

7 No commute worries. I can focus on my job instead of checking the traffic reports and

worrying. (P908)
On average, respondents reported a daily, round trip commute of 67 minutes (median 60 minutes), which is comparable to other people living in the Puget Sound area [43]. In extreme cases,
respondents mentioned a daily commute of more than four hours. “I love saving the 14-18hrs/week
of commuting and being home when my daughter gets home from school.” (P791)
The time saved on commuting led to a wide range of other benefits. It allowed respondents to
work more (Work hours) but also spend time with their families (Family, children, pets) and
focus on healthy activities such as physical exercise and more sleep (Healthy habits).
7 More time with Kids due to reduced commute times. Can workout more when the sun
is out. (P48)
7 Removes the stress of a 30 minute commute to work and saves that wasted time for
either more sleep or more work. Let’s me sleep in a bit and work in a more rested state
than if I got up earlier due to the commute. (P1127)
7 My health has improved. I am getting more sleep and rest, since there is no commute
involved. I can work at my own pace, in a more comfortable environment (my home).
(P529)
Schedule flexibility. Another frequently mentioned benefit was schedule flexibility. Working
from home allowed respondents to plan their day more freely and work at different times than
they did before. Activities that required respondents to be physically present at home at certain
times were easier to do, for example, accepting deliveries, laundry, or physical exercise.
7 I can dictate my own schedule, take breaks when I want to, prioritize self-care throughout
the day (running errands, taking a quick nap, exercising, calling family + friends) (P267)
7 Working from home gives me more flexibility to do things when I take 10 minutes break
twice a day. I can finish up loading the laundry or dishwasher, I can lie down to straighten
up my back if I wish without compromising the productivity. (P833)
7 I can sometimes take a break and do some chores that are often more difficult to do later
in the day (e.g. laundry, where all the machines are usually being used in my building).
(P445)
The flexibility in schedule often led to seamless integration of work and life, where participants
completed chores while waiting for builds or during short work breaks.
7 Sometimes an idea clicks in the middle of the night, and with wfh, implementing that
idea is literally 2 seconds away (P593)
7 Being able to quickly task switch for other non-work related tasks and quickly return
to work. (P289)
7 I feel like I can solve problems more easily since I don’t feel constrained by a clock.
I can start a job and cook dinner, then come back to check the job results while I leave
something in the oven or when I’m done cooking. (P215)
Focus and Interruptions and Distractions were the second and third most frequent codes.
Fewer distractions and interruptions at home made it easier for respondents to concentrate and
focus for longer periods of time. Having fewer meetings, the ability to continue work during remote
meetings, a quiet work environment, and more control over interruptions further contributed to
“Undistracted focus time.” (P1263) for the respondents.
7 I get interrupted less and am able to focus on tasks more without distraction. (P161)

12

D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C. Maddila, J. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan

7 More focus time, ability to go heads down without distractions of being in an open

office constantly or needing to move focus rooms every hour if I am working on something
that requires prolonged quiet time. (P1194)
7 Less distraction from others, especially coming from an open office scenario. Teams
meetings for some meetings where very little participation is required lets you continue to
work while “attending” and listening in, which is better than being idle in a conference
room. (P691)
7 There were plenty of distractions at work too with my office set up. So obviously
colleagues interrupting me is easier to manage now as you have to answer the teams
chat or email or phone call vs. someone just coming into your office or dragging you to a
meeting. It feels more in my control now. (P223)
Work Environment. Several respondents pointed out that they preferred their environment at
home compared to the office, for example, because the environment is more quiet, more spacious,
has a window, more sunlight, or closer bathrooms. Respondents also liked having more privacy and
more control at home, for example, over room temperature or decorations, which is more difficult
in a shared environment.
7 I enjoy the relaxing nature of being in the comfort of my own home. I like being able to
use my nice chair at home, and other nice comforts my home can offer. [. . . ] My wife is
the only other person here, and she respects my zone while I’m working and gives me a
nice quiet environment. (P617)
7 The environment is much nicer. It is quiet with few distraction than my normal open
office. I also have a window which gives me natural light and a nature view neither of
which are present in my open office. This helps improve my mood and makes me more
productive. (P1203)
7 My apartment is much less dreary than the office. Visuals and decorations are not just
about “looking cool”, but have a deep effect on how well/fast/creatively/how long I can
think. In contrast the office has mostly blank white walls, no windows, and every hallway
in the building is identical. Just being in the monotony of that environment is mentally
draining, which drops my productivity. (P146)
7 I work in an open floor area and had to always be careful what was on my screens that
others shouldn’t see, no concerns now with that. (P333)
Participants also enjoyed the ability to wear comfortable clothes, listen to loud music, and work
at their own pace (Personal comfort) in their home work environments.
7 I’m in the comfort of my own home (I can wear lounge clothing, play music, etc). (P325)
7 No need makeup, suitable dress, and few unnecessary social except meeting. Saving
time. Not worry about if anyone will look at me when the moment don’t want to be looked.
More concentrate on work. (P371)
7 I feel more comfortable and have more privacy. I feel less pressured to do work and get
to work on my own pace. (P442)
Family, Children, and Pets. Respondents liked being close to their families, children, and pets.
They appreciated being able to see them during breaks or lunch and that they could take care of
family needs when required.
7 Being at home with family, especially with a toddler and baby. I get to spend a bit of
time each day every few hours to just say hi and be around them, even if just for a few
brief minutes. (P79)

A Tale of Two Cities: Software Developers Working from Home During the COVID-19 Pandemic

13

Table 2. Benefits in Survey 2. The column Distribution refers to the distribution of responses that (from left to
right) do not experience a benefit (light gray ), experience a benefit and consider the benefit as unimportant
(gray ), important (dark gray ) or very important (darker gray ). The column Prevalence indicates the
percentage of respondents who experienced the benefit (
) while the column Importance describes the
percentage of participants who indicated this benefit to be important or very important ( percentage of
with respect to
). The column Productivity Unchanged or Increased reports the percentage of respondents
who reported that productivity stayed “about the same” or increased (“more productive”, “significantly more
productive”) for respondents who did not experience the benefit vs. respondents who did experience the
benefit; statistically significant differences (𝑝 < .01, with Benjamini-Hochberg correction [27]) are indicated
with an asterisk (*). The benefits are sorted and numbered in descending order by column Prevalence.
Productivity Unchanged or Increased
Benefit
B1
B2
B3
B4
B5
B6
B7
B8
B9
B10
B11
B12
B13
B14
B15

Distribution

Prevalence Importance

Less time on commute
Spending less money
Flexible work hours
Closer to family
More comfortable clothing
Reduced health risks
Better Focus Time
Less distractions or interruptions
More time to complete work
More breaks
Better Work Life Balance
Better Work Environment
More Efficient Meetings
More Control Over Work
More physical activity

96%
84%
81%
81%
80%
72%
62%
55%
52%
52%
50%
48%
46%
37%
34%

82%
66%
82%
85%
48%
88%
93%
87%
80%
64%
95%
81%
87%
87%
91%

Benefit not
experienced
63.3%
56.2%
57.9%
61.5%
58.9%
63.5%
42.1%
49.2%
55.4%
69.3%
57.9%
52.4%
59.5%
60.7%
62.4%

Benefit
Delta
experienced (pct points)
68.8%
70.9%
71.1%
70.4%
70.9%
70.5%
84.7%
84.6%
80.6%
68.0%
79.1%
86.5%
79.5%
82.1%
80.3%

+5.5
+14.7
+13.2
+8.9
+12.0
+7.0
+42.6
+35.4
+25.2
–1.3
+21.2
+34.1
+20.0
+21.4
+17.9

(*)
(*)
(*)
(*)
(*)
(*)
(*)
(*)
(*)
(*)
(*)
(*)
(*)

7 Work breaks are fulfilling if you have family members around. (P1265)

Money. Several participants pointed out that working from home saved them money because of
the lack of commute and eating home-made food.
7 I save money on food because I’m eating more out of the refrigerator than spending
money on lunch every day. (P221)
7 No wasted time & money on commute. (P72)
5.2

Survey 2: Benefits and Productivity

From the themes that emerged in Survey 1, we inferred a list of 15 characteristic benefits (B1..B15)
that we included in Survey 2. The results are displayed in Table 2. The benefits are sorted and
numbered in descending order of frequency.
Frequency and Importance of Benefits. We make the following observations from Table 2 about
the prevalence and importance of benefits:
• The Prevalence column shows the frequency of the benefits. The most frequently reported
benefits (B1-B5) were less time on commute (96%), spending less money (84%), flexible work
hours (81%), closer to family (81%), and more comfortable clothing (80%).
• The Importance column shows the percentage of participants who indicated a benefit to be
important or very important if they experienced it. Almost all benefits were rated as important
by the majority of participants who experienced them. The benefits most frequently rated as
important were better work life balance (95%, B11), better focus time (93%, B7), and more physical

14

D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C. Maddila, J. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan

Table 3. Results from the Lasso logit analysis. The dependent variable was whether a participant reported that
productivity stayed the same or increased. The explanatory variables are the direct effects and interactions
for experienced benefits that were considered as important or very important. The logit coefficients are
converted to marginal effects for interpretability. The marginal effect is the difference between changing the
variable from 0 (absent) to 1 (present). The overall mean is the percentage of participants who reported that
productivity stayed the same or increased.

Better focus time (B7)
Less distractions or interruptions (B8)
Better work environment (B12)

Marginal
Effect
+0.189∗∗∗
+0.106∗∗∗
+0.036

Less time on commute (B1)
and Better work environment (B12)

+0.157∗∗∗

(0.055)

Less time on commute (B1)
and More time to complete work (B9)

+0.122∗∗∗

(0.023)

Less distractions or interruptions (B8)
and Closer to family (B4)

+0.089∗∗

(0.035)

Benefit

Overall Mean

0.685

Observations
Pseudo-R2

2,104
0.238

Std. Error
(0.026)
(0.033)
(0.059)

Note: ∗ p<0.1; ∗∗ p<0.05; ∗∗∗ p<0.01

activity (91%, B15). The benefits less frequently rated as important were more comfortable
clothing (48%, B5), more breaks (64%, B10), and spending less money (66%, B2).
Relation between Benefits and Productivity. The Delta column of Table 2 shows the difference
between the percentage of respondents who reported that their productivity stayed “about the same”
or increased (“more productive”, “significantly more productive”) for those who did not experience
the benefit vs. those who did experience the benefit. We make the following observations:
• Almost all benefits had a positive delta on productivity change. This means that, on average,
respondents who experienced a benefit also reported being more productive when working
from home. The delta was only negative for the benefit more breaks ( –1.3 percentage points ,
B10), but the difference was not statistically significant.
• Not all benefits had a statistically significant productivity delta: there was no statistical
difference in productivity change for the benefits less time on commute (B1) and more breaks
(B10).
• The benefits with the highest productivity delta were better focus time ( +42.6 , B7), less
distractions or interruptions ( +35.4 , B8), and better work environment ( +34.1 ), B12). All of
these have been found to be significant predictors of productivity in the past [2, 15, 17, 18].
Differences between Individual Contributors and Managers. Compared to individual contributors,
people managers were less likely to indicate better work life balance (–14.3 percentage points),
flexible work hours (–13.2), more breaks (–12.2), and better focus time (–7.5) as benefits. They were
more likely to indicate being closer to family (+9.1 percentage points) as a benefit.

A Tale of Two Cities: Software Developers Working from Home During the COVID-19 Pandemic

15

Lasso Analysis. We ran a Lasso analysis to see which benefits were most strongly associated with
productivity change in a combined model and to check whether interactions between the benefits
matter (details in Section 3.2). The marginal effects of the logit analysis with the Lasso-selected
variables, shown in Table 3, are similar to the pairwise relationships. The likelihood that people’s
productivity stayed the same or improved was increased by the benefits of better focus time ( +18.9%
) and less distractions or interruptions ( +10.6% ). The coefficient for better work environment at home
was not statistically significant, however, the interaction between better work environment and
less time spent on commute ( +15.7%) was . People who reported benefiting from both less time
spent on commute and more time to complete their work were also more likely to report that their
productivity remained the same or increased ( +12.2% ). As were people who benefited from both
less distractions or interruptions and closer to family (+8.9%).
6 CHALLENGES (RQ3)
In this section, we address the research question “What are the challenges engineers face when
working from home? How have these challenges affected productivity since WFH?” (RQ3). To identify
the challenges, we analyzed the responses to the open-ended questions in Survey 1, and to quantify
the association with productivity, we used the responses to Survey 2.
6.1

Survey 1: Challenges Experienced Working from Home

The survey respondents shared a wide range of challenges and many respondents indicated they
experienced multiple challenges working from home. In this section, we discuss challenges that
were frequently mentioned in Survey 1 or later emerged as significant in the productivity analysis
based on Survey 2.
Connectivity. Of all the challenges, problems with connectivity was the most frequent challenge
shared. This included access to remote desktops, special access workstations, and internet bandwidth.
Respondents mentioned they experienced slow speeds due to a high number of users on their
internet connections:
7 Periodic internet disruption due to wi-fi router and modem resetting due to 2 VPN
connections for my wife & I, and our kids being online for school work. (P1013)
Internet connectivity speed went beyond one’s home internet and became a challenge when a
colleague’s internet connection was not as resilient.
7 Remote desktop connectivity issues. Coworkers with spotty internet quality are hard to
meet with. (P691)
Respondents also described workarounds they used to rectify their connectivity issues:
7 The VPN / Remote tools are not great, crashes often. I especially dont want to Intune my
personal device, so working remotely have been challenging with the redmondts gateway
down more than 50% of the time, and the WVD features crashing / disconnecting / not
allowing correct alt-tab etc. (P37)
Although many attempted to find a resolution, at times the connectivity issues they experienced
felt out of their control.
Family, Children, Pets. One of the most frequent challenges respondents shared concerned
proximity to family life. Being physically co-located with family members, housemates, children,
or pets encouraged some to change their work habits:
7 Staying focused, especially with young kids around. Normally I would only work from
home for a few hours occasionally after the kids went to bed. That is the only time I
currently feel like I can be productive. (P531)

16

D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C. Maddila, J. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan

The additional interactions with family have even to be more mindful of supporting family “child
care schedules” (267). Respondents also mentioned how there was an implicit expectation of being
engaged that often felt at odds with work:
7 Family in the house means there is also expectations from them to spend time or help

around. (P338)
The challenge of being physically present with family but mentally focused on other tasks is an
experience that was hard to resolve.
Communication Channels. Another frequent challenge that respondents reported having
was with the channels they used to communicate with their team members. One issue with
communication channels was the increased friction to get ahold of a colleague versus simply
walking over to their office:
7 The hardest thing has been that standard communications/questions and general

collaboration take about 2-3 times as long. Something I could just pop over to someone’s
office to ask now requires an online chat or an email and the response is much slower.
(P267)
Likewise, for some there was also a higher frequency of using instant messages which made some
participants feel like they should be highly responsive at all times:
7 I also feel like there is no "down time" away from work. I constantly get emails/messages/asks

and sometime I have to respond right away. (P384)
Managing multiple communication channels and the expectation to be very responsive on many of
these channels presents an additional layer of interactions that does not adapt to every respondent’s
working style.
Work Environment. During the pandemic, most respondents’ work environments were their
homes, however, the experience drew comparable challenges with in-office work settings.
7 Tuning out distractions (which is a similar problem I’ve faced working in Open Spaces),

finding the space to set up my home workspace. (P1233)
Many respondents were also not prepared to work from home and improvised their work settings:
7 I did not own a desk and chair so currently improvising with dining table. Not sure

if I want to invest in or have space for expensive home office equipment. I miss having
multiple screens but do not have space at home to set up. (P930)
As respondents missed their work office settings, they found themselves under new constraints
ranging from financial to square footage when trying to create a comparable home office setting.
Interruptions and Distractions. When software developers are working in the office, interruptions and distractions often come from colleagues stopping by their desks. In a remote work
setting, respondents described the advantage and disadvantage of only being available online:
7 Interruptions and concentration as I can [only] be reached on Teams and by email vs

someone walking over for a question. Harder to keep tabs on direct reports. (P333)
However, in this special remote work environment, a new set of distractions emerged from
people they live with (e.g., spouse, children, etc): “Constant distractions especially from kids who are
bored at home” (P552). For some respondents, this created a similarly distracting environment they
had to manage in open office settings:
7 Tuning out distractions (which is a similar problem I’ve faced working in Open Spaces),

finding the space to set up my home workspace. (P1233)

A Tale of Two Cities: Software Developers Working from Home During the COVID-19 Pandemic

17

Healthy Habits. When respondents described challenges with reduced physical activity, they
often mentioned their movements between physical meeting locations which no longer happened:“Sitting for a long time is hard on the body. At work, I’m up and around, moving more. At home
all meetings are online so I never (hardly) move....” (P72). When respondents did find an opportunity
to move, it was either only to the restroom or for more coffee so that they can sit down for longer
periods of time:
7 Since I don’t do my daily bike ride I sometimes feel I just sit the whole day, and only do

very few steps to the toilet [and] coffee machine (P867)
The reduction in what participants referred to as healthy habits also affect their work-life routines.
Work-life Balance and Routine. Respondents described their work-life boundaries blurring
outside of the typical eight-hour work day, running late into the evenings: “Unless I impose a strict
regimen, I feel like I am working for a lot more hours sometimes way into the night - the line between
home and work gets far more blurry.” (P104)
Respondents also reflected on routines they previously had to distinguish boundaries for that
were now lost:
7 To find my time boundaries. Very easily you can end up working much more hours

because you don’t have the signals of "Time to leave the desk", you don’t have the time to
decompress your mind in traffic, for example. You just jump from personal to work tasks
(and vice-versa) so fast. (P195)
In summary, the lost transition time and lack of physical movement between work and home
removed a boundary they had before.
In the next subsection of our paper, we report on the association of these challenge with the
Survey 2 respondents’ productivity.
6.2

Survey 2: Challenges and Productivity

From the themes that emerged in Survey 1, we inferred a list of 20 characteristic challenges (C1..C20)
that we included in Survey 2. The results are displayed in Table 4. The challenges are sorted and
numbered in descending order of frequency.
Frequency and Impact of Challenges. We make the following observations from Table 4 about the
prevalence and impact of challenges:
• The Prevalence column shows the frequency of the challenges. The most frequently reported
challenges (C1-C5) were missing social interactions (83%), lack of work-life boundaries (78%),
poor ergonomics (70%), less awareness of colleagues work (65%), and less physical activity (65%).
• The Impact column shows the percentage of participants that indicated a challenge to be
a major issue among the participants who experienced it. The challenges most frequently
rated as impactful are lack of childcare (58%, C16), poor ergonomics (52%, C3), and less physical
activity (51%, C5). The challenges less frequently rated as a major issue are friction with
collaboration tools (22%, C14), lack of dining options (24%, C18), and being blocked waiting on
others (28%, C16).
Relationships between Challenges and Productivity. The Delta column of Table 4 shows the difference between the percentage of respondents who reported that their productivity stayed “about
the same” or increased (“more productive”, “significantly more productive”) for those who did
not experience the challenge vs. those who did experience the challenge. We make the following
observations:

18

D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C. Maddila, J. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan

Table 4. Challenges in Survey 2. The column Distribution shows the distribution of responses that do not
experience a challenge (light gray ), experience this challenge as a minor issue (gray ), and experience
this challenge as a major issue (dark gray ). The following column Prevalence indicates the percentage
of respondents that experienced the challenge (
), while the column Impact describes the percentage
of participants that indicated this challenge presented a major issue (percentage of
with respect to
). The column Productivity Unchanged or Increased reports the percentage of respondents who reported
that productivity stayed “about the same” or increased (“more productive”, “significantly more productive”)
for respondents who did not experience the challenge vs. respondents who did experience the challenge;
statistically significant differences (𝑝 < .01, with Benjamini-Hochberg correction [27]) are indicated with an
asterisk (*). The challenges are sorted and numbered in descending order by the Prevalence column.
Productivity Unchanged or Increased
Challenge
C1
C2
C3
C4
C5
C6
C7
C8
C9
C10
C11
C12
C13
C14
C15
C16
C17
C18
C19
C20

Missing social interactions
Lack of work life boundary
Poor ergonomics
Less awareness of colleagues work
Less physical activity
Difficult to communicate with colleagues
Insufficient hardware
Connectivity problems
Poor work life balance
Too many meetings
More distractions or interruptions
Lack of a routine
Fewer breaks
Friction with collaboration tools
Lack of motivation
Blocked waiting on others
Poor home work environment
Lack of dining options
Lack of childcare
Less time to complete work

Distribution

Prevalence

Impact

83%
78%
70%
65%
65%
57%
57%
54%
51%
51%
49%
47%
44%
44%
42%
40%
40%
33%
27%
24%

49%
48%
52%
36%
51%
34%
40%
35%
45%
43%
37%
38%
35%
22%
36%
28%
34%
24%
58%
36%

Challenge not Challenge
experienced experienced
82.4%
83.0%
80.4%
81.9%
78.5%
81.1%
77.1%
75.9%
78.5%
71.2%
86.6%
80.5%
69.9%
75.2%
82.6%
75.0%
81.5%
72.6%
72.5%
76.2%

65.7%
64.5%
64.4%
61.6%
63.3%
59.2%
62.0%
62.1%
59.0%
66.1%
50.0%
55.4%
66.9%
60.0%
48.9%
59.1%
48.9%
60.2%
57.8%
45.1%

Delta
(pct points)

–16.7
–18.5
–16.0
–20.4
–15.2
–21.9
–15.1
–13.8
–19.5
–5.0
–36.5
–25.1
–3.0
–15.2
–33.7
–15.9
–32.6
–12.4
–14.7
–31.2

(*)
(*)
(*)
(*)
(*)
(*)
(*)
(*)
(*)
(*)
(*)
(*)
(*)
(*)
(*)
(*)
(*)
(*)

• We found that all of the challenges were associated with lower productivity. For all but two
out of the 20 challenges, the difference was statistically significant.
• The challenges with the largest reduction in productivity are more distractions and interruptions ( –36.5 percentage points , C11), lack of motivation ( –33.7 , C15), poor home work
environment ( –32.6 , C17), less time to complete work ( –31.2 , C20), lack of a routine ( –25.1 ,
C12), difficulty communicating with colleagues ( –21.9 , C6), and less awareness of colleagues
work (–20.4, C4) .
Differences between Individual Contributors and Managers. Compared to individual contributors,
people managers were more likely to indicate too many meetings (+26.1 percentage points), fewer
breaks (+21.1), lack of childcare (+15.2), less time to complete work (+12.8), and poor work life balance
(+11.4) as challenges. They were less likely to indicate lack of motivation (–9.3 percentage points),
and being blocked waiting on others (–5.2) as challenges.
Lasso Analysis. The previous analysis shows the relationship between individual challenges and
change in productivity but does not take into account the presence of multiple challenges and the
interaction effects between two challenges, which can be particularly important for productivity.
Therefore, we ran a Lasso analysis to see which challenges were most strongly associated with
productivity change in a combined model, and to check whether interactions between the challenges
matter.

A Tale of Two Cities: Software Developers Working from Home During the COVID-19 Pandemic

19

Table 5. Results from the Lasso logit analysis. The dependent variable was whether a participant reported that
productivity stayed the same or increased. The explanatory variables are the direct effects and interactions
for major challenges. The logit coefficients are converted to marginal effects for interpretability. The marginal
effect is the difference between changing the variable from 0 (absent) to 1 (present). The overall mean is the
percentage of participants who reported that productivity stayed the same or increased.

More distractions or interruptions (C11)
Lack of motivation (C15)
Difficult to communicate with colleagues (C6)
Connectivity problems (C8)
Missing social interactions (C1)
Poor home work environment (C17)
Less awareness of colleagues work (C4)

Marginal
Effect
−0.409∗∗∗
−0.264∗∗∗
−0.131∗∗∗
−0.119∗∗∗
−0.112∗∗∗
−0.080∗∗
−0.062∗∗

Less time to complete work (C20)

−0.081

(0.060)

Lack of childcare (C19)
and Less time to complete work (C20)

−0.340∗∗∗

(0.099)

Challenge

Overall Mean

0.685

Observations
Pseudo-R2

2,106
0.243

Std. Error
(0.033)
(0.037)
(0.034)
(0.032)
(0.025)
(0.039)
(0.030)

Note: ∗ p<0.1; ∗∗ p<0.05; ∗∗∗ p<0.01

Table 5 shows the marginal effects from the logit analysis for the Lasso-selected variables (details
on the method are in Section 3.2). People are substantially less likely to report that their productivity
is the same or increased when they say that having more distractions and interruptions ( –40.9% ) or
lack of motivation ( –26.4% ) were major issues; difficult to communicate with colleagues ( –13.1% ),
connectivity problems ( –11.9% ), missing social interactions ( –11.2% ), poor home work environment
(–8.0%), and less awareness of colleagues work ( –6.2% ) were also associated with a significantly
lower probability of reporting unchanged or increased productivity.
The challenge less time spent to complete work was also selected by the Lasso algorithm, though
the coefficient is not significant. However, when combined with a lack of childcare, the interaction
between both challenges is associated with a substantial and significant lower probability ( –34.0%
) of reporting unchanged or increased productivity.
7

IMPROVEMENTS (RQ4)

In this section, we address the research question “What recommendations should be made to companies whose engineers may wish to work from home?” (RQ4). To identify these improvements, we first
analyzed the open-ended questions in Survey 1, and to identify the most-requested improvements,
we used the responses to a closed question in Survey 2.
7.1

Survey 1: Improvements to the Work from Home Experience

Respondents included several improvements that could be made to support their work from home
experience. We briefly describe the most frequently mentioned improvements below. Survey 1
was sent within the first two weeks of employees working from home. Microsoft implemented

20

D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C. Maddila, J. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan

many improvements throughout the pandemic to provide a better work from home experience to
its employees, for example, employees facing school closures due to the pandemic were offered
up to three months of paid parental leave [44] as well as resources and activities to support their
physical, emotional and financial well-being.
Hardware. Although many respondents noted they were able to bring some equipment home or
purchase additional devices, the most frequent possible improvement noted by respondents in the
first survey was related to hardware. Insufficient hardware was also noted as a key challenge (as
discussed in Section 6) and was mentioned by Ralph et al. in the Pandemic Programming study [40].
7 I think that this is a reminder that when employing individuals that need certain
equipment both at an office and at home, that we come up with a way to fully equip both
locations simultaneously. (P994)
Many employees work with multiple monitors and sometimes multiple machines. In contrast,
when working from home, employees are sometimes limited to just a laptop or a desktop with a
single monitor. Large and/or multiple monitor setups have been found to improve productivity in
information workers [45]. Indeed, the most frequently requested type of hardware we noted in
the second survey was either larger or more monitors. Developers also asked for more powerful
workstations (especially those working on laptops at home) as well as peripherals such as mice,
keyboards, and noise-cancellation headphones.
7 Employees should be provided with equipment to make the experience better for everyone: webcams, good noise-cancelling headsets, etc. (P1174)
Employees were allowed to take any non-confidential property off campus to use at home after
informing their manager.
Connectivity. Another frequently requested improvement was better Internet connectivity or
improved VPN access from home, and many that mentioned this as an improvement in Survey
1 added that it was their biggest challenge to address: (“Network connectivity is the biggest pain”
(P44). Some respondents indicated that ensuring good connectivity at home was expensive. Paying
for upgraded home internet connectivity was also a key recommendation from the Pandemic
Programming study [40].
7 Perhaps subsidize higher speed internet connections, or speak with the broadband
providers to get better service in our areas. With multiple people at home, there’s only so
much bandwidth to be shared. (P79)
Stipend/Budget for home office. The third most frequently selected item was to have a stipend
to purchase equipment for a home office, with just slightly more engineers requesting this as an
improvement if they experienced lower productivity. Several tech companies, including Microsoft,
have been offering such a stipend to their employees [46–48].
7 Provide employees a one time reasonable allowance to set up a home office such as
sit/stand desk, ergonomic chair, allowance for monitors, budget for coffee/drinks/snacks.
(P86)
Improvements to communication tools. Once working from home, engineers were totally
reliant on communication tools to collaborate with their colleagues and for meetings. Many noted
specific improvements, including some that were engineering specific:
7 Support whiteboard drawing, support multi desktop sharing from multiple people and
sharing on split windows or on my local multiple screens. (P1277)
7 Add a bunch of developer specific features. A simple example is how do you go around
the room in standup and know that everyone got to talk. (P885)

A Tale of Two Cities: Software Developers Working from Home During the COVID-19 Pandemic

21

Provide more ergonomic furniture. Many participants noted in the first survey that their
furniture at home was not as ergonomic as their furniture at work (e.g., no standup desk, small
desk space, less ergonomic keyboards etc.). To better support employees, Microsoft provides
recommendations on how to setup physical workspaces in an ergonomic way and some stipends
for the workspace.
Not being able to exercise as much was also an issue, as this respondent mentioned:
7 I also don’t have the ability to stand up and work since my home desk doesn’t move.
This means that I’m sitting down even more every day, which also leads to back and neck
pain and frustration. (P1048)
A couple of respondents in our sample suggested treadmill desks as a possible improvement for
WFH to address less of exercise.
For some respondents, working from home goes beyond furniture, as one participant noted:
7 If I am going to continue work from home, I need a new house/space from which I can
work w/fewer distractions. (P1224)
Support for remote work post-pandemic. In the first survey, many suggested that full or
partial remote work should be supported after the pandemic, and that they appreciated the opportunity to work from home and experienced a variety of benefits (as discussed in Section 5). In
particular, several mentioned that working at home, at least some of the time, would help them be
more productive:
7 Allow more people to do this long-term after this current crisis ends; I feel I’m more
productive for it, I’m contributing better to my team, and keeping more people home will
help us meet our sustainability and environmental goals as a company. (P1297)
Some provided concrete suggestions for supporting WFH long-term:
7 Every team should treat their tech stack as if they had to work from home at least 2
days a week. This way things such as VPN, workstations, deploy pipelines, local builds,
etc are naturally able to support remote workers. This will lead us to hiring better remote
talent and allow us to institute remote working policies during health or environmental
changes that hinder the ability of some workers to be in the office. That’s what we’ve done
and it’s made our org more productive during the WFH period. (P33)
Provide guidance for working from home. Many noted that curated guidance for working
from home would benefit not just their own work but also the work of their colleagues. For example,
on how to use different communication platforms, one respondent suggested:
7 Get some primers out so that people can feel comfortable in the space and know the use
cases it’s for. Lack of this knowledge keeps translating to inefficient use of email threads.
(P669)
Improving how knowledge is externalized is also more important when everyone is remote:
7 Encourage documentation as part of our culture. It’s difficult to impossible to use
libraries from within our org without directly talking to the repository owners. Now the
only way to get information about these libraries is to send a message and hope they
respond. (P212)
Some respondents also noted that it isn’t just about improving tools and processes for WFH,
there is also a need for organizational guidance regarding maintaining a positive work-life balance:
7 Broad communication across the company to say "General work ends at 5:00 PM local
unless business critical" as a way to force work/life balance now that work and life are in
the same place. (P696)

22

D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C. Maddila, J. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan

Microsoft continuously provided guidance, tips, and resources for employees working from
home during the COVID-19 outbreak. In addition, communities were created to connect employees
with colleagues around the world for tips and support on working from home.
Other improvements. Other improvements that were suggested by respondents were to improve and encourage social interactions within teams; be more understanding of WFH scenarios beyond
the pandemic; encourage people to be more responsive; minimize the number of meetings; and guidance
for managers to manage WFH employees.
7.2

Survey 2: Relation between Improvements and Productivity

From the themes that emerged in Survey 1, we inferred a list of 12 characteristic improvements
(S1..S12) that we included in Survey 2, in which respondents could select up to three improvements.
The results are displayed in Table 6. The table shows the frequencies for how often an improvement was selected by all respondents (column "All"), by respondents who reported a decrease
in productivity (column "Low"), and by respondents who reported an increase in productivity
(column "High"). The improvements are sorted and numbered in descending order of frequency by
all respondents.
We make the following observations:
• The most frequently selected improvement was to provide more/better hardware for home
(41.6%), improve connectivity (41.5%), and provide a stipend for improving work from home
environment (40.8%).
• Several improvements were more frequently selected by respondents who experienced a
decrease in their productivity:6 improve connectivity (45.8% vs. 35.5%, S2), make improvements
to communication tools (36.9% vs. 29.3%, S4), provide guidance for successfully working from
home (23.7% vs. 16.7%, S7), and minimize the number of meetings (7.6% vs. 3.8%, S11).
• Several improvements were more frequently selected by respondents who experienced an
increase in their productivity. The improvement provide ergonomic furniture was more than
twice as likely to be selected (40.7% vs 17.2%, S5). This may be because more productive
respondents were satisfied with other potentially pressing needs. The improvement support
remote work better during normal circumstances was selected twice as frequently (30.7% vs.
15.1%, S6). This may be because these respondents’ basic needs were met and they were
focused on future needs and being able to continue to working from home.
8 DISCUSSION
Although the pandemic is an unusual—and hopefully uncommon—event in the lives of software
engineers, the sudden work from home directive provides an opportunity to study what happens
when engineers at a very large company are suddenly in a remote working condition with the
rest of their team and the entire organization. Engineering work is similar to knowledge work
in general, but engineers may require highly intense periods of focus work but also rely on tight
collaboration to develop modern software.
As such, the pandemic and the force to working from home provides an interesting opportunity
to understand more about developer productivity, but also to find guidance for developers that
work remotely or for developers that collaborate with remote team members. As many companies
6 We

break down the improvements by productivity, not because we think that getting those improvements explains
productivity, but because it shows how the needs of people who are already productive differ from those who do not. For
example, if a company wants to focus on helping people who report difficulties remaining productive while working from
home, then they should initially focus on improving connectivity and collaboration tools, not providing ergonomic furniture
(since that was primarily requested by those who were already productive).

A Tale of Two Cities: Software Developers Working from Home During the COVID-19 Pandemic

23

Table 6. Improvements in Survey 2. Participants could select up to three items. Column “All” indicates the
frequency the improvement was suggested among all respondents, “Low” the frequency among respondents
who reported a decrease in productivity, and “High” the frequency among respondents who reported an
increase in productivity. Differences between the frequency for “Low” and “High” that are statistically
significant with 𝑝 < .01 after Benjamini-Hochberg correction [27] are labeled with an asterisk (*).
Improvement
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
S8
S9
S10
S11
S12

All

Low

High

Provide more/better hardware for home (more screens, more powerful laptop, etc)
41.6% 39.1% 42.7%
Improve connectivity (fewer VPN drops, reimburse for faster internet)
41.5% 45.8% 35.5% (*)
Provide a stipend for improving work from home environment
40.8% 42.4% 39.4%
Make improvements to communication tools
33.1% 36.9% 29.3% (*)
Provide ergonomic furniture
30.1% 17.2% 40.7% (*)
Support remote work better during normal circumstances
22.3% 15.1% 30.7% (*)
Provide guidance for successfully working from home (e.g., online meeting ettiquette) 20.8% 23.7% 16.7% (*)
Improve and encourage team socialization
16.8% 16.9% 15.8%
Be more understanding of WFH scenarios beyond COVID-19
14.6% 15.7% 15.0%
Encourage people to be more responsive
9.8% 8.9% 12.0%
Minimize the number of meetings
5.8% 7.6% 3.8% (*)
Give guidance to management on how to manage WFH employees
5.6% 5.9% 5.6%

are anticipating supporting much more remote work in the future, some even declaring they will
be entirely remote, the findings from our study are important. However, our study is focused on
the study of remote work during the pandemic. We found many overlapping factors from those
found in studies conducted before the pandemic, such as control over their work, time to complete
work, focus time and work life balance. But some new factors emerged that were specific to the
pandemic context, such as commute time and reduced health risks.
Before discussing our findings further, we remind the reader that the context for this study is a
large multi-national software company, and that our study focuses on engineers working in the US.
8.1

The Yin and Yang of Working from Home

As we saw earlier in Tables 2 and 4 , for some developers that previously worked in-office with their
co-workers, certain factors that were described as a challenge by some, were described as a benefit
by others. In the statistical analysis, we even found that for some factors the corresponding challenge
was associated with statistically significant lower levels of productivity, while the corresponding
benefit was associated with statistically significant higher levels of productivity. Examples are the
ability to focus (B7, C11) and the home work environment (B12, C17).
These dichotomous experiences are expected, which we see from extensive research around the
world on people’s experiences of lock-down or social distancing during the pandemic. Furthermore, divergent experiences are expected given the varied family life, living conditions/location,
job characteristics, and personality characteristics of our studied population. For employers and
managers, knowing that “one size does not fit all” is critically important for the future of software
development work.
The main divergent factors were:
• Ability to focus. The number and nature of interruptions and distractions varied considerably, with some reporting more focus time at home and higher levels of productivity, and
others having less focus time, especially those facing interruptions with family members at
home and lower productivity. But even for those that appreciated fewer “randomizations”
from colleagues since working from home, at the same time, they missed the knowledge and
awareness they gleaned from these and other informal interactions;

24

D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C. Maddila, J. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan

• Work autonomy and motivation. Increased autonomy and control over tasks and timing
increased motivation for some, but reduced motivation for others and also their reported
productivity;
• Work environment. Some appreciated the novelty of working from home, having natural
light and more comfort at home, which was associated with higher productivity, while others
missed their office work environment with extra amenities such as the cafeteria and reported
lower levels of productivity;
• Meetings. Some felt there were too many meetings since WFH, and they missed face-to-face
social cues and whiteboards, but others liked the shorter meetings and the associated artifacts
they could refer to later;
• Work-life balance. Many appreciated having more time due to no commute and being able
to use that for extra time with family or to do personal chores or for self care, but others also
found it difficult to disconnect from work, worked too many hours and did not have healthy
habits since working from home.
• Childcare needs. Having children with a need for childcare led to some surprising dichotomous experiences. From our analysis of the data from Survey 2, we saw that employees
with children who had no difficulty handling childcare less frequently reported a drop in
productivity (20%) than employees without children (30%). However, for employees with
children who had difficulties handling childcare, 40% reported a drop in productivity. We also
found that employees who previously had children in school or childcare were MORE likely
to indicate these major challenges: lack of childcare, more distractions or interruptions, less
time to complete my work, and were LESS likely to indicate lack of motivation as a challenge.
• Social connections. Having fewer social connections was reported as a challenge for many,
but for others, a minority, they felt MORE connected to their team and appreciated online
activities such as standups, social lunches, games, daily check-ins etc.
8.2

Triangulating the Impact of Working from Home

In this paper, we have presented insights based on surveys with self-reported data through the
lens of individual productivity. This is just one of many possible analyses on how remote work
affects productivity. To illustrate an alternative perspective, we show an analysis of productivity
by mining software data collected through the company’s engineering systems. For this section,
we analyze trends across Microsoft to see how developer productivity changed during work from
home. We compared the pull request counts during the pandemic (March/April 2020) with prior
historical values during comparable periods of the fiscal year (March/April 2018 and March/April
2019).
As the Microsoft engineering workforce grew in numbers since 2018, we normalized the pull
request counts by the number of engineers to control for the growth. The number of pull requests
opened per developer during the pandemic increased compared to previous years: 4.4% compared
to 2019 and +3.4% compared to 2018. Similarly, the number of pull requests closed per developer
also increased: +4.0% compared to 2019 and +2.1% compared to 2018.
Different parts of the world went into “lockdown” at different times in March and April 2020.
Microsoft has development teams spread across the world, spanning all continents. In order to
control for geographic differences, we further analyzed the pull request data for the three main
Microsoft regions separately: Puget Sound in North America; ASIA, which includes China, India and
Japan; and EMEA, which includes UK, Netherlands, Germany, France and Scandinavian countries.
We observed that there was no discernible drop in the number of pull requests for all three regions,
including when normalized by engineer count.

A Tale of Two Cities: Software Developers Working from Home During the COVID-19 Pandemic

25

Overall we observe that there is no clear or significant drop (at statistically significant levels)
in terms of the number of pull requests and the pull requests per developer. This data analysis
suggests that the pandemic has not significantly influenced productivity at the company level.
While this particular analysis shows that productivity has been stable or has slightly improved
on average, it is important to recognize that just focusing on the company level alone loses the
nuance of how individual people are affected differently. This highlights the need to run a family
of experiments that investigate work from home using different types of data and methodologies
such as diary studies [49] and workplace analytics [50].
8.3

From Pandemic to Future of Work

The pandemic has been a major disruption and will change how engineers work in the future and
beyond the pandemic. Of course, this is not unique to software development and this disruption is
visible in other professions and for many kinds of knowledge workers. Many companies, software
companies in particular, have announced either a shift to full remote work, or to partial remote
work 7 in a hybrid fashion where more developers may be allowed or encouraged to work from
home several days a week. Working remotely is already the norm for some companies, for example
GitHub 8 , Automattic [51], and many other highly successful open source systems have been
designed, written and maintained by distributed developers, many of them volunteers [52]. Much
can be learned from these existing success stories, but there is more to learn and many factors
to consider in a future hybrid setting. An organization the size of Microsoft that has primarily
relied on co-located work must now adapt and find new ways to work in this new hybrid world
the pandemic has left behind 9 .
Remote work may suit many developers and projects, but there may be other aspects of software
development that are negatively affected and the system engineering output data may not show
those limitations. We already see signals from our survey that teams may face collaboration and
communication challenges. In our first survey, one of our respondents noted that working at home
does not provide the same information about the pulse of work but it could be addressed by tools:
7 Automate team trends and share across the team, it’s difficult to determine the real

focus the team is trying to solve without seeing people stressing behind their desks (or not).
(P891)
And individuals that are part of a team, may be concerned that a lot of the work they do (such as
helping others) may not be visible to the entire team, as one noted:
7 My biggest fear is being “out of sight, out of mind” (P932)

Some reported addressing team work challenges through daily stand-up calls over video, virtual
coffee hours, and more impromptu meetings (which as we mentioned above, was greatly appreciated
by some participants). But some development activities, such as long-term planning and creative
aspects of development, may be affected differently as some early work indicates [53]. These aspects
of development work need to be studied in a longitudinal fashion, especially if work becomes hybrid
for some developers. Managers should also be studied as they may face additional stress working
from home and managing a team. For example, it may be harder for managers to give feedback (an
important factor for developer satisfaction and productivity [17]) and maintain awareness of the
7 See

https://www.forbes.com/sites/jackkelly/2020/05/19/after-announcing-twitters-permanent-work-from-home-policyjack-dorsey-extends-same-courtesy-to-square-employees-this-could-change-the-way-people-work-where-they-liveand-how-much-theyll-be-paid/#4ac1881b614b
8 https://github.com/clef/handbook/blob/master/Employment%20Policies/Working%20Remotely.md
9 For example, articles such as this one that discusses the advantages of remote work from an organization that was previously
remote: https://www.nytimes.com/2020/07/12/business/matt-mullenweg-automattic-corner-office.html

26

D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C. Maddila, J. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan

well-being and productivity of their team members. A shift to hybrid remote work will also have
some societal implications—our survey respondents recognized this and appreciated the positive
effect on the environment less commuting may lead to.
9

RELATED WORK

There has been extensive research that compares distributed/remote development work with
co-located work, as well as several other studies that have studied developer productivity and
well-being during the pandemic. We summarize the key findings from these prior works below and
compare findings across these studies.
9.1

Working Remotely

Remote work was adopted by many large technology organizations long before the pandemic
because of the advantages that working remotely provides to employees. Remote work provides
workers with the opportunity to engage with a globally distributed team introducing a wide range
of perspectives to the project. Another advantage is the flexibility of how to work. Specifically,
workers have the autonomy over when to engage and disengage with colleagues, providing unique
opportunities for deeper concentrated work [54]. Focused time to work is often challenging when
colleagues face unscheduled interruptions [55]. Remote work also provides the flexibility of where to
work, granting workers the ability to work from many parts of the world—which if well supported,
can lead to distributed teams being just as effective as co-located teams [9].
Despite the benefits with remote work, there are also several challenges that remote work presents
for workers. For example, the ability to build trust with colleagues while working remotely is critical
for collaboration [56] but can be harder to achieve. Close proximity and in-person work provides
opportunities for unplanned interactions in-office that build trust. In contrast, interactions in remote
settings must be intentional or they will affect the building of social capital across distributed
teams [57]. In remote settings, there is a need for more devoted time, resources, communication
channels, and events to foster relationships. Although remote work implies the ability to work
from any location, working remotely has often been synonymous with working from home–which
has its own set of challenges. Some of the challenges with working from home include supporting
family members who may be sharing the same working space. For example, Heisman’s interviews
with remote workers at GitHub identifies how they have been able to take advantage of flexible
work hours with use of support groups to support their children [58].
It is important to note that there were a few multinational technology companies who supported
a “remote-first” [59] work environment before the pandemic. Some of these companies have shared
their best practices to support other organizations. For example, in 2017, Stack Overflow shared a
blogpost about how their organization has created a successful remote work environment. In this
post, they proclaim that the most important aspect that has contributed to their success is assigning
an employee to be the main point of contact to respond to all remote work-related questions [60].
Their article further describes how effective it has been for someone in the organizations’ leadership
to advocate on behalf of remote workers.
Similarly, GitLab, an all-remote DevOps technology company, released an inaugural remote
work report to reveal the state of distributed work and explore the future of remote work [61].
This timely report was released only days after King County employees were instructed to work
from home (see Figure 1). The report shares research conducted by a third-party company that
provides insights from over 3,000 remote workers across four countries in a variety of industries
and roles. Some of the key takeaways from this report are all-remote work is surging, remote work
can foster a better sense of work-life harmony, allowing remote work provides a hiring advantage,
and that “remote≠alone”, meaning that remote work does not have to mean workers are isolated.In

A Tale of Two Cities: Software Developers Working from Home During the COVID-19 Pandemic

27

response to COVID-19, GitLab produced a “Remote Work Playbook” [62] where they describe
strategic tactics to help support their more than 1,200 remote workers across 67 countries feel more
supported. It also describes what other now remote companies can do for their newly transitioned
remote workers. The playbook outlines guidelines on how to align values with expectations, how
to manage remote teams, how to identify tools for effective communication, and how to encourage
a healthy remote work lifestyle.
9.2

Studies of Developer Productivity during the COVID-19 Pandemic

In addition to previously remote companies sharing their insights about effective remote work,
several studies have looked at the impact of the pandemic on developers now working from home.
We summarize some of these studies below and briefly compare our findings.
9.2.1 Pandemic Programming: Developer Experiences and How Companies Can Help. Ralph et
al. [40] conducted an online questionnaire with over 2,000 responses from developers around
the world (the largest proportion of 22.7% were from Germany, followed by 16.4% from Russia,
12.2% from Brazil, and 4.4% from US). They aimed to understand how working at home during
the COVID-19 pandemic affected developer well-being and productivity. The survey was run at
the end of March 2020 and participants were primarily recruited through social media channels
frequented by developers.
They found that developers’ productivity and their well-being have suffered since working from
home, and that well-being and productivity are closely related. Dealing with the pandemic and
home office ergonomics affected well-being and productivity and that women/parents/people with
disabilities may be disproportionately affected. Their study leads to several recommendations how
companies can support their employees: pay for home internet, help with home equipment, pay
attention to employee emotional well-being and assure them that their reduced productivity is
expected and will not negatively affect their job.
In a different study, Machado et al. studied the impact of the pandemic on developers in Brazil
and likewise found negative implications on gender equality and on women in particular [63].
9.2.2 GitHub Study in the Early Days of the Pandemic. Forsgren et al. conducted an analysis
of developer activity on projects hosted on GitHub in the early days of COVID-19 [41]. They
considered both open source and private project data. They found the following key insights when
comparing the first three months of 2020 to the same time period in 2019:
• Developer activity (pushes, pull requests, code review and commented issues) was mainly
similar to or slightly increased compared to the previous year.
• There was some disruption in the early days of work from home for enterprise projects but
this quickly stabilized.
• Developer work days were longer by up to an hour per day with more work on weekdays
and on weekends. They suggest this could indicate a risk of burnout.
• Collaboration had increased on open source projects (in terms of number of users and
projects).
Their ongoing study from an engineering system performance point of view indicates that developers have stayed productive throughout the pandemic. Their findings align with the findings we
found from analyzing system data at Microsoft (see Section 8.2).
9.2.3 The Baidu Pandemic Study. Bao et al. studied the effect of the pandemic and working from
home at one of the largest IT companies in China, Baidu [42]. They conducted a quantitative
analysis of 139 developers’ daily activities (over 138 working days). They found that working
from home is associated with positive and negative changes in developer productivity in terms of

28

D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C. Maddila, J. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan

the number of builds, commits and code reviews. They also considered the influence of different
programming languages, project size/age/type, and considered individual developers.
They found working from home was associated with negative changes for large projects and has
different effects for different developers. Their data suggests that developer productivity may be
more stable working from home than working onsite (less variation in their levels of productivity).
They also considered data from individual developers working from home and before work from
home. They found that for the majority (approx. 85%), their productivity is about the same, but
different for others (some are more productive, some are less). They asked developers to share
feedback on their WFH productivity. The benefits that more productive developers reported were:
working from home is exciting and energizing; developers can focus with fewer disturbances;
WFH decreases transportation costs and saves time; WFH increases flexibility of when to work
and improves work-life balance. The challenges that developers with lower productivity included:
more home demands; a need for self discipline; and decreased collaboration with others. For
the developers that found no difference with WFH, they experienced no barriers to completing
their work, they could keep track of their schedule using online scheduling tools, and they found
conferencing tools were powerful and effective for screen sharing.
9.2.4 From Working from Home during the Pandemic to Working from Anywhere: A Case Study.
Smite et al. conducted a case study with a large international company with offices in Sweden,
USA and the UK. They analyzed system data and conducted interviews to study how working from
home during the pandemic impacted developer productivity, satisfaction and collaboration [64].
They found from their system data that work activity continued without significant interruptions,
but they reported changes in their daily routines. They also report different benefits and challenges
speaking to the Tale of Two cities theme, such as less pairing, more loneliness, higher burnout,
more communication friction and more scheduled meetings, but they reported more focus time and
better work-life balance. They conclude their paper with recommendations for the future of work
from anywhere to improve work culture but also to balance individual and team productivity.
9.2.5 A Longitudinal Study of Developers During the Pandemic. Russo et al. followed 200 developers
across the world working in similar lockdown conditions to understand the impact of the lockdown
on their work activity, as well as to understand any changes in their self-reported productivity
and well-being over the course of several weeks during the pandemic [65, 66]. They found that
developers spent relatively the same amount of time on different activities, but they spent less time
in meetings and on breaks. They found no significant relations between productivity, well-being
and working activities, suggesting that working from home by itself does not present a significant
challenge for organizations or developers, but introverts were potentially more impacted by the
lockdown.
9.2.6 Other Pandemic Studies at Microsoft. At the same time that this study was conducted at
Microsoft, several other studies (using a variety of methods and focusing on different populations)
were also ongoing in parallel. An extensive report by Teevan et al. [67] summarizes the findings
from this and other studies. For example, one notable study of developers at Microsoft that was
done in parallel to our study, by Butler et al., describes the use of a diary study to investigate not
just challenges but also the gratitude felt by developers over the course of the first 10 weeks of the
WFH directive [39]. Some challenges reported by developers in this diary study included too many
meetings, feeling overworked, and challenges managing their mental and physical health. However,
these developers also reported feeling gratitude for their families, their job, increased work flexibility
and their team. These authors report how insights from the diaries shape recommendations to
improve developer work from home experiences.

A Tale of Two Cities: Software Developers Working from Home During the COVID-19 Pandemic

29

We also conducted a followup survey study at Microsoft where we considered in more depth the
impact of work from home on team productivity [68]. Similarly, we found that for some developers,
team productivity had gone up, while other developers reported that their team productivity was
lower. Some of the important factors that were associated with these changes include ability to
brainstorm with colleagues, difficulties communicating with team members, and their satisfaction
with social activities. Another follow-on study to the surveys we describe in this paper was
conducted by Wang et al. [69] to study the impact of returning to the office in China when the
country started to recover from the pandemic. They found workers preferred a hybrid style of
working as many of the workers they studied were comfortable working at home after the pandemic
and were used to using communication technology to do so.
In summary, the work from home studies conducted at Microsoft and across the world agree
on a tale of two cities theme, where for some developers they did very well, but others did not,
while many adapted over time. The studies led to important insights and recommendations that
can shape developer work into a hopefully post-pandemic world.
10

CONCLUSION

The COVID-19 pandemic has been and continues to be a worldwide human and economic disaster,
with many repercussions that are already evident, but with other effects that we can’t even yet
imagine. One thing is clear, a return to business as it was before is unlikely, and many predict that
the future of development work is likely to be either fully remote, or for many, some form of hybrid
work. Thus, it is critical to understand what has worked well and what has not gone well with
remote work. We recognize that our study is only a start in understanding the implications of the
pandemic on the software developer. In particular, new models of hybrid work are likely to lead to
new challenges and benefits over remote work.
Our study reveals a “tale of two cities”—even in a company that has support in place for its
developers and remote work—and delivers not just quantitative insights (as we saw from several
studies) on how certain factors may be associated with higher and lower productivity, but also
deeper insights into the narratives from these differential experiences. The improvements our
study participants recommended shine some light on how organizations (and managers) may
support their developers, and we hope that the lessons learned from our study and other studies
of development work during the pandemic will help others recognize and react to the disruptive
changes we see unfolding in our industry.
Acknowledgments. We thank the many respondents who answered our surveys and shared
their experiences about working from home with us. We thank Victor Bahl, Peter Bergen, Surajit
Chaudhuri, Jacek Czerwonka, Nicole Forsgren, Sam Guckenheimer, Brent Hecht, Donald Kossmann,
Courtney Miller, Brendan Murphy, Madan Musuvathi, Paige Rodeghero, Jaime Teevan, and Scott
Wadsworth for the great discussions about work from home and their support of this research. We
also thank the entire Future of Remote Work v-team for the inspiring meetings. We thank Caroline
Davis, Susan Hastings Tiscornia, Tanya Platt, and Kelly Sieben for the privacy and ethics review of
the surveys. We thank the anonymous reviewers and Cassandra Petrachenko for suggestions on
how to improve this paper.
REFERENCES
[1] S. O’Flynn, “What it’s like to lead a 100-person engineering team during the pandemic,” May 2020, retrieved May 27,
2020 from https://www.lohika.com/leading-a-remote-engineering-team.
[2] A. N. Meyer, T. Fritz, G. C. Murphy, and T. Zimmermann, “Software developers’ perceptions of productivity,” in
Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Foundations of Software Engineering, 2014, pp. 19–29.
[3] F. Lanubile, “Collaboration in distributed software development,” in Software Engineering. Springer, 2007, pp. 174–193.

30

D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C. Maddila, J. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan

[4] M.-A. Storey, A. Zagalsky, F. Figueira Filho, L. Singer, and D. M. German, “How social and communication channels
shape and challenge a participatory culture in software development,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering,
vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 185–204, 2016.
[5] S. D. Teasley, L. A. Covi, M. S. Krishnan, and J. S. Olson, “Rapid software development through team collocation,” IEEE
Transactions on software engineering, vol. 28, no. 7, pp. 671–683, 2002.
[6] K. Conboy, X. Wang, and B. Fitzgerald, “Creativity in agile systems development: a literature review,” in Information
systems–Creativity and innovation in small and medium-sized enterprises. Springer, 2009, pp. 122–134.
[7] A. Espinosa, R. Kraut, S. Slaughter, J. Lerch, J. Herbsleb, and A. Mockus, “Shared mental models, familiarity, and
coordination: A multi-method study of distributed software teams,” ICIS 2002 Proceedings, p. 39, 2002.
[8] B. Al-Ani and H. K. Edwards, “A comparative empirical study of communication in distributed and collocated development teams,” in 2008 IEEE International Conference on Global Software Engineering. IEEE, 2008, pp. 35–44.
[9] C. Bird, N. Nagappan, P. Devanbu, H. Gall, and B. Murphy, “Does distributed development affect software quality? an
empirical case study of windows vista,” in 2009 IEEE 31st International Conference on Software Engineering. IEEE,
2009, pp. 518–528.
[10] A. Gupta, E. Mattarelli, S. Seshasai, and J. Broschak, “Use of collaborative technologies and knowledge sharing in
co-located and distributed teams: Towards the 24-h knowledge factory,” The Journal of Strategic Information Systems,
vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 147–161, 2009.
[11] S. Wagner and M. Ruhe, “A systematic review of productivity factors in software development,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1801.06475, 2018.
[12] F. L. Schmidt, J. E. Hunter, R. C. McKenzie, and T. W. Muldrow, “Impact of valid selection procedures on work-force
productivity.” Journal of Applied Psychology, vol. 64, no. 6, p. 609, 1979.
[13] A. J. Ko, Why We Should Not Measure Productivity. Berkeley, CA: Apress, 2019, pp. 21–26. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-4221-6_3
[14] A. N. Meyer, T. Fritz, G. C. Murphy, and T. Zimmermann, “Software developers’ perceptions of productivity,” in
Proceedings of the 22th International Symposium on Foundations of Software Engineering, November 2014.
[15] B. Johnson, T. Zimmermann, and C. Bird, “The effect of work environments on productivity and satisfaction of software
engineers,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 2019.
[16] E. Kalliamvakou, C. Bird, T. Zimmermann, A. Begel, R. DeLine, and D. M. German, “What makes a great manager of
software engineers?” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 87–106, 2019.
[17] M. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, J. Czerwonka, B. Murphy, and E. Kalliamvakou, “Towards a theory of software
developer job satisfaction and perceived productivity,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 2019.
[18] E. Murphy-Hill, C. Jaspan, C. Sadowski, D. Shepherd, M. Phillips, C. Winter, A. Knight, E. Smith, and M. Jorde, “What
predicts software developers’ productivity?” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 2019.
[19] H. Secon, “An interactive map of the us cities and states still under lockdown — and those that are reopening,” June
2020, retrieved July 27, 2020 from https://www.businessinsider.com/us-map-stay-at-home-orders-lockdowns-2020-3.
[20] K. DelBene, “Kurt delbene’s march 4 guidance to king county employees,” March 2020, retrieved July 27, 2020 from
https://news.microsoft.com/2020/03/04/kurt-delbenes-march-4-guidance-to-king-county-employees/.
[21] R. Sandler, “Amazon extends work from home policy until january,” July 2020, retrieved July 27, 2020 from https:
//www.forbes.com/sites/rachelsandler/2020/07/15/amazon-extends-work-from-home-policy-until-january/.
[22] B. Fung, “Google will let employees work from home until at least next summer,” July 2020, retrieved July 27, 2020
from https://www.cnn.com/2020/07/27/tech/google-work-from-home-extension/index.html.
[23] D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C. Maddila, J. L. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan,
“Appendix to a tale of two cities: Software developers working from home during the covid-19 pandemic,”
Microsoft Research, Tech. Rep. MSR-TR-2020-28, August 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.microsoft.com/enus/research/publication/appendix-to-a-tale-of-two-cities/
[24] T. Punter, M. Ciolkowski, B. Freimut, and I. John, “Conducting on-line surveys in software engineering,” in Proceedings
of the 2003 International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering, ser. ISESE ’03. USA: IEEE Computer Society,
2003, p. 80.
[25] E. Smith, R. Loftin, E. Murphy-Hill, C. Bird, and T. Zimmermann, “Improving developer participation rates in surveys,”
in 2013 6th International Workshop on Cooperative and Human Aspects of Software Engineering (CHASE), 2013, pp. 89–92.
[26] E. L. Lehmann and J. P. Romano, Testing statistical hypotheses. Springer Science & Business Media, 2006.
[27] Y. Benjamini and Y. Hochberg, “Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and powerful approach to multiple
testing,” Journal of the Royal statistical society: series B (Methodological), vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 289–300, 1995.
[28] R. Tibshirani, “Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B
(Methodological), vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 267–288, 1996.
[29] H. Allcott and J. B. Kessler, “The welfare effects of nudges: A case study of energy use social comparisons,”
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 236–76, January 2019. [Online]. Available:

A Tale of Two Cities: Software Developers Working from Home During the COVID-19 Pandemic

31

https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/app.20170328
[30] A. Finkelstein, M. Gentzkow, and H. Williams, “Sources of geographic variation in health care: Evidence from patient
migration,” The quarterly journal of economics, vol. 131, no. 4, pp. 1681–1726, 2016.
[31] S. Tian, Y. Yu, and H. Guo, “Variable selection and corporate bankruptcy forecasts,” Journal of Banking & Finance,
vol. 52, pp. 89–100, 2015. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378426614003823
[32] A. Coad and S. Srhoj, “Catching gazelles with a lasso: Big data techniques for the prediction of high-growth firms,”
Small Business Economics, pp. 1–25, 2019.
[33] B. Flyvbjerg, “Five misunderstandings about case-study research,” Qualitative inquiry, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 219–245, 2006.
[34] A. Kuper, The social science encyclopedia. Routledge, 2004.
[35] C. for Disease Control and Prevention, “Health equity considerations and racial and ethnic minority groups,” February 2021, retrieved April 19, 2021 from https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/community/health-equity/raceethnicity.html.
[36] ——, “Women, caregiving, and covid-19,” retrieved April 19, 2021 from https://www.cdc.gov/women/caregivers-covid19/index.html.
[37] P. Wang, “Struggle with multiple pandemics: Women, the elderly and asian ethnic minorities during the covid-19
pandemic,” PORTAL Journal of Multidisciplinary International Studies, vol. 17, no. 1, p. 2, 2021.
[38] E. Deutskens, K. De Ruyter, M. Wetzels, and P. Oosterveld, “Response rate and response quality of internet-based
surveys: An experimental study,” Marketing letters, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 21–36, 2004.
[39] J. Butler and S. Jaffe, “Challenges and Gratitude: A Diary Study of Software Engineers Working From
Home During Covid-19 Pandemic,” in 2021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on Software Engineering:
Software Engineering in Practice (ICSE-SEIP). Madrid, Spain: IEEE, May 2021, pp. 362–363. [Online]. Available:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9402021/
[40] P. Ralph, S. Baltes, G. Adisaputri, R. Torkar, V. Kovalenko, M. Kalinowski, N. Novielli, S. Yoo, X. Devroey, X. Tan,
M. Zhou, B. Turhan, R. Hoda, H. Hata, G. Robles, A. M. Fard, and R. Alkadhi, “Pandemic programming: How covid-19
affects software developers and how their organizations can help,” 2020.
[41] N. Forsgren, “Octoverse spotlight: An analysis of developer productivity, work cadence, and collaboration in the
early days of covid-19,” May 2020, retrieved June 2, 2020 from https://github.blog/2020-05-06-octoverse-spotlight-ananalysis-of-developer-productivity-work-cadence-and-collaboration-in-the-early-days-of-covid-19/.
[42] L. Bao, T. Li, X. Xia, K. Zhu, H. Li, and X. Yang, “How does working from home affect developer productivity? – a case
study of baidu during covid-19 pandemic,” 2020.
[43] B. Savransky, “Seattle ranks 2nd worst commute time in us, report finds,” December 2019, retrieved August 17, 2020
from https://komonews.com/news/local/spend-a-lot-of-time-commuting-seattle-ranks-2nd-worst-in-us-report-finds.
[44] K. Mayer, “Microsoft offers 12 weeks of paid parental leave due to pandemic,” April 2020, retrieved August 17, 2020
from https://hrexecutive.com/microsoft-offers-employees-12-weeks-of-paid-parental-leave-due-to-pandemic/.
[45] M. Czerwinski, G. Smith, T. Regan, B. Meyers, G. G. Robertson, and G. K. Starkweather, “Toward characterizing the
productivity benefits of very large displays.” in Interact, vol. 3, 2003, pp. 9–16.
[46] A. Palmer, “Shopify is giving employees a $1,000 stipend to buy supplies while they work from home during coronavirus
pandemic,” March 2020, retrieved August 17, 2020 from https://www.cnbc.com/2020/03/12/coronavirus-shopify-givesemployees-1000-stipend-to-work-from-home.html.
[47] S. Barker, “Playstation employees working from home until 30th april, will receive full pay and equipment budget,”
March 2020, retrieved August 17, 2020 from https://www.pushsquare.com/news/2020/03/playstation_employees_
working_from_home_until_30th_april_will_receive_full_pay_and_equipment_budget.
[48] D. Vena, “Facebook will give employees $1,000 bonuses to support remote work,” March 2020, retrieved August 17,
2020 from https://www.fool.com/investing/2020/03/17/facebook-will-give-employees-1000-bonus-to-support.aspx.
[49] J. L. Butler and S. Jaffe, “Challenges and gratitude: A diary study of software engineers working from home during
covid-19 pandemic,” in New Future of Work 2020, 2020, available at https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/uploads/
prod/2020/07/NFW-Butler-Jaffe.pdf.
[50] N. Singer-Velush, K. Sherman, and E. Anderson, “Microsoft analyzed data on its newly remote workforce,” July 2020,
retrieved August 17, 2020 from https://hbr.org/2020/07/microsoft-analyzed-data-on-its-newly-remote-workforce.
[51] S. Berkun, The year without pants: WordPress. com and the future of work. John Wiley & Sons, 2013.
[52] E. Raymond, “The cathedral and the bazaar,” Knowledge, Technology & Policy, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 23–49, 1999.
[53] J. L. Burke and S. Jaffe, “Challenges and gratitude: A diary study of software engineers working from home during
covid-19 pandemic,” August 2020, retrieved August 19, 2020 from https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/uploads/
prod/2020/07/NFW-Butler-Jaffe.pdf.
[54] D. Ford, R. Milewicz, and A. Serebrenik, “How remote work can foster a more inclusive environment for transgender
developers,” in Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Gender Equality in Software Engineering, ser. GE ’19.
IEEE Press, 2019, p. 9–12. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/GE.2019.00011

32

D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C. Maddila, J. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan

[55] B. P. Haynes, “Office productivity: a theoretical framework,” Journal of Corporate Real Estate, 2007.
[56] N. Bos, J. Olson, D. Gergle, G. Olson, and Z. Wright, “Effects of four computer-mediated communications channels
on trust development,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ser.
CHI ’02. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2002, p. 135–140. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/503376.503401
[57] J. K. Haines, J. S. Olson, and G. M. Olson, “Here or there? how configuration of transnational teams impacts social
capital,” in IFIP Conference on Human-Computer Interaction. Springer, 2013, pp. 479–496.
[58] L. Heisman, “Remote work: How parents are adapting and working during covid-19,” May 2020, retrieved May 28,
2020 from https://github.blog/2020-05-22-remote-work-how-parents-are-adapting-and-working-during-covid-19/.
[59] A. Mazzina, “What it means to be a remote-first company,” February 2017, retrieved June 4, 2020 from https://
stackoverflow.blog/2017/02/08/means-remote-first-company/.
[60] J. Pardue, “Making remote work: Behind the scenes at stack overflow,” September 2017, retrieved June 4, 2020 from
https://stackoverflow.blog/2017/09/29/making-remote-work-behind-scenes/.
[61] GitLab, “The remote work report by gitlab: The future of work is remote,” March 2020, retrieved June 4, 2020 from
https://page.gitlab.com/rs/194-VVC-221/images/the-remote-work-report-by-gitlab.pdf.
[62] ——, “The remote playbook from the largest all-remote company in the world,” March 2020, retrieved June 4, 2020 from
https://about.gitlab.com/resources/downloads/ebook-remote-playbook.pdf.
[63] L. S. Machado, C. Caldeira, M. Gattermann Perin, and C. R. de Souza, “Gendered experiences of software engineers
during the covid-19 crisis,” IEEE Software, vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 38–44, 2021.
[64] D. Smite, N. B. Moe, E. Klotins, and J. Gonzalez-Huerta, “From forced working-from-home to working-from-anywhere:
Two revolutions in telework,” 2021. [Online]. Available: https://europepmc.org/article/PPR/PPR339042
[65] D. Russo, P. P. H. Hanel, S. Altnickel, and N. van Berkel, “The daily life of software engineers during the covid-19
pandemic,” 2021.
[66] D. Russo, P. H. Hanel, S. Altnickel, and N. van Berkel, “Predictors of well-being and productivity among software
professionals during the covid-19 pandemic–a longitudinal study,” Empirical Software Engineering, vol. 26, no. 4, pp.
1–63, 2021.
[67] J. Teevan, “The new future of work.” [Online]. Available: https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/uploads/prod/
2021/01/NewFutureOfWorkReport.pdf
[68] C. Miller, P. Rodeghero, M.-A. Storey, D. Ford, and T. Zimmermann, ““how was your weekend?” software development
teams working from home during covid-19,” in 2021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE), 2021, pp. 624–636.
[69] Y. Wang, Y. Liu, W. Cui, J. Tang, H. Zhang, D. Walston, and D. Zhang, “Returning to the office during the covid-19
pandemic recovery: Early indicators from china,” in Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, ser. CHI EA ’21. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2021. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3411763.3451685

A

CODEBOOK

We identified 32 codes in the following six themes.
Beyond Work
Ecological Impact: The impact of working from home on ecological factors (e.g. affecting the environment). The most
common is less pollution due to not commuting.
Family, Children, and Pets: Factors related to pets, children, and family. This includes the proximity to them, interruptions
from them, lack of childcare, and needing to help children who are doing school remotely from home.
Food: The impact of working from home on meals and snacks. This includes quality and quantitiy of food, access to food,
diversity of food consumed, and the need to or opportunity to cook for one’s self.
House Work: The impact of working from home on home-related tasks or activities such as laundry, paying bills, picking
up packages, chores, and maintenance.
Money: The impact on money and spending. This may include spending less money due to not eating out or commuting
as well as spending more money on groceries, setting up a home office, or upgrading internet.
Collaboration
Blocks: Comments about being blocked from making progress due to waiting on others to relay information, make decisions,
or complete pre-requisite tasks.

A Tale of Two Cities: Software Developers Working from Home During the COVID-19 Pandemic

33

Collaboration: Aspects of coordination or collaboration that are not explicitly about communication. This also includes
general statements about collaboration such as "Collaboration is worse" or "It’s hard to be creative with people".
Meetings: Explicit mentions of meetings, including frequency, duration, time of day, quality, size, formal versus informal,
and communication channels used.
Social Connections: Non-work communication with co-workers (e.g. to help facilitate work bonds). This includes the
difficulty of managing, forming, or maintaining informal and team relationships as well as feeling isolated and missing
social connections.
Team: Team characteristics such as team culture, team social activities, team productivity, and team mood.
Communication
Channels: Discussions of the use of various communication channels such as Teams chats and calls, Email, instant
messaging, including comments about them such as using too many tools, difficulty of use, and benefits of different
tools. In addition, this includes comparisons of tools to working in office such as the lack of in-person communication
or missing richness of communicating at a whiteboard.
Communication Gaps: Challenges around communication such as it being difficult to connect with particular people (for
example, because schedules are more flexible), hard to communicate, missing communication, and miscommunication.
This also includes lack of awareness of what others are working on.
Formal Communication: Formal communication such as scheduled chats that are work related.
Informal Communication: Unscheduled, informal, or ad-hoc communication that is work related. This includes the inability
to drop by someone’s office or run into someone in the break room as well as the use of tools (e.g. Teams) for frequent,
short interactions.
Well-being
Breaks: Taking or needing more or less breaks (including meal breaks or walks); Reasons for less breaks such as having
meetings are back to back
Healthy Habits: e.g., diet, explicitly saying being "healthy", physical activity (working out), walking between meetings; too
much time on the computer; too much time at home
Mental Health: work related stress; personal stress, anxiety; burnout; fatigue; loneliness
No Commute: The impact of not having a commute. This includes benefits such as less wasted time, but also negatives
such as missing reading on the bus or calling relatives on the drive into work.
Personal Comfort: The impact on working from home on personal comforts such as listening to music without headphones,
wearing more comfortable clothes, or creating a more comfortable working space.
Routine: Any mentions of routine. May include "missing a routine" such as "I miss having breakfast every morning" or the
importance of maintaining a routine.
Schedule Flexibility: The ability to and impact of working outside of the traditional "9-5" work day. This includes working
outside of non-work hours as well as doing non-work related activities (e.g. laundry) during traditional working
hours.
Work Hours: Whether the number of hours worked during the day stayed the same, went up or went down. For instance,
"I get the same amount done, but I’m working 12 hour days to do it."
Work-Life Balance: Changes in boundaries between work and non-work life and the ability (or lack) to not let work
concerns or responsibilities interfere with non-work activities.
Focus: The impact of working from home on the ability to focus, or the impact of various factors on focus time
Interruptions and Distractions: Interruptions or distractions (or the lack of them) when working from home, whether work
related or not.
Motivation: Various intrisic and extrinsic factors affecting motivation as well as differences or changes in motivation.
Productivity: Discussion of perceived productivity and the impact of various factors on productivity
Work Environment

34

D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C. Maddila, J. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan

Connectivity: The challenges of connectivity such as internet speed and latency, "remoting in" to a machine at work to
accomplish work, using secured machines, connections to remote machines going up and down, and the need to
reboot machines remotely.
Environment: Aspects of the physical work environment such as access to natural light, now having a window, dedicated
(e.g. a study) vs non-dedicated (e.g., kitchen table) space, having privacy, temperature, more or less noise.
Ergonomics: The availability or absense of ergonomic furniture, often in comparison to the work office environment.
Furniture: References to furniture that do not mention or allude to ergonomics. Items such as whiteboards or bookcases
are also included.
Hardware: Differences in displays (quantity and quality), and machines (also quantity and quality) as well as accessories
such as mice, keyboards, headphones, and webcams.

A Tale of Two Cities: Software Developers Working from Home During the COVID-19 Pandemic

35

Table 7. Counts and Ranks of the Codes in Survey 1. The columns under Counts indicate the frequency of
each code within questions “Please share details about your answer to the previous question on how your
productivity has changed.” (Q14), “What is good about working from home?” (Q15), “What is bad about
working from home?” (Q16), “What challenges have you encountered working from home?” (Q17), and all
four questions combined (Total). The columns under Ranks indicate the rank of each code with respect to the
other codes for Q14, Q15, Q16, Q17, and all four questions combined (Total). The most frequent code is #1.
Counts
Code

Ranks (#)

Q14

Q15

Q16

Q17

Total

Q14

Q15

Q16

Q17

Total

Beyond Work
Ecological Impact
Family, Children, and Pets
Food
House Work
Money

0
65
7
6
0

6
61
32
33
11

0
38
17
0
1

0
61
9
8
1

6
225
65
47
13

30
3
22
26
30

18
6
10
9
16

30
9
16
30
28

31
3
23
25
28

32
3
22
25
31

Collaboration
Blocks
Collaboration
Meetings
Social Connections
Team

3
12
39
12
7

0
3
29
1
1

14
38
22
94
8

1
16
18
21
1

18
69
108
128
17

28
19
7
19
22

26
22
11
24
24

21
9
14
1
26

28
20
18
13
28

29
20
12
10
30

Communication
Channels
Communication Gaps
Formal Communication
Informal Communication

63
13
0
61

5
0
4
0

87
12
16
49

66
27
14
26

221
52
34
136

4
17
30
5

19
26
21
26

2
22
19
4

2
9
21
10

4
24
26
9

Well-being
Breaks
Commute
Healthy Habits
Mental Health
Personal Comfort
Routine
Schedule Flexibility
Work Hours
Work-Life Balance

19
46
7
17
3
7
21
25
11

21
229
27
45
48
0
71
16
10

17
5
48
22
0
12
1
45
47

20
0
21
9
7
4
25
20
20

77
280
103
93
58
23
118
106
88

14
6
22
15
28
22
13
12
21

14
1
12
8
7
26
4
15
17

16
27
5
14
30
22
28
8
6

15
31
13
23
26
27
11
15
15

19
2
14
15
23
28
11
13
16

83
193
5
31

80
91
0
24

12
87
12
16

25
35
10
17

200
406
27
88

2
1
27
11

3
2
26
13

22
2
22
19

11
6
22
19

5
1
27
16

34
39
13
16
38

0
63
0
2
5

34
26
36
17
47

99
57
33
33
51

167
185
82
68
141

10
7
17
16
9

26
5
26
23
19

12
13
11
16
6

1
4
7
7
5

7
6
18
21
8

Work
Focus
Interruptions and Distractions
Motivation
Productivity
Work environment
Connectivity
Environment
Ergonomics
Furniture
Hardware

