No COVID-19 Climate “Silver Lining” in the U.S. Power Sector: CO2 Emissions
Reductions Not Statistically Significant, Additional Risk to Coal Generators is
Minimal
Max Luke1 , Priyanshi Somani2 , Turner Cotterman3 , Dhruv Suri4 , Stephen J. Lee5
1 NERA Economic Consulting, Boston, MA, USA
of Computer Science and Engineering, Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal, Karnataka, India
3 Department of Engineering and Public Policy, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
4 School of Earth, Energy and Environmental Sciences, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA
5 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA

arXiv:2008.06660v1 [econ.GN] 15 Aug 2020

2 Department

Abstract
Recent studies conclude that the global coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic decreased power sector CO2 emissions
worldwide. In this paper, we analyze the statistical significance of CO2 emissions reductions in the U.S power sector
from March through July 2020 and we present model-informed expectations of the likelihood of sustained reductions
in CO2 emissions.
We use Gaussian process (GP) regression to assess whether CO2 emissions reductions would have occurred with
reasonable probability in the absence of COVID-19 considering uncertainty due to factors unrelated to the pandemic.
We show that CO2 emissions are lower than levels expected in the absence of COVID-19 for each month from March
through July 2020 but that those monthly reductions are not statistically significant considering hypothesis tests at 5%
significance levels. While we determine that CO2 emissions are on average 5.6% lower than what we would expect in
the absence of COVID-19 over these months, the observed emissions reductions are within historically typical ranges
of variance.
To make predictions about whether COVID-19-related CO2 emissions reductions will be sustained in the power
sector, we assess the relative impacts of the pandemic on electricity generation (E) and on the carbon intensity of
electricity supply (C/E). Electricity generation is on average 2.9% lower than what we would expect in the absence of
COVID-19 from March through July 2020. Reductions in electricity generation are attributable mostly to reductions in
gross domestic product (GDP) concurrent with the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect electricity generation to rebound
alongside a recovery of the U.S. economy.
C/E is determined to be 2.7% lower on average than what we would expect in the absence of COVID-19 from March
through July 2020. Reductions in C/E are mostly attributable to reductions in the share of coal-fired electricity generation. We assess the degree to which the pandemic could accelerate coal-fired power plant retirements. We analyze
the expected profitability through 2021 of the 845 coal-fired power plant units operating in the seven unbundled power
market regions in the U.S. We find that only 76 of those units, representing 1.3% of total coal generation capacity,
were expected to be profitable prior to COVID-19 but are no longer expected to be profitable due to COVID-19-related
reductions in electricity prices. We conclude that the impact of COVID-19 on accelerated U.S. coal plant retirements
is limited to about 1.3% of U.S. coal capacity.
Our analysis is the first to estimate the impact of COVID-19 on CO2 emissions accounting for variability in emissions unrelated to the pandemic. We observe reductions in CO2 emissions that are not statistically significant. While
our analysis suggests that recent reductions in CO2 emissions are linked to COVID-19, such a relationship is not as
obvious as several studies suggest it is. Moreover, we find that COVID-19 poses little additional economic risk to the
majority of coal-fired electricity generation units. We conclude that COVID-19 is unlikely to have a material impact
on U.S. power sector CO2 emissions in the long-run.
Keywords:
COVID-19, electric power sector, decarbonization, climate change, United States, counterfactual analysis, Gaussian
processes, machine learning, statistical significance, economic modeling, coal, capacity markets, price duration curve
Preprint

August 15, 2020

1. Introduction

sions, it does facilitate statistical hypothesis testing. We
use our model to evaluate COVID-19-related CO2 emissions reductions and the statistical significance of such
reductions relative to typical variance in emissions.

Despite its disruptive impacts on economic and social activities, the global coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic could have a climate-related “silver lining”: a
reduction in carbon dioxide (CO2 ) emissions [1, 2].
Several studies attribute COVID-19-related decreases in
electricity demand to decreases in power sector CO2
emissions [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. Nonetheless, we are not
aware of an analysis that reports the statistical significance of CO2 emissions reductions accounting for typical variability in emissions. We are also not aware of an
analysis that assesses the likelihood of sustained reductions in power sector CO2 emissions.
We attempt to fill such gaps in this paper. Growing public support for power sector decarbonization initiatives and policies underscore the importance of correctly identifying the drivers of reductions in power sector CO2 emissions [8, 9].
Demonstrating the causal effects of an event in sociotechnical systems is a difficult endeavor; it requires
the comparison of outcomes given the occurrence of
a stated cause to counterfactual outcomes reached in
the absence of that cause [10]. Confounding factors,
those unrelated to the cause being evaluated, hinder our
ability to determine to what degree deviations in outcomes are attributable to a causal factor of interest [11].
While causality can be evaluated empirically in many
cases with randomized experiments, such methods are
not useful in our situation. It is not possible to unequivocally prove the causal effect of COVID-19 on power sector CO2 emissions without comparing observed emissions to emissions in a fictional world that is identical to
ours but in which the pandemic had not occurred. Short
of observing that fictional world, we adopt a counterfactual framework to estimate the probability that observed
reductions in CO2 emissions would have occurred in the
absence of COVID-19.
With respect to the causal effects of COVID-19 on
power sector CO2 emissions, confounding factors include weather, seasonality, socio-demographic changes,
and changes in the electricity supply mix. One approach
to estimate the causal effects of COVID-19 on power
sector emissions would entail modeling each confounding factor in detail. We avoid such an approach because
of the complexities associated with the power system,
the economy, and the human responses to COVID-19.
Instead, we employ a simple and interpretable probabilistic model that captures historical variability associated with the confounding factors of interest. While
the simplicity of our model limits its ability to quantify
the causal effects of COVID-19 on power sector emis-

We also use a counterfactual framework to determine
the relative impacts of changes in electricity generation
(E) and carbon intensity of electricity supply (C/E) on
CO2 emissions. We conclude that reductions in gross
domestic product (GDP) concurrent with COVID-19 are
responsible for most of the total reduction in E. As the
U.S. economy recovers, electricity generation is likely
to return to levels similar to what we would have expected in the absence of COVID-19.
The reductions in C/E are attributable to changes in
the relative supplies of power generation from different fuel sources. We assess the relative electricity supplies of the three principal power generation fossil fuel
sources in the U.S.: coal, natural gas, and oil. Reductions in coal-fired electricity generation, relative to what
we would expect in the absence of COVID-19, account
for the majority of the total reduction in C/E.
Economic modeling is employed to evaluate the expected impact of COVID-19 on U.S. coal plant retirements. We analyze the expected profitability through
2021 of the 845 coal-fired power plant units operating in U.S. wholesale electricity and capacity markets.
Those 845 coal units represent 74% of coal units and
67% of coal capacity in the contiguous U.S. To estimate the expected profitability of coal-fired power plant
units, we use hourly historical electricity market price
data, monthly electricity market price forecasts, annual
and bi-annual capacity market price data, and data related to the locations, operating capacities, and costs of
coal-fired generation units.
We assume that the portion of coal generation capacity that is unprofitable given current expectations of
electricity market prices, but that would have been profitable in a counterfactual scenario reflecting an absence
of COVID-19, is the portion most likely to retire early
as a result of the pandemic.
The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we
employ a probabilistic model to determine the statistical
significance of COVID-19-related reductions on power
sector CO2 emissions. In Section 3, we assess the relative contributions of changes in E and C/E to reductions in CO2 emissions and discuss the likelihood of
sustained reductions in E and C/E. In Section 4, we
provide model-informed expectations of the degree to
which COVID-19 will affect the rate of U.S coal plant
retirements. We conclude in Section 5.
2

2. Are COVID-19-Related Reductions in Power Sector CO2 Emissions Statistically Significant?

a constant such that the Form EIA-923 data matches
the monthly mean value of the hourly time series in the
months in which the two data series overlap. Such a
shift ensures that historical data from EIA-923 are consistent with current data series from the EIA API. Concurrent points from the two series are averaged such that
we use a single series in our regression model.

Several studies report a causal link between COVID19, decreases in electricity demand, and decreases in
power sector CO2 emissions [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7].
Nonetheless, an undisputed quantification of the effects
of COVID-19 on power sector CO2 emissions would require a comparison of actual emissions to emissions in a
fictional world in which the pandemic had not occurred
but is otherwise identical to ours. We employ a simple and interpretable probabilistic model to evaluate the
statistical significance of COVID-19-related CO2 emissions reductions relative to typical variability in emissions. In the section that follows, we elaborate on the
data and methods that we employ in that modeling exercise. The results are presented and the implications for
decision-makers are discussed.

2.2. Methods
Gaussian process (GP) regression is employed to
model and forecast CO2 emissions in the contiguous
U.S. GP regressions are attractive because of their interpretability, simplicity and ease of use, ability to fit
periodic functions to capture seasonal effects, and ability to characterize uncertainty [16, 17]. GP regressions have been used to forecast electricity demand and
prices, wind and solar power generation, CO2 emissions, battery state-of-charge, and optimal grid management strategies, among other related applications
[18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26].
We develop a GP regression that represents a counterfactual scenario in which the COVID-19 pandemic
had not occurred. The GP regression is fit using historical CO2 emissions data. It is developed using the
Python GPy library [17]. We employ a linear kernel,
a bias kernel, and a standard periodic kernel in GP regression to capture both short-term and medium-term
trends over the time period that we consider. The linear and bias terms capture average year-over-year trends
while the standard periodic kernel, which is constrained
to model one-year periods, describes repeating seasonal
patterns in the time series. The GP model is fit using a
SciPy implementation of the L-BFGS-B algorithm with
five random restarts [27]. We attribute uncertainty in
the model to variability in factors that include weather,
short-term macroeconomic changes, and population and
demographic changes.
The GP regression is fit to historical emissions data
for the period between January 2016 and February
2020. That historical period is long enough to obtain
a reasonable model fit but not so long as to necessitate nonlinear approximations for year-over-year trends.
The regression model is used to forecast emissions in
March, April, May, June, and July 2020. Such a forecast is a probabilistic representation of what emissions
would have been in a counterfactual scenario characterized by the absence of COVID-19. We compare observed data to forecasted data and evaluate deviations
between the two. We assess whether those deviations
could be related to the COVID-19 pandemic.

2.1. Data
Our analysis of U.S. power sector CO2 emissions requires two data types: net generation time series by fuel
type and emissions factors for each fuel type. Net generation time series by fuel type is obtained from the U.S.
Energy Information Administration (EIA) Form EIA923 [12] and the EIA API for “Net Generation by Energy Source” [13]. EIA-923 reports monthly generation
and fuel consumption at the power plant-level and “Net
Generation by Energy Source” reports aggregate hourly
net generation by fuel type. We obtain Form EIA923 data for the period January 2001 through February
2020, and “Net Generation by Energy Source” data for
the period October 2018 through July 2020.
Form EIA-923 reports generation quantities for all
U.S. power plants and categorizes power plants by fuel
type. Monthly plant-level emissions are computed by
multiplying fuel consumption for each plant by fuel
code-specific emissions factors published by the EIA
[14]. Total CO2 emissions for the contiguous U.S. are
evaluated by aggregating plant-level emissions.
Hourly “Net Generation by Energy Source” data is
converted to CO2 emissions in a similar way. We multiply net generation by fuel type for the contiguous U.S.
by fuel type-specific emissions factors that we obtain
from the Emissions and Generation Resource Integrated
Database (eGRID) published by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) [15].
We combine the CO2 emissions time series that we
derive from Form EIA-923 and the EIA API for “Net
Generation by Energy Source.” First, hourly generation data from the EIA API is aggregated into monthly
data. Then the Form EIA-923 time series is shifted by
3

Carbon Dioxide Emissions (MMT, annualized)

Carbon Dioxide Emissions, C
2400
2200
2000

GP regression mean
GP 95% credible interval
EIA 923, mean adjusted, used to fit GP
EIA hourly, used to fit GP
EIA hourly, March through July 2020

1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
2016

2017

2018

Time (year)

2019

2020

Figure 1: Expected and observed CO2 emissions (C). GP regression is used to estimate expected CO2 emissions in the absence
of COVID-19, as shown by the GP regression mean. The GP’s 95% credible interval describes the range in which CO2 emissions
are expected 95% of the time. March, April, May, June, and July 2020 CO2 emissions are all below the GP regression mean;
however, no point is outside of the 95% credible interval.

2.3. Results

2.4. Discussion
An average CO2 emissions reduction of 5.6% is observed in the five month period relative to the expected
values given by the GP regression model. Nonetheless, each of the monthly reductions are within historically typical ranges of variability after adjusting for
seasonality and linear trends in emissions reductions.
Such variability could result from weather, short-term
macroeconomic changes, and population and demographic changes that are unrelated to COVID-19. Such
a finding suggests that a causal link between COVID-19
and reductions in CO2 emissions is not as obvious as it
is reported in other analyses [3, 5].
Figure 1 shows that certain historical deviations from
the GP regression mean are larger than deviations concurrent with COVID-19 shelter-in-place orders. For example, emissions in January 2018 are outside of the
95% credible interval. In January 2018, the “bomb cyclone” weather event in the Northeast and Mid-Atlantic
constrained natural gas pipelines and prompted large increases in oil-fired and dual-fired generation [28]. Another month, January 2020, is also outside of the GP regression model’s 95% credible interval. The reasons for
such a deviation are not as clear as they are for January
2018. However, January 2020 was among the warmest
Januarys on record in the U.S. [29]. Those historical deviations from the GP regression mean suggest that the
magnitude of deviations concurrent with COVID-19 are
not unprecedented.

We show in Figure 1 deviations from the GP regression’s predictive distribution for power sector CO2
emissions in the contiguous U.S. CO2 emissions are reported in million metric tonnes (MMT) of CO2 on an
annualized basis. Figure 1 reflects model results fit to
more than four years of historical data through February
2020, the last month before shelter-in-place orders took
effect in the U.S. The black and green points show CO2
emissions that are obtained from Form EIA-923 and the
EIA’s hourly “Net Generation by Energy Source” data.
We show GP regression means, or expected values, as a
dark blue line, and the 95% credible interval as the light
blue shaded area. Seasonal variation in power sectorrelated CO2 emissions are observed. Additionally, an
overall decreasing trend in emissions is observed.
Red points show CO2 emissions in March, April,
May, June, and July 2020. Those emissions are 3.9%,
10.5%, 15.4%, 8.9%, and 0.9% lower than the levels we
would expect in the absence of COVID-19, respectively,
but are not outside of the 95% credible interval. Thus,
those deviations are not statistically significant under
hypothesis tests at 5% significance levels. The rightmost column of Table 1 shows those percent deviations
in addition to credible interval bounds at each month in
units of percent deviation.
4

It is instructive to consider the magnitude of COVID19-concurrent U.S. power sector CO2 emissions reductions relative to state and national decarbonization targets, such as the former national target associated with
the Paris Agreement. The U.S. submitted its intended
nationally determined contribution (INDC) to stabilizing atmospheric greenhouse gas (GHG) concentrations
in March 2015 for the Conference of the Parties-21
(COP21) held in Paris. The U.S. INDC signalled the
U.S. Federal Government’s intent to achieve a 26 to
28% reduction in economy-wide GHG emissions below
2005 levels by 2025 [30], consistent with a long-term
deep decarbonization pathway to reduce 80% of emissions by 2050 [31].
Although the U.S. withdrew from the Paris Agreement, several state governments and electric utilities established deep decarbonization targets in the past two
years [8]. Those targets in aggregate require a reduction
in U.S. CO2 emissions of about 50% by mid-century.
If the 5.6% observed average reduction in CO2 emissions concurrent with COVID-19 were to persist, such
a reduction would constitute rapid progress toward state
and utility decarbonization targets and toward the INDC
that was formerly pledged by the U.S. Federal Government.
In the sections that follow, we describe the drivers
of observed emissions reductions and make modelinformed predictions about whether those emissions reductions are likely to persist.

March 2020 percent deviation
(95% credible interval bounds)
April 2020 percent deviation
(95% credible interval bounds)
May 2020 percent deviation
(95% credible interval bounds)
June 2020 percent deviation
(95% credible interval bounds)
July 2020 percent deviation
(95% credible interval bounds)
Average deviation, March
through July 2020

E
-3.8%
(+/- 6.2%)
-7.0%
(+/- 6.4%)
-7.4%
(+/- 6.0%)
-1.2%
(+/- 5.3%)
2.3%
(+/- 4.8%)

C/E
-1.4%
(+/- 9.1%)
-6.1%
(+/- 9.4%)
-8.7%
(+/- 9.1%)
-4.7%
(+- 8.3%)
1.2%
(+/- 7.7%)

C
-3.9%
(+/- 17.1%)
-10.5%
(+/- 18.6%)
-15.4%
(+/- 16.4)
-8.9%
(+/- 12.8)
-0.9%
(+/- 10.8%)

-2.9%

-2.7%

-5.6%

Table 1: Percent deviations between observed values and
counterfactual estimates and 95% credible interval bounds for
E, C/E, and C in the U.S power sector for March, April, May,
June, and July 2020.

Section 2 for data related to CO2 emissions, electricity
generation, electricity generation by fuel type, and CO2
emissions by fuel type.
3.2. Methods
We assess counterfactual and observed values of electricity generation (E) and carbon intensity of electricity
supply (C/E). The counterfactual scenario assumes the
continuation of historical power sector CO2 emissions.
The same probabilistic modeling framework that is described in Section 2 is used to estimate counterfactual
values for E and C/E.
As in our counterfactual analysis of CO2 emissions,
we include a linear kernel, a bias kernel, and a standard periodic kernel in the GP regressions to capture
both short-term and medium-term trends in E and C/E
over a period from January 2016 to February 2020. The
GP regression-defined counterfactual data is compared
to observed data in March, April, May, June, and July
2020.
E and C/E are modeled independently and the joint
relationships between those terms are not modeled. As
such, the product of the E and C/E values that are computed in a given month is not necessarily equal to C, the
CO2 emissions that are computed in that month.

3. Assessment of the Impacts of E and C/E on
COVID-19-Related CO2 Emissions
We extend upon the statistical hypothesis tests that we
present in Section 2 to determine the relative impacts of
changes in electricity generation (E) and carbon intensity of electricity supply (C/E) on reductions in power
sector CO2 emissions. We describe the data sources and
methods that are used to estimate the impacts of changes
in E and C/E on COVID-19-related reductions in CO2
emissions. The results of counterfactual analyses based
on GP regression predictive distributions are presented.
Further, we discuss the relative contributions of changes
in factors that impact E, such as GDP, and the impacts
of changes in coal-, natural gas-, and oil-fired electricity
generation on C/E.

3.3. Results
Table 1 shows the deviations in E, C/E, and C, relative
to what we would expect in our counterfactual scenario,
for March, April, May, June, and July 2020, and the
average deviations for the five month period. Fig. 2 and
Fig. 3 show the observed values, GP regressions, and
counterfactual values for E and C/E, respectively.
The reductions in E are greater than the deviations in
C/E in March and April and less than the reductions in
C/E in May, June, and July. The largest deviations in

3.1. Data
The steps we perform to obtain CO2 emissions time
series are described in Section 2. We follow analogous steps to derive time series for E and C/E. Additionally, we use the same data sources that are described in
5

Electricity Generation (TWh, annualized)

Electricity Generation, E
4750
4500

GP regression mean
GP 95% credible interval
EIA 923, mean adjusted, used to fit GP
EIA hourly, used to fit GP
EIA hourly, March through July 2020

4250
4000
3750
3500
3250
2016

2017

2018

Time (year)

2019

2020

Figure 2: Expected and observed electricity generation (E). Observed E values in March, April, May, and June 2020 are 3.8%,
7.0%, 7.4%, and 1.2%, lower than the levels we would expect in the absence of COVID-19, respectively, and 2.3% higher in July
2020. The values in April and May are statistically significant at 5% significance levels.

a sustained reduction in the energy intensity of the economy due to COVID-19-related increases in teleworking
and automation. With respect to C/E, the relative impacts from changes in coal-, natural gas-, and oil-fired
electricity generation are discussed.

E and C/E are -7.4% and -8.7%, respectively, and both
occur in May. The deviations in E in April and May are
statistically significant at 5% significance levels, while
the deviations in C/E are not statistically significant in
any month.
Additional analysis is performed to show the relative
impacts on C/E associated with changes in coal-, natural
gas-, and oil-fired electricity generation (Table 2). The
GP regressions for each of those fuel sources exhibit
large credible intervals. For example, the 95% credible interval for CO2 emissions from coal-fired electricity generated ranges from +/- 36% in April 2020. We
attribute such a result to confounding factors such as
variability in weather and in merit-order dispatch schedules.
Nonetheless, CO2 emissions from coal-fired generation decreased much more than CO2 emissions from
natural gas- or oil-fired generation, relative to estimated counterfactual values. The average reduction in
CO2 emissions from coal-fired electricity generation is
14.5% compared to average increases in CO2 emissions
from natural gas-fired and oil-fired generation of 1.0%
and 7.9%, respectively.

3.4.1. Pandemic Impacts on E
Reductions in E are observed relative to what we
would have expected in the absence of COVID-19, in
March, April, May, and June, and an increase in E is
observed in July. The reductions in April and May are
statistically significant at 5% significance levels. The
largest reduction in E is 7.4% in May. Factors that impact the observed changes in E include changes in GDP,

Counterfactual
Average Emissions,
March-July 2020
(MMT, annualized)
Observed
Average Emissions,
March-July 2020
(MMT, annualized)
Average
Percent Deviation,
March-July 2020

3.4. Discussion
The possibility of sustained impacts of COVID-19 on
E and C/E is discussed. With respect to E, we assess
changes in factors that impact E and that are concurrent with COVID-19, such as reductions in GDP and
COVID-19-related deaths. We discuss the possibility of

C from Coal

C from Natural Gas

C from Oil

806.7

593.9

20.3

689.8

599.7

21.9

-14.5%

1.0%

7.9%

Table 2: Average counterfactual and observed power sector
CO2 emissions attributable to coal, natural gas, and oil, March
to July 2020, contiguous U.S.; and average percent deviations
between counterfactual and observed emissions for each fuel
source.

6

Carbon Intensity of Electricity Supply (kg/MWh)

Carbon Intensity of Electricity Supply, C/E
500
450

GP regression mean
GP 95% credible interval
EIA 923, mean adjusted, used to fit GP
EIA hourly, used to fit GP
EIA hourly, March through July 2020

400
350
300
2016

2017

2018

Time (year)

2019

2020

Figure 3: Expected and observed carbon intensity of electricity supply (C/E). Observed C/E values in March, April, May, and
June 2020 are 1.2%, 6.1%, 8.7%, 4.7% lower than the levels we would expect in the absence of COVID-19, respectively, and 1.2%
higher in July. None of those values are outside of the GP 95% credible interval.

other long-lasting impact to the energy intensity of the
economy relates to a possible acceleration of automation in U.S. industries. The loss of jobs in middleskill, routine occupations is concentrated in economic
downturns, but much of the new economic output following recessions is not accompanied by a recovery in
employment of those same routine occupations [39].
Furthermore, employers impacted by a recession are
more likely to permanently replace routine workers with
higher-skilled workers and machine technologies [40].
The potential for substituting automation for labor is
largest in sectors with high concentrations of routine occupations, such as food services, manufacturing, transportation, and retail trade [41]. The possible impacts of
automation on electricity generation are not well understood. For example, studies that focus on the impacts
of widespread electric vehicle automation on electricity
demand report results that range from large decreases to
large increases in energy consumption and GHG emissions [42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48]. The lasting impacts of
COVID-19 on the energy intensity of the economy are
uncertain and may be as likely to increase CO2 emissions as to decrease emissions. Moreover, GDP is expected to recover to levels that we would have expected
in the absence of COVID-19. With respect to GDP, the
American Staffing Association (ASA) expects GDP to
increase by 15.2% in Q3 2020 on an annualized basis,
and by 6.8%, 5.8%, and 4.9% in subsequent consecutive quarters. Those forecasts reflect the average expectations of more than 70 Wall Street Journal economists

population, and in the energy intensity of the economy.
We discuss below the relative impacts of such factors on
changes in E concurrent with COVID-19, and the likelihood of sustained changes in each factor.
Reductions in economic output concurrent with
COVID-19 are larger in magnitude than changes in
other factors that impact E. The U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) reports reductions in real GDP
of 5.0% in Q1 2020 and 32.9% in Q2 2020 [32]. Reductions in population due to COVID-19 are much smaller
in percentage terms. As of August 1st 2020, there are
142,024 reported COVID-19-related deaths in the contiguous U.S. [33]. Those deaths represent a 0.04% reduction in population in the contiguous U.S. relative to
population forecasts for the same period made in August
2019 [34].
The energy intensity of the economy represents the
amount of electricity generated per dollar of economic
output. The impacts of COVID-19 on the energy intensity of the economy are not as clear as the impacts
of COVID-19 on GDP or on population. COVID19-related shelter-in-place measures prompted educational institutions, companies, and public agencies to
adopt organization-wide online learning and working
procedures (“teleworking”), which could persist in various sectors after governments relax shelter-in-place
measures [35, 36, 37]. While teleworking could reduce commuting-related and commercial building energy consumption, estimates of the potential impacts of
teleworking on energy use are inconclusive [38]. An7

[49]. As a consequence of that economic recovery, electricity generation is likely to increase to levels that we
would have expected in the absence of COVID-19.

In this section, we assess expectations for whether
COVID-19 will accelerate coal plant retirements in the
contiguous U.S. To evaluate potential retirements, we
estimate the expected profitability through 2021 of each
of the 845 coal-fired power plant units in the seven unbundled power market regions in the U.S. Those coalfired power plant units comprise 74% of coal units and
67% of coal capacity in the contiguous U.S.
Profitability is estimated in two scenarios: a counterfactual scenario in which we employ an electricity market price forecast developed prior to COVID-19-related
shelter-in-place orders; and a scenario that reflects current expectations in which we use observed electricity
market prices from March to July 2020 and an electricity market price forecast developed after shelter-inplace orders took effect. Both energy and capacity
market revenues are taken into account. We identify
coal plants that were expected to be profitable prior
to COVID-19-related shelter-in-place orders but are no
longer expected to be profitable due to expected reductions in electricity demand and prices. Those plants are
considered to be at risk of retirement due to COVID-19.

3.4.2. Pandemic Impacts on C/E
The carbon intensity of electricity supply (C/E) is impacted by changes to the relative supplies of power generation fuels. We observe deviations in C/E of -1.4%,
-6.1%, -8.7%, -4.7%, and 1.2% in March, April, May,
June, and July 2020, respectively, relative to the counterfactual estimates.
The reduction in coal-fired electricity generation
drives much of the overall reduction in C/E. Table 2
shows that the reduction in CO2 emissions from coalfired electricity generation is much larger than increases
in natural gas- and oil-fired electricity generation in absolute terms. Average monthly emissions from coalfired generation between March and July 2020 were
116.9 MMT lower than our counterfactual estimates, on
an annualized basis. Meanwhile, average monthly emissions from natural gas- and oil-fired generation were 5.8
and 1.6 MMT higher than counterfactual estimates, on
an annualized basis.
CO2 emissions may decline permanently to the extent that decreases in electricity demand accelerate coal
power plant retirements in the U.S. In the next section,
the economic impact of COVID-19 on coal-fired power
plant retirements is analyzed. We compare the expected
profitability of U.S. coal-fired power plants under two
scenarios: a counterfactual scenario in which we employ an electricity market price forecast published in
January 2020, and a scenario that reflects current expectations. Current expectations reflect a scenario in
which we employ actual electricity market prices between March and July 2020 and an electricity market
price forecast published in July 2020.

4.1. Data
Estimates of coal-fired power plant profitability rely
on data related to electricity market prices and capacity
auction clearing prices. We also rely on data related
to the locations, installed generating capacities, variable
costs, and fixed costs of coal-fired electricity generation
units.
Historical hourly zonal electricity market prices are
obtained from S&P Global Market Intelligence (S&P)
[57]. We obtain hourly historical price data for 57 electricity market zones for the period between January 1,
2018 and July 31, 2020.1
Forecasts of monthly average regional electricity
market prices are obtained from the EIA [58, 59]. The
EIA publishes monthly average wholesale electricity
market prices in a single zone in each electricity market
region.2 Two market price forecasts published by the

4. Will COVID-19 Accelerate the Rate of U.S. Coal
Plant Retirements?
Coal generation capacity and utilization in the U.S.
decreased every year after a peak in 2008 [50]. Such
decreases persisted in recent years despite policy interventions by the Trump administration intended to support the coal industry [51]. Decreases in coal generation
were driven by reductions in natural gas prices, flat or
negative growth in electricity demand, and increasing
state-level support for renewable generation technologies [52, 53, 54]. Additionally, some financial institutions are reluctant to support new coal power plants and
refurbishments [55, 56].

1 For CAISO, zones NP-15, SP-15, and ZP-26; for ERCOT, zones
Houston, North, South, and West; for MISO, zones Z1 through Z10;
for New England, zones Connecticut, Maine, NEMA, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, SEMA, Vermont, and WCMA; for New York,
zones A through K; for PJM, zones APS, AEP, ATSI, AE, BGE,
COMED, DAYTON, DPL, DOM, DEOK, DLCO, EKPC, JCPL,
METED, PECO, PENLC, PEPCO, PL, PS, and RECO; and for SPP,
zone SPP South.
2 For CAISO, zone SP-15; for ERCOT, zone North; for MISO,
zone Illinois Hub; for New England, zone Internal Hub; for New York;
zone G (Hudson Valley); for PJM, zone Western; and for SPP, zone
South.

8

EIA are obtained: a forecast published in January 2020
prior to COVID-19-related shelter-in-place orders, and
another forecast published in July 2020, after shelter-inplace orders took effect.
Two electricity market price scenarios are constructed. A counterfactual price scenario reflects electricity market price forecasts from March 2020 through
December 2021; this scenario was published by the EIA
in January 2020. The other scenario reflects our current expectations of electricity market prices. The current expectations scenario reflects actual historical market prices from March through July 2020 and electricity
market price forecasts from August 2020 through December 2021. These forecasts were published by the
EIA in July 2020. Fig. 4 shows the capacity-weighted
monthly average electricity prices in our counterfactual
and current expectations scenarios.
Capacity auction clearing prices are obtained from
S&P for the four electricity market regions that run
forward capacity auctions: MISO, New England, New
York, and PJM [60]. In these four regions, generators submit offers to electricity system operators to provide generation capacity in a future “capacity commitment period,” in exchange for payment from electricity
system operators. MISO, New England, and PJM run
annual capacity auctions for forward capacity commitment periods beginning June 1 and ending May 31. New
York runs biannual capacity auctions that correspond to
a winter capacity commitment period between November 1 and April 30, and a summer capacity commitment
period between May 1 and October 31. Capacity auction clearing prices are established on a zonal basis.
We obtain actual zonal capacity auction clearing
prices through May 31, 2022 for New England and PJM.
For MISO, price data are available through May 31,
2021. We assume that prices for the subsequent annual
commitment period, ending May 31, 2020, are the same
as prices for the period ending May 31, 2021. For New
York, price data is available through October 31, 2020.
We assume that prices for two subsequent winter commitment periods, ending April 30, 2021 and April 30,
2022, are the same as prices for the winter period ending April 30, 2020. We assume that prices for the subsequent summer commitment period, ending October 31,
2021, are the same as prices for the summer period ending October 31, 2020.
The locations, installed generation capacities, and
variable costs of each coal-fired electricity generation
unit in the seven U.S. electricity market regions are obtained from S&P [61]. Such data is obtained for 2019,
the latest year in which data is available. That data reports the regional and zonal locations of each generation

unit, the month and year that each unit entered into service, the operating capacity of each unit, and the variable and fixed costs of each unit. Coal-fired cogeneration facilities that produce both electricity and heat are
excluded. Such facilities typically supply electricity directly to industrial and commercial facilities. It is difficult to estimate the profitability of such units because
they do not earn electricity market revenues for the electricity they supply directly to those facilities.
Finally, an estimate of the weighted average cost of
capital (WACC) of coal-fired electricity generation units
is obtained from the National Renewable Energy Laboratory Annual Technology Baseline 2019 (NREL ATB)
[62]. We adopt an annual WACC of 4.61%.
4.2. Methods
The profitability of coal-fired power plant units is estimated. The profitability (P) for a given month (m) and
generation unit (u) is calculated as that unit’s electricity
and capacity market revenues (Em,u and Cm,u , respectively) net of variable operating costs and fixed operating and maintenance (O&M) costs (Vm,u and Fm,u respectively):
Pm,u = (Em,u + Cm,u ) − (Vm,u + Fm,u )

(1)

We describe below the methods we use to estimate expected zonal hourly electricity market prices,
monthly electricity market revenues and variable costs,
monthly capacity market revenues, and overall profitability for the period between March 1, 2020 and December 31, 2021.
4.2.1. Zonal Hourly Electricity Market Prices
Profitability is estimated across two sets of electricity market prices: one set based on an electricity market
price forecast published by the EIA in January 2020,
prior to COVID-19-related shelter-in-place orders, and
another set based on actual historical prices between
March and July 2020 and an electricity market price
forecast published by the EIA in July 2020.
Each of the seven electricity market regions has multiple electricity market zones. The EIA publishes average monthly market price forecasts for each of the seven
electricity market regions. Those monthly regional market price forecasts are converted to hourly zonal market price forecasts. Such a step is necessary to accurately model expected electricity market revenues, variable costs, and capacity market revenues, which are allocated on a zonal basis. The following procedure is
performed to determine the forecasted hourly prices in
a given month and electricity market zone:
9

Figure 4: Generation capacity-weighted monthly average electricity market prices, counterfactual scenario and current
expectations scenario. We show monthly average prices across all electricity market regions weighted by the coal generation
capacity in each region. Circles show counterfactual estimates and triangles show estimates under current expectations. Blue data
points reflect forecasts published by the EIA in January 2020. Yellow data points reflect forecasts published by the EIA in July
2020. Green data points reflect actual historical prices.
1. For a given month and electricity market zone and
region (e.g., June, AEP zone, PJM region), average
prices in that month (e.g., June) are determined for
each of the two years prior to 2020 for which we
obtain historical data, 2018 and 2019.

4.2.2. Monthly Electricity Market Profits and Variable
Costs
The electricity market revenue and variable operating
costs for a given generation unit are estimated by determining the number of hours in a month in which that
unit is online. We assume a generation unit is online for
the hours in which the electricity market price is greater
than or equal to the unit’s variable cost of operation. For
each month, we generate a price duration curve (PDC)
in which we order hourly electricity prices from highest
to lowest. The PDC is used to estimate total variable
operating costs and electricity market revenues.
The use of PDCs is illustrated in Fig. 5. In Fig. 5,
we show two PDCs that correspond to hourly electricity prices in June 2020 in the AEP zone in the PJM region. The prices in Fig. 5 (a) reflect an electricity price
forecast published by the EIA in January 2020, prior to
shelter-in-place orders, and the prices in Fig. 5 (b) reflect actual prices in June 2020. The horizontal dashed
lines reflect the variable operating cost ($/MWh) of a
coal unit in the AEP zone, “Rockport ST1.” Monthly
electricity market profits are shown in blue and monthly
total variable operating costs ($) in yellow. The vertical grey lines indicate the numbers of hours in which it
is profitable for Rockport ST1 to operate in each of the
two scenarios.
Electricity market profits and variable operating costs
are calculated for each of the 845 coal-fired generation units in the seven electricity market regions in the
U.S. We calculate those profits and costs using the price

2. We compute the differences of those historical average prices with the corresponding monthly price
forecast in the appropriate electricity market region (e.g., June 2020, PJM region) published by
the EIA.
3. The hourly prices from the historical month associated with the smallest difference that we compute
in Step 2 are adopted as our hourly zonal forecast
price profile.
4. We shift the hourly zonal forecast price profile up
or down by a constant value such that the average
monthly zonal price (e.g., June 2020, AEP zone) is
equal to the average monthly regional price (e.g.,
June 2020, PJM region) published by the EIA.
That series of steps is applied to each forecast month
and each zone in each electricity market region. Two
sets of hourly price forecasts are developed for each
zone: one set based on monthly price forecasts published by the EIA in January 2020, prior to COVID-19related shelter-in-place orders, and another set based on
actual historical prices between March and July 2020,
and monthly price forecasts published by the EIA in
July 2020.
10

Figure 5: Monthly price duration curve, electricity market revenues, and variable operating costs using (a) a price forecast
published prior to shelter-in-place orders, and (b) actual prices. Electricity market profits (blue area) and total variable operating costs (yellow area) are shown for Rockport ST1, a coal-fired generation unit in the AEP Zone in the PJM electricity market, in
the month of June 2020.

forecast published by the EIA prior to shelter-in-place
orders and a combination of actual electricity market
prices, from March to July 2020, and a price forecast
published by the EIA in July 2020.

Bcp,u = Vcp,u + Fcp,u − Ecp,u

(2)

Capacity auction clearing prices are obtained or estimated for each capacity commitment period through
2021 for each of the four regions that run forward capacity auctions. Those clearing prices are established
on a zonal basis. A generation unit that submits a bid
that is equal to or lower than the auction clearing price
receives capacity market revenues. A generation unit
(u) that clears in a given commitment period (cp) in a
given zone (z) receives capacity market revenue (C) in
a given month (m) equal to the zonal auction clearing
price (Gcp,z ), in units of $/MW-day, multiplied by the
operating capacity of the unit (Ou ) and the number of
days in the month (n):

4.2.3. Monthly Capacity Market Revenues
Four of the seven electricity market regions, MISO,
New England, New York, and PJM, run annual or biannual generation capacity auctions in which those regional operators solicit bids from generation units to be
available to provide capacity in a future capacity commitment period [60].
We assume that a generation unit bids into a capacity
auction such that the unit can expect to be profitable if
its bid clears in a given capacity commitment period.
For a generation unit (u) that does not otherwise expect to be profitable in a given capacity commitment
period (cp), that unit submits a capacity bid such that
the present value of cash flows associated with its bid
(Bcp,u ) would cover the present value of the sum of its
variable costs and fixed O&M costs (Vcp,u and Fcp,u respectively) net of the present value of electricity market
revenues (Ecp,u ). For a generation unit that does expect
to be profitable in a given capacity commitment period,
that unit bids zero dollars into the capacity auction for
that period. Eq. 2 shows the bidding behavior for generation units that do not expect to be profitable in electricity markets alone, in a given capacity commitment
period.

Cm,u = Gcp,z × Ou × n

(3)

Capacity market revenues are calculated for every
coal-fired electricity generation unit in New England,
New York, MISO, and PJM, and for every month in the
period from March 1, 2020 to December 31, 2021.
4.2.4. Overall Profitability for the Period Between
March 1, 2020 and December 31, 2021
The overall profitability of each coal-fired generation
unit is estimated for the period between March 1, 2020
and December 31, 2021. The overall profitability (P)
for each unit (u) is estimated as the sum of discounted
cash flows in each month, where m ranges from 1 to 22,
11

the number of months in the period. Lm is the monthly
nominal net cash flow, and r is the weighted average
cost of capital (WACC) (Eq. 4). We apply a monthly
WACC of 0.38% that we derive from an annual WACC
of 4.61%, consistent with the NREL ATB.
Pu =

m
X

Lm
(1 + r)m

less profit in the current expectations scenario in March
through December 2020.
4.4. Discussion
We show in Fig. 4 that actual average electricity market prices in March to July 2020 are lower than what
prices would have been in a counterfactual scenario in
which COVID-19 had not existed. Those lower prices
reduced the amount of time during which it would have
been profitable for coal plants to operate and contributed
to a reduction in profitability relative to the counterfactual scenario. Those coal-fired generation units that
operated less frequently earned the same capacity auction revenues but earned less electricity market revenues
than they would have in the counterfactual scenario.
Nonetheless, we show in Fig. 4 that electricity market
prices are expected to increase to prices similar to those
we would have expected in the absence of COVID-19
by Q4 2020. Additionally, we show in Fig. 6 that coal
unit profitability in aggregate is expected to increase to
levels of profitability that we would have anticipated in
the absence of COVID-19.
For the total period between March 1, 2020 and December 31, 2021, coal generation units in aggregate
make $10.9 billion in profit, compared to $14.8 billion
in the counterfactual case, in present value terms. Despite such a potential aggregate loss, only 76 units representing 1.3% of total capacity are at risk of early retirement due to COVID-19. That is, those 76 units would
have been profitable in the counterfactual scenario but
are not profitable in the current expectations scenario.
The results suggest that the impact of COVID-19 on
coal power plant retirements is limited to about 1.3%
of existing coal generation capacity.
Our findings comport with some independent assessments and conflict with others. The results of a survey of representatives of 11 companies that own coal
generation facilities suggests none of those companies
altered their coal retirement plans due to COVID-19
[63]. The EIA expects coal-fired electricity generation
in 2020 will be 22% lower than it anticipated in a forecast published prior to shelter-in-place orders, but that
coal-fired electricity generation in 2021 will be only 1%
lower than it anticipated previously [58, 59]. In contrast, Moody’s concludes that the reductions in coalfired electricity generation in 2020 are unlikely to recover in 2021 or beyond [64].

(4)

The monthly nominal net cash flow (Lm ) is the sum
of monthly nominal electricity and capacity market revenues net of the sum of monthly nominal variable costs
and fixed O&M costs. The profitability of every coal
generation unit is calculated in two scenarios: a counterfactual scenario that relies on an electricity market price
forecast published by the EIA in January 2020 prior to
shelter-in-place orders, and a scenario that reflects our
current expectations and is based on actual prices in
March through July, and a price forecast published by
the EIA in July 2020. We assume that the differences in
prices in our two scenarios are negligible after 2021.
4.3. Results
We analyze the expected profitability from March
2020 to December 2021 of the 845 coal-fired electricity
generation units operating in the seven unbundled power
market regions in the U.S. Only 76 of the 845 coal-fired
generation units, representing 2.0 GW or 1.3% of coal
generation capacity in the seven power market regions,
were expected to be profitable prior to COVID-19 but
are no longer expected to be profitable due to COVID19-related reductions in electricity prices. We consider
those 76 units to be at risk of early retirement due to
COVID-19. The mean age and operating capacity of
those 76 units are 58.0 years and 25.9 MW, respectively.
The newest units were operational in November 2012
and the oldest unit was operational in July 1954. A single at-risk unit resides in SPP, while the remaining units
reside in MISO: 66 units in MISO Zone 6 and nine units
in MISO Zone 4.
Estimates of the impacts of COVID-19 on the
monthly profitability of coal-fired electricity generation
units in aggregate are illustrated in Fig. 6. Fig. 6 (a)
shows estimates in the counterfactual scenario, and Fig.
6 (b) shows estimates in the current expectations scenario. Squares represent monthly revenues, diamonds
represent monthly costs, and the shaded areas represent monthly profits or losses. Coal generation units in
total are $3.9 billion less profitable in the current expectations scenario relative to the counterfactual scenario over the entire period, in present value terms.
Of that amount, coal generation units earn $3.2 billion

5. Conclusions
A counterfactual framework is employed to analyze
the statistical significance of CO2 emissions reductions
12

Figure 6: Monthly coal generator revenues, costs, and profits, March 2020 through December 2021. Monthly revenues,
costs, and profits for all coal plants in aggregate are shown in (a) the counterfactual scenario and (b) the current expectations
scenario. Squares represent revenues, diamonds represent costs, and the shaded areas represent profits or losses.
in the U.S power sector from March 1 to July 31, 2020.
We report the contributions to CO2 emissions reductions
of electricity generation, E, and the carbon intensity of
electricity supply, C/E, and present model-informed expectations of the likelihood of sustained reductions in
CO2 emissions.
In Section 2, we show that CO2 emissions are lower
than levels expected in the absence of COVID-19 in
each month from March through July 2020 but that
those reductions are not statistically significant considering hypothesis tests at 5% significance levels. In Section 3, the relative impacts on CO2 emissions reductions
of E and C/E are reported. Similar average changes in
E and C/E are observed in the months concurrent with
COVID-19. A reduction in GDP is responsible in large
part for the overall reduction in E. As the U.S. economy recovers, electricity generation is likely to return
to levels that we would have expected in the absence of
COVID-19.
A reduction in the share of coal-fired electricity generation accounts for the majority of the overall reduction
in C/E. In Section 4, we analyze the expected profitabil-

ity through 2021 of the 845 coal-fired power plant units
that are operating in the seven unbundled power market
regions in the U.S. Only 76 of those units, representing
1.3% of total coal generation capacity, were expected
to be profitable prior to COVID-19 but are no longer
expected to be profitable due to COVID-19-related reductions in electricity prices.

Our results suggest that COVID-19 led to reductions
in power sector CO2 emissions in the contiguous U.S.;
however, they also suggest that the magnitudes of those
reductions are not as obvious as several studies suggest.
Reductions in CO2 emissions concurrent with COVID19 are within historical ranges of variance. Further, the
impact of COVID-19 on U.S. coal plant retirements is
limited to about 1.3% of U.S. coal capacity. We conclude that there is no COVID-19 climate “silver lining”
in the U.S. power sector. Within a couple of years, CO2
emissions are likely to increase to levels we would have
expected prior to the pandemic.
13

6. Author Contributions

[10] H. E. Brady, Causation and explanation in social science. 2008.
[11] J. Peters, D. Janzing, and B. Schölkopf, Elements of causal inference. The MIT Press, 2017.
[12] U.S. Energy Information Administration, “Form EIA-923 detailed data with previous form data (EIA-906/920).” https://
www.eia.gov/electricity/data/eia923, April 2020. Accessed: 2020-05-13.
[13] U.S. Energy Information Administration, “U.S. Electricity
System Operating Data.” https://www.eia.gov/opendata/
qb.php?category=3390105. Accessed: 2020-05-13.
[14] U.S. Energy Information Administration, “Carbon Dioxide
Emissions
Coefficients.”
http://www.eia.gov/
environment/emissions/co2_vol_mass.cfm,
February 2016. Accessed: 2020-05-05.
[15] U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, “Emissions and
Generation Resource Integrated Database.” https:
//www.epa.gov/energy/emissions-generationresource-integrated-database-egrid, March 2020.
Accessed: 2020-05-13.
[16] C. E. Rasmussen and C. K. Williams, Gaussian Processes for
Machine Learning, vol. 1. MIT press Cambridge, 2006.
[17] GPy, “GPy: A gaussian process framework in python.” http:
//github.com/SheffieldML/GPy, since 2012.
[18] A. Zeng, H. Ho, and Y. Yu, “Prediction of building electricity
usage using Gaussian Process Regression,” Journal of Building
Engineering, vol. 28, p. 101054, 2020.
[19] P. Kou, D. Liang, L. Gao, and J. Lou, “Probabilistic electricity
price forecasting with variational heteroscedastic Gaussian process and active learning,” Energy Conversion and Management,
vol. 89, pp. 298–308, 2015.
[20] H. Sheng, J. Xiao, Y. Cheng, Q. Ni, and S. Wang, “Short-term
solar power forecasting based on weighted Gaussian process regression,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 65,
no. 1, pp. 300–308, 2017.
[21] N. Chen, Z. Qian, I. T. Nabney, and X. Meng, “Wind power
forecasts using Gaussian processes and numerical weather prediction,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 29, no. 2,
pp. 656–665, 2013.
[22] M. Sharifzadeh, A. Sikinioti-Lock, and N. Shah, “Machinelearning methods for integrated renewable power generation: A
comparative study of artificial neural networks, support vector
regression, and Gaussian Process Regression,” Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 108, pp. 513–538, 2019.
[23] J. Lee, P. Zhang, L. K. Gan, D. A. Howey, M. A. Osborne,
A. Tosi, and S. Duncan, “Optimal operation of an energy management system using model predictive control and Gaussian
process time-series modeling,” IEEE Journal of Emerging and
Selected Topics in Power Electronics, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 1783–
1795, 2018.
[24] G. O. Sahinoglu, M. Pajovic, Z. Sahinoglu, Y. Wang, P. V. Orlik,
and T. Wada, “Battery state-of-charge estimation based on regular/recurrent Gaussian process regression,” IEEE Transactions
on Industrial Electronics, vol. 65, no. 5, pp. 4311–4321, 2017.
[25] D. Fang, X. Zhang, Q. Yu, T. C. Jin, and L. Tian, “A novel
method for carbon dioxide emission forecasting based on improved Gaussian processes regression,” Journal of cleaner production, vol. 173, pp. 143–150, 2018.
[26] S. J. Lee, Adaptive electricity access planning. Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, 2018.
[27] P. Virtanen, R. Gommers, T. E. Oliphant, M. Haberland, T. Reddy, D. Cournapeau, E. Burovski, P. Peterson,
W. Weckesser, J. Bright, S. J. van der Walt, M. Brett, J. Wilson, K. Jarrod Millman, N. Mayorov, A. R. J. Nelson, E. Jones,
R. Kern, E. Larson, C. Carey, İ. Polat, Y. Feng, E. W. Moore,
J. Vand erPlas, D. Laxalde, J. Perktold, R. Cimrman, I. Hen-

The authors worked collectively to design the study.
PS and DS performed the GP regression data analysis
with guidance from ML and SL. ML and PS developed
the energy and capacity market profitability model with
guidance from SL. ML, TC, DS, and SL drafted and
edited the manuscript. All authors approved the submitted version.
7. Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Dr. Jesse D. Jenkins and Dr. David Harrison for reviewing a draft of this
work. They would also like to thank Dr. Edward S.
Rubin, Doug Houseman, Bruce Nilles, Laura Martin,
Ted Nace, Dr. Christopher Greig, Dr. Christian Hauenstein, and Dr. Audun Botterud for providing expertise
with respect to coal power plant investment decisions
and capacity market bidding behavior.
References
[1] International Energy Agency, “Global Energy Review 2020:
The Impacts of the COVID-19 Crisis on Global Energy Demand
and CO2 Emissions,” tech. rep., 2020.
[2] C. Le Quere, R. B. Jackson, M. W. Jones, A. J. Smith, S. Abernethy, R. M. Andrew, A. J. De-Gol, D. R. Willis, Y. Shan,
J. G. Canadell, P. Friedlingstein, F. Creutzig, and G. P. Peters,
“Temporary reduction in daily global CO2 emissions during the
COVID-19 forced confinement,” Nature Climate Change, 2020.
[3] Z. Liu, Z. Deng, P. Ciais, R. Lei, S. J. Davis, S. Feng, B. Zheng,
D. Cui, X. Dou, P. He, B. Zhu, C. Lu, P. Ke, T. Sun, Y. Wang,
X. Yue, Y. Wang, Y. Lei, H. Zhou, Z. Cai, Y. Wu, R. Guo,
T. Han, J. Xue, O. Boucher, F. Chevallier, E. Boucher, Y. Wei,
Q. Zhang, D. Guan, P. Gong, D. M. Kammen, K. He, and H. J.
Schellnhuber, “COVID-19 causes record decline in global CO2
emissions,” 2020.
[4] L. Myllyvirta, “COVID-19 Could Result in Much Larger
CO2 Drop in 2020.” https://www.carbonbrief.org/
analysis-coronavirus-has-temporarily-reducedchinas-co2-emissions-by-a-quarter, February 2020.
Accessed: 2020-05-25.
[5] S. Evans, “Analysis: Coronavirus set to cause largest ever
annual fall in CO2 emissions.” https://www.carbonbrief.
org/analysis-coronavirus-set-to-cause-largestever-annual-fall-in-co2-emissions,
April 2020.
Accessed: 2020-04-25.
[6] Z. Hausfather, “COVID-19 Could Result in Much Larger CO2
Drop in 2020.” https://thebreakthrough.org/issues/
energy/covid-co2-drop, April 2020.
[7] K. T. Gillingham, C. R. Knittel, J. Li, M. Ovaere, and
M. Reguant, “The Short-run and Long-run Effects of Covid-19
on Energy and the Environment,” Joule, 2020.
[8] Clean Air Task Force, “Factsheet: State and utility climate
change targets shift to carbon reductions, technology diversity,”
tech. rep., November 2019.
[9] J. D. Jenkins, M. Luke, and S. Thernstrom, “Getting to zero carbon emissions in the electric power sector,” Joule, vol. 2, no. 12,
pp. 2498–2510, 2018.

14

[28]
[29]
[30]

[31]
[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]

[41]
[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46]

riksen, E. A. Quintero, C. R. Harris, A. M. Archibald, A. H.
Ribeiro, F. Pedregosa, P. van Mulbregt, and S. . . Contributors,
“SciPy 1.0: Fundamental Algorithms for Scientific Computing
in Python,” Nature Methods, vol. 17, pp. 261–272, 2020.
A. Lee, “Januarys cold weather affects electricity generation mix
in Northeast, Mid-Atlantic,” 2018. Accessed: 2020-07-18.
J. Bateman, “January 2020 was 5th warmest on record for the
U.S.,” 2020. Accessed: 2020-07-18.
United States of America, “U.S. Cover Note, INDC, and
Accompanying
Information.”
https://www4.unfccc.
int/sites/submissions/INDC/Submission%20Pages/
submissions.aspx, March 2015. Accessed: 2020-07-07.
White House, “United States mid-century strategy for deep decarbonization,” tech. rep., November 2016.
Bureau of Economic Analysis, “Gross Domestic Product.”
https://www.bea.gov/data/gdp/gross-domesticproduct. Accessed: 2020-05-13.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “United States
COVID-19 Cases and Deaths by State.” https://www.cdc.
gov/covid-data-tracker/index.html#cases. Accessed:
2020-08-11.
U.S. Census Bureau, “2019 National and State Population
Estimates.” https://www.census.gov/newsroom/presskits/2019/national-state-estimates.html, December
2019. Accessed: 2020-05-13.
R. Beutel, “How will COVID-19 impact long term trends
in contracting?.” https://federalnewsnetwork.com/
commentary/2020/04/how-will-covid-19-impactlong-term-trends-in-contracting, April 2020. Accessed: 2020-05-03.
D. N. Harris, “How will COVID-19 change our schools in the
long run?.” https://www.brookings.edu/blog/browncenter-chalkboard/2020/04/24/how-will-covid-19change-our-schools-in-the-long-run, April 2020.
Accessed: 2020-05-03.
P. W. Forster and Y. Tang, “The role of online shopping and fulfillment in the Hong Kong SARS crisis,” in Proceedings of the
38th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, pp. 271a–271a, IEEE, 2005.
A. Hook, V. Court, and B. Sovacool, “A systematic review of
the energy and climate impacts of teleworking,” Environmental
Research Letters, 2020.
N. Jaimovich and H. E. Siu, “Job Polarization and Jobless
Recoveries,” Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 102,
pp. 129–147, 2020.
B. Hershbein and L. B. Kahn, “Do Recessions Accelerate Routine-Biased Technological Change? Evidence from
Vacancy Postings,” American Economic Review, vol. 108,
pp. 1737–1772, 2018.
Brookings, “Automation and Artificial Intelligence: How machines are affecting people and places,” tech. rep., January 2019.
J. B. Greenblatt and S. Saxena, “Autonomous taxis could greatly
reduce greenhouse-gas emissions of US light-duty vehicles,”
Nature Climate Change, vol. 5, pp. 860–863, 2015.
Z. Wadud, D. MacKenzie, and P. Leiby, “Help or hindrance?
The travel, energy and carbon impacts of highly automated vehicles,” Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice,
vol. 86, pp. 1–18, 2016.
C. Ross and G. Subhrajit, “Autonomous Vehicles and Energy
Impacts: A Scenario Analysis,” Energy Procedia, vol. 143,
pp. 47–52, 2017.
U.S. Energy Information Administration, “Autonomous Vehicles: Uncertainties and Energy Implications,” tech. rep., May
2018.
J. Lee and K. M. Kockelman, “Energy implications of self-

[47]

[48]

[49]

[50]

[51]

[52]

[53]

[54]

[55]

[56]

[57]
[58]

[59]

[60]
[61]
[62]

[63]

[64]

15

driving vehicles,” in 98th Annual Meeting of the Transportation
Research Board, Washington DC, 2019.
M. Taiebat, S. Stolper, and M. Xu, “Forecasting the Impact of
Connected and Automated Vehicles on Energy Use: A Microeconomic Study of Induced Travel and Energy Rebound,” Applied Energy, vol. 247, pp. 297–308, 2019.
K. E. Brown and R. Dodder, “Energy and emissions implications of automated vehicles in the U.S. energy system,” Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment, vol. 77,
pp. 132–147, 2019.
American Staffing Association, “GDP Quarterly.” https:
//americanstaffing.net/staffing-research-data/
asa-data-dashboard/gdp-quarterly-projections,
July 2020. Accessed: 2020-08-11.
W. J. Culver and M. Hong, “Coals decline: Driven by policy or
technology?,” The Electricity Journal, vol. 29, no. 7, pp. 50–61,
2016.
R. Mendelevitch, C. Hauenstein, and F. Holz, “The death spiral
of coal in the US: will changes in US Policy turn the tide?,”
Climate Policy, vol. 19, no. 10, pp. 1310–1324, 2019.
J. Coglianese, T. D. Gerarden, and J. H. Stock, “The effects
of fuel prices, environmental regulations, and other factors on
US Coal Production, 2008-2016,” The Energy Journal, vol. 41,
no. 1, 2020.
A. Benn, P. Bodnar, J. Mitchell, and J. Waller, Managing the
Coal Capital Transition: Collaborative Opportunities for Asset
Owners, Policymakers, and Environmental Advocates. Rocky
Mountain Institute, 2018.
U.S. Energy Information Administration, “Most coal plants in
the United States were built before 1990.” https://www.eia.
gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=30812, April 2017.
Accessed: 2020-06-25.
J. Smyth, “Major banks announce new policies to help push
utilities away from coal.” https://www.energyandpolicy.
org/major-banks-announce-new-policies-to-helppush-utilities-away-from-coal, May 2020. Accessed:
2020-06-25.
G. Readfearn, “Adani mine: three major insurers to have
no further involvement in coal project.” https://www.
theguardian.com/environment/2020/jun/12/adanimine-three-major-insurers-to-have-no-furtherinvolvement-in-coal-project, June 2020. Accessed:
2020-06-25.
S&P Global Market Intelligence, “ISO Real-Time Prices.” Paid
subscription service.
U.S. Energy Information Administration, “Short-Term Energy
Outlook, January 2020.” https://www.eia.gov/outlooks/
steo/archives/jan20_base.xlsx. Accessed: 2020-08-06.
U.S. Energy Information Administration, “Short-Term Energy
Outlook, July 2020.” https://www.eia.gov/outlooks/
steo/archives/jul20_base.xlsx. Accessed: 2020-08-06.
S&P Global Market Intelligence, “ISO Capacity Auction Results.” Paid subscription service.
S&P Global Market Intelligence, “Asset Data, Power Plant
Units.” Paid subscription service.
U.S. National Renewable Energy Laboratory, “Annual Technology Baseline 2019.” https://data.nrel.gov/system/
files/115/2019-ATB-data.xlsm. Accessed: 2020-08-06.
D. Sweeney, T. Kuykendall, and A. Duquiatan, “So far, COVID19 fallout not altering plans to retire US coal-fired plants,” 2020.
Accessed: 2020-07-23.
J. Mendez, M. Meyer, J. Leaton, B. Nelson, and J. Hempstead,
“Coronavirus-related power demand reductions drive lower carbon emissions,” tech. rep., Moodys, 2020.

