arXiv:2008.11147v1 [cs.SE] 25 Aug 2020

A Tale of Two Cities: Software Developers Working from
Home During the COVID-19 Pandemic
DENAE FORD, Microsoft Corp.
MARGARET-ANNE STOREY, University of Victoria, Canada
THOMAS ZIMMERMANN, Microsoft Corp.
CHRISTIAN BIRD, Microsoft Corp.
SONIA JAFFE, Microsoft Corp.
CHANDRA MADDILA, Microsoft Corp.
JENNA L. BUTLER, Microsoft Corp.
BRIAN HOUCK, Microsoft Corp.
NACHIAPPAN NAGAPPAN, Microsoft Corp.
The COVID-19 pandemic has shaken the world to its core and has provoked an overnight exodus of developers
that normally worked in an office setting to working from home. The magnitude of this shift and the factors
that have accompanied this new unplanned work setting go beyond what the software engineering community
has previously understood to be remote work. To find out how developers and their productivity were affected,
we distributed two surveys (with 3,634 responses)—weeks apart to understand the presence and prevalence
of the benefits, challenges, and opportunities to improve this special circumstance of remote work. From
our thematic qualitative analysis and statistical quantitative analysis, we find that there is a dichotomy of
developer experiences influenced by many different factors (that for some are a benefit, while for others a
challenge). For example, a benefit for some was being close to family members but for others having family
members share their working space and interrupting their focus, was a challenge. Our surveys led to powerful
narratives from respondents and revealed the scale at which these experiences exist to provide insights as to
how the future of (pandemic) remote work can evolve.

1

INTRODUCTION

Charles Dickens’ “A Tale of Two Cities” begins, “It was the best of times, it was the worst of
times.” Adapting Dickens’ line to leading an engineering team during the global pandemic,
I’d say “We’re doing very well, we’re barely hanging in there.”
— Shane O’Flynn [1]
Software engineering is a complex knowledge based technical task that requires intense periods
of focused, uninterrupted work [2], while coordinating and collaborating with other developers
and stakeholders [3]. Despite a need for intense periods of coordination, collaboration and communication for managing intricate dependencies within and across systems, there are compelling
success stories of how developers can effectively develop high quality complex software in a distributed fashion. Successful open source communities, globally distributed software projects and
fully remote software companies are all testaments to distributed and remote work. Decades of
engineering tools (such as version control and continuous integration tools) and knowledge sharing
tools (such as email, Stack Overflow, and Wikipedia) were conceived and designed by developers
for developers to manage the collaborative and distributed nature of software engineering [4].
Despite having rich tools to support distributed development, many software companies believe
that there are significant advantages to working in a co-located fashion, with many advocating for
close proximity among developers (such as in shared team rooms) [5]. Some of the claimed benefits
Authors’ addresses: Denae Ford, denae@microsoft.com; Thomas Zimmermann, tzimmer@microsoft.com; Christian Bird,
cbird@microsoft.com; Sonia Jaffe, sonia.jaffe@microsoft.com; Chandra Maddila, chmaddil@microsoft.com; Jenna L. Butler,jennbu@microsoft.com; Brian Houck, Brian.Houck@microsoft.com; Nachiappan Nagappan, nachin@microsoft.com,
Microsoft Corp., 1 Microsoft Way, Redmond, WA, 98052; Margaret-Anne Storey, mstorey@uvic.ca, University of Victoria,
POBox 3055, STN CSC, Victoria, BC, Canada, V8W 3P6.

2

D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C. Maddila, J. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan

for co-location are seamless coordination, increased creativity, faster learning and easier to manage
projects [6, 7].
There are numerous studies that give insights about the benefits and challenges of distributed
corporate development work compared with co-located development [8–10], but these studies
tend to focus on specific teams or investigate the velocity or quality of the code developed using
quantitative analysis of system trace data. They do not capture the experiences of developers across
a large company that have had to switch (over night) from a mostly co-located mode to remote
work from home. And yet this is what happened for many developers worldwide with the pandemic
forcing technology companies to close their offices.
The COVID-19 pandemic has undoubtedly been a worldwide human and economic disaster, but
it has also led to interesting and some unexpected revelations about how we work, play and live.
Although working from home during a pandemic is not the same as working from home during
“normal times” 1 , it is nevertheless an opportunity to study the results from a “natural experiment”
and compare the benefits and challenges developers may experience in terms of their development
productivity in these two modes. We are not alone in studying software development during the
pandemic as it unfolds and we discuss these ongoing studies in Section 2 and later compare our
findings with these other studies in Section 8. Our work adds a new perspective that dives deeper
into the narratives which reveals a tale of two cities.
In our paper, we report the dichotomous experiences of engineers (developers and program
managers) working from home (WFH) during the pandemic. We share their very early experiences,
and their experiences after several weeks of working from home. Our initial survey uncovered the
main benefits and challenges they faced, and the second survey revealed the frequency/impact of
those benefits/challenges. From the second survey, we also uncovered developers’ self-reported
changes in productivity since WFH and how the benefits and challenges they experienced associate
with those changes in productivity. Finally we share developer suggested improvements that can
be made to support the WFH experience (as shared by the engineers in our study).
Of note is that many of the factors we uncovered were seen as a benefit for some, but as a challenge
by others. These differential experiences were in some cases driven by engineers’ personal contexts
(e.g., if they have school age children or space for a home office) and characteristics of their work
(such as reliance on team members). However, some factors were experienced as both a benefit and
a challenge by some of the the same participants (such as time flexibility)
The main takeaways from our paper are as follows:
• Productivity, when measured using engineering system data, appears to be stable or slightly
improved, but some developers, at least initially, appeared to thrive and report being more
productive, while others face significant challenges with remote work and feel they are not
as productive.
• Some factors (such as schedule flexibility, proximity to family members and more time for
work) lead to dichotomous experiences across developers and even by individual developers.
• Organizations can support remote work by firstly understanding the varied experiences of
developers, the challenges their employees may face and that there are actionable recommendations they can follow to support developers working from home now or in the future
as part of hybrid model.
Our paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we provide a background of literature that
has studied developer performance, productivity and remote development work. In Section 3 we
describe the methodology we followed for the two surveys we conducted over the first few months
of the pandemic. In Section 4 we discuss the change in productivity reported across the surveys. In
1 https://twitter.com/shanselman/status/1252040170783641600

A Tale of Two Cities: Software Developers Working from Home During the COVID-19 Pandemic

3

Section 5 we report the main benefits encountered and in Section 6 we report the main challenges
encountered as developers working from home. Section 7 summarizes the key recommendations
that developers suggested organizations should follow to improve the situation for developers
working from home. In Section 8, we delve into the main factors and discuss how these may play a
role in the dichotomous experiences of developers. We also discuss how engineering system output
data can help triangulate the impact of work form home and how the pandemic may shape the
future of remote work once the pandemic is over. Section 9 discusses more recent related works
about programmers during the pandemic. Finally, Section 10 concludes our paper.
2

BACKGROUND

There has been extensive research that compares distributed/remote development work with
co-located work and many studies that investigate developer performance and productivity. We
summarize the key findings from these prior works below. Some of the factors we uncover overlap
this earlier research, but the abrupt change for individual developers and the entire organization to
working from home reveal new benefits and challenges of working from home, as we will discuss
later in the paper.
2.1

Working Remotely

Remote work has been adopted by many large technology organizations because of the advantages
that working remotely provides to its employees. For instance, remote work provides workers with
the opportunity to engage with a globally distributed team introducing a wide range of perspectives
to the project. Another advantage that comes with remote work is the flexibility of how to work.
Specifically, workers have autonomy over when to engage and disengage with colleagues providing
unique opportunities for deeper concentrated work [11]. Focused time to work is often challenging
when colleagues face unscheduled interruptions [12]. Remote work also provides the flexibility of
where to work, granting workers the ability to work from many parts of the world—which if well
supported can lead to distributed teams being just as effective as collocated teams [9].
Despite the benefits with remote work, there are also several challenges that remote work presents
for workers. For example, the ability to build trust with colleagues while working remotely is critical
for collaboration [13] but can be harder to achieve with remote work. Close proximity, in-person
work provides opportunities for unplanned interactions in-office that would build trust. Interactions
in remote settings must now be intentional or it will affect social capital across distributed teams [14].
In remote settings, there is a need for more devoted time, resources, communication channels, and
events to foster relationships. Although remote work implies the ability to work from any location,
working remotely has often been synonymous with working from home–which has its own set of
challenges. Some of the challenges with working from home include supporting family members
who may be sharing the same working space. For example, Heisman’s interviews with remote
workers at GitHub identifies how they have been able to take advantage of flexible work hours and
support groups to support their children [15].
Of note is that there are a few multinational technology companies who have been supporting a
work environment that is “remote-first” [16] before the pandemic. Some of these companies have
shared their best practices to support other organizations. For example, in 2017 Stack Overflow
shared a blog about how their organization has created a successful remote work environment.
In this post, they proclaim that the most important aspect that has contributed to their success is
having an employees whose job is be a point of contact for all remote work related questions [17].
This article further describes how effective it has been for someone in the organizations leadership
to advocate on behalf of remote workers.

4

D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C. Maddila, J. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan

Similarly, GitLab, an all-remote DevOps technology company, released an inaugural remote
work report to reveal the state of distributed work and explore the future of remote work [18]. This
timely report was released only days after King County employees were instructed to work from
home (see Figure 1). The report shares research conducted by a third party company that provide
insights from over 3,000 remote workers from across four countries in a variety of industries and
roles where they have the opportunity to work remotely. Some of the key takeaways from this
report are all-remote work is surging, remote work can foster a better sense of work life harmony,
allowing remote work provides a hiring advantage, and that “remote,alone” meaning that remote
work does not have to mean workers are isolated—reporting several in-person gatherings that can
be supported by companies. Days later in response to COVID-19, GitLab produced a “Remote Work
Playbook” [19] where they describe strategic tactics to help support their more than 1,200 remote
workers across 67 countries feel the most supported and what other newly remote companies
can do for their newly transitioned remote workers. This playbook outlines guidelines on how to
align values with expectations, how to manage remote teams, how to identify tools for effective
communication, and how to encourage a healthy remote work lifestyle.
2.2

Developer Performance and Productivity

Understanding developer productivity in software engineering has been an important topic seeing
great interest from research and industry, as improving developer productivity may lead to faster
development speed, higher quality code and also higher developer satisfaction. A concern during the
work from home shift during the pandemic is that both developer productivity and their well-being
may have been negatively affected. Existing research brings insights about developer performance,
productivity, satisfaction and developer well-being.
In terms of performance, system engineering activity metrics can provide important signals about
developer activity and productivity. Wagner and Ruhe’s review of the literature summarize studies
that use performance measures such as lines of code or function points as proxies to productivity [20].
However, within the area of organizational behavior, performance and productivity are acknowledged to be related [21], with higher levels of performance leading to higher levels of productivity,
they are also recognized as distinct concepts. Indeed, many researchers and practitioners emphasize
that developer productivity cannot and should not be measured by engineering metrics alone as
development work is not mechanized work that can be measured using system measures alone. In
fact, doing so may be detrimental to the overall and long term development objectives [22]. For
example, developers spend time mentoring newcomers, reviewing each other’s work informally,
and learning new skills.
Through their systematic literature review, Wagner and Ruhe [20] also identified 51 factors
that influence productivity. In addition to the identified technical factors that seem to dominate
productivity studies in software engineering, they also distilled a number of soft factors that focus
on aspects such as organizational culture and working environment.
Using a different lens, Meyer et al. [23] investigated how developers perceive and think about
their own productivity. Through a survey and subsequent observations and interviews, their study
brought to the surface that developers’ sense of how productive they are may be distorted by
how many interruptions and context switches they experience. Other research about developer
productivity reported that the quality of one’s work environment plays a major role [24] while the
effectiveness of a manager [25] is also an important factor on productivity.
More recent research expanded these factors to include additional factors that may influence
productivity and satisfaction or be used in certain contexts to predict productivity. From an earlier
study [26] we conducted with developers at Microsoft, the factors that more closely associated with
one’s satisfaction with their productivity included job satisfaction, doing impactful work, having

A Tale of Two Cities: Software Developers Working from Home During the COVID-19 Pandemic

5

autonomy over one’s work, the ability to complete tasks, the quality of the engineering system, ability to
complete tasks, personal technical skills, and their work environment. Predictive factors [27] included
job enthusiasm, peer support for new ideas, and getting job feedback, while “use of remote work to
concentrate”, showed the lowest variance across three large software companies.
3

METHODOLOGY

We investigated the experiences of software engineers at Microsoft during the height of the COVID19 pandemic in the United States using a set of online surveys. Figure 1 outlines the timeline of our
study from March–May 2020.

March 4
March 6–9

Employees in King County instructed to work from home
Design of Survey 1

March 10–13

Privacy/ethics review

March 16–20

Survey 1 sent daily over a period of five days to a total of 5,000 full-time
employees (3,500 developers, 1,500 program managers) in King County.
1,369 responses (response rate: 27%)

March 23–April 21

Analysis of Survey 1. Design of Survey 2 based on findings from Survey 1.
Privacy/ethics review.

April/early May

Most US states under stay at home orders (94% of the US population) [28]

April 22–May 9

Survey 2 sent weekly to a total of 9,000 full-time employees in the
United States (developers, program managers, data scientists).
2,265 responses (response rate: 25%)

Fig. 1. Timeline for our multi-survey study

Research Context. The first presumptive positive COVID-19 case in King County (which includes
the Microsoft headquarters) was reported on February 29, 2020. In the late afternoon of March 4,
Microsoft informed its employees that “Consistent with King County guidance, we are recommending
all employees who are in a job that can be done from home should do so” [29]. On March 11, the
schools were closed in Washington State (which was made permanent for the school year on April
8) and many other restrictions were introduced during April. By April 27 the outbreak has reached
its peak in Washington State. Some restrictions on outdoor activities were later lifted but social
distancing was still recommended. The pandemic also affected the rest of the US: at the end of
March, 42 states and a total of 308 million people (94% of the US population) were under stay at
home orders [28]. At the time of writing this paper, Microsoft and other large tech companies had
extended the work from home recommendation until at least the Fall of 2020 and in some cases
even until Summer 2021 [30, 31].
Research Questions. To understand the effect of WFH on software engineers, we posed the
following research questions:
RQ1 How has engineers’ self-reported productivity changed since WFH?
RQ2 What are the benefits engineers experience when working from home? How have these
benefits affected productivity since WFH?

6

D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C. Maddila, J. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan

RQ3 What are the challenges engineers face when working from home? How have these
challenges impacted productivity since WFH?
RQ4 What recommendations should be made to companies whose engineers may wish to
work from home?
To answer these research questions we distributed two anonymous surveys to understand the
experiences of software developers during the pandemic, their prevalence, and the effect on their
work.
3.1

Survey 1: Washington State (1,369 responses)

Our first survey was designed to understand the types of experiences software developers were
having during the pandemic. In this survey, we included a closed-answer question on how productivity has changed with a five-point scale for the responses. Through a following open-ended
question, participants were asked to explain their response.
• Compared to working in office, how has your productivity changed? (Q13) 2
(significantly less productive / less productive / about the same / more productive / significantly more
productive)

• Please share details about your answer to the previous question on how your productivity
has changed. (Q14)
Although there has been previous research to understand which factors affect developer productivity (as discussed above), we anticipated that different benefits and challenges may be more
relevant in this period of unexpected and mass transition to working from home for an entire
organization. Therefore, the first survey was mainly exploratory to investigate if new factors did
emerge through several open ended questions as follows:
• What is good about working from home? (Q15)
• What is bad about working from home? (Q16)
• What challenges have you encountered working from home? (Q17)
• What could be improved about how we do work from home at Microsoft? (Q22)
In addition, the survey included questions about Internet connectivity, interruptions and distractions, work times, meetings, and commute. The full survey is available as supplemental material [32].
Survey Distribution. This survey was distributed to Microsoft employees in King County during
the week of March 16, 2020 (approximately two weeks after the advice to work from home). Each
day the survey was sent to randomly selected 1,000 employees in King County, for a total of 5,000
employees (3,500 developers, 1,500 program managers). We received 1,369 responses for a response
rate of 27% (comparable to the response rates of many other software engineering surveys [33, 34]).
To encourage participation, survey respondents could enter a raffle of multiple $100 Amazon.com
gift certificates. No reminder emails were sent.
Data Analysis. For the open-ended responses to this first survey, we used an open-coding
approach, iterating and refining through multiple rounds of independent coding of an initial sample
of responses. We coded all of the open-ended questions listed above, and across multiple questions
codes for positive aspects of working from home (benefits, RQ2), negative aspects of working from
home (challenges, RQ3) and improvements (RQ4) emerged.
After several iterations coding and discussing codes, we finalized a unified coding scheme with
codes, code definitions and code categories (see Appendix A. We applied these finalized codes to a
random selection of 400 responses (see Table 8). No new codes emerged during this process. To
2 Q13

indicates the question numbers in our survey instrument

A Tale of Two Cities: Software Developers Working from Home During the COVID-19 Pandemic

7

improve the reliability of our codes, an external researcher used our coding scheme to code a subset
of our sample (100) showing an agreement of 81.9%.
The final coding scheme contained 32 codes organized into the following six themes. (The
complete list of codes and descriptions can be found in Appendix A.)
• Beyond work – effects of work from home on non-work aspects of respondents life such as
proximity to family, distribution of finances, and access to food.
• Collaboration – Aspects of collaborative tasks of respondents including challenges being
creative with others, being blocked waiting on others, and a range of interactions with
co-workers.
• Communication – Work related communication including channels used, frequency, duration,
planned versus ad-hoc, and the result of missing communication.
• Well-being – Responses related to the welfare of respondents, including changes to flexibility
of schedule and location and the effects of working from home on health (physical, mental,
and emotional) and personal comfort.
• Work – Responses related to a direct effect on respondents’ technical work output. This
included codes related to productivity, motivation, and factors affecting focus and distraction.
• Work environment – Aspects of the setting in which the respondents accomplish their work
when working from home including the existence or lack of reliable internet connectivity,
ergonomically-sound furniture, satisfactory hardware, and dedicated space.
Note that some responses were coded with multiple codes when participants raised multiple
points. For example, the following response was assigned multiple codes :
7 1. Avoiding commute, hence more productive, save on fuel (environment friendly).

2. Comfort of home (Take a nap of about 20 mins in the noon which powers up my rest of
the day work) 3. Avoid time spent in getting ready to office (10-20 mins per day) (P1269)
Commute EcologicalImpact PersonalComfort Break
We show the frequency of the main codes from the 400 responses in Table 8 in the Appendix,
however, these counts do not represent an accurate description of which benefits or challenges may
be more important, and which ones may affect productivity more or less as these are open-ended
questions.3
3.2 Survey 2: United States (2,265 responses)
To investigate the importance and frequency of the reported benefits and challenges from the first
survey and their association with self reported productivity, we designed and deployed a second
survey. Rather than open-ended questions we included closed answer questions for the factors that
emerged from our coding of the first survey. These closed questions asked about benefits and how
important those benefits were to the respondent, as well as challenges and the impact of those
challenges. In addition, this second survey inquired about additional benefits and challenges.4
3 Quantifying inherently qualitative data such as responses to open-ended questions carries some limitations. For example,
when the Pew Research Center asked about the single issue that mattered most in deciding how participants voted for
president, 35% responded the economy in an open-ended question; however, when the economy was explicitly offered in
a multiple choice question, 58%, more than half, chose the economy. https://www.pewresearch.org/methods/u-s-surveyresearch/questionnaire-design/
4 If a question was identical between Survey 1 and Survey 2, we use the same question number (e.g., Q13). For a closed
answer question in Survey 2 that was based on an open-ended question in Survey 1, we append an asterisk (*) to the
question number (e.g., Q15* is based on Q15).

8

D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C. Maddila, J. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan

• Compared to working in office, how has your productivity changed? (Q13)
(significantly less productive / less productive / about the same / more productive / significantly more
productive)

• What benefits have you experienced working from home and how important are these
benefits? (Q15*)
(I don’t experience this benefit / I experience this benefit but it’s *not* important to me / I experience this
benefit and it’s *important* to me / I experience this benefit and it’s *very important* to me)

• What work-related challenges have you experienced working from home and how impactful are these challenges? (Q17*)
(I don’t experience this challenge / I experience this challenge but it’s a *minor issue* for me / I experience
this challenge and it’s a *major issue* for me)

• What could be improved about working from home (WFH)? Choose up to three (3) items.
(Q22*)
As items for the questions, we identified a list of 15 benefits (B1..B15), 20 challenges (C1..C20),
and 12 improvements/suggestions (S1..S12) based on the thematic analysis of the responses to
Survey 1. The items were displayed in random order within a question. The full survey is available
as supplemental material [32].
Survey Distribution. This survey was distributed to 9,000 engineers (consisting of developers,
program managers and data scientists) across the entire US over a period of three weeks (a different
sample of 3,000 employees was selected for each week). There was no overlap between the samples
in Survey 1 and Survey 2 We received 2,265 responses for a response rate of 25% (comparable to the
response rates of many other software engineering surveys [33, 34]). To encourage participation,
survey respondents could enter a raffle of multiple $100 Amazon.com gift certificates. No reminder
emails were sent.
Collecting data across three weeks, and using the same question as in the first survey, allowed
us to compare the answer to the closed question about change in productivity so that we may be
able to detect if there were any significant changes in productivity (RQ1) as people adapted to or
found it harder to working from home over time.
Data Analysis. For the quantitative data in the second survey, we present descriptive statistics
about the selected benefits and their importance, and the challenges and their impact.
We also considered the association of the benefits (Q15*), challenges (Q17*), and suggested
improvements (Q22*) with the reported changes in productivity (Q13). We used Wilcox Mann
Whitney and Fisher Exact Value tests [35] to check for statistically significant differences. To reduce
false discoveries due to multiple hypothesis testing, p-values were adjusted with the Benjamini
Hochberg correction [36].
To identify benefits and challenges that are most strongly related to productivity and analyze
whether there are important interactions between them, we use a least absolute shrinkage and
selection operator (Lasso) analysis [37]. We ran two analyses: for benefits (Q15*) and for challenges
(Q17*). In both analyses, the dependent variable was whether a participant reported that productivity
stayed the same or (significantly) increased. We include as potential explanatory variables direct
effects and interactions for whether a respondent reported each benefit as important or very
important (for the analysis of Q15*) or each challenge as a major issue (for Q17*). The Lasso approach
selects the most important variables by running a least-squares regression while penalizing the
absolute value of the coefficients. Therefore, a variable is only included if it explains enough of the
variation in the dependent variable. As a standard practice, we use the maximum lambda (penalty
parameter) that gets a mean cross-validation error within one standard error of the minimum. After

A Tale of Two Cities: Software Developers Working from Home During the COVID-19 Pandemic

9

the Lasso analysis, we run a standard linear regression with the selected variables to get coefficients
that are not shrunk by the penalty procedure.
3.3

Limitations

We describe the threats to validity and limitations of our study.
External validity. Single-case empirical studies have historically been shown to contribute to
scientific discovery [38] and delivered insights in the social sciences [39, pp. 95]. The company we
studied employs tens of thousands of software engineers that work on diverse products across many
domains (operating systems, databases, cloud software, software tools, to productivity software)
and use many tools and diverse processes. By studying a single company we were able to control
for many factors that otherwise may influence the employee experience during the pandemic such
as the region and the company’s response to COVID-19. We do not claim that our results are
representative of the views of all software engineers and companies in general.
It is important to keep in mind that remote work during a pandemic is not the same as regular
remote work. While some findings will be specific to the pandemic (e.g., lack of childcare as a
challenge because schools and day cares were closed), not all findings are specific to the pandemic.
We discuss implications of our work for the future of remote work in Section 8.3.
As with any survey, there may have been non-response bias, i.e., the results might not be
representative of the population because the participants disproportionately possess certain traits
which affect the outcome. In addition, our survey was advertised as a “Work From Home Survey”
and therefore could have been subject to self-selection bias, e.g., participants might have been
more likely to participate in the survey if they were more strongly affected by work from home
(negatively or positively). To reduce non-response and self-selection bias, we kept the surveys
as short as possible, were transparent about the survey length (single-page survey), provided an
incentive to participate (raffle), and kept the surveys anonymous.
Construct validity. Although we could have used existing surveys that inquire about developer
productivity and their experience working from home (see Section 2), we recognized from early
reports that new factors specific to the pandemic were playing a bigger role in developer productivity
and experience (such as not having child care and stress of the pandemic). Nothing like this has
happened before and so we used an initial open ended survey to study the factors emerging during
this phenomenon and conducted a second survey to quantify the change in productivity and
frequency/impact of challenges/benefits encountered.
Measuring perceived productivity with a single question has limitations. We chose single response
items to keep the survey length reasonable because shorter questionnaires have been found to
receive higher response rates [40]. Self-rated, single-item response items for productivity have also
been found to correlate with objective productivity measures for software engineers [27].
Internal Validity. There are additional biases from our survey. Respondents may have shared
what they wanted management to hear (in particular in terms of suggested improvements but also
for benefits and challenges) and the wording of our questions may have led to certain responses.
Furthermore, our analysis may have been biased by our own experiences (as we were also working
from home). We tried to offset these somewhat by having additional coders and having experts
review our survey.
Finally, our study involves a single research method (a survey). However, we tried to offset this
limitation by considering the findings from other ongoing studies at the company using different
methods (including objective quantitative analysis of system data).

10

D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C. Maddila, J. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan

Table 1. Changes in self-reported productivity based on the responses to the question “Compared to working
in office, how has your productivity changed?” (Q13, Q13’) The responses to Survey 2 are further broken down
by week: April 22–25 (W1), April 26–May 2 (W2), and May 3–9 (W3).

Survey 1
Significantly more productive
More productive

8%
22%

About the same
Less productive
Significantly less productive
4

Survey 2
11%
26%

32%

32%

32%
6%

26%
6%

W1

W2

W3

13% 10% 10%
23% 28% 26%
31%

30%

34%

26% 26% 24%
7% 6% 6%

CHANGE IN PRODUCTIVITY

In this section we address the research question “How has engineersâĂŹ self-reported productivity
changed since WFH?” (RQ1). In both surveys, we asked participants how their productivity has
changed compared to working in office. The results are shown in Table 1.
• In both surveys, the majority of participants reported that their productivity has not changed
or has even improved (62%-68%). However, a substantial portion of participants (32%-38%)
reported that they are less productive
• The percentage of people reporting to be less productive consistently dropped over the study
period: from 38% in Survey 1 to 30% in the last week of Survey 2. This suggests that some
(but not all) people found ways to restore their productivity to the original levels.
Ralph et al. [41] found evidence that developers have lower perceived productivity while working
from home during the COVID-19 pandemic. Our findings also support this result but offer a
more nuanced view: initially in Survey 1, more people reported lower productivity (38%) than
higher productivity (30%); however, this later changed in Survey 2, when more people reported
higher productivity (36%) than lower productivity (30%). Similar observations have been made by
Forsgren [42] and Bao et al. [43]. We will discuss these paper in more detail in the related work
(Section 9).
It is important to recognize that at an individual level, people are affected differently by work from
home: productivity can decrease, stay the same, or improve depending on a variety of challenges
and benefits. In the next two sections, we discuss the higher level themes in terms of the challenges
and benefits experienced that emerge from our qualitative analysis of additional survey questions.
5

BENEFITS

In this section we address the research question “What are the benefits engineers experience when
working from home? How have these benefits affected productivity since WFH?” (RQ2). To identify
the benefits, we analyzed the responses to the open-ended questions in Survey 1 and to quantify
the association with productivity we used the responses to Survey 2.
5.1

Survey 1: Benefits Experienced Working from Home

Respondent identified a wide range of benefits and many respondents identified multiple benefits
working from home. In this section, we discuss themes that were frequently mentioned in Survey 1
or later emerged as significant in the productivity analysis based on Survey 2.
Commute. Most respondents pointed out benefits related to their well-being. In particular, over
half of the participants mentioned the lack of commute as a positive aspect of working from home.

A Tale of Two Cities: Software Developers Working from Home During the COVID-19 Pandemic

11

7 No commute worries. I can focus on my job instead of checking the traffic reports and

worrying. (P908)
On average, respondents reported a daily, round trip commute of 67 minutes (median 60 minutes), which is comparable to other people living in the Puget Sound area [44]. In extreme cases,
respondents mentioned a daily commute of more than four hours. “I love saving the 14-18hrs/week
of commuting and being home when my daughter gets home from school.” (P791)
The time saved on commute led to a wide range of other benefits. It allowed respondents to work
more (Work hours) but also spend time with their families (Family, children, pets) and focus
on healthy activities such as physical exercise and more sleep (Healthy habits).
7 More time with Kids due to reduced commute times. Can workout more when the sun
is out. (P48)
7 Removes the stress of a 30 minute commute to work and saves that wasted time for
either more sleep or more work. Let’s me sleep in a bit and work in a more rested state
than if I got up earlier due to the commute. (P1127)
7 My health has improved. I am getting more sleep and rest, since there is no commute
involved. I can work at my own pace, in a more comfortable environment (my home).
(P529)
Schedule flexibility. Another frequently mentioned benefit was schedule flexibility. Working
from home allowed respondents to plan their day more freely and work at different times than
they did before. Activities that required respondents to be physically present at home at certain
times were easier to do, for example, accepting deliveries, laundry, or physical exercise.
7 I can dictate my own schedule, take breaks when I want to, prioritize self-care throughout
the day (running errands, taking a quick nap, exercising, calling family + friends) (P267)
7 Working from home gives me more flexibility to do things when I take 10 minutes break
twice a day. I can finish up loading the laundry or dishwasher, I can lie down to straighten
up my back if I wish without compromising the productivity. (P833)
7 I can sometimes take a break and do some chores that are often more difficult to do later
in the day (e.g. laundry, where all the machines are usually being used in my building).
(P445)
The flexibility in schedule often led to seamless integration of work and life, where participants
completed chores while waiting for builds or during short work breaks.
7 Sometimes an idea clicks in the middle of the night, and with wfh, implementing that
idea is literally 2 seconds away (P593)
7 Being able to quickly task switch for other non-work related tasks and quickly return
to work. (P289)
7 I feel like I can solve problems more easily since I don’t feel constrained by a clock.
I can start a job and cook dinner, then come back to check the job results while I leave
something in the oven or when I’m done cooking. (P215)
Focus and Interruptions and Distractions were the second and third most frequent codes.
Fewer distractions and interruptions at home made it easier for respondents to concentrate and
focus for longer periods of time. Having fewer meetings, the ability to continue work during remote
meetings, a quiet work environment, and more control over interruptions further contributed
“Undistracted focus time.” (P1263) of the respondents.
7 I get interrupted less and am able to focus on tasks more without distraction. (P161)

12

D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C. Maddila, J. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan

7 More focus time, ability to go heads down without distractions of being in an open

office constantly or needing to move focus rooms every hour if I am working on something
that requires prolonged quiet time. (P1194)
7 Less distraction from others, especially coming from an open office scenario. Teams
meetings for some meetings where very little participation is required lets you continue to
work while “attending” and listening in, which is better than being idle in a conference
room. (P691)
7 There were plenty of distractions at work too with my office set up. So obviously
colleagues interrupting me is easier to manage now as you have to answer the teams
chat or email or phone call vs. someone just coming into your office or dragging you to a
meeting. It feels more in my control now. (P223)
Work Environment. Several respondents pointed out that they preferred their environment
at home compared to office, for example, because the environment is more quiet, more spacious,
has a window, more sunlight, or closer bathrooms. Respondents also liked having more privacy
and more control at home, for example, over the room temperature or decorations, which is more
difficult in shared environment.
7 I enjoy the relaxing nature of being in the comfort of my own home. I like being able to
use my nice chair at home, and other nice comforts my home can offer. [. . . ] My wife is
the only other person here, and she respects my zone while I’m working and gives me a
nice quiet environment. (P617)
7 The environment is much nicer. It is quiet with few distraction than my normal open
office. I also have a window which gives me natural light and a nature view neither of
which are present in my open office. This helps improve my mood and makes me more
productive. (P1203)
7 My apartment is much less dreary than the office. Visuals and decorations are not just
about “looking cool”, but have a deep effect on how well/fast/creatively/how long I can
think. In contrast the office has mostly blank white walls, no windows, and every hallway
in the building is identical. Just being in the monotony of that environment is mentally
draining, which drops my productivity. (P146)
7 I work in an open floor area and had to always be careful what was on my screens that
others shouldn’t see, no concerns now with that. (P333)
Participants also enjoyed the ability to wear comfortable clothes, listen to loud music, and work
on their own pace (Personal comfort) in their their home work environments.
7 I’m in the comfort of my own home (I can wear lounge clothing, play music, etc). (P325)
7 No need makeup, suitable dress, and few unnecessary social except meeting. Saving
time. Not worry about if anyone will look at me when the moment don’t want to be looked.
More concentrate on work. (P371)
7 I feel more comfortable and have more privacy. I feel less pressured to do work and get
to work on my own pace. (P442)
Family, Children, and Pets. Respondents liked being close to their families, children, and pets.
They appreciated being able to see them during breaks or lunch and that they can take care of
family needs when needed.
7 Being at home with family, especially with a toddler and baby. I get to spend a bit of
time each day every few hours to just say hi and be around them, even if just for a few
brief minutes. (P79)

A Tale of Two Cities: Software Developers Working from Home During the COVID-19 Pandemic

13

Table 2. Benefits in Survey 2. The column Distribution refers to the distribution of responses that (from
left to right) do not experience a benefit (light gray ), experience a benefit and consider the benefit as
unimportant (gray ), important (dark gray ) or very important (darker gray ). The column Prevalence
indicates the percentage of respondents who experienced the benefit (
) while the column Importance
describes the percentage of participants who indicated this benefit to be important or very important (
percentage of
with respect to
). The column Delta reports the difference in the average productivity
change when a benefit was experienced vs. when it was not; statistically significant differences (p < .01,
with Benjamini-Hochberg correction [36]) are indicated with an asterisk (*). To compute the Delta column,
a response “significantly less productive” was coded as –2, “less productive” as –1, “about the same” as 0,
“more productive” as +1, and “significantly more productive” as +2. The benefits are sorted and numbered in
descending order by column Prevalence.

Benefit
B1
B2
B3
B4
B5
B6
B7
B8
B9
B10
B11
B12
B13
B14
B15

Distribution

Less time on commute
Spending less money
Flexible work hours
Closer to family
More comfortable clothing
Reduced health risks
Better focus time
Less distractions or interruptions
More time to complete work
More breaks
Better work life balance
Better work environment
More efficient meetings
More control over work
More physical activity

Prevalence

Importance

96
84
81
81
80
72
62
55
52
52
50
48
46
37
34

82
66
82
85
48
88
93
87
80
64
95
81
87
87
91

Delta
0.31
0.42 (*)
0.40 (*)
0.34 (*)
0.37 (*)
0.24 (*)
1.15 (*)
1.03 (*)
0.78 (*)
0.02
0.59 (*)
1.06 (*)
0.59 (*)
0.68 (*)
0.54 (*)

7 Work breaks are fulfilling if you have family members around. (P1265)

Money. Several participants pointed out that working from home saves them money because of
no commute and eating home-made food.
7 I save money on food because I’m eating more out of the refrigerator than spending

money on lunch every day. (P221)
7 No wasted time & money on commute. (P72)

5.2

Survey 2: Relation between Benefits and Productivity

From the themes that emerged in Survey 1, we inferred a list of 15 characteristic benefits (B1..B15)
that we included in Survey 2. The results are displayed in Table 2. The benefits are sorted and
numbered in descending order of frequency.
Frequency and importance of benefits. We make the following observations from Table 2 about
how the prevalence and importance of benefits:
• The Prevalence column shows the frequency of the benefits. The most frequently reported
benefits (B1-B5) were less time on commute (96%), spending less money (84%), flexible work
hours (81%), closer to family (81%), and more comfortable clothing (80%).

14

D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C. Maddila, J. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan

Table 3. Results from the Lasso regression analysis. The dependent variable was whether a participant
reported that productivity stayed the same or increased. The explanatory variables are the direct effects and
interactions for experienced benefits that were considered as important or very important.

Benefit

Coeff.

Std. Error

Constant (Intercept)

0.393∗∗∗

(0.014)

Better focus time (B7)
Less distractions or interruptions (B8)
Better work environment (B12)

0.223∗∗∗
0.147∗∗∗
0.051

(0.023)
(0.023)
(0.056)

Less time on commute (B1) and Better work environment (B12)
Less time on commute (B1) and More time to complete work (B9)

0.101∗
0.096∗∗∗

(0.057)
(0.021)

Observations
R2
Adjusted R2

2,104
0.260
0.258

Note: ∗ p<0.1; ∗∗ p<0.05; ∗∗∗ p<0.01
• The Importance column shows the percentage of participants who indicated a benefit to
be important or very important if they experienced it. Almost all benefits were rated as
important by most participants who experienced a benefit. The benefits rated most frequently
as important were better work life balance (95%, B11), better focus time (93%, B7), and more
physical activity (91%, B15). The benefits rated less frequently as important were more
comfortable clothing (48%, B5), more breaks (64%, B10), and spending less money (66%, B2).
Relation between benefits and productivity. Table 2 shows in the Delta column the difference in
productivity change (with –2 for “significantly less productive” to +2 for “significantly more productive”) when a benefit was experienced vs. when it was not. We make the following observations:
• All benefits had a positive delta on productivity change. This means that respondents who
experienced a benefit, on average also reported being more productive when working from
home. The delta was small for the benefit more breaks (+0.02, B10).
• Not all benefits had a statistically significant productivity delta: there was no statistical
difference in productivity change for the benefits less time on commute (B1) and more breaks
(B10).
• The benefits with the highest productivity delta were better focus time (+1.15, B7), better work
environment (+1.06, B12), less distractions or interruptions (+1.03, B8). All of these have been
found to be significant predictors of productivity in the past [2, 24, 26, 27].
Lasso analysis. We ran a Lasso analysis to see which benefits were most strongly associated with
productivity change in a combined model and to check whether interactions between the benefits
matter. The regression results with the Lasso-selected variables, shown in Table 3, are similar to the
pairwise relationships. The likelihood that people’s productivity stayed the same or improved was
increased by the benefits of better focus time (+22.3%) and less distractions or interruptions (+14.7%).
The coefficient for better work environment at home was not statistically significant, however,
the interaction between better work environment and less time spent on commute (+10.1%) was
marginally significant. People who reported benefiting from both less time spent on commute and
more time to complete their work were also more likely to report that their productivity remains the
same or increased (+9.6%).

A Tale of Two Cities: Software Developers Working from Home During the COVID-19 Pandemic

6

15

CHALLENGES

In this section we address the research question “What are the challenges engineers face when
working from home? How have these challenges affected productivity since WFH?” (RQ3). To identify
the challenges, we analyzed the responses to the open-ended questions in Survey 1 and to quantify
the association with productivity we used the responses to Survey 2.
6.1

Survey 1: Challenges Experienced Working from Home

The survey respondents shared a wide range of challenges and many respondents indicated they
experienced multiple challenges working from home. In this section, we discuss challenges that
were frequently mentioned in Survey 1 or later emerged as significant in the productivity analysis
based on Survey 2.
Connectivity. Of all the challenges, problems with connectivity was the most frequent challenge shared. This included access to remote desktops, special access work stations, and internet
bandwidth. Respondents mentioned they experienced slow connections due to a high number of
users on their internet connections:
7 Periodic internet disruption due to wi-fi router and modem resetting due to 2 VPN
connections for my wife & I, and our kids being online for school work. (P1013)
Internet connectivity speed went beyond one’s home internet and became a challenge when a
colleagues’ internet connection was not as resilient.
7 Remote desktop connectivity issues. Coworkers with spotty internet quality are hard to
meet with. (P691)
Respondents also described work-a-rounds they used to rectify their connectivity issues:
7 The VPN / Remote tools are not great, crashes often. I especially dont want to Intune my
personal device, so working remotely have been challenging with the redmondts gateway
down more than 50% of the time, and the WVD features crashing / disconnecting / not
allowing correct alt-tab etc. (P37)
Although many have attempted to find resolutions, at times the connectivity issues they experienced
felt like it was something out of their control.
Family, Children, Pets. One of the most frequent challenges respondents shared was with
proximity to family life. Being physically co-located with family members, housemates, children,
or pets encouraged some to change their work habits:
7 Staying focused, especially with young kids around. Normally I would only work from
home for a few hours occasionally after the kids went to bed. That is the only time I
currently feel like I can be productive. (P531)
The additional interactions with family have even to be more mindful of supporting family “child
care schedules”(267). Respondents also mentioned how there was an implicit expectation of being
engaged that often felt at odds with work:
7 Family in the house means there is also expectations from them to spend time or help
around. (P338)
The challenge of being physically present with family, but mentally focused on other tasks is an
experience that was hard to resolve.
Communication Channels. Another frequent challenge that respondents reported having was
with the channels they use to communicate with their team members. One issue with communication
channels was increased friction to get a hold of a colleague in comparison to simply walking over
to their office:

16

D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C. Maddila, J. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan

7 The hardest thing has been that standard communications/questions and general

collaboration take about 2-3 times as long. Something I could just pop over to someone’s
office to ask now requires an online chat or an email and the response is much slower.
(P267)
Likewise, there is also, for some a higher frequency of using instant messages which made some
participants feel like they should be highly responsive at all times:
7 I also feel like there is no "down time" away from work. I constantly get emails/messages/asks
and sometime I have to respond right away. (P384)
Managing multiple communication channels and the expectation to be very responsive on many of
these channels presents an additional layer of interactions that does not adapt to every respondents
working style.
Work Environment. During the pandemic, most respondents work environments were their
homes, however the experience drew comparable challenges with in-office work settings.
7 Tuning out distractions (which is a similar problem I’ve faced working in Open Spaces),
finding the space to set up my home workspace. (P1233)
Many respondents were also not prepared to work from home and have improvised their work
settings:
7 I did not own a desk and chair so currently improvising with dining table. Not sure
if I want to invest in or have space for expensive home office equipment. I miss having
multiple screens but do not have space at home to set up. (P930)
As respondents missed their work office settings, they found themselves under new constraints
ranging from financial to square footage when trying to create a comparable home office setting.
Interruptions and Distractions. When software developers are working in office, interruptions
and distractions often came from colleagues stopping by their desk. In a remote work setting,
respondents described the advantage and disadvantage of only being available online:
7 Interruptions and concentration as I can [only] be reached on Teams and by email vs
someone walking over for a question. Harder to keep tabs on direct reports. (P333)
However, in this special remote work environment, a new set of distractions emerged from
people they live with (e.g., spouse, children, etc): “Constant distractions especially from kids who are
bored at home” (P552). For some respondents, this created a similarly distracting environment they
had to manage in open office settings:
7 Tuning out distractions (which is a similar problem I’ve faced working in Open Spaces),
finding the space to set up my home workspace. (P1233)
Healthy Habits. When respondents described challenges with reduced physical activity, they
often mentioned their movements between physical meeting locations which no longer happen:“Sitting for a long time is hard on the body. At work, I’m up and around, moving more. At home
all meetings are online so I never (hardly) move....” (P72). When respondents did find an opportunity
to move, it was either only to the restroom or for more coffee so that they can sit down for longer
periods of time:
7 Since I don’t do my daily bike ride I sometimes feel I just sit the whole day, and only do
very few steps to the toilet [and] coffee machine (P867)
The reduction in what participants referred to as healthy habits also affect their work-life routines.
Work-life Balance and Routine. Respondents described their work-life boundaries blurring
outside of the typical 8 hr work day and late into the evenings: “Unless I impose a strict regimen, I

A Tale of Two Cities: Software Developers Working from Home During the COVID-19 Pandemic

17

Table 4. Challenges in Survey 2. The column Distribution shows the distribution of responses that do not
experience a challenge (light gray ), experience this challenge as a minor issue (gray ), and experience
this challenge as a major issue (dark gray ). The following column Prevalence indicates the percentage of
respondents that experienced the challenge (
), while the column Impact describes the percentage of
participants that indicated this challenge presented a major issue (percentage of with respect to
). The
column Delta reports the difference in the average productivity change when a challenge was experienced vs.
when it was not; statistically significant differences (p < .01, with Benjamini-Hochberg correction [36]) are
indicated with an asterisk (*). To compute the Delta column, a response “significantly less productive” was
coded as –2, “less productive” as –1, “about the same” as 0, “more productive” as +1, and “significantly more
productive” as +2. The challenges are sorted and numbered in descending order by column Prevalence.

Challenge
C1
C2
C3
C4
C5
C6
C7
C8
C9
C10
C11
C12
C13
C14
C15
C16
C17
C18
C19
C20

Missing social interactions
Lack of work-life boundary
Poor ergonomics
Less awareness of colleagues work
Less physical activity
Difficult to communicate with colleagues
Insufficient hardware
Connectivity problems
Poor work life balance
Too many meetings
More distractions or interruptions
Lack of a routine
Fewer breaks
Friction with collaboration tools
Lack of motivation
Blocked waiting on others
Poor home work environment
Lack of dining options
Lack of childcare
Less time to complete work

Distribution

Prevalence

Impact

Delta

83
78
70
65
65
57
57
54
51
51
49
47
44
44
42
40
40
33
27
24

49
48
52
36
51
34
40
35
45
43
37
38
35
22
36
28
34
24
58
36

-0.62 (*)
-0.52 (*)
-0.47 (*)
-0.65 (*)
-0.40 (*)
-0.67 (*)
-0.38 (*)
-0.38 (*)
-0.45 (*)
-0.09
-0.99 (*)
-0.67 (*)
-0.09
-0.38 (*)
-0.90 (*)
-0.39 (*)
-0.84 (*)
-0.34 (*)
-0.37 (*)
-0.72 (*)

feel like I am working for a lot more hours sometimes way into the night - the line between home and
work gets far more blurry.” (P104)
Respondents also reflected on routines they previously had to distinguish boundaries that are
now lost:
7 To find my time boundaries. Very easily you can end up working much more hours

because you don’t have the signals of "Time to leave the desk", you don’t have the time to
decompress your mind in traffic, for example. You just jump from personal to work tasks
(and vice-versa) so fast. (P195)
In summary, the lost transition time and lack of physical movement between work and home
removed a boundary they had before.
In the next subsection of our paper, we report on the association of these challenge with the
Survey 2 respondents’ productivity.

18

D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C. Maddila, J. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan

Table 5. Results from the Lasso regression analysis. The dependent variable was whether a participant
reported that productivity stayed the same or increased. The explanatory variables are the direct effects and
interactions for major challenges.

Challenge
Constant (Intercept)

Coeff.

Std. Error

0.886∗∗∗

(0.012)

−0.358∗∗∗

More distractions or interruptions (C11)
Lack of motivation (C15)
Difficult to communicate with colleagues (C6)
Missing social interactions (C1)
Connectivity problems (C8)
Less awareness of colleagues work (C4)

−0.214∗∗∗
−0.110∗∗∗
−0.086∗∗∗
−0.082∗∗∗
−0.050∗∗

(0.026)
(0.026)
(0.025)
(0.019)
(0.023)
(0.023)

Less time to complete work (C20)
Lack of childcare (C19) and Less time to complete work (C20)

−0.070
−0.187∗∗∗

(0.043)
(0.059)

Observations
R2
Adjusted R2

2,106
0.294
0.291

Note: ∗ p<0.1; ∗∗ p<0.05; ∗∗∗ p<0.01
6.2

Survey 2: Relation between Challenges and Productivity

From the themes that emerged in Survey 1, we inferred a list of 20 characteristic challenges (C1..C20)
that we included in Survey 2. The results are displayed in Table 4. The challenges are sorted and
numbered in descending order of frequency.
Frequency and impact of challenges. We make the following observations from Table 4 about how
the prevalence and impact of challenges:
• The Prevalence column shows the frequency of the challenges. The most frequently reported
challenges (C1-C5) were missing social interactions (83%), lack of work-life boundaries (78%),
poor ergonomics (70%), less awareness of colleagues work (65%), and less physical activity (65%).
• The Impact column shows the percentage of participants that indicated a challenge to be a
major issue if they experienced it. The challenges rated most frequently as impactful are lack
of childcare (58%, C16), poor ergonomics (52%, C3), and less physical activity (51%, C5). The
challenges reported less frequently as a major issue are friction with collaboration tools (22%,
C14), lack of dining options (24%, C18), and being blocked waiting on others (28%, C16).
Relationships between challenges and productivity. Table 4 shows in the Delta column the difference
in productivity change (with –2 for “significantly less productive” to +2 for “significantly more
productive”) when a challenge was experienced vs. when it was not. We make the following
observations:
• We found that all of the challenges were associated with lower productivity. For all but two
out of the 20 challenges, the difference was statistically significant.
• The challenges with the largest reduction in productivity are having more distractions and
interruptions (–0.99, C11), lack of motivation (–0.90, C15), poor home work environment (–0.84,
C17), less time to complete work (–0.72, C20), difficulty communicating with colleagues (–0.67,
C6), and the lack of a routine (–0.67, C12).

A Tale of Two Cities: Software Developers Working from Home During the COVID-19 Pandemic

19

Lasso analysis. The previous analysis shows the relationship between individual challenges and
change in productivity, but does not take into account the presence of multiple challenges and
the interaction of two challenges, which can be particularly important for productivity. Therefore,
we ran a Lasso analysis to see which challenges were most strongly associated with productivity
change in a combined model and to check whether interactions between the challenges matter.
Table 5 shows the linear regression results for the Lasso-selected variables. People are substantially less likely to report that their productivity is the same or increased when they say that
having more distractions and interruptions (–35.8%) or lack of motivation (–21.4%) were major issues;
difficulty communicating with colleagues (-11.0%), missing social interactions (–8.6%), connectivity problems (–8.2%) and less awareness of colleagues’ work (–5.0%) were also associated with a
significantly lower probability of reporting unchanged or increased productivity.
The challenge less time spent to complete work was also selected by the Lasso algorithm, though
the coefficient is not significant; however, when combined with a lack of childcare, the challenge is
associated with a substantial and significant lower probability (–18.7%) of reporting unchanged or
increased productivity.
7

IMPROVEMENTS

In this section we address the research question “What recommendations should be made to companies
whose engineers may wish to work from home?” (RQ4). To identify these improvements, we first
analyzed the open-ended questions in Survey 1 and to identify the most-requested improvements
we used the responses to a closed question in Survey 2.
7.1

Survey 1: Improvements to the Work from Home experience

Respondents included several improvements that could be made to support their work from home
experience. We briefly describe the most frequently mentioned improvements below. Survey 1 was
sent within the first two weeks of employees working from home. Microsoft implemented many
improvements throughout the pandemic to provide a better work from home experience to its
employees, for example, employees facing school closures due to the pandemic were offered up
to three months of paid parental leave [45] as well as resources and activities to support physical,
emotional and financial well-being of employees.
Hardware. Although many respondents noted they were able to bring some equipment home or
purchased some additional devices, the most frequent possible improvement noted by respondents
in the first survey was related to hardware. Insufficient hardware was also noted as a key challenge
as discussed (Section 6) and was mentioned by Ralph et al. in the Pandemic Programming study [41].
7 I think that this is a reminder that when employing individuals that need certain

equipment both at an office and at home, that we come up with a way to fully equip both
locations simultaneously. (P994)
Many employees work with multiple monitors, and sometimes multiple machines. In contrast,
when working from home, employees are sometimes limited to just a laptop or a desktop with a
single monitor. Large and/or multiple monitor setups have been found to improve productivity in
information workers [46]. Indeed, the most frequently requested type of hardware we noted in
the second survey was either larger or more monitors. Developers also asked for more powerful
workstations (especially those working on laptops at home) as well as peripherals such as mice,
keyboards, and noise-cancellation headphones.
7 Employees should be provided with equipment to make the experience better for every-

one: webcams, good noise-cancelling headsets, etc. (P1174)

20

D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C. Maddila, J. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan

Employees were allowed to take any non-confidential property off campus to use at home after
informing their manager.
Connectivity. Another frequently requested improvement was better Internet connectivity or
improved VPN access from home, and many that mentioned this as an improvement in Survey
1 added that it was their biggest challenge to address: (“Network connectivity is the biggest pain”
(P44). Some respondents indicated that ensuring good connectivity at home was expensive. Paying
for upgraded home internet connectivity was also a key recommendation from the Pandemic
Programming study [41].
7 Perhaps subsidize higher speed internet connections, or speak with the broadband
providers to get better service in our areas. With multiple people at home, there’s only so
much bandwidth to be shared. (P79)
Stipend/Budget for home office. The third most frequently selected item was to have a stipend
to purchase equipment for a home office, with just slightly more engineers requesting this as an
improvement if they experienced lower productivity. Several tech companies, including Microsoft,
have been offering such a stipend to their employees [47–49].
7 Provide employees a one time reasonable allowance to set up a home office such as
sit/stand desk, ergonomic chair, allowance for monitors, budget for coffee/drinks/snacks.
(P86)
Improvements to communication tools. Once working from home, engineers were totally
reliant on communication tools to collaborate with their colleagues and for meetings. Many noted
specific improvements, including some that were engineering specific:
7 Support whiteboard drawing, support multi desktop sharing from multiple people and
sharing on split windows or on my local multiple screens. (P1277)
7 Add a bunch of developer specific features. A simple example is how do you go around
the room in standup and know that everyone got to talk. (P885)
Provide more ergonomic furniture. Many participants noted in the first survey that their
furniture at home was not as ergonomic as their furniture at work (e.g., no standup desk, small
desk space, less ergonomic keyboards etc.). To better support employees, Microsoft provides
recommendations on how to setup physical workspaces in an ergonomical way and some stipends
for the workspace.
Not being able to exercise as much was also an issue, as this respondent mentioned:
7 I also don’t have the ability to stand up and work since my home desk doesn’t move.
This means that I’m sitting down even more every day, which also leads to back and neck
pain and frustration. (P1048)
A couple of respondents in our sample suggested treadmill desks as a possible improvement for
WFH to address less of exercise.
For some respondents working from home goes beyond furniture, as one respondent noted:
7 If I am going to continue work from home, I need a new house/space from which I can
work w/fewer distractions. (P1224)
Support for remote work post-pandemic. In the first survey, many suggested that full or
partial remote work should be supported after the pandemic and that they appreciated the opportunity to work from home and experienced a variety of benefits (as discussed in Section 5). In
particular, several mentioned that working at home, at least some of the time, would help them be
more productive:

A Tale of Two Cities: Software Developers Working from Home During the COVID-19 Pandemic

21

7 Allow more people to do this long-term after this current crisis ends; I feel I’m more

productive for it, I’m contributing better to my team, and keeping more people home will
help us meet our sustainability and environmental goals as a company. (P1297)
Some provided concrete suggestions for supporting WFH long-term:
7 Every team should treat their tech stack as if they had to work from home at least 2
days a week. This way things such as VPN, workstations, deploy pipelines, local builds,
etc are naturally able to support remote workers. This will lead us to hiring better remote
talent and allow us to institute remote working policies during health or environmental
changes that hinder the ability of some workers to be in the office. That’s what we’ve done
and it’s made our org more productive during the WFH period. (P33)

Provide guidance for working from home. Many noted that curated guidance for working
from home would benefit not just their own work but also the work of their colleagues. For example,
on how to use different communication platforms, one respondent suggested:
7 Get some primers out so that people can feel comfortable in the space and know the use

cases it’s for. Lack of this knowledge keeps translating to inefficient use of email threads.
(P669)
Improving how knowledge is externalized is also more important when everyone is remote:
7 Encourage documentation as part of our culture. It’s difficult to impossible to use

libraries from within our org without directly talking to the repository owners. Now the
only way to get information about these libraries is to send a message and hope they
respond. (P212)
Some respondents also noted that it isn’t just about improving tools and processes for WFH, but
there is a need for organization guidance regarding maintaining a positive work life balance:
7 Broad communication across the company to say "General work ends at 5:00 PM local

unless business critical" as a way to force work/life balance now that work and life are in
the same place. (P696)
Microsoft continuously provided guidance, tips, and resources for employees working from
home during the COVID-19 outbreak. In addition, communities were created to connect employees
with colleagues around the world for tips and support on working from home.
Other improvements. Other improvements that were suggested by respondents were to improve and encourage social interactions within teams; be more understanding of WFH scenarios beyond
the pandemic; encourage people to be more responsive; minimize the number of meetings; and guidance
for managers to manage WFH employees.
7.2

Survey 2: Relation between Improvements and Productivity

From the themes that emerged in Survey 1, we inferred a list of 12 characteristic improvements
(S1..S12) that we included in Survey 2, in which respondents could select up to three improvements.
The results are displayed in Table 6. The table shows the frequencies for how often an improvement was selected by all respondents (column "All"), by respondents who reported a decrease
in productivity (column "Low"), and by respondents who reported an increase in productivity
(column "High"). The improvements are sorted and numbered in descending order of frequency by
all respondents.
We make the following observations:

22

D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C. Maddila, J. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan

Table 6. Improvements in Survey 2. Participants could select up to three items. Column “All” indicates the
frequency the improvement was suggested among all respondents, “Low” the frequency among respondents
who reported a decrease in productivity, and “High” the frequency among respondents who reported an
increase in productivity. Differences between the frequency for “Low” and “High” that are statistically
significant with p < .01 after Benjamini-Hochberg correction [36] are labeled with an asterisk (*).
Improvement
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
S8
S9
S10
S11
S12

All

Low

High

Provide more/better hardware for home (more screens, more powerful laptop, etc)
41.6% 39.1% 42.7%
Improve connectivity (fewer VPN drops, reimburse for faster internet)
41.5% 45.8% 35.5% (*)
Provide a stipend for improving work from home environment
40.8% 42.4% 39.4%
Make improvements to communication tools
33.1% 36.9% 29.3% (*)
Provide ergonomic furniture
30.1% 17.2% 40.7% (*)
Support remote work better during normal circumstances
22.3% 15.1% 30.7% (*)
Provide guidance for successfully working from home (e.g., online meeting ettiquette) 20.8% 23.7% 16.7% (*)
Improve and encourage team socialization
16.8% 16.9% 15.8%
Be more understanding of WFH scenarios beyond COVID-19
14.6% 15.7% 15.0%
Encourage people to be more responsive
9.8% 8.9% 12.0%
Minimize the number of meetings
5.8% 7.6% 3.8% (*)
Give guidance to management on how to manage WFH employees
5.6% 5.9% 5.6%

• The most frequent selected improvement was to provide more/better hardware for home
(41.6%), improve connectivity (41.5%), and provide a stipend for improving work from home
environment (40.8%).
• Several improvements were more frequently selected by respondents who experienced a
decrease in their productivity: improve connectivity (45.8% vs. 35.5%, S2), make improvements
to communication tools (36.9% vs. 29.3%, S4), provide guidance for successfully working from
home (23.7% vs. 16.7%, S7), and minimize the number of meetings (7.6% vs. 3.8%, S11).
• Several improvements were more frequently selected by respondents who experienced an
increase in their productivity. The improvement provide ergonomic furniture was more than
twice as likely to be selected (40.7% vs 17.2%, S5). This may be because more productive
respondents were satisfied with other potentially pressing needs. The improvement support
remote work better during normal circumstances was selected as twice as frequently (30.7%
vs. 15.1%, S6). This may be because these respondents’ basic needs were met and they were
focused on future needs and being able to continue to work from home.
8

DISCUSSION

Although the pandemic is an unusual (and hopefully will remain an uncommon) event in the lives
of software engineers, this sudden work from home directive provides an opportunity to study
what happens when engineers at a very large company are suddenly in a remote working condition
with the rest of their team and entire organization. Engineering work is similar to knowledge work
in general, but engineers may require highly intense periods of focus work but also rely on tight
collaboration to develop modern software. As such, the pandemic and the force to working from
home provides an interesting opportunity to understand more about developer productivity, but
also to find guidance for developers that work remotely or for developers that collaborate with
remote team members. As many companies are anticipating supporting much more remote work
in the future (some claim they will be entirely remote), the findings from this study are important.
We remind the reader that the context for this study is a large multi-national software company,
and that our study focuses on engineers working in the US.

A Tale of Two Cities: Software Developers Working from Home During the COVID-19 Pandemic

8.1

23

The Yin and Yang of Working from Home

As we saw earlier, for some developers that previously worked in office with their co-workers,
certain factors that were mentioned as a challenge by some, were reported as a benefit by others.
We even found that some factors (such as ability to focus, home work environment) that when
they were reported as a challenge, they were associated with statistically significant lower levels
of productivity, while if the same factor was reported as a benefit, they were associated with
statistically significant higher levels of productivity.
These dichotomous experiences are expected as we see from extensive research around the
world on people’s experiences of lock-down (or social distancing) during the pandemic. Furthermore, divergent experiences are expected given the varied family life, living conditions/location,
job characteristics and personality characteristics of our studied population. For employers and
managers, knowing that “one size does not fit all” is critically important for the future of software
development work.
The main divergent factors were:

• ability to focus: the number and nature of interruptions and distractions varied considerably,
with some reporting more focus time at home (and higher levels of productivity), and others
having less focus time (especially those facing interruptions with family members at home)
and lower productivity. But even for those that appreciated fewer “randomizations” from
colleagues since working from home, at the same time, they missed the knowledge and
awareness they gleaned from these and other informal interactions;
• work autonomy and motivation: increased autonomy and control over tasks and timing
increased motivation for some, but reduced motivation for others (and also their reported
productivity);
• work environment: some appreciated the novelty of working from home, having natural
light and more comfort at home and this was associated with higher productivity, while
others missed their office work environment with extra amenities such as the cafeteria and
reported lower levels of productivity;
• meetings: some felt there were too many meetings since WFH, and they missed face to face
social cues and whiteboards, but others liked that meetings were shorter since WFH and the
associated artifacts they could refer to later;
• work life balance: many appreciated having more time (due to no commute) and being able
to use that for extra time with family or to do personal chores or for self care, but others also
found it difficult to disconnect from work, worked too many hours and did not have healthy
habits since working from home.
• childcare needs: having children with a need for childcare led to some surprising dichotomous experiences. From our analysis of the data from Survey 2, we saw that employees
with children who had no difficulty handling childcare, less frequently reported a drop in
productivity (20%) than employees without children (30%). However, for employees with
children who had difficulties handling childcare, 40% reported a drop in productivity. We also
found that employees who previously had children in school or childcare were MORE likely
to indicate these major challenges: lack of childcare, more distractions or interruptions, less
time to complete my work, and were LESS likely to indicate lack of motivation as a challenge.
• social connections: having fewer social connections was reported as a challenge for many
but for others (a minority) they felt MORE connected to their team and appreciated online
activities such as standups, social lunches, games, daily check-ins etc.

24

8.2

D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C. Maddila, J. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan

Triangulating the Impact of Working from Home

In this paper, we have presented insights based on surveys with self-reported data through the
lens of individual productivity. This is just one of many possible analyses on how remote work
affects productivity. To illustrate an alternative perspective, we show an analysis of productivity
at the company data by by mining software data collected through the engineering systems. For
this section, we analyze trends across Microsoft to see how developer productivity changed during
work from home. We compared the pull request counts during the pandemic (March/April 2020)
with prior historical values during comparable periods of the fiscal year (March/April 2018 and
March/April 2019).
Since the engineering workforce in Microsoft grew in numbers since 2018, we normalized the
pull requests counts by the number of engineers to control for the growth. The number of pull
requests per developer opened during the pandemic increased compared to previous year years:
4.4% compared to 2019 and +3.4% compared to 2018. Similarly, the number of pull requests closed
per developer also increased: +4.0% compared to 2019 and +2.1% compared to 2018.
Different parts of the world went into “lockdown” at different times in March and April 2020.
Microsoft has development teams spread across the world spanning all continents. In order to
control for geographic differences, we further analyzed the pull request data for the three main
Microsoft regions separately: Puget Sound in North America; ASIA, which includes China, India and
Japan; and EMEA, which includes UK, Netherlands, Germany, France and Scandinavian countries.
We observed that there was no discernible drop in the number of pull requests for all three regions,
including when normalized by engineer count.
Overall we observe that there is no clear or significant drop (at statistically significant levels)
in terms of the pull requests and pull requests per developer. This data analysis suggest that the
pandemic has not significantly influenced productivity at the company level. While this particular
analysis shows that productivity has been stable or has slightly improved on average, it is important
to recognize that just focusing on the company level alone loses the nuance of how individual people
are affected differently. This highlights the need to run a family of experiments that investigate
work from home using different types of data and methodologies such as diary studies [50] and
workplace analytics [51].
8.3

From Pandemic to Future of Work

The pandemic has been a major disruption and will change how engineers work in the future
beyond the pandemic. Of course, this is not unique to software development and this disruption is
visible in other professions, and for many kinds of knowledge workers. Many companies, software
companies in particular, have announced either a shift to full remote work, or to partial remote
work 5 in a hybrid fashion, where more developers may be allowed or encouraged to work from
home several days a week. Working remotely is already norm for some companies, for example
GitHub 6 and Automattic [52], and many highly successful open source systems have been designed,
written and maintained by distributed developers, many of them volunteers [53]. Much can be
learned from these existing success stories, but there is more to learn and many factors to consider
in a future hybrid setting. An organization the size of Microsoft that has previously primarily relied

5 See https://www.forbes.com/sites/jackkelly/2020/05/19/after-announcing-twitters-permanent-work-from-home-policy-

jack-dorsey-extends-same-courtesy-to-square-employees-this-could-change-the-way-people-work-where-they-liveand-how-much-theyll-be-paid/#4ac1881b614b
6 https://github.com/clef/handbook/blob/master/Employment%20Policies/Working%20Remotely.md

A Tale of Two Cities: Software Developers Working from Home During the COVID-19 Pandemic

25

on co-located work must now adapt and find new ways to work in this new hybrid world the
pandemic has left behind 7 .
Remote work may suit many developers and projects, but there may be other aspects of software
development that are negatively affected and the system engineering output data may not show
those limitations. We already see signals from our survey that teams may face collaboration and
communication challenges. In our first survey, one of our respondents noted that working at home
does not provide the same information about the pulse of work but could be addressed by tools:
7 Automate team trends and share across the team, it’s difficult to determine the real

focus the team is trying to solve without seeing people stressing behind their desks (or not).
(P891)
And individuals that are part of a team, may be concerned that a lot of the work they do (such as
helping others) may not be visible to the entire team, as one noted:
7 My biggest fear is being “out of sight, out of mind” (P932)

Some reported addressing team work challenges through daily stand-up calls over video, virtual
coffee hours and more impromptu meetings (which as we mentioned above was greatly appreciated
by some participants). But some development activities, such as long term planning and creative
aspects of development may be affected differently as some early work indicates [54]. These aspects
of development work need to be studied in a longitudinal fashion, especially if work becomes hybrid
for some developers. Managers should also be studied as they may face additional stress working
from home and managing a team. For example, it may be harder for managers to give feedback
(an important factor for developer satisfaction and productivity [26]) and maintain awareness of
well-being and productivity of their team members. A shift to hybrid remote work will also have
some societal implications, and our survey respondents recognized this and appreciated the positive
effect on the environment less commuting may lead to.
9

RELATED WORK

We are not alone in studying the result of this almost overnight migration to working at home
for software developers. In this section, we first review research papers that discuss findings from
studies of developers at other technology companies. We then compare our study with this other
research and summarize the similarities and differences with our study and findings.
9.1

Studies of Developer Productivity during the COVID-19 Pandemic

Although the pandemic occurred a mere few months ago, there are already preliminary findings
from several studies on how software development has changed during the pandemic-induces
working from home. We summarize three of these studies below. The first study uses a survey to
understand the changes in developer well-being and how organizations may better support them.
The other two mine engineering system data and analyze that quantitative data to understand
changes in engineering performance metrics. Although some of these studies, are at the time of
writing this paper under review, they provide useful early findings that are relevant to our survey.
9.1.1 Pandemic programming: developer experiences and how companies can help. Ralph et al. [41]
conducted an online questionnaire with over 2,000 responses from developers around the world (the
largest proportion of 22.7% were from Germany, followed by 16.4% from Russia, 12.2% from Brazil,
and 4.4% from US). They aimed to understand how working at home during the COVID-19 pandemic
7 For

example from articles such as this one that discusses the advantages of remote work from an organization that was
previously remote: https://www.nytimes.com/2020/07/12/business/matt-mullenweg-automattic-corner-office.html

26

D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C. Maddila, J. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan

affected developer well-being and productivity. The survey was run at the end of March 2020 and
participants were primarily recruited through social media channels frequented by developers.
They found that developers’ productivity and their well-being are suffering since working from
home, and that well-being and productivity are closely related. Dealing with the pandemic and home
office ergonomics affected well-being and productivity; women/parents/people with disabilities
may be disproportionately affected. Their study leads to several recommendations how companies
can support their employees: pay for home internet, help with home equipment, pay attention to
employee emotional well-being and assure them that their reduced productivity is expected and
will not negatively affect their job.
9.1.2 GitHub study in the early day of COVID-19. Forsgren et al., conducted an analysis of developer
activity on projects hosted on GitHub in the early days of COVID-19 [42]. They considered both
open source and private project data. They found the following key insights when comparing the
first three months of 2020 to the same time period in 2019:
• Developer activity (pushes, pull requests, code review and commented issues) was mainly
similar to or slight increased compared to last year.
• There was some disruption in the early days of work from home for enterprise projects but
this quickly stabilized.
• Developer work days were longer by up to an hour per day with more work on weekdays
and on weekends. They suggest this could be an indication of a risk of burnout.
• Collaboration had increased on open source projects (in terms of number of users and
projects).
Their study is ongoing and from an engineering system performance point of view indicates that
developers were staying productive even in this time of a pandemic. These findings aign with the
findings we found from analyzing system data at Microsoft (see Section 8.2).
9.1.3 Baidu WFH Study. Bao et al., studied the effect of the pandemic and working from home at
one of the largest IT companies in China, Baidu [43]. They conducted a quantitative analysis of 139
developersâĂŹ daily activities (over 138 working days). They found that working from home is
associated with positive and negative changes in developer productivity in terms of the number of
builds, commits and code reviews. They also considered the influence of different programming
languages, project size/age/type and considered individual developers.
They found working from home was associated with negative changes for large projects and has
different effects for different developers. Their data suggests that developer productivity may be
more stable working from home than working onsite (less variation in their levels of productivity).
They also considered data from individual developers working from home and before work from
home. They found that for the majority (approx. 85%) their productivity is about the same, but
different for others (some are more productive, some are less). They asked developers to share
feedback on their WFH productivity. The benefits that more productive developers reported were:
working from home is exciting and energizing; developers can focus with fewer disturbances;
WFH decreases transportation costs and saves time; WFH increases flexibility of when to work
and improves work life balance. The challenges that developers with lower productivity included
more home demands; a need for self discipline; and decreased collaboration with others. For
the developers that found no difference with WFH, they experienced no barriers to completing
their work, they could keep track of their schedule using online scheduling tools, and they found
conferencing tools were powerful and effective for screen sharing.

A Tale of Two Cities: Software Developers Working from Home During the COVID-19 Pandemic

9.2

27

Comparing our findings with other pandemic developer studies

Many of the factors that emerged from this study aligned with the factors from previous studies
that aimed to understand developer productivity [26] or predict productivity [27] (see Section 2).
But many new factors emerged (such as childcare and no commute) given the unique context of
working from home since the pandemic.
A more relevant comparison, given the unique context of the pandemic, is to compare our
research with studies that have been done since the pandemic forced developers to working from
home (as summarized above). In Table 7 we compare our study directly with these other studies,
specifically we compare the research questions posed, the research methods used, the data analyzed,
the participants studied, the timing of the studies, the key findings and the main recommendations,
with our study.
From this table, we see that in terms of method our research is closest to the paper by Ralph et
al. [41], but our focus is on a cohort of developers from a single large organization (similar to the
Baidu study). Our findings are more nuanced in terms of the differential experiences the factors we
identify influence. Our research also paints a more positive picture when compared with the Ralph
et al. study—this may be because the developers in our study may be well-supported in general.
We see convergence between the GitHub and Baidu studies in terms of engineering performance
data we analyzed (as we discuss above in Section 8.2). Our study, through the survey, reveals many
potential benefits, challenges and suggests many recommendations for an organization to follow
while we see a mixed picture of terms of changes in productivity. Looking at data alone would
not have informed the “tale of two cities” effect we reveal when we ask developers about their
experiences.
10

CONCLUSION

The COVID-19 pandemic has been and continues to be a worldwide human and economic disaster,
with many repercussions that are already evident, but with other effects that we can’t even yet
imagine. One thing is clear, a return to business as it was before is unlikely, and many predict that
the future of development work is likely to be either fully remote or for many some form of hybrid
work. Thus, understanding what has worked well, and what has not gone well with remote work,
is critical. We recognize that our study is only a start in understanding the implications of the
pandemic on the software developer. In particular, new models of hybrid work are likely to lead to
new challenges and benefits over remote work.
Our study reveals a “tale of two cities” – even in a company that has support in place for its
developers and remote work – and delivers not just quantitative insights on how certain factors
may be associated with higher and lower productivity, but also deeper insights into the narratives
from these differential experiences. The improvements our study participants recommended shine
some light on how organizations (and managers) may support their developers and we hope that
the lessons learned from our study and other studies of development work during the pandemic
will help others recognize and react to the disruptive changes we see unfolding in our industry.
Acknowledgments. We thank the many respondents who answered our surveys and shared
their experiences about working from home with us. We thank Victor Bahl, Peter Bergen, Surajit
Chaudhuri, Jacek Czerwonka, Nicole Forsgren, Sam Guckenheimer, Brent Hecht, Donald Kossmann,
Courtney Miller, Brendan Murphy, Madan Musuvathi, Paige Rodeghero, Jaime Teevan, and Scott
Wadsworth for the great discussions about work from home and their support of this research. We
also thank the entire Future of Remote Work v-team for the inspiring meetings. We thank Caroline
Davis, Susan Hastings Tiscornia, Tanya Platt, and Kelly Sieben for the privacy and ethics review of
the surveys.

Pandemic Programming
(Ralph et al., 2020) [41]

Baidu COVID-19 Study
(Bao et al., 2020) [43]

Microsoft study
(This paper)

Research questions/
goals

Understand dev productivity,
work cadence, collaboration
during early COVID-19

Understand how WFH due to
COVID-19 affects dev wellbeing
and productivity

Understand impact of WFH on
productivity

Understand benefits/challenges since
WFH and factors that affect productivity over time

Research methods

Descriptive analysis of
GitHub developer activity

Survey to test hypotheses of dev
experience since WFH

Analysis of dev activity records and
survey

Surveys (exploratory, quantitative)

Population

Open source projects and
paid/enterprise accounts

Software developers anywhere in
the world

Baidu developers in China

Microsoft engineers (devs and program
managers in Puget Sound (Survey 1)
and US (Survey 2)

Participants/data

Data from all open source/
paid accounts

Approx. 2.25K survey responses
from 53 countries (23% Germany,
16% Russia, 12% Italy, 4% USA)

139 devs’ activities over 138 days

1,369 responses (Survey 1)
2,265 responses (Survey 2)

Timing

Jan - March, 2020 (compared
with Jan-March 2019)

March 19-April 14, 2020

Dec 2019 to March 2020, compared
with 2019

March 16-20, 2020 (Survey 1).
April 22-May 9, 2020 (Survey 2)

Findings

- Dev activity consistent or
- Change in wellbeing and
increased since last year
productivity
- Work cadence changed
- Change in productivity depends
(longer days/more weekends) on ergonomics/disaster prep
- More collaboration (esp in
- Change in wellbeing depends on
open source)
ergonomics and fear
- People with children have less
ergonomic home offices
- People with disabilities less
prepared for disasters

- WFH has different impacts on dev
productivity (varies by project
age/type/language/size/metric)
- Productivity of majority of devs
when WFH is similar to onsite
- For those that are more productive,
they feel more enthusiastic/focused
and have better work life balance
- For those less productive they have
more home chores, harder collab

- Main challenges of WFH: miss social interactions, poor work life boundary, poor ergonomics, less awareness
of others’ work, less exercise, difficult
communication, for some lack of childcare
- Main benefits of WFH: no commute,
money, flexible hours, close to family,
comfort at home, health, time
- Identify the main challenges and benefits that explain both positive and negative changes in productivity

Implications/
recommendations

- Plan tool/process flexibility
- Embrace collaboration
- Anticipate burnout

- WFH should be a choice
- Project characteristics matter
- Individual devs need different
strategies if WFH

- Dichotomous experiences for same
factors, support all/part WFH options
- Provide better hardware, internet,
stipend, software, guidelines, support

- Pay for home internet charges
- Care about employee wellbeing
- Little consensus among devs
what orgs can do to help

D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C. Maddila, J. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan

GitHub COVID-19 Study
(Forsgren et al., 2020) [42]

28

Table 7. Comparing the research goals, research methods, key findings and implications from the studies that have studied developers as they work from
home during the COVID-19 pandemic.

A Tale of Two Cities: Software Developers Working from Home During the COVID-19 Pandemic

29

REFERENCES
[1] S. O’Flynn, “What itâĂŹs like to lead a 100-person engineering team during the pandemic,” May 2020, retrieved May
27, 2020 from https://www.lohika.com/leading-a-remote-engineering-team.
[2] A. N. Meyer, T. Fritz, G. C. Murphy, and T. Zimmermann, “Software developers’ perceptions of productivity,” in
Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Foundations of Software Engineering, 2014, pp. 19–29.
[3] F. Lanubile, “Collaboration in distributed software development,” in Software Engineering. Springer, 2007, pp. 174–193.
[4] M.-A. Storey, A. Zagalsky, F. Figueira Filho, L. Singer, and D. M. German, “How social and communication channels
shape and challenge a participatory culture in software development,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering,
vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 185–204, 2016.
[5] S. D. Teasley, L. A. Covi, M. S. Krishnan, and J. S. Olson, “Rapid software development through team collocation,” IEEE
Transactions on software engineering, vol. 28, no. 7, pp. 671–683, 2002.
[6] K. Conboy, X. Wang, and B. Fitzgerald, “Creativity in agile systems development: a literature review,” in Information
systems–Creativity and innovation in small and medium-sized enterprises. Springer, 2009, pp. 122–134.
[7] A. Espinosa, R. Kraut, S. Slaughter, J. Lerch, J. Herbsleb, and A. Mockus, “Shared mental models, familiarity, and
coordination: A multi-method study of distributed software teams,” ICIS 2002 Proceedings, p. 39, 2002.
[8] B. Al-Ani and H. K. Edwards, “A comparative empirical study of communication in distributed and collocated development teams,” in 2008 IEEE International Conference on Global Software Engineering. IEEE, 2008, pp. 35–44.
[9] C. Bird, N. Nagappan, P. Devanbu, H. Gall, and B. Murphy, “Does distributed development affect software quality? an
empirical case study of windows vista,” in 2009 IEEE 31st International Conference on Software Engineering. IEEE,
2009, pp. 518–528.
[10] A. Gupta, E. Mattarelli, S. Seshasai, and J. Broschak, “Use of collaborative technologies and knowledge sharing in
co-located and distributed teams: Towards the 24-h knowledge factory,” The Journal of Strategic Information Systems,
vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 147–161, 2009.
[11] D. Ford, R. Milewicz, and A. Serebrenik, “How remote work can foster a more inclusive environment for transgender
developers,” in Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Gender Equality in Software Engineering, ser. GE
âĂŹ19. IEEE Press, 2019, p. 9âĂŞ12. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/GE.2019.00011
[12] B. P. Haynes, “Office productivity: a theoretical framework,” Journal of Corporate Real Estate, 2007.
[13] N. Bos, J. Olson, D. Gergle, G. Olson, and Z. Wright, “Effects of four computer-mediated communications channels
on trust development,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ser. CHI
âĂŹ02. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2002, p. 135âĂŞ140. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/503376.503401
[14] J. K. Haines, J. S. Olson, and G. M. Olson, “Here or there? how configuration of transnational teams impacts social
capital,” in IFIP Conference on Human-Computer Interaction. Springer, 2013, pp. 479–496.
[15] L. Heisman, “Remote work: How parents are adapting and working during covid-19,” May 2020, retrieved May 28,
2020 from https://github.blog/2020-05-22-remote-work-how-parents-are-adapting-and-working-during-covid-19/.
[16] A. Mazzina, “What it means to be a remote-first company,” February 2017, retrieved June 4, 2020 from https://
stackoverflow.blog/2017/02/08/means-remote-first-company/.
[17] J. Pardue, “Making remote work: Behind the scenes at stack overflow,” September 2017, retrieved June 4, 2020 from
https://stackoverflow.blog/2017/09/29/making-remote-work-behind-scenes/.
[18] GitLab, “The remote work report by gitlab: The future of work is remote,” March 2020, retrieved June 4, 2020 from
https://page.gitlab.com/rs/194-VVC-221/images/the-remote-work-report-by-gitlab.pdf.
[19] ——, “The remote playbook from the largest all-remote company in the world,” March 2020, retrieved June 4, 2020 from
https://about.gitlab.com/resources/downloads/ebook-remote-playbook.pdf.
[20] S. Wagner and M. Ruhe, “A systematic review of productivity factors in software development,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1801.06475, 2018.
[21] F. L. Schmidt, J. E. Hunter, R. C. McKenzie, and T. W. Muldrow, “Impact of valid selection procedures on work-force
productivity.” Journal of Applied Psychology, vol. 64, no. 6, p. 609, 1979.
[22] A. J. Ko, Why We Should Not Measure Productivity. Berkeley, CA: Apress, 2019, pp. 21–26. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-4221-6_3
[23] A. N. Meyer, T. Fritz, G. C. Murphy, and T. Zimmermann, “Software developers’ perceptions of productivity,” in
Proceedings of the 22th International Symposium on Foundations of Software Engineering, November 2014.
[24] B. Johnson, T. Zimmermann, and C. Bird, “The effect of work environments on productivity and satisfaction of software
engineers,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 2019.
[25] E. Kalliamvakou, C. Bird, T. Zimmermann, A. Begel, R. DeLine, and D. M. German, “What makes a great manager of
software engineers?” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 87–106, 2019.
[26] M. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, J. Czerwonka, B. Murphy, and E. Kalliamvakou, “Towards a theory of software
developer job satisfaction and perceived productivity,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 2019.

30

D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C. Maddila, J. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan

[27] E. Murphy-Hill, C. Jaspan, C. Sadowski, D. Shepherd, M. Phillips, C. Winter, A. Knight, E. Smith, and M. Jorde, “What
predicts software developers’ productivity?” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 2019.
[28] H. Secon, “An interactive map of the us cities and states still under lockdown âĂŤ and those that are reopening,” June
2020, retrieved July 27, 2020 from https://www.businessinsider.com/us-map-stay-at-home-orders-lockdowns-2020-3.
[29] K. DelBene, “Kurt delbeneâĂŹs march 4 guidance to king county employees,” March 2020, retrieved July 27, 2020 from
https://news.microsoft.com/2020/03/04/kurt-delbenes-march-4-guidance-to-king-county-employees/.
[30] R. Sandler, “Amazon extends work from home policy until january,” July 2020, retrieved July 27, 2020 from https:
//www.forbes.com/sites/rachelsandler/2020/07/15/amazon-extends-work-from-home-policy-until-january/.
[31] B. Fung, “Google will let employees work from home until at least next summer,” July 2020, retrieved July 27, 2020
from https://www.cnn.com/2020/07/27/tech/google-work-from-home-extension/index.html.
[32] D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C. Maddila, J. L. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan,
“Appendix to a tale of two cities: Software developers working from home during the covid-19 pandemic,”
Microsoft Research, Tech. Rep. MSR-TR-2020-28, August 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.microsoft.com/enus/research/publication/appendix-to-a-tale-of-two-cities/
[33] T. Punter, M. Ciolkowski, B. Freimut, and I. John, “Conducting on-line surveys in software engineering,” in Proceedings
of the 2003 International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering, ser. ISESE âĂŹ03. USA: IEEE Computer
Society, 2003, p. 80.
[34] E. Smith, R. Loftin, E. Murphy-Hill, C. Bird, and T. Zimmermann, “Improving developer participation rates in surveys,”
in 2013 6th International Workshop on Cooperative and Human Aspects of Software Engineering (CHASE), 2013, pp. 89–92.
[35] E. L. Lehmann and J. P. Romano, Testing statistical hypotheses. Springer Science & Business Media, 2006.
[36] Y. Benjamini and Y. Hochberg, “Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and powerful approach to multiple
testing,” Journal of the Royal statistical society: series B (Methodological), vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 289–300, 1995.
[37] R. Tibshirani, “Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B
(Methodological), vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 267–288, 1996.
[38] B. Flyvbjerg, “Five misunderstandings about case-study research,” Qualitative inquiry, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 219–245, 2006.
[39] A. Kuper, The social science encyclopedia. Routledge, 2004.
[40] E. Deutskens, K. De Ruyter, M. Wetzels, and P. Oosterveld, “Response rate and response quality of internet-based
surveys: An experimental study,” Marketing letters, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 21–36, 2004.
[41] P. Ralph, S. Baltes, G. Adisaputri, R. Torkar, V. Kovalenko, M. Kalinowski, N. Novielli, S. Yoo, X. Devroey, X. Tan,
M. Zhou, B. Turhan, R. Hoda, H. Hata, G. Robles, A. M. Fard, and R. Alkadhi, “Pandemic programming: How covid-19
affects software developers and how their organizations can help,” 2020.
[42] N. Forsgren, “Octoverse spotlight: An analysis of developer productivity, work cadence, and collaboration in the
early days of covid-19,” May 2020, retrieved June 2, 2020 from https://github.blog/2020-05-06-octoverse-spotlight-ananalysis-of-developer-productivity-work-cadence-and-collaboration-in-the-early-days-of-covid-19/.
[43] L. Bao, T. Li, X. Xia, K. Zhu, H. Li, and X. Yang, “How does working from home affect developer productivity? – a case
study of baidu during covid-19 pandemic,” 2020.
[44] B. Savransky, “Seattle ranks 2nd worst commute time in us, report finds,” December 2019, retrieved August 17, 2020
from https://komonews.com/news/local/spend-a-lot-of-time-commuting-seattle-ranks-2nd-worst-in-us-report-finds.
[45] K. Mayer, “Microsoft offers 12 weeks of paid parental leave due to pandemic,” April 2020, retrieved August 17, 2020
from https://hrexecutive.com/microsoft-offers-employees-12-weeks-of-paid-parental-leave-due-to-pandemic/.
[46] M. Czerwinski, G. Smith, T. Regan, B. Meyers, G. G. Robertson, and G. K. Starkweather, “Toward characterizing the
productivity benefits of very large displays.” in Interact, vol. 3, 2003, pp. 9–16.
[47] A. Palmer, “Shopify is giving employees a $1,000 stipend to buy supplies while they work from home during coronavirus
pandemic,” March 2020, retrieved August 17, 2020 from https://www.cnbc.com/2020/03/12/coronavirus-shopify-givesemployees-1000-stipend-to-work-from-home.html.
[48] S. Barker, “Playstation employees working from home until 30th april, will receive full pay and equipment budget,”
March 2020, retrieved August 17, 2020 from https://www.pushsquare.com/news/2020/03/playstation_employees_
working_from_home_until_30th_april_will_receive_full_pay_and_equipment_budget.
[49] D. Vena, “Facebook will give employees $1,000 bonuses to support remote work,” March 2020, retrieved August 17,
2020 from https://www.fool.com/investing/2020/03/17/facebook-will-give-employees-1000-bonus-to-support.aspx.
[50] J. L. Butler and S. Jaffe, “Challenges and gratitude: A diary study of software engineers working from home during
covid-19 pandemic,” in New Future of Work 2020, 2020, available at https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/uploads/
prod/2020/07/NFW-Butler-Jaffe.pdf.
[51] N. Singer-Velush, K. Sherman, and E. Anderson, “Microsoft analyzed data on its newly remote workforce,” July 2020,
retrieved August 17, 2020 from https://hbr.org/2020/07/microsoft-analyzed-data-on-its-newly-remote-workforce.
[52] S. Berkun, The year without pants: WordPress. com and the future of work. John Wiley & Sons, 2013.
[53] E. Raymond, “The cathedral and the bazaar,” Knowledge, Technology & Policy, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 23–49, 1999.

A Tale of Two Cities: Software Developers Working from Home During the COVID-19 Pandemic

31

[54] J. L. Burke and S. Jaffe, “Challenges and gratitude: A diary study of software engineers working from home during
covid-19 pandemic,” August 2020, retrieved August 19, 2020 from https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/uploads/
prod/2020/07/NFW-Butler-Jaffe.pdf.

A

CODEBOOK

We identified 32 codes in the following six themes.
Beyond Work
Ecological Impact: The impact of working from home on ecological factors (e.g. affecting the environment). The most
common is less pollution due to not commuting.
Family, Children, and Pets: Factors related to pets, children, and family. This includes the proximity to them, interruptions
from them, lack of childcare, and needing to help children who are doing school remotely from home.
Food: The impact of working from home on meals and snacks. This includes quality and quantitiy of food, access to food,
diversity of food consumed, and the need to or opportunity to cook for one’s self.
House Work: The impact of working from home on home-related tasks or activities such as laundry, paying bills, picking
up packages, chores, and maintenance.
Money: The impact on money and spending. This may include spending less money due to not eating out or commuting
as well as spending more money on groceries, setting up a home office, or upgrading internet.
Collaboration
Blocks: Comments about being blocked from making progress due to waiting on others to relay information, make decisions,
or complete pre-requisite tasks.
Collaboration: Aspects of coordination or collaboration that are not explicitly about communication. This also includes
general statements about collaboration such as "Collaboration is worse" or "It’s hard to be creative with people".
Meetings: Explicit mentions of meetings, including frequency, duration, time of day, quality, size, formal versus informal,
and communication channels used.
Social Connections: Non-work communication with co-workers (e.g. to help facilitate work bonds). This includes the
difficulty of managing, forming, or maintaining informal and team relationships as well as feeling isolated and missing
social connections.
Team: Team characteristics such as team culture, team social activities, team productivity, and team mood.
Communication
Channels: Discussions of the use of various communication channels such as Teams chats and calls, Email, instant
messaging, including comments about them such as using too many tools, difficulty of use, and benefits of different
tools. In addition, this includes comparisons of tools to working in office such as the lack of in-person communication
or missing richness of communicating at a whiteboard.
Communication Gaps: Challenges around communication such as it being difficult to connect with particular people (for
example, because schedules are more flexible), hard to communicate, missing communication, and miscommunication.
This also includes lack of awareness of what others are working on.
Formal Communication: Formal communication such as scheduled chats that are work related.
Informal Communication: Unscheduled, informal, or ad-hoc communication that is work related. This includes the inability
to drop by someone’s office or run into someone in the break room as well as the use of tools (e.g. Teams) for frequent,
short interactions.
Well-being
Breaks: Taking or needing more or less breaks (including meal breaks or walks); Reasons for less breaks such as having
meetings are back to back
Healthy Habits: e.g., diet, explicitly saying being "healthy", physical activity (working out), walking between meetings; too
much time on the computer; too much time at home
Mental Health: work related stress; personal stress, anxiety; burnout; fatigue; loneliness

32

D. Ford, M.-A. Storey, T. Zimmermann, C. Bird, S. Jaffe, C. Maddila, J. Butler, B. Houck, and N. Nagappan

No Commute: The impact of not having a commute. This includes benefits such as less wasted time, but also negatives
such as missing reading on the bus or calling relatives on the drive into work.
Personal Comfort: The impact on working from home on personal comforts such as listening to music without headphones,
wearing more comfortable clothes, or creating a more comfortable working space.
Routine: Any mentions of routine. May include "missing a routine" such as "I miss having breakfast every morning" or the
importance of maintaining a routine.
Schedule Flexibility: The ability to and impact of working outside of the traditional "9-5" work day. This includes working
outside of non-work hours as well as doing non-work related activities (e.g. laundry) during traditional working
hours.
Work Hours: Whether the number of hours worked during the day stayed the same, went up or went down. For instance,
"I get the same amount done, but I’m working 12 hour days to do it."
Work-Life Balance: Changes in boundaries between work and non-work life and the ability (or lack) to not let work
concerns or responsibilities interfere with non-work activities.
Focus: The impact of working from home on the ability to focus, or the impact of various factors on focus time
Interruptions and Distractions: Interruptions or distractions (or the lack of them) when working from home, whether work
related or not.
Motivation: Various intrisic and extrinsic factors affecting motivation as well as differences or changes in motivation.
Productivity: Discussion of perceived productivity and the impact of various factors on productivity
Work Environment
Connectivity: The challenges of connectivity such as internet speed and latency, "remoting in" to a machine at work to
accomplish work, using secured machines, connections to remote machines going up and down, and the need to
reboot machines remotely.
Environment: Aspects of the physical work environment such as access to natural light, now having a window, dedicated
(e.g. a study) vs non-dedicated (e.g., kitchen table) space, having privacy, temperature, more or less noise.
Ergonomics: The availability or absense of ergonomic furniture, often in comparison to the work office environment.
Furniture: References to furniture that do not mention or allude to ergonomics. Items such as whiteboards or bookcases
are also included.
Hardware: Differences in displays (quantity and quality), and machines (also quantity and quality) as well as accessories
such as mice, keyboards, headphones, and webcams.

A Tale of Two Cities: Software Developers Working from Home During the COVID-19 Pandemic

33

Table 8. Counts and Ranks of the Codes in Survey 1. The columns under Counts indicate the frequency of
each code within questions “Please share details about your answer to the previous question on how your
productivity has changed.” (Q14), “What is good about working from home?” (Q15), “What is bad about
working from home?” (Q16), “What challenges have you encountered working from home?” (Q17), and all
four questions combined (Total). The columns under Ranks indicate the rank of each code with respect to the
other codes for Q14, Q15, Q16, Q17, and all four questions combined (Total). The most frequent code is #1.
Counts
Code

Ranks (#)

Q14

Q15

Q16

Q17

Total

Q14

Q15

Q16

Q17

Total

Beyond Work
Ecological Impact
Family, Children, and Pets
Food
House Work
Money

0
65
7
6
0

6
61
32
33
11

0
38
17
0
1

0
61
9
8
1

6
225
65
47
13

30
3
22
26
30

18
6
10
9
16

30
9
16
30
28

31
3
23
25
28

32
3
22
25
31

Collaboration
Blocks
Collaboration
Meetings
Social Connections
Team

3
12
39
12
7

0
3
29
1
1

14
38
22
94
8

1
16
18
21
1

18
69
108
128
17

28
19
7
19
22

26
22
11
24
24

21
9
14
1
26

28
20
18
13
28

29
20
12
10
30

Communication
Channels
Communication Gaps
Formal Communication
Informal Communication

63
13
0
61

5
0
4
0

87
12
16
49

66
27
14
26

221
52
34
136

4
17
30
5

19
26
21
26

2
22
19
4

2
9
21
10

4
24
26
9

Well-being
Breaks
Commute
Healthy Habits
Mental Health
Personal Comfort
Routine
Schedule Flexibility
Work Hours
Work-Life Balance

19
46
7
17
3
7
21
25
11

21
229
27
45
48
0
71
16
10

17
5
48
22
0
12
1
45
47

20
0
21
9
7
4
25
20
20

77
280
103
93
58
23
118
106
88

14
6
22
15
28
22
13
12
21

14
1
12
8
7
26
4
15
17

16
27
5
14
30
22
28
8
6

15
31
13
23
26
27
11
15
15

19
2
14
15
23
28
11
13
16

83
193
5
31

80
91
0
24

12
87
12
16

25
35
10
17

200
406
27
88

2
1
27
11

3
2
26
13

22
2
22
19

11
6
22
19

5
1
27
16

34
39
13
16
38

0
63
0
2
5

34
26
36
17
47

99
57
33
33
51

167
185
82
68
141

10
7
17
16
9

26
5
26
23
19

12
13
11
16
6

1
4
7
7
5

7
6
18
21
8

Work
Focus
Interruptions and Distractions
Motivation
Productivity
Work environment
Connectivity
Environment
Ergonomics
Furniture
Hardware

