A New Dynamic Model to Predict the Effects of
Governmental Decisions on the Progress of the CoViD-19
Epidemic
Kamran Soltani1, Ghader Rezazadeh1, 2
1
2

Mechanical Engineering Department, Urmia, Iran

South Ural State University, Chelyabinsk, Russian Federation

Abstract
Background: The outbreak of the new type of corona virus known as CoViD-19 in the entire
world resulted in a large variation and impacts on worldwide interactions including,
economics, social routine and etc. Unfortunately, it is still spreading and there is no certain
vaccine yet, therefore, predicting CoViD-19 trend and understanding of its dynamic behavior
may play a fundamental role in the prevention measures and control strategies. In the present
paper, we have expressed a new look at the mathematical epidemic modeling based on the
well-known compartmental models, to show the effects of the governmental decisions on the
behavior of the epidemic in order to on-time effective actions.
Methods: We have established a novel mathematical model that considers various aspects of
the spreading of the virus, including, the transmission based on being in the latent period,
environment to human transmission, governmental decisions, and control measures. To
accomplish this, a compartmental model with eight batches (sub-population groups) has been
proposed and the simulation of the set of differential equations has been conducted to show
the effects of the various involved parameters. Also, to achieve more accurate results and
closer to reality, the coefficients of a system of differential equations containing transmission
rates, death rates, recovery rates and etc. have been proposed by some new step-functions
viewpoint.
Results: First of all, the efficiency of the proposed model has been shown for Iran and Italy,
which completely denoted the flexibility of our model for predicting the epidemic progress
and its moment behavior (using assumed logical model parameters). The model has shown
that the reopening plans and governmental measures directly affect the number of active
cases of the disease. Also, it has specified that even releasing a small portion of the
population (about
percent) can lead to a severe increase in active patients and
consequently multiple waves in the disease progress. The effects of the healthcare capacities
of the country have been obtained (quantitatively), which clearly specify the importance of
this context. Control strategies including strict implementation of mitigation (reducing the
transmission rates) and re-quarantine of some portion of population have been investigated
and their efficiency has been shown.
Future works: This work is more and more efficient by undertaking statistical data for
predicting and showing epidemic trends (Not just CoViD-19, but any other epidemic). So,
our future work in this area may be dealing with the modeling of the other aspects of such
* Corresponding authors: Kamran Soltani, Ghader Rezazadeh
Kamran Soltani (K. Soltani), kamransoltani16377@gmail.com, ORCID: 0000-0002-4479-2551,
Ghader Rezazadeh (G. Rezazadeh), g.rezazadeh@urmia.ac.ir, ORCID: 0000-0001-5243-3199.

epidemics and more certainty forecasting of the progression, of course by utilizing real
statistical data.
Keywords: CoViD-19, Epidemic modeling, Governmental Decisions, Wave Analyze,
Control measures, Epidemic forecasting, Environmental pollution transmission.
1 Introduction
The outbreak of the new virus, known as SARS-CoV-2 or 2019-CoViD (severe acute
respiratory syndrome corona virus 2), by the International Committee on Taxonomy of
Viruses (ICTV), was started in December 2019 in Wuhan, China, when some
incomprehensible symptoms were appeared in the patients [1,2]. The crisis of spreading this
new type of virus (CoViD-19) had many notable effects on the typical trend worldwide such
as economics, health, environmental and social, and unfortunately, it is still continued [3].
Therefore, fighting with this new virus to suppress and eliminate it is of particular
importance.
In order to suppress the CoViD-19 disease, many preventive measures such as social
distancing, quarantine, contact tracing, promotion wearing a face mask, the closing of high
population density places such as schools, universities, offices, and etc. have been applied.
However, the virus is progressing and still, there is no a certain and accessible vaccine to
ward off the CoViD-19 epidemic, even if, it will be built soon, it will take a considerable
amount of time to propagate in the entire of the world which is because of economic reasons
and also maybe governments political reasons. During conflicts with the CoViD-19 epidemic,
besides medical and biological efforts to find an effective vaccine, other scientific societies
have a great responsibility to investigate other aspects of this pandemic including
mathematical modeling of epidemics, biological systems modeling, and etc. [4–6].
Among, all of the above fields, the mathematical modeling can play a key role for predicting
and determining the epidemic characteristics such as the pattern of the outbreak, the number
of the people for example who infected (or the number of death cases), the threshold of the
epidemic, the duration of the epidemic, effectiveness of the control measures and etc. [2,7].
So, mathematical modeling has a fundamental role in the perspective of governmental
decisions and on-time actions to suppress and curb the spreading. The dynamical modeling of
each epidemic has its own challenges that may lead to unexpected behavior and having some
deviation from the real statistics information. The challenges of modeling of the epidemics
such as CoViD-19 are because of their dependence on the many parameters and factors that
they involved in the dynamical progress existing some vague medical issues, and regional
reasons such as culture, being rich, and poor of the people and so on. In the early stage of
most infectious diseases, the spreading dynamics is still unclear [8]. Mathematical modeling
of the out breaking dynamics of the pandemic diseases including CoViD-19 implemented
using a well-known family of the compartmental models [1,6,9], wherein the population is
divided into subpopulation groups. The governing system of differential equations of the
spread regarding the nature of the epidemic and its features are written and afterward, the
flow of the transmission of the individuals from one compartment to another is obtained from
solving a set of the governing differential equations [8]. There are various compartmental
models with different structures; they are named based on the number and type of the
compartments. At the beginning of the dynamical modeling of the epidemics, the number of
boxes was limited to two or three compartments. The major classifications of the population

in the compartmental models are susceptible-infectious (SI) [10], susceptible-infectioussusceptible (SIS) [10], susceptible-infectious-recovery or susceptible-infectious-removed
(both known as SIR) [6,11–13], susceptible-infected-recovered-dead (SIRD) [14,15],
susceptible-exposed-infectious-recovery (SEIR) [1,6,11,16] as well as more generalizations
of the SEIR model [2,6,9,17,18], that can be found in the literature.
In the present study, a new mathematical modeling of epidemic disease for CoViD-19 is
conducted. Governmental decisions (actions) and environmental disease transmission are
modeled by a new approach. In order to closer predicting of the epidemic pattern some
coefficients including infection rates, death rate, are proposed time-dependent, and the results
for the model under time-varying coefficients is obtained. To show the efficiency and
flexibility of the proposed model in the outbreak prediction, by considering logical model
parameters the patterns of the spreading for Iran and Italy are obtained. During this,
governmental decisions, change of transmission rates with time and etc. are employed.
Multiple waves of the epidemic, healthcare capacity effects, environmental transmission
effects and etc. are predicted and the suppressing controlling measures are shown. The results
of the analysis are summarized as a proposal to make effective measures by the government
and society.
2 Mathematical Modeling
As mentioned before, many compartmental models have been developed to model infectious
diseases. Most of them are a generalization of the SEIR model and adding some new classes
of the population try to consider as many involved parameters and conditions as possible.
Here, too we follow the same process and consequently we consider a compartmental
epidemic model by adding several new batches of the peoples. Meanwhile, unlike most of the
existing models, the presented model takes into account infection of the susceptible
individuals from the people who are in the latent period of the disease. This issue is very
important especially for diseases like CoViD-19, which has a notable latent period. Based on
the proposed compartmental model (figure (1)), the entire population is divided into eight
batches. First of all, the people who are resistant to the disease, known as insusceptible ( ),
these individuals are subtracted from the entire population. The other class is known as
susceptible ( ), which they able to get the disease by contact with both of exposed ( ) and
infected ( ) individuals, the exposed people are those who they do not have any disease
symptom yet, and they are in the incubation period (here it is considered equal to the latent
period) of the disease, where the term of "incubation period" referred to a duration of time
that the symptoms of the disease have not appeared yet (especially for cases like CoViD-19)
[17,19]. Therefore, the susceptible individuals become infected at a rate by contact with
the infected individuals and at a rate by contact with the asymptomatic people (Exposed
individuals). Where the coefficients and are the transmission rates.
For cases similar to CoViD-19 the main cause of the contagion is associated with the
connecting between susceptible and exposed people (hence
). In addition, susceptible
individuals may become infected by contact with a polluted environment (at the rate of ). It
is assumed that the infection rate by the polluted environment to humans is a function of
exposed people (
) as well as disinfection measures. The
individuals from the exposed group are transferred to the infectious people at an appearance
rate,
equal to
. The Presented model uses an added isolated

(hospitalized), , compartment and a quarantined ( ) compartment to include the effects of
the isolation of the infectious individuals and also the quarantine of the susceptible people. It
is assumed that the isolated persons cannot infect new individuals from the susceptible
people, also, we suppose that they are added to the isolation compartment by a fraction, , of
the infectious individuals. There are two possibilities for other remaining individuals in the
infectious group, one, those who are recovered after passing from the corresponding
infectious period of the disease and one, who has died. We suppose that, the recovery rate of
the infectious individuals is where it is equal to
, as well as, the death
rate (or mortality rate) from the infectious and quarantined people are and , respectively.
It should be mentioned that a fraction of the individuals from isolation compartment has been
considered as
which they are recovered. Accordingly, the set of differential equations of
the dynamical modeling of the CoViD-19 can be written as follows:

Fig 1: The proposed SEIR epidemiological model of CoViD-19 disease.
dS(t )
dt
dE(t )
2:
dt
dI (t )
3:
dt
dH (t )
4:
dt

1:

dN (t )
dt
( (t )I

( (t )I

(t )E(t ))S(t )

(t )E(t ))S(t )

E(t )

I (t )

qI (t )

qr H (t )

di (t )I (t )

E(t )

qI (t )

dh (t )H (t )

(E )S(t )
(E )S(t )

Gd(t )

dR(t )
dt
dD(t )
6:
dt

5:

7:

8:

I (t )

qr H (t )

di (t )I (t )

dSq (t )

dh (t )H (t )

(1)

Gd(t )

dt

dN (t )
dt

IS(t )
dt
n

9 : Gd(t )

S(t ) E(t ) I (t )
dt
dt
dt
2
(t Ti )
exp(
)
,
i
2 i2

H (t )
dt

R(t )
dt
S0i

D(t )
dt

dSq (t )
dt

i

(2 i2 )0.5
In the proposed model,
, is a function of applying the effects of the governmental
decisions on the quarantine of the susceptible individuals at different times. More details
about the
transmission rates will be discussed in the next sections. , is the decision
time. The number of the susceptible individuals also changes by the natural birth and
mortality rates in the society, so this effect is modeled as
in the susceptible
compartment. A notable assumption of the presented model is that the all population is not
subjected to the disease, directly, that means the quarantine people are immune from the
infection to the disease until they will be subjected to disease, directly, (by contacting with
other exposed/infected people or polluted public places). The summation of the eight groups
is the total population of the society as follows:
i 1

IS(t )

S(t )

E(t )

I (t )

H (t )

R(t )

D(t )

Sq (t )

N (t )

(2)

It should be noted that, in the system of differential equations (1),
is known as mass
conservation equation and is obtained from the derivative of equation (2). Table (1) provides
a brief definition of each compartment, in order to better understand their distinction.
Table 2: The definitions of the compartments and the individuals
Compartment
Insusceptible ( )
Susceptible ( )
Quarantined (

Exposed ( )
Infectious ( )
Isolated ( )
Recovered ( )
Death ( )

)

Explanation
The people who are resistant against the disease (immune against
the disease)
The people who are subjected to the disease directly (by their
especial work, job or duty), these people can be infected.
The individuals that they are not subjected to the disease directly
these individuals cannot be infected unless the quarantine is removed
(e.g. the community of students because of closing schools and
universities),
Infected with the disease but without any typical symptoms (in
incubation period)
Infected by virus with general symptoms of the disease
Individuals who have been isolated (hospitalized people)
People who have been healed and are not infected again
People who have died!

It is worth mentioning that applying mathematical models on the systems in the real-world
(physical, social, economic, biological and etc.) will be valid only under its utilized

hypothesis and assumptions [6]. Hence, this research is the same as other mathematical
models that will have a bit of deviation from the clinical information and formal statistics.
Table (2) shows an overview of the main assumptions which are considered in the presented
compartmental model. Also, there are many noise and perturbations in the real statistical data
that is because of the many parameters that affect the behavior of the system in reality (the
nature of our world). The practical mathematical description of the physical phenomenon can
predict only a general behavior of the system by considering the most effective parameters.
Table 2: An overview of main assumptions, used in the present analysis.
Related part
Variables

Assumptions
• The variables used in the presented model are assumed to be continuous
in time

Birth and natural
deaths

• It is assumed that the number of newborns and died individuals are
neglected relative to the total population, so the population is remained
constant by a good approximation.

Male and female

• In the present model there are no distinguished differences between male
and female, although, the rate of the infection of the men and women are
different [6].

Age effects

• have been not considered.

Geopolitical
factor

• have been not considered.

Recovery of cases

• It is assumed that recovered people will no longer be infected.

2-1 Governmental Decision effects
As mentioned briefly before, large scale governmental decisions such as closing or opening
of public communities, workplaces and etc. lead more individuals to be subjected with the
virus. This is because of increasing the number of direct contacts or the rising infection rates,
suddenly. In the present study, this phenomenon is modeled as an impact on the variations of
the people subjected to the disease (susceptible individuals). The first reason is the novelty
(the main one) of the presented paper, which considers the effects of the quarantine on the
transmission of the susceptible people into exposed and then infectious individuals. That
means that, during an epidemic outbreak, when the government decides for opening (closing)
of a portion of the population, it leads to suddenly increasing (decreasing) of the susceptible
compartment. Therefore, the governmental decisions are considered as a sum of Gaussian
functions ( ) at the start of the performing of a decision. The justification of this selection is
because of the step variations of the susceptible individuals, hence its variations (derivative
respect to time) is impulsive. Also, when a change occurs, it is not expected that the model
parameters including coefficients of transmission rates remain constant, therefore, in the
perspective of the compatibility between the coefficients we assume that the other rates in the
set of equations change. One of the main factors in determining the prevalence of the
epidemic disease like CoViD-19 is the transmission rates ( and ) that they denote the rate
of transferring individuals from the compartment susceptible to the compartment of exposure.

The infection rate depends on many various parameters such as culture, healthcare
possibilities, the amount of economic well-being of the people, educational infrastructure,
and government assistance for people during for example quarantine and etc. Therefore, it
seems logical that we assume the infection rate coefficients are time-dependent (
and
). Any decision on a large scale in a country can impress the transmission rates and other
existent coefficients. But as we will show later, even decreasing the transmission rates after
the reopening plans, the breaking of lockdown may lead to an increase in the infectious
people dramatically. Accordingly, Governmental measures control the progress of the
outbreak directly, for example, in Iran at the beginning of the spreading of CoViD-19 some
preventative measures such as banned festival celebration, closing Friday Prayers,
disinfection of the public places and paths, closing holy shrines, closing schools, universities
and offices were applied which reduced the rate of the spreading the CoViD-19 (Fig (2)) [20].
As can be understood from figure (2), after the reopening of some workplaces and jobs on
around May 3, the number of infectious cases began to rise again.

Fig 2: Active infectious cases in Iran from February 20th to July 14th [20].
The idea of the modeling of the variations of the infection rates with time seems to be
interesting for in the investigation of the behavior of the epidemics for example repeating of
the waves of the disease. For this purpose various functions have been used in the literature to
describe the infection rate as a function of time for other epidemics [21,22]. In the present
study, we provide a sum of step functions for transmission rate coefficients during a certain
period. Also, it is assumed that the infection rates change after the governmental decisions,
since the government may apply the necessities of the personal preventative measures such as
wearing a face mask, and so on. Following stepwise function is used for infection rates and
the rate of fatality:
(t )

u 0 (t )

0

(

1

0

)u1(t )
1

...

P(t )
.
N

(

N

N 1

)uN (t ) 1

P(t )
N

N

u (t )
0 0

(
i 1

i

i 1

)ui (t )

(3)

(t )

u 0 (t )

(

0

1

0

)u1(t )

(d0u0 (t )

(d1

(

d0 )u1(t )

...

N 1

N

P(t )
N

)uN (t ) 1

(4)

N

P(t )
.
N

1

d(t )

...

u (t )
0 0

(

i

i 1

)ui (t )

i 1

(dM

dM 1 )uM (t ))

(5)

M

d0u0 (t )

(di

di 1 )ui (t )

Death Rate

i 1

where

, is a shifted unit step function that is introduced as follows:

ui (t )

u(t

i

)

(6)

the coefficients , and are the mean value of transmission rates and death rates over the
time interval between
and , respectively. Also
is a term known as " Perception of
risk" that directly depends on the mortality rates ( and
) [21]. The parameter of the
perception of risk, depending on the nature of the epidemic, is increased when more
individuals are died (increasing death rate) and it is reduced naturally. For the presented
model for CoViD-19 the variations rate of the perception of risk can be expressed by the
following equation:

dP(t )
dt

D(t )

em P(t )

P(t )

(7)

the constant is a parameter that determines the strength of the response. Also
,
and
are the meantime of the transmission of the infectiousness to the deaths, the average
duration of the impact of death cases on the perception of the public and the duration of the
media effects on the general mentality, respectively, where both parameters to be estimated.
2-2 Epidemic model Threshold
One of the key parameters that determine the threshold of the outbreak is called basic
reproduction number,
(or basic reproductive ratio) which is defined as the number of
produced secondary infected cases in a completely susceptible population [8,23]. When
, the spread is suppressed rapidly (decreases with time), by other words, the disease is
not an epidemic. For case
the disease is spread, and it is continued until all the
individuals in the society will be infected [24]. Noting to the definition, there are two general
methods for determining
, one using a statistical clinical-related data fitting and other
using a mathematical model of the epidemic (known as Next generation method in literature)
[24]. The mathematical calculation of the
is more popular when we have a compartmental
model since it gives a closed form expression for
as a function of model parameters. For
determining the epidemic progress in the absence of the
we calculate the basic
reproductive ratio for the provided model. According to the proposed model, (when there is
no
term in the equations), a unique disease-free equilibrium (DFE) can be obtained as
follows:
X0

(S 0, Sq0, E 0, I 0, H 0, R0, D0 )

(fN ,(1

f )N , 0, 0, 0, 0, 0)

(8)

where , is the initial fraction of the susceptible population ( ) that are subjected to the
disease, directly. At first, the next-generation matrix (NGM) should be formed, for this

purpose, compartments , and are considered as disease compartments and other as nondisease compartments. More details about formation of NGM can be found in Refs
[19,25,26]. So, according to the set of equations (1), the matrix of new infections, , and the
matrix of the transition of individuals from disease compartments, , are expressed as the
following:
fN .

fN

E

0

F

E 0

fN

0

0

0

0
and V

q
0

0

0

therefore, the NGM,

fN

(9)

0

di

q

qr

dh

0

, can be obtained as following relationship:

fN .

E

E 0

(
FV

0

fN
q di )

fN (

q

di ) 0

(10)

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

Finally,
, is calculated by determining the spectral radius (matrix eigenvalue with the
largest magnitude) of NGM, we have:
0

(FV

1

)

fN
(

fN
q di )

fN

.

E

(11)
E 0

at which the first two terms are related to the new infection by susceptible-exposed and
susceptible-infected contacts, respectively. Also, the third term measures the infected ones by
a polluted environment, as can be seen disinfection can directly affect the progress of the
epidemic [19].
2-3 Environmental pollution effects
Regarding the lifespan of the CoVid-19 on the various surfaces, it can be concluded that, the
environmental transmission is a notable source in the spreading of the virus. To take into
account this subject our model added a new term of interacting susceptible people with the
polluted environment that as said before is a function of the rate of disinfection by people and
related organs and the number of the exposed individuals. In this paper, we assumed that the
variations of the environmental transmission rate with the rate of disinfection are negligible
relative to the variation with the number of exposed people. The main source of the pollutionrelated transmission is the public places; therefore, the function has been selected in a way
that is proportional to the number of exposed individuals exponentially. Of course, by
defining a saturation point a better approximation is obtained. Accordingly, the following
function is considered for the relativity of the environmental transmission rate with the
exposed people:

E
(12)
(E )
(1 e 00 )
0
where
and
are the positive coefficients to adjustment of the function for real data.
Also, the is the saturation level of environmental pollution. Finally, the basic reproductive
number, , comes to the following form:

(

)fN

fN
(13)
(
q di )
In the present study, it is assumed that the CoViD-19 epidemic is near its saturation point in
terms of environmental transmission, so,
. However, statistical data can be useful
for predicting as better of the environmental-related infection.
0

(FV

1

)

0 00

4 Result and Discussion
4-1 Simulation
As can be understood, the set of differential equations (1) is a nonlinear system (caused by
terms
and
), so the exact solution maybe is not practically possible. For solving this
system, familiar numerical methods can be used. In the present study, the 4th-order RungeKutta method is used for solving the governing nonlinear equations. According to the physics
of the problem, the set of differential equations (1) needs a series of initial conditions for the
involved variables. In the present analysis, it is assumed that, at the beginning of the
outbreak, a fraction of susceptible people population ( ), are subjected to the disease, also,
only one person has been exposed to the virus (Table (3)). It should be noted that, some
parameters have a relatively constant value or they change in a relatively specific interval
which depend on the structure and the nature of the virus, such as incubation period and
infectious period (for these coefficients the mean value is considered), in the other hands,
there are some coefficients, that they change with many external parameters. These
coefficients often vary from one community to another (e.g. infection rates and the
environmental polluted coefficient). The values of parameters and coefficients have been
brought in Table (3) for Iran and Italy. In the present analysis, due to the severe lack of
statistical data, some parameters have been assumed, however, assumed parameters are
relatively logical (according to the available data) but they need accurate estimation in the
future works. Methods such as maximum-likelihood parameter estimation and least square
are well known in the area of the data estimation [27,28]. Details of these coefficients have
been shown in Table (4). More accurate simulations by including extensive statistical
research can be conducted in future works (this paper alone cannot include this wide range of
data estimation).
4-2 model Validation: Iran and Italy
In order to show the flexibility and efficiency of our proposed model to cover the existing
data and verifying the model, the behaviors of the spreading CoViD-19 in Iran and Italy have
been derived for a relatively long term of the epidemic (Figure (3)) using some logical model
parameters. As denoted before, accurate data analysis and advanced statistical works by
incorporating a verity of the related parts (Including ministry of health and hospital statistical
centers etc.) are needed to more accurately predict the outbreak in order to apply on-time of
prevention strategies.

(a)

(b)
Fig 3: Model validation for active infected cases in a) Italy and b) IRAN using proposed
dynamical model [20].
As Figure (3) illustrates, our model is able to well predict disease progression, both in terms
of trend and quantity. Note that for deriving the results for both countries of Italy and Iran
relatively reasonable coefficients and governmental measures have been considered. For
example, for Italy, it has been assumed that at the beginning of the epidemic, since some
people have been concerned (because of the media effects and the news of the world) they
have begun to respect self and family isolation (at home generally). Also, they have removed
unnecessary commuting, so it has been assumed that only
(
) of the population are
subjected to the virus directly. Also, the exposure to susceptible transmission rate ( ) is timedependent and varies tangible, but the infectious to susceptible infection rate ( ) has a slower
variation with time, since it often occurs in hospitals and treatment centers, therefore a mean
constant value has been selected. On the other hand, a few days after the entrance of the virus
to the country the government may have declared the quarantine, so a considerable portion of
the population was prevented from the direct exposure to the disease (for Italy it is assumed
of the population). In the progress of the epidemic CoViD-19 the government may
decide to remove the lockdown of some special cortexes (due to their essential jobs)

gradually (about
for the case of Italy until Jul 14). A similar trend can be imagined for
epidemic progress in Iran.
Table 3: Summarized values of the parameters and variable used in the analysis.

Parameter & Discerption

Notation Value

Remark

Population and initial Conditions
(Feb
)
million
million

Total population of Italy
Total population of Iran
Initial susceptible people

(Italy)

Assumed
Assumed

(IRAN)

Initial exposed people
Initial infectious cases
Initial death cases
Initial quarantined people
Initial recovered people
Initial quarantined people

From mass
conservation

Initial insusceptible people
Coefficients
day, [29]
day, [29]

Incubation (or Latent) period
Infectious period
Fraction of isolation of active cases

Italy

Assumed

IRAN
Italy

Mean death rate

IRAN

day [8]

Mean period of quarantined of active
cases
Mean environmental infection rate

Italy

Assumed

IRAN

day (-1)
day (-1)
day (-1)

Death perception of risk coefficient
Medial effect coefficient
Coefficient of naturally decay of risk
Risk strength response
Infectious to exposed transmission rate

Assumed
Assumed
Assumed

Italy

Assumed
Assumed
Table 4: The considered parameters for cases of Italy and IRAN.
IRAN

IRAN
Infection
rate
2.8
)
Day after
beginning
(day)
Day after
beginning
(Gd)

1.03

-

-

2.65

-

(day)
Change
of
populatio
n
-

Italy
Infection
rate
)
Day after
beginning
(day;
date)
Day after
beginning
(Gd)
(day;
date)
Change
of
populatio
n
-

4-3 Peaks and Repeating waves for CoViD-19
From the perspective of the control strategies and prevention measures, the peaks of the
infectious population, and repetition of the epidemic waves during spreading, play a striking
role [6,30,31]. The peaks of epidemics are related to the local and global extremums of the
infected group, so the peaks occurred in time at which
or equivalently for our
model (
). As can be seen, the characteristics of epidemic peaks
(including amplitude and time gap and occurrence time) depend on the dynamical behaviors
(in terms of modeling) as well as, the parameters of the model. In the past epidemics such as
influenza-1918 multiple waves have been observed, for example, the United States
experienced multiple waves in each three influenza pandemic that occurred in the 20th
century (Spanish flu-1918, Asian flu-1957, and Hong-Kong flu-1968) [6,18,22,32]. There are
several mechanisms that may lead to the repetition of waves of epidemics including the
variations of transmission of the virus, virus mutation, heterogeneity (geography,
demography and etc.) and loss of immunity [30,33]. In the present study, we propose a new
mechanism that may lead to generating multiple waves, and it is the governmental large-scale
measures in direction of the removing lockdown for quarantined people. Once again, consider
the infected diagram of the active infected cases in Iran and Italy, suppose the government
decides to reopen schools and universities, so a fraction of the population is transferred from
the quarantine compartment to the direct subjection to the disease. Also, Figure (4) represents
this effect on the progress of the epidemic in Iran and Italy, respectively. Note that, we have
assumed that after reopening schools and universities (or in general any public places), the
government will also apply mitigation measures such as social distancing, forcing people to
wear a face mask etc. Therefore, the values of the transmission rates have been considered
less than before the opening. Other tips that can be understood from Figure (4a) is that,
although the mean coefficient of the transmission rate ( ) decreased from about late October
(early November), reopening can lead to a great shock in the infectious individuals.
Therefore, despite adopting mitigation measures of the transmission rate, quarantine removal

(even for a portion of the society) is dangerous, and should not be implemented, as much as
possible. This phenomenon also verifies our proposed mechanism for producing multiple
waves in the epidemic procedure. A notable tip about the presented results is that all of the
conducted simulations have been utilized using assumed parameters, however, as far as
possible, they have been considered logical, the main goal is only providing a vision of our
proposed model for governmental decisions.

(a)

(b)
Fig 4: The number of total active infected cases under the scenarios of the reopening for a)
Italy and b) Iran. The prediction after 14th Jul has been accomplished using assumed
coefficients and parameters (
and etc.) [20].
Figure (4b) shows the variations of the active infective cases for Iran under two different
scenarios of the reopening and breaking of lockdown. As can be seen, the peak of the infected
people increases when more individuals are free from quarantine. It should be mentioned that
percent of the population (about
persons) has a notable efficacy on the
amplitude of the peak. In addition, it can also be seen that the peak time occurs earlier, this

result has an agreement with other conducted studies [34]. Another important finding
associates with the response of society to the reopening plans at different decision times,
Figure (5) illustrates this dependency. According to Figure (5) the time of the government
decision (in the perspective of the reopening) effects on all peak properties including
amplitude, time gap and occurrence time, in a way that, when the government is applied a
reopening plan; whatever the number of the exposed and infectious individuals be lesser, the
reopening plan leads to the smaller amplitude of the peak, lesser time gap as well as shift
(forward) of the occurrence time. Therefore, our model does not recommend the breaking of
the lockdown, when the number of the exposed people (consequently, infectious people) is
still high.

Fig 5: The infectious cases for different reaction times The prediction after 14th Jul has been
accomplished using assumed coefficients and parameters (
and etc.) [20].
From the perspective of the healthcare capacity (e.g. Hospital beds and intensive care units
(ICU)) we should note the peaks of the epidemic in a way that, in the peak times the system
should be able to respond to all the patients [8]. The effects of the quarantine (isolation) rate
of the infected cases ( ) shown in figure (6). Figure (6) specified that the increasing
temporary hospitals and CoViD-19 treatment (care) centers (increasing the value of the )
can reduce the number of infectious people especially in the peak time. Also, it can be found
that, for the time-independent values of the isolation rate the time peaks do not change, this
conclusion is logical due to the peak time governed equation (
).

Fig 6: The effects of the isolation rate.
The environmental-related transmission of the disease is the next parameter that has an effect
on the dynamical behavior of the spreading CoViD-19. Because of the novelty of our
approach for environmental pollution-based transmission and lack of sufficient statistical data
we use some desired pollution coefficient only in order to show its general effects (Figure
(7)).

Fig 7: The variations of infectious people versus time for different pollution transmission
coefficient (for after Sep 2).
Figure (7) displays that the number of infectious individuals increases when the environment
is more polluted therefore, disinfection measures also to be considered as much as possible.
Finally, the main question is "what can the government do after a reopening plan when the
number of infectious cases is increased?" With regards to the proposed compartmental model,
there are two basic answers, one reducing the possibility of the infection per contact by
applying strict necessaries of personal healthcare and disinfection measures, and quarantining

a fraction of the susceptible people once again [35]. These effects have been investigated in
Figures (8a) and (8b), respectively.

(a)
(b)
Fig 8: The variations of infectious cases for two different mitigation measures a) requarantine plan and b) reducing transmission rate.
Figure (8a) shows the effectiveness of the quarantine as a control measure. According to
figure (8b), although reducing the transmission rate is very useful but may not be practically
possible simply. It is worth mentioning that all of the parameters used in the simulation are
assumed values but logical.
4-4 Limitation and outlook
Although, here the paper was focused on the CoViD-19 and the case studies were only for
Iran and Italy, but, the proposed mathematical model can be utilized to forecasting each
similar epidemic everywhere. Of course, extensive statistical data analysis should be used for
accurate prediction and efficient providing optimum control strategies. The limitations of the
proposed work can be classified as below:
(1) The model does not consider the male, female, children and other types of inhomogeneity
dependent.
(2) The discussion about the basic reproductive number of our model in the presence of
governmental actions should be improved in the future work.
Also as mentioned before, in order to the more efficient and realistic prediction of epidemic
diseases such as CoViD-19 the model parameters and involved variables should be
determined by statistical data.
5 Conclusions
In the present paper, a novel mathematical epidemic modeling was provided, which includes
several basic elements such as governmental decisions (actions), environmental disease
transmission, the behavioral response of the individuals, time-dependent model parameters
etc. The governmental decision was applied in the model to consider the large-scale
lockdown and reopening plan effects. In order to better describe the epidemic behavior and
its progress pattern, some of the parameters were considered time-dependent. In addition, a
new environmental-based transmission model was proposed to include the infection through
the pollution places and surfaces. The equations governing the dynamical behavior of the
system were solved using the 4th-order Runge-Kutta method. Using the results from the
solution of the model considering given coefficients and model parameters were fitted the

spreading pattern of Iran and Italy. Also, the model can well predict the future of the
epidemic, quantitatively, in the event that merged with accurate statistical data analysis.
Under semi-logical assumptions of the simulation, the general conclusion and proposals
based on the implemented analysis are summarized as the following.







Taking into account the governmental decisions and environment-related pollution
can better predict the pattern of the spread.
The reopening plans may lead to multiple waves in the epidemics, even the
transmission rate decreases.
Even breaking the quarantine of 2-3 percent of the population of a common country
can lead to highly shocks and waves in active infected cases.
Reopening plans should be conducted with respect to the current situation of the
epidemic since it would have existed more infected and exposed still should not break
up lockdown even though the trend of the epidemic is decreasing.
Sufficient re-quarantine and mitigation measures directly change the trend of the
epidemics, therefore, in the re-ascent of the epidemic, they are recommended as much
as possible.

References
[1]

Y. Li, B. Wang, R. Peng, C. Zhou, Y. Zhan, Z. Liu, X. Jiang, B. Zhao, Mathematical
Modeling and Epidemic Prediction of COVID-19 and Its Significance to Epidemic
Prevention and, Ann. Infect. Dis. Epidemiol. 5 (2020) 1052.

[2]

L. Peng, W. Yang, D. Zhang, C. Zhuge, L. Hong, Epidemic analysis of COVID-19 in
China by dynamical modeling, (2020) 1–18. http://arxiv.org/abs/2002.06563.

[3]

I. Chakraborty, P. Maity, COVID-19 outbreak: Migration, effects on society, global
environment and prevention, Sci. Total Environ. 728 (2020) 138882.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.138882.

[4]

O. Diekmann, H. Heesterbeek, T. Britton, Mathematical Tools for Understanding
Infectious Disease Dynamics, Princeton University Press, 2012.
https://doi.org/10.23943/princeton/9780691155395.001.0001.

[5]

J.W. Haefner, Modeling biological systems: Principles and applications, Springer
Science & Business Media, 2005. https://doi.org/10.1007/0-387-25012-3_1.

[6]

R. Sameni, Mathematical Modeling of Epidemic Diseases; A Case Study of the
COVID-19 Coronavirus, ArXiv Prepr. ArXiv2003.11371. (2020).
http://arxiv.org/abs/2003.11371.

[7]

J. Panovska-Griffiths, Can mathematical modelling solve the current Covid-19 crisis?,
BMC Public Health. 20 (2020) 551. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-020-08671-z.

[8]

K. Chatterjee, K. Chatterjee, A. Kumar, S. Shankar, Healthcare impact of COVID-19
epidemic in India: A stochastic mathematical model, Med. J. Armed Forces India. 76
(2020) 147–155. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mjafi.2020.03.022.

[9]

B. Tang, N.L. Bragazzi, Q. Li, S. Tang, Y. Xiao, J. Wu, An updated estimation of the
risk of transmission of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCov), Infect. Dis. Model. 5
(2020) 248–255. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.idm.2020.02.001.

[10] H.W. Hethcote, The Mathematics of Infectious Diseases, SIAM Rev. 42 (2000) 599–
653. https://doi.org/10.1137/S0036144500371907.
[11] J. Ma, Estimating epidemic exponential growth rate and basic reproduction number,
Infect. Dis. Model. 5 (2020) 129–141. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.idm.2019.12.009.
[12] M. Banerjee, A. Tokarev, V. Volpert, Immuno-epidemiological model of two-stage
epidemic growth, Math. Model. Nat. Phenom. 15 (2020) 27.
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1051/mmnp/2020012.
[13] V. Volpert, M. Banerjee, S. Petrovskii, On a quarantine model of coronavirus infection
and data analysis, Math. Model. Nat. Phenom. 15 (2020) 1–6.
https://doi.org/10.1051/mmnp/2020006.
[14] C. Anastassopoulou, L. Russo, A. Tsakris, C. Siettos, Data-based analysis, modelling
and forecasting of the COVID-19 outbreak, PLoS One. 15 (2020) 1–21.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0230405.
[15] P. V Khrapov, A.A. Loginova, Comparative analysis of the mathematical models of
the dynamics of the coronavirus COVID-19 epidemic development in the different
countries, 8 (2020).
[16] M. Peirlinck, K. Linka, F. Sahli Costabal, E. Kuhl, Outbreak dynamics of COVID-19
in China and the United States, Biomech. Model. Mechanobiol. (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10237-020-01332-5.
[17] G. Giordano, F. Blanchini, R. Bruno, P. Colaneri, A. Di Filippo, A. Di Matteo, M.
Colaneri, Modelling the COVID-19 epidemic and implementation of population-wide
interventions in Italy, Nat. Med. 26 (2020) 855–860. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591020-0883-7.
[18] Q. Lin, S. Zhao, D. Gao, Y. Lou, S. Yang, S.S. Musa, M.H. Wang, Y. Cai, W. Wang,
L. Yang, D. He, A conceptual model for the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
outbreak in Wuhan, China with individual reaction and governmental action, Int. J.
Infect. Dis. 93 (2020) 211–216. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2020.02.058.
[19] C. Yang, J. Wang, A mathematical model for the novel coronavirus epidemic in
Wuhan, China, Math. Biosci. Eng. 17 (2020) 2708–2724.
https://doi.org/10.3934/mbe.2020148.
[20] 42E678D96C861C2D9C35B0653D60023Eec71Fb6a @ Www.Worldometers.Info,
(n.d.). https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/country/iran/.
[21] D. He, J. Dushoff, T. Day, J. Ma, D.J.D. Earn, Inferring the causes of the three waves
of the 1918 influenza pandemic in England and Wales, Proc. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 280
(2013) 20131345. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2013.1345.
[22] B.B. Xu, J. Cai, D. He, G. Chowell, B.B. Xu, Mechanistic modelling of multiple
waves in an influenza epidemic or pandemic, J. Theor. Biol. 486 (2020) 110070.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2019.110070.
[23] P.L. Delamater, E.J. Street, T.F. Leslie, Y.T. Yang, K.H. Jacobsen, Complexity of the
basic reproduction number (R0), Emerg. Infect. Dis. 25 (2019) 1–4.
https://doi.org/10.3201/eid2501.171901.
[24] J.. Heffernan, R.. Smith, L.. Wahl, Perspectives on the basic reproductive ratio, J. R.

Soc. Interface. 2 (2005) 281–293. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2005.0042.
[25] P. van den Driessche, J. Watmough, Reproduction numbers and sub-threshold endemic
equilibria for compartmental models of disease transmission, Math. Biosci. 180 (2002)
29–48. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0025-5564(02)00108-6.
[26] M. Trawicki, Deterministic Seirs Epidemic Model for Modeling Vital Dynamics,
Vaccinations, and Temporary Immunity, Mathematics. 5 (2017) 7.
https://doi.org/10.3390/math5010007.
[27] A. Charnes, E.L. Frome, P.L. Yu, The Equivalence of Generalized Least Squares and
Maximum Likelihood Estimates in the Exponential Family, J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 71
(1976) 169–171. https://doi.org/10.1080/01621459.1976.10481508.
[28] J. Devore, A Modern Introduction to Probability and Statistics: Understanding Why
and How, J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 101 (2006) 393–394.
https://doi.org/10.1198/jasa.2006.s72.
[29] J.A. Backer, D. Klinkenberg, J. Wallinga, Incubation period of 2019 novel coronavirus
(2019- nCoV) infections among travellers from Wuhan, China, 20 28 January 2020,
Eurosurveillance. 25 (2020) 2000062. https://doi.org/10.2807/15607917.ES.2020.25.5.2000062.
[30] A. Mummert, H. Weiss, L.P. Long, J.M. Amigó, X.F. Wan, A Perspective on Multiple
Waves of Influenza Pandemics, PLoS One. 8 (2013) 1–12.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0060343.
[31] A. Aleta, D. Martin-Corral, A. Pastore Y Piontti, M. Ajelli, M. Litvinova, M. Chinazzi,
N.E. Dean, M.E. Halloran, I.M. Longini, S. Merler, A. Pentland, A. Vespignani, E.
Moro, Y. Moreno, Modeling the impact of social distancing, testing, contact tracing
and household quarantine on second-wave scenarios of the COVID-19 epidemic.,
MedRxiv Prepr. Serv. Heal. Sci. (2020) 1–31.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20092841.
[32] J. Lin, V. Andreasen, R. Casagrandi, S. A. Levin, Traveling waves in a model of
influenza A drift, J. Theor. Biol. 222 (2003) 437–445. https://doi.org/10.1016/S00225193(03)00056-0.
[33] U. States, CDC Estimates of 2009 H1N1 Influenza Cases, Hospitalizations and Deaths
in the United States, April – December 12, 2009, Emerg. Infect. Dis. 2009 (2010) 1–7.
[34] S. Stawicki, R. Jeanmonod, A. Miller, L. Paladino, D. Gaieski, A. Yaffee, A. De Wulf,
J. Grover, T. Papadimos, C. Bloem, S. Galwankar, V. Chauhan, M. Firstenberg, S. Di
Somma, D. Jeanmonod, S. Garg, V. Tucci, H. Anderson, L. Fatimah, T. Worlton, S.
Dubhashi, K. Glaze, S. Sinha, I. Opara, V. Yellapu, D. Kelkar, A. El-Menyar, V.
Krishnan, S. Venkataramanaiah, Y. Leyfman, H. Saoud Al Thani, P. B Nanayakkara,
S. Nanda, E. Cioè-Peña, I. Sardesai, S. Chandra, A. Munasinghe, V. Dutta, S. Dal
Ponte, R. Izurieta, J. Asensio, M. Garg, The 2019–2020 novel coronavirus (severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2) pandemic: A joint american college of
academic international medicine-world academic council of emergency medicine
multidisciplinary COVID-19 working group consensus paper, J. Glob. Infect. Dis. 12
(2020) 47. https://doi.org/10.4103/jgid.jgid_86_20.
[35] R.M. Anderson, H. Heesterbeek, D. Klinkenberg, T.D. Hollingsworth, How will
country-based mitigation measures influence the course of the COVID-19 epidemic?,

Lancet. 395 (2020) 931–934. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30567-5.

