1

Multifaceted COVID-19 Outbreak
Aneesh Mathews Paul, and Sinnu Susan Thomas, Member, IEEE
Abstract—The time when everyone is struggling in the cruel hands of COVID19, we present the holistic view on the effects of this
pandemic in certain aspects of life. A lot of literature exists in COVID-19, but most of them talk about the social and psychological side
of the COVID problems. COVID-19 has affected our day-to-day life and its effects are extensive. Most of the literature presents the
adverse effect of the pandemic, but there are very few state-of-the-art approaches that discuss its beneficial effects. We see the
multiple faces of the pandemic in this paper. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first review that presents the pros and cons of
the pandemic. We present a survey that surrounds over effects on education, environment, and religion. The positive side of COVID19 raises an alarm for us to wake up and work in that direction.
Index Terms—SARS-CoV-2, Impacts, Education, Environment, Religion, Global Outbreak.

F
1

INTRODUCTION

N

digital transformation in the marketplace. Devaux et al.
OVEMEBER 2019 has created a history in the records of

the World Health Organization (WHO) while in-troducing
COVID-19 disease to the world. The coronavirus was first
found in the 1930s in chickens, but then it was found in
humans in the 1960s for the first time. Since then, couple of
times humans were a victim of this virus such as SARS-CoV
in 2003, HCoV NL63 in 2004, HCoV HKU1 in 2005, MERSCoV in 2012, and SARS-CoV-2 in 2019 [1]. COVID-19 belongs
to the category of Severe Acute Respi-ratory Syndrome
Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) corona virus category. SARSCoV-2 is a positive-sense single-stranded RNA virus causing
respiratory problems. Humankind has not faced such a
disastrous and global health challenge since the Second World
War. Wuhan, Hebei province, China became the epicentre to
introduce this respiratory disease to

the world.
WHO Director-General Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus declared the SARS-CoV-2 outbreak a Public Health
Emergency of International Concern on 30th January 2020.
COVID-19 has changed the entire lifestyle of mankind [2].
Every facet of life has been affected despite being from rich
or poor countries [3]. There are positive as well as negative
impacts of this epidemic. The world has changed a lot
during this time. A lot of researchers are working on
COVID-19, while being a novel problem with many
unexplored areas. Researchers have worked on prediction
[4], classification [5], [6], diagnosis [7], [8], [9], hardware
[10], [11]. Very little research is being carried out showing
the impacts of COVID-19 [12], [13]. The authors in [12], [13]
has studied the impact of COVID-19 on global economy
and explored the use of Internet of Things, Unmanned
Aerial Vehicles, Blockchain, Artificial Intelligence, and 5G to
mitigate the impact of COVID-19 outbreak. Yim [12] has
studied the structural change in consumption and the

[14] investigated the effects of hydroxychloroquine against
SARS-CoV-2 virus. Faridi [15] has studied the effect of Middle
East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) that has
caused havoc in Saudi Arabia in 2012. The author has seen
the effect of MERS-CoV on male and female in Riyadh. The
authors in [16], [17], [18], [19] assessed the psy-chological
stress of COVID-19 on health workers. Xiang et al. [20]
reported an overview of infected healthcare workers in China
and Italy during the early periods of the COVID-19. The
authors in [21], [22], [23] studied some social impacts of
COVID-19. Chakraborty and Maity [24] studied the COVID-19
effect on the economy and global environment. Ivanov
[25] predicted the impact of COVID-19 on global supply
chains. Xu et al. [26] studied the air quality index to see the
effects of COVID-19 on the environment. Chinazzi et al. [27]
studied the effect of travel and quarantine influence on the
dynamics of the spread of COVID-19. Braun [28] narrated
examples of the situations of the poor during COVID-19.
Ahmed et al. [29] highlighted the precarious position of
postdoctoral fellows in academic positions due to COVID-19.
Staniscuaski et al. [30] projected out the problems faced by
academic mothers having many difficulties working at home
during COVID-19. Bouillon et al. [31] discussed the positive
side effect of coronavirus on air pollution. Suicide rate has
increased during the pandemic time [32], [33].The situation of
COVID-19 has diverse effects in India [34].

In this paper, we study the multi-faceted effects of
COVID-19 on our planet. Our contribution in this paper is
threefold.
1)

2)
Aneesh Mathews Paul is with Department of Network Planning,
BSNL, Ernakulam, Kerala, India, 682020.
E-mail: aneesh@bsnl.co.in
Sinnu Susan Thomas (Corresponding author) is with Image and
Vision Computing Lab, IIITMK Trivandrum, Kerala India, 695581.
E-mail: sinnu.thomas@iiitmk.ac.in

3)

The pandemic has affected the entire education
sys-tem and a new era of distance learning has
emerged. A review on various education systems
during the pandemic is looked out.
COVID-19 has benefits in certain areas such as the
environment. The environmental effects are discussed.
Overall change in religious practices has changed
and we review these aspects in this paper.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.

This PDF is created at https://www.pdfonline.com/convert-pdf/

2

Section II highlights the overall change in the education
system during the COVID-19 season, and discusses the
social and psychological impacts of the pandemic. Section
III presents the religious and environmental effects of coronavirus. Section IV presents the conclusions of this paper.

2

EDUCATIONAL ASPECTS

Education system is one of the prime pillars in developing a
nation. It constitutes an important ingredient in deter-mining
the growth of a country. Human development is an
important determinant in a person’s health and trade. The
education system is severely interrupted in most of the
countries since the outbreak of this pandemic across the
globe. The schools, colleges, and universities are in the
total closure mode. Billions of academic learners became
devoid of their knowledge acquisition during this pandemic.
The teachers, students, schools, and families —all became
a victim of this bitter truth. The world has gone under complete reorganization during this period be it any sector, the
education sector is not left apart. The speed of the
pandemic and the closure of schools was so fast that it was
difficult to come up with a solution with all facilities. The
closure of educational institutes will not only have short
term impact, but leave a footprint on economic and societal
components. There are number of areas in education that is
affected by the pandemic:
1)

Cross border movements
The landscape of higher education across the world is
defined by the cross border movements of the
students. Globally every year there is an increase of
10% in the number of students studying abroad as
shown in Fig. 1. As per the UNESCO [35], the
students enrolled for higher education for a period of
typically a year to seven years. According to the
statistics given by Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), the in-ternational
student population with demographic changes is likely
to reach 8 million by 2025 [36]. Most of the
international students prefer either the United States,
the United Kingdom, Germany, France, or Australia for
their higher education [37] as shown in Fig. 2. As per
the statistics in 2019, the top host countries involved in
sending students to other countries include China,
India, South Korea, and France [35] as shown in Fig.
3. The pandemic has brought a sluggish impact on the
movement of students across the border. The travel
restrictions during lockdown and the fear of pandemic
will affect the cash flow at the universities. Parents are
afraid to send their ward across any border in this
situation. The universities in these countries are
undergoing extreme pressure on student admission. If
this problem persists, there is a possibility of decline in
international higher education in the com-ing years.
The pandemic has brought a devastating effect on the
global education system. The pandemic has shrinked
the world under their own home and hometown and
cross border movements seem to be a threat to the
life of an individual.

2)

Fig. 1. Number of international mobile students.

Online learning

Fig. 2. The destination country preferred by international mobile students,2019.

Active learning is not only a source of fun but also a
source of formation of cognitive social skills.
Carlsson et al. [38] emphasized on the increase in
cognitive skills with the total number of school days
attended. The study carried out in Sweden showed
that crystallized intelligence can be aug-mented
significantly by 1% of a standard devia-tion while
attending ten days of extra schooling. The closure
of schools for almost a month at the beginning of
this pandemic can cause a trivial loss of 3% of the
standard deviation. The pandemic has left the
learning systems with no options other than
embracing a distant or online learning.
As per the statistics released by UNESCO [39], the
pandemic has affected nearly 1.3 billion learners
around the world. The recovery of the disruption of the
learning process is essential to facilitate the continuity
of the education system. When physical presence is a
risky situation, an alternative has to be

This PDF is created at https://www.pdfonline.com/convert-pdf/

3

4)
Fig. 3. The host country of international mobile students, 2019.

taken at various levels of learning. Online learning
is a new strategy embraced by the education
system in this time of pandemic. The transition from
active learning to passive learning was very rapid
during this pandemic. The curriculum was not
designed for passive learning, so the viewers are
losing their interest in the content.
The shift in developed countries to the online
learning system does not pose any problem, but for
developing and under-developed countries - it is a
challenging situation. The rural areas of these
countries do not have the basic infrastructure to
facilitate the online learning. The pandemic has
posed a threat to the overall development of the
underprivileged in these countries resulting in
shattering their economies. The video telephony
softwares is being used for distant learning. The
concept of keeping the electronic gadgets far from
the children has been loosened even for a primary
school going child during this pandemic. The online
learning has removed the commuting time for the
learners but on the other hand, made them
addicted to electronics devices leading to many
social, psychological, and physical disabilities.

3)

Online learning brought a paradigm shift in one’s
own comfort zone. The hassle of traffic jams, pollution, queues, health problems, allergies is halted in
this course of time. Most of the learners are happy
with the online learning system since environmental problems do not leave them void of attending
classes.
Unprepared teachers
Online learning has brought an end to the centuries
old practice of chalk and talk. Due to the sudden
change to the online learning in the education system, the preparedness of the tutors was a concern.
An inhibition of this sudden change was found in
the tutors during the beginning phase. The course
curriculum was not made for passive learning. The

5)

sudden shift in the teaching system with inadequate preparation from the learner side was also
noticeable. Teaching is a knack that everybody is
not gifted with, so many tutors are not so effective
in an online mode. In countries like India, where
there is a huge shortage of technology savvy tutors,
this model of learning would not work out. Lack of
infrastructure and resources in the rural parts of
these countries is an obstacle for teachers for a
complete preparation of imparting the knowledge.
An unavailability of dedicated online platforms is
posing a threat for outcome based education. The
tutors are adjusting the platforms with the video
telephony platforms. If the problem of pandemic
persists, there is a need for creating dedicated
learn-ing platforms.
New admission procedure
Most of the schools and universities undergo the
ad-mission process during the month of May-June
for Fall Semester. Due to the severity of the
pandemic in many parts of the world, the admission
process is hindered. The situation in the admission
process is becoming alarming in the foreseeable
future with the pandemic situation.
Traditional admission procedures would not take
place in this season. New procedural strategies for
admissions should be considered in order to fill the
gap in this pandemic. Some universities are not
con-sidering taking any students the current
academic year, while some are luring people with
discounts. It is a crucial task for the students to
decide which school they would like to attend
without visiting respective campuses.
Collaborative work
The pandemic has forced people to create a virtual
world of working at home. The virtual world cre-ates
effortless paths to collaborate across the globe. The
conferences, academic meetings, classes, and
seminars have gone online leaving a space for academic collaborations. We see a lot of unprecedented
collaborative work globally among the educators

6)

[40] during this pandemic leading to a loss in the
travel economy. The cancellation of universityfunded international travel for conferences, blanket
bans on any international travel for spring break,
canceling study-abroad programs [41] made different academicians closer virtually. Collaborations
serve a larger purpose as an individual and also as
an organization [42]. There are lots of scope for
online conferencing platform business. The concept of education will be reformed envisaging the
global collaboration. Globally, the collaboration has
brought a new direction to certification courses and
degrees. These collaborations fulfills the need of
each other while dividing the work in chunks.
Recruitment procedure
The pandemic has brought a halt to the organizational structure making a scarcity in the manpower.
The universities are facing challenges to recruit new
students, and faculty during this pandemic. The retention is also questionable. The recruitment for the

This PDF is created at https://www.pdfonline.com/convert-pdf/

4

faculty is a worrisome issue for the administration
when the risk of losing students is hovering around
them. When survival of many institutes is a burden
for them, the recruitment of new faculty members
increases their load.

7)

Economic impact
The consequences of a sudden shift in the learning
system brought a slowdown to the world economy.
The international students from China and India
constitute 33.7% and 18.4% of the total international
students in the USA higher education sector. The
travel restrictions during the pandemic would cut down
the admission process leading to an economic burstdown. The conveyance to the institutes are at a halt
causing recession in the travel sector.
All the learners cannot afford to stay near their institutes, so they stay far and face a time-consuming
and costly commute [44]. Students spend approximately £100 a month for commutation to their
academic institutes. Pandemic has saved the pocket
of students in higher education. In countries like India,
private schools and private vehicles charge a heavy
conveyance fare for the commutation. The pandemic
has given relief to the parents. Same time, the train
services and the road services are hit badly. Cashflow in these services reduced leading to an economic
crunch in these sectors.

Due to the recession in the corporate sector, the
recruitment process for the students is a great disaster. The job offers have been withdrawn creating a
havoc in the student community. The global outlook of
the pandemic would massively devastate the
livelihoods in the entire world. Fig. 4 shows the
number of unemployed people in G7 countries according to March 2020. According to the statistics released by Centre for Managing Indian Economy [43]
st

on 1 July, 2020, the unemployment rate in India has
increased by three times during the pandemic
outbreak with urban employment rate shooting to
25.79% and rural to 22.48%. Fig. 5 shows how the
unemployment rate of developing countries have
devastated during the pandemic.

8)

Health Benefits
The students use to take long commutes to the
institutes taking away their well-being [45]. They
are deprived of their sleep and exercises. To commute long distances, students get up early and the
daily routine is hampered. Lack of daily exercises
make them obese which is a major cause of
concern among the youngsters.
Students carry a heavy load of bags on their backs to
the school in countries like India. Carrying school bags
are back breaking work to the students. Heavy loads
of school bags have deleterious effects on the spine of
children [46]. Many measures are taken to reduce the
amount of school baggage, but it was all at a
minuscule level. The online learning during the
pandemic season turned out to be a heavy relief to the
students carrying heavy school bags.

Fig. 4. No. of Unemployed People in G7 Countries.

9)

Fig. 5. Unemployment Rate of India in 2020.

Being in a well-being state is an important aspect of
human being. We tend to give rest to the body if it
is not in a position to commute. The learners refrain
from going to class if they are not well. The pandemic situation takes off all the health issues and
helps in smooth learning of classes. The students
are free to learn from their home in any physical
condition.
Assessment procedures
The structure of the learning system is based on
various assessment procedures. The students are
assessed based on the merit system. The pandemic
hit the world during the key assessment period
cancelling many exams. The cancellation of exams
would have a long-term consequence on the ca-reer
of the student. First, the internal assessment and then
the public examinations were cancelled. The grades at
the end of the academic year were predicted
according to some undefined rules influ-encing the
privileged students. Education system is shifting to an
online assessment system that can cre-ate
measurement errors. These errors in an abrupt

This PDF is created at https://www.pdfonline.com/convert-pdf/

5

assessment would increase the differences between
the privileged and under-privileged students in the
future. The labour market would face the dire consequences of inefficient assessment scores.

10)

d)

The entrance exam in higher education is a worst
hit in assessment procedures. The entrance exams
to top universities are either postponed or
cancelled. The exam agencies are coming up with
alternative solutions in consultation with the
international in-stitutes.
Strike free education
Education system is at stake be it teachers strike or
any other political strike. These strikes prevent students from attending classes. According to the study
at Argentina [47], 180 days of teachers strike there is
a decline of years of education by 3:1% in an academic year. The teacher strike has a negative effect
on student learning and their overall achievement

11)

12)

[48]. Frequent political strikes or hartals impact the
overall education system. According to the statistics
in Kerala, India [49], there would be one hartal in
every four days leading to disruption in the holistic
coverage of prescribed syllabus.
The online education system is not affected by any
sort of socio-political disruptions. Education system
in the virtual platform eased out the disturbances
due to the strike.
Pressure on Family
The education aspects during the pandemic impacted the family in many ways.
a)

b)

c)

The education system comes with mid day
meals for the underprivileged in countries like
India and the pandemic situation has taken the
bread out of the mouth of some children.
Children from poor families would come to
school with the greed for getting a one time
meal. If the pandemic persists, then there is a
high chance of drop-outs from the school.
Moreover, it would be a tremendous challenge
to keep up the motivation of the
underprivileged children after the pandemic.
Most of the parents in the pandemic era are
working from home. It is difficult for most of the
parents to handle domestic pressure and work
pressure at home. Working parents are
juggling with children and working at home.
Global home schooling would pro-duce
disparities depending on the ability of the
family members to help their children learn.
The inequality in each student skill set would
overall affect human capital growth.

The unprecedented learning system needs
assistance of basic infrastructure for its
smooth conduct. Power supply and internet
connectivity are the essentials needed without disruption. To avail these resources at
home and keep the student without stress is
a burdensome work for the parents. In
developing countries, it is a difficult situation
to maintain the resources around the clock.

3

Women take care of the children and rela-tives
at home when compared to men. They are
more insecure in their jobs. Women are
struggling with their household obligations and
work during the pandemic. The juggling
between children at home and work would
reduce their opportunities and earnings at the
workplace. Women have to work harder in
order to compensate for the workload and at
an increased stress during this period. The
study says that many women have left their job
during the pandemic due to the imbal-ance in
the worklife. COVID19 is a disaster that would
widen the gender inequalities.

Loss of societal skills
Studies reveal that there is an increase of 60% in
usage of electronic gadgets by the impressionable
minds. Gadget addiction is one of the major drawbacks of the online learning system. Irritational
behavioural patterns are observed in the students
during this pandemic. The long time exposure to
electronic gadgets are making them obese. An attachment towards gadgets creates a space for
emo-tional imbalances in their personality.
Students have confined themselves into their own
territory keeping them away from the societal component of life. Studying and living together with their
companions under one roof increases their social
abilities but lockdown has created a void space for
problem solving and decision making skills. Social
unawareness and lack of cognitive skills would be
more visible. These skills improve their
employability, productivity, health, and well-being in
the future, and ensure the overall progress of the
nation.

ENVIRONMENTAL ASPECTS
1)

Greenhouse gases emission
People around the world are worried about the
undergoing changes in the climate. The global temperature is a major concern for many environmen-tal
changes. The last five years (2015-2019) were
recorded as the hottest years. Globally 3°C temperature has increased since the last century. An increase
in per capita Gross Domestic Product (GDP) is proportional to global warming. A study conducted by [50]
shows the environmental degradation and CO2
emission has increased with the economic growth and
more production [51]. According to the census in
2019, the countries with the highest CO2 emis-sion in
the world is shown in Fig. 6. We see that the
environmental degradation increases with the increase
in production for economic growth. A lot of measures
were taken to reduce the hazardous emis-sion, but a
substantial decrement was not possible. The CO2 or
greenhouse gas disturbs the natural regulation of
temperature in the atmosphere and leads to global
warming and climate change.

Humans manipulated nature according to his
whims and fancies that resulted in paradoxical im-

This PDF is created at https://www.pdfonline.com/convert-pdf/

6

reduced by 8% or 2.6 GigaTonnes (GT) which is
equivalent to a decade earlier data. There was an
average decline of 25% energy demand per week
during full lockdown and an average of 18% decline
in partial lockdown countries. An unprecedented
decline in demand for various fuels is seen during
the pandemic as shown in Fig. 8. The crisis of pandemic is paving a way for clean energy transitions.
This decline in CO2 emission is unprecedented and
would be temporary, unless there is a resilient effort
to change the structure.

Fig. 6. CO2 emission in 2019.

Fig. 8. Usage of Fuel during Lockdown.

2)

Fig. 7. Sources of CO2 emission.

balances. Humans are responsible for the emission of
the greenhouse gas in the atmosphere over the last
200 years. COVID19 is the only disaster that has
come as a boom to the environment. The major
sources of CO2 emission are energy, agricultural
processing, land use changes, industrial processing,
and other waste. Electricity and heat is generated by
burning fossil fuel, coal, and natural gas. A total of
24.9% greenhouse gases are emitted while burning
these fuels and are the leading cause for tempera-ture
regulation. Industries emit 14.7%, transporta-tion 14.3%, agriculture processing - 13.8%, land use
change - 12.2%, and industrial processes- 4.3%.
Distribution of different sources of greenhouse gas are
shown in Fig. 7.

Before the arrival of pandemic, it was difficult to
control the industrial and transportation emission.
An impossible action of putting a halt on these
hazardous sources was done overnight. Accord-ing
to estimates published by International Energy
Agency [52] in mid April, global CO2 emission are

3)

Vibration in the earth crust
High frequency seismic waves are propagated into
the earth mainly due to the activities of the human.
The seismic noise renders the real time estimate of
population dynamics. The COVID19 pandemic
period is the longest seismic noise quiet period
ever recorded. According to the Royal Observatory
of Belgium [53], the seismic noise of the earth during the pandemic is not prevalent, reducing the
vibration of the earth by 50%. The vibrations are
reduced by one-third of the normal activity during
the lockdown. It becomes easy for seismologists to
detect the movement in the earth crust without
much of an expedition.
Construction Projects
The construction projects in some countries were at
complete hold during the initial stages of the
lockdown. The availability of the workforce and the
site constraints halted some of the projects.
Construction activities create an adverse impact on
the environment. The burning of fossil fuel, noise,
and the waste of the construction contribute to the
regulation of the temperature in the environment.
The halt in construction reduced the amount of
PM10 by three times in the month of April 2020. Air
pollution is recorded highest in many cities of India.
The annual average PM2.5 concentration during
the lockdown was much better than the safer limit
[54], [55], [56], [57] as shown in Fig. 9.

This PDF is created at https://www.pdfonline.com/convert-pdf/

7

Pandemic season was a lockdown for mankind, but on
the contrary animals were liberalized. Humans were
away but animals took over the deserted cities and
towns. Animals took the advantage of the drop in
human activity and came out to explore and play in the
public places. Scavengers are not around to shoo
them away giving a space for wildlife to thrive. Mallard
ducks, wild deers, herd of goats, troop of monkeys,
kangaroos, gangs of turkeys, and many others are
taking human spaces. Road mortality was a threat to
the wildlife population

[59]. The mortality has reduced to 58% due to less
traffic on roads in the USA. Less roadkill reduces
the ecological imbalances.
Some animals have successfully adapted to live
alongside humans and their survival is dependent
on them. An absence of human activity endangers
some wildlife species. Some governments mobilize
funds to feed and preserve these animals, and the
lockdown hindered their progress. According to the
Livestock Census of 2012, there are around 18
million stray dogs in India. These dogs are fed by
NGOs or leftovers from restaurants. The closed
restaurants and the restrictions in the movement
made these stray dogs starve.

Fig. 9. P M2:5 Concentration at Different Cities of India.

4)

Breathing rivers
Under the banner of economic growth, entire industrial and other waste is dumped into the rivers
making it difficult to breathe. The aquatic species
are becoming extinct due to the pollutants in the
river. India is at the top of river pollution. Ganges
river is the most populated river in the world. The
present pandemic has come as a blessing in
disguise for rivers. The water pollution has
decreased con-siderably during COVID19 period.
The waters from the rivers in India are tested during
COVID19 and the results provoke us to take
measures to clean the rivers. The pH levels, the
conductivity level, dissolved oxygen (DO), and the
biological oxygen demand (BOD) of the water is
reduced during the lockdown period [58]. A
betterment in standards of drinking water was seen
during the lockdown period as shown in Fig. 10.

The sustenance of the people in rural places of poor
countries became difficult during the pandemic.
People are driven to take extreme steps for their
livelihood through poaching. The illegal hunting of
endangered species in African continent is a threat for
the wildlife society. According to study conducted by
TRAFFIC, the wildlife poaching in India has increased
twice during the pandemic pe-riod. It has increased
from 22% to 44% during the lockdown period. It may
turn disastrous and pave a way for another pandemic.
Humans struggled from recent pandemics such as
AIDS, EBOLA, MERS, and SARS that came as an
effect of consumption of animal meat [60], [61]. It
becomes
the
responsibility of
the Wildlife
Conservation Society to prevent any pandemic in the
future.

6)

4
Fig. 10. Drinking Water Standards of River Ganges in India.

5) Wildlife effects

Non-COVID diseases
Due to the clean air and lockdown, non-COVID
diseases are at steep decline in countries prone to
all pollution. The behavioural changes during the
lockdown has brought a decline in insurance claims
by 40% in India. Waterborne infectious diseases
and respiratory related diseases are being recorded
as lowest during the pandemic time. The claims on
deadly diseases such as cancer has turned down
by 42% as per the statistics of the insurance
companies in India [62].
Due to decrease in vaccination [63] and disruption
in the hospital services, there is a possibility of an
outbreak of other diseases.

RELIGIOUS ASPECTS

Religion makes people follow different practices and form
socio-cultural groups. Each culture recorded in human history practised some organized system of beliefs and prac-

This PDF is created at https://www.pdfonline.com/convert-pdf/

8

tices. We tend to see very few people practicing faith in
normal life. For some it seems absolutely mandatory but for
some these are obnoxious practices. Religion and faith is
an integral part of people’s lives worldwide, even though it
is increasing. Religious practices were hampered during
lockdown. Various aspects of religion during lockdown are
discussed in detail:
1)

prayer meeting in France, and many more [71],
[72], [73]. The pandemic spread in various
countries was sparked by religious gatherings as
shown in Fig. 12. In South Korea 63:5%, Israel
40%, USA 38%, Malaysia 36%, India 26%, and
Pakistan 22% COVID19 cases can be traced back
to religious gath-erings.

Religious Polarization
Religion is a predominant factor for satisfaction in
life, on the contrary the religious tensions can be
annoying [64] and affect the economic growth of
the country. Religious fervency is vigorous in most
secularized countries [65]. The polarization towards
targeted groups increased in many countries during
the earlier stage of the pandemic [66]. Since the
cases of the virus were aggravated by the religious
gathering in some countries, we could see religious
bigotries coupled with the pandemic. The virus has
morphed itself into an anti- community virus [67],
[68]. The bigotries and xenophobia towards different sects of people can be seen in different
countries as shown in Fig. 11.

Fig. 12. COVID19 Spread due to Religious Gatherings.

Fig. 11. Percentage of xenophobia during COVID-19.

2)

Religion and politics are a crucial part of life and
COVID-19 has acquainted the human life without
these jargon words. The places that culminated
religious polarization at the earlier stages of the
pandemic were felt at peace in the later stages of
the pandemic. Everybody came out in unison to
curb this pandemic through their services. Charity
works and social commitment was seen at large
during the pandemic.
Life without Religious Practices
The role of religious practices in spreading COVID-19
was predominant [69], [70]. The religious lead-ers
surpassing the mass gathering orders became a
source of virus carriers in the entire nation. Some of
the early COVID19 outbreaks were traced back to
religious gatherings such as Daegu church in South
Korea, Bnei-Brak in Israel, Oom in Iran, TablighiJamaat in India, Tabligh-e-Jamaat in Malaysia,

3)

Many people are fervent in religious practices such
as visiting places of worship, mass gatherings,
religious celebrations, and many more. All these
practices are hindered during the pandemic. Entire
paradigm shift was seen in the religious fraternity.
The religious holidays and celebrations were practiced at home. The key moments of rituals were
experienced in their own home. Religious leaders
were bound to ask their followers to stay at home
during pandemics. They started releasing double
the amount of messages for the community to cope
up with the stress during the pandemic. The religious organizations started doing more charita-ble
services. People started living with faith rather than
religious places. Social distancing would be the
most tricky in places of worship. The survey
concludes that the public has become comfortable
staying at home and practising their faith till the
resumption of the normal situation [74].
Technical Advancements
Religious leaders are challenged to foster and to
bring their services and communities together in
these trying times from a distance. The online
platforms were used to connect to the community
during religious ceremonies. During the pandemic
time, the searches for prayer have skyrocketed in
Google search engines. Many spiritual and therapeutic activities, such as yoga, meditation, martial
arts, and conscious dance classes have gone
online during this pandemic. These temporary
solutions are not sustainable solutions as they need
physical relationships with people.
The places of worship is a source of income for

This PDF is created at https://www.pdfonline.com/convert-pdf/

9

many religious leaders and the common man. These
sources of income are hindered by the pandemic. Life
without religious practices also hit livelihoods of
businesses around the places of worship.

5

CONCLUSION

We humans have gone through multiple virus pandemics in
different times. Pandemic came with human devastation but
with times we came over it. COVID-19 is a disaster in many
aspects of life, but in some it has proved a blessing. This
paper describes the multiple faces of virus outbreak. We
have looked upon a few possible areas of life which have
been affected by COVID-19 such as the educational sector,
environmental sector, and religious sector. The areas
where it is a boom leaves a space to ponder on the living
standard of human beings. Lot of effort was taken with
respect to some serious problems on the earth, but
everything was in vain and it was noticed that there was a
sudden break in these problems during a pandemic. Once
the pandemic is over, there is a call by the earth to make it
a better healthy living place.

REFERENCES
[1]

[8]

B. Rockx, T. Kuiken, S. Herfst, T. Bestebroer, M. M. Lamers,
B. B. O. Munnink, D. de Meulder, G. van Amerongen, J. van den
Brand, N. M. Okba et al., “Comparative Pathogenesis of COVID19, MERS, and SARS in a Nonhuman Primate Model,” Science,
2020.
A. Haleem, M. Javaid, and R. Vaishya, “Effects of COVID 19
Pandemic in Daily Life,” Current Medicine Research and Practice.
“Rolling Updates on Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19),”
https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus2019/events-as-they-happen, accessed: 2020-05-25.
N. Zheng, S. Du, J. Wang, H. Zhang, W. Cui, Z. Kang, T. Yang,
B. Lou, Y. Chi, H. Long, M. Ma, Q. Yuan, S. Zhang, D. Zhang,
F.Ye, and J. Xin, “Predicting COVID-19 in China Using Hybrid AI
Model,” IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics, pp. 1–14, 2020.
X. Wang, X. Deng, Q. Fu, Q. Zhou, J. Feng, H. Ma, W. Liu, and C.
Zheng, “A Weakly-supervised Framework for COVID-19
Classification and Lesion Localization from Chest CT,” IEEE
Transactions on Medical Imaging, pp. 1–1, 2020.
Y. Oh, S. Park, and J. C. Ye, “Deep Learning COVID-19 Features
on CXR using Limited Training Data Sets,” IEEE Transactions on
Medical Imaging, pp. 1–1, 2020.
Z. Han, B. Wei, Y. Hong, T. Li, J. Cong, X. Zhu, H. Wei, and
W. Zhang, “Accurate Screening of COVID-19 using Attention
Based Deep 3D Multiple Instance Learning,” IEEE Transactions
on Medical Imaging, pp. 1–1, 2020.
X. Ouyang, J. Huo, L. Xia, F. Shan, J. Liu, Z. Mo, F. Yan, Z. Ding,

[9]

Q. Wang, and D. Shen, “Dual-Sampling Attention Network for
Diagnosis of COVID-19 from Community Acquired Pneumonia,”
IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, pp. 1–1, 2020.
H. Kang, L. Xia, F. Yan, Z. Wan, F. Shi, H. Yuan, H. Jiang, D. Wu,

[2]
Fig. 13. Prayer Topics During Lockdown.

4)

[3]
[4]

Path towards Prayer
A loneliness during the pandemic times created furore
among the individuals. People were compla-cent in
their comfort zone but they were kicked out of that with
hopelessness and despair. Adapting to a new
environment with a U-turn in an individual’s life was a
difficult task. Life is fragile during pan-demic time but
increase in spirituality and faith be-came a vital part of
their life. Religion is considered as a source of solace
in terms of pain and scepticism. The role of prayer in
the current pandemic situation among the general
public is noteworthy [75]. There was an increased
interest ever recorded in search of prayer as per the
daily data recorded from Google for 95 countries.
According to Tearfund COVID19 Prayer Public
Omnibus Research [76] conducted in the UK during
the lockdown period gauged the responses to spiritual
practices. The statistics was conducted on 2,101 UK
adults aged 18+ and shows that nearly half (44%) of
UK adults pray regularly and a quarter (24%) of UK
adults attended online religious service during
lockdown. One in twenty UK adults (5%) who attended
religious service have never gone to church and Twothirds (66%) of UK adults agree that prayer changes
the world. Generally, religion is more appealing to the
older generation, but during the lockdown period the
reli-gious revival was seen in younger ones. The
highest number of Quran apps from Google Playstore
was downloaded during pandemic [77]. Irrespective of
any religion, everybody started seeking hope in their
faith and started praying for various topics as shown in
Fig. 13.

[5]

[6]
[7]

Q. Yang, B. Song, F. Shi, H. Yuan, Y. Wei, X. Cao, Y. Gao, D. Wu,

H. Sui, C. Zhang, and D. Shen, “Diagnosis of Coronavirus Disease
2019 (COVID-19) with Structured Latent Multi-View Representa-tion
Learning,” IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, pp. 1–1, 2020.

[10] X. Ding, D. Clifton, N. JI, N. H. Lovell, P. Bonato, W. Chen, X. Yu,
Z. Xue, T. Xiang, X. Long, K. Xu, X. Jiang, Q. Wang, B. Yin, G. Feng,
and Y. Zhang, “Wearable Sensing and Telehealth Technology with
Potential Applications in the Coronavirus Pandemic,” IEEE Re-views
in Biomedical Engineering, pp. 1–1, 2020.

[11] A. K. Tripathy, A. G. Mohapatra, S. P. Mohanty, E. Kougianos,
A. M. Joshi, and G. Das, “EasyBand: A Wearable for SafetyAware Mobility during Pandemic Outbreak,” IEEE Consumer
Electronics Magazine, pp. 1–1, 2020.
[12] R. Y. Kim, “The Impact of COVID-19 on Consumers: Preparing for
Digital Sales,” IEEE Engineering Management Review, pp. 1–1, 2020.

[13] V. Chamola, V. Hassija, V. Gupta, and M. Guizani, “A Comprehensive Review of the COVID-19 Pandemic and the Role of IoT,
Drones, AI, Blockchain, and 5G in Managing its Impact,” IEEE
Access, vol. 8, pp. 90 225–90 265, 2020.
[14] C. Devaux, J. Rolain, P. Colson, and D. Raoult, “New Insights on
the Antiviral Effects of Chloroquine Against Coronavirus: What to
Expect for COVID-19?” International Journal of Antimicrobial
Agents, Jan 2020.

This PDF is created at https://www.pdfonline.com/convert-pdf/

10

[15] U. Faridi, “Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERSCoV): Impact on Saudi Arabia, 2015,” Saudi Journal of Biological
Sciences, vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 1402 – 1405, 2018.
[16] M.-H. Temsah, F. Al-Sohime, N. Alamro, A. Al-Eyadhy, K. AlHasan, A. Jamal, I. Al-Maglouth, F. Aljamaan, M. A. Amri],
M. Barry, S. Al-Subaie, and A. M. Somily, “The Psychological Im-pact
of COVID-19 Pandemic on Health Care Workers in a MERS-CoV
Endemic Country,” Journal of Infection and Public Health, 2020.

[17] S. Kisely, N. Warren, L. McMahon, C. Dalais, I. Henry, and
D. Siskind, “Occurrence, Prevention, and Management of the
Psychological Effects of Emerging Virus Outbreaks on Healthcare
Workers: Rapid Review and Meta-analysis,” BMJ, vol. 369, 2020.
[18] Z.-Q. Dong, J. Ma, Y.-N. Hao, X.-L. Shen, F. Liu, Y. Gao, and
L. Zhang, “The Social Psychological Impact of the COVID-19
Epidemic on Medical Staff in China: A Cross-sectional Study,”
European Psychiatry, p. 1–22, 2020.
[19] Garc´ıa-Fernandez,´ Lorena and Romero-Ferreiro, Veronica´ and
Lopez´-Roldan,´ Pedro David and Padilla, Sergio and CaleroSierra, Irene and Monzo´-Garc´ıa, Mar´ıa and Perez´-Mart´ın,
Jorge and Rodriguez-Jimenez, Roberto, “Mental Health Impact of
COVID-19 Pandemic on Spanish Healthcare Workers,”
Psychological Medicine, p. 1–6, 2020.
[20] B. Xiang, P. Li, X. Yang, S. Zhong, A. Manyande, and M. Feng,
“The Impact of Novel Coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 Among
Healthcare Workers in Hospitals: An Aerial Overview,” American
Journal of Infection Control, 2020.
[21] I. Ali and O. M. Alharbi, “COVID-19: Disease, Management,
Treatment, and Social Impact,” Science of The Total
Environment, vol. 728, p. 138861, 2020.
[22] M. S. Razai, P. Oakeshott, H. Kankam, S. Galea, and H. StokesLampard, “Mitigating the Psychological Effects of Social Isolation
During the Covid-19 Pandemic,” BMJ, vol. 369, 2020.
[23] T.-J. Hwang, K. Rabheru, C. Peisah, W. Reichman, and M. Ikeda,
“Loneliness and Social Isolation during the COVID-19 Pandemic,”
International Psychogeriatrics, p. 1–15, 2020.
[24] I. Chakraborty and P. Maity, “COVID-19 Outbreak: Migration,
Effects on Society, Global Environment and Prevention,” Science
of The Total Environment, vol. 728, p. 138882, 2020.
[25] D. Ivanov, “Predicting the Impacts of Epidemic Outbreaks on
Global Supply Chains: A Simulation-based Analysis on the Coronavirus
Outbreak
(COVID-19/SARS-CoV-2)
Case,”
Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation
Review, vol. 136, p. 101922, 2020.
[26] H. Xu, C. Yan, Q. Fu, K. Xiao, Y. Yu, D. Han, W. Wang, and J.
Cheng, “Possible Environmental Effects on the Spread of COVID19 in China,” Science of The Total Environment, vol. 731, p.
139211, 2020.
[27] M. Chinazzi, J. T. Davis, M. Ajelli, C. Gioannini, M. Litvinova,
S.Merler, A. Pastore y Piontti, K. Mu, L. Rossi, K. Sun, C. Viboud,
X. Xiong, H. Yu, M. E. Halloran, I. M. Longini, and A. Vespignani,
“The Effect of Travel Restrictions on the Spread of the 2019 Novel
Coronavirus (COVID-19) Outbreak,” Science, vol. 368, no. 6489,
pp. 395–400, 2020.
[28] J. von Braun, S. Zamagni, and M. S. Sorondo, “The Moment to
See the Poor,” Science, vol. 368, no. 6488, pp. 214–214, 2020.
[29] M. A. Ahmed, A. H. Behbahani, A. Bruckner,¨ C. J. Charpentier,
L. H. Morais, S. Mallory, and A.-H. Pool, “The Precarious Position
of Postdocs during COVID-19,” Science, vol. 368, no. 6494, pp.
957– 958, 2020.
[30] F. Staniscuaski, F. Reichert, F. P. Werneck, L. de Oliveira, P. B.
Mello-Carpes, R. C. Soletti, C. I. Almeida, E. Zandona, F. K. Ricachenevsky, A. Neumann, I. V. D. Schwartz, A. S. K. Tamajusuku,

A. Seixas, L. Kmetzsch, and , “Impact of COVID-19 on Academic
Mothers,” Science, vol. 368, no. 6492, pp. 724–724, 2020.
[31] J.-B. Bouillon-Minois, F.-X. Lesage, J. Schmidt, and F. Dutheil,
“Coronavirus and Exceptional Health Situations: The First Disaster with Benefits on Air Pollution,” Disaster Medicine and Public
Health Preparedness, p. 1–5, 2020.
[32] P. Devitt, “Can We Expect an Increased Suicide Rate Due to Covid19?” Irish Journal of Psychological Medicine, p. 1–15, 2020.

[33] H. Hughes, M. Macken, J. Butler, and K. Synnott, “Uncomfortably
Numb: Suicide and the Psychological Undercurrent of COVID-19,”
Irish Journal of Psychological Medicine, p. 1–7, 2020.
[34] A. Mukherjee, G. Bandopadhyay, and S. S. Chatterjee, “COVID-19
Pandemic: Mental Health and Beyond - The Indian Perspective,” Irish
Journal of Psychological Medicine, p. 1–11, 2020.

[35] “Facts and Figures: Mobility in Higher Education,” UNESCO,
Tech. Rep., 2019.
[36] Impel Overseas Consultants Limited, “46 Study Abroad Statistics:
Convincing Facts and Figures,” https://www.impeloverseas.
com/46-study-abroad-statistics-convincing-facts-and-figures/,
2019.
[37] Global Migration Data Portal, “International Students,”
https://migrationdataportal.org/themes/international-students,
Jun 2020.
¨
M. Carlsson, G. B. Dahl, B. Ockert, and D.-O. Rooth, “The Effect of

vol. 97, no. 3, pp. 533–547, 2015.
“Education: From Disruption to Recovery,” UNESCO, Tech. Rep.,
2019.
A. Honigsfeld and J. Nordmeyer, “Teacher Collaboration During
vol. 77, pp. 47–50, 2020.
Y. Iwai, “Online Learning during the COVID-19 Pandemic,”
https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/observations/onlinelearning-during-the-covid-19-pandemic/, Mar 2020.
Research, Education, and Clinical Practice: Working Together for
1–10, 2015.
Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy, “Unemployment Rate in
India,” https://unemploymentinindia.cmie.com/, Jul 2020.
Jack Grove, “Students Spending Millions Commuting,”
https://www.timeshighereducation.com/news/studentsspending-millions-commuting/, Jul 2013.
Richard Florida, “Long School Commutes Are Terrible for
Kids,” https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2019-05-07/
how-distance-to-school-affects-student-well-being, May 2019.
M. S. Malhotra and J. S. Gupta, “Carrying of School Bags by
Children,” Ergonomics, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 55–60, 1965.
pp. 1097–1139, 2019.
G. Wills, “The Effects of Teacher Strike Activity on Student
Learning in South African Primary Schools,” Economic Research
Southern Africa, Working Papers 402, Jan 2014.
Ahona Sengupta, “Kerala Suffers 1 Hartal Every
4
Each One Burns Rs 200-Crore Hole in State’s Economy,”
https://www.news18.com/news/india/kerala-suffers-1hartal-every-4-days-each-one-burns-rs-200-crore-hole-in-stateseconomy-1992303.html, Jan 2019.
Economic Growth and Carbon Dioxide Emissions?” 2016.
Emissions, 01 2012.
R. S. M. De Plaen, F. Massin, G. Hillers, R. E. Anthony, M.-T.
Apoloner, M. Arroyo-Solorzano,´ J. D. Assink, P. Buy¨ukakpınar,¨
A. Cannata, F. Cannavo, S. Carrasco, C. Caudron, E. J. Chaves,
D. G. Cornwell, D. Craig, O. F. C. den Ouden, J. Diaz, S. Donner, C. P. Evangelidis, L. Evers, B. Fauville, G. A. Fernandez,
A. Kafka, M. R. Koymans, C. R. Labedz, E. Larose, N. J. Lindsey,
M. McKinnon, T. Megies, M. S. Miller, W. Minarik, L. Moresi,
V. H. Marquez´-Ram´ırez, M. Mollhoff,¨ I. M. Nesbitt, S. Niyogi,
K. Stammler, A. E. Stott, S. Subedi, M. B. Sørensen, T. Taira,
M. Tapia, F. Turhan, B. van der Pluijm, M. Vanstone, J. Vergne,
Quieting of High-frequency Seismic Noise due to COVID-19 Pandemic Lockdown Measures,” Science, 2020.
Sarath Guttikunda, “Data Analysis: How Has
the
Lockdown Changed the Pollution Over North India?”
https://science.thewire.in/environment/lockdown-airpollution-north-india-pm25-pm10-nox-ozone/, April 2020.
Badri Chatterjee, “Mumbai’s Vehicular Pollution
Dropped
by Three-fourth during Lockdown Period:
Study,”
https://www.hindustantimes.com/mumbai-news/mumbais-vehicular-pollution-drops-by-three-fourth-during-lockdown-

This PDF is created at https://www.pdfonline.com/convert-pdf/

11

period-safar-analysis/story-lB0HxcSWx0PsAZM1cfk4XK.html,
May 2020.
[56] Aishwarya Sudhir, “Air Pollution dropped 28% in Bengaluru during Lockdown,” https://bengaluru.citizenmatters.in/bengaluru-airpollution-pm-reduction-lockdown-study-47025, June 2020.
[57] Niraj Bhatt, “Air Quality in Chennai during Lockdown
- Do We have Clues to Mitigate Air Pollution?”
https://www.cag.org.in/blogs/air-quality-chennai-during-lockdowndo-we-have-clues-mitigate-air-pollution, April 2020.
[58] S. P. Mohammad Arif, Rajesh Kumar, “Reduction in Water Pollution in Yamuna River due to lockdown under COVID-19 Pandemic,” 06 2020.
[59] T. Nguyen, M. Saleh, M.-K. Kyaw, G. Trujillo, M. Bejarano, K.
Tapia, D. Waetjen, and F. Shilling, “Impact of COVID-19 Mitigation on Wildlife-Vehicle Conflict,” Davis, Tech. Rep., 2020.
[60] S. J. Salyer, R. Silver, K. Simone, and C. B. Behravesh, “Prioritizing
Zoonoses for Global Health Capacity Building—themes from One
Health Zoonotic Disease Workshops in 7 Countries, 2014–2016,”
Emerging Infectious Diseases, vol. 23, no. Suppl 1, p. S55, 2017.

[61] C. Machalaba, P. Daszak, and W. B. Karesh, “Anthropogenic
Drivers of Emerging Infectious Diseases,” Tech. Rep.
[62] A. Manikandan, “Insurers see up to 40% fall in Non-COVID
Medical Claims,” https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/
industry/banking/finance/insure/insurers-see-up-to-40-fall-in-noncovid-medical-claims/articleshow/75704497.cms, May 2020.
[63] “WHO and UNICEF warn of a Decline in Vaccinations during
COVID-19,” WHO, Tech. Rep., Jul 2020.
[64] M. Migheli, “Religious Polarization, Religious Conflicts and Individual Financial Satisfaction: Evidence from India,” Review of
Development Economics, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 803–829, 2019.
[65] E. Ribberink, P. Achterberg, and D. Houtman, “Religious Polarization: Contesting Religion in Secularized Western European
Countries,” Journal of Contemporary Religion, vol. 33, no. 2, pp.
209– 227, 2018.
[66] Niranjan Sahoo, “India: Infections, Islamophobia, and Intensifying
Societal Polarization,” https://carnegieendowment.org/2020/
04/28/india-infections-islamophobia-and-intensifying-societalpolarization-pub-81646, Apr 2020.
[67] P. Health, “New Center for Public Integrity/Ipsos Poll finds most
Americans say the Coronavirus Pandemic is a Natural Disaster,”
https://www.ipsos.com/en-us/news-polls/center-for-publicintegrity-poll-2020, Apr 2020.
[68] R.
of Increase in Anti-Asian
Sentiment, Attacks,” https:
//www.ctvnews.ca/canada/statcan-survey-shows-newevidence-of-increase-in-anti-asian-sentiment-attacks-1.5016027,
Jul 2020.
[69] S. A. Quadri, “COVID-19 and Religious Congregations: Implications for Spread of Novel Pathogens,” International Journal of
Infectious Diseases, vol. 96, pp. 219–221, 2020.
[70] W. J. Wildman, J. Bulbulia, R. Sosis, and U. Schjoedt, “Religion
and the COVID-19 Pandemic,” Religion, Brain & Behavior, vol.
10, no. 2, pp. 115–117, 2020.
[71] Dave Lawler, “God and COVID-19,” https://www.axios.com/
church-coronavirus-easter-passover-ramadan-2e47a5a4-b9f94990-911f-07a68ee5f7e8.html, Apr 2020.
[72] A. Schuchat, “Public Health Response to the Initiation and Spread of
Pandemic COVID-19 in the United States, February 24–April 21,
2020,” MMWR. Morbidity and mortality weekly report, vol. 69, 2020.

[73] A. James, L. Eagle, C. Phillips, D. S. Hedges, C. Bodenhamer, R.
Brown, J. G. Wheeler, and H. Kirking, “High COVID-19 Attack
Rate Among Attendees at Events at a Church—Arkansas, March
2020,” 2020.
[74] P. Mittra, “Have Prayers Changed in Lockdown? People of Faith
Answer,” https://www.axios.com/church-coronavirus-easterpassover-ramadan-2e47a5a4-b9f9-4990-911f07a68ee5f7e8.html, Jun 2020.
[75] J. Bentzen, “In Crisis, We Pray: Religiosity and the COVID-19
Pandemic,” 2020.
[76] Savanta ComRes, “Tearfund COVID19 Prayer Public Omnibus
Research,”
https://comresglobal.com/polls/tearfund-covid-19prayer-public-omnibus-research/, May 2020.
[77] Sebastian Shehadi and Miriam Partington, “How Coronavirus is
Leading to a Religious Revival,” https://www.newstatesman.
com/politics/religion/2020/04/how-coronavirus-leading-religiousrevival, Apr 2020.

This PDF is created at https://www.pdfonline.com/convert-pdf/

Flanagan,

“StatCa

