Modular Reactivation of Mexico City After COVID-19
Lockdown
Guillermo de Anda-Jáuregui ​1,2,3,*​ , PhD; Enrique Hernández-Lemus, PhD ​1,2

1. Computational Genomics Division, National Institute of Genomic Medicine, México City, México
2. Center for Complexity Sciences, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, México City Mexico
3. Programa de Cátedras CONACYT, Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnología, México City, México
* Corresponding author: gdeanda@inmegen.edu.mx

Abstract
During the COVID-19 pandemic, the slope of the epidemic curve in Mexico City
has been quite unstable. We have predicted that in the case that a fraction of
the population above a certain threshold returns to the public space, the
negative tendency of the epidemic curve will revert. Such predictions were
based on modeling the reactivation of economic activity after lockdown by
means of an epidemiological model resting upon a contact network of Mexico
City derived from mobile device co-localization. We evaluated the epidemic
dynamics
considering the tally of active and recovered cases documented in
the mexican government’s open database. Scenarios were modeled in which
different percentages of the population are reintegrated to the public space
by scanning values ranging from 5 % (around 350,000; close to the number of
people estimated by the local authorities to be returning to the public space)
up to 50 %. Null models were built by using data from the Jornada Nacional de
Sana Distancia (the Mexican model of elective lockdown) in which there was a
mobility reduction of 75 % and no mandatory mobility restrictions. We found
that a new peak of cases in the epidemic curve was very likely for scenarios
in which more than 5% of the population rejoined the public space; The return
of more than 50 % of the population synchronously will unleash a peak of a
magnitude similar to the one that was predicted with no mitigation strategies.
By evaluating the tendencies of the epidemic dynamics, the number of new cases
registered, new cases hospitalized, and new deaths, we consider that under
this scenario, reactivation following only elective measures may not be
optimal. Given the need to reactivate economic activities, we suggest to
consider alternative measures that allow to diminish the contacts among people
returning to the public space. We evaluated that by “encapsulating”
reactivated workers (that is, using measures to reduce the number of contacts
beyond their effective community in the contact network) may allow a
reactivation of a larger fraction of the population without compromising the
desired tendency in the epidemic curve.

1. Introduction
COVID-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 is a complex
pathology of infectious origins. The pathology is contagious via the airway
(very likely even air-borne) [Stadnytskyi, et al 2020]
and is able to
unleash, not only the characteristic severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)
both also a series of clinical manifestations of immune and inflammatory type
that may lead to pneumonia and even lead to sepsis induced systemic failure
(SISF) [Zaim, et al, 2020]. Being a nascent infectious epidemic, we have
little information regarding its broad clinical manifestations, even less
regarding the molecular mechanisms behind. However, it is known that the
disease is able to adopt a broad range of forms, from a mild, temporary
respiratory infectious disease to a complex pathology with a high mortality
rate, often requiring critical care.
The enormous burden of disease caused by SARS-CoV2 has been a consequence of
the highly intertwined chains of transmission of the epidemic over extensively
interconnected contact networks, local, regional and global [Yamamoto, et al
2020]. For this reason, facing the challenges posed by this disease involves
understanding the way dynamic epidemic processes happen in complex human
interaction networks [Altohouse, et al 2020; Kojaku, et al 2020].

1.1 A primer on network epidemiology
Network Epidemiology or Epidemics on Networks (EoN) has been defined as the
study of the spread of disease and risky behaviors among populations founded
in the tenets of network science [Eames and Read, 2007; Kiss, et al 2017].
EoN is then concerned on the modelisation of disease spreading, as well as
contagion and diffusion processes happening amidst social (especially public)
spaces in living systems. Tha main emphasis to date has been applied to human
populations, however similar methods can be easily adapted to deal with animal
plagues, epidemics on livestock and so on. The aim of EoN is being able to
build realistic, mechanistic models to explain the spread of human disease by
considering individual and collective mobility as well as population and
meta-population features influencing the contact between individuals leading
to contagion events.
These models may in turn be used to forecast the spreading of diseases
(infectious and otherwise) by agents. Such agents may be infectious organisms
such as bacteria, virus, and the likes, both also social behaviors such as the
propensity to smoke, overeating and other factors influencing chronic diseases
with a collective dimension component. As in clinical and social epidemiology,
the goal is to be able to determine risks, containment strategies and to be
able to assess targeted interventions [Kiss, et al 2017].
The usual setting of EoN considers the individuals in a population as nodes in
a network. The interactions connecting the individuals (i.e. the links) are

such that epidemic behavior emerges from these, such as contacts leading to
the propagation of contagious agents (pathogens). The structure of the network
influences the dynamic behavior of the epidemic and may offer clues as to what
kind of mitigation and containment strategies can be used.

2. Materials and Methods
2.1 Network modelling of human interactions using mobile devices:
Human contact networks are characterized by an heterogeneous connectivity
degree distribution with a long tail. The properties of this type of networks
are the object of study of the discipline called Network Science [Albert &
Barabasi,
2001].
Such
heterogeneous
connectivity patterns have some
consequences in the epidemiological setting such as a high variance in the
individual reproductive number and the dominance of the superspreading events
that arise due to the high degree nodes [Kiss, et al 2017].
A major challenge for EoN is the accurate representation of contact networks
for
a
given
population.
Using a combination of observational and
technology-based methods, it is possible to reconstruct contact networks in
limited, well-bound settings such as schools [Stehlé et al, 2011], hospitals
[Isella ​et al 2
​ 011], or conferences [Szomszor ​et al 2
​ 010]. However, the
challenge of reconstructing a contact network at the scale of a city is
non-trivial. Recently, a contact network for Mexico City was reconstructed
through the use of anonymized mobile device locations throughout a single day
[​de-Anda Jáuregui et al 2020​]. This network was released as open data
[doi:​10.17605/OSF.IO/B6G92​].
In order to be able to effectively run epidemic simulations, we scaled down
the large contact network for Mexico City using a methodology based on the
stochastic blockmodel (SBM) structure of the original network [Peixoto 2014,
Peixoto 2015]. Briefly, we obtained the SBM structure of the largest connected
component of the contact network of Mexico City, and scaled the size of each
individual block to 1/10th of the original. Then, we generated a new network
using the original SBM edge probability on the scaled down blocks. This new
network captures the original’s topology in terms of degree distribution and
clustering coefficients, which is necessary for the results of an EoN dynamics
to be representative of the larger one [Kiss, et al 2017]. These network
operations were performed using the {graph-tool} package [Peixoto 2014b].

3. Theory/Calculations
3.1 Model Fundamentals and assumptions
In this study, we will be working under the following set of assumptions:

1. The disease in Mexico City is transmitted over a heterogeneous network
reflecting the highly hierarchical and modular structure of urban systems
[Levinson, 2012]
2. Epidemic dynamics is guided, in part, by factors intrinsic to the virus
which exhibit stochastic behavior as a product of interindividual biological
heterogeneity [Zhao and Chen, 2020].
3. In view of assumptions 1 and 2, the distribution of the number of
contagions induced by each infected individual exhibits a long tail, giving
rise to the existence of certain nodes acting as contagion hubs. This in turn
led to the formation of super-spreading events.
Under these assumptions, we used the previously described contact network for
Mexico City for our modelling purposes. A node in this contact network
represents an inhabitant of Mexico City, and a link represents a close-range
physical interaction between people; considering the resolution reported in
the original manuscript (less than 2 m), these contacts can potentially
transmit the infectious agent.

Figure 1: A network, with 7216 vertices and 86775 edges, representative of the
close contact dynamics in Mexico City. The color of each node represents its
“community,” a module of nodes which are more closely connected to each other.
We call this the CDMX network.
Once we have a somewhat reliable model for the human contact network structure
of Mexico City, we are in a position to consider epidemic processes (namely,
COVID-19 epidemics) happening on top of that network structure. The following
subsection will be devoted to this.

3.2 Epidemiological simulation
We performed simulations of the epidemic dynamics by using the Epidemics on
Network package (EoN, ​https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.01731​) [Miller & Ting
2020] in order to simulate possible trajectories that the epidemic phenomena
in different economic reactivation scenarios. To do so, we used a stochastic

Susceptible-Exposed-Infected-Recovered
network.

model

on

the

Mexico

City

contact

To capture the interindividual variability in terms of incubation and recovery
times, we used the parameters reported for the official Mexico City’s
government model (​https://modelo.covid19.cdmx.gob.mx/​) to generate a uniform
distribution of values, such that each individual node has an incubation and
recovery time between within half and twice the value used for the official
model.
Since by the time period studied, general hygiene measures such as widespread
use of face masks have been adopted, we decided to calculate the transmission
rate for our model using the average Rt for the month of June, calculated as
described in [Salas, 2020]. We used this value as the mean of a normal
distribution, to account for the fact that certain contact behaviours are more
conductive to disease transmission.
Epidemic dynamic calculations over realistic contact networks allow us for the
modelisation of what may happen under different reactivation scenarios amidst
the ongoing Covid-19 surges. In particular, this may open the way to educated
predictions regarding risks for outbreaks of different magnitudes as we will
see in the next subsection.

3.3 Risk assessment of reactivation schemes
The initial response to the COVID-19 emergency in Mexico was a voluntary
lockdown known as ​Jornada Nacional de Sana Distancia (JNSD; literally:
“Healthy Distance National Period”). During this period, non-essential
economic
activities
were
limited.
Based
on
official
figures
[https://covid19.sinave.gob.mx/], there was a 75% mobility reduction within
Mexico City. We represent the effect of such lockdown in network terms, by
taking the original CDMX network and randomly removing 75% of its edge set; we
refer to this as the JNSD network.
Any economic reactivation following the lockdown period implies that part of
the city’s population will return to its regular work activities. This will
lead to a reemergence of contacts between people returning to the public
space. In network terms, this is akin to the reemergence of links adjacent to
the nodes representing people returning to the public space.

Figure 2: Schematic representation of the changes in contact networks induced
by lockdowns and economic reactivation. Lockdowns induce disconnection of some
links between nodes; whereas economic reactivation involves the reconnection
of links adjacent to nodes representing people returning to the public space.
With this in mind, we can represent different scenarios
reactivation, by reconnecting nodes that were removed in the JNSD
simulating epidemic dynamics with the aforementioned parameters
every scenario analysed, we run 100 iterations of EoN dynamics,
the behaviour in terms of:

of economic
network, and
on them. For
and evaluate

i) whether a peak in the number of active infections occurs: measured as the
number of simulations in which there is at least one day with more infected
nodes than day 0.
ii) Percentage of infected population at the peak: measured as the average
magnitude of the peak for all simulations.
iii) Peak time: measured as the average peak time for all simulations.
With these ideas in mind, we will present the epidemic risk evaluation under
different reactivation scenarios.
3.3.1 Minimum and maximum contact scenarios - JNSD and CDMX networks
The range of scenarios is bound on one end by the minimum level of contact
that happened during the lockdown, and is represented by the JNSD network. On
the other side of the spectrum, the maximum level of contact is found in the
CDMX network, which captures the usual contact patterns of the City without
the constraints induced by the pandemic.
3.3.2 Scenarios of constraint-free reactivation
As we previously mentioned, economic reactivation involves the reintegration
of a fraction of the population back into the public space. This renewed
activity can be represented as a reconnection of those contacts that were
removed during the lockdown.

Without any constraint and no additional information, it can be assumed that
the workforce is evenly distributed within the population represented in the
contact network [Freire 2010]. Therefore, the reactivation of any fraction of
the population will be akin to randomly sampling the nodes of the contact
network, and reconnecting the links lost during the lockdown. This is a
conservative assumption due to lack of further information on the
sociodemographic and spatial distribution of the individuals involved in the
activities that will be reactivated.
We evaluate this scenario for different fractions of population ranging from
5% to 50%, using the following algorithm.
For each fraction of reactivated population F:
1) We selected F nodes of the Mexico City contact network
2) We considered that all links to nodes adjacent to these nodes are
unrestrictedly re-activated.
3) We considered that the rest of the nodes in F (those with no correspondence
to links in F) are the ones in the network as modeled under lockdown
conditions as given by JNSD network.
We used the resulting network to run an EoN dynamic using the parameters
described previously.
3.3.3 Scenarios of modular reactivation
An

alternative

approach

to

economic

reactivation

consists

of

leveraging

network properties in order to impose limits to the epidemic dynamic. The
concept of modularity in complex networks [Girvan & Newman, 2004] A module in
a complex network is loosely defined as a set of nodes (individuals) with a
higher number of connections among members of the set than with other nodes of
the network, i.e. there are more connections within a module than between
modules. An important property of modular networks is that dynamic phenomena
(such as a random walk or pathogen propagation) tends to remain inside a
module for a longer time before spreading outside the module.
In our proposed modular reactivation, instead of reactivating nodes spread
throughout
fraction

the

of

network,

the

whole modules are reactivated, until the desired

population

is

reactivated.

All

edges

adjacent

to

the

reactivated nodes are reconnected as well; it can be proven that this will
include all links within a given module, and a smaller subset of links beyond
the boundaries of the module.

In

​Figure

3

​we

illustrate

and

contrast

a

constraint-free

and a modular

reactivation strategy.

Figure 3. Modular interconnections and contact structure. Panel
constraint-free reactivation. Panel B: modular reactivation. Nodes to
reactivated are highlighted in red; the rest are shown in black.

A:
be

In panel A, the contacts of the red nodes may include job and non-job related
contacts with similar probabilities. This way, by being randomly distributed
in the network, contacts are reactivated both, with other essential workers
(red) and with the rest of the population (black nodes) which in principle
must remain under confinement (as during the lockdown).
Panel B, depicts a scenario in which red nodes form a module, hence, it is
more likely that they connect to other essential workers (red nodes). In case
of contagion within the module, the general population is, to an extent,
shielded since the outbreak has a greater probability to keep spreading within
the module. Hence the outbreak will become contained more easily.
We evaluated epidemic dynamics under these modularization scenarios, as
presented in Figure 1 in the intermediate panels. We can see that allowing
modularized contact network structures
by encapsulating essential workers,
the percentage of the population that may return to public space activities
without causing major outbreaks is significantly higher, up to 25 % with a
“smart modularized” strategy.
It is however relevant to highlight that such strategies may require strict
adherence to the confinement scheme. This may imply the implementation of
measures such as relocation of essential workers to housing near the
workspaces, dedicated transportation and so on.
3.3.4 Leveraging intermodule connectivity to optimize modular reactivation
While

modular

reactivation

can

be

accomplished

by

arbitrarily

activating

modules, the interconnection between modules can also be used to further
refine the modular reactivation. Dynamic processes will tend to remain within
a modular structure; therefore, reactivating smaller, topologically distant
modules in the network will further encapsulate the epidemic phenomena and
minimize its spread.

Figure 4: These are module projections of the CDMX contact network; each node
represents

a

intermodule

module

in

connections

the
(that

contact
is,

network,

contacts

with

between

links
nodes

representing
belonging

to

different modules). In both panels, the sum of nodes in the selected (red)
modules contains roughly 20% of the network’s population. In panel A, this
fraction is concentrated in 6 modules, whereas in panel B it is spread over 33
smaller modules.

4. Results
In

what

follows

we

will

present

the

results

of

several

reactivation

interventions in the predicted behavior of the epidemic curves in Mexico City.
In

order

to

comply

with

our

scaling without imposing ecological fallacy

biases, all our reports of epidemic curves will be expressed as a percentage
of the population.

4.1 Constraint free reactivation quickly approaches the behaviour of a full reactivation
One

initial,

non-surprising

result

is

that

unconstrained

reactivation

of

increasing fractions of the population, with no use of knowledge about the
human

contact

network

structure

of

Mexico

City,

epidemic conditions of full reactivation (Figure 5).

rapidly

approaches

the

Figure 5: Ensemble visualization of epidemic simulations on networks. The
colored line is traced on the average infected population percentage for each
time point. The shadowed area represents ±1 standard deviation. Panel A is
from the simulation using the JNSD network, representing a full lockdown;
panels B through G represents dynamics on networks with a reactivation of 5%
through 50% of the population, sampled without constraints from the network.
Panel H represents the dynamics on a fully reactivated network.
Summarizing the results of the simulations, Table 1 shows that under different
unconstrained scenarios, as the fraction of the population returning to the
open public spaces increases, the behavior of a full reactivation (high peaks,
longer growth curves and higher likelihood of outbreaks) is recovered.
Table 1: Summary statistics for constraint free reactivation strategies
Reactivation
scenario

Average Infection
Peak
Magnitude
(%population)

Average Peak Time
(days)

Peak likelihood

0%
(Lockdown
continued
as
during JNSD)

2.560421

5.436402

31%

5%

3.085227

4.668209

34%

10%

6.983370

12.705593

77%

15&

9.493764

15.403023

97%

20%

9.570953

14.997234

97%

25%

9.802384

15.311280

97%

50%

11.986835

18.733040

100%

100% (full return
to
regular
activity)

12.282289

18.420751

100%

Reactivation strategies in which the population is randomly distributed within
the population allow for only a very small fraction of the population to be
reactivated without a high risk for a resurgence of cases. We observe that any
fraction beyond 5% of the population rejoining the public space leads to a
high risk of a new peak to appear. Furthermore, a reactivation of 50% of the
population is virtually indistinguishable to a full reactivation in terms of
the magnitude, timing, and likelihood of a new peak.

4.2 Modular reactivation is better tolerated in terms of peak magnitude and time
A second, less dramatic scenario occurs whenever we make use of some knowledge
about the human contact network structure of Mexico City, namely its modular
character. The height and duration of the peaks as shown in Figure 6 is
diminished (for similar percentages of returning population) with respect to
the epidemic curves in the unconstrained case (Figure 5).
A quick glance at the summary statistics presented in Table 2 in comparison
with Table 1 also reveals that this is actually the case.

Figure 5: Ensemble visualization of epidemic simulations on networks. The
colored line is traced on the average infected population percentage for each
time point. The shadowed area represents ±1 standard deviation. Panel A is
from the simulation using the JNSD network, representing a full lockdown;
panels B through G represents dynamics on networks with a reactivation of 5%
through 50% of the population, achieved through the reactivation of modules in
the contact network. Panel H represents the dynamics on a fully reactivated
network.
Table 2: Summary statistics of modular reactivation
Reactivation
scenario

Average Infection
Peak
Magnitude
(%population)

Average Peak Time
(days)

Peak likelihood

0%
(Lockdown
continued
as
during JNSD)

2.560421

5.436402

31%

5%

2.599640

5.510503

31%

10%

2.560560

5.408285

31%

15%

2.589800

5.527020

31%

20%

3.046286

7.439762

31%

25%

3.047949

7.723727

31%

50%*

2.720205*

11.197762*

27%*

100% (full return
to
regular
activity)

12.282289

18.420751

100%

* Exhibits more than one peak; first peak is described.
Economic

reactivation

strategies

using

the

modular

structure

of

contact

networks limit the spread of the infectious agent. We can observe that a
reactivation of up to 25% of the population can be achieved with little
deviation from the full lockdown in terms of magnitude, timing, and likelihood
of a new peak. In the case of a 50% modular reactivation, subsequent peaks are
likely to emerge. It is important to note, however, that the magnitude of
these peaks is less than that observed in a full reactivation scenario.
Modular reactivation is thus a better alternative in terms of allowing the
incorporation of higher percentages of the population without the risk of
massive outbreaks. However, as we can see later on, there are still better
alternatives

nurtured by the use of a deep knowledge of the topological

parameters of the human contact network of Mexico City.

4.3 Topology-guided smart selection further mitigates epidemic dynamics
By taking into account not only the global topological modularity of the human
contact network of Mexico City but also the way the modules are connected (in
the down-scaled version), we have been able to develop an optimized set of
reactivation strategies as is presented in Figure 6 and Table 3.

Figure 6: Ensemble visualization of epidemic simulations on networks. The
colored line is traced on the average infected population percentage for each
time point. The shadowed area represents ±1 standard deviation. Panel A and B
represent

the

dynamics

with

20%

population

reactivation

using

a

modular

strategy. For panel A, reactivation is achieved by reactivating 6 modules;
whereas the same population fraction was spread in 33 modules for panel B.
Panels C and D show the same contrast, this time for a 50% of the population,
distributed in 164 and 247 modules respectively. Notice that by spreading the
reactivation in several smaller modules, the height of new peaks is reduced.
Table 3: Summary statistics of modular reactivation
Reactivation
scenario

Average Infection
Peak
Magnitude
(%population)

Average Peak Time
(days)

Peak likelihood

20% - 6 modules

3.046286

7.439762

31%

20% - 33 modules

2.496397

4.903131

30%

50% - 164 modules

2.720205*

11.197762*

27%*

50% - 247 modules

2.300166*

8.815707*

27%*

* Exhibits more than one peak; first peak is described.
If the population to be reactivated is spread throughout several (smaller)
modules, it is possible to exert more control over the epidemic dynamics. Even

in the case of a 50% population reactivation, this “smarter” modular strategy
decreases the magnitude of subsequent possible peaks.
Hence, by considering the global and local modularity structure of the contact
network and simulating epidemic dynamics compliant with these, we have been
able to devise an optimized progressive de-containment strategy.

5. Discussion:
General Discussion
Epidemic spread of infectious diseases occurs via chains of transmission which
are dynamic processes over networks capturing different human behaviors. In
the

case of COVID-19, the disease is spread through close contact human

interactions [Shi, et al 2020], which can be modelled as contact networks. The
contact networks
Metropolitan urban environments, in particular large ones such as Mexico City
present special challenges for epidemic network modelisation due to their
intricate modular structure and size. Computationally efficient methods to
scale-down the real (very large) contact networks to manageable yet still
descriptive sizes, capturing the relevant aspects of the modular structure of
the

original

networks

are

needed

to

perform

epidemic

dynamic

models

representative of the real populations.
Using these scaled contact networks, as well as a stochastic dynamics on
networks approach, we were able to capture the essentials of epidemic spread
in Mexico City. We used the knowledge of said spreading patterns to model
de-confinement scenarios to evaluate reactivation strategies after lockdown in
Mexico City. Although these networks exhibit a dynamic dimension themselves,
using a representative network as a baseline on which different lockdown and
reactivation strategies can be modelled provides an efficient tool to explore
different scenarios.
Since human contact networks in large urban environments tend to exhibit a
modular structure, this invisible compartmentalization is one of the features
that shapes the transmission chains of an epidemic phenomenon. By optimizing
the modular structure of the re-entrant essential worker population we have

been able to propose schemes that allow for a significant percentage of the
population to return to public space without leading to massive outbreaks.
In

this

work,

necessarily

we

find

resulting

that

in

a

economic
new

reactivation

outbreak.

is

However,

for

feasible
this

without
to

work,

reactivation must occur within contact communities. Optimally, these modules
should be small and exhibit minimal connections within them, in order to limit
the spread of the disease. A set of behavioral and regulatory actions are
needed to tightly constrain this contact dynamics; as the alternative shows
that even a small fraction of the population being arbitrarily reactivated
leads to an epidemic behavior similar to that of implementing no lockdown at
all.

From the whiteboard to public policy: how to translate
It

is

well

known

that

implementing

health

policy

from

the

findings

of

biomedical research is not a trivial task. A large gap between the volume of
research-generated public health knowledge and its application in community
settings has been documented. It is quite common that public health scholars
find

challenging

to

translate

or

disseminate

their

research

outcomes

to

distill them into public policy for use in community settings where it is
likely to have positive impacts [Browson, et al 2006].
In clinical fields as is the case of medicine and nursing, a similar void is
found between scientific discovery and health policy application. A number of
authors have suggested that in order to attain an effective dissemination of
scientific

findings

community

foundations,

training,

strong

Furthermore,

the

it

is

necessary

considering

organizational
implementation

of

to

establish

time-efficient
values
a

on

research

a

program

with

approaches,

evidence-based
discovery

among

solid

ongoing
practice.

government

health organizations, clinical practice groups, and the general population is
not immediate, but is expected to proceed in stages. The decision to adopt,
accept, and utilize an innovation is not an instantaneous act, but more often
a process [Giles-Corti, et al 2015].
In the epidemiology of infectious diseases in an open population, such as the
case of COVID-19 this situation is actually worsened by the fact that the
contact network is not visible in real time. And even if it was, to see it and
act on it may involve serious privacy issues. Who do you interact with, how

much and how often are questions which result central for the transmission
chains to happen. This information may be of a sensible nature or simply, out
of reach.
Therefore,there

is

a

need

for

multiple

approaches

to

properly

reach

modularization even under such constraints. To this end, modelisation studies
may result in enlightenment. The studies just referred have provided us with
the

following

intuitions

regarding

modularization

of

the

human

contact

structure in urban environments such as the one in Mexico City:
i) Residential proximity induces communities (people go to the same shops,
etc).
ii) Non-public facing workspaces induce communities.
iii)

Commuting

induces

intermodule

connections

(intermixing

in

public

transportation, recreational outings, etc).
iv) Public facing jobs induce intermodule connections.
Since we know which behaviours involve intra and inter links, we can try to
use such correlations in order to limit various at the same time:
Interleaved reactivation​: different, physically distant neighborhoods every
day.
Delay​ the return of workers that require long commutes.
Authorities can ​enforce modularity by closing public transportation needed for
intermodular connections; however other public policies will be needed to
equilibrate so that workers are not penalized by this. This involves a great
degree of ​logistic complexity (beyond the scope of the paper), that must be
resolved by the competent authorities.
In order to translate the findings of this study into actionable policy, it is
necessary

to

take

into

account

the

aforementioned

sources

of

logistic

complexity. In this regard, some measures that may be implemented to encourage
modularity reactivation are presented in Table 4.

Table 4. Some examples of policies to encourage/enforce modular reactivation
Policy

Government
actionable

Citizenship
actionable

Expected adoption

Encouraging local
trade/consumption
habits

Suggested

Yes

Heterogeneous

Phased workplace
reactivation

Suggested
or
Mandatory

No

Suggested:
Heterogeneous

Turnover of the
workforce by
residential
address location

Suggested
or
Mandatory

Yes

Partial
transportation
shutdown

Complete shutdown
or
Turned-over
schedule of a
fraction of
public
transportation
spots/hubs

No

Mandatory:
High
Suggested:
Heterogeneous
Mandatory:
High
Mandatory:
High, if combined
with
complementary
policies

Concluding remarks
By considering mechanisms for the reactivation of economic activities in
Mexico City, we have evaluated the risk that the negative slope of the
epidemic curve may be reversed by the effect of the incorporation of a
fraction of the population to the public space.
As null models, we ran the epidemic dynamics on the contact network of Mexico
City with no mobility restrictions, representing a return to the connectivity
prevailing prior to the start of the pandemic. The second null model
considered was the network corresponding to the JNSD network which is a

subgraph of the Mexico City contact network with just the 25 % of active
links, capturing the effect of the reported mobility reduction. In these
models, reactivated nodes are randomly distributed on the network, which is a
conservative assumption due to lack of further information on the
sociodemographic and spatial distribution of the individuals involved in the
activities that will be reactivated.
By taking into account the strong need to reactivate economic activities and
following the concept of modularity in network theory, we propose the
exploration
of
encapsulation
scenarios
for
new
essential
workforce
reactivation.
A module in a complex network is loosely defined as a set of nodes
(individuals) with a higher number of connections among members of the set
than with other nodes of the network, i.e. there are more connections within a
module than between modules. An important property of modular networks is that
dynamic phenomena (such as a random walk or pathogen propagation) tends to
remain inside a module for a longer time before spreading outside the module.
By being able to translate the findings of network-based analytics and
epidemiological models into actionable public policy measures, it is possible
to advance into incorporating predicted risks into the assessment portfolio
for reactivation large urban conglomerates such as Mexico City after lockdown
in the face of the still ongoing Covid-19 pandemic.

References
1. Altohouse,

B.

Wenger,

E,

Hébert-Dufresne,

L,

Hu,

transmission

dynamics

Miller,

H.

J,

Scarpino,

Stochasticity
of

and

S.,

Allard,

heterogeneity

SARS-CoV-2.

in

Arxiv,

A.,
the
2020

https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.13689
2. Albert,

R,

Barabasi,

A.

Statistical

Mechanics

of

Complex

Networks.

Arxiv, 2001.
3.

Brownson RC, Kreuter MW, Arrington BA, True WR. Translating scientific
discoveries into public health action: how can schools of public health
move

us

forward?.

​Public

Health

doi:10.1177/003335490612100118

Rep.
​

2006;121(1):97-103.

4. Christakis, N, Fowler, J. Social Network Sensors for Early Detection of
Contagious Outbreaks. Arxiv, 2010. ​https://arxiv.org/abs/1004.4792
5. de Anda-Jáuregui, G., Guzmán, P., & Hernández-Rosales, M. (2020). The
Contact Network of Mexico City. ​arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.14596​.

6. Eames, K. T., & Read, J. M. (2007, April). Networks in epidemiology. In
Workshop

on

Bio-Inspired

Berlin, Heidelberg.

Design

of

Networks

(pp.

79-90).

Springer,

7. Giles-Corti, B., Sallis, J. F., Sugiyama, T., Frank, L. D., Lowe, M., &
Owen, N. (2015). Translating active living research into policy and
practice: one important pathway to chronic disease prevention. ​Journal
of public health policy​, 3
​ 6​(2), 231-243.

8. Girvan, M., & Newman, M. E. (2002). Community structure in social and
biological networks. ​Proceedings of the national academy of sciences​,
99(
​ 12), 7821-7826.

9. Isella, L., Romano, M., Barrat, A., Cattuto, C., Colizza, V., Van den
Broeck, W., Gesualdo, F., Pandolfi, E., Ravà, L., Rizzo, C., Tozzi, A.E.
(2011). Close Encounters in a Pediatric Ward: Measuring Face-to-Face
Proximity and Mixing Patterns with Wearable Sensors. PLOS ONE 6(2).
10.Kiss, I, Miller, J, Simon, P. Mathematics of Epidemics on Networks.
Springer, 2017. 10.1007/978-3-319-50806-1
11.Kojaku, S, Hébert-Dufresne, L, Ahn, Y. The effectiveness of contact
tracing

in

heterogeneous

networks.

Arxiv,

2020.

https://arxiv.org/pdf/2005.02362.pdf
12.MacLean DR. Positioning dissemination in public health policy. Can J
Public Health. 1996;87(Suppl 2):S40–3
13. Miller, J. C., & Ting, T. (2020). EoN (Epidemics on Networks): a fast,
flexible

Python

package

for

simulation,

analytic approximation, and

analysis of epidemics on networks. ​arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.02436.
​

14.Peixoto, T. P. (2014). Hierarchical block structures and high-resolution
model selection in large networks. ​Physical Review X,
​ ​4​(1), 011047.

15. Peixoto, T. P. (2014b). The graph-tool python library. ​figshare​.

16. Peixoto, T. P. (2015). Model selection and hypothesis testing for
large-scale network models with overlapping groups. ​Physical Review X,
​
5(
​ 1), 011033.

17. Salas, Joaquín. (2020). Improving the Estimation of the COVID-19 Basic
Reproduction Number using Nowcasting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.09800
18. Shi, Y., Wang, Y., Shao, C. ​et al. COVID-19 infection: the perspectives
on

immune

responses.

​Cell

Death

Differ

​27,

​1451–1454

(2020).

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41418-020-0530-3
19.Stadnytskyi,
airborne
importance

V.,

lifetime
in

Bax,
of

C.

E.,

small

SARS-CoV-2

Bax,
speech

A.,

&

Anfinrud,

droplets

transmission.

Academy of Sciences​, 1
​ 17(
​ 22), 11875-11877.

and

​Proceedings

20.Stehlé, J, Voirin, N., Barrat, A., Cattuto,

P. (2020). The
their
of

the

potential
National

C., Isella, L., Pinton,

J.F., Quaggiotto, M., Van den Broeck, W., Régis, C., Lina, B., Vanhems,

P. (2011). High-Resolution Measurements of Face-to-Face Contact Patterns
in a Primary School. PLOS ONE 6(8).
21.Szomszor, M., Kostkova, P., Cattuto, C., Van den Broeck, W., Barrat, A.,
Alani, H. (2010). Providing Enhanced Social Interaction Services for
Industry Exhibitors at large Medical Conferences. Proceedings of the 3rd
International Conference on Developments in eSystems Engineering (DeSE
2010) 6-8 September 2010.
22.Yamamoto-Elizalde, Y, Hernández-Lemus, E, de Anda-Jáuregui, G. Diffusion
processes

in

multilayer

transportation

networks:

the

flight

of

the

Coronavirus. Revista Mexicana de Física, 2020. June-July.
23. Zaim, S., Chong, J. H., Sankaranarayanan, V., & Harky, A. (2020).
COVID-19

and

multi-organ

response.

​Current

Problems

in

100618.

Cardiology,
​

24. Zhao, S., & Chen, H. (2020). Modeling the epidemic dynamics and control
of COVID-19 outbreak in China. ​Quantitative Biology​, 1-9.

25. Freire, S. (2010). Modeling of spatiotemporal distribution of urban
population at high resolution–value for risk assessment and emergency
management.

In

​Geographic

information

and

cartography

for

crisis management​ (pp. 53-67). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.

risk

and

