Ontology-based annotation and analysis of
COVID-19 phenotypes
Yang Wang a,b , Fengwei Zhang a , Hong Yu a,b , Xianwei Ye a,b , Yongqun He c,1

a

Guizhou University Medical College, Guiyang, Guizhou 550025, China.

Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Guizhou Provincial People’s
Hospital and NHC Key Laboratory of Immunological Diseases, People’s Hospital of
Guizhou University, Guiyang, Guizhou 550002, China.

b

c

University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.
Abstract. The epidemic of COVID-19 has caused an unpredictable and devastated
disaster to the public health in different territories around the world. Common
phenotypes include fever, cough, shortness of breath, and chills. With more cases
investigated, other clinical phenotypes are gradually recognized, for example, loss
of smell, and loss of tastes. Compared with discharged or cured patients, severe or
died patients often have one or more comorbidities, such as hypertension, diabetes,
and cardiovascular disease. In this study, we systematically collected and analyzed
COVID-19-related clinical phenotypes from 70 articles. The commonly occurring
17 phenotypes were classified into different groups based on the Human
Phenotype Ontology (HPO). Based on the HP classification, we systematically
analyze three nervous phenotypes (loss of smell, loss of taste, and headache) and
four abdominal phenotypes (nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and diarrhea)
identified in patients, and found that patients from Europe and USA turned to have
higher nervous phenotypes and abdominal phenotypes than patients from Asia. A
total of 23 comorbidities were found to commonly exist among COVID-19
patients. Patients with these comorbidities such as diabetes and kidney failure had
worse outcomes compared with those without these comorbidities.
Keywords. COVID-19, phenotype, ontology, comorbidity, CIDO, HPO.

1. Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic had resulted in a major loss worldwide. In the US alone,
the pandemic had caused over 1.6 million confirmed cases and near 10 thousand deaths
by May 25, 2020. The cause of the disease is SARS-CoV-2, a single-positive RNA
virus. It belongs to the order Nidovirales, family Coronaviridae, and subfamily
1

Yongqun Oliver He, Corresponding author, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI,
USA. E-mail: yongqunh@med.umich.edu.

Coronavirinae [4]. According to the literature and newspapers reporting, the clinical
symptoms in different areas are overall stable but also show differences, which we
often ignored. The common symptoms include fever, cough, shortness of breath or
difficulty breathing, and chills [12]. However, physicians and pathologists have
recognized other clinical phenotypes, for example, loss of smell, and loss of tastes. In
many cases, the symptoms of the digestive system become the primary phenotypes [12].
The early recognition of these symptoms facilitates early diagnosis and treatment,
which would bring immeasurable good outcomes to them.
Compared to discharged or cured patients of COVID-19, severe or died patients
are more likely to have comorbidities. Comorbidity here refers to the simultaneous
presence of some disease(s) or condition(s) in a patient when COVID-19 occurs.
Hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular diseases are a few examples of the most
common comorbidities associated with COVID-19 [1]. However, a systematic
investigation and classification of the relations between the comorbidities and disease
outcomes have not been reported.
Ontology has played a significant role in standard data representation,
classification, integration, and analysis. Many ontologies have been widely used in the
field of medicine and pharmacy in recent years. The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO)
is a standardized vocabulary for phenotypic abnormalities in human disease. Each term
in the HPO describes a phenotypic abnormality, such as Pneumonia. HPO currently
contains over 13,000 terms [6]. It bridges a computational link between genome
biology and clinical medicine.
In this study, we systematically annotated COVID-19 clinical phenotypes and
comorbidities from journal and preprint articles, and applied HP to classify these
phenotypes and examine the internal patterns. Our study also identified many shared
and differential phenotype patterns in COVID-19 patients from countries in different
regions in the world.
2. Methods
2.1. Data collection
Peer-reviewed journal articles and preprint bioRxiv and medRxiv articles were
searched to identify relevant articles.
2.2. Ontology classification
The identified symptoms and comorbidities were mapped to the terms in the Human
Phenotype ontology (HPO). Ontobee [13] was used to search the HP terms. Ontofox
[16] was used to extract the specific sets of the phenotypes. The Protégé-OWL editor
was used for display, classification, and analysis.
2.3. Ontology modeling
The mapped and extracted HP terms and subsets were imported to the Coronavirus
Infectious Disease Ontology (CIDO) (http://github.com/CIDO-ontology/cido).

3. Results
3.1. Data collection
We reviewed 70 papers from December 2019 to date in Pubmed and preprint bioRxiv
and medRxiv. The patients reported in these papers include countries in Asia (e.g.,
China, South Korea, Singapore, Japan), Middle East(e.g., Iran), Europe (e.g., Italy,
France, Spain, German, Belgium, Switzerland), and North America (the USA). Ten
representative articles are provided in Table 1.
Table 1. Ten representative articles annotated in this study
Report time

Country

Cases

Reference (PMID or DOI)

Feb 19 ,2020

China

140

PMID: 32077115

Feb 28 ,2020

China

1099

PMID: 32109013

Mar 27, 2020

Iran

10069

Doi:https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.23.20041889

Apr 17, 2020

France

114

PMID: 32305563

Apr 22, 2020

America

5700

PMID: 32320003

Apr 22, 2020

Italy

374

PMID: 32320008

Apr 24, 2020

America

169

PMID: 32329222

Apr 24, 2020

America

1299

PMID: 32329797

Apr 28, 2020

Britain

16749

Doi:https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.23.20076042

Apr 30, 2020

France、Italy、

1420

PMID: 32352202

Spain、Belgium、
Switzerland

3.2. Ontology-based classification of common phenotypes
Based on our literature search, we found a large number of COVID-19 case reports and
analyses from December 2019 to date in different regions all around the world. A total
of 17 common clinical symptoms were found, including fever, cough, shortness of
breath or difficulty breathing, chills, repeated shaking with chills, muscle pain,
headache, sore throat, new loss of smell or taste etc. HP was used to classify these 17
common symptoms (Figure 1). Overall, these symptoms are located in the abdominal
system, nervous system, head, respiratory system, constitutional system, and blood.
The nervous system abnormality includes parageusia (loss of taste, HP:0031249),
anosmia (loss of smell, HP:0000458), and headache (HP:0002315). The abnormality of
the head includes abnormality of face and pharynx. Parageusia and anosmia are
abnormality of face phenotypes. Pharingitis belongs to the abnormality of nasopharynx
and pharynx.

Figure 1. Common phenotypes of COVID-19 based on HP classification.

3.3. Differential profiles of nervous phenotypes in patients from different regions
Instead of focusing on individual phenotypes, we hypothesized that the analysis of
phenotypes as groups would identify new scientific insights. First, we analyzed the
group of COVID-19-related nervous system phenotypes, which includes loss of smell
(anosmia), loss of taste (parageusia), and headache (Figure 1). The combined analysis
of all these three phenotypes as a whole provided us a unique angle to study how the
disease affects the nervous system.
As shown in Figure 2, all the three nervous symptom phenotypes in Asian patients
appeared low. Ten groups of Chinese patients were analyzed. Among the three
phenotypes, headache was relatively common in Chinese patients. However, except
one group reporting low level of hyposmia and hypogeusia [11], the other 9 groups did
not report any cases of loss of smell and loss of taste. South Korean and Japanese also
show the consistent pattern of lower incidence of loss of smell and loss of taste in
Figure2.
In contrast, in Iran, Italy, France, German, Spain, USA, there were higher
proportions of cases with the loss of smell or tastes. Especially in Europe, there were
two large investigation questionnaires [9] about loss of smell and taste in confirmed
patients, including many doctors and nurses infected in hospital. According to the
multicenter study, the loss of smell was a key symptom in mild-to-moderate COVID19 patients, the loss of smell was also not associated with nasal obstruction and
rhinorrhea. Females and young patients were more susceptible to having the symptoms
of smell and taste loss, whereas elderly individuals often presented fever, fatigue and
loss of appetite. An obvious correlation between smell and taste disorders was also
identified [9].

Figure 2. Cases with three nervous system phenotypes in different countries. Three symptoms (i.e.,
headache, loss of smell, and loss of taste) were analyzed. Each symptom has 0-100% of occurrence.

3.4. Differential profiles of abdominal phenotypes in patients from different regions
Many mild-moderate COVID-19 patients had gastrointestinal disorders as primary
symptoms. The primary abdominal phenotypes include nausea, vomiting, abdominal
pain, and diarrhea. We analyzed these four abdominal phenotypes together and
compared the cases from different countries and regions.
A retrospective case-control study in New York found that those patients with
gastrointestinal symptoms (defined as diarrhea or nausea/vomiting) were significantly
more likely to be tested COVID-19 positive than negative (61% vs. 39%, p=0.04) [12].
In 393 patients with COVID-19 in two hospitals in New York, the disease
manifestations were in general similar to those in a large case series from China [7];
however, gastrointestinal symptoms appeared to be more common in New York than in
China (where these symptoms occurred in 4 to 5% of patients) [5]. We also found that
digestive symptoms, especially diarrhea, occurred in almost all countries (Figure 3).
However, the accumulated percentages of digestive symptoms were significantly
higher in UK, France, New York, California. The time also appears to be a factor. More
digestive symptoms were showed in middle-late of March and early April.

Figure 3. Cases with four abdominal system phenotypes in different countries. Four symptoms (i.e.,
nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and diarrhea) were analyzed. Each symptom has 0-100% of occurrence.

3.5. Ontology-based analysis of the relation between comorbidity vs disease outcomes
Many factors, such as age, gender, smoking status, have been found to significantly
affect disease outcomes. For example, among reported COVID-19 cases, the older men
have a higher mortality rate [2]. Comorbidity (i.e., existing medical conditions when
patient is infected) is another important risk factor for outcomes. Hypertension,
diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, chronic pulmonary diseases are the most common
comorbidities. Other complication comorbidities include chronic kidney, hepatitis B/C
infection, chronic hepatic failure, cirrhosis, chronic neurological disease (e.g., seizures
and dementia), and haematological system disease (e.g., abnormality of blood and
blood-forming tissues) [5].
We identified 23 common comorbidities and used HP to classify these
comorbidities (Figure 4). Such ontology classification of comorbidities allows us to
identify different groups of comorbidities and their hierarchical relations. Specifically,
these comorbidities occur in various systems such as the cardiovascular system, blood,
immune system, metabolism, digestive system, nervous system, kidney, respiratory
system. Cirrhosis, viral hepatitis, and chronic hepatic failure belong to the digestive
system. Dementia, seizure is the subclass of abnormal nervous system. Obesity and
autoimmune deficiency status are also important risk factors for poor prognosis (Figure
4).

Figure 4. Hierarchical lay of 23 common comorbidity phenotypes based on HP classification.

3.6. Correlation between the comorbidity phenotypes and severe disease outcomes
To further study the relation between different comorbidity phenotypes and disease
outcomes, we survey the disease data from the literature and compared the incidences
of specific comorbidity phenotypes in severe or non-severe COVID-19 patients. From
the long list of comorbidity phenotypes (Figure 4), we chose diabetes and kidney
disease for our further analysis (Figure 5). The results from a total of 7 papers were
applied for the study.
As shown in Figure 5, the morbidity of severe patients with diabetes or kidney
failure phenotype was generally higher than that in non-severe patients. In all regions
except California, the morbidity of kidney disease was higher in severe patients than in
non-severe patients. In all records of COVID-19 patients, whether severe or non-severe,
the incidence of diabetes was significantly higher than renal disease in COVID-19
patients. The incidence of diabetes was significantly higher in severe patients than that
in non-severe patients (Figure 5). It was reported that cytokine storm might be
activated in diabetic patients, leading to poor prognosis and death [3]. The exact
mechanism deserves further investigation.

Figure 5. Correlation between two comorbidity phenotypes (diabetes and kidney failure) and two
disease outcomes (severe or non-severe). In severe disease patients, the incidence of diabetes or kidney
failure was higher than that in non-severe patient groups (The X-axis is country/city, report date, number of
cases).

3.7. CIDO ontological modeling of the COVID-19 phenotypes and comorbidities
The Coronavirus Infectious Disease Ontology (CIDO; https://github.com/CIDOontology/cido) is a community-based ontology in the domain of coronavirus diseases
with a specific focus on COVID-19. CIDO covers different coronavirus disease-related
topics including coronaviruses, natural hosts of coronaviruses, phenotypes,
comorbidities, drugs, and vaccines. To date, CIDO has more than 5,500 terms. In terms
of COVID-19 phenotype classification, CIDO has imported the HP representations of
COVID-19-related phenotypes (Figure 1) and comorbidities (Figure 4).
Different viruses have the disposition of inducing specific phenotypes in the
patients. Currently study focuses on analyzing the COVID-19 phenotypes induced by
SARS-CoV-2. CIDO also covers other coronaviruses such as SARS-CoV and MERSCoV. To differentiate the relations between different viruses and phenotypes, we use a
relation called ‘pathogen susceptible to induction of phenotype’ defined in the
Ontology of Host-Pathogen Interactions (OHPI) [14]. With this relation, we can define
the virus-phenotype relation such as the following:
SARS-CoV-2: ‘pathogen susceptible to induction of phenotype’ some headache
4. Discussion

The worldwide epidemic of COVID-19 has caused serious damage and posed a serious
threat to people's health and lives. Many specific drugs are still in clinical trials and
vaccines are being developed in various countries. With the outbreak of COVID-19,
many different clinical phenotypes are occurring in patients, so we want to map these
phenotypes and comorbidities, to help doctors and CDC scientists better to know the
clinical profiles of COVID-19.
Ontologies such as HPO and CIDO provides computer-interpretable
bioinformatics resources for the analysis of phenotypes and underlying causes. HPO
provides not only a standard phenotype terminology but also a collection of diseasephenotype annotations. CIDO reuses HPO and focuses on the identification of the
causal relations between phenotypes and coronaviruses. These ontologies, together
with ontology-based software programs and computational algorithms, can be
combined to analyze the large amounts of data including clinical cases and basic
experimental data with an aim to fully understand the internal mechanisms under
different phenotypes of COVID-19 and their relations with various genetic mutations in
the viruses, and to support rational development of therapeutic and preventive
measures against the pathological infections.
Based on the HP classification, we systematically analyzed 17 clinical phenotypes
of COVID-19 in case reported. We focused on three nervous phenotypes (loss of smell,
loss of taste, and headache) and four abdominal phenotypes (nausea, vomiting,
abdominal pain, and diarrhea) identified in patients, and found that patients from
Europe and USA turned to have higher nervous phenotypes and abdominal phenotypes
than patients from Asia. A total of 23 comorbidities were found to commonly exist
among COVID-19 patients, usually COVID-19 patients with comorbidities had worse
outcomes. From the study, patients with these comorbidities such as diabetes and
kidney failure had worse outcomes compared with those without these comorbidities.
Whether these results are related to the distribution of mutated virus strains in different
regions and populations will be our next research direction. We will also investigate
whether and how other conditions (such as temperature and season) are risk factors to
the disease and infections.
Recently, children infected with COVID-19 presented kawasaki-like disease
manifestations and systemic inflammatory responses syndrome in the United States and
Europe, which led to critical illness and even deaths [10; 15]. And other patients
infected with covid-19 have skin lesions as the main symptom, especially in toes,
which is known as COVID-19 toes [8]. These new occurring phenotypes deserve our
keen attention and require further careful monitoring and analysis.
References
[1]
C. Chen, C. Chen, J.T. Yan, N. Zhou, J.P. Zhao, and D.W. Wang, [Analysis of myocardial injury
in patients with COVID-19 and association between concomitant cardiovascular diseases and severity of
COVID-19], Zhonghua Xin Xue Guan Bing Za Zhi 48 (2020), E008.
[2]
N. Chen, M. Zhou, X. Dong, J. Qu, F. Gong, Y. Han, Y. Qiu, J. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Wei, J. Xia, T.
Yu, X. Zhang, and L. Zhang, Epidemiological and clinical characteristics of 99 cases of 2019 novel
coronavirus pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a descriptive study, Lancet 395 (2020), 507-513.
[3]
S.A. Cole, H.A. Laviada-Molina, J.M. Serres-Perales, E. Rodriguez-Ayala, and R.A. Bastarrachea,
The COVID-19 Pandemic during the Time of the Diabetes Pandemic: Likely Fraternal Twins?, Pathogens 9
(2020).

[4]
V.M. Corman, D. Muth, D. Niemeyer, and C. Drosten, Hosts and Sources of Endemic Human
Coronaviruses, Adv Virus Res 100 (2018), 163-188.
[5]
P. Goyal, J.J. Choi, L.C. Pinheiro, E.J. Schenck, R. Chen, A. Jabri, M.J. Satlin, T.R. Campion, Jr.,
M. Nahid, J.B. Ringel, K.L. Hoffman, M.N. Alshak, H.A. Li, G.T. Wehmeyer, M. Rajan, E. Reshetnyak, N.
Hupert, E.M. Horn, F.J. Martinez, R.M. Gulick, and M.M. Safford, Clinical Characteristics of Covid-19 in
New York City, N Engl J Med (2020).
[6]
T. Groza, S. Kohler, D. Moldenhauer, N. Vasilevsky, G. Baynam, T. Zemojtel, L.M. Schriml,
W.A. Kibbe, P.N. Schofield, T. Beck, D. Vasant, A.J. Brookes, A. Zankl, N.L. Washington, C.J. Mungall,
S.E. Lewis, M.A. Haendel, H. Parkinson, and P.N. Robinson, The Human Phenotype Ontology: Semantic
Unification of Common and Rare Disease, Am J Hum Genet 97 (2015), 111-124.
[7]
W.J. Guan, Z.Y. Ni, Y. Hu, W.H. Liang, C.Q. Ou, J.X. He, L. Liu, H. Shan, C.L. Lei, D.S.C. Hui,
B. Du, L.J. Li, G. Zeng, K.Y. Yuen, R.C. Chen, C.L. Tang, T. Wang, P.Y. Chen, J. Xiang, S.Y. Li, J.L.
Wang, Z.J. Liang, Y.X. Peng, L. Wei, Y. Liu, Y.H. Hu, P. Peng, J.M. Wang, J.Y. Liu, Z. Chen, G. Li, Z.J.
Zheng, S.Q. Qiu, J. Luo, C.J. Ye, S.Y. Zhu, N.S. Zhong, and C. China Medical Treatment Expert Group for,
Clinical Characteristics of Coronavirus Disease 2019 in China, N Engl J Med 382 (2020), 1708-1720.
[8]
N. Landa, M. Mendieta-Eckert, P. Fonda-Pascual, and T. Aguirre, Chilblain-like lesions on feet
and hands during the COVID-19 Pandemic, Int J Dermatol 59 (2020), 739-743.
[9]
J.R. Lechien, C.M. Chiesa-Estomba, D.R. De Siati, M. Horoi, S.D. Le Bon, A. Rodriguez, D.
Dequanter, S. Blecic, F. El Afia, L. Distinguin, Y. Chekkoury-Idrissi, S. Hans, I.L. Delgado, C. CalvoHenriquez, P. Lavigne, C. Falanga, M.R. Barillari, G. Cammaroto, M. Khalife, P. Leich, C. Souchay, C.
Rossi, F. Journe, J. Hsieh, M. Edjlali, R. Carlier, L. Ris, A. Lovato, C. De Filippis, F. Coppee, N. Fakhry, T.
Ayad, and S. Saussez, Olfactory and gustatory dysfunctions as a clinical presentation of mild-to-moderate
forms of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19): a multicenter European study, Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol
(2020).
[10]
A. Morand, D. Urbina, and A. Fabre, COVID-19 and Kawasaki Like Disease: The KnownKnown,
the
Unknown-Known
and
the
Unknown-Unknown.,
Preprints
(2020),
doi:
10.20944/preprints202005.200160.v202001.
[11]
E.J. Needham, S.H. Chou, A.J. Coles, and D.K. Menon, Neurological Implications of COVID-19
Infections, Neurocrit Care (2020).
[12]
Y.R. Nobel, M. Phipps, J. Zucker, B. Lebwohl, T.C. Wang, M.E. Sobieszczyk, and D.E.
Freedberg, Gastrointestinal Symptoms and COVID-19: Case-Control Study from the United States,
Gastroenterology (2020).
[13]
E. Ong, Z. Xiang, B. Zhao, Y. Liu, Y. Lin, J. Zheng, C. Mungall, M. Courtot, A. Ruttenberg, and
Y. He, Ontobee: A linked ontology data server to support ontology term dereferencing, linkage, query and
integration, Nucleic Acids Res 45 (2017), D347-D352.
[14]
S. Sayers, L. Li, E. Ong, S. Deng, G. Fu, Y. Lin, B. Yang, S. Zhang, Z. Fa, B. Zhao, Z. Xiang, Y.
Li, X.M. Zhao, M.A. Olszewski, L. Chen, and Y. He, Victors: a web-based knowledge base of virulence
factors in human and animal pathogens, Nucleic Acids Res 47 (2019), D693-D700.
[15]
L. Verdoni, A. Mazza, A. Gervasoni, L. Martelli, M. Ruggeri, M. Ciuffreda, E. Bonanomi, and L.
D'Antiga, An outbreak of severe Kawasaki-like disease at the Italian epicentre of the SARS-CoV-2 epidemic:
an observational cohort study, Lancet (2020).
[16]
Z. Xiang, M. Courtot, R.R. Brinkman, A. Ruttenberg, and Y. He, OntoFox: web-based support for
ontology reuse, BMC Res Notes 3:175 (2010), 1-12.

