Layoffs, Inequity and COVID-19: A
Longitudinal Study of the Journalism
Jobs Crisis in Australia from 2012 to
2020

Journalism
XX(X):1–19
©The Author(s) 2021
Reprints and permission:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/1464884921996286
www.sagepub.com/

SAGE

arXiv:2008.12459v2 [econ.GN] 24 Feb 2021

Nik Dawson12 , Sacha Molitorisz3 , Marian-Andrei Rizoiu4 and Peter Fray5

Abstract
In Australia and beyond, journalism is reportedly an industry in crisis, a crisis exacerbated by COVID-19. However,
the evidence revealing the crisis is often anecdotal or limited in scope. In this unprecedented longitudinal research,
we draw on data from the Australian journalism jobs market from January 2012 until March 2020. Using Data Science
and Machine Learning techniques, we analyse two distinct data sets: job advertisements (ads) data comprising 3,698
journalist job ads from a corpus of over 8 million Australian job ads; and official employment data from the Australian
Bureau of Statistics. Having matched and analysed both sources, we address both the demand for and supply of
journalists in Australia over this critical period. The data show that the crisis is real, but there are also surprises.
Counter-intuitively, the number of journalism job ads in Australia rose from 2012 until 2016, before falling into decline.
Less surprisingly, for the entire period studied the figures reveal extreme volatility, characterised by large and erratic
fluctuations. The data also clearly show that COVID-19 has significantly worsened the crisis. We then tease out more
granular findings, including: that there are now more women than men journalists in Australia, but that gender inequity
is worsening, with women journalists getting younger and worse-paid just as men journalists are, on average, getting
older and better-paid; that, despite the crisis besetting the industry, the demand for journalism skills has increased;
and that, perhaps concerningly, the skills sought by journalism job ads increasingly include social media and generalist
communications.
Keywords
Journalism Jobs, Skills, Demand

Introduction
Globally, the news about the news is not good. This was
true before 2020, but COVID-19 has only made matters
worse. Take Australia. In March 2020, newswire service the
Australian Associated Press announced it would be shutting
down its operations after 85 years (Samios 2020). In June,
a last-minute consortium of investors and philanthropists
saved the day – but salvation was merely partial, with only
85 of the company’s 180 journalists, photographers and other
staff retained (Wahlquist 2020). Meanwhile, News Corp has
been closing scores of regional titles (see below). In the US,
the news about the news is just as bad, if not worse. In
February, the country’s No. 2 newspaper chain (McClatchy)
declared bankruptcy (Benton 2020). Amid widespread pay
cuts, furloughs and layoffs, US newsrooms reportedly shed
more than 11,000 jobs in the first half of 2020 (Willens
2020).
Even before COVID-19, digital technology upended
journalism’s advertising-driven business model (ACCC
2019). As the Nieman Lab notes:
The Internet has brought forth an unprecedented flowering of news and information. But
it has also destabilised the old business models that have supported quality journalism for
decades. Good journalists across the country are
Prepared using sagej.cls [Version: 2017/01/17 v1.20]

losing their jobs or adjusting to a radically new
news environment online (Nieman-Lab 2020).
But is journalism in crisis? A wealth of research in Australia,
the US and comparable countries suggests yes. Profits have
been hard, if not impossible, to come by; many firms were
struggling or collapsing; and layoffs and redundancies were
the norm (ACCC 2019). As Fenton (2011) wrote in a paper
centred on the UK, ‘News media are in crisis. The crisis is
being managed by closing papers or shedding staff [and]
these cuts are having a devastating effect on the quality
of the news.’ That was nearly a decade ago. Subsequent
research suggests the situation has worsened significantly.
In Australia, the commonly cited figure based on research
by the journalists’ union is that 3,000 journalism positions
have been lost since 2011 (Ricketson et al. 2020). For
instance, it is estimated that in 2011 news publisher Fairfax
Media employed about 1,000 editorial staff across the Sydney

1 Centre

for Artificial Intelligence, University of Technology Sydney
Future of Work Research Fellow
3 Centre for Media Transition, University of Technology Sydney
4 Data Science Institute, University of Technology Sydney
5 Private Media
2 OECD

Corresponding author:
Nik Dawson
Email: nikolasjdawson@gmail.com

2

Morning Herald, The Age, The Australian Financial Review,
and its Sunday papers, The Sun Herald and The Sunday Age.
By mid-2017, however, half of those jobs were gone (Zion
et al. 2018) (including the job of one of this paper’s authors).
And then the coronavirus wielded its scythe. Already,
the reported impact of COVID-19 on journalism jobs has
been devastating, with widespread closures and job losses,
particularly in regional areas (Crerar 2020).
This research assesses the extent of the claimed
‘journalism crisis’ in Australia by analysing labour market
data from January 2012 to March 2020. To do this, we
performed a quantitative analysis of two longitudinal data
sets: job advertisements (ads) for journalism jobs and
the official Australian employment statistics. This allowed
us to measure longitudinally the demand for and supply
of journalism jobs in Australia. Further, the breadth and
detail of these data provided us with the opportunity to
comprehensively assess the quality and characteristics of
these journalism jobs. Not only did we examine how key
features of journalism jobs have changed – such as salaries,
location or years of experience – but also how journalism
skills required in Australia have evolved. Additionally, the
available data enabled us to measure the early effects of
COVID-19 on journalism jobs.
Our findings confirm that there is a crisis in Australian
journalism; a crisis that appears to have worsened during
the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic. However,
the data also yields more granular findings, including
three surprise findings. The first finding is that advertised
journalism jobs only started to decline from 2016, not before.
The second finding is that as the journalism jobs market
became more volatile, gender inequity worsened: women
journalists who remained were younger and worse paid
than the men. And the third finding is that, according to
our skill similarity calculations, generalist skills such as
‘Communications’, ‘Public Relations’, and ‘Social Media’
became more important to journalism, as opposed to
traditionally specialist journalism skills such as ‘Reporting’,
‘Editing’, and ‘Investigative Journalism’. These findings,
together with others, reveal that the crisis in journalism is
not only real, but in some ways more complex than was
previously understood.
By implementing a data-driven methodology, we provide
a comprehensive and longitudinal assessment of journalism
jobs in Australia from January 2012 to March 2020. We
tease out granular and specific trends, including the early
impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, the contrasting effects
on regional and urban journalism jobs, and the gendered
nature of ongoing impacts. And we analyse the underlying
skills data to identify the skills sought in journalism jobs,
and where people with journalism skills are likely finding
alternate career paths.

Relevant Literature & Background
Journalism jobs in crisis. If there is a crisis, the simple
explanation is the Internet. (Putting aside COVID-19, to
which we will return.) While digital channels have given
journalism bigger audiences, they have also strangled
income. Once, advertising funded journalism, but now
advertising has largely migrated online. As the Australian
Prepared using sagej.cls

Journalism XX(X)

Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) found in
2019, in the Final Report of its Digital Platforms Inquiry,
‘The reduction in advertising revenue over the past 20 years,
for reasons including the rise of online advertising, appears
to have reduced the ability of some media businesses to
fund Australian news and journalism’. The ACCC cited
Census data showing that ‘from 2006 to 2016, the number
of Australians in journalism-related occupations fell by
9 per cent overall, and by 26 per cent for traditional
print journalists (including those journalists working for
print/online news media businesses)’. Further, the ACCC
cited data provided by leading media companies showing
that the number of journalists in traditional print media
businesses fell by 20 per cent from 2014 to 2018 – a time
of growth for Australia’s population and economy (ACCC
2019).
However, the pressures on news media were not spread
evenly. For instance, local news in particular bore the brunt.
Between 2008 and 2018, 106 local and regional newspaper
titles closed across Australia, representing a 15 per cent
decrease in the number of such publications. As a result,
21 local government areas previously served by a newspaper
were now without coverage, including 16 local government
areas in regional Australia (ACCC 2019). These figures are
mirrored in the US. In 2018, Abernathy (2018) from the
Hussman School of Journalism and Media at UNC released
a report, ‘The Expanding News Desert’, which found that
the US had lost almost 1800 papers since 2004, with 7112
remaining (1283 dailies and 5829 weeklies). This meant that
the US lost roughly 20 per cent of its newspapers between
2004 and 2018. These closures included large dailies such as
the Tampa Tribune and the Rocky Mountain News, but also
many newspapers that had circulations of fewer than 5000
and served small, impoverished communities.
As the above research reveals, news media companies
were under pressure, and journalism jobs were being cut.
There was some hope in the shape of new players entering
the market and hiring journalists, including digital natives
such as Vice and Buzzfeed. However, in 2019 these two
companies were among the many that announced significant
staff layoffs (Goggin 2019). Worse, in 2020 Vice cut a further
155 jobs and Buzzfeed furloughed many of its workers
without pay (Izadi 2020). Furthermore, as Australia’s ACCC
notes, these publications ‘tend to employ relatively few
journalists’ (ACCC 2019). Even accounting for new arrivals,
the number of journalism jobs in Australia continued to fall
(our own analysis in Jobs Data Analysis and Results also
shows this trend), and as a result there were areas (including
local government, local court, health and science issues) that
journalism no longer covered adequately (ACCC 2019).
Further research has also revealed a clearer profile of
the typical journalist, and also the typical journalist who
loses his/her job. Drawing on 2017 data, one study found
that journalism jobs internationally were largely filled by
a young, inexperienced and itinerant workforce (Josephi
and Oller Alonso 2018). Meanwhile, research suggests
that it was journalists with extensive experience who were
losing their jobs (at least in Australia) (Sherwood and
O’Donnell 2018). And those who lost their jobs faced
decidedly uncertain futures. In longitudinal research tracking
the post-journalism careers of Australian journalists who

Dawson et al.

had been made redundant, many of those surveyed revealed
they were experiencing job precarity (Zion et al. 2018).
Further, a significant minority had moved into strategic
communications or public relations (Zion et al. 2018).
However, the flow of journalists into PR (and sometimes
back again) is not new (Carey 1965; Fisher et al. 2014;
Macnamara 2014, 2016) and our analysis also supports these
previous results.
The nature of ‘journalism work’ has also changed.
Increasingly, scholars have sought to theorise journalism
in terms of boundaries and blurring (Carlson and Lewis
2015; Loosen 2015; O’Regan and Young 2019; Maares and
Hanusch 2020). The idea of blurred boundaries is intended
to capture the ways in which journalism is increasingly
difficult to define, and how traditional notions of journalism
have been upended in the digital age (Loosen 2015).
Empirical work suggests that journalism is a fluid concept
that now means many things, and that the definition of
journalism is changing over time (Bögenhold and Fachinger
2013). For example, many contributors to social networks,
including Instagrammers, can be considered to be creating
work that is journalism (Maares and Hanusch 2020). As
such, there is now no such thing as a typical journalist;
rather, journalism is marked by diversity and heterogeneity
rather than any unifying concept (Bögenhold and Fachinger
2013). The notion of blurred boundaries aligns with our
findings regarding the way journalism jobs, and journalism
skills, have been shifting. Indeed, Carlson (2016) argues
that journalism is uncertain, which means that scholars and
audiences need to work towards clarifying both the value of
journalism, and its meaning. Our research has been datadriven, analysing journalism jobs data according to the
Australian occupational classifications of journalists (see
Supplemental Material Appendix (2021)) and based on their
underlying skills in job ads data. Nonetheless, we suggest
that our findings, coupled with previous research, have the
potential to further inform how precisely journalism jobs in
Australia have changed during this tumultuous period for the
media industry.
The impacts of COVID-19. There is a growing body
of research into the impacts of COVID-19 on news and
its audiences. Unsurprisingly, the research reveals that the
outbreak of the global pandemic was accompanied by a
marked upswing in news consumption in Australia (Park
et al. 2020), the US (Casero-Ripollés 2020) and the
UK (Kalogeropoulos et al. 2020). In Australia in 2019, 56
per cent of Australians accessed news more than once a
day; by April 2020, three months after the first local case
of COVID-19 was confirmed, that figure had jumped to 70
per cent (Park et al. 2020). Among other things, this increase
involved audiences returning to television and legacy media
in greater numbers (Park et al. 2020; Kalogeropoulos et al.
2020). Soon, however, many people started avoiding news
– and especially news about coronavirus - because it made
them anxious (Park et al. 2020; Kalogeropoulos et al. 2020).
As Kalogeropoulos et al. (2020) wrote following a survey
of UK audiences conducted in May, ‘After an initial surge
in news use, there has been a significant increase in news
avoidance.’
Ultimately, COVID-19 gave rise to a paradox. The above
surveys show that, as audiences sought out information to
Prepared using sagej.cls

3

stay safe, there was a dramatic surge in the consumption of
news - at least initially. At the same time, however, news
outlets found it even harder to make money, as advertising
dried up even further (Radcliffe 2020; Doctor 2020;
Olsen et al. 2020). With concerts cancelled and restaurants
shuttered, promoters and restaurateurs had nothing to
advertise, and the impacts on local and regional news were
especially harsh (Doctor 2020). On March 25, 2020, The
Atlantic ran a story under the headline, ‘The coronavirus is
killing local news’ (Waldman and Sennott 2020). The author
urged people to subscribe: ‘Among the important steps you
should take during this crisis: Wash your hands. Don’t touch
your face. And buy a subscription to your local newspaper.’
As one US media expert noted in late March, ‘Advertising,
which has been doing a slow disappearing act since 2008, has
been cut in half in the space of two weeks’ (Doctor 2020).
Even before COVID-19, the advertising crisis for
journalism has been described not as a single black swan,
but as a flock of black swans (Doctor 2020). By one estimate,
from 2006 to 2020, US newspapers lost more than 70 percent
of their advertising dollars (Doctor 2020). COVID-19 further
cruelled advertising, compounding the strain on news media
and the journalists they employ (Olsen et al. 2020).
In Australia, there were widespread closures and job
losses before the pandemic, but COVID-19 compounded
the problem. In late March, Rupert Murdoch’s publishing
business News Corp warned of ‘inevitable’ job cuts and the
closure of regional titles (Meade 2020c). Soon afterwards,
News Corp – Australia’s biggest publisher - suspended
the print editions of 60 Australian newspapers, including
the Manly Daily and Wentworth Courier in Sydney, the
Brisbane News and the Mornington Peninsula Leader in
Victoria (Meade 2020c). In May, News Corp confirmed that
more than 100 of its local and regional mastheads would
either switch to digital only or disappear completely (Meade
2020b). These cuts came in the wake of a dramatic drop
in advertising from the entertainment, restaurant and real
estate industries, the titles’ main revenue sources. The global
pandemic is ongoing, and its lasting impact on journalism
remains to be seen. Our findings, drawn from data that
runs until March 2020, are early and indicative rather than
definitive.
Job ads as a proxy for labour demand. Job ads provide
‘leading’ indicators of shifting labour demands as they occur,
as opposed to the ‘lagging’ indicators from labour market
surveys. Consequently, job ads are increasingly used as a
data source for analysing labour market dynamics (Markow
et al. 2017; Blake 2019). For instance, job ads data have
also been used to assess labour shortages. Dawson et al.
(2019) defined a range of indicators to evaluate the presence
and extent of shortages, such as posting frequency, salary
levels, educational requirements, and experience demands.
They also built a metric based on the forecasting error
from Machine Learning models trained to predict posting
frequency. Intuitively, occupations experiencing high posting
volatility are difficult to predict. Subsequent work showed
these indicators to be predictive of labour shortages in the
Australian Labour Market (Dawson et al. 2020). In the
present research, in Jobs Data Analysis and Results, we
use a similar set of indicators to analyse labour demand for

4

journalists. Further details on job ads data are provided in the
Supplemental Material Appendix (2021).
Analysing journalism jobs. Journalism jobs have
previously been analysed using job ads. Young and Carson
(2018) collected and assessed how Australian media outlets
defined journalism job positions when hiring journalists
from November 2009 to November 2010. The authors
used a content analysis methodology and manually labelled
data fields, such as employer, educational qualifications,
job responsibilities, experience requirements, location, work
hours, media platform, skill demands, job title, and any
other miscellaneous information. The authors found that
journalism was not a high priority during this period; instead
employers advertised four times as many job ads for sales,
marketing, and advertising positions.
More recently, Guo and Volz (2019) conducted content
analysis on 669 journalist job announcements from US
media organisations from 1 July to 31 December 2017. The
authors’ objective was to define, compare, and analyse the
journalists’ expertise requirements as expressed through job
ads. To achieve this objective, the authors manually reviewed
and codified job vacancies. This research found that ‘multiskilled’ journalists are experiencing higher levels of demand.
The authors also found that journalists’ ability to flexibly
adapt to changing situations was a characteristic of growing
importance. These studies, while significant, are relatively
limited in scope. In this paper, we analyse a nine-year dataset
of job ads which allows us to uncover longitudinal dynamics
of journalism jobs.
Historic employment levels of journalists in Australia
have also been analysed by O’Regan and Young (2019).
The authors used five-yearly census data and found that not
only has the advent of digital platforms coincided with the
decline of many types of journalists (for example, ‘Print’,
‘Radio’, ‘Television’ and ‘Editors’), but employment has
shifted into related professions, such as ‘Authors’ and ‘Public
Relations’. O’Regan and Young’s paper built on earlier
research by Higgs and Cunningham (2007). Our research
complements the findings of O’Regan and Young (2019),
providing additional labour demand detail from job ads
data while also matching it with labour supply data from
employment statistics.
Limitations of job ads data. Job ads data are
an incomplete representation of labour demand. Some
employers use traditional forms of advertising for vacancies,
such as newspaper classifieds, their own hiring platforms,
or recruitment agency procurement. Furthermore, anecdotal
evidence reveals that some vacancies are filled informally,
using channels such as word of mouth, professional
networks and social media. Job ads data also overrepresent occupations with higher-skill requirements and
higher wages, colloquially referred to as ‘white collar’
jobs (Carnevale et al. 2014). Finally, just because a job
is advertised, does not mean that the position will be,
or has been, filled. Despite these shortcomings, job ads
provide extremely rich information for what employers are
demanding in near real-time; including information that
cannot be gathered from employment statistics. Given the
sample size of journalism job ads available and the detailed
skills extracted in the data set, we are confident that the
Prepared using sagej.cls

Journalism XX(X)

journalism job ads used for this research provide a useful
indication of journalism labour demand.
Employment statistics and occupational standards.
Employment statistics provide data on populations employed
in standardised occupational classes. Occupations in Australia correspond to their respective occupational classes
according to the Australian and New Zealand Standard Classification of Occupations (ANZSCO) (Australian Bureau of
Statistics 2013).
There are significant shortcomings to analysing occupations within ANZSCO categories. Official occupational
taxonomies (like ANZSCO) are often static and are rarely
updated, therefore failing to capture emerging skills, which
can misrepresent the true labour dynamics of particular jobs.
For example, the occupational class of ‘Print Journalist’ has
been a constant in Australian occupational statistics. Yet,
the underlying skills of a ‘Print Journalist’ have changed
dramatically in recent decades.
To overcome the above-stated limitations, in our data
construction, we leveraged the Burning Glass Technologies
(BGT – the job ads data source) occupational ontology
together with the ANZSCO ontology. We also used the rich
skill-level information from job ads that are missing from
occupational employment statistics to build an encompassing
journalism job ads dataset.

Data & Methods
Data Sources
This research used both labour demand and labour supply
data to analyse journalism jobs. On the labour demand
side, we used a detailed dataset of over 8 million
Australian job ads, spanning from January 2012 to March
2020. These data were generously provided by Burning
Glass Technologies* (BGT). For labour supply data, we
leveraged official employment statistics (Australian Bureau
of Statistics 2019a) and salary levels (Australian Bureau
of Statistics 2019b) provided by the Australian Bureau of
Statistics (ABS) over the same period. These data sources
provide longitudinal employment and salary information
that have been disaggregated by gender, location, and types
of employment (full-time and part-time). Further details
of data sources and data construction are provided in
the Supplemental Material Appendix (2021). While there
are nuances to ‘journalism work’ and the requirements of
journalism jobs have evolved over time (Macnamara 2016;
O’Regan and Young 2019; Maares and Hanusch 2020), this
research defines journalism jobs by the official ANZSCO
standards (ABS 2019).

Skill Similarity
To analyse the underlying journalism skills within occupations, we implemented a skill similarity methodology
adapted from Alabdulkareem et al. (2018) and then by
Dawson et al. (2019) to calculate the pairwise similarities
between skills from job ads.

∗ BGT

is a leading vendor of online
https://www.burning-glass.com/

job

ads

data.

Dawson et al.

5

j 0 ∈J

j 0 ∈J

where j and j 0 are individuals jobs ads from the set J, and
e(s, j) ∈ {0, 1} measures the importance of skills s for job
j using theory from Trade Economics (Hidalgo et al. 2007).
Skills s and s0 are considered highly complementary if they
commonly co-occur and are both ‘important’ for the same
job ads. Finally, θ(s, s0 ) ∈ [0, 1], a larger value indicates
that s and s0 are more similar, and it reaches the maximum
value when s and s0 always co-occur (i.e. they never appear
separately).
We build the top yearly lists of journalism skills by
computing θ(Journalism, s) – i.e. the similarity between
the skill ‘Journalism’ and each unique skill that occurs
for each year from 2014-2018. The yearly top 50 skills
most similar to ‘Journalism’ are shown in the Supplemental
Material Appendix (2021) together with the full details of the
θ measure.
Finally, we determined the occupations with the highest
levels of skill similarity to the top journalism skills
uncovered from above. We propose η, the ‘Journalism Skill
Intensity’, for each standardised BGT occupation, defined as
percentage of journalism skills relative to the total skill count
for the job ads related to an occupation o. Formally:
P
x(j, s)
j∈O,s∈D
P
η(o, D) =
(2)
x(j, s0 )
j∈O,s0 ∈S

where D is the set of journalism skills, and O is the set of job
ads associated with the occupation o. This method allowed
us to adaptively select occupations based on their journalism
skill intensities.

Jobs Data Analysis and Results
In this section, we conducted a data-driven analysis of
journalism jobs in Australia based on job ads data and official
occupational statistics. First, we longitudinally examined key
features of jobs data, such as employment levels, job ads
posting frequency, salaries, and posting frequency growth
and predictability level. We also analysed how the underlying
skills of journalists had changed over time, and which skills
and occupations grew in similarity to journalism.
Prepared using sagej.cls

Posting Frequency & Employment levels

-RXUQDOLVWV (PSOR\HG 4XDUWHUO\

-RXUQDOLVP -REV $GV
-RXUQDOLVWV (PSOR\HG 8QLW /HYHO

-RXUQDOLVP 4XDUWHUO\ -RE $GV

Two skills are similar when the two are related and
complementary, i.e. the two skills in a skills-pair support
each other. For example, ‘Journalism’ and ‘Editing’ have a
high pairwise similarity score because together they enable
higher productivity for a journalist; whereas ‘Journalism’
and ‘Oncology’ have a low similarity because they are
seldom required together. We measured the similarity of
skill-pairs based on their co-occurrence patterns in job ads,
while accounting for skill ubiquity and specialisation. To
capture how journalism skills have changed over time, we
measured skill similarity during calendar years.
Formally, given J as the set of job ads posted during a
specific calendar year, we measured the similarity between
two skills s and s0 as:
P
e(j, s)e(j, s0 )
0 ∈J
j
!
(1)
θ(s, s0 ) =
P
P
0
max
e(j, s),
e(j, s )

Figure 1. Quarterly posting frequency of journalism job ads
(see Sec. Data & Methods) and employment levels of
‘Journalists & Other Writers’ at the ANZSCO Unit level (000’s)
from Jan 2012 to Mar 2020.

In Australian journalism, 2012 is considered a watershed
year. An estimated 1,500 journalists were made redundant,
the majority of those from Australia’s two largest print
companies, Fairfax Media (now Nine Entertainment) and
News Limited (now News Corp Australia) (Zion et al.
2016). The severity of this industrial shock can be observed
in Fig. 1. Against the left y-axis, the blue line shows
quarterly job ads posting frequency for journalism jobs. As
the graph depicts, posting frequency for journalism job ads
experienced extremely low levels in 2012 until 2013, when
they began to increase. The volume of vacancies increased
until mid-2014, before plummeting in late-2014 to the levels
last seen in 2012. From 2015, journalism job ads experienced
strong growth, reaching a peak in mid-2016. Since then,
journalism job ads have trended downward until the first
quarter of 2020 (end of available data for job ads), albeit
with volatile peaks and troughs. In summary, the data shows
that journalism job ads had not been in freefall since 2012.
Rather, there was erratic growth in journalism job ads until a
peak in 2016, followed by erratic decline.
Similarly, employment levels underwent immense volatility from 2012 to 2013. Against the right y-axis of Fig. 1,
the orange line shows the number of quarterly employed for
‘Journalists & Other Writers’ at the ANZSCO Unit level.
Employment levels peaked in mid 2012, before dramatically
dropping in early 2013. This is an effect of the mass journalist redundancies made in 2012, given that employment
statistics are ‘lagging indicators’ and it takes time for labour
markets to reflect changes in occupational statistics. Early
2013 marked the lowest point of journalist employment seen
in this time-series. As also observed in job ads data, journalist employment levels grew until 2016-2017 and has since
trended downwards, exhibiting volatile quarterly changes
through to the first quarter of 2020.
COVID-19 and journalism jobs. The early effects of
COVID-19 were apparent in the posting frequency of job
ads in Australia. This was the case for most occupations,
including journalists. Higher vacancy rates typically mean
higher levels of labour demand by employers, which is a
critical component of healthy labour markets. As Fig. 2

6

Journalism XX(X)

Figure 2. Posting frequency for journalism jobs during the early stages of the COVID-19 crisis in Australia and its major
cities: (a) Weekly posting frequency volumes for journalists and all Australian job ads between April 2019 and March 2020. Both
decreased as the early stages of the COVID-19 crisis hit; (b) Monthly posting frequency for journalists were down 63 per cent when
comparing March 2019 to March 2020. This was significantly higher than all Australian job vacancies, which was down 37 per cent
over the same period.

Salaries
We compared salaries extracted from job ads with ABS
reported wage data for ‘Journalists and Other Writers’† .
Fig. 3 reveals two main findings regarding journalist
salaries. First, according to job ads data, journalists attracted
considerably lower annual wage levels (solid blue line) than
the market average (dashed blue line). As of 2018, job ads
indicated that journalists earned approximately AU$10,000
less than the market average. These findings, however, are
somewhat contrary to the wage earnings data collected by
the ABS (Australian Bureau of Statistics 2019b), according
to which ‘Journalists and Other Writers’ (solid orange line)
had been earning a growing wage premium over the market
average (dashed orange line) since 2014. This discrepancy
Prepared using sagej.cls

Journalist salaries

100k

Salaries (AUD)

highlights, vacancy volumes declined for both journalism
jobs and at aggregate levels in Australia. Since mid-February
2020, weekly posting frequency had decreased across all
Australia job ads, as seen in Fig. 2a. Such a decline
this early in the year is atypical. As Dawson and Rizoiu
(2020) show, the frequency of job ad postings follow a
yearly seasonal pattern, with late February and early March
typically being a period of upward trend growth. However,
late February and early March 2020 coincided with the
international outbreak of COVID-19. During this period, the
Australian government instituted widespread quarantine and
social distancing measures, which significantly constrained
economic activity (Boseley and Knaus 2020). The impacts
of these COVID-19 containment laws are starkly apparent
in Fig. 2b. Posting frequency for journalism jobs were
down 63 per cent when comparing March 2019 volumes to
March 2020. This was significantly higher than the aggregate
market of all Australian job ads, which was down 37 per
cent over the same period. Fig. 2b shows that Melbourne
appeared to be the city hardest hit, recording no journalism
job ads in March 2020 and only 3 posts for the first quarter
of 2020, even before the major lock-downs instituted for
Melbourne in August 2020. Clearly the pandemic had an
early and damaging effect on the journalism jobs market.

95k
90k
85k
80k
75k
70k
65k
2012

2013

2014

Journalist salaries job ads average
All AUS job ads average

2015

2016

2017

2018

Journalists Unit Group salaries average
Unit Group salaries average

Figure 3. Journalist salaries (solid blue line) increased
according to job ads data, but remained below market average
levels (dashed blue line). However, according to ABS data,
‘Journalists & Other Writers’ (ANZSCO Unit level, solid orange
line) earned a growing wage premium above the market
average (dashed orange line).

can be explained by the fact that job ads data tend to overrepresent occupations in the ‘Professional’ and ‘Manager’
classes (Carnevale et al. 2014), which typically attract higher
wages. As a result, the average salary levels from job ads
data (dashed blue line) were about AU$20,000 higher than
average salary levels from ABS data (dashed orange line),
from 2014 to 2018. However, the salary levels for journalists
were very similar when comparing across the two data
sources.
Fig. 3 yields a second observation: journalist salary levels
increased in both absolute and relative terms compared to
average market levels, between 2012 to 2018 in both data
sources. More importantly, the relative salary growth of
journalists exceeded the market averages, during the period
studied.

† ABS

wage data is reported biennially, with the latest reporting year being
2018. Therefore, wage values in the ‘odd’ years in between the reporting
periods were interpolated, calculated as the mean of the previous and the
subsequent years.

Dawson et al.

7

2
1.5
1

Journalists

0.5
3
2

Data Scientists

1
20
15

Data Analysts

10
3000
2500
2000
1500
2012

All Australian Jobs
2014

2016

2018

Figure 4. Trend lines of posting frequency for ‘Journalists’,
‘Data Scientists’, ‘Data Analysts’, and ‘All Australian job ads’.
Posting frequency for ‘Journalists’ trended downwards since
2016.

Trend Analysis & Predictability
Posting trends. We constructed an auto-regressive Machine
Learning model to predict posting frequency of journalism
job ads in Australia (Taylor and Letham 2018). The model
accounts for long term trends, seasonality patterns and
external events (see the Supplemental Material Appendix
(2021) for technical details). We isolated the posting
frequency trend component and, in Fig. 4, plotted it
comparatively for ‘Journalists’ against two occupations
that have experienced high levels of labour demand,
‘Data Scientists’ and ‘Data Analysts’, as well as against
the aggregated market trend. Visibly, journalism jobs
experienced varying degrees of growth until mid 2016, at
which point growth plateaued, and started to decline. From
the end of 2017 until 2019, the trend for journalism job
ads has heavily decreased, even when compared to the
aggregate market, which also shows a more modest decrease
during the same period. ‘Data Scientists’ and ‘Data Analysts’
consistently grew throughout the entire period.
Quantify labour demand volatility. When constructing
Machine Learning models, it is standard procedure to
use error metrics to evaluate the prediction accuracy.
Volatility in posting volumes inherently lead to lowered
prediction performance and higher error values. Here we
use the prediction error measured using the ‘Symmetric
Mean Absolute Percentage Error’ (Scott Armstrong 1985;
Makridakis 1993) as a proxy for the volatility of labour
demand for different occupations (see the technical section
in the Supplemental Material Appendix (2021) for more
details).
Fig. 5 shows the prediction performance for three occupations (‘Journalists’, ‘Data Scientists’, ‘Data Analysts’)
Prepared using sagej.cls

Figure 5. (a) Predictability comparison of temporal posting
frequency highlighting the difficulties of predicting journalism job
ads and their volatility.

and for the volume of ‘All Australian job postings’. We
used a sliding window approach to obtain multiple predictions (see the Supplemental Material Appendix (2021)) that
we aggregated as boxplots. The higher the error score on
the vertical axis, the lower the predictive abilities for that
occupation. As Fig. 5 reveals, predicting the daily posting
frequency of journalism jobs was consistently more difficult
than for the other occupations, and the market as whole.
‘Data Scientists’, an occupation undergoing strong relative
growth, is also showing a high prediction error compared to
the market as a whole, indicative of experiencing a degree of
volatility. However, it was not nearly commensurate to the
predictive difficulties, and volatility, of journalists. This was
true from 2012 to 2019, and has become worse in 2020 with
the spread of COVID-19.

Gender
There have been growing gender differences of employed
journalists in Australia (North 2016, 2009) and across
the world (Hanitzsch et al. 2019); the data presented in
this research reinforces these previous findings. Fig. 6a
shows that the ratio of female employed journalists
increased relative to male journalists (ANZSCO Unit
Level) (Australian Bureau of Statistics 2019a). In 2014,
the female-to-male employment ratio was 0.7. In 2018,
the proportion more than doubled, with almost 1.8 female
journalists employed for every male journalist. It then
declined in 2019 to 1.35, but this proportion was still almost
double that of 2014.
Fig. 6b also shows that wage inequality between female
and male journalists worsened from 2014 to 2018 (Australian
Bureau of Statistics 2019b). Since 2014, the annual salaries
for female journalists increased by only AU$3,000, whereas
annual salaries for male journalists increased by more
than AU$30,000. Male journalists thus experienced an
average wage growth that was ten times greater than female
journalists from 2014 to 2018.
There were also changing age demographics of employed
journalists during the studied period. The markers on Fig. 6b
highlight the average age of journalists by gender, per
year. Male journalists were getting older, their average
age increasing by two years from 2014 to 2018. Female
journalists, however, were steadily getting younger. The

8

Journalism XX(X)

1.8

1500

1.4
1.2

1000
1
500
0.8
0

2012

2014

2016

Female Journalists Avg Salaries

80k

42

Female Journalists Avg Age

40

60k

38

40k

36

20k

34
0

Female-to-Male Ratio

(a)

44

Male Journalists Avg Salaries
Male Journalists Avg Age

2018

Female Journalists Employed

Male Journalists Employed

100k

Average Age (Years)

1.6

Gender: salaries
Female-to-Male Ratio

2000

Average Annual Salaries (AUD)

Number Employed

Gender: employment levels

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

(b)

Figure 6. Journalist employment levels and salaries by Gender: (a) Since 2015, the employment ratio of female-to-male
journalists increased; (b) Wage inequality increased between males and females in the ‘Journalists & Other Writers’ Unit group.
This was at the same time that the average age of journalists decreased for females and increasing for males since 2014.

63

2012
2013

85

28

18

89

120

2014
2015

110

2016

213

2017

113

2019

32

0%

133

103

312

58

204
62

25%

Melbourne

285

89

173

Sydney

121

43

161

2018

34

188

50%

Brisbane

75%

Canberra & ACT

100%

Perth

Other

(a)

(b)

Figure 7. Location of journalists in Australia: (a) Posting frequency for journalism jobs decreased in major Australian cities, in
relative terms; (b) As of 2019, the majority of journalists in Australia were employed in New South Wales, Victoria, and Queensland,
respectively.

0LQLPXP \HDUV RI H[SHULHQFH

0LQLPXP \HDUV RI HGXFDWLRQ

-RXUQDOLVWV

$OO -REV

$OO -REV

<HDUV RI (GXFDWLRQ 5HTXLUHG DYHUDJH

-RXUQDOLVWV

(a)

(b)

Figure 8. (a) Years of Education demanded by employers from job ads were consistent with the market average; (b) Years of
Experience required by employers consistently remained below the market average, according to job ads. However, this gap had
closed since 2014.

average age for female journalists decreased by more than
four years from 2014 to 2018.

Location
Fig. 7 plots the location and volume of employed journalists
in Australia. Fig. 7a shows the absolute and relative number

Prepared using sagej.cls

Dawson et al.

9

of job ads posted for each of the capital cities, and
outside them, and Fig. 7b shows the location of employed
journalists per state. Unsurprisingly, Sydney and Melbourne,
the respective capital cities of New South Wales (NSW) and
Victoria (VIC), consistently had the highest job ad posting
frequencies. However, the relative share of job ad posting
frequency in Australian capital cities had shrunk in later
years, with Fig. 7a showing an increase outside of major
cities, both in relative and absolute terms. This trend reached
a peak in 2017, when less than 50 per cent of all journalist job
ads were for positions inside capital cities. A small rebound
followed, and in 2019 Sydney commanded approximately
one-third of all journalism job ads.

Education & Experience
Figs. 8a and 8b show respectively the number of years of
formal education required for journalists, and the experience
requirements (both per year, extracted from job ads data).
The education requirements consistently remained at market
average levels, with journalists required to possess a
Bachelor-level degree (approximately 16 years of education).
By contrast, the experience requirements were more
variable. Since 2012, employers required fewer years of
experience from journalists than was required in the market
generally. However, the gap narrowed. In 2019, employers
demanded of journalists, on average, half of an additional
year of experience compared to 2014. This countered
the general market, where employers’ demands trended
downward from 2012 to 2019.

Figure 9. Temporary positions represented the majority of
journalism job ads in Australia.

The relative rankings of these three skills also increased.
For each year, we counted the posting frequency of each
unique skill that appears in job ads. We then ranked these
skills by posting frequency as a proxy for labour demand.
Fig. 10b shows that the rankings of all three of these
fundamental journalism skills had improved from 2012 to
2019. In other words, not only did the posting frequency of
these three journalism skills increase in job ads over these
eight years, but their importance relative to all other skills
also increased.
(a) Demand for journalism skills
80k
Journalism
Editing
Writing

70k

Employment Type

60k

Casual and temporary work have become more commonplace in Australia (Gilfillan 2018), and we study if this is
also the case for Australian journalism jobs. In Fig. 9 we plot
the number of permanent and temporary journalism jobs, per
calendar year – in the job ads data, jobs are classified as either
‘Permanent’, ‘Temporary’, or not specified according to the
content of the job descriptions. The number of ‘Temporary’
journalism jobs had increased in absolute terms since 2012,
which made up the majority of all journalism ads in every
year. It is noteworthy too that the share of ‘Permanent’ journalism vacancies had also increased since 2012. However,
this trend should be interpreted with a degree of scepticism as
only ∼ 50 per cent of all journalism job ads specified whether
the roles advertised were permanent or temporary.

50k

Journalism Skills
Growing demand for journalism skills.
Here, we analysed how the demand for some fundamental
journalism skills changed over time. First, we selected three
traditionally important skills to journalists that appear in job
ads: (1) ‘Journalism’, (2) ‘Editing’, and (3) ‘Writing’. These
skills were then counted across all job ads in Australia,
regardless of their occupational class. While Fig. 4 shows
that labour demand for journalists has decreased since 2016,
Fig. 10a presents the more nuanced story, showing that the
posting frequency for each of these core journalism skills
increased from 2012 to 2019, with 2018 to 2019 being the
first yearly decline.
Prepared using sagej.cls

40k
30k
20k
10k
0

(b)

Yearly Rank of Journalism Skills

17

21

95
124

317
368
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Figure 10. The absolute posting frequency (a) and relative
yearly rank (b) of three major journalism skills increased
between 2012 and 2019.

Changing importance of journalism skills. We wanted
to determine whether the relative importance of the
Journalism skill changed over time, using a skill similarity
approach. Given the dynamics of skill requirements in job
ads, skills can become increasingly more (or less) similar
over time. We used the similarity measures in Eq. (1) to
identify the skills that are becoming more relevant to being

10

a journalist (see Data & Methods for details, and the
Supplemental Material Appendix (2021) for the top 50 skills
for each from 2014 to 2018). The higher the similarity
score, the more likely the skills pair will complement and
support each other in a given job. Fig. 11a shows the
changes in similarity scores between the skill ‘Journalism’
and each of the eight other top journalism skills (as per
the top yearly journalism skills lists in the Supplemental
Material Appendix (2021)). The greater the area covered
in the radar chart, the greater the similarity score, with
the blue area representing 2014 and the red area 2018.‡
Visibly in Fig. 11a, ‘Social Media’ related skills became
increasingly relevant for journalists, with the relative ratio of
more traditional skills such as ‘Editing’ and ‘Copy Writing’
diminishing with respect to ‘Social Media’, from 2014 to
2018.
Occupations that require journalism skills. Here,
we studied which occupations most required journalism
skills, and their dynamics over time (according to the
BGT occupational taxonomy). Given the yearly lists of
top journalism skills (described in Skill Similarity),
we used Eq. (2) to determine the occupations with the
highest intensities of journalism skills, for each year from
2014 to 2018. Intuitively, this allows us adaptively to
identify occupations that become more or less similar
to ‘Journalism’, based on their underlying skill usage. It
also provides a means to assess likely transitions between
occupations, as workers are more likely to transition to
occupations where the underlying skill requirements are
similar (Bechichii et al. 2018). Higher similarity lowers the
barriers to entry from one occupation to another.
Fig. 11b highlights eight top occupations and their journalism skill intensity scores for 2014 and 2018. ‘Reporter’,
‘Editor’, and ‘Copywriter’ cover the highest percentage of
journalism jobs in the dataset, respectively. While the journalism skill intensities of these occupations were relatively
high in 2018, their growth since 2014 was relatively low.
In comparison, ‘Photography’, ‘Communications’, ‘Social
Media’, and ‘Public Relations’ experienced higher journalism skill intensity growth from 2014 to 2018. This provides
insights as to where workers with journalism skills might
have found employment outside of journalism.

Discussion
Volatility of journalism jobs
Drawn from job ads and employment statistics, our findings
reveal the highly volatile nature of the journalism industry.
Compared to other occupations and the aggregate labour
market, journalism experiences dramatic fluctuations that
are unpredictable and irregular (see Fig. 5). The data also
confirmed that journalism is an industry in crisis, worsened
in the early stages of COVID-19. However, the data also
reveals surprises, including that the number of journalism
jobs ads and employment levels increased from 2012 until
2016. Since then, though, journalism jobs in Australia
declined.
The volatility of journalism jobs in Australia was clearly
apparent in Posting Frequency & Employment levels.
Posting frequency of job ads ranged from near zero levels
in 2012 and 2014 to more than 200 posts per quarter in
Prepared using sagej.cls

Journalism XX(X)

2016. These violent swings are also apparent in the quarterly
employment statistics of ‘Journalists and Other Writers’.
Following the mass redundancies of 2012, employment
levels plummeted, reaching their lowest levels in 2013. They
then increased before falling again into the beginning of
the COVID-19 pandemic. However, the data confirms that
volatility of employment has been a constant for journalism,
and that this has worsened during COVID-19.
Fig. 5 reveals this extreme volatility. The error metrics
from the Machine Learning model used to predict daily
posting frequencies of job ads (as detailed in Trend
Analysis & Predictability) highlight the difficulties of
making predictions about journalism employment. This lack
of predictability is indicative of volatility. The higher the
error scores for a given occupation, the higher the likelihood
that the occupation is experiencing significant disruption.
This becomes apparent when we compare journalism to
other occupations. For example, the volatility of ’Journalists’
dwarfs that of ‘Data Scientists’, an occupation experiencing
significant demand and volatility in Australia (Dawson et al.
2019).
The volatility of journalism jobs was further revealed
by a time series analysis of journalism compared to other
occupations (Fig. 4), a gender-based analysis (Fig. 6),
a geographical analysis (Fig. 7) and an analysis of the
temporary nature of journalism jobs (Fig. 9).
What is indisputably clear is that the advertising market
for news and journalism collapsed, and, at the time of
writing, continues to collapse (Shirky 2009; ACCC 2019;
Doctor 2020). Meanwhile, consumers have tended to show
an unwillingness to pay for digital journalistic content:
in 2019, Australian news consumers admitted they would
much would rather subscribe to a video streaming service
such as Netflix (34 per cent), than pay for online news (9
per cent) (Fisher et al. 2019). Admittedly, during COVID19 some subscription rates have risen (Edmonds 2020).
Clearly, however, the Internet has detonated the advertising
model that once sustained journalism, and simultaneously readjusted consumer expectations on the monetary value of
journalism content. The fact that journalism is struggling
is confirmed in several ways by the data, including by the
unpredictability of job ads posting frequency and the clear
shifts in employment levels, as shown in Fig. 1. To say that
journalism has been disrupted is an understatement.
Volatility exacerbated by COVID-19. In a fragmenting
news ecosystem, consumer demand for news and journalism
is difficult to quantify. The Digital News Report: Australia
2019 has found that many consumers are disengaging, with
the proportion of Australians avoiding news increasing from
57 per cent in 2017 to 62 per cent in 2019 (Fisher et al. 2019).
Demand for ‘quality’ and ‘public interest’ journalism is even
harder to quantify, given ongoing debates as to what exactly
constitutes ‘quality’ and ‘public interest’ (Wilding, D., Fray,
P., Molitorisz, S. & McKewon, E 2018). Nonetheless,
demand for journalism has surged dramatically since the
outbreak of COVID-19.

‡ At

the time of analysis, 2018 was the final full year available of access to
the required skills-level data.

Dawson et al.

(a)

11

(b)

Figure 11. Skill and occupational similarity analyses: (a) The changing similarity (or relative importance) of specific skills
compared to the skill ‘Journalism’; (b) Eight occupations that had the highest similarity to the ‘Top Yearly Journalism Skills’.

The irony of the coronavirus pandemic is that even as
it has been killing off journalism jobs, it has also created
a heightened demand for, and appreciation of, journalism
among the general public. As news analyst Doctor (2020)
wrote of the US situation in late March, ’The amount of time
Americans spend with journalists’ work and their willingness
to pay for it have both spiked, higher than at any point since
Election 2016, maybe before ... [but] how many journalists
will still have jobs once the initial virus panic subsides?’.
In the UK in March, The Guardian received 2.17 billion
page views, an increase of more than 750 million above its
previous record, set in October 2019 (Bedingfield 2020).
Since the outbreak of COVID-19, the volatility of the
journalism jobs market has worsened dramatically. We noted
above that in May News Corp ended the print run of
more than 100 newspapers nationally In April, Australian
Community Newspapers, which publishes 170 community
titles, said it was suspending publication of some of its
non-daily newspapers; as a result, four printing presses
were closed and an unspecified number of staff were
stood down (Meade 2020a). Also in April, the federal
government announced a AU$50million package to support
public interest journalism across TV, newspapers and radio
in regional and remote Australia (Hayes and Rubbo 2020).
And on April 20, the Australian government announced that
digital platforms including Google and Facebook would be
forced to pay for content as the Internet advertising business
would be overhauled to help local publishers survive the
economic fallout of the coronavirus crisis (Crowe 2020). The
scheme, which would involve a mandatory code imposed on
digital giants, would potentially set a global precedent. The
combined and ongoing impact on journalism jobs of these
sudden, cumulative developments are hard to predict, but will
no doubt be profound.

Gender Wage Gap
At first glance, the data seems to suggest that gender
equity is finally arriving in Australia for journalism – an
Prepared using sagej.cls

industry that has traditionally been male-dominated – as
more women than men are employed. As the data shows,
in 2014 there were 0.7 female journalists employed for
every male Journalist, but by 2018 the proportion of femaleto-male employment more than doubled, with almost 1.8
female journalists employed for every male Journalist. It then
declined in 2019 to 1.35, a proportion still almost double that
of 2014.
However, further detail reveals that equity remained
elusive. Specifically, wage inequality worsened. Since
2014, annual salaries for female journalists increased by
AU$3,000, compared with an increase for male journalists of
over AU$30,000 over the same period. From 2014 to 2018,
average wage growth for Male journalists was more than
ten times greater than for female journalists. Meanwhile, the
average male Journalist was getting older, while the average
female Journalist was getting younger. In 2014, the average
age for a Journalist, whether male or female, was roughly
the same: late 30s. By 2018, the average age for a male
journalist was 42, whereas for a female journalist it was
34. These results support previous findings on the changing
demographic characteristics of journalists in Australia. In
a survey of female journalists in Australia, North (2016)
found gendered divisions of tasks associated with reporting,
where the majority of female reporters were assigned ‘softnews’ areas, such as arts, education, and health. These
gender and age inequities for journalists were also present
in other countries (Hanitzsch et al. 2019). The wage and age
discrepancies between female and male journalists observed
in the employment statistics are consistent with the surveyed
experiences of female journalists in Australia by North
(2016).
The potential impacts of this worsening disparity are
concerning. It is possible that senior positions responsible for
major editorial decisions were increasingly being dominated
by men, whereas junior roles were being filled by women
who are younger and worse-paid.

12

Further research is needed into related issues of the
industry’s composition, including, for instance, the ethnicity
of journalists. A vast body of literature exists regarding the
importance of diversity in news (Rodrigues and Paradies
2018; Budarick and Han 2017). Further work is needed into
diversity (and its various sub-categories), and what effect
diversity has, for instance, on the proportion of people who
are actively avoiding the news.

Location
As discussed above, the sustained pressures on regional and
local journalism have led to a worrying growth of ‘news
deserts’ in countries including Australia and the US. This
trend alarmingly accelerated in the early stages of COVID19, leaving many areas without any regional or local news
coverage. For instance, as of October 2020, ‘Public Interest
Journalism Initiative’ had documented a net decline of 124
newsrooms from January 2019 (PIJI 2020). Hence, we might
assume that journalism jobs in regional and local areas were
been drying up, and that an ever-increasing proportion of
journalism jobs were in urban centres.
The data, however, were not so clear until the end of
2019. As Fig. 7a shows, in 2012 fewer than a quarter
of Australia’s journalism job ads were for jobs outside
Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Canberra and the ACT or
Perth. In every subsequent year, the proportion of job ads
for journalism positions outside these urban centres was
considerably higher. The peak came in 2017, when nearly
half of all job ads were for positions outside the major cities.
Does this suggest that in 2017 there were as many jobs
for journalists in the regions as in the centres? Surely not.
The explanation, we suggest, lies in various factors. These
include that regional journalism jobs are hard to fill, perhaps
because they offer relatively low salaries, and are hence readvertised. It is also possible that there is a high turnover
for some regional positions. In short, the job ads data may
simply be an indication that the journalism industry is even
more volatile in the regions than in major urban centres.
Research consistently and emphatically reveals that
regional and local journalism have been suffering, with an
increasingly bleak prognosis of cuts and closures (Abernathy
2018; ACCC 2019; Doctor 2020). While the data shows
a surprisingly high proportion of journalism job ads for
positions outside the main metropolitan centres, this cannot
be taken to suggest that journalism is holding steady in these
areas.

Journalism XX(X)

needed to transition between occupations to find new work.
There are, however, significant transition costs moving
between jobs (Bechichii et al. 2018; Bessen 2015). These
costs can come in the form of education, training, physically
moving for new employment and other barriers. To reduce
the friction of these transition costs, workers tend to leverage
their extant skills, in concert with acquiring new skills, to
make career transitions.
As seen in Fig. 11a, the skill ‘Journalism’ became
more similar to ‘Social Media’ and more ‘generalist’
communications skills. After applying the Skill Intensity
formula from Eq. (2), we identified the top occupations
with highest intensities of journalism skills from 20142018 – these normalised measures from Eq. (1) and
Eq. (2) take into account newly emerging and redundant
skills. The Fig. 11b chart reinforces that top journalism
skills were becoming more important to other occupations,
such as ‘Photographers’, ‘Social Media Strategists’, ‘Public
Relations Professionals’, and ‘Communications Specialists’.
While it is certainly possible that journalism tasks were being
performed in these different occupations, it nonetheless
highlights the changing nature of journalism work and
the occupations where journalism skills were of growing
importance.
From the data, we suggest, three conclusions can be
drawn, which supports previous research (Young and Carson
2018; O’Regan and Young 2019; Macnamara 2014, 2016).
First, to be hired, journalists are required to have a
wider array of skills, such as photography and social
media aptitude. Second, jobs requiring journalism skills
were increasingly occupations in social media, generalist
communications, and public relations rather than in reporting
and editing. And third, we see hints as to where onetime
journalists are finding alternate career paths. As employment
conditions progressively worsen, journalists are seemingly
pursuing new careers in the occupational areas seen in
Fig. 11b, such as photography or public relations.
At a time of great uncertainty, with employment prospects
deteriorating, it is no wonder that journalists look beyond
traditional journalism for their futures. For society, however,
the implications are significant. In this time of economic
instability and polarising politics, the people who possess the
journalism skills required to keep the public informed and
hold leaders to account are, in many cases, employing their
talents elsewhere. This places enormous strain on the health
and quality of journalism in Australia.

Evolving journalism skills

Conclusion

Skills are the building blocks of jobs and standardised
occupations. In this regard, occupations can be characterised
as ‘sets of skills’. Intuitively, skills that are similar can be
interpreted as complementary when they are paired together
or relatively easy to acquire when one skill is already
possessed.
This intuition provides insight into how journalism skills
are evolving and where journalists might be finding alternate
career paths. As Fig. 1 shows, both the demand for and
supply of journalists have been declining in Australia since
2016. Therefore, a growing number of former journalists,
who presumably possess an assortment of journalism skills,

The data reveals a contradiction: demand for journalism
skills increased at the same time that demand and
employment for journalists declined. Indeed, this is one of
several contradictions in a volatile industry. For an increasing
number of news media organisations, a sustainable business
model remains elusive.
Our findings give a clearer outline of the problem.
Unfortunately, the solutions remain less clear. Quality
journalism is expensive. Good reporting is often slow and
laborious, fixed to the unfolding story. What is required of
quality journalism is, therefore, at odds with the prevailing
employment conditions. The declines in employment of

Prepared using sagej.cls

Dawson et al.

traditional journalists could have serious implications if the
media produce poorer quality materials.
This paper highlights the stresses experienced by
journalism in Australia by analysing jobs data. We observed
the volatility and downward trajectory of the occupation both
in job ads and employment statistics. These unfavourable
employment conditions were worsened by the unfolding
COVID-19 crisis. Our longitudinal analysis also yields
important findings regarding gender inequity. While women
represented a greater share of employed journalists, they
earned less, and the wage gap grew.
Further, this paper also identified top journalism skills.
Adopting a data-driven method, we described which skills
are most similar to ‘Journalism’. We then used these yearly
skill sets to adaptively select similar occupations. This
enabled us to quantitatively show that the skill demands
of journalists became increasingly similar to those of
‘Social Media Strategists’, ‘Public Relations Professionals’,
‘Communications Specialists’, and others. This suggests
where people with journalism skills were likely finding
alternate career paths, but also raises a related concern. On
the face of it, the journalism jobs data we have analysed does
not look so bad after all. On reflection, however, it suggests
that the thinning ranks of ‘journalism’ are populated by fewer
journalists, and more public relations specialists.
Future research could compare these results to other
labour markets in different countries to assess and compare
the validity of these findings. For example, the skill similarity
methodology could be applied in other labour markets to
compare the resulting top journalism skills in different
locations. Additionally, labour demand analyses could be
conducted on occupations most similar to journalists to
better understand the incentives to transition to other
vocations. This could provide insights into the boundaries
of ‘journalism work’ and analyse the relative demand for
different types of journalism. Further work could also
examine the implications of changing journalism skill
demands for journalism schools. This research demonstrated
that not only have the skills demanded of journalists evolved,
but the occupations that require journalism skills have
broadened. The extent to which journalism schools are
adequately preparing their students for the quickly changing
labour demands of journalists is a rich area of inquiry.
The results from this research both reinforce the welldocumented difficulties of journalism in Australia and
provide granular details that isolate and reveal these
challenges. The hope is that these analytical methods and
insights can contribute to the health and well-being of the
Fourth Estate, and hence to the health and well-being of
society.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Burning Glass Technologies for generously
providing the job advertisements data that has enabled this
research.

Funding
The authors disclosed receipt of the following financial support for
the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: MarianAndrei Rizoiu was partially supported by Facebook Research
under the Content Policy Research Initiative grants and the

Prepared using sagej.cls

13

Commonwealth of Australia (represented by the Defence Science
and Technology Group).

Author Biographies
Nikolas Dawson is a Labour Economist and PhD candidate at the
University of Technology Sydney. His doctoral research at UTS
is on the changing labour market dynamics in Australia, where
he analyses issues such as skill shortages, job transitions, and
emerging technology adoption in the Australian labour market. In
his research, Nikolas applies data science and machine learning
techniques to draw insights from large datasets, including online job
advertisements, employment statistics, and longitudinal household
survey data. During his Doctoral studies, Nikolas was selected as an
OECD Future of Work Research Fellow and has also worked with
agencies of the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland researching
the ‘Economic Impacts of Artificial Intelligence’.
Sacha Molitorisz is a lecturer at the Centre for Media Transition
with the University of Technology Sydney, employed jointly by
the Law Faculty and the Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences.
In May 2020, his book Net Privacy, How we can be free in
an age of surveillance, was published by New South Books
(Australia) and McGill-Queens University Press (Canada). He
has co-authored com-missioned reports for bodies including
the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission and the
Australian Communications and Media Authority, he has worked
as a consultant for the Public Interest Journalism Initiative on
the development of Australia’s world-first news media bargaining
code, and he has been published in mainstream outlets such as
The Conversation and The Sydney Morning Herald as well as in
leading academic journals. He is also a regular media commentator.
Previously, he spent nearly 20 years on staff at the Sydney Morning
Herald and smh.com.au as a writer, editor, and blogger.
Marian-Andrei Rizoiu is a lecturer with the University of
Technology Sydney, where he leads the Behavioral Data
Science group, studying human attention dynamics in the online
environment. His research has made several key contributions
to applications such as online popularity prediction and realtime tracking and countering disinformation campaigns. For the
past four years, he has been developing theoretical models for
online information diffusion, which can account for complex social
phenomena, such as the rise and fall of online popularity, the spread
of misinformation, or the adoption of disruptive technologies. He
approached questions such as “Why did X become popular, but
not Y?” and “How can problematic content be detected based
solely on how it spreads?” with implications in detecting the spread
of conspiracy theories and disinformation campaigns. MarianAndrei also works in understanding shortages and mismatches
in labour mar-kets. Together with his collaborators, he built a
real-time occupation transition recommender system usable in
periods of massive disruptions (such as COVID-19). He also has
shown that social-media predicted personality profiles are linked
with worker occupation. Marian-Andrei has published in the most
selective venues, such as the PNAS, WWW, WSDM, ICWSM,
and CIKM. His work has received significant media attention—
including Bloomberg Business Week, Nature Index, BBC, and The
Conversation—, and Marian-Andrei served as an expert for the
NSW government’s Defamation Law Reform. See more at http:
//www.rizoiu.eu.
Peter Fray is managing editor of Private Media, an independent
Australian news media company. He was formerly a professor of
journalism practice at University Technology Sydney, the founder

14

of PolitiFact Australia, and the editor of The Sydney Morning
Herald, the Canberra Times, and the Sunday Age.

References
Abernathy PM (2018) The Expanding News Desert. Technical
report, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
ABS (2019) UNIT GROUP 2124 JOURNALISTS AND
OTHER WRITERS.
https://www.abs.gov.
au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/Latestproducts/
F4496F62EA226B67CA2584A8000E79B9?
opendocument. Accessed: 2020-10-20.
ACCC (2019) Digital platforms inquiry - final report. Technical
report, Australian Competition and Consumer Commission.
Alabdulkareem A, Frank MR, Sun L, AlShebli B, Hidalgo C and
Rahwan I (2018) Unpacking the polarization of workplace
skills. Sci Adv 4(7): eaao6030.
Appendix O (2021) Appendix: Layoffs, Inequity and COVID-19: A
Longitudinal Study of the Journalism Jobs Crisis in Australia
from 2012 to 2020. https://arxiv.org/pdf/2008.
12459.pdf#page=17.
Australian Bureau of Statistics (2013) 1220.0 - ANZSCO –
Australian and New Zealand Standard classification of
occupations, 2013, version 1.2.
https://www.abs.
gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/Lookup/1220.
0Main+Features12013,%20Version%201.2?
OpenDocument. Accessed: 2019-8-1.
Australian Bureau of Statistics (2019a) 6291.0.55.003 - Labour
Force, Australia, Detailed, Quarterly, May 2019.
Australian Bureau of Statistics (2019b) 6306.0 - Employee
Earnings and Hours, Australia, May 2018.
Bechichii N, Grundkei R, Jameti S and Squicciarini M (2018)
Moving between jobs: an analysis of occupation distances and
skill needs. Technical Report 52, OECD.
Bedingfield W (2020) Coronavirus news fatigue is real and it could
become a big problem. https://www.wired.co.uk/
article/coronavirus-news-fatigue. Accessed:
2020-4-22.
Benton J (2020) On a rough day for American newspapers,
investors aren’t buying gannett’s story and tribune’s not done
chopping .
Bessen J (2015) Learning by Doing: The Real Connection between
Innovation, Wages, and Wealth. Yale University Press.
Blake A (2019) Dynamics of data science skills. Technical report,
The Royal Society.
Bögenhold D and Fachinger U (2013) Blurred boundaries of
journalism: multiple employment in the media industry and the
hybridity of occupational work. International Journal of Arts
and Commerce 2(10): 171–183.
Boseley M and Knaus C (2020) Australia’s coronavirus social
distancing rules explained: state by state guidelines. The
Guardian .
Budarick JN and Han GS (2017) Minorities and Media:: Producers,
Industries, Audiences. Palgrave Macmillan.
Carey JW (1965) The communications revolution and the
professional communicator.
The Sociological Review
13(1 suppl): 23–38.
Carlson M (2016) Establishing the boundaries of journalism’s
public mandate. C. Peters and M .

Prepared using sagej.cls

Journalism XX(X)

Carlson M and Lewis SC (2015) Boundaries of journalism:
Professionalism, practices and participation. Routledge.
Carnevale A, Jayasundera T and Repnikov D (2014) Understanding
online job ads data. Technical report, Georgetown University.
Casero-Ripollés A (2020) Impact of Covid-19 on the media
system. Communicative and democratic consequences of news
consumption during the outbreak.
El profesional de la
información 29(2): e290223.
Crerar S (2020) Coronavirus and the crisis in regional
news.
https://www.uts.edu.au/researchand-teaching/our-research/centre-mediatransition/news/coronavirus-and-crisisregional-news. Accessed: 2020-4-27.
Crowe D (2020) ’A level playing field’: digital giants will
have to pay for news. https://www.smh.com.au/
politics/federal/a-level-playing-fielddigital-giants-will-have-to-pay-for-news20200419-p54l7q.html. Accessed: 2020-4-20.
Dawson N and Rizoiu MA (2020) Coronavirus infecting
Australian jobs: vacancy rates down since early february. The
Conversation URL https://theconversation.com/
coronavirus-infecting-australian-jobsvacancy-rates-down-since-early-february134234.
Dawson N, Rizoiu MA, Johnston B and Williams MA (2019)
Adaptively selecting occupations to detect skill shortages from
online job ads. In: 2019 IEEE International Conference on Big
Data (Big Data). pp. 1637–1643.
Dawson N, Rizoiu MA, Johnston B and Williams MA (2020)
Predicting Labor Shortages from Labor Demand and Labor
Supply Data: A Machine Learning Approach. URL http:
//arxiv.org/abs/2004.01311.
Department of Employment, Skills, Small and Family Business
(2019) Sixty per cent of job vacancies in australia are
advertised online. https://www.employment.gov.
au/newsroom/sixty-cent-job-vacanciesaustralia-are-advertised-online.
Accessed:
2019-7-7.
Doctor K (2020) Newsonomics: What was once unthinkable
is quickly becoming reality in the destruction of local
news.
https://www.niemanlab.org/2020/03/
newsonomics-what-was-once-unthinkableis-quickly-becoming-reality-in-thedestruction-of-local-news/.
Accessed: 20204-19.
Edmonds R (2020) A fresh publishing study argues that
paid digital subscriptions are the only avenue to
growth.
https://www.poynter.org/businesswork/2020/a-fresh-publishing-studyargues-that-paid-digital-subscriptionsare-the-only-avenue-to-growth/.
Accessed:
2020-10-24.
Fenton N (2011) Deregulation or democracy? New media, news,
neoliberalism and the public interest. Continuum 25(1): 63–72.
Fisher C, Park S, Lee G Jand Fuller and Sang Y (2019) Digital
news report: Australia 2019. Technical report, News and Media
Research Centre.
Fisher C et al. (2014) ’watchdog’to’spin-doctor’: Challenges and
benefits. Australian Journalism Review 36(2): 145.

Dawson et al.

Gardiner A, Aasheim C, Rutner P and Williams S (2018)
Skill requirements in big data: A content analysis of job
advertisements. Journal of Computer Information Systems
58(4): 374–384.
Gilfillan G (2018) Characteristics and use of casual employees in
Australia. Technical Report Research paper series, 2017–18,
Parliament of Australia.
Goggin B (2019) 7,800 people have lost their jobs so far this year
in a media landslide. Business Insider .
Guo L and Volz Y (2019) (re) defining journalistic expertise
in the digital transformation: A content analysis of job
announcements. Journalism Practice 13(10): 1294–1315.
Hanitzsch T, Hanusch F, Ramaprasad J and De Beer AS (2019)
Worlds of journalism: Journalistic cultures around the globe.
Columbia University Press.
Hayes J and Rubbo L (2020) $50m coronavirus bailout announced
for regional media. ABC News .
Hidalgo CA, Klinger B, Barabási AL and Hausmann R (2007) The
product space conditions the development of nations. Science
317(5837): 482–487.
Higgs PL and Cunningham SD (2007) Australia’s creative
economy: Mapping methodologies .
Izadi E (2020) With cuts at Vice, Quartz and BuzzFeed,
even media’s savviest digital players are hurting. URL
https://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/
media/with-cuts-at-vice-quartz-buzzfeedeven-medias-savviest-digital-players-arehurting/2020/05/19/f15d3dde-96e9-11ea91d7-cf4423d47683{_}story.html.
Accessed:
2020-10-22.
Josephi B and Oller Alonso M (2018) Re-examining age: Journalism’s reliance on the young. Journalism : 1464884918800077.
Kalogeropoulos A, Fletcher R and Nielsen RK (2020) Initial surge
in news use around coronavirus in the UK has been followed
by significant increase in news avoidance. Available at SSRN
3609184 .
Loosen W (2015) The notion of the “blurring boundaries”
journalism as a (de-) differentiated phenomenon. Digital
Journalism 3(1): 68–84.
Maares P and Hanusch F (2020) Exploring the boundaries of
journalism: Instagram micro-bloggers in the twilight zone of
lifestyle journalism. Journalism 21(2): 262–278.
Macnamara J (2014) Journalism and PR: Unpacking ‘Spin’,
Stereotypes and Media Myths. Peter Lang Publishing.
Macnamara J (2016) The continuing convergence of journalism
and PR: New insights for ethical practice from a threecountry study of senior practitioners. Journalism & Mass
Communication Quarterly 93(1): 118–141.
Makridakis S (1993) Accuracy measures: theoretical and practical
concerns. International Journal of Forecasting 9(4): 527–529.
Markow W, Braganza S, Taska B, Miller SM and Hughes D (2017)
The quant crunch: How the demand for data science skills is
disrupting the job market. Technical report, Burning Glass
Technologies.
Meade A (2020a) Dozens of Australian newspapers stop printing as
coronavirus crisis hits advertising. The Guardian .
Meade A (2020b) News Corp announces end of more than 100
Australian print newspapers in huge shift to digital. The
Guardian .

Prepared using sagej.cls

15

Meade A (2020c) News Corp Australia warns of coronavirus crisis
job cuts as smaller regional papers close. The Guardian .
Nieman-Lab (2020) About Nieman Lab.
https://www.
niemanlab.org/about/. Accessed: 2020-3-10.
North L (2009) The gendered newsroom: how journalists
experience the changing world of media. Hampton Press.
North L (2016) The gender of “soft” and “hard” news: Female
journalists’ views on gendered story allocations. Journalism
Studies 17(3): 356–373.
OECD (2019) OECD skills strategy 2019 - skills to shape a better
future. Technical report, OECD.
Olsen RK, Pickard V and Westlund O (2020) Communal news
work: Covid-19 calls for collective funding of journalism.
Digital Journalism : 1–8.
O’Regan T and Young C (2019) Journalism by numbers:
trajectories of growth and decline of journalists in the
Australian census 1961–2016. Media International Australia
172(1): 13–32. DOI:10.1177/1329878X19862935. URL
https://doi.org/10.1177/1329878X19862935.
Park S, Fisher C, Lee JY and McGuinness K (2020) Covid-19:
Australian news and misinformation. Technical report.
PIJI (2020) The Australian Newsroom Mapping project. https:
//anmp.piji.com.au/. Accessed: 2020-10-24.
Radcliffe D (2020) Covid-19 has ravaged american newsrooms–
here’s why that matters. Available at SSRN 3693903 .
Ricketson M, Dodd A, Zion L and Winarnita M (2020) “Like
being shot in the face” or “I’m glad I’m out”: Journalists’
experiences of job loss in the Australian media industry 2012–
2014. Journalism Studies 21(1): 54–71.
Rodrigues UM and Paradies Y (2018) News Consumption
Habits of Culturally Diverse Australians in the Digital
Era: Implications for Intercultural Relations. Journal of
Intercultural Communication Research 47(1): 38–51.
Samios Z (2020) Investors look to salvage parts of AAP as
newswire faces closure.
Scott Armstrong J (1985) Long-Range Forecasting: From Crystal
Ball to Computer. 2 edition edition. Wiley-Interscience.
Sherwood M and O’Donnell P (2018) Once a Journalist, Always a
Journalist? Journalism Studies 19(7): 1021–1038.
Shirky C (2009) Newspapers and thinking the unthinkable. Risk
Management 56(3): 24.
Shutters ST, Muneepeerakul R and Lobo J (2016) Constrained
pathways to a creative urban economy. Urban Stud. 53(16):
3439–3454.
Taylor SJ and Letham B (2018) Forecasting at scale. The American
Statistician 72(1): 37–45.
Vollrath TL (1991) A theoretical evaluation of alternative
trade intensity measures of revealed comparative advantage.
Weltwirtsch. Arch. 127(2): 265–280.
Wahlquist C (2020) Australian Associated Press sold to
consortium of investors and philanthropists at 11th hour.
URL
https://www.theguardian.com/media/
2020/jun/29/australian-associated-presssold-to-consortium-of-investors-andphilanthropists-at-11th-hour.
Accessed:
2020-10-22.
Waldman S and Sennott C (2020) The coronavirus is killing local
news. The Atlantic .

16

Wilding, D, Fray, P, Molitorisz, S & McKewon, E (2018) The
impact of digital platforms on news and journalistic content.
Technical report, University of Technology Sydney.
Willens M (2020) The second wave of media layoffs is here.
URL https://digiday.com/media/the-secondwave-of-media-layoffs-is-here/.
Accessed:
2020-10-22.
Young S and Carson A (2018) What is a journalist? The view from
employers as revealed by their job vacancy advertisements.
Journalism Studies 19(3): 452–472.
Zion L, Sherwood M, O’Donnell P, Dodd A, Ricketson M and
Marjoribanks T (2016) ‘It has a bleak future’: The effects of
job loss on regional and rural journalism in Australia .
Zion L, Sherwood M, O’Donnell P, Marjoribanks T, Ricketson
M, Dodd A and Winarnita M (2018) New Beats report:
mass redundancies and career change in Australian journalism.
Technical report.

Prepared using sagej.cls

Journalism XX(X)

Dawson et al.

17

Contents (Appendix)
Technical Appendix
Data Sources . . . . . . . . . . . .
Skill Similarity . . . . . . . . . . .
Trend Analysis & Predictability . .
Quantify Labour Demand Volatility
Top Journalism Skills by Year . . .

3. OR All job ads with the ‘Journalist’, ‘News’, or
‘Editor’ in any part of the job title.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

17
17
18
19
19
19

This document is accompanying the submission Layoffs,
Inequity and COVID-19: A Longitudinal Study of the
Journalism Jobs Crisis in Australia from 2012 to 2020. The
information in this document complements the submission,
and it is presented here for completeness reasons. It is
not required for understanding the main paper, nor for
reproducing the results.

Technical Appendix
Here, we describe the data sources we used to analyse
journalism jobs. We also outline the skill similarity
methodology that enables us to construct temporal (yearly)
sets of top journalism skills. Lastly, we describe how these
temporal sets of top journalism skills then allow us to
adaptively identify occupations that are ‘most similar’ to
journalism, at the granular skill level.

Data Sources
Journalism job ads. This research draws on more than
8 million Australian online job ads from 2012-01-01 until
2019-02-28, courtesy of data provided by Burning Glass
Technologies§ (BGT). BGT also granted access to the
aggregated job ads data from 2019-03-01 to 2020-03-31,
allowing us to address the early impacts of the unfolding
coronavirus pandemic (COVID-19) on journalism jobs in
Australia. BGT collected the job ads data via web scraping
and systematically processed it into structured formats. The
dataset consists of detailed information on individual job ads,
such as location, salary, employer, educational requirements,
experience demands, and more. The skill requirements have
also been extracted (totalling > 11, 000 unique skills) and
each job ad is classified into its relevant occupational and
industry classes. There are two occupational ontologies in
the job ads dataset. The first is ANZSCO, which is the
official occupational classification standard in Australia and
New Zealand. The other is the BGT occupational ontology,
which has been developed due to shortcomings of official
occupational standards (as described in Relevant Literature
& Background).
To ensure selection accuracy, we instituted the following
search query conditions over the dataset:
1. All job ads with ANZSCO Occupation labels of
‘Newspaper or Periodical Editor’, ‘Print Journalist’,
‘Radio Journalist’, ‘Television Journalist’, and ‘Journalists and Other Writers nec’ (where ‘nec’ stands for
‘not elsewhere classified’).
2. OR All job ads with the BGT Occupation label of
‘Journalist / Reporter’ and ‘Editor’ (the two primary
BGT occupational classes for journalists);
Prepared using sagej.cls

After manually reviewing the returned job ad features for
accuracy, the selection process resulted in a sample of 3,231
Australian journalism job ads from 2012-01-01 until 201902-28. We used the same search query and approach for the
2019-03-01 to 2020-03-31 period to supplement this sample.
This returned 467 journalism job ads, amounting to a total
of 3,698 journalism job ads from 2012-01-01 to 2020-03-31.
The job ads during the period are observed aggregated daily,
with limited skill level details. However, much of the analysis
that follows requires access to the features within individual
job ads, so only Fig. 2 leverages the 2020 data.
Further details on job ads data. It is estimated that
approximately 60% of Australian job ads are posted
online (Department of Employment, Skills, Small and
Family Business 2019), which grew quickly in the early
2000’s before plateauing in recent years (Carnevale et al.
2014). At aggregate levels, online job advertisements (ads)
provide valuable indicators of relative labour demands.
This includes demand features, such as salaries, educational
requirements, years of experience, and, most importantly,
skill-level information. Here, a distinction must be made
between skills, knowledge, abilities, and occupations.
‘Skills’ are the proficiencies developed through training
and/or experience (OECD 2019); ‘knowledge’ is the
theoretical and/or practical understanding of an area;
‘ability’ is the competency to achieve a task (Gardiner et al.
2018); and ‘occupations’ are standardised jobs that are the
amalgamation of skills, knowledge, and abilities used by
an individual to perform a set of tasks that are required
by their vocation. Throughout this paper, the term ‘skill’
will incorporate ‘knowledge’ and ‘ability’. Skills, in this
sense, are the constituent elements that workers use to
perform tasks, which ultimately define jobs and occupations.
While it is possible that the ways skills are described could
evolve over time, it is unlikely that their meanings materially
changed over the nine year period analysed in this research.
Advantages of job ads data. Understanding how the
composition of skill sets evolve within an occupation
is essential to understanding trends in that occupation.
However, occupational data rarely captures skill-level data.
Most often, official occupational standards are static, rarely
updated classifications, which fail to capture the changing
skill demands of occupations, or to detect the creation of new
types of jobs.
Example of journalism job ad titles. The table below
illustrates a random sample of job ad titles classified as
journalists in the BGT dataset.
Journalist employment statistics. Employment data
(labour supply) were collected from the ‘Quarterly Detailed
Labour Force’ statistics by the ABS (Australian Bureau
of Statistics 2019a). These employment data are organised
into standardised occupations called the Australia and New
Zealand Standard Classification of Occupations (ANZSCO).
ANZSCO provides a basis for the standardised collection,
analysis and dissemination of occupational data for Australia

§ BGT

is a leading vendor of online
https://www.burning-glass.com/

job

ads

data.

18
Table 1. Random sample of journalism job ad titles

Job Ad Title
News And Features Journalist - The Courier
Journalist/Copywriter
Senior Finance Journalist/Content Manager
ABC Rural Reporter
Rural Reporter, ABC Local Radio
Newspaper Journalist
Journalist Radio News - Illawarra
News Writer
Editor, News
Senior Digital News Editor - Leading Digital Media
Company

and New Zealand. The structure of ANZSCO has five
hierarchical levels - major group, sub-major group, minor
group, unit group and occupation. The categories at the most
detailed level of the classification are termed ’occupations’.
A shortcoming, however, is that the lowest level of
occupational employment data available by the ABS is
at the 4-digit Unit level, which is one hierarchical level
above specific occupations. As our research is focused
on the employment Unit class of ‘Journalists and Other
Writers’, all ABS employment statistics cited in this
research include the following occupations: ‘Copywriter’,
‘Newspaper or Periodical Editor’, ‘Print Journalist’, ‘Radio
Journalist’, ‘Technical Writer’, ‘Television Journalist’, and
‘Journalists and Other Writers nec’. While the inclusion
of the ‘Copywriter’ and ‘Technical Writer’ occupations in
these statistics could distort results pertaining to ‘Journalists’
to an extent, we consider this impact to be limited in
scope. As we describe in Jobs Data Analysis and Results,
the employment statistics highlight important trends in
journalism occupations, which are confirmed by findings
from the job ads data.
Another shortcoming of employment statistics is their
‘lagging’ nature. The inertia of labour markets means that
it takes time for changes to materialise in employment
statistics. Additionally, the official reporting of employment
statistics takes time. Employment statistics are often
published several months or years after the reported period.
As a result, these ‘lagging’ characteristics are not available
for the most recent periods in our work (such as for the
second half of 2019 and later.)

Skill Similarity
In this section, we detail the methodology previously
employed in (Alabdulkareem et al. 2018; Dawson et al.
2019) to measure skill similarity dynamically. Here, we
present the building blocks for this method, applying it for
journalism related skills and occupations.
Intuition. Two skills are similar when the two are related
and complementary, i.e. the two skills in a skills-pair support
each other. For example, ‘Journalism’ and ‘Editing’ have a
high pairwise similarity score because together they enable
higher productivity for the worker, and because the difficulty
to acquire either skill when one is already possessed by a
worker is relatively low.
Prepared using sagej.cls

Journalism XX(X)

Our goal, therefore, is to calculate the similarity of each
unique skill relative to every other unique skill in the dataset.
Such a measure allows us to identify which skills have the
highest pairwise similarities to a specific skill or set of skills.
We also want to identify how skill similarity evolves over
time. To achieve this, we have instituted a temporal split of a
calendar year. This enables us to assess yearly changes to the
underlying skill demands of journalism jobs.
The Revealed Comparative Advantage of a skill.
We implement a data-driven methodology to measure
the pairwise similarity between pairs of skills that cooccur in job ads. One difficulty we encounter is that
some skills are ubiquitous, occurring across many job
ads and occupations. We address this issue by using the
Revealed Comparative Advantage (RCA), which maximises
the amount of skill-level information obtained from each
job ad, while minimising the biases introduced by overexpressed skills in job ads. Formally, RCA measures the
relevance of a skill s for a particular job ad j as:
P
x(j, s)/
x(j, s0 )
s0 ∈S
P
(3)
RCA(j, s) = P
x(j 0 , s)/
x(j 0 , s0 )
j 0 ∈J

j 0 ∈J ,s0 ∈S

where x(j, s) = 1 when the skill s is required for job j,
and x(j, s) = 0 otherwise; S is the set of all distinct skills,
and
" J is the set of all
# job ads in our dataset. RCA(j, s) ∈
P
0,
x(j 0 , s0 ) , ∀j, s, and the higher RCA(j, s) the
j 0 ∈J,s0 ∈S

higher is the comparative advantage that s is considered
to have for j. Visibly, RCA(j, s)P
decreases when the skill
s is more ubiquitous (i.e. when
x(j 0 , s) increases), or
j 0 ∈J

when many
skills are required for the job j (i.e.
P other
when
x(j, s0 ) increases). RCA provides a method to
s0 ∈S

measure the importance of a skill in a job ad, relative to
the total share of demand for that skill in all job ads. It
has been applied across a range of disciplines, such as trade
economics (Hidalgo et al. 2007) (Vollrath 1991), identifying
key industries in nations (Shutters et al. 2016), and detecting
the labour polarisation of workplace skills (Alabdulkareem
et al. 2018).
Measure skill similarity. The next step is measuring the
complementarity of skill-pairs that co-occur in job ads. First,
we compute the ‘effective use of skills’ e(j, s) defined as
e(j, s) = 1 when RCA(j, s) > 1 and e(j, s) = 0 otherwise.
Finally, we compute the skill complementarity (denoted θ) as
the minimum of the conditional probabilities of a skills-pair
being effectively used within the same job ad. Skills s and
s0 are considered as highly complementary if they tend to
commonly co-occur within individual job ads, for whatever
reason. Formally:
P
e(j, s).e(j, s0 )
j 0 ∈J
0
!
(4)
θ(s, s ) =
P
P
e(j, s),
e(j, s0 )
max
j 0 ∈J

j 0 ∈J

Note that θ(s, s0 ) ∈ [0, 1], a larger value indicates that s and
s0 are more similar, and it reaches the maximum value when
s and s0 always co-occur (i.e. they never appear separately).

Dawson et al.

19

Top journalism skills. Following the procedure outlined
in (Dawson et al. 2019) for building sets of highly
complementary skills, we use the θ function together
with ‘Journalism’ as the ‘seed’ skill to create top yearly
lists of journalism skills. More precisely, we compute
θ(Journalism, s) – i.e. the similarity between the skill
‘Journalism’ and each unique skill that occurs during a
given year. Skills on each yearly list are ordered by their
descending pairwise skill similarity scores. When inspecting
the yearly skill lists, we make two observations. First, the
skills in 2012 and 2013 appear of notably lower quality
than from 2014 onward. We posit that this has to do with
imperfect skills extraction methods during the early years
of the BGT dataset. As a result, we decided to measure
the top yearly journalism skill sets from 2014 to 2018 (the
last available full year of data for which we had access). ¶
Second, we decided to retain only the top 50 skills on each
yearly list. Through qualitative analysis, we determined that
this threshold of 50 is both sufficiently exclusive for defining
journalism skills and reasonably inclusive for detecting
the evolution of new, emerging skills in journalism. The
purpose of these top journalism skills lists is to capture
journalism labour trends; it is not intended to represent a
complete taxonomy of journalism skills. The yearly lists
of top journalism skills, and their similarity scores, can be
observed in the Supplemental Material Sec. Top Journalism
Skills by Year.
Compute journalism skill intensity. For the occupational
similarity analysis in Sec. Journalism Skills, we decided to
use the BGT occupational ontology as opposed to ANZSCO.
This is because the BGT occupational classes appear more
reflective of current job titles. For example, a job title
advertised for a ‘Social Media Manager’ is classified by BGT
as a ‘Social Media Strategist / Specialist’. Whereas the same
job title would be classified by ANZSCO as an ‘Advertising
Specialist’ or ‘Marketing Specialist’.

We use the Prophet time-series forecasting tool developed
by Facebook Research (Taylor and Letham 2018). Prophet
is an auto-regressive tool that fits non-linear time-series
trends with the effects from daily, weekly, and yearly
seasonality, and also holidays. The main model components
are represented in the following equation:

We evaluate the forecasting performance using a temporal
holdout setup. That is, we split the available time-series
into a training part (the first part of the sequence) and
a testing part (the latter part of the sequence). We train
the Prophet model on the training part, and we generate
job ad posting forecasts by “running time forward” in
Eq. (5) for time t in the testing period. Finally, we measure
the accuracy of the forecast against the observed posting
volumes using the Symmetric Mean Absolute Percentage
Error (SMAPE) (Scott Armstrong 1985; Makridakis 1993).
SMAPE is formally defined as:
T

SM AP E(At , Ft ) =

200 X |Ft − At |
T t=1 (|At | + |Ft |)

(6)

where At denotes the actual value of jobs posted on day t,
and Ft is the predicted value of job ads on day t. SMAPE
ranges from 0 to 200, with 0 indicating a perfect prediction
and 200 the largest possible error. When actual and predicted
values are both 0, we define SMAPE to be 0. We selected
SMAPE as an alternative to the more widely used MAPE
because it is (1) scale-independent and (2) robust to actual
or predicted zero values. To evaluate the uncertainty of
the forecast, we adopt a ‘sliding window’ approach. This
consists of using a constant number of training days (here
1, 186 days) to train the model, and we test the forecasting
performance on the next 365 days. We then shift both the
training and the testing periods right by one day, and the
process is repeated. Consequently, we train and test the
model 365 times, and we obtain 365 SMAPE performance
values.

Top journalism skills calculated by skill similarity methodology in Sec. Skill Similarity.

(5)

where g(t) refers to the trend function that models nonperiodic changes over time; s(t) represents periodic changes,

Prepared using sagej.cls

Quantify Labour Demand Volatility

Top Journalism Skills by Year

Trend Analysis & Predictability

y(t) = g(t) + s(t) + h(t) + t

such as seasonality; h(t) denotes holiday effects; and t is the
error term and represents all other idiosyncratic changes.

¶ We

did not notice a deterioration of quality regarding other features, such
as salaries, education, experience etc. Therefore, these 2012 and 2013 will
be used for parts of the analysis.

20

Journalism XX(X)

Table 2. Top journalism skills calculated by skill similarity methodology in Skill Similarity
Rank
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50

2014
Journalism
Editing
Media Relations
Corporate Communications
Copy Writing
Content Management
Public Relations
Social Media
Content Management Systems (CMS)
Multimedia
Copywriting
Content Development
Strategic Communications
Facebook
Social Media Platforms
Marketing Communications
Media Coverage
Publicity
Proofreading
Social Media Tools
Digital Communications
Crisis Management
Adobe Photoshop
Communications Programmes
Digital Journalism
Community Relations
Photography
Social Media Strategy
Graphic Design
Youtube
Media Strategy
Brand Management
Web Content Management
Adobe Indesign
Social Content
Marketing Materials
Event Planning
Digital Marketing
Writing
Instagram
Online Research
Adobe Acrobat
LinkedIn
Google Analytics
Video Editing
Website Production
Proofing
Video Production
Media Planning
Campaign Management

Prepared using sagej.cls

2015

2016

2017

2018

Journalism
Editing
Media Relations
Copy Writing
Content Management
Copywriting
Social Media
Public Relations
Social Media Platforms
Corporate Communications
Content Development
Content Management Systems (CMS)
Strategic Communications
Social Media Tools
Multimedia
Facebook
Marketing Communications
Social Content
Digital Communications
Publicity
Media Production
Social Media Strategy
Communications Programmes
Media Coverage
Internal Communications
Content Marketing
Proofreading
Writing
Adobe Photoshop
Brand Awareness Generation
Adobe Indesign
Marketing Materials
Digital Marketing
Video Editing
Adobe Creative Suite
Adobe Acrobat
Graphic Design
Video Production
Instagram
LinkedIn
Media Strategy
Photography
PR Agency
Meeting Deadlines
Digital Journalism
Event Planning
Google Analytics
Media Campaigning
Press Releases
Crisis Management

Journalism
Editing
Copy Writing
Media Relations
Content Management
Social Media
Social Media Platforms
Copywriting
Corporate Communications
Public Relations
Content Development
Social Media Tools
Digital Marketing
Online Marketing
Multimedia
Strategic Communications
Market Research
Marketing Communications
Content Management Systems (CMS)
Writing
Content Marketing
Photography
Instagram
Publicity
Digital Communications
Media Coverage
Social Content
Social Media Strategy
Media Production
Proofreading
Facebook
Event Planning
Adobe Photoshop
Meeting Deadlines
Self-Starter
Marketing
Creativity
Adobe Indesign
Adobe Creative Suite
Adobe Illustrator
Community Relations
Adobe Acrobat
Press Releases
Internal Communications
Campaign Management
Creative Writing
Video Production
Blog Posts
Crisis Management
Youtube

Journalism
Editing
Content Management
Social Media
Copy Writing
Media Relations
Corporate Communications
Social Media Platforms
Content Development
Social Content
Public Relations
Copywriting
Facebook
Strategic Communications
Social Media Tools
Marketing Communications
Content Management Systems (CMS)
Multimedia
Proofreading
Content Marketing
Digital Journalism
Digital Communications
Publicity
Media Coverage
Digital Marketing
Writing
Video Production
Graphic Design
Media Production
Communications Programmes
Instagram
Social Media Strategy
Video Editing
Adobe Photoshop
Self-Starter
Breaking News Coverage
Creativity
Adobe Illustrator
Event Planning
Adobe Indesign
Adobe Creative Suite
Adobe Acrobat
Promotional Materials
Photography
Content Curation
Marketing
Meeting Deadlines
Google Analytics
Media Strategy
Business-to-Business

Journalism
Editing
Content Management
Media Relations
Copy Writing
Social Media Platforms
Social Media
Content Development
Corporate Communications
Public Relations
Social Media Tools
Copywriting
Content Management Systems (CMS)
Social Content
Strategic Communications
Social Media Strategy
Content Marketing
Facebook
Digital Communications
Media Coverage
Publicity
Proofreading
Multimedia
Instagram
Video Production
Marketing Communications
Adobe Photoshop
Content Curation
Video Editing
Adobe Indesign
Adobe Creative Suite
Adobe Acrobat
Brand Awareness Generation
Adobe Illustrator
Google Analytics
Press Releases
LinkedIn
Digital Marketing
Digital Journalism
Media Production
Communications Programmes
Crisis Management
Media Strategy
Writing
Photography
Blog Posts
Internal Communications
Event Planning
Creative Problem Solving
Creativity

