© 2020 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/

In Search of Patient Zero:
Visual Analytics of Pathogen Transmission Pathways in Hospitals

arXiv:2008.09552v3 [cs.SI] 21 Sep 2020

T. Baumgartl∗ , M. Petzold∗ , M. Wunderlich, M. Höhn, D. Archambault, M. Lieser, A. Dalpke, S. Scheithauer,
M. Marschollek, V. M. Eichel, N. T. Mutters, HiGHmed Consortium, and T. von Landesberger

Figure 1: Transmission pathway tracing interface. 1. The Epidemic Curve View shows the number of infected patients. 2. The
Contact Network View shows patient contacts as a network. 3. The Transmission Pathway View shows contacts and infection status.
Tracing interaction shows potential infection transmission events. 4. Patient event details are shown in Patient Timeline View.
Abstract—Pathogen outbreaks (i.e., outbreaks of bacteria and viruses) in hospitals can cause high mortality rates and increase costs
for hospitals significantly. An outbreak is generally noticed when the number of infected patients rises above an endemic level or the
usual prevalence of a pathogen in a defined population. Reconstructing transmission pathways back to the source of an outbreak – the
patient zero or index patient – requires the analysis of microbiological data and patient contacts. This is often manually completed
by infection control experts. We present a novel visual analytics approach to support the analysis of transmission pathways, patient
contacts, the progression of the outbreak, and patient timelines during hospitalization. Infection control experts applied our solution to a
real outbreak of Klebsiella pneumoniae in a large German hospital. Using our system, our experts were able to scale the analysis
of transmission pathways to longer time intervals (i.e., several years of data instead of days) and across a larger number of wards.
Also, the system is able to reduce the analysis time from days to hours. In our final study, feedback from twenty-five experts from
seven German hospitals provides evidence that our solution brings significant benefits for analyzing outbreaks. It is also applicable to
COVID-19 hospital-associated transmissions.
Index Terms—dynamic networks, visualization applications, health, medicine, outbreak, Klebsiella, infection control

1

I NTRODUCTION
Pathogen transmissions are an acute problem in hospitals around the
world [21, 25]. The transmission of pathogens, such as bacteria and
viruses, can endanger the lives of patients, since they represent a very
vulnerable group of persons. Pathogen infections in hospitals can be
transmitted via patient-to-patient contact in the same room or ward [19].
Transmissions are generally difficult to detect since patients may be
infected, but show no clinical symptoms. These carriers are invisible
sources for potential transmissions. Screenings can detect carriers, but
regular screening of all patients is very costly and ineffective. Thus,
only high risk patients are usually screened when entering the hospital
or after transfers within the hospital.
One initial infected patient, a patient zero or index patient, may
transmit the pathogen to other patients [21]. These patients may change
wards and infect further patients. The endemic level represents the
usual prevalence of a pathogen in a defined population. When the
number of infected patients rises above a certain endemic level, and
a spatio-temporal context is observed, it is called cluster or outbreak.
The endemic level is characterized by parameters such as the type of patients and the location within the hospital (underlying diseases), as well
as the pathogen specifics: e.g., the mode of transmission, seasonality
of occurrence, the resistance potential and infectiousness. As automatic outbreak detection is still an ongoing research problem [22, 84],
usually, the endemic level is set manually by comparing numbers of

• ∗ T. Baumgartl and M. Petzold are shared first authors.
• T. Baumgartl, M. Wunderlich, M. Höhn and T. von Landesberger are with
TU Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany. T. von Landesberger is now with
Universität Rostock, Germany. E-mail: office@gris.tu-darmstadt.de.
• D. Archambault is with Swansea University, Swansea, United Kingdom
E-mail: D.W.Archambault@Swansea.ac.uk.
• M. Lieser, M. Petzold, V. M. Eichel, N. T. Mutters are with University
Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, E-mail:
{first.last}@med.uni-heidelberg.de.
• A. Dalpke is with TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany. E-mail:
alexander.dalpke@ukdd.de.
• S. Scheithauer is with University Medicine Göttingen, Universität Göttingen,
Germany. E-mail: simone.scheithauer@med.uni-goettingen.de.
• M. Marschollek is with L. Reichertz Institute for Medical Informatics,
Hannover, Germany. E-mail: Marschollek.Michael@mh-hannover.de.
• This paper is contributed by HiGHmed infection control study group.
Manuscript received xx xxx. 201x; accepted xx xxx. 201x. Date of Publication
xx xxx. 201x; date of current version xx xxx. 201x. For information on
obtaining reprints of this article, please send e-mail to: reprints@ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx

1

newly infected patients within a certain time frame with the numbers
of infected patients in a previously recorded time frame. As not all
patients can be regularly tested or screened, depending on the pathogen,
it can take days, weeks or months before an outbreak is detected [28].
Therefore, the monitoring of infectious persons and determining their
transmission pathways is the primary goal of Infection Control experts,
e.g., hygienists, clinicians, hygiene experts, in order to intervene in
time and prevent further pathogen spreading.
Once an outbreak has been detected (Task 1), the infection control
experts need to trace the infection back to its source in order to determine if the patients are connected and belong to an outbreak. This
means the identification of all potentially infected patients back to the
patient zero, i.e., the overall source of the outbreak (Task 2). The
experts need to reconstruct these transmission pathways – by whom,
when and where did a transmission occur. This information is used
to find the origin of the infectious agent: whether it is nosocomial –
hospital-intern. Furthermore, patient localization (which rooms/wards
– Task 3) and outbreak duration (begin/end – Task 4) need to be determined. The transmission pathway is then used to identify putative
colonized or infected patients that are yet unknown and thus require
testing (Task 5). Intervention procedures can then be implemented
by isolating or cohorting affected patients in separate rooms, special
disinfecting processes, increasing hand hygiene, screening and teaching
staff affected: infected and exposed.
The identification of transmission pathways is challenging because
it can occur over several contacts, involve several hospital wards and
various time spans (days to years). Tracing requires integrating both
the spatio-temporal patient information and microbiological test results.
Outbreak pathway reconstruction needs to be fast and precise: each
potential patient and their contacts need to be detected to prevent further
disease spreading. Often there is uncertainty about the patient status
at the time of a contact, as screening often detects an infection or
colonization only at a later date. Thus, also potential infections need to
be considered.
Currently, transmission pathway reconstruction is a time-consuming
and potentially error-prone manual process. It may take days to weeks,
using current hospital systems [28]. Visual analytics systems have the
potential to support this analysis process by saving analyst time [16].
However, current solutions focus mainly on the disease evolution at a
population level (see Sect. 2).
In cooperation with Infection Control experts from four German
Hospitals and Infection Research Institutes, we developed a novel visual analytics system for the exploration of disease outbreaks. We used
iterative, user-centered design within a common project HiGHmed
over two years. The system offers several specialized views for the
exploration of outbreaks and pathogen transmissions. The core contribution is a novel view for contract tracing that was inspired by the well
known storyline visualization [38, 47, 53]. The visual design, layout
and interactions enable to explore contacts as well as to automatically
determine and highlight patients and their contacts that could transmit
pathogenic organisms.
Our approach was applied to a real outbreak of Klebsiella pneumoniae in a large German hospital. The experts were able to effectively
reconstruct the transmission pathway back to the patient zero in a faster
and in a more comprehensive way when compared to existing methods.
In our final qualitative study, we gathered feedback from twenty-five
experts located in seven German hospitals. The results indicated significant added value when tracing transmission and analyzing outbreaks
in hospitals.
2

analytics approaches target disease spreading over a large population at
a macroscopic level. They visualize the number of people infected over
time, but detailed views about individual patient contacts are not the
focus. Machine learning methods working with visual analytics have
been proposed [17, 35], and more specifically for disease progression
pathways [34]. They have been applied to the problem of infection
control [43], but in this closely related work the transmission pathway
was not reconstructed. Machine learning is effective, but may not be
feasible for rarely occurring pathogens, such as K. pneumoniae, where
the numbers of items in the trained classes of (non)-infection are very biased. Thus, transmission pathway reconstruction and the identification
of potentially infected patients requires interactive exploration.
Disease Spread and Dynamic Networks. As many pathogens
are transmitted over contacts preferentially, disease spreading is often
simulated as dynamic processes over contact networks. A number
of approaches have focused on the population level: the number of
infected patients through line charts [1, 19,37, 57]. They use the contact
networks in the simulation, but only provide macroscopic views of
disease progression. The simulations often result in a collection of
thousands of dynamic graphs with very few existing approaches for this
data [10, 39]. Manynets [23], GraphLandscape [30] and SOM-based
clustering [76] extract graph properties and compare many static graphs
and these methods could be adapted and applied. However, two very
different graphs can have the same properties [15]. Network piling
approaches [5, 72] allow the comparison of several static graphs in
detail but do not scale well to larger graphs and have not been adapted
to compare multiple dynamic graphs. Recently, a simulation and visualization of disease spreading over contact networks in hospitals has been
presented [81]. It shows the disease and transmission probability on
individual level, but takes only a static network as input. This simplification is done for simulation purposes. However, in real cases, patients
move across wards over time. Both visualization and simulation should
take into account the network dynamics over time. In sum, however,
the simulations focus only on disease spreading prediction and not on
the reconstruction of pathogen transmission pathways.
Visualization of Contact Dynamics. The reconstruction of
pathogen transmission pathways requires analyzing patient contacts and
patient infection status over time. A number of methods exist for visualizing a single dynamic graph over time in a scalable way [6, 56, 70, 74].
These methods use timeslices as a basis for the visual analytics process.
The uniformity of timeslices poses a problem as the distribution of
transmission events is unequal over time. Event-based methods [42, 51]
for the visualization of dynamic networks [36, 64, 65, 79] are more applicable. However, they have not been designed for outbreak networks
visualization in a way that fulfills the needs of the infection control
experts.
The visualization of contact network dynamics for hospital data
could be supported by dynamic set visualization and storyline approaches. Set visualization methods [2] for the visualization of set dynamics [46,73] are able to show the set sizes and the number of changes
between sets over time. Methods for visualizing long time series [7]
and text visualizations [18, 60] have similar representations. Showing
the group membership over time on individual level has also motivated the storyline research. Storyline visualizations [38, 47–49, 68, 69]
devote one dimension, usually the x-axis, to time and encode each
individual character in a story as a line. Lines that are placed close
together to indicate the characters share a scene; when the lines separate, the scene ends. For disease spreading, this encoding can be
used to show contacts in the same ward and forms a key part of our
approach. Research in storyline visualization has focused on optimizing the compactness of storyline visualizations (either automatic
or users-assisted) [4, 24, 38, 48, 49, 52, 62, 63, 68, 69], reducing crossings [26, 33, 71, 80], plotting approaches [61], combining storylines
with event-based methods [3], genealogical data [32], streaming and
dynamic data [67, 82], and contacts between living things or actors exhibiting similar behavior [53]. Reda et al. [53] is the closest approach
to ours, but it needs to consider all contacts in the storyline. In our
work, we can reduce clutter by determining and highlighting pathogen

R ELATED W ORK

Visual Analytics of Health Data. Visual Analysis of healthcare data is an active area of research. Event-based visual analytics approaches for health record data has been a main focus of this
area [14, 27, 29, 42, 54, 55, 58]. Disease surveillance and epidemiology has also been of interest [50]. Visual analytics approaches for
epidemiologists focus on the spatio-temporal evolution of a disease at
a population level–how many people will be infected, in which geographic area(s), and the speed of the spread [13, 40, 83]. These visual
2

© 2020 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/
transmitting contacts. On the other hand, we need to show more specific
locations inside the hospital or if the patient is discharged.
3

BACKGROUND – TASKS

AND

Micro- Patient A
biological
Data
Patient B

DATA
Patient A
Location

Test
Infected - diseased
Test
Infected - diseased

Patient B

Transfer
Transfer
Transfer Transfer
Home
Home Ward 2 Temporary home Ward 3
Transfer
Transfer Transfer
Home Ward 1 Ward 2
Ward 3

Figure 2: Data characteristics. Bottom: Patient locations determined by
hb28.04.20
|Fa
ce20
f matk Insti rafischaktiv teme
| o aumtl 34
transfer
events.
ieIno i| tut
G -Inter Top:
e-Sys Infection
Tm gar | status of patients over time determined
r
byr microbiological
data Bevents.

Patient Locations: The location data consists of a list of patient
transfer events T R = {T Rk }. A transfer T Rk records that the patient Pk ,
was transferred to location Lk at time tkT R for the following reason typek .
Thus, a transfer is T Rk = (Pk , Lk ,tkT R ,typek ). The typek , determines
whether the transfer was 1) between wards, 2) from home to hospital,
i.e., first hospital admission, or 3) home between hospital stays, i.e.,
‘temporary home’, or 4) was the end of a hospital stay. The current
location of the patient is the destination of the patient’s last transfer (see
Fig. 2). The time intervals between successive transfers are irregular
and cannot be transformed to regular intervals without sampling or
without causing scalability challenges. Even very short stays at a
location can lead to important contacts in pathway reconstruction.

Tasks

Our work resulted in these tasks without a strict workflow order:
T1 Detect Outbreak. Is there an outbreak? When the number of
infected patients rises above a normal level within a certain period,
i.e., the endemic level, an outbreak occurs. Depending on the
pathogen, this endemic level can be two or more patients. As
patients may not be tested or screened generally, an outbreak is
determined by manual inspection.
T2 Outbreak Pathway.
T2.1 Determine transmission contacts. Did contacts occur between patients that could have led to pathogen transmission? If yes, where, when and with whom?
T2.2 Determine index patient (patient zero). Who is the source of
the outbreak? Identifying the transmission pathway should
lead back to the index patient, i.e., the patient zero.
T2.3 Distinguish between a single or multiple outbreaks. Is the
observed outbreak a single outbreak or multiple, simultaneous outbreaks of similar pathogens? Depending on the
answer, there could be one or more index patients.
T3 Outbreak Location.
T3.1 Determine if the outbreak is hospital-associated. Did the
transmissions occur within the hospital or have been infections brought in from outside the hospital? A withinhospital transmission, i.e. a nosocomial, points to a source
of infection such as a patient/staff/device. These transmissions should be avoided as patients can have lower immune
response and thus may be more vulnerable.
T3.2 Locate ward(s) with pathogen transmissions. For nosocomial transmissions, in which ward has the transmission
occurred? This location needs to be disinfected or closely
monitored.
T4 Quantify outbreak duration. When did the outbreak first start?
How long does it last? Early detection mitigates the risk of larger
outbreaks. Tracing back the time point of all transmissions to the
initial index patient determines the total duration.
T5 Identify potentially infected patients. Who is also potentially
infected? Not all patients can be screened in the hospital to determine their infection, and not all infected patients show symptoms.
These potentially (i.e., putative) infected patients need to be identified via their contacts to infected patients.
3.2

Unknown

Infected - carrier
Screening
Unknown
Time

Over the course of one year, we investigated the data and tasks that are
performed by infection control experts in four German hospitals during
their procedures. The data and tasks were guided by the scope of the
HiGHmed project. For a deep understanding of the data, tasks and current analysis methods, we conducted a structured interview following
the methodology in [75]. We first used an online questionnaire that was
answered by six infection control experts and epidemiologists. Moreover, we interviewed three hygienists to learn the current work methods
by infection control experts in three hospitals and one infection control
institute. Further details on the tasks and data were assessed during the
iterative design process (see Sect. 4). Our system is designed to support
one of their main tasks: tracing transmission pathways in outbreaks.
3.1

Screening
Unknown

Microbiological data: MB is information about the tests and
screenings of patients for pathogens. More formally, it is a set of
events MB = {MB j }. Each element MB j records which patient Pj ,
was tested or screened s j , for which pathogen ρ, at what time t MB
j
and the result r j : MB j = (Pj , s j ,t MB
j , ρ j , r j ). Patients may have several
microbiological data records associated with them or none at all. The
analysis can take place before, during or after the hospital stay and the
spacing between events is irregular.
The result r j determines patient’s infection status (see Fig. 2):
• infected – carrier: A positive result of a screening means that the
patient is colonized. Due to lack of data on recovery (see Sect. 8)
from this moment onwards, the patient retains this status unless
he/she is later identified as diseased.
• infected – diseased: If a patient with symptoms is tested positively
on the pathogen ρ, he/she is in a diseased state. Due to lack of
data on recovery (see Sect. 8), the patient retains this status from
the moment of the positive test onwards.
• unknown: Before the first positive screening or targeted microbiological test, the infection state is unknown. If the patient is
not tested for the pathogen ρ, it is unknown whether they are
infected/colonized. If a patient becomes infected at a later point
in the data set, the patient is labeled “unknown – will be infected”.
4 D ESIGN P ROCESS AND F INAL A PPROACH
Our approach was developed through iterative design with our domain
experts over two years following guidelines for effective visualization
design [31, 44, 59]. After the initial task and data analysis, we had
regular quarterly meetings with project participants. The number of
participants in the meetings varied as not all participants could attend
each meeting. On average, ten of our expert participants were present
in our meetings. The expertise included: infection control, hygienists,
infection control data management, epidemiologists and infection control managers. Between the meetings, we communicated per email and
held interactive sessions onsite.

Data

The pathogen transmission analysis requires to combine two types of
data 1) patient locations for determining contacts, and 2) microbiological data for identifying infection status. Due to privacy reasons,
collection of this data is limited (see Sect. 8). The patient location is
only determined by a log record of their ward, not by tracking. The
infection status is only known at the time of screening or test. These
data sets can span years with events recorded down to second precision.
The time between two consecutive events (e.g. transfers) can be on the
order of seconds to months.

4.1 Prototype Development
Our first prototype had several linked views [77] (see Fig. 3a). The
epidemic curve view showed the number of infected patients over a two
weeks period (see Fig. 3a–part 1,2). It highlighted potential outbreaks
with infections above the endemic level per selected pathogens. For
3

identifying hospital-associated (nosocomial) infections, the patient stay
along with infection status was shown (see Fig. 3a–part 3). Potential transmissions between patients were supported only by node-link
diagrams showing patient contacts and current infection status (see
Fig. 3a–part 4). A total of thirteen domain experts responded to our call
for feedback by filling out an online questionnaire [77]. The prototype
demonstrated a high degree of usefulness (mode 4 and 5 respectively on
a five point Likert scale). The experts especially appreciated views that
were new to them: a) patient stay and the infection duration and b) the
contact network. They wanted these views to scale to longer periods of
time, larger sets of microbiological data, and views to support pathogen
transmission pathway reconstruction.
The second design included a Patient Timeline View that showed
the patient stay and his/her microbiological data (see Fig. 3b). This
design leveraged the infection control expert’s experience with excelbased information. Each row is one patient, and the x-axis is time.
The background color shows the infection status, colored horizontal
bars show the patient location, and colored vertical bars show the
screening and test results. Our experts found that this view provided
a good overview of patient location and infection status. However,
the separation of patients into rows made it difficult to spot contacts
leading to pathogen transmission. Sorting the rows by the time of the
first infection did not help, as a patient can have contact with several
patients.
Our third design used a storyline representation of the infection
data (see Fig. 3c). Patients are lines and the x-axis is time. Lines
are colored according to infection status. Contacts in this view are
line bundles. Although the view shows all data needed for pathogen
transmission analysis, the experts had difficulty relating to it. The layout
that emphasized the movements made it difficult to follow patients and
to determine transmissions.
4.2

(a) Initial visualization, see also [77]

(b) Patient timeline view.

Final Prototype

The final visual interface is shown in Fig. 1. This design combines the
pathogen pathway reconstruction views of the user-selected pathogen
needed for our tasks (see Sect. 3.1).
1. Epidemic Curve View shows the number of infected persons per
day in order to support Task 1 – outbreak detection. The infection
control expert can select the total number of infections or only
new ones (i.e., without copystrains). To see how it relates to the
endemic level, a moving average of the user-selected time period is
shown. This view can show data for the hospital (see Fig. 9 top) or
specific wards (see Fig. 9 bottom). It supports longer time periods
via focus-and-context methods inspired by [78].
2. Contact Network View shows the contacts of selected patients for
determining putative infected patients (Task 5).
3. Transmission Pathway View supports Tasks 2–4. This view shows
patient contacts and possible pathogen transmissions over time
in a storyline-like view. The extensions are layout, design, and
highlighting of potential transmission events more directly.
4. Patient Timeline View shows the patient location overlaid with microbiological data. It supports the visual analytics process with
infection status and location information. The data encoding is
unchanged since its early prototype described in Sec. 4.1.
5

(c) Initial storyline-like design

Figure 3: Early prototypes. Interfaces were translated into English.

Line color conveys infection status, and background color is used to
encode location information. Technical details are below.
5.1

Layout

We propose a modified storyline [47] layout algorithm to support our
tasks. While typical approaches to storyline drawing optimize the
number of edge crossings and minimize bends, we have the constraint
of patient locations, including ward (Task 3), and patient contacts
(Task 2). Fast layout is required for interactive exploration, as sets of
patients in the view can change when filters are applied, and data sets
are loaded. Thus, we prioritize runtime over crossing optimization and
minimizing bends (see Sect. 8). We build upon existing layouts and
combine them and adapt them for our purposes. Given these desired
goals, our algorithm is structured as follows (see also Fig. 4):
1. Data pre-processing: Construct patient contact graph
2. Initialization: Compute initial layout
3. Constrained force-directed layout:
(a) Constraint – x position: The temporal order of patient
transfers is preserved
(b) Constraint – home/hospital: Patient y position for home,
hospital and temporary home location is preserved
(c) Force – ward separation: Different wards are spaced out
on the y-axis
(d) Force – ward position: Spring forces encourage keeping
wards at the same y position
(e) Force – line straightening: Force encourages straight lines
after each iteration
4. Finalization:
(a) Line order: For simultaneous contacts of many patients,

Transmission Pathway View

The Transmission Pathway View shows patient infection status and
contacts over time and across locations (Fig. 1 (3)). Outbreak duration,
potential transmission contacts between patients, and patient locations
are visible (Task 2–4).
Each line represents a patient and the x-axis encodes time (Task 4).
Each patient line starts with the earliest recorded admission to hospital
and ends with the last recorded stay. Temporary home stays are also
shown. This helps in detecting hospital-associated transmissions during
previous stays (Task 3.1). Patient lines pass close to each other for
every potential contact (Task 2.1). The y-axis encodes patient location.
Fixed vertical positions for individual wards (as in Baling et al. [8]) is
not scalable due to the larger number of wards and patients (hundreds),
but our layout still aims at preserving the vertical position of wards [4].
4

© 2020 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/
y order of lines according to the transfer time
(b) Temporal adjustment: Align x position according to the
exact time moments
1. Pre-processing We construct a directed acyclic graph (DAG)
from the event-based data. Nodes are sets of patients at a location
(i.e., patient contacts) or infection state changes (see Fig. 4a). Edges
are transitions between these states. As the transfers have a single
timestamp, nodes are interpreted as instantaneous events. Edges that
connect these nodes form a from-to transfer edge. This duplication also
ensures the duration of the stay at a particular location, and all possible
contacts between two transfer time moments. The locations, location
changes, and patient contacts can be followed through paths in this
graph. For changes in infection state, an infection state change node is
created and passing through this node changes the patient’s infection
state.
2. Initialization As each node of the DAG represents a set of patients together in a location, an initial layout can be computed using
dynamic set visualization based on Sankey Diagrams (D3 implementation used [12]). This initial layout takes into account the cardinalities
of the sets and operates on the structure of the DAG only. The exact
time of patient transfers is taken into account in the finalization.
3. Constrained force-directed layout We employ a force-directed
layout for storylines [47, 63]. Our initialization helps avoid local minima, but it requires refinement subject to additional constraints (e.g., to
convey patient location). After experimenting with various ways to use
space to convey patient location (i.e., all on the bottom), we decided
to divide the screen into home – hospital – temporary home from top
to bottom (see Fig. 4b). Admission to the hospital is a vertical line
descending from the top area of the screen. Temporary home transfers
are vertical lines towards the bottom of the screen. When optimizing
the layout with the force-directed algorithm, we use a constraint-based
approach [20] to enforce these locations and use additional forces to
encourage the desired properties of the layout. The first constraint preserves the temporal order of movements along the x-axis. The second
constraint restricts movement outside y-axis areas for the three location
types (Task 3.1). Additional forces are used to maximize the stability
of the y position of a patient during a stay in a ward to help represent
contact location (see Fig. 4c) (Task 3.2.). Still, the y position can vary
significantly when a patient stays in a location for long periods of time.
To remove this position change, we replace the individual y positions
of these nodes with the average (see Fig. 4d).
4. Finalization Lines are ordered from top to bottom according to
the order patients entered the ward (see Fig. 4e). Even though this may
cause more edge crossings, this order helps support Task 2: tracing
transmissions. Patients that were in the ward for longer periods of
time are more likely to be involved in transmission events. Finally,
individual nodes are placed at the precise time of their events along the
x-axis, which is important for determining outbreak duration and time
of possible pathogen transmissions (Task 4) (see Fig. 4f).
5.2

S
Tr
Tr
Home Ward 2
Ward 3
Tr
S - carrier
Tr
Tr
Patient B Home Ward 1
Ward 2
Ward 3

Patient A

A
A
B
B
t1

B
t2

Tr
Home
Tr
Home

A
A

A

A

A
B

A
B

A
B

A
B

A
B

A
B

B

B
t3

t4

B
t5

B
t6

t7

B
t8

B
t9

(a) Pre-processing: Constructing patient contact graph

m
.0
8
2
b
|Fa
20
ch
afei
tker
4.20
Insti rafisc aktiv teme
| To aumgar
t 37
In
o
i| tut G hem
l
r
Inter Sys
B
|

This variant leads to more clutter and lower discriminability between home and
’temporary home’ transfers.

The used variant distinguishes transfers from home (lines from top) and from
’temporary home’(lines from the bottom).
(b) Constraining area for home, hospital, and temporary at home.

(c) Spring force for wards improves stability of y position.

(d) Line straightening is performed after each iteration

Visual Design and Interaction

Infection status is encoded using color (see Fig. 5 left) in order to help
in tracing transmissions (Task 2). Differentiating between ‘unknown’
and ‘unknown-will be infected’ helps infection control experts track
patients over long time periods, reducing the requirement to pan and
zoom. Details on microbiological data are shown on demand through a
tooltip. The contact location (Task 3), specifically the ward, is shown
on demand by a colored background hull.
Using a process inspired by [32,69], patient lines are drawn smoothly.
As short periods of contact can lead to transmission, wiggles in the line
indicate new contacts (see Fig. 4e). We emphasize contacts between
patients on the same ward (Task 2) by minimizing the line width for
vertical lines (see Fig. 5 right). This also reduces overplotting as
inspired by Tanahashi and Ma [68].
Standard pan and zoom operations are supported as well as highlighting of selected patients. When a patient is selected, its line width
is increased. Non-focus information is not filtered out [32], as it is
a requirement to be able to track patients in the data set. Straightening selected patient lines [38] would be an alternative, but this would

(e) Line order according to patient transfer order. Wiggles emphasize transfers, esp., ensure
visibility of short time periods.

(f) Finalization by aligning X position to the exact time.

Figure 4: Stages of the layout algorithm which transform the eventbased data into a final storyline layout used by the interactive system.

5

interfere with our ward location encoding.

unknown

unknown

unknown

carrier

carrier

diseased

unknown

carrier

diseased

diseased

carrier

diseased

(a) Contact event types for infection transmission
Relevant contact

Übertragungsmöglichkeiten

Patient A

carrier
Infection unknown
home Ward 2 Temporary home
Location

Patient B

unknown event
Infection
Location home Ward 1 Ward 2

Transmission

Contact
diseased
Ward 3

home

diseased
Ward 3

Time
.04.20
7
2
b
ch
|Fa
e20
f matk Insti rafisc aktiv teme
| To aumgar
t 41
ieIno i| tut G hem
l
contacts
r (b)
r RelevantInter
Sys for pathogen
B
|transmission and possible transmission events.
b27.0fer
|Fa
ch20
ei
4.20
matk Insti rafisc aktiv teme
| To aumgar
t 39

Figure
6: The types
of contacts
and encoding of transmission events.
Io i| tut G hem
l

Figure 5: Left: Visual design, where line color encodes infection status.
Colored background hulls display wards. Right: Emphasizing patient
contacts by reducing the width of vertical lines.

5.3

nr

B

|

Support for Transmission Pathway Exploration

Potential pathogen transmissions must be visible [45] among many
patient contacts over long periods of time (months to years). Panning
and zooming over such long time periods is inefficient and may lead
to missing important contacts in the data. We developed specialized
tracing interactions to support this visual analysis.
Our interactive approach supports 1) backward tracing – finding
transmission events and patients in the past that could have infected a
selected patient. The interaction enables the search for an index patient,
i.e., patient zero (Task 2). 2) forward tracing – finding patients that
could be infected by a selected infected patient at a later point in time,
i.e., putative infected patients (Task 5).
We now explain the necessary computation required to interactively
backward trace. Computation for forward tracing is done analogously.
For a selected patient P, we calculate which contacts might have lead
to the patient’s infection. A pathogen can be transmitted from an
infected patient Pi to the patient P when the patients come into contact. Note, a contact between two diseased patients is deemed irrelevant as both patients are already diseased (see Fig. 6 top). We
identify relevant contacts as shown in Fig. 6: the pathogen transmission must have happened during a critical contact before the infection
was detected – the time moment of the earliest positive microbiological result τ. For each Pi of P and each contact location L, we
determine the earliest critical contact before the infection is detected
CCi,L = mints {Pj ,ts ,te ,ts ≤ τ : L(P) = L(Pi ) = L)}. We assume the
starting time moment of the contact interval (ts ,te ) where tt = ts as the
transmission event time, Lt is transmission location (Task 3) and Pt
is transmission contact. Note, P can have several potential transmission events – different persons and locations and different times. This
analysis is repeated, especially for contacts with unknown infection
status, as they could be potentially infected if they had contact to an
infected patient before. These critical contacts are computed using
a constrained path search in the DAG used for the layout. There is
currently no bound on how far back or forward in time the transmission
events are searched, but user-specified bounds could be implemented,
depending on the specifics of the investigated pathogen.
In the view, the selected patient P is emphasized. Relevant contact patients Pt are kept and the non-relevant patients are de-emphasized. The
positive test/screening events τ are highlighted with ellipses (orange for
carrier and red for diseased) and connected to potential transmission
events (tt , Pt , Lt ) with flashback lines inspired by [49] (see Fig. 7 & 8).
The circle color encodes the type of relevant contact (Task 2.1). We
show all possible transmission events – i.e., several flashback lines.
Connections indicate the length of time the potential infection was not
detected by the screening or testing (Task 4).
6

Inter Sys

Figure 7: Forward tracing of pathogen transmissions of patient P68475.
The patient potentially infected many patients at the ward S279.

includes hospital location data of ∼180,000 patients and ∼900,000
microbiological data over four years. The focus of the case study is
a multi-resistant pathogen of special interest: the bacteria Klebsiella
pneumoniae. K. pneumoniae is a commensal gut bacterium that is a
dominant cause of hospital-acquired infections. It is responsible for
infections in the urinary tract, respiratory tract and blood stream [41].
In the first quarter of 2012 (actual date anonymized), the infection
control experts faced an outbreak of K. pneumoniae in an area with
four wards. Staff members work on all four wards and the patients
are frequently swapped between these locations. The total capacity of
the area is 50 beds. The outbreak investigation performed at that time
was done manually by the infection control experts, meaning the data
was collected from several systems and merged into spreadsheets. The
original analysis using classical epidemiological data assigned in total
12 patients to the outbreak. However, a deeper analysis of the pathogen
transmission was not possible.
This use case shows how the infection control experts analyzed
this outbreak retrospectively using the system. The interaction with
the system was supported by the visual analytics experts. Since the
patient zero was not found during the first outbreak investigations, the
experts aimed to trace back the initial source of infection and to identify
potential cases that were overlooked at that time.
First, the infection control expert consults the epidemic curve for
K. pneumoniae of the first months of 2012 for the entire hospital to
assess the number of infected patients (Task 1). The data was cleaned
for copystrains (repeated samples of the same patients), allowing to
focus on new positive results (see Fig. 9a). Only a small increase in the
number of infections at the hospital has occurred. Thus, this outbreak is
difficult to detect automatically. Based on his expertise, his focus turns
to the four wards, S276, S278, S279, and S295 (see Fig. 9b), where
the outbreak was initially localized. The numbers of new infections
in February in the wards were: 1 patient (S276), 3 patients (S278)
and 9 patients (S279) (see Fig. 9b). The number of newly infected
patients on the wards was higher than the endemic level assuming an K.

C ASE S TUDY

The visual analytics system was applied to real data from a large German hospital by an infection control expert. The anonymized data
6

© 2020 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/

P108085

P113749
P152395

P68475

P176101

October

2012

Figure 8: Backward tracing of pathogen transmissions of patient P68475 – indirectly via patient P76101’s contact with two patients on ward S295.

pneumoniae outbreak on the ward.
The expert begins to reconstruct the transmission pathway (Task 2)
and visualizes all positively tested patients on the wards in the Transmission Pathway View (see supplementary material and Fig. 7). In
total, there were 23 infected patients, which is higher than the original
outbreak analysis showed. A dominant cluster of patients highlights
12 infected patients on ward S279 in winter 2011/2012. It reveals the
first infected patient, patient P68475, who was already tested positive
in November 2011 – three months before this cluster of K. pneumoniae
(Task 4). By using the forward tracing interaction from patient P68475,
the infection control expert identified further patients that were in contact with this patient (see Fig. 7). Thus, patient P68475 is the cause for
the spreading of K. pneumoniae on ward S279, but not for all patients
in the outbreak.
Since there was no previous contact of patient P68475 with colonized
patients (carrier) or diseased patients (with K. pneumoniae) in ward
S279, the expert uses the backward tracing interaction to search for
potential contacts on other wards (see Fig. 8). The visualization showed
that patient P68475 had no direct contact to patients with positive
laboratory tests for K. pneumoniae. However, the tracing lines lead to
ward S95. As shown in the zoomed view of Fig. 8, patient P68475 had
contact with infected patients indirectly via patient P76101, who, in
turn, was in contact with two patients on ward S295 (Task 2.1). This
is a novel insight. Both patients, P113749 and P108085, were tested
positive for K. pneumoniae. Thus, a possible transmission route of K.
pneumoniae to ward S279 could be via P113749/108985 − P761010 −
P68475. As Fig. 8 shows, both patients are frequently returning to the
hospital (many vertical lines from bottom) and usually stay for longer
periods in the hospital (long horizontal lines). Forward tracing shows
the potential beginning of the transmission events was before their first
admission to the hospital (see the start and the length of the tracing lines
in Fig. 10). Patient Timeline View confirms this finding (see Fig. 11),
where the first positive microbiological results (red vertical lines of
patient P113749 and P108985) are before the first hospital admission
(Task 3.1). This is due to the limited dataset availability. The real
first admission was before the start of the available data. The forward
tracing shows that both patients could infect patients at ward S295 and
S279 (see Fig. 10).
The Patient Timeline View (see Fig. 11) identifies a third infected
patient, patient P152039 on ward S276, who tested positive before
the increase of infected patients occurs (see red vertical line in 2011).
Since all patients had contact to several patients, these three patients
are regarded as patient zero(s) and the potential origin for the K. pneumoniae for this outbreak on the four wards S276, S278, S279 and S295
(Task 2& 3) with genetic analysis required for confirmation.
To provide further support and verification for the hypothesized
transmission pathways, the experts also used genome information of

(a) Epidemic curve for new infections of K. pneumoniae– sum of whole hospital.

(b) Epidemic curve for new infections of K. pneumoniae– suspicious wards.

Figure 9: Epidemic curve with focus on the time period of interest:
Early-2012 indicates an higher number of new infections at ward S279.

the pathogen. Comparison of genomes of bacterial strains adds further
evidence to the analysis of outbreaks. Details of this external analysis
are provided in the annex in the supplementary material. The genome
analysis confirms that eleven patients on the wards S279 and S295
were infected by one K. pneumoniae bacteria strain, including the
potential patient zero candidate P113749. Interestingly, the two other
potential patients zero P108085 and P152039 reveal substantial genome
differences to this set of patients (see Fig. A1 in annex). Thus, the expert
assigns P113749 as patient zero of this outbreak on the wards. The
genome analysis reveals P1520395 as a further source of infection for
at least one more patient on the wards. Thus, the two transmission
pathways occurred simultaneously (Task 2.3). This is a novel insight.
A further question is how many undetected transmissions the patient
zero P11349 had and whether there are potentially other infected patients (Task 5). Therefore, the infection control expert opens a Contact
Network View for this patient in the period when the initial transmissions were detected – beginning of November 2011 (see Fig. 12). The
tracing interaction in this view highlights several potential transmissions to patients that were (not) detected as infected during their stay
on the wards. Transmission Pathway View and Patient Timeline View
(see Fig. 1) show that the non-infected patients were screened (e.g.,
rectal screening, urine, catheters) regularly and tested negative.
The use case provides support that the visual analytics system enables the infection control experts to conduct a classical epidemiolog7

AA

P113749

Figure 12: Contact Network View: Patient 113749 could have infected
more patients in early November 2011.
Figure 10: Forward tracing for P113749 shows potential early start of
outbreak and transmissions to patients at wards S279, S295 and S278.

I understand this view

Participants
Familiarity

P175082
P70448

all

P126336

non-familiar

P47422

3
3

familiar

P110597

Participants
Familiarity

P65363

0

all

P57678

P55803

familiar

P93284

5

4

mode = 4
mode = 4

5

mode = 4

10

3

1

5 - fully agree

1

5

4

4
6

15

This view is useful
2

0

P62411

1
9

non-familiar

P53293

1 - not at all 2 3

14

1

P48878
P54688

2

20

8

2

25

2 3

1- not at all

4

5 - fully agree
mode = 5

10

mode = 2

3

6

7

5

10

15

mode = 5
25

20

P152333

Figure 13: Understandability and usefulness of the view.

P175742
P64716
P63842
P63104
P76101

meaning ’fully agree’ and could provide free text comments.
Participants found the view useful (Mo = 5) and easy to understand
(Mo = 4) (see Fig. 13). As expected, participants familiar with the
tool gave higher scores. This result together with free text feedback
indicates that training is needed for using the approach effectively.
We also assessed how well the views supported the intended tasks
(see Fig. 14). Participants could identify contacts (Mo = 4) and understand
their infection status (Mo = 5) (Task 2.1). They can clearly
2015
identify patient stay duration and movement in or out of the hospital
(Mo = 4) (Task 3.1). Participants found it harder to identify the wards
(Mo = 3) (Task 3.2). The free text showed mixed reviews of using
background color with some participants preferring it while others not.
Therefore, we interactively enable/disable this encoding.
Participants found the highlighting of potential transmission events
very useful (Mo = 4) and understandable (Mo = 4) (see Fig. 15). They
found the feature helpful in determining which contacts could lead to
a transmission and spreading of pathogens (Mo = 4, 5). The feedback
on support for long time periods when determining outbreak duration
(Task 3) was also positive (Mo = 5). In free text, experts called for
further pan and zoom support, which we revised in our visual interface.
The comparison of the network diagram and pathway views showed
that nine participants preferred Transmission Pathway View and six
participants preferred Contact Network View. Ten participants preferred
a combination of the two views. The distribution of preferences was
the same for both familiar and non-familiar participants. This result is
expected as the views target different tasks: “I need both views, as they
help find an answer to different tasks.” Transmission Pathway View is
useful for detailed spatio-temporal analysis of transmissions and the
Contact Network View is useful for an overview of contacts without

P65141
P67867
P69635
P66512
P68475
P152039
P108085
P113749

2011

2012

2013

2014

Figure 11: Patient Timeline View of the outbreak patients sorted by
time of first infection shows first infected patients already in 2011. The
red background indicates the infection status starting from the first
laboratory evidence of K. pneumoniae–shown as red vertical bar.

ical analysis in a fast, reliable and comprehensive way. Highlighting
potential transmission events enables to reveal transmission pathways
within the hospital. The steps taken for this analysis with our tool
took the hygienist 30 minutes. He estimated that this analysis would
normally take about two working days using his previous methods. The
hygienists usually determine the epidemic curves and contact networks
manually through raw data from multiple information systems.
7 D OMAIN E XPERT F EEDBACK
This qualitative evaluation focused on the Transmission Pathway View
through an online questionnaire. Twenty-five domain experts from
seven institutions in Germany participated in this evaluation. All participants had several years of practical experience with infection control
in hospitals: eleven were clinicians, epidemiologists or hygienists, six
were medical data analysis experts, six were medical data experts, and
two were healthcare managers. Overall, 60% of the participants were
familiar with our interactive visualization, i.e., have participated in
feedback sessions, or had seen a live demonstration of the tool. At the
beginning of the experiment, a one- paragraph explanation of each view
was provided with no further training.
The online questionnaire showed the views from the use case and
asked participants to read these visualizations and answer the usability
and understandability questions as presented in Fig. 13–15. Participants
rated their answers to each question on a Likert scale: 1–5, with 5

I see clearly, ...
... when patients change ward
(with ward background) 1
..., when patients change ward
(without ward background)
..., if it is the first admission to hospital
..., when patients are infected 2
..., when patients have contact 1

0

1 - not at all
2

2

3

4

10

7

6

9

4

3
2

2

6

5
10

5

mode = 3

5

mode = 3

7

mode = 5

12

11

10

15

2

20

Figure 14: Results for readability of the views.
8

mode = 4

8

5

5

5 -fully agree

mode = 4
25

© 2020 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/
1 - not at all
I understand this view
I think, this view is useful 1
Highlighting is useful to recognise
1
which contacts have led to disease
Transmission Pathway is suitable
to visualize long time spans 0

3

2 3

4

5

11

8

7

9

7

4

5

6

9

5

1

5 - fully agree

9

4

10

10

15

20

Layout
Our
[38]

mode = 4
mode = 4
mode =
4, 5
mode = 5
25

Edge crossing
25a (37b )
14

Runtime (ms)
197
160

Pre-processing (ms)
18
N/A

Figure 15: Results for questions on tracing interaction.

temporal focus (e.g., finding a “super-spreader”).
The free text feedback was positive: “Interesting and well thoughtout visualization. I was very enthusiastic about the presentation of this
visualization. The visualization of such complex data is not-trivial.”
Participants found some training was required, but after understanding
it, they found it very useful: “I find the Transmission Pathway View
really good. Of course, one has to get used to it first and learn to use
it first.” One expert suggested broader applicability “I would strongly
recommend this visualization to be shown to public health authority
(Gesundheitsamt). It could be ‘fit for purpose”’.
The participants found that scalability in terms of the number of
patients posed a significant challenge. They recommended a two-staged
process with filtering through the contact network and then show the
filtered data in the Transmission Pathway View. Four of the twenty-five
participants wanted to change the colors (e.g., showing each patient
in a different color, using more prominent colors for the three areas
(home, hospital, temporary home)). One participant requested further
differentiation between carrier and diseased, as it is important for
certain pathogens. A number of future extensions were suggested that
mainly require additional data. We discuss them in Sect. 8.
8

D ISCUSSION

AND

Figure 16: Layout quality using Matrix dataset [66]. (a ) comparable to
Storyflow [38], (b ) - including start/end lines.

records do not confirm when a patient has been recovered. Therefore,
patients remain infected for the remainder of the data set, which is
often not the case. These data need to be extracted from the current raw
data by new algorithms. These algorithms have to be adjusted to the
ward, the patient-type, the type of pathogen and the tests. Additional
features, like the comparison and matching of antimicrobial profiles
simultaneous with the integration of genomics results of the pathogens
would help the infection control expert automatically cluster patients
according to strains to better identify transmission pathways. We used
an external tool to perform genome analysis to verify the suggested
transmission routes. The genome analysis visualization is not part of
our system. However, since laboratories have access to near real-time
genome analysis, this data can be extracted and used for matching
specific pathogens to help verify the transmission pathway hypotheses.
Moreover, the visual interface could be extended to support provenance
of analysis and interaction. In the future, it would be interesting to
encode the mode of transmissions (e.g., airborne or contact) or other
potential risk factors (e.g., diabetes, immunotherapy).
Our approach was designed and implemented for transmission
pathway reconstruction in hospitals. A modified version of the
system has now been deployed in several hospitals for analyzing
COVID-19 hospital-associated transmissions (see video in German at
https://youtu.be/HAsb3dnUKyI). More generally, our approach could
be used to visually analyze contact tracing graphs of localized outbreak
clusters and in closed environments, such as cruise ships and buildings.
The approach could be applicable to different definitions of spread,
such as financial or information contagion. The tracing interaction
could help with this reconstruction, but it needs to be adapted to the
specifics of the application. For example for information spread, the
model would take the beliefs about the information, i.e., whether a
person supports or opposes the information [9] into account.

F UTURE W ORK

The Transmission Pathway View layout was specifically designed for
our tasks rather than to optimize edge crossing and wiggles. Still, the
approach performs well on the benchmark Matrix dataset, with 14
entities and 90 transfers [66] (see Fig. 16). We used a laptop PC with an
Intel i7-9750H CPU (2.6 GHz) and 32GB memory. Pre-processing lasts
18 ms, the initialization stabilized after 30 iterations (62 ms) and forcedirected layout after 10 iterations (135 ms). The layout of use case with
27 entities and 704 transfers and the same number of iterations lasted
2517ms in total (190ms + 1265ms + 1062ms). The computation of
tracking interaction for all critical patients lasted 37ms in total.
Our data sets pose visual scalability challenges in terms of the time
spans of the data sets, number of patients, number of locations, number
of patient transfers, and the number of screenings and tests. Interaction
is leveraged to allow the approach to scale to larger data sets, combining
several views and automatically highlighting transmission pathway
events. They allow to explore pathways of up to hundred patients (see
Annex). Explicitly visualizing the number of forward and backward
connections of a patient would help the system scale when tracing
contacts. Other methods for increasing the scalability of our approach
should be investigated.
The visual design of Transmission Pathway View relies heavily on
colors to encode infection status and wards, limiting the number of
wards that can be represented. Automatic detection of suspicious wards
(i.e., a sudden increase in the number of cases) would help with this
scalability along with forms of automated support. In order to scale a
larger number of wards, interactive highlighting could help and hulls
could improve space efficiency [68]. The expert feedback indicated a
need for enabling annotations to the visualizations with genome data or
measures taken during the outbreak, which could be implemented.
The data collection methodology and privacy considerations pose
limitations on what can be analyzed. A core challenge is localizing
contacts accurately, which is currently handled via electronic health
records. More accurate data on patient mobility through the hospital,
locations of rooms and beds, as well as information where procedures
occur (e.g., surgery, endoscopy, radiography) could be helpful for
certain visual analytics tasks. Technologies, such as RFID, could be
used, but would incur significant privacy considerations. Also, current

9

C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we have presented a visual analytics system for visualizing
transmission events and outbreaks in hospitals. The approach focuses
on methods for reconstructing the transmission pathways for a certain
pathogen back to a patient zero. This visual analytics approach was
developed through iterative, user-centered design with seven German
Hospitals and Infection Control Institutes or Units. As part of the design
process, storyline visualizations were adapted to visualize temporal
contact networks. Our approach was applied to a real outbreak of
Klebsiella pneumoniae in a large German hospital. Infection control
experts were able to effectively unravel the outbreak and reveal two
distinct transmission pathways. Tracing back the initial source, patient
zero was conducted in a faster and in a more comprehensive way when
compared to existing methods. In our final qualitative user study of
twenty-five users, we found significant value in the approach when
making sense of outbreaks in hospitals.
Acknowledgments We would like to thank all infection control
experts involved, in particular A. Wulff, P. Biermann, S. Rey, C. Baier
and M. Kaase, for their helpful feedback. This work was supported
by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF)
9

within the Medical Informatics Initiative (01ZZ1802B/HiGHmed).
[22]

R EFERENCES
[1] S. E. Abdelhamid, C. J. Kuhlman, M. V. Marathe, and S. S. Ravi. Interactive exploration and understanding of contagion dynamics in networked
populations. In Int. Conf. Behavioral, Economic and Socio-cultural Computing, pp. 1–6, 2016.
[2] B. Alsallakh, L. Micallef, W. Aigner, H. Hauser, S. Miksch, and P. Rodgers.
The state-of-the-art of set visualization. Computer Graphics Forum,
35(1):234–260, 2016.
[3] D. Arendt and M. Pirrung. Too much time not enough space: Multiscale
event sequence visual analytics with m-SVEN. In The Event Event: IEEE
VIS 2016 Workshop on Temporal & Sequential Event Analysis, 2016.
[4] D. Arendt and M. Pirrung. The y of it matters, even for storyline visualization. In IEEE Conference on Visual Analytics Science and Technology,
pp. 81–91. IEEE, 2017.
[5] B. Bach, N. Henry-Riche, T. Dwyer, T. Madhyastha, J.-D. Fekete, and
T. Grabowski. Small multipiles: Piling time to explore temporal patterns
in dynamic networks. Computer Graphics Forum, 34(3):31–40, 2015.
[6] B. Bach, E. Pietriga, and J.-D. Fekete. GraphDiaries: Animated transitions
and temporal navigation for dynamic networks. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, 20(5):740–754, 2013.
[7] B. Bach, C. Shi, N. Heulot, T. Madhyastha, T. Grabowski, and P. Dragicevic. Time Curves: Folding time to visualize patterns of temporal evolution
in data. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
22(1):559–568, 2016.
[8] J. T. Balint, D. Arendt, and L. M. Blaha. Storyline visualizations of
eye tracking of movie viewing. In IEEE Workshop on Eye Tracking and
Visualization, pp. 35–39. IEEE, 2016.
[9] Y. Bao, C. Yi, Y. Xue, and Y. Dong. A new rumor propagation model
and control strategy on social networks. In IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining, pp.
1472–1473, 2013.
[10] F. Beck, M. Burch, S. Diehl, and D. Weiskopf. A taxonomy and survey of
dynamic graph visualization. Computer Graphics Forum, 36(1):133–159,
2017.
[11] S. Bialek-Davenet, A. Criscuolo, F. Ailloud, V. Passet, L. Jones, A.S. Delannoy-Vieillard, L. H. Simon, G. Arlet, M.-H. Nicolas-Chanoine,
D. Decr, and S. Brisse. Genomic definition of hypervirulent and multidrugresistant Klebsiella pneumoniae clonal groups. Emerg Infect Dis, 20(11):9,
2014. doi: 10.3201/eid2011.140206
[12] M. Bostock, V. Ogievetsky, and J. Heer. D3 data-driven documents. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 17(12):2301–2309,
2011.
[13] C. Bryan, X. Wu, S. Mniszewski, and K.-L. Ma. Integrating predictive
analytics into a spatiotemporal epidemic simulation. In IEEE Conference
on Visual Analytics Science and Technology, pp. 17–24. IEEE, 2015.
[14] H. S. G. Caballero, A. Corvo, P. M. Dixit, and M. A. Westenberg. Visual
analytics for evaluating clinical pathways. In IEEE Workshop on Visual
Analytics in Healthcare, pp. 39–46. IEEE, 2017.
[15] H. Chen, U. Soni, Y. Lu, R. Maciejewski, and S. Kobourov. Same stats,
different graphs. In Graph Drawing and Network Visualization, pp. 463–
477. Springer, 2018.
[16] M. Chen, L. Floridi, and R. Borgo. What is visualization really for? In
L. Floridi and P. Illari, eds., The Philosophy of Information Quality, pp.
75–93. Springer, 2014. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-07121-3 5
[17] E. Choi, M. T. Bahadori, J. Sun, J. Kulas, A. Schuetz, and W. Stewart.
Retain: An interpretable predictive model for healthcare using reverse time
attention mechanism. In Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems, pp. 3504–3512, 2016.
[18] W. Cui, S. Liu, L. Tan, C. Shi, Y. Song, Z. Gao, H. Qu, and X. Tong.
Textflow: Towards better understanding of evolving topics in text. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 17(12):2412–2421,
2011.
[19] T. Donker, J. Wallinga, R. Slack, and H. Grundmann. Hospital networks
and the dispersal of hospital-acquired pathogens by patient transfer. PloS
one, 7(4), 2012.
[20] T. Dwyer, Y. Koren, and K. Marriott. Ipsep-cola: An incremental procedure for separation constraint layout of graphs. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, 12(5):821–828, 2006.
[21] S. Engler-Hüsch, T. Heister, N. T. Mutters, J. Wolff, and K. Kaier.
In-hospital costs of community-acquired colonization with multidrug-

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]

[41]

10

resistant organisms at a german teaching hospital. BMC health services
research, 18(1):1–7, 2018.
D. G. Enki, P. H. Garthwaite, C. P. Farrington, A. Noufaily, N. J. Andrews,
and A. Charlett. Comparison of statistical algorithms for the detection of
infectious disease outbreaks in large multiple surveillance systems. PloS
one, 11(8):e0160759, 2016.
M. Freire, C. Plaisant, B. Shneiderman, and J. Golbeck. Manynets: an
interface for multiple network analysis and visualization. In SIGCHI Conf.
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 213–222. ACM, 2010.
T. Fröschl and M. Nöllenburg. Minimizing wiggles in storyline visualizations. In Graph Drawing and Network Visualization, pp. 585–587.
Springer, 2017.
C. Geffers and P. Gastmeier. Nosocomial Infections and Multidrugresistant Organisms in Germany. Detsches Ärzteblatt International,
108(6):87–93, 2011. doi: 10.3238/arztebl.2011.0087
M. Gronemann, M. Jünger, F. Liers, and F. Mambelli. Crossing minimization in storyline visualization. In International Symposium on Graph
Drawing and Network Visualization, pp. 367–381. Springer, 2016.
S. Guo, K. Xu, R. Zhao, D. Gotz, H. Zha, and N. Cao. Eventthread:
Visual summarization and stage analysis of event sequence data. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 24(1):56–65, 2018.
B. Haarbrandt, B. Schreiweis, S. Rey, U. Sax, S. Scheithauer, O. Rienhoff,
P. Knaup-Gregori, U. Bavendiek, C. Dieterich, B. Brors, et al. Highmed–an
open platform approach to enhance care and research across institutional
boundaries. Methods of information in medicine, 57(S 01):e66–e81, 2018.
A. Hakone, L. Harrison, A. Ottley, N. Winters, C. Gutheil, P. K. Han, and
R. Chang. Proact: Iterative design of a patient-centered visualization for
effective prostate cancer health risk communication. IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 23(1):601–610, 2016.
A. Kennedy, K. Klein, A. Nguyen, and F. Y. Wang. The graph landscape:
using visual analytics for graph set analysis. J. Visualization, 20(3):417–
432, 2017.
N. Kerracher and J. Kennedy. Constructing and evaluating visualisation
task classifications: Process and considerations. Computer Graphics
Forum, 36(3):47–59, 2017.
N. W. Kim, S. K. Card, and J. Heer. Tracing genealogical data with
timenets. In International Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces, pp.
241–248, 2010.
I. Kostitsyna, M. Nöllenburg, V. Polishchuk, A. Schulz, and D. Strash.
On minimizing crossings in storyline visualizations. In International
Symposium on Graph Drawing, pp. 192–198. Springer, 2015.
B. C. Kwon, V. Anand, K. A. Severson, S. Ghosh, Z. Sun, B. I. Frohnert,
M. Lundgren, and K. Ng. DPVis: Visual analytics with hidden markov
models for disease progression pathways. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 2020.
B. C. Kwon, M.-J. Choi, J. T. Kim, E. Choi, Y. B. Kim, S. Kwon, J. Sun,
and J. Choo. Retainvis: Visual analytics with interpretable and interactive recurrent neural networks on electronic medical records. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 25(1):299–309,
2018.
A. Lee, D. Archambault, and M. Nacenta. Dynamic network plaid: A
tool for the analysis of dynamic networks. In CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, p. paper 130, 2019.
Y. Liang, Z. Shi, S. I. Sritharan, and H. Wan. Simulation of the spread
of epidemic disease using persistent surveillance data. Simulation, p. 1,
2010.
S. Liu, Y. Wu, E. Wei, M. Liu, and Y. Liu. Storyflow: Tracking the
evolution of stories. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, 19(12):2436–2445, 2013.
Z. Liu, S. H. Zhan, and T. Munzner. Aggregated dendrograms for visual
comparison between many phylogenetic trees. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, 2019. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2019.
2898186
R. Maciejewski, P. Livengood, S. Rudolph, T. F. Collins, D. S. Ebert, R. T.
Brigantic, C. D. Corley, G. A. Muller, and S. W. Sanders. A pandemic
influenza modeling and visualization tool. Journal of Visual Languages &
Computing, 22(4):268–278, 2011.
S. Magill, J. Edwards, W. Bamberg, Z. Beldavs, G. Dumyati, M. Kainer,
R. Lynfield, M. Maloney, L. McAllister-Hollod, J. Nadle, S. Ray,
D. Thompson, L. Wilson, S. Fridkin, and the Emerging Infections Program Healthcare-Associated Infections & Antimicrobial Use Prevelance
Survey Team. Multistate point-prevalence survey of health care-associated
infections. N Eng J Med, 370(13):10, 2014.

© 2020 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/
[42] M. Monroe, R. Lan, H. Lee, C. Plaisant, and B. Shneiderman. Temporal
event sequence simplification. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, 19(12):2227–2236, 2013.
[43] M. Müller, M. Petzold, M. Wunderlich, T. Baumgartl, M. Höhn, V. Eichel,
N. Mutters, S. Scheithauer, M. Marschollek, and T. von Landesberger.
Visual analysis for hospital infection control using a rnn model. In EuroVA,
pp. 073–077. EuroGraphics, 2020.
[44] T. Munzner. A nested model for visualization design and validation. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 15(6):921–928,
2009.
[45] T. Munzner, F. Guimbretière, S. Tasiran, L. Zhang, and Y. Zhou. TreeJuxtaposer: Scalable tree comparison using focus+context with guaranteed
visibility. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2003, p. 453462, 2003. doi: 10.1145/
1201775.882291
[46] P. H. Nguyen, K. Xu, R. Walker, and B. W. Wong. Timesets: Timeline
visualization with set relations. Information Visualization, 15(3):253–269,
2016.
[47] M. Ogawa and K.-L. Ma. Software evolution storylines. In International
Symposium on Software Visualization, p. 3542. ACM, 2010. doi: 10.1145/
1879211.1879219
[48] K. Padia, K. H. Bandara, and C. G. Healey. Yarn: generating storyline
visualizations using HTN planning. In Graphics Interface, pp. 17–24.
ACM, 2018.
[49] K. Padia, K. H. Bandara, and C. G. Healey. A system for generating storyline visualizations using hierarchical task network planning. Computers &
Graphics, 78:64–75, 2019.
[50] B. Preim and K. Lawonn. A survey of visual analytics for public health.
Computer Graphics Forum, 39(1):543–580, 2020.
[51] J. Qi, C. Liu, B. C. Cappers, and H. van de Wetering. Visual analysis of
parallel interval events. In EuroVis (Short Papers), pp. 31–35, 2018.
[52] L. Qiang and C. Bingjie. Storycake: A hierarchical plot visualization
method for storytelling in polar coordinates. In International Conference
on Cyberworlds, pp. 211–218. IEEE, 2016.
[53] K. Reda, C. Tantipathananandh, A. Johnson, J. Leigh, and T. BergerWolf. Visualizing the evolution of community structures in dynamic social
networks. Computer Graphics Forum, 30(3):1061–1070, 2011.
[54] A. Rind, P. Federico, T. Gschwandtner, W. Aigner, J. Doppler, and M. Wagner. Visual analytics of electronic health records with a focus on time. In
New Perspectives in Medical Records, pp. 65–77. Springer, 2017.
[55] A. Rind, T. D. Wang, W. Aigner, S. Miksch, K. Wongsuphasawat,
C. Plaisant, and B. Shneiderman. Interactive information visualization to
explore and query electronic health records. Foundations and Trends in
HCI, 5(3):207–298, 2013.
[56] M. Rosvall and C. T. Bergstrom. Mapping change in large networks. PLoS
One, 5(1):e8694, 2010.
[57] F. D. Sahneh, A. Vajdi, H. Shakeri, F. Fan, and C. Scoglio. Gemfsim: a
stochastic simulator for the generalized epidemic modeling framework.
Journal of Computational Science, 22(1):36–44, 2017.
[58] C. Schmidt, M. Rhlig, B. Grundel, P. Daumke, M. Ritter, A. Stahl,
P. Rosenthal, and H. Schumann. Combining visual cleansing and exploration for clinical data. In IEEE Workshop on Visual Analytics in
Healthcare, pp. 25–32, 2019.
[59] M. Sedlmair, M. Meyer, and T. Munzner. Design study methodology:
Reflections from the trenches and the stacks. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, 18(12):2431–2440, 2012.
[60] D. Shahaf, C. Guestrin, and E. Horvitz. Trains of thought: Generating
information maps. In International Conference on World Wide Web, p.
899908, 2012. doi: 10.1145/2187836.2187957
[61] A. Shrestha, B. Miller, Y. Zhu, and Y. Zhao. Storygraph: Extracting
patterns from spatio-temporal data. In SIGKDD Workshop on Interactive
Data Exploration and Analytics, pp. 95–103. ACM, 2013.
[62] S. Silvia. Variantflow: Interactive storyline visualization using force
directed layout, 2016.
[63] S. Silvia, J. Abbas, S. Huskey, and C. Weaver. Storyline visualization with
force directed layout. In IEEE VIS Posters, 2015.
[64] P. Simonetto, D. Archambault, and S. Kobourov. Drawing dynamic graphs
without timeslices. In Graph Drawing and Network Visualization, pp.
394–409. Springer, 2018.
[65] P. Simonetto, D. Archambault, and S. G. Kobourov. Event-based dynamic
graph visualisation. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, 26(7):2373–2386, 2018.
[66] Y. Tanahashi. Movie interaction dataset. http://vis.cs.ucdavis.
edu/˜tanahashi/data_downloads/storyline_visualizations/

11

story_data.tar, 2013.
[67] Y. Tanahashi, C.-H. Hsueh, and K.-L. Ma. An efficient framework for generating storyline visualizations from streaming data. IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 21(6):730–742, 2015.
[68] Y. Tanahashi and K.-L. Ma. Design considerations for optimizing storyline visualizations. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, 18(12):2679–2688, 2012.
[69] T. Tang, S. Rubab, J. Lai, W. Cui, L. Yu, and Y. Wu. istoryline: Effective
convergence to hand-drawn storylines. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics, 25(1):769–778, 2018.
[70] S. van den Elzen, D. Holten, J. Blaas, and J. J. van Wijk. Reducing
snapshots to points: A visual analytics approach to dynamic network
exploration. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
22(1):1–10, 2015.
[71] T. C. van Dijk, M. Fink, N. Fischer, F. Lipp, P. Markfelder, A. Ravsky,
S. Suri, and A. Wolff. Block crossings in storyline visualizations. In
International Symposium on Graph Drawing and Network Visualization,
pp. 382–398. Springer, 2016.
[72] A. Vogogias, J. Kennedy, D. Archambault, B. Bach, V. A. Smith, and
H. Currant. BayesPiles: Visualisation support for bayesian network structure learning. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems Technology, 10(1),
2018.
[73] T. von Landesberger, S. Bremm, N. Andrienko, G. Andrienko, and
M. Tekušová. Visual analytics methods for categoric spatio-temporal
data. In IEEE Conference on Visual Analytics Science and Technology, pp.
183–192. IEEE, 2012.
[74] T. von Landesberger, S. Diel, S. Bremm, and D. W. Fellner. Visual analysis
of contagion in networks. Information Visualization, 14(2):93–110, 2015.
[75] T. von Landesberger, D. W. Fellner, and R. A. Ruddle. Visualization
system requirements for data processing pipeline design and optimization.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 23(8):2028–
2041, 2016.
[76] T. von Landesberger, M. Gorner, and T. Schreck. Visual analysis of graphs
with multiple connected components. In Visual Analytics Science and
Technology, pp. 155–162. IEEE, 2009.
[77] T. von Landesberger, M. Wunderlich, T. Baumgartl, M. Hhn,
M. Marschollek, and S. Scheithauer. Visual-Interactive Exploration of
Pathogen Outbreaks in Hospitals. In EuroVis 2019 - Posters. The Eurographics Association, 2019. doi: 10.2312/eurp.20191133
[78] J. Walker, R. Borgo, and M. W. Jones. Timenotes: a study on effective
chart visualization and interaction techniques for time-series data. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 22(1):549–558,
2015.
[79] Y. Wang, D. Archambault, H. Haleem, T. Moeller, Y. Wu, and H. Qu.
Nonuniform timeslicing of dynamic graphs based on visual complexity.
In IEEE Visualization Conference (VIS) Short Papers, pp. 241–245. IEEE,
2019. doi: 10.1109/VISUAL.2019.8933748
[80] A. Wolff. Computing storyline visualizations with few block crossings. In
Graph Drawing, vol. 10692, p. 365. Springer, 2018.
[81] M. Wunderlich, I. Block, T. von Landesberger, M. Petzold,
M. Marschollek, and S. Scheithauer. Visual analysis of probabilistic
infection contagion in hospitals. In Vision, Modeling, and Visualization,
pp. 143–150. Eurographics Association, 2019.
[82] S. Yagi, T. Itoh, and M. Takatsuka. A layout technique for storyline-based
visualization of consecutive numerical time-varying data. In International
Symposium on Visual Information Communication and Interaction, pp.
156–157. ACM, 2015.
[83] A. Yanez, J. Duggan, C. Hayes, M. Jilani, and M. Connolly. Pandemcap:
Decision support tool for epidemic management. In IEEE Workshop on
Visual Analytics in Healthcare, pp. 24–30. IEEE, 2017.
[84] B. Zacher and I. Czogiel. Supervised learning improves disease outbreak
detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.10061, 2019.

A A NNEX : G ENOME A NALYSIS
To provide further support and verification for the hypothesized transmission pathways, the experts also used genome information of the
pathogen. Comparing genomes of bacterial strains adds a further evidence to the analysis of outbreaks. This tool does not belong to the
described system but represents a standard tool to describe the relatedness of pathogens collected from patients.
In brief, the DNA of each K. pneumoniae was extracted (using
Qiagen DNeasy Blood & Tissue) and sequenced using the illumina
MiSeq system (sequences available from the authors on request).
In total, the genomes of 23 bacterial isolates were analyzed and
compared using the whole genome MultiLocus Sequence Typing
(wgMLST) scheme for K. pneumoniae [11] (BioNumerics v7.6 created
by Applied Maths NV). The results represent the genome relation of the
bacteria strains in a minimum spanning tree. Identical or very similar
genomes (less than 5 allelic differences) were regarded as the same
strain and support a direct transmission. The genome analysis confirms
that eleven patients on the subwards S279 and S295 were infected by
one K. pneumoniae bacteria strain, including the potential patient zero
candidate P113749. The bacterial strains of the patients show no differences in the wgMLST profile. Interestingly, the two other potential
patients zero P108085 and P152039 reveal substantial differences to
this cluster of patients (see Fig. A1). Based on the data, the expert
assigns patient P113749 as patient zero of this particular outbreak on
the subwards. The genome analysis reveals patient P1520395 as a further source of infection for at least one more patient on the considered
wards. Thus, the two transmission pathways occurred simultaneously.

P62411
P63104
P63842
P64716
P66512
P67867
P68475
P70448

P110597

K.

pneumoniae Transmission Cluster 1

K.

pneumoniae Transmission Cluster 2

K. pneumoniae

P152333

unrelated Isolates

P93284

P108085

P113749
P76101
P175082

P53293

P55803

P152039
P48878

P69635
P126336

P54688

P65141

Figure A1: The genome analysis of patients infected by K. pneumoniae
bacteria strain. The numbers on the line indicate the number of different
alleles in the wgMLST scheme. Bacterial strains were regarded as
identical/similar when less than five alleles differed. The visualization
is a minimum spanning tree and was done with BioNumerics.

12

