Impact on the Productivity of Remotely Working IT Professionals of
Bangladesh during the Coronavirus Disease 2019
Kishan Kumar Ganguly, Noshin Tahsin, Mridha Md. Nafis Fuad, Toukir Ahammed,
Moumita Asad, Syed Fatiul Huq, A.T.M. Fazlay Rabbi and Kazi Sakib

arXiv:2008.11636v2 [cs.CY] 11 Sep 2020

Institute of Information Technology, University of Dhaka, Dhaka, Bangladesh
Email: {kkganguly, bsse0914, bsse0920, bsse0806,
bsse0731, bsse0732, bsse0926, sakib}@iit.du.ac.bd

Abstract— Similar to the rest of the world, the recent pandemic situation has forced the IT professionals of Bangladesh
to adopt remote work. The aim of this study is to find out
whether remote work can be continued even after the lockdown
is lifted. As work from home may change various productivity
related aspects of the employees, i.e., team dynamics and
company dynamics, it is necessary to understand the nature
of the change during WFH. Conducting a survey, we asked
the IT professionals of Bangladesh how they perceive their
level of productivity during WFH and how the factors related
to productivity have changed. We analyzed the change and
identified the areas affected by WFH. We discovered that
resource and workspace related issues, emotional well-being
of the employees have been hampered the most during WFH.
We believe that the findings from this study will help to decide
how to resolve those issues and will help to understand whether
WFH can be continued even after the lockdown is lifted.

I. INTRODUCTION
With a GDP growth rate of 8.2%, Bangladesh has one
of the fastest growing market economies in the world [1].
Current Digital Economy Report by the United Nations show
that the ICT sector has become a major economic driver
as global ICT deliverable service exports have tripled from
2005 to 2018 [2]. The export value of Bangladesh ICT sector
has correspondingly increased about fivefold in the same
time range [3]. Moreover, the ICT sector employment in
Bangladesh has increased three times starting from 2013 and
still growing [4]. The target of $5 billion ICT export and 2
million employment set forth by Bangladesh indicates that
its ICT sector will continue to grow.
Due to the current coronavirus pandemic, ICT companies worldwide are increasingly adopting Work From Home
(WFH). A recent survey on global technology industry
employees has shown that WFH during the pandemic has
exercised both positive effects such as increased short breaks
and more freedom as well as negative ones such as burnout,
resource problems and mental health issues [5]. However,
these factors vary across countries, for example, countries
with more nuclear families may face less distraction related
productivity loss than the ones with joint families. A few
studies have been conducted regarding the influence of
these factors on productivity which only focus on developed
countries in a pandemic setting [6]. To the best of the
author’s knowledge, no work has been done on this subject

for developing countries like Bangladesh to date. However,
such a study on Bangladesh is required due to the following
reasons. Firstly, the rapid growth of the ICT sector in
Bangladesh has created increasing pressure on the the ICT
companies to be more productive even during the pandemic.
As these companies are increasingly adopting WFH, knowing the factors that control productivity can help them to
optimize employee performance. Secondly, Bangladesh is
a densely populated country with a significantly different
culture from the developed countries studied in the literature.
Therefore, the influence of the socio-cultural environment
on productivity related factors will be evident in a study
conducted on Bangladesh. Thirdly, As Bangladesh has been
strongly hit by this pandemic, the employees are burdened
with increased mental pressure.
The study conducted by Ralph et al. is the only one that
analyzes ICT sector employee productivity during COVID19 [6]. They measured the impact of mental wellbeing
during this pandemic on employee productivity and found
a significantly negative relationship. Apart from this, several
studies were conducted on productivity factor analysis before
the pandemic. Wagner et al. performed a systematic review of
the productivity related factors where they divided these into
two groups namely technical and soft factors [7]. Technical
factors are related to the project characteristics and developing process such as software size and project duration [7].
Soft factors comprise the culture and working environment
related ones such as communication and cooperation between
team members [7]. Graziotin et al. assessed the productivity
of software engineers based on their comments on news
and social media [8]. They found that increasing task and
turnover rate decreases productivity where frequent short
breaks increases it. Murphy et al. analyzed the productivity
of employees from Google, ABB and National Instruments
[9]. They observed three factors to be positively associated
with productivity which are meeting preparation, feedback
and time management freedom. Meyer et al. conducted a
survey on 379 participants from IT companies of developed
countries where they found the role of workplace environment to significantly influence employee productivity [10].
As literature shows, no study has been done on the productivity ICT professionals of a developing country during the

pandemic situation.
The objective of this study is to understand the impact of
COVID-19 pandemic on the productivity. The target population is the remotely working IT professionals of Bangladesh.
First, an anonymous survey is designed to collect the data.
The questionnaire is prepared considering the factors that
have an impact on productivity in literature. For example,
miscommunication has negative impact on productivity, quiet
workplace has positive impact on productivity etc. A pilot
survey is conducted to refine the questionnaire. Experts from
IT industry and academicians from universities were the
participants of this pilot survey. Then the final questionnaire
is circulated among the IT professionals of Bangladesh.
The data is collected throughout a month. After collecting
data, the preprocessing, i.e., data cleaning and encoding, is
performed. Finally, descriptive analysis is conducted on each
of the factors collected from the survey.
In this survey, the respondents were asked 47 questions
about their personal-life and work-life to discover how those
aspects affect productivity during WFH. Among those, 24
questions were related to their work-life, which were carefully chosen based on related studies mentioned in the previous paragraph. After analyzing those 24 aspects, it has been
found that WFH can be adopted in the software industry of
Bangladesh as it increases the overall employee productivity.
In this study, the top 6 influential factors that positively impact productivity during WFH has been carefully examined
to find whether there is a decrease in productivity caused
by those factors. For example, team cooperation is one of
those factors. After analyzing the survey responses, it has
been found that 60.7% of the respondents’ team cooperation
either increased or remained unchanged during WFH. As
a result, productivity is not hampered. Similarly, the other
5 factors increased or remain unchanged, not hampering
employee productivity. To determine whether WFH increases
productivity or not, it is necessary to examine the factors
negatively affecting productivity. Related studies show that
miscommunication is such a factor. From the data, it has been
seen that although there is an increase in miscommunication
among the employees, the top 6 factors positively affecting
productivity have increased. As a result, increased miscommunication could not hamper productivity. Other factors that
negatively affect productivity have been examined also. It is
seen that resource accessibility, work environment, and emotional well-being during WFH have changed the most leaving
a negative impact on productivity. Most of the respondents
are facing worsened internet connections (60.8%), hardware
constraints (60.2%), more interruption (49.4%), the necessity
of a quiet work-space (42.6%) and increased frequency of
household chores (65.2%). Most of them are feeling less
cheerful (57.7%) than before. As a result, their productivity
has been decreased. From all these findings, it can be seen
that WFH does not affect 18 out of 24 of the productivityrelated factors. The data reflects that the major problems
during WFH are resource-related, work-environment related
and mental state-related. The study reveals that ensuring
strong internet connection, suitable workspace and emotional

well-being, the drawbacks of WFH can be mitigated.
II. M ETHODOLOGY
After problem identification and thorough background
study, a questionnaire was constructed. After incorporating the feedbacks of a pilot survey, the final survey was
conducted. After the pre-processing of the collected data,
patterns and relationship between the factors have been discovered through descriptive analysis. The steps are described
in the following sub-sections.
1) Questionnaire construction: After thoroughly studying related works, 24 factors related to employee productivity were identified. Questions and answers were
designed to understand the change in each of those
factors during WFH and relate that to productivity. The
questions were asked in such a way that makes it easier
for the respondents to compare how the factors were
before WFH and how the factors are now. To scale
the responses, the Likert scale, the most widely-used
approach has been chosen for this study. For example,
to understand how the feedback of work has changed,
the respondents were asked “During work from home,
I get useful feedback about job performance.” and they
were told to select one of the following options: a) Less
b) Slightly less c) Same as before d) Slightly more e)
More.
2) Pilot survey: To refine the questionnaire, a pilot survey
was conducted. Experts from the IT industry and
academicians from universities participated in this pilot
survey and evaluated the questionnaire. Incorporating
the valuable feedback received from them, the questionnaire was modified accordingly.
3) Survey conduction: After the refinement, the final
questionnaire was circulated among the IT professionals of Bangladesh. To keep the dataset unbiased, data
was collected from IT professionals across the country.
The respondents were from 29 out of 64 districts of
Bangladesh. The respondents were from diverse company sectors including software firms, banks and other
financial organizations, telecom companies, technology
consultancies, IT and network services providers, and
Information Technology Enabled Services (ITeS) [11].
Responses were collected throughout a month.
4) Preprocessing: After collecting responses throughout
a month, an excel datasheet was generated from the
survey data. The initial column names were replaced
with short and appropriate terms. The unnecessary
columns, i.e., the email of the respondents and their
company name were dropped for anonymization. As
the study is concerned only with the professionals
who are working from home during this pandemic,
the rows containing data of the respondents who said
they were not working remotely (106 respondents) and
some invalid responses of people who were not IT
professional (69 responses), were removed from the
dataset. For this reason, this study is based on 1062
respondents who are working remotely, among the

randomly sampled 1237 total respondents. There were
some missing values in some columns. In that case, the
analysis was based on the available responses. The column values have been encoded as most of the data was
obtained from user selection from specified options,
thus categorical. The answers were encoded according
to Likert-scale as the options of the questions were
designed based on it. The designation column was
converted to a numeric category by manual verification
as the respondents were free to set the designation title
according to their workplace hierarchy.
5) Analysis: After pre-processing the data, descriptive
analysis has been conducted on each of the factors
collected from the survey to get an idea of the data and
discover patterns and relationships among the factors.
Pie charts, bar-charts, and stacked-bar charts have been
developed to visualize the data.
III. R ESULT AND D ISCUSSION
The detailed results in the following sub-sections demonstrate the viability of WFH in the long run. Although WFH
has both positive and negative consequences, necessary steps
can be undertaken to negate the unwanted outcomes. The
chosen 24 aspects related to the respondents’ work-life were
categorized into 8 different sections: Team Dynamics, Company Dynamics, Team Collaboration, Access to Resources,
Work Environment, Emotional Well-being, Proximity to the
COVID-19 virus, and others, based on the relation between
the factors to make the analysis more efficient. The dataset
has been carefully examined to find which of the 8 sections
are negatively affected by WFH so that it may help the
authority to take necessary measures to mitigate the negative
impacts and ensure maximum productivity during WFH.
From the graphs, it has been found that team cooperation,
activity level, well-defined goals, the number of task assignments, feedback of work, and frequency of communication
are the most influential 6 factors positively impacting productivity. The changes in these factors have also been examined
carefully. After analyzing the data, it has been found that
the respondents’ resource accessibility, work environment,
and emotional well-being during WFH have changed the
most leaving a negative impact on productivity. The data
indicates that ensuring necessary resources, suitable work
environment, and emotional well-being, the drawbacks of
WFH can be mitigated. The following 8 sub-sections state
the findings from the data with necessary graphs.
1) Team Dynamics: As related studies show, change in
team dynamics plays a significant role in the distortion
of individual member output [7], it is necessary to
track its change during WFH. To understand the nature
of team dynamics during WFH, the respondents were
asked about the change in their team cooperation, the
definition of team goals, and team size. Fig. 1 is the
visual representation of the change in team dynamics.
During WFH, changes in the 3 factors related to team
dynamics are stated below.

a) Team Cooperation: Related studies show that,
if cooperation between team members increases,
productivity increases [7]. From the data, it is
seen that 60.7% of the respondents’ team cooperation either remained unchanged or increased
during WFH. It can be said that there has been
no major negative change in productivity due to
this factor.
b) Definition of Team Goals: According to related
studies, a team with clearly-defined goals shows
better performance and is more productive [7].
From the data, it is seen that 71.8% of the respondents’ goals are either equally clearly defined
or more clearly defined during WFH. There has
been no major negative change in productivity
due to change in the teams’ goal definition.
c) Team Size : According to literature, small teams
are more efficient as increase in team size hampers communication and decreases productivity
[7]. From the data, it is seen that 76% of the
respondents’ team size is the same as before or
has decreased during WFH which has a positive
impact on productivity.
2) Company Dynamics: Related studies show that,
changes in company dynamics such as a change in
salary, number of task assignment, and turnover rate
can affect an employee’s productivity to a great extent
[8]. To understand the nature of company dynamics
during WFH, the respondents were asked about the
change in their salary, the number of task assignments,
and the turnover rate. Fig. 2 is the visual representation
of the change in company dynamics. During WFH,
changes in the 3 factors related to company dynamics
are stated below.
a) Salary Change: According to literature, increasing salary increases productivity [12]. From the
data, it can be seen that 78.9% of the respondents’
salary is the same as before or has increased
during WFH which has no negative effect on their
productivity.
b) Number of Task Assignment: Related studies show if employees are assigned more tasks
than before, their productivity decreases [8]. But
from our data, it is seen that the respondents’
productivity increased with increasing number
of tasks. It happened because the respondents
perceived the term "Number of assigned tasks"
as the number of tasks accomplished by them
and thought it as a way to be more productive.
79.1% of the respondents said that the number
of assigned tasks has increased or is the same as
before during WFH increasing their productivity.
That is 79.1% of the respondents accomplished
more or the same amount of task during WFH.
c) Turnover Rate: While according to the literature,
increase in the turnover rate decreases produc-

tivity [8], 88% of the respondents said that the
turnover rate in their company is the same as
before or has decreased which has a positive
impact on productivity.

Fig. 1.

Fig. 2.

The change in team dynamics during WFH

The change in company dynamics during WFH

3) Team Collaboration: To understand how well the
team members are collaborating and communicating
during WFH, the respondents were asked about the
change in their frequency of miscommunication, frequency of communication, meeting preparation, and
feedback of work, as literature shows that these factors
are related to employee productivity [8] [9] Fig. 3
is the visual representation of the change in team
collaboration. During WFH, changes in the 4 factors
related to team collaboration are stated below.
a) Frequency of Miscommunication: Related studies show that increasing miscommunication decreases productivity [8]. The data reveals that
60% of the respondents’ frequency of miscommunication either remained unchanged or decreased during WFH. 40% of the respondents
said that there has been an increase in miscommunication. However, the most influential 6 factors
positively affecting productivity have increased
minimizing the negative impact of miscommunication on productivity.
b) Frequency of communication: According to the
literature, increase in communication between
team members increases productivity [7]. From
the data, it is seen that 60.6% of the respondents’
frequency of communication has either increased
or remained unchanged leaving no negative impact on productivity.
c) Meeting Preparation: Taking more preparation
for meetings increases productivity, according to
related studies [9]. From the data, it is seen that
73.4% of the respondents are taking the same or
more preparation for meetings during WFH. As
a result, there is no decrease in productivity due
to the lack of proper meeting preparation.

d) Feedback: Literature shows that receiving useful
feedback about job performance increases productivity [9]. From the data, it is seen that 67.5%
of the respondents are receiving the same or
more useful feedback for their work during WFH.
There is no decrease in productivity due to the
lack of useful feedback.
4) Access to Resources: Whether the employees have
access to necessary resources, is important to be considered when measuring productivity. For understanding how well the respondents are getting access to
resources during WFH, the respondents were asked
about their software accessibility, quality of internet
connection, and hardware accessibility. Fig. 4 is the
visual representation of the change in access to resources. During WFH, changes in the 3 factors related
to resource access are stated below.
a) Software Accessibility: Related studies show,
access to a limited number of tools (software) has
a negative impact on productivity [13]. Whether
the respondents can access all the necessary software tools during WFH, is a major concern to
understand the change in productivity. The data
reveals that, 77.7% of the respondents are not
feeling any lack of software access during WFH.
b) Quality of Internet Connection: A weak internet connection hampers employee productivity to
a great extent. From the survey data, a significant
negative change has been noticed in the quality
of internet connection during WFH. 60.8% of
the respondents said that the quality of internet
connection of their home is worse than office
causing an obvious decrease in productivity.
c) Hardware Accessibility : Hardware constraints
negatively affect productivity. In this survey,
60.2% of the respondents said they are facing
hardware constraints during WFH. Among them
6.6% are facing it always, 14.7% are facing it
often and 38.9% are facing it sometimes.

Fig. 3.

The change in team collaboration during WFH

5) Work Environment: A proper work environment is
vital for the employees for working productively.
Studies show that the workplace needs to be quiet,
and free of distractions [7]. The lack of a proper
work environment hampers productivity. To find how
work environment during WFH differs from the office
environment, and how it is impacting productivity,

Fig. 4.

The change in access to resources during WFH

the respondents were asked about their workplace
suitability and the frequency of interruptions they are
facing. Fig. 5 is the visual representation of the change
in work environment. During WFH, changes in the
2 factors related to the work environment are stated
below.
a) Workplace Suitability: Literature shows a quiet
work environment increases productivity [7].
From the data, it is seen that 42.6% of the
respondents are feeling the necessity of a quite
work-space. This portion of the respondents’
productivity has been hampered. 32.1% of the
respondents said that the workplace is more quite
than the office. 25.3% said it is suitable during
WFH as it was before.
b) Frequency of Interruptions: According to related studies, the less the frequency of interruptions, the more productivity is [10]. From the
data, it is seen that, 49.4% of the respondents
are feeling that they are facing more interruption
during WFH, while 27.1% said they are facing
less interruption. This increase in interruptions
caused decrease in their productivity.
6) Emotional Well-being: Studies show that the emotional well-being of an employee is associated with
productivity [14]. If a person is emotionally stable
and cheerful, he can perform his tasks better than an
emotionally drained person. To understand the state
of the emotional well-being of the employees during
WFH, the respondents were asked whether they are
feeling cheerful, calm, active, whether they are waking
up feeling rested every day, and whether they are
feeling interest in their daily activities. Fig. 6 is the
visual representation of the change in the employees’
emotional well-being. During WFH, changes in the
5 factors related to emotional well-being are stated
below.
a) Cheerfulness: Being cheerful and in good spirits
increases productivity. 57.7% of the respondents
said that they are feeling less cheerful than before, which has a negative impact on productivity
during WFH. 21.7% of the respondents said that
they are feeling more cheerful, while the rest
of the respondents said their cheerfulness is the
same as before.
b) Calmness: According to related studies, feeling
calm and relaxed has a positive impact on pro-

ductivity. From the data, it is seen that 51% of the
respondents said that they are feeling calm and
relaxed, either the same as before or more than
before. As a result, there is no negative impact
on their productivity.
c) Activity level: Related studies show that, feeling
active and vigorous increases productivity. From
the data, it is seen that 53.5% of the respondents
are feeling active and vigorous, either the same
as before or more than before. As a result, their
productivity is not hampered.
d) Waking up rested: Related studies show, waking
up feeling fresh and rested increases productivity.
62.3% of the respondents said that they are waking up feeling more rested or the same as before,
which has a positive impact on productivity.
e) Pursuance of interest: Respondents were asked
whether their daily life is filled with things that
interest them, as related studies show that pursuance of interest increases productivity. From
the data, it is seen that 62.2% of the respondents
either agree or stay neutral of the fact that they
are doing things that interest them, while 37.8%
of the respondents disagree.

Fig. 5.

Fig. 6.

The change in work environment during WFH

The change in emotional well-being during WFH

7) Proximity to the COVID-19 virus: As exposure
to the COVID-19 virus can affect the employees’
productivity, the employees were asked whether they,
their family members, and roommates are affected with
COVID-19 or not. They were also asked whether they
were affected but got cured, or tested but didn’t get
the results yet. Fig. 7 is the visual representation of
the state of the employees’ exposure to COVID-19.
The findings are stated below.
a) Being affected with Covid-19: From the data, it
has been seen that 75% of the respondents are not
currently infected with COVID-19, were never

infected and never even tested for the virus. As
a result, their productivity is not hampered.
b) Roommate infected with COVID-19: The data
reveals that 72.5% of the respondents’ roommates
are not currently infected, were never infected
and never even tested for the virus. Their productivity is not hampered due to this factor.
c) Family member infected with COVID-19: If
any of the family members of an employee is
infected with COVID-19, his/her emotional wellbeing gets hampered causing decrease in productivity. From the data, it is seen that 70.5% of the
respondents’ family members are not currently
infected, were never infected and never even
tested for the virus. As a result, their productivity
is not hampered due to this factor either.
8) Miscellaneous: The respondents were asked about the
change in other factors associated with productivity.
The factors are the frequency of short breaks, freedom
of time management decisions, frequency of listening
music, frequency of household chores, and fear of
losing job, as those factors impact productivity [8] [9]
[15]. Fig. 8 is the visual representation of the change
in these factors during WFH. The findings are stated
below.
a) The frequency of short breaks: From related
studies, it is seen that, short and frequent breaks
increases productivity [8]. In this survey, 68.9%
of the respondents said that the frequency of
taking short breaks has increased during WFH or
remained unchanged, which has a positive impact
on their productivity.
b) Freedom of time management decisions: According to literature, freedom of making decisions about managing someone’s own time is positively associated with productivity [9]. From the
survey data, it is clear that 78.7% of the respondents’ freedom of time management decisions has
increased or remained unchanged during WFH
which has a positive impact on productivity.
c) Frequency of listening music: Related works
show that listening to music increases productivity [8]. 63% of the respondents of the survey said
their frequency of listening to music has remained
the same as before or increased, increasing productivity.
d) Frequency of household chores: The amount
of household chores has a significant impact on
productivity. If the frequency of household chores
increases, productivity decreases. From the data,
it is seen that 65.2% of the total respondents’
frequency of household chores increased during
WFH, which has a negative impact on the productivity of the employees.
e) Fear of losing job: According to literature, job
security is associated with productivity [15]. The

data reveals that 62.2% of respondents said their
fear of losing job has not increased, leaving no
negative impact on their productivity.

Fig. 7.

Proximity to COVID-19 during WFH

Fig. 8.

Miscellaneous Factors

IV. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
Various studies have been done so far focusing on employee productivity. In this study, we focused on understanding employee productivity during WFH in Bangladesh to find
out whether WFH can be established as an official system
of operations in the IT sector of Bangladesh after the end of
this lockdown through taking proper measures. After clearly
defining the population for this research, factors related to
their productivity were carefully chosen based on related
studies. The questionnaire included only relevant questions.
The pilot survey further helped in checking the relevance
of the questionnaire. After incorporating feedback from the
pilot survey, the questionnaire was modified accordingly. The
randomly selected respondents of the final survey were asked
how they perceive their current level of productivity and
how the 24 aspects related to their work-life changed during
WFH. Ensuring the anonymity of the respondents helped
in getting accurate responses. Analyzing the responses and
discovering the change in those 24 aspects, the longevity of
WFH in the IT sector of Bangladesh has been discovered.
Although the data reveal that WFH has a negative impact on
6 out of 24 of the productivity-related factors (the quality
of internet connection, hardware accessibility, the frequency
of household chores, workplace suitability, the frequency
of interruptions, and cheerfulness of the employees), the
drawbacks can be mitigated through proper steps.
The outcomes of this study may be impacted by
Hawthorne effect. That is, the participants’ responses might
have been changed a bit because of knowing that they
are participating in an experiment. Another issue to be
considered is that, the emotional well-being related factors
are not only affected by WFH. The panic of the pandemic

might have further contribution to the employees’ state of
emotional well-being.
There is a wide area of scope to proceed with the collected
data and conduct further studies to get useful insights. Works
in the future will include a detailed analysis of productivity,
its correlation with the 24 aspects, and their correlation
to each other. Answer for the questions like why WFH is
affecting the mental well-being of the employees, how to
deal with the work-space related issues and ensure a suitable
work-environment in remote work, how to ensure better
hardware access in WFH, how to better manage work-life
and personal life to get the best out of WFH will be searched,
which will require significant research efforts.
R EFERENCES
[1] The World Bank. Gdp growth (annual %) - bangladesh, 2019.
[2] United Nations. Value creation and capture: Implications for developing countries. Digital economy report 2019, United Nations, New
York, United States of America, 2019.
[3] Export Promotion Bureau. Export promotion bureau (epb) data, 2018.
[4] ICT Division. It and ites industry statistics of bangladesh 2019. A
research of leveraging ict for growth, employment & governance (lict)
project, ICT Division, Dhaka, Bangladesh, 2019.
[5] Robin Gray. 74 statistics on remote working during covid-19 lockdown, 2020.
[6] Paul Ralph, Sebastian Baltes, Gianisa Adisaputri, Richard Torkar,
Vladimir Kovalenko, Marcos Kalinowski, Nicole Novielli, Shin Yoo,
Xavier Devroey, Xin Tan, et al. Pandemic programming: How covid19 affects software developers and how their organizations can help.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.01127, 2020.
[7] Stefan Wagner and Melanie Ruhe. A systematic review of productivity
factors in software development. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.06475,
2018.
[8] Daniel Graziotin, Xiaofeng Wang, and Pekka Abrahamsson. Software developers, moods, emotions, and performance. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1405.4422, 2014.
[9] Emerson Murphy-Hill, Ciera Jaspan, Caitlin Sadowski, David Shepherd, Michael Phillips, Collin Winter, Andrea Knight, Edward Smith,
and Matt Jorde. What predicts software developers’ productivity?
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 2019.
[10] André N Meyer, Thomas Fritz, Gail C Murphy, and Thomas Zimmermann. Software developers’ perceptions of productivity. In
Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on
Foundations of Software Engineering, pages 19–29, 2014.
[11] Amit Seal Ami, Asif Imran, Alim Ul Gias, and Kazi Sakib. Effects of
internship on fresh graduates: A case study on iit, du students. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2008.07450, 2020.
[12] Paige Ouimet and Elena Simintzi. Wages and firm performance:
Evidence from the 2008 financial crisis. Available at SSRN 2409496,
2020.
[13] Katrina D Maxwell and Pekka Forselius. Benchmarking software
development productivity. Ieee Software, 17(1):80–88, 2000.
[14] Christian Winther Topp, Søren Dinesen Østergaard, Susan Søndergaard, and Per Bech. The who-5 well-being index: a systematic review
of the literature. Psychotherapy and psychosomatics, 84(3):167–176,
2015.
[15] Aditya Kuvalekar and Elliot Lipnowski. Job insecurity. American
Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 12(2):188–229, 2020.

