1

New Normal: Cooperative Paradigm for Covid-19
Timely Detection and Containment using Internet of
Things and Deep Learning

arXiv:2008.12103v1 [cs.CY] 15 Aug 2020

Farooque Hassan Kumbhar, Syed Ali Hassan, Soo Young Shin Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—The spread of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19)
has caused trillions of dollars in damages to the governments and
health authorities by affecting the global economies. The purpose
of this study is to introduce a connected smart paradigm that not
only detects the possible spread of viruses but also helps to restart
businesses/economies, and resume social life. We are proposing a
connected Internet of Things ( IoT) based paradigm that makes
use of object detection based on convolution neural networks
(CNN), smart wearable and connected e-health to avoid current
and future outbreaks. First, connected surveillance cameras feed
continuous video stream to the server where we detect the interobject distance to identify any social distancing violations. A
violation activates area-based monitoring of active smartphone
users and their current state of illness. In case a confirmed
patient or a person with high symptoms is present, the system
tracks exposed and infected people and appropriate measures
are put into actions. We evaluated the proposed scheme for
social distancing violation detection using YOLO (you only look
once) v2 and v3, and for infection spread tracing using Python
simulation.
Index Terms—Convolution Neural Network, Contagious Diseases, Internet of Things, Smart City, Tracking

I. I NTRODUCTION
The coronavirus (COVID-19) is a contagious virus from the
severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) family which affects the respiratory system of the host with high fever, cough,
and breathing problems. The virus has spread to 213 countries
with devastating effects, starting in 2019-Dec with more than
13.4 million reported cases and 0.58 million deaths by 15 July
20201 . The contagious virus spread by direct exposure to the
infected hosts (human, animals) through a cough or sneeze
droplets which can travel up to 2 meters (6 feet). The risk
of getting infected increases with a close encounter with the
confirmed patient without any intermediate preventive coverings such as face masks, glass shields, eye protectors, etc [1].
Various regular business and social activities such as having
coffee at a coffee shop, getting haircuts from barbers, walking
in a group, taking public transports, etc. lead to human-tohuman infection spread. Various governments took extreme
measures of countrywide lockdown and time-based curfews
to reduce the number of new cases. These steps however cost
too much in terms of business, government financial support,
F. H. Kumbhar, S. A. Hassan and S. Y. Shin are with the IT convergence
department at Kumoh National Institute of Technology, Korea. Corresponding
author S. Y. Shin, email:wdragon@kumoh.ac.kr
1 Total cases: 13.4 million, death: 581,221, active cases: 4.9
million, highest daily cases: 236,000 on 10-July-2020 [Online:
https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/]

and personal psychological impacts. Stopping the spread of
COVID-19 is essential but resuming daily life activities is
also important. Standard operating procedures (SOPs) with
smart lockdowns to minimize the possible spread of infection
can help achieve the goal of restoring economies in a safe
environment.
To open businesses and economies, it is essential to conduct mass screening [2], infection tracing, confirmed patient
monitoring, and timely detection to reduce further spread by
taking appropriate actions. We believe that the Internet of
Things (IoTs) with smart wearable, fog computing [3], and the
smart connected city has a lot to offer [4]. The contact tracing
using mobile applications is already being used by various
countries such as Australia, Singapore, and South Korea to
track people with the confirmed disease and newcomers in self
isolation [5] [6]. Google+Apple and Facebook have stepped
up to provide their service for contact tracing as well [7]. A
partial solution in [8] proposes a headset like wearable device
which can track COVID-19 symptoms. Authors in [9] propose
a surveillance system to monitor social distancing between a
group of people using convolution neural network based object
detection technique; YOLO (you only look once) v3 [10]. An
interesting study in [11] proposed to identify regions with high
mobility using cellular handovers by mapping the relationship
of cellular mobility to disease spread. However, researchers are
working tirelessly to combat the challenges of the COVID-19
pandemic. However, we believe that there is a dire need of
a connected paradigm which not only restricts further virus
spread but also allows people to resume their life.
In this study, we propose a connected IoT-based paradigm
that targets two major agendas; 1) timely detection and appropriate actions to stop the spread and 2 ) new normal with
connected and informed resumption of daily life activities.
First, a connected surveillance camera detects violations of
social distances by detecting objects and reporting for the
possible spread of viruses [12]. Thereafter, the fog nodebased server [13] traces connected cellular devices for active
confirmed patients in the reported area. Each wearable device
based on IoT assists in identifying people with high symptoms
in the reported area. If a confirmed patient or a person with
high symptoms is in the reported area, the system trigger
warnings and/or actions to contain the spread of the virus,
using the connected health care system [14]. Not only does
the proposed paradigm restricts the spread of the virus, but it
also allows a more secure and informed environment to restart
new normal. Our major notable contributions are:

2

Social Distancing Violation

Area based tracking

Disease/Symptoms
based actions

Our proposed scheme has three major phases, as illustrated
in Fig. 1, in which we detect social distance, area of risk, and
personal (exposed or infected) tracing.
A. Social Distancing Violation Detection
The continuous video stream by surveillance cameras is fed
to fog node based object detection model. Each frame of the
video is considered as a separate image and a CNN based
object detection assigns boundary boxes to each object in the
picture. The CNN based model is trained with a number of
desired objects for a single class detection, in this case, person.
Fig. 2 shows the training images which consist of random
people so that the model can detect any person. Our training
has an image database of 2,000 pictures, marked with person
class. We considered two methods of object detection which
are widely used, YOLO v2 and YOLO v3 [15]. YOLO models
accurately and quickly detect objects classified by multiple
labels by applying a single neural network to the image. The
image is divided into several regions where each detected
object is assigned a bounding box with features, such as center
coordinates, height and width, confidence, and object class
shape accuracy. The YOLO v3 is an improved incremental
approach (over YOLO v2) with 53 convolutional layers and
a deep network darknet-53 backbone. Given a test image, the

Timeline

II. P ROPOSED N EW N ORMAL S OLUTION

Testing

1) Detection of social distance breaches using YOLO v2 and
YOLO v3 based on CNN.
2) Area-based tracking of cellular user activity.
3) Detection of active diseased persons in the area.
4) Detection of a highly symptomatic person using a smart
wearable.
5) Contact tracing of persons in the reported area at risk
(confirmed illness or high symptom).
6) Timely actions and warnings (quarantine or self-isolation)
toward persons at risk.

Training

Fig. 1: Proposed IoT and CNN based timely detection scheme, spanning over three major phases

Acceptable Distance

Violation

Fig. 2: Social distance violation detection using CNN based
object detection (YOLOv2 and YOLOv3)

CNN based model produces a collection of all the detected
objects. It can be seen in Fig. 2 that given a video stream over
a timeline, the object detection method identifies the violation
immediately. An example of testing images is also depicted
where the inter-object distance is acceptable or it is in the
violation. The violation triggers area and disease based tracing
for appropriate actions.

3

Algorithm 1 Proposed New Normal Algorithm
1:
2:
3:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
14:
15:
16:
17:
18:
19:
20:

Camera share continuous video stream with the server
for all Video frames do
Detects objects and assigns bounding boxes using
CNN based object detection (YOLO v2 or YOLO v3)
for all Pair of detected objects do
if Exists Dij < Dth then
Server identifies area by communicating with
BSs (associated with camera)
for all Active users in BS(s) area do
Active user health update using health center information
if Exists a user with confirmed disease then
Immediate health and safety actions
else
Active user health vitals using IoT
based smart wearable or last handheld checkup
if Exists a user with high symptoms
then
Immediate notification for self isolation to affected users based on proximity
end if
end if
end for
end if
end for
end for
where Dij is the inter-object distance between
boundary boxes of detected objects, Dth is the allowed
minimum distance threshold,

B. Area at Risk Tracking and Disease/ Symptoms Based
Actions
The connected cellular devices in the area at risk are
identified using cellular data. Each camera feed is also mapped
to the cellular base stations (BSs) in that area. The active
mobile users are scrutinized on two aspects:
1) Confirmed disease cases: We assume that the health
centers have data of confirmed active cases. If a cellular
user in the reported area is a diagnosed active case
then the health officials are notified. Notification to the
active users in the area informs about a possible exposure
which also requires them to self-isolate or to contact a
medical center. Moreover, the active confirmed patient is
immediately quarantined.
2) People having high symptoms for COVID-19: The people
who have been in contact with active confirmed patients
or have been traveling might not show symptoms immediately. We consider that each person is either wearing an
IoT based health monitor or getting health vitals checked
frequently using handheld equipment. Each disease, specially COVID-19 has widely known symptoms that can
help in identifying a possible infection. The IoT based
smart wearable can monitor major observed symptoms
for COVID-19, such as fever (98.6% cases), fatigue (70%
cases), and dry cough (60% cases). A person having

TABLE I: Simulation Parameters
Simulation parameters CNN based object detection (YOLO v2 and
YOLO v3 training parameters)
Parameters
Values
Parameters
Values
Optimizer
SGD (StochasIterations
10,000 [15]
tic Gradient Descent) [15]
Input image di416 X 416 [15]
Exposure
1.5 [15]
mension
Learning rate
0.001 [15]
Channels
3 [15]
Batch size
64 [15]
Decay
0.0005 [15]
Subdivisions
4 [15]
Momentum
0.9 [15]
Stride
1 [15]
Hue
.1 [15]
Saturation
1.5 [15]
Simulation parameters python based virus spread simulation
Time
300 min
Active
50
confirmed
patient
People count
150 to 2500
R0
without
0.6
Masks
Area
1,000 x 1,000
R0 with Masks
0.3
meters
Mobility
Random Walk
Contact duration
10 m
with confirmed
patient
Mobility Speed
[1, 10] meter /
Symptoms per60 m
min
sistence duration
Distance
5 meters
Symptom
0.9
Threshold
Threshold

symptoms higher than a specified threshold for a minimum specific time is also a major concern. If a person
with high symptoms is recorded regardless of the reported
area, then immediate notifications are dispatched. The
person and the people in the close proximity are promptly
asked to self-isolate.
It should be noted that the area that has no violations,
confirmed patients or a person with high symptoms, is not
at risk and can resume activities in the social life.
C. Proposed Connected Paradigm
Algorithm 1 outlines the proposed new normal algorithm
where surveillance cameras continuously monitor to detect any
social distancing violations. Each video frame is passed to
the pre-trained CNN based image detection model. The CNN
based model returns all the detected objects (person class) in
the given picture with boundary boxes. Fig 2 shows the test
images, where three objects are detected and assigned boundary boxes. For every pair of detected objects, an inter-object
distance is compared with a pre-defined and programmable
distance threshold. If the objects (people class) violate the
guidelines for social distancing then the system will request all
active BSs to track active users. With the information available
at health centers, it is identified that any active user in that
area has been confirmed for the infectious disease or that any
user has persistent high symptoms. If there is any confirmed
patient present in the area then immediate action is taken by
health authorities. On the other hand, if a person has high
symptoms, he/she is notified to take immediate self-isolation
precautionary and to notify health officials. The people in the
area at risk are notified without revealing the identities, to take
precautions, and contact health officials if feeling sick.

4

E x p o s e d
In fe c te d (N o M a s k s )
In fe c te d (M a s k s )

YOLOv2
5

P e o p le in P r o x im ity

4
3
2

YOLOv3

1
0

5 0 0

1 0 0 0

1 5 0 0

2 0 0 0

2 5 0 0

A c tiv e U s e r s in T h e A r e a

Fig. 4: People in the proximity of the people with confirmed
disease
E x p o s e d
In fe c te d (N o M a s k s )
In fe c te d (M a s k s )

Fig. 3: Object detection mAP for YOLO v2 and YOLO v3
Our proposed scheme allows people to perform day-to-day
business and operations using smart wearables to keep track
of documented patients and potential patients. We believe that
the proposed system creates a new normal environment, which
can help reopen economies and reduce the wide spread of the
disease.
III. E XPERIMENTS AND P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION
We evaluate the proposed scheme in two perspectives; 1)
Object detection using CNN (YOLO v2 and YOLO v3), and
2) Virus spread using python simulation.
CNN based object detection: We have evaluated two
widely used CNN based object detection algorithms; YOLO v2
and YOLO v3 [10] using a system with GPU NVIDIA Titan.
The darknet-19 for YOLO v2 and darknet-53 for YOLO v3 are
trained on our dataset [15]. The model is trained with 2,000
images each having a resolution of 416 × 416, with a batch
size of 64 and the subdivision of 8. The learning rate of 0.001
ensures faster model convergence with early training time [15].
We ran 10,000 iterations with Stochastic Gradient Descent
(SGD) optimizer. A list of all training parameters is outlined
in Table I. The mean average precision (mAP) is calculated
with the train/test split set of 80/20 ratio. Fig. 3 illustrates
the comparative results generated by the trained CNN based
models of YOLO v2 and YOLO v3. The results smooth in both
the models after 3,000 iterations with very small loss value.
However, the YOLO v3 outperforms YOLO v2 by achieving
the mAP value of up to 90 % as opposed to mAP value of 73
%.

P e o p le in P r o x im ity

3 0 0
2 0 0
1 0 0
0

5 0 0

1 0 0 0

1 5 0 0

2 0 0 0

2 5 0 0

A c tiv e U s e r s in T h e A r e a

Fig. 5: People in the proximity of a person having high
symptoms (potential virus carriers)

Python simulation for virus spread: Considering that the
CNN based object detection module generates a violation
warning in a particular area of 2,000 × 2,000 meters having
500 to 2,500 active users. Each user depicts random mobility
between [0, 20] meters per minute. Our python based simulation assigns a wearable health monitoring device to each
active user which continuously reports health vitals for an
observation period of 500 minutes. We plant 50 confirmed
patients on random locations in the reported area. A user is
exposed to the disease by being in the proximity (distance
threshold 3 meters) of a confirmed patient or a person with
high symptoms. However, the probability of getting infected
if everyone is wearing masks or not wearing masks is set to
an arbitrary programmable value of 0.5 and 0.2, respectively.
Moreover, the symptoms based detection identifies a possible
infected person if he/ she has symptoms higher than a predefined threshold (0.9), for an hour duration.
Fig. 4 illustrates the potentially infected count of exposed

5

persons to the people having confirmed disease. With the
increase in the number of people from 500 to 2500, the risk of
getting exposed also heightens. However, wearing protective
gear like a face mask or eye masks substantially reduces
the probability of getting infected by 50%. On the other
hand, Fig. 5 shows that the number of people exposed to a
person having high symptoms (potential carrier) increase from
20 to 350+ with the increase in the total active users from
500 to 2500, respectively. The protective gears reduce the
risk of getting infected after having exposure by more than
50%. Nevertheless, the proposed scheme’s timely detection
of exposed or infected help in taking appropriate actions.
Only the detected people are required to be isolated or tested,
whereas others carry on with the social lives in the new
normal.
IV. C ONCLUSION
In this study, we propose a connected paradigm by using
IoT based health monitoring and CNN based object detection
methods. The proposed scheme aims to contain the spread
as soon as possible and allow people to continue with their
social activities. Our scheme identifies the social distancing
violations using CNN based object detection and tracks exposed or infected people using a smart wearable. The YOLO
v3 darknet-53 model based on CNN achieves 90%accuracy
in object detection to identify inter-object distance and violation of social distancing. In addition, the python simulation
successfully traces all exposed people with the likelihood that
they will get infected with and without masks. We believe that
this pandemic needs to be evaded by the proposed connected
paradigm and can be a fundamental system for future disasters.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been supported by the National
Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) with grant no.
2019H1D3A1A01102978.
R EFERENCES
[1] V. Chamola, V. Hassija, V. Gupta, and M. Guizani, A Comprehensive
Review of the COVID-19 Pandemic and the Role of IoT, Drones, AI,
Blockchain, and 5G in Managing its Impact, IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp.
9022590265, 2020.
[2] M. S. Hossain, G. Muhammad, and N. Guizani, Explainable AI and Mass
Surveillance System-based Healthcare Framework to Combat COVID-19
like Pandemics, IEEE Network, pp. 17, 2020.
[3] M. Mobasheri, Y. Kim, and W. Kim, Toward Developing Fog Decision
Making on the Transmission Rate of Various IoT Devices Based on
Reinforcement Learning, IEEE Internet Things M., vol. 3, no. 1, pp.
3842, Mar. 2020.
[4] K. S. Awaisi, S. Hussain, M. Ahmed, A. A. Khan, and G. Ahmed,
Leveraging IoT and Fog Computing in Healthcare Systems, IEEE Internet
Things M., vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 5256, Jun. 2020.
[5] R. Abbas and K. Michael, COVID-19 Contact Trace App Deployments:
Learnings from Australia and Singapore, IEEE Consumer Electron. Mag.,
pp. 11, 2020.
[6] E. Hernandez-Orallo, P. Manzoni, C. T. Calafate, and J.-C. Cano, Evaluating How Smartphone Contact Tracing Technology Can Reduce the
Spread of Infectious Diseases: The Case of COVID-19, IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 9908399097, 2020.
[7] K. Michael and R. Abbas, Getting Behind COVID-19 Contact Trace
Apps: The Google-Apple Partnership, IEEE Consumer Electron. Mag.,
pp. 11, 2020.

[8] R. Stojanovic, A. Skraba, and B. Lutovac, A Headset Like Wearable
Device to Track COVID-19 Symptoms, in 2020 9th Mediterranean
Conference on Embedded Computing (MECO), Budva, Montenegro, Jun.
2020, pp. 14.
[9] N. S. Punn, S. K. Sonbhadra, and S. Agarwal, Monitoring COVID-19
social distancing with person detection and tracking via fine-tuned YOLO
v3 and Deepsort techniques, arXiv:2005.01385 [cs], May 2020, Accessed:
Jul. 11, 2020. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2005.01385.
[10] Redmon, Joseph, and Ali Farhadi. ”Yolov3: An incremental improvement.” arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.02767 (2018). [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1804.02767.pdf;
[11] A. A. R. Alsaeedy and E. K. P. Chong, Detecting Regions At Risk
for Spreading COVID-19 Using Existing Cellular Wireless Network
Functionalities, IEEE Open J. Eng. Med. Biol., vol. 1, pp. 187189, 2020.
[12] Syed Ali Hassan, Tariq Rahim, Soo Young Shin, Real-time UAV Detection based on Deep Learning Network, 2019 International Conference
on Information and Communication Technology Convergence (ICTC) pp.
630-632, 2019.
[13] M. Antonini, M. Vecchio, and F. Antonelli, Fog Computing Architectures: A Reference for Practitioners, IEEE Internet Things M., vol. 2, no.
3, pp. 1925, Sep. 2019.
[14] C. Guo, P. Tian, and K.-K. R. Choo, Enabling Privacy-assured Fog-based
Data Aggregation in E-healthcare Systems, IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf., pp. 11,
2020.
[15] W. Fang, L. Wang, and P. Ren, Tinier-YOLO: A Real-Time Object
Detection Method for Constrained Environments, IEEE Access, vol. 8,
pp. 19351944, 2020, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2961959.

Farooque Hassan Kumbhar is a postdoctoral researcher at the School of Electronics, Kumoh National Institute of Technology, Gumi, South Korea.
Between 2017 and 2020 he was an assistant professor in the Department of Computer Science, National
University of Computer and Emerging Sciences,
Pakistan. In 2017, he received his MS and Ph.D.
degree from the College of Software, Sungkyunkwan
University, South Korea. His research findings cover
privacy, mobile communications, C-RAN, Internet
of Things, and Machine to Machine Communication.
His work is well published with IEEE, Springers, IETE, and IET. He is
also director of the research group named as intelliNet: http://intellinet.rf.gd/
Email: farooque.hassan@nu.edu.pk

Syed Ali Hassan completed his master’s degree
from Kumoh National Institute of Technology,
Gumi, South Korea and currently working in korea
as an AI/AR Application Software Developer. He
completed his B.S. (’16) from the Department of
Software Engineering, Mohammad Ali Jinnah University, Pakistan. His interests are in Mixed Reality,
Augmented Reality, Virtual Reality, and Deep Learning. Email: syedali1621@gmail.com

6

Soo Young Shin (M07SM17) received his Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering and computer science
from Seoul National University in 2006. He was
with WiMAX Design Lab, Samsung Electronics,
Suwon, South Korea from 2007 to 2010. He joined
as a full-time professor at School of Electronics,
Kumoh National Institute of Technology, Gumi,
South Korea from 2010. He is currently an Associate
Professor. He was a post-Doc. researcher at the
University of Washington, USA in 2007. In addition,
he was a visiting scholar to University of the British
Columbia, Canada in 2017. His research interests include 5G/6G wireless
communications and networks, signal processing, Internet of things, mixed
reality, drone applications, etc. Email: wdragon@kumoh.ac.kr

