C ROSS -C ULTURAL P OLARITY AND E MOTION D ETECTION
U SING S ENTIMENT A NALYSIS AND D EEP L EARNING - A C ASE
S TUDY ON COVID-19

arXiv:2008.10031v1 [cs.SI] 23 Aug 2020

A P REPRINT
Ali Shariq Imran
Dept. of Computer Science, Norwegian University of Science & Technology (NTNU), Norway.
ali.imran@ntnu.no
Sher Muhammad Doudpota
Dept. of Computer Science, Sukkur IBA University, Pakistan
sher@iba-suk.edu.pk
Zenun Kastrati
Dept. of Computer Science and Media Technology, Linnaeus University, Sweden,
zenun.kastrati@lnu.se
Rakhi Bhatra
Dept. of Computer Science, Sukkur IBA University, Pakistan
rakhi.bhatra@iba-suk.edu.pk

August 25, 2020

A BSTRACT
How different cultures react and respond given a crisis is predominant in a society’s norms and
political will to combat the situation. Often the decisions made are necessitated by events, social
pressure, or the need of the hour, which may not represent the will of the nation. While some are
pleased with it, others might show resentment. Coronavirus (COVID-19) brought a mix of similar
emotions from the nations towards the decisions taken by their respective governments. Social media was bombarded with posts containing both positive and negative sentiments on the COVID-19,
pandemic, lockdown, hashtags past couple of months. Despite geographically close, many neighboring countries reacted differently to one another. For instance, Denmark and Sweden, which share
many similarities, stood poles apart on the decision taken by their respective governments. Yet, their
nation’s support was mostly unanimous, unlike the South Asian neighboring countries where people
showed a lot of anxiety and resentment. This study tends to detect and analyze sentiment polarity
and emotions demonstrated during the initial phase of the pandemic and the lockdown period employing natural language processing (NLP) and deep learning techniques on Twitter posts. Deep
long short-term memory (LSTM) models used for estimating the sentiment polarity and emotions
from extracted tweets have been trained to achieve state-of-the-art accuracy on the sentiment140
dataset. The use of emoticons showed a unique and novel way of validating the supervised deep
learning models on tweets extracted from Twitter.

Keywords Behaviour Analysis · COVID-19 · Crisis · Deep Learning · Emotion Detection · LSTM · Natural Language
Processing · Neural Network · Outbreak · Opinion mining · Pandemic · Polarity Assessment · Sentiment Analysis ·
Tweets · Twitter · Virus.

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 25, 2020

Figure 1: Abstract Model of the Proposed Tweets’ Sentiment and Emotion Analyser.

1

Introduction

The world is seeing a paradigm shift the way we conduct our daily activities amidst ongoing coronavirus (COVID19) pandemic - be it online learning, the way we socialize, interact, conduct businesses or do shopping. Such global
catastrophes have a direct effect on our social life; however, not all cultures react and respond in the same way given a
crisis. Even under normal circumstances, research suggests that people across different cultures reason differently [1].
For instance, Nisbett in his book "The geography of thought: How Asians and Westerners think differently... and why"
stated that the East Asians think on the basis of their experience dialectically and holistically, while Westerners think
logically, abstractly, and analytically [2]. This cultural behavior and attitude are mostly governed by many factors,
including the socio-economic situation of a country, faith and belief system, and lifestyle. In fact, the COVID-19 crisis
showed greater cultural differences between countries that seem alike with respect to language, shared history and
culture. For example, even though Denmark and Sweden are two neighboring countries that speak almost the same
language and share a lot of culture and history, they stand at extreme ends of the spectrum when it comes to the way
how they reacted to coronavirus [3]. Denmark and Norway imposed more robust lockdown measures closing borders,
schools, restaurants, and restricting gathering and social contact, while on the other side, Sweden has taken a relaxed
approach to the corona outbreak keeping its schools, restaurants, and borders open.
Social media platforms play an essential role during the extreme crisis as individuals use these communication channels to share ideas, opinions, and reactions with others to cope with and react to crises. Therefore, in this study, we
will focus on exploring collective reactions to events expressed in social media. Particular emphasis will be given to
analyzing people’s reactions to global health-related events especially the COVID-19 pandemic expressed in Twitter’s
social media platform because of its widespread popularity and ease of access using the API. To this end, tweets
collected from thousands of Twitter users communicated within four weeks after the corona crisis are analyzed to
understand how different cultures were reacting and responding to coronavirus. Additionally, an extended version
of publicly available tweets dataset was also used. A new model for sentiment and emotion analysis is proposed.
The model takes advantage of natural language processing (NLP) and deep neural networks and comprises two main
stages. The first stage involves sentiment polarity classifier that classifies tweets as positive and negative. The output
of the first stage is then used as input to an emotion classifier that aims to assign a tweet to either one of positive
emotions classes (joy and surprise) or one of the negative emotions classes (sad, disgust, fear, anger). Figure 1 shows
the abstract model of proposed system of sentiment and emotion analysis on tweets’ text.
2

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 25, 2020

1.1

Study Objective & Research Questions

Our primary objective with this study is to understand how different cultures behave and react given a global crisis.
The state of the questions addressed about the cultural differences as a techno-social system reveals potentialities in
societal attitudinal, behavioral, and emotional predictions.
In the present investigation, to examine those behavioral and emotional factors that describe how societies react under different circumstances, the general objective is to analyze the potential of utilizing NLP-based sentiment and
emotional analysis techniques in finding answers to the following research questions (RQ).
1. RQ1: To what extent NLP can assist in understanding cultural behavior?
2. RQ2: How reflective are the observations to the actual user sentiments analyzed from the tweets?
3. RQ3: To what extent the sentiments are the same within and across the region?
4. RQ4: How are lockdowns and other measures seen by different countries/cultures?
1.2

Contribution

The major contributions of this article are as following:
• A supervised deep learning sentiment detection model for Twitter feeds concerning the COVID-19 pandemic.
• Proposed a multi-layer LSTM assessment model for classifying both sentiment polarity and emotions.
• Achieved state-of-the-art accuracy on Sentiment140 polarity assessment dataset.
• Validation of the model for emotions expressed via emoticons.
• Provide interesting insights into collective reactions on coronavirus outbreak on social media.
The rest of the article is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the research design and study dimensions. Related
work is presented in section 3. Data collection procedure and data preparation steps are described in section 4, whereas,
sentiment and emotion analysis model is presented in section 5. Section 6 entails the results followed by discussion
and analysis in section 7. Lastly, section 8 concludes the paper with potential future research directions.

2
2.1

Material & Methods
Research Design

The study is conducted using quantitative (experimental) research methodology on users’ tweets posted post corona
crisis. The investigation required collecting users’ posts on Twitter from early February 2020 until the end of April
2020, when the first few cases were reported worldwide and in a respective country for ten to twelve weeks. The
reason for using only the initial few weeks is that people usually get accustomed to the situation over time and an
initial phase is enough to grasp the general/overall behavior of the masses towards a crisis and the policies adopted
by respective governments. Several measurements have been taken in this study during data collection that requires
cataloging for training deep learning models and for further analysis. These are discussed in the next subsection.
2.2

Study Dimensions

Following dimensions are used to facilitate the interpretation of the results:
• Demography-(d): country / region under study. This study focuses on two neighbouring countries from South
Asia, two from Nordic, and two from North America.
• Timeline-(t): the day from the initial reported cases in the country up to 4-12 weeks.
• Culture-(c): East (South-East Asia) vs. West (Nordic/America)
• Polarity-(p): sentiment classified as either positive or negative.
• Emotions-(e): Feelings expressed as joy, surprise (astonished), sad, disgust, fear and anger.
• Emoticons-(et): emotions expressed through graphics for emotions listed above i.e.,
3

,

,

,

,

.

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 25, 2020

2.3

Tools & Instrument

Python scripts are used to query Tweepy Twitter API1 for fetching users’ tweets and extracting feature set for cataloging. NLTK2 is used to preprocess the retrieved tweets. NLP-based deep learning models are developed to predict
sentiment polarity and users’ emotions using Tensorflow and Keras as a back-end deep learning engine. Sentiment140
and Emotional Tweets datasets are used to train classifier A and Classifier B/C respectively, as discussed in section 5.
Visualization and LSTM model prediction as an instrument to analyze the results in addition to correlation are used.
The results of sentiment and emotion recognition are validated through an innovative approach to exploiting emoticons
extracted from the Tweets, which is a widely accepted feature of expressing one’s feelings.
2.4

Deep Learning Models

Deep learning models for sentiment detection are employed in this study. A deep neural network (DNN) consists of an
input, output, and a set of hidden layers with multiple nodes. The training process of a DNN consists of a pre-trainig
and a fine-tuning steps.
The pre-training step consists of weight initialization in an unsupervised manner via a generative deep belief networks
(DBN) on the input data [4], followed by network training in a greedy way by taking two layers at a time as a restricted
Boltzmann machine (RBM), given as:
E(v, h) = −

K X
L
K
L
X
X
(vk − ak )2 X
vk
hl b l ,
hl wkl −
−
2
σk
2σk

k=1 l=1

k=1

(1)

l=1

where σk is the standard deviation, wkl is the weight value connecting visible units vk and the hidden units hl , ak
and bl are the bias for visible and hidden units, respectively. The Equation 1 represents the energy function for the
Gaussian-Bernoulli RMB.
The hidden and visible units’ joint-probability are defined as:
e−E(v,h)
p(v, h) = P −E(v,h) .
e

(2)

v,k

Whereas, a contrastive divergence algorithm is used to estimate the trainable parameters by maximizing the expected
log probability [4], given as:
X
θ = argmaxθ E[log
p(v, h)],
(3)
h

where θ represents the weights, biases and standard deviation.
The network parameters are adjusted in a supervised manner using back-propagation technique in the fine-tuning step.
The back-propagation is an expression for the partial derivative ∂C
∂w of the cost function C with respect to any weight
w (or bias b) in the network. The quadratic cost function can be defined as:
1 X
2
y(x) − αL (x) ,
(4)
C=
2n x
where n is the total number of training examples, x is the training samples, y = y(x) is the corresponding desired
output, L denotes the number of layers in the network, and αL = αL (x) is the vector of activations output from the
network when x is input.
The proposed sentiment assessment model employs LSTM, which is a variant of a recurrent neural network (RNN).
LSTMs help preserve the error that can be back-propagated through time and layers. They allow RNN to learn
continuously over many time steps by maintaining a constant error. RNN maintains memory which distinguish itself
from the feedforward networks. LSTMs contain information outside the normal flow of the RNN in a gated cell. The
process of carrying memory forward can be expressed mathematically as:
ht = φ(W xt + U ht−1 ),

(5)

where ht is the hidden state at time t. W is the weight matrix, and U is the transition matrix. φ is the activation
function.
1
2

https://www.tweepy.org
https://www.nltk.org

4

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 25, 2020

3

Related Work

3.1

Reactions to Events in Social Media

There is a large body of literature concerning people’s reactions to events expressed in social media, which generally
can be distinguished by the type of the event the response is related to and by the aim of the study [5]. Types of
events cover natural disasters, health-related events, criminal and terrorist events, and protests, to name a few. Studies
have been conducted for various purposes including examining the spreading pattern information on Twitter on Ebola
[6] and on coronavirus outbreak [7], tracking and understanding public reaction during pandemics on twitter [8, 9],
investigating insights that Global Health can draw from social media [10], conducting content and sentiment analysis
of tweets [11].
3.2

Sentiment Polarity Assessment

Sentiment analysis on Twitter data has been an area of wide interest for more than a decade. Researchers have
performed sentiment polarity assessment on Twitter data for various application domains such as for donations and
charity [12], students’ feedback [13], on stocks [14–16], predicting elections [17], and understanding various other
situations [18]. Most approaches found in the literature have performed lexicon-based sentiment polarity detection
via a standard NLP-pipeline (pre-processing steps) and POS tagging steps for SentiWordNet, MPQA, SenticNet or
other lexicons. These approaches compute a score for finding polarity of the Tweet’s text as the sum of the polarity
conveyed by each of the micro-phrases m which compose it [19], given as:
P ol(mi ) =

k
X
score(termj ) ∗ wpos( termj )

|mi |

j=1

,

(6)

where wpos( termj ) is greater than 1 if pos(termj ) = adverbs, verbs, adjectives, otherwise 1.
The abundance of literature on the subject cited led Kharde et al. [20] and others [21–23] to present a survey on
conventional machine learning- / lexicon-based methods to deep learning-based technique respectively, to analyze
tweets for polarity assessment, i.e., positive, negative, and neutral.
The authors in [24] address the issue of spreading public concern about epidemics using Twitter data. A sentiment
classification approach comprising two steps is used to measure people’s concerns. The first step distinguishes personal
tweets from the news, while the second step separates negative from non-negative tweets. To achieve this, two main
types of methods were used: 1) an emotion-oriented, clue-based method to automatically generate training data, and
2) three different Machine Learning (ML) models to determine the one which gives the best accuracy.
Exploratory sentiment classification in the context of COVID-19 tweets is investigated in the study conducted by
Samuel et al. [25]. Two machine learning techniques, namely Naïve Bayes and Logistic Regression, are used to
classifying positive and negative sentiment in tweets. Moreover, the performance of these two algorithms for sentiment
classification is tested using two groups of data containing different lengths of tweets. The first group comprises
shorter tweets with less than 77 characters, and the second one contains longer tweets with less than 120 characters.
Naïve Bayes achieved an accuracy of 91.43% for shorter tweets and 57.14% for longer tweets, whereas, a worse
performance is obtained by Logistic Regression, with an accuracy of 74.29% for shorter tweets and 52% for longer
tweets, respectively. After the lockdown on the COVID-19 outbreak, Twitter sentiment classification of Indians is
explored by the authors in [26]. A total of 24,000 tweets collected from March 25th to March 28th , 2020 using the
two prominent keywords: #IndiaLockdown and #IndiafightsCorona are used for analysis. The results revealed that
even though there were negative sentiments expressed about the lockdown, tweets containing positive sentiments were
quite present.
3.3

Emotion Classification

Hassan et al. [27] utilized the Circumplex model that characterizes affective experience along two dimensions: valence
and arousal for detecting emotions in Twitter messages. The authors build the lexicon dictionary of emotions from
emotional words from LIWC3 (Linguistic Inquiry & Word Count). They extracted uni-grams, emoticons, negations
and punctuation as features to train conventional machine learning classifiers in a supervised manner. They achieved
an accuracy of 90% on tweets.
3

http://www.liwc.net/

5

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 25, 2020

Figure 2: Total No. of Tweets per Country for the Period 3rd to 29th Feb. 2020 for Trending Hashtags #.
The study conducted by Fung et al. [28] examines how people reacted to the Ebola outbreak on Twitter and Google. A
random sample of tweets are examined, and the results showed that many people expressed negative emotions, anxiety,
anger, which were higher than those expressed for influenza. The findings also suggested that Twitter can provide
valuable information on people’s anxiety, anger, or negative emotions, which could be used by public authorities and
health practitioners to provide relevant and accurate information related to the outbreak.
The authors in [29] investigate people’s emotional response during the Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS)
outbreak in South Korea. They used eight emotions to analyze people’s responses. Their findings revealed that 80%
of the tweets were neutral, while anger and fear dominated the tweet concerning the disease. Moreover, the anger
increased over time, mostly blaming the Korean government while there was a decline in fear and sadness responses
over time. This observation, as per the authors, was understandable as the government was taking strict actions to
prevent the infection, and the number of new MERS cases decreased as time went by. The important finding was
that the surprise, disgust, and happiness were more or less constant. A similar study is conducted by the researchers
in [7]. The study focuses on emotional reactions during the COVID-19 outbreak by exploring the tweets. A random
sample of 18,000 tweets is examined for positive and negative sentiment along with eight emotions, including anger,
anticipation, disgust, fear, joy, sadness, surprise, trust. The findings showed that there exists an almost equal number
of positive and negative sentiments, as most of the tweets contained both panic and comforting words. The fear among
the people was the number one emotion that dominated the tweets, followed by the trust of the authorities. Also,
emotions such as sadness and anger of people were prevalent.

4

Dataset

We used two tweets’ datasets in this study to detect sentiment polarity and emotion recognition. Trending hashtag
# data explained in subsection 4.1 that we collected ourselves and the Kaggle dataset presented in subsection 4.2.
We additionally used the Sentiment140 [30] and Emotional Tweets dataset [31] to train our proposed deep learning
models. The reason for using these two particular datasets for training the model is: (i) the availability of manually
labeled state-of-the-art dataset and (ii) the lack of labeled tweets extracted from Twitter. The focus of our study is six
neighboring countries from three continents having similar cultures and circumstances. These include Pakistan, India,
Norway, Sweden, USA, and Canada. We specifically opted for these six countries for cross-cultural analysis due size,
approach adopted by respective governments, popularity and cultural similarity.
4.1

Trending Hashtag Data

The study employs retrieving and collecting trending hashtag # tweets ourselves due to the lack of publicly available
datasets for the initial period of COVID-19 outbreak. For instance, #lockdown was trending across the globe during
6

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 25, 2020

February 2020; #StayHome was trending in Sweden, while COVID-19 was trending throughout the period February
- April 2020. Figure 2 shows the total number of tweets per country for trending hashtags # between 3rd February to
29th February 2020. We only retrieved the trending hashtag # tweets from across six countries mentioned earlier for
the initial phase of the pandemic for this study.
4.1.1

Data collection procedure

A standard Twitter search API, known as Tweepy, is used to fetch users’ tweets. Multiple queries are executed via
Tweepy containing trending keywords #Coronavirus, #COVID_19, #COVID19, #COVID19Pandamic, #Lockdown,
#StayHomeSaveLives, and #StayHome for the period Tp = {Sd , Ed }, where Sd is the starting date, i.e. when the first
case of the corona patient is reported in a given country/region and Ed is the end date. The keywords are chosen based
upon the trending keywords during Tp . Only tweets in English for a given region are cataloged for further processing
containing Tweet ID, text, user name, time, and location.
4.1.2

Data preparation

PRISMA4 approach is adopted in this study to query COVID-19 related tweets and to filter out the irrelevant ones.
Following pre-processing steps are applied to clean the retrieved tweets:
1. Removal of mentions and colons from tweet text.
2. Replacement of consecutive non-ASCII characters with space.
3. Tokenization of tweets.
4. Removal of stop-words and punctuation via NLTK library.
5. Tokens are appended to obtain cleaned tweets.
6. Extraction of emoticons from tweets.
The following items are cataloged for each tweet: Tweet ID, Time, Original Text, Cleaned Text, Polarity, Subjectivity,
User Name, User Location and Emoticons. A total of 27,357 tweets were extracted after pre-processing and filtering,
as depicted in Table 1.
Sr.#
1
2
3
4
5
6

Country Trending Hashtag # Dataset Kaggle Dataset
Pakistan
2501
9869
India
8455
70392
Norway
168
476
Sweden
571
816
Canada
5367
42127
USA
10295
336606
Total
27357
460286
Table 1: No of tweets per Country for Trending Hashtag # Dataset After Filtering and Kaggle Dataset.

4.2

Kaggle Dataset

We further went on to include Tweets for the period of March to April 2020 from the publically available dataset since
after data-preparation, we were left with a small number of tweets from Nordic countries. Table 1 shows the number
of tweets per country under consideration for the Kaggle dataset5 from 12th of March to 30th April 2020. The total
number of tweets is 460,286, out of which USA tweets contribute 73%. The hashtags # applied to retrieve Kaggle
dataset tweets include #coronavirus, #coronavirusoutbreak, #coronavirusPandemic, #covid19, #covid_19. From 17th
March till the end of the April two more hashtags were included, i.e., # epitwitter, #ihavecorona.
4.3

Sentiment140 Dataset

We used the Sentiment140 dataset from Stanford [30] for training our sentiment polarity assessment classifier - A,
presented in section 5.1. This dataset contains an overwhelming number of positive and negative tweets. Each category
4
5

http://www.prisma-statement.org
https://www.kaggle.com/smid80/coronavirus-covid19-tweets

7

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 25, 2020

contains 0.8 million tweets, a staggering number of a total of 1.6 million tweets. We particularly opted for this dataset
to train our deep learning models in a supervised manner due to the unavailability of the labeled tweets related to
COVID-19.
4.4

Emotional Tweets Dataset

Emotional Tweets dataset is utilized in this study to train classifier B and classifier C for emotions recognition, described in 5.2 and 5.3, respectively. The tagging process of this dataset is reported by Saif et al. in [31]. The dataset
contains six classes as summarized in Table 2. The first two labels, joy and surprise, are positive emotions, whereas
the remaining four, sadness, fear, anger, and disgust, are negative emotions. The dataset comprises of 21,051 total
number of labeled tweets.
Sr. # Class Label Number of Instances Sentiment Polarity
1
Joy
8240
Positive
2
Surprise
3849
Positive
3
Sad
3830
Negative
4
Fear
2816
Negative
5
Anger
1555
Negative
6
Disgust
761
Negative
Table 2: Emotional Tweet Dataset Containing Six Class Labels for Positive and Negative Sentiment Polarity.

5

Model for Sentiment and Emotion Analysis

Literature suggests many attempts of tweets’ sentiment analysis, but very few attempts of emotions’ classification.
Sentiment analysis on tweets refers to the classification of an input tweet text into sentiment polarities, including
positive, negative and neutral, whereas emotions’ classification refers to classifying tweet text in emotions’ label
including joy, surprise, sadness, fear, anger and disgust.
Sentiment polarity certainly conveys meaningful information about the subject of the text; however, the emotion
classification is the next level. It suggests if the sentiment about the subject is negative, then to what extent it is
negative – being negative with anger is a different state of mind than being negative and disgusted. Therefore, it is
important to extend the task of sentiment polarity classification to the next level and identify emotion in negative and
positive sentiment polarities. The rest of this section explains the working of each of the components in the abstract
model, depicted in Figure 1. All the models and Jupyter Notebooks developed for this paper are available on paper’s
GitHub repository6 .
5.1

Sentiment Assessment – Classifier A

The first stage classifier in our model classifies an input tweet text in either positive or negative polarity. For this, we
employed the Sentiment140 dataset explained in section 4.3 – the most popular dataset for such polarity classification
tasks. For developing our first stage model, we padded each input tweet to ensure a uniform size of 280 characters,
which is standard tweet maximum size.
To establish a baseline model, a simple deep neural network based on an embedding layer, max-pooling layer, and
three dense layers of 128, 64, and 32 outputs were developed. The last layer uses sigmoid as an activation function,
as it performs better in binary classification, whereas all intermediate layers use ReLU as an activation function. This
baseline model splits 1.6 million tweets in training and test sets with 10% tweets (160,000 tweets) spared for testing
the model. The remaining 90% tweets were further divided into a 90/10 ratio for training and model validation,
respectively. The model training and validation was set to ten epochs; however, the model over fits immediately after
two epochs, therefore, it was retrained on two epochs to avoid overfitting. The training and validation accuracy on the
baseline models was 96% and 81%, respectively. Table 3 summarizes training and validation accuracy for each of the
five proposed models along with model structures. Figure 3 shows structure of the best performing model i.e. LSTM
with FastText model.
Table 4 shows the F1 and the accuracy scores on test set – 10% of the dataset comprising of 160,000 tweets equally
divided into positive and negative polarities. The table also presents the previously best-reported accuracy and F1
score on the dataset, as reported in [32]. The model proposed in this paper based on FastText outperforms all other
6

https://github.com/sherkhalil/COVID19

8

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 25, 2020

Sr. #
1

Model Name
DNN (Baseline)

2

LSTM + FastText

3

LSTM + GloVe

4

LSTM + GloVe
Twitter

5

LSTM
without
pretrained
embedding

Model Configuration/ Parameters
Embedding Layer with 300 Dimension,
GlobalMaxPooling Layers with 128, 64,
32 with ReLU, Dense 2 with Sigmoid
Embedding Layer with wiki-news-300d1M.vec, LSTM(32) ReLU, Dropout and
Recurrent Dropout = 0.2, Dense(2) with
Sigmoid
Embedding Layer with glove.6B.300d.txt,
LSTM(32) ReLU, Dropout and Recurrent
Dropout = 0.2, Dense(2) with Sigmoid
Embedding
Layer
with
glove.twitter.27B.200d.txt,
LSTM(32)
ReLU, Dropout and Recurrent Dropout =
0.2, Dense(2) with Sigmoid
Embedding Layer LSTM (32) with ReLU
and Dense Layers 2 with Sigmoid

Training Accuracy
95%

Validation Accuracy
81%

94%

82%

96%

82%

92%

83%

96%

83%

Table 3: Training-validation Accuracy on Sentiment140 Dataset for Five Proposed Deep Learning Models.

Figure 3: LSTM + FastText Model Summary.
models, including previously best-reported accuracy. Therefore, we choose this model as our first stage classifier to
classify tweets in positive and negative polarities.
5.2

Emotion Recognition – Classifier B

Once the polarity from Classifier A is positive, the next step is to identify positive emotions in the tweet. In order
to extract tweet emotions, we use the Emotional Tweets dataset presented in section 4.4. If the label from first stage
Classifier A is positive, the text is applied to classifier A to determine exact positive emotions – joy or surprise.
In order to extract positive emotions from the positive tweets, the negative emotions’ labels were removed at Classifier
B, leaving only two positive labels – joy and surprise. Repeating the same experiments as in Classifier A, the performance of five models was tested for this classification task. The test accuracy for each of these models is reported in
Table 5. The model based on Glove.twitter.27B.300d pre-trained embedding with LSTM outperforms the other four
models; therefore, we use LSTM with GloVe embedding at this stage.
5.3

Emotion Recognition – Classifier C

The final classifier at the second stage is Classifier C, which classifies negative polarity tweets in negative emotions. As
reported in Table 2, although there are four labels in negative emotion category, however, we drop the forth category –
disgust as it has very few instances and causes performance degradation for the dataset being imbalance. We performed
experiments of remaining three labels on our five models. Table 6 summarises models’ performance on 10% test data.
Once again, the classifier based on LSTM with pre-trained embedding Glove.twitter.27B.300d outperforms the other
four models; therefore, we use it for classifying negative polarity tweets in negative emotions – sadness, anger and
fear. Figure 4 shows the structure of model for classifier B and C.
9

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 25, 2020

Model #
1
2
3
4
5

Model Name
F1 Score Accuracy
DNN (Baseline)
79.0%
78.4%
LSTM + FastText
82.4%
82.4%
LSTM + GloVe
81.5%
81.4%
LSTM + GloVe Twitter
80.4%
80.4%
LSTM + w/o Pretrained
81.6%
81.4%
Embed.
6
CONV Based on [32]
81.7%
81.1%
Table 4: F1 and accuracy scores of Six Deep Learning Models
Model #
1
2
3
4
5

Model Name
F1 Score Accuracy
DNN (Baseline)
62.7%
78.4%
LSTM + FastText
67.5%
80.8%
LSTM + GloVe
69.0%
80.3%
LSTM + GloVe Twitter
69.9%
81.9%
LSTM + w/o Pretrained
68.4%
79.8%
Embed.
Table 5: F1 and Accuracy Scores of Five Proposed Models on Positive Emotions (Joy and Surprise).

The GloVe: Global Vector for Word Representation used in classifier B and C is a model for word representation
trained on five corpora, a 2010 Wikipedia dump with 1 billion tokens; a 2014 Wikipedia dump with 1.6 billion tokens;
Gigaword 5 which has 4.3 billion tokens; the combination Gigaword5 + Wikipedia2014, which has 6 billion tokens;
and on 42 billion tokens of web data, from Common Crawl. The process of learning GloVe word embedding is
explained in [33].
Similarly, FastText word embedding used in our Classifier A is an extension to word2vec model. FastText represents
words as n-gram of characters. For example, to represent word computer with n = 3, the FastText representation is <co,
com, omp, mpu, put, ute, ter, er>. A more detailed information on integration of general-purpose word embeddings
like GloVe and FastText, and deep learning within a classification system can be found in [34].
5.4

Validation Criteria

The lack of ground truth i.e. labeled Tweets for queried test dataset for sentiment assessment concerning COVID-19,
required the use of emoticons as a mechanism to validate the detected results into positive and negative polarities, as
well as for emotions. We, therefore, propose the use of emoticons extracted from tweets to check whether a tweet’s
polarity and emotions reflect the sentiments depicted via emoticons the same or no. It may not be a perfect system, but
a way to assess the accuracy of more than a million tweets via our proposed classifiers in a weakly supervised manner.
The use of emoticons in sentiment analysis is not something new. In fact, there is an abundance of literature that
supports the notion of utilizing emoticons in sentiment analysis [35, 36]. However, rather than using emoticons for
sentiment detection, we use them for validating our model’s performance. The emoticons were grouped into six
categories, as described in Table 2. The type and description of emoticons used are depicted in Table 7 for each group
category.

Figure 4: LSTM + GloVe Model Summary.
10

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 25, 2020

Figure 5: Side-by-Side Country-Wise Comparison of Sentiments Analysis on Trending Hashtag # data for the Period
Feb.3 to Feb.29, 2020. Positive and Negative Sentiment Graphs long with the Averaged Tweets’ Polarity for Sweden
(top–left), Norway (top–right), Canada (middle–left), USA (middle–right), Pakistan (bottom–left), and India (bottom–
right).

11

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 25, 2020

Model #
1
2
3
4
5

Model Name
F1 Score Accuracy
DNN (Baseline)
59.0%
64.5%
LSTM + FastText
62.1%
66.0%
LSTM + GloVe
65.8%
67.7%
LSTM + GloVe Twitter
69.2%
69.9%
LSTM + w/o Pretrained
62.1%
66.0%
Embed.
Table 6: F1 and Accuracy Scores of Five Models on Negative Emotions (Sad, Anger, Fear)
Sr

Emtotions

1

Joy

2

Surprise

3

Sad

4

Anger

5

Fear

6

Disgust

Emoticons

Unicode Description
1F600
grinning face
1F602
face with tears of joy
1F603
smiling face with open mouth
1F604
smiling face with open mouth and open eyes
1F605
smiling face with open mouth and cold sweat
1F606
smiling face with open mouth and tighly-closed eyes
1F60A
smiling face with smiling eyes
1F60D
smiling face with heart-shaped eyes
1F632
astonished face
1F62E
face with open mouth
1F62F
hushed face
1F613
face with cold sweat
1F614
pensive face
1F61E
dissappointed face
1F622
crying face
1F62D
loudly crying face
1F623
persevering face
1F620
angry face
1F621
pounting face
1F624
face with look of triumph
1F628
fearful face
1F632
face screaming in fear
1F62C
grimacing face
Table 7: Grouping of the Emoticons based on the Emotions.

We had a total number of 460,286 tweets from six selected countries in the English language. Out of these tweets,
443,670 tweets did not contain any emoticon, whereas 11,110 tweets used positive emoticon (joy, surprise), and 5,674
used negative emoticon (sad, disgust, anger, fear). The remaining tweets used a mix of emoticons like joy with disgust,
anger with surprise, etc.; therefore, these usages of emoticons were considered sarcastic expressions of emotion, thus
being excluded in the validation process.
We tested our Model #2 presented in Table 4 (based on LSTM + FastText trained on Sentiment140) on the remaining
16,784 positive and negative tweets. We used these 16,784 tweets as test data to assess model accuracy. The emoticons
were considered actual labels and the model predicted the labels on the tweet text. The model achieved an accuracy
of 76% and an F1 score of 78%. This indicates that our model is reasonably consistent with the users’ sentiments
expressed in terms of emoticons.
The reason of good accuracy achieved in the validation phase is that our process of validation is indeed the same as
the process used in preparing the Sentiment140 dataset – the dataset on which our model is based upon for sentiment
polarity assessment.

6

Results on Trending Hashtag # Data

The proposed Model #2, which achieved state-of-the-art polarity assessment accuracy on the Sentiment140 dataset,
was used to detect polarity and emotions on the trending hashtag # data.
12

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 25, 2020

Figure 5 shows the side-by-side country-wise comparison of sentiment polarity detection for the initial period of four
weeks. The sentiments are normalized to 0 - 1 as the sum of tweets per day/total number of tweets for a given country.
As can be seen from the graphs illustrated in Figure 5, there were only a few tweets concerning the coronavirus
outbreak posted over almost all the month of February. There were also few days where no tweets have been posted,
especially in Pakistan and India. It is interesting to note that the number of tweets is rapidly increased only in the last
2-3 days of February, and all six countries see this growing trend among Twitter users for sharing their attitudes, i.e.,
positive and negative about coronavirus.
The graphs between neighboring Sweden and Norway (top–row) and that of Canada and USA (middle–row) have a
similar pattern of tweets’ emotions, unlike Pakistan and India (bottom–row). In India, people’s reaction seems quite
strong, as evident from the average number of positive and negative posts (yellow and blue horizontal line). The
reason could be the early outbreak of COVID-19 in India, i.e., 30th of January 2020. A similar pattern was observed
for Canada probably because they had their first positive case reported during the same time as well.

7

Discussion & Analysis

7.1

Polarity Assessment Analysis between Neighbouring Countries

Figure 6 gives an overview of the side-by-side country-wise sentiment for both negative and positive polarity. The
sentiments are normalized to 0 - 1. As can be seen in Figure 6 (top–left), the attitudes of Swedes over coronavirus
outbreak has changed over time. The peak of negative comments expressed in twitter is registered on March 22. This
was a day before the Prime Minister had a rare public appearance addressing the nation over the coronavirus outbreak.
It is fascinating to note that on the day of Prime Minister’s speech there exists an equal number of positive (top–right)
and negative (top–left) sentiments, while a day after, the positive emotions dominated the tweets showing Swedes’
trust in Government with respect to the outbreak.
There is an equal number of negative sentiments for both Norway and Sweden over the entire period, whereas the
average polarity for positive sentiments is higher in the case of Sweden compared to Norway. A gradual decline in
positive trends for Norway can be observed in (top–right) plot in the figure. Till May 1st , 2020, the positive sentiments
(blue line) for Norway were above the average (orange line), after which it started to decline. Figure 7 shows the actual
number of persons tested positive in Norway during the same period (data source7 ). The percentage of positive cases
in the chart is based upon the total number of persons tested each day. The number of positive registered cases started
increasing the second week of March 2020 till the first week of April, after which it dropped, which is in line with the
sentiments expressed by the users which started to decline during the same week (Figure 6, top–left and –right).
The trend between the positive and negative sentiments between Pakistan and India and that of the USA and Canada
are very similar, as evident from the middle and bottom charts in Figure 6. A closer look at the average sentiments
between Pakistan and India reveals that the Indians expressed higher negative sentiments than Pakistanis (middleleft). Also, a significant number of positive posts appeared for Pakistan (middle–right), which showed that the people
showed some trust in Government’s decision. It partially is attributed to Pakistan’s Prime Minister address to the
nation on coronavirus on multiple occasions (March 17th and March 22nd ) before the lockdown. It is worthy to note
that the first case in India was reported on 30th January 2020 and for Pakistan on 26th February 2020, however, both
countries went into the lockdown around the same time, i.e., 21st of March for Pakistan and 24th of March for India.
Table 8 shows when the first COVID-19 case was reported in the given country and the day it went into the lockdown.
Sr. # Country First COVID-19 case Lockdown Date
1
Pakistan
26th Feb.
21st Mar.*
th
2
India
30 Jan.
24th Mar.
th
3
Norway
26 Feb.
12th Mar.
st
4
Sweden
31 Jan.
No Lockdown
5
USA
21st Jan.
19th Mar.*
th
6
Canada
25 Jan.
26th Mar.
Table 8: Initial COVID-19 Case and the Lockdown Dates. *Lockdown Dates Varies for Different States/Province
It is also worth mentioning here that at the beginning of April, the number of tweets declined, and so does the sentiments representation, which dropped below the average for all the countries except Sweden, where still a significant
number of positive sentiments can be observed (top–right). Moreover, Pakistan had the least negative sentiments (i.e.,
7

https://www.fhi.no/en/id/infectious-diseases/coronavirus/daily-reports/daily-reports-COVID19/

13

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 25, 2020

Figure 6: Side by side country-wise comparison of sentiments analysis: (top–left) negative polarity between NO –
SW, (top–right) positive polarity between NO – SW; (middle–left) negative polarity between PK – IN, (middle–right)
positive polarity between PK – IN; (bottom–left) negative polarity between US – CA, (bottom–right) positive polarity
between US – CA.

Figure 7: No. of positive cases reported in Norway between 24th Feb. to 30th May, 2020.

14

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 25, 2020

Figure 8: Side-by-Side Country-Wise Comparison of Emotions Between Sweden and Norway: (left-side) +ve emotions, (right-side) -ve emotions.

avg = 0.201 - yellow line - (middle–left)), whereas, Swedes were more positive (i.e., avg = 3.98 - yellow line - top–
right)). This could be attributed to the fact that most of the businesses run as usual in Sweden. In the case of Pakistan,
the number of cases during the initial period was still low, as anticipated by the Government. Additionally, people did
not observe the standard operating procedures enforced by the state much, despite the country was in lockdown. A
similar trend was observed in India; however, the Government there had a much strict shutdown, though it came quite
late since the first case was reported late January, which may have triggered more negative posts than positive.
7.2

Emotion Assessment Analysis Between Neighbouring Countries

We observed that there was a visible difference between the sentiments expressed by the people of Norway and Sweden
(Figure 6). We further analyze these two countries in detail in our study of emotional behavior. The results are depicted
in Figure 8. Positive emotions are presented in the left figures and negative emotions on the right – the graph shows
which emotions are dominated over a period of time. The graph is scaled between 0 to 25 for better readability. It
represents the accumulative emotions stacked on top of each other.
As we can see from Figure 8 (top–left), in both countries, the joy dominates the positive tweets whereas sad and fear
are the most commonly shared negative emotions, with anger being less shared. The pattern, in particular, for Norway
is in line with the actual statistics for positive cases reported by the Norwegian Institute of Public Health (NIPH)
(Figure 7).
7.3

Correlation Analysis

Additionally, we analyze the Pearson correlation between neighboring countries to see the sentiment polarity and
emotion trend during the COVID-19 lockdown. As can be seen in Table 9, there is a high correlation between USA and
Canada (US-CA), and Pakistan and India (PK-IN), unlike between Norway and Sweden (NO-SW). The correlation
between (NO-SW) is around 50% for negative and 40% for positive sentiments. This shows that the sentiments
expressed in tweets on Twitter by the people of both countries were different during the same period. A possible
reason for this is the different approach that these two countries have taken over the outbreak.
Similar trend can be observed for emotions depicted in Table 10. Pakistan and India have the highest correlation
across all five emotions, followed by the USA and Canada. While Norway and Sweden have the least number of
tweets sharing common polarity, as evident from the emotions "surprise" and "anger". A possible explanation for this
is the response of people to respective Governments’ decision on COVID-19, especially to the lockdown restrictions.
15

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 25, 2020

No. Sentiments US-CA PK-IN NO-SW
1
Positive
0.967
0.816
0.402
2
Negative
0.971
0.860
0.517
Table 9: Correlation for Sentiment Polarity Between Neighbouring Countries.

There were few Swedes who felt surprised and angry as well, towards the Swedish Government’s decision to not
impose any lockdown measures and its choice to go for the herd immunity. For example, the tweet
“Tweet No 416: A mad experiment 10 million people #Coronasverige #COVID19 #SWEDEN”
expresses both feelings, surprise and anger, of the user on the decision of the Swedish Government. On the other side,
users from Norway did not express any kind of these feelings as their Government followed the approach implied
by most of the countries in the world by imposing lockdown measures from the very beginning of the outbreak. For
instance,
“Tweet No 103: Norway closing borders, airports, harbours from Monday 16th 08:00. The Norwegian government taking Corona #Covid_19 seriously I wish us best hope survive”
shows people’s faith in the Norwegian Government’s decision.
No

Correlation
Joy
Surprise
Sad
Fear Anger
b/w
1
US-CA
0.795
0.740
0.877 0.718 0.673
2
PK-IN
0.962
0.959
0.953 0.945 0.913
3
NO-SW
0.229
0.161
0.343 0.375 0.190
Table 10: Correlation for Emotions Between Neighbouring Countries.

7.4

Findings concerning RQ’s

Following the detected sentiment and emotions by the proposed model and the analysis of results presented in previous
subsections, for (RQ1), it is safe to assume that NLP-based deep learning models can provide, if not enough, some
cultural and emotional insight across cross-cultural trends. It is still difficult to say to what extent, as for non-native
English speaking countries, the number of tweets was far less than those of the USA for any statistically significant
observations. (RQ2) Nevertheless, the general observations of users’ concern and their response to respective Governments’ decision on COVID-19 resonates with sentiments analyzed from the tweets. (RQ3) It was observed that the
there is a very high correlation between the sentiments expressed between the neighbouring countries within a region
(Table 9 and 10). For instance, Pakistan and India, similar to the USA and Canada, have similar polarity trends, unlike
Norway and Sweden. (RQ4) Both positive and negative emotions were equally observed concerning #lockdown; however, in Pakistan, Norway, and Canada the average number of positive tweets was more than the negative ones (Figure
5 and 6).

8

Conclusion

This paper aimed to find the correlation between sentiments and emotions of the people from within neighboring
countries amidst coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak from their tweets. Deep learning LSTM architecture utilizing pretrained embedding models that achieved state-of-the-art accuracy on the Sentiment140 dataset and emotional tweet
dataset are used for detecting both sentiment polarity and emotions from users’ tweets on Twitter. Initial tweets right
after the pandemic outbreak were extracted by tracking the trending hasthtags# during February 2020. The study also
utilized the publicly available Kaggle tweet dataset for March - April 2020. Tweets from six neighboring countries are
analyzed, employing NLP-based sentiment analysis techniques. The paper also presents a unique way of validating
the proposed model’s performance via emoticons extracted from users’ tweets. We further cross-checked the detected
sentiment polarity and emotions via various published sources on the number of positive cases reported by respective
health ministries and published statistics.
Our findings showed a high correlation between tweets’ polarity originating from the USA and Canada, and Pakistan
and India. Whereas, despite many cultural similarities, the tweets posted following the corona outbreak between two
Nordic countries, i.e., Sweden and Norway, showed quite the opposite polarity trend. Although joy and fear dominated
16

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 25, 2020

between the two countries, the positive polarity dropped below the average for Norway much earlier than the Swedes.
This may be due to the lockdown imposed in Norway for a good month and a half before the Government decided to
ease the restrictions, whereas, Swedish Government went for the herd immunity, which was equally supported by the
Swedes. Nevertheless, the average number of positive tweets was higher than the average number of negative tweets
for Norway. The same trend was observed for Pakistan and Canada, where the positive tweets were more than the
negative ones. We further observed that the number of negative and positive tweets started dropping below the average
sentiments in the first and second week of April for all six countries.
This study also suggests that NLP-based sentiment and emotion detection can not only help identify cross-cultural
trends but is also plausible to link actual events to users’ emotions expressed on social platforms with high certitude,
and that despite socio-economic and cultural differences, there is a high correlation of sentiments expressed given a
global crisis - such as in the case of coronavirus pandemic. Deep learning models on the other hand can further be
enriched with semantically rich representations using ontology as presented in [37, 38] for effectively grasping one’s
opinion from tweets. Moreover, advanced seq2seq type language models as word embedding can be explored as a
future work.
Till to date (i.e., the first week of May 2020), the pandemic is still rising in other parts of the world, including Brazil and
Russia. It would be interesting to observe more extended patterns of tweets across more countries to detect and assert
people’s behavior dealing with such calamities. We hope and believe that this study will provide a new perspective to
readers and the scientific community interested in exploring cultural similarities and differences from public opinions
given a crisis, and that it could influence decision makers in transforming and developing efficient policies to better
tackle the situation, safe-guarding people’s interest and needs of the society.

References
[1] P. Johnson-Laird and N. Lee, “Are there cross-cultural differences in reasoning?” in Proceedings of the Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 2006, pp. 459–464.
[2] R. Nisbett, The geography of thought: How Asians and Westerners think differently... and why.
Schuster, 2004.

Simon and

[3] T. L. Dk, “Why is denmark’s coronavirus lockdown so much tougher than sweden’s?” The Local. [Online]. Available: https://www.thelocal.dk/20200320/why-is-denmarks-lockdown-so-much-more-severe-than-swedens
[4] G. E. Hinton, S. Osindero, and Y.-W. Teh, “A fast learning algorithm for deep belief nets,” Neural computation,
vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 1527–1554, 2006.
[5] A. Dunkel, G. Andrienko, N. Andrienko, D. Burghardt, E. Hauthal, and R. Purves, “A conceptual framework for
studying collective reactions to events in location-based social media,” International Journal of Geographical
Information Science, vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 780–804, 2019.
[6] H. Liang, I. C.-H. Fung, Z. T. H. Tse, J. Yin, C.-H. Chan, L. E. Pechta, B. J. Smith, R. D. Marquez-Lamed,
M. I. Meltzer, K. M. Lubell, and K.-W. Fu, “How did ebola information spread on twitter: broadcasting or viral
spreading?” BMC Public Health, vol. 19, no. 438, pp. 1–11, 2019.
[7] R. P. Kaila and A. K. Prasad, “Informational flow on twitter – corona virus outbreak – topic modelling approach,”
International Journal of Advanced Research in Engineering and Technology (IJARET), vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 128–
134, 2020.
[8] M. Szomszor, P. Kostkova, and C. S. Louis, “Twitter informatics: Tracking and understanding public reaction
during the 2009 swine flu pandemic,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conferences on Web
Intelligence and Intelligent Agent Technology, vol. 1, 2011, pp. 320–323.
[9] K.-W. Fu, H. Liang, N. Saroha, Z. T. H. Tse, P. Ip, and I. C.-H. Fung, “How people react to zika virus outbreaks
on twitter? a computational content analysis,” American Journal of Infection Control, vol. 44, no. 12, pp. 1700–
1702, 2016.
[10] T. Vorovchenko, P. Ariana, F. van Loggerenberg, and P. Amirian, “#ebola and twitter. what insights can global
health draw from social media?” in Proceedings of the Big Data in Healthcare: Extracting Knowledge from
Point-of-Care Machines, P. Amirian, T. Lang, and F. van Loggerenberg, Eds., 2017, pp. 85–98.
[11] C. Chew and G. Eysenbach, “Pandemics in the age of twitter: Content analysis of tweets during the 2009 h1n1
outbreak,” PLoS ONE, vol. 5, no. 11, pp. 1–13, 2010.
[12] A. Shelar and C.-Y. Huang, “Sentiment analysis of twitter data,” in Proceedings of the 2018 International Conference on Computational Science and Computational Intelligence (CSCI), 2018, pp. 1301–1302.
17

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 25, 2020

[13] Z. Kastrati, A. S. Imran, and A. Kurti, “Weakly supervised framework for aspect-based sentiment analysis on
students’ reviews of moocs,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 106 799–106 810, 2020.
[14] S. Das, R. K. Behera, S. K. Rath et al., “Real-time sentiment analysis of twitter streaming data for stock prediction,” Procedia computer science, vol. 132, pp. 956–964, 2018.
[15] V. S. Pagolu, K. N. Reddy, G. Panda, and B. Majhi, “Sentiment analysis of twitter data for predicting stock market
movements,” in Proceedings of the international conference on signal processing, communication, power and
embedded system (SCOPES), 2016, pp. 1345–1350.
[16] R. Batra and S. M. Daudpota, “Integrating stocktwits with sentiment analysis for better prediction of stock price
movement,” in Proceedings of the 2018 International Conference on Computing, Mathematics and Engineering
Technologies (iCoMET), 2018, pp. 1–5.
[17] W. Budiharto and M. Meiliana, “Prediction and analysis of indonesia presidential election from twitter using
sentiment analysis,” Journal of Big data, vol. 5, no. 1, p. 51, 2018.
[18] S. Liao, J. Wang, R. Yu, K. Sato, and Z. Cheng, “Cnn for situations understanding based on sentiment analysis
of twitter data,” Procedia computer science, vol. 111, pp. 376–381, 2017.
[19] C. Musto, G. Semeraro, and M. Polignano, “A comparison of lexicon-based approaches for sentiment analysis
of microblog posts,” in Proceedings of the 8th International Workshop on Information Filtering and Retrieval,
2014, pp. 59–68.
[20] V. Kharde and S. Sonawane, “Sentiment analysis of twitter data: a survey of techniques,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1601.06971, pp. 5–15, 2016.
[21] L. Zhang, S. Wang, and B. Liu, “Deep learning for sentiment analysis: A survey,” Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 1–34, 2018.
[22] A. Giachanou and F. Crestani, “Like it or not: A survey of twitter sentiment analysis methods,” ACM Computing
Surveys (CSUR), vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 1–41, 2016.
[23] M. Desai and M. A. Mehta, “Techniques for sentiment analysis of twitter data: A comprehensive survey,” in
Proceedings of the International Conference on Computing, Communication and Automation (ICCCA), 2016,
pp. 149–154.
[24] X. Ji, S. A. Chun, Z. Wei, and J. Geller, “Twitter sentiment classification for measuring public health concerns,”
Social Network Analysis and Mining, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 1–25, 2015.
[25] J. Samuel, M. N. Ali, M. M. Rahman, E. Esawi, and Y. Samuel, “Covid-19 public sentiment insights and machine
learning for tweets classification,” Information, vol. 11, pp. 1–21, 2020.
[26] G. Barkur, Vibha, and G. B. Kamath, “Sentiment analysis of nationwide lockdown due to covid 19 outbreak:
Evidence from india,” Asian Journal of Psychiatry, vol. 51, pp. 1–2, 2020.
[27] M. Hasan, E. Rundensteiner, and E. Agu, “Emotex: Detecting emotions in twitter messages,” in Proceedings of
the ASE Bigdata/Socialcom/Cybersecurity Conference, 2014, pp. 1–10.
[28] I. C.-H. Fung, Z. T. H. Tse, C.-N. Cheung, A. S. Miu, and K.-W. Fu, “Ebola and the social media,” The Lancet,
vol. 384, no. 9961, pp. 128–134, 2014.
[29] H. J. Do, C.-G. Lim, Y. J. Kim, and H.-J. Choi, “Analyzing emotions in twitter during a crisis: A case study of
the 2015 middle east respiratory syndrome outbreak in korea,” in Proceedings of the international conference on
big data and smart computing (BigComp), 2016, pp. 415–418.
[30] A. Go, R. Bhayani, and L. Huang, “Twitter sentiment classification using distant supervision,” CS224N project
report, Stanford, vol. 1, no. 12, pp. 1–6, 2009.
[31] S. M. Mohammad and F. Bravo-Marquez, “WASSA-2017 shared task on emotion intensity,” in Proceedings of
the Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity, Sentiment and Social Media Analysis (WASSA),
2017, pp. 34–39.
[32] M. Cai, “Sentiment analysis of tweets using deep neural architectures,” in Proceedings of the 32nd Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2018), 2018, pp. 1–8.
[33] J. Pennington, R. Socher, and C. D. Manning, “Glove: Global vectors for word representation,” in Proceedings
of the 2014 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing (EMNLP), 2014, pp. 1532–1543.
[34] Z. Kastrati, A. S. Imran, and A. Kurti, “Integrating word embeddings and document topics with deep learning in
a video classification framework,” Pattern Recognition Letters, vol. 128, pp. 85 – 92, 2019.
[35] A. Debnath, N. Pinnaparaju, M. Shrivastava, V. Varma, and I. Augenstein, “Semantic textual similarity of sentences with emojis,” in Companion Proceedings of the Web Conference 2020, 2020, pp. 426–430.
18

A PREPRINT - AUGUST 25, 2020

[36] W.-L. Chang and H.-C. Tseng, “The impact of sentiment on content post popularity through emoji and text on
social platforms,” in Proceedings of the Cyber Influence and Cognitive Threats, 2020, pp. 159–184.
[37] Z. Kastrati, A. S. Imran, and S. Y. Yayilgan, “An improved concept vector space model for ontology based classification,” in 2015 11th International Conference on Signal-Image Technology Internet-Based Systems (SITIS),
2015, pp. 240–245.
[38] Z. Kastrati, A. S. Imran, and S. Y. Yayilgan, “The impact of deep learning on document classification using
semantically rich representations,” Information Processing & Management, vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 1618–1632, 2019.

19

