On the relation between active population and infection rate of COVID19
Takashi Shimada∗ and Yoshiyuki Suimon, Kiyoshi Izumi

II.
A.

Calculating effective reproduction number

Let us start from taking a simple compartmental model
in the difference equation form:

200
150
100
50
0

150

200

0

50

100

150

200

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.2

100

FIG. 1. Daily data for infection rate and crowd in this study.
(Top) Daily number of infection reports in Tokyo metropolitan area [4]. (Bottom) The daily total number of passengers in
main stations of Tokyo metropolitan area (Shinjuku, Shibuya,
Ikebukuro, Shinagawa, and Tokyo) detected by a mobile carrier company[5, 6], relative to its typical average.

(1)

where St , It , and Rt are the numbers of susceptible, infected, and recovered (removed) people at a discrete time
(i.e. day in this study) t, respectively. Positive constant parameters β and γ represent the (effective) infection rates per human contact and the recovery rate,
respectively. In the following we take γ = 14.0−1 [day],
i.e. the average time till recover is 2 weeks, and it will
be confirmed later. The function C(St , It ) denotes the

∗

50

Day

METHOD

∆St = St+1 − St = −βC(St , It ),
∆It = It+1 − It = βC(St , It ) − γIt ,
∆Rt = Rt+1 − Rt = γIt ,

0

0.2

Reducing the number of people in public area by some
means of regulations is one of the most major strategies to slow or prevent the spread of epidemics such as
COVID-19. The main drawback of this measure is its
negative impact on our economical and social activity.
Therefore it is practically very important to quantify the
effect of reduction of population density in public area
on the reduction of infection rate. It is also essential for
wide field including ecology, epidemiology, and sociology
to understand the functional relation between the population density and the infection (contact) rate in real
case [1–3].
Here we report our empirical study on the relation
between the number of passengers in mains stations of
Tokyo metropolitan area and the increase in the number
of infections.

ReportedInfection[,
Number of2]Infections

INTRODUCTION

Relative
Tokyo_stations[,
Number of Passengers
7]/Cmax

I.

250

The relation between the number of passengers in the main stations and the infection rate of
COVID19 in Tokyo is empirically studied. Our analysis based on conventional compartment model
suggests: 1) Average time from the true day of infection to the day the infections are reported is
about 15 days. 2) The scaling relation between the density of active population and the infection rate
suggests that the increase of infection rate is linear to the active population rather than quadratic,
as that is assumed in the conventional SIR model. 3) Notable deviations from the overall scaling
relation seems to correspond to the change of the peoples’s behavior in response to the public
announcements of action regulation.

0.0

arXiv:2008.07791v2 [physics.soc-ph] 21 Sep 2020

Department of Systems Innovation, Graduate School of Engineering, The University of Tokyo
(Dated: September 22, 2020)

Also at Mathematics and Informatics Center, The University of
Tokyo; shimada@sys.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

rate of human contacts. For example, taking a LotkaVolterra type contact rate: C ∝ St It corresponds to the
SIR model.
As shown in Fig. 1, the typical data available is the
daily report of newly infected people Ot+td = −∆St . The
delay time td is the difference between the day of the
report of an infection and the real moment of infection,
which is typically said to be around 2 weeks, consists of
the time from the day of infection to the day the person
went to a hospital, the time the institution took on PCRtest, and the time spent to include that result to the
report, etc. We will estimate td from the data.

0.75
0.65

4

Correlation

0.55

(2)
0.8

5

10

15

3
Re
2
0

0.0

is the key quantity to predict whether the epidemic process will grow (Re > 1) or decay (Re < 1) if the effect of
in- and out-flows are negligible.
Note that, because Ot is known to have strong systematic dependance on days of week which comes from the
difference in the activity such as testing and reporting,
we take 7 day average for Rte in the following analysis.

B.

20

Delay Time td

1

Oτ +td e

τ =τ0

!

0.6

γ

−γ(t−τ )

0.4

Ot+td
t
X

0.2

−∆St
=
∆Rt

nt

Ret ≡

1.0

The effective reproduction number calculated as

5

2

Estimating the relative number of active people
60

Another key data for our study is the change in the
number of passengers in Tokyo main stations (Shinjuku,
Shibuya, Ikebukuro, Shinagawa, and Tokyo), estimated
from the mobile phone data (Fig. 1, Appendix). We take
the sum of observed passengers Nt to simply estimate the
number of people who were not staying home on that day
Ntactive , i.e. Ntactive ∝ Nt .

C.

Relating Re and nt

Let nt = Nt /N̄ be the number of people acting outside
on a certain day relative to a normal typical average N̄ .
Then the number of people who had a chance to contact should be replaced by the actual active population
S̃t = nt St and I˜t = nt It . Therefore, assuming the SIR
(Lotka-Volterra) type contact rate C = C0 St It , the rate
of infection and the effective reproduction number should
depend proportionally to the square of nt

80

100

(3)
(4)

In the second equation we assume that the accumulated
number of infections is negligibly smaller than the total population, i.e. 1 − St /S0 ≈ 0. This assumption
is strongly supported by the random antibody test conducted in early June in Tokyo area, which reported that
only 0.10% of people have antibody [7]. Any deviation
from this simple scaling relation between Nt and Re implies that the simple SIR-model-type contact rate, which
models the chance of human contact based on the wellmixed picture, does not hold in reality.

140

160

180

Day

FIG. 2.
The time series of effective reproduction number
Rte for optimal td = 15 [day] (solid magenta line, axis to the
left), with the number of passengers Nt (dashed cyan line,
axis to the right). Both time series are smoothed by taking
7 day average. Dotted line is the Re with no consideration
of delay time (i.e. td = 0) for comparison. Inset shows the
Spearman’s rank correlation between N and Re to given delay time td . Vertical lines are the eye-guide for notable days
of regulation (solid) or relaxation (dashed) in policy; Day 98
(7th April): the first emergency declaration to limited area
including Tokyo, Day 107 (16th April): emergency declaration was expanded to entire country, Day 135 (14th May):
emergency declaration was canceled for the area except for
Hokkaido, Saitama, Chiba, Tokyo, Kanagawa, Kyoto, Osaka,
and Hyogo, Day 146 (25th May): emergency declaration was
canceled for entire country, Day 154 (2nd June): declaration
of “Tokyo-alert”, and Day 163 (11th June): cancelation of
“Tokyo-alert”. The reported number of infections are also
shown inversely for eye-guide.

III.

Ot+td = −∆St = (βC0 St It ) n2t ,


Ot+td
βC0
Ret =
n2t .
≈
γIt
γ

120

A.

RESULTS

Determining the typical delay time from the
infection to the detection

The dotted line in Fig. 2 shows the effective reproduction number calculated by eq. (2), with no consideration
about the delay time (i.e. td = 0). The estimated value
of Re is in a plausible range (< 3.0), except for the early
period and the short period around the sharp peak. The
former is simply from the smallness of the denominator
in eq. (2) and the latter sharp peak period is considered
to be from the inflow of infected people from abroad.
The unknown parameter that should to be determined
first for our analysis is the average delay time td from the
actual day of infection to the day on which the infection

5.0
2.0

R

3

1.0

0

1

2

4

e

3

4

5

5

3

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Re

5.0
0.1

0.2

1

0.5

Re

2.0

2

0.5

Re

n

0

0.1

0.1

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.2

0.5

1.0

nt

0.2

0.4

nt

0.6

0.8

1.0

nt

FIG. 3. The scaling relation between the relative number of passengers and the effective reproduction number Rte , which is
proportional to the rate of infectious contacts. Lines show the fittings by quadratic function: RtLV 1 = R0 n2t (cyan dashed line),

2
t +n0
quadratic term with constant base population: RtLV 2 = R0 n1+n
(green dotted line), and the power-law: RtDD = R0 n2−α
t
0

(blue dot-dashed line). Inset figures show the loop shape of the same nt − Rte plot with non-optimal time delay (td = 7 [day]).

is reported. As mentioned above, although it is generally
said to be around 2 weeks in the case of Tokyo, we cannot determine this parameter solely from epidemiological
knowledge.

To estimate this parameter, we take a natural modelfree assumption: Infection rate is an increasing function
of active population. Under this assumption, optimal td
should give the highest rank correlation between Nt and
Ot+td (and hence Re ). From this criterion, the optimal
delay time is found to be td = 15 [day] (both from Spearman’s and Kendall’s rank correlation coefficients, and for
a certain range of γ. See Appendix for more detail). A
good correlation between Nt and Rte (Speaman’s rank
correlation coefficient rs∗ = 0.7815) can be also easily
confirmed in Fig. (2) by eye.

What is interesting, in addition to the overall correlation, is that the days of the changes of regulations policy
on the people’s activity coincide with the changes in Rte .
Rte shows sharp drops soon after the days of first emergency declaration (to a part of Japan including Tokyo,
7th April) and its application to the entire country (16th
April), and also soon after the declaration of “Tokyoalert” from the Tokyo metropolitan government. Sharp
rises are also found soon after the days of relaxing the
policies. Those might be indications of the change in the
people’s behavior, rather than the change in the population outside.

B.

Scaling relation between Re and nt

Having obtained the good estimate for the average delay time td , we next examine the relation between the
active population Nt and the infection rate on that day
Rte . For this analysis, we take the period t ≥ 50 (from
5th Mar) so that the accumulated number and the daily
numbers in it is enough to obtain the estimation of Re
in a reasonable range: < 5.0. As shown in Fig. 3, Rte
in this period obeys to an almost single-valued function
of the passenger density nt , confirming the correctness of
the estimated td .
The first fitting function to be tested is that of SIRtype (Lotoka-Volterra-type) model LV1:
RtLV 1 = R0 n2t .

(5)

This model is based on the well-mixed approximation for
the collisions among people, which in this case is consistent with an assumption that the dominant process of the
infection is “random collisions” in the street or in some
Model
LV1: R0 n2t
LV2: R0



n0 + nt
n0 + 1

DD: R0 n2−α
t

2

R0

second parameter

deviance

3.045

-

91.90

2.572

n0 = 0.5183

71.43

2.489

α = 0.9558

66.37

4
other public areas.
Keeping the SIR-type contact term, we also try a twoparameter model LV2 which assumes that there is a hidden base population n0 which are active but does not
appear in the passenger data:
RtLV 2

= R0



n0 + nt
n0 + 1

2

.

(6)

Our last model to be tested is based on an densitydependent (DD) contact rate
C(St , It ) =

C0 St It
.
(St + It + Rt )α

(7)

In comparison to the former models, this model can treat
more general density-dependence and hence the more
complex human activity. For example, if one assume
that the major risk of infectious contact is the intended
meetings (or co-locating) with a pre-determined member size (e.g. working in the office, dining with friends,
shoppings, etc), the actual contact rate should become
more moderate and hence we expect positive α. The
exponent α is also expected to be positive if people are
trying to take a distance each other to avoid infection.
In this sense, α > 0 can be regarded as an indication of
human behavior actively perfomed. On the other hand,
if people are in a situation that they may be trying to
take a distance but sometimes they simply cannot (e.g.
in crowded trains, stations, shops, etc.), the contact rate
becomes steeper and hence the exponent α should be
negative. This density-dependent contact rate gives the
corresponding fitting function for Re :
RtDD = R0 n2−α
.
t

by their will or demand, rather than random or passive
ones. LV2 model gives the second best fit, although the
obtained fitting line is similar to that of DD model. LV1
model is the worst in the overall fitting, while it gives the
best prediction in the least nt region.
The border between the region in which DD and LV2
model fit well and the region in which LV1 fit better is
characterized by the sharp drop and rise of Re at around
nt = 0.35. These vertical moves in the nt -Re diagram
correspond to the beginning and the end of the maximum
alert period (from day 107 to 135: the emergency declaration was applied to the entire country). If we take DD
model or LV2 model, the origin of these jumps deviating
from the theoretical fits should be the sharp change in
people’s behavior and closing of most shops, restaurants,
etc in response to the emergency declaration. Interestingly, similar sharp drop in Re is observed just after the
declaration of “Tokyo alert” (the local alert declared by
the Tokyo metropolitan gevernment), during the increase
of nt .
IV.

CONCLUSIONS

We have empirically investigated the relation between
the effective reproduction number Ret the number of passengers in the main stations in Tokyo nt . The delay time
from the moment of infection to the day the infection
is reported is first estimated robustly at around td = 15
days, which is consistent with what is generally expected.
Based on the estimated delay time, the scaling relation
between Ret and nt is examined. The best fit function
suggest a density-dependent correction to the rate of human contact, the exponent of which illustrates the relevance of the active aspects of human behavior.

(8)

As shown in the Table I and Fig. 3, the density dependent contact rate model (DD) is found to give the
best fit to the data. The obtained exponent α ≈ 1 > 0
implies that the people’s behavior is better characterized

[1] J. D. Murray, in Mathematical Biology: I. An introduction,
Vol. 17 (Springer-Verlag, New York, 2002) 3rd ed.
[2] J. D. Murray, in Mathematical Biology: II. Spatial Models and Biomedical Applications, Vol. 18 (Springer-Verlag,
New York, 2003) 3rd ed.
[3] M. Begon, J. L. Harper, and C. R. Townsend, in Ecology:
Indivisuals, Populations and Communities (Blackwell Science Ltd., Oxford, 1996) 3rd ed.
[4] https://stopcovid19.metro.tokyo.lg.jp/ (2020), reported
by Bureau of Social Welfare and Public health, Tokyo

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was partly supported by JSPS KAKENHI
grant number 18K03449TS to TS.

Metropolitan Government.
[5] Original data is from KDDI Location Analyzer: https://klocationanalyzer.com.
[6] Y. Suimon, https://www.jcbconsumptionnow.com/en/info/news57 (2020), (in Japanese).
[7] https://www.mhlw.go.jp/content/000640287.pdf (2020),
(in Japanese).

