1

COVID-19 in CXR: from Detection and Severity
Scoring to Patient Disease Monitoring
Rula Amer1 , Maayan Frid-Adar1 , Ophir Gozes1 , Jannette Nassar1 , and Hayit Greenspan1,2
1

arXiv:2008.02150v1 [eess.IV] 4 Aug 2020

2

RadLogics Ltd., Tel Aviv, Israel
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel

Abstract—In this work, we estimate the severity of pneumonia
in COVID-19 patients and conduct a longitudinal study of
disease progression. To achieve this goal, we developed a deep
learning model for simultaneous detection and segmentation
of pneumonia in chest Xray (CXR) images and generalized
to COVID-19 pneumonia. The segmentations were utilized to
calculate a ”Pneumonia Ratio” which indicates the disease
severity. The measurement of disease severity enables to build
a disease extent profile over time for hospitalized patients. To
validate the model relevance to the patient monitoring task,
we developed a validation strategy which involves a synthesis
of Digital Reconstructed Radiographs (DRRs - synthetic Xray)
from serial CT scans; we then compared the disease progression
profiles that were generated from the DRRs to those that were
generated from CT volumes.
Index Terms—COVID-19, pneumonia, detection, localization,
severity scoring, patient monitoring, DRR.

I. I NTRODUCTION
The 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19), that originated in
Wuhan, China, has been rapidly spreading worldwide, where
several cases of pneumonia with an unknown underlying cause
were reported. The majority of patients experience mild symptoms including a fever, dry cough, and a sore throat. However,
some patients deteriorate to various fatal complications such
as pneumonia, Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS),
organ failure and even death [1]–[3].
Studies regarding which imaging modality to use for
COVID-19 patients, compare the advantages of CT vs Chest
Xray (CXR), and vise versa [4], [5]. The decision to use one
modality over another depends on the disease phase of the
subject and the community norms. In countries where the
access to RT-PCR tests is limited, the adopted approach is
to encourage patients to approach doctors early. If suspected
patients manifest mild symptoms, a CT scan is performed as
it’s more sensitive to mild pneumonia changes in the lungs
than a CXR examination. In contrast, in countries where the directive approach is to instruct patients to present to the hospital
only when they experience advanced symptoms, the preferred
modality is CXR as it clearly shows abnormalities in the lungs.
Another factor that favors the CXR is the high contagion of
the COVID-19 virus. The complications related to the patients’
transport to the CT suites involve the risks of cross-infections
along the transport route, and in the scanning room. Additionally, lack of sterilization equipment in parts of the world
strengthens this claim. These complications therefore favor the

use of the CXR modality for the identification and followup of COVID-19 patients. Moreover, CXR is very useful for
assessing disease progression in hospitalized patients in which
the disease state is more likely to be advanced.
With the wide and rapid spread of coronavirus, AI has
become of significant importance to healthcare specialists
in diagnosis and prognosis of COVID-19. AI is actively
contributing to the fight against COVID-19 through recent
applications [6]. Reviews of AI-empowered publications [7],
[8] show numerous machine learning-based research on segmentations of infected regions in CT scans of COVID-19
patients. However, most CXR publications target the classification task for multiple classes [9]–[12] and provide interpretable
and explainable maps using class activation maps (CAM),
rather than accurate COVID-19 pneumonia segmentations as
provided by CT. Most of these methods were published in the
early outbreak of the pandemic, and thus trained solely on a
few examples of COVID-19 that were mainly aggregated from
publications and radiological websites, and thus not ideal for
comparison. In [13] and [14] experiments were conducted to
prove that this data selection might cause the network to learn
features that are dataset-biased rather than learning diseasespecific characteristics, especially when images of different
labels are selected from different databases. As most of the
current works focus on the diagnosis of COVID-19, very few
works (e.g. [15], [16]) target severity assessmen of the disease
in CXR. Moreover, to the best of our knowledge, almost no
AI-based work studied and validated the follow-up and patient
monitoring of COVID-19 patients using chest radiographs.
In this work, we evaluate the degree of severity of pneumonia in COVID-19 patients and monitor patients’ disease
progression over time. Fig. 1 illustrates the overview of the
system components as follows: we first detect if pneumonia
is present and localize the infected area of the lung (Green
color blocks). Then, by combining a lung segmentation step
(Black), we can measure the relative area of the lung that
is infected. This in turn leads to our ability to assess the
severity of the case as well as to monitor patients in time
(Yellow): For hospitalized patients that have an extended
record of disease, we generate a disease profile over time.
To validate our results, we utilize a novel CT-Xray duality
(Orange): Using the CT and its accurately defined disease
extent, we generate a corresponding synthetic Xray, using a
newly developed scheme for Digital Reconstructed Radiograph
(DRR) generation. Disease profiles in CT and Xray space

2

II. R ELATED W ORK

Fig. 1: Overview of the proposed system: Detection and localization models are described in Section III. The methods used
for lung segmentation, severity assessment, patient monitoring
and CT-DRR duality-based validation are provided in Section
IV.

are extracted and compared. Additional analysis is conducted
to show the relationship between CT and Xray in defining
disease states. The detection and localization components of
the system are detailed in Section III. Generating severity
estimates and monitoring in time are presented in Section IV.
Experiments and results are presented in Section V, followed
by conclusion and discussion in Section VI.
Our contributions are as follows:
•

•

•

•

•

We propose a dual-stage training scheme in the Detection
and Localization network, to accurately segment regions
in the lungs infected with pneumonia, from inaccurate
ground truth (GT) bounding boxes. We exploit the GradCAM [17] algorithm to generate segmentation proposals,
and use these proposals to learn accurate segmentations
that are directly outputted from the model.
We prove our model’s ability, trained on non-COVID19 pneumonia patients, to generalize the detection, localization, severity scoring, and monitoring of COVID-19
pneumonia cases.
We introduce a robust lung segmentation method, using
unconventional augmentation methods, such as synthetic
radiographs of abnormal lungs, gamma correction, and
blob implanting. Our proposed augmentations ameliorate
the segmentation of pathological lungs.
We demonstrate the system capability for measuring
pneumonia extent in the lungs and for tracking disease
progression.
We present a novel validation strategy for the CXRbased patient disease monitoring, by utilizing CT scans of
COVID-19 patients over time, producing corresponding
DRRs, and exploring the CT and Xray duality.

Several studies have been published recently on COVID19 detection in chest radiographs. Here we review several
related works. For an additional review of the field, we refer
the reader to an overview paper [7] and the COVID-specific
Special Issues of TMI1 and MedIA2 .
In Wang et al. [9], the ”COVID-Net” architecture is presented for COVID-19 detection in CXR. Three datasets, collected from different sources [18]–[20], were used to train
the network to predict three categories: no infection (normal),
non-COVID19 infection, and COVID-19 viral infection. They
reported a sensitivity of 0.95, 0.94, 0.91 for each class with a
test set of 100 normal, 100 non-COVID-19 pneumonia and 100
COVID-19 images, respectively. Apostolopoulos et al. [10]
adopted state-of-the-art CNNs that were proposed over the last
few years for small medical datasets using transfer learning
method. They utilized public datasets of COVID-19 from [21],
[22] for the task of bacterial pneumonia, viral pneumonia
of COVID-19, and normal image classification. The authors
showed results of 10-fold-cross-validation on two datasets of
COVID-19, common bacterial pneumonia (with and without
non-COVID-19 patients) and normal cases. Optimal results of
sensitivity and specificity greater than 0.96 were obtained with
MobileNet v2 network on 224 COVID-19 images. Zhang et al.
[11] developed a deep anomaly detection model for the task of
COVID-19 vs non-COVID-19 pneumonia classification. They
used 100 COVID-19 images from [18] and 1431 additional
CXR images confirmed as other pneumonia from the public
ChestX-ray14 dataset [23]. They reported AU C of 0.95.
The severity scoring has also caught attention in CXR
publications lately. Signoroni et al. [15] designed a multipurpose network for COVID-19 pneumonia prediction, lung
segmentation and lungs alignment that outputs the severity
prediction by dividing the lungs into 6 regions. They utilized
annotated 5,000 CXR images from ASST Spedali Civili of
Brescia, Italy, in addition to 194 images from the public dataset
of [18]. Mean absolute error (MAE) of severity score on a
subset of 150 images from the private dataset is 1.8 compared
to the gold standard with correlation coefficient of 0.85. The
MAE on the 194 images from the public dataset is 2.18. Cohen
et al. [16] developed a model to predict COVID-19 pneumonia
severity based on CXR: they pre-trained a DenseNet on 18
common radiological findings from multiple public datasets,
and then trained a linear regression model on a subset of
the COVID-19 dataset, that was scored by three experts to
predict the severity scores using different sets of extracted
features. The correlation coefficient, R2 and MAE, on a test
set of 50 images are 0.78, 0.58 and 0.78, respectively for the
pneumonia extent score, and 0.8, 0.6 and 1.14, respectively
for the opacity score (encounters the opacity texture features
of consolidation/ground glass).
In our work we focus on both COVID-19 detection and
severity scoring in CXR, presenting an end-to-end solution
for COVID-19 disease management.
1

https://www.embs.org/tmi/

2 https://www.journals.elsevier.com/medical-image-analysis/call-for-papers/

special-issue-on-intelligent-analysis-of-covid-19-imaging-da

3

Fig. 2: Diagram of the proposed Detection Localization network. (a) Backbone: pre-trained ResNet50, (b) Classification
Head: classifies the images to pneumonia/non-pneumonia and
(c) Localization Head: fuses intermediate convolutional layers
of ResNet50 to form the localization heatmap.
Fig. 3: Illustration of the training and testing stages.
III. COVID-19 P NEUMONIA D ETECTION AND
L OCALIZATION
In order to assess the severity of pneumonia in COVID19 patients, the pneumonia region in CXR of positive patients
needs to be accurately segmented. In this section we introduce
the pneumonia detection and localization network we propose,
that entails a two-stage training methodology, to generate finegrained localization maps from coarse ground truth labels.
A. Detection and Localization Network
As Grad-CAM [17] became a useful tool for localizing
COVID-19 pneumonia infection in CXR [11], [12], this
method is generally used when localization GT data is not
available and enables only rough localization. Training a
network that combines detection and localization allows a
more accurate disease extent evaluation.
We propose a deep-learning model to predict pneumonia
labels and a heatmap simultaneously. An illustration of the
proposed network is shown in Fig. 2. It consists of three
components - backbone, classification head and localization
head. A detailed description of each component is given in
the text below.
The backbone network is a 50-layer residual network
(ResNet-50) [24]. The network is pre-trained on the ImageNet
dataset. As shown in Fig. 2(a), the images are fed to a
convolutional layer with 7 × 7 kernels and a stride of 2,
followed by a 3 × 3 max-pooling layer with a stride of 2.
This is followed by convolution and identity blocks with skip
connections. Each convolution block has 3 convolution layers
and another convolution layer in the skip connection, and each
identity block also has 3 convolution layers.
The last dense layer of ResNet-50 is replaced with three
consecutive dense layers with 1024, 256 and 1 neurons,
respectively. A dropout layer is inserted between the first two
dense layers. Finally, a sigmoid activation function is applied,
creating the classification head. The output score indicates the
probability of the image having pneumonia.

The localization head is a feature pyramid-like network [25].
Low resolution features extracted from the final identity block,
named Act − 14, are upsampled by a factor of 2 using the
nearest neighbor. The upsampled features undergo a 1 × 1
convolution layer to reduce the channel dimensions. Next,
each lateral connection fuses feature maps of the same spatial
size from the previous residual block output (Act − 28) by
element-wise addition. This process is repeated for the higher
resolution features (activation output of the previous identity
block: Act − 56). Finally, a 3 × 3 convolution layer followed
by ReLU activation is applied to the last summation and forms
the localization output. The last convolution layer formed has
128 feature maps, which allows a prediction of sparse maps
and prevents the network from over-fitting the predictions to
a rectangular (bounding box) shape. In order to create one
heatmap in the inference stage, the maximal value among the
128 output maps is taken for each matching pixel.
B. Training Pipeline
The proposed network is trained using the RSNA Pneumonia Detection Challenge Dataset [20]. Pediatric patients are
removed from the dataset to prevent bias due to age. The
remaining images in the RSNA dataset are split to three sets:
training (9004 images), validation (1126 images) and testing
(1124 images). The dataset includes annotation labels of
pneumonia/non-pneumonia (in equal amounts) and bounding
boxes annotations of the pneumonia regions. The training
images are resized to a fixed size of 448 × 448 pixels. A preprocessing step consisting of a Contrast Limited Histogram
Equalization (CLAHE) method is applied to the images before
training, followed by normalization according to the mean and
standard deviation values of the ImageNet database.
The training pipeline consists of two-stages (see Fig. 3): in
the first stage, we train the network on the training images with
the corresponding bounding boxes. Next, we use the trained
model to generate accurate segmentation proposals for subset

4

Fig. 4: Heatmap results of example images as they are
produced from the localization head: (a) input CXR images,
(b) heatmaps produced from first stage model (DLNet-1), (c)
heatmaps produced from second stage model (DLNet-2).

Fig. 5: Two examples of synthesized abnormal CXR images:
(a) normal image, (b) corresponding lung segmentation generated by XLSor and (c-g) abnormal CXRs that are augmented
from the input image using MUNIT .

of the training images, and then replace the bounding boxes
annotations with the accurate segmentations to train the model
again. Fig. 4 compares the produced heatmaps after each
training stage, showing the generation of more fine-grained
heatmaps after the second stage. The detailed description of
the stages is given below:
1) First Stage: The network is trained on RSNA data,
where the GTs in this stage are the labels of pneumonia/nonpneumonia and the corresponding bounding boxes. We denote
this detection and localization model as DLN et − 1. Prior
to training, a binary image is produced from the bounding
boxes, then dilated with a 5 × 5 kernel and finally smoothed
with a Gaussian Blur. This last processing step guarantees an
accurate prediction of the bounding box location, and gives a
percentage of uncertainty in the edges. The proposed network
is trained using the Adam optimizer. The initial learning rate
is set to 1e − 4 and decreases by a factor of 0.2 when
learning stagnates for 2 epochs. The batch size is set to 8
images and the max number of epochs to 30. The loss is
comprised of two parts: (1) classification loss (binary cross
entropy) and (2) localization loss (mean squared error). The
total loss is a linear combination of the two losses, where the
binary cross entropy loss on the prediction and the GT label
is denoted by BCE(lpred , lgt ), and the mean squared error by
M SE(BBpred , BBgt ). The total loss is described in (1):

segmentation map, a threshold of 0.4, a value that gave the
highest performance according to intersection with the GT
bounding boxes over the testing set, is applied to the heatmap.
These segmentations are multiplied by the GT bounding boxes
in order to eliminate false positives, and then smoothed with
Gaussian Blur to account for possible uncertainties in the
edges. Segmentations are generated for half of the positive
images in the training set that passed a 0.8 classification
threshold. The remaining positive images are kept with their
corresponding bounding boxes. Those images, together with
the negative images, are used for further training the proposed
network. The second stage model is trained for 30 epochs with
the same training parameters, optimizer and losses that were
mentioned in the previous subsection.

Loss = BCE(lpred , lgt ) + λM SE(BBpred , BBgt )

(1)

where λ is set to 1e−5 to scale the localization loss according
to the classification loss scale.
2) Second Stage: The first trained model is exploited to
generate a more accurate pneumonia segmentation GT for
training the second stage. We will denote this model as
DLN et−2. This is done using the Grad-CAM [17] algorithm:
Two heatmaps are produced, the first generated by backpropagating the gradients from the last convolution layer of
the localization head up till the Act − 28 activation layer,
and the second up till the Act − 14 activation layer. The
heatmaps are then resized to full image size. The two heatmaps
are combined to generate one heatmap, whose pixels’ class
probability is more accurate than each heatmap separately.
The two heatmaps are combined by taking the maximum
value of matching pixels from both maps. The final heatmap
is then smoothed and normalized. To generate the final GT

IV. S EVERITY S CORING AND PATIENT M ONITORING
In this section, we focus on measuring the extent of pneumonia in the lungs of detected positive patients in order to assess
the disease severity level. We utilize the severity estimates
to monitor patients over time. A novel validation strategy is
proposed that uses CT-Xray duality: we perform validations on
digitally reconstructed radiographs (DRRs) synthesized from
CT scans and compare to the original CT images in monitoring
the patients’ disease state.
A. Lung Segmentation
To accurately measure the extent of pneumonia in the lungs,
we introduce a lung segmentation method for patients with
severe opacities and low visibility of the lung fields.
The proposed architecture is a modified U-Net [26] in which
the pre-trained VGG-19 [27] encoder replaced the contracting
path (the encoder) in the U-net, as was introduced by FridAdar et al. [28] for segmentation of anatomical structures in
chest radiographs. The original model, named LSN et, was
trained on the Japanese Society of Radiological Technology
(JSRT) dataset with traditional augmentations (zoom, translation, rotation and horizontal flipping). Here, we propose an improved model that is more robust, generalizes on images with
severe infections and reduces false detections (LSN et−Aug).
The model was improved by challenging the training process
with enriched augmented training data. In addition to the
original training JSRT dataset, we added images and lung

5

Fig. 6: Severity score computation - Block diagram: Input image enters the detection network. If the classification score is
lower than a pre-determined threshold, the image is classified as negative; otherwise, the image segmentation is outputted from
the localization head. At this point, the pneumonia segmentation and the lung segmentation blocks are utilized to compute the
”Pneumonia Ratio”.

masks GT from the Montgomery County (MC) - Chest X-ray
Database [29], [30], the XLSor dataset [31] and 100 images
from the NIH dataset that were provided by XLSor authors.
The XLSor dataset consists of real and synthetic radiographs:
an image-to-image translation module (MUNIT [32]) is utilized to synthesize radiorealistic abnormal CXRs (synthesized
radiographs that appear anatomically realistic) from the source
of normal ones, for data augmentation purposes. The lung
masks of those synthetic abnormal CXRs are propagated from
the segmentation results of their normal counterparts, and then
serve as pseudo masks for robust segmentation training. The
aim is to construct a large number of abnormal CXR pairs with
no human intervention, in order to train a powerful, robust and
accurate model for CXR lung segmentation. Fig. 5 shows two
examples of normal lung images, the GT segmentation maps,
and their corresponding synthesized abnormal CXRs.
Additional augmentations are adopted such as gamma correction and blob implanting. The gamma correction simulates
Xray images with different intensities from different sources.
The blob implanting simulates obstructions in the CXR images, such as tubes, machines and strong infections. The model
is trained with Dice loss and optimized using Adam optimizer.
The images are resized to 448 × 448 and normalized by
their mean and standard deviation. The output score map is
thresholded to generate a binary lung segmentation mask.
B. Severity Measurement
We examine patients that were imaged multiple times during
hospitalization. To evaluate the progression of pneumonia,
we suggest a ”Pneumonia Ratio” metric which quantifies the
relative area of the segmented pneumonia regions to the total
lungs area.
The pneumonia ratio is calculated according to both the
lung segmentation and the pneumonia segmentation to give a

severity measurement of the patient’s disease. The lungs are
segmented using the lung segmentation module as described
above and the segmentation of the suspected pneumonia region
is produced, as outlined in V-B, only for patients that were
identified with pneumonia by the classification head. The
outputted segmentation map is then multiplied by the lung
mask to restrict pneumonia detections to the lung area. The
area of the lungs (Arealungs ) and the pneumonia segmentation
(Areapneumonia ) are calculated according to the total number
of pixels involved, and a pneumonia ratio is calculated using
the following equation:
P neumonia Ratio = 100 ×

Areapneumonia
Arealungs

(2)

The system’s components and ”Pneumonia Ratio” calculation steps are shown in Fig. 6.
C. CT and Xray Duality for Patient Monitoring
In order to demonstrate the efficacy of our model in performing a follow-up task, we establish a strategy to evaluate
the accuracy of disease progression using CXR. Rendering
realistic DRRs from serial COVID-19 patients’ CT scans
is manipulated to validate our method. In particular, the
DeepDRR framework [33], [34] is implemented to generate
DRRs from CT. These DRRs are then inputted to our model
to calculate the ”Pneumonia Ratio” following the steps in Fig.
6. The CXR Pneumonia Ratio is then compared with the CT
Pneumonia Ratio, using the the CT disease localization method
described in [35].
The system of DRR generation and evaluation is depicted
in Fig. 7 and described in detail next:
DeepDRR. DeepDRR is a machine learning-based method
that consists of four modules: (1) material decomposition
(air, soft tissue and bones) in CT volumes using a deep

6

TABLE I: Number of images that were used for training,
validation and testing for each one of the datasets.
Dataset
Dataset 1
Dataset 2

Dataset 3

Fig. 7: CT and Xray Duality for Patient monitoring - Block
Diagram: Shown are the steps used to create the DRR;
Pneumonia Ratio can then be computed both on the CT image
as well a on the generated synthetic CXR image.

segmentation ConvNet, (2) analytic forward projection, (3)
scattering estimation in 2D image using a neural networkbased Rayleigh, and (4) noise injection. This framework enables the user to generate synthetic Xray images with different
parameter configurations, controlling image size, resolution,
spectrum energy level, image view (rotation), noise and scatter
control and more. This can be exploited for data augmentation
and parameters tuning. The selected parameters set for the
generated DRRs in this work include 1024 × 1024 image size,
with 0.168 mm pixel size. The spectrum of a tungsten anode
operating at 120 kV with 4.3 mm aluminum is used and a
high-dose acquisition is assumed with 105 photons per pixel.
Posterior-anterior (PA) and anterior-posterior (AP) images are
produced for each CT volume.
Chest Body Part Segmentation. A thoracic CT may include
scanned objects exterior to the body part such as the bed
on which the patient lies. These objects are seen on the
generated DRRs, concealing parts of the chest and appearing
as undesirable noise. Thus, a pre-processing step is held
to keep only the chest parts. First, bit-wise operations are
applied to the masks of the decomposed materials: the air
mask is inverted using NOT operation, then, OR operation is
performed on the inverted air mask, the soft tissue mask and
the bones mask. This step creates a mask of the chest part
(without the air in lungs) as the bed and other unrelated objects
are composed of different materials. To produce a binary
mask of the whole chest part including the lungs, a hole-fill
algorithm is applied. Finally, the filled mask is multiplied by
the CT volume, excluding all the unrelated objects.
Post-processing. The DRRs are first inverted as they appear
dark. They are then converted to 8-bit values. Images that are
very bright (with their average intensity value greater than
220) undergo gamma correction with γ = 0.2.

Source
RSNA Pneumonia
Detection Challenge [20]
COVID-19 Image
Data Collection [18]
+ RSNA Pneumonia
Detection Challenge [20]
COVID-19 Image
Data Collection [18]
+ RSNA Pneumonia
Detection Challenge [20]
+ Figure 1 COVID19 Chest
Xray Dataset Initiative [19]

Train
9004

Validation
1126

Test
1124

—

—

574

13604

1278

300

V. E XPERIMENTS AND R ESULTS
A. Datasets
To train our network, the main source of data is the
RSNA Pneumonia Detection Challenge [20], [36] The data
is comprised of AP and PA. It includes: 20, 672 radiographs
that are labeled with ’Normal’ or ’No Lung Opacity / Not
Normal’ indicating that the image is negative to pneumonia,
and 6, 012 which are labeled with suspected pneumonia (’Lung
Opacity’). The patients in this study are aged between 1−100;
In testing the proposed system, three testing scenarios
are used: In what we term Dataset 1, data was set aside
from within the RSNA Pneumonia Detection dataset: 562
CXR images from pneumonia patients, and 562 CXR images
diagnosed as healthy or with lung pathologies other than
pneumonia (total of 1124 images); the number of P A and
AP images is 470 and 654, respectively.
In a second testing scenario, hereon called Dataset 2,
two data sources are merged: The main source of the data
is the open source COVID-19 Image Data Collection [18].
The dataset consists of COVID-19 cases (as well as SARS
and MERS cases) with annotated CXR and CT images; data
is collected from public sources as well as through indirect
collection from hospitals and physicians. Till the writing of
this paper, the number of CXR images in the dataset is 339,
where 287 (from 180 patient) P A and AP images and the rest
are lateral view position. To balance the data, we randomly
selected, and merged, 287 non-pneumonia images from the
RSNA Dataset. Subsets of Dataset 2 include additional GT
labels, including lung mask images and severity scoring (will
be elaborated in section V-C).
Motivated by the COVID-Net experiment conducted in [9],
we collected the same dataset and data split for our third testing scenario. The dataset includes a total of 8,066 patient cases
who have no pneumonia (i.e., normal), 5,538 patient cases
who have non-COVID19 pneumonia, and 358 CXR images
from 266 COVID-19 patient cases. Among these, 100 normal,
100 pneumonia, and 100 COVID-19 images were randomly
selected for testing (Dataset 3). Detailed description of the
data split for all the datasets used in this paper is shown in
Table I.
B. COVID-19 Pneumonia Detection
Several experiments were conducted to evaluate the system
detection performance. Table II summarizes the COVID-19

7

(a)

(b)

Fig. 8: (a) mean average precision (mAP) at different localization thresholds. The threshold that yields the maximum mAP is
selected to produce the segmentations. (b) ROC curve of our model performance on pneumonia classification.
TABLE II: Quantitative results of pneumonia classification in COVID-19 and pneumonia patients over three datasets. CIConfidence Interval.

Dataset 1
Dataset 2
Dataset 3

AUC [95% CI]
0.93 [0.93, 0.94]
0.94 [0.94, 0.95]
0.98 [0.97, 0.98]

Sens [95% CI]
0.87 [0.86, 0.88]
0.86 [0.85, 0.87]
0.92 [0.91, 0.93]

Spec [95% CI]
0.85 [0.84, 0.87]
0.91 [0.90, 0.92]
0.97 [0.96, 0.98]

pneumonia classification performance over the three datasets
defined above in terms of sensitivity (Sens), specificity
(Spec), accuracy (ACC) and positive predictive value (P P V ).
In the first experiment we evaluate the model performance
for both localization and classification on Dataset 1, which
does not include COVID-19 patients. Starting with the quality
of the pneumonia localization heatmaps (examples over the
test set are shown in Fig. 4), we measure our proposed network
localization predictions vs GT labels of bounding boxes using
intersection performance metric. For a fair comparison, we
generate bounding boxes out of the produced heatmaps by
thresholding, and set a tight bounding box around the segmented region. Different threshold values affect the localization performance. The localization performance is assessed by
the mean average precision (mAP) at multiple intersection over
union (IoU ) thresholds as suggested by the RSNA pneumonia
challenge. IoU is calculated using (3):
IoU (A, B) = A∩B
A∪B ,
A − prediction, B − ground truth

(3)

We then threshold the IoU at each threshold from 0.4 to
0.75 with step size 0.05, and count the number of true positive
(T P ), false negative (F N ), and false positive (F P ) detections
calculated from the comparison of predicted to GT bounding
boxes. The precision is then calculated at each threshold t with
(4) for each image i:
precisioni (t) =

T P (t)
T P (t) + F P (t) + F N (t)

(4)

ACC [95% CI]
0.86 [0.86, 0.87]
0.89 [0.88, 0.89]
0.94 [0.93, 0.94]

PPV [95% CI]
0.86 [0.85, 0.87]
0.90 [0.90, 0.91]
0.98 [0.98, 0.99]

The average precision of a single image is calculated as the
mean of the above precision values for all IoU thresholds. The
total precision is then defined as the average of precisions of
all the images:

mAP =

X
X
1
1
precisioni (t) (5)
|images| i |thresholds| t

In order to set a threshold value over the produced heatmaps,
which optimize the mAP, we measured the mAP at different
values from 0.5 to 0.9. As depicted in Fig. 8a. The optimal
threshold value is 0.8 which resulted in mAP of 0.27.
In Fig. 9, we provide examples of bounding box predictions
of our network in comparison to the GT bounding boxes from
the same test set. The top row shows successful predictions
and the bottom row depicts discrepancies between GT and
prediction boxes.
The pneumonia classification performance is evaluated using pneumonia/non-pneumonia labels of Dataset 1. Fig. 8b
shows the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve
that plots the trade-off between sensitivity and specificity at
different thresholds on the test set. The reported Area Under
to Curve (AUC) is 0.93. The sensitivity, specificity and ACC
at the optimal thershold of 0.62 - which is set at the point that
satisfies the minimal Euclidean distance from the point (1, 0),
are 0.87, 0.85 and 0.86, respectively. The Positive predictive
value (P P V ), which is the probability that the disease is
present when the test is positive is 0.86.

8

TABLE III: Lung segmentation results: reported for both Unet based VGG-16 encoder method and the same method with
additional abnormal datasets and augmentations. Ground truth
masks were generated using [37].

Method
LSNet
LSNet-Aug

Fig. 9: Example results on the test set. The top row depicts
successful predictions and the bottom row shows errors. Predictions and GT shown as red and blue overlays, respectively.
In the second experiment, we examine the model’s robustness to COVID-19 data by testing on Dataset 2, that includes
COVID-19 patients. The reported Area Under to Curve (AUC)
for Dataset 2 is 0.94. The sensitivity, specificity, ACC and
P P V are 0.86, 0.91, 0.89 and 0.90, respectively, which shows
the generalization on COVID-19 patients’ data.
In the last experiment, we use Dataset 3, which includes
pneumonia and COVID-19 patients. For a fair comparison,
we trained our network according to the data-split suggested
by the authors of [9], where we merged the non-COVID-19
pneumonia and COVID-19 pneumonia images to one class
to fit our proposed network. In this classification task, we
achieve a performance of 0.98 AUC, with 0.92 sensitivity and
0.97 specificity. These results are equivalent to state-of-theart performance. We note that the method proposed shows
high sensitivity for COVID-19 pneumonia detection, proving
its capability to detect COVID-19 pneumonia in addition to
non-COVID-19 pneumonia.
To summarize, the results in Table II show high performance
on non-COVID-19-pneumonia detection (Dataset 1), and an
even higher performance on COVID-19-pneumonia detection
(Dataset 2), despite the fact that the network was not trained
on COVID-19 images. Including COVID-19 images in the
training dataset (Dataset 3) yields an even better performance, competitive to the state-of-the-art.
C. COVID-19 Severity Scoring and Follow-up
1) Lung Segmentation Evaluation: The lung segmentation
task is essential in order to calculate an accurate severity score.
We present a model for lung segmentation, named LSN et, and
suggest an improved model LSN et−Aug, that generalizes on
images with severe infections as COVID-19, by using various
data augmentation techniques and including abnormal data
sources. Evaluation is performed on 210 images provided in
Dataset 2. The lung masks of these images were generated
using the model from [37] as this achieved the most accurate
segmentations. Therefore, we consider Selvan’s method as our
reference, and compare it to our lung segmentation models.
The results are evaluated using the Dice and Jaccard coefficient. Table III shows an improvement in both metrics for lung
segmentation after adding the aforementioned augmentations
and the datasets during training.

Dice
0.89 ± 0.07
0.92 ± 0.09

Jaccard
0.81 ± 0.10
0.86 ± 0.11

2) Quantitative Analysis: Dataset 2 includes a cohort of
94 PA CXR images that are assigned with a severity score of
[0/1/2/3/4], indicating the extent of ground glass opacity or
consolidation in each lung (right and left lung). Images were
labeled by three experts, following a score strategy adapted
from [38]. The opacity extent was scored as follows: 0 =
no involvement; 1 =< 25% involvement; 2 = 25 − 50%
involvement; 3 = 50 − 75% involvement; 4 => 75% involvement. The total extent score in both lungs ranged from 0 to
8. To compare our results to the GT scores, we compute the
”Pneumonia Ratio” for each lung. We divide the ”Pneumonia
Ratio” into four levels following the same GT criterion, and
the total score is summed for both lungs.
Fig. 10a shows the predicted severity scores against the GT
scores from the 94 patient cohort, with correlation coefficient
of the fitted model being 0.83 and R2 = 0.67. These results
surpass the reported severity estimation of [18], tested on a
subset of the same dataset. The confusion matrix in Fig. 10b
shows larger confusion between close severity scores such as
the low levels [0, 1, 2]. Even though the high severity level
images are slightly underestimated, none were scored with a
mild condition stage and vice versa. Given the high inter-rater
variability, our plots show a satisfactory agreement.
Table IV presents the severity scoring performance using
different development phases of our proposed method and
shows the improvement of the severity measure by each
component; Using the basic model for lung segmentation,
LSN et, and the localization model after the second stage
of training for the pneumonia localization (DLN et − 2), the
performances are higher than using the localization model after
the first stage of training. The accuracy of the severity score
vs. the GT is further improves when using the advanced model
for the lung segmentation (LSN et − Aug).
TABLE IV: Comparison of severity scoring performance metrics of our method after first/second stage and with/without
lung segmentation improvement.
Method
DLNet-1 + LSNet
DLNet-2 + LSNet
DLNet-2 + LSNet-Aug

Correlation Coefficient
0.75
0.79
0.83

R2
0.38
0.59
0.67

3) Qualitative Analysis: To estimate the progression and
severity of pneumonia in COVID-19 patients, we explore the
”Pneumonia Ratio” for patients from Dataset 2, scanned at
multiple time points. We provide a qualitative analysis over
time for three selected patients. Fig. 11 shows the CXR scans
of these patients, superimposed with red contours indicating
the predicted regions of pneumonia. The ”Pneumonia Ratio”

9

(a)

(b)

Fig. 10: (a) Scatter plot showing the relationship between the predicted and GT severity level. The dashed line corresponds to
a perfect correlation and the solid blue line shows our linear regression model. (b) Confusion matrix showing the number of
images that were scored with different combinations.

increase followed by a period without major change and then
another increase in disease severity. In contrast, for patient
171 the ratio indicates recovery from the disease following a
substantial infection increase.
D. CT-Xray duality for patient monitoring validation

Fig. 11: Example of patient monitoring with time in three
patients using the ”Pneumonia Ratio”.

indicates the severity of pneumonia in these patients in percentages out of the lung field, right lung and left lung. In
patient 10, the ”Pneumonia Ratio” shows evidence of disease
deterioration over time. In patient 117, we see a substantial

To further explore the ability of the proposed method to
monitor COVID-19 patients, a quantitative analysis following
the strategy described in IV-C is performed. The DeepDRR
framework is applied to 9 patients with severe disease state.
The patients were scanned at Wenzhou hospital in China and
were diagnosed with COVID-19 with the RT-PCR test. Each
patient had a chest CT scan (slice thickness, {1, 1.5} mm) at
one or multiple time points (up to 4).
After generating the DRRs, the proposed method of pneumonia classification and localization is applied (without retraining the model), and the ”Pneumonia Ratio” is computed
for each patient’s generated Xray. A ratio of the detected
infection in the lungs is also computed from the CT volume,
following the method in [35], [39]. A linear regression model
is fitted to the CT and CXR pneumonia ratio values, as shown
in Fig. 12 The Correlation coefficient found between the two
methods is 0.74 (p < 0.001), where the slope of the line is
0.87 and the intercept with the y-axis is -7.2, thereby indicating
overall agreement.
Fig. 13 shows the pneumonia ratios that were extracted from
the DRRs and the ratios that were computed on CT volumes,
for each time point per patient. Our aim is to compare
the disease progression trends using the two modalities. We
observe that in most of the cases the trend of the regression
lines is similar, i.e., when the CXR ratio increases, so does
the CT ratio, and vice versa. The agreement of the two lines
is quantified as follows: for each time point, if the quotient
of the current time point to the previous is greater than one,
the sample gets a label of 1; otherwise; 0. Following this
definition, we compute an overall accuracy of 0.87. We note

10

Fig. 12: Linear regression model describing the relationship
of the ”Pneumonia Ratio” from DRRs vs. the ratio that is
calculated on CT volume.
the differences in ratio values between the CT and CXR
computations. These are expected as the former is computed
over the 3D volume, and the latter on a 2D image. With the
goal to monitor the disease progression, the absolute difference
in magnitude is not investigated here. In mild conditions,
the CT is more sensitive in detecting penumonia than CXR.
This is exemplified in patient #9, where the graph shows a
ratio of 0 in CXR (indicating that the patient is negative for
pneumonia), whereas the CT shows a positive ratio. Therefore,
the “Pneumonia Ratio” is more accurate in monitoring patients
at an advanced disease stage.
VI. D ISCUSSION
Due to the recent outbreak of the COVID-19, there is a
need for automatic diagnosis and prognosis of COVID-19
pneumonia infections in CXR images. This includes automatic
follow-up of coronavirus patients in order to monitor their
condition and the progression of the disease.
In this work, we propose an end-to-end solution for COVID19 pneumonia detection, localization, and severity scoring
in CXR. We propose a dual-stage network training to simultaneously detect and localize pneumonia. The training
scenario involves learning accurate segmentation from coarse
annotations. Finally, we present a novel validation approach
to assess disease monitoring based on CT-Xray coupling.
Several other works have attempted to solve the problem of
detecting COVID-19 in CXR images [9]–[11]. Most networks
were trained and tested on COVID-19 patients with high imbalanced labels from distinct datasets, in addition to testing on
small test sets. This raised a concern that the network solutions
may be dataset-biased, and not robust as desired [13], [14].
In order to assure robustness of our solution we took special
care to train the network on a single (RSNA) dataset, that
includes non-COVID-19 pneumonia. In the inference phase,
we tested the method on a larger dataset, including COVID-19
patients from an external public dataset and demonstrated high
performance in these cases. Including COVID-19 cases in the
training phase significantly improved the network’s results and

Fig. 13: Comparison of patients’ monitoring using the pneumonia ratios computed from CT volumes and the corresponding DRRs.

yielded performance values comparable to the state-of-the-art.
The segmentation maps provided by our network manifest our
model’s ability to learn features that are specific to the disease,
thereby showing that we are not dataset-biased.
The severity of pneumonia is directly associated with its
extent in the lungs; thus, an accurate segmentation of the
regions infected with pneumonia is necessary. The lack of
accurate segmentation in public datasets encouraged us to
adopt a two-stage training process. This leverages weak delineations (bounding boxes) to learn segmentation proposals,
that in turn, help learn accurate segmentations in the second
stage. A measure of the relative pneumonia region to total
lung region was found to strongly correlate with the disease
severity score estimation. Comparing to [16], we note that a
smaller test set was used, while training on the same source,
and including COVID-19 patients in the training process.
In [28] it was reported that segmentation was found to be
less accurate in pathological lungs. For severe conditions of
pneumonia, an improvement in the lung segmentation solutions is therefore crucial. We address this issue with unconventional augmentations in the training procedure, including:
synthesizing pathological lungs from normal lung cases and
adding blobs to the images along with gamma correction.
With this augmentation we were able to improve the segmentation results considerably and overall enhance the network
performance. Using the two-stage detection and localization
network, along with the augmented lung segmentation model,
we note the improvement in the correlation coefficient and R2
values, as can be seen in Table IV.
In order to validate patient-specific disease progression
profiles, we would ideally need as GT a disease score per
time-point. In this work, we exploit the high sensitivity of
CT and utilize available serial CT scans of severe patients
to conduct a validation test of patient monitoring in CXR.
In order to learn the correspondence of CT and CXR, we
would ideally want to have patients scanned simultaneously

REFERENCES

11

with CT and CXR. The lack of such duality in hospitals urged
us to search for an alternative: we suggest to synthesize Xray
(DRR) from CT using the DeepDRR AI-based technique. We
use the proposed CT-Xray duality for longitudinal comparison,
utilizing a model capable of both assessing and monitoring the
disease state and severity of COVID-19 patients from CXR
images.

[7]

[8]

VII. C ONCLUSION
This work demonstrates the utility of AI for COVID19 pneumonia quantification, severity scoring and patient
monitoring. The presented model simultaneously detects and
localizes the region of pneumonia and assesses its extent in
the lungs. We suggest a dual-stage training that leverages the
weak annotations of bounding boxes in order to output an
accurate segmentation of pneumonia in COVID-19 patients.
An improvement of a previous lung segmentation method [28]
is presented using unconventional additions that enhance the
results of lung segmentation on diseased lungs. The pneumonia
and lung segmentation are exploited to quantify a ”Pneumonia
Ratio” which indicates the pneumonia extent in the lungs.
Additional exploration in the CT-Xray coupling is presented to
validate the capability of our method to monitor patients over
time. In conclusion, our proposed solution has the potential
to generate quantitative measures for improved diagnosis,
facilitation of patient follow-up, and reduction in observerdependent bias to provide overall decision support.
R EFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

T. Singhal, “A review of coronavirus disease-2019
(covid-19),” The Indian Journal of Pediatrics, pp. 1–6,
2020.
N. Chen, M. Zhou, X. Dong, J. Qu, F. Gong, Y. Han,
Y. Qiu, J. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Wei, et al., “Epidemiological
and clinical characteristics of 99 cases of 2019 novel
coronavirus pneumonia in wuhan, china: A descriptive
study,” The Lancet, vol. 395, no. 10223, pp. 507–513,
2020.
C. Sohrabi, Z. Alsafi, N. O’Neill, M. Khan, A. Kerwan,
A. Al-Jabir, C. Iosifidis, and R. Agha, “World health
organization declares global emergency: A review of
the 2019 novel coronavirus (covid-19),” International
Journal of Surgery, 2020.
A. Jacobi, M. Chung, A. Bernheim, and C. Eber,
“Portable chest x-ray in coronavirus disease-19 (covid19): A pictorial review,” Clinical Imaging, 2020.
G. D. Rubin, C. J. Ryerson, L. B. Haramati, N. Sverzellati, J. P. Kanne, S. Raoof, N. W. Schluger, A. Volpi,
J.-J. Yim, I. B. Martin, et al., “The role of chest imaging
in patient management during the covid-19 pandemic:
A multinational consensus statement from the fleischner
society,” Chest, 2020.
J. Bullock, K. H. Pham, C. S. N. Lam, M. LuengoOroz, et al., “Mapping the landscape of artificial intelligence applications against covid-19,” ArXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.11336, 2020.

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

F. Shi, J. Wang, J. Shi, Z. Wu, Q. Wang, Z. Tang, K. He,
Y. Shi, and D. Shen, “Review of artificial intelligence
techniques in imaging data acquisition, segmentation
and diagnosis for covid-19,” IEEE reviews in biomedical engineering, 2020.
S. Latif, M. Usman, S. Manzoor, W. Iqbal, J. Qadir, G.
Tyson, I. Castro, A. Razi, M. N. K. Boulos, A. Weller,
et al., “Leveraging data science to combat covid-19: A
comprehensive review,” 2020.
L. Wang and A. Wong, “Covid-net: A tailored deep
convolutional neural network design for detection of
covid-19 cases from chest x-ray images,” ArXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.09871, 2020.
I. D. Apostolopoulos and T. A. Mpesiana, “Covid19: Automatic detection from x-ray images utilizing
transfer learning with convolutional neural networks,”
Physical and Engineering Sciences in Medicine, p. 1,
2020.
J. Zhang, Y. Xie, Y. Li, C. Shen, and Y. Xia,
“Covid-19 screening on chest x-ray images using
deep learning based anomaly detection,” ArXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.12338, 2020.
Y. Oh, S. Park, and J. C. Ye, “Deep learning covid-19
features on cxr using limited training data sets,” IEEE
Transactions on Medical Imaging, 2020.
G. Maguolo and L. Nanni, “A critic evaluation of
methods for covid-19 automatic detection from x-ray
images,” ArXiv preprint arXiv:2004.12823, 2020.
E. Tartaglione, C. A. Barbano, C. Berzovini, M. Calandri, and M. Grangetto, “Unveiling covid-19 from chest
x-ray with deep learning: A hurdles race with small
data,” ArXiv preprint arXiv:2004.05405, 2020.
A. Signoroni, M. Savardi, S. Benini, N. Adami, R.
Leonardi, P. Gibellini, F. Vaccher, M. Ravanelli, A.
Borghesi, R. Maroldi, et al., “End-to-end learning for
semiquantitative rating of covid-19 severity on chest xrays,” ArXiv preprint arXiv:2006.04603, 2020.
J. P. Cohen, L. Dao, P. Morrison, K. Roth, Y. Bengio, B.
Shen, A. Abbasi, M. Hoshmand-Kochi, M. Ghassemi,
H. Li, et al., “Predicting covid-19 pneumonia severity
on chest x-ray with deep learning,” ArXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.11856, 2020.
R. R. Selvaraju, M. Cogswell, A. Das, R. Vedantam, D.
Parikh, and D. Batra, “Grad-cam: Visual explanations
from deep networks via gradient-based localization,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on
computer vision, 2017, pp. 618–626.
J. P. Cohen, P. Morrison, and L. Dao, “Covid-19 image data collection,” ArXiv preprint arXiv:2003.11597,
2020.
(2020). Figure 1 covid-19 chest x-ray data initiative,
[Online]. Available: https : / / github . com / agchung /
Figure1-COVID-chestxraydataset.
R. S. of North America. (2019). Rsna pneumonia detection challenge, [Online]. Available: https://www.kaggle.
com/c/rsnapneumonia-detection-challenge/data.

12

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

Kaggle. (2020). Covid-19 x rays x rays and ct snapshots
of convid-19 patients, [Online]. Available: https://www.
kaggle.com/andrewmvd/convid19-X-rays.
D. S. Kermany, M. Goldbaum, W. Cai, C. C. Valentim,
H. Liang, S. L. Baxter, A. McKeown, G. Yang, X.
Wu, F. Yan, et al., “Identifying medical diagnoses and
treatable diseases by image-based deep learning,” Cell,
vol. 172, no. 5, pp. 1122–1131, 2018.
X. Wang, Y. Peng, L. Lu, Z. Lu, M. Bagheri, and
R. M. Summers, “Chestx-ray8: Hospital-scale chest xray database and benchmarks on weakly-supervised
classification and localization of common thorax diseases,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2017, pp. 2097–
2106.
K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual
learning for image recognition,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2016, pp. 770–778.
T.-Y. Lin, P. Dollár, R. Girshick, K. He, B. Hariharan, and S. Belongie, “Feature pyramid networks for
object detection,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2017,
pp. 2117–2125.
O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation,”
in International Conference on Medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention, Springer, 2015,
pp. 234–241.
K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recognition,”
ArXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556, 2014.
M. Frid-Adar, A. Ben-Cohen, R. Amer, and H.
Greenspan, “Improving the segmentation of anatomical
structures in chest radiographs using u-net with an
imagenet pre-trained encoder,” in Image Analysis for
Moving Organ, Breast, and Thoracic Images, Springer,
2018, pp. 159–168.
S. Candemir, S. Jaeger, K. Palaniappan, J. P. Musco,
R. K. Singh, Z. Xue, A. Karargyris, S. Antani, G.
Thoma, and C. J. McDonald, “Lung segmentation in
chest radiographs using anatomical atlases with nonrigid registration,” IEEE transactions on medical imaging, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 577–590, 2013.
S. Jaeger, A. Karargyris, S. Candemir, L. Folio, J.
Siegelman, F. Callaghan, Z. Xue, K. Palaniappan, R. K.
Singh, S. Antani, et al., “Automatic tuberculosis screening using chest radiographs,” IEEE transactions on
medical imaging, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 233–245, 2013.
Y. Tang, Y. Tang, J. Xiao, and R. M. Summers, “Xlsor:
A robust and accurate lung segmentor on chest x-rays
using criss-cross attention and customized radiorealistic
abnormalities generation,” in International Conference
on Medical Imaging with Deep Learning (MIDL), 2019.
X. Huang, M.-Y. Liu, S. Belongie, and J. Kautz, “Multimodal unsupervised image-to-image translation,” in
Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer
Vision (ECCV), 2018, pp. 172–189.

[33]

M. Unberath, J.-N. Zaech, S. C. Lee, B. Bier, J. Fotouhi,
M. Armand, and N. Navab, “Deepdrr–a catalyst for
machine learning in fluoroscopy-guided procedures,” in
International Conference on Medical Image Computing
and Computer-Assisted Intervention, Springer, 2018,
pp. 98–106.
[34] M. Unberath, J.-N. Zaech, C. Gao, B. Bier, F. Goldmann, S. C. Lee, J. Fotouhi, R. Taylor, M. Armand,
and N. Navab, “Enabling Machine Learning in X-raybased Procedures via Realistic Simulation of Image
Formation,” International journal of computer assisted
radiology and surgery (IJCARS), 2019.
[35] O. Gozes, M. Frid-Adar, H. Greenspan, P. D. Browning,
H. Zhang, W. Ji, A. Bernheim, and E. Siegel, “Rapid
ai development cycle for the coronavirus (covid-19)
pandemic: Initial results for automated detection & patient monitoring using deep learning ct image analysis,”
ArXiv preprint arXiv:2003.05037, 2020.
[36] A. Stein. (2018). Pneumonia dataset annotation methods. rsna pneumonia detection challenge discussion.,
[Online]. Available: https : / / www . kaggle . com / c /
%20rsna - pneumonia - detection - challenge / discussion /
%2064723.
[37] R. Selvan, E. B. Dam, S. Rischel, K. Sheng, M.
Nielsen, and A. Pai, “Lung segmentation from chest xrays using variational data imputation,” ArXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.10052, 2020.
[38] H. Y. F. Wong, H. Y. S. Lam, A. H.-T. Fong, S. T.
Leung, T. W.-Y. Chin, C. S. Y. Lo, M. M.-S. Lui, J. C. Y.
Lee, K. W.-H. Chiu, T. Chung, et al., “Frequency and
distribution of chest radiographic findings in covid-19
positive patients,” Radiology, p. 201 160, 2020.
[39] O. Gozes, M. Frid-Adar, N. Sagie, H. Zhang, W. Ji,
and H. Greenspan, “Coronavirus detection and analysis on chest ct with deep learning,” ArXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.02640, 2020.

