Epidemiological projections for COVID-19 considering lockdown
policies and social behavior: the case of Bolivia

arXiv:2008.06345v1 [physics.soc-ph] 11 Aug 2020

M. L. Peñafiel1, ∗ and G. M. Ramı́rez-Ávila2, †
1

CBPF - Brazilian Center for Research in Physics,

Xavier Sigaud st. 150, zip 22290-180, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
2

Instituto de Investigaciones Fı́sicas,

Universidad Mayor de San Andrés, Casilla 8635, La Paz, Bolivia.
(Dated: August 17, 2020)

Abstract
We assess the epidemic situation caused by SARS-CoV-2 using Tsallis’ proposal for determining the occurrence of the peak, and also the Susceptible-Infected-Recovered-AsymptomaticSymptomatic and Dead (SIRASD) compartmental model. Using these two models, we determine
a range of probable peak dates and study several social distancing scenarios during the epidemic.
Due to the socioeconomic situation and the conflictive political climate, we take for our study the
case of Bolivia, where a national election was originally scheduled to occur on September 6th and
recently rescheduled to be on October 18th. For this, we analyze both electoral scenarios and show
that such an event can largely affect the epidemic’s dynamics.

∗

mpenafiel@cbpf.br

†

gramirez@ulb.ac.be

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

COVID-19 pandemic has shook the world. Since the official notification of the detection of the novel corona-virus, a huge scientific effort has been made all over the world
in many respects, e.g. the investigation of a prospective treatment or vaccine [1, 2], the
proper mechanisms of the virus and new epidemiological models for the disease spreading
[3], among others. On the other hand, the pandemic control around the world has tested
the sanitary and economic policies of almost any country in the world, leading most of the
countries to impose lockdown periods [4]. Underdeveloped or developing countries represent
a particularly dangerous scenario for the spreading of COVID-19, since both scientific and
governmental efforts are strongly limited due to the lack of economic and human resources.
Latin America has become the new epicentre for the spreading of COVID-19 during the
past month, with specially concerning cases in Brazil, Mexico, Ecuador, Perú and Chile,
with an overall of over 3 million cases as of July, 2020. Bolivia, in its own right, is a
particularly concerning country due to the high percentage of population living on a basis of informal economy1 , recent political events leading to exacerbated polarization, and
a deficient healthcare system. Moreover, a national election was originally scheduled for
September 6, this kind of event implies the mobilization of over 7 million people across the
country (representing about 70% of whole population). Furthermore, the epidemiological
peak for Bolivia is expected to occur in late August or early September according to the
public health authorities2 , meaning that the national election was going to take place in the
worst possible scenario: the epidemiological peak. Based on their predictions; recently, the
local electoral authorities have re-scheduled the poll day to occur on October 18.
Across Latin America, several local efforts (see [6, 7] and the references therein) have been
made in order to predict and forecast the epidemiological peaks in each country (c.f. [8, 9])
taking into account, for instance, several political, economical [10] and social measures [11].
These works are of particular importance in the actual crisis due to the need of governments
for taking the less harmful actions in order to overcome the current scenario.
Specifically, the current situation (as of July 2020) in Bolivia is alarming. Due to the
economic urgency, the rigid quarantine was lifted on June 1 in most of the country, and
1

2

Bolivian informal economy reached 62.3% of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) as of 2018 according to
the International Monetary Fund (IMF) [5].
Nevertheless, no public data about these projections is available.

2

data suggests that social distancing measures were technically loosen weeks before the official release date. Moreover, both public and private healthcare systems are collapsed and
the national diagnosing facilities had to overcome several human and material deficiencies,
conducting to a publicly recognized sub-estimation of both active and recovered cases. Also,
the lack of an effective treatment has led people to search for miraculous cures, such as
the “miracle mineral solution” (MMS) or chlorine dioxide solution (CDS), among others
[12], guided by several highly influential journalists and some local authorities and medicine
practitioners, which might eventually lead to a overcharging of the healthcare system not
only due to COVID-19.

In this work we intend to tackle the problem of the forthcoming national election from
a statistical point of view, by analyzing the situation of a massive mobilization given the
current projections based on reliable epidemiological models. We also intend to address
the problem of imposing a rigid quarantine before and after the epidemic peak, assessing
the potential case reduction and appearance of a second peak following the first one. For
this respect, in Sec. II we use a fit model proposed by Tsallis and Tirnakli [9] with the
purpose of fitting the Bolivian data for active cases and estimate a time range for the peak
date of the epidemic curve. In Sec. III we review the SIRASD compartmental model
which accounts for a fraction of the infected population being asymptomatic, which, as is
known, is the case for COVID-19. Furthermore, we estimate the epidemiological parameters
for the early evolution of the epidemic in Bolivia and propose several scenarios for the
evolution of the epidemic curves. In Sec. IV we discuss the results obtained for the different
epidemic scenarios proposed; finally in Sec. V we conclude and offer perspectives for further
developments.

We emphasize that the intention of the present work does not consist in predicting
a date for the occurrence of the epidemiological peak, but rather on the analysis of the
social distancing policies near the epidemic peak and near an extraordinary event implying
a massive concentration of persons that might dramatically heighten the contagion: the
election day.
3

II.

FITTING THE BOLIVIAN DATA

The first case of COVID-19 in Bolivia was diagnosed on March 9th [13] and, up to
July 12th the local health authorities have accounted for 47200 positive cases. Tsallis and
Tirnakli [9] inspired on a stock-market model proposed an analytic function that fits several
full epidemiological curves for countries such as China, South Korea, France, etc. with the
aim of forecasting their epidemiological curves. They have proposed the following functional
form for the behavior of the COVID-19 active cases
N =C

(x − x0 )α
,
(1 + (q − 1)β̄(x − x0 )γ̄ )1/(1−q)

(1)

where C > 0, α > 0, β̄ > 0, γ̄ > 0, q > 0 and x accounts for the time elapsed since the first
case measured in days. Eq. (1) is known as a q-exponential function. The parameters in (1)
are interpreted as (C, x0 ) being trivial parameters depending on the country’s population
and initial day of the pandemic with respect to China’s data3 , respectively; (q, γ̄) being
disease-specific parameters that may account for the biological aspects of COVID-19 and
are quite universal in the many cases analyzed, with q ≈ 1.26 and γ̄ ≈ 3 [9]. Finally, (α, β̄)
account for the country’s particular spreading of the disease, which include social distancing
policies, the adequate control of the isolation of infected persons and might, as well, involve
particular environmental conditions that could alter the disease propagation and its severity
[14, 15].
Figure 1 shows the active cases data fitted with Eq. (1), the relevant parameters for this
fit are C = 2.601×10−2 , α = 3.0689, β̄ = 2.5492×10−7 while the pair (γ̄, q) = (3, 1.26) is fixed
to the Chinese parameters since the local epidemic in Bolivia has not reached its peak yet.
We observe that Fig. 1 is in good agreement with the available data. It is clear that for the
parameter fitting, its quality is improved with the quantity of available data. Interestingly
enough, we can perform such a parameter estimation for available data at different dates
and calculate both the epidemic peak date and its height. Figure 2 shows this calculation for
different available data. According to the fit function, (1), for the available data proposed
in [9], the Bolivian epidemic peak is expected to occur in the range [Aug-6,Sep-6], which
coincides with local authorities’ information divulgation.
3

Since x0 represents a shift in the origin for the beginning of the country’s epidemic, we will take x0 = 0
for sake of simplicity.

4

III.

MODEL

The compartmental epidemiological model we use in the present work is the so-called
Susceptible-Infected-Recovered for Asymptomatic-Symptomatic and Dead (SIRASD) model
[16] modified in order to account for the sorting of the total population in two groups [10],
those who are not economically obliged to break social distancing measures (i.e., the fraction
of the population possessing a formal work), and those who need to break social distancing
measures due to economical reasons (i.e., the fraction of the population living in the informal
sector of the economy). This model describes the evolution of a disease accounting for the
infected population consisting of asymptomatic (Aj ) and symptomatic (infected) individuals
(Ij ) in each group; which, as is known, is the case for the COVID-19 pandemic. For sake
of simplicity, only the symptomatic fraction of the infected individuals is susceptible to die

FIG. 1. Data for the active cases in Bolivia as of July 11th, the fit corresponds to the function
proposed in [9]. According to this fit, the peak of infections is expected to occur on the day 160,
i.e. September 5th.

5

FIG. 2. Projections for the peak date and height of active cases corresponding to data available
on successive dates according to Tsallis’ fit.

6

from the disease.The model is given by the following equations
X
Sj
dSj
φj φk (βA Ak + βI Ik )
=−
,
dt
N

(2a)

X
dAj
Sj
φj φk (βA Ak + βI Ik )
= (1 − p)
− γA Aj ,
dt
N

(2b)

2

k=1

2

k=1

dIj
=p
dt

2
X

φj φk (βA Ak + βI Ik )

k=1

Sj
− γ I Ij ,
N

dRj
= (1 − r)γI Ij + γA Aj ,
dt
dDj
= rγI Ij ,
dt
dNj
= −2rγI Ij ,
dt

(2c)
(2d)
(2e)
(2f)

where Sj accounts for the susceptible fraction of the population, Aj for the asymptomatic
fraction, Ij for the symptomatic fraction (which is more likely to be tested positive), Rj
for the recovered fraction of the total infected individuals and Dj for the fraction of the
population that dies from the disease, the sub-index j takes account of the group label;
consequently, for our case it can be either 1 or 2. Since this model assumes a portion of
the population dies from the disease, the total number of individuals is not constant over
P
time and is given by N(t) = N1 (t) + N2 (t) = 2j=1 (Sj + Ij + Aj + Rj − Dj ). Furthermore,
the parameter φj represents the noncompliance degree of the social distancing measures
corresponding to the group j [10]. Note that Eqs. (2) take account of intragroup interactions
(φj φj ) as well as interactions between members of different groups (φj φk , j 6= k)
For the purpose of estimating the parameters of the model we first need to use the simpler
SIRD model [16], which does not assume an asymptomatic fraction of the population and
consists of the population composed by only one group. This model is given by the same
equations as (2) with the detail that the compartments Aj are removed, as well as their
corresponding parameters βA and γA [16].
The first 2 COVID-19 cases in Bolivia were diagnosed on March 9, 2020. Soon after, the
central government took several social distancing policies, such as the closure of educational
establishments at all levels and a partial quarantine, that consisted on a reduction of the
working hours of public and private institutions, including the suspension of cultural, religious and sporting events; however, these measures did not impose, in practice, limits for
potential crowds to gather, e.g., public transportation and political manifestations, among
7

others. These measures lasted for 13 days until March 22, where the government announced
a rigid quarantine, allowing citizens to stay out of their homes 1 day per week and banning
both public and private transportation. Assuming that this final measure is reflected in
the data with a delay of ∼ 2 weeks after the measure, we will estimate the epidemiological
parameters using the first 27 days of epidemiological data.
In order to estimate the parameters it is necessary to solve the system of nonlinear differential equations (Eq. (2) for the case of the SIRASD model) and minimize the square error
with respect to the relevant parameters [16]. Hence, we estimate the relevant parameters in
the early stage of the epidemics using the SIRD model as βI ∼ 0.457868, γI ∼ 0.345233,
r ∼ 0.0677. By replacing these parameters in Eq. (2) we can further estimate the remaining
parameters as βA ∼ 0.437923, γA ∼ 0, 280624, p ∼ 0.544546. Figure 3 shows the infections
curve for the early evolution of the epidemic for the single population SIRASD model using these parameters, additionally we plot the 95% confidence interval for these parameters.
Since the scope of the work is to give a qualitative description of social distancing measures,
for sake of clarity, the rest of the epidemiological curves are plotted only using the estimated
parameters.
With the intention of assessing the behavior of the epidemic in Bolivia we will explore
three scenarios:
1. The free evolution of the epidemiological curves, where region I encompasses the first
27 days of the epidemic and φ1 = φ2 = 1; region II covers the rigid quarantine period,
from day 27 to day 67 and we set φ1 = 0.8, φ2 = 0.9. Finally, region III encompasses
the rest of the epidemic with lax social distancing measures and φ1 = 0.87, φ2 = 0.98.
2. The scenario where rigid social distancing measures or lockdown are imposed near the
epidemiological peak and the social distancing measures are lifted at a given time toff
after the peak, as in [10]. Regions I and II are the same as in scenario 1, while region
III ends at tin = tpeak − n, n ∈ N with tpeak = 166. Region IV starts at tin and
ends at toff with tin and toff having variable values. Finally, region V goes from toff
to the end of the epidemic. The values of φj for the first three regions are the same
as in scenario 1, while for region IV we set φ1 = 0.85, φ2 = 0.94 and region V has
φ1 = 0.9, φ2 = 0.95.
3. The scenario considering that the poll day occurs on September 6th, which corresponds
8

FIG. 3.

Early evolution for infected individuals for the parameters estimated for the SIRASD

model assuming one population only. The red points are the real data for infected cases, the blue
line is the estimated infection curve and the green region represents the 95% confidence interval
for the estimated parameters.

to day 181 (and on October 18th, day 223), and no social distancing policies are
adopted during the peak. Such a democratic event implies the massive mobilization
of people not only on the election day but also on periods both before and after the
event. For this respect we will assume that massive mobilizations (φ1 = φ2 = 1) take
place one week before and after the event. For this scenario we have regions I and II
unaltered and region III goes up to day 174 for September (216 for October); for region
IV we set φ = 1 and it goes up to day 188 for September (230 for October). Finally,
region V recovers the values of III for φ and lasts until the end of the evolution.

IV.

RESULTS

We set Bolivia’s population to be N0 = 11677580. In order to solve the set of Eqs. (2) we
(j)

consider the initial conditions S0 = fj N0 − Aj (0) − Ij (0) − Rj (0) − Dj (0) according to the
first reported cases informed by the Ministry of Health. Thus, we set I1 (0) = 2, A1 (0) = 2
and the rest of the initial conditions to 0. fj is the fraction of the total population which
9

FIG. 4. Scenario 1. Region I corresponds to φ1 = φ2 = 1, region II corresponds to φ1 = 0.8, φ2 =
0.9 and region III to φ1 = 0.87, φ2 = 0.98.

belongs to each social group j; therefore we have 1 = f1 + f2 . For the Bolivian case, we set
f1 = 0.38 and f2 = 0.62 assuming that group 2 consists exclusively on the fraction of the
population living on a basis of informal economy according to the IMF data [5].
Scenario 1 is shown in Fig.

4. This scenario shows a behavior that is very close to

FIG. 5. (Left) Scenario 3 with toff = 7. For the parameters chosen for region IV there is a
substantial drop in the number of active cases during this stage. (Right) Scenario 3 with toff = 14,
for this configurations there is no second peak after region IV. In both plots we set tin = 160.

10

FIG. 6. Dependence of the peak height and the day of occurrence of this peak with respect to tin .

the official notified cases4 . In this scenario, the epidemiological peak is expected to occur
around day 166 (i.e., around August 22th) assuming that the overall parameters will remain
the same until the end of the epidemic. This projection for the peak date also coincides
with the range of dates obtained in Sect. II and with official authorities information.
Different configurations for toff in scenario 2 for tin = 160 are shown in Fig. 5. For the
chosen values of φ for region IV in this scenario, it may be seen that the epidemic peak of
scenario 1 is avoided, and the peak may be shifted to occur before the initial predicted date.
Fig. 6 shows this behavior, by varying the starting date of the rigid quarantine around the
peak we show that both the height and the peak day can be lowered by varying tin . In fact,
for the given scenario we show that it is possible to engineer an optimized quarantine. For
instance, in Fig. 6 there is an optimal day for the beginning of the quarantine, where the
new peak shall occur before the initial predicted day, therefore offering for the possibility of
an anticipated economy re-opening, and a considerable reduction in the number of infected
people at the peak, allowing for the healthcare system to be able to handle the peak. Fig. 6
shows that such value for tin is day 152.
The national election scenario is shown in Fig. 7. For the case of the poll day occurring
on September 6th, the popular mobilizations before and after the democratic event might
induce a second peak almost immediately after the first one. This kind of behavior, besides
4

See the site https://www.boliviasegura.gob.bo for up to date data.

11

the undeniable fact of the overcharging of a weak healthcare system, can lead to a further
uncontrollable situation for the disease’s management. Of course, evidence suggests that
having a national election immediately after the peak is a reckless action. On the other
side, having the vote rescheduled to occur on October 18th5 could be a less disadvantageous
scenario for the potential spreading of the disease. This behavior is mainly due to the fact
that the election day is far away from the epidemic peak. Thus, there are less persons in
the mobilized population that can be potential (symptomatic or asymptomatic) carriers of
the disease.

V.

CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVES

The socioeconomic particularities of Bolivian society play an important role in the dynamics of the epidemic, since about 62% of the economy relies on informal work, i.e., on a
day-to-day based economy. The success rate for any social distancing policy heavily depends
on the engagement of the second group at any time of the epidemic.
We have shown that the imposition of a rigid quarantine at any time of the epidemic can
affect its dynamics. Furthermore, it is possible to avoid reaching an epidemiological peak
by carefully designing a social distancing policy involving the strengthening of all public

FIG. 7. (Left) Scenario 3 for the poll day set on September 6th. There exists a second peak due
to the massive mobilizations near the elections. (Right) Scenario 3 for the election day set on
October 18th. There exists a slight delay in the diminution of the number of active cases due to
the elections.
5

Based on electoral authorities’ information, this is the last possible date to have an election.

12

resources aimed at controlling the epidemic and the overall population’s engagement in
obeying the social distancing policies. The shift produced in the time at peak occurs as a
goal, in principle, to prepare the healthcare system adequately in such a way to avert an
over-stressed situation.
We must note that the estimated epidemiological parameters in Section III take account
of the first 27 days of the epidemic in Bolivia. Social distancing policies were imposed very
early in the development of the pandemic, hence, the estimated parameters do not account
for an entirely free evolution of the epidemic but instead may consider for the soft social
distancing imposed in the early stage (closure of schools, reduced working hours) but also
for the non-regulated activities during that period (mainly consisting in crowds gathering in
public transportation, cultural events, etc.). This fact affects the rest of the evolution of the
model presented in Section III, since φ = 1 at the beginning of the development, this value
represents the social scenario of March 2020 and any other scenario with φ < 1 describes a
situation where social distancing is stricter than that of the early epidemics.
Regarding the electoral scenario, we have shown that the best possible date for the
occurrence of the elections corresponds to a time far away from the epidemic peak. In the
case of the present work, and based on the estimated parameters (which, for instance, offer
reliable projections for July 2020), the peak is expected to occur around mid-August. We
emphasize that this scenario can be drastically changed due to the social behavior in the
midterm. Thus, the peak can easily be shifted for occurring before or after the expected
time; and even, it might be lowered.
The vast heterogeneity of environments and the different palliative actions taken in distinct regions of the country imply that each region possesses a particular dynamical scenario
for the evolution of the epidemics. However, the numerical evidence shows that the outbreaks’ overall behavior can be affected by the imposition of social distancing measures at
any time of the epidemic. Of course, it is better to have a rigid quarantine near the peak
due to the overcharging of the healthcare system. We highlight that social distancing policy
alone cannot be entirely sufficient if other measures do not accompany it. For instance,
those involving the insurance that most of the persons will be able to obey the quarantine
(especially involving people belonging to the informal economy group), the strengthening of
the healthcare system in general including the diagnosis phase, an adequate case tracking
and enhancement of treatment resources for the population.
13

Among further developments of this work, we intend to enhance the epidemiological
model to account for different age groups, imposing various social distancing measures to
each group. For instance, official data reveals that during the early stage of the epidemic,
most of the reported cases (and deceases) consisted of elderly persons. In contrast, as for
late July (after having loosened the first rigid quarantine), most of the infected cases account
for persons in working age. It could also be important to incorporate in future work the
effect of re-contagion. Finally, We consider that the noncompliance degree for each group is
an important indicator of social behavior, and it deserves further in-depth analysis.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

MLP acknowledges support from the State Scientific and Innovation Funding Agency of
Rio de Janeiro (FAPERJ, Brazil). MLP thanks V. M. Peñafiel for useful comments on an
early version of this manuscript.

[1] H.-I.

Shih,

C.-J.

Wu,

Y.-F.

Tu,

and

C.-Y.

Chi,

Biomedical Journal (2020), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bj.2020.05.021.
[2] T.

Alsuliman,

L.

Alasadi,

B.

Alkharat,

M.

Srour,

and

A.

Alrstom,

Current Research in Translational Medicine (2020), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.retram.2020.05.004.
[3] F.

Ndaı̈rou,

I.

Area,

J.

J.

Nieto,

and

D.

F.

Torres,

Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 135, 109846 (2020).
[4] O. Mitjà, À. Arenas, X. Rodó, A. Tobias, J. Brew,

and J. Benlloch, The Lancet,

The Lancet 395, 1193 (2020).

[5] L. Medina and F. Schneider, Shadow Economies Around the World: What Did We Learn Over the Last 20 Ye
IMF Working Papers 18/17 (International Monetary Fund, 2018).
[6] K. Y. Fiesco-Sepúlveda and L. M. Serrano-Bermúdez, PeerJ 8, e9332 (2020).
[7] Y. Caicedo-Ochoa, D. E. Rebellón-Sánchez, M. P. naloza Rallón, H. F. Cortés-Motta, and
Y. R. M.-F. no, International Journal of Infectious Diseases 95, 316 (2020).
[8] N. Crokidakis, arXiv e-prints , arXiv:2003.12150 (2020), arXiv:2003.12150 [q-bio.PE].
[9] C. Tsallis and U. Tirnakli, Frontiers in Physics 8, 217 (2020).

14

[10] M. A. Pires, N. Crokidakis, D. O. Cajueiro, M. Argollo de Menezes, and S. M. Duarte Queirós,
arXiv e-prints , arXiv:2005.09019 (2020), arXiv:2005.09019 [q-bio.PE].
[11] S. B. Bastos, M. M. Morato,

and D. O. C. a. J. E. Normey-Rico, arXiv e-prints ,

arXiv:2006.15268 (2020), arXiv:2006.15268 [q-bio.PE].
[12] X. Zhou, A. Mulay, E. Ferrara, and R. Zafarani, arXiv e-prints , arXiv:2006.05557 (2020),
arXiv:2006.05557 [cs.SI].
[13] J.
G.
D.

P.

Escalera-Antezana,

Alarcón-De-la
K.

Vega,

N.
L.

Bonilla-Aldana,

E.
A.

F.

Lizon-Ferrufino,

Alvarado-Arnez,
J.

M.

Rodrguez-Morales,

A.

Maldonado-Alanoca,

A.

Balderrama-Saavedra,
and

LANCOVID,

Travel medicine and infectious disease 35, 101653 (2020).
[14] C. Arias-Reyes, N. Zubieta-DeUrioste, L. Poma-Machicao, F. Aliaga-Raduan, F. CarvajalRodriguez, M. Dutschmann, E. M. Schneider-Gasser, G. Zubieta-Calleja,

and J. Soliz,

Respiratory Physiology & Neurobiology 277, 103443 (2020).
[15] J. Soliz, E. M. Schneider-Gasser, C. Arias-Reyes, F. Aliaga-Raduan, L. Poma-Machicao,
G. Zubieta-Calleja, W. I. Furuya, P. Trevizan-Ba, R. R. Dhingra, and M. Dutschmann,
Respiratory Physiology & Neurobiology 279, 103476 (2020).
[16] S.

B.

Bastos

and

D.

O.

Cajueiro,

arXiv:2003.14288 [q-bio.PE].

15

arXiv

e-prints

,

arXiv:2003.14288

(2020),

