Efficacy of face coverings in reducing transmission of COVID-19: calculations
based on models of droplet capture
Joshua F. Robinson,1, a) Ioatzin Rios de Anda,1, 2 Fergus J. Moore,1, 2 Jonathan P. Reid,3 Richard P. Sear,4 and
C. Patrick Royall5, 1, 3, 6
1)

H. H. Wills Physics Laboratory, University of Bristol, Bristol, BS8 1TL, United Kingdom
School of Mathematics, University Walk, University of Bristol, BS8 1TW,
United Kingdom
3)
School of Chemistry, Cantock’s Close, University of Bristol, Bristol, BS8 1TS,
United Kingdom
4)
Department of Physics, University of Surrey, Guildford, GU2 7XH, United Kingdom
5)
Gulliver UMR CNRS 7083, ESPCI Paris, Université PSL, 75005 Paris, France
6)
Centre for Nanoscience and Quantum Information, University of Bristol, Bristol, BS8 1FD,
United Kingdom
2)

arXiv:2008.04995v3 [cond-mat.soft] 11 Feb 2021

(Dated: 12 February 2021)

In the COVID–19 pandemic, among the more controversial issues is the use of masks and face coverings. Much
of the concern boils down to the question – just how effective are face coverings? One means to address this
question is to review our understanding of the physical mechanisms by which masks and coverings operate
– steric interception, inertial impaction, diffusion and electrostatic capture. We enquire as to what extent
these can be used to predict the efficacy of coverings. We combine the predictions of the models of these
mechanisms which exist in the filtration literature and compare the predictions with recent experiments and
lattice Boltzmann simulations, and find reasonable agreement with the former and good agreement with the
latter. Building on these results, we explore the parameter space for woven cotton fabrics to show that threelayered cloth masks can be constructed with comparable filtration performance to surgical masks under ideal
conditions. Reusable cloth masks thus present an environmentally friendly alternative to surgical masks so
long as the face seal is adequate enough to minimise leakage.
I.

INTRODUCTION

Face coverings have become a common (though controversial) motif of the global response to the COVID–19
pandemic1–4 . At the time of writing, 139 countries have
mandated the use of face coverings (or already practiced
universal masking) in public spaces such as on public
transport, 19 countries mandate coverings on a regional
level and a further 17 countries recommend (but do not
require) their use5 . The World Health Organisation has
recently reversed their earlier policy on face coverings,
and now advise that the public wear them and offer some
guidance on the essential features of effective coverings6 .
SARS-CoV-2 is transmitted primarily by the airborne
route, i.e. by direct inhalation of aerosolised particles containing virus7–15 . Face coverings work to prevent this
transmission route by suppressing onwards transmission
of the virus on exhalation16 (so-called “source control”)
or to provide protection to the wearer on inhalation i.e. as
personal protective equipment (PPE). The former is especially important in this pandemic because the majority
of cases of transmission seem to occur from asymptomatic
or presymptomatic patients4,17–26 . Following the emergence of more infectious variants of SARS-CoV-2, some
policy makers have mandated the wearing of medicalgrade PPE in public spaces27 .

a) Electronic

mail: joshua.robinson@bristol.ac.uk

The literature on face coverings is limited2,28 , and
there is a great deal of inconsistency and a lack of
clarity in the guidance concerning their use. The academic literature is a combination of medical studies (using either live wearers29–31 or mannequins32–34 ), retrospective studies2,35–38 , epidemiological modelling2,39–41
engineering studies (particularly in the filtration
literature)33,34,42–48 and aerosol science4,7,9,18,36,49–51 .
Such a complex phenomenon as airborne transmission depends on very many parameters (e.g. air flow, humidity,
separation, mask fit). The disparate disciplines which
have considered the use of face coverings take wildly
differing approaches, and there seems to be a lack of
any consistent experimental protocol, and studies typically only address a subset of the parameters upon which
transmission depends.
The mechanisms by which droplets1 are captured by
filters are reasonably well-established52 . There are four
principle mechanisms by which droplets may be captured
by fibres in a covering which concern us here43 .

1

Here we use droplet to refer to liquid particles of any size, independent of the mechanisms by which they transmit pathogens.
In the literature the terms droplet and aerosol are used to describe distinct routes for disease transmission, mediated by liquid
droplets in different size regimes. There is a great deal of ambiguity involved in distinguishing these two regimes, which is
discussed in more detail in Ref. 18. To avoid confusion and an
arbitrary classification into different size regimes, we use a single
term for particles of all sizes.

2
• Steric interception – capture neglecting inertia, so
a droplet follows stream lines of the air but collides
with a fibre due to the size of the droplet.
• Inertial impaction – where inertia is taken into
account resulting in the droplet deviating from
stream lines and colliding with the fibre.
• Diffusion – diffusion of droplets in the air leads to
contact with a fibre.
• Electrostatic capture – Coulombic and/or dipolar
attractions between the droplets and fibres pull
the droplet into contact. Note that the previous
three mechanisms assume no interaction until particle/fibre contact. Studying this mechanism requires knowledge of the charge distribution in the
droplets and fibres.
Gravitation can also play a role in droplet capture, however this is negligible compared to the other mechanisms outlined above53 . The filtration literature’s focus on these mechanisms was primarily motivated by
developing medical grade PPE. However, experimental
work during the pandemic has confirmed the potential of
household fabrics to effectively filter some virus-bearing
particles45–48 .
Here we shall primarily focus on those filtration mechanisms pertinent to droplet capture in cloth masks: interception and inertial impaction. We review the literature
which addresses these mechanisms and assess experimental measurements of droplet capture by face coverings.
We give a technical account of filtration theory in a rigorous fashion by borrowing some ideas from soft matter
physics. By clearly articulating its underlying assumptions, we are able to extend the standard theory to begin
to treat household fabrics. Our work provides a route
through which mask design can be optimised, and further questions of public policy can be explored in future
e.g. the importance of mask fit.
Our model predicts that multi-layered masks made
from standard household fabrics should provide comparable filtration performance to surgical masks under
ideal conditions, though practical mask performance crucially depends on the fit. We conclude that for many
three-layered cloth masks capture of droplets larger than
& 3 µm is highly effective. For smaller (0.1 to 3 µm)
droplets, the efficacy is dependent on the type of material from which the face covering is comprised, but some
materials can achieve excellent protection (≥ 95 %) for
& 1 µm droplets which is comparable to surgical masks.
This paper is organised as follows: in section II we describe experiments exploring the material properties of
fabrics. Section III is dedicated to theory and simulations for filtration by a single-fibre. Then in section IV
we investigate the filtration properties of fabrics by combining the work of previous sections. We discuss the significance of our findings and conclude in section V. The
code used to do the calculations in this work is available
at Ref. 54.

II.

MATERIAL PROPERTIES OF MASKS

Fabrics are broadly categorised as knitted, woven or
nonwoven. We refer to face coverings that would be worn
by members of the public, that are neither surgical masks
nor respirators, as cloth masks, and we use masks as a
catch-all term for all kinds of filters. Filtration theory is
well-developed for nonwoven materials43 , which are typical of surgical masks and respirators. However cloth
masks typically contain knitted or woven fabrics so we
introduce some fundamental characteristics of these fabrics below.
Knitted and woven fabrics are created by spinning fibres into yarn55 . In practice many of these threads are
typically twisted together (the “ply”) into a composite
yarn with additional stability against being unwound.
Note that the process described above is for staple yarn,
where the natural fibres are short, but a different process
(filament yarn) may be used where the fibres are naturally long (e.g. silk or synthetic polymers) which results in
smoother thread (cf. silk strands are smooth in Fig. 1(a)
whereas cotton thread in Fig. 1(b) features stray strands
resembling a frayed rope).
Weaving involves interlacing multiple parallel yarn into
a tight pattern, whereas knit fabrics are formed by drawing the yarn in complex loops (the “stitches”). Knitting thus results in regions of high curvature, so threads
are able to bend which typically results in stretchier fabrics. By contrast, nonwoven materials are formed by entangling the fibres mechanically, thermally or chemically
which results in a less ordered structure.
The filtration characteristics of masks depends on
many parameters, including the size and charge on the
droplets as well as mask properties such as fibre thickness, density of fibres, their material composition and
thickness of the mask. In addition, in cloth fabrics details of yarn structure and weave/knit pattern matter.
Treating all of these within a single framework represents
a significant challenge, so we focus on the most relevant
parameters.
A.

Contact forces

All combinations of fibres and droplets interact on contact between the droplet and the fibre, even when they
are electrically neutral. In almost all cases we expect
droplets to stick when they contact the surface of the fibre. Whether a droplet sticks and spreads on a surface it
contacts, or carries on moving, is controlled by the ratios
of two competing energies. The first energy acts to keep
droplets moving without sticking: the inertial or kinetic
energy. The second energy drives sticking and spreading
of the droplets: the surface free energy.
For droplets in the size range of interest the surface
free energy is much larger than the kinetic energy, so the
surface free energy will win and the droplet will stick —
at least in the vast majority of cases. The ratio of the

N95/FFP2
respirator

knitted
woven
respirator (nonwoven)
surgical mask (nonwoven)
other nonwoven

0.2
0.1

d

0.125

0.5

1.0
1.5
2.0
thickness (mm)

e

0.100
0.075
0.050

0.02

0.025
0

3.0

0.04

50

0.000

2.5

cotton mask (1)
cotton mask (2)
cotton cleaning cloth
cotton tea towel
100% cotton t-shirt
60% cotton t-shirt
log-normal fit

frequency

c

0.3

0.0
0.0

frequency

b

woven cotton

knitted silk

a

volume fraction

3

10

20
30
diameter df (µm)

75

df (µm)

40

50

FIG. 1. (colour online) Summary of fabrics comprising masks considered here. (a) Knitted fabrics formed by looping yarn
through previous layers (layers coloured differently for clarity). (b) Woven fabrics formed by intersecting perpendicular yarns
(the “warp” and “weft”). (c) Nonwoven fabrics are formed by entangling fibres through other means, resulting in less ordered
arrangements. Scanning electron microscope images of example fabrics in figures (a)-(c) share a scale bar of 100 µm. (d)
Geometric properties measured for sample fabric layers, with region of interest marked with a dashed circle (discussed in text).
Respirators and surgical masks are comprised of multiple layers, with individual layers plotted separately within this panel. (e)
Distribution of fibre diameters in cotton fabric samples, which loosely follow a log-normal distribution. Inset: the 60% cotton
40% polyester t-shirt shows a second peak at larger fibre diameter corresponding to the second material, which can also be
modelled as a log-normal (pink dashed).

kinetic energy to the surface free energy is the Weber
number:
ρp dp U02
kinetic energy
=
,
We =
surface free energy
γ
for a droplet of mass density ρp , diameter dp , surface
tension γ, and moving at speed U0 .
For mucus droplets, γ ∼ 0.05 N m−156 . For a droplet
of diameter dp ∼ 10 µm travelling at 0.1 m s−1 , We ∼
2 × 10−3 ; surface tension forces are then about 500 times
stronger than inertial forces, so we expect them to dominate and the vast majority of droplets to stick on contact. Natural fibres such as cotton are more hydrophilic
than synthetic polymers used in medical-grade surgical
masks and respirators. However, at these very small Weber numbers we do not expect this variation to have a
significant effect. Small droplets can even stick to hydrophobic surfaces57 .

B.

Experiments

We examined a variety of fabrics used to make masks
including cloth masks, surgical masks and respirators.
These masks are typically multi-layered structures, and
were decomposed into their individual layers for examination. Their properties are summarised in Fig. 1(d) and
a full breakdown is given in Table S1 in the Supplementary Material (SM).
An important quantity for filtration is the volume fraction of fibres α, which we determined from
α=

ρA
,
ρb L

(1)

where ρA is the areal density (the “fabric weight”, typically measured in g m−2 ), ρb is the bulk density of the
fibre and L is the fabric thickness. ρA /L gives the fabric
density. We measured ρA by weighing strips of known
area, and ρb is determined from the fabric material (e.g.

4
1.54 g m−3 for cotton). We measured the fabric thickness by cutting the material into thin strips, clamping
them at one end, and measured their thicknesses under
bright-field microscopy (Leica DMI 3000B) with a 4x and
10x objective (depending on the thickness of the fabric).
This method likely overestimates the thickness for fabrics with a yarn structure: an alternative method for inferring the fabric thickness will be introduced in section
IV D (and a comparison of both methods is given in SM).
The manufacturers did not state the material composition of the surgical masks and respirators we sampled, so
we assumed they were made from polypropylene fibres
(ρb = 0.91 g m−3 ). We neglect any porosity within the
fibre in (1); the SEM images in Fig. 1(a-c) and the SM
suggests that the porosity is not large enough to significantly affect the measured volume fractions.
We found that the majority of fabric layers were 0.4 to
1.2 mm thick consistent with e.g. Ref. 58 and had volume
fractions in the range 0.05 . α . 0.15; these ranges are
circled in Fig. 1(d). Notable exceptions to the latter rule
included a silk tie and a paper bag with α ∼ 0.26 0.20
respectively; however we found these samples to be difficult to breath through when placed to the face, making
them unsuitable as potential mask materials.
For scanning electron microscopy (SEM) characterisation, samples were mounted on SEM stubs and
coated with gold/palladium in an Emitech K575X Sputter coater before being imaged in an FEI Quanta 200
FEGSEM (Thermo Fisher Scientific). SEM images were
taken at 8 kV using comparable magnifications for all the
fabrics. From these images we manually measured the
distribution of fibre diameters df , using the open-source
software Fiji59 , and parameterised it with a log-normal
fit. Natural fibres (e.g. cotton) do not have perfectly circular cross-sections, so modelling them as cylinders is an
approximation. Our measured distribution of fibre diameters will thus be affected by fibre orientation, a consequence of obtaining 3d information from 2d images. A
minimum of 50 individual fibres were measured per fabric. The size distributions obtained for cotton samples in
Fig. 1(e), and the remaining distributions are given in the
SM. For cotton we find ln (df /µm) ∼ N (µ = 2.68, σ 2 =
0.12), so a cotton layer ∼ 1 mm thick will typically be 50
to 100 fibres thick.

III.

CAPTURE OF DROPLETS BY A SINGLE FIBRE

In this and the next section we describe the standard
theory for filtration of droplets/particles, test its assumptions and generalise it to incorporate the polydisperse fibre size distributions obtained in the previous section.
In this section, we explore how a single fibre can collect
droplets, and in the next section we look at filtration by
a fabric formed from a mesh of such fibres. We mostly
follow Ref. 43, but we also make use of Refs. 49 and 53.
We use the subscript f for fibre and p for incident particles, e.g. dp is the particle diameter whereas df is the

a

b

~
...

y
z

FIG. 2. (colour online) Illustration of single-fibre filtration.
Particles moving along trajectories between the upper and
lower orange lines collide with the fibre and are filtered out.
Particles along these trajectories just glance the surface of a
fibre. The width of the collection window, λ is defined as
being the distance between the upper and lower trajectories
far from the fibre, illustrated in (a). Far from the fibre we
assume that particles follow the air streamlines. Near the
fibre, particle trajectories are highly curved precluding a simple geometric interpretation of λ. λ depends on the particle
and fibre sizes, as well as the background gas flow. Lighter
(darker) shading corresponds to faster (slower) background
flow speed.

fibre diameter.
A.

Single-fibre efficiency from idealised flows

To understand the filtering capacity of a single fibre,
we consider the flow around an infinitely long cylinder
aligned perpendicular to the direction of flow. Assuming that the particles faithfully follow the streamlines infinitely far from the cylinder, we define the single-fibre
efficiency as the fraction of particles collected by the fibre, i.e.
η=

number of collection trajectories
.
number of streamlines

(2)

Infinitely far from the mask the velocity field is u = U0 ex
so that the streamlines are distributed uniformly on
planes with normal vector ex , as in Fig. 2(a). We assumed z-symmetry so that our problem geometry is twodimensional in the xy-plane, so this leaves width (in
the y-direction) as a suitable measure for the number of
streamlines. Given these considerations we can write the
single fibre efficiency as η = λ/Ly where λ is the width of
the collection window in Fig. 2 and Ly is the total width
of the mask in the y-direction.
Our definition of single-fibre efficiency differs from that
normally used in filtration literature, namely the quantity λ/df in e.g. Refs. 43, 49, and 53. We have chosen
a definition which guarantees η < 1 so it can be interpreted as a probability; the more common definition is

5
not properly normalised which can lead to incorrect and
poorly posed results when combining multiple collection
mechanisms (cf. section III A 5).

our simple two-dimensional model. In all cases we run
the LB simulations until we reach steady state, and then
use the steady-state flow field.

1.

3.

Kuwabara flow field

Flow through a filter occurs at low Reynolds number,
so it is well described by Stokes flow. There is no solution to Stokes flow around a free cylinder because of
the Stokes’ paradox60 , however the mask is composed of
many fibres and we can obtain a solution for flow around
a fibre immersed in an effective neighbourhood of other
fibres: the Kuwabara flow 61 . The effective neighbourhood
√ is treated as an outer circle boundary at distance
af / α where af is the radius of the fibre, so that √
the
flow is modelled in the coaxial region af ≤ ρ ≤ af / α
which allows solution without a paradox. Moreover, the
radial component of the√velocity at the outer boundary
is taken as uρ (ρ = af / α) = U0 cos θ. U0 is the average flow speed through the mask, obtained from the flow
speed at the mask surface (cf. table I).
For incompressible flow ∇ · u = 0 the velocity field can
be expressed in terms of a streamfunction, i.e.
u=∇×ψ

(3)

where

The equation for particle velocity v (Newton’s second
law) while being transported by the flow u is
mp

f (ρ) =

f1
+ f2 ρ + f3 ρ3 + f4 ρ ln
ρ




ρ
,
af

(4a)
(4b)

with coefficients {fi } set by the boundary conditions.
The Kuwabara flow field is obtained by assuming the
velocity vanishes on the fibre surface u(ρ = af ) = 0, and
that the √
vorticity ∇ × u vanishes at the outer boundary
ρ = af / α to approximate the neighbourhood around
the fibre61 . We give the explicit values of the coefficients
obtained in the SM.
Lattice Boltzmann flow field

To test the validity of the Kuwabara flow field, we
also calculated flow fields using Lattice Boltzmann (LB)
simulations62–65 . In these simulations the Reynolds number Re is nonzero, and can be varied, and the fluid is compressible. However, at our small Re the spatial variation
in density is very small. To do the LB simulations we
use a modified version of a code from PALABOS group
at the University of Geneva66 . See SM for details.
We have performed two types of LB simulations. In
the first we can calculate the flow field around a single
fibre, which allows us to calculate the single-fibre collection window λ. In the second we calculate the flow field
in a disordered hexagonal lattice of fibres, which is our
model of a mask. This flow field allows us to test the theory’s ability to predict filtration efficiency, at least within

dv
v−u
=−
+F
dt
B

(5)

where mp is its mass. The first term on the right hand
side is the Stokes drag. In this term B = C/6πµap is the
particle mobility, with µ the dynamic viscosity of air and
C the Cunningham slip correction factor67,68 . F contains
any other external forces such as gravity, which we do
not consider here. We have assumed that the particle
interacts with the flow field as a point particle so that:
(a) the flow field u is unperturbed by the presence of
the particle and (b) the Stokes drag couples only to the
particle’s centre of mass.
We denote dimensionless parameters with tildes, dee , v = U0 v
e,
fined through the transformations u = U0 u
r = af e
r, and t = af e
t/U0 so (5) becomes
St

ψ(ρ, θ) =U0 f (ρ) sin θ ex ,

2.

Particle motion

B
de
v
e) +
F,
= −(e
v−u
U0
de
t

(6)

with Stokes number
St =

2ρp a2p U0 C
mp U0 B
6.2 × 106 d2p
=
∼
U0 C,
af
9µaf
m2 s−1 df

(7)

with the latter step evaluated for parameter values typical of incoming droplets. These are in table I. The
Stokes number describes the effective inertia of the particle moving under the flow field. For threads with diameter O(100 µm) typical of yarns used in knitted and
woven fabrics, we find St  1 making inertia irrelevant
for particles around O(1 µm) in diameter; for this reason the smaller fibres are crucial for capture of exhaled
droplets in cloth masks.
4.

Particle deposition and collection efficiency

For the LB flow field the length of the single-fibre collection window λ can be determined by direct measurement of its geometric definition in Fig. 2. The Kuwabara
flow field is only valid in the region of high curvature
close to the fibre surface, so determining λ is slightly
more subtle.
Defining n as the number density of incoming particles,
the continuity equation in the steady-state ṅ = 0 yields
∇ · (nv) = 0. All particle trajectories that terminate on
the fibre surface are contained in the volume bounded by
the limiting path shown by a solid black line in Fig. 3(a).

6

a

b

d

c

e

S1
path

S0

Θ1
Θ0

FIG. 3. (colour online) Geometry of particle capture in the Kuwabara flow field. Lighter (darker) shading corresponds to
faster (slower) flow speed. (a) Diagram of limiting trajectory in more detail. In the absence of attractive forces and inertia the
capture angle will be θ1 = π/2. (b-c) Effect of spherically symmetric forces on the incoming particle trajectories. The forces
move the limiting trajectory towards the near or far side of the fibre depending on whether the interaction is attractive (b)
or repulsive (c). (d-e) Inertia brings the limiting trajectories towards the near side of the collecting fibre, shown are particle
trajectories for (d) St = 0 and (e) St = 0.5.

We integrate the continuity equation over this and apply
the divergence theorem to give
Z
Z
nv · dS +
nv · dS = 0
(8)
S0

S1

using the fact that the v · dS = 0 along the limiting trajectory and the fibre surface at r = af , and the surfaces
Quantity

Value

Reference

Air
mass density
1.2 kg m−3
dynamic viscosity µ
1.8 × 10−5 Pa s
kinematic viscosity ν
1.5 × 10−5 m2 s−1
Water/mucus
mass density ρp (water)
998 kg m−1
dynamic viscosity (mucus)
0.1 Pa s
mucus/air surface tension γ
0.05 N m−1
Typical breathing flow rates
tidal breathing at rest
6 l min−1
during mild exertion
20 l min−1
during moderate exertion
30 l min−1
during maximal exertion
85 l min−1
Average flow speeds
effective mask area
190 cm2
flow speed (rest)
0.5 cm s−1
flow speed (mild)
1.8 cm s−1
flow speed (moderate)
2.7 cm s−1
flow speed (maximal)
7.5 cm s−1

69
69
69
69
56
56
70
70
70
70
71

TABLE I. Table of key parameter values for masks including air, water and mucus at 20 °C and atmospheric pressure
105 Pa. Note that small droplets dry rapidly and this will
cause their viscosity to increase. Flow rates are determined
from the volume typically exhaled during one minute. Moderate exertion is defined as that readily able to be sustained
daily during 8 hours of work, whereas maximal exertion is the
upper limit of what can be sustained for short periods of time
(e.g. during competitive sports). Flow speeds are calculated
for the stated mask area and flow rates assuming perfect face
seal; in practice leakage would reduce flow through the mask.

S{0,1} are defined in Fig. 3(a). We write the magnitude
of either integral in the above expression as Φ/2: (half)
the rate of particle deposition on the fibre surface. We
multiply by two to account for collection along both sides
of the fibre, taking advantage of the symmetry in the ydirection.
The width of the collection window is determined from
the deposition rate by λ = Φ/n0 U0 Lz where n0 is the
particle number density far away from the fibre and U0 is
the √
flow speed. We apply the boundary condition n(r =
af / α) = n0 , which is a constant along S0 , so we have
the following expression for collection efficiency:
df
λ= √
α

Z

θ0

π



af
veρ θ; ρ = √
dθ.
α

(9)

The velocity field at the outer boundary is a boundary
condition of the field, so θ0 is the key quantity needed to
evaluate efficiency through this route. For v = u at the
boundary this reduces to


af
λ = df sin (θ0 )f √
.
α
The angle θ0 is obtained by following the limiting trajectory (e.g. the one shown in Fig. 3(a)) that only just
glances the fibre. Particle trajectories in this limit are
defined by
1 dρ
vρ
uρ
=
=
,
ρ dθ
vθ
uθ

(10)

which can be integrated backwards in time with final
conditions r = af and θ = θ1 = π/2 to determine θ0 .
5.

Single-fibre efficiency from combined mechanisms

From the definition of the single-fibre collection efficiency (2), we can see that if the mechanisms act completely independently then the penetration probability,

7
the probability of passing the fibre, will be the product of the penetration probabilities due to the individual
mechanisms i.e.

 2 !
X λk
Y
λk
λk
1−η =
1−
=1−
+O
Ly
Ly
Ly
k

k

where k sums over the different mechanisms and the last
step is valid in the macroscopic limit (λ/Ly )2  1. However, in practice these mechanisms are not independent
and the relative catchment lengths λk will overlap. Assuming perfect overlap and no interaction between mechanisms, the total efficiency will simply equal the most
efficient individual mechanism i.e. max ({ηk }).
Combining the two limits above, we find
X λk
max ({λk })
≤η≤
Ly
Ly
k

If one mechanism dominates over the others then these
two bounds converge and we can simply take the dominant mechanism.
6.

Specific mechanisms

As noted in the introduction, there are four principle mechanisms by which droplets may be captured by a
mask which concern us here, steric interception, inertial
impaction, diffusion and electrostatic capture 43 . These
mechanisms generally act in different size regimes, so it
is simpler to calculate their effects in isolation and then
combine them using the approach outlined in the previous section.
Electrostatic capture is crucial for high efficiency filtration of particles with size of order O(0.1 µm) in respirators which make use of electret fibres that sustain surface charges of order O(1 nC cm−2 )53,72 2 , however cloth
masks often have negligible charge and must rely on the
first three mechanical mechanisms 3 . We therefore neglect electrostatic capture in this work.
For interception, collection occurs when the finite-sized
particles touch the surface of the fibre while passing, with

2

3

Note that the dielectric breakdown of air would occur for
cylinders with a surface charge density in the range of ∼3 to
10 nC cm−2 (depending on the fibre’s dielectric constant cf. SM
for this calculation), so electret fibres are impressively capable of
sustaining almost the maximum possible charge.
Natural cellulose fabrics such as cotton and wool can typically sustain a maximum charge density in the range of
O(0.01 nC cm−2 ) (or O(0.1 nC cm−2 ) for silk) when charged
tribolectrically73 . This provides an upper bound for charge in
most cloth fabrics, and we expect this to have minimal impact
on filter efficiency. Electrostatics could become important for
other fibres made from synthetic polymers such as polyester or
polypropylene that can sustain more charge73 , but for most fabrics it can be neglected.

the limiting trajectory occurring at θ1 = π/2. The particle follows the flow v = u (inertia is included in impaction
but not in interception) and the limiting trajectory occurs at θ1 = π/2, so (9) gives
λR =

2ψ(af + ap , π/2)
.
U0

(11)

In general, capture efficiency is further enhanced by diffusion and inertia. The role of diffusion is quantified by
the Péclet number,
Pe =

rate of convection
df U0
=
,
rate of diffusion
D

(12)

where D is the particle diffusion coefficient for motion
relative to the flow. We find that Pe  1 for dp & 1 µm
so diffusion is negligible for capture of larger droplets.
Similarly, inertia plays no role in the capture of smaller
droplets dp . 0.1 µm because St  1 in that regime.
Most exhaled droplets are larger than dp & 1 µm74 , thus
inertia is crucial to the effectiveness of cloth masks in
the relevant size regime and warrants a more detailed
treatment. We use standard results for diffusion, given
in the SM.
To determine the single-fibre collection window λ for
finite Stokes number St, we use an iterative scheme where
we test whether a particular initial angle leads to collision
with the fibre, and update a lower and upper bound for θ0
accordingly. By testing for collision for the midpoint between the current bounds, we ensure each iteration adds
∼ 1 bit of information to the approximation of λ and
convergence is rapid. For the LB flow field we use a similar scheme, but varying the initial height of the particle
far from the mask where the flow is parallel (cf. Fig. 2).

B. Droplet inertia rapidly increases efficiency above a
threshold value

Inertia causes droplets to deviate from streamlines
which can bring particles closer to the fibre enhancing
capture. The inertia, as measured by the Stokes’ number St in (7), increases as d2p so this mode dominates
capture of large droplets. Naively, we would expect this
increase in efficiency to be a simple increasing function
of the Stokes number. However, inertia also carries particles closer to the fibre where the flow is slower and
more curved, which increases the opposing forces acting
against the particle; this creates competition and inertial
capture is non-trivial for intermediate values of St.
In Fig. 4 we show how λ varies with α and St. There
is a sharp crossover from weak to strong capture as St
reaches values in the O(0.1) range when α & 0.01. This
sharp crossover is a residual of an underlying dynamical
transition occurring in the point particle limit dp /df → 0
demonstrated by Araújo, Andrade, and Herrmann 75 . We
will explore this transition in more detail in a future
manuscript, but here the important message is that once

8

10

λ (µm)

4

inertia
dominates

0.05
0.00
0.0

inertia
enhances

0.5
1.0
inertia (St)

1.5

K α = 0.2
K α = 0.1
K α = 0.05
LB α = 0.2
LB α = 0.1
LB α = 0.05

5

a

0
1.0

2
P

0.10

15

3

0

0.15

≥5

5

0.20

λ−λR
λR

1

volume fraction α

0.25

inertia weakens

R = 0.1

α = 0.05
α = 0.1
α = 0.2

1

0.5

≤0

0.0
0.0

FIG. 4. (colour online) Deviation λ/λR − 1 of single-fibre
collection efficiency λ from the interception capture efficiency
λR for finite particle-to-fibre size ratio R = dp /df = 0.1. We
see a sharp crossover from interception to inertial capture as
the dominant mechanism. λ increases by a factor of & 5 as
St is increased to ∼0.5. λR is defined in (11). We assumed
the particle moves in the Kuwabara flow field in these calculations.

inertia becomes a relevant mechanism the total mask efficiency will rapidly increase (with particle size) to unity
independent of the mask details. However, the location
of this crossover does depend on the mask properties.
Curiously, we find that for small St there is a region
where inertia decreases the efficiency of capture for finite
R highlighting that capture efficiency has a non-trivial
dependence on inertia.
All the above calculations used the approximate
Kuwabara flow field to compute λ. We performed LB
simulations to check the validity of the Kuwabara approximation. Kuwabara and LB values for λ are compared in
Fig. 5(a). We note that, especially at small fibre volume
fraction α, the Kuwabara approximation gives λ values
close to those obtained by LB simulations. So we conclude that at least under most conditions, the Kuwabara
flow field yields good approximations for λ.
Above the dynamical transition, λ increases rapidly
with particle size, see Fig. 5(a), due to the effect of increasing inertia. So in this regime, typically of particles micrometres in diameter, the filtration efficiency increases rapidly. To see this, consider a fibre of diameter
15 µm (typical of cotton from Fig. 1(e)), in air for a flow
speed of 2.7 cm s−1 corresponding to breathing during
moderate exertion. LB calculations for a particle of diameter 2 µm find a collection range λ = 0.36 µm or about
2.5% of the fibre width. However, increasing the particle
diameter to 8 µm yields a collection range λ = 7.1 µm or
almost half the fibre width.

b
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
particle diameter dp (µm)

FIG. 5.
(colour online) Comparison of theoretical model
against Lattice Boltzmann simulations. (a) Plot of the single
fibre λ as a function of particle diameter calculated from the
Kuwabara (solid lines) and LB (dashed lines) flow fields. (b)
Comparison between the penetration P calculated using LB
simulations of model filters (points) with the predictions of
(13b) (curves). In both cases, the flow speed U0 = 2.7 cm s−1
and the fibre diameter df = 15 µm with α = 0.05, 0.1 and 0.2.

IV. FROM SINGLE FIBRES TO TOTAL FILTER
EFFICIENCY

In the previous section we developed the theory for
the width of the region over which a single fibre collects
the droplets: λ. In this section we model a filter as an
array of these fibres, and calculate filtration efficiencies
from λ, the volume fraction α and thickness of the filter.
Standard filtration theory assumes the fibres are identical
in shape and size, act (i.e. filter) independently and are
distributed homogeneously in space. These assumptions
are reasonable for nonwoven materials such as surgical
masks, however in common fabrics we typically find:
1. The individual fibres vary in shape and size.
2. In woven and knitted fabrics, the fibres are hierarchically arranged because of the yarn structure.
The fibres are densely packed in yarns, leaving regions of lower density in the inter-yarn pores.
Our treatment generalises filtration theory to account for
these heterogeneities. We present these generalisations in
subsequent sections, and numerically compare the resulting theory against the experimental data available from
the literature.
A.

Filter efficiency from a polydisperse assembly of fibres

Standard filtration theory considers filters as an assembly of identical cylindrical fibres. Here, we borrow

9
ideas from statistical mechanics to rigorously formulate
the main result of filtration theory, as well as provide the
natural generalisation for when the fibres vary in diameter. As we noted in section II B, natural fibres are seldom
perfectly cylindrical so this formulation is approximate.
For simplicity we consider a rectangular filter of dimensions (Lx , Ly , Lz ), although the shape details perpendicular to the direction of flow do not matter because we
will ultimately consider the limit of an infinite plane. On
average the streamlines (carrying particles) will occupy
an effective area of (1 − α)A, so the effective efficiency is
modified to ηk = λk /((1 − α)Ly ), where we have introduced a subscript k for the efficiency of fibre k as materials are generally heterogeneous and λ will be taken from
a distribution of values (cf. distribution of fibre sizes in
Fig. 1(e)). Assuming the results for single fibres of previous sections, the probability that a particle is collected
by fibre k then equals the probability that a cylinder of
diameter λk crosses the particle path. Those results assume that all the fibres are aligned perpendicular to the
flow direction.
In the simplest case where the particle trajectory is
a straight line through the filter, the probability that a
(1)
particle passes the k th fibre is Pk = 1 − ηk . Assuming
the fibres act independently gives the penetration, the
total fraction of particles that pass through the filter, as
P = lim

Ly →∞

N
Y

R+

so the total penetration becomes


Lx
,
P = exp −
ξ

(13a)

with penetration length
Z

R+

d2f dµ(df ),

and effective collection window
Z
λ=
λ(df ) dµ(df ).
R+

In Fig. 5(b) we compare the predictions of (13) with
the penetrations observed in LB simulations of a disordered lattice of fibres. We see that (13) systematically
overpredicts the penetration, but that the error is typically relatively small. Thus, as the model is only a very
simplified realisation of a mask, we conclude that the approximations involved in (13) give an acceptable level of
accuracy. Note that due to the Stokes’ paradox60 , fibres
are never completely independent of each other. Moreover, fibres will be arranged in a disordered fashion and
so there will be variation in the distances between neighbouring fibres, so (13) essentially both neglects correlations and assumes each fibre has the same local environment.

B.

k=1

which introduces the measure on the fibre
R size distribution µ(df ) that is normalised through R+ dµ(df ) = 1.
Taking the limit yields


λ
λ
lim Ly ln 1 −
,
=−
Ly →∞
(1 − α)Ly
1−α

(1 − α)π
ξ=
4αλ

Our fundamental assumptions to achieve the above expressions were that (a) the fibres act independently, and
(b) their sizes are independent and identically distributed
random variables. We directly test assumption (a) in section II D of the SM.

(1)

Pk

where N = nLx Ly is the total number of fibres in terms
of fibre density (number per unit cross-sectional area)
n = 4α/πd2f . Geometrically, the Ly → ∞ limit above
takes the limiting geometry as an infinite plate (as Lz →
∞ is already implicit in our 2d formulation). We take this
limit by considering the logarithm of both sides, giving
Z
ln P = lim nLx Ly
ln p(df ) dµ(df )
Ly →∞

Finally, we take the measure to be a log-normal distribution based on the fits to the experimental measurements
described in section II B (cf. table S1 in SM).

(13b)

(13c)

Filtration efficiency of nonwoven materials

The theory of the previous section is sufficient to
predict the filtration efficiency of nonwoven materials.
To demonstrate this we compare the predictions of our
model against experimental data for three surgical masks
from Refs. 45 and 46 (SM1, SM2 and SM3). The physical
properties of these masks were not stated, so for comparison we sampled two new surgical masks (SM4 and SM5)
and characterised their thickness and fibre distribution
using the methods in section II B. These surgical masks
consisted of three layers with distinct properties and thus
penetrations through individual application of (13). Eq.
(13) implies that layers act independently, so the total
mask penetration was obtained by combining the penetrations of the individual layers multiplicatively.
Our results compare favourably against the literature
data in Fig. 6(a). Our theoretical prediction for these
masks closely matches the precise data of Ref. 45 for
their own masks (SM1 and SM2). Our theory captures
the experimental behaviour without any free parameters.
Moreover, our model agrees with the trend of increasing
filtration efficiency going into the micron regime seen in
Ref. 46 (SM3). There was a small amount of variation in
the physical properties we observed in masks SM4 and
SM5 (parameters given in SM) which creates some variation in filtration efficiency. The small deviations from
the precise data of Ref. 45 may therefore arise from differences in mask manufacture.

10

particle diameter (µm)
100

1−P

10−1
1.0

Ref. [45] SM1
Ref. [45] SM2
Ref. [46] SM3
theory SM4
theory SM5

0.5
0.0
1.0
0.5

filtration efficiency = 1 − P

0.0
0.5
0.0
0.5

a
hαi = 0.48
hLx i = 0.16 mm

b
hαi = 0.26
hLx i = 0.24 mm

c
hαi = 0.30
hLx i = 0.32 mm

d

0.0

0.5

FIG. 7. (colour online) (a-b) The same woven cotton layer
under (a) optical and (b) scanning electron microscopy. (c)
Schematic of how we treat heterogeneous woven fabric as an
effective homogeneous medium by averaging over the geometric parameters over the dense yarn and sparse pore regions.
(d) Sideways view of a yarn showing the local fabric thicknesses taken for averaging. Elastic deformations flatten the
yarns’ cross-sections into stadium shapes76 . (e) Idealised decomposition of yarns into their constituent fibres.

hαi = 0.65
hLx i = 0.14 mm

0.5
0.0

101

e

hαi = 0.32
hLx i = 0.22 mm

f

0.0 −1
10
100
101
particle diameter (µm)
FIG. 6.
(colour online) Comparison between our theoretical model (lines) and the experimentally determined filtration efficiencies (points) of Refs. 45 and 46 for (a) surgical
masks and (b-f) the plain-woven cotton fabrics considered in
Ref. 45 (numbered 1-4 and 11 there and in table II). The
filled region surrounding the theoretical prediction indicates
the confidence interval from propagating the uncertainties in
the experimentally determined parameters. For reference, the
left panels in (b-f) show our “zeroth-order” prediction where
we ignore the inter-yarn pores (dashed) and 1/3 of surgical
mask SM4 (black dotted). The right panels in (b-f) are illustrations of 1 mm2 square regions of each fabric.

C. Ease of breathing through a mask and the effect of
hierarchical structure on the flow

The pressure drop across a homogeneous filter ∆p is
given by43

∆p =

µLx U0 fp (α)
,
d2f

(14)

where the function fp (α) = 16α/K for the Kuwabara
flow field or it can be estimated from previous empirical
studies43 . The pressure drop across the mask needed for
a given flow speed U0 , scales with this speed as well as
mask thickness placing limits on how thick masks can be
made. The variation with fibre size as d−2
f (which follows
directly from Poiseuille flow) makes finer fibres harder to
breathe through. This is often expressed in terms of a
filter quality factor q such that P = e−q∆p43,53 .
Pressure drops measured across masks vary from a few
Pa46 to 100 Pa and above48 . This pressure drop cannot be too large, to allow easy breathing. The N95
standard specifies maximum values for ∆p of 343 Pa on
inhalation and 245 Pa on exhalation (at flow rates of
85 l min−1 )77,78 . With a fixed limit to ∆p, there are really
only two factors that we can vary: the particle collection
efficiency of a single fibre, λ, and the mask geometry
through α. In practice, the quality factor q can be optimised by varying the geometric parameters df and α
(and thus implicitly λ) by e.g. combining layers of different materials. The resulting efficiency from combining
fabric layers has been explored extensively in experiments
in Refs. 46 and 48.
For spatially heterogeneous masks (woven or knitted)
(14) no longer applies. However, from mechanical considerations the pressure drop must be independent of the
path through the mask which allows us to treat this more

11
general case. We will consider the effect this has on the
flow through woven materials illustrated in Fig. 7. Specifically, we consider the inter-yarn pore regions shown in
Fig. 7(a-c). The pores are seen as the light regions under bright-field microscopy in Fig. 7(a), however SEM
(Fig. 7(b)) reveals that these pores are not empty and
so droplet capture can still occur there. However, these
pores contain considerably fewer fibres than inside the
yarns so the flow is faster there.
If U0 corresponds to the average flow speed through the
entire fabric (constrained by the breathing rate), then
we generally expect to find Uf  U0  Up where Uf
and Up are respectively the average flow speeds through
the dense yarn and sparse inter-yarn pore regions. Typical flow speeds can be estimated by inserting Uf into
(14) and equating the pressure drop with that expected
through the inter-yarn pores assuming Poiseuille flow.
This yields a relationship between Uf and Up in terms of
the pore area fraction
gy gz
κ=
.
ly lz

(15)

For typical values of κ we find that & 99 % of the flow is
expected to go through the pore region, and the average
flow inside the pore is approximately
Up '

U0
.
κ

(16)

This is related to the longstanding ‘stagnant core problem’ of laundry detergency79 .
D.

Extending filtration to woven and knitted materials

1.

Zeroth-order approximation: ignoring pores

As a zeroth-order approximation to modelling spatially
heterogeneous fabrics, we treat them as an effective homogeneous (nonwoven) medium. We assign each fabric
an average quantity hαi and hLx i, obtained by averaging over the fabric unit cell shown in Fig. 7(a). Fig. 7(b)
shows how yarns elastically deform to have stadium crosssections where they interlock76 , which we approximate as
a rectangular cross-section to simplify the averaging procedure. Thus, the local thickness of the fabric simply
equals the sum of diameters of any yarns present while
traversing the unit cell in Fig. 7(c); consequently we take
the thickness to be zero in the pore region and assign Lx
as in Fig. 7(d) where there are yarns:
• Lx = Dy + Dz in the four corner regions of the unit
cell, occupying a total area Dy Dz .
• Lx = Dy or Dz in the rectangular regions where
there is a single yarn, with areas gz Dy and gy Dz .
Dy , Dz  df are the thicknesses of the warp and weft
yarns (cf. Fig. 7), which we obtained for our sample fabrics in section II B and Zangmeister et al. state these for

fabric
1
2
3
4
11

Dx /mm
0.17(1)
0.23(1)
0.25(1)
0.12(1)
0.19(1)

Dy /mm
0.15(1)
0.17(1)
0.21(1)
0.13(1)
0.19(1)

gx /mm
0.33(6)
0.33(6)
0.33(6)
0.20(2)
0.33(6)

gy /mm hLx i/mm
0.33(6) 0.16(2)
0.33(6) 0.24(3)
0.33(6) 0.32(4)
0.25(3) 0.14(2)
0.33(6) 0.22(3)

hαi
0.48(7)
0.26(4)
0.30(4)
0.65(9)
0.32(4)

TABLE II. Parameters characterising the plain-woven cotton
fabrics considered in Ref. 45, with estimated last-digit uncertainties given in parentheses. These were estimated from the
measurements given in the SM of Ref. 45, together with equations (1) and (17) for hLx i and hαi as described in the text.

their fabrics and summarised in table II. This gives the
average thickness as
hLx i =

gy Dz2 + gz Dy2 + (Dy + Dz )Dy Dz
.
ly lz

(17)

The average volume fraction hαi is then obtained from
(1) by combining hLx i with the fabric weight and the
bulk density of the material. By inserting these spatially
averaged parameters into (13) we can treat a woven fabric as an effectively homogeneous (nonwoven) one. We
thus assume an average flow of U0 through this effective
medium in this zeroth-order approximation.
We compare this approximation (dashed line) to literature experimental data for several plain-woven cotton
fabrics considered in Zangmeister et al. in Fig. 6(b-f).
The agreement with the literature data is poor for small
particles, but improves approaching larger particle sizes
of dp ∼ 1 µm. The smallest particles are unlikely to contain even a single virion, however the poor agreement
causes us to overestimate the efficiency in the intermediate size regime so it is worthwhile to improve on this
approximation. We consider the sources of disagreement
below and attempt to refine the model.
2.

Correction for pores

In the section IV C we found that most of the flow is
expected to go through the inter-yarn pores in textiled
materials. Consequently, compared to flow through a homogeneous material: (i) the effective fibre density will be
reduced and (ii) the typical flow speed will be increased.
Effect (i) generically lowers the collection efficiency as
there are fewer fibres to collect particles, whereas the
effect of (ii) depends on the collection mechanism. Collection by inertia (impaction) is enhanced by increasing
the flow speed, opposing the effect from an effectively
reduced fibre density. After cancellation we thus expect
the resulting change in efficiency to be small, and so we
do not correct this collection mechanism. However, the
efficiency of collection by diffusion decreases with increasing flow speed, reinforcing effect (i), which is potentially
significant.

12

V.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

Masks and face-coverings affect two of the steps in the
transmission of a respiratory infection such as COVID19. These are exhalation from an infected person, and
inhalation by a susceptible person. Mask effectiveness
is not independent of other aspects of transmission, for
example, mask efficiency is highest for droplets so large
they sediment rapidly. Sedimentation and aerosol dilution play crucial roles at large physical separations and so
mask-wearing is not a substitute for physical distancing.
The basic physics of filtration by fibrous filters, means

≥ 3 µm
m
1µ

2 µm

3 µm

250
200

2 µm

µm

fabric weight (g m−2 )
2

0.20

a
m

150
0.25

3µ

yarn width (mm) thread count

We attempt to correct the efficiency of filtration by
diffusion by replacing U0 with the approximate pore flow
speed (16) in our calculated Péclet number (12). We estimate the pore area fraction κ using (15) with the yarn
parameters given in Ref. 45. When we use this flow speed
in the expression for diffusion efficiency (SM IV), we obtain a final filtration efficiency that more closely matches
the experimental data of Zangmeister et al. in Fig. 6(bf). While the precise data of Zangmeister et al. does not
extend into the the micron regime, the correct position of
the minima in Fig. 6(b-f) and the trend towards increasing efficiency approaching 1 µm (especially in Fig. 6(e))
indicates that leaving inertia uncorrected is reasonable.
Considerable variation from fabric to fabric was reported in Refs. 45, 46, and 48, some of which is seen
in Fig. 6(b-f). For example, the fabric in Fig. 6(b) is
roughly equivalent to a surgical mask whereas the fabric in Fig. 6(e) considerably outperforms surgical masks.
Conversely, the fabric in Fig. 6(f) performs very poorly;
Zangmeister et al. writes that this fabric “had visually
open weave structures compared to all other fabrics analyzed” (i.e. gx and gy are large) suggesting that the fabric
is a poor filter from a combination of having a low thread
count and thin yarns. The biggest difference we can see
between the fabrics in panels (e) and (f) is that (e) has
a significantly larger fibre density, as measured through
hαi (cf. table II).
While our model is clearly approximate, it allows us to
explore a much wider range of parameters than is typical
of experiments to determine the key parameters for effective masks. In Fig. 8 we show how filtration efficiency
is expected to be more strongly influenced by the fabric
weight than the thread count or yarn sizes in woven fabrics. The fabric weight is influenced by the thread count,
but also by the details of the fabric pattern, the yarn
“crimp” (i.e. how meandering the yarn is in Fig. 7(d)) and
the structure of the yarns themselves (i.e. how many fibres protrude from the central core). All else being equal,
increasing the fabric weight corresponds to an increased
hαi: this may indicate that the inter-yarn pores are more
populated with fibres and gives some crude indication of
the fabric’s 3d structure. This is broadly consistent with
the explanations proposed by Zangmeister et al. for their
best performing fabrics.

1µ

m

0.15
0.10

b
100
200
300
fabric weight (g m−2 )

≤ 1 µm

FIG. 8. (colour online) Particle sizes dp above which woven
masks achieve ≥ 95 % filtration. Here, we consider 3 layers of identical plain-woven cotton fabrics with (a) fixed yarn
widths of 0.2 mm and (b) thread counts of 200. For reference we show lines of surgical mask equivalents (blue dashed
line) and where the pressure drop across the mask exceeds
the 245 Pa threshold set by NIST (red dotted line)77,78 . We
assume identical warp and weft yarns in these calculations.
The thread count and fabric weights refer to the properties of
individual layers rather than the final multi-layered structure.

that filtering out particles of diameter & 3 µm is straightforward to achieve in standard fabrics. Moreover, some
fabrics are expect to effectively filter ≥ 95 % particles of
diameter ∼ 1 µm, which is comparable to surgical masks;
an example is the first woven cotton fabric studied in
Ref. 45 and shown in Fig. 6(b). Our model makes austere assumptions, so further experiments would be required to refine the parameter range over which these
are equivalent. In particular, the fibre density must be
characterised in the inter-yarn pores where most of the
air flows through.
For fibres of typical diameters of order O(10 µm), the
Stokes number is of order one or more, and so droplets of
this size cannot follow the air streamlines faithfully. They
then deviate from the path of the air flowing through the
mask, and so collide with the fibres and are filtered out.
However, filtering out sub-micrometre droplets is much
harder as these faithfully track the streamlines of air flowing through the mask. Without introducing electrostatic
interactions, which feature in common fabrics only to a
very limited extent it is hard to see how to reliably filter out droplets in this size range. The sharp cross-over
leading to efficient filtration of particles 1 to 3 µm in diameter emerges from an underlying dynamical transition
that was first studied in Ref. 75, and so we expect this
to be a robust result.
Even masks made from simple cotton fabrics are predicted to reduce transmission of respiratory viruses,
unless transmission is dominated by sub-micrometre

13
droplets. As masks are cheap, and wearing a mask is a
relatively minor inconvenience compared to contracting
SARS-CoV-2, recommending mask use is a simple way
to reduce transmission. A simple face covering will never
completely eliminate transmission, as some virus-laden
droplets will always bypass it. However, unless transmission is dominated by sub-micrometre droplets, mask use
should suppress onwards transmission of the virus. To
the best of our knowledge, sub-micrometre droplets are
highly unlikely to carry significant viral loads80,81 .
Rather than mandating medical-grade PPE, policy
makers could pursue a strategy of improving the quality
of cloth masks worn in community settings. Our theoretical model enables the systematic exploration of the mask
parameters, which provides a route to optimise mask performance. We have shown that under ideal conditions
cloth masks can be optimised to perform as well as surgical masks. However, the practical performance of any
particular mask (cloth or surgical) will crucially depend
on the quality of the face seal80,82 . Practical guidance
on reducing leakage would therefore be required to pursue this strategy. For example, Duncan, Bodurtha, and
Naqvi 82 found that surgical masks sealed via tie straps
offered better face seal than ear loops.
The limited data available on face seal suggests the
leakage of a single mask is typically around ∼25 to
50 %83,84 , corresponding to effectively ∼5 to 25 % when
both inhaler and exhaler are masked. Even with this
leakage we would expect a 50 to 75 % reduction in exposure to viral particles larger than ≥ 1 µm under universal
masking, or 15 to 50 % for sub-micrometre droplets. Note
that a reduction in basic reproduction number R from
R0 = 4 by a conservative 25 % would prevent ∼ 75 % of
cases during one month of exponential growth assuming
a case doubling time of 3.5 days85 .
Our calculations relied on the standard models of the
physics of filtration by fibrous filters. These capture the
essential physics, but rely on simple, two-dimensional,
models. We have generalised these models to incorporate the polydisperse fibre diameter distributions obtained from SEM experiments, as well as to treat the hierarchical (yarn) structure in woven fabrics in an ad hoc
fashion. There is scope for future work to look at fully
three-dimensional models, models where droplets do not
couple to the flow field just at the centre of mass, and
models for the fibre/droplet interaction.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors wish to thank Lewis Husain, for providing the inspiration for this work, Kate Oliver for helpful
discussions on textiles which guided our initial investigation, Patrick Warren for guidance on LB simulations,
Mahesh Bandi for making us aware of his ingenious use
of a candyfloss maker, as well as Mike Allen, Jens Eggers and Flo Gregson for helpful discussions. We gratefully acknowledge Daniel Bonn, Patrick Charbonneau,

Tanniemola Liverpool, John Russo, Hajime Tanaka, and
Patrick Warren for providing valuable comments on the
manuscript.
JFR, CPR and JPR wish to thank the Bristol Aerosol
COVID-19 group for valuable discussions and feedback
on this work. JFR would like to thank Kirsty Wynne
for assistance in debugging the code used in the calculations with the Kuwabara flow field. The authors would
like to thank Jean-Charles Eloi and Judith Mantell of
the Wolfson Bioimaging Facility and the Chemical Imaging Facility (EPSRC Grant ”Atoms to Applications”,
EP/K035746/1), respectively, for the SEM images and
assistance in this work.
1 J.

Howard, A. Huang, Z. Li, Z. Tufekci, V. Zdimal, H.-M. van
der Westhuizen, A. von Delft, A. Price, L. Fridman, L.-H. Tang,
V. Tang, G. L. Watson, C. E. Bax, R. Shaikh, F. Questier,
D. Hernandez, L. F. Chu, C. M. Ramirez, and A. W. Rimoin,
“An evidence review of face masks against COVID-19,” Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 118, e2014564118 (2021).
2 DELVE Initiative, “Face masks for the general public,” DELVE
Report 1 (2020).
3 T. Greenhalgh, M. B. Schmid, T. Czypionka, D. Bassler, and
L. Gruer, “Face masks for the public during the covid-19 crisis,”
BMJ , m1435 (2020).
4 K. A. Prather, C. C. Wang, and R. T. Schooley, “Reducing
transmission of SARS-CoV-2,” Science , eabc6197 (2020).
5 Masks4All,
“What Countries Require Masks in Public
or
Recommend
Masks?”
https://masks4all.co/
what-countries-require-masks-in-public/ (2020), accessed:
2020-01-23.
6 World Health Organisation, “Mask use in the context
of COVID-19,” Tech. Rep. WHO/2019-nCov/IPC Masks/2020.5
(World Health Organisation, 2020).
7 L. Morawska and J. Cao, “Airborne transmission of SARS-CoV2: The world should face the reality,” Environ. Int. 139, 105730
(2020).
8 E. L. Anderson, P. Turnham, J. R. Griffin, and C. C. Clarke,
“Consideration of the Aerosol Transmission for COVID-19 and
Public Health,” Risk Analysis 40, 902–907 (2020).
9 N. van Doremalen, T. Bushmaker, D. H. Morris, M. G. Holbrook,
A. Gamble, B. N. Williamson, A. Tamin, J. L. Harcourt, N. J.
Thornburg, S. I. Gerber, J. O. Lloyd-Smith, E. de Wit, and V. J.
Munster, “Aerosol and Surface Stability of SARS-CoV-2 as Compared with SARS-CoV-1,” N. Engl. J. Med. , NEJMc2004973
(2020).
10 A. C. Fears, W. B. Klimstra, P. Duprex, A. Hartman, S. C.
Weaver, K. S. Plante, D. Mirchandani, J. A. Plante, P. V.
Aguilar, D. Fernández, A. Nalca, A. Totura, D. Dyer, B. Kearney, M. Lackemeyer, J. K. Bohannon, R. Johnson, R. F. Garry,
D. S. Reed, and C. J. Roy, “Persistence of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 in Aerosol Suspensions,” Emerg.
Infect. Dis. 26, 2168–2171 (2020).
11 J. A. Lednicky, M. Lauzard, Z. H. Fan, A. Jutla, T. B.
Tilly, M. Gangwar, M. Usmani, S. N. Shankar, K. Mohamed,
A. Eiguren-Fernandez, C. J. Stephenson, M. M. Alam, M. A.
Elbadry, J. C. Loeb, K. Subramaniam, T. B. Waltzek, K. Cherabuddi, J. G. Morris, and C.-Y. Wu, “Viable SARS-CoV-2 in the
air of a hospital room with COVID-19 patients,” International
Journal of Infectious Diseases 100, 476–482 (2020).
12 M. Jayaweera, H. Perera, B. Gunawardana, and J. Manatunge,
“Transmission of COVID-19 virus by droplets and aerosols: A
critical review on the unresolved dichotomy,” Environmental Research 188, 109819 (2020).
13 G. Kampf, Y. Brüggemann, H. E. Kaba, J. Steinmann, S. Pfaender, S. Scheithauer, and E. Steinmann, “Potential sources,
modes of transmission and effectiveness of prevention mea-

14
sures against SARS-CoV-2,” Journal of Hospital Infection ,
S0195670120304370 (2020).
14 A. Azimuddin, S. Thakurdas, A. Hameed, G. Peel,
and
F. Cheema, “Shifting Approach to Environmentally Mediated
Pathways for Mitigating COVID-19: A Review of Literature
on Airborne Transmission of SARS-CoV-2,” Preprint (DOI:
10.20944/preprints202007.0194.v1, 2020).
15 S. Asadi, N. Bouvier, A. S. Wexler, and W. D. Ristenpart, “The
coronavirus pandemic and aerosols: Does COVID-19 transmit
via expiratory particles?” Aerosol Science and Technology 54,
635–638 (2020).
16 K. K. Cheng, T. H. Lam, and C. C. Leung, “Wearing face masks
in the community during the COVID-19 pandemic: Altruism and
solidarity,” The Lancet , S0140673620309181 (2020).
17 S. M. Moghadas, M. C. Fitzpatrick, P. Sah, A. Pandey,
A. Shoukat, B. H. Singer, and A. P. Galvani, “The implications
of silent transmission for the control of COVID-19 outbreaks,”
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA , 202008373 (2020).
18 V. Vuorinen, M. Aarnio, M. Alava, V. Alopaeus, N. Atanasova,
M. Auvinen, N. Balasubramanian, H. Bordbar, P. Erästö,
R. Grande, N. Hayward, A. Hellsten, S. Hostikka, J. Hokkanen,
O. Kaario, A. Karvinen, I. Kivistö, M. Korhonen, R. Kosonen,
J. Kuusela, S. Lestinen, E. Laurila, H. J. Nieminen, P. Peltonen,
J. Pokki, A. Puisto, P. Råback, H. Salmenjoki, T. Sironen, and
M. Österberg, “Modelling aerosol transport and virus exposure
with numerical simulations in relation to SARS-CoV-2 transmission by inhalation indoors,” Safety Science 130, 104866 (2020).
19 A. Sakurai, T. Sasaki, S. Kato, M. Hayashi, S.-i. Tsuzuki, T. Ishihara, M. Iwata, Z. Morise, and Y. Doi, “Natural History of
Asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 Infection,” N Engl J Med , NEJMc2013020 (2020).
20 M. M. Arons, K. M. Hatfield, S. C. Reddy, A. Kimball, A. James,
J. R. Jacobs, J. Taylor, K. Spicer, A. C. Bardossy, L. P. Oakley,
S. Tanwar, J. W. Dyal, J. Harney, Z. Chisty, J. M. Bell, M. Methner, P. Paul, C. M. Carlson, H. P. McLaughlin, N. Thornburg,
S. Tong, A. Tamin, Y. Tao, A. Uehara, J. Harcourt, S. Clark,
C. Brostrom-Smith, L. C. Page, M. Kay, J. Lewis, P. Montgomery, N. D. Stone, T. A. Clark, M. A. Honein, J. S. Duchin,
and J. A. Jernigan, “Presymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 Infections
and Transmission in a Skilled Nursing Facility,” N Engl J Med
382, 2081–2090 (2020).
21 T. A. Treibel, C. Manisty, M. Burton, Á. McKnight, J. Lambourne, J. B. Augusto, X. Couto-Parada, T. Cutino-Moguel,
M. Noursadeghi, and J. C. Moon, “COVID-19: PCR screening of asymptomatic health-care workers at London hospital,”
The Lancet 395, 1608–1610 (2020).
22 H. Streeck, B. Schulte, B. Kuemmerer, E. Richter, T. Hoeller,
C. Fuhrmann, E. Bartok, R. Dolscheid, M. Berger,
L. Wessendorf, M. Eschbach-Bludau, A. Kellings, A. Schwaiger,
M. Coenen, P. Hoffmann, M. Noethen, A.-M. Eis-Huebinger,
M. Exner, R. Schmithausen, M. Schmid, and G. Hartmann,
“Infection fatality rate of SARS-CoV-2 infection in a German
community with a super-spreading event,” Preprint (Infectious
Diseases (except HIV/AIDS), 2020).
23 L. Ferretti, C. Wymant, M. Kendall, L. Zhao, A. Nurtay,
L. Abeler-Dörner, M. Parker, D. Bonsall, and C. Fraser, “Quantifying SARS-CoV-2 transmission suggests epidemic control with
digital contact tracing,” Science 368, eabb6936 (2020).
24 A. James, L. Eagle, C. Phillips, D. S. Hedges, C. Bodenhamer,
R. Brown, J. G. Wheeler, and H. Kirking, “High COVID-19 Attack Rate Among Attendees at Events at a Church — Arkansas,
March 2020,” MMWR Morb. Mortal. Wkly. Rep. 69, 632–635
(2020).
25 J. C. Emery, T. W. Russel, Y. Liu, J. Hellewell, C. A. Pearson, CMMID 2019-nCoV working group, G. M. Knight, R. M.
Eggo, A. J. Kucharski, S. Funk, S. Flasche, and R. M. G. J.
Houben, “The contribution of asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infections to transmission - a model-based analysis of the Diamond Princess outbreak,” Preprint (Infectious Diseases (except
HIV/AIDS), 2020).

26 D.

Adam, P. Wu, J. Wong, E. Lau, T. Tsang, S. Cauchemez,
G. Leung, and B. Cowling, “Clustering and superspreading
potential of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2) infections in Hong Kong,” Preprint (In Review,
2020).
27 “Bavaria mandates FFP2 masks, all of germany may follow,”
Deutsche Welle (2021), accessed: 2021-01-26.
28 B. J. Cowling, Y. Zhou, D. K. M. Ip, G. M. Leung, and A. E.
Aiello, “Face masks to prevent transmission of influenza virus: A
systematic review,” Epidemiol. Infect. 138, 449–456 (2010).
29 B. J. Cowling, K.-H. Chan, V. J. Fang, C. K. Cheng, R. O. Fung,
W. Wai, J. Sin, W. H. Seto, R. Yung, D. W. Chu, B. C. Chiu,
P. W. Lee, M. C. Chiu, H. C. Lee, T. M. Uyeki, P. M. Houck,
J. S. M. Peiris, and G. M. Leung, “Facemasks and Hand Hygiene
to Prevent Influenza Transmission in Households: A Cluster Randomized Trial,” Ann Intern Med 151, 437 (2009).
30 W. E. Bischoff, T. Reid, G. B. Russell,
and T. R. Peters, “Transocular Entry of Seasonal Influenza-Attenuated Virus
Aerosols and the Efficacy of N95 Respirators, Surgical Masks,
and Eye Protection in Humans,” Journal of Infectious Diseases
204, 193–199 (2011).
31 A. E. Aiello, V. Perez, R. M. Coulborn, B. M. Davis, M. Uddin, and A. S. Monto, “Facemasks, Hand Hygiene, and Influenza
among Young Adults: A Randomized Intervention Trial,” PLoS
ONE 7, e29744 (2012).
32 A. Balazy, M. Toivola, A. Adhikari, S. K. Sivasubramani, T. Reponen, and S. A. Grinshpun, “Do N95 respirators provide 95%
protection level against airborne viruses, and how adequate are
surgical masks?” Am. J. Infect. Control 34, 51–57 (2006).
33 V. M. Dato, D. Hostler, and M. E. Hahn, “Simple Respiratory
Mask: Simple Respiratory Mask,” Emerg. Infect. Dis. 12, 1033–
1034 (2006).
34 Z. T. Ai and A. K. Melikov, “Airborne spread of expiratory
droplet nuclei between the occupants of indoor environments:
A review,” Indoor Air 28, 500–524 (2018).
35 T.-w. Wong, C.-k. Lee, W. Tam, J. T.-f. Lau, T.-s. Yu, S.-f. Lui,
P. K. Chan, Y. Li, J. S. Bresee, J. J. Sung, U. D. Parashar, and
for the Outbreak Study Group, “Cluster of SARS among Medical
Students Exposed to Single Patient, Hong Kong,” Emerg. Infect.
Dis. 10, 269–276 (2004).
36 J. Wang and G. Du, “COVID-19 may transmit through aerosol,”
Ir J Med Sci (2020), 10.1007/s11845-020-02218-2.
37 D. K. Chu, E. A. Akl, S. Duda, K. Solo, S. Yaacoub, H. J.
Schünemann, D. K. Chu, E. A. Akl, A. El-harakeh, A. Bognanni, T. Lotfi, M. Loeb, A. Hajizadeh, A. Bak, A. Izcovich,
C. A. Cuello-Garcia, C. Chen, D. J. Harris, E. Borowiack,
F. Chamseddine, F. Schünemann, G. P. Morgano, G. E. U.
Muti Schünemann, G. Chen, H. Zhao, I. Neumann, J. Chan,
J. Khabsa, L. Hneiny, L. Harrison, M. Smith, N. Rizk,
P. Giorgi Rossi, P. AbiHanna, R. El-khoury, R. Stalteri,
T. Baldeh, T. Piggott, Y. Zhang, Z. Saad, A. Khamis, M. Reinap,
S. Duda, K. Solo, S. Yaacoub, and H. J. Schünemann, “Physical
distancing, face masks, and eye protection to prevent personto-person transmission of SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19: A systematic review and meta-analysis,” The Lancet 395, 1973–1987
(2020).
38 N. Zeng, Z. Li, S. Ng, D. Chen, and H. Zhou, “Epidemiology
reveals mask wearing by the public is crucial for COVID-19 control,” Medicine in Microecology 4, 100015 (2020).
39 L. Tian, X. Li, F. Qi, Q.-Y. Tang, V. Tang, J. Liu, Z. Li,
X. Cheng, X. Li, Y. Shi, H. Liu, and L.-H. Tang, “Calibrated Intervention and Containment of the COVID-19 Pandemic,” arXiv
(2020), arXiv:2003.07353.
40 T. Jombart, K. van Zandvoort, T. W. Russell, C. I. Jarvis,
A. Gimma, S. Abbott, S. Clifford, S. Funk, H. Gibbs, Y. Liu,
C. A. B. Pearson, N. I. Bosse, Centre for the Mathematical Modelling of Infectious Diseases COVID-19 Working Group, R. M.
Eggo, A. J. Kucharski, and W. J. Edmunds, “Inferring the number of COVID-19 cases from recently reported deaths,” Wellcome
Open Res 5, 78 (2020).

15
41 R.

O. J. H. Stutt, R. Retkute, M. Bradley, C. A. Gilligan, and
J. Colvin, “A modelling framework to assess the likely effectiveness of facemasks in combination with ‘lock-down’ in managing the COVID-19 pandemic,” Proc. R. Soc. A. 476, 20200376
(2020).
42 S. Rengasamy, B. Eimer, and R. E. Shaffer, “Simple Respiratory
Protection—Evaluation of the Filtration Performance of Cloth
Masks and Common Fabric Materials Against 20–1000 nm Size
Particles,” Ann. Occup. Hyg. (2010), 10.1093/annhyg/meq044.
43 C.-s. Wang and Y. Otani, “Removal of Nanoparticles from Gas
Streams by Fibrous Filters: A Review,” Ind. Eng. Chem. Res.
52, 5–17 (2013).
44 A. Davies, K.-A. Thompson, K. Giri, G. Kafatos, J. Walker, and
A. Bennett, “Testing the Efficacy of Homemade Masks: Would
They Protect in an Influenza Pandemic?” Disaster Med. Public
Health Prep. 7, 413–418 (2013).
45 C. D. Zangmeister, J. G. Radney, E. P. Vicenzi,
and J. L.
Weaver, “Filtration Efficiencies of Nanoscale Aerosol by Cloth
Mask Materials Used to Slow the Spread of SARS-CoV-2,” ACS
Nano 14, 9188–9200 (2020).
46 A. Konda, A. Prakash, G. A. Moss, M. Schmoldt, G. D. Grant,
and S. Guha, “Aerosol Filtration Efficiency of Common Fabrics
Used in Respiratory Cloth Masks,” ACS Nano , acsnano.0c03252
(2020).
47 S. R. Lustig, J. J. H. Biswakarma, D. Rana, S. H. Tilford, W. Hu,
M. Su, and M. S. Rosenblatt, “Effectiveness of Common Fabrics to Block Aqueous Aerosols of Virus-like Nanoparticles,” ACS
Nano , acsnano.0c03972 (2020).
48 Y. Wang, “Filtration performance of common household materials for manufacturing homemade masks,” (2020).
49 W. C. Hinds, Aerosol Technology: Properties, Behavior, and
Measurement of Airborne Particles, 2nd ed. (Wiley, New York,
1999).
50 L. Setti, F. Passarini, G. De Gennaro, P. Barbieri, M. G. Perrone,
M. Borelli, J. Palmisani, A. Di Gilio, P. Piscitelli, and A. Miani,
“Airborne Transmission Route of COVID-19: Why 2 Meters/6
Feet of Inter-Personal Distance Could Not Be Enough,” Int. J.
Environ. Res. Public. Health 17, 2932 (2020).
51 P. Han and S. Ivanovski, “Saliva—Friend and Foe in the COVID19 Outbreak,” Diagnostics 10, 290 (2020).
52 C.-S. Wang, “Electrostatic forces in fibrous filters—a review,”
Powder Technology 118, 166–170 (2001).
53 C. C. Chen, M. Lehtimäki, and K. Willeke, “Loading and filtration characteristics of filtering facepieces,” Am. Ind. Hyg. Assoc.
J. 54, 51–60 (1993).
54 J. F. Robinson and R. P. Sear, “maskflow: a python package
to evaluate filtration properties of face masks and coverings.”
https://github.com/tranqui/maskflow (2020).
55 P. B. Warren, R. C. Ball, and R. E. Goldstein, “Why Clothes
Don’t Fall Apart: Tension Transmission in Staple Yarns,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 120, 158001 (2018).
56 S. Gittings, N. Turnbull, B. Henry, C. J. Roberts, and P. Gershkovich, “Characterisation of human saliva as a platform for oral
dissolution medium development,” European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 91, 16–24 (2015).
57 I. K. Zwertvaegher, M. Verhaeghe, E. Brusselman, P. Verboven,
F. Lebeau, M. Massinon, B. M. Nicolaı̈, and D. Nuyttens, “The
impact and retention of spray droplets on a horizontal hydrophobic surface,” Biosystems Engineering 126, 82–91 (2014).
58 Y. Li, T. Wong, J. Chung, Y. Guo, J. Hu, Y. Guan, L. Yao,
Q. Song, and E. Newton, “In vivo protective performance of
N95 respirator and surgical facemask,” Am. J. Ind. Med. 49,
1056–1065 (2006).
59 J. Schindelin, I. Arganda-Carreras, E. Frise, V. Kaynig, M. Longair, T. Pietzsch, S. Preibisch, C. Rueden, S. Saalfeld, B. Schmid,
J.-Y. Tinevez, D. J. White, V. Hartenstein, K. Eliceiri, P. Tomancak, and A. Cardona, “Fiji: An open-source platform for
biological-image analysis,” Nat Methods 9, 676–682 (2012).
60 M. Van Dyke, Perturbation Methods in Fluid Mechanics, annotated ed ed. (Parabolic Press, Stanford, Calif, 1975).

61 S.

Kuwabara, “The Forces experienced by Randomly Distributed
Parallel Circular Cylinders or Spheres in a Viscous Flow at Small
Reynolds Numbers,” J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 14, 527–532 (1959).
62 S. Chen and G. D. Doolen, “LATTICE BOLTZMANN
METHOD FOR FLUID FLOWS,” Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 30,
329–364 (1998).
63 Q. Zou and X. He, “On pressure and velocity boundary conditions for the lattice boltzmann bgk model,” Physics of Fluids 9,
1591–1598 (1997).
64 Y. B. Bao and J. Meskas, Lattice Boltzmann method for fluid
simulations (Department of Mathematics, Courant Institute of
Mathematical Sciences, New York University, New York, 2011).
65 O. Behrend, R. Harris, and P. B. Warren, “Hydrodynamic behavior of lattice Boltzmann and lattice Bhatnagar-Gross-Krook
models,” Phys. Rev. E 50, 4586–4595 (1994).
66 “Palabos - university of geneva,” (2020).
67 K. W. Lee and B. Y. H. Liu, “On the Minimum Efficiency and
the Most Penetrating Particle Size for Fibrous Filters,” J. Air
Pollut. Control Assoc. 30, 377–381 (1980).
68 C. Kanaoka, H. Emi, Y. Otani, and T. Iiyama, “Effect of Charging State of Particles on Electret Filtration,” Aerosol Sci. Technol. 7, 1–13 (1987).
69 CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 95th ed. (CRC Press,
Boca Raton).
70 D. M. Caretti, P. D. Gardner, and K. M. Coyne, “Workplace
Breathing Rates: Defining Anticipated Values and Ranges for
Respirator Certification Testing:,” Tech. Rep. (Defense Technical
Information Center, Fort Belvoir, VA, 2004).
71 C. C. Coffey, D. L. Campbell, and Z. Zhuang, “Simulated Workplace Performance of N95 Respirators,” American Industrial Hygiene Association Journal 60, 618–624 (1999).
72 A. Kravtsov, H. B. Nig, S. Zhandarov, and R. Beyreuther, “The
electret effect in polypropylene fibers treated in a corona discharge,” Adv. Polym. Technol. 19, 5 (2000).
73 S. Liu, W. Zheng, B. Yang, and X. Tao, “Triboelectric charge
density of porous and deformable fabrics made from polymer
fibers,” Nano Energy 53, 383–390 (2018).
74 G. Johnson, L. Morawska, Z. Ristovski, M. Hargreaves,
K. Mengersen, C. Chao, M. Wan, Y. Li, X. Xie, D. Katoshevski,
and S. Corbett, “Modality of human expired aerosol size distributions,” J. Aerosol Sci. 42, 839–851 (2011).
75 A. D. Araújo, J. S. Andrade, and H. J. Herrmann, “Critical Role
of Gravity in Filters,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 138001 (2006).
76 A. Kemp, “An Extension of Peirce’s Cloth Geometry to the
Treatment of Non-circular Threads,” Journal of the Textile Institute Transactions 49, T44–T48 (1958).
77 J.-H. Kim, R. J. Roberge, J. B. Powell, R. E. Shaffer, C. M.
Ylitalo, and J. M. Sebastian, “Pressure drop of filtering facepiece
respirators: How low should we go?” International journal of
occupational medicine and environmental health 28, 71 (2015).
78 U. S. Government, “Code of federal regulations (42 cfr 84.180),”
https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CFR-2007-title42-vol1/
pdf/CFR-2007-title42-vol1-sec84-180.pdf.
79 S. Shin, P. B. Warren, and H. A. Stone, “Cleaning by Surfactant Gradients: Particulate Removal from Porous Materials and
the Significance of Rinsing in Laundry Detergency,” Phys. Rev.
Applied 9, 034012 (2018).
80 S. Freitag, S. G. Howell, and K. T. C. Jim, “Why simple face
masks are unexpectedly efficient in reducing viral aerosol transmissions,” Preprint (Public and Global Health, 2020).
81 J. F. Robinson, I. Rios de Anda, F. J. Moore, F. K. A. Gregson,
J. P. Reid, L. Husain, R. P. Sear, and C. P. Royall, “How effective
are face coverings in reducing transmission of covid-19?” (2020),
preprint: arXiv 2012.01314.
82 S. Duncan, P. Bodurtha, and S. Naqvi, “N95 respirators, disposable procedure masks and reusable cloth face coverings: Total inward leakage and filtration efficiency of materials against
aerosol,” Preprint (Occupational and Environmental Health,
2020).
83 S. Rengasamy, B. C. Eimer, and J. Szalajda, “A Quantitative

16
Assessment of the Total Inward Leakage of NaCl Aerosol Representing Submicron-Size Bioaerosol Through N95 Filtering Facepiece Respirators and Surgical Masks,” Journal of Occupational
and Environmental Hygiene 11, 388–396 (2014).
84 E. Hossain, S. Bhadra, H. Jain, S. Das, A. Bhattacharya,
S. Ghosh, and D. Levine, “Recharging and rejuvenation of decontaminated N95 masks,” Physics of Fluids 32, 093304 (2020).
85 Y. M. Bar-On, A. Flamholz, R. Phillips, and R. Milo, “SARSCoV-2 (COVID-19) by the numbers,” eLife 9, e57309 (2020).

Supplementary Material for “Efficacy of face coverings in reducing
transmission of COVID-19: calculations based on models of droplet capture”
I.

EXPLICIT KUWABARA FLOW FIELD PARAMETERS

The components of velocity (3) in plane polar coordinates are
f (ρ)
,
ρ
uθ =u · eθ = − sin θf (ρ).

uρ =u · eρ = cos θ

(S1a)
(S1b)

The vorticity is
ω =∇×u

(S2)

The outer boundary conditions introduced in section III A 1 can be expressed as
0

f (ρb ) − ρb f (ρb ) −

f (ρb )
2 00
ρb f (ρb )

=ρb ,

(S3a)

=0,

(S3b)

√
where ρb = af / α is the location of the outer boundary. Together with the inner boundary conditions f (af ) = 0 (no
penetration) and f 0 (af ) = 0 (no slip) we obtain the solution for the coefficients in (4b) as
2−α 2
a
4K f
α−1
f2 =
2K
α
f3 = − 2
4af K
1
f4 =
K
f1 =

(S4a)
(S4b)
(S4c)
(S4d)

introducing the hydrodynamic factor:
K =−

ln α 3
α2
− +α−
.
2
4
4

(S4e)

This flow field was first obtained by Kuwabara 1 , from whom it bears its name.
II.

LATTICE BOLTZMANN SIMULATIONS OF FLOW FIELD AROUND FIBRES

Lattice Boltzmann (LB) simulations are performed on a two-dimensional lattice of nx by ny lattice sites; x is the
flow direction. Our code is a modified version of a Python code of the Palabos group at the University of Geneva2 .
Their code models flow around a cylinder.
The lattice is the standard square D2Q9 lattice with nine velocities at each lattice site3–5 , each pointing along a
vector ei . The vectors ei = (0, 0), (0, −1), (0, 1), (−1, 0), (−1, −1), (−1, 1), (1, 0), (1, −1), (1, 1). The LB fluid has
only one parameter, its relaxation rate τ . This controls the LB dynamics via
fi (r + ei , t + 1) = fi (r, t) − τ −1 [fi (r, t) − feq,i (r, t)]

(S5)
P

for fi (r, t) the density at site r and time t, associated with flow in direction i. The density ρLB = i fi , and the flow
P
velocity u = ρ−1
LB
i fi ei . The LB gas is compressible, so the density ρLB does vary with position but at the small
Reynolds numbers we run for, this variation is small. We start with an initial density ρLB = 1. The equilibrium
density is
feq,i (r, t) = ρLB wi [1 + 3ei .u]

(S6)

2
with weights wi = (4/9, 1/9, 1/9, 1/9, 1/36, 1/36, 1/9, 1/36, 1/36).
The LB’s relaxation time τ sets the LB kinematic viscosity, via νLB = (2τ − 1)/65 . We set τ = 1 in LB units. This
sets its kinematic viscosity to be νLB = 1/6 in LB units. The LB method suffers from stability issues outside of a
relatively narrow range of values of τ . 14 . We compared λ values for τ = 0.75 and τ = 1, and there were only very
small differences.
We run the LB simulations until the change in mean flow speed along x is very small. We then take that flow field
as being a steady-state flow field, and use it to evaluate particle trajectories.

A.

Boundary conditions

We have periodic boundary conditions along the direction perpendicular to flow (y). Along the downstream edge
along x, we impose continuity of the missing components. The three missing components are the ones pointing
upstream (because in the bulk these are propagated from the line of elements downstream which are missing along
this edge). We simply set the values along the final row equal to their known values along the last-but-one row. As
this downstream of the fibres, we expect this boundary to have little effect on our results.

1.

Zou-He boundary conditions

To impose the flow field, we use standard Zou-He boundary conditions3 along the upstream, x = 0 edge of the
simulation box. To do this, we first impose velocity along left-edge lattice sites, at ux = uBC and uy = 0, then within
Zou He boundary conditions, the density is calculated from
ρ=

1
[f0 + f1 + f2 + 2 (f3 + f4 + f5 )]
1−u

(S7)

note the first three f s are those corresponding to a zero x component ei , while the second three are the ones with
negative x components. We then set the three f s with positive x components
2
f6 = f3 + ρuBC
3
1
f7 = f5 + (f2 − f1 )
2
1
f8 = f4 − (f2 − f1 )
2

2.

(S8)
(S9)
(S10)

Fibres

A fibre is modelled as a circular domain of all lattice sites within a radius rLB of the fibre centre. So the simulation
lattice has two types of sites, air sites plus fibre sites. The boundary conditions on the fibres are standard LB on-site
bounce back5,6 , to model stick boundary conditions. So at every step the velocities in all fibre sites are reversed.
The fibre radius is the lengthscale we use to define the Reynolds number in our simulation, via Re = uBC rLB /νLB <
1.

B.

Model mask

We model the fibres as a disordered hexagonal lattice of discs, each of the same radius rLB ,√see Fig. S1(b). The
lattice constant of the hexagonal lattice is a, and so the fibres occupy an area fraction, α = (π 3.0/6)(2r/a)2 . The
disordered lattice is obtained by starting with a perfectly ordered hexagonal lattice, then displacing the centre of a
disc randomly and uniformly within a square of side rdisp centred at the position in the perfect lattice.
Note that in a perfect lattice some streamlines periodically repeat along with the lattice and simulations of particles
with low Stokes number are then also periodic and so are not filtered out, no matter how many layers there are in
the lattice. As the fibres in masks are not perfectly ordered, this is unrealistic, and so we introduce the disorder.

3
C.

A fibre for calculation of λ

We cannot have an isolated single fibre in two dimensions due to the Stokes paradox. So, we simulate in effect a
single row of fibres perpendicular to the flow direction, with a spacing of the lattice constant a. This is shown in
Fig. S1(a). The system has two fibres, one in the centre (along y) for the calculation of λ and another at the edge.
Thus it should be borne in mind that our “single-fibre” is a fibre in an array of a set density, and that this density
affects the flow field.
a

b

FIG. S1. Flow fields calculated using Lattice-Boltzmann simulations. The flow field is shown via (blue) streamlines, with the
fibres shown in dark√red. The system is periodic along y. (a) is the system used to calculate the single-fibre λ for α = 0.2, the
fibre spacing is df / α. (b) is a model filter, made up five layers of a disordered hexagonal lattice of fibres, with the same α.
U0 = 2.7 cm s−1 , and df = 15 µm, with the lattice constant equal to 0.375 µm so fibres are 40 LB lattice sites across. Note (a)
is shown at a larger scale than (b), in both systems the fibres are the same size in LB units.

D.

Test of assumption that fibres filter independently

Equation 13 was derived assuming that the fibres filter independently, and each fibre’s local environment is welldescribed by the same α. This can only be approximately true, so we tested it using LB simulations. We calculated
the single-fibre λ using a system as shown in Fig. S1(a), and also computed the penetration directly using a model
filter composed of five layers of a disordered hexagonal lattice of fibres, using a system as shown in Fig. S1(b).

E.

Particle trajectories

Once we have a steady-state flow-field, we simulate (independent) particle trajectories in this flow field, to estimate
the λ or filtration efficiency.
Each particle’s trajectory is obtained by starting the particle at a point at x = 0, and at a selected y coordinate.
The particle’s initial velocity is that of the flow field.
The only force on the particle is Stokes drag from the flow field. Therefore its acceleration obeys (6). The particles
are not on a lattice but the flow field is only defined on the lattice of the LB simulations. Thus the flow field at the
centre of the particle u(r) is obtained from bilinear interpolation of the surrounding four lattice sites of the LB flow
field.
We then integrate the trajectory forward in time, using modified Euler integration, until the particle either collides
with a fibre, or reaches the right-hand (large x) edge of the simulation box. At each time step, we check for a collision.
A collision occurs if the centre of the particle is within the sum of the radii of the fibre and particle.

4
1.

Evaluation of λ from Lattice Boltzmann flow field

The single-fibre λ is determined by starting with a pair of initial positions along y that bracket the value of y that
separates where particle trajectories collide with the fibre and where the particle passes by the fibre. One initial
position is the y coordinate of the centre of the fibre and the second is sufficiently far away that trajectory misses the
fibre. Then a bisection search is performed to accurately determine where the dividing y is for collisions. λ is then
just twice this y value; the collision zone is symmetric around the centre of the central fibre as the simulation box is
symmetric, see Fig. S1(a).

2.

Evaluation of penetration of model filter from Lattice Boltzmann flow field

The penetration for a model mask is determined by starting a set of Nsamp particles on an evenly-spaced grid along
the y axis. Then particle trajectories are calculated, and the penetration is estimated from the fraction of particles
that penetrate the model filter.

III.

SCANNING ELECTRON MICROSCOPE IMAGES

Unless otherwise stated, SEM images feature a 100 µm scalebar. Macroscopically, the inner layer of both N95/FFP2
respirators and one of the KN95 respirators appeared to consist of a single layer; however, under SEM imaging we
found two distinct populations of fibre sizes on opposing sides of the sample which we treat as two fused layers. We
number these layers 1 and 2 for the innermost and outermost inner layers respectively. The distribution of fibre
sizes determined from these images (and additional images not shown) are shown in Fig. S2. The parameters of the
log-normal fits to these size distributions, as well as the measured material properties (thickness and volume fraction)
are given in table S1. In table S2 we show the results show the results of the indirect method (described in the main
text) of inferring the fabrics’ material properties from the yarn measurements for two of the woven fabrics; note that
this method predicts thinner (and thus denser) fabrics.

5
N95/FFP2 Respirator 1:

N95/FFP2 Respirator 2:

KN95 Respirator 1:

KN95 Respirator 2:

6
Surgical masks (labelled SM4 and SM5 in main text):

3-layered cotton mask:

Woven fabrics:

7
Knitted fabrics:

Nonwoven fabrics:

IV.

DIFFUSION COLLECTION EFFICIENCY

To model the effect of diffusion we use the result of Stechkina and Fuchs 7 :
λD
2.9
0.624 1.24R2/3
=
+
+ √
,
2
df
Pe
(KPe )1/3
KPe

(S11)

where R = dp /df , and K is given by (S4e) — this expression assumes the Kuwabara flow field. Note that the Péclet
number scales as Pe ∝ df (see definition (12) in the main text) which must be taken into consideration when averaging
over a polydisperse system of fibres.
V.

ELECTROSTATIC POTENTIAL AROUND CYLINDRICAL FIBRES

The electric potential of a line charge (monopole) of magnitude Λ centred at the origin is
 
Λ
ρ
ln
Φ0 = −
2π0
ρ0

(S12)

where ρ0 is a reference point close to the line charge where we set the potential to zero, and 0 is the vacuum
permittivity. This generalises to assemblies of line charges on the fibre surface ρ = af via a multipole expansion of

8
fabric
N95/FFP2 respirator 1 inner layers
N95/FFP2 respirator 1 inner layer 1
N95/FFP2 respirator 1 inner layer 2
N95/FFP2 respirator 1 middle layer
N95/FFP2 respirator 1 outer layer
N95/FFP2 respirator 2 inner layers
N95/FFP2 respirator 2 inner layer 1
N95/FFP2 respirator 2 inner layer 2
N95/FFP2 respirator 2 middle layer
N95/FFP2 respirator 2 outer layer
KN95 respirator 1 inner layer
KN95 respirator 1 middle layer
KN95 respirator 1 outer layer
KN95 respirator 2 inner layer
KN95 respirator 2 middle layer
KN95 respirator 2 outer layer
SM4 inner layer
SM4 middle layer
SM4 outer layer
SM5 inner layer
SM5 middle layer
SM5 outer layer
cloth mask inner layer
cloth mask middle layer
cloth mask outer layer
tie 1
tie 2
tea towel
shirt
t-shirt 1
t-shirt 2
cleaning cloth
felt
all purpose kitchen cloth
vacuum cleaner bag
vacuum cleaner filter
paper towel
coffee filter

type
material
bulk density (g/cm3 )
respirator
polypropylene
0.91
respirator
polypropylene
0.91
respirator
polypropylene
0.91
respirator
polypropylene
0.91
respirator
polypropylene
0.91
respirator
polypropylene
0.91
respirator
polypropylene
0.91
respirator
polypropylene
0.91
respirator
polypropylene
0.91
respirator
polypropylene
0.91
respirator
polypropylene
0.91
respirator
polypropylene
0.91
surgical mask
polypropylene
0.91
surgical mask
polypropylene
0.91
surgical mask
polypropylene
0.91
surgical mask
polypropylene
0.91
surgical mask
polypropylene
0.91
surgical mask
polypropylene
0.91
woven
linen
1.50
knitted
cotton
1.54
woven
cotton
1.54
woven
polyester
1.38
woven
silk
1.33
woven
cotton
1.54
knitted
silk
1.33
knitted
cotton
1.54
knitted
60% cotton 40% polyester
1.476
knitted
cotton
1.54
nonwoven
felt
1.50
nonwoven
70% viscose 30% PET
1.534
nonwoven
paper (cellulose)
1.50
nonwoven
paper (cellulose)
1.50
nonwoven
paper (cellulose)
1.50
nonwoven
paper (cellulose)
1.50

µdf
0.375
2.987
2.807
3.238
0.733
3.023
2.738
3.220
0.375
2.683
3.200
0.733
2.828
3.268
0.980
2.780
2.898
0.822
2.861
3.033
2.571
2.714
2.775
2.682
2.578
2.594
2.780
2.703
2.759
2.549
2.664
2.490
3.427
3.379
3.031
3.253

σdf Lx (mm)
0.448
0.189
0.074
0.145 0.663
0.104 0.944
0.595
0.378
0.066
0.140 0.796
0.109 0.994
0.189 0.814
0.311 2.003
0.285 0.547
0.378 0.581
0.211 1.902
0.048 0.996
0.410 0.430
0.051 0.294
0.056 0.214
0.497 0.240
0.065 0.241
0.080 0.358
0.356 1.200
0.248 2.300
0.282 1.027
0.269 0.825
0.152 0.340
0.354 2.017
0.079 0.804
0.358 0.960
0.287 0.814
0.396 2.673
0.113 1.692
0.128 0.442
0.484 0.064
0.332 0.228
0.400 0.477
0.263 0.114

α
0.087
0.114
0.101
0.069
0.104
0.097
0.106
0.026
0.110
0.057
0.026
0.131
0.051
0.070
0.082
0.080
0.094
0.063
0.079
0.149
0.077
0.138
0.263
0.073
0.088
0.120
0.138
0.072
0.077
0.069
0.202
0.179
0.062
0.293

TABLE S1. Measured properties of sample masks. The manufacturer did not state what material the surgical masks and
respirators were made of, so we assigned polypropylene to them as our best guess. For the 60 % cotton t-shirt we state the
results for the first (most likely cotton) peak. Parameters are shown for the distribution of fibre diameters modelled by the
log-normal ln (df /µm) ∼ N (µdf , σd2f ); the modal diameter in µm is given by exp (µdf ).

fabric
cloth mask inner layer
cloth mask outer layer

type
linen
cotton

Dx
0.36
0.25

Dy
0.36
0.21

lx
0.54
0.31

ly
0.55
0.25

hLx i (mm)
0.47
0.38

hαi
0.20
0.22

TABLE S2. Estimating the properties of two sampled woven fabrics using an indirect method described in the main text (cf.
discussion around (17). Here we estimated the warp and weft widths (Dx and Dy ) from SEM images, whereas we estimated
the separations between their centres (lx and ly ) from optical microscopy taking advantage of the larger field of view. The
parameters hLx i and hαi are inferred from the yarn parameters (Dx , Dy , lx and ly ). Note that this method predicts a thinner
(and thus more dense) fabric than was determined by optical microscopy in table S1.

9
ln (ρ/ρ0 )8 . For surface line charge distributions of the form σ = σ0 cos (kθ) we find the electric potential outside the
fibre adopts the form
Φk =

σ0 ak+1
cos (kθ)
f
0 (1 + f )kρk

for k > 0 and ρ > af and where f is the dielectric constant of the fibre. For electret fibres the most important terms
from this expansion are the monopole term (S12) for fibres with net charge, or the k = 1 term
Φ1 =

σ0 a2f cos θ
0 (1 + f )ρ

(S13)

for fibres with a dipole polarisation.
Dielectric breakdown is expected to occur where the field |Φ0 (af )| = 3 × 106 V m−1 , the dielectric strength of air.
This corresponds to surface charges of σ0 ∼ 3 nC cm−2 for monopole fibres and σ0 ∼ (1 + r )3 nC cm−2 for dipolar
fibres. Polypropylene, a widely used material for the electret fibres in respirators, has r ' 2 giving σ0 ∼ 9 nC cm−2 .
Electret fibres can readily sustain charges in the O(1 nC cm−2 ) range9,10 , so they are close to this upper limit.
Natural cellulose fabrics such as cotton and wool can typically sustain a maximum charge density in the range of
O(0.01 nC cm−2 ) (or O(0.1 nC cm−2 ) for silk) when charged tribolectrically11 . This is one to two orders of magnitude
smaller than in electret fibres, so we expect electromagnetic forces to be negligible in cloth fabrics compared to
respirators.
1 S.

Kuwabara, “The Forces experienced by Randomly Distributed Parallel Circular Cylinders or Spheres in a Viscous Flow at Small
Reynolds Numbers,” J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 14, 527–532 (1959).
2 “Palabos - university of geneva,” (2020).
3 Q. Zou and X. He, “On pressure and velocity boundary conditions for the lattice boltzmann bgk model,” Physics of Fluids 9, 1591–1598
(1997).
4 O. Behrend, R. Harris, and P. B. Warren, “Hydrodynamic behavior of lattice Boltzmann and lattice Bhatnagar-Gross-Krook models,”
Phys. Rev. E 50, 4586–4595 (1994).
5 Y. B. Bao and J. Meskas, Lattice Boltzmann method for fluid simulations (Department of Mathematics, Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University, New York, 2011).
6 D. P. Ziegler, “Boundary conditions for lattice Boltzmann simulations,” J Stat Phys 71, 1171–1177 (1993).
7 I. B. Stechkina and N. A. Fuchs, “Studies on Fibrous Aerosol Filters—I. Calculation of Diffusional Deposition of Aerosols in Fibrous
Filters,” Ann. Occup. Hyg. (1966), 10.1093/annhyg/9.2.59.
8 D. J. Griffiths, Introduction to Electrodynamics, fourth edition ed. (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom ; New
York, NY, 2018).
9 C. C. Chen, M. Lehtimäki, and K. Willeke, “Loading and filtration characteristics of filtering facepieces,” Am. Ind. Hyg. Assoc. J. 54,
51–60 (1993).
10 A. Kravtsov, H. B. Nig, S. Zhandarov, and R. Beyreuther, “The electret effect in polypropylene fibers treated in a corona discharge,”
Adv. Polym. Technol. 19, 5 (2000).
11 S. Liu, W. Zheng, B. Yang, and X. Tao, “Triboelectric charge density of porous and deformable fabrics made from polymer fibers,”
Nano Energy 53, 383–390 (2018).

10

1.50

Resp1
Resp2
Resp3
Resp4
SM4
SM5

1.00
0.75
0.50

Resp1
Resp2
Resp3
Resp4
SM4
SM5

0.4
frequency

frequency

1.25

0.5

(N95/FFP2)
(N95/FFP2)
(KN95)
(KN95)

0.3
0.2
0.1

0.25
0.00

0.0
0

2
4
6
diameter df (µm)

8

0

10
20
30
diameter df (µm)

(a) Innermost mask layers

0.4

Resp1
Resp2
Resp3
Resp4
SM4
SM5

40

(b) Middle mask layers

0.30

(N95/FFP2)
(N95/FFP2)
(KN95)
(KN95)

N95/FFP2 (1) Inner 2
N95/FFP2 (2) Inner 2
KN95 (1) Inner 2

0.25
frequency

0.3
frequency

(N95/FFP2)
(N95/FFP2)
(KN95)
(KN95)

0.2

0.20
0.15
0.10

0.1
0.05
0.0

0.00
0

10
20
30
diameter df (µm)

40

0

(c) Outer mask layers

0.20
0.15
0.10

Vacuum bag
Vacuum filter
Paper towel
Coffee filter

0.06
frequency

frequency

0.25

40

(d) Other mask layers

Polyester tie
Silk tie
Silk shirt
Felt
Kitchen cloth
Linen

0.30

10
20
30
diameter df (µm)

0.04

0.02

0.05
0.00

0.00
0

10
20
30
diameter df (µm)
(e) Other fabrics

40

0

20
40
diameter df (µm)

60

(f) Paper samples

FIG. S2. Distribution of fibre diameters in sampled fabric layers determined from analysis of SEM images (points) and their
log-normal fits (lines). Mask layers are grouped by those with similar size distributions. (a-d) Sampled masks show progressively
smaller fibres as they move innerwards; this is true for all surgical masks (SM), respirators (Resp) and the (cotton/linen) cloth
mask sampled. Panel (a) shows that the innermost layer was particularly fine in all cases, containing fibres an order of magnitude
smaller in the O(1 µm) range. (e) Other fabric samples showed fibres of comparable diameter (10 to 20 µm) and polydispersity
to those in sampled masks (and cotton samples shown in Fig. 1 in the main text), suggesting they could be used as substitute
materials in homemade masks. (f) Paper samples contained the largest and most polydisperse fibres, suggesting they would
have worse filtration performance than the cloth layers sampled.

