THE GENERALIZED OTOC
FROM
SUPERSYMMETRIC QUANTUM MECHANICS

arXiv:2008.03280v2 [hep-th] 14 Jan 2021

Study of Random Fluctuations from Eigenstate Representation of Correlation Functions

Kaushik Y. Bhagat1 , Baibhab Bose2 , Sayantan Choudhury3,4,5‡, § , Satyaki Chowdhury4,5 ,
Rathindra N. Das6 , Saptarshhi G. Dastider7 , Nitin Gupta8 , Archana Maji6 ,
Gabriel D. Pasquino9 , Swaraj Paul10
1 Indian

Institute of Science, Bengaluru, Karnataka-560012, India
of Physics & Astrophysics, University of Delhi, Delhi-11007, India
3 Quantum Gravity and Unified Theory and Theoretical Cosmology Group,
Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics (Albert Einstein Institute),
Am Mühlenberg 1, 14476 Potsdam-Golm, Germany.
4 National Institute of Science Education and Research, Bhubaneswar, Odisha - 752050, India
5 Homi Bhabha National Institute, Training School Complex, Anushakti Nagar, Mumbai - 400085, India
6 Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Powai, Mumbai - 400076, India
7 Sree Chaitanya College, Prafullanagar, Habra, West Bengal - 743268
8 Department of Physical Sciences, Indian Institute of Science Education & Research Mohali, Punjab - 140306, India
9 University of Waterloo, 200 University Ave W, Waterloo, ON, Canada, N2L 3G1
10 Discipline of Mathematics, Indian Institute of Technology Indore, Indore 453 552, India
2 Department

Abstract
The concept of the out-of-time-ordered correlation (OTOC) function is treated as a very
strong theoretical probe of quantum randomness, using which one can study both chaotic
and non-chaotic phenomena in the context of quantum statistical mechanics. In this paper,
we define a general class of OTOC, which can perfectly capture quantum randomness phenomena in a better way. Further, we demonstrate an equivalent formalism of computation
using a general time-independent Hamiltonian having well-defined eigenstate representation for integrable supersymmetric quantum systems. We found that one needs to consider
two new correlators apart from the usual one to have a complete quantum description. To
visualize the impact of the given formalism we consider the two well-known models viz.
Harmonic Oscillator and one dimensional potential well within the framework of supersymmetry. For the Harmonic Oscillator case, we obtain similar periodic time dependence
but dissimilar parameter dependences compared to the results obtained from both microcanonical and canonical ensembles in quantum mechanics without supersymmetry. On the
other hand, for one dimensional potential well problem, we found significantly different
time scale and the other parameter dependence compared to the results obtained from
non-supersymmetric quantum mechanics. Finally, to establish the consistency of the prescribed formalism in the classical limit, we demonstrate the phase space averaged version
of the classical version of OTOCs from a model-independent Hamiltonian along with the
previously mentioned these well-cited models.
Keywords: OTOC, Supersymmetry, Out-of-equilibrium quantum statistical mechanics.
‡

Corresponding author, E-mail : sayantan.choudhury@aei.mpg.de, sayanphysicsisi@gmail.com
NOTE: This project is the part of the non-profit virtual international research consortium “Quantum
Aspects of Space-Time & Matter” (QASTM) .
§

We would like to dedicate this work
for the people those who are helping
us to fight against COVID-19
pandemic across the globe.

i

Contents
1 Introduction

1

2 Lexicography

12

3 A short review of Supersymmetric Quantum Mechanics

13

4 General remarks on time disorder averaging and thermal OTOCs

15

5 Eigenstate Representation of thermal OTOCs in Supersymmetric Quantum
Mechanics
23
5.1 Partition Function from Supersymmetric Quantum Mechanics
27
(1)
5.2 Representation of two point OTOC : Y (t1 , t2 )
28
5.3 Representation of two point OTOC : Y (2) (t1 , t2 )
29
(3)
5.4 Representation of two point OTOC : Y (t1 , t2 )
30
(1)
5.5 Representation of four point OTOC : C (t1 , t2 )
31
(1)
5.5.1 Un-normalized : C (t1 , t2 )
31
e(1) (t1 , t2 )
5.5.2 Normalized
: C
33
5.6 Representation of four point OTOC : C (2) (t1 , t2 )
34
(2)
5.6.1 Un-normalized : C (t1 , t2 )
34
e(2) (t1 , t2 )
5.6.2 Normalized
: C
36
5.7 Representation of four point OTOC : C (3) (t1 , t2 )
37
(3)
5.7.1 Un-normalized : C (t1 , t2 )
37
(3)
e
5.7.2 Normalized
: C (t1 , t2 )
38
5.8 Summary of Results
40
6 Model I: Supersymmetric Quantum Mechanical Harmonic Oscillator
6.1 Eigen spectrum of the super-partner Hamiltonian
6.2 Partition Function
6.3 Computation of two point OTOCs
6.3.1 Computation of Y (1) (t1 , t2 )
6.3.2 Computation of Y (2) (t1 , t2 )
6.3.3 Computation of Y (3) (t1 , t2 )
6.4 Computation of un-normalized four point OTOCs
6.4.1 Computation of C (1) (t1 , t2 )
6.4.2 Computation of C (2) (t1 , t2 )
6.4.3 Computation of C (3) (t1 , t2 )
6.5 Computation of normalized four point OTOCs
e(1) (t1 , t2 )
6.5.1 Computation of C
e(2) (t1 , t2 )
6.5.2 Computation of C
e(3) (t1 , t2 )
6.5.3 Computation of C
6.6 Summary of Results

43
43
44
45
45
47
49
51
51
54
56
59
59
62
63
64

7 Model II: Supersymmetric One Dimensional Potential Well

67

8 General remarks on the classical limiting interpretation of OTOCs

68

9 Classical Limit of OTOC for Supersymmetric One Dimensional Harmonic Oscillator
70
10 Classical Limit of OTOC for Supersymmetric 1D box

73

11 Numerical Results
11.1 Supersymmetric 1D Infinite Potential Well
11.2 Supersymmetric 1D Harmonic oscillator

76
78
86

12 Conclusions

104

References

109

A Derivation of the normalization factors for the Supersymmetric HO

109

B Poisson bracket relation for the Supersymmetric partner potential associated
with the 1D infinite well potential
111

iii

1

Introduction

The concept of out-of-time-ordered-correlators (OTOC) first introduced by the author
duo, Larkin and Ovchinnikov to describe the semi-classical correlation in the context of superconductivity [1], which was mostly used in various condensed matter systems to study
various out-of-equilibrium phenomena in the quantum regime [2]. However, recently it
has attracted the attention of theoretical physicists from other branches in very different
context finding applications in the finite-temperature extension of quantum field theories,
bulk gravitational theories, quantum black holes, and many more sensational topics in
the list[3–8]. It is considered to be one of the strongest theoretical probes for quantifying
quantum chaos in terms of quantum Lyapunov exponent [9], quantum theories of stochasticity and randomness among the theoretical physics community. Besides playing a key
role in investigating the holographic duality [10–13] between a strongly correlated quantum
system and a gravitational dual system, it also characterizes the chaotic behaviour and information scrambling [14–19] in the context of many-body quantum systems [21–23]. The
detailed study of OTOCs reveal an intimate relationship between three entirely different
physical concepts, namely holographic duality, quantum chaos and information scrambling.
The key idea of OTOCs can be best understood as the growth of the non-commutativity of
quantum mechanical operators5 which are defined at different time scales, and hence can
be described using the Poisson Brackets for its classical counterpart. Not only that but
also the quantum mechanical thermal ensemble average or equivalently the quantum mechanical trace operation can be described by using the phase space average in the classical
limit. It is considered as the quantum mechanical analogue of the classical sensitiveness to
the initial conditions in the time dynamics of a quantum system. The exponential growth
of these correlators indicates the presence of chaos in the quantum system, which has led
to discussions of the “butterfly effect” in black holes [24–26] with a saturation bound on
the quantum Lyapunov exponent and for various spin models [27, 28].
There has been a growing interest to understand the behaviour of OTOC even for systems where quantum chaos is expected to be absent, the most relevant example being
the study of OTOC in the quantum Ising spin chain model, where power law growth
of OTOC’s is observed as opposed to the exponential growth in non-integrable models
in support of non-chaoticity [29–31]. Another interesting revelation came from a recent
study of OTOC’s for a quantum system with discrete energy levels, weakly coupled to a
5

Specifically this non-commutative structure of the quantum operators describe the unequal time commutation relations (UETCRs) within the framework of quantum mechanics. However, the mathematical
structure as well as the physical consequences of these correlators in the quantum regime is completely different from the concept of formulating advanced and the retarded correlators. In the later part of this paper
we will explicitly demonstrate such differences or the correlators within the framework of micro-canonical
and canonical quantum statistical systems.

1

non-adiabatic dissipative thermal environment. This type of system is commonly known
as open quantum system (OQS), where the OTOC was found to saturate exponentially in
contrast to the exponential growth for a quantum chaotic system [32]. OTOC’s has been
of prime theoretical interest for diagnosing also the rate of growth of chaos with respect to
the different time scales involved in the quantum system through the operators and hence
for studying the scrambling of quantum information in black holes and strongly correlated
quantum mechanical systems. It serves as a strong theoretical probe for investigating
various bulk gravitational dual theories in the framework of AdS/CFT correspondence.
Among others, the existence of shock waves inside black holes [33–35] and the maximum
saturation bound of the quantum version of the Lyapunov exponent are the most famous
examples where out of time ordered correlation functions have proven to be useful in the
Ads/CFT correspondence. This maximum saturation bound is famously known as the
Maldacena-Shenker-Stanford (MSS) bound [36]. The SYK model [37–67] is a well known
model which saturates this well known bound and shows the signature of maximal chaos
both in its 1D CFT and gravitational dual 2D balck hole counterpart. In the ref. [68]
this bound on quantum Lyapunov exponent was further generalized for many body systems using the well known Eigenstate Thermalization Hypothesis (ETH). Very recently in
the ref. [69], the author used the tools and techniques of computing OTOC in the context of Cosmology by following the underlying slogan Cosmology meets Condensed Matter
Physics to study the quantum mechanical correlation functions from random primordial
fluctuations appearing in the context of cosmological perturbation theory of background
spatially flat FLRW metric. Specifically, these fluctuations are appearing in the context of
stochastic particle production during inflation, during the epoch of reheating and also for
the primordial phenomena which is governed by the quantum generalization of Brownian
motion i.e. for the cosmological epochs in the time line of the universe where the physics
of out-of-equilibrium phenomena play significant role.
In ref. [70], the earlier discussed fact regarding the exponential growth of the OTOCs in
the associated time scales to describe the chaotic fluctuations for non-integrable systems
has been established for various well known quantum mechanical systems. A study of
the same for integrable models suggest non-chaotic quantum mechanical fluctuations in
the quantum regime. In the present context, the phrase quantum randomness describes a
physical phenomena which describes chaotic or non-chaotic i.e. in principle any random
behaviour of a system with respect to the associated time scales of the system. For the
physical systems such quantum randomness can be described by the following two-fold
formalisms:
1. Formalism I:
The first approach is based on the construction and the mathematical from of the
solution of the Fokker Planck equation, using which various stochastic phenomena
in the quantum out-of-equilibrium regime can be studied. One of the famous ex-

2

ample is the stochastic cosmological particle production phenomena which can be
directly mapped to a problem of solving Schrödinger equation with an impurity potential within the framework of quantum mechanics, which is actually describing
propagation of electrons inside an electrical wire in presence of an impurity or defect. Within the framework of quantum statistical mechanics instead of solving the
Schrödinger problem directly or may be solving the dynamical equation for the quantum mechanical fluctuations during the stochastic particle production one can think
about a cumulative probability distribution function of of this stochastic process,
P(n, τ ) which depend on two crucial quantities, which are - the number density of
the produced particle and the associated time scale of the stochastic process. Using
a detailed physical arguments and computation one can explicitly show that this
probability distribution function, P(n, τ ), satisfy Fokker Planck equation, which is
given by:
At infinite temperature (β → 0) :

1 ∂P(n, τ )
∂ 2 P(n, τ )
∂P(n, τ )
= n(n + 1)
+ (1 + 2n)
,
2
µ ∂τ
|
{z ∂n } |
{z ∂n }
Diffusion

(1.1)

Drift

At finite temperature (β 6= 0) :

∂ 2 P(n, τ )
1 ∂P(n, τ )
∂P(n, τ )
= n(n + 1)
+ (1 + 2n)
2
µ ∂τ
|
{z ∂n } |
{z ∂n }
Diffusion
Drift




∂V (n) ∂P(n, τ ) ∂ 2 V (n)
∂V (n)
+ β n(n + 1)
+
P(n, τ ) + (2n + 1)
P(n, τ ) . (1.2)
∂n
∂n
∂n2
∂n
|
{z
}
Finite temperature contribution

where µ represents the mean stochastic particle production rate and V (n) associated
potential which is only significant at finite temperature. By solving these set of
equations in presence of appropriate initial conditions one can get to know about the
related profile of the stochastic process semi classically in the present context. Just
not only that, but also one can treat these versions of the Fokker Planck equation as
the semi classical statistical moment generating equations because by replacing the
profile function P(n, τ ) with the appropriate moment generating function F(n) one
can compute all the moments. To serve this purpose one need to use the following
fundamental equation:
Z
Statistical average of moment generator : hF(n)i := dn F(n) P(n, τ ), (1.3)
which physically represents the expectation value or the statistical average value
of the number density dependent moment generating any arbitrary function F(n).

3

Further substituting the appropriate form of this function in the moment dependent
Fokker Planck equations one can explicitly compute the expression for all the physically relevant statistical moments i.e. hni, hn2 i, · · · explicitly without explicitly
knowing about the particular mathematical structure of the profile of the related
stochastic dynamical process at infinite or finite temperature for a given structure of
number density potential function. These moments are extremely important in the
present context of study as all of them semi classically compute the expressions for all
the equal time quantum correlation functions required to study the out-of-equilibrium
aspects, such as stochastic effects, disorder, random fluctuations etc. both at infinite
and finite temperatures. See the references [2, 71–74] where all authors have studied the physical impact of this formalism to describe out-of-equilibrium aspects in
various different contexts.
Now let us speak about some applicability issues related to this particular formalism. Since this formalism only allows us to know about the effect of the semi-classical
correlations at equal time that might be not very interesting when we are actually
thinking of doing the computation of the correlations and its rate of change at different time scales associated with the quantum mechanical system of study. For
an example, if we are interested to compute the any general N -point semi-classical
correlation function as defined by the following expression:
N
Y
h n(τi )i = hn(τ1 )n(τ2 ) · · · n(τN )i
i=1

∀ τi (i = 1, 2, · · · , N ) contain disorder,

(1.4)

then this particular formalism will not work, as using this formalism one cannot capture the effect of disorder effect in the associated time scale of the system. On the
other by following the usual tools and techniques one can only compute the above
mentioned N -point correlators either in time ordered sense, where τ1 > τ2 > · · · > τN
or in the anti-time ordered sense, where τ1 < τ2 < · · · < τN . So from the technical
ground defining this N -point correlators including the effect of disorder in the time
scale at any arbitrary temperature is also a very important topic of research and here
comes the crucial role of the next formalism where we can allowed to define and explicitly compute such quantum effects at the level of correlation functions. Another
important aspect we want to point out here that, the present formalism don’t bother
about any Lagrangian or the Hamiltonian formulation of the associated quantum
mechanical system under consideration. So if we really interested to know about
the effect of time disordering in the expressions for the quantum mechanical correlation functions which are defined in terms of the fundamental operators appearing
in the quantum version of the Lagrangian or the Hamiltonian of the system under
consideration and also want to explicitly know about time variation with respect to
different time scales associated with the system, which are actually the source of

4

time disordering, then instead of the present formalism it is obviously technically
correct and easier to think about the implementation of the second formalism, which
gives us the better understanding of time scale disordering. In the next point and in
the rest of the paper we will follow the second formalism to compute the quantum
correlation functions from the fundamental operators from the quantum mechanical
systems under study which can explicitly capture the effect of disordering in the time
scale. Not only us, but also the present trend in the research suggesting to make use
of the next formalism to get better understanding of time disordering phenomena in
quantum mechanical system.
2. Formalism II:
The second approach is based on finding quantum correlation functions including
the time disordering effect and through out the paper we have followed this formalism to study effects of out-of-equilibrium physics in physical systems[69]. The present
computational methodology helps us to know more about the underlying unexplored
physical facts regarding the quantum mechanical aspects of various stochastic random process where time ordering or anti time ordering is not at all important and
instead of that disorder in the time scale can be captured in the quantum correlations at very early time scale. This method not only helps us to know about the
early time behaviour of quantum correlations in the out-of-equilibrium regime of the
quantum statistical mechanics, but also give crucial information regarding the late
time equilibrium behaviour of the quantum correlations of a specific quantum system.
However for all the systems in nature the above interpretation of the quantum mechanical aspects of the randomness phenomena are not same. Based on all these types
of quantum systems one can categorize the random time disordering phenomena as,
A. Chaotic system which shows exponential growth in the quantum correlators, B.
Non-chaotic system which shows periodic or aperiodic or irregular random fluctuations in the quantum correlators. The best possible theoretical measure of all such
time disorder averaging phenomena for various statistical ensembles, micro-canonical
and canonical ensembles are described by out-of-time-ordered correlation (OTOC)
function within the framework of quantum statistical mechanics. Let us define, a set
of operators, Oi (tj ) ∀ i, j = 1, 2 with i 6= j or i = j possibilities. The time disorder
thermal average over statistical ensemble is described by the following expression:
h
i
(ij)
∀ i, j = 1, 2, (1.5)
CN (t1 , t2 ) := −h[Oi (t1 ), Oj (t2 )]N iβ = −Tr ρβ [Oi (t1 ), Oj (t2 )]N
where the thermal density matrix ρβ is defined as:
ρβ :=

1
exp (−βH) with Z = Tr [exp(−βH)] .
Z

5

(1.6)

(ij)

In the present context, CN (t1 , t2 ), represent three possible types of OTOC out of
which only i 6= j possibility which will describe only one OTOC have been explored in
earlier works in this area. The other two OTOCs which are appearing from the i = j
possibility will be explicitly studied in this paper. The prime objective is to incorporate two more type of OTOCs along with the well known other OTOC is to study
the all possible signatures of time disordering average from a quantum mechanical
system. Our expectation is all these three types of OTOCs can able to describe the
more general structure of stochastic randomness or any simple type of random process in the quantum regime. Though, this idea was revived by Kitaev, then followed
by Maldacena, Shenker and Stanford (MSS) and many more to study the quantum
mechanical signature of chaos, which is actually the i 6= j case in the above definition, but the mathematical structure of the other two OTOCs represented by the
i = j case suggests that any non-chaotic behaviour, such as, periodic or aperiodic
time dependent behaviour, any time dependent growth in the correlators which are
different from any type of exponential growth, any type of decaying behaviour in
the correlators can be explained in a better way compared to just studying the time
dependent behaviour from the well known OTOC which are commonly used in the
literature. So in short, to give a complete picture of any kind of time disordering
phenomena it is better to study all these possible three types of OTOCs to finally
comment on the properties of any physical systems in quantum mechanical regime.
Few other important things we want to point out here for better understanding the
structure of all these OTOCs capturing the underlying physics of disordering averaging phenomena. First of all here we have to mention that in the definition that
we have provided in this paper using which we can able to compute three sets of 2N
point OTOCs. Though in the further computation we have restricted our study in
the paper by considering N = 1 and N = 2 cases, but to study the general time
disorder averaging process one may study the any even multipoint (i.e. 2N point)
correlation functions from the present definition. Now here the N = 1 case is basically representing a non-zero UTCR and can be treated as the building block of the
full computation as this particular case is mimicking the computation of the Green’s
function in presence of time disordering. More technically, one can interpret that
this contribution is made up of two disconnected time disorder averaged thermal
correlator. These disconnected contributions are extremely significant if we wait for
a large time scale, in literature we usually identified this time scale as a dissipation
time scale on which one can explicitly factorize any higher 2N point correlators in
terms of the non-vanishing disconnected contributions. For this specific reason one
can treat N = 1 case result as the building block of the any higher 2N point thermal correlators. However, for most of the quantum systems the N = 1 case shows
random but decaying behaviour with respect to the associated time scales which are
explicitly appearing in the quantum operators of the theory. For this reason study of

6

any N > 1 play significant role to give a better understanding of the time disordering
phenomena. For this purpose next we have studied the N = 2 case, which represents
the four point thermal correlator in the present context of study and one of the most
significant quantity in the present day research of this area which can capture better
information regarding the time disorder averaging compared to the N = 1 case. In
a future version of this work we have a plan to extend the present computation to
study the physical implications of N > 2 quantum correlators to better understand
the time disorder averaging phenomena. Now we will comment on the technical side
of the present formalism using which one can explicitly compute these OTOCs in
the present context. First of all we talk about the time independent Hamiltonian of
a quantum system which have their own eigenstates with specific energy eigenvalue
spectrum. In this case, construction of the OTOCs describing the time disorder thermal averaging over a canonical ensemble is described by two crucial components, the
Boltzmann factor on which the general eigenstate dependent spectrum appears and
also the temperature independent micro-canonical part of the OTOCs. At the end
we need to take the sum over all possible eigenstates, which will finally give a simplified closed expressions for OTOCs in the present context. Due to the appearance
of the eigenstates from the time independent Hamiltonian this particular procedure
will reduce the job extremely to study the time dependent behaviour of all the previously mentioned OTOCs that we have defined earlier in this paper. In the rest of
the paper we have followed this prescription which is only valid for time independent Hamiltonian which have their own well defined eigenstates. For more details
see the rest of the computations and related discussion that we have studied in this
paper. Most importantly, using this formalism we can compute all of these OTOCs
in a very simple model -independent way. The other technique is more complicated
than the previously discussed one. In this case one starts with a time dependent
Hamiltonian of the theory and using the well known, Schwinger Keldysh formalism,
which is a general path integral framework at finite temperature for the study of the
time evolution of a quantum mechanical system which is in the out-of-equilibrium
state. At the early time scale once a small perturbation or a response is provided to
a quantum system, then it is described by a out-of-equilibrium process within the
framework of quantum statistical mechanics and the present formalism provides us
the sufficient tools and techniques using which one can compute the expressions for
the OTOCs. Not only that, the late time behaviour of such OTOC is described by
a saturation behaviour for chaotic systems from which one can compute the various
characteristic features of large time equilibrium behaviour from these OTOCs.

7

3. Formalism III:
The third approach is based on the circuit quantum complexity,[75–81] which is relatively a very new concept and physically defined as the minimum number of unitary
operators, commonly known as quantum gates, that are specifically required to construct the desired target quantum state from a suitable reference quantum mechanical
state. In amore generalized physical prescription, quantum mechanical complexity
can serve as one of several strong diagnostics for probing the time disorder averaging phenomena of a quantum mechanical system or quantum randomness. The
underlying physical concept of circuit complexity can essentially provide essential
information regarding various aspects of quantum mechanical randomness, such as
the concept of scrambling time, Lyapunov exponent 6 , etc, which are particularly the
key features of the study of quantum mechanical chaos. One can further compare between the physical outcomes of the two strongest measures of quantum randomness,
which are appearing from out-of-time-order correlators (OTOCs) and the quantum
mechanical circuit complexity and comment on further that for a specific quantum
system which one is capturing the more information regarding the description of
quantum mechanical randomness.
In this paper we generalize the study of OTOCs for investigating the phenomena of quantum randomness in various supersymmetric integrable quantum mechanical models. The
main motivation behind introducing the concept of supersymmetry lies in the well established fact that for any Supersymmetric quantum mechanical model, the original Hamiltonian is always associated with a partner Hamiltonian, which in general is widely different
from its original counterpart in terms of eigenstates. Though not always but it is possible
that the quantum mechanical model under consideration, attains vastly different properties
in the context of quantum randomness, due to the introduction of supersymmetry within
the framework of quantum mechanics. It is our expectation that this generalization of the
study of all the classes of OTOCs would provide an understanding about the significant
role that supersymmetry plays in modifying the randomness behaviour of the quantum
mechanical models under investigation. Most importantly, from the present study it will
be clear that the additional inclusion of symmetries in the form of supersymmetry will
at all effect, if so then how much it will effect the time disorder averaging phenomena
for a canonical and micro-canonical statistical ensemble studied within the framework of
out-of-equilibrium quantum statistical mechanics. In the eigenstate representation of the
OTOCs we have actually studied three types of OTOC in this paper, out of that one
of them is commonly studied in this literature mostly used to explain the phenomena of
6

The associated time scale when the quantum circuit complexity starts to grow is usually identified
to be the scrambling time scale and in the representative plot with respect to the time scale particularly
the magnitude of the slope of the linear portion of the curve is physically interpreted as the Lyapunov
exponent for the specific systems where the general quantum randomness or the time disorder averaging
phenomena is described by quantum chaos.

8

quantum mechanical randomness (not only chaotic behaviour, but also a general feature
including any types of non-chaotic behaviour), and the other two OTOCs that we have
included in this paper might not be completely independent physical information of each
other, but extremely important to capture the complete quantum mechanical effect in
the quantum mechanical correlation functions to give a more general physical interpretation and a complete and detailed description of time disorder averaging phenomena for
various quantum statistical ensembles within the framework of supersymmetric quantum
mechanics. Now if we can’t able to find out the eigenstate representation of a given time
independent Hamiltonians within the framework of supersymmetry then the prescribed
methodology for computing the general class of OTOCs in terms of the simplest eigenstate
representation will not work. This can happen for the physical systems which is actually
described by the time dependent Hamiltonians. In that case to compute all of these previously mentioned general class of OTOCs one need to use the quantum mechanical path
integral generalization of the present framework, which is commonly described by the,
Schwinger Keldysh formalism, at finite temperature within the framework of supersymmetric quantum mechanics. The good news is physical outcomes of such a generalization
also have not studied yet, which we have future plan to look into in detail and we are also
hopeful to get non-trivial and better understanding of various supersymmetric quantum
mechanical models out of these computations.
Organization of the Paper is as follows• In Sec. 3 we provide a brief review of the concept of Supersymmetric Quantum
Mechanics.
• In Sec. 4, we explain how the phenomenon of Quantum Randomness can be diagnosed
through the out of time ordered correlators.
• In Sec. 5, we provide a model independent eigenstate representation of the 2 and the
4-pt correlators of all the three kinds defined equally well for any QM model with
well defined eigenstates.
• In Sec. 6 we explicitly calculate the correlators for the supersymmetric Harmonic
Oscillator.
• In Sec. 7 we provide the numerical calculations of the correlators for the Supersymmetric 1D infinite potnetial well.
• In Sec. 8 we discuss the semiclassical analogue results for the two Supersymmetric
QM model.
• Finally we conclude with the most important observations from our analysis of the
considered Supersymmetric QM models.

9

Supersymmetry in
Quantum Mechanics
What is the nature
of Randomness
In Supersymmetric
Quantum Mechanics ?

Quantum Randomness
Through Correlators

SUSY
Harmonic Oscillator
Eigenstate
Representation
Of Correlators
And Partition
functions

Superpotential
Formalism

SUSY
1D Potential well

Partition functions
2-pt Correlation Functions
4-pt Correlation Functions

Representation
of
2pt Correlators

Representation
of
4pt Correlators

Classical
Limit

SUSY
Harmonic
Oscillator

SUSY
1D Potential
Well

2pt and 4pt
Correlators

Figure 1: This mnemonic diagram shows the organization of the entire paper.
10

Figure 2: The OTOC Team

11

2

Lexicography
Symbol

Meaning

W(x)

Superpotential
Hamiltonian of the Supersymmetric Quantum mechanical model.
Eigenstate of the Supersymmetric QM model
in the direct sum Hilbert space.
Energy difference between the nth and mth
energy eigenstate.
Microcanonical 2-pt correlator of first kind.

HSU SY
|Ψn i
Enm = En − Em
(1)

ym (t1 , t2 )

Microcanonical 2-pt correlator of second
kind.
Microcanonical 2-pt correlator of third kind.
Un-normalized 2-pt correlator of first kind.

(2)

ym (t1 , t2 )
(3)

ym (t1 , t2 )
Y (1) (t1 , t2 ) = -h[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]iβ

Un-normalized 2-pt correlator of second
kind.
Un-normalized 2-pt correlator of third kind.
Microcanonical 4-pt correlator of first kind.

Y (2) (t1 , t2 ) = -h[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]iβ
Y (3) (t1 , t2 ) = -h[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]iβ
(1)
cm (t1 , t2 )

Microcanonical 4-pt correlator of second
kind.
Microcanonical 4-pt correlator of third kind.
Un-normalized 4-pt canonical correlator of
first kind.
Un-normalized 4-pt canonical correlator of
second kind.
Un-normalized 4-pt canonical correlator of
third kind.
Normalized 2-pt correlator of first kind.

(2)

cm (t1 , t2 )
(3)

cm (t1 , t2 )
C (1) (t1 , t2 ) = -h[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]2 iβ
C (2) (t1 , t2 ) = -h[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]2 iβ
C (3) (t1 , t2 ) = -h[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]2 iβ
h[x(t1 ),p(t2 )]iβ
Ye (1) (t1 , t2 ) = - hx(t1 )x(t1 )i hp(t2 )p(t
2 )i
β

β

h[x(t1 ),x(t2 )]iβ
Ye (2) (t1 , t2 ) = - hx(t1 )x(t1 )i hx(t2 )x(t
2 )i

Normalized 2-pt correlator of second kind.

h[p(t1 ),p(t2 )]iβ
Ye (3) (t1 , t2 ) = - hp(t1 )p(t1 )i hp(t2 )p(t
2 )i

Normalized 2-pt correlator of third kind.

β

β

β

β

2

h[x(t1 ),p(t2 )] iβ
e(1) (t1 , t2 ) = C
hx(t1 )x(t1 )i hp(t2 )p(t2 )i
β

Normalized 4-pt correlator of first kind.
β

h[x(t1 ),x(t2 )]2 iβ

e(2) (t1 , t2 ) = C
hx(t1 )x(t1 )i

Normalized 4-pt correlator of second kind.

e(3) (t1 , t2 ) = C
hp(t1 )p(t1 )i

Normalized 4-pt correlator of third kind.

β hx(t2 )x(t2 )iβ
h[p(t1 ),p(t2 )]2 iβ
β hp(t2 )p(t2 )iβ

12

3

A short review of Supersymmetric Quantum Mechanics

The theory of Supersymmetric Quantum Mechanics [83–88] relates quantum eigenfunctions and the corresponding eigenvalues between two partner Hamiltonians through an
intertwining relationship using the so called charge operators. It generally uses the technique of factorizing the Hamiltonian in terms of the intertwining operators and hence
to determine the superpotential using the well known Riccati equation. The idea of factorizing generally allows one to express the superpotential in terms of the ground state
wave-function of the original Hamiltonian of the quantum mechanical model under consideration. The process of factorization is mathematically described by the following equation:
H1 = A† A,

(3.1)

where A and A† are the intertwining operators which are defined from the superpotential
as:
1 d
A† = − √
+ W (x).
2 dx

1 d
+ W (x) ;
A= √
2 dx

(3.2)

Within the framework of supersymmetry, the ground state energy is usually taken to be
zero, which is well justified because it is only the relative energy difference that matters.
For a zero energy ground state, the Schrödinger equation can be written as:
H1 |Ψ0 i = 0.

(3.3)

Substituting the expressions for A and A† in the above equation it is not very hard to
derive the Riccati equation, which further gives a way of writing the potential in terms of
the superpotential given by the following expression:
1
V1 (x) = W 2 (x) − √ W 0 (x),
2

(3.4)

where 0 corresponds to d/dx in the above equation. It is often an overrated fact that one
needs to know the form of the potential guiding the Hamiltonian to have an idea about
the wave functions of the quantum mechanical system and the fact that the knowledge of
the ground state wave function allows one to exactly know the potential associated with
the system is overlooked. However, in Supersymmetric quantum mechanics one generally
utilizes this unappreciated fact to construct the potential from the known ground state

13

wave function with zero modes:
W (x) = − √

1 ψ00 (x)
.
2m ψ0 (x)

(3.5)

The knowledge of superpotential allows one to determine the supersymmetric partner
potential via the following equation:
1
V2 (x) = W 2 (x) + √
W 0 (x).
2m

(3.6)

The partner Hamiltonian is constructed by reversing the order of the intertwining operators
used in the factorization of the original Hamiltonian. The energy eigenvalues and the
eigenstates of the original and the partner Hamiltonian are not independent of each other
and that’s where the beauty of supersymmetry lies. Knowing the original Hamiltonian and
its ground state one can easily determine the energy spectrum of the partner Hamiltonian.
The eigenvalues of H1 (original Hamiltonian) and H2 (partner Hamiltonian) are related
via the following equation:
(1)

En(2) = En+1

;

(1)

E0 = 0 ∀ n = 0, 1, 2, . . .

(3.7)

It is easy to show that the knowledge of the eigen functions of H1 can be used to derive
the eigen functions of H2 using the A operator and the eigen functions of H1 from that of
H2 using the A† operator. The role of the operators A and A† , apart from the conversion
of an eigenfunction of the original Hamiltonian to that of its partner Hamiltonian with the
same energy, it also destroys or creates one node in the eigenfunction. This justifies the
absence of the zero energy or the ground energy state of the partner Hamiltonian. One
can put this argument simply by stating that the operator A converts an energy state of
the original Hamiltonian into a lower energy state of the partner Hamiltonian keeping the
energy value of the state constant. A† on the other hand does the opposite conversion i.e
takes an energy state of the partner Hamiltonian and converts it into an higher energy
state of the original Hamiltonian keeping the energy eigenvalue fixed.
A supersymmetric quantum mechanical model is generally described by a Hamiltonian
having the following form:
HSUSY



H1 0
=
.
0 H2

(3.8)

In general, for such a Hamiltonian a quantum state is represented by:
|Ψn iT =


|ψ (1) i |ψ (2) i ,

(3.9)

where, |ψ (1) i and |ψ (2) i are the wave functions of the original and the partner Hamiltonian

14

respectively.
The prime objective of this paper is to provide an eigenstate representation of the
desired OTOCs, that we have already defined in the introduction, using which we study
the various well known quantum mechanical models in the context of supersymmetry to
study the general aspects of time disorder averaging phenomena. With this aim, one would
generally look for an eigenstate of the Hamiltonian under inspection. Remembering the
relation between the energy eigenvalues and eigenstates of the original and the partner
Hamiltonian it can be easily verified that the wave function given by Eq. (3.9) is not an
eigenstate of the Hamiltonian given in Eq. (3.8). We therefore take the wave function of
the Hamiltonian to be of the form
1
|Ψn iT = √
2


|ψ (1) i |ψ (2) i ,

(3.10)

which indeed represents a normalized eigenfunction of the Hamiltonian of the supersymmetric quantum mechanical systems considered in this work.
!
!
!


(1)
(1)
(1)
(1)
(1)
1 H1 0
En
1
En |ψn i
|ψn i
|ψn i
HSU SY |Ψn i = √
= √
,
=√
(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)
|ψn−1 i
2 0 H2
2 En−1 |ψn−1 i
2 |ψn−1 i
(2)

(1)

where we have used the relation En−1 = En . If we use Eq. (3.9) then |Ψn i does not
remain an eigenstate of HSUSY as we show below.
!
!


(1)
(1)
(1)
|ψn i
En |ψn i
H1 0
=
.
HSUSY |Ψn i =
(2)
(2)
(2)
0 H2
|ψn i
En |ψn i
Since the energy associated with the nth energy eigenstate of the original Hamiltonian H1
(1)
(2)
is not equal to that of its associated partner Hamiltonian H2 , i.e En 6= En , |Ψn i fails to
be an eigenstate of HSUSY .

4

General remarks on time disorder averaging and thermal OTOCs

Quantum randomness, using which we have prime objective to technically demonstrate
the time disorder averaging phenomena is actually a very broad topic of research in theoretical physics and there are many ways and possibilities using which one can explicitly
quantify this phenomena in the quantum regime. Quantum correlators of different orders
are one of them. When a quantum state evolves to reach equilibrium at the late time scales
in that case the overall amplitude of the correlators also evolves with the evolutionary time
scales, which are usually described in terms of the fundamental quantum operators and
the time evolution of these correlators can show the presence of time disorder averaging in
the form of chaotic or non-chaotic, periodic or aperiodic random behaviour in the quantum

15

mechanical system under study. Thermal average over the canonical statistical ensemble of
a quantum operator is a very powerful technique using which one can explicitly study the
time dependent exponential growth (chaotic) or some other time dependent non-chaotic
random behaviour of an operator for a quantum system that is in out of equilibrium after giving an external response.For a very longer time it was not very clear that how
actually one can quantify these quantum correlation functions within the framework of
out-of-equilibrium quantum statistical physics. Following the previous set of works the
present work helps us to quantify as well as to physically understand the impact of them
in the present context. In this paper we are actually interested in three specific kinds of
OTOCs which are described by six set of correlators which are given by:
1. 2-point OTOCs: h[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]i, h[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]i, h[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]i,
2. 4-point OTOCs:

h[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]2 i, h[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]2 i, h[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]2 i.

where x is the quantum position operator and p is the associated canonically conjugate
momentum and most importantly both the quantum operators are defined at different
time scales, which is one of the prime requirement to study the effect of time disorder
averaging phenomena through the above set of OTOCs. Also, it is important to note that,
the symbol h· · · i actually represents the thermal average of a time dependent quantum
operator over a canonical ensemble within the framework of quantum mechanics, which is
technically defined as:
hO(t)i :=

1
Tr [exp(−βH)O(t)] = Tr [ρβ O(t)] ,
Z(t)

(4.1)

where the partition function Z and thermal density matrix operator ρβ in terms of a
quantum system Hamiltonian, H, are already defined in the introduction of this paper.
Since we are dealing with quantum mechanical operators using which we are trying to
understand the impact of random features in the quantum regime, it is quite expected
to start with the fact that thermal one point function of the position operator x and
momentum operator p defined at a specific time scale are zero, which can be technically
demonstrated as,
hx(t)i = 0, hp(t)i = 0,

(4.2)

where t is the associated time scale on which both of the quantum operators are evolving.
For this specific reason, the explicit study and the computation of these one point functions
are not at all important in the present context of discussion. On the other hand, due to
the time translational symmetry in these thermal correlators, which is actually described
by the well known, Kubo Martin Schwinger condition, all the odd point OTOCs appearing
in the present context will be trivially zero and for that reason not the object of interest

16

in the present context of study. This can be further technically demonstrated as,
Odd x correlator :
hx(t1 )x(t2 )x(t3 ) · · · odd number of termsi = 0,

(4.3)

hp(t1 )p(t2 )p(t3 ) · · · odd number of termsi = 0,

(4.4)

hp(t1 )x(t2 )x(t3 ) · · · odd number of termsi = 0,

(4.5)

hx(t1 )p(t2 )p(t3 ) · · · odd number of termsi = 0.

(4.6)

Odd p correlator :

One p & even x correlator :
One x & even p correlator :

This implies that we are only left with all even order OTOCs out of which in this paper
we are explicitly computing the physical outcomes from the sex set of time dependent
correlators, describe by the previously mentioned two point and the four point all possible
OTOCs.
Among these correlators two are made of different operators which will show the perturbation of one operator measured at one time scale to the other measured at a different
time and vice versa. The other four operators are the new sets of two and four point
correlators which are defined in terms of the same quantum operators, which are basically
capturing the quantum effect of the self-correlation of one operator on itself having any
arbitrary time dependent profile in general to describe the phenomena of time disordering
within the framework of quantum mechanics. In specific cases it may happen that these
newly defined operators show exponential growth or some other kind of growth which is
periodic or aperiodic in the corresponding associated time scales of the quantum mechanical operator on which we are interested in the present context. In a more general context
one can see by studying different kinds of physical systems available in the literature where
the two-point self-correlation will decay exponentially with an associated time scale of td ,
widely known as “dissipation time scale”. This particular time scale is playing the role of
transition scale in the present context after reaching that the four-point correlators can
be factorised into the product of two two-point correlation functions representing disconnected diagrams within the framework of quantum field theory. Also, it is important to
note that, here at the “dissipation time scale” all other terms are exponentially suppressed
by the factor e−t/td , which will completely disappear from the factorized version of the four
point correlators on which we are interested in this paper in the large time limit given by,
t  td with t → ∞. In usual prescription the “dissipation time scale”, td is identified
with the inverse temperature β i.e. td ∼ β = 1/T , where we use Boltzmann constant
kB = 1 and T physically represents the equilibrium temperature of the quantum statistical
ensemble on which we are interested in. So one can translate the large time limit in terms
of the associated equilibrium temperature as, tT  1, which is not obviously true for zero

17

temperature case, but can be justifiable in any (small or large) temperature of the system
under consideration. For example, we now look into a specific four point thermal correlation function at the vicinity of the previously mentioned dissipation time scale, around
which one can factorize it in the following specific form:
hx(t1 )x(t1 )p(t2 )p(t2 )i
|
{z
}

Unequal time 4−point correlator

≈

hx(t1 )x(t1 )i
|
{z
}

Equal time 2−point correlator

+

hp(t2 )p(t2 )i
| {z }

Equal time 2−point correlator

O(e−t/td )
| {z }

,

Subdominant decaying contribution

(4.7)
where in this above mentioned factorization O(e−t/td ) are the higher order correction
terms which are actually sub-dominant at the vicinity of the dissipation time scale. One
more thing we can observe from the above mentioned factorization is that, the individual
contributions of the two point contributions don’t mix up the time scales and for this
reason they can be written in terms of the product of two equal time two point correlators.
Also for this particular example when we are thinking of doing the computation with
two different operators, after doing the factorization one can easily observe that the two
different operators don’t mix with each other at the level of two-point correlators. So,
we are mainly interested in the terms that can not be written in time ordered form and
those terms provide more insight to the randomness present in a system. Now we would
like to go one step further and normalize the OTOC, which is basically related to this
factorization process of the four-point correlators in terms disconnected equal time two
point contributions. The process of normalization actually helps us to reduce the unwanted
fluctuations from the computed OTOCs which further allows us to give a clearer picture
of the time dependent behaviour of the desired OTOCs in which we are interested in this
paper. We do not normalize the two-point correlation functions as they are the main
building blocks of our computation of OTOCs and hence we only normalize the four-point
OTOC as given by the following expression. We can write − h[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]2 i in the following
simplified mathematical form:
− h[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]2 i = 2 {[hx(t1 )x(t1 )p(t2 )p(t2 )i] − Re [hx(t1 )p(t2 )x(t1 )p(t2 )i]} .

(4.8)

After imposiing the previously mentioned constrained obtained at the vicinity of the dissipation time scale, one can further simplify the expression for the mentioned correlator as
given by the following expression:
− h[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]2 i = 2 {hx(t1 )x(t1 )i hp(t2 )p(t2 )i − Re [hx(t1 )p(t2 )x(t1 )p(t2 )i]} + O(e−t/td ).
(4.9)

18

(a) Correlator : − h[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]i

(b) Correlator : − h[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]i

(c) Correlator : − h[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]i

(d) Correlator : − h[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]i

(e) Correlator : − h[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]i

(f) Correlator : − h[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]i

Figure 3: Diagrammatic representation of all possible two-point OTOCs.
Now we normalize this above mentioned quantity using two different equal time two-point
correlators, which we have obtained from the factorization in terms of the disconnected
pieces. Consequently, we get the following simplified form of the normalized OTOC:
C

(1)



− h[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]2 i
Re [hx(t1 )p(t2 )x(t1 )p(t2 )i]
.
=2 1−
(t1 , t2 ) =
hx(t1 )x(t1 )i hp(t2 )p(t2 )i
hx(t1 )x(t1 )i hp(t2 )p(t2 )i

(4.10)

The first expression in Eq. (4.10) is a universal contribution, which will always appear for
the quantum systems where the previously mentioned factorization process works at the

19

(a) Correlator : − h[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]2 i

(b) Correlator : − h[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]2 i

(c) Correlator : − h[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]2 i

(d) Correlator : − h[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]2 i

(e) Correlator : − h[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]2 i

(f) Correlator : − h[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]2 i

Figure 4: Diagrammatic representation of all possible four-point OTOCs.
vicinity of the dissipation time scale. On the other hand, the second term of Eq. (4.10) is
basically representing a normalized version of the previously mentioned four-point function
which can only appear after dissipation time. The other two non-trivial OTOCs in which
we are also interested in this paper are of the form − h[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]2 i and − h[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]2 i,
and by following the same logical argument at the vicinity of the dissipation time scale we
can normalize them as well and write them in the following simplified mathematical forms:
C

(2)



− h[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]2 i
Re [hx(t1 )x(t2 )x(t1 )x(t2 )i]
(t1 , t2 ) =
=2 1−
,
hx(t1 )x(t1 )i hx(t2 )x(t2 )i
hx(t1 )x(t1 )i hx(t2 )x(t2 )i

20

(4.11)

and
C

(3)



− h[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]2 i
Re [hp(t1 )p(t2 )p(t1 )p(t2 )i]
=2 1−
.
(t1 , t2 ) =
hp(t1 )p(t1 )i hp(t2 )p(t2 )i
hp(t1 )p(t1 )i hp(t2 )p(t2 )i

(4.12)

Now, since these OTOCs acts as a theoretical probe to know about the generic chaotic
or non-chaotic time dependent behaviour of quantum system, it has to satisfy the following
constraints in terms of the four point correlations, which survived in the vicinity of the
previously introduced dissipation time scale, as given by:

t1 +t2
2π

(1)

 1 − A12 eλ1 ( 2 ) with λ1 ≤
,
Chaotic

β1
Re [hx(t1 )p(t2 )x(t1 )p(t2 )i] 
=
(4.13)

hx(t1 )x(t1 )i hp(t2 )p(t2 )i



 1 − B (1) f (t , t ).
Non-Chaotic
1 1 2
12

t1 +t2
2π

(2)

 1 − A12 eλ2 ( 2 ) with λ2 ≤
,
Chaotic

β2
Re [hx(t1 )p(t2 )x(t1 )p(t2 )i] 
=
(4.14)

hx(t1 )x(t1 )i hp(t2 )p(t2 )i



 1 − B (2) f (t , t ).
Non-Chaotic
2 1 2
12

t1 +t2
2π

(3)

 1 − A12 eλ3 ( 2 ) with λ3 ≤
,
Chaotic

β3
Re [hp(t1 )p(t2 )p(t1 )p(t2 )i] 
=
(4.15)

hp(t1 )p(t1 )i hp(t2 )p(t2 )i



 1 − B (3) f (t , t ).
Non-Chaotic
12

3

1

2

The above mentioned expression captures all the possibilities which one can observe in
(3)
(2)
(1)
different quantum mechanical systems available in nature. Here A12 , A12 and A12 are
the quantum mechanical model dependent pre-factors which shows exponential growth
(chaotic behaviour) in the four point correlator with respect to the time scales associated
(1)
(2)
(3)
with the system under study. On the other hand, B12 , B12 and B12 are the quantum
mechanical model dependent pre-factors which shows any type of time dependent fluctuations (non-chaotic behaviour). Also, for the general prescription the quantum Lyapunov
exponents, λ1 , λ2 and λ3 are not same for which the MSS bound on quantum chaos from
these three cases are also not the same. Consequently, the equilibrium saturation temperatures at the late time scales from these three OTOCs also differ from each other i.e.
β1 6= β2 6= β3 . Also it is important to point out that, the mathematical structure of the
time dependent functions f1 (t1 , t2 ), f2 (t1 , t2 ) and f3 (t1 , t2 ) are also different for general
quantum mechanical set ups. When we are considering the quantum mechanical models
are described by time dependent Hamiltonian in that case these expectations and all sorts
of predictions work very well. However, when we are thinking about particularly quantum mechanical models which are described by the time independent Hamiltonian and the

21

eigenstate representation of OTOCs, in that situations one might have further simplifications. There might be possibility to have underlying connection between the two functions
f2 (t1 , t2 ) and f3 (t1 , t2 ) in the eigenstate representation of the OTOCs in the non-chaotic
case and for this reason they might not be capturing completely independent information
of the time disorder averaging. On the other hand, in the chaotic case if three of the
OTOCs independently show exponential growth in the time scale the quantum Lyapunov
exponents and the related equilibrium saturation temperatures are not at all same even in
the eigenstate representation. But if the first OTOC is showing the chaotic behaviour and
other two are not, in that case the previous connection between the two functions f2 (t1 , t2 )
and f3 (t1 , t2 ) holds good in the eigenstate representation.
In figure, 3 and 4, we have presented the diagrammatic representations of all types
of OTOCs in which we are interested in this paper. Particularly in figure 3, we have
explicitly depicted the possible two point OTOCs. Here we have three possibilities, which
are given by, − h[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]i, − h[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]i and − h[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]i. Since each OTOC
are made up of commutator bracket in the quantum mechanical description, for each case
we have two different contributions having overall opposite signatures. Further to draw
the representative diagrams we need to consider the flow of time scale from t1 to t2 or t2 to
t1 . In all the representative diagrams, the two vertical solid thick line corresponds to the
specific time slice having time, t = t1 and t = t2 respectively. It is understandable from
the mathematical structure of the mentioned two point OTOCs that since the correlator
involve only two time scales , that is why drawing two vertical parallel lines are physically
justifiable in the present context. Because of the previously mentioned flow of time scale
from t1 to t2 or t2 to t1 for each two point OTOCs we have two possible diagrams. So as
a whole for the two-point OTOCs one can draw six possibilities. Also by studying each
of the diagrammatic representations we can also observe that each of the contributions of
the two point functions are represented by separate lines with representative arrows on
that which is completely depend on the structure of the individual two point correlators.
Two differentiate between these two contributions we have used red dotted line and blue
solid line in the representative diagrams. Further, in figure 4, we have explicitly shown
the possible four point OTOCs in the present context of discussion. Here we can draw
three possible representative diagrams, which are coming from the three possible OTOCs,
as given by, − h[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]2 i, − h[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]2 i and − h[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]2 i. Here as we can see
that the each of the OTOCs are made up of commutator bracket squared contributions
in the quantum description, for each case we have four contributions if we expand them.
Out of these four four point thermal correlators two of them having positive signature and
other two of them overall negative signature in the front of each contributions. Just like
the two point OTOCs here also we need to consider the flow of time scale from t1 to t2 or
from t2 to t1 . It is understandable from the mathematical structure of the mentioned four
point OTOCs that since the correlator involve only two time scales instead of four different
time scales , that is why drawing two vertical parallel lines to represent the time slice at

22

t = t1 and t = t2 are physically justifiable in the present context. Now, because of the
time scale flow each of the four point OTOCs have two contributions in the diagrammatic
representation. Also for a given time flow we have four possible diagrams which we shown
in a single diagram for the sake of simplicity. So as whole consider both the possibilities
of the time flow we have cumulatively 24 diagrams from the four point OTOCs. Like
the previous case, here also to differentiate between each of the individual terms for a
given OTOC with a specified time flow we have used red dotted line, blue dotted line and
red thick line respectively in the representative diagrammatic representations. Last but
not the least, here it is important to point that these set of diagrams are the simplest
version of the well known Feynman diagrams as appearing in the context of quantum field
theory literature. However, within the present framework we don’t have exactly similar
Feynman diagrams, but to understand the structure of the previously mentioned OTOCs
the present version of the diagrammatic representations play a very crucial role. All of
the arrows appearing in all the diagrams representing an underlying time disordering upon
which we have to take finally average in the present context.

5

Eigenstate Representation of thermal OTOCs in Supersymmetric
Quantum Mechanics

In this section our prime objective is to study various thermal correlators, OTOCs
and see how they can be expressed in a model independent manner in the framework of
quantum mechanics. We also demarcate clearly the effect of Supersymmetry and how it
modifies the functional form of the correlators at the end.
To perform this explicit computation we will follow the prescription outlined in the
ref. [70] to compute all the thermal OTOCs we have mentioned in the previous section of
this paper7 . According to this prescription for any time-independent Hamiltonian we define
the expectation value of quantum mechanical operators as thermal expectation value in the
present context, which one can easily apply for a canonical quantum statistical ensemble.
Let’s say, a quantum mechanical time dependent operator A(t) is defined on a specific
Hilbert Space H with an associated Hamiltonian H (which is time independent obviously)
and the eigenvalues (eigen energy spectrum) of H corresponding to a infinite tower of
eigenkets |Ψn i ∀ n = 0, 1, · · · , ∞, where the corresponding energy levels are characterized
by the index n. This energy eigen spectrum is represented by En ∀ n = 0, 1, · · · , ∞.
Then for a canonical quantum statistical ensemble the thermal expectation value of the
quantum mechanical time dependent operator A(t) at inverse temperature β, considering
7

Particularly the ref. [70] is extremely important for our computation because here the authors first
have performed the computation of the first OTOC, − h[x(t1 ), p(0)]2 i (though in our computation we
have generalized this to − h[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]2 i) in the eigenstate formalism for a time independent quantum
mechanical model independent Hamiltonian.

23

the Boltzmann constant kB = 1, is defined as:
hA(t)iβ =



1
Tr e−βH A(t) ,
Z



where the thermal partition function is represented by Z such that Z = Tr e−βH . Here
our job is to represent this mathematical trace operation in terms of the sum over all
possible eigenstates starting from the ground state (n = 0). Once we can able to express
this operation clearly then the rest of the story is very usual and following this one can
easily compute all of the mentioned OTOCs in the eigen state representation. It pays
to use the thermal representation for expectation values of quantum mechanical operators
because there are many physical models and physically relevant toy models which have wellstudied structure of time independent Hamiltonian and hence we can utilize this property
to give an eigenstate representation to the correlators as presented elaborately in this work.
Consequently, the analysis presented in this paper is physically justifiable, applicable and
believable, as such, to quantum mechanical models with well defined Hamiltonian. In the
eigenstate representation the thermal expectation value of a quantum mechanical time
dependent operator A(t) can be written as :

X


hA(t)iβ =

X
1
Tr e−βH A(t)
|Ψn i hΨn |
Z
n
|
{z
}


=

n

e−βEn hΨn |A(t)|Ψn i
X

.

e−βEn

n

Identity operator

Here we work in the Heisenberg Picture where the operators evolve with time as given by,
OH (t) = eiHt OS (0) e−iHt , where OH (t) represents operator OH at time scale t in Heisenberg picture and OS (0) represents its Schrödinger picture representation at all time scales
since operators do not evolve with time in Schrödinger picture. The later one is denoted
as OS to simplify the notation and make it easier to read.

What we learn here?


1
Tr e−βH A(t)
Z
Heisenberg Repsentation of Operators : OH (t) = eiHt OS e−iHt
X
e−βEn hΨn |A(t)|Ψn i

Thermal Expectation Value : hA(t)iβ =

Eigenstate Rep. of Thermal Exp. : hA(t)iβ =

n

X
n

24

e

−βEn

(5.1)
(5.2)

(5.3)

To demonstrate the computation further let us consider a general time independent
Hamiltonian of the following form:
H(qi , pi ) =

N
X

p2i + V (qi ),

(5.4)

i=1

where we have used the fact that the mass of all N number of particles are same and given
by, mi = m = 1/2 to make the further computation simpler. Now here it is very easy to
prove the following relation (see [70]), which relates the quantum mechanical momentum
operator matrix elements with that of the position and the energy operator matrix elements
by the following expression:
i
pkm = Ekm xkm .
2

(5.5)

Furthermore, the role Supersymmetry plays in modification of non-supersymmetric quantum mechanical observables can be seen vis-a-vis the matrix elements of observables. Let’s
consider a simple matrix element for the position operator x. In the following chart we
show exactly show how the matrix elements in non-supersymmetric quantum mechanical
theories and supersymmetric quantum mechanical theories are connected:

switch off

xmk = hΨm |x|Ψk i =





1
2



|

B
hψm
|x|ψ B i
| {z k }

bosonic part
non-SUSY & SUSY

B
−−−−−→
hψm
|x|ψkB i ,

SUSY




SUSY
B
F
F
−−−−−−−−→ √12 hψm
|x|ψkB i ,
+ hψm−1 |x|ψk−1 i −
if one of m/k is
|
{z
}
 ground state

fermionic part 
SUSY-only

{z

neither m/k is ground state

}

SUSY

−−−−−−−−−→
both m & k are
ground state

B
|x|ψkB i .
hψm

The modifications due to supersymmetry can clearly be traced back to the fact that we
could formulate a wave function of total Hamiltonian as given in Eq. (3.10) from the two
partner Hamiltonians H1 and H2 , as appearing from the bosonic and the fermion sectors in
supersymmetry. In fact, its the factorization property of H1 and H2 which generalizes to
a more powerful setting in terms of supersymmetric generalized description of the theory
under consideration. One might consider the power of the supersymmetric description in
two fold ways:
1. First, one can merely consider it as a tool to solve non-trivial potentials by means of
solutions of their partner ones, provided that the partner ones are easily solvable.
2. Secondly, one can consider it as a more unifying description of a more beautiful
theory based on the principles of symmetries of nature. It is this second philosophy

25

which has been considered in this work.
We will consider the following six correlators in this work as stated below :

Correlation Functions
2-pt Correlator : Y (1) (t1 , t2 ) = − h[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]iβ

(5.6)

2-pt Correlator : Y (2) (t1 , t2 ) = − h[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]iβ

(5.7)

2-pt Correlator : Y (3) (t1 , t2 ) = − h[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]iβ

(5.8)

4-pt Correlator : C (1) (t1 , t2 ) = − h[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]2 iβ

(5.9)

4-pt Correlator : C (2) (t1 , t2 ) = − h[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]2 iβ
4-pt Correlator : C (3) (t1 , t2 ) = − h[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]2 iβ

(5.10)
(5.11)

We will also consider normalized 4-pt Correlation Functions and the discussion pertaining
to those is provided in the previous section:

Normalized 4-pt Correlation Functions
e(1) (t1 , t2 )
Normalized 4-pt Correlator : C

e(2) (t1 , t2 )
Normalized 4-pt Correlator : C

e(3) (t1 , t2 )
Normalized 4-pt Correlator : C

=
=

− h[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]2 iβ
hx(t1 )x(t1 )iβ hp(t2 )p(t2 )iβ

=

C (2) (t1 , t2 )
hx(t1 )x(t1 )iβ hx(t2 )x(t2 )iβ

=

− h[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]2 iβ
hx(t1 )x(t1 )iβ hx(t2 )x(t2 )iβ

=

C (3) (t1 , t2 )
hp(t1 )p(t1 )iβ hp(t2 )p(t2 )iβ

=

26

C (1) (t1 , t2 )
hx(t1 )x(t1 )iβ hp(t2 )p(t2 )iβ

− h[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]2 iβ
hp(t1 )p(t1 )iβ hp(t2 )p(t2 )iβ

(5.12)

(5.13)

(5.14)

5.1

Partition Function from Supersymmetric Quantum Mechanics

In the context of Supersymmetric quantum mechanics the partition function, Z, can be
can be expressed in terms of the eigenstate by the following expression:
Z = Tr[e−βHSUSY ] =

X
m

hΨm |e−βHSUSY |Ψm i .

Here the underlying relation between supersymmetric total system and the component (or
partner) systems, as discussed in Sec. 3, is established through the following relations :



 −βH1
H1 0
e
0
−βHSUSY
,
HSUSY =
=⇒ e
=
0 H2
0 e−βH2


1  (1)
(2)
(1)
|Ψm iT = √
i 0 .
|ψm i |ψm−1 i
; |Ψ0 iT = |ψm
2
So, the supersymmetric quantum partition function in the eigenstate representation can
be explicitly written as :
o
1 X n (1) −βH1 (1)
(2)
(2)
hψm |e
|ψm i + hψm−1 |e−βH2 |ψm−1 i ,
2 m>0
m=0


(1)
(2)
(1)
1 X −βEm
(2)
(2)
−βEm
(1) (1)
−βEm−1
(1) (1)
+
=e
e
hψm |ψm i + e
hψm−1 |ψm−1 i .
hψm |ψm i
2 m>0
m=0
{z
}
|

(1) −βH1
(1)
Z = hψm
|e
|ψm
i

+

Ground State
Contribution

As shown in Sec. 3 in supersymmetric quantum mechanical theories we have the following constraint:
(2)

(1)
Em = Em
= Em−1 ,

(5.15)

with the requirement that the ground state is eigenstate of H1 only and all other states
are doubly degenerate. It is also important to note that the ground state always has zero
energy eigenvalue. It is to be noted that Em refers to the energy eigenvalue of the total
Hamiltonian HSUSY . Using this sets of requirements, the above mentioned expression for
the quantum partition function within the framework of supersymmetry can be further
simplified as:
o
X
1 X n −βEm  (1) (1)
(2)
(2)
Z =1+
e
hψm |ψm i + hψm−1 |ψm−1 i
=1+
e−βEm ,
2 m>0
m>0

27

(5.16)

which is different compared to usual quantum mechanics result without supersymmetry
as in the present context ground state energy eigen value E0 = 0 which is not in general zero
for the other case. So this implies that if we separately write down the contribution from the
ground state and from all other excited states, instead of writing sum over all eigenstates
together, then one can clearly visualize the difference between the results obtained for
quantum partition function in the eigenstate representation in both the cases. In the next
section, we will provide the summary of all the obtained general model independent results
in which we will implement the above mentioned fact to explicitly show that our obtained
results for all types of OTOCs in the framework of supersymmetric quantum mechanics
are different compared to the results obtained from usual quantum mechanics without
supersymmetry.
5.2

Representation of two point OTOC : Y (1) (t1 , t2 )

The first two point OTOC is given by the thermal average of the operator −[x(t1 ), p(t2 )],
which is described in the eigenstate representation as:
X
Y (1) (t1 , t2 ) : = − h[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]iβ = −

m

e−βEm hΨm |[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]|Ψm i
!
1+

X

..

e−βEm

m>0

Using Eq. (5.2) for Heisenberg representation for x(t1 ) and p(t2 ) and inserting the identities
between the operators this two-point correlator can be written in terms of the microcanonical correlator, which shows the temperature independent behaviour of the system:
X
Y (1) (t1 , t2 ) =

(1)
e−βEm ym
(t1 , t2 )

m

! ,
1+

X

(5.17)

e−βEm

m>0

where the micro-canonical two point OTOC is defined as:
(1)
ym
(t1 , t2 ) = − hΨm |[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]|Ψm i .

(5.18)

Expanding the commutator in the definition of the micro-canonical correlator, and using
the above relation with appropriate insertion of identities between the operators, it can be
(1)
shown that the eigenstate representation of the micro-canonical correlator ym (t1 , t2 ) takes
the following form.

28

(1)
ym
(t1 , t2 ) = −i

X
k

Ekm xmk xkm cos Ekm (t1 − t2 ) ,

(5.19)

where we define, Emk/m,k = Em − Ek and xmk/m,k = hΨm |x|Ψk i .
Substituting the above mentioned expression for the micro-canonical OTOC in the definition of the canonical correlator, Y (1) (t1 , t2 ) we get the following expression :
X
Y (1) (t1 , t2 ) = −i

m,k

e−βEm Ekm xmk xkm cos Ekm (t1 − t2 )
1+

(5.20)

.

!
X

−βEm

e

m>0

5.3

Representation of two point OTOC : Y (2) (t1 , t2 )

The second two point OTOC is given by the thermal average of the operator −[x(t1 ), x(t2 )],
which is described in the eigenstate representation as:
X
Y (2) (t1 , t2 ) = − h[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]iβ = −

m

e−βEm hΨm |[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]|Ψm i
!
1+

X

.

e−βEm

m>0

Using Eq. (5.2) for Heisenberg representation for x(t1 ) and x(t2 ) the two point correlator
in terms of the temperature independent micro-canonical correlator can be written as:
X
Y (2) (t1 , t2 ) =

(2)
e−βEm ym
(t1 , t2 )

m

! ,
1+

X

(5.21)

e−βEm

m>0

where the micro-canonical two point OTOC is defined as:
(2)
(t1 , t2 ) = − hΨm |[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]|Ψm i .
ym

(5.22)

Expanding the commutator in the definition of the micro-canonical correlator and inserting
identity in between the operators, it can be shown that the eigenstate representation for
(2)
micro-canonical correlator ym (t1 , t2 ) takes the following form:

29

(2)
ym
(t1 , t2 ) = −2i

X
k

xmk xkm sin Emk (t1 − t2 ).

(5.23)

where we define, Emk/m,k = Em − Ek and xmk/m,k = hΨm |x|Ψk i .
Substituting Eq. (5.23) in Eq. (5.21), the eigenstate representation for the canonical correlator Y (2) (t1 , t2 ) takes the form :
X
Y (2) (t1 , t2 ) = −2i

m,k

e−βEm xmk xkm sin Emk (t1 − t2 )
1+

(5.24)

.

!
X

e−βEm

m>0

5.4

Representation of two point OTOC : Y (3) (t1 , t2 )

The third two point OTOC is given by the thermal average of the operator −[p(t1 ), p(t2 )],
which is described in the eigenstate representation as:
X
Y (3) (t1 , t2 ) = − h[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]iβ = −

m

e−βEm hΨm |[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]|Ψm i
!
1+

X

.

e−βEm

m>0

Proceeding as previously mentioned we obtain the following expression for the OTOC which
can be expressed in terms of the temperature independent micro-canonical correlator as:
X
Y (3) (t1 , t2 ) =

(3)
e−βEm ym
(t1 , t2 )

m

! ,
1+

X

e

(5.25)

−βEm

m>0

where the micro-canonical two point OTOC is defined as:
(3)
ym
(t1 , t2 ) = − hΨm |[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]|Ψm i .

(5.26)

Expanding the commutator in the definition of the micro-canonical correlator and inserting
identity in between the operators, it can be shown that the eigenstate representation for
(3)
micro-canonical correlator ym (t1 , t2 ) is given by the following expression:

30

(3)
ym
(t1 , t2 ) = −

iX
Emk xmk Ekm xkm sin Ekm (t1 − t2 ) .
2 k

(5.27)

Substituting the expression for the micro-canonical correlator obtained from Eq. (5.27)
in Eq. (5.25), the eigenstate representation for the canonical correlator Y (3) (t1 , t2 ) can be
written as :
X
Y (3) (t1 , t2 ) = −

i
2

m,k

e−βEm Emk xmk Ekm xkm sin Ekm (t1 − t2 )
.

!
1+

X

(5.28)

e−βEm

m>0

5.5

Representation of four point OTOC : C (1) (t1 , t2 )

In this section, we provide the eigenstate representation of the four-point OTOCs that
are mainly used for studying the quantum mechanical analogue of phenomena of time
disorder averaging , related randomness in quantum regime. Similar to the two-point
correlators we define three kinds of four-point correlators. Generally in the literature
people study the four-point correlator C (1) (t1 , t2 ) (as per our notation) which is the thermal
expectation value of the square of the commutator made up of the dynamical operators of
different kinds at different time scales. The four-point correlator, C (1) (t1 , t2 ) is proposed
as a quantifier of quantum chaos but chaos is a specific kind of randomness. Hence, it is
important to consider the correlators constructed from similar operators at different times
for having a complete understanding of the underlying phenomenon of randomness. To
understand this time disordering phenomena explicitly we have also introduced two more
new correlators, C (2) (t1 , t2 ) and C (3) (t1 , t2 ), described in detail in the later half of this
paper.
5.5.1

Un-normalized : C (1) (t1 , t2 )

The first four point OTOC is given by the thermal average of the operator −[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]2 ,
which is described in the eigenstate representation as:

X
C (1) (t1 , t2 ) = − h[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]2 iβ =

e−βEm c(1)
m (t1 , t2 )

m

! ,
1+

X
m>0

31

e−βEm

(5.29)

(1)

where cm (t1 , t2 ) is the micro-canonical correlator and is responsible for the temperature
independent behaviour of the correlator. The temperature dependence in the canonical
correlator is actually appearing due to the exponential thermal Botzmann factor in the
eigenstate representation of the OTOC. Once we will take the sum over all possible eigen
states (finite or infinite in number) we get a cumulative dependence on time, temperature
and energy eigenstates. In the present context the micro-canonical four-point correlator
for Eq. (5.29) is given by the following simplified expression:

2
c(1)
m (t1 , t2 ) = − hΨm |[x(t1 ), p(t2 )] |Ψm i =

X

(1)

(1)∗

bmk (t1 , t2 ) bmk (t1 , t2 ),

(5.30)

k
(1)

where we define a time dependent matrix element, bmk (t1 , t2 ), which is given by:
(1)

bmk (t1 , t2 ) = −i hΨm |[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]|Ψk i .
.

Using the Heisenberg picture evolution equation for an operator and inserting identity
(1)
between the operators after expanding the commutator, it is not hard to verify that bmk
can be written as:
(1)∗

bmk (t1 , t2 ) =

1 X
Erk eit1 Erm eit2 Ekr − Emr eit2 Erm eit1 Ekr xrm xkr .
2 r
(1)∗

Substituting the above expression of bmk (t1 , t2 ) in Eq. (5.30), it can be shown that after
simplification the eigenstate representation of the micro-canonical correlator for Eq. (5.29)
is given by the following expression:
c(1)
m (t1 , t2 )


1X
=
xml xlk xrm xkr × Erk Elk eiErl (t1 −t2 ) + Emr Eml e−iErl (t1 −t2 )
4 k,l,r

i(Erm +Elk )(t1 −t2 )
−i(Erm +Elk )(t1 −t2 )
− Erk Eml e
− Emr Elk e
.
(5.31)

So, the eigenstate representation of canonical correlator from Eq. (5.29) using Eq. (5.31)
is given as :

32

1
X

C (1) (t1 , t2 ) =
4

1+

X
!
e−βEm

e−βEm xml xlk xrm xkr

m,k,l,r

m>0



× Erk Elk eiErl (t1 −t2 ) + Emr Eml e−iErl (t1 −t2 )
− Erk Eml e

5.5.2

Normalized

i(Erm +Elk )(t1 −t2 )

− Emr Elk e

−i(Erm +Elk )(t1 −t2 )


.

(5.32)

e(1) (t1 , t2 )
: C

The normalized first four-point OTOC is from the un-normalized one expressed in
Eq. (5.12) can be expressed as:
e(1) (t1 , t2 ) =
C

C (1) (t1 , t2 )
.
hx(t1 )x(t1 )iβ hp(t2 )p(t2 )iβ

We have already calculated the numerator C (1) (t1 , t2 ) as given in Eq. (5.32). So here
our only job is compute the two sets of equal time thermal correlators in the eigenstate
representation. Since we know the formalism very well that we have developed in this
paper, computing these disconnected pieces of equal time correlators which are extremely
significant in the large time dissipation limit are not at all complicated. Now we are going
to show that how one can compute these contributions.
To serve this purpose we need to compute the following expressions in the eigenstate
representation:
X
hj|x(t1 )x(t1 )|ji =
xjl xlj ,
(5.33)
l

hj|p(t2 )p(t2 )|ji =

X
l

pjl plj = −

1X
Ejl Elj xjl xlj .
4 l

(5.34)

Consequently, the desired canonical equal time thermal correlators can be computed as:
X
X
e−βEj xjl xlj
e−βEj hj|x(t1 )x(t1 )|ji
hx(t1 )x(t1 )iβ =

j

!
1+

X

=

e−βEm

j,l

1+

m>0

!,
X
m>0

33

e−βEm

(5.35)

X
hp(t2 )p(t2 )iβ =

j

X

e−βEj hj|p(t2 )p(t2 )|ji
!
X

1+

e

=

−βEm

j,l

X

1+

m>0

X

e−βEj pjl plj
e

−βEm

! =−

1
4

e−βEj Ejl Elj xjl xlj

j,l

! .
1+

m>0

X

e

−βEm

m>0

Finally, the normalized first four-point OTOC can be expressed by the following simplified
expression in the eigenstate representation, as given by:
e(1) (t1 , t2 ) =
C

C (1) (t1 , t2 )
hx(t1 )x(t1 )iβ hp(t2 )p(t2 )iβ
!
X
1+
e−βEj

=− X

j>0

e−β(Ej +Em ) Ejl Elj xjl xlj

j,m,l

×

X

e−βEm xml xlk xrm xkr

m,k,l,r



× Erk Elk eiErl (t1 −t2 ) + Emr Eml e−iErl (t1 −t2 )
i(Erm +Elk )(t1 −t2 )

− Erk Eml e

5.6
5.6.1

−i(Erm +Elk )(t1 −t2 )

− Emr Elk e


.

(5.37)

Representation of four point OTOC : C (2) (t1 , t2 )
Un-normalized : C (2) (t1 , t2 )

The second four point OTOC is given by the thermal average of the operator −[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]2 ,
which is described in the eigenstate representation as:
X
C (2) (t1 , t2 ) = − h[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]2 iβ =

e−βEm c(2)
m (t1 , t2 )

m

! ,
1+

X

(5.38)

e−βEm

m>0
(2)

where cm (t1 , t2 ) is the micro-canonical correlator and is responsible for the temperature
independent behaviour of the correlator. The temperature dependence in the canonical
correlator is actually appearing due to the exponential thermal Botzmann factor in the
eigenstate representation of the OTOC. Once we will take the sum over all possible eigen
states (finite or infinite in number) we get a cumulative dependence on time, temperature

34

(5.36)

and energy eigenstates. In the present context the micro-canonical four-point correlator
for Eq. (5.38) is given by the following simplified expression:

2
c(2)
m (t1 , t2 ) = − hΨm |[x(t1 ), x(t2 )] |Ψm i = −

X

(2)

(2)

bmk (t1 , t2 )bkm (t1 , t2 ),

(5.39)

k
(2)

where we define a time dependent matrix element, bmk (t1 , t2 ), which is given by:
(2)

bmk (t1 , t2 ) = hΨm |[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]|Ψk i .
Using the Heisenberg picture for the evolution of operators and inserting identity between
(2)
the operators, it can be shown that bmk (t1 , t2 ) can be written as:
(2)

bmk (t1 , t2 ) =

X
l

eit1 Eml eit2 Elk − eit2 Eml eit1 Elk xml xlk .

(5.40)

Substituting Eq. (5.40) in Eq. (5.39) and simplifying the eigenstate representation for the
temperature independent micro-canonical correlator can be expressed by the following simplified expression:
c(2)
m (t1 , t2 ) = 4

X

xml xlk xkr xrm

k,l,r


× sin

Em + Ek
Er −
2







Em + Ek
(t1 − t2 ) sin El −
(t1 − t2 ) .
2
(5.41)

The canonical or the temperature dependent correlator can be calculated by substituting
the expression of Eq. (5.38) in Eq. (5.41) and it after applying some algebraic manipulation it can be shown that the canonical correlator can be expressed by the following two
expressions :
C (2) (t1 , t2 ) =
1+

4
X

X
!
e−βEj

e−βEm xml xlk xkr xrm

m,k,l,r

j>0







Em + Ek
Em + Ek
(t1 − t2 ) sin El −
(t1 − t2 ) .
× sin Er −
2
2
(5.42)

35

5.6.2

e(2) (t1 , t2 )
: C

Normalized

The normalized first four-point OTOC is from the un-normalized one expressed in
Eq. (5.13) can be expressed as:
e(2) (t1 , t2 ) =
C

C (2) (t1 , t2 )
.
hx(t1 )x(t1 )iβ hx(t2 )x(t2 )iβ

We have already calculated the numerator C (2) (t1 , t2 ) as given in Eq. (5.42). So here
our only job is compute the two sets of equal time thermal correlators in the eigenstate
representation. Since we know the formalism very well that we have developed in this
paper, computing these disconnected pieces of equal time correlators which are extremely
significant in the large time dissipation limit are not at all complicated. Now we are going
to show that how one can compute these contributions.
To serve this purpose we need to compute the following expressions in the eigenstate
representation:
X
xjl xlj = hj|x(t2 )x(t2 )|ji.
(5.43)
hj|x(t1 )x(t1 )|ji =
l

Consequently, the desired canonical equal time thermal correlators can be computed as:
X
X
e−βEj xjl xlj
e−βEj hj|x(t1 )x(t1 )|ji
hx(t1 )x(t1 )iβ =

j

!
1+

X

=

e−βEm

j,l

1+

m>0

X

e−βEm

! = hx(t2 )x(t2 )iβ .

(5.44)

m>0

Finally, the normalized first four-point OTOC can be expressed by the following simplified
expression in the eigenstate representation, as given by:
e(2) (t1 , t2 ) =
C

C (2) (t1 , t2 )
hx(t1 )x(t1 )iβ hx(t2 )x(t2 )iβ
!
X
−βEj
4 1+
e

= X

j>0

e

−β(Ej +Em )

X
xjl xlj xmk xkm

e−βEm xml xlk xkr xrm

m,k,l,r

j,m,l,k







Em + Ek
Em + Ek
× sin Er −
(t1 − t2 ) sin El −
(t1 − t2 ) .
2
2
(5.45)

36

5.7
5.7.1

Representation of four point OTOC : C (3) (t1 , t2 )
Un-normalized : C (3) (t1 , t2 )

The third four point OTOC is given by the thermal average of the operator −[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]2 ,
which is described in the eigenstate representation as:
X
C (3) (t1 , t2 ) = − h[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]2 iβ =

e−βEm c(3)
m (t1 , t2 )

m

! ,
1+

X

(5.46)

e−βEm

m>0
(3)

where cm (t1 , t2 ) is the micro-canonical correlator and is responsible for the temperature
independent behaviour of the correlator. The temperature dependence in the canonical
correlator is actually appearing due to the exponential thermal Botzmann factor in the
eigenstate representation of the OTOC. Once we will take the sum over all possible eigen
states (finite or infinite in number) we get a cumulative dependence on time, temperature
and energy eigenstates. In the present context the micro-canonical four-point correlator
for Eq. (5.46) is given by the following simplified expression:

2
c(3)
m (t1 , t2 ) = − hΨm |[p(t1 ), p(t2 )] |Ψm i = −

X

(3)

(3)

bmk (t1 , t2 )bkm (t1 , t2 ),

(5.47)

k
(2)

where we define a time dependent matrix element, bmk (t1 , t2 ), which is given by:
(3)

bmk (t1 , t2 ) = hΨm |[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]|Ψk i .

(5.48)

Using the Heisenberg picture for the evolution of operators and inserting identity between
(3)
the operators, it can be shown that bmk (t1 , t2 ) can be simplified into the following form:
(3)

bmk (t1 , t2 ) =

X
l

eit1 Eml eit2 Elk − eit2 Eml eit1 Elk pml plk .

(3)

Substituting the expression of bmk (t1 , t2 ) i.e Eq. (5.48) in Eq. (5.47), and simplifying, the
eigenstate representation of the micro-canonical correlator can be expressed as:

37

c(3)
m (t1 , t2 ) =

1 X
Eml Elk Ekr Erm xml xlk xkr xrm
4 k,l,r






Em + Ek
Em + Ek
× sin Er −
(t1 − t2 ) sin El −
(t1 − t2 ) .
2
2
(5.49)

The eigenstate representation of the canonical correlator from Eq. (5.46) using Eq. (5.49)
after simplification can be expressed by the following two equations :
C (3) (t1 , t2 ) =
4 1+

1
X

X
!
e−βEm

e−βEm Eml Elk Ekr Erm xml xlk xkr xrm

m,k,l,r

m>0







Em + Ek
Em + Ek
(t1 − t2 ) sin El −
(t1 − t2 ) .
× sin Er −
2
2
(5.50)

5.7.2

Normalized

e(3) (t1 , t2 )
: C

The normalized first four-point OTOC is from the un-normalized one expressed in
Eq. (5.14) can be expressed as:
e(3) (t1 , t2 ) =
C

C (3) (t1 , t2 )
.
hp(t1 )p(t1 )iβ hp(t2 )p(t2 )iβ

We have already calculated the numerator C (3) (t1 , t2 ) as given in Eq. (5.50). So here
our only job is compute the two sets of equal time thermal correlators in the eigenstate
representation. Since we know the formalism very well that we have developed in this
paper, computing these disconnected pieces of equal time correlators which are extremely
significant in the large time dissipation limit are not at all complicated. Now we are going
to show that how one can compute these contributions.
To serve this purpose we need to compute the following expressions in the eigenstate
representation:
hj|p(t1 )p(t1 )|ji =

X
l

pjl plj = −

1X
Ejl Elj xjl xlj = hj|p(t2 )p(t2 )|ji.
4 l

38

(5.51)

Consequently, the desired canonical equal time thermal correlators can be computed as:
X
X
e−βEj pjl plj
e−βEj Ejl Elj xjl xlj
1 j,l
j,l
! =−
! = hp(t2 )p(t2 )iβ . (5.52)
hp(t1 )p(t1 )iβ =
4
X
X
1+
e−βEj
1+
e−βEj
j>0

j>0

Finally, the normalized first four-point OTOC can be expressed by the following simplified
expression in the eigenstate representation, as given by:
e(3) (t1 , t2 ) =
C

C (3) (t1 , t2 )
hp(t1 )p(t1 )iβ hp(t2 )p(t2 )iβ
4 1+

X

!

e−βEj

j>0

= X

e−β(Ej +Em ) Ejl Elj Emk Ekm xjl xlj xmk xkm

j,m,k,l

×

X

e−βEm Eml Elk Ekr Erm xml xlk xkr xrm

m,k,l,r







Em + Ek
Em + Ek
× sin Er −
(t1 − t2 ) sin El −
(t1 − t2 ) .
2
2
(5.53)

39

5.8

Summary of Results

Eigenstate Representation for Micro-Canonical Correlators
(1)
ym
(t1 , t2 ) = −i
(2)
(t1 , t2 ) = −2i
ym

X
k

X
k

Ekm xmk xkm cos (Ekm (t1 − t2 )) ,

(5.19)

xmk xkm sin (Emk (t1 − t2 )) ,

(5.23)

iX
(3)
(t1 , t2 ) = −
ym
Emk xmk Ekm xkm sin (Ekm (t1 − t2 )) ,
2 k
1X
(t
,
t
)
=
c(1)
xml xlk xrm xkr
1
2
m
4 k,l,r

× Erk Elk eiErl (t1 −t2 ) + Emr Eml e−iErl (t1 −t2 )
i(Erm +Elk )(t1 −t2 )

− Erk Eml e

(5.27)

−i(Erm +Elk )(t1 −t2 )

− Emr Elk e


,
(5.31)

c(2)
m (t1 , t2 ) = 4

X

xml xlk xkr xrm

k,l,r







Em + Ek
Em + Ek
(t1 − t2 ) sin El −
(t1 − t2 ) ,
× sin Er −
2
2
(5.41)
X
1
c(3)
Eml Elk Ekr Erm xml xlk xkr xrm
m (t1 , t2 ) =
4 k,l,r






Em + Ek
Em + Ek
× sin Er −
(t1 − t2 ) sin El −
(t1 − t2 ) .
2
2
(5.49)

40

Eigenstate Representation for Canonical Correlators without normalization
X
Y (1) (t1 , t2 ) = −i

e−βEm Ekm xmk xkm cos (Ekm (t1 − t2 ))

m,k

1+

(5.20)

,

!
X

−βEm

e

m>0

X
Y (2) (t1 , t2 ) = −2i

m,k

e−βEm xmk xkm sin (Emk (t1 − t2 ))
1+

(5.24)

,

!
X

e−βEm

m>0

X
Y (3) (t1 , t2 ) = −

i
2

m,k

e−βEm Emk xmk Ekm xkm sin (Ekm (t1 − t2 ))
!
1+

X

,

(5.28)

e−βEm

m>0

C (1) (t1 , t2 ) =
4

1+

1
X

X

e−βEm xml xlk xrm xkr

!
e−βEm

m,k,l,r

m>0


× Erk Elk eiErl (t1 −t2 ) + Emr Eml e−iErl (t1 −t2 )
− Erk Eml e
C (2) (t1 , t2 ) =
1+

i(Erm +Elk )(t1 −t2 )

4
X

− Emr Elk e

X
!
e−βEm

−i(Erm +Elk )(t1 −t2 )


,

(5.32)

e−βEm xml xlk xkr xrm

m,k,l,r

m>0







Em + Ek
Em + Ek
× sin Er −
(t1 − t2 ) sin El −
(t1 − t2 ) ,
2
2
(5.42)
X
1
!
C (3) (t1 , t2 ) =
e−βEm Eml Elk Ekr Erm xml xlk xkr xrm
X
4 1+
e−βEm m,k,l,r
m>0







Em + Ek
Em + Ek
× sin Er −
(t1 − t2 ) sin El −
(t1 − t2 ) .
2
2
(5.50)

41

Eigenstate Representation for Canonical Correlators with normalization
X

e−βEj xjl xlj

j,l

hx(t1 )x(t1 )iβ =

1+

X

−βEj

e

! = hx(t2 )x(t2 )iβ ,

(5.44)

j>0

X
hp(t1 )p(t1 )iβ = −

1
4

e−βEj Ejl Elj xjl xlj

j,l

= hp(t2 )p(t2 )iβ ,

!
1+

X

e−βEj

(5.52)

j>0

e(1) (t1 , t2 ) =
C

(1)

C (t1 , t2 )
hx(t1 )x(t1 )iβ hp(t2 )p(t2 )iβ
!
X
X
1+
e−βEj e−βEm xml xlk xkr xrm

=−

j>0

m,k,l,r

X

e−β(Ej +Em ) Ejl Elj xjl xlj

j,m,l



× Erk Elk eiErl (t1 −t2 ) + Emr Eml e−iErl (t1 −t2 )
i(Erm +Elk )(t1 −t2 )

− Erk Eml e
e(2) (t1 , t2 ) =
C

=

− Emr Elk e

−i(Erm +Elk )(t1 −t2 )


,

(5.37)

C (2) (t1 , t2 )
hx(t1 )x(t1 )iβ hx(t2 )x(t2 )iβ
!
X
X
1+
e−βEj e−βEm xml xlk xkr xrm
4
j>0

m,k,l,r

X

e−β(Ej +Em ) xjl xlj xmk xkm

j,m,l,k







Em + Ek
Em + Ek
× sin Er −
(t1 − t2 ) sin El −
(t1 − t2 ) ,
2
2
(5.45)
e(3) (t1 , t2 ) =
C

=

C (3) (t1 , t2 )
hp(t1 )p(t1 )iβ hp(t2 )p(t2 )iβ
!
X
X
4
1+
e−βEj e−βEm Eml Elk Ekr Erm xml xlk xkr xrm
m,k,l,r

j>0

X

e−β(Ej +Em ) Ejl Elj Emk Ekm xjl xlj xmk xkm

j,m,k,l







Em + Ek
Em + Ek
× sin Er −
(t1 − t2 ) sin El −
(t1 − t2 ) .
2
2
(5.53)
42

6

6.1

Model I: Supersymmetric Quantum Mechanical Harmonic Oscillator
Eigen spectrum of the super-partner Hamiltonian

We consider a system described by Hamiltonian H1 with the harmonic oscillator potential as given by:
1
V1 (x) = ω 2 x2 ,
2

(6.1)

where ω is the natural frequency of the oscillator and we have assumed that the mass,
(1)
(1)
m = 1, for the sake of algebraic simplification. Now, we represent Ψn (x) and En as the
eigenstates and eigenvalues corresponding to Hamiltonian H1 which can be obtained by
solving the Schrödinger equation as:
Ψ(1)
n (x)
En(1)

 1/4
√
ω 2
ω
1
√
e− 2 x Hn ( ωx) ;
=
π
2n n!


1
= n+
ω .
2

(6.2)
(6.3)

where Hm (y) appearing in the eigenfunctions are the well-known Hermite polynomials of
order m. As discussed in Sec. 3 the superpotential can be calculated once the ground
state wavefunction is known. Hence, using the ground state wavefunction obtained by
substituting n = 0 in Eq. (6.2), the superpotential can be calculated using Eq. (3.5) and
for the case of supersymmetric one dimensional harmonic oscillator it is obtained to be the
following:
x
W (x) = √ .
2

(6.4)

Thus, we can construct the partner Hamiltonian which is of the following form:
H2 = −

1 d2
+ V2 (x),
2 dx2

(6.5)

where V2 is the partner potential and can be computed using Eq. (3.6). For the supersymmetric one dimensional harmonic oscillator we get the following expression for the partner
potential:


ω 2 x2
V2 (x) = 1 +
.
(6.6)
2

43

More precisely, in the context of supersymmetric harmonic oscillator, the original Hamiltonian is usually identified as the Bosonic Hamiltonian and its associated super-partner
is identified as the Fermionic Hamiltonian, which are constructed by subtracting off the
ground state energy as:
HB = H1 − E0 ,

(1)

(6.7)

Fermionic Hamiltonian : HF = H2 − E0 .

(1)

(6.8)

Bosonic Hamiltonian :

Now since this is just a constant shift in the energy, the corresponding eigenstates of the
partner Hamiltonians remain the same, and can be represented as:
(B)
Ψ(1)
n (x) ≡ Ψn (x),

Bosonic eigenstate :

(6.9)

(F)
Fermionic eigenstate : Ψ(2)
n (x) ≡ Ψn (x).

(6.10)
(1)

However, in this case the energy eigenvalues get shifted by an amount E0
described as:

and can be

Bosonic eigenspectrum :

En(B) = nω,

(6.11)

Fermionic eigenspectrum :

En(F )

(6.12)

= (n + 1)ω,

where we have used the property of supersymmetric quantum mechanical theories:
(B)

En(F) = En+1

∀n = 0, 1, 2, . . . . .

(6.13)

We can compute the energy eigenstates of the partner fermionic system by using the
Schrödinger equation for the Hamiltonian HF which yields the same wave functions as for
HB as given in Eq. (6.2) and Eq. (6.3).
6.2

Partition Function

The partition function in the eigenstate representation is defined by the following expression:
X
Z = Tr[e−βH ] =
hΨn |e−βH |Ψn i.
(6.14)
n

In the framework of supersymmetric quantum mechanics as already discussed the ground
state is only bosonic. The structure of the normalized eigenfunctions are also different for
the ground state and the higher energy state. Hence, the partition function can be written
in terms of the ground state contribution and in terms of the contribution coming from

44

the excited state as:
Z=

hΨ0 |Ψ0 i
| {z }

Ground State Contribution

+

1 X B −βHB B
[hΨn |e
|Ψn i + hΨFn−1 |e−βHF |ΨFn−1 i] .
2 n>0
{z
}
|

(6.15)

Excited State Contribution

Further using the fact that the bosonic and the fermionic Hamiltonians nth energy eigenfunction are exactly identical, the partition function for the supersymmetric one dimensional harmonic oscillator can be computed as:

1
1 X  −βωn
1 βω
(e
+ e−βωn ) =
Z =1+
= e 2 cosech
−βω
2 n>0
1−e
2
6.3
6.3.1



βω
2


.

(6.16)

Computation of two point OTOCs
Computation of Y (1) (t1 , t2 )

We compute the 2-pt correlators for the Supersymmetric Harmonic oscillator. We begin
with the correlator constructed from two different dynamical operators which is defined
as:

Y (1) (t1 , t2 ) = − h[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]iβ
1 X −βEn
=−
e
hΨn |[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]|Ψn i
Z n


X
1
−βEn
=−
hΨ0 |[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]|Ψ0 i +
e
hΨn |[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]|Ψn i
{z
}
Z |
n>0
Ground State Contribution
{z
}
|
Excited States Contribution

  
X
βω
(1)
−βωn (1)
− βω
2
e
yn (t1 , t2 ) .
(6.17)
y0 (t1 , t2 ) +
= 2e
sinh
2
n>0
(1)

(1)

where y0 (t1 , t2 ) and yn (t1 , t2 ) represent the micro-canonical correlators for the ground
state and the excited states and the overall temperature dependent normalization function is appearing from the expression for the inverse of the thermal partition function
for canonical quantum statistical ensemble. The purpose of taking the ground state and
excited states separately is due to the fact that in supersymmetric quantum mechanics
the ground state is always bosonic having zero energy eigenvalue, whereas for the excited
states there are contributions from the bosonic as well as the fermionic states. It is easy
to see that the ground state contribution can be calculated by expanding the commutator

45

and inserting the completeness relation,

X
k

|Ψk i hΨk | = 1. However, here it is important

to note that there is no contribution appearing from the k = 0 term as for the ground state
we have, hΨ0 |x(t1 )|Ψ0 i = 0. Hence, from the ground state we finally get the following time
dependent non-trivial contribution, which is given by:
hΨ0 |[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]|Ψ0 i =

i
cos ω(t1 − t2 ).
2

(6.18)

Now further to determine the contribution from the excited states we need to expand
the commutator and insert the completeness relation between the desired time dependent
quantum operators which gives the following expression:
hΨn |[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]|Ψn i =

i
cos ω(t1 − t2 ) δn1
2
p
p

i
+ cos ω(t1 − t2 ) 1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1) .
2

(6.19)

Therefore, the micro-canonical correlators for the ground state and the excited states are
given by the following temperature independent simplified expressions:
i
(1)
y0 = − cos ω(t1 − t2 ),
(6.20)
2
p
p

i
i
yn(1) = − cos ω(t1 − t2 )δn1 − cos ω(t1 − t2 ) 1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
2
2
h
i
p
p
i
= − cos ω(t1 − t2 ) 1 + δn1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1) .
(6.21)
2
Further, using Eq. (6.20) and Eq. (6.21) the canonical two point thermal correlator can be
obtained by the following expression:
 
βω
(1)
− βω
Y (t1 , t2 ) = −ie 2 sinh
cos ω(t1 − t2 )
2



X
p
p
−βωn
−βω
e
1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
× 1+e
+
n>0





i
βω
= − tanh
cos ω(t1 − t2 )
2
2

 X


p
p
βω
−βω (n+ 12 )
× 1 + 2 cosh
e
1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1) .
2 n>0
(6.22)
It can be seen that the obtained OTOC that it is just a periodic function indicating the
absence of chaos. However, it is quite interesting that the obtained result has an explicit
temperature dependence which mainly comes from the contribution of the ground state.

46

Though the two point OTOC is not of much significance. It stills give us a pretty good idea
that at the level two point correlation function is that in the context of supersymmetric
one dimensional harmonic oscillator is non-chaotic in nature.

Micro-Canonical 2-pt Correlator for Ground State :
i
(1)
y0 (t1 , t2 ) = − cos ω(t1 − t2 ).
2

(6.23)

Micro-Canonical 2-pt Correlator for Excited States :
i
h
p
p
i
yn(1) (t1 , t2 ) = − cos ω(t1 − t2 ) 1 + δn1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1) .
2

(6.24)

Canonical 2-pt Correlator :
 
βω
i
(1)
Y (t1 , t2 ) = − tanh
cos ω(t1 − t2 )
2
2



 X
p
p
βω
−βω (n+ 12 )
e
1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1) .
× 1 + 2 cosh
2 n>0
(6.25)
As discussed earlier the correlator Y (1) (t1 , t2 ) alone does not provide the complete knowledge about the quantum randomness of the system. Hence, we need to calculate two other
correlators constructed from similar operators at different time scales. The other two correlators will be : − h[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]iβ and − h[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]iβ which we will compute in the
next part of the paper.
6.3.2

Computation of Y (2) (t1 , t2 )

The second correlator is constructed from the commutator of the two position operators
defined at different time scales and can be represented as:
Y (2) (t1 , t2 ) = − h[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]iβ


X
1
−βEn
hΨ0 |[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]|Ψ0 i +
e
hΨn |[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]|Ψn i
=−
{z
}
Z |
n>0
Ground State Contribution
|
{z
}
Excited States Contribution
  

X
βω
(2)
− βω
−βωn
(2)
= 2e 2 sinh
y0 (t1 , t2 ) +
e
yn (t1 , t2 ) .
(6.26)
2
n>0

47

The reason for separately considering the ground state from the other states has already
been discussed in the calculation of Y (1) (t1 , t2 ). Following a similar procedure we get:
(2)

y0 (t1 , t2 ) = − hΨ0 |[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]|Ψ0 i
i
sin ω(t1 − t2 ),
=
2ω
yn(2) (t1 , t2 ) = − hΨn |[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]|Ψn i
i
=−
sin ω(t1 − t2 )δn1
2ω


p
p
i
sin ω(t1 − t2 ) 1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
−
2ω


p
p
i
sin ω(t1 − t2 ) 1 + δn1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1) .
=−
2ω

(6.27)

(6.28)

Using Eq. (6.27) and Eq. (6.28) the canonical correlator can be obtained as:
 
βω
i − βω
(2)
sin ω(t1 − t2 )
Y (t1 , t2 ) = e 2 sinh
ω
2



X
p
p
−βωn
−βω
e
× 1−e
−
1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
n>0




2i −βω
βω
2
= e
sinh
sin ω(t1 − t2 )
ω
2
 X



p
p
βω
1
−βω (n− 12 )
e
× 1 − cosech
1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
2
2 n>0
 
i −βω
βω
= e
sinh (βω) tanh
sin ω(t1 − t2 )
ω
2
 X



p
p
βω
1
−βω (n− 12 )
e
1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1) .
× 1 − cosech
2
2 n>0
(6.29)

Micro-Canonical 2-pt Correlator for Ground State :
(2)

y0 (t1 , t2 ) =

i
sin ω(t1 − t2 ) = −ω −2 yn(3) (t1 , t2 ).
2ω

(6.30)

Micro-Canonical 2-pt Correlator for Excited States :
yn(2) (t1 , t2 )



(3)
p
p
i
yn (t1 , t2 )
=−
sin ω(t1 − t2 ) 1 + δn1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1) = −
.
2ω
ω2
(6.31)

48

Canonical 2-pt Correlator :
Y

(2)

 
βω
i −βω
sinh (βω) tanh
sin ω(t1 − t2 )
(t1 , t2 ) = e
ω
2


 X

p
p
1
βω
−βω (n− 12 )
1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
× 1 − cosech
e
2
2 n>0
=−

6.3.3

Y (3) (t1 , t2 )
.
ω2

(6.32)

Computation of Y (3) (t1 , t2 )

The third correlator is constructed from the commutator of the two momentum operators defined at different time scales and can be represented as:
Y (3) (t1 , t2 ) = − h[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]iβ


X
1
−βEn
hΨ0 |[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]|Ψ0 i +
e
hΨn |[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]|Ψn i
=−
{z
}
Z |
n>0
Ground State Contribution
{z
}
|
Excited States Contribution

  
X
βω
(3)
− βω
−βωn
(3)
= 2e 2 sinh
e
yn (t1 , t2 ) .
(6.33)
y0 (t1 , t2 ) +
2
n>0
The reason for separately considering the ground state from the other states has already
been discussed in the calculation of Y (1) (t1 , t2 ). Following a similar procedure we get the
following expressions for the micro-canonical correlators for the ground state and excited
states as given by:
(3)

y0 (t1 , t2 ) = − hΨ0 |[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]|Ψ0 i
iω
= − sin ω(t1 − t2 ),
2
(3)
yn (t1 , t2 ) = − hΨn |[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]|Ψn i
iω
=
sin ω(t1 − t2 ) δn1
2


p
p
iω
sin ω(t1 − t2 ) 1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
+
2


p
p
iω
=
sin ω(t1 − t2 ) 1 + δn1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1) .
2

49

(6.34)

(6.35)

Using Eq. (6.34) and Eq. (6.35) the canonical correlator can be obtained as:
 
βω
(3)
− βω
2
Y (t1 , t2 ) = −iω e
sinh
sin ω(t1 − t2 )
2



X
p
p
−βω
−βωn
× 1−e
−
e
1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
n>0


βω
sin ω(t1 − t2 )
= −2iω e
sinh
2

 X


p
p
1
βω
−βω (n− 12 )
× 1 − cosech
e
1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
2
2 n>0
 
βω
−βω
= −iω e
sinh (βω) tanh
sin ω(t1 − t2 )
2
 X



p
p
βω
1
−βω (n− 12 )
e
1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1) .
× 1 − cosech
2
2 n>0
−βω

2



(6.36)

Micro-Canonical 2-pt Correlator for Ground State :
(3)

y0 (t1 , t2 ) = −

iω
(2)
sin ω(t1 − t2 ) = −ω 2 y0 (t1 , t2 ),
2

(6.37)

Micro-Canonical 2-pt Correlator for Excited States :


p
p
iω
(3)
yn (t1 , t2 ) =
sin ω(t1 − t2 ) 1 + δn1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
2
= −ω 2 yn(2) (t1 , t2 ).

(6.38)

Canonical 2-pt Correlator :
Y

(3)


βω
(t1 , t2 ) = −iω e
sinh (βω) tanh
sin ω(t1 − t2 )
2

 X


p
p
1
βω
−βω (n− 12 )
× 1 − cosech
e
1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
2
2 n>0
−βω



= −ω 2 Y (2) (t1 , t2 ).

(6.39)

50

6.4

Computation of un-normalized four point OTOCs

Though the building block two point OTOCs gives us some basic insight about the
nature of randomness present in the quantum system, it is actually the four point OTOCs
that are considered to be the prime observables for determining the degree and the nature
of randomness present in the quantum mechanical systems. Similar to the two point case
we consider here different types of OTOCs for the four point case from all possible three
combinations of the dynamical operators characterising the quantum mechanical system
under consideration, here it is one dimensional supersymmetric harmonic oscillator.
6.4.1

Computation of C (1) (t1 , t2 )

The corresponding four point desired OTOC of first kind is defined by the following
expression:
C (1) (t1 , t2 ) = − h[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]2 iβ
1X
=−
hΨn |e−βH [x(t1 ), p(t2 )]2 |Ψn i
Z n


X
1
−βEn
2
2
e
=−
hΨ0 |[x(t1 ), p(t2 )] |Ψ0 i +
hΨn |[x(t1 ), p(t2 )] |Ψn i
{z
}
Z |
n>0
Ground State Contribution
|
{z
}
Excited State Contribution
#
  "
X
βω
βω
(1)
= 2e− 2 sinh
c0 (t1 , t2 ) +
e−βωn c(1)
(6.40)
n (t1 , t2 ) ,
2
n>0
where the ground and the excited contribution of the micro-canonical part of the four point
temperature independent OTOCs are defined by the following expressions:
(1)

c0 (t1 , t2 ) = − hΨ0 |[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]2 |Ψ0 i
X (1)
(1)∗
=
b0m (t1 , t2 )b0m (t1 , t2 )
=

m
(1)
(1)∗
b00 (t1 , t2 )b00 (t1 , t2 )

+

X

(1)

(1)∗

b0m (t1 , t2 )b0m (t1 , t2 ),

(6.41)

(1)∗
b(1)
nm (t1 , t2 )bnm (t1 , t2 ),

(6.42)

m>0

and
2
c(1)
n (t1 , t2 ) = − hΨn |[x(t1 ), p(t2 )] |Ψn i
X
(1)∗
=
b(1)
nm (t1 , t2 )bnm (t1 , t2 )

=

m
(1)
(1)∗
bn0 (t1 , t2 )bn0 (t1 , t2 )

+

X
m>0

51

(1)

(1)

(1)

(1)

where bnm (t1 , t2 ), b0m (t1 , t2 ), bm0 (t1 , t2 ) and b00 (t1 , t2 ) used in the above expression are
given by:
b(1)
nm (t1 , t2 ) = −i hΨn |[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]|Ψm i ,

(6.43)

b0m (t1 , t2 ) = −i hΨ0 |[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]|Ψm i ,

(6.44)

= −i hΨm |[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]|Ψ0 i ,

(6.45)

= −i hΨ0 |[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]|Ψ0 i .

(6.46)

(1)

(1)
bm0 (t1 , t2 )
(1)
b00 (t1 , t2 )

Now an extremely important fact to keep in mind while performing this calculation is that
the ground state is always bosonic, this enforces considering the ground state separately
each time an identity
X is inserted. On expanding the commutator and inserting the identity
operator (I :=
|Ψk i hΨk |) and considering the k = 0 term separately from the k > 0
k

term above sets of equations can be written as:

(1)
bnm (t1 , t2 ) = −i hΨn |x(t1 ) |Ψ0 i hΨ0 | p(t2 )|Ψm i − hΨn |p(t2 ) |Ψ0 i hΨ0 | x(t1 )|Ψm i
+

X
k>0


hΨn |x(t1 ) |Ψk i hΨk | p(t2 )|Ψm i − hΨn |p(t2 ) |Ψk i hΨk | x(t1 )|Ψm i ,
(6.47)
(1)

(1)

(1)

and a similar expression will be obtained for b0m (t1 , t2 ), bm0 (t1 , t2 ) and b00 (t1 , t2 ). Keeping all the above discussed facts it is not difficult to show that for supersymmetric one
dimensional harmonic oscillator we get:




p
p
i
(1)
(6.48)
bnm (t1 , t2 ) = − cos ω(t1 − t2 ) δn1 + 1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1) δnm ,
2
i
i
(1)
(1)
(6.49)
b0m (t1 , t2 ) = − cos ω(t1 − t2 )δm0 = − cos ω(t1 − t2 )δ0m = bm0 (t1 , t2 ),
2
2
i
(1)
b00 (t1 , t2 ) = − cos ω(t1 − t2 ).
(6.50)
2
Here one can explicitly show that for the supersymmetric one dimensional harmonic oscillator case the following contributions are trivially vanish:
X (1)
(1)∗
(1)
(1)∗
b0m (t1 , t2 )b0m (t1 , t2 ) = 0, &
bn0 (t1 , t2 )bn0 (t1 , t2 ) = 0 ∀ n > 0. (6.51)
m>0

The above equations can be used to calculate the micro-canonical correlator which is the
temperature independent part of the total OTOC. The temperature dependent part comes
from the canonical part of the correlator which can be calculated by substituting Eq. (6.48)
and Eq. (6.49) in Eq. (6.78) and for the supersymmetric one dimensional harmonic oscil-

52

lator we get:
1
cos2 ω(t1 − t2 ),
4

2 
p
p
1
(1)
cn (t1 , t2 ) =
δn1 δn1 + 1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
cos2 ω(t1 − t2 ).
4
(1)

c0 (t1 , t2 ) =

(6.52)
(6.53)

Hence the temperature dependent canonical part of the four point OTOC of the first kind
for a supersymmetric harmonic oscillator is given by substituting Eq. (6.52) and Eq. (6.53)
in Eq. (6.40) to obtain the following simplified result:
 
βω
1 − βω
(1)
C (t1 , t2 ) = e 2 sinh
cos2 ω(t1 − t2 )
2
2

2 

X
p
p
−βω
−βωn
× 1+e
+
e
1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
n>0

1
= e−βω sinh (βω) cos2 ω(t1 − t2 )
2
 X


2 
p
p
1
βω
−βωn
e
1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
× 1 + sech
.
2
2 n>0
(6.54)

Micro-Canonical 4-pt Correlator for Ground State :
(1)

c0 (t1 , t2 ) =

1
cos2 ω(t1 − t2 ),
4

(6.55)

Micro-Canonical 4-pt Correlator for Excited States :


2 
p
p
1
(1)
2
cn (t1 , t2 ) = cos ω(t1 − t2 ) δn1 δn1 + 1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
. (6.56)
4

Canonical 4-pt Correlator :
1
C (1) (t1 , t2 ) = e−βω sinh (βω) cos2 ω(t1 − t2 )
2

 X

2 
p
p
1
βω
−βωn
.
× 1 + sech
e
1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
2
2 n>0
(6.57)

53

6.4.2

Computation of C (2) (t1 , t2 )

The corresponding four point desired OTOC of second kind is defined by the following
expression:
C (2) (t1 , t2 ) = − h[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]2 iβ
1X
=−
hΨn |e−βH [x(t1 ), x(t2 )]2 |Ψn i
Z n


X
1
2
−βEn
2
=−
hΨ0 |[x(t1 ), x(t2 )] |Ψ0 i +
e
hΨn |[x(t1 ), x(t2 )] |Ψn i
{z
}
Z |
n>0
Ground State Contribution
|
{z
}
Excited State Contribution
#
  "
X
βω
βω
(2)
= 2e− 2 sinh
c0 (t1 , t2 ) +
e−βωn c(2)
(6.58)
n (t1 , t2 ) ,
2
n>0
where the ground and the excited contribution of the micro-canonical part of the four point
temperature independent OTOCs are defined by the following expressions:
(2)

c0 (t1 , t2 ) = − hΨ0 |[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]2 |Ψ0 i
X (2)
(2)∗
=
b0m (t1 , t2 )b0m (t1 , t2 )
=

m
(2)
(2)∗
b00 (t1 , t2 )b00 (t1 , t2 )

+

X

(2)

(2)∗

b0m (t1 , t2 )b0m (t1 , t2 ),

(6.59)

(2)∗
b(2)
nm (t1 , t2 )bnm (t1 , t2 ),

(6.60)

m>0

and
2
c(2)
n (t1 , t2 ) = − hΨn |[x(t1 ), x(t2 )] |Ψn i
X
(2)∗
=
b(2)
nm (t1 , t2 )bnm (t1 , t2 )

=

m
(2)
(2)∗
bn0 (t1 , t2 )bn0 (t1 , t2 )

+

X
m>0

(2)

(2)

(2)

(2)

where bnm (t1 , t2 ), b0m (t1 , t2 ), bm0 (t1 , t2 ) and b00 (t1 , t2 ) used in the above expression are
given by:
b(2)
nm (t1 , t2 ) = −i hΨn |[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]|Ψm i ,

(6.61)

= −i hΨ0 |[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]|Ψm i ,

(6.62)

= −i hΨm |[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]|Ψ0 i ,

(6.63)

= −i hΨ0 |[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]|Ψ0 i .

(6.64)

(2)
b0m (t1 , t2 )
(2)
bm0 (t1 , t2 )
(2)
b00 (t1 , t2 )

54

Now an extremely important fact to keep in mind while performing this calculation is that
the ground state is always bosonic, this enforces considering the ground state separately
each time an identity
X is inserted. On expanding the commutator and inserting the identity
operator (I :=
|Ψk i hΨk |) and considering the k = 0 term separately from the k > 0
k

term above sets of equations can be written as:

(2)
bnm (t1 , t2 ) = −i hΨn |x(t1 ) |Ψ0 i hΨ0 | x(t2 )|Ψm i − hΨn |x(t2 ) |Ψ0 i hΨ0 | x(t1 )|Ψm i
+

X
k>0


hΨn |x(t1 ) |Ψk i hΨk | x(t2 )|Ψm i − hΨn |x(t2 ) |Ψk i hΨk | x(t1 )|Ψm i ,
(6.65)
(2)

(2)

(2)

and a similar expression will be obtained for b0m (t1 , t2 ), bm0 (t1 , t2 ) and b00 (t1 , t2 ). Keeping all the above discussed facts it is not difficult to show that for supersymmetric one
dimensional harmonic oscillator we get:




p
p
i
(2)
sin ω(t1 − t2 ) δn1 − 1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1) δnm ,
bnm (t1 , t2 ) =
(6.66)
2ω
i
i
(2)
(2)
b0m (t1 , t2 ) =
sin ω(t1 − t2 )δm0 =
sin ω(t1 − t2 )δ0m = bm0 (t1 , t2 ),
(6.67)
2ω
2ω
i
(2)
b00 (t1 , t2 ) =
sin ω(t1 − t2 ).
(6.68)
2ω
Here one can explicitly show that for the supersymmetric one dimensional harmonic oscillator case the following contributions are trivially vanish:
X (2)
(2)∗
(2)
(2)∗
bn0 (t1 , t2 )bn0 (t1 , t2 ) = 0 ∀ n > 0. (6.69)
b0m (t1 , t2 )b0m (t1 , t2 ) = 0, &
m>0

The above equations can be used to calculate the micro-canonical correlator which is
the temperature independent part of the total OTOC and the corresponding ground and
excited state contributions are explicitly given by the following expressions:
1
sin2 ω(t1 − t2 ),
4ω 2


2 
p
p
1
2
(2)
cn (t1 , t2 ) =
sin ω(t1 − t2 ) δn1 δn1 − 1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
.
4ω 2
(2)

c0 (t1 , t2 ) =

(6.70)
(6.71)

The canonical part of the four point thermal OTOC of the second kind for a supersymmetric Harmonic Oscillator is given by substituting Eq. (6.70) and Eq. (6.71) in Eq. (6.58)
to obtain the following simplified result:

55

C

(2)

 
1 − βω
βω
(t1 , t2 ) =
sin2 ω(t1 − t2 )
e 2 sinh
2
2ω
2


2 
X
p
p
−βω
−βωn
1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
× 1+e
−
e
n>0

1 −βω
=
e
sinh (βω) sin2 ω(t1 − t2 )
2ω 2 
 X

2 
p
p
βω
1
−βωn
e
1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
.
× 1 − sech
2
2 n>0
(6.72)

Micro-Canonical 4-pt Correlator for Ground State :
(2)

c0 (t1 , t2 ) =

1
sin2 ω(t1 − t2 ),
2
4ω

(6.73)

Micro-Canonical 4-pt Correlator for Excited States :


p
p
2
1
(2)
2
cn (t1 , t2 ) =
sin ω(t1 − t2 ) δn1 δn1 − 1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
. (6.74)
4ω 2

Canonical 4-pt Correlator :
C (2) (t1 , t2 ) =

1 −βω
e
sinh (βω) sin2 ω(t1 − t2 )
2ω 2 
 X

2 
p
p
1
βω
−βωn
× 1 − sech
e
1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
.
2
2 n>0
(6.75)

6.4.3

Computation of C (3) (t1 , t2 )

The corresponding four point desired OTOC of third kind is defined by the following
expression:
C (3) (t1 , t2 ) = − h[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]2 iβ
1X
=−
hΨn |e−βH [p(t1 ), p(t2 )]2 |Ψn i
Z n

56

1
=−
Z



X

2

−βEn


hΨn |[p(t1 ), p(t2 )] |Ψn i
2

hΨ0 |[p(t1 ), p(t2 )] |Ψ0 i +
e
|
{z
}
n>0
Ground State Contribution
|
{z
Excited State Contribution
#
  "
X
βω
βω
(3)
= 2e− 2 sinh
c0 (t1 , t2 ) +
e−βωn c(3)
n (t1 , t2 ) ,
2
n>0

}
(6.76)

where the ground and the excited contribution of the micro-canonical part of the four point
temperature independent OTOCs are defined by the following expressions:
(3)

c0 (t1 , t2 ) = − hΨ0 |[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]2 |Ψ0 i
X (3)
(3)∗
=
b0m (t1 , t2 )b0m (t1 , t2 )
=

m
(3)
(3)∗
b00 (t1 , t2 )b00 (t1 , t2 )

+

X

(3)

(3)∗

b0m (t1 , t2 )b0m (t1 , t2 ),

(6.77)

(3)∗
b(3)
nm (t1 , t2 )bnm (t1 , t2 ),

(6.78)

m>0

and
2
c(3)
n (t1 , t2 ) = − hΨn |[x(t1 ), x(t2 )] |Ψn i
X
(3)∗
b(3)
=
nm (t1 , t2 )bnm (t1 , t2 )

=

m
(3)
(3)∗
bn0 (t1 , t2 )bn0 (t1 , t2 )

+

X
m>0

(3)

(3)

(3)

(3)

where bnm (t1 , t2 ), b0m (t1 , t2 ), bm0 (t1 , t2 ) and b00 (t1 , t2 ) used in the above expression are
given by:
b(3)
nm (t1 , t2 ) = −i hΨn |[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]|Ψm i ,

(6.79)

b0m (t1 , t2 ) = −i hΨ0 |[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]|Ψm i ,

(3)

(6.80)

bm0 (t1 , t2 ) = −i hΨm |[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]|Ψ0 i ,

(3)

(6.81)

(3)
b00 (t1 , t2 )

= −i hΨ0 |[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]|Ψ0 i .

(6.82)

Now an extremely important fact to keep in mind while performing this calculation is that
the ground state is always bosonic, this enforces considering the ground state separately
each time an identity
X is inserted. On expanding the commutator and inserting the identity
operator (I :=
|Ψk i hΨk |) and considering the k = 0 term separately from the k > 0
k

term above sets of equations can be written as:

(3)
bnm (t1 , t2 ) = −i hΨn |p(t1 ) |Ψ0 i hΨ0 | p(t2 )|Ψm i − hΨn |p(t2 ) |Ψ0 i hΨ0 | p(t1 )|Ψm i

57

+

X
k>0


hΨn |p(t1 ) |Ψk i hΨk | p(t2 )|Ψm i − hΨn |p(t2 ) |Ψk i hΨk | p(t1 )|Ψm i
(6.83)
(3)

(3)

(3)

and a similar expression will be obtained for b0m (t1 , t2 ), bm0 (t1 , t2 ) and b00 (t1 , t2 ). Keeping all the above discussed facts it is not difficult to show that for supersymmetric one
dimensional harmonic oscillator we get:




p
p
iω
(3)
sin ω(t1 − t2 ) δn1 − 1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1) δnm ,
(6.84)
bnm (t1 , t2 ) =
2
iω
iω
(3)
(3)
b0m (t1 , t2 ) =
sin ω(t1 − t2 ) δn0 =
sin[ω(t1 − t2 )] δ0n = bm0 (t1 , t2 ),
(6.85)
2
2
iω
(3)
b00 (t1 , t2 ) =
sin ω(t1 − t2 ).
(6.86)
2
Using the above equations the ground state and the excited state contributions to the
micro-canonical OTOC can be calculated as follows:
ω2
sin2 ω(t1 − t2 ),
4


2 
p
p
ω2
(3)
2
cn (t1 , t2 ) =
sin ω(t1 − t2 ) δn1 δn1 − 1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
.
4
(3)

c0 (t1 , t2 ) =

(6.87)
(6.88)

Then the canonical part of the thermal four point OTOC of the third kind for a supersymmetric harmonic oscillator is given by substituting Eq. (6.87) and Eq. (6.88) in Eq. (6.76)
to obtain the following simplified result:
 
ω 2 − βω
βω
(3)
2
e
C (t1 , t2 ) =
sinh
sin2 ω(t1 − t2 )
2
2

2 

X
p
p
−βω
−βωn
× 1+e
−
e
1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
n>0

2

=

ω −βω
e
sinh (βω) sin2 ω(t1 − t2 )
2 
 X

2 
p
p
1
βω
−βωn
× 1 − sech
.
e
1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
2
2 n>0
(6.89)

58

Micro-Canonical 4-pt Correlator for Ground State :
(3)

c0 (t1 , t2 ) =

ω2
sin2 ω(t1 − t2 ),
4

(6.90)

Micro-Canonical 4-pt Correlator for Excited States :
c(3)
n (t1 , t2 )



2 
p
p
ω2
2
=
sin ω(t1 − t2 ) δn1 δn1 − 1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
.
4
(6.91)

Canonical 4-pt Correlator :
C (3) (t1 , t2 ) =

ω 2 −βω
e
sinh (βω) sin2 ω(t1 − t2 )
2 
 X

2 
p
p
βω
1
−βωn
× 1 − sech
e
1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
.
2
2 n>0
(6.92)

6.5

Computation of normalized four point OTOCs

In this section our prime objective is to normalize all of the derived un-normalized
three types of OTOCs with appropriate normalization factors, which we have already
introduced in the earlier half of the paper for model independent eigenstate representation.
In this section we will explicitly derive the expressions for the normalization factors for
supersymmetric ine dimensional harmonic oscillator model in its eigenstate representation
and derive all of the possible three types of OTOCs after normalization.
6.5.1

e(1) (t1 , t2 )
Computation of C

To normalize the obtained OTOC C (1) (t1 , t2 ) we need to compute the appropriate factors
which we are going compute in this subsection.
First of all, we need to evaluate the following two point equal time thermal correlator,
which is given by:
1
Tr(e−βH x(t1 )x(t1 ))
Z
1X
=
hΨn |e−βH x(t1 )x(t1 )|Ψn i
Z n

hx(t1 )x(t1 )iβ =

59

1
=
Z


hΨ0 |x(t1 )x(t1 )|Ψ0 i
|
{z
}

Ground State Contribution

+

X
n>0

|

−βEn

e


hΨn |x(t1 )x(t1 )|Ψn i .
{z

Excited State contribution

(6.93)

}

Inserting the completeness relation between the operators and using the Heisenberg
picture equation for the evolution of an operator, the normalization factor involving the
position operator can be written as:
 
1 − βω
βω
2
hx(t1 )x(t1 )iβ =
e
sinh
2ω
2


X
p
p
−βω
−βωn
× 1+e
+
e
[2n + n(n + 1) + n(n − 1)]
n>0

=

1 −βω
e
sinh (βω)
2ω

 X

p
p
1
βω
−βωn
× 1 + sech
e
[2n + n(n + 1) + n(n − 1)] .
2
2 n>0
(6.94)

A similar calculation can carried out for computing the two point equal time thermal
correlator involving the momentum operators, which is given by:
1
Tr(e−βH p(t2 )p(t2 ))
Z
1X
=
hΨn |eβH p(t2 )p(t2 )|Ψn i
Z n


X
1
=
hψ0 |p(t2 )p(t2 )|ψ0 i +
hψn |p(t2 )p(t2 )|ψn i .
|
{z
}
Z
n>0
Ground state contribution
|
{z
}

hp(t2 )p(t2 )iβ =

(6.95)

Excited state contribution

One generally needs to consider the ground state separately from the other higher energy
states due to the fact that in Supersymmetric QM, the ground state has contributions only
from the original Hamiltonian. There is no contribution of the associated partner Hamiltonian in the ground state. Keeping this interesting fact in mind and adopting a similar
approach as taken in the previous case, the normalization factor involving the thermal
expectation value of the momentum operators are given by:

60

 
ω − βω
βω
hp(t2 )p(t2 )iβ = e 2 sinh
2
2


X
p
p
−βω
−βωn
× 1+e
+
e
[2n + n(n + 1) + n(n − 1)]
n>0

ω
= e−βω sinh (βω)
2

 X

p
p
1
βω
−βωn
× 1 + sech
e
[2n + n(n + 1) + n(n − 1)] .
2
2 n>0
(6.96)
Therefore, the normalization factor N1 for the 4-point correlator C (1) (t1 , t2 ) is given by

Normalization factor N1 of C (1)(t1, t2)
N1 = hx(t1 )x(t1 )iβ hp(t2 )p(t2 )iβ
 
1 −βω
βω
2
sinh
= e
4
2
2

X
p
p
−βω
−βωn
× 1+e
+
e
[2n + n(n + 1) + n(n − 1)]
n>0

1
= e−2βω sinh2 (βω)
4

 X
2
p
p
βω
1
−βωn
× 1 + sech
e
[2n + n(n + 1) + n(n − 1)]
2
2 n>0
= ω 2 N2 = ω −2 N3 .

(6.97)

Consequently, the normalized OTOC of the first kind can be expressed as:

Normalized C (1) (t1 , t2 ) :
e(1) (t1 , t2 ) = 2eβω cosech (βω) cos2 ω(t1 − t2 )
C

 X

2 
p
p
1
βω
−βωn
1 + sech
e
1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
2
2 n>0
× 
 X
2 .
p
p
1
βω
−βωn
1 + sech
e
[2n + n(n + 1) + n(n − 1)]
2
2 n>0
(6.98)

61

6.5.2

e(2) (t1 , t2 )
Computation of C

To normalize the obtained OTOC C (2) (t1 , t2 ) we need to compute the appropriate factors
which we are going compute in this subsection.
Similarly the normalization factor N2 for the four point OTOC C (2) (t1 , t2 ) can be computed explicitly, which is given by the following simplified expression:

Normalization factor N2 of C (2)(t1, t2)
N2 = hx(t1 )x(t1 )iβ hx(t2 )x(t2 )iβ
 
1 −βω
βω
2
=
e
sinh
2
4ω
2

2
X
p
p
−βω
−βωn
× 1+e
+
e
[2n + n(n + 1) + n(n − 1)]
n>0

1 −2βω
=
e
sinh2 (βω)
4ω 2

 X
2
p
p
1
βω
−βωn
× 1 + sech
e
[2n + n(n + 1) + n(n − 1)]
2
2 n>0
1
N3
ω4
1
= 2 N1 .
ω

=

(6.99)

Consequently, the normalized OTOC of the second kind can be expressed as:

Normalized C (2) (t1 , t2 ) :
e(2) (t1 , t2 ) = 2eβω cosech (βω) sin2 ω(t1 − t2 )
C

 X

2 
p
p
1
βω
−βωn
1 − sech
e
1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
2
2 n>0
× 
 X
2
p
p
1
βω
−βωn
1 + sech
e
[2n + n(n + 1) + n(n − 1)]
2
2 n>0
e(3) (t1 , t2 ).
=C

(6.100)

62

6.5.3

e(3) (t1 , t2 )
Computation of C

To normalize the obtained OTOC C (3) (t1 , t2 ) we need to compute the appropriate factors
which we are going compute in this subsection.
Similarly the normalization factor N3 for the four point OTOC C (3) (t1 , t2 ) can be computed explicitly, which is given by the following simplified expression:

Normalization factor N3 of C (3)(t1, t2)
N3 = hp(t1 )p(t1 )iβ hp(t2 )p(t2 )iβ
 
βω
ω 2 −βω
2
e
sinh
=
4
2

2
X
p
p
−βωn
−βω
e
[2n + n(n + 1) + n(n − 1)]
× 1+e
+
n>0

2

=

ω −2βω
e
sinh2 (βω)
4

 X
2
p
p
1
βω
−βωn
× 1 + sech
e
[2n + n(n + 1) + n(n − 1)]
2
2 n>0

= ω 4 N2
= ω 2 N1 .

(6.101)

Consequently, the normalized OTOC of the third kind can be expressed as:

Normalized C (3) (t1 , t2 ) :
e(3) (t1 , t2 ) = 2eβω cosech (βω) sin2 ω(t1 − t2 )
C
 X


2 
p
p
βω
1
−βωn
e
1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
1 − sech
2
2 n>0
× 
 X
2
p
p
1
βω
−βωn
1 + sech
e
[2n + n(n + 1) + n(n − 1)]
2
2 n>0
e(2) (t1 , t2 ).
=C

(6.102)

63

6.6

Summary of Results

Ground State Contributions for Micro-Canonical OTOC for
SUSY 1D Harmonic Oscillator
i
(1)
y0 (t1 , t2 ) = − cos ω(t1 − t2 )
2
i
1 (3)
(2)
y0 (t1 , t2 ) =
sin ω(t1 − t2 ) = − 2 y0 (t1 , t2 )
2ω
ω
iω
(2)
(3)
y0 (t1 , t2 ) = − sin ω(t1 − t2 ) = −ω 2 y0 (t1 , t2 )
2
1
(1)
c0 (t1 , t2 ) = cos2 ω(t1 − t2 )
4
1
1 (3)
(2)
2
c0 (t1 , t2 ) =
sin
ω(t
−
t
)
=
c (t1 , t2 )
1
2
4ω 2
ω4 0
ω2
(2)
(3)
sin2 ω(t1 − t2 ) = ω 4 c0 (t1 , t2 ).
c0 (t1 , t2 ) =
4

(6.20)
(6.27)
(6.34)
(6.52)
(6.70)
(6.87)

Excited State Contributions for Micro-Canonical OTOC for
SUSY 1D Harmonic Oscillator
i
h
p
p
i
yn(1) (t1 , t2 ) = − cos ω(t1 − t2 ) 1 + δn1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
2


p
p
i
(2)
yn (t1 , t2 ) = −
sin ω(t1 − t2 ) 1 + δn1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
2ω
1
= − 2 yn(3) (t1 , t2 )
ω


p
p
iω
(3)
sin ω(t1 − t2 ) 1 + δn1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
yn (t1 , t2 ) =
2
= −ω 2 yn(2) (t1 , t2 )

(6.21)

(6.28)

(6.35)


2 


p
p
1
cos2 ω(t1 − t2 ) δn1 δn1 + 1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
(6.53)
4

2 

p
p
1
(2)
2
cn (t1 , t2 ) =
sin ω(t1 − t2 ) δn1 δn1 − 1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
4ω 2
1
= 4 c(3)
(t1 , t2 )
(6.71)
ω n


2 
p
p
ω2
2
(3)
sin ω(t1 − t2 ) δn1 δn1 − 1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
cn (t1 , t2 ) =
4
c(1)
n (t1 , t2 ) =

= ω 4 c(2)
n (t1 , t2 ).

(6.88)

64

Un-normalized two and four point Canonical OTOC for SUSY 1D Harmonic Oscillator
Y

(1)

 
i
βω
(t1 , t2 ) = − tanh
cos ω(t1 − t2 )
2
2


 X

p
p
βω
−βω (n+ 12 )
e
1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
× 1 + 2 cosh
2 n>0
(6.25)

Y (2) (t1 , t2 ) =



βω
i −βω
e
sinh (βω) tanh
sin ω(t1 − t2 )
ω
2



 X
p
p
1
βω
−βω (n− 12 )
× 1 − cosech
1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
e
2
2 n>0

=−
Y

(3)



1 (3)
Y (t1 , t2 )
ω2

(6.32)


βω
(t1 , t2 ) = −iω e
sinh (βω) tanh
sin ω(t1 − t2 )
2
 X



p
p
βω
1
−βω (n− 12 )
e
× 1 − cosech
1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
2
2 n>0
−βω



= −ω 2 Y (2) (t1 , t2 )
(6.39)
1
C (1) (t1 , t2 ) = e−βω sinh (βω) cos2 ω(t1 − t2 )
2

 X
2 

p
p
1
βω
−βωn
× 1 + sech
e
1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
2
2 n>0
(6.57)
C (2) (t1 , t2 ) =

1 −βω
e
sinh (βω) sin2 ω(t1 − t2 )
2ω 2 
 X
2 

p
p
1
βω
−βωn
× 1 − sech
e
1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
2
2 n>0

1 (3)
C (t1 , t2 )
(6.75)
ω4
ω 2 −βω
C (3) (t1 , t2 ) =
e
sinh (βω) sin2 ω(t1 − t2 )
2 
 X

2 
p
p
1
βω
−βωn
× 1 − sech
e
1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
2
2 n>0
=

= ω 4 C (2) (t1 , t2 ).

(6.92)

65

Normalized four point Canonical OTOC for SUSY 1D Harmonic Oscillator
hx(t1 )x(t1 )iβ = hx(t2 )x(t2 )iβ
1 −βω
=
e
sinh (βω)
2ω

 X

p
p
1
βω
−βωn
× 1 + sech
e
[2n + n(n + 1) + n(n − 1)]
2
2 n>0
1
1
hp(t
)p(t
)i
=
hp(t2 )p(t2 )iβ
1
1
β
ω2
ω2
C (1) (t1 , t2 )
e(1) (t1 , t2 ) =
C
hx(t1 )x(t1 )iβ hp(t2 )p(t2 )iβ
=

(6.94)

= 2eβω cosech (βω) cos2 ω(t1 − t2 )
 X


2 
p
p
βω
1
−βωn
1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
e
1 + sech
2
2 n>0
× 
 X
2
p
p
1
βω
−βωn
1 + sech
e
[2n + n(n + 1) + n(n − 1)]
2
2 n>0
(6.98)

e(2) (t1 , t2 ) =
C

C (2) (t1 , t2 )
hx(t1 )x(t1 )iβ hx(t2 )x(t2 )iβ

= 2eβω cosech (βω) sin2 ω(t1 − t2 )
 X


2 
p
p
βω
1
−βωn
1 − sech
e
1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
2
2 n>0
× 
 X
2
p
p
1
βω
−βωn
1 + sech
e
[2n + n(n + 1) + n(n − 1)]
2
2 n>0
e(3) (t1 , t2 )
=C
e(3) (t1 , t2 ) =
C

(6.100)

(3)

C (t1 , t2 )
hp(t1 )p(t1 )iβ hp(t2 )p(t2 )iβ

= 2eβω cosech (βω) sin2 ω(t1 − t2 )
 X


2 
p
p
βω
1
−βωn
e
1 + n(n + 1) − n(n − 1)
1 − sech
2
2 n>0
× 
 X
2
p
p
1
βω
−βωn
1 + sech
e
[2n + n(n + 1) + n(n − 1)]
2
2 n>0
e(2) (t1 , t2 ).
=C

(6.102)

66

7

Model II: Supersymmetric One Dimensional Potential Well

The one dimensional infinite potential well is characterized by the following potential:

V1 (x) =

0
∞

for 0 ≤ x ≤ L
otherwise


.

(7.1)

The eigenfunctions and the corresponding energy eigenvalues associated with the Hamiltonian H1 for this potential is a well known result [88] and is given by the following
expressions:
r


2
(n + 1)π
(n + 1)2 π 2 ~2
(1)
sin
x
and En(1) =
for n ∈ {0, 1, 2, . . . },
ψn =
L
L
2mL2
where we have replaced the energy level tagging from n to n + 1 compared to the regular
expressions one encounters in typical textbooks. This does not change anything physically
and with this convention n can take values from 0 instead of 1. Also, for the sake of
simplicity we consider ~ = L = 2m = 1. Furthermore, as we have previously mentioned
we need the ground state energy to be zero, so that after subtracting off the ground state
energy we get the following simplified results:
ψn(1) =

√

2 sin[(n + 1)πx] and En(1) = n(n + 2) π 2 for n ∈ {0, 1, 2, ...}.

(7.2)

To obtain the partner potential associated with the original potential, the superpotential
needs to be calculated which has been done in [88] and is given by the following expression:
W (x) = −π cot(πx).

(7.3)

Once the superpotential of a supersymmetric quantum mechanical model is known it can
be used to obtain the eigenspectrum and the associated partner potential as discussed in
Sec. 3. For the supersymmetric one dimensional potential well it can be very easily verify
that the associated partner potential is given by the following equation:
V2 (x) = 2π 2 cosec2 (πx).
A look at Eq. (7.4) immediately suggests that the partner potential is remarkably different
from the original one unlike the harmonic oscillator case whose partner potential is identical
to that of the original one. The energy eigenfunctions and eigenvalues associated with the

67

partner potential can easily be calculated as:
s


2
(2)
(n + 2) cos((n + 2)πx) − cot(πx) sin((n + 2)πx) ;
ψn (x) =
(n + 2)2 − 1
En(2) = (n2 + 4n + 3) π 2

for n ∈ {0, 1, 2, . . . }.

(7.4)
(7.5)

To compute the correlators we need the partition function and the matrix elements of
the position operator between any two arbitrary energy states. However while computing
the matrix elements if one of the state is the ground state then the expression can be
written in a closed form as in the ground state there is no contribution of the partner
Hamiltonian.

Z =1+
x0k
, xmk

X

e−βm(m+2) ,

(7.6)

m>0
Z 1

√
2 sin πk
= 2
dx sin πx sin(k + 1)πx =
(k + 2) πk
0

1 sin(k − m)π sin(k + m + 2)π
=
−
4π
(k − m)
(k + m + 2)
2
+p
((1 + k)2 − 1)((1 + m)2 − 1)


Z 1
dx x (1 + k) cos(1 + k)πx − cot πx sin(1 + k)πx
0


(1 + m) cos(1 + m)πx − cot πx sin(1 + m)πx .
√

(7.7)

(7.8)

Substituting the above expressions in the eigenstate representation of the correlators obtained in Sec. 5, the correlators for 1D SUSY potential well can be calculated. Now it is
important to mention here that the OTOCs computed from this particular model only can
be presented in terms of integrals which at the end we need to evaluate using numerical
computation. So to avoid writing complicated mathematical expressions in terms of huge
size integrals and instead of presenting a detailed calculation here we provide and discuss
the results in the later Sec. 11 of this paper.

8

General remarks on the classical limiting interpretation of OTOCs

In this section our prime objective is to study the classical limit of the thermal OTOCs
derived explicitly in the previous sections of this paper in the context of supersymmetric
quantum mechanical systems. This computation is essential to understand the time and
the temperature dependent behaviour of the two and four point thermal OTOCs in the

68

classical limit. By styudying the behaviour in this limit one can check the consistency of
the result obtained of the quantum randomness from the computed thermal OTOCs in the
previous sections.
The strategy adopted in calculating the classical limit of OTOCs is usually replacing the
quantum mechanical commutator bracket with the usual classical Poisson bracket defined
by the following equation:

X  ∂f ∂g
∂f ∂g
{f, g}qi ,pi =
−
.
(8.1)
∂qi ∂pi
∂pi ∂qi
i
In the above equation, the qi and the pi are the generalized coordinates and momenta
and f and g are functions of these coordinates and momenta i.e.
f ≡ f (q1 , . . . , qn ; p1 , . . . , pn , t),

g ≡ g(q1 , . . . , qn ; p1 , . . . , pn , t).

(8.2)
(8.3)

It can be readily checked that the commutator bracket of two quantum mechanical operators satisfy the same properties as that of the classical Poisson bracket and it can be
viewed as the outcome of the following limit on the commutator bracket:
[fˆ, ĝ]
= {f, g}.
~→0 i~
lim

(8.4)

The thermal average of the correlators is carried out by the trace operation in the
quantum case which can be further simplified in the eigenstate representation. For it’s
classical counterpart the trace operation is replaced by the phase space integral in the
classical limit. For a quantum mechanical model in the context of supersymmetry usually
one would expect that there are two generalised coordinates and momenta, one coming
from the original Hamiltonian of the system and the other one from its supersymmetric
part. Below we write down the generic expressions for the Poisson Brackets involving the
position and the momentum operators and provide a general expression for the classical
limit of the two and four point classical versions of the correlators.

Classical limit of two point Canonical OTOCs
ZZ
1
dxdp −βH
Y (t1 , t2 ) =
e
{x(t1 ), p(t2 )}
Zcl
2π
ZZ
1
dxdp −βH
Y (2) (t1 , t2 ) =
e
{x(t1 ), x(t2 )}
Zcl
2π
ZZ
dxdp −βH
1
(3)
Y (t1 , t2 ) =
e
{p(t1 ), p(t2 )}
Zcl
2π
ZZ
dxdp −βH
where Zcl =
e
.
2π
(1)

69

(8.5)
(8.6)
(8.7)
(8.8)

Classical limit of four point Canonical OTOCs
ZZ
dx dp −βH
1
e
{x(t1 ), p(t2 )}2
C (t1 , t2 ) =
Zcl
2π
ZZ
1
dx dp −βH
(2)
C (t1 , t2 ) =
e
{x(t1 ), x(t2 )}2
Zcl
2π
ZZ
1
dx dp −βH
(3)
C (t1 , t2 ) =
e
{p(t1 ), p(t2 )}2
Zcl
2π
ZZ
dxdp −βH
e
.
where Zcl =
2π
(1)

9

(8.9)
(8.10)
(8.11)
(8.12)

Classical Limit of OTOC for Supersymmetric One Dimensional Harmonic Oscillator

As discussed earlier any supersymmetric quantum mechanical Hamiltonian is associated
with a partner Hamiltonian. For a Supersymmetric Harmonic oscillator the potential
associated with the original and the partner Hamiltonian are exactly equal apart from
a constant factor as shown in Sec. 6.1. Hence, the classical solutions of the dynamical
operators takes identical forms and is obtanied by trivially solving the following differential
equation:
d2 x
= −ω 2 x.
dt2

(9.1)

In solving the above differential equation we take the initial position and momentum to
be x(0) and p(0). The classical solutions of the operators obtained by solving the above
differential equation and the mentioned initial conditions are given by:
p(0)
sin ωt;
ω
p(t) = p(0) cos ωt − x(0) ω sin ωt.
x(t) = x(0) cos ωt +

(9.2)
(9.3)

We want to calculate the classical limit of OTOC using the position operators at different
times. Using the distributive property of Poisson Bracket {x(t1 ), p(t2 )} can be expanded
for our supersymmetric case in the following way :
{x(t1 ), p(t2 )} = {xB (t1 ), pB (t2 )} + {xF (t1 ), pF (t2 )} .
|
{z
} |
{z
}
Bosonic part

(9.4)

Fermionic part

Each of the terms of the above equation can be evaluated using the definition of classical

70

Poisson Bracket and has been done below:

∂xB (t1 ) ∂pB (t2 )
{xB (t1 ), pB (t2 )} =
−
∂xB (0) ∂pB (0)

∂xF (t1 ) ∂pF (t2 )
−
{xF (t1 ), pF (t2 )} =
∂xF (0) ∂pF (0)


∂xB (t1 ) ∂pB (t2 )
= cos ω(t1 − t2 ),
∂pB (0) ∂xB (0)

∂xF (t1 ) ∂pF (t2 )
= cos ω(t1 − t2 ),
∂pF (0) ∂xF (0)

(9.5)
(9.6)

which implies that the contributions from both the bosonic and the fermionic part of
the Poisson brackets are exactly identical for supersymmetric one dimensional harmonic
oscillator. Therefore, the Poisson Bracket of the position and the momentum at different
times is given by:
{x(t1 ), p(t2 )} = 2 cos ω(t1 − t2 ).

(9.7)

We want to calculate the classical limit of OTOC using the position variables at different
times. Using the distributive property of Poisson Bracket {x(t1 ), x(t2 )} can be expanded
for our supersymmetric case in the following way:
{x(t1 ), x(t2 )} = {xB (t1 ), xB (t2 )} + {xF (t1 ), xF (t2 )} .
|
{z
}
|
{z
}
Bosonic contribution

(9.8)

Fermionic contribution

Each of the terms of the above equation can be evaluated using the definition of the classical
Poisson Bracket and has been done below:


∂xB (t1 ) ∂xB (t2 )
∂xB (t1 ) ∂xB (t2 )
1
{xB (t1 ), xB (t2 )} =
−
= − sin ω(t1 − t2 ), (9.9)
∂x (0) ∂pB (0)
∂pB (0) ∂xB (0)
ω

 B
∂xF (t1 ) ∂xF (t2 )
1
∂xF (t1 ) ∂xF (t2 )
−
= − sin ω(t1 − t2 ). (9.10)
{xF (t1 ), xF (t2 )} =
∂xF (0) ∂pF (0)
∂pF (0) ∂xF (0)
ω
which implies that the contributions from both the bosonic and the fermionic part of
the Poisson brackets are exactly identical for supersymmetric one dimensional harmonic
oscillator. Therefore, the classical Poisson Bracket of the position variables at different
times is given by:
{x(t1 ), x(t2 )} = −

2
sin ω(t1 − t2 ).
ω

(9.11)

We want to calculate the classical limit of OTOC using the momentum variables at
different times. Using the distributive property of Poisson Bracket {p(t1 ), p(t2 )} can be
expanded for our supersymmetric case and the non zero contribution are given by the
following equation:
{p(t1 ), p(t2 )} = {pB (t1 ), pB (t2 )} + {pF (t1 ), pF (t2 )} .
|
{z
}
|
{z
}
Bosonic contribution

71

Fermionic contribution

(9.12)

Each of the terms of the above equation can be evaluated using the definition of Poisson
Bracket and has been done below:


∂pB (t1 ) ∂pB (t2 )
∂pB (t1 ) ∂pB (t2 )
{pB (t1 ), pB (t2 )} =
−
= −ω sin ω(t1 − t2 ), (9.13)
∂xB (0) ∂pB (0)
∂pB (0) ∂xB (0)


∂pF (t1 ) ∂pF (t2 )
∂pF (t1 ) ∂pF (t2 )
{pF (t1 ), pF (t2 )} =
−
= −ω sin ω(t1 − t2 ). (9.14)
∂xF (0) ∂pF (0)
∂pF (0) ∂xF (0)
which implies that the contributions from both the bosonic and the fermionic part of
the Poisson brackets are exactly identical for supersymmetric one dimensional harmonic
oscillator. Therefore, the classical Poisson Bracket of the momentum variables at different
times is given by:
{p(t1 ), p(t2 )} = −2ω sin ω(t1 − t2 ).

(9.15)

Finally, the classical limit of OTOC of two point thermal classical version of the OTOCs
are given by the following expressions:

Classical limit of two point OTOCs for SUSY 1D HO
Y (1) (t1 , t2 ) = 2 cos ω(t1 − t2 ),
2
1
Y (2) (t1 , t2 ) = − sin ω(t1 − t2 ) = 2 Y (3) (t1 , t2 ),
ω
ω
(3)
Y (t1 , t2 ) = −2ω sin ω(t1 − t2 ) = ω 2 Y (2) (t1 , t2 ).

Classical limit of four point OTOCs for SUSY 1D HO
C (1) (t1 , t2 ) = 4 cos2 (ω(t1 − t2 )),
4
1
C (2) (t1 , t2 ) = 2 sin2 (ω(t1 − t2 )) = 4 C (3) (t1 , t2 ),
ω
ω
(3)
2
2
C (t1 , t2 ) = 4ω sin (ω(t1 − t2 )) = ω 4 C (2) (t1 , t2 ).
From the classical limit result of the Supersymmetric Harmonic oscillator it is clear that
the classical statistics do not produce the quantum result. Though we get a similar time
dependence which is periodic both in the classical and the quantum case, the results are
not identical to each other. The prime difference in the result lies in the fact that the
quantum result depends on the energy eigenstate. This explicit dependence of the OTOC
on the energy eigenstates is what prevents the quantum results to give the classical result
in the high temperature limit. The important factor to note here is the appearance of the
factor 2 in the two point classical correlators. It was already discussed in Sec. 3 that for

72

every potential in supersymmetry there is an associated partner potential. For the case
of Supersymmetric Harmonic oscillator it can be seen that the structure of the partner
potential is exactly similar to the original potential differing in only an overall constant
factor. So it is very easy to understand that the classical solutions for both the potentials
will be exactly identical. Now while calculating the Poisson Bracket in the context of
Supersymmetric, the bosonic and the fermionic part can be considered as two degrees of
freedom. Due to the similar solutions of the dynamical variables the contribution of the
bosonic and the fermionic degrees of freedom for the Supersymmetric harmonic oscillator
are exactly identical, which adds up to give twice the result obtained from one degree of
freedom. Another important point to note that the classical limit of the correlators do not
depend on the initial conditions of the dynamical variables.

10

Classical Limit of OTOC for Supersymmetric 1D box

The case of supersymmetric infinite potential well is not as trivial as that of the Harmonic oiscillator. The associated partner potential is not identical to that of original
potential. As has been derived in the paper [88] the partner potential for a 1D box of unit
length is given by
V2 (x) = 2π 2 cosec2 (πx).

(10.1)

whereas the well known original potential is given by

V1 (x) =

for 0 ≤ x ≤ 1
otherwise

0
∞


.

(10.2)

The classical solutions of the dynamical operators for the original potential are pretty
trivial to calculate and is obtained by trivially solving the following differential equation
d2 x
= 0.
dt2

(10.3)

The classical solutions of the operators in this case can be explicitly written as:
x1 (t) = x1 (0) + 2p1 (0) t ,

(10.4)

p1 (t) = p1 (0).

(10.5)

where x1 (0) and p1 (0) are the initial position and momentum of the particle moving in
the potential V1 (x). However, the classical solution of the particle moving in the potential
V2 (x) can be obtained by solving the following differential equation:
d2 x2
= 4π 3 cot(πx2 ) cosec2 (πx2 ).
dt2

73

(10.6)

The above differential equation can be solved explicitly to give the following solutions of
the dynamical variables:
r

√
1
c
−1
4
x2 (t) = cos
c + 4π (c1 − t) ,
(10.7)
sin
π
c + 4π 4
q
p2 (t) = c − 4π 4 cot2 (πx2 ).
(10.8)
The constants c and c1 can be fixed from the initial conditions by taking the initial position
and momentum to be x2 (0) and p2 (0) respectively and can be written as:
c = p2 (0)2 + 4π 4 cot2 [πx2 (0)] ,
√

c + 4π 4 cos(πx2 (0))
1
−1
√
sin
.
c1 = √
c
c + 4π 4

(10.9)
(10.10)

It is to be noted that the classical solution written above is valid before the particle bounces
at a boundary. After it experienxes a bounce at the boundary the momentum changes its
direction i.e p(t) → −p(t). We take this fact into account by considering the infinitesimal
deviation of the initial position and fixing the momentum as:
(x(0), p(0)) → (x(0) + δx(0), p(0)).
The bouncing of the particle at the boundary is given by the time evolution i.e.
δx(t) = (−1)n δx(0),
after the nth bounce.
We are interested in calculating the Poisson Bracket of the position operator at a certain
time with the momentum operator at another time which gives us the classical limit of the
correlator of first kind. Similarly the classical limit of the correlator of the second kind is
obtained from the Poisson Bracket of the position operators at two different times. The
classical limit of the correlator of the third kind is given by the Poisson Bracket of the
momentum operators at two different times. The Poisson Bracket for the classical limit of
first kind of correlator is given by:
{x(t1 ), p(t2 )} = {x1 (t1 ), p1 (t2 )}B + {x2 (t1 ), p2 (t2 )}F .
|
{z
}
|
{z
}
Bosonic contribution

(10.11)

Fermionic contribution

Using the classical solutions obtained in Eq. (10.4) the Poisson Bracket involving the
position and momentum of the particle moving in the potential V1 can be written as:


∂x1 (t1 ) ∂p1 (t2 )
∂x1 (t1 ) ∂p1 (t2 )
{x1 (t1 ), p1 (t2 )} =
−
= (−1)n .
(10.12)
∂x1 (0) ∂p1 (0)
∂p1 (0) ∂x1 (0)

74

In a similar manner, the Poisson Bracket involving the classical position variables of the
particle associated with the original potential can be calculated as:


∂x1 (t1 ) ∂x1 (t2 )
∂x1 (t1 ) ∂x1 (t2 )
{x1 (t1 ), x1 (t2 )} =
−
= 2 (−1)n (t2 − t1 ). (10.13)
∂x1 (0) ∂p1 (0)
∂p1 (0) ∂x1 (0)
The Poisson Bracket involving the classical momentum variables of the particle associated
with the original potential can be calculated as


∂p1 (t1 ) ∂p1 (t2 )
∂p1 (t1 ) ∂p1 (t2 )
{p1 (t1 ), p1 (t2 )} =
−
= 0.
(10.14)
∂x1 (0) ∂p1 (0)
∂p1 (0) ∂x1 (0)
In the same manner the Poisson Bracket relations of the particle associated with the
partner potential can be calculated in the following way:


X2
∂x2 (t1 ) ∂p2 (t2 )
∂x2 (t1 ) ∂p2 (t2 )
{x2 (t1 ), p2 (t2 )} =
−
= (−1)n
.
(10.15)
∂x2 (0) ∂p2 (0)
∂p2 (0) ∂x2 (0)
Q2
where the expressions of X2 and Q2 are given in Appendix B.
The Poisson Bracket involving the classical position variables of the particle associated
with the partner potential can be calculated as:


K1
∂x2 (t1 ) ∂x2 (t2 ) ∂x2 (t1 ) ∂x2 (t2 )
−
=
.
(10.16)
{x2 (t1 ), x2 (t2 )} =
∂x2 (0) ∂p2 (0)
∂p2 (0) ∂x2 (0)
K2
(10.17)

where the symbols K1 and K2 represent the following terms
K1 = (−1)n (1 + 4π 4 ) (t1 − t2 ) cos(sin−1 (α) − t1 β) cos(sin−1 (α) − t2 β),
p
K2 =
η(t1 ) η(t2 ).
Similarly, the Poisson Bracket involving the classical momentum variables of the particle
associated with the partner potential can be calculated as


∂p2 (t1 ) ∂p2 (t2 )
∂p2 (t1 ) ∂p2 (t2 )
P1
{p2 (t1 ), p2 (t2 )} =
−
=
.
(10.18)
∂x2 (0) ∂p2 (0)
∂p2 (0) ∂x2 (0)
P2
The explicit expressions for the symbols used in the above equations has been written in
the Appendix B. Therefore, the classical limit of OTOC of 2-pt correlators are given by

75

Classical limit of two point Canonical Correlators for SUSY 1D infinite
potential well



ZZ
X2
1
dxdp −βH
n
Y (t1 , t2 ) =
(−1) 1 +
e
,
Zcl
2π
Q2


ZZ
dxdp −βH
K1
1
n
(2)
2 (−1) (t2 − t1 ) +
Y (t1 , t2 ) =
e
,
Zcl
2π
K2
 
ZZ
dxdp −βH P1
1
(3)
e
.
Y (t1 , t2 ) =
Zcl
2π
P2
(1)

Classical limit of four point Canonical Correlators for SUSY 1D infinite
potential well


2
dxdp −βH
X2
n
C
e
(−1) 1 +
,
2π
Q2

2
ZZ
dxdp −βH
K1
1
n
(2)
,
e
2 (−1) (t2 − t1 ) +
C (t1 , t2 ) =
Zcl
2π
K2
 2
ZZ
1
dxdp −βH P1
(3)
C (t1 , t2 ) =
.
e
Zcl
2π
P2
(1)

1
(t1 , t2 ) =
Zcl

ZZ

The solutions of the classical dynamical variables obtained for the partner potential
associated with the 1D infinite well potential is not trivial as obtained in Eqs. (10.7)
and (10.8). The Poisson Bracket involving the partner potential degrees of freedom have
complicated terms whose explicit expressions are given in the Appendix B. An important
observation here is that the contribution of the two degrees of freedom,( one from the
original potential and the other from the partner potential) are not identical, which is
expected as the structure and hence the classical solutions of the dynamical variables are
not same for both the cases. On careful observation of the Poisson Bracket relations of the
partner potential degrees of freedom, it can be seen that there is an explicit dependence
on the initial values of the dynamical variables.

11

Numerical Results

In this section we do the following studies to ascertain the randomness properties of microcanonical and canonical correlators of the two integrable models we have considered :
• Study A :
The time dependence of 2-pt and 4-pt micro-canonical correlators for four different
states : m = 1, m = 2, m = 5, m = 10. This demonstrates the comparative behavior of micro-canonical correlators for different states under time evolution.

76

• Study B :
The time dependence of 2-pt and 4-pt canonical correlators for three different temperatures : T = 10, T = 50, T = 100 at fixed time t = 0.5. We have chosen units such
that the Boltzmann Constant, kB = 1, so that the inverse temperature, β = 1/T .
This demonstrates the comparative behaviour of canonical correlators for different
temperature under time evolution.
• Study C:
The temperature dependence of the 2-pt and 4-pt canonical correlators in the temperature range : 10 ≤ T ≤ 100. This demonstrates the explicit temperature dependence
of the canonical correlators.
Technically, one has to take the full infinite dimensional Hilbert Space associated with
the Supersymmetric 1D Potential Well for computing the correlators but it is not possible
to do that in a numerical evaluation and hence one must choose some finite number of
states in the Hilbert Space. This choice of a finite value of total number of states will
result in an error and this kind of error is known as Truncation Error. The terminology
refers to the fact that the error is arising because we have truncated the number of states to
a finite value. Here, we have chosen the truncation to be such that all states ≤ Ntrunc = 10
for numerical evaluation.
(1,2,3)
From the eigenstate representations for the correlators : ym (t1 , t2 ), Y (1,2,3) (t1 , t2 ),
(1,2,3)
cm (t1 , t2 ) and C (1,2,3) (t1 , t2 ) given in Sec. 5.8 we know that they depend only on t1 − t2
and hence we have defined t = t1 − t2 . So, the negative values of t refer to the case of
t2 > t1 and so on. We proceed to the discussion of obtained numerical results.
To make any bold comments about whether we are observing randomness or not we
need to take the commutator brackets as operators Oi & then calculate :
q
∆Oi = hOi2 iβ − hOi i2β
and check whether ∆Oi depends on time t or not. If it doesn’t then what we have is just
statistical fluctuation which is arising from the inherent quantum nature of the systems
and not from randomness. For example : Consider a QHO which as ∆x 6= 0 but it is also
independent of time, this means that at each instant of time if we take a large number of
copies then there will be some statistical variation in the values of x across different copies
but that variation will be found exactly the same at each instant of time. If ∆Oi = f (t)
then it is indeed a true signature of quantum randomness perhaps depending on functional
form of f (t). Since, we have calculated both hOi2 iβ and hOi iβ it is really easy to check for
any signature of randomness. Furthermore, we can use the same method to calculate higher
moments than ∆Oi and get more and more sensitive measurements for randomness which
is helpful if the f (t) above turns out to be some simple periodic function like f (t) ∼ cos (at)

77

and we are not satisfied with it because we have really sensitive and amazing technology
which can probe for even finer randomness signatures.
To elaborate further consider the following. We don’t really know what is quantum
uncertainty and hence to work with it we replace it by statistical uncertainty using ensembles and so on. Then uncertainty of an operator Oi represents its fluctuation across
ensembles and it is not really a true measure of randomness. The fluctuation is merely
a sampling fluctuation. Say, we take an ensemble consisting of 10000 copies of a system
then the uncertainty tells us the variation in the measured value of Oi across the copies
/ ensemble at a particular time. Now, if we obtain the ∆Oi as a function of time then
we can easily probe for randomness depending on the sensitivity of our instrument. If our
instrument is really sensitive then we can even use higher moments to check for stronger
and stronger conditions of randomness. Obtaining ∆Oi as a function of time means that
the fluctuation itself is changing and hence this can be a true signature of randomness this
ofcourse depends on what kind of function we get.

11.1

Supersymmetric 1D Infinite Potential Well

For numerical evaluation we have chosen : L = 1 & 2m = 1, where L is the length of the
box in which a particle of mass m is confined. We also consider ~ = 1.
• In Figs. 5, 6 and 7 we perform the Study A on the 2-pt micro-canonical correlators
(1,2,3)
ym (t1 , t2 ) for Supersymmetric 1D Infinite Potential Well.
(1,2,3)

– We observe that the correlators ym (t1 , t2 ) are periodic and that their period(1)
icity does not vary with the state. For the correlator ym (t1 , t2 ) the periodicity
is ∆t ' 0.65. At present, there are no studies for the non-Supersymmetric case
(2,3)
for ym (t1 , t2 ) and we plan to do the same in a work which is to appear very
shortly.
– The amplitude of the correlators increases with increasing m which primarily
comes about because we have :
(1)
−i × ym
(t1 , t2 ) ∼ Emk = Em − Ek = π 2 m2 − k 2



in the correlator’s eigenstate representation which increases with increasing state
number.
– It is also observed that with higher and higher excited state the number of nodes
increases and takes on the shape of a wave-packet. This is so because as we go
to higher and higher excited states the high frequency modes become more and
more prominent. So the comparison of the scaling of the number of nodes here
with non-Supersymmetric case is also important job to perform in near future.

78

40
35
30

−i×y(1)
m (t)

25
20
15
10

SUSY 1D Potential Well : y(1)
m (t)
10
8
6
4
2
0
−2
−4
−6
−8
−10
−0.3 −0.2 −0.1 0

m=1
m=2
m=5
m=10

0.1 0.2 0.3

5
0
−5
−10
−1

−0.5

0

Time (t)

0.5

Figure 5: Supersymmetric 1D Infinite Potential Well : Behavior of 2-pt micro-canonical
(1)
correlator ym (t1 , t2 ) = − hΨm |[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]|Ψm i with time for different m. We have chosen
t1 − t2 = t as there is only one relevant time parameter.
(1,2,3)

– In the insets of Figs. 5, 6 and 7 we have also plotted y10 (t1 , t2 ) to draw a
contrast of the boundary / truncation state with the other states. The m = 10
correlators are lacking in feature, sometimes deceptively so, as compared to the
other states which should come as no surprise because we have set our truncation
at Ntrunc = 10. Furthermore, this state appears to violate the properties shown
by other intermediate states but in fact this is merely an artefact of m = 10
being the truncation state and that contribution of states with m > 10 could
not be accommodated in the calculations for m = 10.
(2,3)

– The correlators ym (t1 , t2 ) largely follow the same patterns and behaviour as
(1)
(2)
shown by ym (t1 , t2 ) with two exceptions. First, the amplitude for ym (t1 , t2 )
(3)
correlator is suppressed whereas that of ym (t1 , t2 ) is amplified, both by a factor
(1)
of O(101 ), as compared to ym (t1 , t2 ). This comes from the absence of Emk

79

1

SUSY 1D Potential Well : y(2)
m (t)

0.8

0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
−0.05
−0.1
−0.15
−0.2
−0.3 −0.2 −0.1 0

0.7
0.6

−i×y(2)
m (t)

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

m=1
m=2
m=5
m=10

0.1 0.2 0.3

0.1
0
−0.1
−0.2
−1

−0.5

0

Time (t)

0.5

1

Figure 6: Supersymmetric 1D Infinite Potential Well : Behavior of 2-pt micro-canonical
(2)
correlator ym (t1 , t2 ) = − hΨm |[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]|Ψm i with time for different m. We have chosen
t1 − t2 = t as there is only one relevant time parameter.
(2)

(3)

factor in ym (t1 , t2 ) and the presence of an additional Emk factor in ym (t1 , t2 )
(1)
as compared to ym (t1 , t2 ). Second, contrasting behaviour in the symmetry
(1)
(2,3)
properties in t. Whereas, ym (t1 , t2 ) is symmetric in t, ym (t1 , t2 ) are antisymmetric.
• We present the results of performing Study B and Study C on 2-pt canonical correlators Y (i) (t1 , t2 ) as follows
– In Figs. 8, 9 and 10 we perform Study B on the 2-pt canonical correlators
Y (1,2,3) (t1 , t2 ). We observe that the correlators shows periodic behaviour for the
different chosen values of temperature. We observe that for Y 1 (t1 , t2 ), the mid
temperature value 50 shows the minimum amplitude, whereas lower value of
temperature (10) has greater amplitude. However there is a sudden increase

80

SUSY 1D Potential Well : y(3)
m (t)
3000

1000
800
600
400
200
0
−200
−400
−600
−800
−1000
−0.3 −0.2 −0.1 0

2500
2000
−i×y(3)
m (t)

1500
1000
500

m=1
m=2
m=5
m=10

0.1 0.2 0.3

0
−500
−1000
−1

−0.5

0

Time (t)

0.5

Figure 7: Supersymmetric 1D Infinite Potential Well : Behavior of 2-pt micro-canonical
(3)
correlator ym (t1 , t2 ) = − hΨm |[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]|Ψm i with time for different m. We have chosen
t1 − t2 = t as there is only one relevant time parameter.
in the amplitude of the correlator for temperatures in the higher value range
as can be seen from Fig. 8. In correlators Y 2 (t1 , t2 ) and Y 3 (t1 , t2 ) however we
follow a gradual pattern of decreasing amplitude with increasing in temperature as observed from Fig. 9 and Fig. 10. To have a better understanding of
the temperature dependence of the 2-pt correlators we plot them with varying
temperature keeping the time constant.
– In Figs. 11, 12 and 13 we perform Study C on the 2-pt canonical correlators
Y (1,2,3) (t1 , t2 ). We plot, respectively, Y (1,2,3) (t1 , t2 ) which are the thermal or
(1,2,3)
canonical correlators corresponding to ym (t1 , t2 ) respectively with respect to
temperature. It is clearly visible that for very low temperatures the canonical
correlators are constant. However after a certain value of the temperature the
correlators decays rapidly and falls off to zero within a small temperature range

81

1

1.2

SUSY 1D Potential Well : Y(1) (t)
T = 10
T = 50
T = 100

1
0.8

−i×Y(1) (t)

0.6
0.4
0.2
0

−0.2
−0.4
−0.6
−0.8
−1

−0.5

0

Time (t)

0.5

Figure 8: Supersymmetric
Infinite Potential Well : Behavior of 2-pt canonical correlaP −βE1D
(1)
m
hΨm |[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]|Ψm i with time for different temperatures.
tor Y (t1 , t2 ) = − m e
We have chosen t1 − t2 = t as there is only one relevant time parameter.
– In Figs. 14, 15 and 16 we perform the Study A on the 4-pt micro-canonical
(1,2,3)
correlators cm (t1 , t2 ) for Supersymmetric 1D Infinite Potential Well.
(1,2,3)

– We observe that the correlators cm (t1 , t2 ) are periodic and that their period(1)
icity does not vary with the state. For the correlator cm (t1 , t2 ) the periodicity
is ∆t ' 0.35 which is roughly half of the corresponding 2-pt micro-canonical
correlator. We note that this is approximately the same periodicity, within numerical error, observed in the case of non-Supersymmetric 1D Infinite Potential
Well as obtained by Hashimoto et al. [70]. Hence, we conclude that introducing Supersymmetry in integrable QMcal models does not affect the periodicity
of four-pt micro-canonical correlators. At present, there are no studies for the
(2,3)
non-Supersymmetric case for cm (t1 , t2 ) and we plan to do the same in a work
which is to appear very shortly.

82

1

SUSY 1D Potential Well : Y(2) (t)

0.05

T = 10
T = 50
T = 100

0.04
0.03
−i×Y(2) (t)

0.02
0.01
0

−0.01
−0.02
−0.03
−0.04
−1

−0.5

0

Time (t)

0.5

Figure 9: Supersymmetric
Infinite Potential Well : Behavior of 2-pt canonical correlaP −βE1D
(2)
m
hΨm |[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]|Ψm i with time for different temperatures.
tor Y (t1 , t2 ) = − m e
We have chosen t1 − t2 = t as there is only one relevant time parameter.
(i)

(i)

– Other properties of cm (t1 , t2 ) are much like ym (t1 , t2 ). We observe similar increase in the amplitude of the correlators with increasing m. The scaling of amplitudes in the case of 4-pt micro-canonical correlators is with a factor of O(104 )
(i)
instead of a factor O(101 ) as is the case with ym (t1 , t2 ) such that the relative
(3)
(2)
(1)
order of amplitudes can be arranged as : cm (t1 , t2 ) > cm (t1 , t2 ) > cm (t1 , t2 ).
(i)

– All cm (t1 , t2 ) are symmetric about t = 0 which means that to these 4-pt microcanonical correlators it does not matter whether t1 > t2 or t1 < t2 .
– In Figs. 17, 18 and 19 we perform Study B on the 4-pt canonical correlators. We
plot the 4-pt canonical correlators for three different temperatures. We observe
that all the 4-pt correlators shows periodic behaviour irrespective of the value
of the temperature. it is also observed that for each correlator the amplitude
increases with the increasing temperature. To have a better understanding of

83

1

SUSY 1D Potential Well : Y(3) (t)

40

T = 10
T = 50
T = 100

30

−i×Y(3) (t)

20
10
0

−10
−20
−30
−1

−0.5

0

Time (t)

0.5

Figure 10: Supersymmetric
Infinite Potential Well : Behavior of 2-pt canonical correP −βE1D
(3)
m
hΨm |[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]|Ψm i with time for different temperatures.
lator Y (t1 , t2 ) = − m e
We have chosen t1 − t2 = t as there is only one relevant time parameter.
the temperature dependence of the 4-pt correlators we plot them with varying
temperature keeping the time constant.
– In Figs. 20, 21 and 22 we perform Study C on the 4 point canonical correlators.
we plot, respectively, C (1,2,3) (t1 , t2 ) which are the thermal or canonical correla(1,2,3)
tors corresponding to cm (t1 , t2 ) respectively with respect to temperature. It
is observed that for low temperatures the 4-pt correlators show negligible value.
However after a certain threshold temperature the 4-pt correlators increases and
then saturates to a certain finite value.
• The temperature dependent plots for the 2-pt and the 4-pt canonical correlators suggests that both the 2 and the 4-pt canonical correlators are essential if one wants to
have a complete understanding of the phenomenon of Quantum randomness. The

84

1

0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0.1

100

105

Figure 11: Supersymmetric 1D Infinite Potential Well : Behavior of 2-pt canonical correlators with temperature for a particular value of the time interval . We have chosen
t1 − t2 = t as there is only one relevant time parameter.

0.025
0.020
0.015
0.010
0.005
0.000
0.1

100

105

Figure 12: Supersymmetric 1D Infinite Potential Well : Behavior of 2-pt canonical correlators with temperature for a particular value of the time interval . We have chosen
t1 − t2 = t as there is only one relevant time parameter.

85

4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
0.1

100

105

Figure 13: Supersymmetric 1D Infinite Potential Well : Behavior of 2-pt canonical correlators with temperature for a particular value of the time interval . We have chosen
t1 − t2 = t as there is only one relevant time parameter.
plots suggests that 2-pt correlators are a better probe for understanding Quantum
randomness at low temperatures whereas at high temperatures it is actually the 4-pt
correlators which is more significant. However in the mid-temperature range the 2-pt
and the 4-pt correlators have exactly opposite behavior. Hence, to understand the
significance of temperature in this range on any Supersymmetric Quantum mechanical model having knowledge of both 2 and 4-pt correlators is of utmost importance.

11.2

Supersymmetric 1D Harmonic oscillator

For numerical evaluation we have chosen : ω = 1 & 2M = 1, where ω is the frequency of
the oscillator in which a particle of mass M is confined. We also consider ~ = 1.
• In Figs. 23, 24 and 25 we perform the Study A on the 2-pt micro-canonical correlators
(1,2,3)
ym (t1 , t2 ) for Supersymmetric 1D Harmonic Oscillator.
(1,2,3)

– We observe that the correlators ym
odicity does not vary with the state.

(1)

(t1 , t2 ) are periodic and that their peri-

– The amplitude of the correlator ym (t1 , t2 ) initially increases with increasing
m which can be seen from the greater amplitude for m=2 than the amplitude

86

SUSY 1D Potential Well : c(1)
m (t)

1024

m=1
m=2
m=5
m=10

256

c(1)
m (t)

64

16

4

1
−1

−0.5

0

0.5

Time (t)

Figure 14: Supersymmetric 1D Infinite Potential Well : Behavior of 4-pt micro-canonical
(1)
correlator cm (t1 , t2 ) = − hΨm |[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]2 |Ψm i with time for different m. We have chosen
t1 − t2 = t as there is only one relevant time parameter.
for m=1. However with further increase of m the amplitude of the correlator
shows negligible change and the amplitudes of the higher states almost overlaps.
This suggests that for the lower energy states the micro-canonical correlators
depend on the energy state in which it is calculated. However this state dependency goes away when calculated for the higher energy states. This can also
be understood from the analytical expression obtained for the micro-canonical
correlators obtained in Sec. 6 (calculated for Harmonic Oscillator of unit mass
i.e M = 1). The micro-canonical
state dependence
p a non trivial
p correlators have

in the form of the factor 1 + m(m + 1) − m(m − 1) which reduces simply
to 1 for higher energy states.
(1,2,3)

– In Figs. 23, 24 and 25 we have also plotted y10 (t1 , t2 ) to draw a contrast of
the boundary / truncation state with the other states. The m = 10 correla-

87

1

SUSY 1D Potential Well : c(2)
m (t)

0.06

m=1
m=2
m=5
m=10

0.05

c(2)
m (t)

0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
−1

−0.5

0

Time (t)

0.5

Figure 15: Supersymmetric 1D Infinite Potential Well : Behavior of 4-pt micro-canonical
(2)
correlator cm (t1 , t2 ) = − hΨm |[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]2 |Ψm i with time for different m. We have chosen
t1 − t2 = t as there is only one relevant time parameter.
tors are lacking in feature, sometimes deceptively so, as compared to the other
states which should come as no surprise because we have set our truncation at
Ntrunc = 10. Furthermore, this state appears to violate the properties shown by
other intermediate states but in fact this is merely an artefact of m = 10 being
the truncation state and that contribution of states with m > 10 could not be
accommodated in the calculations for m = 10.
(2,3)

– The correlators ym (t1 , t2 ) largely follow the same patterns and behaviour as
(1)
(2)
shown by ym (t1 , t2 ) with two exceptions. First, the amplitude for ym (t1 , t2 )
(3)
correlator is amplified whereas that of ym (t1 , t2 ) is suppressed, as compared
(1)
to ym (t1 , t2 ). The order of the amplification of the micro-canonical correlator
(2)
(1)
ym (t1 , t2 ) is exactly twice the amplitude of ym (t1 , t2 ) which is merely a reflection
of the fact that the mass of the oscillator has been chosen as 1/2. Similarly the

88

1

SUSY 1D Potential Well : c(3)
m (t)

1.0×109

m=1
m=2
m=5
m=10

c(3)
m (t)

1.0×106

1.0×103

1.0×100
−1

−0.5

0

Time (t)

0.5

Figure 16: Supersymmetric 1D Infinite Potential Well : Behavior of 4-pt micro-canonical
(3)
correlator cm (t1 , t2 ) = − hΨm |[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]2 |Ψm i with time for different m. We have chosen
t1 − t2 = t as there is only one relevant time parameter.
(3)

suppression of ym (t1 , t2 ) is exactly by the same factor. Second, contrasting
(1)
behaviour in the symmetry properties in t. Whereas, ym (t1 , t2 ) is symmetric in
(2,3)
t, ym (t1 , t2 ) are anti-symmetric.
– In Figs. 26, 27 and 28 we perform Study B on the 2-pt canonical correlators
Y (1,2,3) (t1 , t2 ). We observe that the correlators shows periodic behaviour for the
different chosen values of temperature. We observe that each of the 2-pt correlators behave identically with respect to temperature. The amplitude of each of
them decreases with increasing temperature. To have a better understanding of
the temperature dependence of the 2-pt correlators we plot them with varying
temperature keeping the time constant.
– In Figs. 29, 30 and 31 we present the results of performing Study C on 2pt canonical correlators Y (i) (t1 , t2 ). Here we plot Y (1,2,3) (t1 , t2 ) which are the

89

1

SUSY 1D Potential Well : C(1) (t)

18

T = 10
T = 50
T = 100

16
14

C(1) (t)

12
10
8
6
4
2
0
−1

−0.5

0

0.5

Time (t)

Figure 17: Supersymmetric
Well : Behavior of 4-pt canonical correlaP −βEm1D Infinite Potential
2
(1)
hΨm |[x(t1 ), p(t2 )] |Ψm i with time for different temperatures.
tor C (t1 , t2 ) = − m e
We have chosen t1 − t2 = t as there is only one relevant time parameter.
(1,2,3)

thermal or canonical correlators corresponding to ym (t1 , t2 ) respectively with
respect to temperature. It is clearly visible that for very low temperatures the
canonical correlators are constant. After a certain value of the temperature the
amplitude of the correlator shows a gradual increase. It reaches a maximum for
a particular value of the temperature and then decays exponentially to zero.
• In Figs. 32, 33 and 34 we perform the Study A on the 4-pt micro-canonical correlators
(1,2,3)
cm (t1 , t2 ) for Supersymmetric Harmonic Oscillator.
(1,2,3)

– We observe that the correlators cm (t1 , t2 ) are periodic and that their period(1)
icity does not vary with the state. For the correlator cm (t1 , t2 ) the periodicity
is roughly half of the corresponding 2-pt micro-canonical correlator.

90

1

SUSY 1D Potential Well : C(2) (t)

0.02

T = 10
T = 50
T = 100

C(2) (t)

0.015

0.01

0.005

0
−1

−0.5

0

0.5

Time (t)

Figure 18: Supersymmetric
Well : Behavior of 4-pt canonical correlaP −βEm1D Infinite Potential
2
(2)
hΨm |[x(t1 ), x(t2 )] |Ψm i with time for different temperatures.
tor C (t1 , t2 ) = − m e
We have chosen t1 − t2 = t as there is only one relevant time parameter.
(i)

(i)

– Other properties of cm (t1 , t2 ) are much like ym (t1 , t2 ). We observe similar
change in the amplitude of the correlators with changing m. The scaling of am(2)
(3)
plitudes in the case of 4-pt micro-canonical correlators, cm (t1 , t2 ) and cm (t1 , t2 )
(1)
is exactly by a factor of 2 than cm (t1 , t2 ) . This is because for the 4-pt correlators there is a mass square dependence unlike the 2-pt correlators which has just
mass dependence. The amplitudes of the respective 4-pt correlators can also be
found to be exactly half of the amplitudes of its 2-pt counterpart. This is obvious from the time dependent functions appearing in the case of Supersymmetric
Harmonic oscillator.
(i)

– All cm (t1 , t2 ) are symmetric about t = 0 which means that to these 4-pt microcanonical correlators it does not matter whether t1 > t2 or t1 < t2 .
– In Figs. 35, 36 and 37 we perform Study B on the 4-pt canonical correlators

91

1

4.5×104

SUSY 1D Potential Well : C(3) (t)
T = 10
T = 50
T = 100

4.0×104
3.5×104

C(3) (t)

3.0×104
2.5×104
2.0×104
1.5×104
1.0×104
5.0×103
0.0×100
−1

−0.5

0

Time (t)

0.5

Figure 19: Supersymmetric
Well : Behavior of 4-pt canonical correlaP −βEm1D Infinite Potential
2
(3)
hΨm |[p(t1 ), p(t2 )] |Ψm i with time for different temperatures.
tor C (t1 , t2 ) = − m e
We have chosen t1 − t2 = t as there is only one relevant time parameter.
C (1,2,3) (t1 , t2 ). We observe that the correlators shows periodic behaviour for
the different chosen values of temperature. We observe that each of the 4pt correlators behave identically with respect to temperature which is exactly
opposite in character from the 2-pt canonical correlators. The amplitude of each
of them increases with increasing temperature. To have a better understanding
of the temperature dependence of the 4-pt correlators we plot them with varying
temperature keeping the time constant.
– In Figs. 38, 39 and 40 we present the results of performing Study C on 4pt canonical correlators C (i) (t1 , t2 ). Here we plot C (1,2,3) (t1 , t2 ) which are the
(1,2,3)
thermal or canonical correlators corresponding to ym (t1 , t2 ) respectively with
respect to temperature. It is clearly visible that for very low temperatures the
4-pt canonical correlators have negligible amplitudes. After a certain value of

92

1

80
60
40
20
0
0.1

100

105

Figure 20: Supersymmetric 1D Infinite Potential Well : Behavior of 4-pt canonical correlators with temperature for a particular value of the time interval . We have chosen
t1 − t2 = t as there is only one relevant time parameter.

0.016
0.014
0.012
0.010
0.008
0.006
0.1

100

105

Figure 21: Supersymmetric 1D Infinite Potential Well : Behavior of 4-pt canonical correlators with temperature for a particular value of the time interval . We have chosen
t1 − t2 = t as there is only one relevant time parameter.

93

500 000
400 000
300 000
200 000
100 000
0
0.1

105

100

Figure 22: Supersymmetric 1D Infinite Potential Well : Behavior of 4-pt canonical correlators with temperature for a particular value of the time interval . We have chosen
t1 − t2 = t as there is only one relevant time parameter.
50
40

−i×y(1)
m (t)

30
20
10

SUSY Harmonic Oscillator : y(1)
m (t)
1.5

m=1
m=2
m=5
m=10

1
0.5
0
−0.5
−1

−1.5
−10

−5

0

5

10

0
−10
−10

−5

0

Time (t)

5

Figure 23: Supersymmetric Harmonic Oscillator : Behavior of 2-pt micro-canonical cor(1)
relator ym (t1 , t2 ) = − hΨm |[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]|Ψm i with time for different m. We have chosen
t1 − t2 = t as there is only one relevant time parameter.

94

10

80
70
60

−i×y(2)
m (t)

50
40
30
20

SUSY Harmonic Oscillator : y(2)
m (t)
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
−0.5
−1
−1.5
−2
−2.5
−10

m=1
m=2
m=5
m=10

−5

0

5

10

10
0
−10
−20
−10

−5

0

5

Time (t)

10

Figure 24: Supersymmetric Harmonic Oscillator : Behavior of 2-pt micro-canonical cor(2)
relator ym (t1 , t2 ) = − hΨm |[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]|Ψm i with time for different m. We have chosen
t1 − t2 = t as there is only one relevant time parameter.
20

SUSY Harmonic Oscillator : y(3)
m (t)
0.6

m=1
m=2
m=5
m=10

0.4
15

0.2

−i×y(3)
m (t)

0
10

−0.2
−0.4

5

−0.6
−10

−5

0

5

10

0

−5
−10

−5

0

Time (t)

5

Figure 25: Supersymmetric Harmonic Oscillator : Behavior of 2-pt micro-canonical cor(3)
relator ym (t1 , t2 ) = − hΨm |[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]|Ψm i with time for different m. We have chosen
t1 − t2 = t as there is only one relevant time parameter.

95

10

SUSY Harmonic Oscillator : Y(1) (t)

0.6

T = 10
T = 50
T = 100

0.5
0.4

−i×Y(1) (t)

0.3
0.2
0.1
0

−0.1
−0.2
−0.3
−0.4
−10

−5

0

Time (t)

5

10

Figure 26: Supersymmetric
Harmonic Oscillator : Behavior of 2-pt canonical correlator
P −βEm
(1)
Y (t1 , t2 ) = − m e
hΨm |[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]|Ψm i with time for different temperatures. We
have chosen t1 − t2 = t as there is only one relevant time parameter.
1.2

SUSY Harmonic Oscillator : Y(2) (t)
T = 10
T = 50
T = 100

1
0.8

(t)

0.6

−i×Y

(2)

0.4
0.2
0

−0.2
−0.4
−0.6
−0.8
−10

−5

0

Time (t)

5

Figure 27: Supersymmetric
Harmonic Oscillator : Behavior of 2-pt canonical correlator
P −βEm
(2)
Y (t1 , t2 ) = − m e
hΨm |[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]|Ψm i with time for different temperatures. We
have chosen t1 − t2 = t as there is only one relevant time parameter.

96

10

0.3

SUSY Harmonic Oscillator : Y(3) (t)
T = 10
T = 50
T = 100

0.25
0.2

−i×Y(3) (t)

0.15
0.1
0.05
0

−0.05
−0.1
−0.15
−0.2
−10

−5

0

Time (t)

5

10

Figure 28: Supersymmetric
Harmonic Oscillator : Behavior of 2-pt canonical correlator
P −βEm
(3)
Y (t1 , t2 ) = − m e
hΨm |[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]|Ψm i with time for different temperatures. We
have chosen t1 − t2 = t as there is only one relevant time parameter.

0.0
- 0.1
- 0.2
- 0.3
- 0.4
- 0.5
- 0.6
- 0.7
0.1

100

10 5

Figure 29: Supersymmetric 1D Harmonic Oscillator: Behavior of 2-pt canonical correlators with temperature for a particular value of the time interval . We have chosen
t1 − t2 = t as there is only one relevant time parameter.

97

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.1

100

10 5

Figure 30: Supersymmetric 1D Harmonic Oscillator: Behavior of 2-pt canonical correlators with temperature for a particular value of the time interval . We have chosen
t1 − t2 = t as there is only one relevant time parameter.

0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0.1

100

10 5

Figure 31: Supersymmetric 1D Harmonic Oscillator: Behavior of 2-pt canonical correlators with temperature for a particular value of the time interval . We have chosen
t1 − t2 = t as there is only one relevant time parameter.

98

SUSY Harmonic Oscillator : c(1)
m (t)
1.2

m=1
m=2
m=5
m=10

1

200

0.8
0.6

c(1)
m (t)

150

0.4
0.2
0

100

−4

−2

0

2

4

50

0

−4

−2

0

2

Time (t)

4

Figure 32: Supersymmetric Harmonic Oscillator : Behavior of 4-pt micro-canonical cor(1)
relator cm (t1 , t2 ) = − hΨm |[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]2 |Ψm i with time for different m. We have chosen
t1 − t2 = t as there is only one relevant time parameter.

SUSY Harmonic Oscillator : c(2)
m (t)

1000

4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0

c(2)
m (t)

800

600

400

m=1
m=2
m=5
m=10

−4

−2

0

2

4

200

0

−4

−2

0

Time (t)

2

4

Figure 33: Supersymmetric Harmonic Oscillator : Behavior of 4-pt micro-canonical cor(2)
relator cm (t1 , t2 ) = − hΨm |[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]2 |Ψm i with time for different m. We have chosen
t1 − t2 = t as there is only one relevant time parameter.

99

SUSY Harmonic Oscillator : c(3)
m (t)

70

0.3

m=1
m=2
m=5
m=10

0.25

60

0.2

c(3)
m (t)

50

0.15
0.1

40

0.05
0

30

−4

−2

0

2

4

20
10
0

−4

−2

0

Time (t)

2

4

Figure 34: Supersymmetric Harmonic Oscillator : Behavior of 4-pt micro-canonical cor(3)
relator cm (t1 , t2 ) = − hΨm |[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]2 |Ψm i with time for different m. We have chosen
t1 − t2 = t as there is only one relevant time parameter.

SUSY Harmonic Oscillator : C(1) (t)
T = 10
T = 50
T = 100

10

(1)

C (t)

8

6

4

2

0

−4

−2

0

Time (t)

2

4

Figure 35: Supersymmetric
Harmonic Oscillator : Behavior of 4-pt canonical correlator
P −βEm
(1)
C (t1 , t2 ) = − m e
hΨm |[x(t1 ), p(t2 )]2 |Ψm i with time for different temperatures. We
have chosen t1 − t2 = t as there is only one relevant time parameter.

100

SUSY Harmonic Oscillator : C(2) (t)

45

T = 10
T = 50
T = 100

40
35

C(2)(t)

30
25
20
15
10
5
0

−4

−2

0

Time (t)

2

4

Figure 36: Supersymmetric
Harmonic Oscillator : Behavior of 4-pt canonical correlator
P −βEm
(2)
C (t1 , t2 ) = − m e
hΨm |[x(t1 ), x(t2 )]2 |Ψm i with time for different temperatures. We
have chosen t1 − t2 = t as there is only one relevant time parameter.

SUSY Harmonic Oscillator : C(3) (t)

3

T = 10
T = 50
T = 100

2.5

C(3)(t)

2
1.5
1
0.5
0

−4

−2

0

Time (t)

2

4

Figure 37: Supersymmetric
Harmonic Oscillator : Behavior of 4-pt canonical correlator
P −βEm
(3)
C (t1 , t2 ) = − m e
hΨm |[p(t1 ), p(t2 )]2 |Ψm i with time for different temperatures. We
have chosen t1 − t2 = t as there is only one relevant time parameter.

101

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0.1

100

10 5

Figure 38: Supersymmetric 1D Harmonic Oscillator : Behavior of 4-pt canonical correlators with temperature for a particular value of the time interval . We have chosen
t1 − t2 = t as there is only one relevant time parameter.

8
6
4
2
0
0.1

100

10 5

Figure 39: Supersymmetric 1D Harmonic Oscillator : Behavior of 4-pt canonical correlators with temperature for a particular value of the time interval . We have chosen
t1 − t2 = t as there is only one relevant time parameter.

102

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.1

100

10 5

Figure 40: Supersymmetric 1D Harmonic Oscillator : Behavior of 4-pt canonical correlators with temperature for a particular value of the time interval . We have chosen
t1 − t2 = t as there is only one relevant time parameter.
the temperature the amplitude of the correlator starts increasing and finally
saturates to a finite value.
• The temperature dependent plots shows the significance of computing the 4-pt and
the 2-pt correlators to study the phenomenon of quantum randomness for a Supersymmetric quantum mechanical model. From the plots it can be seen that for very
low temperatures the 2-pt correlators shows a certain finite value whereas the 4-pt
correlators are almost negligible. On the other hand at very high temperatures the 2pt correlators are almost zero whereas the 4-pt correlators shows certain finite value.
This suggests that to understand quantum randomness for a Supersymmetric model
at very low temperature, the results from the 4-pt correlators can be misleading
and similarly at high temperatures the 2-pt correlators might not be an appropriate
quantity to study randomness. However to understand quantum randomness at the
mid temperature range both 2 and 4-pt correlators play significant role. We feel this
shows the necessity for computing the 2-pt correlators.

103

12

Conclusions

To summarize, in this work, we have addressed the following issues to study the OTOC
in the context of supersymmetric quantum mechanics:
• We apply the computational techniques of recently developing methodology of out of
time ordered correlators (OTOCs) to study the phenomenon of time disorder averaging for a given quantum statistical ensemble or quantum randomness for two very
well known integrable one dimensional quantum mechanical models viz. Harmonic
Oscillator and 1D potential well in the context of one dimensional supersymmetric
quantum mechanics. We show that to develop a complete understanding of the underlying randomness in the quantum system, not only the correlators constructed
from different operators at different times scales are important, but also the correlators constructed from similar quantum mechanical operators at different time scales,
play a pivotal role.
• We have constructed all the temperature independent micro-canonical and temperature dependent canonical un-normalized and normalized version of these OTOCs in
the eigenstate representation of the supersymmetric time independent Hamiltonian
of the quantum system and represent all of them in a general model independent
way. From the previous study it is expected that the OTOCs in the eigenstate representation one should not expect any chaotic behaviour i.e. the exponential growth
with respect to the time scale in the correlators. However, one can get a broader
knowledge of some other aspects of quantum randomness, which might capture the
random behaviour in the correlators in terms of non-chaoticity. From our analysis it
is expected that a large class of quantum mechanical models will be covered which
provide the signature of quantum mechanical randomness in general.
• The explicit calculation of the 4-pt correlator C (1) (t1 , t2 ) for the Supersymmetric Harmonic Oscillator, shows the significance of the introduction of supersymmetry within
the context of quantum mechanics compared to the framework of quantum mechanics without having any supersymmetry. Supersymmetry introduces an energy state
dependence on the temperature independent micro-canonical correlators which is
usually not appear in the framework without having supersymmetry in the quantum
mechanics description. Apart from the dependence on the energy states the canonical
correlators have an additional dependence on temperature, which is also a different
and notable feature compared to the results obtained from quantum mechanical set
up without having supersymmetry. This energy state and temperature dependence
of the correlators differentiates a Supersymmetric and a Non-Supersymmetric Harmonic oscillator[70] though the time dependence in the OTOCs remains same. Also,
particularly for the Supersymmetric Harmonic Oscillator we have found that the

104

normalized four point OTOCs that are made up of same operators at different time
scales show exactly same behaviour, which implies they are not independent of each
other. However, this statement might not be true for other integrable models. On
the other hand, in the un-normalized version of these two correlators we have found
exact same time dependence, but the overall frequency dependent normalization factors will be different, which implies that they are proportional to each other in this
case.
• The classical limit however matches with the non supersymmetric case apart from a
factor of 2 which can be inferred from the fact that in a supersymmetric quantum
mechanical model there are two degrees of freedom, one from the original potential
and the other associated with the partner potential. The time dependence of the
classical and the quantum version of the correlators are exactly identical. However
the temperature dependence observed in the quantum case vanishes for its classical
counterpart, which is obviously a important finding from our computation.
• We observe a similar temperature and state dependence on the correlators for the
Supersymmetric 1D Infinite potential well. However, it is interesting to note that
[70] also observed this state and temperature dependence for Non-Supersymmetric
Infinite potential well. The behaviour of the only correlator studied in [70] is exactly
identical to what we observe for the Supersymmetric case. The correlator showed
increase in the amplitude with increasing state number and higher temperatures
which is exactly what we observe here. Hence we conclude that introduction of
supersymmetry does not introduce new features in the case of 1D Infinite potential
well.
• The significance of supersymmetry in 1D potential well however can be realised from
its classical counterpart which is markedly different from what is obtained in the nonsupersymmetric case. The classical limit of OTOC for the 1D non supersymmetric
infinite potential well is independent of time and is merely a constant, whereas for
the supersymmetric case there is a non-trivial time dependence, which is obviously
a new finding from our computations.
The future prospects of this work are as follows:
• In this paper we have restricted ourselves in considering only 2 and 4-pt correlation
functions, to study quantum randomness in various Supersymmetric QM models.
However a more generalised approach would be to consider the multipoint correlation functions to have a better understanding about the randomness underlying the
system. We have an immediate plan to carry forward the work along this direction
very soon.

105

• The study of OTOCs can be used to understand quantum randomness in various
quantum mechanical models which are of prime significance in various condensed
matter, nuclear and atomic physics models. Particularly the time dependent Hamiltonians we have not studied in this paper where this eigenstate formalism and related
simplification to determine OTOC will not work. In that case one needs to use the
general definition and representation of OTOC in terms of the well known Schwinger
Keldysh formalism. We have some future plan on that direction as well.
• Use of the other types of correlators defined in this paper can be used to study some
of the well understood QM models, to have an insight on the lost information of
quantum randomness. We are very hopeful that incorporating the study of these
additional correlators which we have defined and evaluated in this paper can able
to capture more broader perspective on time disorder averaging phenomena through
quantum randomness, rather only give insight about quantum mechanical chaos from
the temporal growth of the correlators.
• Very recently in [110–114] the authors have studied various relevant measures for
an entangled open quantum system. The study of OTOCs for such type of entangled systems [115–118] will be quite relevant for understanding the rtime disorder
averaging phenomena and chaos for such an entangled OQS.
• Last but not the least, very recent we have proposed a detailed mechanism and
framework using which one can able to compute the OTOC within the framework
of primordial cosmological perturbation theory by making use of the gauge invariant
scalar perturbations and its associated canonically conjugate momenta [69] and finally found out the chaotic like behaviour in the representative cosmological version
of OTOC. However, in that paper we have not reported anything about the other
possible two operators which we have introduced in this paper. At present we are
working on that direction and very hopeful to get the certain non-trivial features of
time disorder averaging which might have application to explain various cosmologically relevant phenomena within the evolution history of our universe, which was not
explored earlier at all.

106

Acknowledgements
SC is thankful to Latham Boyle, Robert Myers, Andrew R. Liddle, Douglas Stanford, Alexi
Y. Kitaev, Paul Joseph Steinhardt, Martin Bojowald, Eugenio Bianchi, Sudhakar Panda,
Soumitra SenGupta, Sumit Ranjan Das, Igor R. Klebanov, Eva Silverstein, Leonardo Senatore, Subhashish Banerjee, Anupam Mazumdar, Savan Kharel for enormous helpful discussions, suggestions and support. The Post-Doctoral research fellowship of SC is supported
by the ERC Consolidator grant 772295 “Qosmology” of Professor Jean-Luc Lehners. SC
take this opportunity to thank sincerely to Jean-Luc Lehners for his constant support
and inspiration. SC thank Latham Boyle for inviting at Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics (PITP), Zohar Komargodski for inviting at Simons Center for Geometry and
Physics (SCGP), Stony Brook University, Leonardo Senatore for inviting at Institute for
Theoretical Physics, Stanford University, Juan Martı́n Maldacena for inviting at Workshop on Qubits and Spacetime, Institute for Advanced Studies (IAS), Princeton, Paul
Joseph Steinhardt for inviting at Department of Physics, Princeton University, Martin
Bojowald for inviting at The Institute for Gravitation and the Cosmos (IGC), Department of Physics, Eberly College of Science, Pennsylvania State University (University
Park campus), Sudhakar Panda for inviting at School of Physical Sciences, National Institute of Science Education and Research (NISER), Bhubaneswar, Abhishek Chowdhury
for inviting at Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Bhubaneswar,
Anjan Sarkar for inviting at Department of Astrophysics, Raman Research Institute, Bengaluru, Aninda Sinha and Banibrata Mukhopadhyay for inviting at Center for High Energy
Physics (CHEP) and Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, Uma Shankar for inviting at Department of Physics, Indian Institute
of Technology (IIT), Bombay, Shiraz Minwalla for inviting at Department of Theoretical
Physics, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai, Abhishek Mahapatra for inviting at National Institute of Technology (NIT), Rourkela, for official academic visit where
the work was done partially. Part of this work was presented as a talk, titled ”Cosmology
from Condensed Matter Physics: A study of out-of-equilibrium physics” and ” Cosmology
Meets Condensed Matter Physics” at Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics (PITP)
(See the link: http://pirsa.org/19110117/), Simons Center for Geometry and Physics
(SCGP), Stony Brook University (See the link: http://scgp.stonybrook.edu/video portal/video.php?id=4358), Department of Physics, Princeton University, The Institute for
Gravitation and the Cosmos (IGC), Department of Physics, Eberly College of Science,
Pennsylvania State University (University Park campus), workshop on ”Advances in Astroparticle Physics and Cosmology, AAPCOS-2020” at Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics,
Kolkata on the occasion of the 100 years of Saha Ionisation Equation by Prof. Meghnad Saha, Department of Physics, Scottish Church College, Kolkata, School of Physical
Sciences, National Insitute of Science Education and Research (NISER), Bhubaneswar,
Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Bhubaneswar, Department
of Astrophysics, Raman Research Institute, Bengaluru, Center for High Energy Physics

107

(CHEP), Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Bombay, National Institute of Technology (NIT), Rourkela.
SC would like to thank Quantum Gravity and Unified Theory and Theoretical Cosmology Group, Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics, Albert Einstein Institute (AEI), Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics (PITP), Simons Center for Geometry and Physics (SCGP), Stony Brook University, Institute for Theoretical Physics,
Stanford University, The Institute for Gravitation and the Cosmos (IGC), Department of
Physics, Eberly College of Science, Pennsylvania State University (University Park campus), School of Physical Sciences, National Insitute of Science Education and Research
(NISER), Bhubaneswar, Department of Astrophysics, Raman Research Institute, Bengaluru, Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Bombay, Quantum
Space-time Group (Earlier known as String Theory and Mathematical Physics Group),
Department of Theoretical Physics, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai and
National Institute of Technology (NIT), Rourkela for providing financial support for the
academic visits at Canada, U.S.A. and India. SC would like to thank the natural beauty
of Prague, Dresden, Hamburg, Leipzig, Potsdam, Berlin, Mumbai, Bangalore, Kolkata,
Bhubaneswar which inspires to do work very hard during the weekend trips and various
academic visits. Particularly SC want to give a separate credit to all the members of
the EINSTEIN KAFFEE Berlin Alexanderplatz for providing work friendly environment,
good espresso shots and cookies, which helped to write the most of the part of the paper in
that coffee shop. SC also thank all the members of our newly formed virtual international
non-profit consortium “Quantum Structures of the Space-Time & Matter” (QASTM) for
elaborative discussions. SC also would like to thank all the speakers of QASTM zoominar series from different parts of the world (For the uploaded YouTube link look at:
https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLzW8AJcryManrTsG-4U4z9ip1J1dWoNgd) for
supporting my research forum by giving outstanding lectures and their valuable time during this COVID pandemic time. KYB, SC (Satyaki), NG, RND, AM, GDP, SP would like
to thank IISC Bangalore, NISER Bhubaneswar, IISER Mohali, IIT Bombay, University of
Waterloo, IIT Indore respectively for providing fellowships. We would like to dedicate this
work for the people those who are helping us to fight against COVID-19 pandemic across
the globe. Last but not the least, we would like to acknowledge our debt to the people belonging to the various part of the world for their generous and steady support for research
in natural sciences.

108

A

Derivation of the normalization factors for the Supersymmetric
HO

To normalize the obtained OTOC we divide it by the thermal average of the dynamical
variables considered in calculating the OTOC.

hx(t1 )x(t1 )iβ =

1 X −βnω
1
Tr(e−βH x(t1 )x(t1 )) =
e
hΨn |p(t1 )p(t1 )|Ψn i.
Z
Z n

(A.1)

Now keeping in mind that the ground state is only bosonic whereas all the other eigenstates
has a fermionic part associated with it. Hence, separating the ground state from the other
states, the above equation can be written as


X
1
−βnω
hx(t1 )x(t1 )iβ =
hψ0 |x(t1 )x(t1 )|ψ0 i +
e
hψn |x(t1 )x(t1 )|ψn i
(A.2)
Z
n>0


X
X
1
−βnω
e
hψn |x(t1 ) |ψk i hψk | x(t1 )|ψn i .
hψ0 |x(t1 ) |ψk i hψk | x(t1 )|ψ0 i +
=
{z
} n>0
Z k |
Term A
|
{z
}
Term B

Now we are going to explicitly show the calculation of term A and term B. Expanding the
position operators using the Heisenberg picture for the evolution of operators
X
Term A =
hψ0 |x(t1 ) |ψk i hψk | x(t1 )|ψ0 i
k

1X B B
1 X −ikωt1 B ikωt1 B
1
=
e
x0k xk0 =
.
x0k e
xk0 =
2 k
2 k
4ω
X
X
Term B =
e−βnω
hψn |x(t1 ) |ψk i hψk | x(t1 )|ψn i
n>0

=

X
n>0

(A.3)

k

e

−βnω

hψn |x(t1 ) |ψ0 i hψ0 | x(t1 )|ψn i +

X
n>0

e−βnω

X
k>0

hψn |x(t1 ) |ψk i hψk | x(t1 )|ψn i

XX
1 X −βnω inωt1
=
e
e
xn0 e−inωt1 x0n +
xnk (t1 )xkn (t1 )
2 n>0
n>0 k>0


p
p
e−βω
1 X −βnω
=
+
e
2n + n(n + 1) + n(n − 1) .
4ω
4ω n>0

109

(A.4)



X
p
p
1
−βω
−βEn
hx(t1 )x(t1 )iβ =
1+e
+
e
[2n + n(n + 1) + n(n − 1)] .
4Zω
n>0
(A.5)
A similar calculation is carried out for the thermal average of the product of the momentum operators.
hp(t2 )p(t2 )iβ =

1
1 X −βnω
Tr(e−βH p(t2 )p(t2 )) =
e
hΨn |p(t2 )p(t2 )|Ψn i.
Z
Z n

(A.6)

Now keeping in mind that the ground state is only bosonic whereas all the other eigenstates
has a fermionic part associated with it. Hence, separating the ground state from the other
states, the above equation can be written as


X
1
hp(t2 )p(t2 )iβ =
hψn |p(t2 )p(t2 )|ψn i
hψ0 |p(t2 )p(t2 )|ψ0 i +
(A.7)
Z
n>0


X
1X
hψn |p(t2 ) |ψk i hψk | p(t2 )|ψn i .
=
hψ0 |p(t2 ) |ψk i hψk | p(t2 )|ψ0 i +
{z
} n>0
Z k |
Term A
|
{z
}
Term B

Now we are going to explicitly show the calculation of term A and term B. Expanding the
position operators using the Heisenberg picture for the evolution of operators
X
hψ0 |p(t2 ) |ψk i hψk | p(t2 )|ψ0 i
Term A =
k

1 X iE0k t2 B iEk0 t2 B
1X B B
ω
=
e
p0k e
pk0 =
p0k pk0 = .
2 k
2 k
4
X
X
Term B =
e−βEn
hψn |p(t2 ) |ψk i hψk | p(t2 )|ψn i
n>0

=

X
n>0

(A.8)

k

e

−βEn

hψn |p(t2 ) |ψ0 i hψ0 | p(t2 )|ψn i +

XX
n>0 k>0

hψn |p(t2 ) |ψk i hψk | p(t2 )|ψn i

XX
1 X −βEn iEn0 t2
e
e
pn0 eiE0n t2 p0n +
pnk (t2 )pkn (t2 )
=
2 n>0
n>0 k>0


−βω
X
p
p
ωe
ω
−βEn
=
+
e
2n + n(n + 1) + n(n − 1) .
4
4 n>0

110

(A.9)




X
p
p
ω
−βω
−βEn
hp(t2 )p(t2 )iβ =
2n + n(n + 1) + n(n − 1) .
1+e
+
e
4Z
n>0
(A.10)

B

Poisson bracket relation for the Supersymmetric partner potential
associated with the 1D infinite well potential

For calculating the Poisson Bracket {x2 (t1 ), p2 (t2 )} we need the partial derivaties of
the dynamical variables characterising the partner hamiltonian with respect to their initial
values. For the partner potential associated with the 1D box it can be seen from Eq. (10.7)
and Eq. (10.8) that the partial derivatives of the classical variables with respect to its
initial value will not be trivial and will depend on the initial value chosen. For the sake of
convenience we introduce some symbols in this section. We denote the partial derivative
O1
of position with respect to its initial value with the symbol O
i.e
2
∂x2 (t)
O1
= (−1)n .
∂x2 (0)
O2

(B.1)

where the symbols O1 and O2 have the following expressions:

√
−1
O1 = 1 + 4π 4 cos(sin (α) − tβ) sin(πx2 (0)) p2 (0)2 + 4p2 (0)2 π 4 +
16π 8 cot4 (πx2 (0)) + 8π 4 cot2 (πx2 (0))(p2 (0)2 2π 4 − 2π 4 cosec2 (πx2 (0)))
r
p2 (0)2 sin2 (πx2 (0))
− 16π 8 cot3 (πx2 (0)) t c cosec3 (πx2 (0))
c

3/2 
2
2
p2 (0) sin (πx2 (0))
4
3
5
4π t cot(πx2 (0))c cosec (πx2 (0))
.
c
r
p2 (0)2 sin (πx2 (0))
2
O2 = c
η(t).
c

(B.2)
(B.3)

Similarly the partial derivative of x2 (t) with p2 (0) we get


r
√
p2 (0)2 sin2 (πx2 (0))
p2 (0) 1 + 4π 4 cos sin−1 (α) − tβ 4π 4 cos(πx2 (0)) + c3 t
∂x2 (t)
c
r
=
,
2
∂p2 (0)
p2 (0)2 sin (πx2 (0))
3
πc β
η(t)
c
(B.4)
where the symbols α, β and η(t) used in the above equations has the following expres-

111

sions.
α= s

cos(πx2 (0))

,
p2 (0)2 + 4π 4 cot2 (πx2 (0))
p2 (0)2 + 4π 4 + 4π 4 cot2 (πx2 (0))


4
2
−1
η(t) = 1 − (1 + 4π ) sin [sin (α) − tβ] .

q
β = p2 (0)2 + 4π 4 + 4π 4 cot2 (πx2 (0)),

The partial derivative of the momentum associated with the partner potential wrt its initial
position and the momentum are now explicitly evaluated. The partial derivative of the
momentum wrt the initial position is given by


Y1
Y3
2
5
4π − cot(πx2 (0))cosec (πx2 (0)) + Y2 − Y4
∂p2 (t)
s
=
.
(B.5)
∂x2 (0)
4 (1 + 4π 4 ) sin2 [sin−1 (α) − βt]
4π
c2 −
η(t)
where the symbols Y1 , Y2 , Y3 , Y4 used in the above equations refers to the following

4 2
−1
Y1 = (1 + 4π ) cos[sin (α) − βt] sin(πx2 (0)) p2 (0)4 + 4p2 (0)2 π 4 + 16π 8 cot4 (πx2 (0))
+ 8π 4 cot2 (πx2 (0)) (p2 (0)2 + 2π 4 − 2π 4 cosec2 (πx2 (0))) − 16π 8 t cot2 (πx2 (0)) c
r
p2 (0)2 sin2 (πx2 (0))
− 4π 4 t cot(πx2 (0))c3 cosec5 (πx2 (0))
cosec3 (πx2 (0))
c2

3/2 
p2 (0)2 sin2 (πx2 (0))
sin3 [sin−1 (α) − tβ],
(B.6)
c2
r

2
p2 (0)2 sin2 (πx2 (0))
3
4
2
−1
Y2 = c β
− 1 + (1 + 4π ) sin [sin (α) − βt] ,
(B.7)
c2

4
Y3 = (1 + 4π ) sin(πx2 (0)) p2 (0)4 + 4p2 (0)2 π 4 + 16π 8 cot4 (πx2 (0))
(B.8)
+ 8π 4 cot2 (πx2 (0)) (p2 (0)2 + 2π 4 − 2π 4 cosec2 (πx2 (0))) − 16π 8 t cot2 (πx2 (0)) c
r
p(0)2 sin2 (πx2 (0))
− 4π 4 t cot(πx2 (0))c3 cosec5 (πx2 (0))
cosec3 (πx(0))
c2

3/2

p2 (0)2 sin2 (πx2 (0))
−1
sin[2 sin (α) − 2βt] ,
(B.9)
c2
r


p2 (0)2 sin2 (πx2 (0))
3
4
2
−1
Y4 = 2c β
− 1 + (1 + 4π ) sin [sin (α) − βt] .
(B.10)
c2

112

The partial derivative of the momentum wrt the initial momentum is given by


Z3
Z1
2p2 (0) + Z2 − Z4
∂p2 (t)
= s
.
(B.11)
∂p2 (0)
4 (1 + 4π 4 ) sin2 [sin−1 (α) − βt]
4π
2 c2 +
−1 + (1 + 4π 4 ) sin2 [sin−1 (α) − βt]
where the symbols Z1 , Z2 , Z3 , Z4 represents the following expressions

4
4 2
−1
Z1 = 8p2 (0)π (1 + 4π ) cos[sin (α) − βt] 4π 4 cos(πx2 (0))
r

p2 (0)2 sin2 (πx2 (0))
3
sin3 [sin−1 (α) − βt],
+c t
2
c
r


2
p2 (0)2 sin (πx2 (0))
3
4
2
−1
Z2 = c β
− 1 + (1 + 4π ) sin [sin (α) − βt] ,
c2

√
4
4
Z3 = 4p2 (0)π (1 + 4π ) 4π 4 cos(πx2 (0)) + 2tc3
s

p2 (0)2 sin2 (πx2 (0))
‘
,
p2 (0)2 + 4π 4 + (−p2 (0)2 + 4π 4 ) cos(2πx2 (0))

(B.12)
(B.13)
(B.14)

(B.15)
r
Z 4 = c3 β

p2 (0)2 sin2 (πx2 (0))
c




4
2
−1
− 1 + (1 + 4π ) sin [sin (α) − βt] .

(B.16)

In a similar way the Poisson Bracket involving the position and momentum variables
at different times, we denote it by XP22 for the sake of convenience i.e
{x2 (t1 ), p2 (t2 )} = (−1)n

X2
,
Q2

(B.17)

where X2 and Q2 can be explicitly evaluated to have the following expressions

√
4
X2 = p2 (0) 1 + 4π 3p2 (0)4 + 20p2 (0)2 π 4 + 64π 8 − 4(p2 (0)4 + 4p(0)2 π 4 − 16π 8 )
 

t1 γ
2
2 4
−1
cos(2πx(0)) + (p2 (0) − 4p2 (0) π ) cos(4πx(0)) cos sin α − √ cosec3 (πx2 (0))
2
√

−1
4 2
√
√
3γ
(1 + 4π ) cos[4 sin (α) − 2 2t2 γ] γ
√ − 4 2π 4 γ + 24 2π 8 γ +
√
2
2
√
√
√
8
−1
4
− 2 2(−1 + 16π ) cos[2 sin (α) − 2t2 γ] − 16π t1 sin[2 sin−1 (α) − 2t2 γ]
√
√
− 64π 8 t1 sin[2 sin−1 (α) − 2t2 γ] + 16π 4 t2 sin[2 sin−1 (α) − 2t2 γ]

113

8

−1

+ 64π t2 sin[2 sin (α) −

√


2t2 γ] .

(B.18)
s

p
Q2 = 64c2 β 2 p2 (0) sin(πx2 (0)) η(t1 ) (η(t2 ))2

c2 −

4π 4 (1 + 4π 4 ) sin2 [sin−1 (α) − t2 β]
.
η(t2 )

The symbol γ used in the above equations denotes the following expression
s

2
4
2
γ=
p2 (0) + 8π − p2 (0) cos(2πx2 (0)) cosec(πx2 (0)).

(B.19)

The Poisson Bracket of the momentum at different times is symbolically denoted by
{p2 (t1 ), p2 (t2 )} = P1 /P2 , where P1 and P2 represents the following expressions:


2
1
4
4
−1
P1 = 2p(0)π (1 + 4π ) sin(πx(0)) −
1 − 4π + (1 + 4π ) cos[2 sin (α) − 2βt1 ]
4
 
1
−1
−1
β sin[2 sin (α) − 2t2 β] + sin[2 sin (α) − 2t1 β]
1 − 4π 4 + (1 + 4π 4 )
4
2

−1
4
4
−1
cos[2 sin (α) − 2t2 β] β − 2π (1 + 4π )(t1 − t2 ) sin[2 sin (α) − 2t2 β] ,
4

4

(B.20)


2
P2 = p(0) sin(πx(0)) (1 + 4π 4 ) sin2 [sin−1 (α) − t1 β] − 1
s
 
2
4π 4 (1 + 4π 4 ) sin2 [sin−1 (α) − t1 β]
4
2
−1
2
× c +
× (1 + 4π ) sin [sin (α) − t2 β] − 1
(1 + 4π 4 ) sin2 [sin−1 (α) − t1 β] − 1
s
4π 4 (1 + 4π 4 ) sin2 [sin−1 (α) − t2 β]
. (B.21)
× c2 +
(1 + 4π 4 ) sin2 [sin−1 (α) − t2 β] − 1

References
[1] Larkin, A. I., and Yu N. Ovchinnikov. “Quasiclassical method in the theory of
superconductivity.” Sov Phys JETP 28.6 (1969): 1200-1205.
[2] S. Choudhury, A. Mukherjee, P. Chauhan and S. Bhattacherjee, “Quantum
Out-of-Equilibrium Cosmology,” Eur. Phys. J. C 79, no.4, 320 (2019)
[arXiv:1809.02732[hep-th]].
[3] F. M. Haehl, R. Loganayagam, P. Narayan and M. Rangamani, “Classification of
out-of-time-order correlators,” SciPost Phys. 6, no.1, 001 (2019) [arXiv:1701.02820
[hep-th]].
[4] F. M. Haehl, R. Loganayagam, P. Narayan, A. A. Nizami and M. Rangamani, “Thermal
out-of-time-order correlators, KMS relations, and spectral functions,” JHEP 12, 154

114

(2017) [arXiv:1706.08956 [hep-th]].
[5] S. Chaudhuri and R. Loganayagam, “Probing Out-of-Time-Order Correlators,” JHEP 07,
006 (2019) [arXiv:1807.09731 [hep-th]].
[6] S. Chaudhuri, C. Chowdhury and R. Loganayagam, “Spectral Representation of Thermal
OTO Correlators,” JHEP 02, 018 (2019) [arXiv:1810.03118 [hep-th]].
[7] B. Chakrabarty, S. Chaudhuri and R. Loganayagam, “Out of Time Ordered Quantum
Dissipation,” JHEP 07, 102 (2019) [arXiv:1811.01513 [cond-mat.stat-mech]].
[8] H. Gharibyan, M. Hanada, B. Swingle and M. Tezuka, “A characterization of quantum
chaos by two-point correlation functions,” [arXiv:1902.11086 [quant-ph]].
[9] H. Gharibyan, M. Hanada, B. Swingle and M. Tezuka, “Quantum Lyapunov Spectrum,”
JHEP 04, 082 (2019) [arXiv:1809.01671 [quant-ph]].
[10] A. Kitaev, “A simple model of quantum holography.” KITP strings seminar and
Entanglement. Vol. 12. 2015.
[11] I. Heemskerk, J. Penedones, J. Polchinski and J. Sully, “Holography from Conformal Field
Theory,” JHEP 10, 079 (2009) [arXiv:0907.0151[hep-th]].
[12] I. Heemskerk and J. Sully, “More Holography from Conformal Field Theory,” JHEP 09,
099 (2010) [arXiv:1006.0976[hep-th]].
[13] B. Czech, L. Lamprou, S. McCandlish and J. Sully, “Integral Geometry and Holography,”
JHEP 10, 175 (2015) [arXiv:1505.05515[hep-th]].
[14] T. Anous and J. Sonner, “Phases of scrambling in eigenstates,” SciPost Phys. 7, 003
(2019) [arXiv:1903.03143 [hep-th]]. [arXiv:1903.03143[hep-ph]].
[15] B. Yan, L. Cincio and W. H. Zurek, “Information Scrambling and Loschmidt Echo,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 124, no.16, 160603 (2020) [arXiv:1903.02651[quant-ph]].
[16] B. Yoshida, “Firewalls vs. Scrambling,” JHEP 10, 132 (2019)
[arXiv:1902.09763[hep-th]].
[17] Q. Zhuang, T. Schuster, B. Yoshida and N. Y. Yao, “Scrambling and Complexity in Phase
Space,” Phys. Rev. A 99, no.6, 062334 (2019) [arXiv:1902.04076[quant-ph]].
[18] J. G. Hartmann, J. Murugan and J. P. Shock, “Chaos and Scrambling in Quantum Small
Worlds,” [arXiv:1901.04561 [hep-th]].
[19] X. Han and S. A. Hartnoll, “Quantum Scrambling and State Dependence of the Butterfly
Velocity,” SciPost Phys. 7, no.4, 045 (2019) doi:10.21468/SciPostPhys.7.4.045
[arXiv:1812.07598 [hep-th]].
[20] Z. Li, S. Choudhury and W. V. Liu, “Fast scrambling without appealing to holographic
duality,” [arXiv:2004.11269[cond-mat.quant-gas]].
[21] S. Sahu and B. Swingle, “Information scrambling at finite temperature in local quantum
systems,” [arXiv:2005.10814[cond-mat.stat-mech]].

115

[22] B. Swingle, “Unscrambling the physics of out-of-time-order correlators,” Nature Phys. 14,
no.10, 988-990 (2018)
[23] H. Gharibyan, M. Hanada, S. H. Shenker and M. Tezuka, “Onset of Random Matrix
Behavior in Scrambling Systems,” JHEP 07, 124 (2018) [arXiv:1803.08050 [hep-th]].
[24] S. H. Shenker and D. Stanford, “Stringy effects in scrambling,” JHEP 05, 132 (2015)
[arXiv:1412.6087[hep-th]].
[25] S. H. Shenker and D. Stanford, “Black holes and the butterfly effect,” JHEP 03, 067
(2014) [arXiv:1306.0622[hep-th]].
[26] A. Addazi, “Quantum chaos inside Black Holes,” Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 32, no.16, 1750087
(2017) [arXiv:1508.04054[gr-qc]].
[27] I. L. Aleiner, L. Faoro and L. B. Ioffe, “Microscopic model of quantum butterfly effect:
out-of-time-order correlators and traveling combustion waves,” Annals Phys. 375, 378-406
(2016) [arXiv:1609.01251[cond-mat.stat-mech]].
[28] D. A. Roberts and D. Stanford, “Two-dimensional conformal field theory and the butterfly
effect,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, no.13, 131603 (2015) [arXiv:1412.5123[hep-th]].
[29] C. J. Lin and O. I. Motrunich, “Out-of-time-ordered correlators in a quantum Ising chain,”
Phys. Rev. B 97, no.14, 144304 (2018) [arXiv:1801.01636[cond-mat.stat-mech]].
[30] I. Kukuljan, S. Grozdanov and T. Prosen, “Weak Quantum Chaos,” Phys. Rev. B 96,
no.6, 060301 (2017) doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.96.060301
[arXiv:1701.09147[cond-mat.stat-mech]].
[31] Y. Huang, Y. Zhang and X. Chen, “Out-of-time-ordered correlators in many-body
localized systems,” Annalen Phys. 529, no.7, 1600318 (2017)
[arXiv:1608.01091[cond-mat.dis-nn]].
[32] Syzranov, S. V., Gorshkov, A. V., Galitski, V. (2018). ”Out-of-time-order correlators in
finite open systems.” Physical review. B, 97, : 10.1103/PhysRevB.97.161114.
[33] D. A. Roberts, D. Stanford and L. Susskind, “Localized shocks,” JHEP 03, 051 (2015)
[arXiv:1409.8180[hep-th]].
[34] S. H. Shenker and D. Stanford, “Multiple Shocks,” JHEP 12, 046 (2014)
[arXiv:1312.3296[hep-th]].
[35] D. Stanford and L. Susskind, “Complexity and Shock Wave Geometries,” Phys. Rev. D
90, no.12, 126007 (2014) [arXiv:1406.2678[hep-th]].
[36] J. Maldacena, S. H. Shenker and D. Stanford, “A bound on chaos,” JHEP 08, 106 (2016)
[arXiv:1503.01409[hep-th]].
[37] S. Sachdev and J. Ye, “Gapless spin fluid ground state in a random, quantum Heisenberg
magnet,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 3339 (1993) [arXiv:9212030[cond-mat]].
[38] J. Maldacena and D. Stanford, “Remarks on the Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev model,” Phys. Rev. D
94, no.10, 106002 (2016) [arXiv:1604.07818[hep-th]].

116

[39] W. Fu, D. Gaiotto, J. Maldacena and S. Sachdev, “Supersymmetric Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev
models,” Phys. Rev. D 95, no.2, 026009 (2017) [arXiv:1610.08917[hep-th]].
[40] V. Rosenhaus, “An introduction to the SYK model,” J. Phys. A 52, 323001 (2019)
[arXiv:1807.03334[hep-th]].
[41] E. Witten, “An SYK-Like Model Without Disorder,” J. Phys. A 52, no.47, 474002 (2019)
doi:10.1088/1751-8121/ab3752 [arXiv:1610.09758[hep-th]].
[42] D. J. Gross and V. Rosenhaus, “All point correlation functions in SYK,” JHEP 12, 148
(2017) [arXiv:1710.08113[hep-th]].
[43] J. Polchinski and V. Rosenhaus, “The Spectrum in the Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev Model,” JHEP
04, 001 (2016) [arXiv:1601.06768[hep-th]].
[44] Y. Gu, A. Kitaev, S. Sachdev and G. Tarnopolsky, “Notes on the complex
Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev model,” JHEP 02, 157 (2020) [arXiv:1910.14099[hep-th]].
[45] S. R. Das, A. Ghosh, A. Jevicki and K. Suzuki, “Duality in the Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev
Model,” Springer Proc. Math. Stat. 255, 43-61 (2017)
[46] S. R. Das, A. Ghosh, A. Jevicki and K. Suzuki, “Space-Time in the SYK Model,” JHEP
07, 184 (2018) [arXiv:1712.02725[hep-th]].
[47] T. Nosaka and T. Numasawa, “Quantum Chaos, Thermodynamics and Black Hole
Microstates in the mass deformed SYK model,” [arXiv:1912.12302[hep-th]].
[48] S. Choudhury, A. Dey, I. Halder, L. Janagal, S. Minwalla and R. Poojary, “Notes on
melonic O(N )q−1 tensor models,” JHEP 06, 094 (2018) [arXiv:1707.09352[hep-th]].
[49] I. R. Klebanov, A. Milekhin, G. Tarnopolsky and W. Zhao, “Spontaneous Breaking of
U (1) Symmetry in Coupled Complex SYK Models,” [arXiv:2006.07317[hep-th]].
[50] T. Li, J. Liu, Y. Xin and Y. Zhou, “Supersymmetric SYK model and random matrix
theory,” JHEP 06, 111 (2017) [arXiv:1702.01738[hep-th]].
[51] E. Marcus and S. Vandoren, “A new class of SYK-like models with maximal chaos,” JHEP
01, 166 (2019) [arXiv:1808.01190[hep-th]].
[52] B. Kobrin, Z. Yang, G. D. Kahanamoku-Meyer, C. T. Olund, J. E. Moore, D. Stanford
and N. Y. Yao, “Many-Body Chaos in the Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev Model,”
[arXiv:2002.05725[hep-th]].
[53] A. Almheiri, A. Milekhin and B. Swingle, “Universal Constraints on Energy Flow and
SYK Thermalization,” [arXiv:1912.04912[hep-th]].
[54] G. Turiaci and H. Verlinde, “Towards a 2d QFT Analog of the SYK Model,” JHEP 10,
167 (2017) [arXiv:1701.00528[hep-th]].
[55] R. Gurau, “The complete 1/N expansion of a SYK–like tensor model,” Nucl. Phys. B 916,
386-401 (2017) [arXiv:1611.04032[hep-th]].
[56] R. Gurau, “Quenched equals annealed at leading order in the colored SYK model,” EPL
119, no.3, 30003 (2017) [arXiv:1702.04228 [hep-th]]. [arXiv:1702.04228[hep-th]].

117

[57] R. Gurau, “The ı prescription in the SYK model,” J. Phys. Comm. 2, no.1, 015003 (2018)
[arXiv:1705.08581[hep-th]].
[58] D. Benedetti, S. Carrozza, R. Gurau and A. Sfondrini, “Tensorial Gross-Neveu models,”
JHEP 01, 003 (2018) [arXiv:1710.10253[hep-th]].
[59] D. Benedetti and R. Gurau, “2PI effective action for the SYK model and tensor field
theories,” JHEP 05, 156 (2018) [arXiv:1802.05500[hep-th]].
[60] R. Gurau, “Notes on Tensor Models and Tensor Field Theories,”
[arXiv:1907.03531[hep-th]].
[61] I. R. Klebanov and G. Tarnopolsky, “Uncolored random tensors, melon diagrams, and the
Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev models,” Phys. Rev. D 95, no.4, 046004 (2017)
[arXiv:1611.08915[hep-th]].
[62] I. R. Klebanov and G. Tarnopolsky, “On Large N Limit of Symmetric Traceless Tensor
Models,” JHEP 10, 037 (2017) [arXiv:1706.00839[hep-th]].
[63] K. Bulycheva, I. R. Klebanov, A. Milekhin and G. Tarnopolsky, “Spectra of Operators in
Large N Tensor Models,” Phys. Rev. D 97, no.2, 026016 (2018)
[arXiv:1707.09347[hep-th]].
[64] S. Giombi, I. R. Klebanov, F. Popov, S. Prakash and G. Tarnopolsky, “Prismatic Large N
Models for Bosonic Tensors,” Phys. Rev. D 98, no.10, 105005 (2018) [arXiv:1808.04344
[hep-th]].
[65] I. R. Klebanov, F. Popov and G. Tarnopolsky, “TASI Lectures on Large N Tensor
Models,” PoS TASI2017, 004 (2018) [arXiv:1808.09434 [hep-th]].
[66] J. Kim, I. R. Klebanov, G. Tarnopolsky and W. Zhao, “Symmetry Breaking in Coupled
SYK or Tensor Models,” Phys. Rev. X 9, no.2, 021043 (2019) [arXiv:1902.02287
[hep-th]].
[67] A. Kitaev and S. J. Suh, “The soft mode in the Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev model and its gravity
dual,” JHEP 05, 183 (2018) [arXiv:1711.08467 [hep-th]].
[68] C. Murthy and M. Srednicki, “Bounds on chaos from the eigenstate thermalization
hypothesis,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, no.23, 230606 (2019)
[arXiv:1906.10808[cond-mat.stat-mech]].
[69] S. Choudhury, “The Cosmological OTOC: Formulating new cosmological micro-canonical
correlation functions for random chaotic fluctuations in Out-of-Equilibrium Quantum
Statistical Field Theory,” [arXiv:2005.11750[hep-th]].
[70] K. Hashimoto, K. Murata and R. Yoshii, “Out-of-time-order correlators in quantum
mechanics,” JHEP 10, 138 (2017) [arXiv:1703.09435[hep-th]].
[71] S. Choudhury and A. Mukherjee, “Quantum randomness in the Sky,” Eur. Phys. J. C 79,
no.7, 554 (2019) [arXiv:1812.04107[physics.gen-ph]].
[72] M. A. Amin and D. Baumann, “From Wires to Cosmology,” JCAP 02, 045 (2016)

118

[arXiv:1512.02637 [astro-ph.CO]].
[73] M. A. G. Garcia, M. A. Amin and D. Green, “Curvature Perturbations From Stochastic
Particle Production During Inflation,” JCAP 06, 039 (2020) [arXiv:2001.09158
[astro-ph.CO]].
[74] M. A. G. Garcia, M. A. Amin, S. G. Carlsten and D. Green, “Stochastic Particle
Production in a de Sitter Background,” JCAP 05, 012 (2019) [arXiv:1902.09598
[astro-ph.CO]]
[75] A. Bhattacharyya, P. Nandy and A. Sinha, “Renormalized Circuit Complexity,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 124, no.10, 101602 (2020) [arXiv:1907.08223 [hep-th]].
[76] A. Bhattacharyya, A. Shekar and A. Sinha, JHEP 10, 140 (2018)
doi:10.1007/JHEP10(2018)140 [arXiv:1808.03105[hep-th]].
[77] L. Susskind, “Three Lectures on Complexity and Black Holes,” [arXiv:1810.11563
[hep-th]]. [arXiv:2004.07960[hep-th]].
[78] L. Susskind, “Black Holes and Complexity Classes,” [arXiv:1802.02175[hep-th]].
[79] A. R. Brown and L. Susskind, “Complexity geometry of a single qubit,” Phys. Rev. D 100,
no.4, 046020 (2019) [arXiv:1903.12621[hep-th]].
[80] A. R. Brown, L. Susskind and Y. Zhao, “Quantum Complexity and Negative Curvature,”
Phys. Rev. D 95, no.4, 045010 (2017) [arXiv:1608.02612[hep-th]].
[81] J. Cotler, N. Hunter-Jones, J. Liu and B. Yoshida, “Chaos, Complexity, and Random
Matrices,” JHEP 11, 048 (2017) doi:10.1007/JHEP11(2017)048
[arXiv:1706.05400[hep-th]].
[82] A. Kitaev, “Hidden correlations in the Hawking radiation and thermal noise.” Talk given
at the Fundamental Physics Prize Symposium. Vol. 10. 2014.
[83] B. Bagchi, “Supersymmetry in quantum and classical mechanics,”
[84] F. Cooper, A. Khare and U. Sukhatme, “Supersymmetry and quantum mechanics,” Phys.
Rept. 251, 267-385 (1995) [arXiv:9405029[hep-th]].
[85] A. Khare, “Supersymmetry in quantum mechanics,” AIP Conf. Proc. 744, no.1, 133-165
(2004) [arXiv:0409003[math-ph]].
[86] Wipf, Andreas. “Introduction to supersymmetry.” Lect. Notes, Uni. Jena, Germany (2000).
[87] Wellman, T. “An introduction to supersymmetry in quantum mechanical systems.” Brown
University Memorandum (2003).
[88] Kulkarni, A., Ramadevi, P. Supersymmetry. Reson 8, 28–41 (2003) “Supersymmetry,”
[89] S. Choudhury and A. Mukherjee, “A bound on quantum chaos from Random Matrix
Theory with Gaussian Unitary Ensemble,” JHEP 05, 149 (2019)
[arXiv:1811.01079[hep-ph]].
[90] A. Lakshminarayan, “Out-of-time-ordered correlator in the quantum bakers map and

119

truncated unitary matrices,” Phys. Rev. E 99, no.1, 012201 (2019)
[arXiv:1810.12029[quant-ph]].
[91] X. L. Qi and A. Streicher, “Quantum Epidemiology: Operator Growth, Thermal Effects,
and SYK,” JHEP 08, 012 (2019) [arXiv:1810.11958[hep-ph]].
[92] J. Lee, D. Kim and D. H. Kim, “Typical growth behavior of the out-of-time-ordered
commutator in many-body localized systems,” Phys. Rev. B 99, no.18, 184202 (2019)
[arXiv:1812.00357[cond-mat.str-el]].
[93] H. Guo, Y. Gu and S. Sachdev, “Transport and chaos in lattice Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev
models,” Phys. Rev. B 100, no.4, 045140 (2019) [arXiv:1904.02174[cond-mat.str-el]].
[94] A. Romero-Bermúdez, K. Schalm and V. Scopelliti, “Regularization dependence of the
OTOC. Which Lyapunov spectrum is the physical one?,” JHEP 07, 107 (2019)
[arXiv:1903.09595[hep-ph]].
[95] V. Jahnke, K. Y. Kim and J. Yoon, “On the Chaos Bound in Rotating Black Holes,”
JHEP 05, 037 (2019) [arXiv:1903.09086[hep-ph]].
[96] J. Tuziemski, “Out-of-time-ordered correlation functions in open systems: A
Feynman-Vernon influence functional approach,” Phys. Rev. A 100, no.6, 062106 (2019)
[arXiv:1903.05025[quant-ph]].
[97] E. B. Rozenbaum, L. A. Bunimovich and V. Galitski, “Early-Time Exponential
Instabilities in Non-Chaotic Quantum Systems,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, no.1, 014101 (2020)
[arXiv:1902.05466[quant-ph]].
[98] C. B. Dag, K. Sun and L. M. Duan, “Detection of Quantum Phases via Out-of-Time-Order
Correlators,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, no.14, 140602 (2019) [arXiv:1902.05041[quant-ph]].
[99] G. J. Turiaci, “An Inelastic Bound on Chaos,” JHEP 07, 099 (2019) [arXiv:1812.10073
[hep-th]].
[100] R. R. Poojary, “BTZ dynamics and chaos,” JHEP 03, 048 (2020) [arXiv:1812.10073
[hep-th]].
[101] C. Sünderhauf, L. Piroli, X. L. Qi, N. Schuch and J. I. Cirac, “Quantum chaos in the
Brownian SYK model with large finite N : OTOCs and tripartite information,” JHEP 11,
038 (2019) [arXiv:1908.00775 [quant-ph]].
[102] R. Mohseninia, J. R. G. Alonso and J. Dressel, “Optimizing measurement strengths for
qubit quasiprobabilities behind out-of-time-ordered correlators,” Phys. Rev. A 100, no.6,
062336 (2019) [arXiv:1907.10778 [quant-ph]].
[103] B. Lian, S. L. Sondhi and Z. Yang, “The chiral SYK model,” JHEP 09, 067 (2019)
[arXiv:1906.03308 [hep-th]]. [arXiv:1906.03308 [hep-ph]].
[104] A. W. Harrow, L. Kong, Z. W. Liu, S. Mehraban and P. W. Shor, “A Separation of
Out-of-time-ordered Correlator and Entanglement,” [arXiv:1906.02219 [quant-ph]].
[105] B. B. Wei, G. Sun and M. J. Hwang, “Dynamical Scaling Laws of Out-of-Time-Ordered

120

Correlators,” Phys. Rev. B 100, no.19, 195107 (2019) doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.100.195107
[arXiv:1906.00533 [quant-ph]].
[106] P. D. Bergamasco, G. G. Carlo and A. M. F. Rivas, “OTOC, complexity and entropy in
bi-partite systems,” Phys. Rev. Research. 1, 033044 (2019) [arXiv:1904.12830[hep-th]].
[107] A. Kitaev and S. J. Suh, “Statistical mechanics of a two-dimensional black hole,” JHEP
05, 198 (2019) [arXiv:1808.07032 [hep-th]].
[108] Y. Gu and A. Kitaev, “On the relation between the magnitude and exponent of OTOCs,”
JHEP 02, 075 (2019) doi:10.1007/JHEP02(2019)075 [arXiv:1812.00120 [hep-th]].
[109] A. V. Lunkin, A. Y. Kitaev and M. V. Feigel’man, “Perturbed Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev model:
a polaron in the hyperbolic plane,” [arXiv:2006.14535 [cond-mat.str-el]].
[110] C. Jana, R. Loganayagam and M. Rangamani, “Open quantum systems and
Schwinger-Keldysh holograms,” [arXiv:2004.02888 [hep-th]].
[111] S. Choudhury, S. Chowdhury, N. Gupta and A. Swain, “QMetrology from QCosmology:
Study with Entangled Two Qubit Open Quantum System in De Sitter Space,”
[arXiv:2005.13555[hep-ph]].
[112] S. Banerjee, S. Choudhury, S. Chowdhury, R. N. Das, N. Gupta, S. Panda and A. Swain,
“Indirect detection of Cosmological Constant from large N entangled open quantum
system,” [arXiv:2004.13058[hep-ph]].
[113] S. Akhtar, S. Choudhury, S. Chowdhury, D. Goswami, S. Panda and A. Swain, “Open
Quantum Entanglement: A study of two atomic system in static patch of de Sitter space,”
[arXiv:1908.09929[hep-ph]].
[114] H. Bohra, S. Choudhury, P. Chauhan, A. Mukherjee, P. Narayan, S. Panda and A. Swain,
“Relating the curvature of De Sitter Universe to Open Quantum Lamb Shift
Spectroscopy,” [arXiv:1905.07403[physics.gen-ph]].
[115] S. Choudhury and S. Panda, “Quantum entanglement in de Sitter space from stringy
axion: An analysis using α vacua,” Nucl. Phys. B 943, 114606 (2019)
[arXiv:1712.08299[hep-ph]].
[116] S. Choudhury and S. Panda, “Entangled de Sitter from stringy axionic Bell pair I: an
analysis using Bunch–Davies vacuum,” Eur. Phys. J. C 78, no.1, 52 (2018)
[arXiv:1708.02265[hep-ph]].
[117] S. Choudhury, S. Panda and R. Singh, “Bell violation in primordial cosmology,” Universe
3, no.1, 13 (2017) [arXiv:1612.09445[hep-ph]].
[118] S. Choudhury and S. Panda, “Cosmological Spectrum of Two-Point Correlation Function
from Vacuum Fluctuation of Stringy Axion Field in De Sitter Space: A Study of the Role
of Quantum Entanglement,” Universe [arXiv:1809.02905.[hep-th]].

121

