1

Contact Classification in
COVID-19 Tracing

arXiv:2008.00431v2 [eess.SP] 10 Aug 2020

Christoph Günther and Daniel Günther

Abstract—The present paper addresses the task of reliably
identifying critical contacts by using COVID-19 tracing apps.
A reliable classification is crucial to ensure a high level of
protection, and at the same time to prevent many people from
being sent to quarantine by the app. Tracing apps are based
on the capabilities of current smartphones to enable a broadest
possible availability. Existing capabilities of smartphones include
the exchange of Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) signals and of audio
signals, as well as the use of gyroscopes and magnetic sensors.
The Bluetooth power measurements, which are often used today,
may be complemented by audio ranging and attitude estimation
in the future. Smartphones are worn in different ways, often
in pockets and bags, which makes the propagation of signals
and thus the classification rather unpredictable. Relying on the
cooperation of users to wear their phones hanging from their
neck would change the situation considerably. In this case the
performance, achievable with BLE and audio measurements,
becomes predictable. Our analysis identifies parameters that
result in accurate warnings, at least within the scope of validity
of the models. A significant reduction of the spreading of the
disease can then be achieved by the apps, without causing many
people to unduly go to quarantine. The present paper is the first
of three papers which analyze the situation in some detail.
Index Terms—COVID-19, corona, tracing contacts

I. I NTRODUCTION
HE COVID-19 pandemic has spread to enormous dimensions with 16 Million people affected and more than
644’000 fatalities up to July 26th, 2020. Unfortunately, the
rate of increase has only flattened in China and selected
European countries. The most important effective method to
slow down the pandemic has so far been the enforcement of
quarantine to large portions of the population, which led to
a massive economic disruption. In countries such as China,
South Korea, Singapore, and a number of European countries,
the reduced infection rates made it possible to alleviate some
of the restrictions. This involves the obligation to use masks
and at least a recommendation to use some form of contact
tracing. Different proposals for such a tracing have been made
[1] and several different approaches are being followed in
various countries. The most interesting proposals are those
that fully focus on the tracing of contacts without tracking the
movement of individuals, such as the scheme implemented in
Germany [2]. The associated concepts were developed nearly
synchronously by a number of authors and were published

T

Christoph Günther is with the German Aerospace Center, 82234 Weßling,
and with Technische Universität München, 80330 Munich, Germany, e-mail:
KN-COVID@dlr.de.
Daniel Günther is a student at Technische Universität München, 80330
Munich, Germany, e-mail: d.guenther@tum.de.

in [3], [4], and [5]. A review of associated requirements is
found in [6] and a review of major apps in [7]. In view of
the highly contagious nature of COVID-19, of the lack of a
vaccine and of the high casualty rates, an effective tracing
and significant testing capabilities are essential. In Germany
16 million people have downloaded the associated app on their
iPhone and Android Phones so far.
Tracing apps rely on Bluetooth to detect the proximity
of other people’s devices. These apps generate random IDs,
which are broadcast and stored to identify contacts in the
case that the owner of a device is tested positively. If the
owner is tested positively, the list of IDs stored on his device
is published. Conversely, each device keeps the IDs of past
contacts and compares them to the published list of IDs on a
regular basis in order to establish whether a critical contact has
taken place. Apple published an update of its operating system
to support the development of such apps (iOS 13.1.5) and
Google updated its Application Programming Interface (API).
In the case of a critical contact the person should quarantine
himself and register for testing. The outcome might be that he
is found to be a carrier of the disease. In this case, the owner
should trigger the release of his device’s list of random IDs.
The consequences of positive and negative testing depends
on local regulations. In Germany a contact is characterized
as critical and is called a Category 1 contact, if two people
were in a face-to-face meeting at a distance of less than 2
meters for more than 15 minutes. The present paper relies on
this definition but its parameters can easily be adapted to any
other definition.
Several countries have released tracing apps. The classification methods used are typically not discussed publicly. Ideally,
the classification ensures a minimum missed detection rate at
an acceptable level of false alarms. In the case of too many
false alarms, people will be unduly sent to quarantine and
the app-based will be rejected by the public. If on the other
side the app fails to identify potential carriers, they continue
infecting others and its effectiveness is jeopardized. As shall be
seen both issues are most critical in the case of a high densities
of COVID-19 carriers. As a consequence, the present analysis
will be most pertinent to regions with a high infection rate.
This paper is the first of a series of three papers. The other two
papers address the particularities of the evaluation of Bluetooth
Radio Signal Strength Indicators (BT-RSSI) [8] and of audio
ranging [9] in more detail.
Electromagnetic signals, such as Bluetooth signals, can
be used for time of flight measurements, which provides
accurate ranging results. Unfortunately, this and some other
ideas cannot be considered presently, since a contact tracing

2

app must rely on existing smartphones and devices. Thus,
only existing functions provided by the chipsets, and even
more importantly by the APIs of the devices can be used.
The options for Bluetooth on existing equipment are limited
to power measurements. The outcome of such measurements
very much depend on the location of the device, which might
be in a pocket or in a bag, often together with keys, coins,
metallic business card holders and the like. Furthermore, the
human body, with a strong water content, strongly absorbs
Bluetooth signals. Together these uncertainties greatly influence the power levels measured at a distant receiver. The difficulties of tracing contacts by Bluetooth power measurements
are also discussed in [10]. The remaining uncertainties about
a potential contact to an infected person could potentially
be resolved by interrogating the people involved. This would
require the disclosure of the location at the time of contact,
which might have been on a commuter train or at lunch in a
restaurant, for example. The people must then identify where
they sat or stood, which they might remember or not. In any
case, this would be a source of privacy issues, discomfort and
residual uncertainty. The German app would not support such a
manual tracing anyway, since it does not collect the necessary
information! In any case, such a human intervention would
reduce the level of acceptance.
As a consequence, we propose to carry the smartphone in
an exposed manner, namely hanging around one’s neck. In
summer time, younger people often do that already. On the
basis of the present findings, this is recommended to everyone,
also in a business context, see Figure 1. Corresponding cases
are available from several vendors. This mode of wearing
the smartphone ensures a line of sight situation between
two fellows facing each other. It leads to measurements that
are a lot easier to interpret using Bluetooth Radio Signal
Strength Indication (RSSI), audio ranging as well as gyro
and magnetic sensors. The paper starts with a description of
the statistical relationship between individual measurements
and their classification in Section II. This section lays the
foundation for evaluating the performance of classification in
simulations or experiments. The probability of missed detection turns out to be critical for the success of the classification.
Bluetooth RSSI evaluation is rather sensitive to the manner in
which measurements are evaluated. Section III describes some
aspects relating to the modeling of Bluetooth propagation and
power measurements, as well as the essential result from the
more in-depth study of the situation developed by Dammann
et al. [8]. The following Section IV addresses audio ranging,
which turns out to be an important complementary technique.
Some audio properties of smartphones are summarized in this
section. A more detailed study is published by Kurz et al. [9].
Section V shortly addresses the possibility of using attitude
sensing, which is not explored in depth. Section VI finally
discusses some basics of classifying contacts using the set of
sensors mentioned.
II. S TATISTICS OF C LASSIFICATION
The success of classifying contacts into Category 1 and
other contacts depends critically on our capability of estimating distances. As a consequence, it is important to understand

Fig. 1. Example of a hull for carrying a smartphone hanging from the neck.

the influence of under- and overestimating distances from a
pandemic point of view. This requires a study of the associated
statistics. For a Category 1 contact, two fellows have to be
facing each other at a distance of less than 2 meters for at
least 15 minutes. This is called a C1 contact throughout the
paper.
Assume that we are the person A and that we monitor the
presence of B. We aim at determining whether the contact to
B is a C1 contact or not, denoted by C1 or ¬C1 , respectively.
Furthermore, denote the outcome of the estimation process by
Ĉ1 and ¬Ĉ1 , then there are four different possibilities, as listed
in Table I (classical hypothesis testing).
Obviously, in any good design pmd , and pf a are small. The
four cases have to be considered jointly with the possibility
that B is tested positively, which happens with probability pi ,
and shall be denoted by B. Current values, based on data
published by John Hopkins University on July 26th, forpi are
1/50 100 for Germany and 1/113 for the USA. If B is either
not tested or tested negatively, this shall be denoted by ¬B.
Let finally pC1 be the probability of C1 , then this leads to the
situations summarized in Table II.
The first and fourth rows of Table II provide the desired
outcome. The probability pC1 of a contact being C1 is driven
by social behavior. Social distancing aims at reducing pC1 .
This is important, since many people would otherwise be
potentially infected and sent to quarantine by the first row
in the table, whenever pi is significant. The product pC1 pi
is the probability that the contact is C1 and that fellow B
is infected at the same time. Aiming at a small value of
pmd ensures that few potential carriers continue spreading the
disease (second row). The actual value of pmd is a direct
measure of the containment benefit provided by a tracing
app. Since 1 − pC1 is large, it is very important that the
probability pf a of wrongly classifying a contact as being C1
be small. Otherwise, numerous people would be unduly sent
to quarantine by the third row. The value of pf a characterizes
the extra load in terms of quarantining and testing generated
by a tracing app. This has to be taken into account in the tradeoff of pf a versus pmd . Also note that the undesired outcomes,
i.e. the rows 2 and 3, have a probability proportional to pi ,
which means that they are unlikely to occur in the case of
a small density of infectious people. As a consequence, a

3

TABLE I
C1 C ONTACT E VENTS
Event
Ĉ1 |C1
¬Ĉ1 |C1
Ĉ1 |¬C1
¬Ĉ1 |¬C1

Description
C1 is detected and C1 is correct (C1 contact)
C1 is rejected while C1 would have been correct (missed detection)
C1 is detected but C1 is not correct (false alarm)
C1 is rejected, which is the correct conclusion(no contact)

Probability
pd
pmd = 1 − pd
pf a
1 − pf a

TABLE II
C1 C ONTACT E VENT P ROBABILITIES AND C ONSEQUENCES
Event
Ĉ1 |C1 ∧ B
¬Ĉ1 |C1 ∧ B
Ĉ1 |¬C1 ∧ B
¬B ∨ (¬Ĉ1 |¬C1 ∧ B)

Probability
pC1 pi pd ∼ pC1 pi .
pC1 pi pmd
(1 − pC1 )pi pf a
1 − pi + (1 − pC1 )pi (1 − pf a )

potential under-performance of an app only becomes apparent
in environments with a high number of infectious people.
The decision for Ĉ1 or ¬Ĉ1 is taken after a substantial
number of individual measurements. They are assumed to be
performed at regular intervals. The number of such intervals in
a time laps of 15 minutes is denoted by x0 . Depending on the
assumed behavior of people, different methods of analyzing
the measurement data shall be considered:
•

•

•

Model A: People are rather mobile and the environment
is changing quickly - the contact duration is accumulated
over many short intervals. Examples of such situations
occur when people work closely together, which is not
particularly critical in terms of classification. They occur
in underground trains, during breaks at conferences, at
any form of party and the like. In these cases, a decision
is taken every 15 seconds, if x0 = 60 such measurements
indicate that fellow B is in the contact zone of fellow
A the contact is classified as being C1 . It will turn out
that this model cannot be addressed with the current
capabilities.
Model B: People come together, stay in a given relative
pose and then separate again. This happens when people
are seated in a train, especially in long-distance intercity trains, in restaurants, meeting rooms, lecture halls,
theaters and the like. In this case, a single test (x0 = 1)
is performed to decide on whether A is in the contact
zone of B. Specifically, in the case of Bluetooth RSSI
measurements, a timer is started when the RSSI value exceeds a critical value for the first time. From then on, the
times for which the RSSI values are compatible with a C1
contact are accumulated. If the time exceeds 15 minutes
at the end of the contact, a C1 contact is declared. There
are many different options for the implementation of this
model. They will not be further discussed, however, since
they assumes a static constellation of people, which is not
the most common case.
Model C: Is an intermediate model, which allows for slow
changes in the distribution of people. In this model the
RSSI is accumulated over time, like in Model B but only
over intervals of 3 or 5 minutes. Contrary to Model B,
there is no further condition on the accumulation. The

Consequence
A goes to quarantine
A pot. spreads the virus
Unnecessary quarantine of A
none (all other cases)

accumulated RSSI-values are evaluated against a threshold at the end of the interval. Exceeding the threshold
x0 = 5 times (3 minutes of accumulation) or 3 times (5
minutes of accumulation), leads to the decision Ĉ1 . This
approach is more robust with respect to the behavior of
people and preferable to Model B.
Model A is most universally valid with respect to people’s
behavior. Its statistics are so unfavorable that it does not lead to
acceptable values of pmd , however. In all models, the number
of RSSI measurement n that are combined, before taking an
elementary decision, is another parameter that can be adapted.
Large values lead to more reliable decisions but also to a
higher number of exchanged messages. The rate of message
will be n · x0 measurements in 15 minutes.
In order to assess pmd , we need to know the number of
times that the distance and attitude condition for C1 between
A and B are fulfilled. This depends on the profession and
personality of the person. It has two components, the first
one is determined by the number of people met during one
day. Let us assume that this number is k and that it has
probability pn (k), then the probability pS that a particular
fellow A spreads the virus after having been in contact with
m ∈ {1, 2, . . . k} people, who are infectious with probability
pi , under the assumption that i ∈ {1, 2, . . . m} of these
contacts are not detected, is given by:

∞
k 
X
X
k
k−m
pS =
pn (k)
pm
i (1 − pi )
m
m=1
k=0

m 
X
m
·
pimd (1 − pmd )m−i .
i
i=1

Since pi and pmd are small numbers, the dominant term in
this equation is obtained for m = i = 1 :
pS ' Kpi pmd ,
P∞

(1)

with K = k=0 pn (k)k being the average number of contacts, see also the second row in Table II. All these contacts
take place mostly independently and can thus be treated as
such. Each of them is associated with a contact time x ∈ N,
with a distribution pX (x). The latter is derived from social
models and depends on whether people are practicing social
distancing.

4

The accumulation of n measurements leads to a decision
ĉ1 . The latter has a probability of missed detection and false
alarm denoted by πmd and πf a , respectively. In the present
section, both quantities are written without further indices. In
later sections, the dependency on n will be made explicit.
The combination of x0 such decisions ĉ1 finally leads to
the decision Ĉ1 , which is associated with a missed detection
probability:
pmd (x) =

xX
0 −1 
m=0

x
m



x−m
(1 − πmd )m πmd
,

(2)

since the combined missed detection occurs whenever less than
x0 detections succeed. Using this in Equation 1 implies that
the probability that A spreads the disease is:
xM
X

pS ' Kpi

pX (x)pmd (x)

x=x0
xM
X

= Kpi

pX (x)

x=x0

xX
0 −1 
m=0

x
m

(3)


(1 −

x−m
πmd )m πmd
,

with, xM = 24·4·x0 being the number of elementary decisions
taken per day (24 · 4 quarters of hours times x0 ). The above
equation is an approximation since the distribution of contact
times depends on the people and circumstances of the meeting,
like sitting together in the train, having a joint lunch and so
on. If πmd  1, the term m = x0 − 1 is dominant in Equation
(3):


xM
X
x
x−x0 +1
pX (x)
πmd x0 −1 πmd
pS ∼ Kpi
x0 − 1

B and Model C and not possible to achieve in Model A, even
with very large values of n. Rephrasing this in words may help
developing some intuition: since x0 individual ĉ1 decision are
needed for a Ĉ1 decision, missing any one of them leads to
a missed detection. Since there are x0 options for that, pS
becomes essentially proportional to x0 πmd . We will use the
latter product as a measure for the reduction in the spreading
of the disease by the tracing app.
In order to evaluate pf a , we need to additionally know
the number of times y that a person is close enough for a
measurement to take place. The distribution pY (y) does again
depend on social parameters but additionally depends on radio
propagation in the case of Bluetooth measurements, and on
the triggering mechanism in the case of audio ranging. The
number of contacts KY ≥ K is larger, since the presence
detection by Bluetooth signaling is triggered well beyond C1
separation. Consider Bluetooth measurements: if among the
y time instances for which a radio contact to one particular
fellow B persists, and assume that m < x0 of those contacts
are correctly detected as fulfilling the C1 conditions. Then,
q additional erroneously identified contacts (erroneous ĉ1 decisions) with m + q ≥ x0 are needed to cause a false alarm
for that number y of radio contacts to B (see Table III for a
summary of the meaning of the variables):

min{x,x0 −1} 
xM
X
X
x
x−m
pX (x)
pf a (y) =
(1 − πmd )m πmd
m
x=0
m=0
y−x
X  y−x  q
πf a (1 − πf a )y−x−q ,
q
q=x0 −m

(6)

x=x0

= Kpi πdx0 −1

xM X
−x0 +1

pX (x0 + x0 − 1)

(4)

for y ≥ x0 and pf a (y) = 0 for y < x0 .

x0 =1


·
≤

Kpi πdx0 −1

xM X
−x0 +1
x0 =1

x0 + x0 − 1
x0 − 1



TABLE III
VARIABLES USED IN E QUATION III.

x0
πmd

with πd = 1 − πmd . The second line in the equation is
obtained by shifting the indices, the third one is obtained by
expanding the binomial coefficients and bounding the terms
in the numerator. Note that the term for x0 = 1 holds
with equality. Under the same assumptions used so far, the
probability that fellow A is a C1 contact of B after a day is:
pC1 = Kpi

xM
X

pX (x) = N pi

xM X
−x0 +1

pX (x0 + x0 − 1).

x0 =1

x=x0

Using Equation (6), the expected number of an unnecessary
quarantining of people is approximated by:
xM
X

nQ = KY pi
= KY pi

y=x0
xM
X

pY (y)pf a (y)
pY (y)·

y=x0

Thus, the comparison of pS , i.e. the probability of spreading
the virus with tracing, and of pC1 , i.e. the corresponding
probability without tracing, shows that contact tracing is a
very effective option to reduce the spreading whenever
x0 πmd

Meaning
number of radio contacts
number of C1 contacts
number of ĉ1 -decisions to declare C1
number of correct ĉ1 estimates
number of incorrect ĉ1 estimates

Variable
y
x
x0
m
q

1
x0
pX (x + x0 − 1) 0 (x0 πmd ) ,
x!
0

(5)

is small. This implies that the probability of missed detection
must be constrained to a value smaller than 1/x0 , which is
possible to achieve if x0 is small, as it is the case in Model

·
·

xM
X

min{x,x0 −1} 

pX (x)

x=0
y−x
X
q=x0 −m

X

m=0



y−x
q



x
m



x−m
(1 − πmd )m πmd

πfq a (1 − πf a )y−x−q .
(7)

This equation also includes the possibility that users move
with respect to each other, which means that the conditions

5

C1 and ¬C1 alternate as a function of time. If C1 is fulfilled
πf a = 0, and if ¬C1 , the equation πd = 0 holds. At the border
of the C1 domain, the two quantities change their role. This
implies that a small pf a near that border is associated with a
large pmd ∼ 1 − pf a on the other side of the border. This is
uncritical if the distributions are very narrow - concentrated
around a value - as is the case for ranging, but becomes rather
problematic with Bluetooth signal power measurements, which
show a very flat distribution. Unless great precautions are taken
the classification becomes unreliable. Consider the case, that
fellow B is outside of the C1 zone of fellow A, i.e. pX (0) = 1.
Then x = 0 for these measurements and the equation becomes:

y 
xM
X
X
y
nQ = KY pi
pY (y)
πfxa (1 − πf a )y−x .
x
y=x0

x=x0

Although terms with x > x0 may be larger, the term x = x0
gives us an idea of the scaling. Its asymptotic dependency
can be evaluated using Stirling’s formula and limy→∞ (y/(y −
x0 ))y = ex0 :


x0


r
y
y
y
x0
− 1 eπf a
.
πf a ∼
x0
2πx0 (y − x0 )
x0
This means that in the long term, it is the duration of the
radio contact y, which dominates the rate of quarantining
people. Some target figures for πf a can be obtained for a
fully occupied train, for example. In Germany’s 2nd class
setups, there are 4 seats in one row on each side of a carriage,
and around 10 rows in the carriage. The range of Bluetooth
reaches well beyond the next row forward and backward. This
means that KY > 24 of which 4-8 are within the contact zone
and must thus be discounted, leading to an effective value
KY = 16. The value y itself is determined by the duration of
the common journey. For commuter trains we choose 15 and
30 minutes, for inter-city journeys 1, 2, and 3 hours, which
leads to y/x0 = 1, 2, 4, 8, and 12. In such a train a carrier
of the disease will send 4 people to quarantine, thus it should
be tolerable that 2 additional people are sent to quarantine by
false alarms as well. The value of πf a is then obtained by
solving


y
KY
πfxa0 = 2.
x0
Numerical values of πf a are indicated in Table IV. They are
the values that can be tolerated, leading to a 50% increase in
the quarantining of people riding a German train. The situation
is rather uncritical on a short commuter train ride πf a < 0.93
and much more demanding on a longer intercity train journey.
TABLE IV
ROUGH INDICATION FOR ACCEPTABLE VALUES OF πf a . T HEY ARE
OBTAINED BY CONSIDERING TRAIN RIDES .
y/x0
πf a

1
0.93

2
0.25

4
0.11

8
0.05

12
0.03

III. B LUETOOTH P OWER M EASUREMENTS
The Application Programming Interfaces (API) of Android
and iOS allow to trigger the transmission of Bluetooth Low

Energy (BLE) advertisement messages and to measure the radio signal strength of the received signals. The corresponding
values are provided in the form of a Radio Signal Strength
Indicators (RSSI), which is defined as the received signal
power on a logarithmic scale. Bluetooth uses frequencies
from a band shared with microwave heating, which means
that Bluetooth signals are strongly absorbed by water. As a
consequence any part of a human body obstructing the line
of sight significantly attenuates the signal. The wide variety
of options for carrying mobile phones in your hand, pocket
or bag thus implies an enormous variability in received power
levels. This is further amplified by the directional characteristic
of low-cost antennas. You might make an experiment yourself
using a Bluetooth module and a BLE scanner app on your
smartphone, which can be downloaded from the iOS or
Android stores. With the module and phone separated by 1.5
meters, I personally found the following RSSI-values: -61 to
-66 dBm when the module was in my hand and -81 to -89dB when it was in my pocket. Knowing that a 20 dB change
corresponds to a factor 10 in distance exemplifies the difficulty
of estimating distances using Bluetooth RSSI values. This led
us to propose the rule of carrying smartphones hanging down
from the neck. Note that the smartphone could be replaced by
a much smaller device built around a Bluetooth module, an
Inertial Navigation System (INS) and a sonic or ultra-sonic
ranging system, as well.
Even if people follow the above recommendation on how
to carry their smartphone, the situation remains difficult due
to uncertainties in radio propagation, which furthermore takes
place on three different carrier frequencies. The unknown
association of carrier frequencies to measurements adds an
additional level of difficulty. Gentner et al. identified certain
patterns in the use of carriers, see [11], which can be used
to reduce the associated uncertainty. Traditional models of
propagation are shortly addressed in the following section and
in more details in [8]. The section furthermore relates the
associated statistics to the statistics of classification.
A. Propagation Model
The smartphone is assumed to be worn on the chest, see [8]
for details of the measurement setup used to obtain numerical
results. For each individual carrier, the received signal power
PRX is modeled by the equation:
PRX =

γ
PT X + n,
dν

(8)

with PT X denoting the transmit power, γ denoting a stochastic
fading coefficient, d being the distance between the receiver
and the transmitter, ν being the exponent of the decay law,
which is 2 for free space propagation, and with n representing
a superposition of noise and interference. For simplicity, the
noise and interference are not further considered here - at low
distances they are not dominant. In this case, the received
power, can be represented on a logarithmic scale, which leads
to the definition of the RSSI:
RSSI = 10 log PRX = 10 log PT X − ν · 10 log d + η

(9)

6

with η = 10 log γ and with logarithms taken to the basis 10.
The relationship between the reported RSSI value and d is
the basis for distance measurement: the measured RSSI is
compared to



Θ = 10 log PT X − ν · 10 log dc + hηi,
with dc = 2 m being the critical distance. Note that Equation
(8) defines the units, which have to be maintained after taking
logarithms.
In order to evaluate the missed detection probability per
event pmd or the false alarm probability per event pf a , the
statistics for η or γ need to be known. These statistics are
dependent on the situation. In the case, that two fellows
face each other, they are in a line of sight situation. If the
direct path dominates all other contributions, γ is basically
delta distributed with an average of Γ determined by the
antenna pattern. In other cases, the direct path remains present
but is superposed by scattered components. In this case, the
distribution of the amplitude of the received signal is modeled
by a Ricean distribution. This model is considered to provide a
faithful representation of reality, whenever the parameters are
properly estimated. Presently the model is only considered for
comparative purposes, as shall be seen below. The received
power (or attenuation γ) in this model has a non-central χ2 distribution with two degrees of freedom:

√
γγR
1 −(γ+γR )/(2σR2 )
I0
,
(10)
pR (γ) =
2 e
2
2σR
σR
with γR being the non-centrality parameter and σR being the
variance. In the case that the decision about C1 is taken on
the basis of a single measurement (n = 1), e.g. in Model A,
the criterion for the decision is:
 
d ν
γ ≥ γc
,
(11)
dc
with γc being given by:
Z
γc = hγi =

√

 nγR
,
πmd,R,n (d) = 1 − Qn 
σR

√

γc



d
dc

ν/2 

dγγpR (γ).

(12)

The associated estimate is denoted by ĉ1 , and the probability
of missed detection for the distance d < dc is given by:
Z γc (d/dc )ν
πmd (d) =
dγpR (γ).
(13)


.

σR

(14)

The above distributions are adequate for users A and B in
close proximity of each other, as is the case for d ≤ dc . It is
the desired result in Model A and shall serve as a benchmark
in the Models B and C. The reason for not using this result
directly in the latter models is that apps are expected to add
the RSSI values rather than the power values. In this case, the
statistics cannot be determined in closed form but must rather
be evaluated numerically. Before addressing this case, let us
consider the situaiton d > dc with a line of sight that is often
obstructed. In such cases, a lognormal fading distribution is
considered to be a reasonable model of reality, see [12]. The
distribution may either be written in terms of γ:
2
2
10 log (e)
pL (γ) = √ 10 e−(10 log γ−10 log γL ) /(2σL ) ,
2πσL γ

or in terms of η = 10 log γ:
pL (η) = √

2
2
1
e−(η−ηL ) /(2σL ) ,
2πσL

(15)

with ηL = 10 log γL = hηi. Equation (15) makes the Gaussian
character and the meaning of ηL and σL obvious. In the above
discussion, a decision in the case n = 1 was taken in favor
of C1 , whenever the power level was above a threshold. On
the logarithmic scale this condition reads RSSI > Θ, i.e.
whenever the difference
RSSI − Θ = η − ηL + ν · 10 log

∞

0

0

The probability of missed detection (13) in estimating ĉ1 could
then be computed in closed form using Marcum’s Q-function
Qn (., .):

dc
d

(16)

is positive or equivalently whenever η > hηi+ν ·10 log(d/dc ).
Thus, a false alert occurs if this condition is fulfilled for d >
dc . The probability of a false alarm, i.e. and erroneous decision
for c1 , becomes
Z ∞
πf a (d) =
dη pL (η)
(17)
hηi+ν·10 log(d/dc )


ν · 10 log(d/dc )
=Q
,
σL

If one would add several power measurements, i.e. n > 1,
e.g. in Model B and C, this would mean adding n independent identically distributed variables, each of them being χ2 distributed with 2 degrees of freedom. The result would then
with the present Q-function being a scaled version of the error
be χ2 -distributed with 2n degrees of freedom:
function complement:

 n−1
√



2
nγγR
2
γ
1
−(γ+nγR )/(2σR
)
1
x
e
In−1
.
pR,n (γ) =
2
2
Q(x) = erfc √
.
2σR nγR
σR
2
2
The Equations (11) and (12) would remain valid and the latter
In the case of n = 1, a closed form of the statistics thus exists
integral could be computed in closed form for arbitrary n.
for πmd for d ≤ dc and for πf a for d > dc . In the case n > 1,
2
The value γc is the first moment of the χ -distribution with
e.g. Model B and C, the situation changes somewhat since
2
2n degrees of freedom and non-centrality parameter nγR /σR :
measurements are now combined by adding RSSI-values. This
2
γc = n(γR + 2σR
).
corresponds to a geometric average of the received powers.

7

In this case, the probability of false alarm can be computed
easily:
√

n · ν · 10 log(d/dc )
πf a,n (d) = Q
,
(18)
σL
for d > dc . This equation is a consequence of the scaling of ηL
2
and σL
by n. Using the same distribution, but with different
parameters for d < dc is expected to be a worse match to
reality but allows to also evaluate the probability of missed
detection in closed from:
Z hηi+ν·10 log(d/dc )
πmd,L,n (d) =
dη pL (η)
−∞

√
n · ν · 10 log(d/dc )
=1−Q
σL

√
n · ν · 10 log(dc /d)
=Q
σ
 2 L
dc
= πf a,n
.
(19)
d
It leads to an interesting symmetry between the probabilities
of missed detection and of false alert.
Note that both probabilities πmd and πf a depend on the
parameters of the distribution, on the true distance d, and
on the critical distance dc , but that they do not depend on
the explicit threshold Θ, see Equation (16) and the associated
explanations. The resulting functional dependence can either
be used in a simulation of roaming users or can simply be
averaged over the interior of a circle of radius dc for πmd or
over its complement or a relevant subset for πf a . The closed
form of Equation (6) provides the immediate insight that
πf a,n (dc ) = 1/2, which shows that the models are consistent
with our intuition.
B. BLE Measurements Results
The companion paper by Dammann et al. [8] describes the
measurements and their analysis in more details. All these
measurements have so far been made using ideal conditions
with no additional people except A and B (in the very initial
measurements A was a actually a post carrying the receiver).
The experimental basis shall be further broadened in the
future. A first result can be derived from the estimated Rice
parameters at a distance of 2 meters γR = 247 pW, and
σR2 = 9.15 pW, as well as for the lognormal distribution
at 2 and 4 meters: 1.60 and 1.97 dBm, respectively.
This allows plotting the functions from Equation (14) and
(17) for πmd,R,n (d) and for πf a,n (d2c /d) = πmd,L,n (d),
respectively. The values of n determines how many measurements are combined into an elementary decision ĉ1 . For
n = 1, the values πmd,R,1 (d) and πf a,1 (d) are the best models
among those considered - the use of a decision threshold in the
absolute or logarithmic domain are equivalent. The parameter
for 4 meters 1.97 dBm is used for determining the false alarm
rate.
If several RSSI values are added (logarithmic domain), the
statistics associated with the more realistic Rice distribution
in the near range can not be determined in closed form, at
least not today. In this case, Equation (19) for the lognormal

distribution is used to determine πmd,L,n (d) with the parameter for 2 meters. This is used as an approximation of the true
distribution in the exemplary case n = 60. The plots in Figure
(2) show two groups of curves. The upper group corresponds
to n = 1 and the lower group to n = 60. The latter group of
curves shows the benefit of diversity. Within these groups there
are differences between πmd,R,n (d) (wrong combination) and
πmd,L,n (d) (wrong fading statistics) but they turn out not to
be fundamental.

Fig. 2. Probability of missed detection as a function of user distance using
Bluetooth Radio Signal Strength Indication (RSSI).

TABLE V
S ELECTED VALUES OF πmd,av,n UNDER THE ASSUMPTION OF A
LOGNORMAL FADING DISTRIBUTION . T HESE VALUES DEFINE THE
NUMBER OF MEASUREMENTS NEEDED TO ACHIEVE THE DESIRED
PROBABILITY OF FURTHER SPREADING THE DISEASE .

n
1
6
15
30

πmd,av,n
0.12
0.054
0.034
0.023

n
60
120
240
480

πmd,av,n
0.014
0.007
0.002
0.0003

In Section III-A the probability of missed detection was
determined as a function of distance. Since the probability of
detection is additive in the sense that:
Z
πd = dS(r) ρ(r) πd (r).
Z dc
=
2πrdr ρ(r) πd (r)
(20)
0

In this equation πd (r) = 1 − πmd (r) is the condition probability of detection given that fellow B is at distance r and
dS(r) ρ(r) is the probability density for fellow B to be at
that distance. Equation 20 thus is the marginalization of πd (r)
with respect to r. Note that the limitation of the integration is
a consequence of πd (r) = 0, whenever r > dc . This allows
to define the average probability of missed detection over the
distribution of users:
R dc
2πrdr ρ(r) πmd,n (r)
πmd,av,n = 0 R dc
.
(21)
2πrdr ρ(r)
0

8

The probability distribution of users in Equation (20) and (13)
is given by:
dn(r)
dbπr2 c
ρ(r) =
=
.
dS(r)
2πrdr
In this expression n(r) = bπr2 c is the number of people
at a distance not greater than r in the case of a density of
one person per square meter. This corresponds to the densest
packing of people occupying a surface of 1 meter. People are
continuously spread in a symmetric manner around fellow A,
which is a simple way of achieving a densest packing. The
“function”
p dn(r)/dr is mostly zero. It jumps at the values
rm = m/π with
Z rm +
dn(r)
n(rm + ) − n(rm − ) =
dr = 1,
dr
rm −
which is a distribution in the sense of Schwartz [13]. With
these preparations, the integrals become:
r 
mc
m
1 X
πmd,n
,
(22)
πmd,av,n =
mc m=1
π
with mc being the largest integer with such that rmc ≤ dc .
Note that the density of points rm increases with increasing
m, which means that the main contribution comes from the
border of the contact zone. Using the experimental results
from [8], this integral is evaluated to πmd,av,1 = 0.15 for
n = 1 for the χ2 -distribution and to πmd,av,1 = 0.12 for the
lognormal distribution, which are both not very compatible
with the need of a small x0 πmd, . Remember that the latter
value is the reduction factor in the probability of further
spreading of the disease, achieved by contact tracing. Table
V lists values of πmd,av,n , for different n, which can be
used to determine the reduction factor. Even in the case
n = 120, the factor x0 πmd = 0.21 in Model A and it would
require 4 measurement per second. It is only with n = 480,
that factor x0 πmd falls below 1%, which would require 16
measurements per second. This would seriously impact the
standby time of the smart phone. Assuming Model C and a
decision based on 3 minutes intervals, i.e. x0 = 5, means that
we could achieve a reduction by a factor 0.07 provided that
n = 60 measurements are performed and aggregated in each 3
minutes interval, i.e. that one measurement is performed every
3 seconds. In the case of a decision every 5 minutes, which
assumes a lower dynamics in the relative movement of people,
the reduction factor is 0.04 with the same 60 measurements,
but now spread over a 5 minutes interval, which corresponds
to one measurement every 5 seconds. So, lower requirements
in the dynamic allow both to improve the suppression of the
spreading of the virus and to reduce the measurement rate.
Tolerable alarm rates were derived for the train scenario.
This led to the values in Table (IV). The evaluation of πf a,n (d)
is straight forward. For d = dc it gives πf a,n (dc ) = 1/2 as was
already discussed previously. Assuming that people occupy a
circular
surface of 1 square meter gives them a radius δ =
√
1/ π. Thus, the minimum distance to people fully outside of
the critical zone is dc + δ. Evaluating Equation (19) yields:
pf a,1 (dc + δ) = 0.137

and

pf a,3 (dc + δ) = 0.029

respectively. This means that n = 1 is compatible with a
journey of 15 minutes before sending more than the two people
to quarantine. For n = 3, long journeys of up to 3 hours
become possible with the same consequences. The probability
of false alarm does thus not strongly limit the number n of
measurements aggregated to a decision and one might consider
the more demanding homogeneous distribution of users. This
requires a study of the combination of false alarms. Consider
two fellows B and B’, there is no alarm if neither B nor B’
triggers an alarm, i.e.:
1 − πf a = (1 − πf a,B )(1 − πf a,B 0 ).
Furthermore, let users be at distances dc +δ(k+1) with k ∈ Z+
being a positive integer and assume that there are
2

ν(k) = π (dc + 2δ(k + 1)) − π (dc + 2δk)

2

users at that distance (they cover an angular shell of thickness
2δ). This guarantees a densest packing. In that case, the
probability of false alarm, i.e. an erroneous decision in favor
of C1 , becomes:
pf a,n = 1 −

∞
Y

ν(k)

(1 − πf a,n (dc + k))

.

(23)

k=0

In this more demanding scenario, exemplary values are:
pf a,3 = 0.413 and

pf a,9 = 0.009,

which means that n = 9 would be sufficient to reduce the
probability of false alarm to a very small level. Table VI shows
performance figures for a number of possible choices for the
number n of measurements aggregated to an estimate ĉ1 , as
well as for the number x0 of estimates ĉ1 that lead to a decision
Ĉ1 . The product of n and x0 leads to the measurement rate
ρ = x0 n/(15 · 60). The performance figures are the reduction
factor x0 πmd,n of the spreading achieved by tracing as well
as the probability of unduly sending a person to quarantine.
The figures in Table VI all relate to Model C. Model A does
not lead to interesting parameter choices and Model B is too
static.
TABLE VI
K EY PERFORMANCE PARAMETERS : x0 πmd,n MEASURES THE REDUCTION
IN SPREADING , AND pf a,n THE PROBABILITY OF UNDUE QUARANTINING .
T HE PARAMETER ρ IS THE NUMBER OF MEASUREMENTS PER SECOND .

n

x0
6
15
60

x0 πmd,n
3
5
0.16
0.27
0.12
0.17
0.04
0.07

pf a,n
0.064
0.0002
0.0000

ρ
3
1/50
1/20
1/5

5
1/30
1/12
1/3

A choice with n = 15 and x0 = 3, for example, requires
a measurement to be performed every 12 seconds, suppressed
the risk of spreading by a factor 0.12 and does hardly send
anyone unduly to quarantine. Performing a measurement every
five seconds reduces the risk of spreading by a factor 0.04. This
assumes that people let their phones hang from their neck,
and some standard form of environment. In reality, a number
of additional factors have to be taken into account, such as
a more complex propagation situation, e.g., due to metallic

9

walls, a higher dynamic of user movements, e.g. due to
people entering and exiting commuter trains, or unpredictable
shadowing due to the user’s hands, arms or body in the path
of radio signals. Thus, it is advisable to complement the
Bluetooth measurement by an alternative. Audio ranging is
the option that shall be described in the next section. The idea
is to use it whenever the situation is not clear.
IV. AUDIO R ANGING
Smartphones have a microphone and a speaker with rather
good transmit and receive conditions if the device is carried
on the chest or held in the hand. This can be used for audio
ranging up to distances of a few meters. Signals and their
transmission can be configured by the API. In experiments that
we performed recently, we focused on the use Android phones.
The response of the microphones built into three different
phones is shown in Figure 3. The references were a NT1A microphone from Rode and an Adagio Infinite Speaker of
A3 on the source side. Figure 3 shows the response of three
smartphones from two different brands. The curves are very
similar, suggesting that the same microphones are integrated
in those phones. All microphones show a good sensitivity over
all frequencies.

Fig. 3. Frequency response of microphones from three different smartphones.

A similar experiment was performed for the speakers with
a rather different result. In that case only two smartphones
were analyzed. The response on the better device is reduced
by roughly 10 dB above 16 kHz, as compared to the reference.
The response of the other one is degraded by another 3 dB
and the degradation starts 2kHz earlier. Covering the speaker
by one layer of tissue of a sweater degrades the performance
by another 4 dB. If both parties cover their smartphones
the associated attenuation adds up. Thus, the use of audio
ranging requires carrying the devices in an exposed manner,
e.g. hanging from one’s neck, see Figure (1). Transmission
at lower, less attenuated frequencies is not considered as a
true option, since it would be too disturbing. The norm ISO
226:2003 compiles equivalent hearing sensitivity (isophones),
which allows to compare the disturbance caused by acoustical
signals on different frequencies.

Fig. 4. Frequency response of two speakers, as well as influence of covering
the speaker of Smartphone 2 with one layer of a sweater.

On the basis of such considerations, we propose modulating
a carrier at 18 kHz with a modulation rate of 1 kbaud. This
keeps the signal in a spectral range that is not too disturbing to
most people. A spread spectrum modulation provides a good
range resolution and allows to operate at a low signal-to-noise
ratio at the same time. Different options exist and are discussed
in [9]. Since the velocity of sound in air is cs = 343 m/s under
standard conditions, a chip duration of 1 ms corresponds to a
length of 34 cm. At a typical signal-to-noise ratio this leads
to a distance resolution of 1 to 3 cm. Let us be conservative
and assume a resolution of 5 cm. A multipath delay of two
meters leads to an offset by 6 chips and is well suppressed
by the autocorrelation of the spreading code. The length of
the spreading code is assumed to be around 350 chips. An
alternative using chirps is also considered. The performance
of audio ranging is further developed in Section IV.
Audio ranging can be performed in a peer-to-peer or in
a networked manner. Consider the peer-to-peer situation first.
Smartphones do not provide accurate timing control. However,
the microphone input of a smartphone may be sampled at a
fixed rate. Furthermore, smartphones can transmit and receive
at the same time and this is furthermore supported by the
APIs of Android and iOS. Let the smartphones thus agree
to start audio ranging via Bluetooth . In a first step they
open their microphone channels and then proceed according to
Figure 5: at time tT X,A , A transmits the ranging signal using
its speaker. This transmission is delayed with respect to the
API by τT X,A . In parallel to its transmission A’s microphone
capture the transmitted signal. This signal is delayed by the
sum of the local propagation delay τl,A and by the internal
receive delay τRX,A . The delay τl,A is determined by the
device geometry and can be stored in memory. A standard
value of 14 cm should be appropriate for most devices on the
market. The time of reception thus is:
t0RX,A = tT X,A + τT X,A + τl,A + τRX,A ,
and is used for calibration purposes. The same definition of
delays applies at B. Thus, the signal transmitted by A at time

10

tT X,A is received at B at the time tRX,B :

reception time tRX,Ai by terminal A1 , this terminal transmits
the time difference using Bluetooth:

tRX,B = tT X,A + τT X,A + τ + τRX,B ,

∆tA1 ,Ai = tRX,Ai − t0RX,A1 + τl,A1

with τ being the propagation time from A to B. After reception
of the signal from A by B, B sends a corresponding signal to
A. The equations are obtained by changing the roles of A and
B:
t0RX,B = tT X,B + τT X,B + τl,B + τRX,B ,
and
tRX,A = tT X,B + τT X,B + τ + τRX,A .
At the end of the reception A sends
∆tA = tRX,A − t0RX,A + τl,A

(24)

to B and B sends ∆tB = tRX,B − t0RX,B + τl,B , using BLE.
Thus, both can compute the propagation time:
τ=

∆tA + ∆tB
,
2

and thus the distance d = τ cs . The property of audio signals,
which is crucial for this self-calibration, is the possibility to
observe the own transmitted signal.

Fig. 5. Signal paths in two-way acoustical ranging with calibration of transmit
and receive delays.

A. Ranging Protocol
The above peer-to-peer protocol can be extended to a
networked protocol. In this case, the users agree on an ordering
of transmissions via Bluetooth. All smartphones A1 . . . Ak
activate their microphones and one after the other transmit
their audio ranging signals. For simplicity, the scheduling is
prearranged, which also works if some of the smartphone
cannot acquire all signals. In this case, all delays are summed
up: 350 ms for the ranging signal, 10 ms (corresponding to
4 meters) for propagation and 40 ms for the internal delays
between the activation of the transmission command and the
start of transmission (the latter needs to be confirmed by more
data). This allows for a scheduling of a transmission every 400
ms. After the completion of the cycle and the evaluation of the

for 2 ≤ i ≤ k,

If all terminals see each other, they transmit k(k − 1) such
values in total. The annoying transmissions of audio signals remain limited to k, however. The overall time interval spanned
by all transmissions in the networked protocol may be long
enough for users to move slightly. This is not critical, however.
The snap-shot measurements are simply converted to average
values. The only instances, which require some care are those
in which the audio signals are used to calibrate Bluetooth
measurements. Finally, it should be emphasized that audio
beacon transmissions should not be activated if the device is
held to the ear. Even if the signals are hardly heard, this seems
a reasonable precaution.
B. Theoretical Performance of Acoustic Range Estimation
The received audio signal is filtered to remove out-ofband interference and noise to the best possible extent. The
filtered signal is used to determine the in-band interference and
noise level N0 and is furthermore correlated using the filtered
ranging signal. For simplicity, the further exposition focuses on
spread spectrum signals. In a first step the I and Q components
of the correlation C(∆τ ) are computed at intervals of Tc /2
with Tc = 1 ms denoting the chip duration. The result is
searched for the delay leading to the maximum norm |C(∆τ )|.
Although, the implementations by widely used phones seem
not to require that, frequency offsets may be searched as well.
This allows to acquire the signal which may be present or not.
Thus, it is sufficient to search for the delay (and frequency
offsets) leading to the maximum norm from early to late. The
latter ordering is to avoid locking on an echo. If the signal
to noise ratio is above the expected threshold, the signal is
assumed present. In this case, a successive refinement of the
result is performed in a DLL type of processing. The power
discriminator
DP (∆τ ) = |R(∆τ + δ)|2 − |R(∆τ − δ)|2
is used to iteratively increase/reduce the delay ∆τ depending
on the value of DP (∆τ ) ≷ 0. In this equation δ is half the
correlator spacing and is expressed as a fraction ∆ of the
chip duration: δ = ∆Tc . We will restrict ourselves to ∆ = 1.
A further optimization is possible, see Betz and Kolodziejski
[14], [15]. The uncertainty of the delay estimate ∆τ due to
noise is given by (see Dierendonck, Fenton and Ford [16]):


3
∆
2
2
1+
.
(25)
σ∆τ ' Tc
4Ei /N0
(2 − ∆)Ei /N0
In this expression, Ei is the signal energy accumulated during
the correlation, and N0 is the spectral noise density of the
audio noise and interference. The latter quantity is estimated
using the norm of the filtered I and Q samples of the incoming
signal:
N
X

1
N0 =
s2I + s2Q ,
BS N Tc n=1

11

with N denoting the number of samples and with BS denoting the bandwidth of the passband filter. This estimate is
performed ahead of time and is used for setting the volume
of the transmission, such that Ei /N0 = 6 dB at 4 meters. At
this level the signal can be acquired, and Equation (25) implies
that σ∆τ ' Tc /4,which corresponds to 9 cm. At 2 meters, this
is half that value, i.e. 4.5 cm. The calibration of the transmit
power may be performed by listening to the own beacon. This
allows detecting whether the user is inadvertently covering the
microphone or the speaker, which should trigger a request to
the user to remove the blockage. The distribution of audio
ranging measurements is Gaussian with a standard deviation
given by Equation (25). This allows computing πmd , i.e the
probability of deciding against ĉ1 , as a function of the distance
d ≤ dc :
Z ∞
2
1
e−(x−d) /(2σ∆τ )
πmd (d) =
dx √
2πσ∆τ
dc


dc − d
=Q
,
(26)
σ∆τ
and πf a , i.e the probability of wrongly deciding in favor of
ĉ1 , for distances d > dc :
Z dc
2
1
e−(x−d) /(2σ∆τ )
πf a (d) =
dx √
0
 2πσ∆τ
dc − d
=1−Q
.
(27)
σ∆τ
Note that the symmetry of lognormal fading between πmd (d)
and πf a (d2c /d) is lost. The plot for audio ranging, corresponding to σ∆τ = 5 cm is shown in Figure 6

Fig. 6. Probabilities of missed detection as a function of d and of false alarm
as a function of d2c /d for audio ranging.

Again one might evaluate the average rate of missed
detection and of false alarm as in Equation (22). In this
case, the averaged probability of missed detection becomes
πmd,av = 0.016. In the present case, the number of measurements is primarily limited by the acoustical disturbances
associated with the transmission of the beacon. The number
of measurements n used for taking a decision is always 1.
Furthermore, the number of measurements x0 per 15 minutes

must also be small for the same reason. With x0 = 3, the
reduction of the spreading rate of disease is x0 πmd,av < 0.05,
which is a low figure. The probability of false alarm described
by Equation (27) decays so quickly that it is insignificant
at d = dc + δ, i.e. πf a (dc + δ) ' 0. The same applies
for the integration over a two-dimensional plane according to
Equation (23).
The present discussion was about the contributions of uncertainty due to signaling. Additionally, the relative geometry
of the microphones and speakers may add some bias, which
may lead to a shift of the border to a contact zone by
a few centimeters. This is rather uncritical, however. The
important conclusion is that audio ranging provides sharp
results. This form of ranging might thus be activated whenever
the information gained by Bluetooth measurements may lead
to a wrong conclusion.
V. ATTITUDE S ENSING
This section is more a reference to options that may be
considered. The benefits will become visible by the qualitative
discussion of Section VI. Earth gravity in the −e~z direction,
i.e. towards the center of the earth and the magnetic field in
the direction of ~emN , i.e. towards magnetic North provide
two directions that enable attitude determination. Both are
seriously disturbed in ways that depend on the environment.
A number of authors have investigated the quality of attitude
sensing both using algorithms built into smartphones and using
own estimation algorithms. Michel and co-authors summarize
a number of findings [17]. They report an accuracy of 6◦
with a sampling rate of 40Hz whenever the smartphone is
kept in a relatively calm position (front pocket, texting or
phoning). These results apply to their own algorithms “MichelObsF” and “MichelEkfF.” They did not study the behavior
in a train, which is a particularity difficult environment: with
many sources of acceleration, due to the track geometry, due
to passing switches or simply due to irregularities in the
tracks themselves. Similarly, the magnetic field in trains is
modulated by electrical motors, permanent magnets and large
currents. On the other hand people sitting or standing next
to each others are likely to be affected in a similar manner.
Exploiting the latter property, however, requires the use of
common standardized algorithm and precise time stamping of
measurements.
Carrying the smartphone by letting it hang down one’s
neck leads to two stable orientation, one with the display
facing the chest and one with the display facing ahead.
The resolution of the associated ambiguity is rather straightforward, at least as long as people do not predominantly
walk backward. Alternatively, the cameras could be used for
determining the orientation, since the brightness of the pictures
is very different. Pitch angles are suppressed by gravity, as
long as people do not bend backwards, which is unnatural.
Roll angles may occur if one strap is shorter than the other
one. They are compensated by sensing earth gravity. In our
opinion the context of COVID-tracing is quite favorable to
the use of relative attitude estimation, which would provide an
interesting complement to Bluetooth sensing and/or acoustic
ranging. This needs to be developed, however.

12

VI. C LASSIFICATION
The definition of a Category 1 contact by the Robert Koch
Institute [18] includes three elements:
•
•
•

an accumulated duration of 15 minutes, which can easily
be metered,
a distance of less than 2 meters, which is more difficult
to establish,
and the concept of being face-to-face, discussed below.

From the previous sections, specially Section II and III,
we learned that under idealized conditions, Bluetooth RSSI
measurements provide an adequate estimation of the distance
between two fellows or more exactly an estimate on whether
B is in the critical zone of A. The probability of missed
detection was found to the be a critical performance measure.
Audio ranging was found to be an interesting complement
to Bluetooth measurements, in particular if the latter measurements are disturbed by shadowing or multipath. They provide a
comparatively sharp answer, and may be used to calibrate past
and future Bluetooth RSSI measurement. Audio measurements
may be audible and thus annoying for younger people, as
well as for dogs and other animals. As a consequence, it is
beneficial to keep them sparse. In Section V, we very shortly
addressed the use of attitude sensing.
In this section, we shall superficially address the potential
of combining these measurement types. For this discussion,
it is meaningful to differentiate different poses, as shown in
Figure 7. A selection of essential poses of two fellows in
close proximity is shown in a top view. Fellow B is infected
and exhales air charged with microscopic droplets carrying the
virus. Fellow A inhales the droplets. Pose (a) in Figure 7 is
what everyone would agree to call a face-to-face situation. It is
the type of situation, which occurs during a meeting, lunch or
in public transportation for people sitting or standing opposite
to each other. It might also occur when desks are facing each
other and in some other special situations. Pose (b) occurs
in public transportation, in queues as well as in lecture halls,
concert halls, cinemas or the like. It also appears dangerous,
although Fellow B needs to be closer for that, but this might
often be the case. However, unless B stands and is much taller
than A, the air flow will only partially reach A’s nose and
mouth. A further specification by medical authorities would
be helpful in this case. Pose (c) occurs in similar situations
as Pose (b). Pose (d), (e) and (f) occur during meetings both
while standing and sitting, in public transportation and some
other situations. Pose (c) and (d) do not appear too critical,
although B is likely to turn his head from time to time, which
is not detected by the sensors considered. Pose (d), (e), and
(f) are difficult to differentiate even using perfect ranging and
orientation.
Assuming that there is no specific direction in the air-flow,
due to wind or draft, and that the different poses can be
differentiated, medical requirements would probably choose
•
•
•

The possibility to discriminate the cases depends on the type of
sensing, as described so far, and is discussed in the following
three sections.

Pose (a), (d), and (e) to be Category 1, i.e. critical,
Pose (b) would be critical for a lower distance which
might depend on the height differences,
Pose (c) and (f) would be essentially uncritical.

Fig. 7. Different potential poses of a COVID-19 carrier A and of a nearby
person B. The bubble in front of A shows the area into which A exhales air
carrying droplets with the virus.

A. Bluetooth-only Measurements
BLE RSSI measurements will return similar results for
the Poses (a), (c), (d), and (e). The distance d between the
fellows might appear larger in Pose (f) than it actually is.
This is uncritical, however. In Pose (b), the received power
will be associated with a larger distance than the actual one,
as well. Depending on how Pose (b) is classified, this leads
to a missed detection. A similar situation may also occur in
Pose (e) whenever Fellow A obstructs the line of sight with
his left harm, e.g. by holding himself on a bar in public
transportation. All missed detection events are critical since
they leave close encounters undetected. Finally, the poses
(c) and (d) will typically generate false alarms, which sends
people to quarantine and testing. This sort of differentiation
has not been considered so far, at least to our knowledge.
B. Bluetooth, Attitude Sensing
The addition of a attitude sensing, allows to separate the
cases of “Pose (b) with a small distance” from “Pose (a) with
a large distance”. Thus, it might use a lower threshold in the
case of an aligned attitude and thus avoid the missed detection
events in Pose (b). With a lower threshold, however, fellows
in Pose (c) will be identified as C1 up to a rather large relative
distance, potentially generating many false alarms.

13

C. Bluetooth, Attitude Sensing and Audio Ranging
An extensive use of audio ranging, would eliminate false
alarms mostly. It would implement the conditions of Category
1 without the alleviation due to the the condition of being
face-to-face. When combined with the other measurements,
audio measurements provide additional discrimination and
allow reducing the rate of missed detection and false alarms.
In reality, acoustical signals are subject to multipath, which
might be critical if the direct path is strongly attenuated. Since
the receiver searches from early to late it is unlikely to be
induced in error, however, as long as the direct path can still
be detected.
VII. C ONCLUSIONS
Difficulties in Bluetooth RSSI-based ranging are mentioned
by a number of scientists orally. The significant attenuation
by the human body and other influencing factors, such as
keys, coins, metallic pens, business card holders and the like
make the power levels very unpredictable. We thus propose to
standardize the wearing of smartphones or alternative devices
on the chest, when not held in the hand or used for making
phone calls. This provides an environment that is much better
defined for Bluetooth RSSI-based ranging, audio ranging and
attitude determination. Currently, we don’t see an alternative
setting to the present one that allows for an analysis of
the tracing performance in terms of identifying Category 1
contacts and avoiding unduly frequent alerts for contacts that
are not Category 1. The analysis shows that the accumulated
statistics require low figures for the per event missed detection
rate. This can be achieved with measurements every few
seconds aggregated into decisions every few minutes, which
is adequate for stable distributions of people, such as in a
meeting, at lunch, in a train and the like. The false alarm
rate is a lesser problem as soon as a few measurements are
aggregated. The analysis presented in the paper is a preliminary one. Much more experimental data should be generated
to refine the findings. In Germany, the current probability of
encountering an infected person is rather low. In such a context
the performance does not matter too much. There are many
regions in the world, where this is not the case, however.
It would thus be quite beneficial if this work was taken up
and further developed, in particular with respect to attitude
sensing. Some individuals may reject the idea of carrying
their smartphone around their neck. This could be addressed
by producing decorative gadgets which are less obstructive to
wear. Beyond that the carrying of a device around the neck
also enables the use of the camera. This would allow to further
refine the evaluation of the risk but would drain the batteries
much more and would raise concerns about privacy Thus,
the use of the sensors addressed in the present papers seem
to remain most promising. In the future, Bluetooth ranging
should be considered as well. The complete analysis of the
paper and its validity rely on the current model of infection
of the Robert-Koch Institute.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Dr. Armin Dammann
from the German Aerospace Center (DLR) for comments on

Section III-A and for providing us with early results from the
evaluation of the experiments.
VIII. R EFERENCES
R EFERENCES
[1] K. Kupferschmidt and J. Cohen, “Can China’s COVID-19 Strategy Work
Elsewhere?” Science, vol. 367, no. 6482, pp. 1061–1062, 2020. [Online].
Available: https://science.sciencemag.org/content/367/6482/1061
[2] “Corona-Warn-App,” 2020, Robert Koch-Institut, Berlin. [Online].
Available: https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Corona-Warn-App
[3] S. von Arx, I. Becker-Mayer, D. Blank, J. Colligan, R. Fenwick,
M. Hittle, M. Ingle, O. Nash, V. Nguyen, J. Petrie, J. Schwaber,
Z. Szabo, A. Veeraghanta, M. Voloshin, T. White, and H. Xue,
“Slowing the Spread of Infectious Diseases Using Crowdsourced Data,”
2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.covid-watch.org/article
[4] C. Günther, M. Günther, and D. Günther, “Tracing Contacts
to Control the COVID-19 Pandemic,” 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.00517
[5] M. Nanni, G. Andrienko, C. Boldrini, F. Bonchi, C. Cattuto,
F. Chiaromonte, G. Comandé, M. Conti, M. Coté, F. Dignum
et al., “Give more Data, Awareness and Control to Individual Citizens, and They Will Help COVID-19 Containment,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.05222, 2020.
[6] R. Raskar, I. Schunemann, R. Barbar, K. Vilcans, J. Gray,
P. Vepakomma, S. Kapa, A. Nuzzo, R. Gupta, A. Berke et al., “Apps
Gone Rogue: Maintaining Personal Privacy in an Epidemic,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2003.08567, 2020.
[7] P. O’Neill, T. Ryan-Mosley, and B. Johnson, “A flood of coronavirus
apps are tracking us. now it’s time to keep track of them,” 2020.
[8] A. Dammann, C. Gentner, and D. Günther, “On BLE Proximity
Detection Performance for COVID-19 Contact Tracing,” 2020, under
preparation.
[9] L. Kurz, C. Günther, and D. Günther, “Audio Ranging for COVID-19
Contact Tracing,” 2020, under preparation.
[10] P. O’Neill, “Bluetooth contact tracing needs bigger, better data,” MIT
Technology Review, 2020.
[11] C. Gentner, D. Günther, and P. Kindt, “Identifying the BLE Advertising
Channel for Reliable Distance Estimation,” 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.09099
[12] H. Hashemi, “The Indoor Radio Propagation Channel,” Proceedings of
the IEEE, vol. 81, no. 7, pp. 943–968, 1993.
[13] L. Schwartz, Théorie des Distributions. Hermann, Paris, 1966.
[14] J. W. Betz and K. R. Kolodziejski, “Generalized Theory of Code
Tracking with an Early-Late Discriminator Part I: Lower Bound and
Coherent Processing,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic
Systems, vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 1538–1556, 2009.
[15] ——, “Generalized Theory of Code Tracking with an Early-Late Discriminator Part II: Noncoherent Processing and Numerical Results,”
IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, vol. 45, no. 4,
pp. 1557–1564, 2009.
[16] A. Van Dierendonck, P. Fenton, and T. Ford, “Theory and Performance
of Narrow Correlator Spacing in a GPS Receiver,” Navigation, vol. 39,
no. 3, pp. 265–283, 1992.
[17] T. Michel, P. Geneves, H. Fourati, and N. Layaïda, “On Attitude
Estimation with Smartphones,” in 2017 IEEE International Conference
on Pervasive Computing and Communications (PerCom). IEEE, 2017,
pp. 267–275.
[18] “Kontaktpersonennachverfolgung bei Respiratorischen Erkrankungen
durch
das
Coronavirus
SARS-CoV-2,”
2020,
Robert
Koch
Institut,
Berlin.
[Online].
Available: https://www.rki.de/DE/Content/InfAZ/N/Neuartiges_Coronavirus/
Kontaktperson/Management_Download.pdf?__blob=publicationFile

