COVID-19 in the United States: Trajectories and second surge behavior

COVID-19 in the United States: Trajectories and second surge behavior
Nick James1 and Max Menzies2, a)
1) School
2) Yau

of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Sydney, NSW, 2006, Australia
Mathematical Sciences Center, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China

arXiv:2008.02068v2 [physics.soc-ph] 10 Sep 2020

(Dated: 4 August 2020)

This paper introduces a mathematical framework for determining second surge behavior of COVID-19 cases in the United
States. Within this framework, a flexible algorithmic approach selects a set of turning points for each state, computes
distances between them, and determines whether each state is in (or over) a first or second surge. Then, appropriate
distances between normalized time series are used to further analyze the relationships between case trajectories on a
month-by-month basis. Our algorithm shows that 31 states are experiencing second surges, while 4 of the 10 largest
states are still in their first surge, with case counts that have never decreased. This analysis can aid in highlighting the
most and least successful state responses to COVID-19.
The United States (US) has been severely impacted by
COVID-19, and leads the world in both case and death
counts.1 Individual states have largely determined their
own response to the pandemic,2 seeking to protect citizens’
lives while mitigating economic consequences. Following
lockdowns and business closures in March and April, all
50 states reduced their restrictions.3 Since then, the US
has experienced a severe rise in new cases, with a public
debate on whether or not to term this a "second surge."4,5
A careful identification of most and least successful states
is therefore of great relevance to a response to the ongoing threat of COVID-19. This paper has two goals: to
develop a mathematical framework that defines a second
surge and identifies the states that are experiencing one;
and to compare the trajectories of new case counts as a
means of determining effective pandemic responses.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Understanding the trajectory of COVID-19 case counts assists governments in responding to the impact of the pandemic.
Given the highly infectious nature of the disease, an increasing
number of new daily cases may overwhelm the healthcare system and prompt further restrictions on businesses and social
gatherings. Conversely, a decreasing number of new cases is a
good sign, but should be carefully monitored. Thus, the turning points in the new case counts are crucial to identify. Given
the randomness of human behaviour, however, turning points
are difficult to predict and predictive modelling of COVID-19
requires frequent observation of real-time data. This paper
focuses on a retrospective analysis of case trajectories in different US states to determine which public policy responses
were most and least effective. While we focus on the US, our
methodology may be applied more broadly to understand the
impact of public policies on countries with similar federative
structures such as Brazil and India. These three countries have
the highest COVID-19 case counts in the world,1 with govern-

a) Electronic

mail: max.menzies@alumni.harvard.edu

ment responses differing between states and yielding differing
results.6,7
For this goal, we use existing and new techniques from
time series analysis. Time series analysis has been widely applied to epidemiology,8,9 including COVID-19.10–12 Existing
methods of time series analysis are diverse, including powerlaw models,13 and nonparametric methods such as distance
analysis,14 distance correlation15–17 and network models.18 In
this paper, we aim to develop a new mathematical framework
of identification and comparison of turning points of time series to study the spread of COVID-19 in the US. Such turning
points classify the behavior of states’ trajectories throughout
the pandemic as being in (or over) their first surge or second
surge.
In addition to the aforementioned state-by-state determination of turning points, this paper uses a new application of
semi-metrics to measure distance between the states’ behaviors,
and performs clustering based on this. The paper implements
hierarchical clustering,19,20 which has previously been used
in various epidemiological applications. These include inflammatory diseases,21 airborne diseases,22 Alzheimer’s disease,23
Ebola,24 SARS,25 and COVID-19.11
The paper is structured as follows: in each of the proceeding
two sections, we introduce portions of our methodology and
then present our results. Section II describes our framework
for identifying turning points, determining which states are
in a second surge, and clustering based on similar behavior.
Section III analyzes the trajectories of COVID-19 counts in
each state on a month-by-month basis. Section IV summarizes
the results and new findings regarding the spread of COVID-19
in the United States. In Appendix A, we briefly apply our
analysis to the Brazilian states to demonstrate the generality of
our method.

II.

SECOND SURGE ANALYSIS

In this section, we develop a mathematical framework and
procedure to determine whether a state has experienced a second surge. Through the careful selection of turning points, we
formulate a definition applicable to an individual time series,
and develop a method for comparing differing surge behaviors
among a collection of time series.

COVID-19 in the United States: Trajectories and second surge behavior
A. Second surge methodology: determination of turning
points

Let xi (t) ∈ R be a collection of real-valued time series over
a common time interval t = 1, . . . , T, i = 1, . . . , n. In this paper,
the analyzed time series are the daily counts of new cases in
the 50 US states and the District of Columbia (D.C.), ordered
alphabetically, i = 1, . . . , 51. Our data spans 01/21/2020 to
07/31/2020, a period of T = 193 days across n = 51 regions.
There are several irregular features in the data set, including
lower case counts on the weekends, some negative daily counts
due to adjustments of previous figures, and general noise. In
addition, there are small disparities between different data
sources. In order to isolate the signal in a data set, and between
different data sets, we first apply a Savitzky-Golay filter26
to the counts to produce a collection of smoothed time series
x̂i (t), t = 1, . . . , T, i = 1, . . . , n. This combines a moving average
calculation with polynomial smoothing. Through its moving
average computations, it largely eliminates all negative counts,
except when there are very few cases. In these instances, we
replace any negative smoothed count with a zero. For the
remainder of the paper, we analyze these smoothed cases x̂i (t).
Due to the smoothing process, x̂i (t) ∈ R≥0 are not necessarily
integers, but are all non-negative.
Our identification of turning points and second surge behavior of a smoothed time series x̂(t) proceeds in two steps. First,
we identify a sequence of potential local maxima or peaks, and
local minima or troughs. Second, we appropriately refine this
sequence according to chosen conditions. The final sets P and
T of peaks and troughs, respectively, determine whether the
time series is said to be in (or over) its first or second surge. It
will be essential that P and T are non-empty.
For the first step, the basic idea is to designate a time t0 a
peak or trough, respectively, if
x̂(t0 ) = max{x̂(t) : max(1,t0 − l) ≤ t ≤ min(t0 + l, T )} (1)
x̂(t0 ) = min{x̂(t) : max(1,t0 − l) ≤ t ≤ min(t0 + l, T )} (2)
for a parameter l < T2 , the length over which we look. In this
paper, we select l = 17 to account for the 14-day incubation
period of the virus27 and reduced testing on weekends. These
naive definitions (1, 2) have two flaws: first, equal values
of x̂(t) may determine consecutive values of t as peaks or
troughs when only one should be counted. More subtly, it is
possible that two troughs may be detected at two points that
are far apart, with no peak between them, when the time series
has been largely monotonic between the two. For example,
in Figure 1a, troughs are naively detected at t0 = 1 and 126,
corresponding to the start of the time series and 05/26/2020,
respectively. What follows is a method to exclude the latter.
We implement variants of (1, 2) by sequentially examining
the values of x̂(t). The first peak or trough is assigned at the
first value of t0 such that (1) or (2) holds, respectively. For
each US state, this is an initial trough at t0 = 1 corresponding
to zero cases there after smoothing. Having determined a peak
at t0 , we search in the period t > t0 for one of two elements:
if we find a trough at t1 > t0 according to (2) we add it to
the set of troughs and proceed from t1 as normal. If we find

2

a peak at t1 > t0 according to (1) such that x̂(t0 ) ≥ x̂(t1 ), we
ignore this lesser peak as redundant; if we find a peak at t1 > t0
according to (1) such that x̂(t0 ) < x̂(t1 ), we remove the peak t0
and replace it with t1 and continue from there. An analogous
process applies from a trough at t0 . With this process, we
generate an alternating sequence of troughs and peaks, starting
with a trough at t0 = 1. Every time series is assigned at least
one peak and trough at its global maximum and minimum,
respectively. If the global maximum is not unique, a peak is
assigned at the first maximum. This concludes the first step.
So far, every time series in our collection is assigned an
alternating sequence of peaks and troughs beginning with a
trough at t0 = 1. One could naively define a state as being
in its second surge if its sequence so far is TPTP. However,
some detected peaks and troughs are immaterial and should be
excluded. We describe a flexible approach to excluding trivial
peaks or troughs, in which we apply two conditions to do so.
Let t1 < t3 be two peaks, necessarily separated by a trough.
We select a parameter δ , and if the peak ratio, defined as
x̂(t3 )
x̂(t1 ) < δ , we remove the peak t3 . If two consecutive troughs
t2 ,t4 remain, we remove t2 if x̂(t2 ) > x̂(t4 ), otherwise remove
t4 . That is, if the second peak has size less than δ of the first
peak, we remove it, deciding not to term it a second surge.
Finally, we define the log-gradient between times t1 < t2 as
log-grad(t1 ,t2 ) =

log x̂(t2 ) − log x̂(t1 )
.
t2 − t1

(3)

x̂(t2 )
The numerator coincides with log( x̂(t
) ), and is a more appro1

2)
priate substitution for the "rate of increase" given by x̂(t
x̂(t1 ) − 1.
Indeed, a "rate of increase" is asymmetrically bounded between (−1, ∞) while the logarithmic rate is bounded between
(−∞, ∞). The log-grad function measures the average rate of
logarithmic increase over the period [t1 ,t2 ]. Now let t1 ,t2 be an
adjacent peak and trough. We select a parameter ε = 0.01; if

| log-grad(t1 ,t2 )| < ε,

(4)

that is, the average logarithmic increase or decrease is welldefined and less than 1%, we remove both t1 and t2 from our
sets of peaks and troughs. For example, this step removes a
peak and trough from Figure 1b, where the local maximum at
04/17/2020 is immaterial. This condition always preserves the
trough at t0 = 1, where x̂(t0 ) = 0, and the peak at the global
maximum. This concludes the selection of P and T.
To quantify distance between time series’ turning points, we
apply the semi-metrics of Ref. 28 (with p = 1). Given two
non-empty finite sets S1 , S2 , this is defined as


1 ∑b∈S2 d(b, S1 ) ∑a∈S1 d(a, S2 )
D(S1 , S2 ) =
+
,
(5)
2
|S2 |
|S1 |
where d(b, S1 ) is the minimal distance from b ∈ S2 to the set S1 .
The values d(S1 , S2 ) are symmetric, non-negative, and zero if
and only if S1 = S2 . Then, we define the n × n surge behavior

COVID-19 in the United States: Trajectories and second surge behavior
matrix between turning point sets by
DTi jP = D(Pi , Pj ) + D(Ti , T j ).

(6)

Then, DTi jP = 0 if and only if time series x̂i (t) and x̂ j (t) have
equal sets of peaks and troughs, hence identical surge behavior.
These procedures are presented in an algorithmic format in
Appendix B.

B.

Second surge analysis results

Our methodology assigns one of four possible sequence
types to each state. Thirteen states, including Georgia, California, Texas, and North Carolina (Figures 1b, 1c, 1d, and 1e,
respectively) are assigned the sequence TP (that is, one trough,
then one peak) and deemed to be in their first surge. All 13
of these have their unique peak and global maximum on the
final day, and form a cluster of identical similarity in Figure 2,
where we implement hierarchical clustering on DT P . Identical
results are obtained with any value δ ∈ [0.1, 0.2], so we select
δ = 0.2. That is, we exclude any second surge that is less than
a fifth of the first. Then, 31 states plus D.C. are assigned TPTP
- we deem these to be in their second surge. The three largest of
these second surge states are Florida, Pennsylvania and Ohio,
displayed in Figures 1f, 1g and 1h, respectively. Of these, all
but Florida and South Carolina have a peak on the final day,
with 19 exhibiting their global max on that day. These second
surge states form the majority cluster in Figure 2. Four states
are assigned the sequence TPT, of which New York and New
Jersey (1i and 1j) have a local max removed due to a peak ratio
less than 0.2. Their curves have been flattened and the first
surge is completely over. Arizona (1k) and Utah are also assigned TPT, with their latter trough on the final day, indicating
they are still coming down from a first surge. Finally, Maine
(1l) and Vermont are assigned the sequence TPTPT. For Maine,
this final trough is at the end of the period, indicating it is still
coming down from its second surge, while Vermont’s final
trough is before the end, indicating it has flattened the curve on
its second surge. Hierarchical clustering on DT P distinguishes
all these behaviors into separate clusters.

III.

3

a relatively flat normalized trajectory; whereas a state whose
new cases in a month rise from 0 to 100 will present a more
steeply increasing normalized trajectory, as a reflection of
the relative change. We define trajectory distance matrices
Di j = ||gi − g j || that measure distance between normalized
trajectories. This distance differs from the frequently used
distance correlation,10,15–17 which is a more suitable measure
between cumulative cases. First, distance correlation is equal
to 1 when two sequences have the greatest possible similarity,
whereas the distance Di j between two identical sequences is
0. Secondly, whereas sequences (1, 2, 3, 4) and (4, 3, 2, 1) have
distance correlation equal to 1, they have significantly different
normalized trajectory distance, heralding the fact that one sequence is increasing while the other is decreasing. Specifically,
||gi − g j || = 0 if and only if fi = α f j for some α > 0, while
two sequences (Xk ), (Yk ) have distance correlation 1 if and only
if Xk = a + bYk for constants a, b. That is, distance correlation
does not distinguish between positive and negative gradients.
In Figures 3a, 3b, 3c, 3d, respectively, we implement hierarchical clustering on these matrices for the months of April,
May, June and July. There is consistent similarity in the dendrogram structure: every figure has three clusters, two small
clusters, and one majority cluster that contains several subclusters of high internal similarity. The two small clusters generally
consist of states that are experiencing steeply increasing or decreasing trajectories, while the larger cluster exhibits more
heterogeneity. We describe the common features of the dendrograms in Table I. There, we also include the Frobenius norm of
each distance matrix. For an n × n matrix A, this is defined as

1
2
||A|| = ∑ni, j=1 |ai j |2 , and quantifies the total spread of all
distances in a month.

Month
April
May*
June
July

Trajectory distance matrices
Clusters Cluster sizes Frobenius norm
3
{4,6,41}
15.34
3
{2,2,44}
15.97
3
{3,14,34}
18.35
3
{3,4,44}
8.67

TABLE I: Number of clusters, cluster sizes and Frobenius
norm for trajectory distance matrices over four months.
*Three states are excluded in May due to low counts.

DYNAMIC TRAJECTORY MODELLING

In this section, we further analyze the new case counts in
the 50 states and D.C., examining the trajectories of smoothed
case counts on a month-by-month basis. Restricting these
smoothed counts to a particular month gives a sequence fi =
( fi (1), fi (2), . . . , fi (m))) ∈ Rm , where m ∈ {29, 30, 31} is the
number of days in that month, and i = 1, . . . , 51.
m
Let ||fi || = ∑t=1
| fi (t)| be the L1 norm of the vector fi . As
all fi (t) are non-negative, this counts the total number of new
cases (up to smoothing) observed in a month, and is non-zero
for every state and month after March. Thus, we may define gi = ||ffii || . The vectors gi reflect relative changes of new
case counts within a month. For example, a state whose new
cases in a month differ between 1000 and 1100 will present

In April, hierarchical clustering determines the existence
of three clusters of US states, displayed in Figure 3a. The
first contains Alaska, Hawaii, Idaho, Louisiana, Montana and
Vermont, all of which have declining new case trajectories.
Idaho, seen in Figure 4a, displays behavior typical of the cluster, experiencing a peak in early April, and steadily decreasing
for the remainder of the month. The second cluster consists
of Iowa, Kansas, Minnesota and Nebraska, all of which have
steep increases in new case counts. Iowa and Minnesota are
depicted in Figures 4b and 4c, respectively. The final cluster
contains all 41 remaining states and two subclusters of high
self-similarity. The first subcluster contains states whose trajectories are concave down with a local peak in April. Georgia,
Pennsylvania and Connecticut, depicted in Figures 1b, 1g and

COVID-19 in the United States: Trajectories and second surge behavior

4

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

(i)

(j)

(k)

(l)

FIG. 1: Smoothed time series and identified turning points for various states: (a) Mississippi (b) Georgia (c) California (d) Texas
and (e) North Carolina are assigned sequence TP and determined to be in their first surge. (f) Florida (g) Pennsylvania and (h)
Ohio are determined to be in their second surges, with sequence TPTP. (i) New York and (j) New Jersey are assigned sequence
TPT and determined to have concluded their first surge and flattened the curve. (k) Arizona and (l) Maine are assigned TPT and
TPTPT with final trough at the end of the period and determined to be declining from their first and second surges, respectively.

COVID-19 in the United States: Trajectories and second surge behavior

5

FIG. 2: Surge behavior matrix, defined in Section II, measures distance between sets of turning points in new case trajectories.
Five primary (sub)clusters of time series are identified with the following behaviors: 13 states in their first surge, 2 states that have
completed their first surge and flattened the curve, 2 states coming down from their first surge, 31 states plus D.C. that are beyond
their first surge and are now experiencing a second surge and 2 states coming down from their second surge.

4d, respectively, are typical of this subcluster. The second
subcluster consists of states with moderately increasing trajectories, such as Mississippi and Arizona, depicted in Figures 1a
and 1k, respectively.
In May, we exclude Alaska, Hawaii, and Montana from the
dendrogram (Figure 3b), as their smoothed trajectories mostly
consist of zeroes and very low counts. Again, three clusters are
observed: the first and most anomalous cluster contains only
New York and New Jersey, whose trajectories are significantly
decreasing, as seen in Figures 1i and 1j, respectively. The
second cluster contains Arkansas (Figure 4e) and Vermont;
their trajectories are relatively flat at the start of May, with an
uptick in the second half. All other states are contained in the
final cluster, with several observable subclusters. One notable
subcluster contains Northeastern states Connecticut, Delaware,
Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, and D.C. All these
states’ trajectories are steadily decreasing during May, as seen
in Figures 4d and 4f for Connecticut and Massachusetts, respectively. By contrast, another subcluster, containing North
Carolina and Arizona (Figures 1e and 1k, respectively), is
characterized by moderate and consistent increase in May.
In June, three clusters are again observed in Figure 3c. The
first consists of Florida, Idaho and Montana, which display
significantly increasing new cases. Figures 1f and 4a show that
Florida and Idaho, respectively, experienced high growth from
the beginning of June, after a prior month of moderate decrease
and flat cases, respectively. In the second cluster, we again
observe almost all Northeastern states, including Connecticut
(4d), D.C., Maine (1l), Maryland, Massachusetts (4f), New
Hampshire, New Jersey (1j), New York (1i), Rhode Island and
Virginia. These experienced decreasing trajectories in June
from an earlier peak in April. The final cluster is characterized
by states with increasing trajectories. A notable subcluster

that contains Mississippi, Ohio, Arkansas and others, exhibits
considerable similarity in linearly increasing trajectories in
June, seen in Figures 1a, 1h, and 4e, respectively.
For July (3d), the first of three clusters contains Arizona,
Utah, Maine and Vermont. Arizona (1k) and Utah are experiencing decreases from their first surges, and Maine (1l) and
Vermont from their second. The second cluster consists of
Connecticut (4d), Hawaii and Massachusetts (4f), all of which
exhibit growth in new cases from the beginning to end of July.
The states within the final cluster almost all experienced a
consistent increase in July, with more nuanced separation of
trajectories occurring within the subclusters. For example, one
subcluster contains California, Texas and Florida, displayed
in Figures 1c, 1d and 1f, respectively, all of which experience
a rapid increase in early July that begins to level off toward
the end of July. Even New York and New Jersey experience
slight increases in their cases in July, although with much lower
absolute counts. Another subcluster contains Georgia, Pennsylvania and Ohio, (1b, 1g, 1h, respectively), which all experience
approximately linear growth in new cases. As seen in Table
I, the reduced Frobenius norm for the month of July reflects
less spread in the matrix as a whole, due to the large number
of states with similarly increasing trajectories.
IV.

CONCLUSION

In this paper, we propose a new method for analyzing turning
points and trajectories among a collection of time series. Our
mathematical framework defines the characteristics of a state
experiencing (or over) a second surge in COVID-19 cases. The
use of semi-metrics between sets of turning points clusters
states according to their differing surge behaviors and provides

COVID-19 in the United States: Trajectories and second surge behavior

6

(a)

(b)

immediate and visible insight into the behavior of the time
series collection as a whole.
This classification of behaviors is then accompanied by a
close examination of the trajectories on a month-by-month
basis. Here we separate and cluster trajectories according to
the relative rates of increase or decrease of new case counts.
Our methodology is flexible: different smoothing techniques,
metrics between data, (semi-)metrics between sets, parameters in the algorithmic framework, and clustering methods can
be used to study collections of time series and identify differing surge behavior in greater generality than this application.
We demonstrate this with a brief application to the Brazilian
federative units in Appendix A.
Clustering the states’ trajectories on a month-by-month basis
reveals consistent similarity in the cluster structure: there are

always three clusters, that is, one majority cluster and two
smaller clusters. The stable cluster structure over time allows
one to easily observe changes in the cluster membership of
individual states, and determine the time frame under which
new case counts in different states changed direction. For
example, in May, New York and New Jersey move into a
separate cluster characterized by sharply falling numbers of
new cases as they introduced mask mandates.29
Our analysis provides insights into the evolution of COVID19 in the United States. While previous papers have studied
counts of different countries over shorter time windows,10,11
this paper studies the US on a state-by-state basis over 7
months. Within our framework, we determine that 31 states
plus D.C. are experiencing second surges, of which 21 are
more severe than the first surge. 13 states, including 4 of the 10

COVID-19 in the United States: Trajectories and second surge behavior

7

(c)

(d)

FIG. 3: Trajectory dendrograms, defined in Section III for the months of (a) April, (b) May, (c) June and (d) July. These
dendrograms highlight states with similar new case trajectories on a month-by-month basis. For all four months there is a
consistent cluster structure: 2 small clusters and a large cluster with several concentrated subclusters.

largest, are still in their first surge, with new case counts that
have never materially decreased. Only 2 states are completely
over and 2 partially over their first surge with no second surge
as of yet. Just 2 states are over their second. As of the end
of July, all other state counts are increasing and 32 exhibited
their greatest case counts (after smoothing) on the final day of
analysis. All these features are visible in Figure 2, where five
(sub)clusters correspond to these five possible surge behaviors.
The similarities in Figure 2 can help identify common characteristics of the states that have most and least successfully
managed COVID-19. New York and New Jersey, like many of

the Northeastern states, experienced peaks in new COVID-19
cases in early April. Unlike other Northeastern states, these
three reduced their new cases substantially and have avoided a
second surge. Massachusetts and Delaware have experienced
small second surges in July, 28.5% and 55.7% of their first
peak, respectively.
By contrast, California, Texas, Florida and Georgia are four
states that managed the growth of new COVID-19 cases poorly:
their case counts are the highest in the nation. California and
Texas limited restrictions despite cases that never stopped increasing and then reinstated them amid record counts.30–32

COVID-19 in the United States: Trajectories and second surge behavior

8

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

FIG. 4: Smoothed time series and identified turning points for various states: (a) Idaho, (b) Iowa, (c) Minnesota (d) Connecticut
(e) Arkansas, and (f) Massachusetts. Arkansas is in its first surge; Idaho, Iowa and Minnesota are experiencing second surges
more severe than the first; Connecticut and Massachusetts are experiencing new increases in cases with peak ratios greater than
0.2, as defined in Section II. Thus, they are determined to be experiencing second surges.

With cases per capita greater than California and Texas, Georgia remains in its first surge, having overturned local mask
mandates in July.33 After an early first surge, Florida reduced
restrictions and has since experienced a long and steep second
surge, including the highest single day counts of any state.34
Figures 3c and 3d place these states in poorly performing clusters, while Figure 2 shows the long second surge of Florida and
the continuous first surges of California, Texas and Georgia.

DATA AVAILABILITY

The data that support the findings of this study are openly
available at Refs. 36 and 37.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors thank Kerry Chen and Orri Ganel for helpful
comments and edits.
Overall, this paper introduces a new method for analyzing
second surge behavior in a collection of time series and provides new insights into the spread of COVID-19 in the US.
Early in 2020, many states believed that COVID-19 would
resolve quickly. Few predicted that Florida’s second surge, for
example, would be so much more severe than its first. Nonetheless, this is a highly infectious virus, and even countries that
reported zero counts have since observed recurrences.35 As
further surges jeopardize both citizen safety and economic recovery, individual states must closely observe the trajectory of
their cases and react swiftly to minimize the potential for increasing case counts. We predict that many state governments
will learn their lesson from the second surge, and be cautious
in observing new case counts. Vigilance going forward is
necessary, and we hope states learn this in their response.

Appendix A: COVID-19 in Brazil

In this brief section, we demonstrate the generality of our
method by applying it to the 27 federative units of Brazil.
Our data spans 02/25/2020 to 07/31/2020, a period of 158
days. In Figure 5, we implement hierarchical clustering on
the 27 × 27 turning point matrix DT P defined in Section II. In
contrast with the US, we determine that a majority of 14 states
plus the federal district are in their first surge, with new case
counts that have never materially decreased. Just 3 states are
in their second surge - Ceará, Pernambuco and Rio de Janeiro,
while 9 states are decreasing from their first surge. Unlike US
states such as Florida, the second surges are moderate, and
are of comparable severity to their first surges. Like the US,

COVID-19 in the United States: Trajectories and second surge behavior

9

Algorithm 2 Turning point refinement (step 2)
we notice significant similarity based on geography. Of the 9
states that are decreasing at the end of the data period, 6 are in TPSet = Sort(PeakSet ∪ TroughSet);
. Indexing begins from 1
the North Region: Acre, Amapá, Amazonas, Pará, Rondônia Initialize: CurrentPeakIndex = 2;
. Begin the peak ratio refinement
and Roraima. On the final day of analysis, 15 states exhibited while CurrentPeakIndex ≤ Length(TPSet) - 2 do
i = CurrentPeakIndex, t1 = TPSet(i), t3 = TPSet(i + 2);
their greatest new case counts (after smoothing).

Appendix B: Algorithmic description of methodology

In this section, we provide an algorithmic presentation of
the computational steps taken for the determination of second
surge behavior, described in Section II. Algorithm 1 describes
the first step of Section II A, where an alternating sequence of
peaks and troughs is determined. Algorithm 2 describes the
second step, where this list is refined. In our implementation,
we choose three parameters l = 17, δ = 0.2, ε = 0.01. Equations (1) and (2) define necessary conditions in the first step,
while (3) defines a necessary condition in the second step.

Algorithm 1 Turning point identification (step 1)
Given: a time series x(t) ∈ R
Form a smoothed time series: x̂(t) = Savitzky-Golay(x(t));
Data preprocessing: If x̂(t) < 0, then x̂(t) = 0;
Initialize: state = TroughState, Current TP = 1, PeakSet = empty, TroughSet = {1};
while Current TP < T do
Set t0 = Current TP; Flag = false;
for t1 = t0 + 1 to T do
if state = TroughState and t1 satisfies (1) and x̂(t1 ) > x̂(t0 ) then
state = PeakState;
Append t1 to PeakSet;
Current TP = t1 ; Flag = true;
Break for
else if state = TroughState and t1 satisfies (2) and x̂(t1 ) < x̂(t0 )
then
Append t1 to TroughSet;
Remove t0 from TroughSet;
Current TP = t1 ; Flag = true;
Break for
else if state = PeakState and t1 satisfies (2) and x̂(t1 ) < x̂(t0 )
then
state = TroughState;
Append t1 to TroughSet;
Current TP = t1 ; Flag = true;
Break for
else if state = PeakState and t1 satisfies (1) and x̂(t1 ) > x̂(t0 )
then
Append t1 to PeakSet;
Remove t0 from PeakSet;
Current TP = t1 ; Flag = true;
Break for
if Flag = false then
Break while
Output PeakSet and TroughSet.

x̂(t3 )
x̂(t1 )

≥ δ then
CurrentPeakIndex = i + 2;
x̂(t )
else if x̂(t3 ) < δ and i + 2 = Length(TPSet) then
1
Remove t3 from PeakSet;
TPSet=Sort(PeakSet ∪ TroughSet);
x̂(t )
else if x̂(t3 ) < δ and i + 2 < Length(TPSet) then
1
t2 = TPSet(i + 1), t4 = TPSet(i + 3);
if x̂(t2 ) ≤ x̂(t4 ) then
Remove t4 from TroughSet;
else
Remove t2 from TroughSet;
Remove t3 from PeakSet;
TPSet = Sort(PeakSet ∪ TroughSet);
Initialize: CurrentIndex = 1;
. Begin the log-grad refinement
while CurrentIndex < Length(TPSet) do
i = CurrentIndex, t0 = TPSet(i), t1 = TPSet(i + 1);
if | log-grad(t0 ,t1 )| < ε then
. See Equation (3)
Remove t0 and t1 from both TroughSet and PeakSet;
TPSet = Sort(PeakSet ∪ TroughSet);
else
CurrentIndex = i + 1;
Output PeakSet and TroughSet.
if

1 “Our

World in Data,” https://ourworldindata.org/coronavirussource-data (2020), accessed August 1, 2020.
2 R. L. Haffajee and M. M. Mello, “Thinking globally, acting locally - the U.S.
response to Covid-19,” New England Journal of Medicine 382, e75 (2020).
3 M. Iati et al., “All 50 U.S. states have taken steps toward reopening in
time for Memorial Day weekend,” https://www.washingtonpost.com/
nation/2020/05/19/coronavirus-update-us (2020), The Washington Post, May 20, 2020.
4 R. Meyer and A. C. Madrigal, “A devastating new stage of
the pandemic,” https://www.theatlantic.com/science/archive/
2020/06/second-coronavirus-surge-here/613522 (2020), the Atlantic, June 25, 2020.
5 L. L. Maragakis, “First and second waves of coronavirus,”
https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/health/conditionsand-diseases/coronavirus/first-and-second-waves-ofcoronavirus (2020), Johns Hopkins Medicine, June 24, 2020.
6 R. M. da Silva, C. F. de Oliveira Mendes, and C. Manchein, “Scrutinizing
the heterogeneous spreading of COVID-19 outbreak in Brazilian territory,”
medRxiv (2020), 10.1101/2020.06.05.20123604.
7 I. Bharali et al., “India’s policy response to COVID-19,” http:
//centerforpolicyimpact.org/our-work/the-4ds/indiaspolicy-response-to-covid-19 (2020), The Center for Policy Impact
in Global Health, June, 2020.
8 H. W. Hethcote, “The mathematics of infectious diseases,” SIAM Review
42, 599–653 (2000).
9 G. Chowell, L. Sattenspiel, S. Bansal, and C. Viboud, “Mathematical models
to characterize early epidemic growth: A review,” Physics of Life Reviews
18, 66–97 (2016).
10 C. Manchein, E. L. Brugnago, R. M. da Silva, C. F. O. Mendes, and M. W.
Beims, “Strong correlations between power-law growth of COVID-19 in
four continents and the inefficiency of soft quarantine strategies,” Chaos: An
Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science 30, 041102 (2020).
11 J. A. T. Machado and A. M. Lopes, “Rare and extreme events: the case of
COVID-19 pandemic,” Nonlinear Dynamics (2020), 10.1007/s11071-02005680-w.

COVID-19 in the United States: Trajectories and second surge behavior

10

FIG. 5: Surge behavior matrix, defined in Section II, applied to the 27 federative units of Brazil. Three clusters of time series are
identified with the following behaviors: 14 states plus the federal district in their first surge, 9 states coming down from their first
surge, 3 states that are beyond their first surge and are now experiencing a second surge.

12 N.

James and M. Menzies, “Cluster-based dual evolution for multivariate
time series: Analyzing COVID-19,” Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of
Nonlinear Science 30, 061108 (2020).
13 A. Vazquez, “Polynomial growth in branching processes with diverging
reproductive number,” Physical Review Letters 96 (2006), 10.1103/physrevlett.96.038702.
14 R. Moeckel and B. Murray, “Measuring the distance between time series,”
Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena 102, 187–194 (1997).
15 G. J. Székely, M. L. Rizzo, and N. K. Bakirov, “Measuring and testing
dependence by correlation of distances,” The Annals of Statistics 35, 2769–
2794 (2007).
16 C. F. Mendes and M. W. Beims, “Distance correlation detecting Lyapunov
instabilities, noise-induced escape times and mixing,” Physica A: Statistical
Mechanics and its Applications 512, 721–730 (2018).
17 C. F. O. Mendes, R. M. da Silva, and M. W. Beims, “Decay of the distance
autocorrelation and Lyapunov exponents,” Physical Review E 99 (2019),
10.1103/physreve.99.062206.
18 K. Shang, B. Yang, J. M. Moore, Q. Ji, and M. Small, “Growing networks
with communities: A distributive link model,” Chaos: An Interdisciplinary
Journal of Nonlinear Science 30, 041101 (2020).
19 J. H. Ward, “Hierarchical grouping to optimize an objective function,” Journal of the American Statistical Association 58, 236–244 (1963).
20 G. J. Székely and M. L. Rizzo, “Hierarchical clustering via joint betweenwithin distances: Extending Ward’s minimum variance method,” Journal of
Classification 22, 151–183 (2005).
21 A.-M. Madore et al., “Contribution of hierarchical clustering techniques
to the modeling of the geographic distribution of genetic polymorphisms
associated with chronic inflammatory diseases in the Québec population,”
Public Health Genomics 10, 218–226 (2007).
22 M. Kretzschmar and R. T. Mikolajczyk, “Contact profiles in eight European
countries and implications for modelling the spread of airborne infectious
diseases,” PLoS ONE 4, e5931 (2009).
23 H. Alashwal, M. E. Halaby, J. J. Crouse, A. Abdalla, and A. A. Moustafa,
“The application of unsupervised clustering methods to Alzheimer’s disease,” Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience 13 (2019), 10.3389/fncom.2019.00031.
24 H. Muradi, A. Bustamam, and D. Lestari, “Application of hierarchical clustering ordered partitioning and collapsing hybrid in Ebola virus phylogenetic
analysis,” in 2015 International Conference on Advanced Computer Science
and Information Systems (ICACSIS) (IEEE, 2015).
25 R. Rizzi, P. Mahata, L. Mathieson, and P. Moscato, “Hierarchical clustering

using the arithmetic-harmonic cut: Complexity and experiments,” PLoS
ONE 5, e14067 (2010).
26 A. Savitzky and M. J. E. Golay, “Smoothing and differentiation of data by
simplified least squares procedures,” Analytical Chemistry 36, 1627–1639
(1964).
27 S. A. Lauer et al., “The incubation period of Coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) from publicly reported confirmed cases: Estimation and application,” Annals of Internal Medicine 172, 577–582 (2020).
28 N. James, M. Menzies, L. Azizi, and J. Chan, “Novel semi-metrics for multivariate change point analysis and anomaly detection,” Physica D: Nonlinear
Phenomena 412, 132636 (2020).
29 L. Ferré-Sadurní and M. Cramer, “New York orders residents to
wear masks in public,” https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/15/
nyregion/coronavirus-face-masks-andrew-cuomo.html (2020),
The New York Times, April 15, 2020.
30 J. Coleman, “California tells six additional counties to close indoor
businesses, all bars,” https://thehill.com/homenews/statewatch/506117-california-tells-six-additional-countiesto-close-indoor-businesses-all (2020), The Hill, July 6, 2020.
31 P. Svitek, “Gov. Greg Abbott orders Texans in most counties to wear
masks in public,” https://www.texastribune.org/2020/07/02/
texas-mask-order-greg-abbott-coronavirus (2020), The Texas
Tribune, July 2, 2020.
32 C. Silva, “U.S. COVID-19 deaths near 130,000; Florida and Texas
report record case numbers,” https://www.npr.org/sections/
coronavirus-live-updates/2020/07/05/887445479/u-s-covid19-deaths-near-130-000-florida-and-texas-report-recordcase-numbers (2020), NPR, July 5, 2020.
33 S. Neuman, “Georgia’s governor issues order rescinding local mask
mandates,” https://www.npr.org/sections/coronavirus-liveupdates/2020/07/16/891718516/georgias-governor-issuesorder-rescinding-local-mask-mandates (2020), NPR, July 16,
2020.
34 D. Hawkins, F. Somnez, L. Meckler, and M. Iati, “Florida shatters single-day
infection record with 15,300 new cases,” https://www.washingtonpost.
com/nation/2020/07/12/coronavirus-update-us (2020), The
Washington Post, July 13, 2020.
35 “New Zealand has 69 active Covid cases after 13 more diagnosed,” https:
//www.theguardian.com/world/2020/aug/16/new-zealand-has69-active-covid-cases-after-13-more-diagnosed (2020), The
Guardian, August 16, 2020.

COVID-19 in the United States: Trajectories and second surge behavior
36 “Coronavirus

(Covid-19) data in the United States,” https://github.
com/nytimes/covid-19-data (2020), The New York Times, Accessed

11

August 15, 2020.
37 “Painel Coronavírus,” https://covid.saude.gov.br (2020), Ministério

da Saúde, Accessed August 25, 2020.

