GENERALIZED ADDITIVE MODELS TO CAPTURE THE
DEATH RATES IN CANADA COVID-19

arXiv:2008.01030v1 [stat.AP] 5 Jul 2020

FARZALI IZADI

Abstract. To capture the death rates and strong weekly, biweekly and probably monthly patterns in the Canada COVID-19, we utilize the generalized
additive models in the absence of direct statistically based measurement of
infection rates. By examining the death rates of Canada in general and Quebec, Ontario and Alberta in particular, one can easily figured out that there
are substantial overdispersion relative to the Poisson so that the negative binomial distribution is an appropriate choice for the analysis. Generalized additive
models (GAMs) are one of the main modeling tools for data analysis. GAMs
can efficiently combine different types of fixed, random and smooth terms in
the linear predictor of a regression model to account for different types of effects. GAMs are a semi-parametric extension of the generalized linear models
(GLMs), used often for the case when there is no a priori reason for choosing a
particular response function such as linear, quadratic, etc. and need the data
to ’speak for themselves’. GAMs do this via the smoothing functions and take
each predictor variable in the model and separate it into sections delimited
by ’knots’, and then fit polynomial functions to each section separately, with
the constraint that there are no links at the knots - second derivatives of the
separate functions are equal at the knots.

1. Introduction
In late December 2019, some severe pneumonia cases of unknown cause were reported in Wuhan, Hubei province, China. These cases epidemiologically linked to a
seafood wholesale market in Wuhan, although many of the first 41 cases were later
reported to have no known exposure to the market. In early January 2020, the
World Health Organisation (WHO) named this novel coronavirus as Severe Acute
Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) and the associated disease as
COVID-19 [14]. Following this report, there has been a rapid increase in the number
of cases as on 24th June 2020, there were over 9.2 million confirmed cases and almost
475,000 deaths worldwide, while the confirmed cases in Canada was 103,000, with
8,500 deaths mostly distributed in three provinces of Quebec, Ontario, and Alberta.
The death rates for these cases which are available from https://www.canada.ca/
en/public-health/services/diseases/2019-novel-coronavirus-infection.html
are shown in figure 1.
From the box plot one can see that there are a few outliers in the Alberta data only,
see figure 2. Also the trend, seasonal and random components of each case can be
obtained by decomposition function of time series where in figure 3 we plotted only
Date: June, 25, 2020.
2000 Mathematics Subject Classification. Primary 68Txx; Secondary, 65Y10, 68W20,
Key words and phrases. Regression analysis, Semi-parametric models, Generalized linear
models, Generalized additive models, mathematical modeling, Statistical analysis, data science,
COVID-19, Canada deaths, link functions, intermediate rank spline.
1

2

FARZALI IZADI

Figure 1. Reported deaths with COVID-19 in the Canada, Quebec, Ontario and Alberta since January 31, 2020 The Canada lock
down started on March 17, 2020.
the Canada deaths. To see the normality of the data, we can plot the histogram
as well as the density of the deaths, figure 4. The plots clearly show that there are
substantial overdispersion relative to the Poisson for all cases except possibly for
the Alberta data.
2. Generalized additive models
In general, generalized additive models (GAMs), see e.g. S. Wood, 2017, [10] are a
semi-parametric extension of the generalized linear models (GLMs), used often for
the case when there is no a priori reason for choosing a particular response function
(such as linear, quadratic, etc.) and need the data to speak for themselves. GAMs
first introduced by Hastie and Tibshirani, 1986 [7] and Hastie and Tibshirani, 1990
[8] and are widely used in practice (Ruppert et al. 2003) [6]; (Fahrmeir, L., Lang, S.
2001) [1]; (Fahrmeir, et al. 2004) [2] (Fahrmeir et al. 2013) [3]. On the other hand,
GLMs themselves are extension of the linear models (LMs). To understand the
thing better, let us start with LMs. For a univariate response variable of multiple
predictors one may simply write
(2.1)

y = αX + ε = α0 + α1 x1 + α2 x2 + · · · + αm xm + ε,

ε ∼ N (µ, σ 2 ).

It is clear that the response variable y is normally distributed with mean µ, and
variance σ 2 and the linearity of the model is apparent from the equation. One

GENERALIZED ADDITIVE MODELS TO CAPTURE THE DEATH RATES IN CANADA COVID-19
3

Figure 2. Note that there are some outliers in Alberta deaths.

Figure 3. Decomposition of Canada death series into trend, seasonal and random components.

4

FARZALI IZADI

Figure 4. Histogram and the density of the deaths series. Note
that the substantial overdispersion in all cases.
of the issues with this model is that, the assumptions about the data generating
process are limited. One remedy for this is to consider other types of distribution,
and include a link function g(.) relating the mean µ, i.e.,
(2.2)

E(y) = µ,

g(µ) = αX.

In fact the typical linear regression model is a generalized linear model with a Gaussian distribution and identity link function. To further illustrate the generalization,
we may consider a distribution other than the Gaussian for example Poisson or a
negative binomial distribution for a count data where the link function is natural
log function.
(2.3)

g(y) = αX + ε,

ε ∼ D(µ, θ),

where D is any exponential family distribution. We can still generalize more to add
nonlinear terms in the above equation namely
g(µi ) = Xi α + f1 (x1i ) + f2 (x2i ) + f3 (x3i , x4i ) + · · · ,
where µi = E(yi ) and yi ∼ an exponential or non-exponential family distribution
and fj s are any univariate or multivariate functions of independent variables called
smooth and nonparametric part of the model, which mean that the shape of predictor functions are fully characterized by the data as opposed to parametric terms

GENERALIZED ADDITIVE MODELS TO CAPTURE THE DEATH RATES IN CANADA COVID-19
5

that are defined by a set of parameters like the parameter vector α in the linear
part in which both to be estimated.
Having said that, the ordinary least square problem generalizes into

2

L(α) = (ky − Xαk +

(2.4)

n
X

Z

1

λj

(2)

[fj ]2 (x))

0

j=1

where λj , controlling the extent of penalization and establishes a trade-off between
the goodness of fit and the smoothness of the model.
On the other hand, these functions are represented using appropriate intermediate
rank spline basis expansions of modest rank kj , as

(2.5)

fj (x) =

kj
X

βji bji (x).

j=1

Substituting the function under the integral sign with the above equation we get
Z
(2.6)

1

(2)

[fj ]2 (x) = β T Sj β

0

where the right hand side is a quadratic form with respect to the known matrix Sj .
Collecting both the parametric and non-parametric coefficients into a double parameter (α, β), we obtain
n

L(α, β) = (ky − Xαk2 +

(2.7)
Writing Sλ =

(2.8)

Pn

j=1

1X
λj β T Sj β).
2 j=1

λj Sj we get the more compact form
1
L(α, β) = (l(α) + λj β T Sλ β).
2

Let β̂ be the maximizer of L and H the negative Hessian of L at β̂. From a Bayesian
viewpoint β̂ is a posterior mode for β. The Bayesian approach views the smooth
functions as intrinsic Gaussian random fields with prior given by N (0, Sλ− ), where
Sλ− is a MoorePenrose orpseudoinverse of Sλ . Furthermore in the large sample limit
(2.9)

β|y ∼ N (β̂, (H + Sλ )−1 ).

Writing the density in (2.8) as Dg , and the joint density of y and β as D(y, β), the
Laplace approximation to the marginal likelihood for the smoothing parameters λ
and α is D(λ, α) = D(y, β)/Dg (β, y). Finally, nested Newton iterations are used
to find the values of log λ and α; maximizing D(λ, α ) and the corresponding β̂.
Wood, S. N. 2016 [11]

6

FARZALI IZADI

Figure 5. Results of the fitted model to the Canada deaths. Note
that all variable are statistically significant.

3. Application of GAMs for fatal cases of Canada
Let yk denotes the deaths reported on day k. We will study the Canada deaths in
general and the provinces of Quebec, Ontario, and Alberta in particular cases. Due
to overdispersion seen in the deaths, we assume that yk follows a negative binomial
distribution with mean µ and variance
µ + µ2 /θ. Note that N B(θ, p), where p = µ/(µ + θ).
Then let

(3.1)

g(µ) = f (tk ) + fw (dk ) + fb (dk ) + fm (dk ),

where g is a link function log in our discussion, f is a smooth function of time,
tk , measured in days, fw is a zero mean cyclic smooth function of day of the
(n)
(n)
week dk ∈ {1, 2, · · · , 7}, set up so that fw (0) = fw (7), fb is a zero mean cyclic
(n)
smooth function of day of the biweek dk ∈ {1, 2, · · · , 14}, set up so that fb (0) =
(n)
fb (14), fm is a zero mean cyclic smooth function of day of the month dk ∈
(n)
(n)
{1, 2, · · · , 30}, set up so that fm (0) = fm (30), and n ∈ {0, 1, 2} denotes the order
of the derivative in fw , fb and fm , see S. Wood 2020 [13]. Based on the discussion
and notations in section.1, f , fw , fb and fm are basis functions representing the
underlying death rate and the strong weekly, biweekly and monthly cycles seen in
the data respectively.
From (2.8) we can easily compute the confidence intervals for each f and make inferences about when the peak in f occurs. This can be done by executing gam function
of mgcv library in R code. The fitted models to the reported deaths in Canada,
Quebec, Ontario, and Alberta are shown in figures 5, 6, 7 and 8 respectively. In
the Canada case, we model the deaths with respect to day, day of week and day of
month. As the results of figure 5 shows, all the variables are statistically significant
with 0.856 as R-squared.

GENERALIZED ADDITIVE MODELS TO CAPTURE THE DEATH RATES IN CANADA COVID-19
7

Figure 6. Results of the fitted model to the Quebec deaths. Note
that all variable are statistically significant.

Figure 7. Results of the fitted model to the Ontario deaths. Note
that all variable are highly significant.

For the deaths of Quebec, we see that the day, day of week is an appropriate choice
for the predicted variables. As the results of figure 6 shows, all the variables are
statistically significant with 0.75 as R-squared.
In the case of the Ontario we see that also the day, day of week and day of month is
an appropriate choice for the predicted variables. As the results of Figure 7 shows,
all the variables are highly significant with 0.82 as R-squared.
We figured out that the day, day of biweek as predictors for the Alberta case is an
appropriate choice for the model. As the results of figure 8 shows, all the variables
are statistically significant with 0.722 as R-squared.
The next statistics is the results of the gam.check consists of Q-Q plot where for
a good fit the data should lie on the red line. The second is the histogram of
the residuals. In this plot, the histogram must be symmetric with respect to the
line x = 0. Third plot is the Residuals vs. Linear predictors. This plot must be

8

FARZALI IZADI

Figure 8. Results of the fitted model to the Alberta deaths. Note
that all variable are statistically significant.
symmetric with respect to the line y = 0. Finally, the last plot is the Response
vs. Fitted values. The more closer the data to the line y = x, the better the fitted
model. These plots for the corresponding data of Canada, Quebec, Ontario and
Alberta are given in figures 9, 10, 11 and 12 respectively.
The other statistics of the model fits to the reported deaths in all cases are shown
in figures 13, 14, 15 and 16 respectively. The posterior modes (solid) and 95%
confidence intervals for the model functions as well as auto-correlation functions
and the deviance residuals against day for the Quebec and Alberta.
4. Inference about the peak of the day of each four cases
With gam model it is also straightforward to make inferences about when the peak
in f occurs. To this end, it is enough to use the model matrix by removing cyclic
part, the coefficients and variance-covariance matrix of the model to estimate the
model functions and 95% confidence intervals. To find the day of occurrence of the
peak for each corresponding underlying death rate function, f , simply we generates
multivariate normal random deviates using ’rmvn’ function from ’mgcv’ package in
which it takes 3 arguments as number of simulations, the coefficients and variancecovariance matrix of the model. The results for all 4 cases are shown on the figures
17 and 18 respectively.
5. Inference about the past fatal infection cases
To obtain the model priors with auto-generated code and associated data is to
simulate jagam from rjags library in GAMs. We also load glm to improve samplers
for GLMs. This is useful for inference about models with complex random effects
structure. The new mgcv function jagam is designed to be called in the same
way that the modeling function gam would be called. That is, a model formula
and family object specify the required model structure, while the required data
are supplied in a data frame or list or on the search path. However, unlike gam,
jagam does no model fitting. Rather it writes JAGS code to specify the model as a
Bayesian graphical model for simulation with JAGS, and produces a list containing
the data objects referred to in the JAGS code, suitable for passing to JAGS via

GENERALIZED ADDITIVE MODELS TO CAPTURE THE DEATH RATES IN CANADA COVID-19
9

Figure 9. Canada: Q-Q plot, Histogram of residual, Residuals
vs. Linear predictors and Response vs. Fitted values.

the rjags function jags.model (Plummer 2016)[5]. To infer the sequence of past
fatal infections one needs to produce the observed sequence of deaths. Verity et
al. 2020 [9] show that the distribution of time from onset of symptoms to death
for fatal cases can be modelled by a gamma density with mean 17.8 and variance
71.2 (s.d. 8.44). Let fv (t) be the function describing the variation in the number
of eventually fatal cases over time. Let B be the lower triangular square matrix of
order n, describing the onset-to-death gamma density, given above where n is the
number of day of pandemic under consideration. Then we have Bij = γ(i − j + 1) if
i ≥ j and 0 otherwise. Now Bfv = h, where h(k) is the expected number of deaths
on day k. Then log(fv (k)) can be represented using an intermediate rank spline,
again with a cubic spline penalty. We can then employ exactly the model of the
previous section but setting f (k) = log(h(k)). The only difference is that we need
to infer fv over a considerable period before the first death occurs where 15 days

10

FARZALI IZADI

Figure 10. Quebec: Q-Q plot, Histogram of residual, Residuals
vs. Linear predictors and Response vs. Fitted values.
is clearly sufficient given the form of deaths data. After executing the jagam code
for the data frame of deaths, day, day of week, day of biweek and day of month
variables - note that we have used different combination of the above variables to
see which one is appropriate of Canada deaths in general and Quebec, Ontario and
Alberta in particular cases. Jagam code with Poisson family distribution produces
a model containing all the priors. Then by adding the matrix B and a bit of extra
regularization to the output we pass the model to jags.model function JAGS is Just
Another Gibbs Sampler. It is a program for the analysis of Bayesian models using
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) simulation. Then by passing the result to
the jags.samples function with the parameters of thin=300 and iteration=1000000
we get the values of θ, ρ, and the Monte carlo array b of 3 dimension with the first
dimension equals to the number of parameters in the gam model. As in the gam
model, we take the data in the first component of the jags model as the model.matrix
X and the data in first 2 dimension of the b to simulate the fatal infection profiles
f = exp(Xb) and get all the necessary statistics such as median with confidence
intervals, the peak points of the median profile, the squared second difference of

GENERALIZED ADDITIVE MODELS TO CAPTURE THE DEATH RATES IN CANADA COVID-19
11

Figure 11. Ontario: Q-Q plot, Histogram of residual, Residuals
vs. Linear predictors and Response vs. Fitted values.
the median infection profile on the log scale which is proportional to the smoothing
penalty and the absolute gradient of the infection profile. See Wood, S. N. 2016
[12] These are depicted in figure 19.

12

FARZALI IZADI

Figure 12. Alberta: Q-Q plot, Histogram of residual, Residuals
vs. Linear predictors and Response vs. Fitted values.

GENERALIZED ADDITIVE MODELS TO CAPTURE THE DEATH RATES IN CANADA COVID-19
13

Figure 13. Posterior modes (solid) and 95% confidence intervals
for the model functions for the Canada as well as auto-correlation
functions of the deviance residuals. Lag 1 is just significantly negative.

14

FARZALI IZADI

Figure 14. Posterior modes (solid) and 95% confidence intervals
for the model functions for the Quebec as well as auto-correlation
functions of the deviance residuals and deviance residuals against
day. Lag 7 is just significantly negative.

GENERALIZED ADDITIVE MODELS TO CAPTURE THE DEATH RATES IN CANADA COVID-19
15

Figure 15. Posterior modes (solid) and 95% confidence intervals
for the model functions for the Ontario as well as auto-correlation
functions of the deviance residuals. Lag 7 is just significantly negative.

16

FARZALI IZADI

Figure 16. Posterior modes (solid) and 95% confidence intervals
for the model functions for the Alberta as well as auto-correlation
functions of the deviance residuals against day. No significant lag.

GENERALIZED ADDITIVE MODELS TO CAPTURE THE DEATH RATES IN CANADA COVID-19
17

Figure 17. Underlying death rates for the Canada(left) and Quebec (right) with 95% confidence intervals. Day 0 is March 17th
2020 the Canada lock down. The scaled red bar chart illustrates
the distribution of the location of the peak of the death rate curve,
obtained by simulation from the approximate posterior for each
model.

Figure 18. Underlying death rates for the Ontario(left) and Alberta (right) with 95% confidence intervals. Day 0 is March 17th
2020 the Canada lock down. The scaled red bar chart illustrates
the distribution of the location of the peak of the death rate curve,
obtained by simulation from the approximate posterior for each
model.

18

FARZALI IZADI

Figure 19. The inferred Canada fatal infection profile over time
(day 0 is March 17th 2020). The red curve is the posterior median,
the dashed curves delimit an 80% confidence interval and the dotted curves a 95% confidence interval. The scaled black bar chart
shows the posterior distribution of the day of peak fatal infection.
The dashed grey curve is proportional to the squared second difference of the median infection profile on the log scale which is
proportional to the smoothing penalty. The green curve is proportional to the absolute gradient of the infection profile.

GENERALIZED ADDITIVE MODELS TO CAPTURE THE DEATH RATES IN CANADA COVID-19
19

Acknowledgement. I am very grateful to Simon S. Wood as his paper [13]
was very inspirational to my work.
References
1. Fahrmeir, L., and Lang, S. 2001, Bayesian Inference for Generalized Additive Mixed Models
Based on Markov Random Field Priors, Applied Statistics, 50, 201220.
2. Fahrmeir, L., Kneib, T., and Lang, S. 2004, Penalized Structured Additive Regression for
Space-TimeData: ABayesian Perspective, Statistica Sinica, 14, 731761.
3. Fahrmeir, L., Kneib, T., Lang, S., and Marx, B. 2013, Regression Models, New York: Springer.
4. Green, P. J. and B. W. Silverman 1994. Nonparametric Regression and Generalized Linear
Models. Chapman & Hall.
5. Plummer M 2016. rjags: Bayesian Graphical Models Using MCMC. R package version 4-6,
URL https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=rjags.
6. Ruppert, D.,Wand, M. P., and Carroll, R. J. 2003, Semiparametric Regression, New York:
Cambridge University Press.
7. Hastie, T., and Tibshirani, R. 1986, Generalized Additive Models (with discussion), Statistical
Science, 1, 297318.
8. Hastie, T., and Tibshirani, R. 1990, Generalized AdditiveModels, London: Chapman & Hall.
9. Verity, R., L. C. Okell, I. Dorigatti, P. Winskill, C. Whittaker, N. Imai, G. CuomoDannenburg, H. Thompson, P. G. Walker, H. Fu, et al. 2020. Estimates of the severity of
coronavirus disease 2019: a model-based analysis. The Lancet Infectious Diseases.
10. Wood, S. N. 2017. Generalized Additive Models: An Introduction with R (2 ed.). Boca Raton,
FL: CRC press.
11. Wood, S. N., N. Pya, and B. Säf ken 2016. Smoothing parameter and model selection for
general smooth models (with discussion). Journal of the American Statistical Association
111, 15481575.
12. Wood, S. N. 2016. Just another Gibbs additive modeller: Interfacing JAGS and mgcv. Journal
of Statistical Software 75(7).
13. Wood, S. N. Simple models for COVID-19 death and fatal infection profiles
arXiv:2005.02090v1 [stat.AP] 5 May 2020.
14. World Health Organization. www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019. Accessed 15 Mar. 2020.
Mathematics Department Urmia university of, Urmia, Iran
E-mail address: f.izadi@utoronto.ca

