Time-dependent heterogeneity leads to transient
suppression of the COVID-19 epidemic, not herd
immunity
Alexei V. Tkachenko1,* , Sergei Maslov2,4,5,* , Ahmed Elbanna3 , George N. Wong2 , Zachary J. Weiner2 , and Nigel Goldenfeld2,5
Center for Functional Nanomaterials, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY 11973, USA; 2 Department of Physics, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana,
IL 61801, USA; 3 Department of Civil Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA; 4 Department of Bioengineering, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA; 5 Carl R. Woese Institute for Genomic Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA

arXiv:2008.08142v2 [q-bio.PE] 29 Jan 2021

1

Epidemics generally spread through a succession of waves that reflect factors on multiple time-scales. On short time-scales, superspreading events lead to burstiness and overdispersion, while longterm persistent heterogeneity in susceptibility is expected to lead
to a reduction in the infection peak and the herd immunity threshold (HIT). Here, we develop a general approach to encompass both
time-scales, including time variations in individual social activity,
and demonstrate how to incorporate them phenomenologically into a
wide class of epidemiological models through parameterization. We
derive a non-linear dependence of the effective reproduction number
Re on the susceptible population fraction S . We show that a state of
transient collective immunity (TCI) emerges well below the HIT during early, high-paced stages of the epidemic. However, this is a fragile state that wanes over time due to changing levels of social activity, and so the infection peak is not an indication of herd immunity:
subsequent waves can and will emerge due to behavioral changes
in the population, driven (e.g.) by seasonal factors. Transient and
long-term levels of heterogeneity are estimated by using empirical
data from the COVID-19 epidemic as well as from real-life face-to-face
contact networks. These results suggest that the hardest-hit areas,
such as NYC, have achieved TCI following the first wave of the epidemic, but likely remain below the long-term HIT. Thus, in contrast to
some previous claims, these reqions can still experience subsequent
waves.
COVID-19 | Heterogeneity | Overdispersion | Epidemic theory

The COVID-19 pandemic is nearly unprecedented in the
level of disruption it has caused globally, but also, potentially, in the degree to which it will change our understanding
of epidemic dynamics and the efficacy of various mitigation
strategies. Ever since the pioneering works of Kermack and
McKendrick (1), epidemiological models have been widely and
successfully used to quantify and predict the progression of
infectious diseases (2–6). More recently, the important role in
epidemic spreading played by population heterogeneity and
the complex structure of social networks has been appreciated
and highlighted in multiple studies (7–25). However, integration of this conceptual progress into reliable, predictive
epidemiological models remains a formidable task. Among
the key effects of heterogeneity and social network structure
are (i) the role played by superspreaders and superspreading
events during initial outbreaks (12, 13, 16, 26–28) and (ii) a
substantial reduction of the final size of epidemic (FSE) as well
as the herd immunity threshold (HIT) (9, 10, 19–21, 23, 29).
The COVID-19 pandemic has re-ignited interest in the effects
of heterogeneity of individual susceptibility to the disease, in
particular to the possibility that it might lower both HIT and
FSE (30–34). In studying epidemics in heterogeneous pop-

ulations it is important to emphasize the qualitative nature
of two important time-scales. First, overdispersion reflects
short-term patterns of behavior and even accidental events,
and not the degree of persistent population behavioral heterogeneity. Second, short-term overdispersion is generally
supposed to have a limited impact on the long term epidemic
dynamics, being important primarily in early outbreaks which
are dominated by super-spreading events. In other words,
epidemics are generally assumed to have distinct descriptions
on widely-differing time-scales. In this paper, we attempt
to provide a multi-scale theory for epidemic progression and
show that both overdispersion and persistent heterogeneity
affect the overall progression of the COVID-19 epidemic. The
significance of this multi-scale perspective is that it provides
a natural formalism to predict the occurrence and nature of
successive epidemic waves, even when it might seem that a
first wave has attained a state which could be mistaken for
herd immunity.
There are several existing approaches to model the effects
of heterogeneity on epidemic dynamics, each focusing on a
different characteristic and parameterization. In the first approach, one stratifies the population into several demographic
groups (e.g. by age), and accounts for variation in susceptibility of these groups and their mutual contact probabilities (2).
While this approach represents many aspects of population
dynamics beyond the homogeneous and well-mixed assumption, it clearly does not encompass the whole complexity of
individual heterogeneity, interpersonal communications and
spatial and social structures. These details can be addressed in
a second approach, where one analyzes the epidemic dynamics

Significance Statement
Epidemics generally spread through a succession of waves
that reflect factors on multiple time-scales. Here, we develop
a general approach to encompass super-spreading and population heterogeneity, and demonstrate that a fragile state of
transient collective immunity (TCI) emerges well below the HIT
during early, high-paced stages of the epidemic. However,
this is not an indication of herd immunity: subsequent waves
can and will emerge due to behavioral changes in the population, driven (e.g.) by seasonal factors. Analysis of empirical
data suggests that even in locations with strong first waves of
COVID-19, subsequent waves will still emerge.

*

To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: oleksiyt@bnl.gov or maslov@illinois.edu

on real-world or artificial social networks (8, 13, 23, 35, 36).
Through elegant mathematics, it is possible to obtain detailed
results in idealized cases, including the mapping onto wellunderstood models of statistical physics such as percolation
(9). As demonstrated in Refs. (21) the FSE is a very robust
property of the epidemic, insensitive to fine details of its dynamics but defined by (i) distribution of susceptibilities in the
population (20, 29, 37); (ii) correlations between infectivity
and susceptibility. Importantly, it does not depend on the
part of heterogeneous infectivity that is not correlated with
susceptibility. However, these approaches have so far been
mostly limited to the analysis of the FSE and distribution of
outbreak sizes on a static social network.

demic such as its HIT. Importantly, early epidemic dynamics
may be sensitive both to persistent heterogeneity and shortterm overdispersion. As a result, the apparent early-stage
heterogeneity is typically enhanced compared to its long-term
persistent level. This may lead to a suppression of the first
wave of the epidemic due to reaching a novel state that we
call Transient Collective Immunity (TCI) determined by a
combination of short-term and long-term heterogeneity, whose
threshold is lower than the eventual HIT. The implication
is that the first wave of an epidemic ends due to a combination of both persistent heterogeneity and whatever mitigation
constraints are imposed on the population. As the latter are relaxed by authorities or through behavioral changes associated
with seasonal factors, subsequent waves can still occur. Thus,
TCI is dramatically different from the idea of herd immunity
due to heterogeneity.

For practical purposes, it is desirable to predict the complete time-dependent dynamics of an epidemic, preferably
by explicitly including heterogeneity into classical well-mixed
mean-field compartmentalized models. This approach was
developed some time ago in the context of epidemics on networks (10, 23) and the resulting mean-field theory effectively
reproduces the structure of heterogeneous well-mixed models extensively studied in the applied mathematics literature
(19–22, 24, 29). The overall impact of heterogeneity occurs
because as the disease spreads, it preferentially "vaccinates"
the more susceptible individuals, so the remaining population
is less susceptible, and spread is inhibited. This effect is further enhanced by a positive correlation between infectivity
and susceptibility. In the context of static network models this
correlation is perfect since both factors are proportional to the
degree of individual nodes. Ref. (24) studied a hybrid model in
which social heterogeneity represented by network degree was
combined with a biological one. These approaches have been
recently applied in the context of COVID-19 (30, 31, 34, 38, 39).
Here, the conclusion was that the herd immunity threshold
may be well below that expected in classical homogeneous
models.

Our starting point is a generalized version of the heterogeneous well-mixed theory in the spirit of Ref. (10), but we
use the age-of-infection approach (1) rather than compartmentalized SIR/SEIR models of epidemic dynamics (see, e.g.
(2)). Similar to multiple previous studies, we first completely
ignore any time dependence of individual susceptibilities and
infectivities, focusing only on their long-term persistent components. This approach implicitly assumes that any short-term
overdispersion (responsible, e.g. for the super-spreading phenomenon) is effectively averaged out. This is a valid assumption if the large short-term variations in individual infectivity
are completely uncorrelated with an individual’s susceptibility.
However, this approximation is hard to justify in the case of
COVID-19. Indeed, if the two are correlated on the timescale
of a single generation interval (5 days), this will strongly affect
the overall epidemic dynamics. Therefore, our initial analysis
is eventually expanded to a more general theory accounting
for the non-negligible effects of short-term overdispersion. In
the case of persistent heterogeneity we demonstrate how the
model can be recast into an effective homogeneous theory
that can readily encompass a wide class of epidemiological
models, including various versions of the popular SIR/SEIR
approaches. Specific innovations that emerge from our analysis
are the non-linear dependence of the effective reproduction
number Re on the overall population fraction S of susceptible
individuals, and another non-linear function Se that gives an
effective susceptible fraction, taking into account preferential
removal of highly susceptible individuals.

These approaches to heterogeneity delineate end-members
of a continuum of theories: overdispersion describing shortterm, bursty dynamics (e.g. due to super-spreader accidents),
as opposed to persistent heterogeneity, which is a long-term
characteristic of an individual and reflects behavioral propensity to (e.g.) socialize in large gatherings without prudent
social distancing. Overdispersion is usually modeled in terms
of a negative binomial branching process (12, 13, 16, 26–28),
and is expected to be a much stronger source of variation compared to the longer-term characteristics that reflect persistent
heterogeneity. It is generally presumed that this short-term
overdispersion has no effect on the epidemic dynamics outside
the early outbreaks. Indeed, large variations in an individual’s
infectivity would average out as long as they are not correlated
with susceptibility. But since the initial exposure and secondary infections are separated by a single generation interval
(typically about 5 days for COVID-19), the levels of individual
social activity at those times are expected to be correlated,
and (at least partially) reflect short-term overdispersion. How,
then, can one understand the epidemic progression across various timescales, from early stages of a fast exponential growth
to the final state of the herd immunity?

A convenient and practically useful aspect of this approach
is that it does not require extensive additional calibration
in order to be applied to real data. In the effort to make
quantitative predictions from epidemic models, accurate calibration is arguably the most difficult step, but is necessary
due to the extreme instability of epidemic dynamics in both
growth and decay phases (40, 41). We find that with our
approach, the entire effect of heterogeneity is in many cases
well-characterized by a single parameter which we call the
immunity factor λ. It is related to the statistical properties of
heterogeneous susceptibility across the population and to its
correlation with individual infectivity. The immunity factor
determines the rate at which Re drops during the early stages
of the epidemic as the pool of susceptibles is being depleted:
Re ≈ R0 (1 − λ(1 − S)). Beyond this early linear regime, for
an important case of gamma-distributed individual susceptibilities, we show that the classical proportionality, Re = R0 S,

Below, we present a comprehensive yet simple theory that
accounts for both social and biological aspects of heterogeneity,
and predicts how together they modify early, and intermediate
epidemic dynamics, as well as global characteristics of the epi2

transforms into a power-law scaling relationship Re = R0 S λ .
This leads to a modified version of the result for the herd
−1/λ
immunity threshold, 1 − S0 = 1 − R0
.

This, in turn, suggests that the second wave can be completely
eliminated in such medium-hit locations, if appropriate and
economically mild mitigation measures are adopted, including
e.g. mask wearing, contact tracing, and targeted limitation
of potential super-spreading events, through limitations on
indoor bars, dining and other venues. We further investigate
the issue of fragility of collective immunity in heterogeneous
populations. By allowing rewiring of the social network with
time, we demonstrate that the TCI may wane, much like an
individual’s acquired immunity may wane due to biological
factors. This phenomenon would result in the emergence of
secondary epidemic waves after a substantial period of low
infection counts.

Heterogeneity in the susceptibility of individual members
of the population has several different contributions: (i) biological, which takes into account differences in factors such
as strength of immune response, genetics, age, and comorbidities; and (ii) social, reflecting differences in the number and
frequency of close contacts of different people. The immunity
factor λ in our model combines these sources of heterogeneous
susceptibility as well as its correlation with individual infectivity. As we demonstrate, under certain assumptions the
immunity factor is simply a product of social and biological
contributions: λ = λs λb . In our study, we leverage existing
studies of real-life face-to-face contact networks (13, 19, 36, 42–
45) to estimate the social contribution to heterogeneous susceptibility, and the corresponding immunity factor λs . The
biological contribution, λb , is expected to depend on specific
details of each infection. For the case of COVID-19, there
is little indication that biological variations in susceptibility,
unrelated to one’s social activity, play a significant role in the
epidemic dynamics.

Theory of epidemics in populations with persistent heterogeneity
Following in the footsteps of Refs.(10, 19, 22–24, 29, 31), we
consider the spread of an epidemic in a population of individuals who exhibit significant persistent heterogeneity in their
susceptibilities to infection α. This heterogeneity may be
biological or social in origin, and we assume these factors
are independent: α = αb αs . Effects of possible correlations
between αb and αs have been discussed in Ref. (24). The
biologically-driven heterogeneous susceptibility αb is shaped
by variations of several intrinsic factors such as the strength of
individuals’ immune responses, age, or genetics. In contrast,
the socially-driven heterogeneous susceptibility αs is shaped
by extrinsic factors, such as differences in individuals’ social
interaction patterns (their degree in the network of social interactions). Furthermore, individuals’ different risk perceptions
and attitudes towards social distancing may further amplify
variations in socially-driven susceptibility heterogeneity. We
only focus on susceptibility that is a persistent property of
an individual. For example, people who have elevated occupational hazards, such as healthcare workers, typically have
higher, steady values of αs . Similarly, people with low immune
response, highly social individuals (hubs in social networks), or
scofflaws would all be characterized by above-average overall
susceptibility α.
In this work, we group individuals into sub-populations
with similar values of α and describe the heterogeneity of
the overall population by the probability density function
(pdf) of this parameter, f (α). Since α is a relative measure
of individual
R ∞susceptibilities, without loss of generality we
set hαi ≡ 0 αf (α)dα = 1. Each person is also assigned
an individual reproduction number Ri , which is an expected
number of people that this person would infect in a fully
susceptible population with hαi = 1. Accordingly, from each
sub-population with susceptibility α there is a respective mean
infectivity or reproductive number Rα . Any correlations between individual susceptibility and infectivity will significantly
impact the epidemic dynamics. Such correlations are an integral part of most network-based epidemiological models due
to the assumed reciprocity in underlying social interactions,
which leads to Rα ∼ α (9, 10, 23). In reality, not all transmissions involve face-to-face contacts, and biological susceptibility
need not be strongly correlated with infectivity. Therefore, it
is reasonable to expect only a partial correlation between α
and Rα .
Let Sα (t) be the fraction of susceptible individuals in the
subpopulation with susceptibility α, and let jα (t) = −Ṡα be

To test this theory, we use empirical data for the COVID19 epidemic to independently estimate the immunity factor
λ. In particular, we apply our previously-described epidemic
model that features multi-channel Bayesian calibration (40)
to describe epidemic dynamics in New York City and Chicago.
This model uses high quality data on hospitalizations, Intensive
Care Unit (ICU) occupancy and daily deaths to extract the
underlying Re (S) dependence in each of two cities. In addition,
we perform a similar analysis of data on individual states in the
USA, using data generated by the model in Ref. (46). Using
both approaches, we find that the locations that were severely
impacted by the COVID-19 epidemic show a more pronounced
reduction of the effective reproduction number. This effect is
much stronger than predicted by classical homogeneous models,
suggesting a significant role of heterogeneity. The estimated
immunity factor ranges between 4 and 5. Importantly, this
represents a transient value of the parameter λ observed on
intermediate timescales and dependent on both persistent
and short-term heterogeneity. Our estimates of the longterm, value of the immunity factor, defined by persistent
heterogeneity only, is considerably lower: λ∞ ' 2. This
difference explain why achieving the state of transient collective
immunity after the first wave of the epidemic does not imply
long-term herd immunity.
Finally, we integrate the persistent heterogeneity theory
into our time-of-infection epidemiological model (40), and
project possible outcomes of the second wave of the COVID-19
epidemic in during the summer months in NYC and Chicago,
using data up to the end of May 2020. By considering the
worst-case scenario of a full relaxation of any currently imposed mitigation, we find that the results of the heterogeneitymodified model significantly modify the results from the homogeneous mode. In particular, based on our estimate of the
immunity factor, we expect virtually no second wave in NYC in
the immediate future, indicating that the TCI has likely been
achieved there. Chicago, on the other hand, has not passed the
TCI threshold that we infer, but the effects of heterogeneity
would still result in a substantial reduction of the magnitude
of the second wave there, even under the worst-case scenario.
3

function of S, defined parametrically by Eqs. (4,8). Further
generalization of this theory for the time-modulated age-ofinfection model is presented in the Supporting Information
Appendix (SI Appendix). There, we also discuss the adaptation
of this approach for the important special case of a compartmentalized SIR/SEIR model. Such non-linear modifications
to homogeneous epidemiological models have been proposed
in the past, both as plausible descriptions of heterogeneous
populations and in other contexts (17–19). However, those
empirical models exhibited a limited range of applicability
(19) and have not had a solid mechanistic foundation, with a
noticeable exception of a special case of SIR model without
correlation between susceptibility and infectivity studied in
Ref. (29). Our approach is more general: it provides the
exact mapping of a wide class of heterogeneous well-mixed
models onto homogeneous ones, and provides a specific relationship between the underlying statistics of α and Rα and
the non-linear functions Re (S) and Se (S).
One of the striking consequences of the non-linearity of
Re (S) is that the effective reproduction number could be
decreasing at the early stages of an epidemic significantly
faster than predicted by homogeneous models. Specifically, for
1−S(t) ' Z(t)  1 one can linearize the effective reproduction
number as
Re ≈ R0 (1 − λ(1 − S))
[9]

the corresponding daily incidence rate, i.e., the fraction of
newly infected individuals per day in that sub-population. At
the start of the epidemic, we assume everyone is susceptible to
infection: Sα (0) = 1. The course of the epidemic is described
by the following age-of-infection model:
dSα
= jα (t) = αSα (t)J(t)
dt

−

[1]

∞

Z

hRα K(τ )jα (t − τ )i dτ

J(t) =

[2]

0

Here t is the physical time and τ is the time since infection for
an individual. h. . .i represents averaging over α with pdf f (α).
J(t) represents the mean daily attack rate, i.e. hypothetical
incidence rate in a fully susceptible homogeneous population
with α = 1. K(τ ) is the distribution of the generation interval, which we assume to be independent of α for the sake of
simplicity.
According to Eq. (1), the susceptible subpopulation for any
α can be expressed as
Sα (t) = exp(−αZ(t)).

[3]

Rt

Here Z(t) ≡ 0 J(t0 )dt0 . The total susceptible fraction of the
population is related to the moment generating function Mα
of the distribution f (α) (i.e., the Laplace transform of f (α))
according to:

We named the coefficient λ the immunity factor because it
quantifies the effect that a gradual build-up of population
immunity has on the spread of an epidemic. The classical value
of λ is 1, but it may be significantly larger in a heterogeneous
case. By linearizing Eq. (5) in terms of 1 − S ' Z  1 and
dividing the result by R0 = hαRα i one gets:

∞

Z

f (α)e−αZ(t) dα = Mα (−Z(t))

S(t) =

[4]

0

Similarly, the effective reproductive number Re can be
expressed in terms of the parameter Z:

Z
Re (t) =

∞

αRα f (α)e−αZ(t) dα

λ=

[5]

0

∞

dτ K(τ )Re (t − τ )J(t − τ )

J(t) =

[6]

0

Furthermore, by averaging Eq. (1) over all values of α one
arrives at the following heterogeneity-induced modification to
the relationship between the force of infection and incidence
rate:
dS
= −Se J
[7]
dt
Here

Z
Se (t) =
0

∞

dMα (−Z(t))
αf (α)e−αZ(t) dα = −
dZ

[10]

As one can see, the value of the immunity factor, thus depends
both on the statistics of susceptibility α, and on its correlation
with infectivity Rα .
We previously defined the overall susceptibility as a combination of biological and social factors: α = αs αb Here αs is
a measure of the overall social connectivity or activity of an
individual, such as the cumulative time of close contact with
other individuals averaged over a sufficiently long time interval (known as node strength in network science). Since the
contribution of interpersonal contacts to an epidemic spread
is mostly reciprocal, we assume Rα ∼ αs . On the other hand,
in our analysis we neglect a correlation between biological
susceptibility and infectivity, as well as between αb and αs .
Under these approximations, the immunity factor itself is a
product of biological and social contributions, λ = λb λs . Each
of them can be expressed in terms of leading moments of αb
and αs , respectively:

Note that for Z = 0, this expression gives the basic reproduction number R0 = hαRα i. Since both S and Re depend on
time only through Z(t), Eqs. (4)–(5) establish a parametric
relationship between these two important quantities during
the time course of an epidemic. In contrast to the classical
case when these two quantities are simply proportional to each
other, i.e. Re = SR0 , the relationship in the present theory
is non-linear due to heterogeneity. Now one can re-write the
renewal equation for the force of infection in the same form as
if this were a homogeneous problem:

Z

hα2 Rα i
hαRα i

hαb2 i
= 1 + CVb2
hαb i2

[11]

hαs3 i
CVs2 (2 + γs CVs )
=
1
+
hαs ihαs2 i
1 + CVs2

[12]

λb =

λs =

[8]

These equations follow from Eq. 10 in the limit Rα = const
and Rα ∼ α respectively. Although these equations resemble
classical results for R0 in heterogeneous networks (8–10, 23),
here they describe a completely different effect of suppression of

is the effective susceptible fraction of the population, which
is less than S due to the disproportionate removal of highly
susceptible individuals. Just as with Re , it is a non-linear
4

Re in response to depletion of susceptible population S. That
is why λs in Eq. 12 is proportional to the third moment of αs
instead of the second moment in the case of R0 = hαRα i ∼ αs2 .
Note that the biological contribution to the immunity factor
depends only on the coefficient of variation CVb of αb . On the
other hand, the social factor λs depends both on the coefficient
of variation CVs and the skewness γs of the distribution of αs .
Due to our normalization, hαs ihαb i ≈ hαs αb i = hαi = 1.
The relative importance of biological and social contributions to the overall heterogeneity of α may be characterized by a single parameter χ. For a log-normal distribution
of αb , χ appears as a scaling exponent between infectivity
and susceptibility: Rα ∼ αχ (see SI Appendix for details).
The corresponding expression for the overall immunity factor is λ = hα2+χ i/hα1+χ i. The limit χ = 0 corresponds
to a predominantly biological source of heterogeneity, i.e.,
λ ≈ λb = 1 + CVα2 , where CVα is the coefficient of variation
for the overall susceptibility. In the opposite limit χ = 1,
population heterogeneity is primarily of social origin, hence
λ ≈ λs is affected by both CVα and the skewness γα of the
pdf f (α). The biological contribution λb depends on specific
biological details of the disease and thus is unlikely to be as
universal and robust as the social one. For the COVID-19
epidemic, there is no strong evidence of a wide variation in
attack rates unrelated to social activity, geographic location,
or socioeconomic status. For instance, there is very little age
variability in COVID-19 prevalence as reported by the NYC
Department of Health (47) based on the serological survey
that followed the first wave of the epidemic. Therefore, below
we will largely ignore possible biological heterogeneity, and
focus on social heterogeneity.

ing to Eqs. (4) and (5), Re , Se and S are related by scaling
relationships (see SI Appendix):

As we were finalizing this paper for public release, a preprint by
Aguas et al. appeared online (48) that independently obtained
our Eqs. (14, 15) for gamma-distributed susceptibilities. The
same result has also been recently obtained in Ref. (39). Note
however that the full quasi-homogeneous description of the
epidemic dynamics requires both Re (S) and Se (S), that in the
general case is characterized by different scaling exponents.
Our focus on the gamma distribution is well justified by
the observation that the social strength αs is approximately
exponentially distributed, i.e., it is a specific case of the gamma
distribution with η = CVα2 = 1 (see more discussion of this
in the next section). A moderate biological heterogeneity
would lead to an increase of the overall CVα , but the pdf f (α)
will still be close to the gamma distribution family. From
the conceptual point of view, it is nevertheless important
to understand how the function Re (S) would change if f (α)
had a different functional form. In SI Appendix, we present
analytic and numerical calculations for two other families of
distributions: (i) an exponentially bounded power law f (α) ∼
e−α/α+ /αq (q ≥ 1, with an additional cut-off at lower values
of α) and (ii) the log-normal distribution. In addition, we
give an approximate analytic result that generalizes Eq. (14)
for an arbitrary skewness of f (α). This generalization works
remarkably well for all three families of distributions analyzed
in this work. As suggested by Eqs. (11-12), as the distribution
becomes more skewed, the range between the χ = 0 and χ = 1
curves broadens. For instance, for distributions dominated by a
power law, f (α) ∼ 1/αq , with 3 < q < 4 and χ = 1, λ diverges
even though CVα remains finite. This represents a crossover to
the regime of so-called scale-free networks (2 ≤ q ≤ 3), which
are characterized by zero epidemic threshold yet strongly
self-limited dynamics: the epidemic effectively kills itself by
immunizing the hubs on the network (10, 23, 49).

Chicago

Re/R0

0.7

0.6

0.5
1/R0 range
for COVID-19
0.3

0.2

0.1

0
0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

[14]

The exponent λ =
= 1+(1+χ)η coincides with
the early-epidemics immunity factor defined in Eqs. (9)–(10)
for a general case. Note that without correlation (χ = 0), both
scaling exponents would be the same; this result has been
previously obtained for the SIR model in Ref. (29) and more
recently reproduced in Ref. (38) in the context of COVID-19.
The scaling behavior Re (S) is shown in Fig. 1 for λ = 3 ± 1 .
This function is dramatically different from the classical linear
dependence Re = SR0 . To emphasize the importance of this
difference, we indicate the estimated fractions of the population
in New York City and Chicago susceptible to COVID-19, as
of the end of May 2020.
Eq. (14) immediately leads to a major revision of the
classical result for the herd immunity threshold 1 − S0 =
1 − 1/R0 . S0 is the fraction of susceptible population at which
the exponential growth stops, while 1 − S0 is the relative size
of the epidemic at that time. By setting Re = 1 in Eq. (14),
we obtain:
 1/λ
1
1 − S0 = 1 −
[15]
R0

0.8

0

Re (S) = R0 S λ
1+(1+χ)CVα2

0.9

0.4

[13]

and

1

NYC

Se (S) = S 1+η

1

S

Fig. 1. Re /R vs S dependence for gamma-distributed susceptibility with λ = 3 ± 1
(blue area). The dashed line shows the classical homogeneous result, Re = R0 S .
Note a substantial reduction of Re for COVID-19 epidemic expected in both NYC and
Chicago, compared to that value. Approximate fractions of susceptible populations, S ,
for both cities are estimated as of the end of May 2020, by using the model described
in Ref. (40).

So far, our discussion has focused on the early stages of
epidemics, when the Re (S) dependence is given by a linearized expression Eq. (9). To describe the non-linear regime,
we consider a gamma-distributed susceptibility: f (α) ∼
α1/η−1 exp(−α/η), where η = CVα2 . In this case, accord5

Role of short-term variations in social activity

the population may reach the state of Transient Collective Immunity (TCI) earlier than the actual long term Herd Immunity
determined by persistent heterogeneity. However, this state
is fragile and may wane with time. Specifically, as J(t) drops
after the first wave, the second term in Eq. (17) gradually
decays, bring λeff (t) closer to λ∞ . According to Eq.(19), it is
the correlation time of bursty social activity δa(t) that sets
the timescale over which this TCI state deteriorates, and the
new epidemic wave may get ignited. The relationship between
this relaxation time and the duration of a single epidemic wave
also determines the typical value of λeff during that wave.
Despite a large number of empirical studies of contact
networks (50–53), information about the temporal correlations
in α(t) or its proxies remains limited. On the other hand, much
more is known about parameters of persistent heterogeneity.
Recently, real-world networks of face-to-face communications
have been studied using a variety of tools, including RFID
devices (42), Bluetooth and Wi-Fi wearable tags, smartphone
apps (43, 44), as well as census data and personal surveys (13,
36, 45). Despite coming from a wide variety of contexts, the
major features of contact networks are remarkably robust. In
particular, pdfs of both the degree (the number of contacts per
person), and the node strength plotted in log-log coordinates
appear nearly constant followed by a sharp fall after a certain
upper cut-off. This behavior is generally consistent with an
exponential distribution in fs (αs ) (19, 43, 45), f (α) ∼ e−α/hαi .
That sets the value of η = CVα2 ≈ 1. If not for short-term
overdispersion, that would yield λ = hαs3 i/hαs2 i = 3!/2! = 3
according to Eq. (12). However, with temporal effects taken
into account, the build-up of long-term collective immunity is
determined by λeff (∞) = λ∞ . In order to estimate it, we make
a simple model assumption that the short-term overdispersion
for a particular individual is proportional to the persistent
value of that person’s social activity: δa2i ∼ αi . This leads to

Short-term overdispersion in transmission is commonly presumed to have no effect on the overall epidemic dynamics, aside
from the early outbreak often dominated by superspreaders.
This would indeed be the case if overdispersed transmission
were completely uncorrelated with individual susceptibility.
But since the timescale for an individual’s infectivity (about 2
days) is comparable to a single generation interval (about 5
days) for the COVID-19 epidemics, ignoring such correlations
appears unreasonable. We therefore developed a generalization
of the theory presented in the previous section, that takes into
account a time dependence of individual susceptibilities and
infectivities, as well as temporal correlations between them.
The theory is presented using a path-integral formulation in
SI Appendix. Here we present several important results directly related to the transient suppression of an epidemic and
differentiate these effects from herd immunity.
Since fast variations are primarily caused by bursty dynamics of social interactions (50–53), and since heterogeneous
biological susceptibility appears subdominant in the context of
COVID-19, we set αb = 1 for all individuals. So α has purely
social origin. Let ai (t) = αi + δai (t) be the time-dependent
susceptibility of a person, which we associate with variable
level of social activity. Hence, the same function determines
also individual infectivity a(t)R around time t. Interestingly,
even the classical result for basic reproduction number in a
heterogeneous system, R0 = Rhα2 i, needs to be modified due
to correlated short-term variations in social activity:



R0 = R hα2 i + δa2i



[16]

In the time-dependent generalization of our theory Re and
S no longer have a fixed functional relationship between them.
Instead, this relationship becomes non-local in time. For
instance, our result for the suppression of Re at the early
stages of the epidemic is still formally valid, but the effective
value of immunity factor λ becomes time dependent, and
Eqs.(9)-(10) become
1
λeff (t) = λ∞ +
1 − S(t)
λ∞ =
δλ(t, t0 ) =

Z

hα3 i + αi δa2i
hα2 i + δa2i
δa2i (t)δai (t − t0 )
hα2 i + δa2i

λ∞ = 1 + η(1 + χ∗)
∗

Here χ = hα i/ai (t)2 is a parameter that measures the relative strength of persistent heterogeneity and the overdispersion
on the timescale of a single generation interval. Note that
formally we recover our original result for λ in the purely persistent case, with χ∗ replacing the parameter χ that originally
quantified the correlation between infectivity and susceptibility. By assuming the limit of strong short-term overdispersion
(χ∗  1), we obtain λ∞ ≈ 2. As shown in SI Appendix, the
very same value of λ∞ should be used as a scaling exponent
for long-term behavior of Re (S). Therefore, HIT is set by
Eq.(15) with λ = λ∞ ≈ 2. Its value is plotted vs. R0 in
Fig. 2, along with the homogeneous result, and the estimated
threshold of T CI. To estimate the corresponding transient
immunity factor λeff , we analyze the empirical data for the
first wave of the COVID-19 epidemic below.

∞

δλ(t, t0 )J(t − t0 )dt0

[20]

2

[17]

0

[18]
[19]

Constant λ∞ reflects suppression of Re due to the build-up
of the long-term collective immunity. On the other hand, the
time-dependent term δλ(t0 ) leads to an additional suppression
of Re over intermediate timescales. This term has likely played
a significant role in shaping the transient self-limiting dynamics
during the first wave of COVID-19 epidemic in some hard-hit
locations.
Note that according to Eq. (17), δλ(t0 ) is being averaged
with the weight proportional
to the force of infection J(t − t0 )
R∞
0
since 1 − S(t) ≈ 0 J(y − t )dt0 . Since δλ(t, t0 ) decreases with
time difference t0 , its effect on λeff should be the strongest
during the initial period of fast exponential growth. The initial
suppression of the epidemic is caused by the combined effect of
mitigation measures and both terms in λeff . Since λeff > λ∞ ,

Application to the COVID-19 epidemic
The COVID-19 epidemic reached the US in early 2020, and
by March it was rapidly spreading across multiple states. The
early dynamics was characterized by a rapid rise in the number of cases with doubling times as low as 2 days. In response to this, the majority of states imposed a broad range
of mitigation measures including school closures, limits on
public gatherings, and Stay-at-Home orders. In many regions,
especially the hardest-hit ones like New York City, people
6

1

1
0.9

0.9

0.8
HIT, homogeneous ( =1)

0.8

COVID-19 range
0.7

NYC

0.7

Chicago

0.6

NYC, best fit: =4.5

0.05

HIT, heterogeneous (

Re(t)/R0

0.5

0.6

1-S

A

=2)

0.5

0.4

0.3
0.4

TCI threshold ( eff=4)
0.3

0.2
0.2

0.1

0.7

0
1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

0.75

0.8

0.85

0.9

0.95

1

susceptible population fraction, S(t)

5

R0

Fig. 2. TCI threshold (dot-dashed), long-term heterogeneous HIT (solid), and homogeneous HIT (dotted) for various values of R0 (x-axis). HIT (solid line) is determined
by persistent heterogeneity. The corresponding immunity factor λ∞ ≈ 2 is estimated
from empirical face-to-face contact network. For transient behavior λeff ≈ 4 is assumed based on analysis of empirical data for COVID-19 epidemic in select locations.

0.7

B

TN
AZ

50 states + DC

0.6

slope: =5.3

0.5

MS

CO

0.6

DE
IN

0.4

IL

Re(t)/R0

LA

started to practice some degree of social distancing even before government-mandated mitigation. In order to quantify
the effects of heterogeneity on the spread of the COVID-19 epidemic, we apply the Bayesian age-of-infection model described
in Ref. (40) to New York City and Chicago. For both cities,
we have access to reliable time series data on hospitalization,
ICU room occupancy, and daily deaths due to COVID-19
(47, 54–56). We used these data to perform multi-channel
calibration of our model (40), which allows us to infer the
underlying time progression of both S(t) and Re (t). The fits
for Re (S) for both cities are shown in Fig. 3A. In both cases,
a sharp drop of Re that occurred during the early stage of the
epidemic is followed by a more gradual decline. For NYC, there
is an extended range over which Re (S) has a constant slope in
logarithmic coordinate. This is consistent with the power law
behavior predicted by Eq. 14 with the slope corresponding to
transient immunity factor λeff = 4.5 ± 0.05. Chicago exhibits
a similar behavior but over a substantially narrower range
of S. This reflects the fact that NYC was much harder hit
by the COVID-19 epidemic. Importantly, the range of dates
we used to estimate the immunity factor corresponds to the
time interval after state-mandated Stay-At-Home orders were
imposed, and before the mitigation measures began to be gradually relaxed. The signatures of the onset of the mitigation
and of its partial relaxation are clearly visible on both ends
of the constant-slope regime. To examine the possible effects
of variable levels of mitigation on our estimates of λeff in Fig.
S2 we repeated our analysis in which Re (t) was corrected by
Google’s community mobility report in these two cities (57)
(see SI Appendix). Although the range of data consistent with
the constant slope shrank somewhat, our main conclusion
remains unchanged. This provided us with a lower bound
estimate for the transient immunity factor: λeff = 4.1 ± 0.1.
To test the sensitivity of our results to details of the epidemiological model and choice of the region we performed an
alternative analysis based on the data reported in (46). In
that study, the COVID-19 epidemic was modelled in each of

0.3

PA
RI

DC

AL
AR
SC

IA

TX OK WY
WI UT
MO NE MT
NH
MN
HI
NC ID
AK
NV
OH
KS
OR
VA WA
ND
KY
GA
VT
FL
ME
SD
WV
CA
NM

MD

MA
CT
MI

0.2

NJ

NY

0.84

0.86

0.88

0.9

0.92

0.94

0.96

0.98

1

Susceptible population fraction, S(t)

Fig. 3. Correlation between the relative reduction in the effective reproduction number
Re (t)/R0 (y-axis) with the susceptible population S(t). In Panel A, we present
the progression of these two quantities for New York City and Chicago, as given by
the epidemiological model described in Ref. (40). Panel B shows the scatter plot of
Re (t0 )/R0 and S(t0 ) in individual states of the US, evaluated in Ref. (46) (t0 is
the latest date covered in that study).

the 50 US states and the District of Columbia. Because of the
differences in population density, level of urbanization, use of
public transport, etc., different states were characterized by
substantially different initial growth rates of the epidemic, as
quantified by the basic reproduction number R0 . Furthermore,
the time of arrival of the epidemic also varied a great deal
between individual states, with states hosting major airline
transportation hubs being among the earliest ones hit by the
virus. As a result of these differences, at any given time the
infected fraction of the population differed significantly across
the US (46). We use state level estimates of Re (t), R0 and
S(t) as reported in Ref. (46) to construct the scatter plot
Re (t0 )/R0 vs S(t0 ) shown in 3, with t0 chosen to be the last
reported date in that study, May 17, 2020. By performing the
linear regression on these data in logarithmic coordinates, we
obtain the fit for the slope λeff = 5.3 ± 0.6 and for S = 1 intercept around 0.54. In Fig. S3 (see SI Appendix), we present an
extended version of this analysis for the 10 hardest-hit states
and the District of Columbia, which takes into account the
overall time progression of Re (t) and S(t), and gives similar estimate λeff = 4.7 ± 1.5. Both estimates of the immunity factor
7

number R0 is set back to its value at the initial stage of the
epidemic, and the only factor limiting the second wave is the
partial or full TCI, Re = R0 S λ . The projected daily deaths
for each of the two cities under this (unrealistically harsh)
scenario are presented in Fig. 4 for various values of λ. For
both cities, the homogeneous model (λ = 1, blue lines) predicts a second wave which is larger than the first one with an
additional death toll of around 35, 000 in NYC and 12, 800 in
Chicago. The magnitude of the second wave is greatly reduced
by heterogeneity, resulting in no second wave in either of the
two cities for λ = 5 (black lines). Even for a modest value
λ = 3 (red lines), which is less than our estimate, the second
wave is dramatically reduced in both NYC and Chicago (by
about 90% and 70%, respectively).

based on the state data are consistent with our earlier analysis
of NYC and Chicago. In light of our theoretical picture, this
value of this transient immunity factor, λeff ' 4, is set by the
the pace of the first epidemic wave in the US. As expected,
it exceeds our estimate of λ∞ ≈ 2 associated with persistent
heterogeneity and responsible for the long-term herd immunity.

1400

A: New York City
=1: 36,000 deaths in 2nd wave

1200

=3: 5000 deaths in 2nd wave
=4: no 2nd wave

1000

daily deaths

=5: no 2nd wave
800

Fragility of Transient Collective Immunity

Deaths data:
17,563 reported as of June 20
600

One of the consequences of the bursty nature of social interactions is that the state of TCI gradually wanes due to changes
of individual social interaction patterns on timescales longer
than single generation interval. This may be viewed as a slow
rewiring of social networks. In the context of the COVID-19
epidemic, individual responses to mitigation factors such as
Stay-at-Home orders may differ across the population. When
mitigation measures are relaxed, individual social susceptibility αs inevitably changes. The impact of these changes
on collective immunity depends on whether each person’s αs
during and after the mitigation are sufficiently correlated. For
example, the TCI state would be compromised if people who
practiced strict self-isolation compensated for it by an aboveaverage social activity after the first wave of the epidemic has
passed.
To illustrate the effects of post-mitigation rewiring of social
networks we consider a simple modification of the heterogeneous model with no persistent heterogeneity (α = 1 for
everyone) and exponentially distributed instantaneous levels
of social activity ai (t). This corresponds to λeff (0) = 3 and
λeff (∞) = λ∞ = 1. In this model each individual completely
changes the set of his/her social connections at some time scale
τs . These changes destroy heterogeneity giving rise to gradual
relaxation of susceptible fraction Sa towards its overall mean
value S. To model this, we modify Eq. 1 to include a simple
relaxation term:
1
Ṡa = −αSa J − (Sa − S) .
[21]
τs

400

200

0
Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Jul

Aug

Sep

date

450

B: Chicago

400

=1: 12800 deaths in 2nd wave
=3: 4300 deaths in 2nd wave

350

=4: 2000 deaths in 2nd wave

daily deaths

300
250

=5: no 2nd wave

Deaths data (7-day moving average):
2,485 reported as of June 20

200
150
100
50
0
Apr

May

Jun
date

Fig. 4. Projections of daily deaths under the hypothetical scenario in which any
mitigation is completely eliminated as of June 15 2020, for (A) NYC and (B) Chicago.
Different curves correspond to different values of the transient immunity factor λeff =
1 (blue), 3 (red), 4 (green) and 5 (black lines). The model described in Ref. (40) was
fully calibrated on daily deaths (circles), ICU occupancy and hospitalization data up to
the end of May. See SI Appendix, Figs. S4-S5 in for additional details, including
confidence intervals.

Epidemiological models with rewiring of underlying social networks have been studied before (58) (see (59) for a review), but
under a constraint that the individual level of social activity
quantified by network degree is preserved. In contrast, the
dynamics described above stems from the individual level of
social activity αs changing in time.
Fig. 5 shows the simulation of SIR model, where the first
wave of the epidemic is mitigated, thereby reducing the effective reproduction number R0 = 2.5. During the course of
the mitigation R0 is multiplied by µ = 0.7. After the mitigation measures have been lifted at the end of the first wave,
the population is positioned slightly below the TCI threshold
preventing the immediate start of the second wave. However,
gradual rewiring of the social network with time constant
τs = 150 days ultimately results in the second and even the
third wave of the epidemic (see Fig. 5). The inset of this figure shows Re (t) plotted as a function of S(t) in this epidemic.

We can now incorporate this transient level of heterogeneity into our epidemiological model, and examine how future
projections change as a result of this modification. This is
done by plugging scaling relationships given by Eqs. (13)-(14)
into the force of infection and incidence rate equations of the
original model. These equations are similar to Eqs. (6)-(7),
but also include time modulation due to the mitigation and a
possible seasonal forcing (see SI Appendix for more details).
After calibrating the model by using the data streams on ICU
occupancy, hospitalization and daily deaths up to the end of
May, we explore a hypothetical worst-case scenario in which
any mitigation is completely relaxed as of June 1, in both
Chicago and NYC. In other words, the basic reproduction
8

Note that each of the waves follows the power law relationship
between Re (t) ∼ S(t)λ predicted by Eq. 14. Since constant
rewiring eliminates correlations in individual social activity
on scales longer than τs , the epidemic stops after multiple
waves bring the total fraction of infected individuals close to
the unmodified (homogeneous) herd immunity threshold 1/R0 .
Note, however that in this case there is almost no overshoot
and thus the final size of the epidemic is reduced compared to
the case of a purely homogeneous and unmitigated epidemic.

0.03

Mitigation
(t)=70%

but only due to the persistent heterogeneity. This suppression
is significantly weaker than the initial stabilization responsible
for the TCI state reached after the first wave of a fast-paced
epidemic.
Among other implications of the TCI phenomenon is the
suppression of the so-called overshoot. Namely, it is well
known that most models predict that an epidemic will not
stop once HIT is passed, ultimately reaching a significantly
larger cumulative attack rate, FSE. Multiple prior studies (9,
10, 20, 21, 29, 33) have shown that FSE would be suppressed by
persistent heterogeneity, similarly to HIT. In SI Appendix, we
present a simple result that unifies several previously studied
limiting cases, and gives an explicit equation for the FSE for
the gamma-distributed susceptibility and variable level of its
correlation with infectivity. However, because of the transient
suppression of the early waves of the epidemic discussed in
this work, the overshoot effect would be much weaker or
essentially eliminated. For instance, our simple rewiring model
demonstrates how the epidemic, after several waves, ultimately
reaches HIT level, but does not progress much beyond it (see
Fig. 5). The FSE result may still be used, but primarily as
an estimate for the size of the first wave of an (unmitigated)
epidemic. In that case, the transient value of immunity factor
λeff should be assumed.
By applying our theory to the COVID-19 epidemic we
found evidence that the hardest-hit areas such as New York
City, have likely passed TCI threshold by the end of the first
wave, but are less likely to have achieved a real long-term herd
immunity. Other places that had intermediate exposure, such
as e.g. Chicago, while still below the TCI threshold, have their
effective reproduction number reduced by a significantly larger
factor than predicted by traditional epidemiological models.
This gives a better chance of suppressing the future waves of
the epidemic in these locations by less disruptive measures
than those used during the first wave, e.g. by using masks,
social distancing, contact tracing, control of potential superspreading events, etc. However, similar to the case of NYC,
transient stabilization of the COVID-19 epidemic in Chicago
will eventually wane. As for the permanent HIT, although
suppressed compared to classical value, it definitely has not
yet been passed in those two locations.
In a recent study (34), the reduction of HIT due to heterogeneity has been illustrated using a toy model. In that
model, 25% of the population was assumed to have their social
activity reduced by 50% compared to a baseline, while another
25% had their social activity elevated twofold. The rest of the
population was assigned the baseline level of activity. According to Eq. 12, the immunity factor in that model is λ = 1.54.
For this immunity factor, Eq. (15) predicts HIT at S0 = 64%,
55% and 49%, for R0 = 2, 2.5, and 3, respectively. Despite
the fact that the model distribution is not gamma-shaped,
these values are in a very good agreement with the numerical
results reported in Ref. (34): S0 = 62.5%, 53.5%, and 47.5%,
respectively.
Thus there is a crucial distinction between the persistent
heterogeneity, short-term variations correlated over the time
scale of a single generation interval, and overdispersion in
transmission statistics associated with short-term superspreading events (12, 13, 16, 26–28). In our theory, a personal
decision to attend a large party or a meeting would only contribute to persistent heterogeneity if it represents a recurring

2.5
2

0.025

Re(t)

infectious population fraction

1.5
0.02

1

0.015

0.01

0.5
0.4

0.6

0.8

S

1

R0=2.5, no mitigation,

0.005

social rewiring time = 150 days

0
0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

time (days)

Fig. 5. Effect of social rewiring on the epidemic dynamics. The time course of an
epidemic in a heterogeneous SIR model with R0 = 2.5 and λ = 3. During the first
100 days a mitigation factor µ = 0.7 is applied. Social networks gradually rewire with
a time constant τs = 150 days. The figure shows multiple waves. The inset shows
Re (t) plotted as a function of S(t). Solid line shows the homogeneous limit reached
after multiple waves.

Discussion
In this work, we have demonstrated how the interplay between short-term overdispersion and persistent heterogeneity
in a population leads to dramatic changes in epidemic dynamics on multiple time scales, transient suppression of the
epidemic during its early waves, all the way up to the state
of long-term herd immunity. First, we developed a general
approach that allows for the persistent heterogeneity to be
easily integrated into a wide class of traditional epidemiological models in the form of two non-linear functions Re (S) and
Se (S), both of which are fully determined by the statistics
of individual susceptibilities and infectivities. Furthermore,
Re (S) is largely defined by a single parameter, the immunity
factor λ, introduced in our study. Like susceptibility itself, λ
has two contributions: biological and social (see Eqs. (11-12)).
We then expanded our approach to include effects of time
dependence of individual social activity, and in particular of
likely correlations over the timescale of a single generation
interval. While our results for purely persistent heterogeneity
confirmed and corroborated that HIT would be suppressed
compared to the homogeneous case, addition of temporal
variations led to a dramatic revision of that simple narrative.
Both persistent heterogeneity and short-term overdispersion
contributions lead first to a slow down of a fast-paced epidemic,
and to its medium-term stabilization. However, this state of
Transient Collective Immunity (TCI) is fragile and does not
constitute long-term herd immunity. HIT is indeed suppressed,
9

behavioral pattern. On the other hand, superspreading events
are shaped by short-time variations in individual infectivity
(e.g. a person during highly infectious phase of the disease
attending a large gathering). Hence, the level of heterogeneity
inferred from the analysis of such events (12, 27) would be
significantly exaggerated and should not be used to estimate
the TCI threshold and HIT. Specifically, the statistics of superspreading events is commonly described by the negative
binomial distribution with dispersion parameter k estimated to
be about 0.1 for COVID-19 (28). According to Ref. (12), this
is consistent with the expected value of the individual-level
reproduction number Ri drawn from a gamma distribution
with the shape parameter k ' 0.1. This distribution has a
very high coefficient of variation, CV 2 = 1/k ' 10. In the
case of a perfect correlation between individual infectivity and
susceptibility α, this would result in an unrealistically high
estimate of the immunity factor: λ = 1+2CV 2 = 1+2/k ' 20.
For this reason, according to our perspective and calculation,
the final size of the COVID-19 epidemic may have been substantially underestimated in Ref. (30). Similarly, the degree
of heterogeneity assumed in other recent studies (31, 48) is
considerably larger than our estimates. Based on our analysis,
the value of the immunity factor λ depends on the pace of the
epidemic and on the timescale under consideration. We estimated its long-term value (responsible for the permanent HIT)
as λ∞ ≈ 2. However, the transient values are expected to be
higher, especially during the first several waves of COVID-19
in select locations, characterized by large growth rates. Our
analysis of the empirical data in NYC and Chicago indicate
that the slowdown of the epidemic dynamics in those locations
was consistent with λ ≈ 4. In Table 1 we present our estimates
of the factor by which Re is transiently suppressed as a result
of depletion of susceptible population in selected locations
in the world, as of early June 2020, as well as the predicted
long-term suppression related to acquisition of a partial herd
immunity.

regions during future waves of the epidemic. This might be a
general mechanism that ultimately limits the scale of many
pandemics, from the Black Death to the 1918 influenza.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.

We gratefully acknowledge discussions
with Mark Johnson at Carle Hospital. The calculations we have
performed would have been impossible without the data kindly
provided by the Illinois Department of Public Health through a
Data Use Agreement with Civis Analytics. This work was supported by the University of Illinois System Office, the Office of the
Vice-Chancellor for Research and Innovation, the Grainger College
of Engineering, and the Department of Physics at the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Z.J.W. is supported in part by the
United States Department of Energy Computational Science Graduate Fellowship, provided under Grant No. DE-FG02-97ER25308.
A.E. acknowledges partial support by NSF CAREER Award No.
1753249. This work made use of the Illinois Campus Cluster, a
computing resource that is operated by the Illinois Campus Cluster Program (ICCP) in conjunction with the National Center for
Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) and which is supported by
funds from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. This
research was partially done at, and used resources of the Center
for Functional Nanomaterials, which is a U.S. DOE Office of Science Facility, at Brookhaven National Laboratory under Contract
No. DE-SC0012704.

Table 1. Effects of heterogeneity on suppression of the effective reproduction number Re in selected locations. The transient and longterm suppression coefficients Re /R0 are calculated using λ = 4 and
λ = 2, respectively. Fraction of susceptible population S as of early
June 2020 is estimated from the cumulative reported death count per
capita, assuming the infection fatality rate (IFR) of 0.7% (60).
Location
New York City, USA (47)
Lombardy, Italy (61)
London,UK (62)
Chicago, USA (54)
Stockholm, Sweden (63)

Deaths,
per 1000

Attack Rate
(1-S)

2.1
1.7
0.9
0.9
0.9

30%
24%
13%
13%
13%

Re suppression
transient
long-term
0.24
0.33
0.58
0.58
0.58

0.50
0.58
0.75
0.75
0.75

Population heterogeneity manifests itself at multiple scales.
At the most coarse-grained level, individual cities or even
countries can be assigned some level of susceptibility and
infectivity, which inevitably vary from one location to another
reflecting differences in population density and its connectivity
to other regions. Such spatial heterogeneity will result in selflimiting epidemic dynamics at the global scale. For instance,
hard-hit hubs of the global transportation network such as
New York City during the COVID-19 epidemic would gain full
or partial TCI thereby limiting the spread of infection to other
10

1. Kermack WO, McKendrick AG (1927) A contribution to the mathematical theory of epidemics.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Containing papers of a mathematical
and physical character 115(772):700–721.
2. Keeling MJ, Rohani P (2011) Modeling infectious diseases in humans and animals. (Princeton
University Press).
3. Rock K, Brand S, Moir J, Keeling MJ (2014) Dynamics of infectious diseases. Reports on
Progress in Physics 77(2):026602.
4. Ma J (2020) Estimating epidemic exponential growth rate and basic reproduction number.
Infectious Disease Modelling 5:129 – 141.
5. Fraser C (2007) Estimating individual and household reproduction numbers in an emerging
epidemic. PLoS One 2(8):e758.
6. Chowell G (2017) Fitting dynamic models to epidemic outbreaks with quantified uncertainty:
A Primer for parameter uncertainty, identifiability, and forecasts. Infect Dis Model 2(3):379–
398.
7. Lloyd AL, May RM (2001) Epidemiology - how viruses spread among computers and people.
Science 292(5520):1316–1317.
8. May RM, Lloyd AL (2001) Infection dynamics on scale-free networks. Physical Review E
64(6):066112.
9. Newman MEJ (2002) Spread of epidemic disease on networks. Physical Review E 66(1).
10. Moreno Y, Pastor-Satorras R, Vespignani A (2002) Epidemic outbreaks in complex heterogeneous networks. European Physical Journal B 26(4):521–529.
11. Dezső Z, Barabási AL (2002) Halting viruses in scale-free networks. Physical Review E
65(5):055103.
12. Lloyd-Smith JO, Schreiber SJ, Kopp PE, Getz WM (2005) Superspreading and the effect of
individual variation on disease emergence. Nature 438(7066):355–9.
13. Meyers LA, Pourbohloul B, Newman MEJ, Skowronski DM, Brunham RC (2005) Network
theory and sars: predicting outbreak diversity. Journal of Theoretical Biology 232(1):71–81.
14. Keeling MJ, Eames KTD (2005) Networks and epidemic models. Journal of the Royal Society
Interface 2(4):295–307.
15. Ferrari MJ, Bansal S, Meyers LA, Bjornstad ON (2006) Network frailty and the geometry of
herd immunity. Proceedings of the Royal Society B-Biological Sciences 273(1602):2743–
2748.
16. Small M, Tse C, Walker DM (2006) Super-spreaders and the rate of transmission of the sars
virus. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena 215(2):146–158.
17. Roy M, Pascual M (2006) On representing network heterogeneities in the incidence rate of
simple epidemic models. Ecological Complexity 3(1):80–90.
18. Stroud PD, et al. (2006) Semi-empirical power-law scaling of new infection rate to model
epidemic dynamics with inhomogeneous mixing. Mathematical Biosciences 203(2):301–318.
19. Bansal S, Grenfell BT, Meyers LA (2007) When individual behaviour matters: homogeneous
and network models in epidemiology. Journal of the Royal Society Interface 4(16):879–891.
20. Katriel G (2012) The size of epidemics in populations with heterogeneous susceptibility. Journal of Mathematical Biology 65(2):237–262.
21. Miller JC (2012) A note on the derivation of epidemic final sizes. Bulletin of mathematical
biology 74(9):2125–2141.
22. Bansal S, Meyers LA (2012) The impact of past epidemics on future disease dynamics. Journal of Theoretical Biology 309:176–184.
23. Pastor-Satorras R, Castellano C, Van Mieghem P, Vespignani A (2015) Epidemic processes
in complex networks. Reviews of Modern Physics 87(3):925.
24. Gou W, Jin Z (2017) How heterogeneous susceptibility and recovery rates affect the spread
of epidemics on networks. Infectious Disease Modelling 2(3):353–367.
25. Kim Y, Ryu H, Lee S (2018) Agent-based modeling for super-spreading events: A case study
of mers-cov transmission dynamics in the republic of korea. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 15(11):2369.
26. Galvani AP, May RM (2005) Epidemiology - dimensions of superspreading. Nature
438(7066):293–295.

27. Shen Z, et al. (2004) Superspreading sars events, beijing, 2003. Emerging Infectious Diseases 10(2):256–260.
28. Endo A, Abbott S, Kucharski A, Funk S (2020) Estimating the overdispersion in covid-19
transmission using outbreak sizes outside china. Wellcome Open Research 5:67.
29. Novozhilov AS (2008) On the spread of epidemics in a closed heterogeneous population.
Mathematical Biosciences 215(2):177–185.
30. Hébert-Dufresne L, Althouse BM, Scarpino SV, Allard A (2020) Beyond r0: Heterogeneity in
secondary infections and probabilistic epidemic forecasting. medRxiv 2020.02.10.20021725.
31. Gomes MGM, et al. (2020) Individual variation in susceptibility or exposure to sars-cov-2
lowers the herd immunity threshold. medRxiv 2020.04.27.20081893.
32. Brennan PV, Brennan LP (2020) Susceptibility-adjusted herd immunity threshold model
and potential r0 distribution fitting the observed covid-19 data in stockholm. medRxiv
2020.05.19.20104596.
33. Ball F (1985) Deterministic and stochastic epidemics with several kinds of susceptibles. Advances in Applied Probability 17(1):1–22.
34. Britton T, Ball F, Trapman P (2020) A mathematical model reveals the influence of population
heterogeneity on herd immunity to sars-cov-2. Science 369(6505):846–849.
35. Stack JC, Bansal S, Kumar VSA, Grenfell B (2013) Inferring population-level contact heterogeneity from common epidemic data. Journal of the Royal Society Interface 10(78).
36. Eubank S, et al. (2004) Modelling disease outbreaks in realistic urban social networks. Nature
429(6988):180–184.
37. Hickson R, Roberts M (2014) How population heterogeneity in susceptibility and infectivity
influences epidemic dynamics. Journal of Theoretical Biology 350:70–80.
38. Rose C, et al. (2020) Heterogeneity in susceptibility dictates the order of epidemiological
models. arXiv: 2005.04704.
39. Neipel J, Bauermann J, Bo S, Harmon T, Jülicher F (2020) Power-law population heterogeneity governs epidemic waves. PLoS one 15(10):e0239678.
40. Wong GN, et al. (2020) Modeling covid-19 dynamics in illinois under non-pharmaceutical
interventions. Physical Review X 10.
41. Castro M, Ares S, Cuesta JA, Manrubia S (2020) The turning point and end of an expanding
epidemic cannot be precisely forecast. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
117(42):26190–26196.
42. Isella L, et al. (2011) What’s in a crowd? analysis of face-to-face behavioral networks. Journal
of Theoretical Biology 271(1):166–180.
43. Nielsen BF, Sneppen K, Simonsen L, Mathiesen J (2020) Heterogeneity is essential for contact tracing. medRxiv 2020.06.05.20123141.
44. Starnini M, et al. (2017) Robust modeling of human contact networks across different scales
and proximity-sensing techniques in Social Informatics, eds. Ciampaglia GL, Mashhadi A,
Yasseri T. (Springer International Publishing, Cham), pp. 536–551.
45. Danon L, Read JM, House TA, Vernon MC, Keeling MJ (2013) Social encounter networks: characterizing great britain. Proceedings of the Royal Society B-Biological Sciences
280(1765).
46. Unwin HJT, et al. (2020) Report 23: State-level tracking of COVID-19 in the United States
WHO Collaborating Centre for Infectious Disease Modelling MRC Centre for Global Infectious
Disease Analytics.
47. (2020) Data w from https://github.com/nychealth/coronavirus-data.
48. Aguas R, et al. (2020) Herd immunity thresholds for sars-cov-2 estimated from unfolding
epidemics. medRxiv 2020.07.23.20160762.
49. Pastor-Satorras R, Vespignani A (2001) Epidemic spreading in scale-free networks. Physical
Review Letters 86(14):3200–3203.
50. Barabasi AL (2005) The origin of bursts and heavy tails in human dynamics. Nature
435(7039):207–211.
51. Kossinets G, Watts DJ (2006) Empirical analysis of an evolving social network. science
311(5757):88–90.
52. Rybski D, Buldyrev SV, Havlin S, Liljeros F, Makse HA (2009) Scaling laws of human interaction activity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106(31):12640–12645.
53. Saramäki J, Moro E (2015) From seconds to months: an overview of multi-scale dynamics of
mobile telephone calls. The European Physical Journal B 88(6):164.
54. (2020) Data were downloaded from https://www.dph.illinois.gov/covid19/covid19-statistics.
55. (2020) Data from https://github.com/thecityny/covid-19-nyc-data.
56. (2020) Data originally due to https://www.thecity.nyc/.
57. (2020) https://www.blog.google/technology/health/covid-19-community-mobility-reports?hl=
en.
58. Volz E, Meyers LA (2007) Susceptible–infected–recovered epidemics in dynamic contact networks. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 274(1628):2925–2934.
59. Bansal S, Read J, Pourbohloul B, Meyers LA (2010) The dynamic nature of contact networks
in infectious disease epidemiology. Journal of biological dynamics 4(5):478–489.
60. Meyerowitz-Katz G, Merone L (2020) A systematic review and meta-analysis of published
research data on COVID-19 infection-fatality rates. medRxiv 2020.05.03.20089854.
61. (2020) Data from https://github.com/pcm-dpc/COVID-19.
62. (2020) Data from https://data.london.gov.uk/dataset/coronavirus--covid-19--deaths.
63. (2020) Data from https://github.com/mrunesson/covid-19.

11

Supporting Information Appendix
Derivation of quasi-homogeneous model.
Age-of-infection model. We start we the same age-of-infection model as described in the main text, but include additional time-dependent

modulation of the force of infection :

∞

Z


dτ Rα K(τ )jα (t − τ )

J(t) = µ(t)

[S1]

0

α

Here, the modulation factor µ(t) can be due (e.g.) to mitigation measures or seasonal forcing. Due to this modification, Eq. (5) should be
rewritten as follows:
Z ∞
Re (t)
1
αRα f (α)e−αZ(t) dα
[S2]
SR (S) ≡
=
µ(t)R0
R0 0

R∞

Here R0 =
αRα f (α)dα is the basic reproduction number. Now one can write an integral equation for force of infection which is
0
formally identical to the one for a homogeneous case:
∞

Z

dτ K(τ )j ∗ (t − τ )

J(t) = µ(t)R0

[S3]

0

Here introducing infectivity-weighted incidence rate, j ∗ = SR J. Eq. (7) completes the set of our quasi-homogeneous equations:
dS
= −Se J
dt

[S4]

As discussed in the main text, the inhomogeneity is fully accounted for by non-liner function SR (S), and variable effective susceptibility
αe (S).
Compartmentalized SIR/SEIR models. The basic SIR and SIER models can be viewed as particular cases of the age-of infection model

discussed above. However, because of their great importance and wide use, we present our construction for a specific case of SEIR:

Here, the force of infection is J(t) = µ(t)γI

R∞
0

Ṡα = −αSα J

[S5]

Ėα = αSα J − γE Eα
I˙α = γE Eα − γI Iα

[S6]
[S7]

Rα I(α)f (α)dα. We define infectivity-weighted "Exposed" and "Infectious" fractions as
∞

Z
E=

Rα E(α)f (α)dα

[S8]

0

I=

J
=
γI µ(t)

∞

Z

Rα I(α)f (α)dα

[S9]

0

[S10]
This leads to a complete description of epidemic dynamics with three ordinary differential equations, formally equivalent to those for the
homogeneous case. The difference are, once again, functions Re = µ(t)SR (S)R0 and Se (S):
Ṡ = −µ(t)γI Se I

[S11]

Ė = Re (t)γI I − γE E
I˙ = γE E − γI I

[S13]

[S12]

Correlation parameter and scaling relationship between infectivity and susceptibility. Below we consider a model in which biological sus-

ceptibility αb is correlated neither with infectivity nor with social strength αs of an individual. On the other hand, both the overall
susceptibility and infectivity are proportional to αs . Let fx and fy be probability density functions (pdfs) of variables x ≡ ln αs and
y ≡ ln αb . It is reasonable to assume a log-normal distribution for αb , since biological susceptibility can be modeled as a product of several
random factors (due to age, gender, genetics, pre-existent conditions, etc). This corresponds to a Gaussian form for fy with variance σ 2
and mean −σ 2 /2 (assuming normalization hαb i = 1). For a given value of α, this translates into Gaussian distribution of variable x with
the same variance, and mean ln α + σ 2 /2. This allows us to calculate the average αs which is proportional to Rα :

R



fx (x) exp x −

Rα ∼ hαs i ∼

R



fx (x) exp −

(x−ln α−σ 2 /2)2
2σ 2




2

(x−ln α−σ 2 /2)
2σ 2

dx
[S14]

dx

This integral can be evaluated by the method of steepest descents: for most pdfs fx and fy , will be dominated by the vicinity of point x0
defined by the condition f 0 (x0 )/f (x0 ) = (x0 /σ 2 − 1/2). By expanding ln f (x) in x0 = x − x0 , we obtain fx (x0 ) ≈ f (xσ ) exp(rx0 − κx02 /2),
where r = f 0 (x0 )/f (x0 ) = x0 /σ 2 − 1/2 and κ = −f 00 (x0 )/f (x0 ) + r2 . After substituting this Gaussian approximation for fx back into the
above equation, we obtain the scaling relationship between α and Rα


Rα ∼ exp

(σ 2 + ln α)2 − (ln α)2
2σ 2 (1 + κσ 2 )

Here χ = 1/(1 + κσ 2 ).

1


∼ αχ

[S15]

Functions SR (S) and Se (S). According to Eq.(4), function S(Z) is directly related to the moment generating function Mα for pdf f (α)

hα2 iZ 2
hα3 iZ 3
−
+ ···
2
6
This function also determines the effective fraction of susceptible population Se :
S = he−αZ iα = Mα (−Z) = 1 − Z +

[S16]

d ln S
[S17]
dZ
Remarkably, once the function Se (S) is found, it completely determines how SR , and hence Re , behaves in the limiting cases of both
the strong and weak correlations:
Se = hαe−αZ iα = −


SR =

hαe−αZ iα = −dS/dZ = Se ,

χ=0

1 dS 2
hα2 i dZ 2

χ=1

Se dSe
,
hα2 i dS

=

[S18]

Application to specific distributions of susceptibility.
Gamma distribution. Consider the gamma distribution with hαi = 1 and CVα2 = η:

f (α) ∼ α1/η−1 exp(−α/η)

[S19]

S = (1 + ηZ)−1/η

[S20]

By using Eqs. (4)-(5), we obtain:
Se = (1 + ηZ)−1/η−1 = S 1+η
−(1+(χ+1)/η)

SR = (1 + ηZ)
This leads to the scaling relationship Re = R0 S λ , Eq. (14).

=S

[S21]
λ

[S22]

Truncated power law distribution. We now consider power law distributed α, f (α) ∼ 1/α1+s (s > 0), with upper and lower cut-offs, α+
and α+ , respectively. If the upper cut-off is implemented as an exponential factor exp(−α/α+ ), we recover the functional form identical
to the gamma distribution, Eq. (S19) discussed above, but with negative values of the shape factor:

f (α) =

αq−1
exp(−α/α+ )
+
αq Γ(1 − q, )

[S23]

Due to the normalization hαi = 1,
Γ(1 − q, )
.
[S24]
Γ(2 − q, )
In the case of gamma distribution, the coefficient of variation CVα would completely determine the overall shape of pdf. For power law
with exponent 1 ≤ q ≤ 3, the value of η = CV 2 sets the dynamic range the between upper and lower cut-offs, i.e. the parameter :
α+ =

1 + η = hα2 i =

Γ(1 − q, )Γ(3 − q, )
Γ(2 − q, )2

[S25]

By using Eq. (4)-(5), we can obtain exact results for S SR in terms of Z:
S=

Γ(1 − q, (1 + α+ Z))
Γ(1 − q, )(1 + α+ Z)1−q

[S26]

Γ(ν, (1 + α+ Z))
[S27]
Γ(ν, )(1 + α+ Z)ν
Here ν = 2 + χ − q. The resulting function Re /R0 = SR (S) is shown in Fig. S1 for several values of the exponent q.
For χ = 0, the overall function SR (S) = Se (S) can be very well fitted by an empirical analytic formula that depends only on
λ0 = 1 + CVα2 and an additional shape parameter ∆λ = CVα (γα − 2CVα ):
SR =

Se (S) ≈

S
(1 + ∆λ (1 − S))(λ0 −1)/∆λ

[S28]

According to Eq. (S18), this function completely defines behavior of SR in both limits of the weak and strong correlation regimes :
SR ≈

(1 + (∆χ − 1)(1 − S)) S
(1 + ∆λ (1 − S))(λ−∆χ )/∆λ

[S29]

Here ∆χ = (∆λ + 1)/λ0 , and λ = λ1 for χ = 1. For χ = 0, δχ has to be set to 1.
Log-normal distribution. The log-normal distribution is a very natural candidate to describe statistics of α. It universally emerges for

multiplicative random processes. Transmission of an infection involves a complex chain of random events, both social and biological,
which can be conceptualized as such multiplicative process. For instance, it may depend on how likely a given person would be involved in
a potential superspreading event, how likely that person would have a close contact with a potential infector, what would be the duration
of their contact, how effective the individual immune system is in preventing and suppressing the infection.
For the log-normal distribution, the initial drop in Re according to Eq. (10), is noticeably faster than for a gamma distribution:
λ = (1 + CVα2 )(1 + χCVα2 ). However, the initial linear regime is also much narrower. Figure S1 shows the dependence Re (S) for the
log-normal distribution alongside with the above results for gamma and power law distributions computed for the same values of CV
(specifically, CVα2 = 2). As one can see from these plots, despite a stronger effect of heterogeneity at the early stage, the curves generated
by log-normal distribution approach Re = 0 significantly slower than those corresponding to the gamma distribution. Note that the overall
behavior of Re (S) generated by the log-normal distribution closely matches the one obtained for the power law distribution with a certain
scaling exponent q. This exponent would depend on CV and should approach 1 in the limit of sufficiently wide distribution when the
log-normal pdf asymptotically approaches a power law 1/α with upper and lower cut-offs.

2

Final Size of Epidemic. Here we derive a simple result for FSE in a population with a persistent heterogeneity. To do this, we integrate Eq.
R∞
R1
Re (t)J(t)dt =
Re (S)dS/Se (S) for the final value of Z when the epidemic has run its
(6) over time t. This yields a relation Z∞ =
0
S∞
course, and this in turn can conveniently be expressed in terms of the fraction of the susceptible population, S∞ :
1

 Z
−

S∞ = Mα

S∞

Re (S)dS
Se (S)


[S30]

This equation is valid for an arbitrary distribution of α, arbitrary correlation between susceptibility and infectivity, and for any statistics of
the generation interval. This result can be also obtained as a solution to a general integral equation derived in Ref. (21) for the well-mixed
case. Eq. S30 combines and generalizes several well-known results: (i) in the weak correlation limit (Rα = R0 ), when the integral in
the r.h.s. is equal to R0 (1 − S∞ ), Eq.(S30) reproduces results of Refs. (20, 21, 29, 33), (ii) in the opposite limit of a strong correlation
(Rα ∼ α), the integration gives R0 (1 − Se (S∞ ))/hα2 i, and one recovers the result for the FSE on a network (9, 10, 21).
For the case of gamma-distributed persistent susceptibility Eq. (S30), gives:
S∞ =

1+

λ−η
R0 η 1 − S∞

 !−1/η
[S31]

λ−η

It should be emphasized however that this result is of limited relevance to more realistic situations. Even if one assumes no governmentimposed mitigation or societal response to the epidemic, the case of fully persistent heterogeneity is just an approximation. As we
demonstrate in our paper, short-term correlations of time-dependent individual susceptibilities and infectivities lead to transient stabilization
of a fast-pacing epidemic. Because of this effect, Eq.(S30)-Eq.(S31) should be interpreted as an estimate of the size of the first wave rather
than the actual FSE.
Path-integral theory of epidemic with time-dependent heterogeneity. Here we present a generalization of the theory developed in the previous

section that incorporates the effects of time variations of individual susceptibilities and infectivities, as well as temporal correlations
between them. Since these fast variations are primarily caused by bursty dynamics of social interactions, and since heterogeneous biological
susceptibility appears subdominant in the context of COVID-19, we set αb = 1 for all individuals, so that α has purely social origin. Let
ai (t) = αi + δai (t) be the time-dependent susceptibility of a person. Because of the social nature of a(t), one’s individual infectivity is
also proportional to it at any given time: βi (t) = R · K(τ )ai (t). As before, τ is time from infection, K(τ ) is the pdf of generation intervals.
Accordingly R is individual reproductive number of an "average" person with social activity ai (t) = 1, in the fully susceptible population.
The state of an individual is described by a step function si (t) which is 1 as long as the person is susceptible, and turns to 0 at the
moment of infection. The time evolution of the epidemic follows a stochastic generalization of Eqs. (1)-(2):
E [ṡi (t)] = −ai (t)si (t − 0)J(t)

Z

[S32]

∞

R · K(τ )ai (t)ṡi (t − τ )dτ

J(t) = −

[S33]

0

Here bar . ¯. . represents averaging over individual members of population (indexed by i), in contrast with h. . . i, averaging over all subgroups
with various values of persistent heterogeneity α. E[. . . ] stands for expected value.
The overall quasi-homogeneous description given by Eqs.(7)-(6), remains valid. It is obtained by averaging Eqs. (S32)-(S33) over
the entire population. However, in contrast to the case of persistent heterogeneity, variables S(t), Se (t) and Re are no longer connected
to each other by a simple functional relationship.
 To relate them we first note that the average probability that an individual is still
susceptible at time t is given by E[si (t)] = exp −

Rt

−∞

J(t0 )ai (t0 )dt0 . Therefore,

 Z

t



S(t, [J(t0 )]) ≡ si (t) = exp −

J(t0 )ai (t0 )dt0

[S34]

−∞

In other words, S becomes a functional over the set of all possible epidemic trajectories J(t). It still has the structure of a moment
generating function for the field ai (t), and thus is a direct analogue of the partition function broadly used in statistical physics, stochastic
calculus, and field theory. The specific form of this functional depends on probabilities assigned to different individual trajectories ai (t).
As a natural generalization of the case of persistent heterogeneity, Se (t) and Re (t) can be obtained as, respectively, the first and the
second variations of the functional S over J(t):
Se (t) = ai (t)si (t) = −

δS(t, [J(t0 )])
δJ(t)

Re (t) = Ra2i (t)si (t) = R

[S35]

δ 2 S(t, [J(t0 )])

[S36]

δJ(t)2

For the sake of simplicity, in deriving Eq.(S36) we assumed αi (t) to be smoothed over the timescale of a single generation interval. As a
R∞
result,
ai (t)ai (t − τ )K(τ )dτ ≈ a2i (t). By applying Eq.(S36) to the initial state of fully susceptible population we obtain the result for
0
R0 , Eq. (16):

R0 = R hα2 i + δa2i
[S37]

Rt

At the early stages of epidemic E[si (t)] ≈ 1 −
a (t0 )J(t0 )dt0 for the entire population. After substituting this expression for si (t)
−∞ i
to Eq.(S36) one obtains a generalization of our previous result for the initial suppression of Re , Eqs.(9)-(10):


Re (t) ≈ R0

∞

Z

Λ(t, t0 )J(t − t0 )dt0

1−


[S38]

0

Λ(t, t0 ) =

α̃2i (t)ai (t − t0 )
hα2 i + δa2i

3

= λ∞ + δλ(t, t0 )

[S39]

Here λ∞ = Λ(∞) and δλ(t, t0 ) are the constant and time-dependent contributions to "immunity kernel" Λ(t, t0 ) which are discussed in the
main text.
To obtain a corrected result for HIT, we assume a very slow progression of the epidemic (e.g. due to a gradual relaxation of the level of
mitigation). In this case, any intermediate-term correlations between time dependent variations δαi (t) become negligible, and we largely
recover the formalism developed for pure persistent heterogeneity. Under the same assumption that was used for the estimate of λ∞ in the
main text (i.e. δa2i ∼ αi ), the only modification that needs to be done is to replace the term αRα in Eq. (5) with (χ∗ α2 + (1 − χ∗ )α)R0
(χ)

(where χ∗ = hα2 i/a2i ). This gives an expression for Re (S) in terms of two earlier results, Re (S) (for χ = 0 and 1, respectively):
Re
(1)
(0)
= χ∗ Re + (1 − χ∗ )Re ≈ S λ∞
R0

[S40]

Here λ∞ = 1 + (1 + χ∗ )η. To obtain this result, we substituted the scaling functions for gamma-distributed persistent heterogeneity,
Re (S) = R0 S λ , with λ = 1 + (1 + χ)η, as given by Eq.(14).

4

Fig. S1. Re /R0 vs S dependence for three different families of probability distribution f (α): Gamma (light blue), truncated power law (dashed lines), and log-normal (yellow).
Different curves correspond to the same value of the coefficient of variation CVα2 = 2, and two limiting values (0 and 1) of the correlation parameter χ.

5

1.5

Re(t)/R0 or Re(t)/[R0*Mobility(t)]

1.1

0.7
0.5

0.3

NYC
Chicago
NYC, best fit: =4.5

0.1

0.05

NYC/Google mobility
Chicago/Google mobility
NYC/Goolge mobility, best fit: =4.1

0.7

0.75

0.8

0.85

0.9

0.95

0.08

1

susceptible population fraction, S(t)
Fig. S2. Exploration of effect of mobility on data presented in Figure 3(A). Triangles represent data points for NYC and Chicago with Re (t)/R0 corrected by a mobility factor
calculated from Google community mobility report, Ref. (57). We compute the mobility for NYC using average mobility of its five counties: New York county, Bronx county, Kings
county, Richmond county, and Queens county, weighted by their population fraction.

6

1
0.8

Re(t)/R0

0.6

0.4
DC
RI
PA

CT
MD

LA

0.2

NJ

IL

MA
MI

slope: =4.7

1.6

NY

0.84

0.86

0.88

0.9

0.92

0.94

0.96

0.98

1

susceptible population fraction, S(t)

Fig. S3. Time progressions of Re(t)/R0 and S(t) for the hardest-hit US states and DC, as reported in Ref. (46). Black dots correspond to absolute minima of transmission
and population susceptible fractions. The dashed line with slope λ = 4.7 ± 1.6 is the best power law fit through these black dots.

7

λ=1

λ=3

104

104

103

103

102

102

101

101

100

100

λ=4
10

λ=5

4

10

103

103

102

102

101

101

100

hospitalized
critical
deaths

4

100

M

h1
arc

r
Ap

il 1

y1
Ma

n
Ju

e1

J

1
uly

g
Au

1
ust

e
mb
pte

r1

rch

Ma

Se

1

ril

Ap

1

y1
Ma

ne

Ju

1

ly

Ju

1

st
gu
Au

1

r1
be
m
e
t
Sep

Fig. S4. Hospitalization, ICU occupancy and daily deaths in NYC modeled under hypothetical scenario when any mitigation is completely eliminated as of Jun 15 2020, for
various values of λ. Model described in Ref. (40) is calibrated on data from Ref.(54), up to June 10, 2020 (shown as crosses). 95% confidence intervals are indicated.

8

λ=1

λ=3

104

104

103

103

102

102

101

101

100

100

λ=4
10

λ=5

4

10

103

103

102

102

101

101

100

hospitalized
critical
deaths

4

100

M

h1
arc

r
Ap

il 1

y1
Ma

n
Ju

e1

J

1
uly

t1

us

g
Au

e
mb
pte

1
rch
Ma

r1

Se

ril
Ap

1

y1
Ma

ne
Ju

1

1
ly

Ju

st
gu
Au

1

r1
be
m
e
t
Sep

Fig. S5. Hospitalization, ICU occupancy and daily deaths in Chicago modeled under hypothetical scenario when any mitigation is completely eliminated as of Jun 15 2020, for
various values of λ. Model described in Ref. (40) is calibrated on data from Ref.(54), up to June 10, 2020 (shown as crosses). 95% confidence intervals are indicated.

9

