Public risk perception and emotion on Twitter during the
Covid-19 pandemic
Joel Dyer1,2,*,♦ and Blas Kolic1,2,†,♦

arXiv:2008.00854v2 [cs.SI] 7 Dec 2020

1

Institute for New Economic Thinking at the Oxford Martin School,
University of Oxford
2
Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford
†
blas.kolic@maths.ox.ac.uk
*
joel.dyer@maths.ox.ac.uk
♦
Equal contribution
December 8, 2020

Contents
1 Introduction
1.1 Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3
4

2 Data
2.1 Twitter dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2 Epidemiological data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5
5
6

3 Analysing the public’s perception of the pandemic
3.1 Defining perception from linguistic inquiry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 Comparing the public’s perception with epidemiological data . . . . .
3.2.1 Psychophysical numbing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3 Analysing the emotional framing of Covid-19 casualties with semantic
3.3.1 Qualitative overview of the Death-Affect partition . . . . . . .
3.3.2 Quantitative analysis of the Death-Affect partition . . . . . .
3.3.3 Discussion and summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.4 Modeling attention to Covid-19 casualties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.4.1 The Weber-Fechner law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.4.2 Power-law perception . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.4.3 Model comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . .
. . . . . .
. . . . . .
networks
. . . . . .
. . . . . .
. . . . . .
. . . . . .
. . . . . .
. . . . . .
. . . . . .

6
7
8
8
10
11
14
15
18
18
20
21

4 Discussion and conclusions

23

5 Declaration
5.1 Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2 Funding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.3 Competing interests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

25
25
25
25

1

5.4
5.5
5.6

Availability of data and materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
Authors’ contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26

Appendices

31

A Further model comparison

31

B National Linguistic Scores
34
B.1 Exogenous peaks in the National Linguistic Scores . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
C Word co-occurrence analysis
34
C.1 Further technical details on co-occurrence network construction . . . . . . . . . 34
C.2 Word co-occurrence networks for Spanish-language tweets . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
D Covid-19 epidemiological data

37

2

Abstract
Successful navigation of the Covid-19 pandemic is predicated on public cooperation
with safety measures and appropriate perception of risk, in which emotion and attention
play important roles. Signatures of public emotion and attention are present in social
media data, thus natural language analysis of this text enables near-to-real-time monitoring of indicators of public risk perception. We compare key epidemiological indicators
of the progression of the pandemic with indicators of the public perception of the pandemic constructed from ∼ 20 million unique Covid-19-related tweets from 12 countries
posted between 10th March – 14th June 2020. We find evidence of psychophysical numbing: Twitter users increasingly fixate on mortality, but in a decreasingly emotional and
increasingly analytic tone.
Semantic network analysis based on word co-occurrences
reveals changes in the emotional framing of Covid-19 casualties that are consistent with
this hypothesis. We also find that the average attention afforded to national Covid-19
mortality rates is modelled accurately with the Weber-Fechner and power law functions
of sensory perception. Our parameter estimates for these models are consistent with estimates from psychological experiments, and indicate that users in this dataset exhibit
differential sensitivity by country to the national Covid-19 death rates. Our work illustrates the potential utility of social media for monitoring public risk perception and
guiding public communication during crisis scenarios.

Keywords: Risk perception, Twitter, Covid-19, natural language processing, psychophysics,
regression analysis, linguistic networks, network partitions

1

Introduction

The Covid-19 pandemic has brought about widespread disruption to human life. In many
countries, public gatherings have been broadly forbidden, mass restrictions on human movement
have been introduced, and entire industries have been paralysed in attempting to lower the
peak stress on healthcare systems [1]. However, the degree to which these restrictions have
been enforced by law has varied over time and by location, and their success in mitigating
public health risks depends on the extent of cooperation on the part of the public.
A key determinant of the public’s behaviour and their cooperation with state-imposed social
restrictions is the public’s emotional response to, and their perception of the the risk presented
by, the pandemic. However, the evolution of emotions and risk perception in response to
disasters is not well-understood, and there is a need for more longitudinal data on such responses
with which this understanding can be improved [2]. Our goal is thus to contribute to bettering
this understanding, and we do so by exploring the empirical relationships present between the
progression of the Covid-19 pandemic and the public’s perception of the risk posed by the
pandemic.
We explain our findings in terms of the existing body of literature surrounding public perception of risk, disasters, and human suffering in cognitive psychology. In particular, we draw
from psychophysics, the field that studies the relationship between stimulus and subjective sensation and perception [3]. The search for psychophysical “laws” of perception has existed since
at least the mid-19th Century with the proposing of the Weber-Fechner law [4], which posits
that the smallest perceptible change ds in a physical stimulus of magnitude s is proportional
to s. Thus, the perceived magnitude p of such stimuli follows
dp ∝

ds
.
s

(1)

In the continuum limit, this implies that p grows logarithmically with the physical magnitude
s of the stimulus. More recently, empirical studies by S. S. Stevens [5] supported, instead, a
3

power law relationship between human perception of a stimulus and the physical magnitude of
the stimulus:
p ∝ sβ .
(2)
Summers et al. [6] extended this concept to human sensitivity to war death statistics and
found that a power law with exponent β = 0.32 best fit the data. A number of further
studies have corroborated the extension of these psychophysical laws describing the subjective
perception of physical magnitudes to the subjective evaluations of human fatalities [7, 8, 9].
In all of these, perception is a concave function of the stimulus, meaning that the larger the
stimulus magnitude, the more it has to change in absolute terms to be equally noticeable.
Thus, perception is considered relative rather than absolute, implying that our judgments
are comparative in nature. This observation has been shown to account for deviations from
rationality in economic decision-making [10].
These proposed psychophysical laws of human perception present an opportunity for monitoring a population’s response to a disaster scenario such as the Covid-19 pandemic. By
evaluating the goodness of fit of these models to data on the perception of the progression of
the pandemic, and determining the parameter values of such fits, we can describe the sensitivity
of populations to the state of such crises, with important implications for risk communication
and disaster management.
To this end, we make use of a massive Twitter dataset consisting of user-posted textual data
to study the public’s emotional and perceptual responses to the current public health crisis.
Twitter provides convenient access to the conversation amongst members of the public across
the globe on a plethora of topics, and many authors are studying several aspects of the public’s
response to the pandemic with it. Twitter is a particularly appropriate tool under conditions
of physical distancing requirements and furlough schemes, where online communication has become more than ever a central feature of everyday life. Moreover, results from psycholinguistics
and advances in natural language processing techniques enable the extraction of psychologically
meaningful attributes and the reconstruction of cognitive structures (e.g. semantic networks)
from textual data. With this dataset, our general approach is to offer a quantitative, spatiotemporal comparison between indicators of the state of the pandemic and the topics and
psychologically meaningful linguistic features present in the discussion surrounding Covid-19
on social media on a country-by-country basis, for a selection of countries.

1.1

Related work

Our work is novel in that, to our knowledge, it is the first to use a large social media dataset
spanning multiple countries to model the perceptual response of countries’ citizens to the pandemic in the context of risk perception. To date, empirical validation of the aforementioned
psychophysical laws has largely taken place in controlled laboratory settings, in which decisions,
actions, and scenarios are artificial or hypothetical. Our work thus contributes to the body of
literature surrounding risk perception by investigating these laws in a naturalistic setting.
However, there have been numerous authors using social media to analyse the public response to the Covid-19 pandemic. This includes work that has focused on the psychological
burden of the social restrictions. For instance, Stella et al. [11] use the circumplex model of
affect [12] and the NRC lexicon [13] to give a descriptive analysis of the public mood in Italy
from a Twitter dataset collected during the week following the introduction of lockdown measures. In addition, Venigalla et al [14] has developed a web portal for categorising tweets by
emotion in order to track mood in India on a daily basis.
Others have instead focused on negative emotions, as in the work of Schild et al. [15], where
they study the rise of hate speech and sinophobia as a result of the outbreaks. More specifically
on perception, Dryhust et al. [16] measured the perceived risk of the Covid-19 pandemic by
4

conducting surveys at a global scale (n ∼ 6000) and compared countries, finding that factors
such as individualistic and pro-social values and trust in government and science were significant
predictors of risk perception. de Bruin and Bennett [17] perform similar work in the United
States. The closest work we have been able to find to our own are those of Barrios and Hochberg
[18] and Aiello et al. [19], where both research pieces focus on the current pandemic using
data from the United States. In the former, they combine internet search data with daily
travel data to show that regions in the United States with a greater proportion of Trump
voters exhibit behaviours that are consistent with a lower perceived risk during the Covid-19
pandemic. In the latter, they assess the epidemic psychology using Covid-19 Twitter data in
the United States according to several linguistic features present in the tweets. They identify
three psychological phases consistent with the refusal-suspended reality-acceptance stages of
grief. Despite the above, we have been unable to find work that combines large-scale social
media data with linguistic analysis to offer a spatiotemporal, quantitative analysis of emotion
and risk perception during the Covid-19 pandemic across multiple countries.
Beyond the Covid-19 pandemic, our work is related to a small but growing body of literature
on the use of data science in understanding human emotion and risk perception. In such work,
natural language analysis has succeeded in supporting established linguistic theories such as
the importance of the distribution of words in a vocabulary as a proxy for knowledge [20], and
regarding the relation between the uncertainty of events and the emotional response to their
outcome [21, 22]. For instance, using textual data from Twitter, Bhatia found that unexpected
events elicit higher affective responses than those which are expected [23]. In another instance,
the same author conducted experiments with 300 participants and predicted the perceived risk
of several risk sources using a vector-space representation of natural language, concluding that
the word distribution of language successfully captures human perception of risk [24]. Similar
work has been conducted by Jaidka et al. [25] in the area of monitoring public well-being, in
which they compare word-based and data-driven methods for predicting ground-truth survey
results for subjective well-being of US citizens on a county-level basis using a 1.5 billion Tweet
dataset constructed from 2009 to 2015.
The remainder of this paper is laid out as follows. In Section 2, we present the data set used
in the subsequent analysis. In Section 3, we provide further details on the approach followed
to explore the relationships between indicators of the state of the pandemic and the public’s
perception of the pandemic, and discuss possible explanations for our observations by drawing
on psychological literature. In Section 4, we summarise and offer concluding remarks, along
with a discussion of the limitations of the current work and suggestions for avenues of future
work.

2

Data

2.1

Twitter dataset

In the following analysis, we make use of the set of tweets gathered by J. Banda et. al [26],
which are obtained and mantained using the Twitter free Stream API1 . At the time of writing,
this data set consists of ∼ 80 million original tweets spanning from March 11, 2020 to June
14, 2020. By original we mean that we do not consider retweets, which is standard for natural language processing [27, 26]. Data is collected according to the following query filters2 :
1

The free Stream API randomly samples around 1% of the total tweets for the given queries
A number of publicly available Twitter datasets have emerged in relation to the pandemic. We chose to
work with this dataset since it used the most generic query terms among all the publicly available datasets we
considered, and we wanted the least amount of bias possible for our analysis.
2

5

Argentina
Australia
Canada
Chile
Colombia
India
Mexico
Nigeria
South Africa
Spain
United Kingdom
United States
Total

Language

Number of tweets

Unique users

Spanish
English
English
Spanish
Spanish
English
Spanish
English
English
Spanish
English
English & Spanish

846,706
701,072
1,209,712
342,013
466,477
1,806,685
1,133,350
754,152
354,613
1,697,049
3,490,703
6,297,720
19,072,850

194,818
97,027
195,507
60,235
103,845
344,894
187,064
133,797
78,447
274,010
631,017
1,397,410
3,699,071

Table 1: Per-country summary of the Twitter dataset constructed from the repository maintained by Banda et al. [26]. All tweets are original, i.e. all retweets are removed.
“COVID19”, “CoronavirusPandemic”, “COVID-19”, “2019nCoV”, “CoronaOutbreak”, “coronavirus”, “WuhanVirus”, “covid19”, “coronaviruspandemic”, “covid-19”, “2019ncov”, “coronaoutbreak”, “wuhanvirus”.
For our analysis, we consider only the English and Spanish tweets with a non-empty selfreported location field. We process every self-reported location using OpenStreetMaps [28]
and remove non-sensical locations (e.g. “Mars”, “Everywhere”, “Planet Earth”). This allows
us to group the remaining tweets by country and proceed with our analysis on a country-bycountry basis. To assure the statistical significance of our analysis, we keep the countries with
the highest number of tweets for each language, resulting in a geolocated Twitter dataset of
∼ 20 million original tweets posted by ∼ 4 million users on 12 different countries, which we
summarise in Table 1.

2.2

Epidemiological data

We measure the progression of the pandemic with the number of Covid-19 confirmed cases
and deaths for all the countries in our analysis. The data was made publicly available by Our
World in Data repository [29]. In particular, we take the daily Covid-19 cases and deaths,
both in linear and logarithmic scale, since these are four epidemiological indicators that are
most frequently used to summarise the state of the pandemic, and are therefore frequently
encountered by the public.

3

Analysing the public’s perception of the pandemic

In this section, we study the public’s perception of the pandemic on a country-by-country basis,
using the countries with the highest number of tweets in the observation period (see Table 1).
We do this on a country-by-country basis since the pandemic has often evoked nation-level
responses, making nation-level analysis the most natural geographic scale. Our broad approach
is to inspect and compare the linguistic features of the tweets released by users in the Twitter
dataset described in Section 2.1 with the epidemiological data described in Section 2.2.

6

3.1

Defining perception from linguistic inquiry

Our goal is to explore the public’s perception of the pandemic. To do this, we analyse the
linguistic features present in the textual data generated by Twitter users, and map these features
to psychologically meaningful categories that are indicative of the Twitter users’ perception.
Here, we are assuming that the words used by these Twitter users are indicative of their
internal cognitive and emotional states [30], which is supported in [24] where they predict
the perception of risk using text data. Thus, we quantify the linguistic content of each tweet
using the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) program [31]. LIWC has been widely
adopted in several text data analyses, and it has proven successful in applications ranging from
measuring the perception of emotions [32] to predicting the German federal elections using
Twitter [33]. Moreover, it has recently been used to successfully identify the early-epidemic
psychological stages of grief in the current pandemic [19].
LIWC operates as text analysis program that reports the number of words in a document
belonging to a set of predefined linguistically and psychologically meaningful categories3 [30].
For our purposes, a document is a tweet dti posted on date t and from a user based in country i.
LIWC represents documents as an unordered set of words, and a LIWC category l is similarly
a set of words associated with concept l. For a given document dti , the linguistic score pl for
category l is the percentage of words in dti that belong to l:
pl (dti ) =

|dti ∩ l|
· 100.
|dti |

(3)

There are many such categories l, including Family, Work, and Motion. We capitalise such
category titles, and use the titles to refer to either the set of words associated with that category
or to refer to the category itself. Linguistic scores from Eq. (3) for individual tweets will be
noisy, as they are short documents. Moreover, we are interested in the average response of the
population of a country. For this reason, we group the tweets by country i and by date t, and
0
denote these sets of tweets as Dit = { dti0 | i0 = i, t0 = t }. We then compute the National
Linguistic Score (NLS) for category l as the average of the linguistic scores over documents in
Dit relative to an empirically observed Twitter base rate plB :
pli (t) =

100 X pl (d) − plB
.
|Dit |
plB
t

(4)

d∈Di

The base rates plB for the use of words on Twitter associated with category l are given in
[31]. Using Eq. (4) for all the selected linguistic categories, we construct multidimensional
country-level time series that represent the evolution of the public perception of the pandemic,
similar to the linguistic profiles introduced by Tumasjan et al. [33]. These perception dynamics
are influenced by each user in our dataset, which may include bots and institutional or public
relations accounts. We discuss the possible implications of this aspect of our data in Section 4.
In Figure 1, we show the collection of NLSs for a selection of relevant linguistic categories.
We observe clear trends that, in most cases, are synchronized between countries and languages.
In particular, most categories associated with emotion – notably Affect, Anger, Anxiety, Positive emotion, Negative emotion, and Swear words (swearing is associated with frustration
and anger [34]) – have their highest scores in mid-to-late March, when the World Health Organisation (WHO) announced the pandemic status of Covid-19 and most Western countries
introduced more stringent social restrictions [1]. These scores decay thereafter, indicating a
3

For the English-language tweets, we make use of the 2015 English dictionary. For the Spanish-language
tweets, the most recent dictionary is the 2007 edition, which has fewer categories than the 2015 English dictionary.

7

relaxation of the emotional response in the conversation. This is consistent with results reported by Bhatia regarding the affective response to unexpected events [23] and with those
of Aiello et al. [19] where the Death NLS of the United States rises from late March on. A
qualitatively similar trend can be seen in the Social processes panel, the category involving “all
non-first-person-singular personal pronouns as well as verbs that suggest human interaction
(talking, sharing)” [31].
We also observe that health-related categories such as Death and Health show an overall
rising trend, with Death rising most rapidly throughout March. These categories, with the
exception of Positive Emotion and Health, peak again in the United States at the end of
May, coinciding with the murder of George Floyd and the subsequent Black Lives Matter
protests. Such universal trends are not apparent by visual inspection in the Money, Risk, and
Sadness panels. An additional feature of these plots is the absolute scale of these values: in all
cases, there is a significant percentage change from their baseline values, with large percentage
increases observed initially in the use of words associated with Anxiety and later with Death,
and a moderate percentage increase in the use of words associated with Risk.

3.2

Comparing the public’s perception with epidemiological data

In this section, we explore the relationship between the NLSs described in Section 3.1, which we
use as a proxy for the public’s perception, and the intensity of the pandemic, which we assume
is the stimulus triggering this perception. Our measure of the intensity of the pandemic is the
number of Covid-19 cases and deaths from the data described in Section 2.2.
A straightforward way of approaching this relationship is by computing the correlations between the NLSs and the epidemiological data in a per-country basis, and we show the average
across countries of these per-country correlations in Figure 2. On the one hand, we observe
significant negative correlations in emotionally charged categories (eg. Swear words, Anger,
Anxiety, Affective processes), indicating a decay in emotion as the pandemic intensifies. Conversely, categories related with health and mortality (Death, Health) and analytical thinking
(Analytic) show significant positive correlation4 .
3.2.1

Psychophysical numbing

We believe the trends we observe in Fig. 1 and the correlations we observe in Fig. 2 are
consistent with the notion of psychophysical numbing. This term was introduced by Robert
Jay Lifton [35], and developed by Paul Slovic [7, 8] in the context of human perception of
genocides and their associated death tolls, to describe the paradoxical phenomenon in which
people exhibit growing indifference towards human suffering as the number of humans suffering
increases. By inspecting the correlations between the NLSs and the epidemiological indicators,
we find that as the pandemic intensifies – in the sense of an increasing number of cases and
deaths reported daily – our emotional response diminishes, as expected from a psychophysical
numbing phenomenon.
Specifically, we observe negative correlations between almost all components of the NLSs
associated with affect – Affective processes, Anger, Anxiety, Negative emotion, Positive emotion, and Swear words – and the epidemiological data5 . By inspecting Figure 1, we see that
4

When analysing these correlations, we found that, overall, the cumulative cases and deaths correlate better
with most linguistic categories than the daily data. However, while this is sensible in the early stages of the
pandemic, it is unlikely to remain the case over a long time horizon due to humans’ finite memory. We therefore
proceeded with our comparison using the daily epidemiological data alone for this reason.
5
The only exception is the cross-country average of the Sadness component of the NLSs, which is positively
correlated with the epidemiological indicators and appears to be driven only from Argentina’s, Chile’s, and
Colombia’s increasing use of words related to Sadness. The remaining countries remain stationary at a lower-

8

Figure 1: Time series for the NLSs for the countries as indicated by the legend. Each panel
shows the individual linguistic categories. The units on the y-axis represent the percentage
change of the National Linguistic Scores (NLS) on our data with respect to the LIWC baselines
for Twitter (see Eq. (4)).

9

Figure 2: Correlation coefficients between epidemiological indicators and national linguistic
scores (NLSs) averaged across all countries. *“Risk” and “Analytic” are only available for
the English-language LIWC. These two categories are thus averages across English-language
countries only.
every country exhibits similar downward trends in these components and, with the exception of
Anxiety, are all significantly lower than their baseline values throughout the observation period.
This unusually low and decreasing Affect word count is accompanied, conversely, with a
growing awareness of the morbidity of the situation in that we observe significant positive
correlations between the Death NLSs and the daily national cases and deaths, indicating that
the decrease in affect occurs simultaneously with and despite an attentional shift towards Covid19 related mortality. We also observe a simultaneous increase in the Analytic component of
each English-language dataset6 over this same period, indicating a movement towards more
logical and analytical, rather than intuitive and emotional, thinking.
The potential implication of this is that the public is less perceptive of the risk that the
pandemic poses to public health, since their emotional response is reduced and reducing [36].
For example, Van Bavel et al. [37] and Loewenstein et al. [38] describe that risk perception
is driven more by association and affect-based processes than analytic and reason-based processes, with the affect-based processes typically prevailing when there is disagreement between
the two modes of thinking. The negative correlations between the intensity of the pandemic
and affective processes, together with its positive correlation with the prevalence of analytic
processes, suggests that public risk communication could be adjusted to re-balance the degree
of affective and analytic thinking amongst members of the public to achieve favourable risk
avoidance behaviour and, consequently, favourable public health outcomes.

3.3

Analysing the emotional framing of Covid-19 casualties with
semantic networks

To support our claim that these observations are attributable to psychophysical numbing, we
construct word co-occurrence networks using tweets in our dataset.
Word co-occurrence
networks are a class of linguistic networks, in which nodes are words appearing in a body of
text and an edge is placed between a pair of words with a weight given by some function of the
number of co-occurrences of that pair in the text. Empirical word co-occurrence networks have
than-baseline value for this component.
6
Unfortunately, the Spanish LIWC dictionary does not yet have an Analytic category.

10

been used in cognitive network science as approximate reconstructions of the author’s latent
cognitive structures, e.g. semantic or conceptual networks [39], with a given corpus deemed to
be an empirical manifestation of such structures.
For example, Kenett et al. [40] reconstruct participants’ internal semantic networks on
the basis of their responses in a free word association task, reporting that participants that
were found independently to have lower creativity scores also had less well-connected semantic
networks – specifically, a higher modularity, average shortest path length, and diameter, and a
lower small-world-ness [41] – than participants scoring more highly in creativity.
In the context of the Covid-19 pandemic, Stella et al. [11] use word and hashtag cooccurrence networks in conjunction with word-to-emotion mappings to uncover complex emotional profiles amongst Twitter users posting from Italy during the first week of lockdown. More
generally, a plethora of models for inferring semantic relationships between words in natural
language processing tasks are based on some notion of word co-occurrence [42]. The semantic
proximity of a pair of words in such models has also been shown to possess predictive power
regarding the subjective probability participants assign to hypothetical real-world events involving that pair of concepts [43]. For a more complete review of the use of linguistic networks
in the study of human cognition, we refer the interested reader to [39].
Given the well-established utility of word co-occurrence analysis in providing a view of
authors’ internal cognitive structures, we employ such an approach on W = Death ∪ Affect
– the set of words in either the Death or Affect categories – in an attempt to approximate
the Twitter users’ internal semantic relationships between these two concepts7 . Specifically, we
hypothesise that, if the psychophysical numbing effect is legitimate, the modular structure of
these networks will separate Death-related and Affect-related words more decidedly at larger
daily death counts than at lower death counts. This would indicate that conversation regarding
Covid-19-related mortality evokes a weaker emotional response at higher daily death counts.
Given a set T of tweets, the word co-occurrence network G(T ) is represented by a weighted
adjancency matrix A(T ) in which the nodes are words belonging to the Death and Affect LIWC
dictionaries. Entry Aij (T ) counts the number of co-occurrences between words i and j across
all tweets in T , and is computed as

(5)
Aij (T ) = B(T )T B(T ) ij ,
where Btk (T ) counts the number of instances of word k in tweet t ∈ T . We ignore self-edges
by imposing Aii = 0, since it is the relationship between distinct words that is of interest. (See
Appendix C.1 for further details on the construction of these networks.)
3.3.1

Qualitative overview of the Death-Affect partition

We identify three main periods for which we construct network snapshots of word cooccurrences (see Figures 3a to 3c). The first period spans 11th March to 9th April 2020,
in which the WHO declared Covid-19’s pandemic status and governments generally imposed
social restrictions. The second period spans 10th April to 23rd May, during which most
Covid-19 cases either underwent exponential growth or flattened out for some countries in Europe. The final period spans 24th May to 13th June, during which most countries were at
the peak daily rate of Covid-19 cases or where in a stage of decreasing number of daily cases.
Moreover, the Black Lives Matter protests were triggered by the murder of George Floyd in the
USA in this period. In constructing these networks, we weight each country equally by taking
a random sample of approximately 300,000 tweets from each country.
7

The Affect category contains all the words related with affective processes. This includes the words in
Anger, Anxiety, Positive and Negative emotion, and Swear words, which are all significantly correlated with
Death and daily deaths.

11

Word
positive
isolat*
care

panic
protests

Figures Interpretation
3a to 3c Used in reference to the number of people that have tested positive
for Covid-19
3a, 3b
Used in discussion surrounding symptomatic and at-risk individuals
self-isolating
3b,3c
Used in relation to: the health care system; the death care industry;
the admission of Covid-19 patients to intensive care units; and
deaths occurring in care homes for the elderly
3a
Panic-buying of household goods, e.g. toilet paper, hand-sanitiser
3c
George Floyd’s death and subsequent Black Lives Matter protests

Table 2: Words belonging to the Affect LIWC category that appear in the primarily Deathbased clusters in the three snapshot word co-occurrence networks shown in Figures 3a to 3c.
The middle and right columns indicate in which snapshots they are most prominent, and the
likely explanation for their association with the concept of death during the pandemic.

In Figures 3a to 3c, we visualise these three snapshots for the English-language tweets.
From these we observe that two clusters emerge in all cases: a left-hand cluster consisting
mainly of Death-related words and a right-hand cluster consisting primarily of Affect-related
words. We also observe that the relative sizes of these clusters vary over time: the Deathcluster grows in size as the pandemic progresses, and remains separated from the Affect-based
cluster. This indicates that the evolving structure of these networks may be consistent with our
hypothesis of psychophysical numbing: throughout, Covid-19 casualties appear not to evoke a
strong emotional response.
However, we find that a number of the most highly connected nodes in these Death clusters
are Affect-related words: in the first network, the Affect-related words “panic”, “positive”,
and “isolat*” appear; in the second, the words “care”, and “fail*” also appear; and in the
third, “protests” appears. While such words are normally associated with affective processes,
we argue that some of these are more readily understood in terms of their association with
Covid-19-specific topics that are less indicative of an affective experience in this context than
they might be more generally. For example, “positive” is used very frequently in the context of
the pandemic in relation to individuals “testing positive” for the virus. In Table 2, we address
five of these words, providing what we believe are the most plausible explanations for their
association with conversation surrounding mortality during the Covid-19 pandemic.
Altogether, this initial examination indicates that words associated with a subjective emotional/affective experience and words related to death may be well-separated in this Twitter
data, which is consistent with the notion of psychophysical numbing as an explanation for
the trends and correlations observed in Figures 1 and 2. For completeness, we include the
equivalent co-occurrence graphs for the Spanish-language tweets in Appendix C.2, about which
similar statements can be made.
Our discussion has so far been qualitative given that the aforementioned network snapshots
(i) vary considerably in size, (ii) represent the aggregate conversation of the tweets across countries in our dataset, and (iii) involve crude aggregation over large time periods. In the next
section, we address these issues by investigating the change in a number of network measures
over time and discuss the extent to which they support our hypothesis of psychophysical numbing.

12

(a) March 11th to April 9th, 2020.

(b) April 10th to May 23rd, 2020.

(c) May 24th to June 13th, 2020.

Figure 3: Snapshots of the word co-occurrences associated with Death (green labels) and Affect
(red labels) for English-language tweets aggregated across all analyzed countries in three different time windows (see sub-captions). The nodes are coloured according to their community
label as obtained by maximising modularity with the Louvain algorithm [44]. We filtered edges
with weight below 20 co-occurrences for visualisation purposes.

13

3.3.2

Quantitative analysis of the Death-Affect partition

To further probe this hypothesis, we seek network measures that describe the strength of
association between the concept of death and affective processes. Since the primary tenet
of psychophysical numbing is that “the more who die, the less we care”, our investigation
is focused on the degree to which conversation around Covid-19 mortality evokes the use of
affective language, which is our proxy for “degree of caring”. In particular, we are interested
in whether the emotional framing of such conversation changes as the daily death rates change
in each country, where a less emotional conversation at higher daily death rates would support
the hypothesis of psychic numbing.
For this purpose, we investigate the dynamics of the following network measures over a
sequence of comparable snapshots for each country:
1. the weighted modularity for the partition PLIWC induced by assigning nodes to their
respective LIWC categories, i.e. Death or Affect. We define the weighted modularity
following Newman [45] as


ki (t)kj (t)
1 X
Aij (t) −
δ(ci , cj ),
(6)
QLIWC (t) =
2m(t) ij
2m(t)
P
where Aij (t) is the weighted adjacency matrix of a network at snapshot t, ki (t) = j Aij (t)
P
is the strength of node/word i, m(t) = 12 ij Aij (t) is the total strength of the network,
ci ∈ {Death, Affect} represents the community assigned of node i under partition PLIWC ,
and δ(·, ·) is the Dirac delta function.
2. the fraction of the total strength of node “death*” (“muert*”) that can be
attributed to its connections with other nodes in the Death category:
fDeath (t) =

1

X

kdeath∗ (t)

j

Adeath∗ ,j (t) δ(cdeath∗ , cj ).

(7)

The range of fDeath is bounded between 0 and 1, being 0 when all of the neighbours of
node “death*” (“muert*”) are in the Affect category and 1 when all of its neighbours are
in the Death category.
We henceforth omit the explicit time-dependence of fDeath and QLIWC to simplify notation.
The first measure tracks the quality of separation of the Death and Affect categories in these semantic networks. A larger QLIWC indicates a better separation between Death and Affect in the
empirical word co-occurrences. This is relevant to our investigation of psychophysical numbing
in the following sense: if the numbing effect is genuine, we should expect that QLIWC is larger
at larger values of the daily number of deaths and lower at lower values of the daily number of
deaths. This would indicate that conversation around Covid-19-related deaths evokes affective
responses less strongly for larger death rates. If a weakening association between the concept
of death and affective processes is an accurate measure of growing apathy and indifference –
of the “collapse of compassion” [46] – then observing a positive correlation between QLIWC
and the daily national number of deaths would provide evidence supporting our hypothesis of
psychophysical numbing.
The second is a local measure of the strength of association between the concept of Covid-19
deaths – represented with the word “death*” (“muert*”) in a tweet – and the affective processes
within those tweets. A high fDeath value suggests a weak evocation of affective responses during
conversation around Covid-19-related deaths.
14

To perform this analysis, we compute a sequence (Gt )t of higher-frequency snapshots than
those in Figures 3a to 3c, where t = 1, . . . , T labels each of the T snapshots for a given country.
Each snapshot represents, on average, the tweets contained in 3 consecutive days and, for
each country, each snapshot has roughly the same number of tweets (see Appendix C.1 for
details on the construction of these networks). With this construction, each network contains
approximately the same number of nodes, edges, and network total strength, enabling a fair
comparison of the network measures, Eqs. 6 and 7, over time.
In Figure 4, we plot the z-scores of these network measures and of the log of the daily
number of deaths log s(t) for each country, and report the Pearson correlation coefficients ρQ
and ρf of QLIWC and fDeath with log s(t), respectively, in parenthesis above each plot. In
general, we observe similar dynamics for both QLIWC and fDeath . This is sensible, since both
are measures of the relative strength of association within the two communities induced by the
Death and Affect word sets. Furthermore, we observe a number of instances – most notably,
Canada, Colombia, Mexico, the United Kingdom, and the United States – in which there is a
relatively strong correlation between these network measures and log s(t). These correlations
are, however, weaker in other countries to varying degrees.
To verify that the observed ρQ and ρf can be attributed to the empirical word co-occurrences,
we compute the same correlations for corresponding sequences of null network models. For our
null model, we take the weighted version of the configuration model described in [47]. Here, a
realisation Gnull
j,t of the null model at random seed j involves assigning node i Di stubs, where
Di ∼ p(d)

(8)

and p(d) is the empirical degree distribution. The kth stub for node i is then assigned a weight
Wik ∼ p(w|Di = d),

(9)

where p(w|Di = d) is the empirical distribution of weights W for nodes with degree w. Stubs
with the same weight are then joined withuniformprobability.


of null model ensembles for each country
As a baseline, we compute a sequence Gnull
j,t j
t
at each snapshot t, where j = 1, . . . , J labels each of the J realisations of the null model. Here,
we take J = 100 realisations per snapshot. We then compute the average network measure
null
over each ensemble for both QLIWC and fDeath , here denoted Qnull
LIWC and fDeath respectively.
null
null
Similarly, we write the correlation coefficients as ρQ and ρf . We report these coefficients,
along with the correlation coefficients for the empirical networks, in Figure 5.
We find that, in most cases, the correlation coefficients are higher for the empirical word
co-ocurrences than for the null model counterparts. In particular, each of Australia, Canada,
Colombia, South Africa, the United Kingdom, and the United States have ρQ  ρnull
Q . This
difference is also present for Nigeria, although it is smaller in this instance. For the remaining
countries, however, the differences are either negligible or in the opposite direction. Overall,
nonetheless, we see that the average across countries of ρnull
Q is low, whereas the average across
countries of ρQ is almost three times larger, and that ρQ > ρnull
Q for nine cases out of twelve.
null
A similar pattern is observed for ρf and ρf . In some instances – namely Australia, Colombia, South Africa, the United Kingdom, and the United States – we observe an increase > 0.2
in the correlation coefficients of the original sequence of snapshots relative to the corresponding
sequences of null snapshots. This indicates that these increases in ρf can be attributed to the
empirical word co-occurrences. The difference is smaller but nonetheless in the correct direction
for Chile, Mexico, and Nigeria. For the remaining countries, the difference is negligible.
3.3.3

Discussion and summary

Overall, this analysis provides evidence in favour of our hypothesis of psychophysical numbing,
although this evidence is not definitive. We have seen that, for most countries, the separation
15

Figure 4: Panel plot time series for the network measures QLIWC and fDeath (see Eqs. (6) and
(7) respectively).

16

Figure 5: Correlation coefficients between the daily national death counts and the network
measures QLIWC and fDeath (see Eqs. (6) and (7) respectively).
between words associated with Death and Affect in our approximate semantic networks – as
measured by QLIWC and fDeath – becomes more pronounced as the national daily deaths rise,
and that this relationship is generally weaker in the null model realisations.
There are nonetheless some exceptions to this statement. In particular, we find for Chile
and Mexico that the difference between ρ and ρnull is marginal, but that both versions of
the correlation coefficients are high. We also report low correlations between these network
measures and the time series of daily deaths for Argentina, India, and Spain. For the case of
Spain, however, there are two exogenous death-related events contributing to this anomalous
behaviour and low correlation values, see Appendix B for details. For the case of India, there
is evidence suggesting that Twitter users posting from India have a strong preference for using
Hindi in the expression of negative sentiment and emotion, but English in the expression of
positive emotion [48]. Our use of an English-language dictionary for evaluating the emotional
content of such tweets may therefore bias our results, and a more thorough analysis including
tweets and dictionaries in both Hindi and English (or in “Hinglish”, the blending of the two
[49]) should be performed in future. This is a specific case of a more general problem regarding
the use of a single dictionary to analyse texts from different world regions, which typically differ
in dialect.
For the remaining countries in our dataset, however, the empirical co-occurrences yield
stronger correlations between the network measures and the national daily deaths than in the
case of the baseline models, providing support for our psychophysical numbing hypothesis.
Our observations thus indicate that psychophysical numbing may be a genuine effect for many
Twitter users, but that other factors are possibly contributing to our results. Some of these
factors are methodological issues with this work. First, we saw in Figures 3a to 3c that LIWC
is unable to account for context, and that there are a number of words that are classically
associated with affective processes that are more appropriately associated with concepts surrounding mortality in the context of the pandemic. Second, in analysing word co-occurrences,
we only retain tweets that contain at least two distinct words in the set Death ∪ Affect by
construction. We have evaluated separately the proportion of tweets in each snapshot that
contribute to our word co-occurrence networks, and have seen that this usually corresponds to
between 10-20% of tweets for each snapshot, with between 20-30% of tweets involving the use of
only one word in Death ∪ Affect. As such, this potentially leads to a systematic overestimation

17

of the relative strength of association between words in Death ∪ Affect. Finally, as with most
studies of organic social media data, it is hard to control for exogenous factors that form part
of the Covid-19 conversation (e.g. Black Lives Matter protests, death-related news). It is thus
important to treat such evidence as complementary to classical laboratory-based, controlled
psychological experiments.

3.4

Modeling attention to Covid-19 casualties

In the previous section, we demonstrated our finding that as the pandemic intensifies, the proportion of words that appear in the set of Tweets posted in each country that indicate emotion
diminishes over time. This indicates that the actual emotional response to the pandemic diminishes as the intensity of the pandemic increases, implying a psychophysical numbing effect.
We supported this explanation by showing that the word co-occurrence networks induced by
our set of tweets host a community structure that separates words in the Death and Affect
dictionaries, suggesting that people do not talk about Covid-19 deaths in a highly emotional
tone. We built on this analysis by tracking a number of measures of this supposed separation in higher-frequency sequences of snapshots for each country, observing that these network
measures behaved consistently with our hypothesis of psychophysical numbing for a number of
countries.
The following sections model the relationship between the progression of the Covid-19 pandemic and the Twitter users’ perception using grounded theories of psychophysical numbing.
Until this point, we have used the emotional framing of the conversation around Covid-19
mortality as an indication of the degree of concern or indifference towards these casualties.
However, one could argue that attention itself is equally indicative of the degree of concern
experienced by individuals regarding such casualties. Indeed, both are recognised as key components to risk perception and the perception of threats [7]. For this reason, we investigate the
relationship between the typical perceptual response of individuals to a stimulus, in this case
the daily number of reported deaths nationally, and seek to describe this relationship using
established psychophysical laws, as in previous lab-based psychological experiments e.g. [50].
3.4.1

The Weber-Fechner law

Our analysis suggests that the public’s perception of the progression of the pandemic is logarithmic or, at least, sublinear. From Figure 2, we observe that the correlation magnitudes
between NLSs and epidemiological data are generally larger in absolute value whenever the
latter are taken in logarithmic scale. To exemplify this observation, we show in Figure 6 the
z-scores8 of the Death NLSs and of the logarithm of the daily number of deaths and cases
within each country.
The general correspondence between all three normalised features in each country is striking9
We propose that this can be explained in terms of the Weber-Fechner law [4], which is a
quantitative statement with its origins in psychology and psychophysics regarding humans’
perceived magnitude p of a stimulus with physical magnitude s. It states that a human’s
perception of the magnitude of a stimulus varies as the logarithm of the physical magnitude
s of the stimulus, meaning we are more sensitive to ratios when comparing different physical
magnitudes than we are to absolute differences. In the continuum limit, Eq. (1) gives the
8

Recall that the z-score of a sequence of observations Y = (y1 , · · · , yT ) is given by Z = (Y − µY )/σY , where
µY and σY are the mean and standard deviation of Y, respectively.
9
We note that the correspondence is weaker for Australia, Nigeria, and South Africa due to the relatively
low number of cases in these countries (see Fig. 11 in the Appendix for reference). The correspondence is also
weaker in Spain because it contains two exogenous peaks not related to psychophysical numbing. See Appendix
B for a discussion of these peaks for Spain and other countries, which we remove from the time series.

18

Figure 6: Panel time series for pDeath
(t) (blue), the logarithm of the daily deaths (orange),
i
and the logarithm of the daily cases (green). Each panel presents a different country, with
the country name provided in the subplot title. The correlation between pDeath
(t) and the
i
national daily death rate is given in parentheses for each country. Data is smoothed with a
3-day moving average and standardized with their z-score to make them visually comparable.
Vertical lines represent peaks in the death discourse caused by exogenous events not related
to psychophysical numbing (see Appendix B for details) which we remove from the time series.

19

Weber-Fechner law
Country

k

s0

95% CI
(k)

Argentina
Australia
Canada
Chile
Colombia
India
Mexico
Nigeria
South Africa
Spain
United Kingdom
United States

1.044
1.042
0.596
0.575
0.604
0.332
0.846
0.457
0.282
-0.016
0.752
0.788

0.0080
0.1047
0.4477
0.0001
0.0011
0.0061
0.0300
0.0003
0.0001
inf
5.241
4.2478

t
(k)

0.758 – 1.329 7.29
0.508 – 1.576 3.94
0.508 – 0.683 13.53
0.412 – 0.737 7.05
0.436 – 0.772 7.18
0.264 – 0.4
9.69
0.742 – 0.95
16.2
0.168 – 0.747 3.16
0.127 – 0.436 3.64
-0.198 – 0.165 -0.18
0.61 – 0.894 10.54
0.672 – 0.905 13.43

P > |t|
(k)

R2

NRMSE

n

0.0
0.0003
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0025
0.0005
0.8593
0.0
0.0

0.421
0.275
0.683
0.395
0.414
0.543
0.775
0.147
0.171
0
0.555
0.677

0.113
0.171
0.105
0.149
0.144
0.128
0.101
0.222
0.183
0.198
0.143
0.126

75
43
87
78
75
81
78
60
66
82
91
88

Table 3: Results from the fit of the Weber-Fechner law to the observed relationship between
the Death NLS and the logarithm of the daily number of deaths in each country (see Figure 6).
Overall, this model best describes the relationship between the daily number of deaths local to
each country and the Death NLS.
following functional form for the Weber-Fechner law:
p(t) = k log

s(t)
+ R(t),
s0

(10)

where k and s0 are real-valued parameters and R(t) the residual. Parameter k determines
the sensitivity of perception to changes in the stimulus s, while s0 determines the minimum
threshold that the stimuli s must overcome in order to be perceived. The residual term R(t)
is a random variable representing noise not directly captured by the stimulus. For instance,
exogenous events can trigger abrupt peaks in the Death score. This is the case, for example,
with the murder of George Floyd in the United States, or the peak in Nigeria around April 17th
2020, triggered by a number of prominent African figures dying from Covid-19 around that day,
including the Nigerian President’s top aide (see Appendix B for details in these peaks).
(t), the
In order to test the Weber-Fechner law, we fit a linear regression model to pDeath
i
Death NLS time series in country i, and log si (t), the daily number of deaths in the same
country, and summarize the results of these fits in Table 3. We find that Eq. (10) accurately
models the data, with significant coefficients (p-value < 0.01) for all countries except Spain. The
sensitivity parameter k has the same order of magnitude for all significant countries. However,
the country with the lowest k is ∼ 3 times less sensitive than the highest, indicating that
Twitter users in different countries may react differently to the evolution of the pandemic. The
minimum stimuli threshold s0 , in the other hand, is always small: most countries, except for the
United States and the United Kingdom, need only one Covid-19 death in a given day in order
to be perceived. Conversely, the United States and United Kingdom need approximately 5 and
6 deaths to be perceived, which is small compared to the thousands of daily deaths registered
in these countries during the observation period.
3.4.2

Power-law perception

An alternative functional form for the relationship between human perception p of a stimulus
and the physical magnitude s of the stimulus is a power law relationship
p(t) = ν · s(t)β + R̃(t),
20

(11)

Power law
Country
Argentina
Australia
Canada
Chile
Colombia
India
Mexico
Nigeria
South Africa
Spain
United Kingdom
United States

β

ν

95% CI
(β)

t
(β)

P > |t|
(β)

R2 *

NRMSE

n

0.164
0.363
0.288
0.085
0.112
0.126
0.141
0.104
0.087
0.014
0.356
0.309

2.21
0.99
0.37
2.47
1.81
0.77
1.52
1.56
1.11
2.14
0.16
0.21

0.121 – 0.208
0.181 – 0.546
0.252 – 0.323
0.06 – 0.109
0.083 – 0.142
0.101 – 0.15
0.126 – 0.157
0.037 – 0.172
0.037 – 0.136
-0.03 – 0.059
0.302 – 0.409
0.279 – 0.339

7.59
4.02
16.29
6.97
7.57
10.33
18.04
3.09
3.52
0.64
13.21
20.54

0.0
0.0002
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0031
0.0008
0.5241
0.0
0.0

0.411
0.259
0.678
0.382
0.425
0.558
0.78
0.143
0.16
-0.042
0.514
0.608

0.114
0.173
0.106
0.151
0.143
0.126
0.1
0.223
0.184
0.202
0.149
0.139

75
43
87
78
75
81
78
60
66
82
91
88

Table 4: The results from the fit of a power law to the relationship between the Death NLS and
the national daily death count. This is the best model in some cases, though is outperformed
by the Weber-Fechner law most times. *While we fit this model assuming a log-log relationship
between p and s, we compute R2 with linear p to make it comparable to the model implied
by the Weber-Fechner law (see Eq. (14) in Appendix A for details). This may cause negative
values of R2 as is the case for Spain.
where ν and β are parameters determining the perception from a stimulus of unit magnitude
and the growth rate of the perception as a function of the stimulus magnitude, and R̃(t) is a
residual term. This form has been shown to outperform the Weber-Fechner law in characterising
human perception in a number of empirical studies [5]. We also therefore report the results of
(t) and national daily death
this model fit to the relationship between the Death NLS pDeath
i
counts si (t) for each country i, reporting our results in Table 4.
In all cases, we observe sublinear exponents β for the perception of the daily deaths data,
with significant exponents (p-value < 0.01) ranging between 0.085 and 0.36. These exponents
are of the same order of magnitude as the β of 0.32 reported in [6], where in several laboratory experiments they measure psychophysical numbing in participants’ perception of death
statistics. As discussed previously, the data for Spain is unusual for a number of reasons, thus
the model does not accurately describe the data in this instance. These results suggest that
Twitter users in certain countries are more sensitive to change in the number of deaths than
others.
3.4.3

Model comparison

Both the Weber-Fechner law and power-law relationships between the Death NLS and the daily
number of reported deaths accurately model the data. Each captures the phenomenon in which
“the first few fatalities in an ongoing event elicit more concern than those occurring later on”
[51]. By way of comparison, we present in Table 5 the normalised root mean squared errors
(NRMSE), defined as
q P
n
1
2
t e(t)
n
,
(12)
NRMSE =
pmax − pmin
for these models, in addition to a linear model between pDeath
(t) and si (t) as a baseline “null”
i
model. Here, e(t) = p(t) − p̂(t) is the model residual, and n is the sample size. The models
21

NRMSE
Country
Argentina
Australia
Canada
Chile
Colombia
India
Mexico
Nigeria
South Africa
Spain
United Kingdom
United States
Mean
Proportion of best fits
Proportion of second-best fits

Power law

Weber-Fechner law

Linear relationship

0.114
0.173
0.106
0.151
0.143
0.126
0.1
0.223
0.184
0.202
0.149
0.139
0.151
16.7 %
66.7 %

0.113
0.171
0.105
0.149
0.144
0.128
0.101
0.222
0.183
0.198
0.143
0.126
0.149
58.3 %
33.3 %

0.116
0.175
0.117
0.17
0.145
0.125
0.133
0.218
0.188
0.193
0.166
0.179
0.16
25 %
0%

Table 5: Comparison of the normalised root mean squared error (NRMSE) (see Eq. (12))
between the power law model of Eq. (11), the Weber-Fechner model of Eq. (10), and a linear
relationship between variables, which we use as a benchmark model. Lower values indicate
better-fitting models. Note that, overall, the Weber-Fechner law outperforms the other models.
For further details, see Figs. 8 and 9 in Appendix A.
are directly comparable in this sense, since each involves only two parameters. Bhatia [43]
performed a similar model comparison to test psychophysical laws for subjective probability
judgements of real-world events, in that case finding that the linear relationship was the best. In
our case, however, a linear relationship between s and p is significantly worse than the present
concave models of perception (see Appendix A for the results of the linear model), reinforcing
our hypothesis of psychophysical numbing.
While the Weber-Fechner law is better than the power law model overall, the difference
in their goodness of fit – as measured by the NRMSE – is marginal. Both are reasonable
descriptions of the observed relationship, and similar conclusions can be drawn from both.
In particular, the parameters k and β from the Weber-Fechner law and power law, respectively, are analogous in their interpretation as the measure of the sensitivity of the nation’s
Twitter users to changes in the national Covid-19 daily death rate. To illustrate this, we rank
the countries in our dataset in order of sensitivity to changes in the local death rate, as measured separately by these two parameters, and plot the correlation between the countries’ ranks
in Figure 7. Here, low rank indicates high sensitivity to changes in the number of daily deaths
nationally. The correlation between the two methods of ranking – according to k, the WeberFechner law slope parameters, and according to β, the power law model exponents – is high,
with correlation coefficient 0.77. This shows that the sensitivity of each country is relatively
robust between models. By both measures, therefore, Twitter users tweeting in English and
Spanish from Australia and Argentina, respectively, appear to be the most sensitive to changes
in the national daily death rate, while Twitter users posting in English from South Africa,
India, and Nigeria and in Spanish from Spain and Chile appear to be the least sensitive to
these changes.

22

Figure 7: Comparison of the rank of each country as determined by their k and β parameters in
the Weber-Fechner and power-law fits, respectively, which determine the sensitivity of Twitter
users tweeting from each country to changes in the number of daily reported deaths. Low
rank indicates high sensitivity relative to the remaining countries. The correlation between
countries’ ranks from both measures is high at 0.77.

4

Discussion and conclusions

We explored the country-by-country relationship between the linguistic features present in a
large set of tweets posted in relation to the Covid-19 pandemic, and the progression/intensity
of the pandemic as measured by the daily number of cases and deaths in each country we
consider. By considering the change, relative to a baseline, in the percentage of words present
in each tweet that are associated with a number of psychologically meaningful categories –
here called linguistic scores – we observed significant trends that we believe are indicative of a
psychophysical numbing effect [7].
We found that the national linguistic scores (NLSs, see Eq. (4)) associated with emotion
and affect decrease as the pandemic intensifies. This is in spite of a greater attentional focus on
death and mortality and a simultaneous increase in use of words indicating analytic reasoning.
We showed, by constructing word co-occurrence networks on different time periods of the
pandemic, that words related to death co-occur more frequently with other words related to
death than they do with words indicating affect and emotion. We constructed network measures
of this separation between the concepts of death and emotion – namely the weighted modularity
of the partition induced by the Death and the Affect LIWC dictionaries, and the fraction of
strength of the “death*” (muert*) node attributable to connections with other nodes in the
Death category – and showed that this separation became more pronounced at larger daily
death rates for a number of countries. This is consistent with the notion of psychophysical
numbing, which we believe may explain these observations.
We also showed that the psychophysical laws of Weber-Fechner and of power law perception
in humans accurately model the relationship between the frequency of words related to death
23

and the actual daily number of Covid-19 deaths in each country. We estimated sub-linear
exponents in the power law perception function that are of similar values to values previously
estimated from psychological experiments [6]. These exponents, together with parameter k of
the Weber-Fechner law (see Eq. (10)), tell us how sensitive the Twitter users in each country
are to their national Covid-19 daily deaths, and were seen to vary by country, indicating intercountry differences in risk perception and sensitivity to death rates. Such sensitivities were
consistent across models (see Fig. 7) suggesting that these measures of a nation’s Twitter
users’ sensitivities to changes in the national death rate are robust features of the data.
Overall, our results indicate that two key factors contributing to risk perception – attention
and emotion [7] – may be evolving in line with that predicted by psychophysical numbing
amongst members of the public. In general, both measures of the degree of concern towards
Covid-19-related casualties expressed by the Twitter users in our dataset appear to decrease
as the number of Covid-19-related casualties increases. This potentially reflects a collapse of
compassion and a concavity in the value assigned to human lives as the number of potential
casualties grows.
Our findings illustrate the signaling power of Twitter, and demonstrate its potential use
as a tool for monitoring public perception of risk during large-scale crisis scenarios. With the
modelling and visualisation approaches we employ in this paper, policy-makers and public officials could track in near-to-real-time the public’s attitudes towards threats to public well-being
and the prevalence of factors important to public perception of risk, including degree of outrage
and relative attentional focus on the threat. Our findings also imply a functional form for agent
perception of the system state in models of opinion dynamics. This will be instrumental for
developing coupled opinion dynamics-epidemiological models, in which the bidirectional relationships between human perception, human behaviour, and epidemic progression are modelled
endogenously.
A natural extension to this work would involve nowcasting and/or forecasting of certain
economic indicators. It has also been limited in that we assumed that only the national death
rate is a significant predictor of perception. A more complete analysis should account for the
effect of other countries’ death statistics as a driver of local perception, or more broadly an
advancement of a process-level explanation of the cross-cultural differences we observe in the
sensitivity to death statistics. This analysis could also be enhanced by relating these measures
of risk perception to behavioural data, which – since “people’s behavior is mediated by their
perceptions of risk” [10] – may be useful for understanding the role of emotions in driving
behaviours that are conducive to public health during crises. Further, a deconstruction of the
aggregate indicators we have developed to the state and regional level may be necessary to
more accurately characterise the relationship between local crisis progression and human risk
perception.
It is important to acknowledge that additional factors may be at play and contributing to
our findings. In particular, our dataset is a large social media dataset in which non-human
accounts – for instance, bots, institutional accounts, and companies’ public relations accounts
– coexist with human accounts. Such public relations and institutional accounts can be subject to editorial constraints on the kind of language used, and therefore may not reflect any
true underlying subjective experience. The use of tweets from such non-human accounts may
nonetheless be appropriate. Indeed, it is widely accepted that news media play a significant role
in shaping public attention and opinion, e.g. via the Cultivation or Agenda-Setting theories of
consumer-media relations [52, 53]. With almost half of all UK adults consuming news through
social media in 2020 [54], for example, the inclusion of news and institutional accounts may act
as a proxy for public attention and opinion at large.
With regard to bots: previous large-scale studies of Twitter data have demonstrated the
influence bots can have on the exposure of human accounts to emotional content [55] and the
24

extent to which they can distort the discussion on certain topics [56]. More recently and in the
context of the current pandemic, bots have been shown to have a significant role in promoting
political conspiracy theories [57]. By ignoring retweets and using unique original tweets only,
we mitigate to some extent the potential effect of bots, which have previously been shown
to engage in retweeting behaviour significantly more frequently than they do the creation of
original content [56]. It is nonetheless likely that, even if the hypothesised psychophysical
numbing effect is genuine, our observations are partly attributable to the nature of content
generated by these non-human accounts.
Furthermore, we stress that the results presented in this paper may be indicative only of
the responses of Twitter users posting from each of these countries in each of these languages,
so extrapolating these results to the broader population will only be possible with a better
understanding of the biases present in, and representativeness of, the dataset at hand. While
the demography of Twitter users has been to some extent mapped for the United States (see
e.g. [58]) and the United Kingdom (see e.g. [59]), it is difficult to find similar studies for the
remaining countries in our dataset, and thus to interpret these country-level differences in terms
of potentially differing demographic representation on Twitter. We nonetheless advance this as
a factor that possibly contributes to our results.
We also reiterate that our analysis has been crude in that we make use of a single dictionary
for each language when extracting linguistic features from our data. This ignores important
differences in dialect and language use between different nationalities and cultures, and can
result in the systematic omission of certain linguistic features [48, 49] which may also contribute
to the observed differences between countries. Further important differences between countries
which may help to account for the observed results are differences in the importance of religion
in each of the considered countries. The set of countries under consideration here span the full
spectrum of importance assigned to religion [60], and attitudes towards death and the framing of
mortality may vary accordingly by country. Despite these difficulties inherent to the empirical
analysis of social media data, we nonetheless hope that our work inspires further investigations
into the use of natural language processing and cognitive network science to investigate the
prevalence of psychophysical numbing in naturalistic contexts.

5
5.1

Declaration
Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank Mirta Galesic, Rodrigo Leal Cervantes, Rita Maria del Rio
Chanona, François Lafond, and J. Doyne Farmer for helpful feedback, and to the Oxford
INET Complexity Economics group for stimulating discussions. The authors also thank the
anonymous reviewers whose suggestions significantly improved the quality of the final paper.

5.2

Funding

BK acknowledges funding from the Conacyt-SENER: Sustentabilidad Energética scholarship
and JD acknowledges funding from the EPSRC Industrially Focused Mathematical Modelling
Centre for Doctoral Training.

5.3

Competing interests

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

25

5.4

Availability of data and materials

The Twitter data used in the manuscript is collected and maintained by Banda et al. at the
Panacea Lab [26], and it is available at their website http://www.panacealab.org/covid19.
The data on Covid-19 confirmed cases and deaths were obtained from the “Coronavirus Pandemic (COVID-19)” page of the Our World in Data website [29], and the stable URL for this
data is https://covid.ourworldindata.org/data/owid-covid-data.csv.

5.5

Authors’ contributions

BK and JD both conceived the idea, carried out the analysis, and wrote, read, and approved
the final manuscript.

5.6

Abbreviations

• LIWC: Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count.
• WHO: World Health Organization.
• NLS: National linguistic score.

References
[1] T. Hale, S. Webster, A. Petherick, T. Phillips, and B. Kira, “COVID-19 Government
Response Tracker, Blavatnik School of Government,” 2020. Data use policy: Creative
Commons Attribution CC BY standard.
[2] W. J. Burns and P. Slovic, “Risk Perception and Behaviors: Anticipating and Responding
to Crises,” Risk Analysis, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 579–582, 2012.
[3] G. A. Gescheider, Psychophysics: the fundamentals. Mahwah, N.J. ;aLondon: Erlbaum,
3rd ed., 1997.
[4] G. T. Fechner, D. H. Howes, and E. G. Boring, Elements of psychophysics, vol. 1. Holt,
Rinehart and Winston New York, 1966.
[5] S. S. Stevens, Psychophysics. New York: Wiley, 1975.
[6] C. Summers, P. Slovic, D. Hine, and D. Zuliani, “‘Psychophysical Numbing’: An Empirical
Basis for Perceptions of Collective Violence,” Collective Violence: Harmful Behavior in
Groups and Governments, 1994.
[7] P. Slovic, “If I look at the mass I will never act”: Psychic numbing and genocide. Springer,
Dordrecht, 2010.
[8] D. Fetherstonhaugh, P. Slovic, S. Johnson, and J. Friedrich, “Insensitivity to the value of
human life: A study of psychophysical numbing,” J Risk Uncertain, vol. 14, p. 283–300,
1997.
[9] J. Friedrich, P. Barnes, K. Chapin, I. Dawson, V. Garst, and D. Kerr, “Psychophysical
numbing: When lives are valued less as the lives at risk increase,” J Consum Psychol,
vol. 8, p. 277–299, 1999.

26

[10] E. U. Weber, “Perception matters: Psychophysics for economists,” The psychology of
economic decisions, vol. 2, pp. 163–176, 2004.
[11] M. Stella, V. Restocchi, and S. De Deyne, “#lockdown: network-enhanced emotional
profiling at the times of COVID-19,” Big Data and Cognitive Computing, vol. 4, no. 2,
p. 14, 2020.
[12] J. Posner, J. A. Russell, and B. S. Peterson, “The circumplex model of affect:An integrative approach to affective neuroscience, cognitive development, and psychopathology,”
Development and Psychopathology, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 715–734, 2005.
[13] S. M. Mohammad and P. D. Turney, “Emotions evoked by common words and phrases:
Using mechanical turk to create an emotion lexicon,” Proceedings of the NAACL HLT
2010 workshop on computational approaches to analysis and generation of emotion in text,
pp. 26–34, 2010.
[14] A. Sri Manasa Venigalla, D. Vagavolu, and S. Chimalakonda, “Mood of India During
Covid-19 – An Interactive Web Portal Based on Emotion Analysis of Twitter Data,”
arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2005.02955, May 2020.
[15] L. Schild, C. Ling, J. Blackburn, G. Stringhini, Y. Zhang, and S. Zannettou, ““Go eat a bat,
Chang!”: An Early Look on the Emergence of Sinophobic Behavior on Web Communities
in the Face of COVID-19,” arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2004.04046, Apr. 2020.
[16] S. Dryhurst, C. R. Schneider, J. Kerr, A. L. J. Freeman, G. Recchia, A. Marthe van der
Bles, D. Spiegelhalter, and S. van der Linden, “Risk perceptions of COVID-19 around the
world,” Journal of Risk Research, 2020.
[17] W. B. de Bruin and D. Bennett, “Relationships Between Initial COVID-19 Risk Perceptions and Protective Health Behaviors: A National Survey,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 2020.
[18] J. M. Barrios and Y. V. Hochberg, “Risk Perception Through the Lens of Politics in the
Time of the COVID-19 Pandemic,” NBER Working Paper No. 27008, 2020.
[19] L. M. Aiello, D. Quercia, K. Zhou, M. Constantinides, S. Šćepanović, and S. Joglekar,
“How epidemic psychology works on social media: Evolution of responses to the covid-19
pandemic,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.13169, 2020.
[20] Z. S. Harris, “Distributional structure,” Word, vol. 10, no. 2-3, pp. 146–162, 1954.
[21] N. Feather, “The effect of differential failure on expectation of success, reported anxiety,
and response uncertainty,” Journal of Personality, 1963.
[22] J. S. Verinis, J. M. Brandsma, and C. N. Cofer, “Discrepancy from expectation in relation
to affect and motivation: Tests of McClelland’s hypothesis,” Journal of personality and
social psychology, vol. 9, no. 1, p. 47, 1968.
[23] S. Bhatia, B. Mellers, and L. Walasek, “Affective responses to uncertain real-world outcomes: Sentiment change on Twitter,” PloS one, vol. 14, no. 2, p. e0212489, 2019.
[24] S. Bhatia, “Predicting risk perception: New insights from data science,” Management
Science, vol. 65, no. 8, pp. 3800–3823, 2019.

27

[25] K. Jaidka, S. Giorgi, H. A. Schwartz, M. L. Kern, L. H. Ungar, and J. C. Eichstaedt,
“Estimating geographic subjective well-being from Twitter: A comparison of dictionary
and data-driven language methods,” PNAS, vol. 117, no. 19, pp. 10165–10171, 2020.
[26] J. M. Banda, R. Tekumalla, G. Wang, J. Yu, T. Liu, Y. Ding, and G. Chowell, “A largescale COVID-19 Twitter chatter dataset for open scientific research - an international
collaboration,” May 2020.
[27] A. Go, R. Bhayani, and L. Huang, “Twitter sentiment classification using distant supervision,” CS224N project report, Stanford, vol. 1, no. 12, p. 2009, 2009.
[28] OpenStreetMap contributors, “Planet dump retrieved from https://planet.osm.org .”
https://www.openstreetmap.org, 2017.
[29] E. O.-O. Max Roser, Hannah Ritchie and J. Hasell, “Coronavirus Pandemic (COVID-19),”
Our World in Data, 2020. https://ourworldindata.org/coronavirus.
[30] Y. R. Tausczik and J. W. Pennebaker, “The psychological meaning of words: LIWC and
computerized text analysis methods,” Journal of language and social psychology, vol. 29,
no. 1, pp. 24–54, 2010.
[31] J. W. Pennebaker, R. L. Boyd, K. Jordan, and K. Blackburn, “The Development and
Psychometric Properties of LIWC2015,” 2015.
[32] D. Yin, S. D. Bond, and H. Zhang, “Anxious or angry? Effects of discrete emotions on the
perceived helpfulness of online reviews,” MIS quarterly, vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 539–560, 2014.
[33] A. Tumasjan, T. O. Sprenger, P. G. Sandner, and I. M. Welpe, “Predicting elections with
twitter: What 140 characters reveal about political sentiment,” in Fourth international
AAAI conference on weblogs and social media, 2010.
[34] T. Jay and K. Janschowitz, “The pragmatics of swearing,” Journel of Politeness Research,
vol. 4, pp. 267–288, 2008.
[35] R. J. Lifton, “Beyond psychic numbing: a call to awareness,” American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, vol. 52, no. 4, 1982.
[36] P. M. Sandman, Responding to Community Outrage: Strategies for Effective Risk Communication. American Industrial Hygiene Association, 1993.
[37] J. J. Van Bavel, K. Baicker, P. S. Boggio, V. Capraro, A. Cichocka, M. Cikara, M. J.
Crockett, A. J. Crum, K. M. Douglas, J. N. Druckman, et al., “Using social and behavioural
science to support COVID-19 pandemic response,” Nature Human Behaviour, pp. 1–12,
2020.
[38] G. Loewenstein, E. Weber, C. Hsee, and E. Welch, “Risk as feelings,” Psychological Bulletin, vol. 127, pp. 267–286, 2001.
[39] C. S. Siew, D. U. Wulff, N. M. Beckage, and Y. N. Kenett, “Cognitive network science:
A review of research on cognition through the lens of network representations, processes,
and dynamics,” Complexity, vol. 2019, 2019.
[40] Y. N. Kenett, D. Anaki, and M. Faust, “Investigating the structure of semantic networks
in low and high creative persons,” Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, vol. 8, p. 407, 2014.

28

[41] M. D. Humphries and K. Gurney, “Network ‘Small-World-Ness’: A Quantitative Method
for Determining Canonical Network Equivalence,” PLOS ONE, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 1–10,
2008.
[42] M. N. Jones, J. Willits, S. Dennis, J. R. Busemeyer, Z. Wang, J. T. Townsend, and
A. Eidels, Models of Semantic Memory of a single chapter of a title in Oxford Handbooks
Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice). Models of Semantic Memory The Oxford Handbook of Computational and Mathematical Psychology.
No. September, 2020.
[43] S. Bhatia, “Vector Space Semantic Models Predict Subjective Probability Judgments for
Real-World Events,” in CogSci, 2016.
[44] V. D. Blondel, J.-L. Guillaume, R. Lambiotte, and E. Lefebvre, “Fast unfolding of communities in large networks,” Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment,
vol. 2008, p. P10008, oct 2008.
[45] M. E. J. Newman, “Analysis of weighted networks,” Phys. Rev. E, vol. 70, p. 056131, Nov
2004.
[46] C. D. Cameron and B. K. Payne, “Escaping Affect: How Motivated Emotion Regulation
Creates Insensitivity to Mass Suffering,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
vol. 100, no. 1, pp. 1–15, 2011.
[47] T. Britton, M. Deijfen, and F. Liljeros, “A Weighted Configuration Model and Inhomogeneous Epidemics,” Journal of Statistical Physics, vol. 145, no. 5, pp. 1368–1384, 2011.
[48] K. Rudra, S. Rijhwani, R. Begum, K. Bali, M. Choudhury, and N. Ganguly, “Understanding language preference for expression of opinion and sentiment: What do hindi-english
speakers do on twitter?,” in Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pp. 1131–1141, 2016.
[49] P. Mathur, R. Sawhney, M. Ayyar, and R. Shah, “Did you offend me? Classification of
Offensive Tweets in Hinglish Language,” pp. 138–148, 2019.
[50] S. S. Stevens, “On the psychophysical law,” Psychological Review, vol. 64, no. 3, pp. 153–
181, 1957.
[51] C. Olivola, “The Cognitive Psychology of Sensitivity to Human Fatalities: Implications
for Life-Saving Policies,” Policy Insights from the Behavioral and Brain Sciences, vol. 2,
no. 1, p. 141–146, 2015.
[52] J. Bryant and D. Miron, “Theory and Research in Mass Communication,” Journal of
Communication, vol. 54, pp. 662–704, 01 2006.
[53] M. E. McCOMBS and D. L. SHAW, “THE AGENDA-SETTING FUNCTION OF MASS
MEDIA*,” Public Opinion Quarterly, vol. 36, pp. 176–187, 01 1972.
[54] “News consumption in the uk: 2020 report,” Ofcom, Aug. 2020. https://www.ofcom.org.
uk/research-and-data/tv-radio-and-on-demand/news-media/news-consumption.
[55] M. Stella, E. Ferrara, and M. De Domenico, “Bots increase exposure to negative and
inflammatory content in online social systems,” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, vol. 115, no. 49, pp. 12435–12440, 2018.

29

[56] A. Bessi and E. Ferrara, “Social bots distort the 2016 u.s. presidential election online
discussion,” First Monday, vol. 21, Nov. 2016. https://firstmonday.org/ojs/index.
php/fm/article/view/7090.
[57] E. Ferrara, “What types of covid-19 conspiracies are populated by twitter bots?,” First
Monday, vol. 25, May 2020.
[58] S. Greenwood, A. Perrin, and M. Duggan, “Social Media Update 2016,” Pew Research
Center, no. November, 2016.
[59] L. Sloan, “Who Tweets in the United Kingdom? Profiling the Twitter Population Using
the British Social Attitudes Survey 2015,” Social Media and Society, vol. 3, no. 1, 2017.
[60] C. Hackett, S. Kramer, and A. Schiller, “The Age Gap in Religion Around the World,”
Pew Research Center, no. June, 2018.
[61] S. Collinson, “Trump responds to protests with a strongman act,” CNN
Politics,
Jun.
2020.
https://edition.cnn.com/2020/06/02/politics/
donald-trump-george-floyd-protest-military/index.html.
[62] “Protests across the globe after george floyd’s death,” CNN World, Jun. 2020. https:
//edition.cnn.com/2020/06/06/world/gallery/intl-george-floyd-protests/
index.html.

[63] “Ministerio de salud decreta cuarentena total para la ciudad de santiago y seis
comunas aledañas,” Ministerio de Salud, May 2020.
https://www.minsal.cl/
ministerio-de-salud-decreta-cuarentena-total-para-la-ciudad-de-santiago-y-seis-comu
[64] “Argentina entra en cuarentena obligatoria hasta el 31 de marzo,”
El
Paı́s,
Mar.
2020.
https://elpais.com/sociedad/2020-03-20/
argentina-entra-en-cuarentena-obligatoria-hasta-el-31-de-marzo.html.
[65] “’i can’t breathe’: Man dies after pleading with officer attempting to detain him
in minneapolis,” NBC News, May 2020. https://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/
man-dies-after-pleading-i-can-t-breathe-during-arrest-n1214586.
[66] “Matanza de 23 presos y 83 heridos sacude a una colombia temerosa del covid19,” Agencia EFE, Mar. 2020.
https://www.efe.com/efe/america/sociedad/
matanza-de-23-presos-y-83-heridos-sacude-a-una-colombia-temerosa-del-covid-19/
20000013-4201992.
[67] “Africa’s
Top
Virus
Deaths.”
https://www.africanews.com/2020/06/25/
africa-s-prominent-coronavirus-deaths/. Accessed: 2020-07-07.
[68] “Sanidad elimina casi 2.000 fallecidos del balance total tras una revisión
de los casos,” El Diario, May 2020.
https://www.eldiario.es/sociedad/
espana-registra-fallecidos-ultimas-diagnostica_1_5972351.html.
[69] “España registra su primer dı́a sin muertes por covid-19,”
El Financiero,
Jun.
2020.
https://www.elfinanciero.com.mx/mundo/
espana-registra-su-primer-dia-sin-muertes-por-covid-19.
[70] “Coronavirus: ’sombre day’ as uk deaths hit 10,000,” BBC, Apr. 2020. https://www.bbc.
com/news/uk-52264145.

30

Appendices
A

Further model comparison

In this section, we present further results of our models to give a more complete overview of
their quality. Besides the Weber-Fechner law and power law models (see Eqs. (10) and (11)),
we use the following linear relationship between s and p as our benchmark model
p(t) = a · s(t) + b,

(13)

where a and b are parameters. We summarize our results for the linear model in Table 6.
For all models, we compute the R2 values
Pn
2
2
t=1 e(t)
R =1−
,
(14)
(n − 1)σp2
P
where e(t) = p(t) − p̂(t) is the model residual, σp2 = nt=1 (p(t) − µp )2 /(n − 1) is the variance of
p(t), and n is the sample size. The R2 values for all models are summarized in Table 7. (Note
that as the power law model implies a log-normal residual, the R2 values can be negative.) From
this table we see that, once again, the Weber-Fechner law is generally a better fit to the data
across all countries, but that the power law and Weber-Fechner models are often comparable
and significantly better than the linear model.
We also show in Figures 8 and 9 scatterplots of the Death NLSs against the logarithm of the
daily number of deaths in each country, with the y-axis in linear- and log-scales, respectively.
Red lines indicate the line of best fit, with the slope equal to k and β in Eqs. 10 and 11,
respectively.

a

b

Country
Argentina
Australia
Canada
Chile
Colombia
India
Mexico
Nigeria
South Africa
Spain
United Kingdom
United States

0.057 2.603
0.192 0.912
0.005 0.759
0.005 2.969
0.016 2.147
0.002 1.074
0.003 2.428
0.047 1.589
0.006 1.295
0
2.248
0.001 0.877
0
1.235

95% CI
(a)

t
(a)

0.04 – 0.074 6.79
0.087 – 0.298 3.67
0.005 – 0.006 11.46
0.003 – 0.007 4.58
0.011 – 0.02 7.11
0.002 – 0.003 10.14
0.002 – 0.003 10.97
0.021 – 0.073 3.61
0.002 – 0.01 2.95
-0.0 – 0.001
1.98
0.001 – 0.001 7.69
0.0 – 0.001
6.84

P > |t|
(a)

R2

NRMSE

n

0.0
0.0007
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0006
0.0045
0.0506
0.0
0.0

0.387
0.247
0.607
0.216
0.409
0.566
0.613
0.184
0.119
0.047
0.399
0.352

0.116
0.175
0.117
0.17
0.145
0.125
0.133
0.218
0.188
0.193
0.166
0.179

75
43
87
78
75
81
78
60
66
82
91
88

Table 6: Results for the linear model defined in Eq. (13).

31

R2
Country
Argentina
Australia
Canada
Chile
Colombia
India
Mexico
Nigeria
South Africa
Spain
United Kingdom
United States
Mean
Proportion of best fits
Proportion of second-best fits

Power law

Weber-Fechner law

Linear relationship

0.411
0.259
0.678
0.382
0.425
0.558
0.78
0.143
0.16
-0.042
0.514
0.608
0.36
41.7 %
66.7 %

0.421
0.275
0.683
0.395
0.319
0.397
0.775
0.004
0.171
0
0.555
0.556
0.379
50 %
33.3 %

0.387
0.247
0.607
0.216
0.28
0.477
0.613
0.007
0.119
0.047
0.399
0.24
0.303
8.33 %
0%

Table 7: Comparison of R2 between the power law model of Eq. (11), the Weber-Fechner model
of Eq. (10) and a linear relationship between variables, which we use as a benchmark model.
Higher values indicate better models.

Figure 8: Resulting scatter plot for the Weber-Fechner law model fit, where each panel shows
a different country with their corresponding NRMSE in parenthesis (the lower the better).
32

Figure 9: Resulting scatter plot for the power law model fit, where each panel shows a different
country with their corresponding NRMSE in parenthesis (the lower the better).

33

B
B.1

National Linguistic Scores
Exogenous peaks in the National Linguistic Scores

In this section, we address significant deviations in the National Linguistic Scores from our
proposal of psychophysical numbing as an explanation for their trends over the observation
period, and suggest possible explanations for their occurrence, see Table 8. We stress that the
following Table might be prone to error although we double checked every peak.

C
C.1

Word co-occurrence analysis
Further technical details on co-occurrence network construction

In constructing the word co-occurrence networks presented in Section 3.2.1, we preform basic
text preprocessing, including taking the lower-case form of all letters, removing URLs, removing
punctuation, and removing the following small set of stopwords from the vocabulary:
to, today, too, has, have, like.
We retain hashtags, since LIWC also recognises hashtags and because hashtags are an essential
aspect to communications on Twitter. It is also necessary to account for the fact that a number
of “words” appearing in the LIWC dictionary are in fact regular expressions to which many
complete words in the Twitter dataset map. For example, the “word” “isolat*” appears in
the English LIWC dictionary, to which each of the following words would map: “isolate”,
“isolated”, “isolating”. Thus, construction of the word co-occurrence networks G0i involves a
two-step procedure: first, constructing the raw word co-occurrence networks Gi , in which the
nodes are words exactly as they appear in the Twitter dataset; and then reducing this to a
quotient graph G0i by contracting nodes in Gi that are matched by the same regular expression
in the LIWC dictionary. More formally: the LIWC dictionary implies an equivalence relation
∼ on the vocabulary V implied by the Twitter dataset, such that v ∼ u for words v, u ∈ V if
both v and u are matched by the same regular expression in the LIWC dictionary. The weights
of edges between nodes v 0 ⊂ V and u0 ⊂ V in G0i are then taken to be
X
wGi (u, v),
(15)
wG0i (u0 , v 0 ) =
u∈u0 ,v∈v 0

where wG (x, y) is the weight of edge (x, y) in G. Note that wG (x, y) = wG (y, x) and wG (x, y) = 0
if (x, y) is not an edge in G.
To construct the higher-frequency sequences of snapshots, we impose a minimum document
frequency of 5 × 10−3 (2.5 × 10−3 for Spanish tweets) for each term in the vocabulary in order
to reduce the effect of noise. In Table 9, we summarise the approximate number Ntweets of
tweets per snapshot for each country. The number of tweets per snapshot for each country
was chosen in order that each country had approximately the same number of data points
separated by approximately 3 days, and such that edge effects did not yield a final snapshot
with a disproportionately low number of tweets. While this ultimately led to some snapshots
representing aggregation over longer periods than others, this yielded sequences of networks that
are comparable in terms of their total strength and order, enabling reasonably fair comparison
of the modularities of the partition induced by the Death and Affect LIWC categories.

34

Country

Date

Category

June 2, 2020

Anger

June 6-7, 2020

Anger

Chile

May 13-15, 2020

Anger

Argentina

March 20, 2020

Death

Australia

May 20-26, 2020

Death

Canada
Colombia

May 2, 2020
March 22, 2020

Death
Death

India
Nigeria

March 29, 2020
April 18, 2020

Death
Death

Spain

May 25, 2020

Death

Spain

June 1, 2020

Death

United Kingdom

April 10, 2020

Death

United States

May 25, 2020

Death

United States

Australia, Nigeria,
United Kingdom

Description
Donald Trump responding near the
White House to the protests against the
murder of George Floyd [61]
Worldwide protests against the murder
of George Floyd in the United States
[62]
Chilean Health Ministry announces total lockdown [63].
President Alberto Fernandez announces
total national lockdown [64].
New Covid-19 deaths after several days
without casualties. Moreover, the murder of George Floyd in the United
States took place on May 25 [65].
Unknown
Shootout in a prison triggered by prisoners demanding better hygiene conditions for Covid-19 results in 23 deaths.
[66]
Unknown
Many important African political figures die from Covid-19 this day [67].
Correction in Covid-19 data repositories show negative daily deaths [68].
First day in Spain without Covid-19
deaths [69].
The United Kingdom surpasses 10,000
Covid-19 deaths [70].
Murder of George Floyd [65]

Table 8: A list of plausible explanations for anomalous peaks observed in Figure 1. Most of
these peaks arise from the murder of George Floyd and the consequent protests. We focused
mainly on the Death and emotionally-charged categories as these are the ones that are most
related to the psychophysical numbing effect we describe in the main text.

Country
Ntweets
Country
Ntweets
Country
Ntweets

Argentina
Australia
Canada
4
4
3.5 × 10
2 × 10
5 × 104
Colombia
India
Mexico
4
4
1.5 × 10
5 × 10
4 × 104
South Africa
Spain
United Kingdom
1 × 104
5 × 104
1 × 105

Chile
1 × 104
Nigeria
2 × 104
United States
1 × 105

Table 9: The number of tweets taken per snapshot for each country.

35

C.2

Word co-occurrence networks for Spanish-language tweets

For completeness, we provide here the word co-occurrence graphs for the Spanish language
tweets. We omit a discussion of the results, since similar conclusions can be drawn from these
as in the English counterparts.

(a) March 11th to April 9th, 2020.

(b) April 10th to May 23rd, 2020.

(c) May 24th to June 14th, 2020.

Figure 10: Snapshots of the word co-occurrences associated with death (“muerte”, green labels)
and affect (“afecto”, red labels) for Spanish-language tweets aggregated across all analyzed
countries in three different time windows (see sub-captions). The nodes are coloured based on
the community labels obtained by maximising modularity using the Louvain algorithm [44].
We filtered edges with weight below 20 co-occurrences for visualisation purposes.

36

D

Covid-19 epidemiological data

We include this section as a reference for the actual number of deaths in each country for the
period we analysed throughout the paper, which we present in Fig. 11.

Figure 11: Daily deaths related to Covid-19 for each of the countries in our analysis (see legend)
from March 11 to June 14, 2020.

37

