Cruickshank and Carley

RESEARCH

Characterizing Communities of Hashtag Usage on
Twitter During the 2020 COVID-19 Pandemic by
Multi-view Clustering
arXiv:2008.01139v1 [cs.SI] 3 Aug 2020

Iain J Cruickshank* and Kathleen M Carley
*

Correspondence:
icruicks@andrew.cmu.edu
CASOS, Carnegie Mellon
University, 5000 Forbes Ave,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Full list of author information is
available at the end of the article

Abstract
The COVID-19 pandemic has produced a flurry of online activity on social media
sites. As such, analysis of social media data during the COVID-19 pandemic can
produce unique insights into discussion topics and how those topics evolve over
the course of the pandemic. In this study, we propose analyzing discussion topics
on Twitter by clustering hashtags. In order to obtain high quality clusters of the
Twitter hashtags, we also propose a novel multi-view clustering technique which
incorporates multiple different data types that can be used to describe how users
interact with hashtags. The results of our multi-view clustering show that there
are distinct temporal and topical trends present within COVID-19 twitter
discussion. In particular, we find that some topical clusters of hashtags shift over
the course of the pandemic, while others are persistent throughout, and that
there are distinct temporal trends in hashtag usage. This study is the first to use
multi-view clustering to analyze hashtags and the first analysis of the greater
trends of discussion occurring online during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Keywords: Social Media; Clustering; Multi-view Data; COVID-19

Introduction
At the time of the writing of these words, the world is undergoing a pandemic.
This pandemic, which is caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus and often referred to
as the COVID-19 pandemic, has caused immense societal and economic disruption
across the world. Since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic many nations have
adopted a social-distancing strategy which has had the unintended consequence of
emphasizing and increasing the role of social media in linking people together [1],
[2]. Consequently, the study of social media data during the current COVID-19
pandemic can provide unique insights into online social behavior.
Thus far, much of the work with COVID-19 social media data has focused on the
prevalence and spread of COVID-19 misinformation. There has been less work on
understanding what are the important topics of discussion associated with the pandemic and how those discussion topics may change over the course of the pandemic.
One social media innovation which can be used to characterize and understand
topics of social media conversations are hashtags. Hashtags are a social media innovation which were designed to allow users to easily find and interact with certain
discussion topics. So, in this work, we propose clustering hashtags from COVID-19
social media data in order to understand the topics of discussion happening within
the greater COVID-19 social media discussion.

Cruickshank and Carley

In order to cluster hashtags from social media data, we propose the use of multiview clustering. Many naturally-occurring, social phenomena give rise to multiple
types and views of data. So, using a clustering method that can exploit information
from all of those views should result in a better clustering of the data. To date
and the best of the authors’ knowledge, most clustering of social media data is not
clustered by multi-view clustering. So, in this work, we propose the use of multiview clustering in order to better understand the discussion topics surrounding
COVID-19 on social media. In particular, we analyze topical clusters of twitter data
by multi-view clustering on hashtags, where we use the co-occurrence of hashtags,
tweet text, twitter users, and Uniform Resource Locators (URLs) that co-occur with
hashtags in a tweet as the views to cluster the hashtags. The main contributions of
this work are summarized as follows:
• The first use of a multi-view clustering technique and approach to understand
topical groups of hashtags.
• The first use of a multi-view clustering technique on a large, social-based
data set; multiple collections each consisting of upwards of 85,000 objects are
clustered in this study whereas most multi-view clustering techniques have
been used on data sets, social-based or otherwise, of at most one collection of
70,000 objects (i.e. full MNIST data set).
• Characterization of topical clusters of hashtags that give distinct insight into
what conversations surround the COVID-19 pandemic on twitter, such as coopting of the calamity to support different causes and a persistent coupling
of U.S. politics related hashtags with conspiracy theory related hashtags.
The article is organized as follows: In the next section we provide some background
on COVID-19 social media analyses and multi-view clustering. In the data section,
we provide an overview of the data used in this study and the steps taken to
process the data. In the methodology section we describe the methodology proposed
in this work for clustering multi-view, social-based data, like hashtags, and the
settings used for this study’s data. In the results section we present the results of
the multi-view clustering, identify different time periods of hashtag usage, perform
an ensemble clustering of the hashtag clusters to produce prototypical hashtags
clusters for the different time periods, and then qualitatively analyze those clusters
and the user bases of the clusters. Finally, we conclude the study with a discussion
of the results and directions for future work.

Background
Current study into online social behavior during the COVID-19 pandemic has
largely focused on how information and misinformation operates during a pandemic. This is because good information is a key enabler to combat the effects
of the pandemic whereas misinformation can exacerbate its effects [2], [3]. Recent
studies into the prevalence and persistence of misinformation have shown that misinformation on the COVID-19 pandemic has been especially persistent and spreads
through online social networks quickly [4], [1], [5]. The spread of COVID-19 misinformation has become so problematic and widespread that many many researchers
are referring to it as an ‘Infodemic’ [3], [6], [1]. The Infodemic is characterized by a
virus-like spread of misinformation across many different communication mediums,

Page 2 of 39

Cruickshank and Carley

most notably online social networks. Additionally, other researchers have identified
important mechanisms by which the misinformation propagates in social media.
Recent research has identified the importance of bots in the spread of misinformation [7]. Other research has highlighted the role of alternative news sources and user
characteristics like political beliefs in the spread of COVID-19 misinformation [5],
[8].
One area that is less clear is how social media users may be changing their behavior
and how social media communities and discussions are changing in response to the
COVID-19 pandemic and Infodemic. While the aforementioned research has shown
that social media users are spreading COVID-19 misinformation, sometimes even
faster than good information, its not clear how users’ interactions or how discussion
communities may be changing during the pandemic. It is also not clear if there are
any topical areas of focus for social media users during the ongoing pandemic. For
example, are social media discussions focusing around topics like health and welfare
or around politics and business, or any combination thereof?
One of the recent social media innovations that have been used to track and understand conversations and conversational topics are hashtags. Hashtags originated
in 2007 on the social media platform Twitter as a means of allowing users to efficiently retrieve information relevant to a topic [9]. The use of hashtags on Twitter
has expanded to not only be a means of characterizing discussion topics, but also a
means of predicting user links and characterizing both communities of users as well
as the users themselves [9], [10], [11], [12], [13]. As such, clustering of hashtags can
be used to understand topics of interest for social media users and the communities
that form around certain discussions [14], [15]. The clustering of hashtags has been
done by either the text context used with the hashtags, co-occurrence of hashtags
within the same social media post (i.e. same tweet), or by having similar users that
use the same hashtags [14], [10]. More recent work on clustering hashtags has focused on better feature engineering of the text that accompanies hashtags in order
to capture the semantic meaning of the text and thus better hashtag clusters [15].
To date, no work has attempted to combine all of these different views of hashtag usage and use multi-view clustering to cluster hashtags in order analyze social
media data for understanding topics of interest for social media users.
Multi-view Clustering
Multi-view clustering techniques are techniques designed to handle clustering of
objects which can be described by more than one data source. Many different realworld, social phenomena give rise to ‘views’ of data which are often different types of
data that can be used to describe the same set of actors. For example, social media
users can post content, which could give rise to a text view, and have interactions
with each other, which can give rise to network views. So, multi-view clustering
aims to fuse the information from these different views of the data to produce one
clustering of the object that created the data [16], [17], [18], [19]. There have been
a surge of new techniques developed in multi-view clustering for handling genetic
[20], [21] and image data [18], [22]. Many of these techniques rely on producing
graphs of each view of the data and then collectively clustering those graphs [16],
[19]. By doing so, these techniques can then define one function across all of the

Page 3 of 39

Cruickshank and Carley

views for measuring the goodness of the clustering and exploit properties of graphs
in modeling and preserving complex structures in the data, as is often done with
spectral clustering [23], [24], [25], [26]. While these techniques can be used — at least
in principle — with any kind of data, very few have been applied to social-based,
multi-view data.
Part of the difficulty in multi-view clustering of social media data like hashtags
are that the data is often very large (on the order of tens or hundreds of thousands
of hashtags being used in any given conversation) which can pose problems for
many of the existing multi-view clustering techniques. Additionally, social media
data often have partially-complete views of data; social-media users and objects,
like hashtags, may not have any interactions within some views. For example, a
hashtag may never co-occur with another hashtag, or a user may never engage in
an activity like re-tweeting. These partially complete views pose challenges for many
existing multi-view clustering techniques as these objects naturally become isolates
or small connected components in the view graphs used in the clustering.
Finally, Within the realm of social-based data, and in particular social network
analysis, there are two main areas of research that deal with multi-view data. The
first is multi-layer or multiplex social network analysis. Multiplex networks are
networks in which a node has more than one type of link connecting it to other nodes
[27]. These networks can be modeled as a collection of networks that are defined
over the same nodeset but have different links within each of the networks. So, in
this data format, each network represents a possible view of the data. Multi-layer
networks contain the same networks as multiplex networks, but with the addition
of inter-layer links where a node in one layer can be connected to nodes in other
layers [27]. As with multiplex networks, each layer can be considered a view of the
data. There have been a host of techniques designed to work with multi-layer and
multiplex networks, most of which leverage Network Modularity as the objective
function to cluster the networks [28], [29], [30], or use a stochastic block-model [31],
[29], [32]. So, while there are a wealth of techniques available, these techniques are
limited to multi-view data that only consists of networks.
The second main area of multi-view clustering of social-based data are attributed
networks. Attributed networks are networks which also have additional information
on the nodes [33]. So, an attributed network will have two views of data; one view
which is the network itself and a second view of features describing the nodes
present in the network. Attributed networks are often clustered by either combining
the attribute information into the network itself and then clustering that network
by standard network clustering techniques [33], [34], [35], [36], or by defining a new
measure of network modularity that incorporates a term for the attributes [37], [33].
So, attributed network clustering is limited to just the multi-view data scenario in
which there is one network view and one non-network view of the data.

Data
The data for this analysis comes from Twitter’s streaming API [1] . The data collection was done using a list of key words including “coronavirus”, “coronaravirus”,
https://developer.twitter.com/en/docs/tweets/filter-realtime/guides/basicstream-parameters
[1]

Page 4 of 39

Cruickshank and Carley

“wuhan virus”, “wuhanvirus”, “2019nCoV”, “NCoV”, “NCoV2019” [8]. The collected data spans the time period from 1 February 2020 to 30 April 2020 and
consists of over 300 million tweets that have, on average, 45,000 unique hashtags
per day. The following figure, Figure 1 depicts the daily statistics concerning the
use of hashtags within the data set. It should be noted that as a prepossessing step,
any hashtag that was not used in at least 3 tweets was not included in the data.
These hashtags are often misspellings of more widely used hashtags.

Figure 1 Daily Statistics of the COVID-19 Twitter Data from 1 February 2020 to 30 April 2020.
Use of Hashtags by users and within tweets remains high and persistent over the time period.

Hashtag usage within the data is both prevalent and increases in the diversity
of hashtags being used over time. The use of unique hashtags generally increase
over the time period of data collection and displays some weekly cyclical patterns
as well (i.e. slight drops in the number of unique hashtags being used on weekend
days). It is interesting to note that these counts are counts of unique hashtags and
not the total use of hashtags. So, it is possible that as the scope of the COVID-19
pandemic expanded, hashtags that were originally unassociated with the COVID-19
pandemic end up becoming a part of the conversation. It is also possible that as
the scope of the pandemic expanded, that new hashtags were invented to better
address the changing needs of the conversation about the pandemic. Additionally,
there is a relatively high ratio of hashtags being used in tweets throughout all of
the data (greater than 40% of tweets have a hashtag). While this is in part due to
the means of collecting the data, it also reflects a trend observed by other authors
of increasing hashtag usage among social media users generally [13], [9]. The ratio
of hashtag usage in tweets has three observable phases over time. In the first phase,
from 1 February to 24 February, the ratio of hashtags present in tweets remains at
its highest, with a slight positive trend. Then, starting on the 25th of February the
ratio of hashtags in tweets decreases and remains lower until the 15th of March.
Finally, in the third phase from the 16th of March until the 30th of April, the
ratio of hashtags being used in tweets remains stable at around 55% of the tweets.

Page 5 of 39

Cruickshank and Carley

So, while there is a high percentage of tweets that have at least one hashtag, this
percentage is not stable over time. While its not clear why this temporal trend
exists, it is likely related to the dynamic nature of the users interacting on Twitter
over the various stages of the COVID-19 pandemic.
There is also a reasonably high percentage of hashtag use among individual users,
which generally increases with time. As with the ratio of tweets that feature a
hashtag, the ratio of users that use at least one hashtag on a given day breaks into
three observable periods. The first period is a period of a lot of oscillation in daily
hashtag usage centered around 37%. The second period is a decline in hashtag use
corresponding to the same period of decreased hashtags being used in individual
tweets, from 25 February to 15 March. The third period is from the 16th of March
to the 30th of April and has a sustained hashtag use at around 43% of users using
at least one hashtag in a tweet per day. Overall, 50.47% of users use at least one
hashtag during the three months that data was collected. In terms of individual
hashtag usage, for users in general the usage statistics of hashtags are as follows:
min: 0, max: 100%, mean: 31.6%, and standard deviation: 38.8% of their tweets
featuring hashtags. Of those users that use at least on hashtag in their tweets,
the usage statistics become: min: 1.9%, max: 100%, mean 62.6%, and standard
deviation: 32.4% of their tweets featuring hashtags.
This hashtag usage takes place in a background of variable trends in the number of
unique daily users present within the data set. There is a declining number of unique
users within the data from the 1st of February to around the 21st of February, at
which point there is a large increase in the number of unique users until the 20th
of March. From the 20th of March to the end of April, the number of daily unique
users begins to decline again. So, while the use of hashtags increases as well as the
use of unique hashtags increases, the number of unique users actually declines. So,
during the early stages of the pandemic there are a fairly small number of users
tweeting relevant tweets which often have hashtags which then transitions over the
course of the pandemic to a much larger user base that does not initially use many
hashtags. This observation suggests that user’s interactions on Twitter are dynamic
over the course of a pandemic and that discussion topics, in the form of hashtags
are also dynamic over the course of a pandemic. It also suggests that hashtag usage
becomes more widely adopted after an initial surge in users possibly as means of
better characterizing the new and burgeoning conversations happening on Twitter
surrounding the pandemic. All together, the nature of the use of hashtags and the
hashtags in use have likely changed over the course of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Data Processing
The aforementioned collection of raw tweets was then transformed into view data
for clustering of the hashtags. First, the data was separated into days. Second,
the daily tweet data was preprocessed as follows: First, any hashtag which was
used in less than 3 tweets was excluded from the data. Second, the tweet text was
preprocessed by removing all of hashtags, URLs, symbols (i.e. emojis, punctuation,
etc.), and twitter-specific tags (i.e. mentions, quotes, etc.) from the tweet text. From
there, for each hashtag, the accompanying text, other hashtags, the user, and any
URLs used in each tweet that contained that hashtag were extracted. This data

Page 6 of 39

Cruickshank and Carley

was then separated into four separate views of the data. The first view is the text
view and contains all of the pre-processed text from each tweet that features a
hashtag. The intuition behind this view is that the text accompanying a particular
hashtag may give insight into how and what a particular hashtag is used for in
discussions. The accompanying tweet text, whether used in a raw form or given
semantic enhancement has been previously used to cluster hashtags [14], [15]. The
second view is the users which tweet a hashtag with the idea that users may be
partial to tweeting particular hashtags as part of a discussion. Shared users have
also been used to cluster hashtags in previous works [14]. The third view is the
URLs which co-occur with a hashtag. Since URLs are often used as information
to support claims in tweets, this view should give insight into what information is
underlying the use of certain hashtags. Finally, the fourth view is the co-occurrence
of hashtags within tweets. Within any given tweet using hashtags, a user may use
multiple, related hashtags as part of their tweet. The co-occurrence of hashtags
is frequently used to create hashtag-to-hashtag networks for analysis by standard
network science techniques [15]. So, all together, the collected tweets are processed
to create four different views of the data for each day in order to cluster the hashtags.

Methodology
In this section, the method for performing a multi-view clustering of the hashtags
is detailed. As was mentioned in the background section, multi-view clustering of
social-based objects poses some distinct challenges. Namely, there are hundreds of
thousands of hashtags that need to be clustered, partially complete views, and the
views consist of both network and non-network data. As such, we propose a new
method of multi-view clustering that can handle all of the aspects of this data. As
with any multi-view clustering technique, there are two main requirements: conversion of the views of the data into a format which can fuse information from
the views together, and a clustering goodness function that is defined for all of the
views used in the clustering. For the first requirement, we adopt the method used
in many multi-view clustering techniques of converting all of the views of the data
into graphs. This allows for preservation of local structures in the data and provides
a flexible format that can be used with any data type [38], [39]. For the second requirement, we use network modularity due to its effectiveness as a clustering quality
function for networks or graphs and because many fast, scalable heuristics already
exist for maximizing network modularity (i.e. Louvain [40], Leiden [41], etc.). We
refer to this multi-view clustering technique as Multi-view Modularity Clustering
(MVMC). The following figure, Figure 2, displays the overall methodology.
The methodology proposed in this work for clustering multi-view. social-based
data consists of two steps. The first step is to form graphs for every view of the
data (A in Figure 2). This can done by the computationally quick heuristic of
using a symmetric k-Nearest Neighbor graph, where k is the square root of the
√
number of vertices, k = b nc, for modes that are not already networks or graphs
[38]. While this method can be used for creating the graphs, there are many other
methods for inferring or learning graphs from data which could easily be used in this
methodology [39], [38]. Having formed graphs of all of the views, the next step is
to use a modularity-based clustering procedure to simultaneously cluster all of the

Page 7 of 39

Cruickshank and Carley

Page 8 of 39

Figure 2 Overview of the Multi-view Modularity Clustering (MVMC) method. the method works
in two main steps. In step A, all of the views of the data are converted into graphs. In step B,
these view graphs are collectively clustered using an iterative modularity maximization technique
to produce clusters.

views (B in Figure 2). This can be done by using a multiplex network modularity
maximization procedure [28], [29].
Creation of the View Graphs
The first step of the MVMC procedure is to create graphs of each of the views.
For each view, a similarity graph was created. So, for each view graph, an edge
represents how similar two objects are with respect to that view. For example,
for the text view, an edge indicates that two hashtags share similar text in their
tweets, or for the co-occurence view that two hashtags tend to occur with the same
set of other hashtags. In order to measure similarity, I first transformed the view
data from raw counts (i.e. the number of times a users uses a hashtag) to Term
Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency (tf-idf) scores using,

wij = tfij ×

n
dfj

(1)

where tfij is the number of terms (i.e. users, word tokens, URLs, etc.) occur with
hashtag i, dfj is the number of Hashtags that also feature the jth term, and n is
number of hashtags. This transformation was done in order to down-weight those
terms which are common across all hashtags, like ‘COVID19’ and up-weight those
terms which may be significant for cluster structure. While it has been noted in
previous works that tf-idf can be insufficient for textual information for tweets,
the primary reason for this insufficiency that individual tweets have very little text
which can accompany them [15], [10]. However, in this methodological set up, many
tweets (often hundreds or thousands) are combined for each hashtag, so the text size
limitation is not a significant issue. Furthermore, using tf-idf is also very scalable
and does not require any kind of a priori semantic knowledge database [15]. So,
for these reason, we have opted to use tf-idf as a means of processing the view

Cruickshank and Carley

Page 9 of 39

data prior to learning the view graphs. Having applied tf-idf to all of the views, the
similarity for each of the views was measured by cosine similarity:

sij =

Ai .Aj
||Ai || × ||Aj ||

(2)

Since the data is large in the number of objects that need to be clustered (i.e.
hashtags) — on the order of tens of thousands — the graph learning procedure
needs to be a computationally efficient one [38]. For that reason, we have adopted
the heuristic procedure of creating a symmetric k-Nearest Neighbor Graph (k-NN)
√
with the number of nearest neighbors as k = n, where n is the number of objects
being clustered [42], [43]. To symmetrize the k-NN the following step as used: once
each object has been connected to k of its nearest neighbors, we have adopted the
average strategy, A0 = 12 A + AT , which is common in spectral clustering methods
[38], [26], [44]. So, at the end of the graph learning step, there is a cosine-similarity
weighted, undirected graph for each view of the data.
Multi-view Clustering
In order to cluster the graphs of all of the views of the data, we use a modularity
maximization technique. The function used in the optimization is a modified version
of that proposed in [28] for dealing with clustering multi-layer networks. The original
multi-layer modualrity is given by:

Q=

m X
X

[Avij −

v=1 ij∈E v

m XX
n
X
deg(i)v × deg(j)v
P v
]δ(Civ , Cjv ) +
ωisv δ(Cis , Cjv )
2 E
(3)
v=1 s6=v i=1

Q = Qintra + Qinter
Where Av is the adjacency matrix for a view, v, deg(i)v is the degree of vertex
Pn
v
v
i in view v (i.e. deg(i)v =
j=1 Aij ), E is the set of edges in the vth graph,
m is the number of views, n is the number of vertices, the δ function is one if
vertices i and j are in the same cluster, ω sv controls the strength of vertices being
in the same cluster between layers, and Civ is the cluster that vertex i belongs
to in view v. So, this function can be broke into two parts: the first measures the
modularity of of the clustering within each layer, Qintra and the second measures the
the modularity of the clustering between layers, Qinter . For multiplex clustering, or
multi-view clustering, where clusters are not allowed to vary between views or layers,
this modularity can be reduced to just the sum of the intra-layer modularities.
Furthermore, it is also possible to weight the different views, or layers, differently
as well. So, a weighted multi-view modularity would have the form of:

Q=

m
X
v=1

wv

X
ij∈E v

[Avij −

deg(i)v × deg(j)v
P
]δ(Ci , Cj )
2 Ev

(4)

where wv is now the weight of a particular view. Despite its empirical successes
and strong grounding in statistical physics, modularity does have an important

Cruickshank and Carley

Page 10 of 39

shortcoming: modularity has a resolution limit. In brief, the resolution limit is
when modularity cannot detect clusters present in a network when the network is
sufficiently large and communities are sufficiently small [45], [46]. In order to address
this shortcoming, several authors have proposed various means of correcting for
different resolutions when clustering networks [47], [48], [49], [50]. One means of
addressing the resolution limit is to add a parameter to the modularity to directly
account for the resolution that may be present in a network:

Q=

m
X
v=1

wv

X

[Avij − γ v

ij∈E v

deg(i)v × deg(j)v
P
]δ(Ci , Cj )
2 Ev

(5)

where γ v is now a resolution parameter for each view graph that can be set
depending on the number of clusters that are present in the network relative to
the network’s size [49]. This final equation is now the measure of cluster structure
present in the multi-view data, and the objective function for modularity optimization procedures, like Leiden or Louvain.
One issue this final function of multi-view network modularity parameters raises
is how to set the view weights and view modularities, without a priori knowing
what they should be. Previous works have found what the resolution parameters
should be for a network given a clustering of that network. In order to set the
the resolution parameter to an optimal value for a particular graph, the following
function is used:

γ=

θin − θout
logθin − logθout

(6)

where γ is the resolution parameter, and θin and θout are the propensities of
having edges internal to clusters or external to clusters respectively. This function
was derived by relating modularity maximization to the planted partition Stochastic
Block Model [51], [29]. The intuition behind this function is that when there is a
greater propensity to form edges internal rather than external to clusters that the
resolution should be higher which would bias the function to find more tightlyknit and possibly smaller communities. Since this formulation relies on knowing
the clusters to compute the θ values, it does not on first glance seem useful for
actually clustering a graph. However, the function for computing the resolution
has been used in an iterative fashion with modularity-based graph clustering to
optimally cluster graphs in reasonably few (i.e. less than 20) iterations [51], [29].
So, it is possible to iteratively cluster and then update the resolution parameter to
both find the optimal clustering of the graph as well as its appropriate resolution
parameter.
The same means of computing the optimal resolution parameter can be extended
to compute the optimal view weights. Pamfil et al. used the same derivation process
of finding the optimal resolution parameters from the relation of Reichardt and

Cruickshank and Carley

Page 11 of 39

Bornholdt modularity to planted partition Stochastic Block Models to obtain the
optimal weights for each of the layers in a multiplex graph as:

wv =

v
v
logθin
− logθout
v
v
< logθin − logθout >v

(7)

v
v
θout
are the propensities for
where wv is the weight given to a view, v, and θin
edges to form internal to a cluster or external for the vth view, respectively. < . >v is
the average across all of the views. The intuition behind this derivation is that those
views with higher propensity to have edges internal to clusters versus having edges
external to clusters relative to the average across all views will have higher weights.
So, a view with a better than average propensity to have edges internal to clusters
should be weighted more heavily in the modularity calculation for clustering. Once
again, as with the resolution parameter, the weight parameter can be determined
in an iterative fashion [29].
Having defined the new objective functions, a new algorithm can then be developed to cluster multi-view data by a modularity maximization optimization. At
a high level, the algorithm runs by first assigning staring resolution and weight
parameters for every view (typically one) and then clustering the graph using a
modularity maximization technique like Louvain [40] or Leiden [41]. These clusters
are then used to compute new resolution and weight parameters. This process is
repeated until the resolution and weight parameters no longer change. In the event
that the resolution and weight parameters do not converge (which can happen in
practice [29]), the clustering with the highest modularity value is chosen as the final
clustering. The following psuedocode, Algorithm 1 describes the algorithm in detail.

Algorithm 1 Multi-view Modularity Clustering (MVMC)
input:
• Adjacency for each view: Av
• Max number of iterations: max iter = 20
• Starting resolutions: γ1v = 1, ∀v ∈ m
• Starting weights: w1v = 1, ∀v ∈ m
• Convergence tolerance: tol = 0.01
output: Cluster assignments
clustering ∗ ← N one
modularity ∗ ← −∞
for i = 1 : max iter do
clusteringi ← cluster(A, wi , γi )
modularityi ← RBmodularity(A, clusteringi , wi , γi )
θin , θout ← calculate thetas(A, clusteringi )
v
γi+1
←
v
wi+1
←

v
v
θin
−θout
, ∀v ∈ m
v −logθ v
logθin
out
v
v
logθin
−logθout
v −logθ v > , ∀v
<logθin
out v

∈m

if abs(γi+1 − γi ) < tol AND abs(weightsi+1 − weightsi ) < tol then
clustering ∗ ← clusteringi
modularity ∗ ← modularityi
BREAK
end if
if iter >= max iter then
best iteration ← argmax(modularity)
clustering ∗ ← clustering[best iteration]
modularity ∗ ← modularity[best iteration]
end if
end for
return clustering ∗

Cruickshank and Carley

Page 12 of 39

The algorithm begins by initializing all the resolution parameters, γ1v , and weight
parameters, w1v to one (or whatever the user may specify). The algorithm then
goes on to cluster the view graphs, Av , by a modularity maximization technique
(i.e. Louvain, Leiden), cluster(), with the current resolution and weight settings.
The output of this is then used to determine the propensities for internal edge
v
v
formation θin
, and external edge formation, θout
for each view. These values are
v
then used to update the resolution, γ , and weight parameters, wv , for each of the
views. If the new weight and resolution parameters are the same as the previous
ones (within tolerance), the algorithm then exists and returns the final clustering.
If the algorithm fails to converge to stable resolution and weight parameters, within
the maximum number of iterations allowed, then the algorithm returns whichever
clustering produced the highest modularity. Note, that modularity for this algorithm
is the view-weighted, Reichardt and Bornholdt modularity, which incorporates the
view resolutions.
One of the important elements in the aforementioned algorithm, Algorithm 1,
is the computation of the edge propensities, θ. In order to calculate these edge
propensities, we follow the guidance outlined in previous works and assume edges
form by a degree-corrected model [51], [29]. Given a degree corrected model, the
expected number of edges that occur internal to clusters is given by:

ein =

deg(i)deg(j)
1XX
P
θin
δ(Ci , Cc )δ(Cj , Cc )
2 c
2 E
ij∈E

θin X 2
= P
κ
4 E c c

(8)

P
where c is a cluster and κc = i deg(i)δ(Ci , Cc ), or the sum of the degree of the
vertices within cluster c. Using the observed number of edges internal to the clusters
for the expected number of edges internal to clusters, ein , this equation can then
be used to calculate the propensity to form edges internally as:

θin = P

ein

c 4

κ2c
P

(9)
E

Similar to the propensity to form edges internally, the propensity to form edges externally can be derived from the expected external edges under the degree-corrected
model as:

P
E − ein
P 2
θout = P
c κc
E − 4P
E

(10)

With these equations, and the assumption of edges forming by a degree-corrected
model, the propensities for edges to occur internal or external to a cluster can be calculated. It is important to note, however, that these equations assume the observed
edges internal or external to the clusters are equal to the expected edges internal

Cruickshank and Carley

Page 13 of 39

or external to clusters. In practice, these values may actually differ. For example,
if every vertex ends up in its own cluster, than no edges will be internal which will
lead to the propensity internal term, θin to become zero, and the resolution and
weight updates to fail. A similar problem can occur if all the vertices end up in one
cluster and so no external edges occur. While at first glance these examples may
appear to be edge cases, these problems can also occur in more important cases.
For example, if the graph consists of a series of disconnected cliques. The optimal
clusters in this situation would then be to put all of the cliques within their own,
separate clusters. However, this would result in there being no external edges, and
so the resolution and weight updates would fail. In order to address these shortcomings, we have chosen to have a small value substitute for the propensities if there
are either no internal edges and/or no external edges. So, while the observed edges
can act as a proxy for the expected edges in most cases, the expected edges will
always be a nonzero number. With these corrections, the algorithm for computing
the propensity values is given in pseudocode by Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2 Calculation of Edge Propensities
input:
• Adjacency for each view: Av
• clustering: C
output: Internal and external edge propensities (θin , θo ut)
for v = 1:m do
ein = 0
κ2 = []
for c = 1:—C—
P v do
ec =
Ec
ein + = ec P
κ2 .append(( i∈V v deg(i))2 )
c
end for
if ein = 0 then
1
v ←
θin
|E v |
else
ein
v ←
θin
P
κ2
4

P

Ev

end if
P v
if ein ==
E then
v
θout ← |E1v |
else
P v
E −e
v
θout
← P v P in
κ2
E −

4

P

Ev

end if
end for
return θin , θout

The algorithm goes through each graph to calculate the propensities for each
graph separately. For each graph, the algorithm begins by calculating the number
of internal edges and the degree-corrected, null-model terms (i.e. κ2 ) for each of
the clusters. Then, the algorithm checks as to whether the graph is directed or
undirected and whether there are no internal or external edges and then calculates
v
v
the final propensities for that view graph, θin
, θout
. Once the propensities have been
calculated for all of the view graphs, these are then returned. With the calculation
of the edge propensities, θ, we now have everything needed to perform multi-view
clustering of the hashtags based upon the four different views of their usage.
For clustering the COVID-19 hashtag data, the following parameters for MVMC
were used: The initial weights and resolutions were all set to one. The convergence

Cruickshank and Carley

tolerance for the resolutions was set to 0.3 and for the weights to 0.1. And, the
procedure was allowed to run for a maximum of 20 iterations.

Results
In this section, we describe the multi-view clustering results on the COVID-19
twitter data. In the first section, we provide an overview of the clustering results. In
the second section, we detail the results of learning graphs on the different views of
the data and the insights the graphs give about the data and the cluster structures
present within the data. In the third section, we analyze the temporal patterns
within the hashtag cluster data. In the fourth section we analyze the user bases
of the different clusters of hashtags. Finally, in the fifth section we do an in depth
analysis of some of the interesting clusters identified within the data.
Overview of Multi-view Clustering Results
Multi-view clustering of the COVID-19 twitter data extracted between 20 and 160
clusters of hashtags per day, with a varying size of the clusters. These clusters varied
in size and also in number between different days. The following figure, Figure 3,
displays plots of the daily number of clusters and daily cluster size statistics over
the full 90 day period.

Figure 3 Daily clustering statistics on clusters produced by the MVMC technique on four views of
the hashtags. The daily clusters display three different, temporal patterns of clustering.

There is a presence of several small clusters within the daily clusterings. First, on
any given day there were between 20 and 80 clusters that had a size of less than five
objects. These clusters were almost exclusively composed of either small, localityspecific hashtags, non-English language hashtags, or hashtags that seem to have
little relevance to the pandemic. For example, a particular local business, like a car
dealership may have a hashtag that is used in a tweet that happens to mention one
of the key terms, which was then retweeted by local residents, which would cause it
to be above the initial screening criteria of being used in more than three tweets, but

Page 14 of 39

Cruickshank and Carley

otherwise bear little relation to how any of the other hashtags in the data are used.
These small clusters are also often composed of objects that are isolates within one
or more of the view graphs, which is what makes them difficult to group into larger
clusters. This result illustrates an important point about multi-view clustering of
real-world data; the data is often messy and incomplete and requires some degree
of additional processing. These arbitrary clusters do not actually contribute much
to understanding the data, or the macro-cluster structure of the data, or use of
hashtags beyond recognizing that the collection process can produce some noise in
clustering results. Removing these small clusters does not affect the overall patterns
existing within the clusters, and makes interpretation of the clusters easier.
Second, there are dynamic patterns within the clusters. The clusters start off as
many in number and small in size and become fewer in number and larger in size as
time passes. Up until the end of February, there are around 80 non-arbitrary clusters
with a size of around 250 hashtags. This pattern changes at the end of February
where the number of daily hashtag clusters decreases but the size of these clusters
increases. This change in the clustering structure over time may indicate that the use
of hashtags and their associated discussions begin to congeal into larger discussions
over the course of the pandemic. Additionally, there can be large oscillations in
numbers of clusters and sizes of clusters between any given set of days. While, there
is an increasing trend toward fewer and larger clusters, there are oscillations present
within the data, especially during the middle of the time period, around the month
of March. While it is not quite clear why these oscillations occur, it was noted in the
description of the data that there are weekly periodic patterns within the number
of unique hashtags used over time. So, its possible these oscillations are in part
due to cyclical, time-dependent patterns in twitter use. This dynamic nature in the
clusterings will be further investigated in an upcoming section.
Graph Learning Results
In order to better understand the clustering results, we now turn to the analyzing
the view graphs. As was described in the methodology section, the graphs for all
of the different views were created by a heuristic symmetric k-NN graph learning
procedure. This procedure is meant to learn a graph that represents the data. So,
graph-theoretic and network science measures can be used to analyze the graphs
and thereby better understand the data. The following figures, Figure 4, display
some important graph properties of the different view graphs for each of the daily
data sets.
From the graphs, one can first observe that the graph densities follow a pattern
that would be expected from the the number unique of hashtags. Density initially
increases slightly, and then decreases as time moves forward. From the section on
the data it is also easy to observe that this pattern is roughly the inverse pattern of
the number of daily unique hashtags. So, as expected from observations of real-world
networks, as the number of nodes — or unique hashtags, in this case — increases,
the density decreases [52]. Additionally, the text view is consistently the most dense
graph while the shared users graph is the least dense graph. Since these graphs were
created by a symmetric k-NN graph learning procedure, most of difference in density
for the users view is from more groups of overlaps, around the size of k, in users

Page 15 of 39

Cruickshank and Carley

Figure 4 Graph metrics for each of the daily view graphs. All views but the URL view display
useful graph properties for clustering the data.

between hashtags. When there is more groups of overlaps around the size of k on the
features, nearby objects in a k-NN graph tend to be within the k nearest neighbors
of each other and that there are only about k neighbors for any given point, which
results in fewer edges forming overall once the graph is symmetrized. Conversely,
when there are more similar neighbors for each object than the value of k, there
will be more edges in the symmetrized k-NN graph as two nearby objects, while
very similar to each other, may not be within the top-k nearest neighbors of each
other.
Second, the component statistics vary considerably between the different views of
the data. The URLs view, which measures similarity between hashtags if they cooccur in tweets with the same URLs, has far more components than the other views,
and these components — with the exception of one major connected component —
are almost always isolates. This is to say that of the hashtags that co-occur with
a URL, there are a fair number of URLs that only co-occur with a particular
hashtag. This result is also partly an artifact of resolving the Twitter shortened
URLs; some of the shortened URLs were unable to resolve to the non-Twitter
URL, and Twitter does not always have the same shortened URL for any given
URL. Thus, we would expect the URL view to not be particularly useful in finding
communities of hashtag use. While much lower on the number of components, a
similar pattern is observed with the text mode; those hashtags which are not part
of the major connected component are almost always isolates. These hashtags are
often rarely used hashtags, typically because they are a common misspelling of a
popular hashtag or are a less popular hashtag that occurs with non-English text
or no text (i.e. just the hashtag by itself was tweeted). Also, it should be noted
that the co-occurrence view, which measures similarity between hashtags based on
the other hashtags that those hashtags appear with in a tweet with, has a slightly
higher number of components and percentage of isolates than either the user or
text views. This is due to the fact that some hashtags never co-occur with another

Page 16 of 39

Cruickshank and Carley

hashtag in a tweet. finally, it is worth noting that for all of the views, the number of
components increase with time. These observations suggest that the use of hashtags
is becoming more divided into distinct and non-interacting communities.

Temporal Ensemble Clustering Results

As has been noted throughout the results section and the data section, the usage
of hashtags seems to have some temporal trends and changes over the period of
investigation. So, in this section we will analyze the daily clusterings produced by
MVMC to understand the temporal nature of the hashtag clusters and hashtag
usage. To assess any possible temporal patterns that could exist within the daily
clusterings, we analyzed how similar the daily clusterings are to each other. Comparing the similarities between the clusterings can give insight into how stable both
the usage of hashtags and the broader discussion topics which use the hashtags
are between days. In order to compare the daily clusterings, we opted to use the
Adjusted Rand Index (ARI) [53], which provides a value between zero and one that
expresses how similar two clusterings are. In order to measure the ARI between all
of the daily clusterings, each clustering has to have the same objects, or hashtags,
as every other clustering. So, a set of all of the hashtags used across the entire data
set was collected from the filtered hashtag clusters (the filtered hashtag clusters are
those clusters which have at least five hashtags in them, for each day). For each
daily clustering, if a particular hashtag was not present on that day, it was added
to the daily clustering and assigned a dummy cluster label. So, for each day, the
clusterings have the same hashtags and those hashtags which do not occur on a
particular day are all assigned the same dummy label for that day. Having crossleveled the hashtags across all of the days in the data set, the pairwise ARI between
each day’s clustering and every other day’s clustering can then be computed. The
pairwise ARIs between the daily clusterings are summarized in the following figure,
Figure 5.

Page 17 of 39

Cruickshank and Carley

Figure 5 Heat map of the ARI values between every daily clustering produced by MVMC with
every other daily clustering. The heat map shows there are some regions where the consecutive
days are more similar to each other than to other days. Examples include early to mid-February in
the top left and mid to late-April in the bottom right.

From the figure it can be observed that there are some block structures present
within the data along with some outlier clusterings. For example, early to midFebruary has clusterings which, with the exception of the 13 of February, are all
more similar to each other than to any other days’ clusterings. This temporal pattern
was similarly observed in the clustering overview statistics and MVMC performance
statistics. Additionally, clusterings in April also tend to display a block structure
whereby the clusterings are more similar to each other than to any other days’
clusterings. Outside of these block structures, there are also some outlier clusterings
that are not more similar to those clustering which are temporally close. The 13th
of February provides an extreme example in that it has very low similarity to every
other clustering. Since it appears there are clusters of daily clusterings present
within the data along with a pairwise measure of similarity, the clusterings can
themselves be clustered. To cluster the daily clusterings, we used the pairwise ARI
scores in Agglomerative Hierarchical Clustering with average linkage. It should be
noted that clustering a set of clusterings has been used to analyze other temporal
streams of data in order to understand dynamic trends within the data [54], [55].
The following the figure, Figure 6, displays the full dendrogram for the clustering
of the daily clusterings.

Page 18 of 39

Cruickshank and Carley

Figure 6 Cluster Dendrogram of the daily clusterings produced by Agglomerative Hierarchical
Clustering with ARI as the measure of similarity. The Dendrogram shows 3 main clusters with
some outlier daily clusterings.

From the dendrogram it can be observed that there are indeed clusters of the
daily clusterings. And, these clusters tend to consist of temporally nearby clusterings. Thus, it would seem that there are temporal meta-clusters of daily clusterings
present in the data. To analyze these temporal meta-clusters, we first clustered
the clusterings. Based the dendrogram, the clusterings were divided into 5 clusters.
Note that the division of the daily clusterings is done without respect to time, but
rather is done only on the pairwise ARI between the daily clusterings. Having partitioned the daily clusterings into meta-clusters, we can then see if these meta-clusters
correspond to any time periods within the data. The following figure, Figure 7, displays a plot of the daily clusterings over time versus the meta-cluster that the daily
clusterings were partitioned into.
From the figure, there is an observable temporal pattern to the meta-clusters.
There is a meta-cluster (label 2) that is exclusively composed of the clusterings
from early to late-February. The other two meta-clusters largely contain clusterings
from either February 23rd to April 3rd, or April 4th to April 30th. There are also two
outlier meta-clusters that consist of only one date, February 13th and February 22nd
(labels 3 and 4, respectively). Thus, there is a macro temporal pattern within the
daily hashtag clusterings. This temporal pattern in the hashtag clusterings reflects a
similar pattern regarding user hashtag ratios that were observed in the data section.
In fact the middle period of clusterings, which is the least distinct of the 3 time
periods — having meta-cluster 0 and 1 members — corresponds closely to the time
period where there were many oscillations in MVMC performance. So, not only does
hashtags usage on the user level change over the course of the pandemic, but also
the topical groups of hashtags also change over the course of the pandemic. And,
it would seem there are two stable periods of hashtag usage that occur during the
early stages of the pandemic in February and after the pandemic had been raging
globally for some time, in early April.

Page 19 of 39

Cruickshank and Carley

Figure 7 Plot of daily clustering versus what meta-cluster that daily clustering falls into.
Generally, the meta-clusters of the daily clusterings have distinct temporal bounds indicating that
daily clusterings have a macro, temporal structure to them.

Analysis of Temporally-Ensembled Clusters

Having observed three distinct time periods of hashtag clusters, we would now like
to get a better sense of how these periods differ in terms of hashtag usage. In order
to better understand the hashtag clusters from the different time periods, each
of the clusterings making up a meta-clustering are transformed into one clustering
through cluster ensembling. This is done for two reasons: First, it makes the selection
of which days and which clusters to analyze less arbitrary by reducing the number
of clusters that need to be analyzed. Second, producing an ensemble clustering for
each of the time periods can better mitigate any daily idiosyncrasies that could
affect any given clustering on any given day, and thereby produce a better overall
clustering that represents the whole time period. To produce ensemble clusters for
each time period the BGPA technique, which clusters the object-by-cluster graph,
was used [56]. This technique was used as it is a very scalable cluster ensembling
technique in terms of the number of objects (i.e. hashtags) which it can handle
[57]. The following table, Table 1, displays a summary of the results for each of the
ensembled period meta-clusters.

Page 20 of 39

Cruickshank and Carley

Page 21 of 39

Average
STD Size
Average Internal
Period
Size of
of Clusters ARI
Clusters
February 1 - February 22 14
751
1104
0.416
February 23 - April 3
13
747
1093
0.348
April 4 - April 30
16
566
691
0.536
Table 1: Cluster statistics of the ensembled clusterings of the daily
clusterings for each time period. The ensembled clusterings display
similar temporal trends to the other analyses of the data in that
attributes like the number of clusters present in each period roughly
reflect the numbers of daily clusterings and unique hashtag usage
during these periods.
Number
of Clusters

The ensembled, period meta-clusters produced somewhat different cluster structures for the different time periods. The third period had slightly more clusters and
smaller and more regularly sized clusters than the other time periods. This time
period also had a a higher clustering similarity, in terms of the average pairwise
ARI between its constituent daily clusterings. For the first and second time periods, there was often one large cluster that had a size of around 4,400 hashtags while
the largest cluster in the third time period was 3,025 hashtags. So, the third time
period has a more balanced cluster structure, across the entire time period, than
the other two time periods.
To get a better idea of the ensembled clusters, the following table, Table 2 provides
a qualitative assessment of the topic of cluster as well as how focused and easily
assignable a topic is to each of the clusters in each of the time periods.

Period 1

General Topic

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

Multi-language, general use hashtags
Multi-lingual coronavirus-specific hashtags
News resources related hashtags
Chinese focused hashtags (often of negative sentiment)
Thai related hashtags
Economy/Commerce related hashtags
U.S. Politics related hashtags
technology and business related hashtags
Asian-languages hashtags
Multi-lingual, anti-racism and health news related hashtag
French language and European related hashtags
Italian language hashtags
Arabic script hashtags
All-caps hashtags with some Syrian Civil War hashtags

Period 2

General Topic

0
1
2
3

News and U.S. Politics related hashtags
News-resources related hashtags
Commerce, Economy, and technology related hashtags
Asian-languages hashtags

Focus Level
of Cluster
low
low
medium
high
medium
high
high
high
high
medium
medium
high
high
medium
Focus Level
of Cluster
medium
low
medium
medium

Cruickshank and Carley

4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Period 3
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

Page 22 of 39

Spanish language hashtags
French language hashtags
Italian language hashtags
Turkish language with some conspiracy theory related hashtags
Online entertianment related hashtags
German language hashtags
Arabic script and middle-east related hashtags
Australian and British news related hashtags
Online education related hashtags

medium
high
high
medium
hmedium
medium
high
high
high
Focus Level
General Topic
of Cluster
Spanish language and many general hashtags
low
Multi-lingual, coronavirus and general hashtags
low
Commerce, Economy, and technology related hashtags
medium
Multi-lingual, coronavirus and general hashtags
low
British news, anti-racism, and medical science related and hashtags medium
U.S. Politics related hashtags
high
Arabic-script and location related hashtags
medium
Chinese focused hashtags (often of negative sentiment)
high
French language hashtags
high
Italian language hashtags
high
Canadian and climate change related hashtags
high
German language hashtags
medium
Asian languages hashtags
high
Indonesian and surrounding countries related hashtags
medium
Thai language hashtags
high
Turkish language hashtags
high
Table 2: Topical labels for the temporally-ensembled meta-clusters. Some
clusters had much more focused and readily defined topics than did
others. Also, some topics are persistent throughout all three time periods,
while some only exist in a time period.

Looking at the hashtags present in the clusters of the different ensembled metaclusterings revealed both persistent topical groups and ones which change over time.
In every time period, there is always a cluster that has hashtags for breaking news
or news sources, a cluster that has business and commerce related hashtags, a cluster that has U.S. Politics-related hashtags, and foreign language clusters — most
notably Italian, German, and Spanish. These topical groups indicate that conversations about the global economy, news, and U.S. politics have remained important and consistent topics throughout the pandemic, and that even with Englishlanguage collection terms, the discussions occurring around the COVID-19 pandemic are international in nature. In addition to these persistent clusters there are
also transient cluster topics that emerge in some time periods but not others. For
example, in time period two there is a cluster of hashtags dedicated to online education and a cluster of hashtags concerning online entertainment and entertainment
services (i.e. Hulu, Netflix). Both first and third periods contain clusters with negative sentiment hashtags toward the Chinese government and in support of Hong
Kong protests. Overall, there are consistent topical clusters of discussion and other
topics which emerge and disappear over time.

Cruickshank and Carley

User-base Analysis of Temporally Ensembled Clusters
In order to get a better sense of the hashtag clusters found through multi-view
clustering and temporal ensembling, we can analyze the users that use the hashtags.
In particular, it is of interest to observe whether those individuals which most use
a hashtag also frequently use other hashtags from the same cluster. Presence of a
small number of users being most active in the use of the hashtags could give insight
into whether the topical conversation is being driven by a small group of users or
is more of an open, less centrally-dominated topical discussion. To do so, we first
found the top third of users for each hashtag in each cluster, across all periods,
which we refer to as the ‘top users.’ We then analyzed the number of unique top
users for each cluster in each time period. The number of unique top users within
any given topical hashtag group can give insight into whether there is a diverse userbase driving the topical discussion or not. The following figure, Figure 8, shows the
number of unique top users for each cluster in each time period.

Figure 8 Number of unique users for each cluster of hashtags in each time period. There are
distinct differences between the number of unique users between and within periods. These
differences are largely not driven by the number of hashtags present within a cluster, but rather
with the topic of those hashtags.

From the figure it can be observed that there are differences in user bases both
between time periods and between clusters. The first and third time periods have
generally fewer unique users in each of their clusters than the second time period.
This due in a large part to the previous observation that there are more unique
users in general on any given day during the second period than there are for the
first or third periods. It is worth noting, however, that the total ratio of unique users
to total users in both the second and third periods are about the same at 0.202 and
0.206 respectively. That is to say that even as the number of unique users decreases
slightly in the third period and that the clusters in the third period do not have
as many unique users, the period retains a relatively high number of unique users
across the time period. Additionally, there are distinct differences in the number of
unique top users between clusters within any of the time periods. This is especially
true for the second time period. Generally, this difference in unique users is only
partly accounted for by a difference in the size of the clusters as the 0th and 1st

Page 23 of 39

Cruickshank and Carley

Page 24 of 39

clusters are always the largest in any given period but do not have the greatest
number of unique users for those time periods. This discrepancy in numbers of
unique top users is also a result of the generality of the particular topic of the
clusters, with those clusters having more general topics having higher numbers of
unique top users. For example, the 4th cluster in the second period contains many
hashtags, from many languages, which describe COVID-19, such as ‘#COVID-19’,
‘#covid19’, or ‘#COVID—19.’ So, the topical clusters of hashtags have differences
in their top users with some clusters having a very small top user base and others,
a larger one.
One of the issues with just looking at the the number of unique top users is
that hashtags have different numbers of users in general. So, a hashtag could be
completely used by a different user in each use, but the hashtag itself is not widely
used, which would result in that hashtag having a small unique top user base. This
effect extends to clusters where there are clusters of generally less used hashtags. So,
I also use a top user score for each cluster which compares the ratio of the number
of top unique users for the hashtags versus the number of top unique users if there
was no overlap between the top unique users of the hashtags. As a mathematical
expression, this top user score for a cluster is given by:
P Tr
top usersci
P
top user score = Pr i=1
top usersci
i=1
c

(11)

where c is a particular cluster, r is the number of hashtags present in cluster c,
and top usersci is the set of users for hashtag i in cluster c. The following figure,
Figure 9, displays the top user scores for each of the clusters in each of the time
periods.

Figure 9 Top user scores, which compares the number of unique users for each of clusters to
what would be expected if there were no overlap in the unique users between hashtags from the
same cluster. Using this normalized measures allows us to observer differences in diversity in user
bases of clusters which may have a small, but diverse, number of users

From the figure, normalizing the unique top users by the actual hashtag usage
across the clusters produces some different results than the previous figures. Some of

Cruickshank and Carley

the smaller clusters with a small user base can actually have a very diverse user base.
For example, period one cluster 13, which focuses around the Syrian Civil War, has
the highest top user score but a relatively small number of unique users. Another
example is period 2 cluster 12, which focuses exclusively on online education-related
hashtags, has a small number of unique users but the most diverse user base for the
second time period. So, some clusters which can be small in the number of users
can have very different users using the hashtags. This observation would suggest
that only analyzing hashtags by creating hashtag-to-hashtag networks based on
users is actually insufficient to find clusters of hashtags, which was a similar result
observed by other authors [15]. Additionally, some of the more mid-sized clusters
can have less diverse user bases. For example, period one cluster 3, which focuses on
hashtags critical of the Chinese government, has the least diverse user base in the
first period, but a fair number of unique users. Period two cluster 6, which has many
Italian-language hashtags, and period 3 cluster 5, which focuses on U.S. politics,
have similar patterns. So, the topic of of a cluster tends to drive how diverse the
user base of that cluster is, and not the number of hashtags or even the number of
unique users.
To further explore the nature of the unique users of hashtags within clusters, we
can look at how unique each hashtag’s user base is within each cluster. In order
to better understand the user base of a particular hashtag we calculated the ratio
of the number of unique users that use a hashtag versus the number of times a
hashtag is used in a given period. These hashtag user scores can then be combined
to analyze each cluster within each of the time periods. The following figure, Figure
10, displays a box and whisker plot of the hashtag user scores for each of the cluster
for each of the time periods.

Figure 10 Box and whisker plot of the unique user scores for each of the hashtags within a
cluster. Generally, each cluster has a relatively wide spread of scores which indicates hashtags that
have many unique users and those with very few being present in each cluster. Many clusters also
contain low-scoring outliers which are hashtags that are used by very few or even just one user.

The unique user scores for each of the hashtags within each of the clusters show
distinct differences between the clusters within each period. First, it is worth noting
that the spread of scores for the different clusters tend to be consistently wide; most
clusters have scores ranging from 1.0 to near 0.2. There are notable exceptions to

Page 25 of 39

Cruickshank and Carley

Page 26 of 39

this, like period 2 cluster 12 which focuses on online education, and period 1 cluster
12 which is an Italian-language cluster. Second, while there is a wide range of scores
for the hashtags within any given cluster, most clusters often have outlier hashtags
with very low user scores. That is to say, that most clusters have at least one
hashtag that is often tweeted, but only by a few or one user. So, while the clusters
often present distinct themes in their hashtags, the usage of the hashtags within
the clusters can vary considerably. Some hashtags have a much more diverse base
of usage while some are promulgated by only a few users. This result once again
suggests that clusters of hashtags form around topical groups and that all hashtags
are not equal, at least in terms of usage, within a topical group.
Overall, the user base of the different hashtag clusters demonstrate that not only
are the clusters very different in their user make up, but so to are the user bases
for individual hashtags within the clusters. Certain topical areas of hashtag usage,
and by extension, discussion, tend to be driven by a small number of users, whereas
others have a much more diverse user base. Furthermore, within clusters of hashtags,
hashtags can vary quite a lot with their user bases, with some hashtags being
promulgated by very few, or even one, users. So, even within a certain topical area
of hashtags, a small group of users will control the usage of certain hashtags and
possibly parts of the discussion as well.
Detailed Analyses of Particular Clusters
In this section, we analyze a few of the clusters more deeply. In particular, we
analyze the usage statistics of different hashtags within the clusters as well as the
verbiage associated with those clusters.
First Period, Chinese-focused Cluster
The first cluster of interest is a Chinese-focused cluster from the first period. This
cluster was composed almost entirely of hashtags relating to either China or Wuhan.
It should also be noted that this time period had a hashtag that featured the term
‘china’ or ‘wuhan’ in every single cluster except the cluster focused around business
and commerce (period 1, cluster 11) and the cluster focused around U.S. Politics
(period 1 cluster 6); around 86% of the clusters in the first period featured a hashtag
with one of these terms. In contrast, 68% of the clusters in the second period and
50% of the clusters in the third period had a hashtag with one of these terms. The
following table, Table 3, displays a sample of some of the hashtags present within
the cluster.
Period 1, cluster 3: Chinese-Focused
Number of
Most Used Hashtags
Uses
WuhanVirus
145252
HongKong
116401
CCP
52252
Hubei
46059
Chinese
44336
WuhanPneumonia
31435
Coronarivus
31152
WuhanCoronavirusOutbreak
26612
LiWenliang
26352
HongKongProtests
26324

Hashtag with Highest
Original User Ratio
WeStandWithHongKong
HKpolicestate
Catastrophy
Darkness
ProtestArt
HKexit
Hubie
timelapse
stayclam
PLAAF

User
Ratio
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
0.998
0.995
0.985
0.982
0.982

Hashtags with
Lowest User Ratio
myedgeprop
hongkonggenocide
usdjpy
china is territorist
TechJunkieNews
EiSamay
hongkongprotest
CaptainTripps
Análisis
EnvironmentHealth

User
Ratio
0.058
0.108
0.112
0.122
0.161
0.165
0.176
0.196
0.202
0.207

Cruickshank and Carley

Page 27 of 39

Table 3: Top raked hashtags from period 1, cluster 3 which is Chinese-focused in
its hashtags. Many of the hashtags from this cluster are critical of the Chinese
government for either its response to recent protests in Hong Kong or for its
response to the COVID-19 outbreak from Wuhan.

In general, the hashtags within this cluster express negative sentiment towards
China and the Chinese government. Some of the most used hashtags within the
cluster express support for Hong Kong protests and symbols of frustration with
the Chinese government, like ‘#LiWenliang’ [58]. This trend is further emphasized
with both those hashtags which are used by a diverse user base (highest original
user ratio) and those used by very few users. Overall, there is a mix of anti-Chinese
hashtags and pro-Hong Kong and pro-Tibet hashtags present within the cluster.
So, in the first period, which are the early days of the COVID-19 pandemic there
is a distinct vein of discussion within the COVID-19 discussions that is expressing
negative sentiment toward the Chinese and Chinese government. It is interesting
to observe that this negative sentiment is not limited to COVID-19 but also encompasses other issues with the Chinese government to include protests in Hong
Kong.
To get a better idea of nature of the discussion that uses these hashtags, we now
turn to the text view and the words that co-occur with the hashtags in the cluster.
The following figure, Figure 11 displays a word map of the common words that
co-occur with hashtags from the cluster.

Figure 11 Word map of frequently occurring words and phrases that co-occur with hashtags from
the Chinese-focused cluster in the first period. There is a significant amount of verbiage about the
spread of the virus and about protests in Hong Kong.

Cruickshank and Carley

Page 28 of 39

As with the hashtags themselves, the words that often co-occur with the hashtags
indicate a focus on the spread of the Coronavirus and Hong Kong related issues.
Thus, it would seem that in the early period of the data there is a significant amount
of negative discussion surrounding China and the Chinese government both for
recent actions in Hong Kong and for being the source of the COVID-19 pandemic.
When this result is combined with the user base analysis results of this cluster which
indicate that this cluster has the most overlap between the users of its hashtags, it
would seem that the discussion and condemnation of Chinese government actions
during the early part of the pandemic is driven by relatively few users. This result
also indicates that those users who were already critical of the either the Chinese
response to Hong Kong protests or to the initial Chinese government reaction to the
COVID-19 pandemic may be using the other calamity to draw attention to their
calamity of focus. So, while Chinese related terms feature prominently in many of
the clusters of hashtags in this period, there is also a distinct cluster of hashtag
usage that is critical of the Chinese government.
First Period, Syrian Civil War Cluster
The next cluster of interest is a cluster that features content centered on the Syrian
Civil War. At first glance, this is already a strange cluster to have in a data set
that was collected based on COVID-19 tweets; there is not an obvious connection
between the two entities beside the fact that they are both significant, contemporary
calamities. Additionally, the cluster has a high user ratio score, meaning different
user accounts are using different hashtags. So, it would seem there is actually a
diverse base of users supporting the different hashtags, but the content is almost
solely focused on the Syrian Civil War. The following table, Table 4, displays some
of the salient hashtags from the cluster.
Period 1, cluster 13: Syrian Civil War
Number of
Hashtag with Highest User
Hashtags with
Most Used Hashtags
Uses
Original User Ratio
Ratio
Lowest User Ratio
CORONAVIRUS
38642
BILLGATES
0.955
AssadGenocide
CHINA
10509
Nation
0.944
Assad Torture
WUHAN
2397
ACTUALIZACIÓN
0.929
Chemical Assad
NCOV19
1543
LAMORGESE
0.927
TheResistance1776
IndianArmy
1316
FAKENEWS
0.908
AssadCrimes
ALERT
1294
CINA
0.899
PutinAtWar
BIOWEAPON
992
SINGAPORE
0.896
WhiteHelmets
Syrie
981
BIOWEAPON
0.860
InfoWars
VIRUS
910
BEIJING
0.859
TBT
AssadGenocide
831
ALERT
0.850
VIRUSCORONA
Table 4: Hashtags from period 1 cluster 13, which has content and some hashtags devoted to the Syrian Civil War. Many of the hashtags within the cluster
have non-overlapping users and are often all caps versions of more well known
hashtags.

User
Ratio
0.122
0.123
0.123
0.123
0.123
0.124
0.125
0.215
0.233
0.241

Cruickshank and Carley

The hashtags present in this cluster differ from hashtags in other clusters. For
one, many of the hashtags in use are all caps versions of other hashtags, such as
‘#CORONAVIRUS’ for ‘#coronavirus’. Second, those hashtags which have very
little overlap are almost all of the all caps variety while those with much less user
overlap are more widely used and recognized hashtags, like ‘#WhiteHelmets’. To
get a better idea of the usage of the hashtags present in this cluster, the text
co-occurring with the hashtags can be analyzed. The following figure, Figure 12,
displays a word map for the commonly used text that co-occurs with the hashtags
in this cluster.

Figure 12 Word map of commonly occurring phrases and words from period 1, cluster 13. Much
of the verbiage seems aimed at directing users to links to support various parties involved in the
Syrian Civil War.

As with the hashtag themselves, the text co-occuring with the hashtags is different
from the other clusters. Phrases like ‘link to’ and ‘to help’ feature prominently in
the accompanying text and the accompanying text is much more focused in the
primary topical area of the cluster than other clusters. Additionally, the text is
multi-lingual in that there are mostly English words, but also words from Spanish,
French, and others. So, from the text, these hashtags are used to promote awareness
of the Syrian Civil War and to draw users to websites to provide support to various
organizations involved in the Syrian Civil War. Thus, these hashtags seem to be
aimed at using the COVID-19 pandemic to draw user interest to the Syrian Civil
War. Additionally, it is also interesting to note that while the text is very uniform
in its drawing attention to the Syrian Civil War, the user base is actually very
diverse. This cluster has the most diverse user base of any cluster in the first time
period. So, these results would suggest that while there is a diverse user base for
this cluster, that this diversity is artificial; the users that use the hashtags within

Page 29 of 39

Cruickshank and Carley

Page 30 of 39

this cluster are probably related and possibly being centrally coordinated. At any
rate, it is clear from the results that the hashtag usage in this cluster is meant to
use the COVID-19 pandemic to draw attention to an entirely different calamity.
Second Period, Online Education Cluster
Another cluster of interest is a cluster of hashtags that only exists in the second time
period and focuses exclusively on online education-related hashtags. This cluster
contains relatively few hashtags (37 in total) that all relate to online learning. It
also exists only in the second period when most of the world entered some form of
lock-down to slow the spread of the coronavirus. Despite the few number of hashtags
in the cluster, this cluster has the most diverse user base in the second period and
has all of its hashtags generally having a diverse usage (the lowest user score for a
hashtag in the cluster is 0.619). The following table, Table 5, displays the some of
the salient hashtags from the cluster.
Period 2, cluster 13: Online Education
Number of
Hashtag with Highest User
Hashtags with
Most Used Hashtags
Uses
Original User Ratio
Ratio
Lowest User Ratio
education
9817
child
0.967
Education
onlinelearning
4386
teaching
0.907
Learning
edtech
4673
AcademicChatter
0.907
STEMeducation
college
3530
college
0.901
EdChat
AcademicTwitter
3606
student
0.899
intled
distancelearning
3505
virtuallearning
0.886
highered
AcademicChatter
3204
universities
0.879
edtech
edchat
3594
AcademicTwitter
0.876
HigherEd
online
3235
students
0.874
university
STEM
2936
distancelearning
0.867
education
Table 5: Hashtags from period two cluster 12 which focus on online education.
The hashtags used in this cluster have a diverse user base and are focused in
that there are no hashtags that are not easily identifiable as being educationrelated in the cluster.

User
Ratio
0.619
0.694
0.712
0.714
0.734
0.739
0.751
0.761
0.774
0.777

As was mentioned previously, all of the hashtags in this cluster relate to education, especially online education, and have diverse user bases. In order to better
understand the nature of the usage of the hashtags we turn to the words that cooccur with these hashtags. The following figure, Figure 13, displays a word map for
the frequently used words and phrases from the cluster.
Despite the hashtags all being in English, there is a surprising amount foreign
language text, especially French, that co-occurs with these hashtags. Much of the
text relates to the closing of schools, and new health-related procedures for schools.
These hashtags were used not only to promote online learning solutions and products but also to advertise moving of courses to online and new school-related health
procedures. So, this cluster highlights the use of hashtags in order to inform groups
of users about both relevant happenings as well as education alternatives during a
pandemic. In that sense, this cluster differs from many of the other clusters in that
it focuses not only on different content but also seems more aimed at a sharing of
non-partisan information to users.

Cruickshank and Carley

Page 31 of 39

Figure 13 Word map for commonly used words and phrases present in cluster 12 from period 2,
which has education hashtags. The verbiage is a mix of primarily English and French and has
many phrases relating to school closures and new school hygiene policies.

Comparison of U.S. Politics Focused Clusters
Finally, the U.S. politics focused clusters from periods one and three are analyzed
to both understand their content and how the discussion topic of U.S. politics has
changed over the course of the COVID-19 pandemic. In the first period, the U.S.
politics focused cluster is slightly above average in terms of the user base diversity
and has a relatively large number of hashtags at 343. The following table, Table 6
displays the salient hashtags from the cluster.
Period 1, cluster 6: U.S. Politics
Number of
Hashtag with Highest
User
Hashtags with
Most Used Hashtags
Uses
Original User Ratio
Ratio
Lowest User Ratio
MAGA
13842
OpenBorders
1.000
hillaryemails
Trump
11976
Newyork
0.999
HAction
FakeNews
9905
TheGreatAwakeing
0.994
StopTheMadness
AmericaFirst
9150
DemCast
0.985
bluelivesmatter
QAnon
8456
ThesePeopleAreSick
0.982
ImpeachTrump
GatesFoundation
7768
GatesFoundation
0.981
TRoom
Dobbs
7752
IngrahamAngle
0.980
ABQ
Newyork
7131
TrustThePlan
0.960
rockoftalk
FoxNews
6209
VoteBlueToEndThisNightmare
0.959
NM
FreeZeroHedge
5736
JoeBiden
0.955
Galaxy
Table 6: Hashtags from period one cluster 6 which focuses on U.S. Politics
related clusters. There is a mix of hashtags associated with political news,
political personalities and prominent politically-based conspiracy theories. The
hashtags from this cluster also have a wide range of user bases in terms of the
uniqueness of the users that use the hashtags

User
Ratio
0.008
0.018
0.048
0.062
0.105
0.106
0.135
0.135
0.140
0.148

Cruickshank and Carley

The hashtags are a mix of political commentary, hashtags related to prominent political figures, and hashtags typically related to conspiracy theories (i.e.
‘#QAnon’). Some of the most used hashtags within the cluster relate directly
to current U.S. President Donald Trump (i.e. ‘#MAGA’ and ‘#Trump’) while
some of the most diverse hashtags in the cluster are anti-President Trump (i.e.
‘#VoteBlueToEndThisNightmare’ and ‘#DemCast’). It is also interesting to note
that the two hashtags with the least diverse user base — which have scores well
outside the inter-quartile range of user scores for the cluster — have only one user
who posts both hashtags, 119 and 56 times respectively. So, the cluster contains
various hashtags related to various elements of U.S. Politics, including those which
are generally associated with partisan content. Thus, in some respects, as with the
Syrian War Cluster this cluster contains hashtags which are attempting to use the
COVID-19 pandemic in order to draw attention to certain political views or ideas.
To get a better idea of the hashtag usage in the first period’s U.S. Politics cluster, I
analyzed the text which co-occurs with the hashtags. As with the previous analyses
of other clusters, the following figure, Figure 14, displays the word map for the
co-occurring text.

Figure 14 Word map of commonly occurring phrases and text that co-occur with hashtags from
period 1, cluster 6, which is composed of U.S. politics related hashtags. There is a wide range of
verbiage employed in the cluster, with much of it focusing on the COVID-19 pandemics origins in
China and its subsequent spread.

Page 32 of 39

Cruickshank and Carley

Page 33 of 39

Generally, no phrase or word is particularly dominant in this cluster except for ‘the
coronavirus’ itself. Much of the text mentions the origin of the pandemic in China as
well as the global spread of the virus. In this first period U.S. politics cluster, much
of the verbiage centers around the origin of the virus and its possible effects. So,
much of the discussion from politically-connected hashtags during the first period
focuses on China’s role in the origin and spread of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Turning to the third period U.S. politics focused cluster, there are similar usage
patterns among the hashtags. The following table, Table 7, displays the salient
hashtags from the third period U.S. politics cluster.
Period 3, cluster 5: U.S. Politics
Number of
Hashtag with Highest User
Hashtags with
Most Used Hashtags
Uses
Original User Ratio
Ratio
Lowest User Ratio
Trump
189109
Satanism
0.988
hillaryemails
FakeNews
74076
DeutscheBank
0.987
PoliticalViews
MAGA
70999
Morons
0.986
HAction
FoxNews
67531
Socialists
0.981
drudge
WWG1WGA
49348
ShutItDown
0.978
slate
KAG
48339
AlexJones
0.977
newsabq
Trump2020
46790
2ndAmendment
0.971
abqfm
OneVoice1
43457
hypocrisy
0.969
rockoftalk
QAnon
41446
DrainingTheSwamp
0.960
NewsVideo
CoronavirusUSA
34819
Bullshit
0.960
bluelivesmatter
Table 7: Important hashtags from period 3 cluster 5 which has U.S. Politics
related hashtags. As with other U.S. politics clusters, this cluster is a mix of
hashtags from political news sources, political personalities, and politicallymotivated conspiracy theories. Relative to the first period’s U.S. Politics cluster, there is an increase in the use of more politically inflammatory hashtags.

User
Ratio
0.030
0.037
0.040
0.051
0.064
0.065
0.067
0.076
0.079
0.083

As with the first period’s U.S. politics cluster, many of the hashtags surround
political commentary, politically-motivated conspiracy theories, and high profile
politicians. Unlike the first period, however, the hashtags with the lowest user scores
have larger users bases (i.e. 1 unique user versus 7 for the lowest scoring hashtag).
There is also an increase in the number of hashtags being used, 343 in period one
versus 610 in period three. To get a better sense of the differences between the two
periods, the verbiage of the text co-occurring with the hashtags was then analyzed.
The following figure, Figure 15, displays a word map of the commonly used phrases
and words from the cluster

Cruickshank and Carley

Figure 15 Word map of the commonly used phrases and words from period 3 cluster 5, which
consists of U.S. politics related hashtags. Much of the verbiage focuses on personalities, like
President Donald Trump or Bill Gates who has been erroneously linked to the COVID-19 outbreak
by conspiracy theories.

In this time period phrases surrounding personalities become much more used,
most especially President Donald Trump. Other personalities like Bill Gates and
Joe Biden are also frequently mentioned in the political hashtag tweets. So, from
the first period to the third period, much of the verbiage shifts from a focus on the
virus’ origins in China and its spread, to personalities who are often political in
nature or who have been linked to the coronavirus, even if erroneously, such as Bill
Gates. So, overall there is a shift in the focus of the verbiage paired with the U.S.
politics hashtags over the course of the pandemic. This shift generally goes from an
external focus to an internal focus relative to the United States.
Finally, to get a more complete sense of the differences between the period 1 and
period 3 clusters, we directly compare the membership of these two clusters. The
user base overlap between the two time periods is small; only 8% of the union of the
two time periods’ users are present in both time periods. These users are generally
high profile users like politicians or news sources. There is also a 31.8% overlap in
the hashtags used between the two time periods. To get a sense of the differences in
membership between these clusters, we analyzed the most important hashtags that
exist in only one of the two clusters. It should be noted that many of the hashtags
that exist in only one cluster do exist in the other time period that their cluster
does not belong to, but not within the U.S. politics cluster of that time period. The
following table, Table 8, displays a side-by-side comparison of the hashtags between
the two clusters.

Page 34 of 39

Cruickshank and Carley

Period 1 Only
Hashtags
coronavirusaustralia
newyork
racism
censorship
thegreatawakeing
coronovirus
trumpbudget
democracy
zerohedge
iran

Page 35 of 39

Number of
Period 3 Only
Number of
Period 1 Only
User
Period 3 Only
Uses
Hashtags
Uses
Hashtags
Ratio
Hashtags
35561
smartnews
28748
openborders
1.000
morons
7131
5g
27165
newyork
0.999
socialists
5016
america
18568
thegreatawakeing
0.994
shutitdown
2426
oann
16456
bias
0.946
2ndamendment
2017
pressbriefing
11899
virginia
0.943
hypocrisy
1829
new
8650
trumpbudget
0.939
justasking
1689
nyt
8276
chaos
0.939
nyt
1613
deepstate
7982
confirms
0.926
senatorforsale
1574
senatorforsale
7389
lnpfail
0.923
justsaying
1546
americans
7113
earthquakes
0.922
antivaxx
Table 8: Comparison of the important hashtags that either in the U.S. politics
cluster in period one or period three, but not both. Generally, there is an
increase in conspiracy-related hashtag and inflammatory hashtag usage from
period 1 to period 3.

There are some distinct differences in those hashtags only used in one of the
clusters and not in the other. First, the salient period one only hashtags feature
Australian-related hashtags like ‘#coronavirusaustralia’ and ‘#lnpfail’ which are
not in period three. Also, there is a rise in the use of conspiracy-related hashtags in
the third period only hashtags, such as ‘#5g’, ‘#deepstate’, ‘#antivaxx’ and more
inflammatory hashtags like ‘#morons’ or ‘#senatorforsale’. So, there is not only a
regional shift in terms of the difference in the U.S. politics hashtags between periods
one and three, but also one toward more polarizing and contentious hashtags over
time as well.
Overall, the cluster of U.S. politics-related hashtags differs over the course of the
pandemic. The use of some hashtags (approximately a third) remains the same, but
the verbiage associated with those hashtags changes from a spread of the disease
and Chinese focus to a personality and conspiracy-theory focus. Additionally, the
hashtags used in only one time period also show some distinct differences between
the time periods. So, while an easily defined topical discussion characterized by
the hashtags being used can be persistent over the course of the pandemic, the
nature of that topical discussion cluster changes. It is also worth noting that known
conspiracy theory related hashtags are always present in the U.S. politics cluster,
which demonstrates an strong connection between the two over the course of the
COVID-19 pandemic.

Discussion
There are several findings from this study and results to inspire future research.
First, through a scalable technique, like MVMC, it is possible to extend multiview clustering to a task like clustering hashtags in large-scale social media data.
Large scale social media data often requires clustering of tens or even hundreds
of thousands of objects and the ability to handle partially incomplete data. The
MVMC procedure can successfully deal with both of these conditions in the data
and produce meaningful clusters. Use of the MVMC technique also found that
certain views, in their current form of feature representation, like URLs which cooccur with hashtags in tweets, were not useful in finding a cluster structure in the
hashtags. Also the use of multi-view clustering on hashtag can ameliorate problems
with previous attempts to cluster hashtags based on just one view. For example,

User
Ratio
0.986
0.981
0.978
0.971
0.969
0.959
0.959
0.958
0.956
0.955

Cruickshank and Carley

incorporating text and shared users can overcome the observed phenomenon where
two hashtags are very related in usage, and should be clustered, but are never
used by the same users. Thus, through a technique like MVMC it is possible to
incorporate all of the previous research on clustering hashtags, that have used cooccurring text or users, into one cohesive model and clustering.
Second, hashtag usage patterns during the COVID-19 pandemic displayed dynamic behavior at both the individual and cluster levels. While the data collected
is certainly an incomplete picture of the discussions happening on twitter due to
API restrictions and the terms used to create the data, it can still offer some insights. From the early days of public awareness about the the pandemic in February
of 2020, there was an increase in the number of unique hashtags being used and the
the number of unique users participating in the COVID-19 discussion on twitter.
The usage patterns of hashtags, however, varied over the course of the pandemic
with there being an initially high rate of hashtag usage that drops when the number
of unique users increase, and then increases again as the number of unique users
levels of in late March/ early April. This suggests that when a major exogenous
shock happens to social media users, like a pandemic, there will be an initial phase
of interaction without hashtags, and then a move to start re-using hashtags, likely
as a tool to aid in finding and participating in discussions.
At the cluster level, the data showed there were three main periods of clusters
of hashtags present in the data. The daily hashtag clusterings could themselves be
clustered into three distinct time periods of clusterings based solely on the pairwise
similarity between the daily clusterings. In general, the cluster structure of hashtags
went from a large number of small clusters to fewer, larger clusters and then back
to smaller more numerous clusters. This macro temporal pattern in the cluster
structure mirrors those findings from the use of individual hashtags and supports the
conclusions that there was a surge in COVID-19 twitter discussion which produced
an intermediary period of hashtag usage which then settled into a new pattern of
hashtag usage different from what was observed prior to the user surge.
Using the knowledge that the daily hashtag clustering breaks into three periods,
we then created an ensemble clustering for each of these periods. This ensemble
clustering allows for a clustering analysis of a prototypical clustering for the entire
time period. The results of the analyses of these ensembled clusterings produced
some interesting insights into the nature of some of the topical discussions happening
during the pandemic. Firstly, there are some topics which have been persistent over
the course of the pandemic, like commerce, the economy, U.S. politics, and news.
Other topical groups like online education or negative-sentiment discussion about
the Chinese government are more transitory over the course of the epidemic. From
these clusters it was also observed that some topical groups are intending to direct
COVID-19 discussion to other topics like the Syrian Civil War or protests in Hong
Kong. So, it would seem from the nature of the clusters present that there is the
presence and use of hashtags that are meant to use the COVID-19 pandemic to
draw attention to other causes or ideas. So, hashtags can not only be a means
helping users to find and participate in discussions but also as means of shaping
user engagement and the discussions themselves.
From the results presented in this work there are several avenues for future research. First, this study focused on the use of hashtags in order to understand topical

Page 36 of 39

Cruickshank and Carley

discussions taking place, which naturally discounts users who do not use hashtags.
As was seen in the data section, there is a sizeable amount of the population of users
that are posting content related to the COVID-19 discussions that do not use hashtags. So, a future area of research would be to look more broadly at the concepts
that users are employing in their tweets. So, instead of just clustering on hashtags,
one could look at clustering on hashtags and topical labels from something like the
tweet text. Second, for the multi-view clustering of large scale clustering of hashtags
in social media data there is a need for future research on the appropriate views
and how to feature engineer those views to be useful. The URLs view of the data
ended up being unhelpful for the found clusters, and this seems to be due in large
part to the fact that there was very little overlap on exact URLs. So, there were
situations in which essentially the same story or piece of news was used with two
different hashtags in two different tweets, but because the URLs were not exactly
the same, those hashtags were not recognized as being similar by the method. So, a
means of processing the URLs to do something like just using the top level domains
should be tried in future work. Additionally, previous research on misinformation
during the COVID-19 pandemic has demonstrated that it can spread quickly by
mechanisms like retweeting. It would be of value to create a tweet type view to
characterize what type of tweets are being used with certain hashtags. Such a view
may help with distinguishing between clusters of hashtags used for misinformation
versus those used for more legitimate information. Second, there is also potential for
future research in better cleaning and representing real-world data for multi-view
clustering. For example, the tweets used in this study were not filtered by language.
Performing a filtering step like only using English-language tweets could lead to
more nuanced and meaningful clusters. Also, we adopted a heuristic graph learning
procedure to form the view graphs for multi-view clustering of this data due to
scalability issues with many of the more sophisticated graph learning procedures.
Thus, an important avenue for future research is to find a graph learning procedure
for MVMC that can better fit the intrinsic structure of the data, but that is also
scalable to hundreds of thousands of entities. Finally, the data used in this study
was only a sample of the twitter data pertaining to COVID-19. It would be interesting to see if different COVID-19 twitter data yield the same results and if there
are differences between different social media platforms that also employ hashtags.
List of Abbreviations
MVMC: Multi-view Modualrity Clustering, kNN: k-Nearest Neighbor, URL: Uniform Resource Locator
Declarations
Availability of Data and Material
The datasets used and/or analysed during the current study are available from the corresponding author, or CASOS
institute at casos@cmu.edu on reasonable request. Python implementations of the methods presented in this study
are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.
Competing Interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Ethics Approval and Consent to Participate
Not applicable.
Funding
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship
(DGE 1745016), Department of Defense Minerva Initiative (N00014-15-1-2797), and Office of Naval Research
Multidisciplinary University Research Initiative (N00014-17-1-2675). Any opinion, findings, and conclusions or
recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Science Foundation, Department of Defense, or the Office of Naval Research.

Page 37 of 39

Cruickshank and Carley

Author’s Contributions
Iain Cruickshank and Kathleen M. Carley have developed together the theoretical setup of the study. Iain
Cruickshank created the algorithmic framework, conducted the quantitative analyses and wrote the paper. Kathleen
M. Carley has supervised the entire project.
References
1. Article19: Viral lies: Misinformation and the coronavirus. Technical report (March 2020).
https://www.article19.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/Coronavirus-briefing.pdf
2. Hussain, W.: Role of social media in covid-19 pandemic 4 (2020). doi:10.37978/tijfs.v4i2.144
3. Gallotti, R., Valle, F., Castaldo, N., Sacco, P., De Domenico, M.: Assessing the risks of “infodemics” in
response to COVID-19 epidemics. arXiv e-prints, 2004–03997 (2020). 2004.03997
4. Yang, K.-C., Torres-Lugo, C., Menczer, F.: Prevalence of Low-Credibility Information on Twitter During the
COVID-19 Outbreak. arXiv e-prints, 2004–14484 (2020). 2004.14484
5. Boberg, S., Quandt, T., Schatto-Eckrodt, T., Frischlich, L.: Pandemic Populism: Facebook Pages of
Alternative News Media and the Corona Crisis – A Computational Content Analysis. arXiv e-prints, 2004–02566
(2020). 2004.02566
6. Cinelli, M., Quattrociocchi, W., Galeazzi, A.r., Valensise, C.M., Brugnoli, E., Schmidt, A.L., Zola, P., Zollo, F.,
Scala, A.: The COVID-19 Social Media Infodemic. arXiv e-prints, 2003–05004 (2020). 2003.05004
7. Ferrara, E.: #COVID-19 on Twitter: Bots, Conspiracies, and Social Media Activism. arXiv e-prints,
2004–09531 (2020). 2004.09531
8. Huang, B.: Learning user latent attributes on social media. PhD thesis, Carnegie Mellon University (May 2020)
9. Zhang, Y.: Language in our time: An empirical analysis of hashtags. In: The World Wide Web Conference.
WWW ’19, pp. 2378–2389. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (2019).
doi:10.1145/3308558.3313480. https://doi.org/10.1145/3308558.3313480
10. Xiao, F., Noro, T., Tokuda, T.: Finding news-topic oriented influential twitter users based on topic related
hashtag community detection. J. Web Eng. 13(5–6), 405–429 (2014)
11. Shapp, A.: Variation in the use of twitter hashtags. Master’s thesis, New York University (2014).
https://www.nyu.edu/projects/shapp/Shapp_QP2_Hashtags_Final.pdf
12. Saxton, G.D., Niyirora, J.N., Guo, C., Waters, R.D.: #advocatingforchange: The strategic use of hashtags in
social media advocacy. Advances in Social Work 16(1) (2015). doi:10.18060/17952
13. Sheldon, P., Herzfeldt, E., Rauschnabel, P.A.: Culture and social media: the relationship between cultural
values and hashtagging styles. Behaviour & Information Technology 0(0), 1–13 (2019).
doi:10.1080/0144929X.2019.1611923. https://doi.org/10.1080/0144929X.2019.1611923
14. Kywe, S.M., Hoang, T.-A., Lim, E.-P., Zhu, F.: On recommending hashtags in twitter networks. In:
Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Social Informatics. SocInfo’12, pp. 337–350. Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg (2012). doi:10.1007/978-3-642-35386-4 25. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-35386-4 25
15. Vicient, C., Moreno, A.: Unsupervised topic discovery in micro-blogging networks. Expert Systems with
Applications 42(17), 6472–6485 (2015). doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2015.04.014
16. Baltrušaitis, T., Ahuja, C., Morency, L.: Multimodal machine learning: A survey and taxonomy. IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 41(2), 423–443 (2019).
doi:10.1109/TPAMI.2018.2798607
17. Ye, F., Chen, Z., Qian, H., Li, R., Chen, C., Zheng, Z.: New approaches in multi-view clustering. Recent
Applications in Data Clustering (2018). doi:10.5772/intechopen.75598
18. Yang, Y., Wang, H.: Multi-view clustering: A survey. Big Data Mining and Analytics 1(2), 83–107 (2018)
19. Baltrusaitis, T., Ahuja, C., Morency, L.: Multimodal machine learning: A survey and taxonomy. CoRR
abs/1705.09406 (2017). 1705.09406
20. Zitnik, M., Nguyen, F., Wang, B., Leskovec, J., Goldenberg, A., Hoffman, M.M.: Machine Learning for
Integrating Data in Biology and Medicine: Principles, Practice, and Opportunities. arXiv e-prints, 1807–00123
(2018). 1807.00123
21. Huang, S., Chaudhary, K., Garmire, L.X.: More is better: Recent progress in multi-omics data integration
methods. Frontiers in Genetics 8, 84 (2017). doi:10.3389/fgene.2017.00084
22. Bai, S., Sun, S., Bai, X., Zhang, Z., Tian, Q.: Improving context-sensitive similarity via smooth neighborhood
for object retrieval. Pattern Recognition 83, 353–364 (2018). doi:10.1016/j.patcog.2018.06.001
23. Guo, D., Zhang, J., Liu, X., Cui, Y., Zhao, C.: Multiple kernel learning based multi-view spectral clustering. In:
2014 22nd International Conference on Pattern Recognition, pp. 3774–3779 (2014).
doi:10.1109/ICPR.2014.648
24. Xia, R., Pan, Y., Du, L., Yin, J.: Robust multi-view spectral clustering via low-rank and sparse decomposition.
In: AAAI (2014)
25. Xu, Z., Ke, Y.: Effective and efficient spectral clustering on text and link data. In: Proceedings of the 25th
ACM International on Conference on Information and Knowledge Management. CIKM ’16, pp. 357–366.
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (2016). doi:10.1145/2983323.2983708.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2983323.2983708
26. Yu, H., Lian, Y., Zong, L., Tian, L.: Self-paced learning based multi-view spectral clustering. In: 2017 IEEE
29th International Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence (ICTAI), pp. 6–10 (2017).
doi:10.1109/ICTAI.2017.00013
27. Aleta, A., Moreno, Y.: Multilayer Networks in a Nutshell. Annual Review of Condensed Matter Physics 10,
45–62 (2019). doi:10.1146/annurev-conmatphys-031218-013259. 1804.03488
28. Mucha, P.J., Richardson, T., Macon, K., Porter, M.A., Onnela, J.-P.: Community structure in time-dependent,
multiscale, and multiplex networks. Science 328(5980), 876–878 (2010). doi:10.1126/science.1184819.
https://science.sciencemag.org/content/328/5980/876.full.pdf
29. Pamfil, A.R., Howison, S.D., Lambiotte, R., Porter, M.A.: Relating modularity maximization and stochastic
block models in multilayer networks. CoRR abs/1804.01964 (2018). 1804.01964

Page 38 of 39

Cruickshank and Carley

30. Tagarelli, A., Amelio, A., Gullo, F.: Ensemble-based community detection in multilayer networks. Data Mining
and Knowledge Discovery 31, 1506–1543 (2017)
31. Ni, J., Tong, H., Fan, W., Zhang, X.: Flexible and robust multi-network clustering. In: Proceedings of the 21th
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. KDD ’15, pp. 835–844.
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (2015). doi:10.1145/2783258.2783262.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2783258.2783262
32. Huang, Y., Panahi, A., Krim, H., Dai, L.: Community Detection and Improved Detectability in Multiplex
Networks. arXiv e-prints, 1909–10477 (2019). 1909.10477
33. Chunaev, P.: Community detection in node-attributed social networks: a survey. arXiv e-prints, 1912–09816
(2019). 1912.09816
34. Papadopoulos, A., Rafailidis, D., Pallis, G., Dikaiakos, M.D.: Clustering attributed multi-graphs with
information ranking. In: Chen, Q., Hameurlain, A., Toumani, F., Wagner, R., Decker, H. (eds.) Database and
Expert Systems Applications, pp. 432–446. Springer, Cham (2015)
35. Alinezhad, E., Teimourpour, B., Sepehri, M.M., Kargari, M.: Community detection in attributed networks
considering both structural and attribute similarities: two mathematical programming approaches. Neural
Computing and Applications (2019)
36. Papadopoulos, A., Pallis, G., Dikaiakos, M.D.: Weighted clustering of attributed multi-graphs. Computing 99,
813–840 (2017)
37. Combe, D., Largeron, C., Géry, M., Egyed-Zsigmond, E.: I-louvain: An attributed graph clustering method. In:
Fromont, E., De Bie, T., van Leeuwen, M. (eds.) Advances in Intelligent Data Analysis XIV, pp. 181–192.
Springer, Cham (2015)
38. Qiao, L., Zhang, L., Chen, S., Shen, D.: Data-driven graph construction and graph learning: A review.
Neurocomputing 312, 336–351 (2018). doi:10.1016/j.neucom.2018.05.084
39. Brugere, I., Gallagher, B., Berger-Wolf, T.Y.: Network structure inference, a survey: Motivations, methods, and
applications. ACM Comput. Surv. 51(2), 24–12439 (2018). doi:10.1145/3154524
40. Blondel, V.D., Guillaume, J.-L., Lambiotte, R., Lefebvre, E.: Fast unfolding of communities in large networks.
Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment 2008(10), 10008 (2008).
doi:10.1088/1742-5468/2008/10/P10008. 0803.0476
41. Traag, V.A., Waltman, L., van Eck, N.J.: From louvain to leiden: guaranteeing well-connected communities.
Nature: Scientific Reports 9 (2019). doi:10.1038/s41598-019-41695-z
42. Maier, M., von Luxburg, U., Hein, M.: How the result of graph clustering methods depends on the construction
of the graph. arXiv e-prints, 1102–2075 (2011). 1102.2075
43. Maier, M., Hein, M., von Luxburg, U.: Optimal construction of k-nearest neighbor graphs for identifying noisy
clusters. arXiv e-prints, 0912–3408 (2009). 0912.3408
44. Zhu, X., Loy, C.C., Gong, S.: Constructing robust affinity graphs for spectral clustering. In: 2014 IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1450–1457 (2014). doi:10.1109/CVPR.2014.188
45. Lancichinetti, A., Fortunato, S.: Limits of modularity maximization in community detection 84, 066122 (2011).
doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.84.066122. 1107.1155
46. Fortunato, S., Barthelemy, M.: Resolution limit in community detection. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Science 104(1), 36–41 (2007). doi:10.1073/pnas.0605965104. physics/0607100
47. Traag, V.A., van Dooren, P., Nesterov, Y.: Narrow scope for resolution-limit-free community detection.
Physical Review E 84(1), 016114 (2011). doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.84.016114
48. de Santiago, R., Lamb, L.C.: A ground truth contest between modularity maximization and modularity density
maximization. Artificial Intelligence Review (2020)
49. Reichardt, J., Bornholdt, S.: Statistical mechanics of community detection. Phys. Rev. E 74, 016110 (2006).
doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.74.016110
50. Traag, V.A., Krings, G., van Dooren, P.: Significant scales in community structure. Scientific Reports 3 (2013)
51. Newman, M.E.J.: Community detection in networks: Modularity optimization and maximum likelihood are
equivalent. arXiv e-prints, 1606–02319 (2016). 1606.02319
52. Newman, M.E.J.: Networks: An Introduction. Oxford University Press, ??? (2010)
53. Hubert, L., Arabie, P.: Comparing partitions. Journal of Classification 2(1), 193–218 (1985).
doi:10.1007/BF01908075
54. Magelinski, T., Carley, K.M.: Community-based time segmentation from network snapshots: Streaming and
holistic approaches for semi-static and dynamic nodesets. Applied Network Science 4(25) (2019).
doi:10.1007/s41109-019-0136-1
55. Masuda, N., Holme, P.: Detecting sequences of system states in temporal networks. Scientific Reports 9(795)
(2019). doi:0.1038/s41598-018-37534-2
56. Fern, X.Z., Brodley, C.E.: Solving cluster ensemble problems by bipartite graph partitioning. In: Proceedings of
the Twenty-first International Conference on Machine Learning. ICML ’04, p. 36. ACM, New York, NY, USA
(2004). doi:10.1145/1015330.1015414. http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1015330.1015414
57. Boongoen, T., Iam-On, N.: Cluster ensembles: A survey of approaches with recent extensions and applications.
Computer Science Review 28, 1–25 (2018). doi:10.1016/j.cosrev.2018.01.003
58. Corporation, B.B.: Li wenliang: Coronavirus kills chinese whistleblower doctor. BBC News (2020)

Page 39 of 39

