COVID19 Tracking: An Interactive Tracking,
Visualizing and Analyzing Platform

arXiv:2008.04285v1 [cs.CY] 10 Aug 2020

Zhou Yang?1 , Jiwei Xu?2 , Zhenhe Pan3 , and Fang Jin1
The George Washington University1 , Long Bridge Hk Limited2 , Texas Tech
University3
zhou_yang@gwmail.gwu.edu,ohdarling88@gmail.com, zhenpan@ttu.edu,fangjin@email.gwu.edu
Abstract. The Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) has now become
a pandemic, inflicting millions of people and causing tens of thousands of
deaths. To better understand the dynamics of COVID-19, we present a
comprehensive COVID-19 tracking and visualization platform that pinpoints the dynamics of the COVID-19 worldwide. Four essential components are implemented: 1) presenting the visualization map of COVID-19
confirmed cases and total counts all over the world; 2) showing the worldwide trends of COVID-19 at multi-grained levels; 3) provide multi-view
comparisons, including confirmed cases per million people, mortality rate
and accumulative cure rate; 4) integrating a multi-grained view of the disease spreading dynamics in China and showing how the epidemic is taken
under control in China. This demo will spur further disease spreading
modeling for researchers, support decision-maker, and enrich the public
awareness of the spreading situations of COVID-19 worldwide.

1

Introduction

The outbreak of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) has now rapidly spread
to more than 185 countries and regions, and become a global pandemic, inflicting millions of people and causing tens of thousands of deaths (as of April 10,
2020). Recently, a number of platforms [1–4] about the spreading of COVID-19
have been developed in response to this increasingly exasperated global disaster.
However, most of these platforms suffer from some limitations, e.g., they either
contain only the general statistics such as total reported cases in a nation, daily
increment count, or only present simple visualizations of COVID-19 trend cases
in a limited countries/regions. Moreover, these existing platforms lack comparative information among different countries, which may be useful for countries
that are in the different stages of the pandemic dynamics.
In this paper, we developed an interactive platform 1 to track, visualize and
analyze the reported cases of COVID-19 (a demo video is available2 ). It provides
researchers, public health authorities and the public, with a user-friendly and
comprehensive tool to track, visualize and compare the pandemic as it unfolds.
?
1
2

equal contribution
https://covidtracking.app/#tab=world-map
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NfdajZrrwtM

Zhou Yang, Jiwei Xu? , Zhenhe Pan, and Fang Jin

2

Moreover, the platform provides a multi-view visualizations for further modeling
the pandemic evolution dynamics, inferring spreading trends, and analyzing the
factors that may influence the spreading dynamics of COVID-19. These insights
into this challenging global emergency are extremely important to promotes
the development of appropriate policies, and to contain the spreading of this
pandemic. To summarize, our platform has the following contributions:
– Develop a comprehensive platform to track, visualize and compare COVID19 cases worldwide, which would tremendously inspire disease modeling for
researchers, support decision-maker and public health authorities, and enhace the public awareness of the spreading dynamics.
– Provide a BirdâĂŹs-eye view of the global COVID-19 dynamics and allow
users to view the COVID-19 trends for each country and state/province at
multi-grained levels.
– Present a multi-dimension comparison among countries that are severely
affected by the pandemic.
– Show the full evolution path of the pandemic in China, which could be
beneficial for counties that haven’t contained the disease spreading yet.

2

Platform Framework

In this section, we present the platform we built and pinpoint each component
inside. The landing page of this platform is shown in Figure 1.
2.1

Dataset and Data Flow

The primary data source is DXY, a GitHub repository 3 that is maintained by
many volunteers, which aggregates multiple data sources, such as local media,
government reports, and health organizations, to provide cumulative COVID-19
cases in near real-time.
2.2

Global Heatmap

As shown in part A of Figure 1, the COVID-19 heatmap shows the number of
countries affected, the total number of cases, death toll, and etc. The darker
the color is, the larger the accumulated case number this country/region has.
If the mouse hangs over a county/region, it will highlight the contour of this
country/region.
2.3

National Trends

We group nations into subgroups by their geographical locations and visualize
information, such as total reported cases, cured cases, death counts, the total
number of people under treatment, daily new confirmed cases, daily cured cases,
and daily deaths. We show the visualization of the national trend of Italy in part
B as an example. The curves marked by circles use y-axis on the left, and the
bar charts share the y-axis on the right. Moreover, we also allow users to input
the nation or city name to search the related visualization information.
3

https://github.com/BlankerL/DXY-COVID-19-Data, https://ncov.dxy.cn/ncovh5/view/pneumonia,
https://covidtracking.com/

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

Fig. 1. Landing page of the COVID-19 platform.

3

4

2.4

Zhou Yang, Jiwei Xu? , Zhenhe Pan, and Fang Jin

Multi-view Comparisons

We provide multi-view comparisons among countries, including comparisons on
mortality rate in part C, total confirmed cases in part D, and existing confirmed
cases in part E, confirmed cases per million people in part F. All those visualizations are designed to allow users to select countries for comparisons. The
visualization of total confirmed cases provides users the perspective to retrospect
back, and users can choose a specific country to zoom in.
2.5

Multi-grained Spreading Dynamics in China

We detailed the accumulated reported cases, daily increment, daily cured cases,
and daily deaths in China as part G shows. We also present the disease spreading
at province and city levels. The motivation is that different provinces or cities
may have distinct evolution patterns, and hence a multi-grained view would
unveil more valuable information. Part H uses data collected in Hubei province
only since a big portion of the confirmed cases have Hubei travel history in China.
By showing this multi-grained information, we believe the users can uncover more
information underneath.

3

Conclusions

We develop an interactive platform to track, visualize and analyze reported cases
of COVID-19 worldwide, providing platform users with multi-view and multigrained insights into the pandemic dynamics. Platform users can select countries and information levels they are interested in. At a selected nation level,
the platform provides users with the latest COVID-19 cases, deaths, recoveries,
daily confirmed case increment, daily deaths increment, and daily cured case
increment. This platform will tremendously help researchers with the disease
spreading modeling, support decision-maker, and enrich the public awareness of
the spreading of COVID-19 worldwide.

References
1. 2019-ncov. https://yiqing.ahusmart.com/ (2019)
2. Dong, E., Du, H., Gardner, L.: An interactive web-based dashboard to track covid-19
in real time. The Lancet Infectious Diseases (2020)
3. Mistletoer:
China-covid-19.
https://github.com/Mistletoer/
COVID-19-historical-data-visualization-2019-nCoV4. Tsinghua Database Research Group, Q.C.R.I.: Covid-19 dashboard. https://ncov.
deepeye.tech/ (2019)

