arXiv:2008.08912v1 [eess.IV] 19 Aug 2020

A Data-Efficient Deep Learning Based
Smartphone Application For Detection Of
Pulmonary Diseases Using Chest X-rays.
Hrithwik Shalu2 , Harikrishnan P2 , Akash Das3 ,
Megdut Mandal4 , Harshavardhan M Sali2 , Juned Kadiwala1*
August 21, 2020
1. University of Cambridge
2. Indian Institute of Technology Madras
3. Indian Institute of Technology Patna
4. Kalinga Institute of Industrial Technology Bhubaneswar
*corresponding author
Abstract
This paper introduces a paradigm of smartphone application based
disease diagnostics that may completely revolutionize the way healthcare
services are being provided. Although primarily aimed to assist the problems in rendering the healthcare services during the coronavirus pandemic,
the model can also be extended to identify the exact disease that the patient is caught with from a broad spectrum of pulmonary diseases. The
app inputs Chest X-Ray images captured from the mobile camera which
is then relayed to the AI architecture in a cloud platform, and diagnoses
the disease with state of the art accuracy. Doctors with a smartphone
can leverage the application to save the considerable time that standard
COVID-19 tests take for preliminary diagnosis. The scarcity of training
data and class imbalance issues were effectively tackled in our approach by
the use of Data Augmentation Generative Adversarial Network (DAGAN)
and model architecture based as a Convolutional Siamese Network with
attention mechanism. The backend model was tested for robustness using publicly available datasets under two different classification scenarios
(Binary/Multiclass) with minimal and noisy data. The model achieved
pinnacle testing accuracy of 99.30% and 98.40% on the two respective
scenarios, making it completely reliable for its users. On top of that a
semi-live training scenario was introduced, which helps improve the app
performance over time as data accumulates. Overall, the problems of generalizability of complex models and data inefficiency is tackled through the
model architecture. The app based setting with semi live training helps
in ease of access to reliable healthcare in the society, as well as help in
effective research of rare diseases in a minimal data setting.

Introduction
The increasing adoption of electronic technologies is widely recognized as a
critical strategy for making health care more cost-effective. Smartphone-based
m-health applications have the potential to change many of the modern-day
techniques of how healthcare services are delivered by enabling remote diagnosis [1], but it is yet to realize its fullest potential. There has been a paradigm
shift in the research on medical sciences, and technologies like point-of-care
diagnosis and analysis have developed with more custom-designed smartphone
applications coming into prominence. Due to the high rate of infection, with the
total number of confirmed cases exceeding twenty million since its recent outbreak, COVID-19 was chosen as the initial disease target for us to study. With
studies confirming that chest X-rays are irreplaceable in a preliminary screening
of COVID-19, we started with chest X-rays as the tool to detect the presence of
coronavirus (COVID-19) in the patients.[2] Chest X-ray is the primary imaging
technique that plays a pivotal role in disease diagnosis using medical imaging for
any pulmonary disease. Classic machine learning models have been previously
used for the auto-classification of digital chest images [3][4]. Reclaiming the
advances of those fields to the benefit of clinical decision making and computeraided systems using deep learning is becoming increasingly nontrivial as new
data emerge[5][6][7], with Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) spearheading the medical imaging domain [8]. A key factor for the success of CNNs is its
ability to learn distinct features automatically from domain-specific images, and
the concept has been reinforced by transfer learning [9]. However, the process of
learning distinct features by standard supervised learning using Convolutional
Neural Networks can be computationally non-efficient and data expensive. The
above methods become incapacitated when combined with a shortage of data.
Our approach represents a substantial conceptual advance over all other published methods by overcoming the problem of data scarcity using a one-shot
learning approach with the implementation of a Siamese Neural Network. Contrasting to its counterparts, our method has the added advantage of being more
generalizable and handles extreme class imbalance with ease. We leverage open
chest X-Ray datasets of COVID-19 and various other diseases that were publicly
available (refer datasets section)[10]. Once a Siamese network has been tuned,
it can capitalize on powerful discriminative features to generalize the predictive power of the network not just to new data, but to entirely new classes
from unknown distributions[11][12]. Using a convolutional architecture, we can
achieve reliable results that exceed those of other deep learning models with
near state-of-the-art performance on one-shot classification tasks. The world is
being crippled by COVID-19, an acute resolved disease whose onset might result
in death due to massive alveolar damage and progressive respiratory failure [13].
A robust and accurate automatic diagnosis of COVID-19 is vital for countries to
prompt timely referral of the patient to quarantine, rapid intubation of severe
cases in specialized hospitals, and ultimately curb the spread. The definitive
test for SARS-CoV-2 is the real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) test. However, with sensitivity reported as low as 60-70%[14]

and as high as 95-97%[15], a meta-analysis concluded the pooled sensitivity of
RT-PCR to be 89%[16]. These numbers point out false negatives to be a real
clinical problem, and several negative tests might be required in a single case to
be confident about excluding the disease[17]. A resource-constrained environment demands imaging for medical triage to be restricted to suspected COVID19 patients who present moderate-severe clinical features and a high pretest
probability of disease, and medical imaging done in an early phase might be
feature deficient [18][19]. Although the cause of COVID-19 was quickly identified to be the SARS-CoV-2 virus, scientists are still working around the clock
to fully understand the biology of the mutating virus and how it infects human cells[20]. All these calls for a robust pre-diagnosis method, which hopes
to provide higher generalization, work efficiently with insufficient feature data,
and tackles the problem of data scarcity. This is where our proposed method
of Data Augmentation Generative Adversarial Network (DAGAN) exploited by
a Convolutional Siamese Neural Network with attention mechanism comes into
the picture, exhibiting a state of the art accuracy and sensitivity.

0.1

Generative Adversarial Networks

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) are deep learning based generative
models which take root from a game theoretic scenario where two networks compete against each other as an adversary. The constituent network models – a
Generative Network and a Discriminative Network play a zero-sum game. GAN
architecture paved way for sophisticated domain-specific data augmentation by
treating an unsupervised problem as a supervised one, thus automatically training the generative model.

Figure 1: Figurative representation of data flow in a Generative Adversarial
Network
The Generative Network utilizes the latent space, which is a projection or

compression of the data distribution to generate plausible training examples.
Latent space is the end result of mapping the points in the multidimensional
vector space to points in the problem domain. Random vectors drawn from data
distributions like the Gaussian distribution are used to seed the generative process. The Discriminative Network has the primary objective of classifying real
(training set samples) and fake instances (generator samples). The Discriminative network component of the GANs are usually normal binary classification
models, with real instances as positive examples and fake instances as negative
examples. It connects to two loss functions, the generator loss and the discriminator loss. Training of discriminative networks penalizes the discriminator
loss with the examples from generative networks with constant weights and real
examples as its input, ignoring the generator loss. Similarly the generator is
trained to create competent plausible samples and modifies its weights based on
the generator loss.
0.1.1

Data Augmentation Generative Adversarial Networks (DAGAN)

Data Augmentation procedure is crucial in the training procedure of a deep
learning model as it has proven to be an effective solution in tackling the problem of overfitting at numerous occasions. As the data could be made more
generalized, by providing the same with suitable augmentation strategies. In
the case of images, Augmentation plays a crucial role. As to correctly identify
and recognise specific features in the same, a diverse set of considerably different sets of images are required. Image augmentation techniques are henceforth
found in diversely different ways, ranging from simple transforms (rotation) to
adversarial data multiplicative methods such the one we would be using for our
purposes, called the data augmentation generative adversarial networks (DAGAN).

Figure 2: The DAGAN architecture

The purpose and uniqueness of DAGAN when compared to other types of
GANs , is the ability to generate distinctive augmented images for any given
image sample while preserving the distinctive class features intact. A general
network architecture of the same is provided in Figure 2.
Generator : The Generator component of the DAGAN contains an encoder
which provides a unique latent space representation for a given image and a decoder which generates an image given a latent representation. Any given image
is first passed through the encoder to attain the corresponding latent representation, to which a scaled noise ( usually sampled from a Gaussian distribution
) is added to obtain a modified latent vector. The same is then passed through
the decoder to obtain the corresponding augmented image.
Discriminator : The discriminator component of the DAGAN is similar
to other GANs, where the basic purpose of which is to perform a binary classification to tell apart the generated and real images. The discriminator takes
as input a fake distribution (generated images) and a real distribution (Images
belonging to the same class).

0.2

One Shot Learning and Siamese Networks

Forming an ideal dataset for a typical multi-class classification task using standard supervised learning methods is quite difficult. In addition to class imbalance issues, data for certain tasks such as medical image analysis could rarely be
collected to meet ideal standards. One-shot learning methods helps tackle these
issues effectively. In the Deep Learning literature, Siamese Neural Networks are
typically used to perform one-shot learning.
The Siamese Neural Network is a pair of neural networks trying to learn
discriminative features from a pair of data points from two different classes.In
our case the Siamese Networks would consist of two twin Convolutional Neural Networks which accept distinct inputs but are joined together by an energy
function.The latent vector is the overall output from either of the twin neural networks, it is a unique and meaningful representation of individual images
passed. In one shot learning the overall training objective is to obtain a vector
valued function (Neural Network) which provides meaningful latent representation vectors to the each image passed. As any machine learning task, the one
shot learning too has a loss function whose value conveys how close the network
is in attaining optimal parameter values. In the case of Siamese Networks, the
loss is a similarity measure between the latent vector outputs , enforced by a
binary class label (like or unlike). The energy function takes as input the latent vectors formed by the CNN’s at their last dense layer (for each pair input
passed) and outputs an energy value. The overall goal during the training process (optimization) can now be conveyed in terms of the energy function. The
energy (output of the energy function) of a like pair is minimised and between
unlike pairs it is maximised.
The typical energy functions used could be anything from a simple euclidean
norm to a fairly advanced function such as the contrastive energy function. A
typical example of the contrastive energy is explained in brief.

The contrastive energy function takes in two vectors as input and in general
performs the following computation.
L(W ) =

P
X

~1 , X
~2 )i )
L(W, (Y, X

(1)

i=1

Where,
i
i
~1 , X
~2 )i ) = (1 − Y )LS (DW
L(W, (Y, X
) + Y LD (DW
)

(2)

DW is the parameterized distance function as mentioned below
~1 ) − GW (X
~2 )
~1 , X
~2 ) = GW (X
DW (X

(3)
2

Y is the binary class label.
LS and LD are functions chosen as per the task.

Figure 3: Feature comparison methods represented by a Siamese Neural Network architecture

0.3

Attention Mechanism

Data no matter how clean will have irrelevant features, many of the predictive or
analytic tasks does not rely on all of the features present in raw data. One of the
factors that sets us humans apart from computers is our instinct of contextual
relevance while performing any of our day to day activities. Our brains are
adept at such tasks which makes us able to perform complex tasks quite easily.
Attention is a deep learning technique designed to mimic this very property
of our brain. Attention, as the name suggests is a methodology by which a
neural network learns to selectively focus on relevant features and ignoring the
rest. Attention was first introduced in the branch of natural language processing

(NLP) [21], where it enabled contextual understanding for Sequence to Sequence
models (Ex: Machine Translation) which led to better performance of the same.
Attention mechanism in NLP solved the problem of vanishing gradients for
Recurrent Neural Networks and at the same time brought in feature relevance
understanding which boosts performance. The revolutionary impacts of deep
learning paved way for creation of more efficient network architectures such as
the Transformer (BERT) [22], which are widely applied these days. Moreover
attention has been applied to other fields related to deep learning such as the
ones focusing on signal and visual processing.
0.3.1

Visual Attention Mechanism

Images are a very abstract from of data, they contain numerous amounts of
patterns (features) which could be analysed using latest computational tools to
gain understanding on them. For many machine learning tasks such as regression or classification, identifying features of contextual relavance would improve
the model performance and simplify the task. The same is the case for machine learning applied to images. For most images, the regions could be broadly
classified as background and objects, where objects are of prime focus and background doesn’t contribute to inference. Because of the same, knowing where to
look and what regions to focus on while making an inference from images helps
boost the performance of the model. Convolutional neural networks(CNN) are
one of the best feature extraction tools for images in today’s deep learning literature, attention applied to Convolutional features will help pick out relevant
features of interest from the large pool of features extracted by a CNN.

Figure 4: A visualization of the attention mechanism applied to Convolutional
features overlaid on X-ray images

1

Related Work

The outbreak of the COVID-19 [23] pandemic and the increasing count of the
number of deaths have captured the attention of most researchers across the
world. Several works have been published which aim to either study this virus
or in a way aim to curb the spread. Owing to the supremacy of computer
vision and deep learning in the field of medical imaging, most of the researchers
are using these tools as means to diagnose COVID-19. Chest X-ray (CXR) and
Computed Tomography (CT) are the imaging techniques that play an important
role in the detection of COVID-19 [24], [25].
As inferred from literature Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) remains
the preferred choice of researchers for tackling COVID-19 from digitized images and several reviews have been carried out to highlight it’s recent contributions to COVID-19 detection[26]-[28]. For example in [29] a CNN based on
Inception network was applied to detect COVID-19 disease within computed
tomography (CT). They achieved a total accuracy of 89.5% with specificity of
0.88 and sensitivity of 0.87 on their internal validation and a total accuracy
of 79.3% with specificity of 0.83 and sensitivity of 0.67 on the external testing
dataset. In [30] a modified version of the ResNet-50 pre-trained network was
used to classify CT images into three classes: healthy, COVID-19 and bacterial
pneumonia. Their model results showed that the architecture could accurately
identify the COVID-19 patients from others with an AUC of 0.99 and sensitivity
of 0.93. Also their model could discriminate COVID-19 infected patients and
bacteria pneumonia-infected patients with an AUC of 0.95, recall (sensitivity)
of 0.96. In [31] a CNN architecture called COVID-Net based on transfer learning was applied to classify the Chest X- ray (CXR) images into four classes
of normal, bacterial infection, non-COVID and COVID-19 viral infection. The
architecture attained a best accuracy of 93.3% on their test dataset. In [32]
the authors proposed a deep learning model with 4 convolutional layers and 2
dense layers in addition to classical image augmentation and achieved 93.73%
testing accuracy. In [33] the authors presented a transfer learning method with
a deep residual network for pediatric pneumonia diagnosis. The authors proposed a deep learning model with 49 convolutional layers and 2 dense layers
and achieved 96.70% testing accuracy. In [9] the authors proposed a modified
CNN based on class decomposition, termed as Decompose Transfer Compose
model to improve the performance of pre-trained models on the detection of
COVID-19 cases from chest x-ray images. ImageNet pre-trained ResNet model
was used for transfer-learning and they also used Data Augmentation and histogram modification technique to enhance contrast of each image. Their proposed DeTraC-ResNet 18 model achieved an accuracy of 95.12%. In [34] the
authors proposed a pneumonia chest x-ray detection based on generative adversarial networks (GAN) with a fine-tuned deep transfer learning for a limited
dataset. The authors chose AlexNet, GoogLeNet, Squeeznet, and Resnet18 are
selected as deep transfer learning models. The distinctive observation drawn for
this paper was the use of GAN for generating similar examples of the dataset
besides tackling the problem of overfitting. Their work used 10% percent of

the original dataset while generating the other 90% using GAN. In [35] the
authors presented a method to generate synthetic chest X-ray (CXR) images
by developing an Auxiliary Classier Generative Adversarial Network (ACGAN)
based model. Utilizing three publicly available datasets of IEEE Covid Chest
X-ray dataset[10], COVID-19 Radiography Database [36] and COVID-19 Chest
X-ray Dataset [37] the authors demonstrated that synthetic images produced
by the ACGAN based model could improve the performance of CNN(VGG-16
in their case) for COVID-19 detection. The classification results showed an accuracy of 85% with the CNN alone, and with the addition of the synthetically
generated images via ACGAN the accuracy increased to 95% . Thus having
understood the advantages that GAN offers on training models with relatively
smaller datasets, in our research we implemented the DAGAN combined with
the attention based Siamese Neural Networks for getting the optimum results
out of a relatively smaller dataset used for training our model[10].

2

Methods

For our experiments the application was build using Android studio. MVVM
(Model View View-Model) architecture has been used in the app, which helps
in proper state management following the UI Material Design guidelines while
building. For storage of the App data(like the local X-Rays samples) and Authentication, Firebase is used. The deep learning model was trained using publicly available datasets to test for robustness of the same. Some of the major
issues with such datasets were lack of data, inherent noise features and class
imbalance. In the proposed methodology, all three of these issues were tackled
effectively. The smartphone application would pave way for improvement of the
existing model and provide ease of access to state of the art disease diagnosis for
common pulmonary diseases to everyone.A semi-live training scenario was build
on the cloud which enables the model to imporve over time gradually without
intervention.

2.1

Application Usage Overview

The android application acts as an accessible platform which assists doctors or
patients in uploading the X-rays samples to be inferred by the deep learning
model, and obtain corresponding diagnosis results, as seen in Figure 5. The
application is as a cloud-user interface which enables wider accessibility and
help the model imporve by the cloud build semi-live training scenario. The
algorithm is deployed in a FAS ( Function as a Service ), which gets triggered
when a user uploads a sample. There are primarily 2 categories of users : doctors
and patients. Users under the doctor category would be verified and could act
as a potential source for labeled training data. Under the patient category the
inference mechanism gets triggered which enables the backend model to provide
the user with a diagnosis result for the uploaded sample.

Figure 5: Abstract workflow of our smartphone application utilizing an AI cloud
platform

2.2

Backend Model

The backend deep learning architecture mainly consists of two deep learning
models- the DAGAN for robust and effective data augmentation, followed by
the Convolutional Siamese Network with attention mechanism. The Siamese
Network is proven to be data efficient through our experiments. Both of these
networks are pretrained on publicly available datasets. To obtain the pretrained
DAGAN model , suitably processed X-ray images were provided with corresponding class labels. For the pretrained Siamese Network, visually variant
augmented samples with in-class features preserved were generated using the
DAGAN model. Then these generated samples were paired up for all possible
combinations. Each of the pairs were assigned a binary label based on the classes
on which the two images in a pair belonged to - 0 if both images are from the
same class of pulmonary diseases and 1 otherwise. The resulting dataset was
then used to train the Siamese Network. A set of well labelled and noise free
images are selected to be the standard dataset for comparison. During inference
procedure one of the twin among the Siamese Network generates a latent vector
for the uploaded image by a forward pass. The second twin generates a latent

vector for an image in the standard dataset. The obtained latent vectors are
then compared using an energy function. The energy values of all classes in the
standard dataset are obtained using a similar procedure, and the class with the
lowest average value is selected. The class thus selected becomes the diagnosis
for the particular uploaded image. The diagnosis made is conveyed back to the
user through an online database.

Figure 6: General inference process for images

2.3

Semi-live training

X-Ray images used by the backend model could show large variance due to a
variety of reasons, which includes lighting condition while the picture is taken,
the X-Ray machine specifications or camera quality of the user’s smartphone
etc. Since the challenges such as this due to data variation should be accounted
in a real world scenario, a semi-live training scenario was introduced, which
enables the model parameters of the pretrained model to further adapt to new
or variant data. The scenario is triggered when sufficient amounts of data is
obtained.

Figure 7: Overview of the training process of the Siamese Network during semilive training scenario

3

Experiments and Results

Two different datasets are used to obtain a variety of comparison results for
proper model evaluation. On the first and second datasets the tasks are formulated as binary and multiclass classification respectively. Dataset description
and corresponding comparison results are given below. For the selection of the
standard dataset, expert advice and third party help were utilized.

3.1

Datasets

Figure 8: Class distribution of dataset - 1 [10] (Graphical representation)

Figure 9: Class distribution of dataset - 2 [38] (Graphical representation)

Both the datasets used in this study are publicly available. Apart from the
selection of the standard dataset, no specific dataset cleansing was done. Training process was done on the data including even those images with inherent noise
features present, the same helps in confirming the robustness of the proposed
model. Dataset-1 was published in 2018, the X-rays images obtained were part
of clinical care conducted year to year from Guangzhou Medical Center from
5,863 different patients. Dataset-2 was published as an effort to give out relevant data for widespread studies that were conducted to tackle the COVID-19
pandemic situation. Test set size of datasets 1 and 2 were selected as 20% of
images from each class. The training set was further enlarged using the DAGAN
model to ensure a generalized training for the proposed model.

3.2

Comparative Study

A good amount of images were selected as the testing set for the proposed model,
so as to robustly test and evaluate the proposed method. As per the split of
20%, data from each class of the two datasets were randomly selected to be
included in the test set. For dataset(1) used for the binary classification task
the test set consisted of 1170 images out of the 5860 images, as for dataset(2)
used for the multiclass classification task the test set consisted of 180 images
out of the 905 images. No generation of images were done on the testing set, as
it is considered important to conduct model evaluation on real world data samples.Since the testing set in both experiments are large, the confidence interval
for the testing accuracy of the proposed model was calculated by assuming a
Gaussian distribution for the dataset proportion.
Method

Year

Description

[39]

2018

[40]

2019

[41]

2019

[42]

2019

[43]

2020

[34]
Proposed
Method

2020

Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
Deep learning model with 4 convolutional
layers and 2 dense layers + classical
Augmentation
Deep learning model with 7 convolutional
layers and 3 dense layers
Deep learning model with 49 convolutional
layers and 2 dense layers
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
+ Random forest
GAN + Resnet18

2020

DAGAN + Attention Siamese Net

Testing
Accuracy
92.80%
93.73%
95.30%
96.70%
97.00%
99.00%
99.30 +/- 0.63%

Table 1: Comparison of testing accuracy of proposed model with related works
conducted on dataset-1

Method

Year

Description

[44]

2020

[45]

2020

[46]

2020

Using pre-trained model of CheXNet
Extracts the features from chest x-ray
images using FrMEMs moment
Two-level Hierarchical Deep Neural
Network and transfer learning

Proposed
Method

2020

DAGAN + Attention Siamese Net

Testing
Accuracy
90.50%
96.09%
97.80%
98.40 +/- 2.18%

Table 2: Comparison of testing accuracy of proposed model with related works
conducted on dataset-2
The tables illustrate the robustness of the proposed model as well as point
out how effective the model is under the scenario, where there is a lack of
availability of training data.

3.3

Final Model Analysis

For our purposes, in order obtain a robust and deployable model, we combine
both datasets and train a multiclass classification model which is robustly evaluated for performance. The testing set is selected to be 20% of images from
each class, at random. The model thus obtained, achieved a testing accuracy
of 97.8%. The validation set is selected to be 20% of images in each class, from
the training set.

Figure 10: The validation loss vs epoch curve
Detailed analysis was carried to determine the class separation boundary of
the latent space, Figure 11 illustrates the large class separation found.

Figure 11: Range of variation of dissimilarity index for like and unlike classes
The illustration (Figures [12-14]) shows how effective is the latent space
representation so formed by training the model, in representing the lower dimensional projection of images.

Figure 12: Comparing a chest X-Ray image of a COVID-19 positive patient
with test set images in the COVID-19 class

Figure 13: Comparing a chest X-Ray image of a COVID-19 positive patient
with test set images in the Pneumocystis class

Figure 14: Comparing a chest X-Ray image of a COVID-19 positive patient
with test set images in the Normal class
The dissimilarity index values are high when unlike classes are compared, at
the same time a low dissimilarity is obtained when like classes are compared.

Conclusion
In the wake of the global pandemic preventive and therapeutic solutions are in
the limelight as doctors and healthcare professionals work to tackle the threat,
with diagnostic methods having extensive capabilities being the need of the
hour. The COVID-19 outbreak has caused an adverse effect in all walks of day
to day life worldwide. Fact remains that the spread of such a disease could have
been prevented during the early stages, with the help of accurate methods of
diagnosis. Medical images such as X-rays and CT scans are of great use when it
comes to disease diagnosis, particularly chest X-rays being pivotal in diagnosis
of many common and dangerous respiratory diseases. Radiologists can infer
many crucial facts from a chest X-ray which can be put to use in diagnosing
several diseases. Today’s AI methods that mimic disease diagnosis as done
by radiologists could outperform any human radiologist, owing to the higher
pattern recognition capabilities and the lack of the human element of error or
inefficiency in turn paving way for extensive research in this area. A common
and efficient method to employ would be to use a Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) based classifier , which could accurately recognise patterns from images
to make necessary predictions. The limitation of the same being the requirement
of huge amounts of data to obtain a classifier model with enough generalizability
and accuracy. Metrics improvement of an existing model is a hard task since
retraining process for a large deep learning model would be expensive in terms
of time and computation, vulnerable to scalability issues in retraining. Hence
we adopted feature comparison based methods which are superior to feature
recognising methods in these respects, exploiting a deep Generative Network for
data augmentation. The model exhibited profound comparison metrics having
very distinguishable dissimilarity indices. Similar classes showed remarkably
low indices ranging from 0.05 to 0.6 , while different classes had higher values
lying between 1.98 and 2.67. These performance indices of dissimilarity and the
the large gap between these classes consolidates the fact that our model is able
to clearly demarcate and classify diseases with state of the art efficiency.
The limitations of this study include the inevitable noise factor on the dataset
used, to tackle the same a cloud based live training method has been employed
which uses properly annotated and identified data from medical practitioners
worldwide. The underlying method could be employed to detect several other
diseases if necessary, modification required for the current model minimal as
compared to any deep learning based backend systems. Doctors and Radiologists can leverage the ability of our application to make a reliable remote
diagnosis, thereby saving considerable time which can be devoted to medication
or prescriptive measures. Due to the high generalisability and data efficiency of
the method , the application could prove itself to be a great tool in not only in
accurately diagnosing diseases of interest, but to also conduct crucial studies on
emerging or rare respiratory conditions.

Code Availability
The custom Python code and android app used in this study are available from
the corresponding author upon reasonable request and is to be used only for
educational and research purposes.

References
[1] Dorsey, E. et al. "State of Telehealth". New England Journal of Medicine
375. (2016): 154-161
[2] Wei-cai Dai , Han-wen Zhang, et al. CT
ferential diagnosis of COVID-19. Published:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0846537120913033

imaging and difMarch 04 (2020)

[3] E. Dandıl, M. Çakiroğlu, Z. Ekşi, M. Özkan, Ö. K. Kurt and A. Canan,
"Artificial neural network-based classification system for lung nodules on
computed tomography scans," 2014 6th International Conference of Soft
Computing and Pattern Recognition (SoCPaR), Tunis, 2014, pp. 382-386,
doi: 10.1109/SOCPAR.2014.7008037.
[4] Kuruvilla, J., Gunavathi, K.: Lung cancer classification using neural networks for ct images. Computer methods and programs in biomedicine 113(1),
202209 (2014)
[5] Abbas, A., Abdelsamea, M.M.: Learning transformations for automated
classification of manifestation of tuberculosis using convolutional neural network. In: 2018 13th International Conference on Computer Engineering and
Systems (ICCES), pp. 122126.IEEE (2018) Califano, A., Butte, A. J.
[6] Anthimopoulos, M., Christodoulidis, S., Ebner, L., Christe, A.,
Mougiakakou, S.: Lung pattern classification for interstitial lung diseases
using a deep convolutional neural network. IEEE transactions on medical
imaging 35(5), 12071216 (2016)
[7] Sun, W., Zheng, B., Qian, W.: Computer aided lung cancer diagnosis with
deep learning algorithms. In: Medical imaging 2016: computer-aided diagnosis, vol. 9785, p. 97850Z. International Society for Optics and Photonics
(2016)
[8] LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., Hinton, G.: Deep learning. nature 521(7553), 436
(2015)
[9] Asmaa Abbas, Mohammed Abdelsamea, Mohamed Gaber : Classification of
COVID-19 in chest X-ray images using DeTraC deep convolutional neural
network https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.30.20047456
[10] Joseph Paul Cohen, et al. "COVID-19 Image Data Collection." (2020)

[11] Li Fei-Fei, Robert Fergus, and Pietro Perona. One-shot learning of object
categories. Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, IEEE Transactions
on, 28(4):594–611, (2006)
[12] Brenden M Lake, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Jason Gross, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. One shot learning of simple visual concepts. In Proceedings of the 33rd
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, volume 172, (2011)
[13] Xu Z, Shi L, Wang Y et al (2020) Pathological fndings of COVID19
associated with acute respiratory distress syndrome. Lancet Respir Med.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-2600(20)30076-X
[14] Jeffrey P Kanne, Brent P Little, Jonathan H Chung, Brett M Elicker, Loren
H Ketai. Essentials for Radiologists on COVID-19: An Update—Radiology
Scientific Expert Panel. (2020) Radiology. doi:10.1148/radiol.2020200527
[15] Mahmud Mossa-Basha, Carolyn C Meltzer, Danny C Kim, Michael J
Tuite, K Pallav Kolli, Bien Soo Tan. Radiology Department Preparedness for COVID-19: Radiology Scientific Expert Panel. (2020) Radiology.
doi:10.1148/radiol.2020200988
[16] Fang Y, Zhang H, Xie J, Lin M, Ying L, Pang P, Ji W. Sensitivity
of Chest CT for COVID-19: Comparison to RT-PCR. (2020) Radiology.
doi:10.1148/radiol.2020200432
[17] Lauren M. Kucirka, Stephen A. Lauer, Oliver Laeyendecker, Denali Boon,
Justin Lessler. Variation in False-Negative Rate of Reverse Transcriptase
Polymerase Chain Reaction–Based SARS-CoV-2 Tests by Time Since Exposure. (2020) Annals of Internal Medicine. doi:10.7326/M20-1495
[18] Dr
Daniel
J
Bell
et
al.
COVID-19
https://radiopaedia.org/articles/covid-19-4

Radiology

article

[19] NG Ming-Yen, LEE1 Elaine YP, YANG Jin, YANG4 Fangfang, LI Xia,
WANG4 Hongxia, LUI Macy Mei-sze, LO Christine Shing-Yen, LEUNG
Barry, KHONG Pek-Lan, HUI Christopher Kim-Ming, YUEN Kwok-yung,
KUO Michael David . Imaging Profile of the COVID-19 Infection: Radiologic
Findings and Literature Review
[20] Cao, W., Li, T. COVID-19: towards understanding of pathogenesis. Cell
Res 30, 367–369 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41422-020-0327-4
[21] Dzmitry Bahdanau, , Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. "Neural Machine Translation by Jointly Learning to Align and Translate." (2014)
[22] Ashish Vaswani, , Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion
Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. "Attention Is
All You Need." (2017)

[23] J. R. Hageman, “The Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19),” Pediatr.
Ann., (2020)
[24] M.-Y. Ng, E. Y. Lee, J. Yang, F. Yang, X. Li, H. Wang, M.-M.-S. Lui,
C. S.-Y. Lo, B. Leung, P.-L. Khong, C. K.-M. Hui, K.-Y. Yuen, and M.
D. Kuo, “Imaging prole of the COVID-19 infection: Radiologic findings and
literature review,” Radiol., Cardiothoracic Imag., vol. 2, no. 1, 2020, Art.
no. e200034
[25] C. Huang et al., “Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel
coronavirus in Wuhan, China,” Lancet, vol. 395, pp. 497506, Feb. (2020)
[26] Dong, D., Tang, Z., Wang, S., Hui, H., Gong, L., Lu, Y., Xue, Z., Liao,
H., Chen, F., Yang, F., Jin, R., Wang, K., Liu, Z., Wei, J., Mu, W., Zhang,
H., Jiang, J., Tian, J., Li, H.: The role of imaging in the detection and
management of covid-19: a review. IEEE Reviews in Biomedical Engineering
pp. 11 (2020)
[27] Li, L., Qin, L., Xu, Z., Yin, Y., Wang, X., Kong, B., Bai, J., Lu, Y.,
Fang, Z., Song, Q., et al.: Artificial intelligence distinguishes covid-19 from
community acquired pneumonia on chest ct. Radiology p. 200905 (2020)
[28] Shi, F., Wang, J., Shi, J., Wu, Z., Wang, Q., Tang, Z., He, K., Shi, Y.,
Shen, D.: Review of artificial intelligence techniques in imaging data acquisition, segmentation and diagnosis for covid-19. IEEE Reviews in Biomedical
Engineering (2020)
[29] Wang, S., Kang, B., Ma, J., Zeng, X., Xiao, M., Guo, J., Cai, M., Yang,
J., Li, Y., Meng, X., et al.: A deep learning algorithm using ct images to
screen for corona virus disease (covid-19). medRxiv (2020)
[30] Song, Y., Zheng, S., Li, L., Zhang, X., Huang, Z., Chen, J., Zhao, H.,
Jie, Y., Wang, R., et al.: Deep learning enables accurate diagnosis of novel
coronavirus (covid-19) with ct images. medRxiv (2020)
[31] Wang, L., Wong, A.: Covid-net: A tailored deep convolutional neural network design for detection of covid-19 cases from chest radiography images
(2020)
[32] O. Stephen, M. Sain, U. J. Maduh, and D. U. Jeong, “An Efficient Deep
Learning Approach to Pneumonia Classification in Healthcare,” J. Healthc.
Eng., (2019)
[33] G. Liang and L. Zheng, “A transfer learning method with deep residual
network for pediatric pneumonia diagnosis,” Comput. Methods Programs
Biomed., (2020)
[34] Nour Eldeen M. Khalifa, et al. "Detection of Coronavirus (COVID-19) Associated Pneumonia based on Generative Adversarial Networks and a FineTuned Deep Transfer Learning Model using Chest X-ray Dataset." (2020)

[35] A. Waheed, M. Goyal, D. Gupta, A. Khanna, F. Al-Turjman and P. R.
Pinheiro, "CovidGAN: Data Augmentation Using Auxiliary Classifier GAN
for Improved Covid-19 Detection," in IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 91916-91923,
2020, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2994762
[36] Covid19 Radiography Database. Accessed: Mar. 7, 2020. Online. Available:
https://www.kaggle.com/tawsifurrahman/covid19-radiography-database
[37] COVID-19 Chest X-Ray Dataset Initiative. Accessed: Mar. 7, 2020. Online.
Available: https://github.com/agchung/Figure1-COVIDchestxray-dataset
[38] Kermany, Daniel; Zhang, Kang; Goldbaum, Michael (2018), “Large Dataset
of Labeled Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT) and Chest X-Ray Images”, Mendeley Data, v3 http://dx.doi.org/10.17632/rscbjbr9sj.3
[39] Kermany, D., Goldbaum, M., Cai, W., Valentim, C., Liang, H.Y., Baxter,
S., McKeown, A., Yang, G., Wu, X., Yan, F., Dong, J., Prasadha, M.,
Pei, J., Ting, M., Zhu, J., Li, C., Hewett, S., Dong, J., Ziyar, I., Zhang,
K. (2018). (2018)Identifying Medical Diagnoses and Treatable Diseases by
Image-Based Deep Learning. Cell. 172. 1122-1131. e9, 172.(10.), 1122–1131.
[40] Stephen, Okeke, Mangal, Sain, Uchenna, Maduh, and Doun, Jeong.
"(2019)".An Efficient Deep Learning Approach to Pneumonia Classification
in Healthcare. Journal of Healthcare Engineering. 2019. 1-7 10. (2019): 1–7.
[41] Saraiva, Arata, N., Ferreira, and Sousa. "Classification of Images of Childhood Pneumonia using Convolutional Neural Networks"
[42] G. Liang and L. Zheng, “A transfer learning method with deep residual
network for pediatric pneumonia diagnosis,” Comput. Methods Programs
Biomed., (2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmpb.2019.06.023
[43] Wu, Huaiguang Xie, Pengjie Zhang, Huiyi Li, Daiyi Cheng, Ming.
(2020). Predict pneumonia with chest X-ray images based on convolutional deep neural learning networks. Journal of Intelligent Fuzzy Systems.
https://doi.org/10.3233/JIFS-191438
[44] Arpan Mangal, , Surya Kalia, Harish Rajgopal, Krithika Rangarajan,
Vinay Namboodiri, Subhashis Banerjee, and Chetan Arora. "CovidAID:
COVID-19 Detection Using Chest X-Ray." (2020)
[45] Elaziz MA, Hosny KM, Salah A, Darwish MM, Lu S, Sahlol AT (2020)
New machine learning method for image-based diagnosis of COVID-19. PLoS
ONE 15(6): e0235187. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0235187
[46] Maryam Zokaeinikoo, Pooyan Kazemian, Prasenjit Mitra, Soundar
Kumara (2020), “AIDCOV: An Interpretable Artificial Intelligence
Model for Detection of COVID-19 from Chest Radiography Images”
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.24.20111922

