Population-Scale Study of Human Needs
During the COVID-19 Pandemic: Analysis and Implications
Jina Suh

Eric Horvitz, Ryen W. White

Tim Althoff

jinasuh@cs.washington.edu
University of Washington
Microsoft Research

{horvitz,ryenw}@microsoft.com
Microsoft Research

althoff@cs.washington.edu
University of Washington

arXiv:2008.07045v2 [cs.CY] 14 Jan 2021

ABSTRACT
Most work to date on mitigating the COVID-19 pandemic is focused
urgently on biomedicine and epidemiology. Yet, pandemic-related
policy decisions cannot be made on health information alone.
Decisions need to consider the broader impacts on people and
their needs. Quantifying human needs across the population is
challenging as it requires high geo-temporal granularity, high
coverage across the population, and appropriate adjustment
for seasonal and other external effects. Here, we propose a
computational methodology, building on Maslow’s hierarchy of
needs, that can capture a holistic view of relative changes in
needs following the pandemic through a difference-in-differences
approach that corrects for seasonality and volume variations. We
apply this approach to characterize changes in human needs
across physiological, socioeconomic, and psychological realms
in the US, based on more than 35 billion search interactions
spanning over 36,000 ZIP codes over a period of 14 months. The
analyses reveal that the expression of basic human needs has
increased exponentially while higher-level aspirations declined
during the pandemic in comparison to the pre-pandemic period. In
exploring the timing and variations in statewide policies, we find
that the durations of shelter-in-place mandates have influenced
social and emotional needs significantly. We demonstrate that
potential barriers to addressing critical needs, such as support for
unemployment and domestic violence, can be identified through
web search interactions. Our approach and results suggest that
population-scale monitoring of shifts in human needs can inform
policies and recovery efforts for current and anticipated needs.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems → Web log analysis; • Humancentered computing;

KEYWORDS
Web search; Search logs; Human needs; Population-scale; Pandemic;
COVID-19; Public policy; Difference-in-differences

1

INTRODUCTION

Many of the existing studies and datasets of the COVID-19 global
pandemic focus on the biomedical and epidemiological aspect of
the case and fatality rates, including efforts in detection, infection
propagation, therapeutic intervention, and vaccine design, with a
gaze fixed on the virus and illness that it causes. Despite the direct
focus on mitigating the spread and morbidity of infection [60],
pandemic-related policy decisions and investments cannot be
made on health information alone. Challenges span societal (e.g.,

disparities [15]), economic (e.g., unemployment [8, 16]), and
psychosocial (e.g., stress, anxiety [45], loneliness [56]) realms.
Recent work has called for identifying and understanding the multilevel system of humans needs and well-being for pandemic response
and recovery strategies [49]. Our goal is to better understand the
influences of the pandemic and associated policy decisions on
a multitude of human needs, where new insights about shifting
needs can guide valuable refinements of policies and motivate the
development of new interventions, programs, and investments.
Quantifying human needs across the population is important but
challenging, as it requires innovative, ethical, privacy-preserving
approaches with fine-grained and broad geo-temporal coverage.
A standard way to assess human needs is through survey-based
measures [24], which can be costly and time-consuming to conduct
at large scales. Surveys are difficult to manage across time and
geographies when the desire is to provide fine-grained analyses
longitudinally and to be able to understand and react in near realtime. Passively observing human behaviors is another approach,
grounded in the fact that physical and psychosocial needs motivate
human behaviors to express and fulfill those needs when they are
unmet [38]. For example, historical purchase behaviors are used
to predict future consumer needs in market research [1], but this
approach is also limited to smaller-scale, consumer and commercial
interests. E-commerce platforms (e.g., Amazon marketplace) or
specialized service providers (e.g., Talkspace, Coursera) may have
access to large-scale, real-time analysis of customer behaviors, but
they are focused tightly on specific needs. Publicly available social
network data (e.g., Twitter), have been used to characterize needs [4,
63], but these studies examine a subset of needs from data that only
portrays externalized behaviors. Such fragmentation of data limits
the capture of broader expressions and comparisons across a broad
spectrum of human needs.
We address these limitations in obtaining signals about human
needs by observing the behaviors of people through their everyday
interactions with a web search engine. Human behaviors, through
which human needs are expressed or fulfilled, often involve seeking
information or obtaining tangible support or material items, for
which web search has been an integral component. Thus, search
logs provide a unique lens into human needs via providing signals
about human behaviors in their natural state, at large scale, and on
already routinely collected data.
We propose a computational methodology built on constructs of
human needs by Maslow [38, 39] and Max-Neef [41]. We characterize
pandemic changes across a broad spectrum of fundamental human
needs, spanning five broad human needs categories–Self Actualization,
Cognitive, Love and Belonging, Safety, and Physiological–and 79
subcategories. We apply this framework to a dataset of 35+ billion

search interactions across 36,000+ ZIP codes in the United States and
over 14 months (7 months in 2019 and 7 months in 2020) to map
search query strings and click interactions to human needs, resulting
in over three billion expressions of human needs. We demonstrate
how this approach enables the examination of shifts in fundamental
human needs based on disruptions induced by the pandemic.
Our contributions include the following:
• We propose a novel computational framework for characterizing a
holistic view of human behaviors, intents, and unmet needs based
on web search logs and human motivational theories (Sec. 4).
• We leverage a difference-in-differences approach [32] to quantify
the impact of the pandemic and its associated policies on the
relative changes in needs while controlling for seasonality and
external factors (Sec. 4.4).
• We present the first population-scale analysis across a holistic set
of human needs during the COVID-19 pandemic in the United
States through the use of web search logs (35+ billion search
interactions for 14 months on 86% of US ZIP codes; Sections 5-8).
• We find that search interactions in pursuit of basic human needs
(i.e., Physiological, Safety) have increased exponentially during
the pandemic while several higher-level aspirations (i.e., Self
Actualization, Cognitive) have declined (Sections 5, 6).
• We observe geographical differences in how differing statewide
shelter-in-place policies are associated with short-term and longterm changes in social and emotional needs (Sec. 7).
• We demonstrate that potential barriers to accessing critical
resources, in support of people facing unemployment or domestic
violence, can be identified through search interactions combined
with external data sources (Sec. 8).
Our work suggests that signals from web search logs can be
used to characterize and to monitor over time human needs at a
population scale. Our findings also emphasize the importance of
tracking broad sets of human needs in combination with other
reported measures to identify gaps in our current understanding of
challenges and support, to measure the impact of policy changes,
and to design policies and programs that can meet the needs.

2

RELATED WORK

Quantifying Human Needs. Theories about basic human needs
have been discussed for close to a century [46]. In particular,
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs [38, 39] has been applied in numerous
domains [13, 43, 57, 63], despite criticisms of the validity of the
theory [58]. These theories are aimed at providing a holistic
understanding of human needs. The characterizations of broad
spectrum of needs from these models are increasingly relevant
during the pandemic [49]. Most studies use survey-based methods to
measure human needs [13, 40, 42, 54]. Others have applied human
needs theories in computational social science [4, 35, 63], but they
focus deeply on specific topics (e.g., consumer behavior, well-being)
and leverage publicly available social network data. In contrast, we
introduce a computational methodology to extract a full spectrum
of human needs at population scales, which is critical for aligning
policies with societal needs that they are intended to support.
Web Search Logs for Human Needs Analysis. In addition,
we harness search interaction data which captures more natural

Observation period
# of queries
# of human need queries
# of days
# of ZIP codes

14 months (Jan 1-Aug 2 in 2019-2020)
35,650,687,581
3,250,228,644
428
36,667

Table 1: Descriptive statistics for our web search dataset.

observations of human needs [20]. Web search logs have been used
to understand human behaviors across many different domains [5,
26, 59, 61], time [6, 7, 23, 44], location [50, 62], and to predict the
now and the future [14, 21], but prior studies typically focus on
a single aspect of human well-being. Google Trends APIs have
helped to stimulate a prolific range of research in the context of
the COVID-19 pandemic for physical [34], psychological [55], and
socioeconomic [2, 28] well-being that operate on highly normalized
and aggregated data. In distinction, our work leverages finegrained geospatial comparisons across 79 need subcategories and a
difference-in-differences methodology, which allows for controlling
confounders and understanding national coverage with flexible geotemporal normalization and aggregation. We also improve detection
of needs by leveraging click interactions.

3 DATASET AND VALIDITY
3.1 Dataset, Privacy, and Ethics
We collected a dataset containing a random sample of deidentified
search interactions from the first seven months of the years 2019 and
2020 obtained from Microsoft’s Bing search engine. For each search
interaction, we collected the search query strings, all subsequent
clicks from the search results page (e.g., clicked URL), and time and
ZIP code location of the search interaction. The resulting dataset
contains 35+ billion search interactions and represents the web
search traffic of over 86% (36,667/42,632) of US ZIP codes associated
with at least 100 queries per month so as to preserve anonymity
(Table 1). All data was deidentified, aggregated to ZIP code levels or
higher, and stored in a way to preserve the privacy of the users and
in accordance to Bing’s Privacy Policy. Our study was approved by
the Microsoft Research Institutional Review Board (IRB).

3.2

Validation of Data

Considering potential threats to validity, we examined the dataset
from three perspectives: coverage of the population, analysis of
selection bias, and reliability of the trends.
Analyzing National Representation. To understand how much
of the US population is represented by the collected data, we
obtained demographics data from the Census Reporter API [11].
The demographics of the ZIP codes in our dataset closely matched
the US population demographics (Appendix A.1). Although query
volumes are not uniformly distributed across these ZIP codes, the
vast majority of the ZIP codes are included in our dataset. We
leverage location information for our analysis when geographical
differentiation is necessary.
Analyzing Selection Bias. To understand potential biases in
socioeconomic circumstances that would influence the usage of
the Bing search engine, we leveraged deidentified client id as
a proxy for a unique user to estimate the ‘client rate’, or how
much of the population in a ZIP code is using the Bing search

setting personal goals
Self

Actualization
Cognitive
Love and
belonging
Safety
Physiological

(a) Human needs

log 2

online learning resources
<any string>

(b) Expressed needs

(c) Geo-temporal aggregation

Seasonally adjusted
post-pandemic need
Seasonally adjusted
pre-pandemic need
(d) Relative changes
in needs

Figure 1: Illustration of human needs detection framework. (a) Human needs are represented by a ladder according to Maslow’s hierarchy of
needs to indicate than a person may have multiple needs simultaneously. (b) These needs are expressed through search interactions, which
can be categorized through keyword matches and/or subsequent clicks into relevant search result pages. (c) Each search behavior is then
aggregated across categories of human needs, time, or geography. (d) To quantify changes in needs, aggregated needs are compared between
pre-pandemic and pandemic periods while adjusting for seasonal and query volume variation.

engine. We examined the correlation between the client rate and
various demographic factors. While the factors describe some of
the variance, none were correlated more strongly than 𝑟 =–0.058 (%
Housing Owned), suggesting that the dataset is not strongly biased
towards any single demographic (Appendix A.2).
Reliability of Search Interaction Trends. Many Americans use
other search engines such as Google. Therefore, we compared
search trends for Bing with data available via the Google Trends
API for the same time period and for specific keywords in each
need category. We found that the search trends are highly similar,
with a median Pearson correlation of 0.96 (min=0.45, max=0.98, all
𝑝<0.001). This implies that our findings are not simply an artifact of
using one search engine over another (Appendix A.3).

4 HUMAN NEEDS FRAMEWORK
4.1 Human Needs Categories
We draw inspiration from Maslow’s hierarchy of fundamental
human needs [38, 39] to tag each search interaction with one
or more of five broad categories of needs. We represent human
needs as a ladder to convey that a person may have multiple needs
(Fig. 1a). Safety and Physiological are considered as ‘basic’ needs.
Love and Belonging is often considered to be ‘psychological’ needs,
and Cognitive and Self Actualization are considered as ‘growth’
needs, defined in more detail below:
Self Actualization needs are about realizing personal potential,
seeking personal growth, and self-fulfillment. Topics include:
hobbies; parenting; wedding; talent acquisition; goals; charity.
Cognitive needs are about pursuing knowledge and intelligence
through learning and discovering. Topics include: online education,
learning materials; educational degrees; cognition; memory; focus.
Love and Belonging are social and emotional needs and include
emotionally-based relationships such as friendship, family, dating,
sexual intimacy. Topics include: mental health or emotions; social
network or activities; relationships, dating, divorce or breakup.
Safety needs stem from our desire to seek order, stability, and
protection from elements in the world. Topics include: personal
protection; finances; banking; job search; unemployment; housing.
Physiological needs are the basic animal needs such as air, food,
drink, shelter, warmth, sex, and other body needs. Topics include:
health; food and groceries; basic staples; sleep; transportation.
To understand the nuances of the needs, we further subdivided
the five main categories into 79 subcategories. Several researchers
independently developed subcategories which were combined and
resolved collaboratively through consensus meetings. Appendix A.4

describes this process in detail with the full taxonomy of our need
categories, example queries and/or clicked page URLs.

4.2

Human Needs Detection

A search interaction can be an observation of the underlying human
need in two ways: (1) an expression of a potential satisfier (physical
or information) for that need, or (2) a direct expression of the
deficiency or satisfaction of that need. For example, a search query
for ‘bandages’ with a subsequent click on ‘amazon.com’ could
indicate a purchase intent that satisfies a Physiological need. We
require the additional click into one of many e-commerce domains
to solidify that this interaction is a purchase intent. Information
search about ‘online games with friends’ could satisfy a Love and
Belonging need. A need (satisfaction or deficiency thereof) could
be directly expressed in experiential statements such as ‘I feel
depressed’ (Love and Belonging).
We match each search interaction to a corresponding need
subcategory through simple detectors based on regular expressions
and basic propositional logic. Each need subcategory could have
multiple regular expressions applied to either the query string, the
clicked URL, or both, depending on the complexity of the expression
and the need subcategory. We arrived at these regular expressions
based on our data through several collaborative consensus meetings
until we were satisfied with precision and recall (Appendix A.4).
Overall, 9.1% of our query samples matched at least one of the need
categories. Each search interaction can satisfy multiple human
needs [41], so we allowed each search interaction to be tagged
by multiple need categories (only 0.32% have multiple tags). We
then aggregated matched search interactions across need categories
and subcategories, time (e.g., day, week), and geography (e.g., ZIP
code, county, state). Fig. 1 illustrates these steps in detecting and
processing of human needs.
Throughout the paper, we report needs as expressed through
search interactions and not actual underlying human needs. Some
human needs are expressed well by search interactions while
other needs are more appropriately expressed through other digital
and/or non-digital means. When analyzing changes in such search
interactions, careful consideration is required to differentiate actual
shifts in the underlying human needs (e.g., health-related needs
have increased due to COVID-19) from the equally meaningful
changes observed in logs based upon shifts from offline to online
behaviors (e.g., online grocery purchases due to store closures), and
we present our results in both possible contexts.

Precision. We sampled 1.2 million search interactions that matched
at least one need category as a candidate set. From this sample, we
randomly chose 100 unique tuples of search query string and clicked
URL (e.g., ‘15 lb dumbbells’ and click on ‘walmart.com’) for each
of the five high-level need categories, for a total of 500 unique
tuples representing 1,530 search interactions in our evaluation set.
We selected unique tuples to avoid duplication in labeling, but we
mapped the labels back to the original 1,530 search interactions
to compute precision on the distribution of the source evaluation
set. We then collected human labels for each tuple via Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk, where each tuple could be tagged with none, one,
or more of the five needs categories. All labels and predictions have
Boolean values with no ranking among needs categories.
Upon inspecting the label quality, we found common systematic
label errors such as labeling ‘recipe’-related queries as Cognitive
needs, or ‘divorce’-related queries or visits to specific government
unemployment sites as Physiological needs, where the workers
mislabeled the queries according to the definitions we specified
in the task detail. Other errors were due to inherent ambiguities
in search. For example, ‘rent in florida coronavirus’ is tagged as
Physiological for ‘coronavirus’ but not as Safety for ‘rent’ because
our high precision detector requires more qualified keywords such
as ‘apartment rent.’ Although the worker tagged this as Safety
(i.e., rent for shelter), the use of the word ‘rent’ here may not be
shelter-related. We took a conservative approach of only correcting
definitive label errors and not ambiguous errors, and our evaluation
set achieved a precision of 97.2%, using the example-based precision
metric defined in [64] for multi-label classification.
Recall. Although it is infeasible to ensure a perfect recall across a
massive dataset, it is important that we capture a significant number
of needs expressions. We find that 9.1% of our search interactions
match at least one need category. While this recall is significant and
led to more than 3.2 billion detections of needs expressions, we note
that high recall is not necessary for an unbiased analysis approach,
because we conduct a fair comparison among the outputs of the
same detectors across pre-pandemic and pandemic periods. We
did not find that the exact expressions of needs varied drastically
within our dataset that would indicate any temporal bias. We also
investigated whether our need expressions were dominated by a
few categories. Clicks to YouTube or Facebook dominated, but still
only represented 1% of our dataset. We categorized visits to these
sites based on their primary functions (i.e., Facebook for social
networking and YouTube for media consumption). We found that
our results were robust, whether or not we included these hightraffic sites in our dataset.

4.4

Quantifying Changes in Human Needs

Our goal is to quantify the change in human needs during
the pandemic relative to the pre-pandemic period. This can be
challenging due to potential confounding effects of yearly seasonal
variations, weekly seasonal variations, and variations in query
volume over time. Conceptually, we control for yearly seasonal

5/
25
ki
l
l
i
ngMe
o m
6/ fGeor
i
st 6C orald
ar O
g
tt VI eFaya
or D
l
o n
i
secas yd d
i
ntes
he
7/
US
4I
nd
ep
en
de
nc
ed
ay

1
20
CO/
VI Fi
D r
s
catr
seepo
i
t
ntr
heed
US
2
29
de/
at Fi
h r
n stC
3 i
he OV
13 t
em/
D
er US US I
g
e
3/ n nat
25 cy i
on
d
C
a
4/ AR ecl l
3
a
cl
e
ot CD ESA r
h C c d
t
4 ma r
11 skeco pas
ch/
ec Fi s mm sed
ks r
s
en
detst
ds
m
poi
uu
si
t
s
edl

Framework Validation

Our goal is to detect with high precision a large number of needs
across a broad set of categories.

Rel
at
i
v
eChangei
nNeedsi
nLog2Scal
e
(
bet
weenpr
epandemi
cbasel
i
neandeachday
)

4.3

Sel
fAct
ual
i
z
at
i
on

C

Cogni
t
i
v
e
Lov
eandBel
ongi
ng
Saf
et
y
Phy
si
ol
ogi
cal

B
A

F

D
E

H
G

Changei
nConf
i
r
medCOVI
D19Casesi
nt
heUS

Figure 2: Daily relative changes in needs for each human need
category throughout the pandemic. Relevant events are annotated
vertically at the time of occurrence. Changes in confirmed cases in
the US from ‘Bing COVID-19 Tracker’ (http://www.bing.com/covid)
are displayed below. See Sect. 5 for discussion on A-H.

effects through comparisons with the previous year, for weekly
seasonal effects by matching the day of the week between both
years (i.e., Mon Jan 6, 2020 is aligned to Mon Jan 7, 2019), and by
considering relative proportions of the query volume represented by
each need over time. Formally, we follow a difference-in-differences
methodology [19, 32], commonly used in economics, to account
for confounding effects between comparison groups. Finally, our
adjusted effect size is the logarithm of the ratio between two groups.
This is effectively the difference-in-differences approach applied
to the logarithmic effect sizes and has the advantage of the effect
sizes having symmetric properties (i.e., Δ(𝑡 1 ; 𝑡 2 )=−Δ(𝑡 2 ; 𝑡 1 )) [17, 27].
This step allows for appropriate comparison of effect sizes across
both increases and decreases in need. Our estimate of the relative
change in human need 𝐶 between two time periods is defined as
!
!
𝐸 (𝑡 22020, 𝑛)
𝐸 (𝑡 22019, 𝑛)
− log2
𝐶 (𝑡 1 ; 𝑡 2, 𝑛) = log2
𝐸 (𝑡 12020, 𝑛)
𝐸 (𝑡 12019, 𝑛)
where 𝐸 (𝑡 22020, 𝑛) is the expression of need 𝑛 at some time 𝑡 22020
in 2020 (i.e., after the pandemic declaration) and 𝐸 (𝑡 12020, 𝑛) is the
expression of need at 𝑡 12020 (i.e., before the pandemic).
Across all following analyses, we choose the mean daily expression
of needs between Jan 6 to Feb 23, 2020 as the ‘pre-pandemic baseline’,
referred to throughout the paper, and dates on or after Mar 16 as
the ‘pandemic period’ because individual states declared a state of
emergency at different times (Feb 29 to Mar 15). We then compute the
95% confidence interval on this multiplicative effect size by using
bootstrap resampling with replacement (N=500). We report mean
estimates and p-values throughout the text and 95% confidence
intervals in all figures and tables where applicable. All time series
figures (Figures 2, 3, 5B) indicate the moving average of the daily
relative changes, computed from 3 days before to 3 days after.

5

TEMPORAL CHANGES IN HUMAN NEEDS

We first consider how human needs change over time across the
US in the context of major events surrounding the pandemic.
We compute the daily relative change in the expressed needs in
comparison to the pre-pandemic baseline, as described in Sec. 4.4,
for the duration of our entire dataset, giving us per-day relative
changes in all need categories and subcategories. For each inflection
point and major national event, we examine need subcategories
with the highest relative changes to understand which contribute
the most to the overall need.
Elevated Needs and Contributing Subcategories. Fig. 2
illustrates daily relative changes of needs on a log scale, where
zero indicates no change. Overall, we see that all need categories
were at elevated rates during March through May relative to the
earlier months. A few of the local inflection points correspond to
US national events, such as the declaration of national emergency
on Mar 13 or the first stimulus checks being deposited on Apr 11.
Physiological needs start to increase first around February
(Fig. 2A), dominated by health condition related queries (𝐶=1.46
on Feb 29) and subsequently by toilet paper purchase and
health measurement equipment purchase (𝐶=1.14, 0.76 on Mar 6
respectively; Fig. 2B). Around Mar 16, Physiological needs peak
at over 3.8 times the baseline (21.91 ; Fig. 2C). Following national
emergency declaration (Mar 13) and mandated lock downs (first
on Mar 21), we see a sharp increase in Cognitive needs (Fig. 2D),
dominated by educational site visits and online education queries
(𝐶=1.97, 1.42 on Mar 23). Self Actualization needs peak around Apr
11 (Fig. 2E), dominated by cooking site visits and cooking related
queries (𝐶=1.73, 1.15), and online social activities queries and social
technology uses dominate Love and Belonging needs (𝐶=1.77, 1.72 on
Apr 11). A sharp spike of Safety needs can be seen shortly after the
first stimulus checks were deposited: stimulus related queries, state
unemployment site visits, COVID-19 protection purchase dominate
Safety needs (𝐶=8.17, 5.49, 5.12 on Apr 18; Fig. 2F). While other
needs start to trend downwards or stabilize throughout much
of May-July, Physiological needs increase for a second time with
additional interests in health conditions, followed by Safety needs
with queries related to economic stimulus and loans (Fig. 2G), which
aligns with the rise of COVID-19 cases in the US around Jun 6.
Shifting of Needs. Based on the severe health impacts of the
COVID-19 pandemic, we expected to see and confirmed that
Physiological needs dominate throughout our dataset, as COVID-19
is still a major US public health issue at the time of writing. At a
glance, we see two instances of the surge in Physiological needs
followed by a subsequent increase in Safety needs. As Physiological
concerns rise, public health responses (e.g., business closures or
restrictions) could potentially induce instabilities in Safety needs,
and this observation needs to be further investigated. We see basic
needs expressed before other needs consistent with the hypothesis
by Maslow [38] and observations by others [54]. We also expected to
see a decrease in the expression of growth needs (Self Actualization
and Cognitive) as people’s attention shifts toward basic needs.
However, both Cognitive and Self Actualization needs increased
overall, with the increase in Cognitive needs being more temporary
and Self Actualization being more sustained. Despite health and

Need

Need Subcategory

𝐶 mean

𝐶 max

2𝐶max -1

Phys
Safe
Safe
Safe
Safe
Phys
Phys
Phys
Phys
Phys
L&B
Phys

Toilet paper purchase
Stimulus related queries
Unemploy. related queries
State unemploy. site visits
COVID-19 prot. purchase
Health meas. equip. purchase
Health cond. related queries
Food assist. related queries
Grocery related queries
Food delivery queries
Online social activity queries
Food delivery site visits

6.11±0.08
5.69±0.03
4.88±0.02
4.81±0.04
4.67±0.03
3.43±0.04
3.12±0.01
2.62±0.03
2.05±0.01
1.84±0.02
1.77±0.09
1.7±0.01

7.00
8.17
5.72
6.26
5.57
4.56
3.54
3.12
2.54
2.26
2.98
2.26

12691.1%
28601.9%
5156.4%
7585.1%
4634.0%
2257.2%
1065.6%
771.8%
480.8%
379.7%
688.4%
379.3%

Table 2: Top 12 need subcategories with the largest increase in mean
relative change in need within the initial 4 weeks of the pandemic
with 95% confidence intervals, maximum relative change in the
dataset, and maximum percent change.
Need

Need Subcategory

𝐶 mean

𝐶 min

2𝐶min -1

SA
SA
Cog
Safe
Safe
Safe
Phys
SA
SA
Safe
Safe
L&B

Wedding related purchase
Wedding site visits
Edu. degree related queries
Housing related queries
Job search related queries
Job search site visits
Apparel purchase
Outdoor related queries
Life goal related queries
Domestic violence queries
Rental related queries
Divorce related queries

-1.49±0.03
-1.25±0.02
-0.87±0.06
-0.71±0.05
-0.65±0.03
-0.61±0.02
-0.60±0.01
-0.59±0.01
-0.57±0.09
-0.54±0.04
-0.53±0.06
-0.49±0.03

-1.76
-1.56
-1.09
-1.09
-0.91
-0.95
-0.84
-1.07
-1.23
-0.97
-0.82
-0.93

-70.4%
-66.2%
-53.1%
-53.2%
-46.7%
-48.1%
-44.1%
-52.3%
-57.2%
-49.0%
-43.5%
-47.3%

Table 3: Top 12 need subcategories with the largest decrease in mean
relative change in need within the initial 4 weeks of the pandemic
with 95% confidence intervals, minimum relative change in the
dataset, and minimum percent change.

economic concerns, interests in recreational activities or hobbies
(e.g., cooking, gaming) contribute to this steady 23% (=20.3 –1)
increase in Self Actualization needs. Further research into the
temporary nature of Cognitive needs and the long-term impact
of such sustained interest in Self Actualization is necessary.
We see that the peak in Physiological needs occurs around four
weeks before the peak in Safety needs (Fig. 2C, F), while the second set
of peaks are a few days apart (Fig. 2H). This could be an indication of
phenomena like resilience or endurance from economics and disaster
management that requires further examination [22, 37].

6

SIGNIFICANT CHANGES IN HUMAN NEEDS

Next, we examine individual need subcategories that present the
largest increase or decrease in search expressions, possibly due to
the pandemic impact. To explore these two ends of the spectrum,
we compute the mean relative changes in needs during the initial
four weeks of the pandemic period (Mar 16 to Apr 12) compared
to the pre-pandemic baseline, as described in Sec. 4.4. We then
examined the top 12 need subcategories with the largest increase
or decrease in the relative change.
Heightened Physiological and Safety Needs. Table 2 shows that
11 need subcategories with the most increase fall under Physiological
and Safety needs as seen from the temporal trends in Sec. 5, and one

ngr
el
at
edsi
t
ev
i
si
t
s
E SA Weddi

e COVI
D19pr
ot
ect
i
onpur
chase
B Saf

st
ancer
el
at
edquer
i
es
C PhysFoodassi

i
nesoci
al
act
i
v
i
t
i
esquer
i
es
D L&B Onl

Rel
at
i
v
eChangesi
nNeedsi
nLog2 Scal
e
(
bet
weenpr
epandemi
cbasel
i
neandeachday
)

Rel
at
i
v
eChangesi
nNeedsi
nLog2 Scal
e
(
bet
weenpr
epandemi
cbasel
i
neandeachday
)

e Unempl
oy
mentr
el
at
edquer
i
es
A Saf

i
ondegr
eer
el
at
edquer
i
es
F Cog Educat

e Jobsear
chr
el
at
edquer
i
es
G Saf

v
or
cer
el
at
edquer
i
es
H L&B Di

Figure 3: Daily relative changes in select needs with the largest
increase (A-D) and the largest decrease (E-H) in need. Vertical bars
denote the first reported US COVID case (Jan 20) and the US national
emergency declaration (Mar 13).

(online social activities queries) belongs to the Love and Belonging need
category. Toilet paper purchase reached a maximum increase of 127
times the pre-pandemic baseline (Mar 16). Recall that these are not
just queries containing ‘toilet paper’, but purchase intents as indicated
by subsequent clicks to e-commerce sites (Sec. 4.2). Such a high level
of interest in toilet papers is commonly attributed to panic buying due
to the supply scarcity [29] and media coverage [25]. Stimulus related
queries, including general terms like ‘loan forgiveness,’ reached an
even higher maximum increase of 286 times the baseline (Apr 18) and
is sustained at that high level through July, reflecting the magnitude
of the pandemic’s impact on the US economy.
When we examine the daily trends, we see that COVID-19
protection purchase exhibits a small peak (𝐶=1.0 on Jan 29) after
the first reported COVID-19 case (Jan 20), and the needs quickly
escalate from Feb 20 (Fig. 3B), at least three weeks earlier than other
needs (Fig. 3A,C,D) that do not escalate until the national emergency
declaration. A subsequent peak on Apr 3 (𝐶=5.6) coincides with
CDC’s updated recommendation on cloth-based mask use. We
also find that indicators of social-economic instabilities such as
unemployment site visits and food assistance related queries still have
not returned to their baseline levels (Fig. 3A,C), arguably because
the pandemic is still in effect. Online social activities queries follow
a similar pattern (Fig. 3D), reflecting the need to satisfy lock-down
induced social isolation through online services, but it also raises the
question of potential permanent shifts in ways of satisfying social
needs. Our findings revealed that only a few of these needs have
returned to the pre-pandemic baselines while many of them are
sustained at elevated rates.
Shifts Away from Positive Outlooks.
Table 3 shows the most decrease in the expression of several Self
Actualization and one Cognitive need subcategories. Specifically,
indications of Self Actualization needs for partnership have declined
by more than 64% (=2−1.49 –1) of their baseline throughout the
typical US wedding season around Spring and early Summer, which

is expected given restrictions on large gatherings. In addition, needs
that are typically associated with growth, positive outlook, or new
opportunities have taken a large toll. In Self Actualization, queries
about life goals also see a large decline. In other need categories,
needs expressed by educational degree related queries, job search
related queries, job search site visits, or housing related queries have
declined by over 34% (=2−0.61 –1) of their baseline.
Upon inspection of daily trends, expressions of forward-looking
needs have decreased and remain below the pre-pandemic baseline
(Fig. 3E,F,G). The sustained decline in job search related queries
(Fig. 3G) juxtaposed with near 30 times increase in unemployment
needs (Fig. 3A) is a troubling evidence of the declining labor force
as seen in other studies [16]. Indications of growth interests in
educational degrees or life goals have not recovered (Fig. 3F). These
results combined with heightened Physiological needs suggest a
shift of focus away from individual growth. Divorce related queries
exhibited a maximum of 47% (=2−0.93 ; Fig. 3H) decline, possibly
reflecting the challenges that families face in proceeding with divorce
during the lock downs [31]. Therefore, underlying mechanisms for
these shifts, long-term impact of the lack of growth needs, and
support for relationships should be further studied. See Appendix A.5
for corresponding figures on all 24 subcategories.

7

GEOGRAPHICAL DIFFERENCES IN NEEDS

We shift our attention to how the pandemic and its related
policies differentially influence local subpopulations. We use a set
of statewide policies1 readily available through the COVID-19 US
State Policy Database [47]. We examine the impact of the shelter-inplace mandate (its duration and effective date) on social-emotional
and relationship needs (i.e., eight Love and Belonging and two
wedding-related Self Actualization subcategories). We hypothesized
that social isolation induced by longer shelter-in-place mandates
generates more expressions of social-emotional needs.
We used the date on which the shelter-in-place mandate was
enacted and relaxed or lifted for 38 states to derive the mandate
duration2 . We compute two relative changes in needs for each state.
First, to understand the short-term impact of the shelter-in-place
mandate, we compute the relative change in needs for two weeks
after each state’s shelter-in-place mandate compared to the one week
before the mandates3 . Second, to understand the long-term impact
of the mandate, we compute the relative change in needs between
the pre-pandemic baseline and the last four weeks of our dataset (Jul
6 to Aug 2), which is at least two weeks after the last state lifted its
mandate (Jun 19). To quantify the potential impact of these mandates,
we ran a Pearson correlation analysis (1) between the start date of
the shelter-in-place mandates (i.e., ISO day number) and the shortterm relative changes in needs, and (2) between the duration of the
mandates and the long-term relative changes in needs.
Early Adjustments to Social Needs. The start date of shelterin-place mandates ranged between Mar 21 and Apr 7. We find
that the relative changes in online social activities queries (𝑟 =−0.53,
1 Although

our dataset allows ZIP code level analysis, a comprehensive list of local
policies across the US are difficult to obtain at ZIP code, city, or even county levels.
2 Only 38 states had the start and end dates in the dataset as of this writing.
3 We chose one week before the mandate because it is the maximum number of full
weeks after the declaration of national emergency and before the earliest start date (Mar
21) for any shelter-in-place mandate.

Shel
t
er
i
npl
acest
ar
tdat
e

Shel
t
er
i
npl
acedur
at
i
on(
day
s)

Figure 4: Relationships between shelter-in-place start date and
short-term relative changes in mental health and online social
activities needs between 1 week before and 2 weeks after shelterin-place mandates (A-B), and between shelter-in-place duration and
long-term relative changes in mental health and wedding needs
between pre-pandemic baseline and 4 weeks in July (C-D).

𝑝<0.001), wedding site visits ((𝑟 =0.48, 𝑝=0.002), wedding related
purchase (𝑟 =0.43, 𝑝=0.006), and mental health resource site visits
(𝑟 =0.47, 𝑝=0.003) needs were most correlated with the start date.
People from states that have earlier shelter-in-place mandates
expressed significantly reduced interests in weddings and mental
health site visits (Fig. 4A) and significantly more need for online
social activities (Fig. 4B). For example, in the two weeks after
the mandate, people in New Jersey (mandate on Mar 21) sought
online mental health resources 25.7% less than the week before
the mandate, while people in South Carolina (mandate on Apr 7)
sought those resources 13.4% more than the week before.
Long-term Social Impact. When we examine the long-term
changes in expressed needs, we find that shifts in negative mental
health experiential queries (𝑟 =0.42, 𝑝=0.010, Fig. 4C), wedding site
visits (𝑟 =−0.37, 𝑝=0.022, Fig. 4D), and wedding related purchase
(𝑟 =−0.35, 𝑝=0.033) were most correlated with the duration of
sheltering and closures. The duration of the shelter-in-place
mandates were highly correlated with the start date (𝑟 =−0.62,
𝑝<0.001), indicating that people faced with earlier mandates are also
impacted by longer mandates. As we discovered above, these people
likely suppressed their needs for weddings or mental health support
early during the pandemic. At the same time, as wedding needs
slowly recover to the pre-pandemic baseline (Fig. 3E), those impacted
by longer mandates are even slower in their recovery of wedding
needs and are more likely to express negative mental health issues.
For example, people in Mississippi (24 days of shelter-in-place)
expressed 33.2% less negative mental health experiences than before
the pandemic while people in Oregon (88 days) expressed 27.2% more
negative mental health experiences than before (Fig. 4C). Others
attribute this increase in negative emotions during the pandemic to
the shift to basic needs [13]. Per-state analysis of this shift along with
differential prevalence of COVID-19 may be necessary to understand
the mechanisms for this increase in negative emotions and to provide
appropriate social-emotional support.

Unempl
oy
mtneeds
f
r
om Bi
ngsear
ch
Unempl
oy
mtcl
ai
ms
f
r
om USDOL

Rel
at
i
v
eChangei
nNeedsi
nLog2Scal
e

ngsi
t
ev
i
si
t
s
D SA Weddi

A

(
bet
weenpr
epandemi
cbasel
i
neandeachday
)

al
heal
t
hex
p.quer
i
es
C L&B Neg.ment

Rel
at
i
v
eChangei
nNeedsi
nLog2Scal
e

L
or
em I
ps
um

(
bet
weenpr
epandemi
cbasel
i
neandeachday
)

i
nesoci
al
act
i
v
i
t
i
esquer
i
es
B L&B Onl

Rel
at
i
v
eChangei
nNeedsi
nLog2Scal
e
(
bet
weenpr
epandemi
cbasel
i
neand4weeksi
nJul
y
)

Rel
at
i
v
eChangei
nNeedsi
nLog2Scal
e
(
bet
ween1weekbef
or
eand2weeksaf
t
ershel
t
er
i
npl
ace)

al
heal
t
hr
esour
cesi
t
ev
i
si
t
s
A L&BMent

B

Domest
i
cv
i
ol
ence
Fi
r
ear
m pur
chase

Figure 5: Weekly relative changes in unemployment needs from
Bing search and in unemployment claims from the US Department
of Labor compared to pre-pandemic baseline (A), and daily relative
changes in domestic violence and firearm purchase needs compared
to pre-pandemic baseline (B).

8

GAPS BETWEEN EXPRESSED AND
REPORTED NEEDS

As we have demonstrated so far, there are many needs that are
well expressed by web search interactions such as purchasing goods
online, looking for health information online, or accessing economic
assistance through government websites. Our final analysis examines
a gap between how web search facilitates the expression of these
needs and the reported fulfillment of these needs to discover potential
barriers to accessing critical resources. To demonstrate how our
approach allows for exploring these barriers, we focus on two need
subcategories: unemployment and domestic violence.
Expressed Unemployment Needs vs. Reported Claims. We
obtained weekly, seasonally adjusted initial unemployment claims
for 2020 from the US Department of Labor4 and computed the
relative changes in unemployment claims using the same approach
as in Sec. 4.4. We compare the change in reported unemployment
claims with the change in expression of unemployment needs
in search and find that these two changes are closely aligned
(Pearson 𝑟 =0.996, 𝑝<0.001) (Fig. 5A). Despite policies that extend
unemployment eligibility for up to 26 weeks during the pandemic,
we see that the expression of unemployment needs remain at
25% higher than the reported claims since April. This discrepancy
corroborates with known issues with the unemployment benefits:
many people were confused about the benefits (e.g., job search
requirement) and were being denied, having to search for more
information or file multiple applications [9, 51]. Although our
analysis excludes those who use traditional methods for filing
unemployment claims (e.g., mail, phone), our results indicate that
web search is a critical resource that facilitates unemployment
needs and highlight a potential gap in satisfying unemployment
needs which requires further investigation.
Expressed Domestic Violence Needs vs. Reports. One of the
dire consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic is an increased risk
of domestic violence due to shelter-in-place mandates exacerbated
by physical, financial, and social-emotional stressors and increased
alcohol consumption at home [12, 33]. Our analysis shows that the
expression of needs for domestic violence queries has dropped by
nearly 36.7% (=2−0.66 –1) since the pandemic and stabilized at around
-15.9% (=2−0.25 –1, Fig. 5B) below pre-pandemic levels. Interests in
firearm purchase have increased by over 40% (=20.5 –1), corroborating
4 https://oui.doleta.gov/unemploy/claims.asp

other reports of increased gun sales and gun violence and worrisome
links to fatal domestic violence incidents [12, 30, 53].
A similar decrease in domestic violence related metrics in March
is seen by national hotlines5 . Some reports point to potential
underreporting by victims unable to reach out for help under
constant surveillance by the offenders at home and fearful of
exposure to the virus at a shelter [10, 52]. Although the expansion
of online resources are critical to addressing the rise in domestic
violence [36], many studies highlight the need to recognize control
tactics that prevent access to these digital resources [48]. The
sustained decrease in domestic violence queries seen in our data
may indicate such barriers or shifts in access methods for these
online resources. The complexities of domestic violence are evident
in the inconsistencies across many data sources, resource media,
and contexts. Our results frame an urgent question that needs to
be resolved through expertise in domestic violence and social work
organizations and through careful combination of multiple data
sources to identify the underlying explanations for our findings.

9

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

We presented a computational methodology based on theories of
human needs to quantify the effects of the pandemic and its related
events on web search interactions. Although all need categories had
elevated changes in needs, we found that basic need subcategories
were elevated the most while growth-based need subcategories,
indicative of positive outlooks in life, were subdued (Sections 5, 6).
We also found that earlier and longer shelter-in-place mandates may
come with an unintended impact on mental health needs (Sec. 7).
We used unemployment and domestic violence related queries to
demonstrate how our methodology could help expose gaps between
the expression and fulfillment of needs–and frame questions and
directions for urgent investigation (Sec. 8).
Limitations. We cannot use our method to make causal claims.
If other major, concurrent events (e.g., Black Lives Matter) have
significantly influenced human needs during the observations
window, we are not be able to distinguish between needs caused
by the pandemic or these events. However, our analysis clearly
presents changes in the expression of human needs which can
be important on its own for understanding rising needs and
in considering factors for the design of specific interventions.
Our analysis relies on heuristics and correct inference of needs
from search interactions. But our framework is theory-driven,
comprehensive, and achieves 97% precision across five main
need categories. Further fine-tuning of the framework should
be motivated by precision-recall requirements of individual
analysis goals. Although expressions of needs may not reflect the
actual underlying human needs, the methodology serves as a
useful detector for needs, as we have demonstrated through its
corroboration with several external findings, and combining our
methodology with additional data sources and interdisciplinary
collaboration can further the understanding of changes in human
needs during global crises. In contrast to traditional methods of
measuring needs, our approach can operate at population scales
relying solely on data that is already routinely collected by web
5 https://crisistrends.org/;

https://www.thehotline.org/

search engines, and thus allows for effective, retrospective, and
fine-grained studies with observation periods of over one year.
Implications: Resilience and Vulnerability. Our work has
demonstrated major shifts in a spectrum of human needs during the
pandemic, echoing the need to understand the societal, economic,
and psychosocial effects of these events and the underlying system
of human needs. Such understanding is essential for guiding
programs around outreach and support of people during the
current pandemic and preparing for future pandemic responses and
recovery efforts [49]. We observed that some needs have returned
to their baseline levels while others are sustained at elevated (e.g.,
health and economic instability) or suppressed (e.g., job search,
educational degree) levels (Fig. 3). As we saw in Sec. 5, temporal
variations on how and when certain needs arise in response to major
disruptions could indicate a degree of psychological and economic
resilience [22, 37]. Understanding how well a region can endure
disruptions is crucial for balancing health risks against societal risks,
especially for vulnerable populations who are severely impacted
by the pandemic [15]. Our framework could be used to quantify
how much a community has been and might be able to endure
social and economic distress. For example, a region may be able
to withstand prolonged business closures before loan forgiveness
needs surge, while another region may show immediate need for
financial stimulus. In addition, when coupled with demographic
variables, our framework could be used to examine disparities in
needs which may help with understandings of the disparate impacts
of blanket policies on the most vulnerable populations.
Implications: Preparedness and Resources. Our work revealed
strong correlations indicative of a long-term mental health impact
of longer shelter-in-place mandate, suggesting that states with
longer duration of shelter-in-place mandates may need to provide
additional support for social emotional well-being (Fig. 4). We
also saw potential barriers to accessing critical resources for
unemployment and domestic violence; a decrease in domestic
violence queries in spite of conflicting anecdotes should raise
questions and an alarm (Fig. 5). These examples suggest that
expressions of needs through web interactions could highlight
resource deficiencies or barriers. As regions prepare recovery
efforts from COVID-19 or make plans for future disruptions, our
methodology can be harnessed to monitor or anticipate a spectrum
of needs at various geotemporal granularities; this could help reveal
impacts of the pandemic (e.g., mental health [18]) and cater the
appropriate interventions that meet individual and societal needs.
Future Directions. We see this work as a step towards achieving
a more holistic understanding of the multiple influences of the
pandemic and associated policies and programs. While we focused
on retrospective analyses, our approach has the potential to be
used in near real-time to monitor human needs and support
future policy decisions. Understanding the disparate impacts of
the pandemic and its policies on a full spectrum of human needs,
especially for vulnerable populations, is critical for designing
response and recovery efforts for major disruptions. Our work
highlighted future research opportunities and calls for action and
collaboration across epidemiology, economy, social sciences, risk
management, and more. We look forward to further refinement

of the methods presented and hope the work will encourage
discussions on observing and addressing changes across a broad
spectrum of human needs during a global crisis.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the reviewers and colleagues for their valuable feedback.
This research was supported in part by NSF grant IIS-1901386, Bill
& Melinda Gates Foundation (INV-004841), and the Allen Institute
for Artificial Intelligence.

REFERENCES
[1] 2020. A Look at How Home Care Product Claim Preferences Have Shifted Amid
the COVID-19 Pandemic. https://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/article/2020/
a-look-at-how-home-care-product-claim-preferences-have-shifted-amid-thecovid-19-pandemic/
[2] K. A. Abay, K. Tafere, and A. Woldemichael. 2020. Winners and Losers from
COVID-19: Global Evidence from Google Search. World Bank Policy Research
Working Paper (2020).
[3] W. Albert and T. Tullis. 2013. Measuring the user experience: collecting, analyzing,
and presenting usability metrics. Newnes.
[4] R. Alharthi, B. Guthier, C. Guertin, and A. El Saddik. 2017. A dataset for
psychological human needs detection from social networks. IEEE Access 5 (2017).
[5] T. Althoff, E. Horvitz, and R. W. White. 2018. Psychomotor function measured
via online activity predicts motor vehicle fatality risk. NPJ Digit. Med. 1, 1 (2018).
[6] T. Althoff, E. Horvitz, R. W. White, and J. Zeitzer. 2017. Harnessing the web for
population-scale physiological sensing: A case study of sleep and performance.
In WWW.
[7] T. Althoff, T. W. White, and E. Horvitz. 2016. Influence of Pokémon Go on
physical activity: Study and implications. JMIR 18, 12 (2016).
[8] C Baek, P. B. McCrory, T. Messer, and P. Mui. 2020. Unemployment effects of
stay-at-home orders: Evidence from high frequency claims data. Institute for
Research on Labor and Employment Working Paper (2020).
[9] P. Bhardwaj. 2020. Most Job Search Requirements for Unemployment Benefits
Are Waived. So Why Do State Websites Say Otherwise? https://money.com/
unemployment-benefits-job-search-requirements-coronavirus/
[10] Lindsey Rose Bullinger, Jillian B Carr, and Analisa Packham. 2020. COVID-19 and
Crime: Effects of Stay-at-Home Orders on Domestic Violence. Technical Report.
National Bureau of Economic Research.
[11] U.S. Census Bureau. 2014-2018. American Community Survey 5-year estimates.
Retrieved June 8, 2020 from https://censusreporter.org
[12] A. M. Campbell. 2020. An increasing risk of family violence during the Covid-19
pandemic: Strengthening community collaborations to save lives. Forensic Science
International: Reports (2020).
[13] L. Cerbara, G. Ciancimino, M. Crescimbene, F. La Longa, M. R. Parsi, A. Tintori,
and R. Palomba. 2020. A nation-wide survey on emotional and psychological
impacts of COVID-19 social distancing. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci 24, 12 (2020).
[14] H. Choi and H. Varian. 2012. Predicting the present with Google Trends. Economic
record 88 (2012).
[15] M. Chowkwanyun and A. L. Reed Jr. 2020. Racial health disparities and Covid19—caution and context. New England Journal of Medicine (2020).
[16] O. Coibion, Y. Gorodnichenko, and M. Weber. 2020. Labor markets during the
covid-19 crisis: A preliminary view. Technical Report. NBER.
[17] T. J. Cole and D. G. Altman. 2017. Statistics notes: percentage differences,
symmetry, and natural logarithms. Bmj 358 (2017).
[18] M. É. Czeisler, R. I. Lane, E. Petrosky, et al. 2020. Mental Health, Substance Use,
and Suicidal Ideation During the COVID-19 Pandemic – United States, June 2–30,
2020. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep (2020).
[19] J. B. Dimick and A. M. Ryan. 2014. Methods for evaluating changes in health
care policy: the difference-in-differences approach. Jama 312, 22 (2014).
[20] S. Dumais, R. Jeffries, D. M. Russell, D. Tang, and J. Teevan. 2014. Understanding
user behavior through log data and analysis. In Ways of Knowing in HCI. Springer.
[21] F. D’Amuri and J. Marcucci. 2010. ’Google it!’Forecasting the US unemployment
rate with a Google job search index. (2010).
[22] D. Fletcher and M. Sarkar. 2013. Psychological resilience: A review and critique
of definitions, concepts, and theory. European psychologist 18, 1 (2013).
[23] A. Fourney, R. W. White, and E. Horvitz. 2015. Exploring time-dependent concerns
about pregnancy and childbirth from search logs. In ACM CHI.
[24] G. H. Gallup. 1976. Human needs and satisfactions: A global survey. Public
opinion quarterly 40, 4 (1976).
[25] D. R. Garfin, R. C. Silver, and E. A. Holman. 2020. The novel coronavirus (COVID2019) outbreak: Amplification of public health consequences by media exposure.
Health Psychology (2020).

[26] J. Ginsberg, M. H. Mohebbi, R. S. Patel, L. Brammer, M. S. Smolinski, and L.
Brilliant. 2009. Detecting influenza epidemics using search engine query data.
Nature 457, 7232 (2009).
[27] C. Graff. 2014. Expressing relative differences (in percent) by the difference of
natural logarithms. Journal of Mathematical Psychology 60 (2014).
[28] S. Gupta, L. Montenovo, T. D. Nguyen, F. L. Rojas, I. M. Schmutte, K. I. Simon,
B. A. Weinberg, and C. Wing. 2020. Effects of social distancing policy on labor
market outcomes. Technical Report. NBER.
[29] R. Hamilton. 2020. Scarcity and Coronavirus. J. Public Policy Mark. (2020).
[30] J. S. Hatchimonji, R. A. Swendiman, M. J. Seamon, and M. L. Nance. 2020. Trauma
does not quarantine: Violence during the Covid-19 pandemic. Ann. Surg. (2020).
[31] J. L. Lebow. 2020. The Challenges of COVID-19 for Divorcing and Post-divorce
Families. Family Process (2020).
[32] M. Lechner et al. 2011. The estimation of causal effects by difference-in-difference
methods. Foundations and Trends R in Econometrics.
[33] W. Li and B. Schwartzapfel. 2020.
Is Domestic Violence Rising
During the Coronavirus Shutdown? Here’s What the Data Shows.
https://www.themarshallproject.org/2020/04/22/is-domestic-violence-risingduring-the-coronavirus-shutdown-here-s-what-the-data-shows/
[34] Y-H Lin, C-H Liu, and Y-C Chiu. 2020. Google searches for the keywords of
“wash hands” predict the speed of national spread of COVID-19 outbreak among
21 countries. Brain, Behavior, and Immunity (2020).
[35] Z. Long, R. Alharthi, and A. El Saddik. 2020. NeedFull–A Tweet Analysis Platform
to study Human Needs during the COVID-19 pandemic in New York State. IEEE
Access (2020).
[36] Elisabeth Mahase. 2020. Covid-19: EU states report 60% rise in emergency calls
about domestic violence. BMJ: British Medical Journal (Online) 369 (2020).
[37] R. Martin and P. Sunley. 2015. On the notion of regional economic resilience:
conceptualization and explanation. Journal of Economic Geography 15, 1 (2015).
[38] A. H. Maslow. 1943. A Theory of Human Motivation. Psychol. Rev. (1943).
[39] A. H. Maslow. 1970. New introduction: Religions, values, and peak-experiences.
Journal of Transpersonal Psychology 2, 2 (1970).
[40] E. W. Mathes and L. L. Edwards. 1978. An empirical test of Maslow’s theory of
motivation. Journal of Humanistic Psychology 18, 1 (1978).
[41] M. A. Max-Neef. 1992. Human scale development: conception, application and
further reflections. Number 04; HC125, M3.
[42] V. F. Mitchell and P. Moudgill. 1976. Measurement of Maslow’s need hierarchy.
Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process 16, 2 (1976).
[43] S. Moss et al. 2010. An introduction to the entertainment industry. The
entertainment industry: An introduction (2010).
[44] M. J. Paul, R. W. White, and E. Horvitz. 2016. Search and breast cancer: On
episodic shifts of attention over life histories of an illness. TWEB 10, 2 (2016).
[45] B. Pfefferbaum and C. S. North. 2020. Mental health and the Covid-19 pandemic.
New England Journal of Medicine (2020).
[46] T. S. Pittman and K. R. Zeigler. 2007. Basic human needs. (2007).
[47] J. Raifman, K. Nocka, D. Jones, J. Bor, S. Lipson, J. Jay, M. Cole, N. Krawczyk, P.
Chan, S. Galea, et al. 2020. COVID-19 US state policy database. (2020).
[48] Stuart Ross and Sophie Aitken. 2020. “If It Hadn’t Been Online I Don’t Think
I Would Have Applied”: Applicant Experiences of an Online Family Violence
Intervention Order Process. Journal of interpersonal violence (2020).
[49] B. J. Ryan, D. Coppola, D. V. Canyon, M. Brickhouse, and R. Swienton.
2020. COVID-19 Community Stabilization and Sustainability Framework: An
Integration of the Maslow Hierarchy of Needs and Social Determinants of Health.
Disaster medicine and public health preparedness (2020).
[50] A. Sadilek, S. Caty, L. DiPrete, R. Mansour, T. Schenk, M. Bergtholdt, A. Jha, P.
Ramaswami, and E. Gabrilovich. 2018. Machine-learned epidemiology: real-time
detection of foodborne illness at scale. NPJ Digit. Med. 1, 1 (2018).
[51] N. D. Schwartz, T. Hsu, and P. Cohen. 2020. Stymied in Seeking Benefits, Millions
of Unemployed Go Uncounted. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/30/business/
economy/coronavirus-unemployment-claims.html
[52] A. Southall. 2020. Why a Drop in Domestic Violence Reports Might Not Be a
Good Sign. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/17/nyregion/new-york-citydomestic-violence-coronavirus.html
[53] M. Sutherland, M. McKenney, and A. Elkbuli. 2020. Gun violence during COVID19 pandemic: Paradoxical trends in New York City, Chicago, Los Angeles and
Baltimore. The American Journal of Emergency Medicine (2020).
[54] L. Tay and E. Diener. 2011. Needs and subjective well-being around the world.
Journal of personality and social psychology 101, 2 (2011).
[55] A. Tubadji, F. Boy, and D. J. Webber. 2020. Narrative economics, public policy
and mental health. Covid Economics 20 (2020).
[56] K. Usher, N. Bhullar, and D. Jackson. 2020. Life in the pandemic: Social isolation
and mental health. Journal of Clinical Nursing (2020).
[57] F. J. van Lenthe, T. Jansen, and C.B.M. Kamphuis. 2015. Understanding socioeconomic inequalities in food choice behaviour: can Maslow’s pyramid help?
British Journal of Nutrition 113, 7 (2015).
[58] M. A. Wahba and L. G. Bridwell. 1976. Maslow reconsidered: A review of research
on the need hierarchy theory. Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process 15, 2 (1976).

[59] I. Weber, V. R. K. Garimella, and E. Borra. 2012. Mining web query logs to analyze
political issues. In WebSci.
[60] G. A. Wellenius, S. Vispute, V. Espinosa, A. Fabrikant, T. C. Tsai, J. Hennessy, B.
Williams, K. Gadepalli, A. Boulange, A. Pearce, et al. 2020. Impacts of state-level
policies on social distancing in the united states using aggregated mobility data
during the covid-19 pandemic. arXiv:2004.10172
[61] R. West, R. W. White, and E. Horvitz. 2013. From cookies to cooks: Insights on
dietary patterns via analysis of web usage logs. In WWW.
[62] R. West, R. W.. White, and E. Horvitz. 2013. Here and there: Goals, activities, and
predictions about location from geotagged queries. In ACM SIGIR.
[63] H. Yang and Y. Li. 2013. Identifying user needs from social media. IBM Research
Division, San Jose (2013).
[64] M-L Zhang and Z-H Zhou. 2013. A review on multi-label learning algorithms.
IEEE Trans Knowl Data Eng 26, 8 (2013).

A ONLINE APPENDIX
A.1 Analyzing National Representation
To understand how much of the US population is represented
by the collected data, we obtained demographics data from the
Census Reporter API [11] for ZIP codes represented in our dataset.
Census Reporter API provides demographics data for 32,989 US
ZIP codes, and not all of the ZIP codes in our dataset have
available demographics information through this service. Between
our dataset and the demographics data, we have 96.4% overlap of ZIP
codes, representing 97.5% of total queries in our dataset. Table A1
summarizes the median of the select 11 demographic variables for
ZIP codes in our dataset in comparison to all available ZIP codes in
Census Reporter. Given 96.4% overlap, we find that the ZIP codes
in our dataset closely mirrors the US population. Although query
volumes are not uniformly distributed across these ZIP codes, the
vast majority of US ZIP codes is included in our dataset.

Population
Median Income
Median Age
% Race White
% Male
% HS Grad or Higher
Gini Index
% Below Poverty Lvl.
% Housing Owned
% Has Internet

Our Dataset

Census

3,072
$54,231
41.8
0.87
0.5
0.9
0.42
0.12
0.76
0.77

2,775
$54,048
41.9
0.88
0.5
0.9
0.42
0.12
0.76
0.76

Table A1: Distribution of demographic variables (median) for US
ZIP codes in our dataset compared to all of the available US ZIP
codes in the census data.

A.2

Corr Coeff

% Housing Owned
% Female
% Race White
Median Income
% Has Internet
% HS Grad or Higher
Median Age
% Below Poverty Level

-0.058***
-0.029***
-0.024***
0.021***
0.019***
0.018***
-0.010
-0.007

*𝑝 < 0.05, **𝑝 < 0.01, ***𝑝 < 0.001
Table A2: Pearson correlation between Bing client rate and
demographic variables for each ZIP code.

because the Google Trends public API does not support regular
expressions or access to the click interactions. We chose 9 keywords
that were representative of their respective need subcategory
(i.e., ‘online learning’ captures online education queries), had a
significantly larger query volume compared to other keywords
in the need categories (i.e., ‘hand sanitizer’ had more query volume
than ‘mask’), or may have a seasonal effect (i.e., query volume for
‘tax’ could depend on the tax season). We conducted a correlation
analysis on a moving average of a full week to account for timezone
differences between the two data sources. Visual inspection of
both Google and Bing trends confirm that search patterns across
these two search engines are remarkably similar (Fig. A1), and
Pearson correlation coefficients are very high with a median of 0.96
(min=0.45, max=0.98, all 𝑝<0.001). Table A3 summarizes Pearson
correlation outputs. These results imply that our findings are not
simply an artifact of using one search engine over another.

Analyzing Selection Bias

We sought to understand potential biases in socioeconomic
circumstances that would influence the usage of Bing search engine.
We leveraged deidentified client id as a proxy for a unique user to
estimate the ‘client rate’, or how much of the population in a ZIP
code is using the Bing search engine. We examined the correlation
between the client rate and various demographic factors at the
ZIP code level (e.g., income, race, age, gender, education, housing,
internet access). Although unsurprisingly the factors describe some
of the variance, none were correlated more strongly than 𝑟 =-0.058
(% Housing Owned). Table A2 summarizes Pearson correlation
statistics. These results suggest that our dataset is not strongly
biased towards any single demographic.

A.3

Demographic Variable

Reliability of Search Interaction Trends

Although our analysis relies solely on Bing search data, many
Americans use other search engines such as Google. Therefore, we
compared search trends for Bing with data available via the Google
Trends API6 for the same time period and a subset of keywords.
We chose to use select keywords from each need category, rather
than applying our needs aggregation pipeline (described in Sec. 4.2),
6 https://trends.google.com/

Figure A1: Comparison of Bing and Google trends data on select
keywords. The query counts are normalized where 1.0 denotes the
maximum query count in each keyword trend. Bing trends (blue)
closely follow Google trends (orange) with a median correlation of
r=0.96.

A.4

Human Needs Categories and Detection

We draw inspiration from Maslow’s hierarchy of fundamental
human needs [38, 39] to tag each search interaction. Of the eight toplevel human needs from Maslow’s expanded hierarchy of needs, we
omit Esteem, Aesthetics, and Transcendence because they are difficult

Need

Keyword

Corr Coeff

SA
SA
SA
Cog
L&B
Safe
Safe
Safe
Safe
Phys
Phys
Phys
Phys

recipe
netflix
“online games with friends”
“online learning”
“online dating”
unemployment
“hand sanitizer”
tax
gun
“grocery delivery”
coronavirus
“food stamp”
health

0.960***
0.935***
0.896***
0.973***
0.448***
0.977***
0.966***
0.913***
0.764***
0.980***
0.964***
0.963***
0.888***

*𝑝 < 0.05, **𝑝 < 0.01, ***𝑝 < 0.001
Table A3: Pearson correlation between Bing search trend and
Google search trend for each keyword. Quotation marks indicate
that the entire string is matched.

to operationalize from observational data alone. We categorize
search behaviors into one or more of five broad categories of needs.
Safety and Physiological are considered as ‘basic’ needs. Love and
Belonging, Cognitive, and Self Actualization are often considered to
be ‘psychological’ needs, and Cognitive and Self Actualization are
considered as ‘growth’ needs.
We obtain further granularity of the 5 human need categories by
decomposing each need category into many sub-need categories.
This extra level of granularity has advantages in teasing apart
the specific aspects of the need (e.g., shelter vs. finances in Safety
needs) and in debugging and refining the detection logic. Table A4
enumerates 79 sub-needs and their examples.
For each need subcategory, we had multiple regular expressions
applied to either the query string, the clicked URL, or both. This
is noted in Table A4 under the ‘Logic’ column. ‘Keyword and
domain (KD)’ logic indicates that there is one regular expression
for matching query strings and another regular expression for
matching clicked URLs. Both must be matched for the search
interaction to be categorized as that need. ‘Queries (Q)’ logic
indicates that there is one regular expression for query strings
alone regardless of the clicked URLs. ‘Domains (D)’ logic indicates
that there is one regular expression for clicked URLs regardless of
the query strings. A full table of regular expressions used in the
data collection is provided in a separate supplementary file and can
be cross-referenced through the ‘Need Id’ column7 .
There were several steps in arriving at these subcategories and
regular expressions. We first identified a set of e-commerce websites
(1) from market research blog posts and reports that were publicly
available online and (2) from enumerating top 100 URL hosts from
a sample of search interactions that were tagged as purchase or
commerce related using built-in classifiers in Bing. We combined
these two data sources to manually curate a list of 61 e-commerce
domains.
Next, we collected another sample of query strings that led to
subsequent clicks to these e-commerce domains as well as page
snippets that were displayed on the search result page. Using the
7 https://github.com/jinasuh/pandemic_needs

Latent Dirichlet Allocation module in gensim, a popular topic
modeling tool in python, we trained an unsupervised topic model
on the query strings and the associated page snippets for 100, 500,
and 1000 topics on 100,000 unigrams. We manually inspected the
keywords in the topics to curate 22 topics of over 800 keywords. We
also extracted frequent bigrams from the same dataset to expand
our keywords if existing unigrams were too ambiguous. These
topics represented purchase categories because they were collected
from search interactions with subsequent clicks to e-commerce
websites.
Our next step was to categorize these topics into five main
need categories. We used a hybrid card sorting method [3] with
5 participants who merged, split, edited, or created these topics
into need subcategories. Then these need subcategories were then
placed into the 5 main need categories.
Using the outputs from the card sorting activity as a basis, we
further brainstormed subcategories beyond purchase categories.
Several researchers independently brainstormed and categorized
subcategories which were combined and resolved collaboratively
through consensus meetings. We referred to the definitions
presented in the theories of human needs to resolve any remaining
disagreements [38].
Once the need categories and subcategories were identified, we
leveraged keywords and domains from manually curated topics
and card sort outputs. We also obtained a list of topical domains
from publicly available blog posts and articles summarizing
recommended websites (e.g., search for best parenting website) or
manually curated a list of domains (e.g., search for unemployment
benefit page for each state). Again, we independently brainstormed
and curated lists of keywords, keyword patterns, and domains
for each subcategory and collaboratively iterated on the lists
through consensus meetings. These keywords, keyword patterns,
and domain URLs were combined into many regular expressions
that we used to tag each search interaction.
We validated our detection logic by collecting human labels
from Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, and our evaluation set achieved a
precision of 97.2%, as described in detail in Sec. 4.3. A screenshot of
an example task seen by a crowd worker is shown in Fig. A2, and
the full set of detailed task instructions can be found at the end of
this Appendix.

Need Category

Need Id

Subcategory

Logic

Example

SelfActualization

SA1
SA2
SA3
SA4
SA5
SA6
SA7
SA8
SA9
SA10
SA11
SA12
SA13
SA14
SA15
SA16
SA17
SA18
SA19
SA20
SA21
SA22
SA23
SA24
SA25
SA26
SA27
SA28
SA29
SA30
SA31
SA32

Audio/video related purchase
Books and reading related purchase
Charity related queries
Cooking related purchase
Cooking related queries
Cooking site visits
Crafts instruction queries
Crafts related purchase
DIY site visits
Home improvement purchase
Home improvement related queries
Home improvement site visits
Life goal related queries
Media related purchase
Music instruction queries
Musical instrument related purchase
Outdoor related purchase
Outdoor related queries
Outdoor site visits
Parenting site visits
Pet related purchase
Pet related queries
Pet related site visits
Photography related purchase
Photography related queries
Sports related purchase
Streaming media site visits
Technology related purchase
Toys and gaming purchase
Toys and gaming site visits
Wedding related purchase
Wedding site visits

KD
KD
Q
KD
Q
D
Q
KD
D
KD
Q
D
Q
KD
Q
KD
KD
Q
D
D
KD
Q
D
KD
Q
KD
D
KD
KD
D
KD
D

home theater + e-commerce url click
comics + e-commerce url click
charity; donations
cookbooks + e-commerce url click
how to saute onions
click on foodnetwork.com
how to embroider
scrapbooking + e-commerce url click
click on instructables.com
circular saw + e-commerce url click
remodeling; wood working
click on homedepot.com
goals for living; personal goals
dvd player + e-commerce url click
learn to play guitar; how to play a drum
piano + e-commerce url click
hiking shoes + e-commerce url click
best national parks
click on rei.com
click on parents.com
ferret + e-commerce url click
care for frogs
click on petco.com
photography + e-commerce url click
how to take pictures of a bird
elliptical trainer + e-commerce url click
click on netflix.com
ethernet + e-commerce url click
xbox + e-commerce url click
click on twitch.tv
wedding decorations + e-commerce url click
click on theknot.com

Cognitive

C1
C2
C3
C4

Cognition related queries
Educational degree related queries
Educational site visits
Online education queries

Q
Q
D
Q

improve memory; cant pay attention
degree program; online diploma
click on coursera.org
learn remotely; lesson plans

LoveBelonging

LB1
LB2
LB3
LB4
LB5
LB6
LB7
LB8

Dating related queries
Dating site visits
Divorce related queries
Mental health experiential queries
Mental health resource site visits
Online social activities queries
Social network site visits
Social technology uses

Q
D
Q
Q
D
Q
D
KD

online dating; relationship advice
click on tinder.com
divorce lawyer; file for divorce
im alone; i feel depressed
click on talkspace.com
online activities with family
click on facebook.com
families + click on whatsapp.com

S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
S7
S8
S9

Bank related queries
Bankruptcy related queries
COVID-19 protection purchase
Domestic violence queries
Eviction related queries
Financial loan related queries
Firearm purchase
Housing related queries
Job search related queries

Q
Q
KD
Q
Q
Q
KD
Q
Q

banks; banking
foreclosure;bankruptcy
disposable masks; sanitizers
domestic assult; abusive relationship
evicted; rent moratorium
borrower; mortgage
glock holster + e-commerce url click
best neighborhoods; housing safety
job application; resume

Safety

Physiological

S10
S11
S12
S13
S14
S15

Job search site visits
Rental related queries
State unemployment site visits
Stimulus related queries
Tax related queries
Unemployment related queries

D
Q
D
Q
Q
Q

click on indeed.com
rental apartments; houses for rent
click on www.michigan.gov/uia
relief fund; loan forgiveness
irs; tax
im unemployed; jobless benefits

P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
P7
P8
P9
P10
P11
P12
P13
P14
P15
P16
P17
P18
P19
P20

Apparel purchase
Automobile related purchase
Beverage purchase
Cookware purchase
Food and beverage related queries
Food assistance related queries
Food delivery related queries
Food delivery site visits
Grocery related queries
Grocery site visits
Health condition related queries
Health first aid purchase
Health measurement equipment purchase
Health symptom related queries
Household good purchase
Insomnia related queries
Prescription related queries
Prescription site visits
Sleep aid purchase
Toilet paper purchase

KD
KD
KD
KD
KD
Q
Q
D
Q
D
Q
KD
KD
Q
KD
Q
Q
D
KD
KD

athletic wear + e-commerce url click
motorcycle + e-commerce url click
coffee + e-commerce url click
cookie sheet + e-commerce url click
applesauce; noodle soup
food stamps; snap program
grocery delivery; deliver meal
click on instacart.com
grocery; groceries
click on albertsons.com
arthritis; diabetes
bandaid; wound closure
oximeter + e-commerce site visits
i lost hearing; blurred vision
cleaning supplies + e-commerce url click
I cant sleep; help falling asleep
medication interactions; pharmacies
click on rxlist.com
sleep supplement; melatonin
toilet paper; cottenelle

Table A4: Human need categories and subcategories with examples. Under the Logic column, ‘KD’ refers to matching both query string and
clicked URL, ‘Q’ refers to matching query string only, and ‘D’ refers to matching clicked URL only. Need Id is provided to cross-reference with
a full regular expression table provided in a separate file.

Significant Changes in Human Needs
PhysToi
l
etpaperpur
chase

SA Weddi
ngr
el
at
edpur
chase

Saf
e St
i
mul
usr
el
at
edquer
i
es

SA Weddi
ngsi
t
ev
i
si
t
s

Saf
e Unempl
oy
mentr
el
at
edquer
i
es

Cog Edu.degr
eer
el
at
edquer
i
es

Saf
e St
at
eunempl
oy
mentsi
t
ev
i
si
t
s

Saf
e COVI
D19pr
ot
ect
i
onpur
chase

PhysHeal
t
hmeas.equi
pmentquer
i
es

PhysHeal
t
hcondi
t
i
onr
el
at
edquer
i
es

PhysFoodassi
st
ancer
el
at
edquer
i
es

PhysGr
ocer
yr
el
at
edquer
i
es

Rel
at
i
v
eChangesi
nNeedsi
nLog2Scal
e(
bet
weenpr
epandemi
cbasel
i
neandeachday
)

Figure A2: Example labeling task for Amazon’s Mechanical Turk
crowd worker. A query string and/or a clicked domain URL is
displayed with multi-select options for five need categories. Each
option includes a brief description and a set of example topics for
the category.

Rel
at
i
v
eChangesi
nNeedsi
nLog2Scal
e(
bet
weenpr
epandemi
cbasel
i
neandeachday
)

A.5

Saf
e Housi
ngr
el
at
edquer
i
es

Saf
e Jobsear
chr
el
at
edquer
i
es

Saf
e Jobsear
chsi
t
ev
i
si
t
s

PhysAppar
el
pur
chase

SA Out
doorr
el
at
edquer
i
es

SA Li
f
egoal
r
el
at
edquer
i
es

PhysFooddel
i
v
er
yquer
i
es

Saf
e Domest
i
cv
i
ol
encequer
i
es

L&B Onl
i
nesoci
al
act
i
v
i
t
i
esquer
i
es

Saf
e Rent
al
r
el
at
edquer
i
es

PhysFooddel
i
v
er
ysi
t
ev
i
si
t
s

L&B Di
v
or
cer
el
at
edquer
i
es

Figure A3: Daily relative changes in needs for top 12 need
subcategories with the largest increase (left) and top 12 need
subcategories with the largest decrease (right). Vertical bars denote
the first reported US COVID case (Jan 20) and the US national
emergency declaration (Mar 13).

Human Need Detection Instructions
A search query can be an expression of an underlying human need.
For example, if I am running a fever and want to purchase a fever reducer online
(physiological need), my query might be "tylenol" with a subsequent click to
amazon.com in the search results to purchase the item. If I am pursuing baking as a
hobby (self actualization need), my query might be "how to bake a perfect sourdough",
and the subsequent clicks do not matter much to understand the intent for that query.
Or if I am visiting coursera.org, it might indicate that I want to learn a new topic
(cognitive need).
In this task, please read the search query and the subsequent website visit (if available)
to determine which of the following human needs category it belongs to. Search queries
should seek information, express interest, intend to purchase or obtain goods that could
satisfy these needs.

Human Needs Definitions
Self Actualization Need
Self actualization needs are about realizing personal potential, seeking personal growth,
and self-fulfillment. Some of the topics to consider are:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Recreation or hobbies such as reading, technology, craft, music, art, pets,
photography, media, sports, toys, cooking, home improvement, outdoor
Parenting and child rearing
Marriage or wedding
Talent acquisition
Life or personal goals
Charity, donations, volunteering
Example 1:
Search Query: how to photograph birds in flight
Example 2:
Search Query: wedding invitation design
Visited Url: theknot.com

Cognitive Need
Cognitive needs are about pursuing knowledge and intelligence through learning and
discovering. Some of the topics to consider are:
•

Education or learning materials

•
•
•

Online or virtual classroom
Educational degrees or programs
Cognition, memory, focus or attention
Example 1:
Search Query: lesson plans for 4th grade math
Example 2:
Search Query: python data science
Visited Url: coursera.org

Love and Belonging Need
Love and belong needs are social and emotional and include emotionally-based
relationships such as friendship, family, dating, sexual intimacy. Some of the topics to
consider are:
•
•
•
•
•

Expression of or resources for mental health or emotional issues such as anxiety,
depression, loneliness, isolation, suicide, nervousness, rejection, fear or sadness
Social media, social network and relevant technologies
Social activities online or offline
Search for relationships, significant others, dating
Negative relationships such as divorce or breakup

Example 1:
Search Query: online therapist for anxiety
Visited Url: talkspace.com
Example 2:
Search Query: long distance relationships

Safety Need
Safety needs stem from our desire to seek order and stability in the world. These needs
provide protection from elements through shelter and security of body, jobs, food,
resources, family, or health. Some of the topics to consider are:
•
•
•

Protection from harm through equipments such as firearms or security systems
Personal protective equipment such as masks or sanitizers
Lack of protection such as domestic violence

•
•
•
•

Financial related such as tax, loans, banking, or bankrupsy
Jobs and unemployment
Shelter related such as housing, rental, evictions
Assistance for jobs or finances

Example 1:
Search Query: n-95 masks
Visited Url: amazon.com
Example 2:
Search Query: unemployment benefits

Physiological Need
Physiological needs are the basic animal needs such as air, food, drink, shelter,
warmth, sex, and other body needs. Some of the topics to consider are:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Health related such as prescription, measurement, symptoms, conditions, or first
aid
Hygienic products such as toilet paper
Basic staples such as food, beverages, apparel, household products
Services that provice basic staples like grocery delivery or online grocers
Sleep and insomnia
Assistance for food
Transportation and mobility

Example 1:
Search Query: Symptoms of flu
Example 2:
Search Query: whole foods
Visited Url: wholefoodsmarket.com

