arXiv:2008.06976v1 [cs.RO] 16 Aug 2020

Applications of Robots for COVID-19 Response
Robin R. Murphy

Vignesh Babu Manjunath Gandudi

Justin Adams

Computer Science and Engineering
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX
robin.r.murphy@tamu.edu

Computer Science and Engineering
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX
vigneshbabu.gm@tamu.edu

Center for Disaster Risk Policy
Florida State University
Tallahassee, FL
jadams@em.fsu.edu

Abstract—This paper reviews 262 reports appearing between
March 27 and July 4, 2020, in the press, social media, and
scientific literature describing 203 instances of actual use of 104
different models of ground and aerial robots for the COVID19 response. The reports are organized by stakeholders and
work domain into a novel taxonomy of six application categories,
reflecting major differences in work envelope, adoption strategy,
and human-robot interaction constraints. Each application category is further divided into a total of 30 subcategories based on
differences in mission. The largest number of reported instances
were for public safety (74 out of 203) and clinical care (46),
though robots for quality of life (27), continuity of work and
education (22), laboratory and supply chain automation (21),
and non-clinical care (13) were notable. Ground robots were
used more frequently (119) than aerial systems (84), but unlike
ground robots, aerial applications appeared to take advantage of
existing general purpose platforms that were used for multiple
applications and missions. Of the 104 models of robots, 82
were determined to be commercially available or already existed
as a prototype, 11 were modifications to existing robots, 11
were built from scratch. Teleoperation dominated the control
style (105 instances), with the majority of those applications
intentionally providing remote presence and thus not amenable
to full autonomy in the future. Automation accounted for 74
instances and taskable agency forms of autonomy, 24. The data
suggests areas for further research in autonomy, human-robot
interaction, and adaptability.
Index Terms—intelligent robots, rescue robots, service robots,
government, public healthcare

I. I NTRODUCTION
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has already provided
numerous instances of robotics being used to assist agencies with the detection and care of infected populations and
prevent further transmission [1]. Robots are also enabling
industry, educational institutions, and individuals to cope with
the unique consequences of sheltering-in-place restrictions
and workplace absenteeism. The purpose of this paper is
to document the reported uses and perform a preliminary
analysis. This analysis is expected to provide guidance to
policy makers and roboticists who are interested in increasing
the immediate use of robots. It is also expected to provide a
basis for further research and development of robots suitable
for future pandemics and disasters.
The paper relies on 262 reports taken from weekly searches
between March 27 and July 4, 2020 of press reports, social media including YouTube, Twitter, and Facebook using
three search engines: google.com, social-search.com, and talk-

walker.com. The description section and the comment section
of the social media videos were also scraped manually to
obtain additional links LinkedIn was searched manually. The
searches used the following keywords and phrases: COVID,
COVID19, COVID-19 robot, COVID19 Robots, COVID 19
Drone, COVID 19 UAS, COVID Drone, COVID UAS,
“COVID-19 and Robots”, “Use of Robots for COVID-19”,
“Use of Robots for the present pandemic”, and “COVID-19
Robot uses”. The scientific literature was also searched. A
preliminary content analysis was performed resulting in 203
instances of robots in actual use for COVID-19 related activities in 33 countries: Belgium, Chile, China, Cyprus, Denmark,
Estonia, France, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Honduras, India,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Lithuania, Mexico, Netherlands,
Nigeria, Philippines, Rwanda, Singapore, South Korea, Spain,
Sweden, Taiwan, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, UAE, US, and the
UK.
The reliance on press reports and social media may mean
some applications are over- or under-represented; for example, a novel animal-like robot that is used in only a few
locations for prototyping may receive more attention than
commercially available disinfecting robots used in hundreds
of hospitals. Another limitation is that the search relied on
queries in English; fortunately many non-English social media
postings used English keywords such as “robot” and contained
pictures or videos. Despite the inherent incomplete nature of
the reports, they indicate the general types of applications
and stakeholders (e.g., hospitals, private industry, individuals),
which roboticists and policy makers can use to guide future
development.
The article is organized as follows. Section III presents a
novel taxonomy of applications partitioned into six categories
representing distinct use cases, stakeholders, and work envelopes. Each of the subsequent six sections describes the
use cases for each category in more detail. Section X then
discusses three sets of findings on how robots are used, what
modality of robot (ground or air) is used and why, and the
role of autonomy as a control scheme. The article concludes
with topics for further research in autonomy, human-robot
interaction, and adaptability.
II. M ETHODOLOGY
The 262 reports from the weekly searches were copied
into PDF and entered into a master spreadsheet, the master

spreadsheet was divided into subsets of data for different
analyses. This article considers only the subset of the data that
captures actual robot use versus ethical concerns or general
discussions.
Content analysis of the 262 reports produced 203 instances
of a specific robot explicitly stated as being used for an
application due to COVID-19 or a specific robot that would
be used by a specific date for a COVID-19 related application
(e.g., a purchase order had been placed for disinfection robots
to cope with demand). The instances did not include robots
proposed for use or demonstrated in a laboratory; the robots
had to be in use or in trials situated in the work environment.
The report did not have to name the robot to be included
if there was a video or image of the robot. When the robot
was not specified, the media was inspected in order to try to
recognize the robot or spot a logo. In some cases, the report
had links to the manufacturer or showed logos; if the name
of the company was identified, the companys website, as well
their LinkedIn page, as manually scraped in order to attempt
to match the robot in the report.
Duplicate reports were combined into a single instance, as
several robot stories were re-posted or covered by multiple
news agencies. A single report could contain descriptions of
multiple robots for different use cases, in which case the
report produced multiple instances. For example, there were
two reports that documented the use of the LHF-connect
robot for healthcare workers telepresence, patient and family
socializing, as well as quarantine socializing; hence the reports
produced 3 instances with one instance each in healthcare
workers telepresence and patient and family socializing under
Clinical Care and quarantine socializing under Non-Hospital
care respectively.
III. TAXONOMY
Figure 1 provides a graphical representation of the 203
instances grouped into six applications by stakeholder and
general work domain. The representation builds on a prior
taxonomy introduced in [2]. The advantage of grouping by
stakeholder and work domain is that it makes it easier to
consider three factors that influence the design of the robot:
its work envelope (e.g., whether the work envelope is indoors
or outdoors), how it is adopted (e.g., government agencies
have different procurement procedures than private industry
or individuals), and the human-robot interaction (e.g., are
the users specialists or taken from the general population).
The instances within a category are further subdivided into
subcategories to reflect differences in mission, work envelope,
and socio-technical organization. Each application category is
described in more detail in the following sections. Figure 1
also shows the number of instances based on modality. At this
time, only ground and aerial modalities have been reported. Of
the 203 instances, 119 are ground and 84 are aerial.
IV. P UBLIC S AFETY
Public Safety was the largest set of uses (74), with 56
instances using SUAS and 18 ground robots. The category

consists of applications by law enforcement, emergency medical, and public works departments that may be coordinated
with public health officials. The applications impact the general population in public spaces. These public spaces can be
outdoors, either urban areas or recreational areas, or indoors,
such as subways. Normally these public spaces would be populated with citizens, which would impose safety constraints,
but it appeared from the reports that most public spaces
were either empty due to shelter-in-place restrictions or there
were sparse collections of citizens. The applications in Public
Safety are subject to jurisdictional polices and regulations.
Additional regulations, such as aviation restrictions on small
unmanned aerial systems, may be present. In some cases,
aviation restrictions in some countries were likely waived to
permit operation in urban areas. The use of robots provided
greater, and more timely, task coverage, high efficiencies than
manual operations, and protected government workers from
exposure.
The largest reported use within Public Safety was for
enforcement of quarantine restrictions, primarily where law
enforcement officers patrolled with SUAS (33) or ground
robots (2) to detect the presence of large groups. In some
cases, the robots were equipped with speakers and flew or
drove close enough for the officers to give verbal warnings.
The second largest use case was for disinfecting public
spaces (25). SUAS for agricultural spraying were adapted to
spray disinfectant in urban areas and large indoor facilities,
while foggers were mounted on bomb squad or police ground
robots.
Ground and aerial robots were also used to attempt to
identify whether a person in a public space was infected with
coronavirus using thermal sensing (7), though the accuracy of
such methods are in doubt CITE. Robots were also used to
broadcast public service announcements about COVID-19 and
social distancing (6). In one case, a SUAS was used to monitor
traffic flow WHY?
V. C LINICAL C ARE
Clinical Care was the second largest set of uses (46),
all with ground robots. The category represents applications
related to the diagnosis and acute healthcare of patients with
coronavirus, These were generally in a large hospital, or
affiliated clinic, setting, where the hospital was presumed to
have a reliable wireless network and information technology
support. The applications impact the healthcare workers and
support staff (i.e., janitors) and small segments of the general
population (i.e., patients and family members). The area of
application were inside hospitals, with the diversity in waiting
areas, treatment rooms, patient rooms, but also included entrances and parking garages where healthcare workers might
be exposed. Applications are subject to public health, public
health insurers, and hospital-specific polices and regulations.
Some policies and regulations may apply to robots if they are
being used as medical devices for direct healthcare. However,
the larger impact on robotics is whether the costs of acquiring

Reported Use of Ground and Aerial Robots Worldwide for COVID-19 as of July 4, 2020
74

46

27
4

56

Public Safety

46

Clinical Care

23

18

33
2
17

Decreasing frequency of reported uses

8
3
4
2
4

1

Quarantine
enforcement

16

Disinfecting
public spaces

13

Identification of
infected

11

Public service
announcements

3

Monitoring
traffic flow

2

1

Healthcare
telepresence

11

Disinfecting
point of care

7

Prescription/
meal dispensing

5

Patient intake &
visitors

2

Patient and
family socializing

1

Inventory

1

Continuity of
Work and
Education
Sanitation
work/school
Telepresence

Warehouse
automation
Construction

22
13

11

3

5

3
1
1
2

Security

Quality of Life

9

5

1
1

21
10

Delivery food
Delivery nonfood purchases

8
5

2
1

Attend public
social events

3

Interpersonal
socializing

2

Laboratory and
Supply Chain
Automation

13
1

12

Non-Hospital
Care

Delivery

4

Delivery to
quarantined

Infectious
mat. handling

4

Quarantine
socializing

Manufacture or
Decon PPE
Laboratory
automation

1
3
3

1

Off-Site Testing
Testing, care in
nursing homes

Other personal
activities*

Agriculture
© 2020 R. Murphy, V. Gandudi Texas A&M; J. Adams, Center for Robot-Assisted Search and Rescue

Fig. 1: 203 instances of robot use for COVID-19 applications organized into six categories and by modality, with brown
representing ground robots and blue, aerial robots.

and using robots can be reimbursed by insurers; if the insurers do not permit robots, then hospitals have less financial
incentive to use them. The use of robots protected healthcare
workers by enabling them to work remotely, allowed them to
delegate unskilled tasks such as meal delivery and disinfection,
and to cope with surges in demand.
The largest reported use with Clinical Care was for healthcare telepresence (16). This set of uses included use of
teleoperation by doctors and nurses to interact with patients
for diagnosis and treatment. 2 of the instances showed physical
interaction, mostly to press sensors on the patient. 3 instances
were physically invasive and the result of prior research
in medical robotics. The robots were either commercially
available or adapted from commercially available bases.
The second largest reported use was for rapidly disinfecting
the hospital or clinic (13). The majority of robots used UVC
light to perform a gross disinfection followed by a human
wiping down surfaces likely to have been missed. Several
models of this type of robot were already commercially
available and in use for preventing hospital acquired infections.
The third largest use was for prescription and meal dispensing (11), whereby carts navigated autonomously through
a hospital. As with disinfection, these types of robots were
already commercially available but their visibility and use
increased as a means of coping with the surge in patients and
the need to free the healthcare workers to spend more time on
direct and compassionate care.
The three other applications of robots for clinical care
related activities were: use of telepresence robots in processing

the intake of patients and handling families, essentially protecting the receptionists and clerks, (3) and in enabling families
to remote visit patients (2); and in automating inventory
management for a hospital floor (1).
VI. C ONTINUITY OF W ORK AND E DUCATION
Continuity of Work and Education was the third largest
set of uses (27), primarily with ground robots (23) and 4
instances of SUAS. The category represents applications where
private industry and education leverage robotics for their
enterprises, The work domain varied widely, from agriculture
to classrooms. The applications impact small segments of
the population, and the area of application was varied. The
use of robots protected the workforce by enabling them to
work remotely, allowed companies to delegate or automate
tasks in order to cope with surges in demand, especially for
warehouses, or to cope with workforce reductions due to
illness.
Within Continuity of Work and Education, the largest use
was for sanitation of the workplace or school (11), leveraging
the disinfection robots developed for hospitals. Telepresence
(7) and warehouse (5) robots were also leveraged. Robots were
also used as assistants in construction of new hospitals (2), to
automate facility security (1) and agriculture (1) given the loss
of personnel to extended illness.
VII. Q UALITY OF L IFE
Quality of Life was fourth (22), split between SUAS (13)
and some ground robots (9). The captures how individuals are
using robot-based services or applying personal robotics for

day-to-day activities such as shopping and maintaining social
connections. The work domain varied widely, from urban to
rural. The applications involved small segments of the population, spanning the spectrum of human-robot interaction from
no interaction (e.g., packages dropped off at the individual’s
residence) to immersive interaction (e.g., socializing through
robots). The area of application was varied, with delivery
robots working in urban and suburban areas and robots used
for socialization in public venues or in homes. The use of
robots allowed individuals to maintain the quality of life while
complying with quarantining or sheltering in place restrictions.
The largest use within Quality of Life was delivery (13).
Delivery robots provided either food (8) or non-food purchases
(5), where food delivery tended to use small platforms for a
mission of transporting items for a single family. SUAS were
more common (8) than ground robots (5). Social activities
(9) was almost as large as delivery and split between SUAS
(5) and ground robots (4). The use of robots for socializing
reflecting great creativity, with individuals using a SUAS to
ask another person out on a date and to walk a dog.
VIII. L ABORATORY AND S UPPLY C HAIN AUTOMATION
The fifth largest use of robots was for Laboratory and
Supply Chain Automation was fifth (21), split between ground
robots (11) and SUAS (10). Robots in this category were
employed by private companies using robotics to support
healthcare operations, either in hospitals, non-hospital facilities, or testing laboratories. The uses occurred in a wide
range of work envelopes, including flying through urban areas,
navigating through hospitals, and operating in manufacturing
work cells. The interactions were generally limited to humans
trained to use the robots. The use of robots served two
functions. One was to decrease the time for COVID-19 testing
by reducing the time spent transporting samples between
clinics and the diagnostic laboratories, reducing the time for
delivery of reagents, and automating the test processes. The
other was to protect healthcare workers by reducing exposure
to coronavirus, either by robots handling biohazards or by
making or cleaning PPE.
The largest reported uses within the Laboratory and Supply
Chain Automation category was for delivery (13) and transportation of infectious materials (3). Stationary robots were
used for manufacturing or decontaminating PPE (3) or laboratory automation (2). SUAS dominated the two transportationoriented use cases (10 out of 16), leveraging the platforms used
for delivery of food and non-food purchases to individuals.
IX. N ON -H OSPITAL C ARE
The sixth largest use of robots was for Non-Hospital Care
(13), and almost exclusively with ground robots (12). Robots
in this category cover uses for non-acute care or diagnostics
in nursing homes, temporary quarantine facilities, in-home
healthcare providers, and corporate clinics; note that these
settings seem similar to clinical care but have different missions, standards, economics, and stakeholders from acute care
of infected. The uses occurred primarily in indoor setting

mirroring Clinic Care and the instance of off-site testing
mirrored Clinical Care. The robots were used by healthcare
workers and the general population, especially an elderly
population. The use of robots was primarily to protect the
elderly from exposure to coronavirus or to enable public health
officials to handle the surge in quarantined individuals being
housed in hotels or camps.
X. F INDINGS
While a complete analysis of the data is beyond the scope
of this article, the data gathered offers insights into how robots
are used, what modality of robot (ground or air) is used and
why, and the role of autonomy as a control scheme.
A. Uses
The data shows that ground and aerial robots have an
notable impact beyond direct clinical care, as only 46 of the
203 instances (22.66%) were for Clinical Care. This suggests
that robotics is reaching a level of adoption and that industry
and the public are accepting robots in the workplace, social
arenas, and the home. The largest reported use was for Public
Safety (74), as compared to Clinical Care (46). This could
reflect the visibility of public safety applications which, by
definition, appear in view of the public, though the low cost
and availability of consumer SUAS most likely contributed to
agencies innovating creative uses.
Delivery or transportation uses were pervasive, appearing
in Clinical Care, Quality of Life, Laboratory and Supply
Chain Automation, and Non-Hospital Care. This is interesting
because of the differences in how robots are adopted and
by whom and suggests that delivery can become a general
purpose application. Delivery or transportation indoors relied
on ground robots (18), while outdoor movements saw more
use of aerial platforms (17) than ground (13).
B. Modality
The data suggests that while ground robots are used more
frequently (119), SUAS are also emerging as important (84).
SUAS seem to have an advantage as many platforms were
commercially available and are built for general use, especially
to carry different payloads, while ground robots were specialized for the application, especially disinfection, dispensing,
and delivery.
104 different models of robots were identified, of which
82 were determined to be commercially available or already
existed as a prototype, 11 were modifications to existing
robots, 11 were built from scratch, and in 52 instances the
origin of the robot could not be determined. The three most
commonly used robots were the DJI Mavic 2 Enterprise UAS
Duo (11 instances), TEMI UGV (9), and MMC UAS (6).
The 82 models of robots that were reported as being
commercially available were predominately ground robots
(66 models), with 16 models of UAS. The 66 models of
commercially available ground robots were: Temi (9), Xenex
Light strike germ zapping robot (5), Double Robotics (4),
Chloe (2), CloudMinds Robot (2), Keenon Robotics Peanut

(2), Pudu Tech Robot (2), Spot (2), Tru-D (2), Ubtech Robotics
Robot (2), 6 River Systems (1), Anas Newme Robot (1),
Ava Robotics (1), Avid Bots Neo (1), Beam Pro (1), Beep’s
Navya (1), BrainCorp Robot (1), Breezy One (1), Disinfection
robot by Seoul Digital Foundation and Korea Robot Promotion agency (1), EVA Robot (1), Geek+ (1), Germ Falcon
(1), Guangzhou Gosuncn Robot Co robot (1), Intelligent
Sterilization Robot (1), InTouch Vici (1), Ivo (1), Jingdong
Logistics Intelligent Distribution Robot (1), Kindred SORT
(1), Knightscope (1), Lions Bot (1), Miso Robotics (1), Modai
(1), Moxi (1), Ninja, University of Bangkok (1), Nuro R2 (1),
Opentrons OT-2 liquid handling robot (1), Pepper (1), P-Guard
(1), Postmate (1), Promobot (1), Qianxi Robot Catering (1),
REV-1 (1), Robot for Care (1), Seit-UV (1), Seoul Digital
Foundation and the Korea Robot Industry Promotion Agency
Waste Disposal Robot (1), Shanghai TMiRob (1), Siasun
Robot (1), Skytron UV Robot (1), Starship Robot (1), Sunburst
UV Bots (1), Tally (1), Thermal temperature detection Robot
by Seoul Digital Foundation and Korea Robot Promotion
agency (1), Tommy Robot (1), Unity Drive Innovation (1),
UVD Robot (1), Vaporized Hydrogen Peroxide Robot (1),
Vision Semicon (1), White Rhino Auto Company (1), Whiz
(1), Xiangdi (1), Xiaofan Robot (1), Zenplaces Robot (1),
Zen Zoe Robot (1), Zhiping (1), Zorabots (1), and Zorabot
James(1). The 16 models of commercially available aerial
robots were: DJI Mavic 2 Enterprise Duo (11), MMC (4),
Alphabet’s Drone Delivery (2), Flytrex (2), Manna Aero’s
drone (2), Terra Drone Corporation drone (2), Zipline (2), DJI
Phantom (1), DJI Mavic Pro (1), Everdrone (1), HTX Robotics
(1), Solent Transport (1), and Threod drone (1). Verge Aero
(1), Wing (1), and XAG (1),
Of the 11 models of robots that were reported as being
modified for the COVID-19 application, seven were aerial
vehicles and four were ground robots. The following were the
8 models of existing aerial robots that were modified: DJI MG1P (2), MMC (2), Alpha Drone Technology (1), Eagle Hawk
(1). Hexa XL and Agras MG-1 (1), Netra Pro (1), and XAG
(1). The following were the four models of existing ground
robots that were modified: AIS K9 (1), Soochow University
spraying robot (1), Turtle Bot Variant (1), and Youibot (1).
The 11 models of ground robots built from scratch were:
KARMI-Bot (3), LHF-Connect (3), Lego Bot to dispense
sanitizer (2), Amazons disinfection robot (1), Cleantech-J1 (1),
Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Health and the Shenyang
Institute of Automations throat swab robot (1), Pinto Robot
(1), Tsinghua Universitys robot (1), University of California
Berkeley’s Innovative Genomics Institutes testing automation
(1). University of Southern Denmark 3D printed robot (1), and
XDBOT (1 instance),
The overall top three most commonly used models of robots
were DJI SUAS models which accounted for 16 instances in
2 categories and 5 subcategories, with the Mavic 2 Enterprise
Duo model used in 11 of the 16 instances, TEMI ground robot
which accounted for 9 instances in 3 categories and 7 subcategories, and MMC SUAS which accounted for 6 instances in 2
categories and 5 subcategories, Note that the most frequently

(a) DJI Mavic 2 Enterprise

(b) Robot TEMI

(c) MMC

Fig. 2: The three most commonly used robots reported: a)
DJI Mavic 2 Enterprise, b) TEMI, and c) MMC (images from
manufacturer’s Website)

used robots were used for different applications and missions,
showing the value of general purpose platforms for disasters.
See Figure 2. DJI and MMC are made by Chinese companies,
while TEMI is made by an Israeli company.
For Public Safety, 15 of the 56 UAS instances deployed
were commercially available, 9 instances were UAS with modifications, and the commercial maturity of UAS in 32 instances
were unknown. DJI drones and Micromulti copter (MMC)
and were the most common. Different models of DJI drones
accounted for 14 instances across 3 subcategories: Quarantine
Enforcement, Disinfecting Public Spaces, and Public Service
Announcements. MMC were used in 5 instances across 4
subcategories: Quarantine Enforcement, Disinfecting Public
Spaces, Identification of Infected, and Monitoring Traffic
Flow.
Fifteen of the 18 instances with ground robots used com-

mercially available UGVs, 1 used modified robots, and the
commercial maturity of UGVs in 2 instances was unknown.
For Clinical Care, 32 of the 46 UGV instances deployed
were commercially available, 2 instances were UGVs with
modifications, 9 instances were UGVs built from scratch, and
the commercial maturity of UGVs in 3 instances were unknown. Double Robotics Tele-presence robot and KARMI-Bot
were the most common. Double Robotics Tele-presence robot
accounted for 3 instances across 3 subcategories: Healthcare
Workers Telepresence, Patient Intake and visitors, and Patient
and Family Socializing. KARMI-Bot accounted for 3 instances
across 3 subcategories: Healthcare Workers Telepresence, Disinfecting Point of care, and Prescription and Meal Dispensing.
For Continuity of Work and Education, 16 of the 23 UGV
instances deployed were commercially available, 1 instance
was UGV with modifications, 5 instances were UGVs built
from scratch, and the commercial maturity of UGVs in 1 instance was unknown. Xenex LightStrike Germ-Zapping Robot
accounted for two instances across 1 subcategory: Sanitation
at Work/School. 1 of the 4 instances with aerial vehicles used
commercially available UAVs, and the commercial maturity of
UAVs in 3 instances were unknown. XAG agricultural drone
was the commercially available UAV deployed accounting for
1 instance in 1 subcategory: Agriculture.
For Quality of Life, 10 of the 13 UAS instances deployed
were commercially available, and the commercial maturity
of UAS in 3 instances were unknown. DJI drones, Flytrex,
Manna’s Aero Drone and Alphabet’s drone were the most
common. DJI drones accounted for 2 instances across 2
subcategories: Interpersonal Socializing, and Other Personal
Activities. Flytrex, Manna’s Aero Drone and Alphabet’s accounted for 2 instances each across 2 subcategories: Delivery
Food, and Delivery Non-food Purchases. 6 of the 9 instances
with ground robots used commercially available UGVs, and
the commercial maturity of UGVs in 3 instances were unknown.
For Laboratory and Supply Chain Automation, 9 of the
11 UGV instances deployed were commercially available, 1
instance was UGV built from scratch, and the commercial
maturity of UGVs in 1 instance was unknown. 8 of the 10
UAS instances deployed were commercially available, and the
commercial maturity of UAS in 2 instances were unknown.
Terra Drone Corporations drone was the most common one.
It accounted for 2 instances across 2 subcategories: Delivery,
and Infectious Mat. Handling.
For Non-Hospital Care, 10 of the 12 UGV instances deployed were commercially available, 1 instance was UGV built
from scratch, and the commercial maturity of UGVs in 1 instance was unknown. Robot Temi was the most common one.
It accounted for 6 instances across 4 subcategories: Delivery
to Quarantined, Quarantine Socializing, Off-site testing and
Testing-care in Nursing Homes. The commercial maturity the
one UAS instance was unknown.

C. Control Scheme
The 203 instances reflected three types of control: automation (74), teleoperation (105), and taskable agency (24).
Taskable agency instances were often semi-autonomous, where
only a portion of the mission was delegated to the robot. As
examples, consider i) a person wheels the robot into a room
and then the robot performs the rest of the disinfection or ii)
a meal delivery robot brings a meal to the door of a patient,
but the nurse has to take the tray to the patient is too weak.
This incomplete autonomy leads to hidden manpower costs
because a person has to supervise or work with the robot, but
the use of such robots can still provide a savings in time to
complete tasks, reduced the effort and fatigue of workers, and
protect workers from exposure.
Teleoperation was used in 17 out of 30 application subcategories: quarantine enforcement, disinfection of public spaces,
identification of infected, public service announcements, monitoring traffic flow, healthcare telepresence, patient intake and
visitors, patient and family socializing, telepresence (work or
school), sanitation at work, construction, security attend public
social events, interpersonal socializing, other personal activities, quarantined socializing, and off-site testing(Non-hospital
care) Of the 17 subcategories using teleoperation, 9 are remote
presence applications where the human would wish to stay in
the loop in order to apply their unique expertise or skills; have
a rich, unscripted interaction; and provide compassionate care:
healthcare telepresence, patient intake and visitors, patient
and family socializing, telepresence (work or school), attend
public social events, interpersonal socializing, other personal
activities, quarantined socializing, and off-site testing. These
applications may benefit from increased intelligence to make
teleoperation easier but the human would not be eliminated.
Automation or autonomy was used in 19 of the 30 application
subcategories: disinfecting public spaces, public service announcements, disinfecting point of care, prescription and meal
dispensing, patient intake and visitors, inventory, agriculture,
food delivery, delivery non-food purchases, sanitation of work
or school, warehouse automation, interpersonal socializing,
delivery (laboratory-related), manufacture or decontaminate
PPE, laboratory automation, delivery to quarantined, off-site
testing, testing,care in nursing homes, and handling infectious
materials. While autonomy and automation exists, the control
schemes may be subject to further improvements, such as
faster navigation in more cluttered environments with dynamic
obstacles, and general reliability and safety. Six subcategories
had both autonomous and teleoperation instances, suggesting
that autonomy is the ultimate goal for a control scheme
those applications: disinfecting public spaces, public service
announcements, patient intake and visitors, sanitation at work,
interpersonal socializing, and off-site testing These application
subcategories appear to be ripe for advances in artificial
intelligence.
XI. C ONCLUSIONS
The 203 instances of robots being used explicitly to cope
with the COVID-19 pandemic indicate that robots are being

broadly used in all aspects of work and life, not just for clinical
care. The robots protect, not replace, healthcare and public
safety workers by allowing them to work at a distance as
well as handle the surge in duties and missions. The robots
being used by businesses and individuals enable individuals to
continue work and education, reduce the productivity impact
of ill workers, protect at-risk populations in assisted-living
facilities, and maintain social relationships.
The data suggests areas for further research in autonomy,
human-robot interaction, and adaptability. While seven of the
applications appear to be remote presence (LIST HERE) and
thus would never eliminate the human, there are opportunities
for increased intelligence to reduce the cognitive and training
demands on the users. Likewise the autonomous uses were
still relatively limited. The instances suggest that more work
is needed in no particular order:
•
•
•

•
•

navigation and coverage of public spaces- large, irregular,
partial known with human presumably absent,
navigation and coverage of cluttered indoor spaces where
humans may be present,
manipulation, both coarse (grasping for delivery) and
dexterous (for patient care, handling instrumentation,
retrieving inventory, etc.),
physical HRI (especially intrusive medical testing), and
computer vision for manipulation, inventory, recognizing
individuals, etc.

Improved human-robot interaction is important, especially for
i) interfaces for teleoperation by incidental users and the
general population to accomplish mundane task and ii) social
interaction. The data also suggests that more research and
development is needed for adaptable ground robots. General
purpose small unmanned aerial vehicles were rapidly repurposed for new uses quarantine enforcement, disinfection,
construction, and social interactions but ground robots showed
less innovation. This analysis did not consider the attributes
that lead stakeholders to adopt robotic innovations and there
does not appear to be a model of responsible robotics innovation to guide reactive research and development for disasters;
additional research on these topics is also warranted.
The dataset is available upon request and data is updated and
summaries are posted periodically to roboticsForInfectiousDiseases.org.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. IIS-2032729; the opinions, findings,and
conclusions or recommendations expressed are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Science Foundation. It was conducted through the
Center for Robot-Assisted Search and Rescue, a not for profit
501(c)(3) organization. The authors would like to thank Dr.
Hao Su for his help in identifying occurrences in the scientific
literature.

R EFERENCES
[1] G.-Z. Yang, B. J. Nelson, R. R. Murphy, H. Choset, H. Christensen,
S. H. Collins, P. Dario, K. Goldberg, K. Ikuta, N. Jacobstein, D. Kragic,
R. H. Taylor, and M. McNutt, “Combating covid-19the role of robotics in
managing public health and infectious diseases,” Science Robotics, vol. 5,
2020.
[2] R. R. Murphy, “Robots and pandemics in science fiction,” Science
Robotics, vol. 5, 2020.

