Multiscale statistical physics of the Human–SARS-CoV-2
interactome

arXiv:2008.09649v1 [physics.bio-ph] 21 Aug 2020

Arsham Ghavasieh1 , Sebastiano Bontorin1,2 , Oriol Artime1 , Manlio De Domenico1∗

1

Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Via Sommarive 18, 38123 Povo, Italy

2

Department of Physics, University of Trento, Via Sommarive 14, 38123 Povo (TN), Italy

Corresponding author: mdedomenico@fbk.eu
Protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks have been used to investigate the influence of
SARS-CoV-2 viral proteins on the function of human cells, laying out a deeper understanding
of COVID–19 and providing ground for drug repurposing strategies. However, our knowledge of (dis)similarities between this one and other viral agents is still very limited. Here we
compare the novel coronavirus PPI network against 45 known viruses, from the perspective
of statistical physics. Our results show that classic analysis such as percolation is not sensitive to the distinguishing features of viruses, whereas the analysis of biochemical spreading
patterns allows us to meaningfully categorize the viruses and quantitatively compare their
impact on human proteins. Remarkably, when Gibbsian-like density matrices are used to
represent each system’s state, the corresponding macroscopic statistical properties measured
by the spectral entropy reveals the existence of clusters of viruses at multiple scales. Overall,
our results indicate that SARS-CoV-2 exhibits similarities to viruses like SARS-CoV and Influenza A at small scales, while at larger scales it exhibits more similarities to viruses such as
HIV1 and HTLV1.

1

The COVID–19 pandemic, with global impact on multiple crucial aspects of human life, is
still a public health threat in most areas of the world. Despite the ongoing investigations aiming
to find a viable cure, our knowledge of the nature of disease is still limited, especially regarding
the similarities and differences it has with other viral infections. On the one hand, SARS-CoV2 shows high genetic similarity to SARS-CoV 1 — the virus causing 2003 coronavirus outbreak
— and its infection shares a number of symptoms with some other respiratory diseases, such as
flu caused by Influenza virus. On the other hand, according to a number of studies

2–5

, drugs

usually used to treat different infection types, like AIDS caused by Human Immunodeficiency
Virus (HIV), can effectively mitigate COVID–19, suggesting an unexplored parallel between the
function of other viruses and SARS-CoV-2. Characterizing these (dis)similarities can result in a
deeper understanding of the novel coronavirus and facilitate the search for reliable treatments.

With the rise of network medicine

6–11

, methods developed for complex networks analysis

have been widely adopted to efficiently investigate the interdependence among genes, proteins,
biological processes, diseases and drugs 12 . Similarly, they have been used for characterizing the
interactions between viral and human proteins in case of SARS-CoV-2
into the structure and function of the virus

16

13–15

, providing insights

and identifying drug repurposing strategies

17, 18

.

However, a comprehensive comparison of SARS-CoV-2 against other viruses, from the perspective
of network science, is still missing.

Here, we use statistical physics to analyze 45 viruses, including SARS-CoV-2. We consider
the virus-human protein-protein interactions (PPI) as an interdependent system with two parts,
human PPI network targeted by viral proteins. In fact, due to the large size of human PPI network,
its structural properties barely change after being merged with viral components. Consequently,
we show that percolation analysis of such interdependent systems provides no information about
the distinguishing features of viruses. Instead, we model the propagation of perturbations from

2

viral nodes through the whole system, using bio-chemical and regulatory dynamics, to obtain the
spreading patterns and compare the average impact of viruses on human proteins. Finally, we
exploit Gibbsian-like density matrices, recently introduced to map network states, to quantify the
impact of viruses on the macroscopic functions of human PPI network, such as von Neumann
entropy. The inverse temperature β is used as a resolution parameter to perform a multiscale
analysis. We use the above information to cluster together viruses and our findings indicate that
SARS-CoV-2 groups with a number of pathogens associated with respiratory infections, including
SARS-CoV, Influenza A and Human Adenovirus (HAdV) at the smallest scales, more influenced
by local topological features. Interestingly, at larger scales, it exhibits more similarity with viruses
from distant families such as HIV1 and Human T- cell Leukemia Virus type 1 (HTLV1).

Our results shed light on the unexplored aspects of SARS-CoV-2, from the perspective of
statistical physics of complex networks, and the presented framework opens the doors for further
theoretical developments aiming to characterize structure and dynamics of virus-host interactions,
as well as grounds for further experimental investigation and potentially novel clinical treatments.

Results

Here, we use data regarding the viral proteins and their interactions with human proteins for 45
viruses (see Methods and Fig. 1). To obtain the virus-human interactomes, we link the data to the
BIOSTR Human PPI network (19, 945 nodes and 737, 668 edges) built from data fusion of two
comprehensive public repositories (see Methods and Fig. 2).

Percolation of the interactomes. Arguably, the simplest conceptual framework to assess
how and why a networked system loses its functionality is via the process of percolation 19 . Here,
the structure of interconnected systems is modeled by a network G with N nodes, which can be
fully represented by an adjacency matrix A (Aij = 1 if nodes i and j are connected, it is 0 oth3

Figure 1: Virus information summary. The 45 viruses used in this study are shown against their
size, in terms of viral proteins, and coloured by their official family classification.

4

Figure 2: Virus-host interactome as an interdependent network. BIOSTR Human PPI used
in this study, this obtained from data fusion of two comprehensive public repositories, namely
STRING and BIOGRID (see the text for details). The network consists of N = 19, 945 proteins
linked by |E| = 737, 668 edges, and the largest connected component (99.8% nodes, 99.6% edges)
is shown. Proteins targeted by viruses are highlighted in two ways. On the one hand, markers of
distinct size identify targeted proteins: bigger the marker larger the number of times a protein is
targeted by viruses in our data set. On the other hand, distinct colored markers of constant size
encode distinct viruses (45 in total, including SARS-CoV-2): on the right-hand side the same color
scheme is used to show the contribution of each virus to the most frequently targeted proteins.

5

erwise). In the classical version of percolation analysis, one removes a randomly chosen fraction

Figure 3: Percolation analysis. Normalized size of the largest connected component for three
distinct network interventions (see the text for details). All 45 virus are considered for each strategy
and shown accordingly: note that they overlap into a common curve characteristic for each attack
strategy. The degrees are recalculated after each removal, while the node ranking for betweenness
is computed at the beginning of the intervention and kept fixed during the removals.
of nodes or links (depending on the application domain) from the original network and computes
statistical and geometrical properties of the remaining subnetworks, such as the size of the largest
connected component, the size distribution of isolated clusters or correlation functions, among
others

20

. This point of view assumes that, as a first approximation, there is an intrinsic rela-

tion between connectivity and functionality: when the node removal occurs, the more capable of
remaining assembled a system is, the better it will perform its tasks. Hence, we have a quantitative way to assess the robustness of the system. If one wants to single out the role played by a
certain property of the system, instead of selecting the nodes randomly, they can be sequentially
removed following that criteria. For instance, if we want to find out what is the relevance of the
most connected elements on the functionality, we can remove a fraction of the nodes with largest

6

degree 21, 22 . Technically, the criteria can be whatever metric that allows us to rank nodes, although
in practical terms topologically-oriented protocols are the most frequently used due to their accessibility, such as degree, betweenness, etc. Therefore percolation is, at all effects, a topological
analysis, since its input and output are based on structural information.

In the past, the usage of percolation has been proved useful to shed light on several aspects
of protein-related networks, such as in the identification of functional clusters 23 and protein complexes 24 , the verification of the quality of functional annotations 25 or the critical properties as a
function of mutation and duplication rates 26 , to name but a few. Following this research line, we
perform the percolation analysis to all the PPI networks to understand if this technique brings any
information that allows us to differentiate among viruses. The considered protocols are the random
selection of nodes, the targeting of nodes by degree – i.e., the number of connections they have –
and their removal by betweenness centrality – i.e., a measure of the likelihood of a node to be in
the information flow exchanged through the system by means of shortest paths. We apply these
attack strategies and compute the resulting (normalized) size of the largest connected component
S in the network, which serves as a proxy to the remaining functional part, as commented above.
This way, when S is close to unity the function of the network has been scarcely impacted by the
intervention, while when S is close to 0 the network can no longer be operative. The results are
shown in Fig. 3. Surprisingly, for each attacking protocol, we observe that the curves of the size of
the largest connected component neatly collapse in a common curve. In other words, percolation
analysis completely fails at finding virus-specific discriminators. Viruses do respond differently
depending on the ranking used, but this is somehow expected due to the correlation between the
metrics employed and the position of the nodes in the network.

We can shed some light on the similar virus-wise response to percolation by looking at
topological structure of the interactomes. Despite being viruses of diverse nature and causing such

7

different symptomatology, their overall structure shows a high level of similarity when it comes
to the protein-protein interaction. Indeed, for every pair of viruses we find the fraction of nodes
fN and fraction of links fL that simultaneously participate in both. Averaging over all pairs, we
obtain that fN = 0.9996 ± 0.0002 and fL = 0.9998 ± 0.0007. That means that the interactomes
are structurally very similar, so the dismantling ranks. If purely topological analysis is not able
to differentiate between viruses, then we need more convoluted, non-standard techniques to tackle
this problem. In the next sections we will employ these alternative approaches.

Analysis of perturbation propagation. PPI networks represent the large scale set of interacting proteins. In the context of regulatory networks, edges encode dependencies for activation/inhibition with transcription factors. PPI edges can also represent the propensity for pairwise
binding and the formation of complexes. The analytical treatment of these processes is described
via Bio-Chemical dynamics

27, 28

and Regulatory dynamics

29

. In Bio-Chemical (Bio-Chem)

dynamics, these interactions are proportional to the product of concentrations of reactants, thus
resulting in a second-order interaction, forming dimers. Protein concentration Xi (i = 1, 2, ..., N )
is also dependent on its degradation rate Bi and the amount of protein synthesized at a rate Fi .
N
P
The resulting Law of Mass Action: ẋi = Fi − Bxi +
Aij xi xj summarizes the formation of
j=1j

complexes and degradation/synthesis processes that occur in a PPI. Regulatory dynamics can be
instead characterized by an interaction with neighbors described by a Hill function that saturates
N
P
at unity: ẋi = −xi +
Aij xhj /(1 + xhj ), the Michaelis-Menten (M-M) model.
j=1

Propagation of a perturbation from virus interactions. Viral proteins interact with specific
nodes (human proteins) of the reconstructed interactome, which we refer to as a set of affected
nodes V. In the context of Regulatory and Biochemical dynamics we model the effect of viral
interaction as an inhibition in the activity of the affected nodes or decrease in the concentration.
The effect is simulated by introducing a negative constant perturbation at the steady state concen-

8

~ v norm; we find that the amount of
Figure 4: Cumulative Correlation A: Linear Scaling of the G
correlation distributed is linearly proportional to the number of sources of perturbation, as suggested by
scaling laws. Note that in the case of SARS-CoV-2 (inset) the number of sources is 332, the largest one
~ v k1 vs Viruses. Here SARS-CoV-2 is not shown for clarity. In
observed in our data set. B: Rescaled kG
both panels Bio-Chem and M-M norms are rescaled for better comparison by division with their relative
~ vk
maximum value = max kG
v∈viruses

9

tration/activity xi → xi − αxi , ∀i ∈ V (e.g., α = 0.2) and tracking its propagation to the rest of the
network by solving the corresponding set of the coupled equations. For a M-M–like model (with
h = 1) it leads to






ẋi = 0

if i ∈ V

N
X

xj


Aij

ẋi = −xi +
1+x
j=1

(1)
otherwise
j

In the context of the study of signal propagation, recent works have introduced the definition
of network Global Correlation Function

30, 31

as

Gij =

dxi /xi
.
dxj /xj

(2)

Ultimately, the idea is that constant perturbation brings the system to a new steady state xi → xi +
dxi , and dxi /xi quantifies the magnitude of the response of node i from the perturbation in j. This
P
allows also the definition of measures such as Impact 31 of a node as Ii = j Aij GTij describing
the response of i’s neighbors to its perturbation. Interestingly, it was found that these measures
can be described with power laws of degrees (Ii ≈ kiφ ), via universal exponents dependent on the
dynamics underlying ODEs allowing to effectively describe the interplay between topology and
dynamics. In our case, φ = 0 for both processes, therefore the perturbation from i has the same
impact on neighbors, regardless of its degree. We exploit the definition of Gij to define the vector
~ v of perturbations of concentrations induced by the interaction with the virus v, where the k–th
G
entry is given by 31
Gvk =

1 dxk
.
α xk

(3)

The steps we follow to asses the impact of the viral nodes in the human interactome via
the microscopic dynamics are described next. We first obtain the equilibrium states of human
10

interactome by numerical integration of equations. Then, for each virus, we compute the system
~ v . Finally, we
response from perturbations starting in ∀i ∈ V which is eventually encoded in G
repeat these steps for both the Bio-Chem and M-M models. The amount of correlation generated
is a measure of the impact of the virus on the interactome equilibrium state. We estimate it as the
~ v k1 = P |Gvi |, which we refer to as Cumulative
Euclidean 1-norm of the correlation vectors kG
i
Correlation. The results are presented in Fig. 4.

By allowing for multiple sources of perturbation, the biggest responses in magnitude will
~ v k1 .
come from direct neighbors of these sources, making them the dominant contributors to kG
With Ii not being dependent on the source degree, these results support the idea that with these
specific forms of dynamical processes on the top of the interactome, the overall impact of a perturbation generated by a virus is proportional to the amount of human proteins it interacts with.

Results shown in Fig. 5 highlight that propagation patterns strongly depend on the sources
(i.e., the affected nodes V), and strong similarities will generally be found within the same family
and for viruses that share common impacted proteins in the interactome. Conversely, families
and viruses with small (or null) overlap in the sources exhibit low similarity and are not sharply
distinguishable. To cope with this, we adopt a rather macroscopic view of the interactomes in the
next section.

Analysis of spectral information. We have shown that the structural properties of human
PPI network does not significantly change after being targeted by viruses. Percolation analysis
seems ineffective in distinguishing the specific characteristics of virus-host interactomes while, in
contrast, the propagation of biochemical signals from viral components into human PPI network
has been shown successful in assessing the viruses in terms of their average impact on human
proteins. Remarkably, the propagation patterns can be used to hierarchically cluster the viruses,
although some of them are highly dependent on the choice of threshold (Fig. 5). In this section,
11

~ v describe the pattern of perturbations generated on the
Figure 5: Similarity analysis. Vectors G
full network, and can therefore be used as a perturbation state generated by virus v. We seek
similarities in perturbation states by evaluating pairwise Euclidean distances between normalized
~ v . Flaviviridae, Papillomaviridae, Picornaviridae and HTLV viruses in the Retroviridae families
G
are well clustered together, as shown in the dendrogram. Other clusters are less sharp and depend
on the choice of threshold, here chosen arbitrarily as 60 % of the maximum distance between the
clusters.

12

we use statistical physics of complex networks to go beyond the microscopic details provided by
propagation patterns and analyze the macroscopic features of virus-human PPI networks.

A variety of methods have been introduced to analyze the information content of complex
networks 32, 33 . Since networks can be viewed as collections of entangled entities, a density matrix
can be used to describe their state as in quantum statistical mechanics. While some choices of the
density matrix have been shown to be unphysical

34, 35

, Gibbsian-like density matrices have been

successfully used to define spectral entropy 36, 37 and estimate the information content of empirical
complex networks at multiple scales, with applications ranging from transportation systems 38 to
the human microbiome 36 and the human brain 39 .

The density matrix is defined in terms of the combinatorial Laplacian matrix L = D − A,
P
where D is defined as Dii = ki δij and ki =
Aij denotes the degree of i–th node. The Laplacian
j

matrix governs the diffusion dynamics on top of the network and is involved in the linear stability
analysis of many complex dynamics, such as synchronization. Here we use the Gibbs state given
by
ρ(β, G) =

e−βL
,
Tr (e−βL )

(4)

which is defined in terms of the propagator of a diffusion process on top of the network, normalized

by the partition function Z(β, G) = Tr e−βL , which has an elegant physical meaning in terms of
dynamical trapping for diffusive flows

38

. Consequently, the counterpart of Massieu function —

also known as free entropy — in statistical physics can be defined for networks as
Φ(β, G) = log Z(β, G).

(5)

Note that a low value of the Massieu function indicates high information flow between the nodes.
The von Neumann entropy can be directly derived from the Massieu function by
S(β, G) = −β∂β Φ(β, G) + Φ(β, G),
13

(6)

Figure 6: Perturbation analysis of the virus-host interactome. On the top, the BIOSTR human
interactome G is targeted by viral proteins, considered as microscopic perturbations (δG), to build
the virus-human interactome G 0 . Here, the SARS-CoV-2 interactome is shown, while excluding
the 10% human proteins with the highest degree, for clarity. The interdependence is reflected in the
macroscopic functions of the network (right-hand side tables), including the thermodynamic and
dynamic features considered in this study. Interacting with the viral nodes perturbs the macroscopic
properties of the human PPI network (bottom-left panel), captured by the von Neumann entropy
S(β, G), the Massieu function Φ(β, G) and the energy βU(β, G). Based on the von Neumann
entropy and Massieu function perturbations, k-means algorithm is used to cluster the viruses at
different scales corresponding to distinct choices of β (bottom-right panel). The trajectories at the
bottom indicate how the perturbation changes with β and their colors are set by the clustering plot
given at β ≈ 3.
14

encoding the information content of graph G. Finally, the difference between von Neumann entropy and the Massieu function follows
S(β, G) − Φ(β, G) = βU(β, G),

(7)

where U(β, G) is the counterpart of internal energy in statistical physics. In the following, we
use the above quantities to compare the interactomes corresponding to different virus-host interactomes. In fact, as the number of viral nodes is much smaller than the number of human proteins,
we model each virus-human interdependent system G 0 as a perturbation of the large human PPI
network G (See Fig. 6).

After considering the viral perturbations, the von Neumann entropy, Massieu function and
the energy of the human PPI network change slightly. The magnitude of such perturbations can be
calculated as explained in Fig. 6, for von Neumann entropy and Massieu function, while the perturbation in internal energy follows their difference βδU(β, G) = δS(β, G) − δΦ(β, G), according
to Eq. 7. The parameter β encodes the propagation time in diffusion dynamics, or equivalently
an inverse temperature from a thermodynamic perspective, and is used as a resolution parameter
tuned to characterize macroscopic perturbations due to node-node interactions at different scales,
from short to long range 40 .

Based on the perturbation values and using k-means algorithm, a widely adopted clustering
technique, we group the viruses together (see Fig. 6, Tab. 1 and Tab. 2). At small scales, SARSCoV-2 appears in a cluster with a number of other viruses causing respiratory illness, including
SARS-CoV, Influenza A and HAdV. However, at larger scales, it exhibits more similarity with
HIV1, HTLV1 and HPV type 16.

15

Cluster ID

Viruses
SARS-CoV-2 - SARS-CoV - Influenza A - Influenza A(Puerto Rico)

1
HAdV - Smallpox - WNV
HPV type 1a - HPV type 4 - HPV type 5 - Hepatitis A - Hepatitis B
Influenza B - Influenza C - HTLV2 - HTLV3
2
Mumps virus - Rubella virus - HCoV-229E - Human parechovirus 2
Swinepox - Lassa virus - Yellow fever - MARV - Rabies virus
Dengue type 2- Dengue type 3 - Dengue type 4 - Hepatitis C
HIV1 - HIV2 - HTLV1 - HPV type 16 - HPV type 18
Human metapneumovirus - HRSV B
3
Chikungunya virus - Ebola - Herpes
Measles virus - Norwalk virus - Orf virus
Poliovirus type 1 - Rota virus - Varicella zoster virus
4

Cytomegalo

Table 1: The summary of clustering results at small scales (β ≈ 1 from Fig.6) is presented.
Remarkably, at this scale, SARS-CoV-2 groups with a number of respiratory diseases including
SARS-CoV, Influenza A and HAdV.

16

Cluster ID

Viruses

1

SARS-CoV-2 - HIV1 - HTLV1 - HPV type 16

2

Influenza A - Influenza A (Puerto Rico) - HAdV
Dengue type 2 - Dengue type 3 - Dengue type 4 - HIV2

3

Human metapneumovirus - HRSV B - Orf virus - Varicella zoster virus
HPV type 18
Human hepatitis A - Influenza C - Hepatitis B - Herpes

4

HPV type 1a - HTLV3 - Lassa virus - Mumps virus
Poliovirus type 1 - Rubella virus

5

SARS-CoV - Smallpox
Yellow fever - Swinepox - Chikungunya virus - Ebola
Hepatitis C - HCoV-229E - HPV type 4 - HPV type 5

6
Human parechovirus 2 - HTLV2 - Influenza B - MARV
Measles virus - Norwalk virus - Rabies virus - Rota virus
7

WNV

8

Cytomegalo

Table 2: The summary of clustering results at large scales (β ≈ 3 from Fig.6) is presented. Here,
SARS-CoV-2 shows higher similarity to HIV1, HTLV1 and HPV type 16.

17

Discussion

Comparing COVID–19 against other viral infections is still a challenge. In fact, various approaches
can be adopted to characterize and categorize the complex nature of viruses and their impact on
human cells.

In this study, we used an approach based on statistical physics to analyze virus-human
protein-protein interactions outlining 45 different viral infections. Our findings suggest that viral
components have negligible effect on the structural properties of the human PPI network, therefore
classical topological analysis is not able to unravel distinctive patterns. Alternatively, we analyzed
the propagation of perturbations from viral components into the human PPI network, allowing us
to compare viruses in terms of their average impact on human proteins and their corresponding biochemical spreading patterns. While this analysis provides microscopic details about the complex
interactions between viral and human proteins, it is not sufficient to identify distinctive patterns
relating SARS-CoV-2 and existing viruses. Finally, from the analysis of macroscopic features in
terms of information-theoretic and thermodynamic-like quantities, such as the von Neumann entropy, the Massieu function and internal energy, we have been able to cluster the viruses across
multiple scales, determined by the resolution parameter β. According to our results, SARS-CoV-2
shows similarity with SARS-CoV, influenza A and a number of other viruses causing respiratory
infections, as one could plausibly expect. At larger scales, where the interplay between the topology of virus-host interaction and information flow dynamics becomes more relevant, SARS-CoV-2
appears to be more similar to viruses like HIV1 and HTLV1. As mentioned earlier, the response
of COVID–19 patients has been shown to be positive to drugs used for treating HIV infections,
like lopinavir-ritonavir 2–5 . Our findings, in parallel with such a clinical evidence, suggests a rather
unexplored relationship between SARS-CoV-2 and HIV1, motivating further theoretical and experimental investigations.

18

Overall, our framework opens the doors for further analyses of viral agents from the perspective of statistical physics, highlighting the sensitivity of macroscopic functions, such as spectral
entropy, to small variations across interaction networks and, more specifically, virus-host interactomes. Even though the analysis of perturbation propagation patterns lacks the same sensitivity,
according to our results it provides microscopic details about the interactions between viral and
human proteins that complement the macroscopic view, together enhancing our understanding of
this novel coronavirus from a new perspective which can provide a mathematical ground for the
exploration of further clinical treatments and biological understanding.

Methods

Overview of the data set. The human interactome used in this study combines protein-protein
interactions (PPI) from two of the largest repository publicly available to date, namely STRING
v11.0

41

— publicly available at https://string-db.org/cgi/download.pl — and

BIOGRID v3.5.182 42, 43 — publicly available at https://downloads.thebiogrid.org/
BioGRID/Release-Archive/BIOGRID-3.5.182/). For a consistent analysis, all protein names and aliases have been standardized to follow the common nomenclature of official
symbols of NCBI gene database (ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/DATA/GENE_
INFO/Mammalia/ (Accessed: 28/03/2020)

44

). In the following we will refer to this compre-

hensive network, in standardized format, as BIOSTR.

The virus-host interactions for 45 viruses are collected from the STRING database — publicly available at http://viruses.string-db.org/. We consider interactions of any type
as long as their confidence (score) is equal or larger than 0.25. For Influenza C, Yellow fever, Human Hepatitis A, Dengue virus type 4 and Swinepox virus, due to the unavailability of data with
score 0.25, we consider the minimum available value 0.4, instead. For each virus, we record

19

the targeted human proteins and build a virus-host interactome by merging this information with
BIOSTR. However, for the subsequent analyses, which are focused only on the human interactome,
we discard virus-virus interactions.

It is worth noting that to build the COVID–19 virus-host interactions, a different procedure
had to be used. In fact, since the SARS-CoV-2 is too novel we could not find its PPI in the STRING
repository and we have considered, instead, the targets experimentally observed in Gordon et al 13 ,
consisting of 332 human proteins. The remainder of the procedure used to build the virus-host PPI
is the same as before. See Fig. 1 for summary information about each virus.

Figure 2 shows a visualization of the human interactome where proteins targeted by viruses
are highlighted. Remarkably, viruses tend to preferentially target similar regions related to specific
functions of the human interactome. In fact, based on our dataset, TP53 (Tumor Protein p53, NCBI
Gene ID: 7157) is the most targeted node: it is responsible for inducing changes in metabolism,
DNA repair, apoptosis and cell cycle arrest, and its mutations are associated with several human
cancers. Other relevant targets (See Fig. 2) include GK (Glycerol Kinase, NCBI Gene ID: 2710),
an important enzyme contributing to regulate metabolism and glycerol uptake, and its mutations
are associated with glycerol kinase deficiency; TBP (TATA-box Binding Protein, NCBI Gene ID:
6908), which composes the transcription factor IID, which coordinates the activities of more than
70 polypeptides to initiate the transcription by RNA polymerase II; TLR4 (Toll Like Receptor 4,
NCBI Gene ID: 7099), relevant for recognizing pathogens and activating innate immunity; STAT2
(Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription 2, NCBI Gene ID: 6773), acting as a transcription activator within the cell nucleus: it is likely that it contributes to block interferon-alpha
response by adenovirus; PTGS2 (Prostaglandin-endoperoxide Synthase 2, NCBI Gene ID: 5743),
a key enzyme involved in the process of prostaglandin biosynthesis; IFIH1 (Interferon Induced
with Helicase C domain 1, NCBI Gene ID: 64135), encoding MDA5, an intracellular sensor of

20

viral RNA responsible for triggering the innate immune response: it is fundamental for activating
the process of pro-inflammatory response that includes interferons, for this reason it is targeted by
several virus families which are able to hinder the innate immune response by evading its specific
interferon response.

Contributions. AG, OA and SB performed numerical experiments and data analysis. MDD conceived and designed the study. All authors wrote the manuscript.

Competing financial interests. The authors declare no competing financial interests.

Acknowledgements. The authors thank Vera Pancaldi for useful discussions.

References

1. Andersen, K. G., Rambaut, A., Lipkin, W. I., Holmes, E. C. & Garry, R. F. The proximal origin
of SARS-CoV-2. Nature Medicine 26, 450–452 (2020). URL https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41591-020-0820-9.
2. Costanzo, M. et al. The genetic landscape of a cell. Science 327, 425–431 (2010).
3. Young, B. E. et al. Epidemiologic features and clinical course of patients infected with SARS-CoV-2
in singapore. JAMA 323, 1488 (2020). URL https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2020.3204.
4. Cao, B. et al.

A trial of lopinavir–ritonavir in adults hospitalized with severe covid-19.

England Journal of Medicine 382, 1787–1799 (2020).
nejmoa2001282.

21

New

URL https://doi.org/10.1056/

5. Choy, K.-T. et al. Remdesivir, lopinavir, emetine, and homoharringtonine inhibit SARS-CoV-2 replication in vitro. Antiviral Research 178, 104786 (2020). URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
antiviral.2020.104786.
6. Barabási, A.-L., Gulbahce, N. & Loscalzo, J. Network medicine: a network-based approach to human
disease. Nature reviews genetics 12, 56–68 (2011).
7. Ivanov, P. C., Liu, K. K. & Bartsch, R. P. Focus on the emerging new fields of network physiology and
network medicine. New journal of physics 18, 100201 (2016).
8. Zhou, X., Menche, J., Barabási, A.-L. & Sharma, A. Human symptoms–disease network. Nature
communications 5, 1–10 (2014).
9. Silverman, E. K. & Loscalzo, J. Network medicine approaches to the genetics of complex diseases.
Discovery medicine 14, 143 (2012).
10. Goh, K.-I. et al. The human disease network. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 104, 8685–8690 (2007).
11. Halu, A., De Domenico, M., Arenas, A. & Sharma, A. The multiplex network of human diseases. NPJ
Systems Biology and Applications 5, 1–12 (2019).
12. Sonawane, A. R., Weiss, S. T., Glass, K. & Sharma, A. Network medicine in the age of biomedical
big data. Frontiers in Genetics 10 (2019). URL https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2019.
00294.
13. Gordon, D. E. et al. A SARS-CoV-2 protein interaction map reveals targets for drug repurposing.
Nature 583, 459–468 (2020). URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2286-9.

22

14. Cui, H. et al. Structural genomics and interactomics of 2019 wuhan novel coronavirus, 2019-ncov,
indicate evolutionary conserved functional regions of viral proteins. BioRxiv (2020).
15. Vandelli, A., Monti, M., Milanetti, E., Ponti, R. D. & Tartaglia, G. G. Structural analysis of sars-cov-2
and prediction of the human interactome. arXiv:2003.13655 (2020).
16. Estrada, E. Fractional diffusion on the human proteome as an alternative to the multi-organ damage
of SARS-CoV-2. Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science 30, 081104 (2020). URL
https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0015626.
17. Gysi, D. M. et al. Network medicine framework for identifying drug repurposing opportunities for
covid-19. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.07229 (2020).
18. Ray, S., Lall, S., Mukhopadhyay, A., Bandyopadhyay, S. & Schönhuth, A. Predicting potential drug
targets and repurposable drugs for covid-19 via a deep generative model for graphs. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2007.02338 (2020).
19. Callaway, D. S., Newman, M. E., Strogatz, S. H. & Watts, D. J. Network robustness and fragility:
Percolation on random graphs. Physical Review Letters 85, 5468 (2000).
20. Stauffer, D. & Aharony, A. Introduction to Percolation Theory (CRC press, 2018).
21. Albert, R., Jeong, H. & Barabási, A.-L. Error and attack tolerance of complex networks. Nature 406,
378–382 (2000).
22. Cohen, R., Erez, K., Ben-Avraham, D. & Havlin, S. Breakdown of the internet under intentional attack.
Physical Review Letters 86, 3682 (2001).
23. Zhang, S., Ning, X. & Zhang, X.-S. Identification of functional modules in a ppi network by clique
percolation clustering. Computational Biology and Chemistry 30, 445–451 (2006).

23

24. Wang, J., Liu, B., Li, M. & Pan, Y. Identifying protein complexes from interaction networks based on
clique percolation and distance restriction. BMC Genomics 11, S10 (2010).
25. Gilks, W. R., Audit, B., de Angelis, D., Tsoka, S. & Ouzounis, C. A. Percolation of annotation errors
through hierarchically structured protein sequence databases. Mathematical Biosciences 193, 223–234
(2005).
26. Kim, J., Krapivsky, P., Kahng, B. & Redner, S. Infinite-order percolation and giant fluctuations in a
protein interaction network. Physical Review E 66, 055101 (2002).
27. Voit, E. O. Computational Analysis Of Biochemical Systems A Practical Guide For Biochemists And
Molecular Biologists (Cambridge University Press, 2000).
28. Maslov, S. & Ispolatov, I. Propagation of large concentration changes in reversible protein-binding
networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104, 13655–13660 (2007). URL https:
//doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0702905104.
29. Alon, U. An Introduction to Systems Biology (CRC press, 2006).
30. Barzel, B. & Biham, O. Quantifying the connectivity of a network: The network correlation function
method. Physical Review E 80 (2009). URL https://doi.org/10.1103/physreve.80.
046104.
31. Barzel, B. & Barabási, A.-L. Universality in network dynamics. Nature Physics 9, 673–681 (2013).
URL https://doi.org/10.1038/nphys2741.
32. Cimini, G. et al. The statistical physics of real-world networks. Nature Reviews Physics 1, 58–71
(2019). URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s42254-018-0002-6.

24

33. Radicchi, F., Krioukov, D., Hartle, H. & Bianconi, G. Classical information theory of networks. Journal
of Physics: Complexity 1, 025001 (2020). URL https://doi.org/10.1088%2F2632-072x%
2Fab9447.
34. Passerini, F. & Severini, S. The von neumann entropy of networks. SSRN Electronic Journal (2008).
URL https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1382662.
35. De Domenico, M., Nicosia, V., Arenas, A. & Latora, V. Structural reducibility of multilayer networks.
Nature Communications 6, 1–9 (2015).
36. De Domenico, M. & Biamonte, J. Spectral entropies as information-theoretic tools for complex network
comparison. Phys. Rev. X 6, 041062 (2016). URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/
PhysRevX.6.041062.
37. Biamonte, J., Faccin, M. & De Domenico, M. Complex networks from classical to quantum. Communications Physics 2 (2019). URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s42005-019-0152-6.
38. Ghavasieh, A. & De Domenico, M. Enhancing transport properties in interconnected systems without
altering their structure. Phys. Rev. Research 2, 013155 (2020). URL https://link.aps.org/
doi/10.1103/PhysRevResearch.2.013155.
39. Nicolini, C., Forcellini, G., Minati, L. & Bifone, A. Scale-resolved analysis of brain functional
connectivity networks with spectral entropy.

NeuroImage 211, 116603 (2020).

URL https:

//doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.116603.
40. Ghavasieh, A., Stella, M., Biamonte, J. & De Domenico, M. Unraveling the effects of multiscale
network entanglement on disintegration of empirical systems Under revision. Preprint available at
arXiv:2008.05368 (2020).

25

41. Szklarczyk, D. et al. String v11: protein–protein association networks with increased coverage, supporting functional discovery in genome-wide experimental datasets. Nucleic Acids Research 47, D607–
D613 (2019).
42. Stark, C. et al. Biogrid: a general repository for interaction datasets. Nucleic Acids Research 34,
D535–D539 (2006).
43. Oughtred, R. et al. The biogrid interaction database: 2019 update. Nucleic Acids Research 47, D529–
D541 (2019).
44. Murphy, M. et al. Gene help: integrated access to genes of genomes in the reference sequence collection. In Gene Help [Internet] (National Center for Biotechnology Information (US), 2019).

26

