Considerations, Good Practices, Risks and Pitfalls
in Developing AI Solutions Against COVID-19

arXiv:2008.09043v1 [cs.CY] 13 Aug 2020

Alexandra Luccioni1,2 , Joseph Bullock3,4 , Katherine Hoffmann Pham3,5 ,
Cynthia Sin Nga Lam6 and Miguel Luengo-Oroz3
1
Université de Montréal 2 Mila Québec Artificial Intelligence Institute
3
United Nations Global Pulse 4 Institute for Data Science, Durham University
5
NYU Stern School of Business 6 Global Coordination Mechanism on NCDs, WHO
sasha.luccioni@mila.quebec, {joseph,katherine,miguel}@unglobalpulse.org, lams@who.int
Abstract
The COVID-19 pandemic has been a major challenge to humanity, with 12.7 million confirmed
cases as of July 13th, 2020 [1]. In previous work,
we described how Artificial Intelligence can be
used to tackle the pandemic with applications at
the molecular, clinical, and societal scales [2]. In
the present follow-up article, we review these three
research directions, and assess the level of maturity and feasibility of the approaches used, as well
as their potential for operationalization. We also
summarize some commonly encountered risks and
practical pitfalls, as well as guidelines and best
practices for formulating and deploying AI applications at different scales.

1

Introduction

In recent months, an already remarkable body of research
on potential applications of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and
Machine Learning (ML) to address the health and societal
challenges created by the COVID-19 pandemic has been produced. In a recent survey of the literature [2], we identified
over 300 relevant journal articles and preprints with applications ranging from tracking the spread of misinformation to
molecular modeling of the SARS-CoV-2 virus. These applications are emerging in a wide array of settings, increasingly
driven by the priorities of responders and multidisciplinary
collaborations.
In this article, we present a more in-depth analysis of AI
applications at the molecular, clinical, and societal scales.
We build on our previous work by sharing some high-level
observations on the broader landscape of AI for COVID-19
and providing a critical take on best practices and application
strategies. While the speed and scale of the AI community’s
research response to the pandemic is unprecedented, we feel
nonetheless that there are a number of common, structural
challenges faced by many of these projects. We extract shared
design considerations and promising directions, as well as recurring problems, risks, and areas of improvement that could
help researchers and funding bodies when developing further
applications and research agendas.

2

Molecular Scale

Promising Directions AI has been applied in a wide spectrum of molecular research – ranging from better understanding the structure of the SARS-CoV-2 virus to assisting drug
development and improving molecular diagnosis.
Some of the earliest responses to the pandemic were produced by AI researchers leveraging existing protein structure
prediction algorithms [3] and drug discovery pipelines [4], or
exploring pre-built knowledge graphs [5]. Having the infrastructure for this research already in place facilitated a rapid
response to the new challenge of COVID-19. Open science,
based on previously published peer-reviewed papers detailing the methodologies involved, has helped to accelerate the
evaluation of these approaches.
A number of projects studied drug re-purposing, in the
hope of discovering a therapy for which the engineering of
novel compounds is not needed, clinical trials have been authorized, or the compound’s use has already been approved
(e.g., [6]). Others used ML approaches to reduce the computational burden of docking simulations by narrowing down
the set of candidate compounds which needed to be docked
(e.g., [7]). Another notable trend in molecular applications
involves identifying desirable or undesirable properties of a
candidate compound – e.g., novelty, drug likeness, or toxicity
– and then training drug discovery models to suggest compounds that meet these desiderata (e.g., [8]). These applications allowed creative exercises from the modeling perspective, in which researchers experimented with different representations of the same data to design different AI pipelines.
Many papers relied on a common set of open datasets such
as PDBbind, ChemBL, and DrugBank, which makes their
methodologies more accessible and replicable for other researchers. Several even posted models or results on Github or
other web pages, providing open access to all (e.g., [9]).
Risks and Pitfalls Many ML applications in molecular science remain at the research level. It is understandable that
molecular research is part of a multidisciplinary and multistep process; nonetheless, few of the efforts we observed had
advanced through the drug development pipeline to more formal evaluation. One challenge is that synthesizing and testing
compounds is costly and time-consuming, so researchers who
are not embedded within a larger infrastructure are often unable to execute these later steps required to translate research

Figure 1: AI applications for the COVID-19 response organized at three levels: the molecular scale, the clinical scale, and the societal scale.

to practice.
Another barrier in this research-to-practice process could
be limitations in data and model sharing. To our knowledge,
two candidate vaccines that reported the use of ML in their
development have been approved for clinical evaluation [10].
However, both vaccines came from corporations which published limited information on their approach and the extent
to which ML was utilized in vaccine development. More
generally, we found that some of the research produced by
private-sector entities relied on datasets such as knowledge
graphs which are not publicly accessible, describing proprietary models only in vague or high-level terms. Hence, we
would like to reiterate the importance of open science in ensuring accessible vaccines and treatments for vulnerable communities.

3

Clinical Scale

Promising Directions From a clinical perspective, AI and
ML have already been used to assist and improve patient-level
assessment of COVID-19. One major application for ML in
this field has been the analysis of medical imagery such as CT
and X-Ray scans with the help of common neural network architectures, either to provide a supplementary data point to
corroborate COVID-19 diagnosis [11], or to assess the severity and progression of the disease [12]. Some of these approaches are now fully operational and have received institutional approval for deployment in hospitals as triage tools [13]
or as human-in-the-loop systems for radiologists [14].
Approaches using complementary data sources have also
been proposed, ranging from wearable devices and mobile
phones for detecting symptoms [15], to electronic health
records to improve diagnosis and outcome prediction. We
find one of the most promising applications of AI at a clinical
level to be the prediction of patient outcomes and the proposal
of triage approaches based on features extracted from medical data. Such approaches are transparent and practicable,
pinpointing key measurable features which enable hospitals
to plan the use of resources such as ventilators and ICU beds.
Furthermore, there are promising hybrid studies that leverage both medical imagery and clinical features to predict
patient-level characteristics such as the severity of COVID19 [16]. These approaches leverage different complementary
sources of data in order to make more precise and more generalizable predictions of patients’ prognosis. In fact, the clinical

features identified by studies using solely clinical data were
also corroborated by hybrid studies; e.g. both sets of studies
found that high levels of substances such as lactic dehydrogenase (LDH) and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (CRP)
were correlated with mortality risk and longer hospitalization.
Risks and Pitfalls While many studies are being carried
out in situ on COVID-19 patients, there is still much that we
do not know about the virus itself and the factors that can
put patients at risk for hospitalization, developing acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), and eventual death from
respiratory failure. For instance, the extent to which medical
imagery alone can be used for the diagnosis of COVID-19 is
still debated by the medical community [17]. Above and beyond the feasibility of diagnosis, many of the medical imaging papers we reviewed had methodological issues, relying on
small and poorly-balanced datasets that mix data from several
populations, coupled with flawed evaluation procedures [18].
Most also presented no plan for inclusion in clinical workflows and no attempt to provide a transparent explanation for
the diagnosis, which is especially important in patient-level
applications of AI [19]. Finally, while approaches that leverage ML to analyze non-invasive measurements are potentially
promising given the ubiquity and accessibility of sensor technologies, we found that these approaches are not sufficiently
mature to evaluate their performance. We would advocate
more extensive testing and clinical investigations to validate
their performance in deployment.

4

Societal Scale

Promising Directions From a societal perspective, AI has
been applied to the field of epidemiological modelling, as
well as to understanding and combating the “infodemic”
spread of misinformation [20]. At the epidemiological level,
many studies have sought to produce forecasting models for
national and regional level statistics. While a vast body of
literature on modeling already exists, AI based models could
augment classical models in situations where analytic transmission equations are not well known, such as when modelling the effects of public policy measures such as social distancing and self-quarantine [21]. In addition, AI methods can
also be used to incorporate new data sources, such as social
media and search information [22]. Other works use AI to
identify similarities and differences in the evolution of the
pandemic between regions. These approaches have leveraged

both supervised and unsupervised techniques, and may help
inform policy makers at a high level and highlight areas for
more detailed exploration.
AI has also been applied to investigate the scale and spread
of the infodemic in order to address the propagation of misinformation and disinformation including the emergence of
hate speech. Given the vast amount of information now being
disseminated and shared, there is a need for tools to help identify and promote reliable information sources, and understand
the spread of misinformation. Promising work has analyzed
patterns in the transmission of such information and developed infodemic risk scoring algorithms (e.g., [23]). Moreover, there has been an increasing focus on assessing the
emergence of hate speech, particularly using network analysis techniques, which could help inform preventative efforts
or contribute to the development of continuous monitoring
platforms [24].
Risks and Pitfalls Policy decisions must be based on justifiable models which stand up to public scrutiny. Since much
of the data collected for COVID-19 epidemiological modeling tasks is extremely limited, the choice of models and
datasets can have significant effects on overall performance
and models may lack generalizability. A significant limitation
of many articles in this category is the heterogeneous data collection in different countries due to multiple factors including
variations in testing, case tracking, and reporting quality and
standards. Moreover, applying models trained in one context
to another raises concerns surrounding the model’s ability to
capture aspects such as different cultural norms which may
impact the spread and effect of the virus. In such examples,
a transferred model will have to be tailored for local contexts
given that there may be different demographic characteristics
and behaviors. Indeed, developing proper model transferability procedures and guidelines is especially important for data
poor regions. While synthetic data approaches have been proposed, these should be applied with caution.
In order to understand and tackle the infodemic, it is important to capture and analyze information from a diverse
range of sources. While much of the work on this topic uses
data from online sources such as social media and Google
searches, information propagated through alternative channels such as radio is important for capturing wider trends.
Moreover, many of the existing approaches rely on language
modelling techniques developed for English or other widely
spoken languages, but relying on such models might leave
many populations behind, including some of those most vulnerable. Finally, we note that while numerous methods have
been proposed for identifying hate speech, further research is
needed to identify the targeted groups and to learn how to use
the insights gained from these techniques in an effective way
(e.g. see Section II [25]).

5

Discussion

We believe that there are several considerations to keep in
mind when applying AI to a global problem such as the
COVID-19 pandemic. These include:
1. Application relevance and context: Does the application make sense from both an application and a method-

ological perspective? Were domain experts consulted to
properly assess the needs and define the problem to be
solved? Does the solution serve its target audience?
2. Data availability and quality: Has the quantity of data
being used to train and evaluate the model been assessed
and deemed to be of a reasonable size and diversity to
justify the claims made? Has bias in the data been considered and documented? Were privacy measures taken?
3. AI methodology and complexity: Is the approach proposed justified? If an AI based model, has it been benchmarked against more traditional approaches? Has the
approach been validated by other researchers and, if possible, peer-reviewed?
4. Transparency and explainability: Have efforts been
made to render the results and the approach understandable by humans? Is it possible to identify the key features being used by the algorithm?
5. Dissemination of knowledge: Are the data, code and
models being shared in any form? Are there reporting
guidelines and standards that should be followed?
6. Operationalization and performance: Can the approach
be integrated into decision-making workflows? What is
the implementation plan? Are there regulatory frameworks that have to be taken into account? What are the
potential risks? Will the models incorporate user feedback, and if so, how?
The COVID-19 pandemic is a global emergency that has
overstretched health care networks and posed significant
health, economic and social challenges to humanity. AI can
play an important role in alleviating this pressure, but we
would like to reiterate that in order for any technological solution to make an impact, it must be deployed contextually and
appropriately. We advocate for aspiring research initiatives to
be carried out in partnership with stakeholders who have the
necessary domain knowledge. It is also important to investigate how proven solutions can be adapted to local contexts to
address unmet needs, particularly in areas of the world with
fewer resources. This requires developing appropriate model
and data sharing solutions, and specific measures to address
data scarcity (see e.g. [26] for more details).
Finally, given the rapidly changing nature of human understanding regarding the pandemic, and therefore the inability
to fully validate many approaches, we suggest that models
should not be designed to process data in an end-to-end fashion at this stage, but rather to augment human decision making. With careful attention to the implementation context and
operational needs, we believe that AI solutions can be a valuable asset in the fight against the pandemic.

Acknowledgements
United Nations Global Pulse is supported by the Governments of Netherlands, Sweden and Germany and the William
and Flora Hewlett Foundation. JB also is supported by the
UK Science and Technology Facilities Council (STFC) grant
number ST/P006744/1. AL is supported by funding from
IVADO and Mila.

References
[1] WHO. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak situation; 2020. https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/
novel-coronavirus-2019/situation-reports.
[2] Bullock J, Luccioni A, Pham KH, Lam CSN, LuengoOroz M, et al. Mapping the landscape of artificial intelligence applications against COVID-19. arXiv preprint
arXiv:200311336. 2020;.
[3] Jumper J, Tunyasuvunakool K, Kohli P, Hassabis D,
AlphaFold Team. Computational predictions of protein
structures associated with COVID-19; 2020.
[4] Zhavoronkov A, Aladinskiy V, Zhebrak A, Zagribelnyy
B, Terentiev V, Bezrukov DS, et al. Potential COVID2019 3C-like Protease Inhibitors Designed Using Generative Deep Learning Approaches. Insilico Medicine
Hong Kong Ltd A. 2020;307:E1.
[5] Richardson P, Griffin I, Tucker C, Smith D, Oechsle O,
Phelan A, et al. Baricitinib as Potential Treatment for
2019-nCoV Acute Respiratory Disease. The Lancet.
2020;395(10223):e30–e31.
[6] Nguyen DD, Gao K, Chen J, Wang R, Wei G. Potentially highly potent drugs for 2019-nCoV. bioRxiv
preprint bioRxiv:20200205936013v1. 2020;.
[7] Ton AT, Gentile F, Hsing M, Ban F, Cherkasov A. Rapid
Identification of Potential Inhibitors of SARS-CoV-2
Main Protease by Deep Docking of 1.3 Billion Compounds. Molecular Informatics. 2020;39:1–8.
[8] Tang B, He F, Liu D, Fang M, Wu Z, Xu D.
AI-Aided Design of Novel Targeted Covalent Inhibitors against SARS-CoV-2.
bioRxiv preprint
bioRxiv:20200303972133. 2020;.
[9] Lopez-Rincon A, Tonda A, Mendoza-Maldonado L,
Claassen E, Garssen J, Kraneveld AD. Accurate
Identification of SARS-CoV-2 from Viral Genome Sequences Using Deep Learning.
bioRxiv preprint
bioRxiv:20200313990242v1. 2020;.
[10] WHO.
Draft
landscape
of
COVID19 candidate vaccines;
2020.
https:
//www.who.int/who-documents-detail/
draft-landscape-of-covid-19-candidate-vaccines.
[11] Li L, Qin L, Xu Z, Yin Y, Wang X, Kong B, et al. Artificial intelligence distinguishes COVID-19 from community acquired pneumonia on chest CT. Radiology.
2020;.
[12] Tang Z, Zhao W, Xie X, Zhong Z, Shi F, Liu J,
et al. Severity Assessment of Coronavirus Disease 2019
(COVID-19) Using Quantitative Features from Chest
CT Images. arXiv preprint arXiv:200311988. 2020;.
[13] Alaa AM, van der Schaar M. Autoprognosis: Automated clinical prognostic modeling via bayesian optimization with structured kernel learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:180207207. 2018;.
[14] Shan F, Gao Y, Wang J, Shi W, Shi N, Han M,
et al. Lung Infection Quantification of COVID-19

in CT Images with Deep Learning.
arXiv:200304655. 2020;.

arXiv preprint

[15] Radin JM, Wineinger NE, Topol EJ, Steinhubl SR. Harnessing wearable device data to improve state-level realtime surveillance of influenza-like illness in the USA:
a population-based study. The Lancet Digital Health.
2020;.
[16] Shi W, Peng X, Liu T, Cheng Z, Lu H, Yang S, et al.
Deep Learning-Based Quantitative Computed Tomography Model in Predicting the Severity of COVID-19:
A Retrospective Study in 196 Patients. arXiv preprint.
2020;.
[17] Weinstock M, Echenique A, Russell Jea. Chest Xray findings in 636 ambulatory patients with COVID19 presenting to an urgent care center: A normal chest
X-ray is no guarantee. The Journal of Urgent Care
Medicine. 2020; p. 13–18.
[18] Wynants L, Van Calster B, Bonten MM, Collins GS, Debray TP, De Vos M, et al. Prediction models for diagnosis and prognosis of COVID-19 infection: Systematic
review and critical appraisal. BMJ. 2020;369.
[19] Wiens J, Saria S, Sendak M, Ghassemi M, Liu VX,
Doshi-Velez F, et al. Do no harm: a roadmap for responsible machine learning for health care. Nature medicine.
2019;25(9):1337–1340.
[20] WHO. Infodemic management - Infodemiology;
2020. https://www.who.int/teams/risk-communication/
infodemic-management.
[21] Dandekar R, Barbastathis G. Neural Network aided
quarantine control model estimation of COVID spread
in Wuhan, China. arXiv preprint arXiv:200309403.
2020;.
[22] Lampos V, Moura S, Yom-Tov E, Edelstein M, Majumder M, Hamada Y, et al. Tracking COVID-19 using
online search. arXiv preprint arXiv:200308086. 2020;.
[23] Gallotti R, Valle F, Castaldo N, Sacco P, Domenico
MD.
Assessing the risks of “infodemics” in response to COVID-19 epidemics.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:200403997. 2020;.
[24] Velásquez N, Leahy R, Restrepo NJ, Lupu Y, Sear R,
Gabriel N, et al. Hate multiverse spreads malicious
COVID-19 content online beyond individual platform
control. arXiv preprint arXiv:200400673. 2020;.
[25] United Nations. United Nations Guidance Note
on Addressing and Countering COVID-19 related Hate Speech; 2020.
https://www.un.org/en/
genocideprevention/documents/Guidance%20on%
20COVID-19%20related%20Hate%20Speech.pdf.
[26] Wright J, Verity A. Artificial Intelligence Principles For
Vulnerable Populations in Humanitarian Contexts. Digital Humanitarian Network. 2020;.

