Modelling collective decision-making during epidemics

arXiv:2008.01971v2 [q-bio.PE] 19 Nov 2020

Mengbin Ye1,†,∗ , Lorenzo Zino2,† , Alessandro Rizzo3,4,‡ & Ming Cao2,‡

1

Optus–Curtin Centre of Excellence in Artificial Intelligence, Curtin University, Perth, Australia

2

Faculty of Science and Engineering, University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands

3

Dipartimento di Elettronica e Telecomunicazioni, Politecnico di Torino, Torino, Italy

4

Office of Innovation, New York University Tandon School of Engineering, Brooklyn NY, USA

†These authors contributed equally
‡These authors contributed equally

*Correspondence and requests for materials can be addressed to Mengbin Ye (email:
mengbin.ye@curtin.edu.au)

1

The outcome of an epidemic outbreak can be critically shaped by the collective behavioural
response of the population. Likewise, individual decision-making is highly influenced by
the overwhelming pressure of epidemic spreading. However, existing models lack the ability
to capture this complex interdependence over the entire course of the epidemic. We introduce a novel parsimonious network model, grounded in evolutionary game theory, in which
decision-making and epidemics co-evolve, shaped by an interplay of factors mapped onto
a minimal set of model parameters —including government-mandated interventions, socioeconomic costs, perceived infection risks and social influences. This interplay gives rise to a
range of characteristic phenomena that can be captured within this general framework, such
as sustained periodic outbreaks, multiple epidemic waves, or prompt behavioural response
ensuring a successful eradication of the disease. The model’s potentialities are demonstrated
by three case studies based on real-world gonorrhoea, 1918–19 Spanish flu and COVID-19.

1

Introduction

In the absence of pharmaceutical interventions, slowing or eradicating an epidemic in a population
crucially depends on the actions of a sufficiently large number of individuals to adopt appropriate
behavioural responses such as physical distancing or wearing face masks. However, such human behaviours have been overlooked in classical mathematical epidemic models1, 2 . On the other
hand, there has been little attention within the decision-making literature on behaviours under the
magnifying pressure of an epidemic outbreak3 . To bridge this gap, recent efforts have led to individual behavioural responses being incorporated into mathematical epidemic models4–7 . However,

2

a majority of such works suffer from a simplistic focus on the concept of individual awareness:
individuals are assumed to adopt self-protective behaviours once aware of an epidemic outbreak
to reduce the probability of becoming infected4, 8 , yet recent lessons on the complexity of human
behaviours from the COVID-19 outbreak have exposed inherent limitations of awareness-based
modelling mechanisms3, 9 . In particular, awareness-based mechanisms are often purely instantaneous and reactive, thus failing to capture the very factors that affect time-varying behavioural
responses over the whole duration of an epidemic, such as social influence and accumulating socioeconomic costs. An additional salient aspect highlighted by the ongoing pandemic is that individuals’ decision-making processes are impacted by government-mandated policy interventions, which
may be adjusted over time according to the progression of the outbreak10–12 . Finally, high levels of
uncertainty cause bounded rationality to become prominent in an individual’s decision making13 ,
which is seldom included in current awareness-based behavioural-epidemic models.

Game-theoretic models allow for the capturing of more complex and realistic behavioural
responses, which include bounded rationality and social influence. Existing works primarily focus on a different problem in the management of epidemic outbreaks: the implementation and
adoption of pharmaceutical treatments, such as individuals’ decisions to vaccinate14–18 . Both vaccination and behavioural response are individual-level choices that have a strong impact on the
epidemic spreading2, 19 , but there is a key difference between the two decision-making processes.
While an individual’s behavioural response may be revised regularly as the epidemic evolves, the
choice to vaccinate is typically taken once (for instance, for poliomyelitis), or periodically, before
the expected epidemic outbreak (for instance, for seasonal flu). Hence, vaccination entails a one3

shot decision18 or periodic decisions, based on information about an expected future outbreak or
previous epidemic seasons16 . In contrast, the decision-making process that governs behavioural
response enacted during the epidemic spread should evolve at the same time-scale of the epidemic
process, suggesting the need for a co-evolutionary model of the epidemic process and its associated
behavioural response. Imitation dynamics have been proposed as a viable game-theoretic framework to model human behavioural response to epidemic spreading at the population-level via a
mean-field approach20 , and they have recently been utilised to model social-distancing practice for
the ongoing COVID-19 outbreak21–23 . Such an approach can capture some limited aspects of social influence and risk perception, but does not provide a formal framework to assess the complex
interplay between these factors and the implementation of intervention policies.

We believe novel modelling methodology is required, shifting focus from the instantaneous
impact of reactive and fully rational behavioural responses as the epidemic emerges (as in awarenessbased models) to a long-term outlook where complex behavioural dynamics arise at the individuallevel and co-evolve at the same time scale of the epidemic spreading (different form vaccination
games). Our novel paradigm is grounded in evolutionary game theory to describe individual-level
bounded rational decision-making processes24 . We adopt a network model approach, to capture
the individual-level responses and contagion patterns, which collectively shape the emergent behaviour of the epidemic outbreak. Our approach enables the explicit and concurrent inclusion of
the most salient factors that each individual balances and trades off when deciding their behavioural
response to an ongoing epidemic, such as social influence25 , perceived infection risks20 , policy interventions by authorities10 and the accumulation of socio-economic costs21, 26 . This allows for a
4

better assessment of the effectiveness of different policy interventions from a healthcare point of
view, while also evaluating their socio-economic impacts27, 28 .

The focus on this work is to establish a novel methodological and modelling framework for
the co-evolution of epidemic spreading and behavioural response due to decision-making. Toward
this end, we demonstrate our paradigm by incorporating it into three exemplary epidemic progression models and applying them to three case studies inspired by real-world diseases, including
an instance of periodic outbreaks of gonorrhoea, the 1918 Spanish flu pandemic, and the ongoing
COVID-19 pandemic. Notably, we use the current COVID-19 outbreak to investigate the effect of
intervention policies on the decision-making process behind the behavioural responses. We show
that in the early stages, weak interventions can lead to a general failure to adopt self-protective
behaviours, resulting in multiple overlapping infection waves. On the other hand, we demonstrate
that in the advanced phases of the epidemic evolution, the time over which a phased reduction of
a lockdown occurs, rather than the severity of the initial lockdown itself, determines whether a
second infectious wave appears, yielding severe health and socio-economic consequences. Importantly, we identify that social influence acts as a double-edged sword, providing benefits during the
early stages of a lockdown, but accelerating the collective rejection of self-protective behaviours
during its phased reduction. The analysis of these case studies reveal the potentialities of the
proposed paradigm. Within a single, unified mathematical framework, our model allows to reproduce a broad range of real-world phenomena —from periodic outbreaks to endemic diseases, from
multiple overlapping epidemic waves, to quick eradication of the disease— and it elucidates the
effect of different policy intervention scenarios on the course of the epidemic, providing a valuable
5

predictive tool that can assist public authorities in their decisions.

2

Results

Model We consider a population V = {1, . . . , n} of n individuals. Each individual i ∈ V is
characterised by a two-dimensional variable (xi (t), yi (t)), which models their health state and the
social behaviour adopted at the discrete time t ∈ Z≥0 , respectively.
The variable xi (t) ∈ A takes values in a discrete set of health states A. Given the methodological purpose of this paper, we introduce our paradigm in combination with the well-known
susceptible–infected–susceptible (SIS) epidemic model29 , which is characterised by two health
states: S represents susceptible individuals, who are healthy and can be infected by the disease
upon interacting with infected individuals, represented by the state I. A global observable z(t)
measures the detectable prevalence of the epidemic disease at time t: z(t) =

1
n

|{i : xi (t) = I}|,

where | · | denotes a set’s cardinality. It is important to note that although we have introduced our
framework coupled with a simple SIS model, further health states may easily be added to the set A
to capture specific features of the disease being studied, including different stages of the epidemic
progression, heterogeneity among the individuals, and imperfect reporting29, 30 .

The social behaviour of individual i is captured by the binary variable yi (t) ∈ {0, 1} that
expresses whether the individual adopts self-protective behaviours (yi (t) = 1) or continues as
normal (yi (t) = 0). The paradigm is amenable to extensions to capture different levels of selfprotection through modification of the support set of yi (t).
6

λ

S
S
t

S

t
+1
(a)

λ

I

µ
λ

E

I
ν

µ

I

R
µ

R

(b)

Figure 1: Illustration of the network model and the epidemic progression. In (a), two time-steps
in the two-layer network representation31 , which have been previously used to capture epidemic
models that incorporate social factors8 . The upper layer (green) shows influences, the lower layer
(violet) contacts. In (b), schematics of the state transitions of the SIS model (above), of the SIR
model (middle) and of the SEIR model (below). The constants λ, µ and ν indicate transition
probabilities.

7

The spread of the disease and the individuals’ decision-making processes co-evolve, mutually influencing one another on a two-layered31 network structure G = (V, EI , EC (t)), illustrated in
Fig. 1a. The set of undirected links EI defines the static influence layer, capturing social influence
between individuals during the decision-making process. The contact layer is defined through a
time-varying set of undirected links EC (t), which represent the physical contacts between pairs of
individuals that may result in the transmission of the disease. We model the contact layer using
an activity-driven network (ADN)32 , which captures important features of complexity that characterise real-world networks, such as their temporal and heterogeneous nature and the fact that
individuals have a bounded number of contacts per unit-time. In ADNs, a constant parameter
ai ∈ [0, 1], called activity, expresses individual i’s propensity to generate m ≥ 1 interactions
with other individuals at each discrete time instant. More details are provided in the Methods. We
choose to adopt ADNs for their flexibility toward the inclusion and the analysis of key features that
characterise real-world interaction patterns, such as burstiness and memory in the link-formation
process, and the presence of a spatial structure33 . The inclusion of these features will be key toward
the development of models that can be used in practical studies, but are omitted here in order to
allow a focus on the key factors in the novel paradigm influencing the co-evolution of epidemic
spreading and decision-making driven behavioural response.

At each discrete time-step t, every individual i that is susceptible and does not adopt selfprotections (i.e. xi (t) = S and yi (t) = 0) may become infected. A constant parameter λ ∈
[0, 1], termed infection probability, captures the probability that the disease is transmitted by an
infectious individual (xj (t) = I) to a susceptible one through physical contact. We assume that
8

an individual adopting self-protection, yi (t) = 1, is always successful in preventing contagion.
Beside the contagion, at each time-step t, every infected individual i recovers with probability
µ ∈ (0, 1], becoming susceptible again to the disease. These transitions are illustrated in Fig. 1b,
while technical details are provided in the Methods.

Concurrently with the epidemic evolution, at each time-step t, each individual enacts a
decision-making process on the adoption of self-protective behaviours, according to an evolutionary game-based mechanism termed logit learning24 . The resulting behaviour is updated in a
probabilistic fashion. We define two payoff functions πi (0) and πi (1), which represent a combination of socio-psychological, economic and personal benefits received by individual i for enacting
behaviours yi = 0 and yi = 1, respectively. This individual then adopts self-protective behaviours
with a probability equal to

P[yi (t + 1) = 1] =

exp{βπi (1)}
.
exp{βπi (0)} + exp{βπi (1)}

(1)

The parameter β ∈ [0, ∞) measures an individual’s rationality in the decision-making process;
the larger the parameter β, the higher the probability that the individual chooses the behaviour that
maximises their payoff. Payoffs are defined as

πi (0) :=

πi (1) :=

1
di
1
di

X

j:(i,j)∈EI

X

j:(i,j)∈EI

(1 − yj (t)) − u(t),

(2a)

yj (t) + r(z(t)) − fi (t),

(2b)

and contain the following four terms, directly related to behavioural and social factors that shape
the epidemic dynamics (more details can be found in the Methods).
9

• Social influence. The first summation terms in Eqs. (2a) and (2b) are inherited from coordination games on networks34 . These terms capture the social influence of neighbouring
individuals and the individual’s desire to coordinate with them, as it provides an increased
payoff for adopting the same behaviour as that adopted by the majority of the neighbours.
• Policy interventions. The time-varying term u(t) ≥ 0 in Eq. (2a) captures a broad range
of non-pharmaceutical interventions enforced by public authorities to discourage dangerous
behaviours, e.g. by means of a fine or imprisonment or by providing benefits for working
from home.
• Risk perception. The risk-perception function r(z) : [0, 1] → R≥0 in Eq. (2b) is a monotonically non-decreasing function of the detectable prevalence z, which captures an incentive to
adopt self-protective behaviour due to the endogenous fear of becoming infected as the disease spreads. Individuals may learn of z from the media coverage of the epidemic evolution.
For simplicity, here we assume that all individuals share the same risk-perception function.
• Cost of self-protective behaviour. The negative impact of adopting self-protective behaviours is captured in Eq. (2b) by the frustration function

fi (t) = c +

t
X
s=1

γ s cyi (t − s),

(3)

where c ≥ 0 is the social, psychological and economic immediate cost per unit-time associated with the adoption of self-protective behaviours, e.g. related to the inability to socialise,
work from the office, enjoy public spaces, etc., and γ ∈ [0, 1] is its accumulation factor9, 21, 27 .
Thus, fi (t) ≥ 0 reflects accumulative costs for individual i up to time t.
10

Impact of an Epidemic Outbreak A major strength of the proposed paradigm lies in its ability to
facilitate a thorough evaluation of the immediate health and socio-economic impact of an epidemic
outbreak due to the population’s behavioural responses to prescribed policy interventions, a task
that has been considered extremely challenging so far26, 28 . In fact, our formalism enables the
direct computation of the health cost, which is directly related to the health state of individuals (i.e.
xi (t)), and the socio-economic cost, which depends on the behaviours adopted by the population
(i.e. yi (t)). By evaluating these costs for all individuals in the population, a cumulative health
cost H (for example, the percentage of the population infected) and socio-economic cost C for the
epidemic as a whole can be determined. More details and the explicit expression of these quantities
used in the discussion of the case studies below can be found in the Methods.

Three illustrative case studies The explicit derivation of the epidemic threshold for the SIS model
in large scale populations through a mean-field argument (illustrated in Fig.2 and detailed in the
Methods) offers insight into the role of human behaviour in the early stages of an epidemic outbreak. However, the key novelty of the proposed paradigm lies in the possibility to investigate
the interplay between epidemic spreading and human behaviour in the medium/long-term horizon,
involving scenarios in a large initial outbreak occurs as the threshold. To illustrate the general potentialities of our paradigm across different disease progression models, we now present three case
studies based on real disease characteristics, viz. gonorrhoea, Spanish flu and COVID-19. These
case studies allow us to discuss how the emergent behaviour of the epidemic spreading and its
collective behavioural response arises from the interplay of the disease transmission parameters,
the behavioural characteristics of the population, and the intervention policies implemented.
11

0.1

2
1.8

0.06

1.6

0.04

1.4

0.02

1.2

c

0.08

0

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

1

ū
Figure 2: Ratio between the epidemic threshold for the SIS model computed in the Methods (in
the absence of accumulation γ = 0 and for constant intervention policies u(t) = ū) and the
corresponding quantity without self-protective behaviours32 as a function of the cost of adopting
self-protective behaviours c and of policy interventions ū (β = 2). The larger this ratio (i.e.
in the blue region), the more resistant the population is to the epidemic outbreak. The results
suggest that mild non-pharmaceutical interventions (small ū) have only a minor impact on the
epidemic threshold, since they may not provide a sufficient incentive to abandon the status-quo
non-protective behaviours. On the other hand, the epidemic threshold increases significantly if ū is
sufficiently large. The socio-economic cost c also plays an important role, whereby small increases
can lower the threshold even for large ū. This implies that the perception of a high socio-economic
cost may hamper the outcome of strong non-pharmaceutical interventions.

12

To model the spread of gonorrhoea we use the basic SIS model described earlier; to capture the protective immunity after recovery for the Spanish flu, we adopt a susceptible–infected–
removed (SIR) model29 ; while the presence of a non-negligible latency period after contagion
for COVID-19 is captured by a susceptible–exposed–infectious–removed (SEIR) model29 , as described in the Methods and illustrated in Fig. 1b. Parameters are also detailed in the Methods.

SIS Modelling of Gonorrhoea Spreading Despite its simplicity, the SIS model has found an
important application in the study of gonorrhoea outbreaks35 . We focus on revealing the role of
the risk perception function r(z) in shaping the epidemic outbreak and the evolving behavioural
response. Hence, we fix all other parameters and assume that no policy interventions are implemented. In Fig. 3, we consider three scenarios with progressively less cautious populations,
showing that this shift in risk perception changes not only the quantitative, but also the qualitative,
characteristic phenomena observed. This demonstrates the power of our model, which allows to
capture and reproduce a range of real-world phenomena within a unified modelling framework.
In fact, by considering the very same epidemic mechanisms and tuning just one parameter in the
decision-making mechanism, we shift from a prompt and sustained collective response that leads
to fast eradication of the disease (Fig. 3a), to periodic oscillations both in the epidemic prevalence
and in the behavioural response (Fig. 3b), and finally to a partial behavioural response, yielding
the emergence of a meta-stable endemic equilibrium with a pervasive and long-term diffusion of
the disease (Fig. 3c).

Notice that, as further detailed in the Methods, the risk perception function determines a

13

Prevalence

0.1

0.3

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

0.2

0.05

0.1

0

0
0 2 4 6 8 10
Time (years)
(a)

0 2 4 6 8 10
Time (years)

100%
50%

0 2 4 6 8 10
Time (years)

(b)

0%

(c)

Figure 3: Prevalence of gonorrhoea infections (red curve) as a function of time as predicted by
an SIS model using our co-evolution paradigm. The colour intensity of the blue vertical bands
indicates the level of adoption of self-protective behaviours, i.e.

1
n

Pn

i=1

yi . In (a), a responsive

√
population (r(z) = 3 z) results in quick adoption of self-protective behaviours and fast eradication of the disease, after the first wave. In (b), multiple waves emerge in a less cautious population
(r(z) = 3z), yielding periodic waves of reinfection. In (c), in a population that underestimates the
risk (r(z) = 3z 2 ), the disease becomes endemic and a meta-stable equilibrium emerges. Parameters are defined in the Methods.

14

critical prevalence which guarantees a pervasive adoption of self-protections regardless of the behaviour of others. In our first scenario, this critical prevalence is z ∗ ≈ 18%. However, as can be
observed in Fig. 3a, social influence causes individuals to rapidly and widely adopt self-protective
behaviours at a much earlier prevalence of z(t) ≈ 6%, highlighting the key role played by social influence in shaping collective behavioural patterns and, in this instance, helping in the fast
eradication of the disease.

SIR Modelling of the Spanish Flu Pandemic We use an SIR model combined with our paradigm
to qualitatively reproduce the epidemic pattern of the 1918–19 Spanish flu pandemic (see Methods). Using only model parameters rooted in the actual historical context, the simulation results in
Figure 4 are qualitatively consistent with the epidemiological data that witnessed a resurgent pandemic with three waves including a massive second one36–38 . More importantly, key contributing
factors identified from our model predictions as leading to the resurgence of new and even larger
outbreaks also reflect historical observations. In particular, a slowly increasing risk perception —
associated with the initial suppression of news about the flu39 — results in a delay of over a month
after the initial outbreak for the population to adopt self-protective behaviours. Meanwhile, a fast
accumulating frustration (corresponding for example to the emergence of anti-mask movements
at the time) results in self-protective behaviours being abandoned immediately when the epidemic
prevalence decreases.

By doubling the duration of the interventions (from 28 days, as reported in the literature37 , to
56 days) or by relying on a more responsive population (details in the Methods), only a single wave

15

Prevalence

0.6

100%

0.4
50%
0.2
0

0

20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Time (days)

0%

Figure 4: Prevalence of Spanish flu infections (red curve) and cumulative infections (orange curve)
as a function of time as predicted by an SIR model in combination with the co-evolution paradigm.
The colour intensity of the blue vertical bands represents the fraction of adopters of self-protective
behaviours. Our simulation qualitatively reproduces the 1918–19 pandemic outbreak with three
consecutive epidemic waves, with a massive second wave. The impact of the outbreak is measured
by health cost H = 56.06% and socio-economic cost C = 6.05, as detailed in the Methods.

16

is witnessed, consistent with the historical fact that some cities successfully stopped the Spanish
flu through longer, timely interventions40 . The health costs in terms of cumulative epidemic prevalence is reduced from 56% to 9% and 3%, respectively, while the socio-economic costs associated
with the adoption of self-protective behaviours are reduced by more than 50% (see Methods and
Supplementary Fig. S1). This illustrates the power of our paradigm for predicting future scenarios once a particular parametrisation and model have been secured from empirical data. Existing
approaches typically estimate how infection parameters, associated with the disease dynamics, are
explicitly changed due to policy interventions2, 19, 41 . In contrast, our paradigm leaves the disease
dynamics untouched, and allows policy interventions to only influence the decision-making process that determines the behavioural responses, which, in turn, shape the epidemic evolution.

SEIR Modelling of COVID-19 Having established that our model reproduces key features of
past epidemics, we now analyse several different intervention scenarios for the ongoing COVID-19
outbreak19 , for which behavioural aspects are key to determine the future outcome of the infection
spread3 . To this end, we integrate our game-theoretic framework into an SEIR model, with disease
progression parameters tuned to COVID-19. In each of the simulations, we consider the same
cost and accumulation factor, and a population that is slow to perceive the outbreak as a threat; by
varying the intervention strategies, and the level of social influence, we reveal the global impact of
these factors.

Firstly, we observe that mild policy interventions, even if indefinite in duration, may not be
sufficient to ensure a timely and collective adoption of self-protective behaviours. For instance, the

17

Prevalence

0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0

100
200
Time (days)

300

0.2

100%

0.1

50%

0

0

Prevalence

(a)

100
200
Time (days)

300

0%

(b)

0.2

100%

0.6
0.4

0.1

50%

0.2
0

0

100
200
Time (days)
(c)

300

0

0

200
400
Time (days)

600

0%

(d)

Figure 5: Prevalence of COVID-19 infections (red curve) and cumulative infections (orange
curve) as a function of time as predicted by an SEIR model in combination with the co-evolution
paradigm. The colour intensity of the blue vertical bands represents the fraction of adopters of
self-protective behaviours. In (a), a mild policy intervention and accumulating frustration results
in sporadic adoption of self-protection, and thus two massive epidemic waves that overlap and a
long tail (health cost H = 70.45%, socio-economic cost C = 19.63). In (b), a severe policy intervention with a long phased reduction period keeps the epidemic outbreak contained to a single
wave (H = 5.87%, C = 12.05). In (c), a very severe policy intervention with a short phased reduction period results in three consecutive epidemic waves over a period of 10 months (H = 15.73%,
C = 36.16). In (d), the policy in (b) is implemented in a scenario without social influence, showing that social influence is key to guaranteed collective (and thus effective) behavioural responses
(H = 49.58%, C = 41.81). Parameters and costs are detailed in the Methods.
18

population in Fig. 5a is overwhelmed by the epidemic because social influence acts as inertia to
delay the adoption of self-protective behaviours (Supplementary Fig. S2)42 . Then, we consider two
scenarios with severe but short policy interventions, followed by a linear phased reduction (Figs. 5b
and 5c; in the first scenario, the policy is less severe but the reduction period is longer). Comparing
the two scenarios, we conclude that, provided that the initial policy interventions are sufficiently
severe (to avoid the scenario shown in Fig. 5a), the successful eradication of the disease depends
primarily on the phased reduction period being sufficiently long. The latter point is consistent with
observations from the recent literature on the duration of policy interventions12 . In fact, the disease
is quickly eradicated in the first scenario after the first wave, with 5.9% of cumulative infections
and even a decrease in the socio-economic cost compared to the indefinite but mild policy discussed
above, while the second (more severe, but shorter) choice of interventions yields multiple waves
with a final prevalence of 15.7% and a socio-economic cost that is almost three times as much.

Finally, in Fig. 5d, we repeat the scenario observed in Fig. 5b but remove the factor of social
influence, similar to many existing works.We find that the presence of social influence during the
initial severe intervention period helps to ensure a collective population response with a 99% adoption rate of self-protective behaviours (Fig. 5b); in contrast, the adoption rate is reduced to ≈ 60%
without social influence (Fig. 5d). However, during the phased reduction period, social influence
accelerates a collective rejection of self-protective behaviours; in Fig. 5b, individuals overwhelmingly reject self-protective behaviour completely two weeks before the end of the phased reduction
period (Supplementary Fig. S3). This resembles the difficulties experienced by some countries
in controlling the exit out of a lockdown in the current COVID-19 pandemic43 . The crucial role
19

played by social pressures as concluded from our simulation results and the resonance thereof in
the COVID-19 reality indicate the need for epidemics models to include time-varying behavioural
responses. The model predictions highlight the challenges policy makers experience in designing
interventions, but also provide important directions. For example, our model results suggest that
it is more effective to focus on managing the duration and relaxation of the interventions, and our
findings support the suggestion in Van Bavel et al.3 of a closer examination of how to exploit social influence to marshal effective long-term responses to an epidemic. This analysis highlights the
potential of our modelling paradigm in helping policy makers assess control actions to effectively
address epidemic outbreaks. Its input parameters are closely related to observable properties of the
epidemic as well as the population; the wealth of behavioural data currently being gathered in the
context of the COVID-19 pandemic will therefore allow further refining of the model and specific
practical studies.

3

Discussion

To address the urgent need to model the key role played by individuals’ behavioural responses in
shaping a novel epidemic outbreak, we proposed a novel and unified individual-level modelling
paradigm that captures the co-evolution of disease spreading and collective decision-making. Our
framework encapsulates a wide range of time-varying factors crucial in the decision-making process from the inception of the epidemic outbreak to its complete eradication, including government
interventions, risk perceptions, bounded rationality and social interactions.

20

Our methodology is presented as a parsimonious paradigm, adaptable to different epidemic
progression models. This generality enables our framework to capture a broad range of epidemicbehavioural dynamics, including multiple waves in the Spanish Flu, and be used to investigate
different intervention policies and estimate associated health and social-economic costs. In contrast, existing works focus on awareness-based reactive responses4, 7 , game-theoretic models underpinned by imitation dynamics20–23 or (one-shot or periodic) decisions on vaccination15, 16, 18 , and
each work is only able to capture a limited number of specific phenomena. Some works have used
data-based analysis to explain specific past epidemic outbreaks, such as the multiple waves in the
Spanish Flu pandemic38 , as a consequence of certain behavioural response patterns. These works
rely on specialised models that are difficult to generalise or be used to provide insight into key
factors contributing to the behavioural response.

To clearly demonstrate the new methodology of modelling behavioural response and avoid
conflating multiple factors, we have limited our study to simple implementations of the SIS, SIR
and SEIR models. For practical studies on specific scenarios, further detail should be added,
such as age structure, multiple transmission routes, spatial structure, etc. As an advantage of
our framework, these details can be directly incorporated without fundamentally changing the
paradigm.

21

Methods

Details of the network structure The two-layered network structure with a static influence layer
and a time-varying physical contact layer is motivated by the observation that social relationships
(e.g. between family members, friends, colleagues) typically change at a much slower pace than
that of epidemic processes and thus can be assumed constant, while the network of physical contacts evolves at a time-scale comparable with the spread of the disease33 .

The contact layer is modelled using an activity-driven network (ADN)32 . ADNs have emerged
as a powerful paradigm to study the dynamical co-evolution of (i) the network structure, and (ii)
the process unfolding at each node. ADNs have found successful application in mathematical
epidemiology44 . The network formation process acts as follows. At each discrete time instant t,
with probability ai , individual i activates and generates a fixed number of contacts m ≥ 1 with
other individuals chosen uniformly at random in the population. These contacts are added to the
link set EC (t), contribute to the epidemic process, and are then removed before the next discrete
time instant and the next activation of individuals. Despite their simplicity, which enables rigorous
analytical treatment and fast numerical simulations32, 45 , ADNs can capture important features of
complexity that characterise real-world networks and are amenable to analytically-tractable extensions to include further features33 . Importantly, the proposed modelling paradigm can also use
other time-varying network models, e.g. temporal switching networks33 .

22

Details of the SIS model According to the SIS mechanism described in the main paper, the contagion probability for a generic individual i ∈ V is

P[xi (t + 1) = I | xi (t) = S] = (1 − yi (t)) 1 − (1 − λ)Ni (t) ,

(4)

where
Ni (t) = |{j ∈ V : (i, j) ∈ EC (t), xj (t) = I}|

(5)

is the number of infectious individuals that have a link with node i at time t on the contact layer.
While Eq. (4) posits that adoption of self-protective behaviour, viz. yi (t) = 1, always makes
the contagion probability equal to 0, the model can be generalised by introducing a parameter
to reflect that self-protective behaviours have a probability in failing to prevent infection. The
recovery process described in the main paper is governed by the following probabilistic rule:
P[xi (t + 1) = S | xi (t) = I] = µ .

(6)

Details of the SIR model In the SIR model, individuals may have three different health states:
they can be susceptible to the disease (S); infected (I); or removed (R), accounting for both
recoveries and deaths. The disease spreads as for the SIS model, i.e. it follows Eqs. (4) and (5).
The recovery process is governed by the same probabilistic rule as for the SIS model but, once
recovered, individuals become removed (R) and cannot be infected again, i.e.
P[xi (t + 1) = R | xi (t) = I] = µ .

(7)

Details of the SEIR model In the SEIR model, individuals may have four different health states:
they can be susceptible to the disease (S); exposed (E), i.e. already infected but non-infectious;
23

infectious (I); or removed (R), accounting for both recoveries and deaths. The disease spreads in
a manner similar to the SIS and SIR models, i.e. through a link on the contact layer between a
susceptible individual (S) and an infectious one (I). Different from the other two models, after
contagion, individuals becomes exposed (E) but non-infectious with a latency period before transitioning to the infectious state (I). The disease propagates through contacts, each one independent
of the others, yielding

P[xi (t + 1) = E | xi (t) = S] = (1 − yi (t)) 1 − (1 − λ)Ni (t) ,

(8)

where Ni (t) is defined in Eq. (5).

Beside the contagion, two other mechanisms govern the epidemic process: the progression
to becoming infectious, and the recovery process. Specifically, at each time-step t, every individual
i that is exposed (E) has probability ν ∈ (0, 1] to become infectious, independent of the others,
giving
P[xi (t + 1) = I | xi (t) = E] = ν .

(9)

Then, infectious individuals have probability µ ∈ (0, 1] to recover, independent of the others,
giving
P[xi (t + 1) = R | xi (t) = I] = µ .

(10)

Similar to the SIR model, once removed, individuals are immunised (or deceased) and cannot be
infected again.

Details of the decision-making mechanism Here, we provide with some additional details and
comments on the decision-making mechanism. The parameter β ∈ [0, ∞) and the log-linear learn24

ing dynamics in Eq. (15) model bounded rationality in an individual’s decision-making process.
We have assumed for simplicity that β is homogeneous among all individuals in this work, but this
is easily generalisable to a heterogeneous βi distribution. Notice that if β = 0, individuals make
decisions uniformly at random, while for β → ∞, individuals apply perfect rationality to select
the behaviour with highest payoff. This best-response behaviour is myopic, i.e. individuals do not
look forward in time to optimise a sequence of decisions. Myopic behaviour is reasonable given
the uncertain nature of a long-lasting epidemic.

The risk perception function is a monotonic non-decreasing function of z(t), capturing the
fear of being infected that rises as the number of infectious individuals increase. In its simplest
formulation (which will be adopted in the three case studies presented in this paper), it can be
assumed to be a power function
r(z) = kz α ,

(11)

with k > 0 and α > 0. Specifically, α ∈ (0, 1) models cautious populations, where a small initial
outbreak causes a large increase in the risk perception. The case α = 1 captures a population
whose reaction grows exactly proportionally to the epidemic prevalence observe. On the contrary,
α > 1 captures populations that underestimate the risk, and the epidemic prevalence must be large
before the risk perception plays an important role in the decision-making process. The constant
k is a scaling constant. In the main paper, we consider three different functions as archetypes of
three different scenarios: a cautious population (α < 1/2), a population with reaction proportional
to the epidemic prevalence (α = 1), and a slow reacting population (α = 2). In all three cases we
set k = 3.
25

Note that, in the absence of the accumulation of socio-economic costs (γ = 0) and without
policy interventions u(t) = 0, the risk perception function determines a critical prevalence
z ∗ = min{z : r(z) > 1 + c},

(12)

such that, z(t) > z ∗ implies πi (1) > πi (0), for any individual i. In other words, if the detectable prevalence exceeds z ∗ , each individual will always favour the adoption of self-protective
behaviours, regardless of the behaviour of other individuals and of the presence of policy interventions.

We remark that the risk perception (as well as the cost of self-protection) is endogenous to
each individual, different from the policy intervention u(t), which is exogenous and from the social
influence, which is determined by the network structure.

Note that in this work, we have for simplicity defined z(t) =

1
|{i
n

: xi (t) = I}| as the

fraction of individuals who are infectious, i.e., in the health state I. For practical studies, and
depending on the disease, z(t) may be defined with more complexity to reflect under-reporting of
testing or delays in test results, visibility of asymptomatic vs. symptomatic individuals (as opposed
to exposed vs. infectious states), differing prevalence due to spatial structures, etc.

Evaluating the socio-economic impact The health cost H is a functional that quantifies the costs
related to the health state of individuals and may have different definitions, depending on the
epidemic model used and on the focus of the study. In our case studies, we define the heath cost
for the SEIR model as the total number of infections, i.e. the cumulative prevalence. Specifically,
26

fixed a period of observation T ≥ 0 (the duration of the epidemic outbreak), we define
H(T ) =

1
|{i : xi (T ) = R}| .
n

(13)

Note that in the SIS model, the health cost may be defined as the average epidemic prevalence over
the period of observation.

We define the per capita socio-economic cost over a fixed period of observation T ≥ 0
(the duration of the epidemic outbreak) as the average cumulative immediate costs incurred by an
individual in the population, that is,
1 XX
C :=
cyi (t) .
n t=0 i=1
T

n

(14)

Derivation of the epidemic threshold for the SIS model For large populations and fully connected influence layers, we use a mean-field approach46 to obtain insight into the behaviour of the
system at the initial stages of the epidemic through the computation of the epidemic threshold.

In particular, we consider a scenario without cumulative frustration (which is a reasonable
assumption in the early stages of an outbreak) and in which we assume that the intervention is
constant u(t) = ū. For a fully mixed influence layer, we observe that
P[yi (t + 1) = 0] =

exp{βπi (0)}
exp{βπi (0)} + exp{βπi (1)}

(15)

has the same expression for all the nodes. In fact, if we define ȳ(z) as the probability that a generic
node adopts self-protective behaviours when the epidemic prevalence is equal to z, then, according
to the strong law of large numbers, πi (0) = 1 − ȳ(z) − u(t) = 1 − ȳ(z) − ū (since the control
27

is assumed to be a constant function) and πi (1) = ȳ(z) + r(z) − c, which are independent of i.
In a mean-field approach46 , we define θ(t) =

1
n

P

i:xi (t)=I

ai as the average activity of infected

nodes and zi (t) = P[xi (t) = I]. Due to the strong law of large numbers, in the limit of large-scale
systems n → ∞, z(t) =
evolution of zi (t), given by

1
n

Pn

i=1 zi (t)

and θ(t) =

1
n

Pn

i=1

ai zi (t). Hence, from the mean-field

zi (t + 1) = zi (t) − µzi (t) + (1 − zi (t))(1 − ȳ(z(t)))ai z(t) + (1 − z(t))(1 − ȳ(z(t)))λθ(t) , (16)
we determine the following system of difference equations for the epidemic prevalence and the
average activity of infected individuals, linearised about the disease-free equilibrium (z = 0, θ =
0):
z(t + 1) = z(t) − µz(t) + mλhaiz(t)(1 − ȳ(0)) + mλ(1 − ȳ(0))θ(t)

(17)

2

θ(t + 1) = θ(t) − µθ(t) + mλha iz(t)(1 − ȳ(0)) + mλhai(1 − ȳ(0))θ(t) ,
where hai and ha2 i are the average and second moment of the activity distribution, respectively.
From standard theory on the stability of discrete-time linear time-invariant systems47 , the
origin is stable if
λ
1
p
<
.
µ
m(hai + ha2 i)(1 − ȳ(0))

(18)

In fully-mixed influence layers, the probability for an individual to adopt self-protective behaviours ȳ(z) can be derived by substituting πi (0) = 1 − ȳ(z) − ū and πi (1) = ȳ(z) + r(z) − c
into Eq. (15), obtaining the equilibrium equation:

ȳ =

eβ(ȳ−c+r(z))
.
eβ(ȳ−c+r(z)) + eβ(1−ȳ−ū)
28

(19)

Even though it is not possible to derive a closed-form solution, we observe that at the inception
of the epidemic outbreak, yi (0) = 0 for all individuals and, for sufficiently small values of ū (i.e.
ū5.21 + c), in the early stages it is verified that πi (0) > πi (1). Hence, if the rationality β is
sufficiently large, the equilibrium ȳ is close to 0 and can be approximated by Taylor-expanding the
right-hand side of the equation, obtaining
ȳ(z) ≈

eβ(−c+r(z))
.
eβ(1−ū) + (1 − β)eβ(−c+r(z))

(20)

Hence, by substituting Eq. (20) into Eq. (18), we conclude that the outbreak is quickly eradicated
if
eβ(1−ū) + (1 − β)e−βc
λ
p
<
.
µ
m(hai + ha2 i)(eβ(1−ū) − βe−βc )

(21)

Network parameters of the simulations In all the simulations, we consider n = 10, 000 individuals (10 of them initially infected) connected on the influence layer through a Watts–Strogatz
small-world network, which captures many features of real-world influence networks, including a
clustered structure and the presence of long-range interactions48 . We set an average degree 8 and
rewiring probability 1/8, so that each node has on average 1 long-range interaction.

In the simulations in the main article, the contact layer is generated following an ADN with
power-law distributed activities ai , which is a standard assumption for ADNs32 . Note that while
the activity rates ai are power-law distributed, at each time-step, the node degree distribution does
not follow a power-law, and are instead determined by the homogeneous parameter m capturing
the bounded number of interactions that each individual can have per unit time-step. Specifically,
we set the exponent 2.09, as in Aiello et al.49 , and lower cutoff at amin = 0.1. We set m = 1
29

interactions per active node for gonorrhoea and m = 13 for Spanish flu and COVID-19, based
on Mossong et al.50 . Simulations with other activity distributions (namely, a log-normal and a
Weibull distributions) are reported to demonstrate the robustness of our framework in Supplementary Fig. S4.

Epidemic parameters of the simulations In the three case studies we use three different classical
epidemic models: the SIS, the SIR, and the SEIR model. The SIS is used for gonorrhoea, which
is a sexually transmitted disease characterised by negligible protective immunity after recovery
and negligible latency period (individuals are infectious on average the day after contagion)35, 51 .
An SIR model is used for the Spanish flu pandemic, which is characterised by a short latency
period (individuals are infectious on average after 1 − 2 days form the contagion36 ) that can be
neglected and by protective immunity gained after recovery36 . An SEIR model is used to capture
latency periods after contagion and (at least temporary) immunity after recovery, which have been
observed for COVID-1911 .

The epidemic parameters are set from epidemiological data. Specifically, reliable estimations
of the time from contagion to becoming infectious τE for COVID-19 and the time from being
infectious to recovery τI (for all three diseases) are available11, 35, 36 . Similar to Prem et al.11 , from
these data we define


1
,
ν = 1 − exp −
τE

and



1
µ = 1 − exp −
τI



.

(22)

Finally, the parameter λ is obtained from available estimations of the basic reproduction number
R0 for the three diseases11, 35, 36 . The basic reproduction number is defined as the average number
30

of secondary infections produced by an infected individual in a population where everyone is
susceptible. Hence, given that τI is the average time that an individual is infectious, assuming
independence between the time an individual is infectious and their activity, we compute

R0 =

1X
(ai + hai)mλτI = 2haimλτI ,
n i∈V

(23)

R0
.
2mhaiτI

(24)

which implies
λ=

The epidemic parameters computed using this procedure are the following.

• Gonorrhoea. From τI = 55 days and R0 = 1.6, we find λ = 0.3626 and µ = 0.1195, where
the time unit is a week.
• Spanish Flu. From τI = 4.1 days and R0 = 2, we obtain λ = 0.066 and µ = 0.2164, where
the time unit is a day.
• COVID-19. From τE = 6.4 days, τI = 5 days and R0 = 2.2, we obtain λ = 0.06,
ν = 0.1447 and µ = 0.1813, where the time unit is a day.

Decision-making parameters of the simulations We set a common level of rationality β = 6 in
all simulations, which captures a moderate level of rationality so that individuals tend to maximise
their payoff, but always have a small, non-negligible probability of adopting the behaviour with
the lower payoff. Before detailing the parameters used in the three case studies, we provide a brief

31

discussion on the relative order of magnitude between the model parameters, which guided our
choices.

The decision-making process is based on the comparison between the two payoff functions
in Eqs. (2a) and (2b). The contribution of social influence to the payoff is always bounded between
0 and 1. Hence, social influence is significant if the other terms do not have a higher order of
magnitude. Consequently, policy interventions u(t) > 1 can be considered severe, since their
effect is predominant with respect to social influence, while policies with u(t) < 1 are milder. The
cost of self-protective behaviours consists of two terms: the immediate cost per unit-time c and
the accumulation factor γ. Small values of c become negligible in the decision making process,
while, to avoid the immediate cost dominating the other terms, we should assume c < 1. The
accumulation factor γ captures the cost for continued periods in which an individual adopts selfprotective behaviours. To model a non-negligible effect of the accumulation of socio-economic
costs, we should guarantee that over long periods in which an individual consistently adopts selfprotective behaviours, the frustration function saturates to a value comparable to the other terms.
This can be achieved by imposing that
lim c +

t→∞

t
X

γ sc =

s=1

c
≈ 1,
1−γ

(25)

yielding c + γ ≈ 1 (note, the above equality was obtained using the geometric series). Specifically,
values of γ > 1 − c guarantees that self-protective behaviours are eventually dismissed, after
the complete eradication of the disease or the policy intervention is switched off. We use the risk
perception function r(t) = kz α proposed in Eq. (11) with α = 1/2 for cautious populations, α = 1
to model proportional reactions, and α = 2 for slow reacting populations. As observed in Eq. (12),
32

the risk perception function determines a critical epidemic prevalence that triggers the adoption of
self-protective behaviours even in the absence of interventions (in the presence of accumulation,
the immediate cost c in Eq. (12) is substituted by its saturation value from Eq. (25) c/(1 − γ)).
We observe from Eq. (12) that risk perception becomes non-negligible if k > 1 +

c
.
1−γ

To keep

consistency throughout our simulations, we set k = 3, which is a value that verifies the condition
above for all the choices of parameters c and γ we make in the simulations.

The decision-making parameters used for the three case studies are detailed in the following.

• Gonorrhoea. We assume that the accumulation is negligible for gonorrhoea (where the use
of protections has an immediate cost that typically does not accumulate, such as protective
sexual barriers). Hence, for all three simulations, we fix the immediate cost to c = 0.3 and
the accumulation factor γ = 0. No policy intervention is set, with u(t) = 0 for all t ≥ 0.
In the three simulations, we test three different risk perception function. Specifically, we
√
consider a cautious population with r(z) = 3 z in Fig. 3a, a population with a proportional
reaction, r(z) = 3z in Fig. 3b, and a population slow to react with r(z) = 3z 2 in Fig. 3c.
• Spanish flu. Self-protective behaviours involve social distancing and closures of economic
activities, which has been shown to typically yield an accumulation of psychological distress
and economic losses26–28 . Hence, we assume a high accumulation factor γ = 0.9 and we fix
c = 0.1, in light of our discussion above. To capture the slow reaction of the population
due to the initial suppression of information (to keep morale during World War I)37 , we set
r(z) = 3z 2 . To further mirror real-world interventions by public authorities, we set an initial
33

intervention level equal to u(0) = 0, which switches to u(t) = ū = 0.5 once 1% of the
population is infectious and then remains active for 28 days before being turned off again.
• COVID-19. Similar as we did for the Spanish flu, we assume that accumulation is nonnegligible by setting γ = 0.75. Note that we select a smaller value of γ than the one used for
Spanish flu to capture how development in information and communications technologies
has helped alleviate the negative impact of extended lockdown policies during COVID-19
outbreak. In view of the observations above, we fix c = 0.3. We consider a scenario in
which individuals are slow to perceive COVID-19 as a real threat (r(z) = 3z 2 ), as happened in many countries including the UK and US52 . In Fig. 5a, we start with u(0) = 0,
and then set the intervention as u(t) = 0.7 when 1% of the population is infectious, which
is then turned off if 14 consecutive days pass with z(t) = 0. In Fig. 5b and Fig. 5c, we
consider scenarios involving an initial severe but constant lockdown policy followed by a
phased reduction. In the first scenario (Fig. 5b), severe policies (u(t) = 1) are implemented
for 28 days after reaching 1% of infections, after which u(t) is linearly reduced to u(t) = 0
over 44 time-steps. In the second scenario (Fig. 5c), more severe policies (u(t) = 1.2) are
implemented for the same period of 28 time-steps, after which u(t) is linearly reduced to
u(t) = 0 over a shorter time-window of 27 time-steps. Note that we select the intensity of
policy interventions and the duration of the phased reduction to ensure that the cumulative
intervention effort,

P

t

u(t), over the policy intervention period, is equal in the two scenar-

ios. Finally, in Fig. 5d, we tested the intervention scenario in Fig. 5b but in the absence of
social influence. Specifically, we removed the first term in each the two payoff functions in

34

Eqs. (2a) and (2b).

Data Availability All data generated or analysed during this study are included in this Article
(and its Supplementary Information files). Raw data of the figures in the paper and the SI can be
found in the GitHub repository linked below.

Code Availability The code used in the simulations is available at https://github.com/l
zino90/behavior.

References

1. Pastor-Satorras, R., Castellano, C., Van Mieghem, P. & Vespignani, A. Epidemic processes in
complex networks. Rev. Mod. Phys. 87, 925–979 (2015).
2. Bjørnstad, O. N., Shea, K., Krzywinski, M. & Altman, N. Modeling infectious epidemics.
Nat. Methods 17, 455–456 (2020).
3. Van Bavel, J. J. et al. Using social and behavioural science to support COVID-19 pandemic
response. Nat. Hum. Behav. 4, 460–471 (2020).
4. Funk, S., Salathé, M. & Jansen, V. A. Modelling the influence of human behaviour on the
spread of infectious diseases: a review. J. R. Soc. Interface 7, 1247–1256 (2010).
5. Perra, N., Balcan, D., Gonçalves, B. & Vespignani, A.

Towards a Characterization of

Behavior-Disease Models. PLOS One 6 (2011). URL https://doi.org/10.137
1/journal.pone.0023084.
35

6. Wang, Z., Andrews, M. A., Wu, Z.-X., Wang, L. & Bauch, C. T. Coupled disease–behavior
dynamics on complex networks: A review. Phys. Life Rev. 15, 1 – 29 (2015).
7. Verelst, F., Willem, L. & Beutels, P. Behavioural change models for infectious disease transmission: a systematic review (2010-2015). J. R. Soc. Interface 13, 20160820 (2016).
8. Granell, C., Gómez, S. & Arenas, A. Dynamical interplay between awareness and epidemic
spreading in multiplex networks. Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 128701 (2013).
9. The New York Times. As the Coronavirus Surges, a New Culprit Emerges: Pandemic Fatigue.
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/10/17/us/coronavirus-pandemic-fat
igue.html. Accessed: 19 Nov 2020.
10. Flaxman, S. et al. Estimating the effects of non-pharmaceutical interventions on COVID-19
in Europe. Nature 584, 257–261 (2020).
11. Prem, K. et al. The effect of control strategies to reduce social mixing on outcomes of the
COVID-19 epidemic in Wuhan, China: a modelling study. Lancet Public Health 5, e261–
e270 (2020).
12. López, L. & Rodó, X. The end of social confinement and COVID-19 re-emergence risk. Nat.
Hum. Behav. 4, 746–755 (2020).
13. Simon, H. A. Bounded rationality in social science: Today and tomorrow. Mind Soc. 1, 25–39
(2000).

36

14. Fu, F., Rosenbloom, D. I., Wang, L. & Nowak, M. A. Imitation dynamics of vaccination
behaviour on social networks. Proc. Royal Soc. B 278, 42–49 (2011).
15. Zhang, H.-F., Wu, Z.-X., Tang, M. & Lai, Y.-C. Effects of behavioral response and vaccination
policy on epidemic spreading — an approach based on evolutionary-game dynamics. Sci. Rep.
4, 5666 (2014).
16. Chen, X. & Fu, F. Imperfect vaccine and hysteresis. Proc. Royal Soc. B 286, 20182406 (2019).
17. Chang, S. L., Piraveenan, M., Pattison, P. & Prokopenko, M. Game theoretic modelling of
infectious disease dynamics and intervention methods: a review. J. Biol. Dyn. 14, 57–89
(2020).
18. Wells, C. R. et al. Prosocial polio vaccination in Israel. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 117,
13138–13144 (2020).
19. Shea, K., Bjørnstad, O. N., Krzywinski, M. & Altman, N. Uncertainty and the management
of epidemics. Nat. Methods 17, 867–868 (2020).
20. Poletti, P., Caprile, B., Ajelli, M., Pugliese, A. & Merler, S. Spontaneous behavioural changes
in response to epidemics. J. Theor. Biol. 260, 31–40 (2009).
21. Pedro, S. A. et al. Conditions for a Second Wave of COVID-19 Due to Interactions Between
Disease Dynamics and Social Processes. Front. Phys. 8, 428 (2020).

37

22. Kabir, K. M. A. & Tanimoto, J. Evolutionary game theory modelling to represent the behavioural dynamics of economic shutdowns and shield immunity in the COVID-19 pandemic.
R. Soc. Open Sci. 7, 201095 (2020).
23. Wei, J., Wang, L. & Yang, X. Game analysis on the evolution of COVID-19 epidemic under
the prevention and control measures of the government. PLOS ONE 15, 1–16 (2020). URL
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240961.
24. Blume, L. The Statistical Mechanics of Best-Response Strategy Revision. Games Econ.
Behav. 11, 111–145 (1995).
25. Syed, Q., Sopwith, W., Regan, M. & Bellis, M. A. Behind the mask. Journey through an
epidemic: some observations of contrasting public health responses to SARS. J. Epidemiol.
Community Health 57, 855–856 (2003).
26. Nicola, M. et al. The socio-economic implications of the coronavirus pandemic (COVID-19):
A review. Int. J. Surg. 78, 185–193 (2020).
27. Qiu, J. et al.

A nationwide survey of psychological distress among Chinese people in

the COVID-19 epidemic: implications and policy recommendations. Gen. Psychiatr. 33,
e100213–e100213 (2020).
28. Bartik, A. W. et al. The impact of COVID-19 on small business outcomes and expectations.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 117, 17656–17666 (2020).
29. Brauer, F. & Castillo-Chavez, C. Mathematical models in population biology and epidemiology (Springer, New York NY, USA, 2012), 2nd edn.
38

30. Bjørnstad, O., Shea, K., Krzywinski, M. & Altman, N. The SEIRS model for infectious
disease dynamics. Nat. Methods 17, 557–558 (2020).
31. Boccaletti, S. et al. The structure and dynamics of multilayer networks. Phys. Rep. 544, 1 –
122 (2014). The structure and dynamics of multilayer networks.
32. Perra, N., Gonçalves, B., Pastor-Satorras, R. & Vespignani, A. Activity driven modeling of
time varying networks. Sci. Rep. 2 (2012).
33. Leitch, J., Alexander, K. A. & Sengupta, S. Toward epidemic thresholds on temporal networks:
a review and open questions. Appl. Netw. Sci. 4, 105 (2019).
34. Jackson, M. O. & Zenou, Y. Games on Networks. In Handbook of Game Theory with Economic Applications, vol. 4, chap. 3, 95–163 (Elsevier, 2015).
35. Yorke, J. A., Hethcote, H. W. & Nold, A. Dynamics and Control of the Transmission of
Gonorrhea. Sex. Transm. Dis. 5, 51–55 (1978).
36. Mills, C. E., Robins, J. M. & Lipsitch, M. Transmissibility of 1918 pandemic influenza. Nature
432, 904–906 (2004).
37. Markel, H. et al. Nonpharmaceutical Interventions Implemented by US Cities During the
1918-1919 Influenza Pandemic. JAMA 298, 644–654 (2007).
38. He, D., Dushoff, J., Day, T., Ma, J. & Earn, D. J. D. Inferring the causes of the three waves
of the 1918 influenza pandemic in England and Wales. Proc. Royal Soc. B 280, 20131345
(2013).
39

39. Barry, J. M. Pandemics: avoiding the mistakes of 1918. Nature 459, 324–325 (2009).
40. Hatchett, R. J., Mecher, C. E. & Lipsitch, M. Public health interventions and epidemic intensity during the 1918 influenza pandemic. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 104, 7582–7587 (2007).
41. Giordano, G. et al. Modelling the COVID-19 epidemic and implementation of populationwide interventions in Italy. Nat. Med. 26, 855–860 (2020).
42. Washington Post. ‘If I get corona, I get corona’: Miami spring breakers say covid-19 hasn’t
stopped them from partying. https://www.washingtonpost.com/nation/2020
/03/19/coronavirus-spring-break-party/. Accessed: 19 Nov 2020.
43. The Guardian. Major incident declared as people flock to England’s south coast. https:
//www.theguardian.com/world/2020/jun/25/major-incident-declare
d-as-people-flock-to-england-south-coast. Accessed: 19 Nov 2020.
44. Rizzo, A., Pedalino, B. & Porfiri, M. A network model for Ebola spreading. J. Theor. Biol.
394, 212–222 (2016).
45. Zino, L., Rizzo, A. & Porfiri, M. Continuous-time discrete-distribution theory for activitydriven networks. Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 228302 (2016).
46. Van Mieghem, P., Omic, J. & Kooij, R. Virus spread in networks. IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw.
17, 1–14 (2009).
47. Rugh, W. Linear System Theory, vol. 2 (Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 1996).

40

48. Watts, D. J. & Strogatz, S. H. Collective dynamics of ‘small-world’ networks. Nature 393,
440–442 (1998).
49. Aiello, W., Chung, F. & Lu, L. A random graph model for power law graphs. Exp. Math. 10,
53–66 (2001).
50. Mossong, J. et al. Social Contacts and Mixing Patterns Relevant to the Spread of Infectious
Diseases. PLOS Med. 5 (2008). URL https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed
.0050074.
51. Lajmanovich, A. & Yorke, J. A. A deterministic model for gonorrhea in a nonhomogeneous
population. Math. Biosci. 28, 221–236 (1976).
52. Geldsetzer, P. Knowledge and Perceptions of COVID-19 Among the General Public in the
United States and the United Kingdom: A Cross-sectional Online Survey. Ann. Intern. Med.
173, 157–160 (2020).

Acknowledgements The work by M.Y. is partially supported by Optus Business. The work by L.Z. and
M.C. is partially supported by the European Research Council (ERC-CoG-771687) and the Netherlands
Organization for Scientific Research (NWO-vidi-14134). The work by A.R. is partially supported by Compagnia di San Paolo and by the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation (Grant
“Mac2Mic”).

Author Contributions M.Y. and L.Z. contributed equally. They designed the research, performed the
analytical and numerical studies and wrote a first draft of the manuscript. A.R. and M.C. contributed equally

41

to the formulation of the research questions, the supervision of the research, the interpretation and analysis
of the result,s and to reviewing the manuscript. All the authors contributed to the present submission.

Competing Interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Materials & Correspondence Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Mengbin Ye. (email: mengbin.ye@curtin.edu.au)

42

Epidemic prevalence

0.15

100%
self-protections
cumulative infections
epidemic prevalence

0.1

50%
0.05

0

0

10

20

30

40
50
60
Time (days)

70

80

90

100

Self-protections adoption rate

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
Modelling collective decision-making during epidemics

0%

Epidemic prevalence

0.15

100%
self-protections
cumulative infections
epidemic prevalence

0.1

50%
0.05

0

0

10

20

30

40
50
60
Time (days)

70

80

90

100

Self-protections adoption rate

(a)

0%

(b)

FIG. S1: Extension of the Spanish Flu (SIR) case study in the main article. Prevalence of Spanish flu
infections (red curve) and cumulative infections (orange curve) as a function of time as predicted by an SIR model
in combination with the co-evolution paradigm. The colour intensity of the blue vertical bands represents the
fraction of adopters of self-protective behaviours. Consistent with the main article, we set γ = 0.9 and c = 0.1, and
an initial intervention level equal to u(0) = 0, which switches to u(t) = ū = 0.5 once 1% of the population is infected
and then remains active for T̄ days before being turned off again. In Fig. S1a, we set r(z) = 3z 2 (consistent with
Fig. 4 in the main article), but double the intervention duration to T̄ = 56 days. In Fig. S1b, we retain the original
T̄ = 28 days
√ from Fig. 4 in the main article, but assume a more cautious population that is better informed, with
r(z) = 3 z. In both figures, we see the epidemic outbreak is successfully halted after a single wave, either by a
longer policy intervention or a population that has a heightened risk perception, in contrast to Fig. 4 of the main
article. Notice
the impact on collective behaviours of the population when individuals are more cautious (i.e. with
√
r(z) = 3 z). The impact of the outbreak is measured by health cost (a) H = 9.44% and (b) H = 3.02%, and
socio-economic cost (a) C = 2.5 and (b) C = 2.7, as detailed in the Methods.

0.7
hy(t)i
u(t)

75%

0.6
0.5
0.4

50%
0.3
0.2

25%

Policy interventions, u(t)

Self-protections adoption rate

100%

0.1
0%

0

50

100

150
Time (days)

200

250

0
300

(a)

FIG. S2: Lag in the Adoption of Self-Protective Behaviours. This figure shows the same simulation as that
in Fig. 5a of
main article. The adoption rate (blue solid curve) of self-protective behaviours, is quantified by
Pthe
n
hy(t)i = n1 i=1 yi (t), and the intervention policy (cyan dashed curve) shows an on/off constant policy intervention
u(t) = ū = 0.7 being switched on when z(t) > 0.01, and switched off after no infections are reported for 14
consecutive days. Notice that although the intervention is introduced at t = 19, adoption of the self-protective
behaviours peaks only 20 days later, at t = 39 with 51% adoption rate among the populationa . This allows us to
conclude that the adoption of self-protective behaviours is delayed by social influence, which has an inertia effect,
and the adoption rate improves because of individuals have an increasing perceived risk of infection as the epidemic
grows. In contrast, all individuals revert back to standard behaviours at t = 215 days, almost immediately after the
intervention policy ends at t = 214.
a

This adoption rate is well below the 99% seen in Fig. 5b and 5c of the main article, highlighting the necessity of severe interventions

hy(t)i
u(t)

75%

1
0.8
0.6

50%
0.4
25%
0%

0.2
0

20

40

60
Time (days)

80

100

Policy interventions, u(t)

Self-protections adoption rate

100%

0

100%

hy(t)i
u(t)

75%

1
0.8
0.6

50%
0.4
25%

0%

0.2
0

20

40

60
Time (days)

80

100

Policy interventions, u(t)

Self-protections adoption rate

(a)

0

(b)

FIG. S3: The Role of Social Influence. Fig. S3a and Fig. S3b show the same simulation as that corresponding to
Fig. 5b and 5d in the main
Pnarticle, respectively. The adoption rate (blue solid curve) of self-protective behaviours, is
quantified by hy(t)i = n1 i=1 yi (t), and the intervention policy (cyan dashed curve) shows an initial severe and
constant lockdown for 28 days after z(t) > 0.01, followed by a linear phased reduction over 44 days. Note that for
the sake of clarity, the disease evolution is not shown here, and we only plot the time horizon up to the first policy
intervention for Fig. 5d (in actuality, multiple interventions are necessary due to resurgent infection waves). Notice
that in Fig. S3a, there is a delay of 4-5 days between the start of the intervention, and all individuals adopting
self-protective behaviours, in contrast to Fig. S3b, where there is only a single day of delay. This supports the claim
that social influence has an inertia effect in the beginning, but this delay is shortened by a severe intervention.
During the 28 days of constant intervention, social influence acts to ensure a collective adoption of self-protective
behaviours, countering the effects of accumulating costs fi (t), with hy(t)i ≈ 0.99 in Fig. S3a. In contrast, Fig. S3b
sees an initial collective adoption driven by u(t), but as costs accumulate, adoption drops to a constant of
hy(t)i ≈ 0.65. However, once the phased reduction begins, we see the population with no social influence in Fig. S3b
closely mirror the phased reduction. In contrast, social influence in Fig. S3a leads to a collective rejection of
self-protective behaviours, with hy(t)i ≈ 0 by t = 87, over three weeks before the end of the phased reduction at
t = 113 days. This collective rejection opens the door to resurgent waves, as the disease may not be fully eradicated
at this point of the phased reduction in policy intervention.

Epidemic prevalence

0.4

self-protections
cumulative infections
epidemic prevalence

50%

0.2

0

0

20

40

60

80
100 120
Time (days)

140

160

180

200

Self-protections adoption rate

100%
0.6

0%

100%
Epidemic prevalence

0.6

0.4

self-protections
cumulative infections
epidemic prevalence

50%

0.2

0

0

20

40

60

80
100 120
Time (days)

140

160

180

200

Self-protections adoption rate

(a)

0%

(b)

FIG. S4: Robustness against different activity distributions. Fig. S4a and Fig. S4b show the same simulation
as that corresponding to Fig. 4 in the main article in a scenario where the activities are (a) log-normally-distributed
(µ = −1.4457, σ = 0.5987) and (b) Weibull-distributed (λ = 0.3135, k = 1.5555), respectively, with the same mean
(λai = 0.2818) and second moment (λa2 i = 0.1137) of the power-law distribution in Fig. 4 in the main article. In
both scenarios, parameters of the distribution are selected to ensure that the average and variance of the
distributions equal to the ones of the power-law distribution used in Fig. 4 in the main article. The figures show the
prevalence of Spanish flu infections (red curve) and cumulative infections (orange curve) as a function of time as
predicted by an SIR model in combination with the co-evolution paradigm. The colour intensity of the blue vertical
bands represents the fraction of adopters of self-protective behaviours. The simulation results are qualitatively
consistent with the one obtained with a power-law distribution for the activities in Fig. 4 in the main article.

