Epidemics with asymptomatic transmission: Sub-critical phase from recursive contact
tracing
Lorenz Baumgarten∗ and Stefan Bornholdt†

arXiv:2008.09896v1 [physics.soc-ph] 22 Aug 2020

Institut für Theoretische Physik, Universität Bremen, 28759 Bremen, Germany
(Dated: August 25, 2020)
The challenges presented by the COVID-19 epidemic have created a renewed interest in the development of new methods to combat infectious diseases. A prominent property of the SARS-CoV-2
transmission is the significant fraction of asymptomatic transmission. This may influence the effectiveness of the standard contact tracing procedure for quarantining potentially infected individuals.
However, the effects of asymptomatic transmission on the epidemic threshold of epidemic spreading
on networks are largely unknown. Here we study the critical percolation transition in a simple
epidemic network model in the presence of a recursive contact tracing algorithm for instant quarantining. We find that, above a certain fraction of asymptomatic transmission, standard contact
tracing loses its ability to suppress spreading below the epidemic threshold. However, we also find
that recursive contact tracing opens a possibility to contain epidemics with a large fraction of asymptomatic or presymptomatic transmission. In particular, we calculate the required fraction of network
nodes participating in the contact tracing for networks with arbitrary degree distributions and for
varying recursion depths and discuss the influence of recursion depth and asymptomatic rate on the
epidemic percolation phase transition. We test and illustrate our theoretical results using numerical
simulations on infection trees and networks. We anticipate recursive contact tracing to provide a
basis for digital, app-based contact tracing tools that extend the efficiency of contact tracing to
diseases with a large fraction of asymptomatic transmission.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The methods used to fight the spread of the contemporary COVID-19 epidemic have largely been the same
as a hundred years ago during the Spanish flu [1, 2]. In
particular, contact tracing has been used as a standard
procedure that is well understood, both analytically
and in network modeling approaches [3–7]. Some early
papers even already considered the concept of recursive
contact tracing, i.e. not only tracing direct contacts but
also contacts of contacts and so on [8, 9]. However,
lacking a technology to efficiently implement such a
procedure, recursive contact tracing has thus far not
been used.
However, the arrival of the SARS-CoV-2 epidemic,
with its high asymptomatic transmission rate and the
possibility of pre-symptomatic infections, presents new
challenges that need addressing [10–12]. As such, a
renewed interest in recursive contact tracing [13–18],
as well as in digital contact tracing solutions [19–30]
that could finally enable recursive contact tracing, has
emerged in an effort to surpass the methods of a hundred
years ago.
In this article, we introduce a simple model that
considers an epidemic as a percolation problem, as is
common in network epidemiology theory [31–40], , in
combination with a recursive contact tracing algorithm

∗
†

lbaumgarten@itp.uni-bremen.de
bornholdt@itp.uni-bremen.de

operating on the model. We will study the efficacy of
recursive contact tracing and characterize the influence
of a disease’s asymptomatic transmission rate on the
model’s critical transition. Our model allows for arbitrary recursion depths, as has only been done in [14],
and our results, to the best of our knowledge, are the
first to discuss the relationship of recursion depth and
asymptomatic infection rate with regard to the critical
transition.
We find a critical value in the fraction of nodes participating in the contact tracing (corresponding to tracing
app usage) which depends on the asymptomatic transmission rate of the disease. Further we find a critical
(maximum allowed) asymptomatic transmission rate as
a function of the algorithm’s recursion depth. We show
that any disease with arbitrary basic reproduction number and finite asymptomatic rate can be stopped by a
sufficiently large recursion depth. Finally, we validate
our calculations using simulations on infection trees and
networks with different degree distributions, as degree
distribution can have a significant impact on an epidemic
[34, 36, 38, 40–44]. Let us now start by defining the
model.

II.

THEORY

We consider an SIR (susceptible, infected, removed)
model with N nodes and an arbitrary degree distribution p(k) in which a proportion Φ of nodes take part in
contact tracing (“use a contact tracing app”). Nodes in
the network are infected with a virus with symptomatic

2
rate Θ and basic reproduction number R0 . It is known
that in such a network, if we fix R0 , the disease has a
transmissibility
T = R0

hki
hk 2 i − hki

(1)

[36]. Carriers of the disease will be able to infect their
susceptible neighbors with probability T one time step
after being infected themselves and be immune and
non-contagious afterwards.
If an infectious person is symptomatic and uses the
contact tracing app, this will trigger an alarm on the
app and warn neighboring nodes of the chance of being
infected, sending them into quarantine for their one
infectious time step so they effectively skip the infectious
state and jump directly to the recovered stage.
We can consider higher degrees of recursivity r for the
app, meaning how many time steps in the past the app
will consider to guess who might currently be infected.
For r = 0, only the node’s direct neighbors are sent into

quarantine. For r = 1 in addition to those nodes who
are quarantined for r = 0, any node with a distance of
exactly three to the symptomatic node is quarantined,
for r = 2 any node with a distance of five is quarantined,
and so on. This is illustrated in Figure 1. The algorithm disregards any possible immunities due to nodes
having already been infected previously, but it does consider breaks in the infection chain that are caused by
the app’s own quarantining algorithm, i.e., if a node was
quarantined at time t, the app does not consider this
node a possible infection spreader at that time step.
~ of symptomatically infected nodes at
Given a vector S
time t0 ,
(
1
Si =
0

if node i is symptomatically infected
,
otherwise

~ using the app, the vectors Q(t)
~
the vector of nodes U
of
quarantined nodes and P (t) of not quarantined nodes at
time steps t ≤ t0 , and the adjacency matrix A, the vector
of quarantined nodes at t = t0 + 1 can be calculated by

n h
io
~ ·U
~ · P~ (t0 ) · P~ (t0 ) · U
~
Q(t0 + 1) = A · S
{z
}
|
r=0
h  nh 
i
o
i
~ ·U
~ · P~ (t0 − 1) · P~ (t0 − 2) · U
~
~ · P~ (t0 ) · U
~
+ A· A· A· S
· P~ (t0 − 1) · P~ (t0 ) · U
|
{z
}
r=1

+ |{z}
... .
r>1

Multiplications with P~ (·) ensure that a considered node
in the backtracking chain was neither quarantined at its
supposed time of infection nor at the time it could have
~ ensure
infected its neighbors, and multiplications with U
that all nodes in the backtracking chain use the app.
We now calculate the probability that an infected node
is correctly put into quarantine by our algorithm. For
this, we assume an infinitely large network, with a low
enough fraction of the population being infected that an
infected node is only quarantined as a result of its own
infection chain and not coincidentally swept up in the
quarantine caused by a different infection. We assume
that the clustering in the network is negligible so that we
can consider the infection chain effectively as a tree.
For r = 0, both the infected node and the infecting node
must be part of the network and the infecting node needs
to be symptomatic.
Therefore, a first approximation of the probability Pqr=0
of an infected node being correctly put into quarantine

is simply
Pqr=0 (Φ, Θ) = Φ2 Θ.

(2)

However, because the infecting node cannot have been
quarantined, its probability of using the app is
0

Φ =

Φ(1 −

Pqr=0
Φ )

P r=0

Φ(1 − qΦ ) + (1 − Φ)
Φ − Pqr
=
≤ Φ,
1 − Pqr
as the amount of nodes using the app with the ability to
infect other nodes is reduced by a factor (1 − Pqr=0 ), and
therefore
Pqr=0 = ΦΦ0 Θ.

(3)

For higher degrees of recursion, the chance of being quar-

3

FIG. 1. Illustration of the quarantining algorithm with an
infection spreading from top to bottom. Nodes with a black
outline are not infected (susceptible=S), nodes with a red outline are infected (I), either symptomatically (filled nodes, IS )
or asymptomatically (unfilled nodes, IA ), and nodes with a
dashed outline are not using the contact tracing app (noncompliant, NC). Red arrows indicate the spread of the infection, while black lines indicate non-infectious connections
between nodes. The time t indicated on the right hand side
marks the time at which infected nodes are infectious—or,
in the case of the uninfected nodes, the latest time at which
the app would consider them to be possibly infectious. While
nodes could reappear in later time steps, e.g. the node in
the t = 0 row could also be shown in the t = 2 row as it
is connected to (most of) the nodes in the t = 1 row, we
only show nodes once for visual clarity. At time t = 1 a
symptomatic node triggers an alarm on the app. For recursion depth r = 0, only its nearest neighbors are quarantined.
These quarantined nodes cannot infect any other nodes, as
indicated by the blocked outgoing connections. For r = 1,
the app considers every nearest neighbor of the symptomatic
node as a possible origin of the symptomatic node’s infection, and therefore quarantines all nodes that the infection
could have spread to within two time steps from these nearest neighbors. This results in every node with a distance of
exactly three to the symptomatic node being quarantined, so
long as the connection is not interrupted by a node not using
the app or by a node that was in quarantine itself at its time
of infection or in the time step after infection, as shown on
the right hand side. This can, of course, also include nodes
which have not yet actually been in contact with any infected
nodes, as shown by the leftmost nodes in the t = 1 and t = 2
rows. Note that, although the infection chain is shown in a
tree-like structure for visual clarity, these nodes can be part
of a network of arbitrary structure.

antined is increased
···
Pqr>0 = Pqr=0 + (1 − Pqr=0 )Φ00 P1 + |{z}
{z
}
|
r=1

(4)

r>1

= ΦΦ0 [P0 + (1 − P0 )Φ00 {P1 + (1 − P1 )Φ00 (· · · )}]
(5)
with P0 = Θ

(6)

Here, in every part of the sum, the chance of a node having already been quarantined due to a lower recursion
level is excluded via (1 − Pi ), and a factor Φ00 is added
for the chance of the next upstream node using the app.
The factor Φ00 represents the chance of a node using the

app if the next downstream node has not been quarantined, and needs to be used for nodes that are two or more
levels above the currently regarded node in the infection
tree. The chance of such a node using the app regardless of the behavior of its downstream nodes is Φ0 . The
chance of a downstream node, which is using the app, of
a node that is also using the
 app not being quarantined
Pqr
is approximately 1 − ΦΦ0 . Since we assume both infecting node and infected node to be using the app, the
factor ΦΦ0 is removed from Pqr . This approximation disregards that the upstream node not being quarantined
also influences the chance of its downstream node being
quarantined. Then the chance of an upstream node using
the app, given that its downstream node is using the app
and has not been quarantined is


Pr
Φ0 1 − ΦΦq 0


Φ00 =
(7)
Pr
Φ0 1 − ΦΦq 0 + (1 − Φ0 )
=

ΦΦ0 − Pqr
.
Φ − Pqr

(8)

Next, we need to calculate the chance Pi of a node being
quarantined due to the i’th recursion step, given that its
r nearest upstream nodes are using the app. For simplicity’s sake, we start with P1 . Here, a leaf node i is
quarantined due to the first recursion step if any of the
downstream nodes of i’s second degree upstream node,
which we call j, have been infected, use the app, and
are symptomatic. The chance of one node fulfilling these
conditions is Φ0 ΘT . Since just one node needs to cause
an alarm on the app, the chance of being quarantined is
P1 = 1 − (1 − ΦΘT )n ,

(9)

where n is the average number of j’s downstream nodes
minus one. We subtract one, since one of j’s downstream
nodes is i’s direct upstream node and would already have
caused i to be quarantined in the zero’th recursion step,
if it were symptomatic. Since the chance of a node of
degree k being infected is proportional to kp(k) [42], the
average number of downstream nodes minus one is
P∞
k(k − 2)p(k)
P∞
n = k=2
,
(10)
k=2 kp(k)
where we subtract two from k because of the one downstream node that is not considered and j’s upstream
node. Therefore,
P1 = 1 − (1 − ΘΦT )

P∞
k(k−2)p(k)
k=2
P∞
kp(k)
k=2

= P1 (x)|x=2 = 1 − (1 − ΘΦT )

(11)

P∞
k(k−x)p(k)
k=x
P∞
kp(k)
k=x

. (12)
x=2

We indicate how many connections are removed when
calculating n via the variable x.
For the second recursion step, at least one of the downstream nodes of j’s upstream node, which we call l, must

4
fulfill the condition of P1 , meaning that any one of their
downstream nodes must be infected, using the app, and
symptomatic. This chance is given by
h
i
P2 = 1 − 1 − P1 (1)Φ̃
h

= P2 (x)|x=2 = 1 − 1 − P1 (1)Φ̃

i

P∞
k(k−2)p(k)
k=2
P∞
kp(k)
k=2

(13)
Pqr = ΦΦ0 [Θ + (1 − Θ)Φ00 ] .

P∞
k(k−x)p(k)
k=x
P∞
kp(k)
k=x

x=2

(14)
with Φ̃ =

ΦT (1 − Θ)
.
ΦT (1 − Θ) + (1 − ΦT )

(15)

Here, in P1 (x), we do not discount one of each node’s
downstream nodes, since these nodes are not upstream
nodes of node i, and therefore all of their downstream
nodes need to be considered. Thus, we use P1 (1) instead of P1 (2). Also, we use Φ̃, because nodes that are
using the app and symptomatically infected would have
already caused a quarantine in a previous time step and
can therefore not be part of the considered tree. Similarly, the equation for following recursion steps is
h

Pi (x) = 1 − 1 − Pi−1 (1)Φ̃

i

P∞
k(k−x)p(k)
k=x
P∞
kp(k)
k=x

.

(16)

Summarizing these calculations, the chance of a leaf node
being quarantined with a recursion degree of r is



r
 i−1

X
Y

Pqr ≈ ΦΦ0
[1 − Pj (2)] Φ00 Pi (2)


i=0

j=0

(17)


Θ
with Pi (x) = 1 − (1 − P0 (1)ΦT )n(x)

1 − (1 − P (1)Φ̃)n(x)
i−1

if i = 0
if i = 1
otherwise
(18)

P∞
k(k − x)p(k)
P∞
and n(x) = k=x
k=x kp(k)

(19)

Note that (17) is a self-consistent equation, since Φ0 and
Φ00 contain Pqr .
III.

THEORETICAL RESULTS

It is easy to see that the upper limit of Pqr is
Pqr ≤ ΦΦ0 < Φ if Φ < 1,

However, there is still something that can be learned from
taking a closer look at scale-free networks. For γ ≤ 3, the
Pk
sum k=2 k 2 p(k) in the exponent of the Pi ’s diverges,
therefore P1 → 1 (if ΦΘT > 0), and Pqr becomes

(20)

so contact tracing by recursive backtracking is strictly
worse than vaccinating a fraction Φ of the population.
Since such a vaccination strategy is already insufficient to
stop an epidemic on an infinitely large scale-free network
with a degree distribution p(k) ∝ k −γ with γ ≤ 3 [42],
recursive backtracking can also not stop such an epidemic
for Φ < 1.

(21)

We can see that all infected nodes that can be caught by
the algorithm will already be detected in the first recursion step.
Luckily, real world networks are not infinitely large, so
the sum mentioned previously will not diverge, so recursive backtracking will be able to stop epidemics for Φ < 1.
For such networks, we expect the observation made for
infinitely large scale-free networks to be still be relevant,
i.e., the closer a real world network is to an infinitely large
scale-free network, the less will the epidemic threshold Φc
be affected by recursion depths past r = 1.
In Figure 2, we show the reduction of the reproduction
number R = R0 (1 − Pqr ) as a function of Φ for different degree distributions and recursion depths. For degree distributions we choose a simple Erdős-Rényi (ER)
network with average degree hki = 4, a Barabási-Albert
(BA) network with average degree hki = 4 and a cutoff
at κ = 1000, i.e. p(k) = 0 for k > κ, and as a realistic example, a scale-free
 network with exponential cutoff
k
p(k) ∝ k −2 exp 94.2
that produces an epidemic threshold comparable to that of urban networks for SARS [45].
We choose the transmissibility T so that all networks
have a realistic basic reproduction number for the SARSCoV-2 virus, R0 = 3, and we choose Θ = 0.5. We see that
the degree distribution only has a minuscule effect on Pqr ,
and that increasing the recursion depth past r = 1, while
having the largest effect for ER networks (outer two lines
in the inset), still barely decreases the critical value Φc .
We can also calculate the critical value Φc as a function
of the symptomatic rate Θ, as is shown in Figure 3. There
is a large visible difference between the classic contract
tracing method with r = 0 and recursive contact tracing,
even for relatively large values of Θ. While for r > 0 the
recursion depth has little influence on Φc for large values
of the symptomatic rate Θ, we see that there is a critical value Θc , depending on the recursion depth, below
which, even with Φ = 1, an epidemic cannot be stopped.
This critical value is approximately halved when going
from the classical method r = 0 to r = 1, meaning that
recursive contact tracing is an effective method to combat diseases with high asymptomatic rates which would
not have been able to be stopped by previous contact
tracing methods.
The critical value Θc is shown in Figure 4 as a function of
the recursion depth for different values of R0 . The critical
value Θc exponentially decreases with r, with Θc → 0 for
r → ∞. Therefore, any disease with a symptomatic rate
Θ > 0 and arbitrarily large basic reproduction number
R0 can be stopped via recursive contact tracing, given a
sufficiently large recursion depth and app usage rate.

5

FIG. 2. Reduction of the reproduction number R as a function of the app-usage rate Φ for an Erdős-Rényi (ER) network,
a Barabási-Albert (BA) network with a cutoff κ = 1000, and
a scale-free network with exponential cutoff, with R0 = 3
and Θ = 0.5. The dashed line shows the critical value
R0 (1 − Pqr ) = 1, and the inset is a blowup around the critical
points. The curves of the BA distribution and the scale-free
distribution with exponential cutoff lie so close to each other
that they cannot even be distinguished in the inset.

FIG. 3. Critical value Φc as a function of the symptomatic
rate Θ for different recursion depths r with R0 = 3. Since
the ER distribution and the scale-free distribution with an
exponential cutoff again yield almost the same results, we
only plot Φc for the Barabási-Albert distribution with average
degree hki = 4 and cutoff κ = 1000.

IV.

SIMULATIONS

To test the accuracy of our calculations in section II,
we simulate infection trees with recursive backtracking.
The simulation starts with a single infected node, and
each time step for each infected, unquarantined leaf node
k − 1 downstream nodes are added, with k proportional
to kp(k). These new leaf nodes are infected with probability T and symptomatic with probability Θ. Then,
according to the rules described in section II, infected

FIG. 4. Critical symptomatic rate Θc below which an epidemic cannot be stopped even for Φ = 1 as a function of the
recursion depth r for different basic reproduction numbers
R0 using a Barabási-Albert distribution with average degree
hki = 4 and cutoff κ = 1000. For large recursion depths,
the critical value Θc → 0 for all basic reproduction numbers, whereas for r = 1 there is a maximum Θmax
≈ 0.28 at
c
R0 ≈ 3.6.

leaf nodes may be quarantined, causing them to not receive any downstream nodes. We let these dynamics run
for 100 time steps or until there were 10000 new infected
leaf nodes added in a time step, at which point we consider the epidemic out of control. In Figure 5, we show
the fraction of trees in which the epidemic is not stopped
within 100 time steps, the fraction of quarantined nodes,
and the average reproduction number R for trees using an
ER degree distribution or a BA degree distribution with
a cutoff κ = 1000. We see a very good agreement between
our calculation and simulations for recursions r = 1, see
Figure 5. We have also verified that our calculations and
simulations agree very well for larger recursion depths.
Next, we move away from the tree structure and use
networks instead. In these networks, we start with ten
initially infected nodes, which are chosen with a probability proportional to kp(k), and we let the dynamics run
until no new nodes are infected within a time step. Figure 6 shows the fraction of infected nodes, the fraction
of nodes that have ever been quarantined, and the maximum fraction of nodes that has been quarantined at one
point in time for ER networks with different recursion
depths.
For the network size N → ∞, we see that the fractions
of infected and quarantined nodes drop to zero at the
theoretical critical value Φc . For higher recursion depths
and relatively small networks, the infected fraction is already kept quite low below the theoretical critical value
because a large fraction of nodes is being quarantined
and therefore the assumption we made in section II that
nodes are not coincidentally swept up in unrelated infection trees does not hold anymore; however, this lower
infected fraction comes at the cost of wrongly quarantining a relatively large fraction of nodes. Also, this effect

6

FIG. 5. Fraction of trees in which the epidemic survives 100 time steps (left column), probability of an infected node being
quarantined Pq1 (center column), and reproduction number R (right column) for trees built with an ER degree distribution
(upper row) or a BA degree distribution with cutoff κ = 1000 (lower row), with r = 1, R0 = 3, and Θ = 0.5. Blue lines show
the averages of 100 trees per data point, unbroken orange lines show the theoretical results for Pq1 and R, and dashed orange
lines show the theoretical critical value Φc . The dashed black lines in the reproduction number diagrams show the critical
value of R. Note that the measurement for the reproduction number R and the quarantined fraction Pq1 are skewed near or
past the critical point, because the measurements here are dominated by just the beginning of the tree where the quarantining
algorithm does not have enough history yet to quarantine nodes.

is mitigated for larger network sizes N .
For BA networks, especially for large networks, the infection dies out quickly even for low values of Φ, because
the infection dynamics are dominated by the strongly
connected hub nodes which, after some time, will be in
the recovered state, and therefore the effective degree distribution for the infection is quickly cut off for larger k.
Additionally, in a BA network the first few nodes which
are added to the network and later are likely to grow
into the strongest connected nodes are likely to connect
to each other and have common neighbors, meaning that
the assumption we made in section II of low clustering
does not hold, which reduces the number of susceptible
nodes adjacent to an infected large spreader i because its
neighbors are likely to have already been infected by i’s
own infecting node. Both these effects lower the basic reproduction number R0 below the theoretical value given
by equation (1).

V.

CONCLUSION

Considering the problem of epidemic spreading of an
infectious disease with a finite asymptomatic transmission rate, such as the current epidemics caused by the
SARS-CoV-2, we have introduced a combined infection

model of nodes taking susceptible, infected, or recovered
states with a recursive contact tracing algorithm for
quarantining, equivalent to an app used by a network’s
nodes to stop a pandemic in our model.
We have calculated the odds of an infected node being
quarantined by the contact tracing algorithm, as well
as the resulting theoretical critical values for the app
usage rate above which an infection does not percolate
through the network, and the minimum symptomatic
rate beneath which a disease cannot be stopped, depending on the algorithm’s recursion depth, the disease’s
basic reproduction number, and the contact network’s
underlying degree distribution.
We found that the critical app adoption rate and
critical symptomatic rate are both significantly lower for
an algorithm using recursive contact tracing, even with
a low recursion depth, than for the classically employed,
non-recursive method of direct contact tracing. In
fact, any disease with a finite symptomatic rate and
arbitrary basic reproduction number can be stopped
if the app usage rate and recursion depth are large
enough, meaning that recursive contact tracing can be
an effective method for controlling diseases with large
asymptomatic transmission rates which could not have
been stopped with previous contact tracing methods.

7

FIG. 6. Fraction of infected nodes (left), fraction of nodes that have ever been quarantined (center), and maximum number of
nodes that have been quarantined at one time (right) for ER networks with recursion depth r = 1 (top row) and r = 2 (bottom
row) as a function of the app-usage rate Φ. Different color graphs show networks of different sizes N , and orange dashed lines
show the theoretical critical value Φc . All data points are the average of 100 simulation runs.

Our critical app adoption rate of over 95% may seem
unusually high at first glance compared to some other
results [5, 20, 24, 26], with other estimates generally
lying between 56% and 95% [46]; however, this is simply
caused by our model’s harsh assumptions, such as a very
high basic reproduction number R0 = 3, a relatively
high asymptomatic rate of 50%, no infection prevention
measures, such as random testing or social distancing,
apart from contact tracing, no distinguishing between
the infectivity of symptomatic and asymptomatic disease
carriers (symptomatic carriers are often assumed to
self-quarantine and therefore infect fewer people), and
a lack of manual contact tracing even for symptomatic
infected individuals who are not using the app. Our
results are comparable to those of other models making
harsh assumptions [14, 16, 23].
Further, we found that, while higher recursion depths
can stop diseases with a high asymptomatic rate, for low
asymptomatic rates, recursion depths higher than one
show very little improvement in the critical app usage
rate while falsely quarantining more uninfected nodes,
implying that for such diseases recursion depths larger
than one are mostly not useful.
Also, the contact network’s degree distribution was

[1] A. F. Franchini, F. Auxilia, P. M. Galimberti, M. A.
Piga, S. Castaldi, and A. Porro, Acta bio-medica: Atenei

shown to have little impact on these critical values, so
recursive contact tracing is not only viable for ErdősRényi graphs, as tested in previous studies, but also
for more realistic scale-free-like networks, i.e. scale-free
networks with a cutoff.
We have ensured the accuracy of our theoretical calculations using simulations on infection trees and networks
with different degree distributions. We found very good
agreement between our calculations and simulations
for any degree distribution on infection trees and for
Erdős-Rényi networks. For Barabási-Albert networks,
the simulation’s critical values lay below the calculated
ones because quarantining the most connected nodes
quickly changes the network’s degree distribution and
because the effect of clustering, as highly connected
nodes in Barabási-Albert networks are likely to be
connected to each other, was not considered in the
calculations.
The calculations presented here are viable for a simple
model, but we believe that the qualitative conclusions
should be applicable to the real world as well. Future
research should expand this simple model to be more
realistic and possibly fit the infection profiles of real diseases, as well as consider the effect of clustering on the
model’s critical values.

Parmensis 91, 245 (2020).

8
[2] D. C. Wheelock et al., Economic Synopses (2020).
[3] M. Kretzschmar, Y. T. van Duynhoven, and A. J. Severijnen, American Journal of Epidemiology 144, 306 (1996).
[4] M. Eichner, American journal of epidemiology 158, 118
(2003).
[5] K. T. Eames and M. J. Keeling, Proceedings of the Royal
Society of London. Series B: Biological Sciences 270,
2565 (2003).
[6] C. Fraser, S. Riley, R. M. Anderson, and N. M. Ferguson,
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 101,
6146 (2004).
[7] I. Z. Kiss, D. M. Green, and R. R. Kao, Proceedings
of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 272, 1407
(2005).
[8] J. Müller, M. Kretzschmar, and K. Dietz, Mathematical
biosciences 164, 39 (2000).
[9] D. Klinkenberg, C. Fraser, and H. Heesterbeek, PloS one
1, e12 (2006).
[10] X. Yu and R. Yang, Influenza and Other Respiratory
Viruses (2020).
[11] L. Pribylova and V. Hajnova, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.02601 (2020).
[12] S. Khailaie, T. Mitra, A. Bandyopadhyay, M. Schips,
P. Mascheroni, P. Vanella, B. Lange, S. Binder, and
M. Meyer-Hermann, medRxiv (2020).
[13] A. Okolie and J. Müller, Mathematical Biosciences 321,
108320 (2020).
[14] V. B. Bulchandani, S. Shivam, S. Moudgalya, and
S. Sondhi, arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.07237 (2020).
[15] S. Kojaku, L. Hébert-Dufresne, and Y.-Y. Ahn, arXiv
preprint arXiv:2005.02362 (2020).
[16] A. Lambert, medRxiv (2020).
[17] M. Barlow, arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.16182 (2020).
[18] A. Endo, Q. J. Leclerc, G. M. Knight, G. F. Medley,
K. E. Atkins, S. Funk, A. J. Kucharski, et al., medRxiv
(2020).
[19] M. Faggian, M. Urbani, and L. Zanotto, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.10222 (2020).
[20] J. Hellewell, S. Abbott, A. Gimma, N. I. Bosse, C. I.
Jarvis, T. W. Russell, J. D. Munday, A. J. Kucharski,
W. J. Edmunds, F. Sun, et al., The Lancet Global Health
(2020).
[21] R. Hinch, W. Probert, A. Nurtay, M. Kendall,
C. Wymant,
M. Hall,
and C. Fraser,
en.
In:(Apr.
2020).
Available
here.
url:
https://github.
com/BDI-pathogens/covid19 instant tracing/blob/master/Report (2020).
[22] H. Kim and A. Paul, arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.10762
(2020).
[23] Y. Xia and G. Lee, arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.12576
(2020).

[24] L. Ferretti, C. Wymant, M. Kendall, L. Zhao, A. Nurtay,
L. Abeler-Dörner, M. Parker, D. Bonsall, and C. Fraser,
Science 368 (2020).
[25] S. McLachlan, P. Lucas, K. Dube, G. McLachlan, G. Hitman, M. Osman, and N. Fenton, “The fundamental limitations of covid-19 contact tracing methods and how to
resolve them with a bayesian network approach,” (2020).
[26] E. Hernández-Orallo, P. Manzoni, C. T. Calafate, and
J.-C. Cano, IEEE Access (2020).
[27] B. Prasse and P. Van Mieghem, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.14285 (2020).
[28] Y.-C. Ho, Y.-H. Chen, S.-H. Hung, C.-H. Huang, P. Po,
C.-H. Chan, D.-K. Yang, Y.-C. Tu, T.-L. Liu, and C.-T.
Fang, arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.16611 (2020).
[29] G. Cencetti, G. Santin, A. Longa, E. Pigani, A. Barrat, C. Cattuto, S. Lehmann, M. Salathe, and B. Lepri,
(2020).
[30] A. Barrat, C. Cattuto, M. Kivelä, S. Lehmann, and
J. Saramäki, medRxiv (2020).
[31] P. Grassberger, Mathematical Biosciences 63, 157 (1983).
[32] J. L. Cardy and P. Grassberger, Journal of Physics A:
Mathematical and General 18, L267 (1985).
[33] M. E. Newman and D. J. Watts, Physical review E 60,
7332 (1999).
[34] C. Moore and M. E. Newman, Physical Review E 61,
5678 (2000).
[35] R. Pastor-Satorras and A. Vespignani, Physical Review
E 63, 066117 (2001).
[36] M. E. Newman, Physical review E 66, 016128 (2002).
[37] C. P. Warren, L. M. Sander, and I. M. Sokolov, Physical
Review E 66, 056105 (2002).
[38] M. J. Keeling and K. T. Eames, Journal of the Royal
Society Interface 2, 295 (2005).
[39] L. Meyers, Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 44, 63 (2007).
[40] R. Pastor-Satorras, C. Castellano, P. Van Mieghem, and
A. Vespignani, Reviews of modern physics 87, 925 (2015).
[41] R. Pastor-Satorras and A. Vespignani, Physical review
letters 86, 3200 (2001).
[42] N. Madar, T. Kalisky, R. Cohen, D. Ben-avraham, and
S. Havlin, The European Physical Journal B 38, 269
(2004).
[43] J. O. Lloyd-Smith, S. J. Schreiber, P. E. Kopp, and
W. M. Getz, Nature 438, 355 (2005).
[44] C. Castellano and R. Pastor-Satorras, Physical review
letters 105, 218701 (2010).
[45] L. A. Meyers, B. Pourbohloul, M. E. Newman, D. M.
Skowronski, and R. C. Brunham, Journal of theoretical
biology 232, 71 (2005).
[46] I. Braithwaite, T. Callender, M. Bullock, and R. W.
Aldridge, medRxiv (2020).

