Host-to-Host Airborne Transmission As a Multiphase Flow
Problem For Science-Based Social Distance Guidelines

arXiv:2008.06113v1 [physics.flu-dyn] 13 Aug 2020

S. Balachandar,

∗

S. Zaleski,

†

A. Soldati,

‡

G. Ahmadi,

§

L. Bourouiba

¶

Abstract
COVID-19 pandemic has strikingly demonstrated how important it is to develop fundamental knowledge related to generation, transport and inhalation of pathogen-laden droplets and
their subsequent possible fate as airborne particles, or aerosols, in the context of human to
human transmission. It is also increasingly clear that airborne transmission is an important
contributor to rapid spreading of the disease. In this paper, we discuss the processes of droplet
generation by exhalation, their potential transformation into airborne particles by evaporation,
transport over long distances by the exhaled puff and by ambient air turbulence, and final inhalation by the receiving host as interconnected multiphase flow processes. A simple model for
the time evolution of droplet/aerosol concentration is presented based on a theoretical analysis
of the relevant physical processes. The modeling framework along with detailed experiments and
simulations can be used to study a wide variety of scenarios involving breathing, talking, coughing and sneezing and in a number of environmental conditions, as humid or dry atmosphere,
confined or open environment. Although a number of questions remain open on the physics
of evaporation and coupling with persistence of the virus, it is clear that with a more reliable
understanding of the underlying flow physics of virus transmission one can set the foundation
for an improved methodology in designing case-specific social distancing and infection control
guidelines.

1

Introduction

The COVID-19 pandemic has made clear the fundamental role of airborne droplets and aerosols
as potential virus carriers. The importance of studying the fluid dynamics of exhalations, starting from the formation of droplets in the respiratory tracts to their evolution and transport as a
turbulent cloud, can now be recognized as the key step towards understanding SARS-CoV-2 transmission. Respiratory droplets are formed and emitted at high speed during a sneeze or cough [97],
and at lower speed while talking or breathing. The virus-laden droplets are then initially transported as part of the coherent gas puff of buoyant fluid ejected by the infected host [13]. The very
large drops of O(mm) in size, which are visible to naked eye, are minimally affected by the puff.
∗

Corresponding Author, Professor, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA, bala1s@ufl.edu
Professor, Sorbonne Université, Institut Jean Le Rond d’Alembert, Paris, France, stephane.zaleski@sorbonneuniversite.fr; CNRS, Institut Jean Le Rond d’Alembert, Paris, France; Senior Member, Institut Universitaire de
France (IUF), Paris, France
‡
Professor, TU Wien, Vienna, Austria, & University of Udine, Udine, Italy alfredo.soldati@tuwien.ac.at
§
Professor, Clarkson University, Potsdam, NY, USA, ahmadi@clarkson.edu
¶
Professor, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Boston, MA, USA, lbouro@mit.edu
†

1

They travel semi-ballistically with only minimal drag adjustment, but rapidly falling down due to
gravitational pull. They can exit the puff either by overshooting or by falling out of the puff at the
early stage of emission (Fig. 1). Smaller droplets (. O(100 µm)) that remain suspended within
the puff are advected forward. As the suspended droplets steadily evaporate within the cloud, the
virus takes the form of potentially inhalable droplets, or droplet residues when the evaporation of
water is complete. Meanwhile, the velocity of the turbulent puff continues to decay both due to
entrainment and drag. Once the puff slows down sufficiently, and its coherence is lost, the eventual
spreading of the virus-laden droplet residue becomes dependent on the ambient air currents and
turbulence.
The isolated respiratory droplet emission framework was introduced by Wells [115] in the 1930s
and remains the framework used for guidelines by public health agencies, such as the WHO, CDC
and others. However, it does not consider the role of the turbulent gas puff within which the
droplets are embedded. Regardless of their size and their initial velocity, the ejected droplets
are subject to both gravitational settling and evaporation [13]. Although droplets of all sizes
undergo continuous settling, droplets with settling speed smaller than the fluctuating velocity of
the surrounding puff can remain trapped longer within the puff (Fig. 2). Furthermore, the water
content of the droplets continuously decreases due to evaporation. When conditions are appropriate
for near complete evaporation, the ejected droplets quickly become droplet residues of non-volatile
biological material. The settling velocity of these droplet residues is sufficiently small that they
can remain trapped as a cloud and get advected by ambient air currents and dispersed by ambient
turbulence. Based on the above discussion, we introduce the following terminology that will be
consistently used in this paper:
• Puff: Hot, moist air exhaled during breathing, talking, coughing or sneezing, which remains
coherent and moves forward during early times after exhalation
• Cloud: The distribution of ejected droplets that remain suspended even after the puff has
lost its coherence. The cloud is advected by the air currents and is dispersed by ambient
turbulence
• Exited droplets: droplets that have either overshot the puff/cloud or settled down due to
gravity
• Airborne (evaporating) droplets: droplets which have not completed evaporation and retained
within the puff/cloud
• (Airborne) droplet residues: droplets that remain airborne within the puff/cloud and that
have fully evaporated, which will also be termed aerosols.
Host-to-host transmission of virus-laden droplets and droplet residues occurs generally through
direct and indirect routes [4, 12, 84]. The direct route of transmission involves the larger droplets
that may ballistically reach the recipient’s mucosa. This route is currently thought to involve either
the airborne route or drops that have settled on surfaces. The settled drops remain infectious, to
be later picked up by the recipient, and are generally thought to be localized to the vicinity or
at close range of the original infectious emitter. With increased awareness and modified physical
distancing norms it is possible to minimize the spreading of the virus by such direct route.
The indirect route of transmission is one that does not necessarily involve a direct or close
interaction between the infectious individual and the recipient or for the two to be synchronously
2

Figure 1: Image reproduction showing the semi-ballistic largest drops, visible to the naked eye,
and on the order of mm, which can overshoot the puff at its early stage of emission [14, 15]. The
puff continues to propagate and entrain ambient air as it moves forward, carrying its payload of
continuum of drops [13], over distances up to 8 meters for violent exhalations such as sneezes [17].
present in the same contaminated space at the same time. Thus, the indirect route involves respiratory droplets and fully-evaporated droplet residues that are released to the surrounding by the
infected individual, which remain airborne as the cloud carries them over longer distances. The
settling speeds of the airborne droplets and droplet residues are so small, that they remain afloat
for longer times, while being carried by the background turbulent airflow over distances that can
span the entire room or even multiple rooms within the building (O(10 − 100) feet). A schematic
of the two routes of transmission is shown in Fig. 2 and in this paper we will focus on the indirect
airborne transmission.
Another factor of great importance is the possibility of updraft in the region of contamination,
due to buoyancy of the virus-laden warm ejected air-mass. These slight updrafts can keep the virusladen droplets suspended in the air and enhance the inhalability of airborne droplets and droplet
residues by recipients who are located farther way. The advection of airborne droplets and residues
by the puff and subsequently as a cloud may represent transmission risk for times and distances
much longer than otherwise previously estimated, and this is a cause of great concern [99, 100].
Note that if we ignore the motion of the puff of air carrying the droplets, as in the analysis of
Wells, the airborne droplets and residues would be subjected to such high drag that they could not
propagate more than a few cm away from the exhaler, even under conditions of fast ejections, such
as in a sneeze. This illustrates the importance of incorporating the correct multiphase flow physics
in the modeling of respiratory emissions [16], which we shall discuss further here.
It has been recently reported that COVID-19 virus lives in droplets and aerosols for many
hours in laboratory experiments [25]. At the receiving end, an increased concentration of virusladen airborne droplets and residues near the breathing zone increases the probability of them
settling on the body or more importantly being inhaled. Depending on its material and sealing
properties, the use of a mask by the infected host can help reduce the number of virus-laden droplets
ejected into the air, and in a less effective way, the use of a mask or other protective devices by
the receiving host may reduce the probability of inhalation of the virus-laden airborne droplets and

3

residues.
The above description provides a clear sketch of the sequence of processes by which the virus
is transferred host-to-host. This simplistic scenario, though pictorially evocative, is tremendously
insufficient to provide science-based social distancing guidelines and recommendations. There is
substantial variability (i) in the quantity and quality of contaminated droplets and aerosols generated by an infected person, (ii) in the manner by which the contaminated droplets and droplet
residues remain afloat over longer distances and time, (iii) in the possibility of the contaminant
being inhaled by a recipient and (iv) in the effectiveness of masks and other protection devices. Violent exhalations, such as sneezing and coughing, yield many more virus-laden droplets and aerosols
than breathing and talking [13, 73]. All coughing and sneezing events are not alike - the formation
of droplets by break up of mucus and saliva varies substantially between individuals. Significant
variation in initial droplet size and velocity distribution has been reported in [3, 13, 44, 84]. The
measured droplet size distribution, particularly for transient biological emissions such as respiratory exhalations, also depends on ambient temperature and humidity and on the methodology and
instrumentation used to characterize the size distribution [4, 16, 73]. Furthermore, it is of importance to consider the volume of air, and the pathogen load, being inhaled during breathing by the
receiving host. Thus, there is great variability in how much of the virus-laden aerosols reach from
the infected host to the receiving host.
CDC guideline of social distancing of 2 meters (6 feet) is based on the disease transmission
theory originally developed in 1930s and later improved by others [90, 114, 117]. The current recommendation of 6 feet as the safe distance can be improved in several ways: (i) by accurately
accounting for the distance traveled by the puff and the droplets contained within it, while some
continuously settling out of the puff, (ii) by accurately evaluating the evaporation of droplets and
the subsequent advection and dispersal of droplet residues as a cloud [6], (iii) by incorporating the
effect of adverse flow conditions that prevail under confined indoor environment including elevators, aircraft cabins, and public transit, or favorable conditions of open space with good breeze
or cross ventilation, and (iv) by correctly assessing the effectiveness of masks and other protective
devices [20]. Thus, mechanistic, evidence-based understanding of exhalation and dispersal of expelled respiratory droplets, and their subsequent fate as droplet residues in varying scenarios and
environments is important. We must therefore revisit the safety guidelines and update them to
modern understanding. In particular, a multi-layered guideline that differentiates between crowed
class rooms, auditoriums, buses, elevators and aircraft cabins from open outdoor cafes is desired.
Only through reliable understanding of the underlying flow physics of virus transmission one can
arrive at such nuanced guidance in designing case-specific social distancing guidelines.
The object of the paper is to present a coherent analytic and quantitative description of droplets
generation, transport, conversion to droplet residues, and eventual inhalation. We will examine
the available quantitative relationships that describe the above processes and adapt them to the
present problem. The key outcomes that we desire are (i) A simple universal description of the
initial droplet size spectrum generated by sneezing, coughing, talking and breathing activities. Such
a description must recognize the current limitations of measurements of droplet size distribution
under highly transient conditions of respiratory events. (ii) A first-order mathematical framework
that describes the evolution of the cloud of respiratory droplets and their conversion to droplet
residues, as a function of time, and (iii) A simple description of the inhalability of the aerosols
along with corresponding evaluation of the effectiveness of different masks based on existing data
reported to date. The physical picture and the quantitative results to be presented can then be used
4

to study a statistical sample of different scenarios and derive case-specific guidelines. We anticipate
the present paper to spawn future research in the context of host-to-host airborne transmission.
After presenting the mathematical framework in section 2, the three different stages of transmission, namely droplet generation, transport and inhalation will be independently analyzed in
sections 3, 4 and 5. These sections will consider the evolution of the puff of exhaled air and the
droplets contained within. Section 6 will put together the different models of the puff and droplet
evolution described in the previous sections, underline their simplifications, and demonstrate their
ability to make useful prediction. Finally, conclusions and future perspectives are offer in section
7.

INFECTED

100 um Droplets
80 um Droplets
~60 um Droplets
~40 um Droplets
20 um Droplets
1 um Droplets

SUSCEPTIBLE

Exhaling
Talking
Coughing
Sneezing

SUSCEPTIBLE

Inhalation

1m

2m and beyond

Figure 2: The two dominant transmission routes (a) direct transmission route through ballistic
larger droplets (b) indirect airborne transmission route by smaller airborne droplets and droplet
residues. A schematic representation of size distribution at the infected source host, at an intermediate distance and at a receiving host located farther away is also shown.

2

Problem Description and Mathematical Framework

We wish to describe the three main stages involved in the host-to-host transmission of the
virus: droplet generation during exhalation, airborne transport, and inhalation by the receiving
host. In the generation stage, virus-laden drops are generated throughout the respiratory tract
by the exhalation air flow which carries them through the upper airway toward the mouth where
they are ejected along with the turbulent puff of air from the lungs. The ejected puff of air can be
characterized with the following four parameters: the volume Qpe , the momentum Mpe , and the
buoyancy Bpe of the ejected puff, along with the angle θe to the horizontal at which the puff is
initially ejected. The initial momentum and buoyancy of the puff are given by Mpe = ρpe Qpe vpe
and Bpe = (ρa − ρpe )Qpe g, where vpe is the initial velocity of ejected puff, ρpe and ρa are the
initial density of the puff and the ambient, respectively, and g is the gravitational acceleration.
The ejected droplets are characterized by their total number Ne , size distribution Ne (d), droplet
velocity distribution Vde (d) and droplet temperature distribution Tde (d), where d is the diameter of
the droplet. To simplify the theoretical formulation, here we assume the velocity and temperature
of the ejected droplets to depend only on the diameter and show no other variation. As we shall
see in section 4, this assumption is not very restrictive, since the velocity and temperature of the
droplets that remain within the puff very quickly adjust to those of the puff. Both the ejected puff
of air and the detailed distribution of droplets depend on the nature of the exhalation event (i.e.,
5

breathing, talking, coughing or sneezing), and also on the individual.
This is followed by the transport stage, where the initially ejected puff of air and droplets are
transported away from the source. The volume of the puff of air increases due to entrainment
of ambient air. The puff velocity decreases due to both entrainment as well as drag. Since the
temperature and moisture content of the ejected puff of air is typically higher than the ambient,
the puff is also subjected to a vertical buoyancy force, which alters its trajectory from a rectilinear
motion. The exhaled puff is turbulent and both the turbulent velocity fluctuations within the puff
and the mean forward velocity of the puff decay over time.
The time evolution of the puff during the transport stage can then be characterized by the
following quantities: the volume Qp (t), the momentum Mp (t), buoyancy Bp (t) of the ejected puff,
and ρp (t) is the density of air within the puff which changes over time due to entrainment and
evaporation. The trajectory of the puff is defined in term of the distance traveled s(t) and the
angle to the horizontal θ(t) of its current trajectory. Following the work of Bourouiba et al. [13]
we have chosen to describe the puff trajectory in terms of s(t) and θ(t). This information can
be converted to horizontal and vertical positions of the centroid of the puff as a function time.
If we ignore the effects of thermal diffusion and ambient stratification between the puff and the
surrounding air, then the buoyancy of the puff remains a constant as Bp (t) = Bpe . Furthermore, as
will be seen below, the buoyancy effects are quite weak in the early stages when the puff remains
coherent and thus the puff to good approximation can be taken to travel along a straight line path,
as long as other external flow effects are unimportant.
To characterize the time evolution of the virus-laden droplets during the transport stage we
distinguish the droplets that remain within the puff, whose diameter is less than a cutoff (i.e.,
d < dexit ), from the droplets (i.e., d > dexit ) that escape out of the puff. As will be discussed
subsequently in §4, the cutoff droplet size dexit decreases with time - at very early times it decreases
as t−1/4 when the ejection behaves as a jet, then decays as t−1/2 when evolving as a puff and at later
times the cutoff diameter decreases asRt−3/8 . Thus, the total number of droplets that remain within
d
the puff can be estimated as N (t) = 0 exit N (d, t) dd. However, the size distribution of droplets at
any later time, denoted as N (d, t), is not the same as that at ejection. Due to evaporation, size
distribution shifts to smaller diameters over time. We introduce the mapping D(de , t), which gives
the current diameter of a droplet initially ejected as a droplet of diameter de . Then, assuming
well-mixed condition within the puff, the airborne droplet and residue concentration (number per
volume) distribution can be expressed as
φ(d, t) =

N (d, t)
1
=
Ne (D−1 (d, t))
Qp (t)
Qp (t)

for

0 ≤ d ≤ dexit ,

(1)

where the inverse mapping D−1 gives the original ejected diameter of a droplet whose current size is
d. The prefactor 1/Qp (t) accounts for the decrease in concentration due to the enlargement of the
puff over time. In this model the airborne droplets and residue that remain within the coherent puff
are assumed to be in equilibrium with the turbulent flow within the puff. Under this assumption,
the velocity Vd (d, t) and temperature Td (d, t) of the droplets can be estimated with the equilibrium
Eulerian approximation [32, 34].
When the puff’s mean and fluctuating velocities fall below those of the ambient, the puff can
be taken to loose its coherence. Thus, the puff remains coherent and travels farther in a confined
relatively quiescent environment, such as an elevator, class room or aircraft cabin, than in an open
outdoor environment with cross-wind or in a room with strong ventilation. We define a transition
6

time ttr , below which the puff is taken to be coherent and the above described puff-based transport
model applies. For t > ttr , we take the aerosol transport and dilution to be dominated by ambient
turbulent dispersion. Accordingly, this late-time behavior of total number of airborne droplets and
residue and their number density distribution are given by theory of turbulent dispersion. It should
be noted that the value of transition time will depend on both the puff properties as well as the
level of ambient turbulence (see section 4.4).
We now consider the final inhalation stage. Depending on the location of the recipient host
relative to that of the infected host, the recipient may be subjected to either the puff that still
remains coherent, carrying a relatively high concentration of virus-laden droplets or residues, or to
the more dilute dispersion of droplet residues, or aerosols. These factors determine the number and
size distribution of virus-laden airborne droplets and residue the recipient host will be subjected
to. The inhalation cycle of the recipient, along with the use of mask and other protective devices
will then dictate the aerosols that reach sensitive areas of the respiratory tract where infection can
occur. Following the above outlined mathematical framework we will now consider the three stages
of generation, transport and inhalation.

3

Ejection Stage

Knowing the droplet sizes, velocities and ejection angles resulting from an exhalation is the key
first step in the development of a predictive ability for droplet dispersion and evolution. Respiratory
droplet size distributions have been the object of a large number of studies, as reviewed in [39], and
among them, those of Duguid [26] and Loudon & Roberts [69] have received particular scrutiny as
a basis for studies of disease transmission by Nicas, Nazaroff & Hubbard [80]. There are substantial
differences in the methodologies used for quantification of respiratory emission sprays. Few studies
have used common instrumentation that have enough overlap to reconstruct the full distribution of
sizes. For example, there are important gaps in reporting the total volume or duration of air sampling, in addition there are issues in reporting the effective evaporation rates used to back-compute
the initial distribution and in the documentation of assumptions about optical or shape properties
of the droplets being sampled. In addition, sensitivity analyses are often missing regarding the role
of orientation or calibration of sensing instruments with respect to highly variable emissions from
human subjects. Finally, regarding direct high-speed imaging methods [5, 97], the tools for precise
quantification of complex unsteady fragmentation and atomization processes are only now being
developed [16, 110, 112]. There are far fewer studies on the velocities and angles of the droplets
produced by atomizing flows.

3.1

Droplet sizes

The studies of Duguid and Loudon & Roberts have been performed by allowing the exhaled
droplets to impact various sheets or slides, with different procedures being used for droplets smaller
than 20 µm. The size of the stains on the sheets was observed and the original droplet size was
inferred from the size of the stains. To account for the difference between the droplet and the
stain sizes an arbitrary factor is applied and droplets smaller than 10 or 20 microns are processed
differently than larger droplets. The whole process makes the determination of the number of
droplets smaller than 10 microns less reliable. The data are replotted in Fig. 3.

7

Many authors have attempted to fit the data with a log-normal probability distribution function.
In that case, the number of droplets between diameter d and d + dd is Ne (d) dd, and the frequency
of ejected droplet size distribution is given by


B
(ln d − µ̂)2
,
(2)
Log − Normal Distribution : Ne (d) = exp −
d
2σ̂ 2
where dd is a relatively small diameter increment or bin width, B is a normalization constant, µ̂ is
the expected value of ln d, also called the geometric mean and σ̂ is the standard deviation of ln d,
also called the geometric standard deviation (GSD).
On the other hand, there have been also numerous studies of the fragmentation of liquid masses
in various physical configurations other than the exhalation of mucosalivary fluid [38, 97, 108, 111].
These configurations include spray formation on wave crests [106], droplet impacts on solids and
liquids [76], wave impacts on vertical or finite walls/surfaces [60,110,113], and jet atomization [29].
These studies reveal a number of qualitative similarities between the various processes, which can
be best described as a cascade of events. Those events include a primary instability of sheared
layers in high speed air flows [35], and then the non linear growth of the perturbation into thin
liquid sheets. The sheets themselves may be destabilized by two routes, one involving the formation
of Taylor-Culick end rims [21,103], and their subsequent deformation into detaching droplets [110].
The other route to the formation of droplets is the formation of holes in the thin sheets [62, 83, 97].
The holes then expand and form free hanging ligaments which fragment into droplets through the
Rayleigh-Plateau instability [29].
Considering the apparent universality of the process, one may infer that a universal distribution
of droplet sizes may exist. Indeed, the log-normal distribution has often been fitted to experimental
[71] and numerical data on jet formation [47, 65], for droplet impacts on solid surfaces [116], and
for wave impacts on solid walls [116]. The log-normal distribution is frequently suggested for
exhalations [80, 115]. The fit of the numerical results of [65] is shown in Fig. 4. However, this
apparent universality of the log-normal distribution is questionable for several reasons. First,
many other distributions, such as exponential, Poisson, Weibull-Rosin-Rammler, beta, or families
of gamma or compound gamma distributions [61, 107] capture to some extent the complexity of
atomization physics. Second, the geometrical standard deviation (GSD) of the log-normal fits to
the many experimental measurements is relatively small (of the order of 1.2 [65] or 1.8 [71]) while
the wide range of scales in Fig. 3 seems to indicate a much larger GSD. Indeed Nicas, Nazarroff &
Roberts [80] obtain σ̂ ' 8−9. One explanation for the smaller GSD in jet atomization studies, both
numerical and experimental, is that the numerical or optical resolution is limited at the small scales.
Indeed, as grid resolution is increased, the observed GSD also increases [65]. Third, many authors
observe multimodal or bimodal distributions, that can be obtained for example by the superposition
of several physical processes. This would arise in a very simple manner if the Taylor-Culick rim
route produced drops of a markedly different size than the holes-in-film route.
In order to elucidate this discrepancy, we take another look at the fit of the Duguid data in
Fig. 5. We replot the data that was provided in Table 3 of Duguid. Since the data are given as
counts Ni in bins defined by the interval (di , di+1 ), we approximate Ne (d) at collocation points
di+1/2 as Ne (di+1/2 ) = Ni /(di+1 − di ), with di+1/2 = (di+1 + di )/2. We then plot d N (d) in log-log
coordinates in Fig. 5, since if plotted in the variables x = ln d and y = ln[dNe (d)] the distribution
(2) appears as a parabola. When one attempts to fit a parabola between 2 and 50 µm, one obtains
a log-normal distribution with σ̂ = 0.7 and µ̂ = ln(12) (for diameters in microns). However the
8

100000

Duguid cough data
Loudon and Roberts cough data
Pareto B/d2 fit

Frequency Ne(d) (1/microns)

10000
1000
100
10
1
0.1
0.01
0.001

1

10

100

1000

Diameter d (microns)

Figure 3: Frequency of droplet size distribution, replotted from Duguid [26] and Loudon & Roberts
[69]. The Pareto distribution is also plotted.
data above 50 µm are completely outside this distribution. If instead the whole range from 1 to
1000 µm is fit to a log-normal distribution, one obtains a very wide log-normal or alternatively a
Pareto distribution of power 2
Pareto Distribution :

Ne (d) =

B
d2

(3)

In Figs. 3 and 5 we represent the Pareto distribution together with the Duguid and Loudon &
Roberts data. It is especially clear from Fig. 3 that if one does not trust either data at d < 50 µm
then both data sets are well described by the Pareto distribution.
This however does not eliminate the possibility that more data with more statistical power
could show deviations from Pareto, in particular as multimodal distributions. Nevertheless, the
multimodal deviation from the Pareto distribution is difficult to characterize and will not be pursued
in what follows for the sake of simplicity.
It is clear that the Pareto distribution cannot be valid at diameters that are either too large or
too small. The equivalent diameter of the total mass of liquid being atomized is an obvious upper
bound, but it is also very unlikely that droplets with d > h where h is the initial film thickness will
be observed. It is reasonable to put this film thickness on the scale of 1 mm which corresponds to
the upper bound on diameters in the data of Figs. 3 and 5. The lower bound on droplet diameter
is much harder to determine. Exhalations are highly transient, or unsteady, processes involving
complex multiscale geometry [97], and thread breakup is a fractal multiscale process with satellite
9

Ling et al. numerical planar mixing layer droplet counts

count * diameter d N(d)

1

0.1

0.01

0.001

0.0001

numerical data
log normal fit
1

10

100

diameter d (microns)

Figure 4: Count per droplet size, replotted from the numerical simulations of [65]. The y-axis is
the count Ni times the diameter di in bin i. We took di as the center of the bin.

frequency * diameter d Ne(d)

Duguid cough data
log normal fit
Pareto fit Ne = B/d2
Loudon and Roberts cough data
1000

100

10
1

10

100

1000

diameter d (microns)

Figure 5: Fitting the data of Fig. 3 to log-normal and Pareto distributions, in the same coordinates
as Fig. 4. The fit is adequate only up to 50 µm. As a result, only a fraction of the reliable data
fits the log-normal. The Pareto distribution is a reasonable capture of the data in the 10 to 1000
µm range. In the log-log coordinates the log-normal distribution appears as a parabola while the
Pareto distribution is a straight line.

10

droplets [28, 104]. Going down in scale, the fractal process repeats itself as long as continuum
mechanics remains valid, to around 1 nm. This would not be relevant for viral disease propagation
as a lot of the relevant viruses have sizes ranging from O(10 − 100 nm), with an estimated size for
SARS-CoV-2 ranging from 60-120 nm, for example. If the smallest length scale is the thickness at
which the thin liquid sheets will break, then experimental observations in water [83] suggest a scale
of O(100) nm. Other fluids, including biological fluids or biologically contaminated fluids such as
those investigated in [87, 88, 111] may yield different length scales.
Based on the above considerations, we take a histogram of droplet sizes that reads

 B for d < d < d
1
2
Ne (d) = d2
(4)
0 otherwise.
where d1 is set to O(100 nm) and d2 to O(1 mm) for simplicity. The total volume of the droplets is
Qde =

πB 2
πB 2
(d − d21 ) ≈
d .
12 2
12 2

(5)

Since d1 is four orders of magnitude smaller than d2 , the total number of droplets is well approximated by
12Qde 1
Ne =
(6)
π d1 d22
and the cumulative number of droplets f (x) = Ne (d1 ≤ d ≤ x), i.e., the number of droplets with
diameter smaller than x, is very well approximated by


Z x
d1
f (x) =
Ne (d) dd ' Ne 1 −
.
(7)
x
d1
so that f (10d1 )/Ne = 90% of the droplets are of size less that 10 d1 ' 1 µm. In other words,
a numerical majority of the droplets are near the lower diameter bound. On the other hand, a
majority of the volume of fluid is in the larger droplet diameters.

3.2

Droplet velocities and ejections angles

The distribution of velocities and ejection angles has been investigated in the atomization experiments of [23] which follow approximately the geometry of a high speed stream peeling by a gas
layer. These experiments were qualitatively reproduced in the numerical simulations of [66]. To
cite ref. [23], “most of the ejection angles are in the range 0◦ to 40◦ , however it occurs occasionally
that the drops are ejected with angles as high as 60◦ ”.
On the other hand, there are to our knowledge no experimental data on the velocity of droplets,
as they are formed in an atomizing jet, that could be used directly to estimate the ejection speed
of droplets in exhalation. There are however numerical studies [11, 53] in the limit of very large
Reynolds and Weber number. The group velocity of waves formed on a liquid layer below a gas
stream has been estimated by Dimotakis [24] as
Vde ∼



ρp
ρd

1/2

11

vpe ,

(8)

where ρd is droplet density. In [11, 53] it was shown that this was also the vertical velocity of
the interface perturbation. It is thus likely that this velocity plays a role at the end of the first
instability stage of atomization. After this stage, droplets are detached and immersed in a gas
stream of initial ejection velocity vpe . Since the density ratio ρp /ρd is O(10−3 ), we expect the
initial velocity of the ejected droplets at the point of their formation to be small.
As we show below, it is interesting to note that the large Reynolds number limit may apply at
the initial injection stage to a wide range of droplets in the spectrum of sizes found above. Indeed
the ejection Reynolds number of a droplet ejected at a velocity Vde in a surrounding air flow of
velocity vpe is
|Vde − vpe |d
Re e =
,
(9)
νa
where νa is the kinematic viscosity of the ejected puff of air (here taken to be the same as that
of the ambient air). The largest Reynolds number is obtained for the upper bound of d = 1 mm.
For example, if the droplet’s initial velocity is set to Vde ≈ 0, and the air flow velocity in some
experiments [17] is as high as 30 m/s, we can estimate the largest ejection Reynolds number to be
Re e ≈ 2000 and the Reynolds number will stay above unity for droplets down to micron size. But as
the puff of air and the droplets move forward, the droplet Reynolds number rapidly decreases for the
following reasons: (i) as will be seen in section 4.1 the puff velocity decreases due to entrainment
and drag, (ii) as will be seen in section 4.2.1 the droplet diameter will decrease rapidly due to
evaporation, (iii) as will be seen in section 4.2.2 the time scale τV on which the droplet accelerates
to the surrounding fluid velocity of the puff is quite small, and (iv) very large droplets quickly fall
out of the puff and do not form part of airborne droplets. Thus, it can be established that droplets
smaller than 100 µm quickly equilibrate with the puff within the first few cm after exhalation.

4

Transport Stage

This section will consider the evolution of the puff of hot moist air with the droplets after their
initial ejection. First in section 4.1 we will present a simple modified model for the evolution of
the puff of exhaled air, evaluating the effects of drag and the inertia of the droplets within it. This
will enable us, in section 4.2 to discuss the evolution of the droplet size spectrum, velocity and
temperature distributions, with simple first order models. Additionally, section 4.3 will discuss
the effect of non-volatiles on the droplet evolution and the formation of a fully evaporated droplet
residue or aerosol particle. Late-time turbulent dispersion of the virus-laden droplet residues, when
the puff of air within which they are contained stops being a coherent entity, is then addressed in
section 4.4.

4.1

Puff Model

For the puff model we follow the approach of Bourouiba et al. [13], but include the added effects
of drag and the mass of the injected droplets. In addition, a perturbation approach is pursued to
obtain a simple solution with all the added effects included. Fig. 6 shows the evolution of the puff
along with quantities that define the puff [13]. We define t to be the time elapsed from exhalation
and s(t) to be distance traveled by the puff since exhalation. For analytical considerations we define
the virtual origin to be at a distance se from the real source in the backward direction and te to be
the time it takes for the puff to travel from the virtual origin to the real source. We define t0 = t+te
12

to be time from the virtual origin and s0 = s + se to the distance traveled from the virtual origin their introduction simplifies the analysis.
From the theory of jets, plumes, puffs and thermals [105] the volume of the puff exhaled grows
by entrainment. Bourouiba et al. [13] defined the puff to be spheroidal in shape with the transverse
dimension to evolve in a self-similar manner as r0 (t0 ) = αs0 (t0 ), where α is related to entrainment
coefficient. The volume of the puff is then Qp (t0 ) = ηr03 (t0 ) = ηα3 s03 (t0 ) and the projected, or
cross-sectional, area of the puff a(t0 ) = βr02 (t0 ) = βα2 s02 (t0 ), where the constants η and β depend
on the shape of the spheroid. For a spherical puff η = 4π/3 and β = π.
As defined earlier, the ejected puff at the real source (i.e., at t0 = te ) is characterized by the
volume Qpe = ηα3 s3e , momentum Mpe = ρpe Qpe vpe , buoyancy Bpe = Qpe (ρa − ρpe )g and ejection
angle θe . From the assumption of self-similar growth we obtain the virtual origin to be defined as
se =



Qpe
η

1/3

1
α

4/3

and te =

ρpe Qpe
,
(4 + C)αMpe η 1/3

(10)

where the constant C depends on the drag coefficient of the puff and will be defined below. If we
assume a spherical puff with an entrainment factor α = 0.1 [105], the distance se depends only
on the ejected volume. Experimental measurements suggest Qpe to vary over the range 0.00025 to
0.0025 m3 . Accordingly, se can vary from 0.39 to 0.84 m. Similar estimates of te can be obtained
for a spherical puff: as Qpe varies from 0.00025 to 0.0025 m3 and as the ejected velocity varies from
1 to 10 m/s the value of te varies over the range 0.01 to 0.21 s.
The horizontal and vertical momentum balances in dimensional terms are
 0 2
d(Md + Mp ) cos θ
1
ds
= − ρa a CD
cos θ ,
(11)
dt0
2
dt0
d(Md + Mp ) sin θ
1
= Bpe − ρa a CD
dt0
2



ds0
dt0

2

sin θ .

(12)

In the above CD is the drag coefficient of the puff and Md is the momentum of droplets within the
puff. While the puff velocity decreases rapidly over time, the velocity of the larger droplets will
change slowly. Note that in the analysis to follow we take the velocity of those droplets that remain
within the puff to be the same as the puff velocity.
We use se and te as the length and time scales to define nondimensional quantities: s̃ = s0 /se
and t̃ = t0 /te . With this definition the virtual origin becomes t̃ = 0 and s̃ = 0 and the real
source becomes t̃ = 1 and s̃ = 1. In terms of non-dimensional quantities the governing momentum
equations can be rewritten as
d
dt̃
d
dt̃




 2
ds̃ 1 ds̃4
2 ds̃
rm
+
cos θ = −C s̃
cos θ ,
dt̃ 4 dt̃
dt̃




 2
ds̃ 1 ds̃4
2 ds̃
rm
+
sin θ = A − C s̃
sin θ .
dt̃ 4 dt̃
dt̃

(13)

(14)

There are three nondimensional parameters: mass ratio of the initial ejected droplets to the initial
air puff: rm = ρd Qde /(ρp Qpe ); the scaled drag coefficient: C = CD β/(2ηα); and the buoyancy
parameter: A = Bpe t2e /(ρpe Qpe se ). In the above equations, rm is defined in terms of the mass of
13

Figure 6: Evolution of a typical cloud of respiratory multiphase turbulent droplet-laden air following
breathing, talking, coughing and sneezing activities. Image adapted from [13].
the initial ejected droplets. This is an approximation since some of the droplets exit the puff over
time. Even though the droplet mass decreases due to evaporation, the associated momentum is
not lost from the system since it remains within the puff. In any case, soon it will be shown that
the value of rm is small and the role of ejected droplets on the momentum balance is negligible. It
should also be noted that under Boussinesq approximation the small difference in density between
the puff and that the ambient is important only in the buoyancy term. For all other purposes
the two will be taken to be the same and as a result the time variation of puff density is not of
importance (i.e., ρp = ρpe = ρa ).
The importance of inertia of the ejected droplets, drag on the puff and buoyancy effects can now
be evaluated in terms of the magnitude of the nondimensional parameters. Typical experimental
measurements of breathing, talking, coughing and sneezing indicate that the value of rm is smaller
than 0.1 and often much smaller. Furthermore, as droplets fall out continuously [13] from the
turbulent puff, this ratio changes over time. Here we will obtain an upper bound on the inertial
effect of injected droplets by taking the value of rm to be 0.1.
The drag coefficient of a spherical puff of air is also typically small - again as an upper bound we
take CD = 0.1, which yields C = 0.375 for a spherical puff. The value of the buoyancy parameter
A depends on the density difference between the ejected puff of air and the ambient, which in turn
depends on the temperature difference. For the entire range of ejected volumes and velocities, the
value of A comes to be smaller than 0.01, for temperature differences of the order of ten to twenty
degrees between the exhaled puff and the ambient.
Since all three parameters rm , C and A can be considered as small perturbations, the governing
equations can be readily solved in their absence to obtain the following classical expressions for the
nondimensional puff location and puff velocity:
when (rm = C = A = 0) :

s̃(t̃) = t̃1/4

and ṽ(t̃) =

ds̃
1
= t̃−3/4 .
4
dt̃

(15)

With the inclusion of the drag term the governing equations become nonlinear. Nevertheless, they
allow a simple exact solution which can be expressed as
when (rm = A = 0) :
14

s̃(t̃) = t̃1/(4+C) .

(16)

Thus, as to be expected, the forward propagation of the puff slows down with increasing nondimensional drag parameter C. For small values of C the above can be expanded in Taylor series
as
C
C2
when (rm = A = 0) : s̃4 (t̃) = t̃ − t̃ ln(t̃) +
t̃(2 ln(t̃) + ln(t̃)2 ) + O(C 3 ) .
(17)
4
32
A comparison of the exact solution with the above asymptotic expansion shows its adequacy for
small values of C.
For small non-zero values of rm , C and A, the governing equations can be solved using regular
perturbation. The result can be expressed as
s̃4 (t̃) = t̃ −

C
C2
A sin θe
t̃ ln(t̃) +
t̃(2 ln(t̃) + ln(t̃)2 ) + 4rm (1 − t̃1/4 ) −
(1 − t̃)2
4
32
2

(18)

2 , A2 ). Although the effect of buoyancy is to curve
and the above expression is accurate to O(C 3 , rm
the trajectory of the puff, the leading order effect of buoyancy is to only alter the speed of rectilinear
motion. Also, as expected, the effect of non-zero rm is to add to the total inertia and thereby slow
down the motion of the puff. On the other hand, the effect of buoyancy is to slow down if the
initial ejection is angled down (i.e., if θe < 0) and to speed up if the ejection is angled up, provided
the ejected puff is warmer than the ambient.
The time evolution of the puff as predicted by the above analytical expression is shown in
Fig. 7. Note that the point of ejection is given by t̃ = 1, s̃ = 1, and the initial non-dimensional
velocity ṽ(t̃ = 1) = 1/4. The results for four different combinations of C and rm are shown. The
buoyancy parameter has very little effect on the results and therefore is not shown. It should be
noted that at late stages when the puff velocity slows down the effect of buoyancy can start to play
a role as indicated in experiments and simulations. It can be seen that the effect of inertia of the
ejected droplets, even with the upper bound of holding their mass constant at the initial value, has
negligible effect. Only the drag on the puff has a significant effect in reducing the distance traveled
by the puff. It can then be taken that the puff evolution to good accuracy can be represented
by (16). Over a time span of 10 nondimensional units the puff has traveled about 0.7se and the
velocity has dropped to about 15% of the initial velocity. By 100 nondimensional units the puff
has traveled about 1.75se and the velocity has dropped to about 2.5% of the initial velocity.

4.2

Droplet Evolution

The ejected droplets are made of a complex fluid that is essentially a mixture of oral fluids,
including secretions from both the major and minor salivary glands. In addition, it is added up with
several constituents of non-salivary origin, such as gingival crevicular fluid, exhalted bronchial and
nasal secretions, serum and blood derivatives from oral wounds, bacteria and bacterial products,
viruses and fungi, desquamated epithelial cells, other cellular components, and food debris [54].
Therefore, it is not easy to determine precisely transport properties of the droplet fluid. Although
surface tension is measured similar to that of water, viscosity can be one or two orders of magnitude
larger [37] making drops less coalescence prone [92,93]. In the present context, viscosity and surface
tension might be of importance, because they can influence droplet size distribution specifically by
controlling coalescence and breakage. These processes are important only during the ejection stage,
and once droplets are in the range below 50 µm, coalescence and break up processes are impeded,
allowing us to model drops as single, non-interacting small spheres.
15

Figure 7: (a) Time evolution of a nondimensional puff distance s̃ for different combinations of C
and rm . Note that at the source of ejection s̃(t̃ = 1) = 1. (b) Time evolution of puff velocity ṽp
scale by the initial velocity ṽpe = 1/4 plotted on log scale. Thus, y − axis reaching a value of -1
corresponding to a puff velocity of ten times smaller than the initial velocity at ejection.
The ejected swarm of droplets is characterized by its initial size spectrum as given in (4).
The time evolution of the spectrum of droplets that remain within the puff in terms of droplet
size, velocity and temperature is the object of interest in this section. This evolution of the ejected
droplets depend on the following four important parameters: the time scale τV on which the droplet
velocity relaxes to the puff fluid velocity (in the absence of other forcing), the time scale τT on which
the droplet temperature relaxes to the puff fluid temperature, the settling velocity W of the droplet
within the puff fluid, and the Reynolds number Re based on settling velocity. These quantities are
given by [9, 63, 64]
τV =

ρd2
,
18νp Φ

τT =

ρd2 Cr
,
6κp N u

W = τV g

and

Re =

Wd
,
νp

(19)

where ρ ≈ 1000 is the droplet-to-air density ratio, Cr ≈ 4.16 is the droplet-to-air specific heat ratio,
g is acceleration due to gravity, νp and κp are the kinematic viscosity and thermal diffusivity of
the puff. In the above, Φ = 1 + 0.15Re 0.687 and N u = 2 + 0.6Re 1/2 P r1/3 are the finite Reynolds
number drag and heat transfer correction factors; both of which simplify in the Stokes regime for
drops smaller than about 50 µm. Here we take the Prandtl number of air to be P r = 0.72. In the
Stokes limit, the velocity and thermal time scales, and the settling velocity of the droplet increase
as d2 , while Reynolds number scales as d3 . The value of these four parameters for varying droplet
16

sizes is presented in Fig. 8, where it is clear that the effect of finite Re becomes important only for
droplets larger than 50 µm. For smaller droplets τV , τT  1(s), W  1(m/s), and Re  1.

Figure 8: Dependence of velocity time scale τV , thermal time scale τT , still fluid settling velocity
W and Reynolds number of a settling droplet Re as a function of droplet diameter.

4.2.1

Droplet Size Controlled by Evaporation

The size of the droplets under investigation is sufficiently small, and the swarm is dilute to
prevent their coalescence, and the only way in which droplets change their size is via evaporation.
According to the analysis of Langmuir [58], the rate of mass loss due to evaporation of a small sphere
depends on the diffusion of the vapor layer away from the sphere surface, and under reasonable
hypotheses [18, 58, 86, 95], it can be expressed as :
dm
= πdDρp N u ln(1 + Bm ),
(20)
dt
where, m is the mass of a droplet of diameter d, D is the diffusion coefficient of the vapor, ρp is
the density of puff air and Bm = (Yd − Yp )/(1 − Ys ) is the Spalding mass number, where Yd is
mass fraction of water vapor at the droplet surface and Yp is mass fraction of water vapor in the
surrounding puff. Under the assumption that N u and Bm are nearly constant for small droplets,
the above equation can be integrated to obtain the following law (mapping) for the evolution of
the droplet:
p
d(t) = D(de , t) = d2e − k 0 t,
(21)
−

where de is the initial droplet diameter at ejection and k 0 = 4DN u ln(1 + Bm )/ρ has units of m2 /s
and thus represent an effective evaporative diffusivity. It is important to observe that (20) would
predict a loss of mass per unit area tending to infinity as the diameter of the drop tends to zero.
This implies that the droplet diameter goes to zero in a finite time and we establish the result
√
de,evap ∼ k 0 t ,
(22)
17

which for any time t yields a critical value of droplet diameter, and all droplets that were smaller,
or equal, at exhalation (i.e., de ≤ de,evap ) would have fully evaporated by t. The only parameter is
k 0 . Assuming N u = 2 and D = 2.8 × 10−5 m2 /s, even for very small values of Bm , we obtain the
evaporation time for a 10 µm droplet to be less than a second. However, it appears that smaller
than a certain critical size, the loss of mass due to evaporation slows down [18]. This could partly be
due to the presence of non-volatiles and other particulate matter within the droplet, whose effects
were ignored in the above analysis, and will be addressed in section 4.3. It seems that (20) can
give reliable predictions for droplet diameter down to few µm with much slower evaporation rates
for smaller size. Irrespective of whether water completely evaporates leaving only the non-volatile
droplet residue, or the droplet evaporation slows down, the important consequence on the evolution
of the droplet size distribution is that it is narrower and potentially centered around micron size.
4.2.2

Droplet Motion

We now consider the motion of the ejected droplets, while they rapidly evaporate. The equation
of motion of the droplet is the Newton’s law
m

Vd
dV
Vd − v p ) ,
= −g(m − mp )eez − 3πρp νp d Φ (V
dt

(23)

where e z is the unit vector along the vertical direction, mp is the mass of puff displaced by the
droplet, V d and v p are the vector velocity of the droplet and the surrounding puff. Provided the
droplet time scale τV is smaller than the time scale of surrounding flow, which is the case for
droplets of diameter smaller than 50 µm, the above ODE can be perturbatively solved to obtain
the following leading order solution [8, 32, 33]
V d (t) = v p (t) − W e z − τV

dvvp
.
dt

(24)

According to the above equation, the equilibrium Eulerian velocity of the droplet depends on the
local fluid velocity plus the still fluid settling velocity W of the droplet plus the third term that
arises due to the inertia of the droplet. Though at ejection the droplet speed is smaller than the
surrounding gas velocity, as argued in section 3.2, the droplets quickly accelerate to approach the
puff velocity. In fact, since the puff is decelerating (i.e. |dvvp /dt| < 0), the droplet velocity will soon
be larger than the local fluid velocity. As long as the droplet stays within the puff, the velocity and
acceleration of the surrounding fluid can be approximated by those of the puff as |vvp | = ds/dt and
|dvvp /dt| = d2 s/dt2 . This allows evaluation of the relative importance of the third term (inertial
slip velocity) in terms of the puff motion, which is given in (16) as [63]


τV |dvvp /dt|
3 + C τV 1
=
.
(25)
|vvp |
4 + C te t̃
This ratio takes its largest value at the initial time of injection and then decays as 1/t̃. Using the
range of possible values of te given earlier, this ratio is small for a wide range of initial droplet
sizes. We thus confirm that for the most part droplet inertia can be ignored in its motion, and the
droplet velocity can be taken to be simply the sum of local fluid velocity and the still fluid settling
velocity of the droplet.

18

4.2.3

Droplet Exit From the Puff

While the effect of buoyancy on the puff was shown to be small, the same cannot be said of the
droplets. The vertical motion of a droplet with respect to the surrounding puff, due to its higher
density, is dependent only on the fall velocity W , which scales as d2 , which in turn decreases as
given in (21) due to evaporation. The droplet’s gravitational settling velocity can be integrated
over time to obtain the distance over which it falls as a function of time. We now set this fall
distance (left hand side) equal to the puff radius (right hand side) to obtain
ρg
18νa





t + te 1/(4+C)
1
d2e,exit t − k 0 t2 = αse
,
2
te

(26)

where we have set the droplet diameter at exhalation to be de,exit , indicating the fact that a droplet
of initial diameter equal to de,exit has fallen by a distance equal to the puff size at time t. Thus
all larger droplets of size de > de,exit have fallen out of the puff by t and we have been referring to
these as the exited droplets.
The two critical initial droplet diameters, de,evap and de,exit are plotted in Fig. 9a as a function of
t. The only other key parameter of importance is k 0 whose value is varied from 10−12 to 10−6 m2 /s.
In evaluating de,exit using (26), apart from the property values of water and air, we have used the
nominal values of α = 0.1, se = 0.5 m and te = 0.05 s (as an example). The solid lines correspond
to de,exit , which decreases with increasing t and for each value of k 0 there exits a minimum de below
which there is no solution to (26) since the droplet fully evaporates before falling out of the puff.
The dotted lines correspond to de,evap , which increases with t. The intersection of the two curves
is marked by the solid square, which corresponds to the limiting time tlim (k 0 ), beyond which the
puff contains only fully-evaporated droplet residues containing the viruses. Correspondingly we
can define a limiting droplet diameter de,lim (k 0 ). Given sufficient time, all initially ejected larger
droplets (i.e., de > de,lim ) would have fallen out of the puff and all smaller droplets (i.e., de ≤ de,lim )
would have evaporated to become droplet residues.
At times smaller than the limiting time (i.e., for t < tlim ) we have the interesting situation of
some droplets falling out of the puff (exited droplets), some still remaining as partially evaporated
airborne droplets, and some fully-evaporated to become droplet residues. This scenario is depicted
in Fig. 9a with an example of t = 3 s for k 0 = 10−10 m2 /s plotted as a dash line.

4.3

Effect of Non-Volatiles

There can be significant presence of non-volatile material such as mucus, bacteria and bacterial
products, viruses and fungi, and food debris in the ejected droplets [54]. However, the fraction of
ejected droplet volume Qde that is made up of these non-volatiles varies substantially from person to
person. The presence of non-volatiles alters the analysis of the previous sections in two significant
ways. First, each ejected droplet, as it evaporates, will reach a final size that is dictated by the
amount of non-volatiles that were initially in it. The larger the droplet size at initial ejection, the
larger will be its final size after evaporation, since it contains a larger amount of non-volatiles. If
ψ is the volume fraction of non-volatiles in the initial droplet, the final diameter of the droplet
residue after complete evaporation of volatile matter (i.e., water) will be
ddr = de ψ 1/3 .

19

(27)

Figure 9: (a) Variation of de,evap as a function of t plotted as dotted lines and variation of de,exit
as a function of t plotted as solid lines. The results for different values of k 0 are shown in different
colors. Note for k 0 → 0 it takes infinite time for droplet evaporation. The solid square symbols
denote the limiting droplet size de,lim below which evaporation dominates and above which settling
effect dominates. The corresponding time tlim is important since beyond this time all the droplets
of initial diameter greater than de,lim have fallen out of the puff and all the droplets below this
size that remain within the puff are fully-evaporated droplet residues. For any time t < tlim , we
can identify a de,evap (marked by the * for t = 0.1 s and k 0 = 10−8 m2 /s) below which all droplets
have become residues, and a de,exit (marked by solid diamond) above which all droplets have fallen
out of the puff. All ejected droplets of intermediate initial size (i.e., de,evap < de < de,exit ) remain
within the puff partially evaporated. (b) Variation of de,lim and tlim as a function of k 0 .
This size depends on the initial droplet size and composition. Note that even a small, for example
1%, non-volatile composition results in ddr being around 20% of the initial ejected droplet size. It
has also been noted that the evaporation of water can be partial, depending on local conditions in
the cloud or environment. We simply assume the fraction ψ to also account for any residual water
retained within the droplet residue.
The second important effect of non-volatile is to reduce the rate of evaporation. As evaporation
occurs at the droplet surface, a fraction of the surface will be occupied by the non-volatiles reducing
the rate of evaporation. For small values of ψ, the effect of non-volatiles is quite small only at the
beginning. The effect of non-volatiles will increase over time, since the volume fraction of nonvolatiles increases as the volatile matter evaporates. Because of this ever decreasing evaporation
rate, it may take longer for a droplet to decrease from its ejection diameter of de to its final droplet
residue diameter of ddr , than what is predicted by (21). It should be noted that intermittency of
turbulence and heterogeneity of vapor concentration and droplet distribution within the puff will
influence the evaporation rate [27, 30, 74]. Nevertheless, for simplicity, and for the purposes of the
present first order mathematical framework, we use the d2 -law given in (21), but with a smaller
value of effective k 0 to account for the effect of non-volatiles and turbulence intermittency. This
approximation is likely to be quite accurate in describing the early evolution of the droplet. Only
at late stages as the droplet approaches its final diameter ddr , the d2 -law will be in significant error.
20

Applying the analysis of the previous sections, taking into account the presence of non-volatiles,
we separate the two different time regimes of t ≤ tlim and t ≥ tlim . In the case when t ≤ tlim , we
have three types of droplets: (i) exited droplets whose initial size at injection is greater than de,exit ,
(ii) droplets of size at ejection smaller than de,evap that have completely evaporated to become
droplet residues of size ddr and (iii) intermediate size airborne droplets that are within the puff
and still undergoing evaporation. We assume an equation of the form (26) to approximately apply
even in the presence of non-volatiles. With this balance between fall distance of a droplet and the
puff radius we obtain the following expression
de,exit

"

18νa αse
=
ρg t



t + te
te

1/(4+C)

#1/2
1 0
+ kt
.
2

(28)

The corresponding limiting diameter of complete evaporation can be obtained from setting d =
de,evap ψ 1/3 and de = de,evap in (21) as
s
k0 t
de,evap =
.
(29)
1 − ψ 2/3
While the above two estimates are in terms of the droplet diameter at injection, their current
diameter at t can be expressed as
devap = de,evap ψ 1/3

and d2exit = d2e,exit − k 0 t .

(30)

Form the above expressions, we define tlim to be the time when de,exit = de,evap , which in terms
of current droplet diameter becomes dexit = devap . Beyond this limiting time (i.e., for t > tlim )
the droplets can be separated into only two types: (i) exited droplets whose initial size at injection
greater than de,exit = de,evap , and (ii) droplets of size at ejection smaller that have become droplet
residues. The variation of tlim and de,lim as a function of k 0 is presented in Fig. 9b. It is clear that
as k 0 varies over a wide range, tlim ranges from 0.01 s to 450 s, and correspondingly de,lim varies
from 415 to 7 µm.
4.3.1

Droplet Size Spectrum Within the Puff

We now put together all the above arguments to present a predictive model of the droplet
concentration within the puff. The initial condition for the size distribution is set by the ejection
process discussed in Section 3, and the simple Pareto distribution given in (4) provides an accurate
description. Based on the analysis of the previous sections, we separate the two different time
regimes of t ≤ tlim and t ≥ tlim .
In the case when t ≤ tlim the droplet/aerosol concentration (or the number per unit volume of
the puff) can be expressed as

1


Ne (dψ −1/3 )
for d ≤ devap


 Q(t)


√
1
If t ≤ tlim : φ(d, t) =
(31)
Ne
d2 + k 0 t
for devap ≤ d ≤ dexit ,


Q(t)


0
for d ≥ dexit
21

where we have recognized the fact that equation (21) is the mapping D between the current droplet
size and its size at injection. Due to the turbulent nature of the puff, the distribution of airborne
droplets and residues is taken to be uniform within the puff. Quantities such as s̃, devap and dexit
are as they have been defined above and the pre-factor 1/Q(t) accounts for the expansion of the
puff volume. In the case of t ≥ tlim , the droplet number density spectrum becomes

 1 Ne (dψ −1/3 ) for d ≤ d
lim
If t ≥ tlim : φ(d, t) = Q(t)
,
(32)

0
for d ≥ dlim

and only droplet residues remain within the puff. Here, the size of the largest droplet residue within
the puff is related to its initial unevaporated droplet size as dlim = de,lim ψ 1/3 , and the plot of de,lim
as a function of k 0 for a specific example case of puff and droplet ejection was shown in Fig. 9b.
4.3.2

Droplet Temperature

In this subsection we will briefly consider droplet temperature, since it plays a role in determining saturation vapor pressure and the value of k 0 . Following Pirhadi et al. [86] we write the
thermal equation of the droplet as
mCpw

dTd
ln(1 + Bm )
dm
= πkp d N u
(Tp − Td ) + L
,
dt
Bm
dt

(33)

where Cpw is specific heat of water, kp is thermal conductivity of the puff air, L is the latent heat
of vaporization, Td and Tp are the temperatures of the droplet and the surrounding puff. The first
term on the right accounts for convective heat transfer from the surrounding air and the second
term accounts for heat needed for phase change during evaporation.
It can be readily established that the major portion of heat required for droplet evaporation
must come from the surrounding air through convective heat transfer. The equilibrium Eulerian
approach [32] can again be used to obtain the asymptotic solution of the above thermal equation
and the droplet temperature can be explicitly written as
Td (t) ≈ Tp (t) +

dTp
Bm
L
Bm
dm
− τT
,
πkp d N u ln(1 + Bm ) dt
ln(1 + Bm ) dt

(34)

where τT is the thermal time scale of the droplet that was introduced earlier. The second term
on the right is negative and thus contributes to the droplet temperature being lower than the
surrounding puff. Simple calculation with typical values shows that the contribution of the third
term is quite small and can be ignored. As a result, the temperature difference between the droplet
and the surrounding is largely controlled by the evaporation rate dm/dt, which decreases over time.
Again, using the properties of water and air, and typical values for N u and Bm , we can evaluate
the temperature difference Tp − Td to be typically a few degrees. Thus, the evaporating droplets
need to be only a few degrees cooler than the surrounding puff for evaporation to continue.

4.4

Late-Time Turbulent Dispersion

When the puff equilibrates with the surrounding and its velocity falls below the ambient turbulent velocity fluctuation, the subsequent dynamics of the droplet cloud is governed by turbulent
22

dispersion. This late-time evolution of the droplet cloud depends on many factors that characterize
the surrounding air. This is where the difference between a small enclosed environment such as
an elevator or an aircraft cabin or an open field matters, along with factors such as cross breeze
and ventilation. A universal analysis of late-time evolution of the droplet residue cloud is thus
not possible, due to problem-specific details. The purpose of this brief discussion is to establish a
simple scaling relation to guide when the puff evolution model presented in the above sections gives
way to advection and dispersion by ambient turbulence. It should again be emphasized that the
temperature difference between the puff fluid containing the droplet residue cloud and the ambient
air may induce buoyancy effects, which for model simplicity will be taken into account as part of
turbulent dispersion.
We adopt the classical scaling analysis of Richardson [91], according to which the radius of a
droplet cloud, in the inertial range, will increase as the 3/2 power of time as given by
rlt2 (t) = c0  (t + t0 )3 ,

(35)

where c0 is a constant,  is the dissipation rate, which will be taken to be a constant property of
ambient turbulence, and t0 is the time shift required to match the cloud size at the transition time
between the above simple late time model and the puff model. In the above, the subscript lt stands
for late-time behavior of the radius of the droplet-laden cloud. We now make a simple proposal
that there exists a transition time ttr , below which the rate of expansion of the puff as given by
the puff model is larger than drlt /dt computed from the above expression. During this early time,
ambient dispersion effects can be ignored in favor of the puff model. But for t > ttr droplet-laden
cloud’s ambient dispersion becomes the dominant effect.
The constants t0 and ttr can be obtained by satisfying the two conditions: (i) the size of the
droplet-laden cloud given by (35) at ttr matches the puff radius at that time given by αse ((ttr +
te )/te )1/(4+C) , and (ii) the rate of expansion of the droplet-laden cloud by turbulent dispersion
matches the rate of puff growth given by the puff model. This latter condition can be expressed as
3+C
3√ 0
αse
1
c (ttr + t0 )1/2 =
(ttr + te )− 4+C .
1/(4+C)
2
(4 + C) te

(36)

From these two simple conditions we obtain the final expression for the transition time as

ttr =

2/3
2α2/3 se
3(4 + C)(c0 )1/3

! 3(4+C)

(10+3C)

1
2/(10+3C)
te

− te .

(37)

Given a puff, characterized by its initial ejection length and time scales se and te , and the ambient
level of turbulence characterized by , the value of transition time can be estimated. If we take
entrainment coefficient α = 0.1, the constant C = 0, and typical values of se = 0.5 m and te = 0.05 s,
we can estimate ttr = 1.88 s for a dissipation rate of c0  = 10−5 m2 /s3 . The transition time ttr
increases (or decreases) slowly with decreasing (or increasing) dissipation rate. Thus, the early
phase of droplet evaporation described by the puff model is valid for O(1) s, before being taken
over by ambient turbulent dispersion.
However, it must be stressed that the scaling relation of Richardson is likely an over-estimation
of ambient dispersion, as there are experimental and computational evidences that suggest that
the power-law exponent in (35) is lower than 3 [82]. But it must be remarked that even with
23

corresponding changes to late-time turbulent dispersion, the impact on transition time can be
estimated to be not very large. Also, it must be cautioned that according to classical turbulent
dispersion theory, during this late-time dispersal, the concentration of virus-laden droplet residues
within the cloud will not be uniform, but will tend to decay from the central region to the periphery.
Nevertheless, for sake of simplicity here we assume (35) to apply and we take the droplet residue
distribution to be uniform.
According to above simple hypothesis, the effect of late-time turbulent dispersion on number
density spectrum is primarily due to the expansion of the could, while the total number of droplet
residues within the cloud remains the same. Thus, the expressions (31) and (32) still apply. However
the expression for the volume of the cloud must be appropriately modified as


3/(4+C)

 3 3 t + te
ηα se
for t ≤ ttr
Q̃(t) =
(38)
te

η(c0 )3/2 (t + t )9/2
for t ≥ ttr .
0

The location of the center of the expanding cloud of droplets can be still taken to be given by the
puff trajectory s(t), which has considerably slowed down during late-time dispersal. The strength
of the above model is in its theoretical foundation and analytical simplicity. But, the validity of
the approximations and simplifications must be verified in applications to specific scenario being
considered. For example, considering variability in composition, turbulence intermittency, initial
conditions of emissions and the state of the ambient, direct observations show that the transition
between puff dominated and ambient flow dominated fate of respiratory droplets vary from O(1-100
s) [17].

5

Inhalation Stage

This section will mainly survey the existing literature on issues pertaining to what fraction
of the droplets and aerosols at any location gets inhaled by the recipient host, and how this is
modified by the use of masks. These effects modeled as inhalation and filtration efficiencies will
then be incorporated into the puff-cloud model. The pulmonary ventilation (breathing) has a
cyclic variation that varies markedly with age and metabolic activities. The intensity of breathing
(minute ventilation) is expressed in L/min of inhaled and exhaled air. For the rest condition, the
ventilation rate is about 5-8 L/min and increases to about 10-15 L/min for mild activities. During
exercise, ventilation increases significantly depending on age and metabolic needs of the activity.
In the majority of earlier studies on airflow and particle transport and deposition in human
airways, the transient nature of breathing was ignored for simplification and to reduce the computational cost. Haubermann et al. [45] performed experiments on a nasal cast and found that
particle deposition for constant airflow is higher than those for cyclic breathing. Shi et al. [98]
performed simulations on nanoparticle depositions in the nasal cavity under cyclic airflow and
found that the effects of transient flow are important. Grgic et al. [40] and Horschler et al. [48]
performed experimental and numerical studies, respectively, on flow and particle deposition in a
human mouth-throat model, and the human nasal cavity. Particle deposition in a nasal cavity
under cyclic breathing condition was investigated by Bahmanzadeh et al. [7], Naseri et al. [78], and
Kiasadegh et al. [56], where the unsteady Lagrangian particle tracking was used. They found there
are differences in the predicted local deposition for unsteady and equivalent steady flow simulations.
24

In many of these studies, a sinusoidal variation for the volume of air inhaled is used. That is
Qin = Qmax sin(2πt/T ) .

(39)

Here Qmax is the maximum flow rate, and T = 4 s is the period of breathing cycle for an adult
during rest or mild activity. The period of breathing also changes with age and the level of activity.
Haghnegahdar et al. [42] investigated the transport, deposition, and the immune system response
of the low-strain Influenza A Virus IAV laden droplets. They noted that the shape of the cyclic
breathing is subject dependent and also changes with nose and mouth breathing. They provided an
eight-term Fourier series for a more accurate descriptions of the breathing cycle. The hygroscopic
growth of droplets was also included in their study.
Analysis of aspiration of particles through the human nose was studied by Ogden and Birkett [81]
and Armbruster and Breuer [2]. Accordingly, the aspiration efficiency ηa is defined as the ratio of
the concentration of inhaled particles to the ambient concentration. Using the results of earlier
studies and also his works, Vincent [109] proposed a correlation for evaluating the inhalability of
particles. That is, the aspiration efficiency ηa of particles smaller than 100 µm is given as,
ηa = 0.5 [1 + exp(−0.06d)]

for d < 100 µm

(40)

Here, d is an aerodynamic diameter of particles. While the above correlation provides the general
trend that larger particles are more difficult to inhale, it has a number of limitations. It was
developed for mouth-breathing with the head oriented towards the airflow direction with speeds in
the range of 1 m/s to 4 m/s. The experimental investigation of aerosol inhalability was reported
by Hsu and Swift [49], Su and Vincent [101, 102], Aitken et al. [1], and Kennedy and Hinds [55].
Dai et al. [22] performed in-vivo measurements of inhalability of large aerosol particles in calm air
and fitted their data to several correlations. For calm air condition, they suggested,
(
4.57 + 1.06(log d)2 − 4.40 log(d) For rest condition ,
ηa =
(41)
4.16 + 0.97(log d)2 − 4.10 log(d) For moderate exercise .
Computational modeling of inhalability of aerosol particles were reported by many researchers
[19, 51, 52, 57, 75, 78]. Interpersonal exposure was studied by [36, 46]. The influence of thermal
plume was studied by Salmanzadeh et al. [94]. Nasiri et al. [77] performed a series of computational
modeling and analyzed the influence of the thermal plume on particle aspiration efficiency when the
body temperature is higher or lower than the ambient. Their results are reproduced in Figure 10.
Here the case that the body temperature Tb = 26.6 ◦ C and the ambient temperature Ta = 21.3 ◦ C
(Upward Thermal Plume) and the case that Tb = 32.2 ◦ C and Ta = 40.0 ◦ C (Downward Thermal
Plume) are compared with the isothermal case studied by Dai et al. [22]. It is seen that when
the body is warmer than the surrounding, the aspiration ratio increases. When the ambient air
is at a higher temperature than the body, the inhalability decreases compared to the isothermal
case. In light of the results of the previous section it can be concluded that at a distance of O(1) m
the ejected droplets have sufficiently reduced in size that these O(1) µm aerosols have near perfect
inhalability. However, recall that this estimation must be adjusted to account for the possible
slow down of evaporation due to variability in the initial conditions of emissions and the ambient,
intermittency of cloud turbulence and drop concentration. Thus, the above conclusion represents
a lower bound of timescale and distance of transition to fully evaporated droplet residues from the
cloud model [17].
25

Figure 10: Influence of thermal plume on aspiration efficiency [78].

Figure 11: Filtration efficiency of different respiratory masks under normal breathing conditions
[31, 118].

26

5.1

Respiratory Face Masks

Using a respiratory face mask is a practical approach against exposure to airborne viruses and
other pollutants. Among the available facepiece respirators, N95, and surgical masks are considered
to be highly effective [41, 68]. N95 mask has a filtration efficiency of more than 95% in the absence
of face leakage [79,89]. Surgical masks are used extensively in the hospital and operating rooms [67].
Nevertheless, there have been concerns regarding their effective filtration of airborne bacteria and
viruses [10, 59, 68]. There is often discomfort in wearing respiratory masks for extended durations
that increases the risk of spread of infection. The breathing resistance of a mask is directly related
to the pressure drop of the filtering material. The efficiency of respiratory masks varies with several
factors, including the intensity and frequency of breathing as well as the particle size [119]. The
filtration efficiencies of different masks under normal breathing conditions, as reported by Zhang
et al. [118] and Feng et al. [31], are shown in Figure 11. It is seen that the filtration efficiencies of
different masks vary significantly, with N95 having the best performance, which is followed by the
surgical mask. It is also seen that all masks could capture large particles. The N95, Surgical, and
Procedure masks remove aerosols larger than a couple of microns. Cotton and Gauze masks capture
a major fraction of particles larger than 10 µm. The capture efficiency of all masks also shows an
increasing trend as particle size becomes smaller than 30 nm due to the effect of the Brownian
motion of nanoparticles. Figure 11 also shows that the filtration efficiencies of all respiratory masks
drop for the particle sizes in the range of 80 nm to about 1 µm. This is because, in this size range,
both the inertia impaction and the Brownian diffusion effect are small, and the mask capture
efficiency reduces. Based on these results, and the earlier finding that most ejected droplets within
the cloud have become sub-micron-sized aerosol particles by about O(1 − 10) m distance, it can be
stated that only professional masks such as N95, Surgical, and Procedure masks provide reliable
reduction in the inhaled particles. Hence, the importance for healthcare workers to have access to
high-grade respirators upon entering a room or space with infectious patients [17].
It should be emphasize that the concentration that a receiving host will inhale (φinhaled ) depends
on the local concentration in the breathing zone adjusted by the aspiration efficiency given by
Equations (40) and (41) (or plotted in Figure 9). When the receiving host wears a mask, an
additional important correction is needed by multiplying by a factor (1 − ηf ), where ηf is the
filtration efficiency plotted in Figure 9. That is,
φinhaled (d, t) = φ(d, t) ηa (1 − ηf ) ,

(42)

where φ(d, t) is the droplet residue concentration at the breathing zone given in (31) or (32). It is
seen that the concentration of inhaled droplet larger than 10 microns significantly decreases when
the mask is used. But the exposure to smaller droplets, particularly, in the size range of 100 nm
to 1 µm varies with the kind of mask used.

6

Discussion on Current Assumptions and Sample Analysis

The object of this section is to put together the different models of the puff and droplet evolution
described in the previous sections, underline their simplifications, and demonstrate their ability
to make useful prediction. Such results under varying scenarios can then be potentially used
for science-based policy making, such as establishing multi-layered social distancing guidelines
and other safety measures. In particular, we aim at modeling the evolution of the puff and the
27

concentration of airborne droplets and residues that remain within the cloud so that the probability
of potential transmission can be estimated.
As discussed in section 4.2, the virus-laden droplets exhaled by an infected host will undergo
a number of transformations before reaching the next potential host. To prevent transmission,
current safety measures impose a safety distance of two meters. Furthermore, cloth masks are
widely used by public and their effectiveness has been shown to be questionable for droplets and
aerosols of size about a micron. The adequacy of these common recommendations and practices
can be evaluated by investigating the concentration of airborne droplets and residues at distances
larger than one meter and the probability of them being around a micron in diameter, since such an
outcome will substantially increase the chances of transmission. In the following we will examine
two effects: the presence of small quantities of non-volatile matter in the ejected drops that remain
as droplet residues after evaporation, and the adequacy of the log-normal or Pareto distribution to
quantify the number of droplets in the lower diameter classes.

6.1

Current Predictions

Let us consider the situation of speaking or coughing, whose initial puff volume and momentum
are such that they yield se ' 0.5 m and te ' 0.05 s. Under this specific condition, as shown in
Figure 7 the puff travels about 1 m in about 5 s 1 . For this simple example scenario, we will
examine our ability to predict airborne droplet and residue concentration, as an important step
towards estimating potential for airborne transmission in situations commonly encountered.
In most of the countries, current guidelines are based on the work by Xie et al. [117], who revisited previous guidelines by [114] with improved evaporation and settling models. They identified
the possibility that, due to evaporation, the droplets quickly become aerosolized before reaching a
significant distance and thus may represent a minor danger for transmission due to their minimal
virus loading. This scenario is shown in Figure 12, where we present the evolution of the drop size

Number of Droplets

1 × 106

100000

s = 0.00
s = 0.15
s = 0.25
s = 0.35
s = 0.50

1 µm drops

m
m
m
m
m

(t = 0.00
(t = 0.10
(t = 0.30
(t = 0.50
(t = 1.00

s)
s)
s)
s)
s)

Evap. coeff. = k′ = 10−8 m2 /s
10000

1000

100
10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

d [µm]

Figure 12: Evolution of the drop size distribution spectra according to the currently used evaporation models [114, 117].
spectrum while droplets are transported by the ejected puff. The initial droplet size distribution
is taken to be that measured by Duguid [26] modeled with a log-normal distribution, which in the
1

The distance traveled can be upwards of 7-8 meters in a few seconds for sneezes, emitted with speeds on the
order of 10-30 m/s [17]

28

Monte-Carlo approach is randomly sampled with one million droplets divided into one thousand
diameter classes. Each droplet is then followed while evaporating and falling. The evaporation
model is taken to be (21) with the effective diffusion coefficient estimated as k 0 ' 1 · 10−8 m2 /s.
This value is computed under the assumption that drops are made of either pure water or a saline
solution [117] and that air has about 98% humidity. Therefore, this is an environment unfavorable
to evaporation and consequently drop size reduction happens relatively slowly. However, from the
figure it is clear that, even in this extreme case, after few tens of centimeters, and within a second,
all droplets have evaporated down to a size below 10 µm. This is in line with the predictions of Xie
et al. [117]. Naturally, if the air is dryer, the effective evaporation coefficient will be larger (even
as large as k 0 ' 10−5 m2 /s) and the droplet size spectrum will evolve even faster, leaving virtually
all droplets to be smaller than 1 µm in the puff. Recall that intermittency of turbulence with the
puff can create clusters of droplets and concentration of vapor and thereby significantly alter the
evaporation rate [27,30, 74]. Hence, our estimate of evaporation time is a lower bound, as governed
by the d2 -law (21).

6.2

Influence of Non Volatile Matter

As discussed in section 4.3 there is current consensus that droplets ejected during sneezing
or coughing contain, in addition to water, other biological and particulate non-volatile matter.
Specifically, viruses themselves are just large protein chains of size almost 0.1 µm. Here we will
examine the evolution of droplet size distribution in the presence of non-volatile matter. It will
be clear in the following, that in this case, even a small amount of non-volatile matter plays an
important role with the evaporation coefficient being a minor factor in deciding how fast the final
state is reached. In Figure 13, we show the final distribution of droplets under two scenarios where
the initially ejected droplets contain 0.1% and 3.0% of non-volatile matter. In Figure 13a, the
initial drop size distribution is modeled as a log-normal distribution (i.e. as in Fig. 12) whereas in
Figure 13b, the initial drop size distribution is modeled according to the Pareto distribution with
initial droplet size varying between 1 and 100 µm. This range is smaller than that suggested earlier
in section 3. However drops that are larger than 100 µm fall out of the cloud and therefore are not
important for airborne transmission and droplets initially smaller than 1 µm have much smaller
viral load. Here “final droplet size distribution” indicates the number of droplets that remain within
the puff after all the larger droplets have fallen out and all others have completed their evaporation
to become droplet residues. This final number of droplet residues as a function of size does not
vary with time or distance.
The size distribution is computed here as in Figure 12, with a random sampling from the initial
log-normal or Pareto distribution. As before, these computations used an evaporation coefficient
of k 0 = 10−8 m2 /s. However, there are two important differences: each droplet is allowed to fall
vertically according to its time-dependent settling velocity, W , which decreases over time as the
droplet evaporates. Integration of the fall velocity over time provides the distance traveled by the
droplet relative to the puff. Droplets whose fall distance exceeds the size of the puff are removed
from consideration. Second, each droplet that remains within the puff evaporates to its limiting
droplet residue size that is dictated by the initial amount of non-volatile matter contained within the
droplet. For ψ = 0.1% non-volatile matter, the final aerosol size cannot decrease below 10% of the
initial droplet diameter, whereas for 3.0% of non-volatile matter, the final droplet size cannot decrease below 30% of the initial diameter. From Fig. 13, it is clear that when eveporation is complete

29

s = 0.00 m (t = 0.00 s) Initial distr.
s = 1.00 m (t = 4.00 s) 0.1 % n.v.m.
s = 1.00 m (t = 4.00 s) 3.0 % n.v.m.
Log-Normal Distribution
i
h
2
N (d) = Bd exp − ln(d−µ̂)
2σ2

1000
100
10
1

s = 0.00 m (t = 0.00 s) Initial distr.
s = 1.00 m (t = 4.00 s) 0.1 % n.v.m.
s = 1.00 m (t = 4.00 s) 3.0 % n.v.m.

10000
Number of Droplet Residues

Number of Droplet Residues

10000

1000
Pareto Distribution
N (d) = B/d2

100

10

1

0.1
0.1

1

10

100

0.1

d [µm]

1

10

100

d [µm]

Figure 13: Influence of small quantities of non volatile matter on the final drop size distribution.
the drop size distribution rigidly shifts towards smaller diameters, with a cut-off upper diameter
due to the settling of large drops. Essentially, it is clear that the initial number of viruses that were
in droplets of size smaller than de,exit still remain within the cloud almost unchanged, representing
a more dangerous source of transmission than predicted by the conventional assumption of near-full
evaporation. Again, it is important to note that the final droplet size distribution is established
rapidly even with the somewhat lower effective evaporation diffusivity of k 0 = 10−8 m2 /s, and when
not accounting for the effect of localized moisture of the cloud in further reducing the rate. Figure
13 also illustrates the important difference in the drop size distribution. The Pareto distribution
will predict a much larger number of drops in the micron and sub-micron range, possibly the most
dangerous for both inhalation efficiency and filtration inefficiency.

6.3

Sample Model Estimation of Airborne transmission

In this section we will demonstrate the efficacy of the simple model presented in (31) and (32)
for the prediction of droplet/aerosol concentration. In contrast to the Monte-Carlo approach of
the previous subsection, where the evolution of each droplet was accurately integrated, here we
will use the analytical prediction along with its simplifying assumptions. The cases considered are
identical to those presented in Figure 13 for ψ = 0.1% and k 0 = 10−8 m2 /s. The initial droplet
size distributions considered are again log-normal and Pareto distributions. In this case, however,
we underline that the quantity of importance in airborne transmission is not the total number of
droplet residues, but rather their concentration in the proximity of a susceptible host. Accordingly,
we plot in Figure 14 airborne droplet and residue concentration (per liter) of volume as a function
of droplet size. Here the area under the curve between any two diameter yields the number of
droplets within this size range per liter of volume within the cloud. At the early times of t = 0.025
and 0.2 s, we see that larger droplets above a certain size have fallen out of the cloud, while droplet
residues smaller than devap have fully evaporated and their distribution is a rigidly-shifted version
of the original distribution. The distribution of intermediate size airborne droplets reflects the fact
that they are still undergoing evaporation. Unlike in Figure 13, the concentration continues to fall
even after tlim ' 0.68 s when the number and size of droplets within the cloud have reached their
limiting value. This is simply due to the fact that the volume of the puff continues to increase
and this continuously dilutes the aerosol concentration. Most importantly, the results of the simple
model presented in (31) and (32) are in excellent agreement with those obtained from Monte-Carlo
30

simulation. The increasing size of the contaminated cloud with time can be predicted with (38)
and the centroid is given by the scaling law (16).

Figure 14: Droplet/aerosol concentration evolution as predicted by the analytical model presented
in (31) and (32).

7

Conclusions and Future Perspectives

The primary goal of this paper is to provide a unified theoretical framework that accounts for all
the physical processes of importance, from the ejection of droplets by breathing, talking, coughing
and sneezing to the inhalation of resulting aerosols by the receiving host. These processes include:
(i) forward advection of the exhaled droplets with the puff of air initially ejected; (ii) growth of
the puff by entrainment of ambient air and its deceleration due to drag; (iii) gravitational settling
of some of the droplets out of the puff; (iv) modeling of droplets evaporation, assuming that the
d2 -law prevails; (v) presence of non-volatile compounds which form the droplet residue left behind
after evaporation; (vi) late-time dispersal of the droplet residue-laden cloud due to ambient air
turbulent dispersion.
Despite the complex nature of the physical processes involved, the theoretical framework results
in a simple model for the airborne droplet and residue concentration within the cloud as a function
of droplet diameter and time, which is summarized in equations (31), (32) and (38). This framework
can be used to calculate the concentration of virus-laden residues at the location of any receiving
host as a function of time. As additional processes, the paper also considers (vii) efficiency of
aspiration of the droplet residues by the receiving host; and (viii) effectiveness of different kinds of
masks in filtering the residues of varying size.
It must be emphasized that the theoretical framework has been designed to be simple and
therefore involves a number of simplifying assumptions. Hence, it must be considered as the
starting point. By relaxing the approximations and by adding additional physical processes of
relevance, more complex theoretical models can be developed. One of the primary advantages of
such a simple theoretical framework is that varying scenarios can be considered quite easily: these
different scenarios include varying initial puff volume, puff velocity, number of droplets ejected, their
size distribution, non-volatile content, ambient temperature, humidity, and ambient turbulence.

31

The present theoretical framework can be, and perhaps must be, improved in several significant
ways in order for it to become an important tool for reliable prediction of transmission. (i) Accurate
quantification of the initially ejected droplets still remains a major challenge. Further high-quality
experimental measurements and high-fidelity simulations are required, especially mimicking the
actual processes of talking, coughing and sneezing, to fully understand the entire range of droplet
sizes produced during the exhalation process. (ii) As demonstrated above, the rate at which
an ejected droplet evaporates plays an important role in determining how fast they reach their
fully-evaporated state. It is thus important to calculate more precisely the evaporation rate of
non-volatile-containing realistic droplets resulting from human exhalation. The precise value of
evaporation rate may not be important when droplets evaporate fast, since all droplets remaining
within the puff would have completed their evaporation. But under slow evaporation conditions,
accurate evaluation of evaporation is important. (iii) The assumption of uniform spatial distribution
of droplets within the puff and later within the dispersing cloud is a serious approximation [96]. The
intermittency of turbulence within the initial puff and later within the droplet cloud is important
to understand and couple with the evaporation dynamics of the droplets. In addition to the role of
intermittency, even the mean concentration of airborne droplets and residues may decay from the
center to the outer periphery of the puff/cloud. Characterization of this inhomogeneous distribution
will improve the predictive capability of the model. (iv) The presence of significant ambient mean
flow and turbulence either from indoor ventilation or outdoor cross-flow will greatly influence the
dispersion of the virus-laden droplets. But accounting for their effects can be challenging even in
experimental and computational approaches. Detailed experiments and highly-resolved simulations
of specific scenarios should be pursued. But it will not be possible to cover all possible scenarios with
such an approach. A simpler approach where the above theoretical framework can be extended to
include additional models such as random flight model (similar to those pursued in the calculation
of atmospheric dispersion of pollutants [43]) may be promising approaches.

8

Acknowledgments

SB acknowledges support from the Office of Naval Research (ONR) as part of the Multidisciplinary University Research Initiatives (MURI) Program, under grant number N00014-16-1-2617
and from the UF Informatics Institute. SZ wishes to thank the French ANR for its support through
its flash Covid-19 program - NANODROP grant, the ERS Advanced Grant TRUFLOW and the
PRACE network for its Covid-19 Fast Track Call grant NANODROP on the Irene TGCC. AS acknowledges funding from the PRIN project Advanced computations and experiments in turbulent
multiphase flow (Project No. 2017RSH3JY). GA acknowledges support through the NSF Grant
No. CBET 2029548 and the Clarkson IGNITE Fellowship. LB acknowledges support from the
Smith Family Foundation, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Policy Lab, the MIT
Reed Fund, and the Esther and Harold E. Edgerton Career Development chair at MIT.

References
[1] Aitken, R.J., Baldwin, P.E.J., Beaumont, G.C., Kenny, L.C., and Maynard, A.D., Aerosol
inhalability in low air movement environments. Journal of Aerosol Science, Vol. 30(5), 1999,
613–626.

32

[2] Armbruster, L., and Breuer, H., Investigations into defining inhalable dust, Ann. Occup. Hyg.,
26(1), 1982, 21–32.
[3] Asadi, S., Wexler, A.S., Cappa, C.D., Barreda, S., Bouvier, N.M., and Ristenpart, W.D.,
Aerosol Emission and Superemission during Human Speech Increase with Voice Loudness,
Scientific Reports, Vol. 9(1), 2019, 1–10.
[4] Atkinson, J., Chartier, Y., Pessoa-silva, C.L., Jensen, P., and Li, Y,, WHO Report: Natural
Ventilation for Infection Control in Health-Care Settings Edited By: World Health Organization, 2009.
[5] Bahl, P., de Silva C. M., Chughtai, A. A., MacIntyre, C. R., Doolan, C. An experimental
framework to capture the flow dynamics of droplets expelled by a sneeze, Experiments in
Fluids, Vol. 61, 2020, 176.
[6] Bahl, P., Doolan, C., Silva, C., Chughtai, A.A., Bourouiba, L., and MacIntyre, C.R., Airborne
or Droplet Precautions for Health Workers Treating Coronavirus Disease 2019, The Journal
of Infectious Diseases, 2020. https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jiaa189.
[7] Bahmanzadeh, H., Abouali, O., and Ahmadi, G., Unsteady particle tracking of micro-particle
deposition in the human nasal cavity under cyclic inspiratory flow, Journal of Aerosol Science,
Vol. 101, 2016, 86–103.
[8] Balachandar, S., and Eaton, J.K., Turbulent dispersed multiphase flow, Annual review of fluid
mechanics, Vol 42, 2010, 111–133.
[9] Balachandar, S., A scaling analysis for pointparticle approaches to turbulent multiphase flows.
International Journal of Multiphase Flow, Vol. 35(9), 2009, 801-810.
[10] Balazy, A., Toivola, M., Reponen, T., Podgrski, A., Zimmer, A., and Grinshpun, S.A.,
Manikin-based performance evaluation of N95 filtering-facepiece respirators challenged with
nanoparticles. Annals of Occupational Hygiene, Vol. 50(3), 2006, 259–269.
[11] Blumenthal, R., Hoepffner, J., and Zaleski, S., Self-similar wave produced by local perturbation
of the Kelvin-Helmholtz shear-layer instability, Phys. Rev. Lett, Vol. 106, 2011, 104502.
[12] Bourouiba, L., Turbulent Gas Clouds and Respiratory Pathogen Emissions: Potential Implications for Reducing Transmission of COVID-19, Journal of the American Medical Association,
E1-2. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2020.4756.
[13] Bourouiba, L., Dehandschoewercker, E., and Bush, J.W.M., Violent Expiratory Events:
On Coughing and Sneezing, Journal of Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 745, 2014, 537–63.
https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2014.88.
[14] Bourouiba, L, Anatomy of a sneeze, Howard Hughes Medical Institute Image of The Week,
2016, https://www.biointeractive.org/classroom-resources/anatomy-sneeze.
[15] Bourouiba, L., A Sneeze. New England Journal of Medicine, 2016, 357(8):e15.
[16] Bourouiba, L., The fluid dynamics of disease transmission.Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics,
2021 in press.
33

[17] Bourouiba, L., Turbulent gas clouds and respiratory pathogen emissions: potential implications
for reducing transmission of covid-19, JAMA, Vol. 323(18), 2020, 1837–1838.
[18] Bradley, R.S., Evans, M.G., and Whytlaw-Gray, R.W., The rate of evaporation of droplets.
Evaporation and diffusion coefficients, and vapour pressures of dibutyl phthalate and butyl
stearate, Proc. Royal Soc., 1945, 368–390.
[19] Chen, Q., and Zhang, Z., Prediction of particle transport in enclosed environment, China
Particuology, Vol. 3(6), 2005, 364–372.
[20] Cooper, L., Guan. N., Bustos, N., MacIntyre, C. R., Bourouiba, L., A systematic review of the
science and engineering of masks and respiratory protection: need for standardized evaluation
and testing, 2020, under review.
[21] Culick, F.E.C., Comments on a ruptured soap film, J. Appl. Phys., Vol. 31, 1960, 1128–1129.
[22] Dai, Y.T., Juang, Y.J., Wu, Y.Y., Breysse, P.N., and Hsu, D.J., In vivo measurements of
inhalability of ultralarge aerosol particles in calm air by humans, J. Aerosol Sci. Vol. 37(8),
2006, 967–973.
[23] Descamps, M., Matas, J.P., and Cartellier, A.H., Gas-liquid atomisation: gas phase characteristics by piv measurements and spatial evolution of the spray, 2nd colloque INCA, Initiative
en Combustion Avancee, Oct 2008, Rouen, France.
[24] Dimotakis, P.E., Entrainment and growth of a fully developed, two-dimensional shear layer,
AIAA J, Vol. 24, 1986, 1791–1796.
[25] Doremalen, N., Bushmaker, T., Morris, D.H., Holbrook, M.G., Gamble, A., et al. Aerosol and
Surface Stability of SARS-CoV-2 as Compared with SARS-CoV-1, The New England Journal
of Medicine, 2020 https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMc2004973.
[26] Duguid, J.P., The size and the duration of air-carriage of respiratory droplets and dropletnuclei, Epidemiology & Infection, Vol. 44(6), 1946, 471–479.
[27] Eaton, J. K. and Fessler, J. R. Preferential concentration of particles by turbulence, International Journal of Multiphase Flow, Vol. 20, 1994, 169–209.
[28] Eggers, J., Nonlinear dynamics and breakup of free-surface flows, Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 69,
1997, 865–929.
[29] Eggers, J., and Villermaux, E., Physics of liquid jets, Vol. 71, 2008, 036601 (79pp).
[30] Ernst, M., Sommerfeld, and M., Lan, S., Quantification of preferential concentration of colliding particles in a homogeneous isotropic turbulent flow, International Journal of Multiphase
Flow, Vol. 117, 2019, 163–181,
[31] Feng, Y., Marchal, T., Sperry, T., and Yi, H., Influence of wind and relative humidity on the
social distancing effectiveness to prevent COVID-19 airborne transmission: A numerical study.
Journal of Aerosol Science, Vol. 147, 2020, 105585.

34

[32] Ferry, J., and Balachandar, S., A fast Eulerian method for disperse two-phase flow, International Journal of Multiphase Flow, Vol. 27(7), 2001, 1199–1226.
[33] Ferry, J., Rani, S. L., and Balachandar, S., A locally implicit improvement of the equilibrium
Eulerian method. International journal of Multiphase Flow, Vol. 29(6), 2003, 869-891.
[34] Ferry, J., and Balachandar, S., Equilibrium Eulerian approach for predicting the thermal field
of a dispersion of small particles, International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, Vol. 48(34), 2005, 681–689.
[35] Fuster, D., Matas, J.-Ph., Marty, S., Popinet, S., Hoepffner, J., Cartellier, A., and Zaleski, S.,
Instability regimes in the primary breakup region of planar coflowing sheets. J. Fluid Mech.,
Vol. 736, 2013, 150–176.
[36] Gao, N., and Niu, J., Transient CFD simulation of the respiration process and interperson
exposure assessment, Build. Environ., Vol. 41(9), 2006, 1214–1222.
[37] Gittings, S., Turnbull, N., Henry, B., Roberts, C.J., and Gershkovich, P., Characterisation
of human saliva as a platform for oral dissolution medium development, European Journal of
Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics, Vol. 91, 2015, 16–24
[38] Gorokhovski, G., and Herrmann, M., Modeling primary atomization, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech.,
Vol. 40, 2008, 343–366.
[39] Gralton, J., Tovey, E., McLaws, M.-L., and Rawlinson, W.D., The role of particle size in
aerosolised pathogen transmission: A review, Journal of Infection, Vol. 62, 2011, 1–13.
[40] Grgic, B., Martin, A., and Finlay, W., The effect of unsteady flow rate increase on in vitro
mouth–throat deposition of inhaled boluses. Journal of Aerosol Science, Vol. 37(10), 2006,
1222–1233.
[41] Grinshpun, S.A., Haruta, H., Eninger, R.M., Reponen, T., McKay, R.T., and Lee, S.A., Performance of an N95 filtering facepiece particulate respirator and a surgical mask during human
breathing: two pathways for particle penetration. Journal of Occupational and Environmental
Hygiene, Vol. 6(10), 2009, 593–603.
[42] Haghnegahdar, A., Zhao, J., Feng, Y., Lung aerosol dynamics of airborne influenza A virusladen droplets and the resultant immune system responses: An in silico study, Journal of
Aerosol Science, Vol. 134, 2019, 34-55.
[43] De Haan, P., and Rotach, M.W., A novel approach to atmospheric dispersion modelling: The
PuffParticle Model. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, Vol. 124(552), 1998,
2771-2792.
[44] Han, Z.Y., Weng, W.G., and Huang, Q.Y., Characterizations of Particle Size Distribution
of the Droplets Exhaled by Sneeze, Journal of the Royal Society Interface, Vol. 10, 2013,
20130560.
[45] Haubermann, S., Bailey, A.G., Bailey, M.R., Etherington, G., and Youngman, M., The influence of breathing patterns on particle deposition in a nasal replicate cast. Journal of Aerosol
Science, Vol. 33, 2002, 923–933.
35

[46] He, Q., Niu, J., Gao, N., Zhu, T., and Wu, J., CFD study of exhaled droplet transmission between occupants under different ventilation strategies in a typical office room, Build. Environ.,
Vol. 46(2), 2011, 397–408.
[47] Herrmann, M., On Simulating Primary Atomization Using the Refined Level Set Grid Method.
Atomization and Sprays, Vol. 21(4), 2011, 283–301, 2011.
[48] Horschler, I., Schroder, W., and Meinke, M., On the assumption of steadiness of nasal cavity
flow. Journal of Biomechanics, Vol. 43(6), 2010, 1081–1085.
[49] Hsu, D.-J., and Swift, D.L., The measurements of human inhalability of ultralarge aerosols in
calm air using mannikins. Journal of Aerosol Science, Vol. 30(10), 1999, 1331–1343.
[50] Hu, Z., and Srivastava, R.C., Evolution of Raindrop Size Distribution by Coalescence, Breakup,
and Evaporation: Theory and Observations, J. Atmospheric. Sci., Vol. 52, 1995, 1761–1783.
[51] Inthavong, K., Ge, Q.J., Li, X.D., and Tu, J.Y., Detailed predictions of particle aspiration
affected by respiratory inhalation and airflow, Atmos. Environ., Vol. 62, 2012, 107–117.
[52] Inthavong, K., Ge, Q.J., Li, X.D., and Tu, J.Y., Source and trajectories of inhaled particles
from a surrounding environment and its deposition in the respiratory airway, Inhal. Toxicol.,
Vol. 25(5), 2013, 280–291.
[53] Jerome, J.J.S., Marty, S., Matas, J.P., Zaleski, S., and Hoepffner, J., Vortices catapult droplets
in atomization, Physics of Fluids, Vol. 25(11), 2013, 112109.
[54] Kaufman, E., and Lamster, I.B., The diagnostic applications of saliva - A review, Critical
reviews in Oral Biology & Medicine Vol. 13, 2002, 197–212.
[55] Kennedy, N.J., and Hinds, W.C., Inhalability of large solid particles. Journal of Aerosol Science, Vol. 33(2), 2002, 237–255.
[56] Kiasadegh, M., Emdad. H., Ahmadi, G., and Abouali, O., Transient numerical simulation
of airflow and fibrous particles in a human upper airway model, Journal of Aerosol Science,
Vol. 140, 2020, 105480.
[57] King Se, C.M., Inthavong, K., and Tu, J., Inhalability of micron particles through the nose
and mouth, Inhal. Toxicol., Vol. 22 (4), 2010, 287–300.
[58] Langmuir, I., The Evaporation of Small Spheres, Phys. Rev., Vol. 12, 1918, 368–370.
[59] Lee, S-A., Grinshpun, S.A., and Reponen, T., Respiratory Performace offered by N95 respirators and surgical masks: human subject evaluation with NaCl aerosol representing bacterial
and viral particle size range. Annals of Occupational Hygiene, Vol. 52(3), 2008, 177–185.
[60] Lejeune, S., Gilet, T., and Bourouiba, L., Edge-effect: Liquid sheet and droplets formed by
drop impact close to an edge, Physical Review Fluids, Vol. 3, 2018, 083601..
[61] Lefebvre, A. H. and McDonell, V. G., Atomization and Sprays, CRC Press - Taylor & Francis
Group, 2017.
36

[62] Lhuissier, H., and Villermaux, E., Effervescent atomization in two dimensions, Journal of Fluid
Mechanics, Vol. 714, 2013, 361–392.
[63] Ling, Y., Parmar, M., and Balachandar, S., A scaling analysis of added-mass and history
forces and their coupling in dispersed multiphase flows. International journal of multiphase
flow, vol. 57, 2013, 102-114.
[64] Ling, Y., Balachandar, S., and Parmar, M., Inter-phase heat transfer and energy coupling in
turbulent dispersed multiphase flows. Physics of Fluids, Vol. 28(3), 2016, 033304.
[65] Ling, Y., Fuster, D., Zaleski, S., and Tryggvason, G., Spray formation in a quasiplanar
gas–liquid mixing layer at moderate density ratios: A numerical closeup, Phys. Rev. Fluids,
Vol. 2(1), 2017, 014005.
[66] Ling, Y., Zaleski, S., and Scardovelli, R., Multiscale simulation of atomization with small
droplets represented by a Lagrangian point-particle model, Int. J. Multiphase Flow, Vol. 76,
2015, 122–143.
[67] Lipp, A., and Edwards, P., Disposable surgical face masks for preventing surgical wound
infection in clean surgery. Sao Paulo Medical Journal, Vol. 130(4), 2012, 269–269.
[68] Loeb, M., Dafoe, N., Mahony, J., John, M., Sarabia, A., Glavin, V., Webby, R., Smieja,
M., Earn, D.J., Chong, S., Webb, A., and Walter, S.D., Surgical mask vs N95 respirator for
preventing influenza among health care workers: a randomized trial. JAMA, Vol. 302(17),
2009, 1865–1871.
[69] Loudon, R., and Roberts, R., Relation between the airborne diameters of respiratory droplets
and the diameter of the stains left after recovery, Nature, Vol. 213, 1967, 95–96.
[70] Marcotte, F., and Zaleski, S., Density contrast matters for drop fragmentation thresholds at
low Ohnesorge number, Physical Review Fluids, Vol. 4, No. 10, 2019, 103604.
[71] Marty, S., Contribution à l’étude de l’atomisation assistée d’un liquide : instabilité de cisaillement et génération du spray, Ph.D. thesis, Université Grenoble Alpes, Université de Grenoble,
April 2015.
[72] Matas, J.-P., Marty, S., and Cartellier, A., Experimental and analytical study of the shear
instability of a gas-liquid mixing layer, Physics of fluids, Vol. 23(9), 2011, 094112.
[73] Memarzadeh, F., Improved Strategy to Control Aerosol-Transmitted Infections in a Hospital
Suite, In IAQ Conference, 2011.
[74] Villermaux, E., Moutte, A., Amielh, M. and Meunier, P., Fine structure of the vapor field in
evaporating dense sprays. Physical Review Fluids, Vol. 2, 2017, 074501.
[75] Millage, K.K., Bergman, J., Asgharian, B., and McClellan, G. A review of inhalability fraction
models: discussion and recommendations, Inhal. Toxicol., Vol. 22(2), 2010, 151–159.
[76] Mundo, C.H.R., Sommerfeld, M., and Tropea, C., Droplet-wall collisions: experimental studies
of the deformation and breakup process, International journal of multiphase flow, Vol. 21(2),
1995, 151–173.
37

[77] Naseri, A., Abouali, O., Ghalati, P.F., and Ahmadi, G., Numerical investigation of regional
particle deposition in the upper airway of a standing male mannequin in calm air surroundings,
Comput. Biol. Med., Vol. 52, 2014, 73–81.
[78] Naseri, A., Shaghaghian, S., Abouali,O., and Ahamdi,G., Numerical investigation of transient
transport and deposition of microparticles under unsteady inspiratory flow in human upper
airways, Respiratory Physiology & Neurobiology, Vol. 244, 2017, 56–72.
[79] National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (1997). 42 CFR 84 Respiratory Protective Devices: Final Rules and Notice. 60. Federal Register: 110.
[80] Nicas, M., Nazaroff, W.W., and Hubbard, A., Toward Understanding the Risk of Secondary
Airborne Infection: Emission of Respirable Pathogens, Journal of Occupational and Environmental Hygiene, Vol. 2(3), 2017, 143–154.
[81] Ogden, T., and Birkett, J., The human head as a dust sampler, Inhaled Particles, Vol. 4, 1975,
93–105.
[82] Okubo, A., Oceanic diffusion diagrams, In Deep sea research and oceanographic abstracts,
Vol. 18(8), 1971, 789-802.
[83] Opfer, L., Roisman, I.V., Venzmer, J., Klostermann, M., and Tropea, C., Droplet-air collision
dynamics: Evolution of the film thickness, Phys. Rev. E, Vol. 89(1), 2014, 013023.
[84] Pan, M., Lednicky, J.A., and Wu, C.Y., Collection, Particle Sizing and Detection
of Airborne Viruses, Journal of Applied Microbiology, Vol. 127(6), 2019, 1596–1611.
https://doi.org/10.1111/jam.14278.
[85] Pilch, M., and Erdman, C.A., Use of breakup time data and velocity history data to predict
the maximum size of stable fragments fo acceleration-induced breakup of a single drop. Int. J.
Multiphase Flow , Vol. 13, 1987, 741–757.
[86] Pirhadi, M., Sajadi, B., Ahmadi, G., and Malekian, D., Phase change and deposition of inhaled
droplets in the human nasal cavity under cyclic inspiratory airflow, Journal of Aerosol Science,
Vol. 118, 2018, 64–81.
[87] Poulain, S., Villermaux, E., and Bourouiba, L., Ageing and burst of surface bubbles, Journal
of Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 851, 2018, 636–671.
[88] Poulain, S. and Bourouiba, L., Biosurfactants change the thinning of contaminated bubbles at
bacteria-laden water interfaces, Physical Review Letters, Vol. 121, 2018, 204502.
[89] Qian, Y., Willeke, K., Grinshpun, S.A., Donnelly, J., and Coffey, C.C., Performance of N95
respirators: filtration efficiency for airborne microbial and inert particles. American Industrial
Hygiene Association, Vol. 59(2), 1998, 128–132.
[90] Qureshi, Z. , Jones, N., Temple, R., Larwood, J. P. J., Greenhalgh, T., Bourouiba, L. OxfordMIT Evidence Review: What is the evidence to support the 2-metre social distancing rule to reduce COVID-19 transmission? (2020), https://www.cebm.net/covid-19/what-is-the-evidenceto-support-the-2-metre-social-distancing-rule-to-reduce-covid-19-transmission/.
38

[91] Richardson, L.F., Atmospheric diffusion shown on a distance-neighbour graph. Proceedings of
the Royal Society of London, Series A, Vol. 110(756), 1926, 709–737.
[92] Roccon, A., De Paoli, M., Zonta, F. and Soldati, A., Viscosity-modulated breakup and coalescence of large drops in bounded turbulence, P hys. Rev. Fluids, Vol. 2, 2017, 083603.
[93] Soligo, G., Roccon, A. and Soldati A., Breakage, coalescence and size distribution of surfactant
laden droplets in turbulent flow, J ournal of Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 881, 2019, 244-282.
[94] Salmanzadeh, M., Zahedi, G., Ahmadi, G., Marr, D., and Glauser, M., Effect of thermal
plume adjacent to the body on the movement of indoor air aerosol particles, Journal of Aerosol
Science, Vol. 53, 2012, 29–39.
[95] Sazhin, S.S., Advanced models of fuel droplet heating and evaporation, Progress in energy and
combustion science, Vol. 32(2), 2006, 162–214.
[96] Sbrizzai, F., Verzicco, R., Pidria, M.F. and Soldati A., Mechanisms for Selective Radial Dispersion of Microparticles in the Transitional Region of a Confined Turbulent Round Jet, Int.
J. Multiphase Flow, Vol. 30, 2004, 1389-1417.
[97] Scharfman, B.E., Techet, A.H., Bush, J.W.M., and Bourouiba, L., Visualization of sneeze
ejecta: steps of fluid fragmentation leading to respiratory droplets, Experiments in Fluids,
Vol. 57(2), 2016, 24.
[98] Shi, H., Kleinstreuer, C., and Zhang, Z., Laminar airflow and nanoparticle or vapor deposition
in a human nasal cavity model. Journal of Biomechanical Engineering, Vol. 128(5), 2006,
697–706.
[99] Shiu, E.Y., Leung, N.H., and Cowling, B.J., Controversy around Airborne versus Droplet
Transmission of Respiratory Viruses: Implication for Infection Prevention, Current opinion in
infectious diseases, Vol. 32(4), 2019, 372-379.
[100] Smieszek, T., Lazzari, G., and Salathe, M., Assessing the Dynamics and Control of Dropletand Aerosol-Transmitted Influenza Using an Indoor Positioning System, Scientific Reports,
Vol. 9(1), 2019, 1–10.
[101] Su, W.C., and Vincent, J.H., New experimental studies to directly measure aspiration efficiencies of aerosol samplers in calm air. Journal of aerosol science, Vol. 33(1), 2002, 103–118.
[102] Su, W.C., and Vincent, J.H., Experimental measurements of aspiration efficiency for idealized
spherical aerosol samplers in calm air. Journal of aerosol science, Vol. 34(9), 2003, 1151–1165.
[103] Taylor, G.I., The dynamics of thin sheets of fluid III. Disintegration of fluid sheets, Proc.
Roy. Soc. London A, Vol. 253, 1959, 313–321.
[104] Tjahjadi, M., Stone, H.A., and Ottino, J.M., Satellite and subsatellite formation in capillary
breakup, Journal of Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 243, 1992, 297–317.
[105] Turner, J.S., Buoyancy effects in fluids. Cambridge university press, 1979.
[106] Veron, F., Ocean spray, Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 47, 2015, 507-538.
39

[107] Villermaux, E., and Bossa, B., Drop fragmentation on impact, Journal of Fluid Mechanics,
Vol. 668, 2011, 412–435.
[108] Villermaux, E., Fragmentation, Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 39, 2007, 419–446.
[109] Vincent, J.H., Aerosol Sampling. Science and Practice, John Wiley & Sons Ltd., New York,
NY(USA), 1989.
[110] Wang, Y., and Bourouiba, L., Unsteady sheet fragmentation: droplet sizes and speeds, Journal of Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 848, 2018, 946–967.
[111] Wang, Y., Dandekar, R., Bustos, N., Poulain, S., and Bourouiba, L., Universal rim thickness
in unsteady sheet fragmentation. Physical Review Letters. Vol. 120, 204503, 2018.
[112] Wang, Y., and Bourouiba, L., Non-Galilean Taylor-Culick law governs sheet dynamics in
unsteady fragmentation, Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 2020, In press.
[113] Watanabe, Y, and Ingram, D.M., Transverse instabilities of ascending planar jets formed by
wave impacts on vertical walls, Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical
and Engineering Sciences, Vol. 471(2182), 2015, 20150397.
[114] Wells, W.F., On air-borne infection: Study II. Droplets and droplet nuclei, American Journal
of Epidemiology, Vol. 20(3), 1934, 61118.
[115] Wells, W.F. Airborne Contagion and Air Hygiene. An Ecological Study of Droplet Infections.
Airborne Contagion and Air Hygiene. An Ecological Study of Droplet Infections., Harvard
University Press, Cambridge Massachusetts, 1955.
[116] Wu, Z.N., Prediction of the size distribution of secondary ejected droplets by crown splashing
of droplets impinging on a solid wall, Probabilistic engineering mechanics, Vol. 18(3), 2003,
241–249.
[117] Xie, X., Li, Y., Chwang, A.T.Y., Ho, P.L., and Seto, W.H. How far droplets can move in
indoor environmentsrevisiting the Wells evaporationfalling curve. Indoor air, Vol. 17(3), 2007,
211-225.
[118] Zhang, X., Li, H., Shen, S., and Cai, M., Investigation of the flow-field in the upper respiratory system when wearing N95 filtering facepiece respirator. Journal of Occupational and
Environmental Hygiene, Vol. 13(5), 2016, 372–382.
[119] Zou, Z, and Yao, M. Airflow resistance and bio-filtering performance of carbon nanotube
filters and current facepiece respirators. Journal of Aerosol Science, Vol. 79, 2015, 61–71.

40

