KDD’20 Health Day: AI for COVID, August 23-27, 2020

Navigating the landscape of COVID-19 research through literature
analysis: A bird’s eye view.
Lana Yeganova §, Rezarta Islamaj §, Qingyu Chen, Robert Leaman, Alexis Allot, Chin-Hsuan Wei,
Donald C. Comeau, Won Kim, Yifan Peng, W. John Wilbur, Zhiyong Lu *.
National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI), NLM, NIH, Bethesda, MD USA
{Lana.Yeganova, Rezarta.Islamaj, Qingyu.Chen, Robert.Leaman, Alexis.Allot, Chih-Hsuan.Wei, Donald.Comeau,
Won.Kim, Yifan.Peng, John.Wilbur, Zhiyong.Lu}@nih.gov

ABSTRACT
Timely access to accurate scientific literature in the battle with the
ongoing COVID-19 pandemic is critical. An unprecedented public
health risk, this pandemic has motivated research towards
understanding the disease in general, identifying drugs to treat the
disease, developing potential vaccines, etc. This has given rise to a
rapidly growing body of literature that doubles in number of
publications every 20 days as of May 2020. Providing medical
professionals with means to quickly analyze the literature and
discover growing areas of knowledge is necessary for addressing
their question and information needs.
In this study we analyze the LitCovid collection, 13,369 COVID19 related articles found and curated from PubMed as of May 15 th,
2020 with the purpose of examining the landscape of literature data
and presenting it in a format that facilitates information navigation
and understanding. We do that by applying state-of-the-art named
entity recognition, classification, clustering and other natural
language processing (NLP) techniques. Applying named entity
recognition tools, we capture relevant bioentities (such as diseases,
internal body organs, etc.) and assess the strength of their
relationship with COVID-19 by the extent they are discussed in the
corpus. We also collect a variety of symptoms and co-morbidities
discussed in reference to COVID-19. Our clustering algorithm
identifies topics represented by groups of related terms, and
computes clusters corresponding to documents associated with the
topic terms. Among the topics we observe several that persist
through the duration of multiple weeks and have numerous
associated documents, as well several that appear as emerging
topics with fewer documents. All the tools and data are publicly
available, and this framework can be applied to any literature
collection. Taken together, these analyses produce a
comprehensive, synthesized view of COVID-19 research to
facilitate knowledge discovery from literature.

CCS CONCEPTS
Natural Language Processing, Artificial Intelligence, Named Entity
Recognition, Unsupervised Clustering.

KEYWORDS
COVID-19, literature-based knowledge discovery, clustering of
COVID-19 data, named entity recognition, artificial intelligence.

1

Introduction

Keeping up to date with COVID-19 related research is increasingly
challenging as the number of publications on the topic doubles
every 20 days. Since the beginning of the pandemic, the natural
language processing community has responded to the needs of
domain experts by applying state-of-the-art AI and NLP methods
to improve information understanding, comprehension, and
discoverability.
These
efforts
include:
LitCovid
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/research/coronavirus/), a daily
updated website curating and providing access to the most
comprehensive and informative COVID-19 publications in
PubMed (Chen, Allot et al. 2020); CORD-19, a weekly updated
dataset of articles on COVID-19 and other coronavirus es such as
MERS and SARS (https://www.semanticscholar.org/cord19);
https://www.semanticscholar.org/cord19);
Neural
Covidex
(covidex.ai), a neural network based question answering system.
Due to the rapid growth of the COVID-19 related literature, there
is an unmet urgency for helping the biomedical and clinical
community keep afloat in a sea of literature(Brainard 2020). At the
same time this presents an extraordinary opportunity for research
in the field of natural language processing to be of critical
importance. There are already examples of recent studies
examining this growing body of literature, including
comprehensive named entity recognition (Wang, Song et al. 2020),
automatic textual evidence extraction (Wang, Liu et al. 2020), topic
analysis and visualization (Bras, Gharavi et al. 2020), among
others. In our approach we combine several directions, including
NER and topic analysis and visualization, to paint a comprehensive
picture and juxtapose findings from complementary analyses.
To this end, we present the entire COVID-19 literature, through
automated text analytics, in a format that facilitates understanding
and information navigation to help researchers and medical

§ The first two authors wish it to be known that they should be regarded as joint First Authors.
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +1-301-594-7089

Figure 1 Number of publications available in PubMed in weekly
increments from February1 to May 15, 2020.

professionals grasp the literature landscape of the disease. We
analyze the collection of PubMed articles made available through
the LitCovid website; we will refer to these articles as the LitCovid
collection. To analyze the articles in the LitCovid collection we
make an extensive use of available NLP tools, including named
entity recognition (NER) methods, supervised multiclass
classification strategies, and unsupervised clustering algorithms.
Using the unsupervised topic analysis and clustering approach
(Islamaj, Yeganova et al. 2020) we discover meaningful topics in
the dataset, including both major topics rich in terms and with many
relevant articles, as well as smaller clusters representing emerging
topics or trends.

1

Figure 2 Distribution of COVID-19 articles by Semantic Categories:
Prevention, Treatment, Mechanism, Diagnosis, Epidemiologic
Forecasting, Case Report, General Information.

Furthermore, PubMed articles can be attributed to more than one
category, resulting in 2,002 articles attributed to two categories, and
375 articles to three or more categories. The most frequent cooccuring categories are Mechanism and Treatment (888 pmids),
Diagnosis and Treatment (641 pmids), and Transmission and
Prevention(344 pmids), as shown in Figure 2.

2
LitCovid collection and characteristics

Our LitCovid dataset includes 13,369 PubMed articles as of May
15, 2020. Visualizing the characteristics of the dataset is a useful
step in exploratory analysis of the literature collection.
Temporal characteristics. Projecting articles on a timeline allows
one to observe spikes in the events relevant to the topic of interest.
For the COVID-19 pandemic we observe an exponential growth
rate of publications from January 2020 to the present, May 15 th,
2020 (Figure 1). Literature collections could experience growth
spikes due to various reasons such as a pandemic, a scientific
breakthrough, increase/decrease in funding, etc. In the case of
COVID-19, the expansion is not unexpected due to the severity of
the outbreak and the determination of scientists worldwide to
engage the problem.
Semantic classification of articles in LitCovid collection. Since
the beginning, the articles in the LitCovid collection have been
categorized into eight broad semantic categories. Specifically,
topics were assigned by examining article titles, abstracts and, as
needed, the full article text. The first batch of documents was
annotated manually. Publications in the LitCovid collection are
distributed among the topics as follows: Prevention (5,466 articles),
Treatment (2,802 articles), Diagnosis (1,947 articles), Mechanism
(1,487 articles), General Information (928 articles), Case Reports
(832 articles), Transmission (673), and Epidemic Forecasting (227
articles). 1,843 articles were not identified with any category.

Biomedical Entities in LitCovid collection

We identified most-occurring biomedical concepts in the COVID19 literature by extracting the concept annotations in PubTator for
the LitCovid collection. PubTator is a repository of biomedical
concept annotations (Wei, Allot et al. 2019), powered by state-ofthe-art entity taggers to identify six concept types: GNormPlus
(Wei, Kao et al. 2015) for genes, TaggerOne (Leaman and Lu 2016)
for diseases and cell lines, tmVar (Wei, Phan et al. 2018) for genetic
variants, SR4GN (Wei, Kao et al. 2012) for species and a
BlueBERT-based tagger (Peng, Yan et al. 2019) for chemicals. We
used
the
PubTator
annotations
from
5/28/2020
(https://github.com/ncbi-nlp/PubTator-Covid19). We calculated
the article mention counts for each entity, that is, the number of
articles that mention the entity at least once, including synonyms
(e.g. remdesivir and GS-5734 refer to the same drug). These results
allow us to observe the entities mentioned and analyze their
significance over time.
The five drugs most frequently mentioned are hydroxychloroquine,
chloroquine, remdesivir, tocilizumab, and lopinavir/ritonavir drug
combination. Chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine combined are
mentioned extensively, with hydroxychloroquine dominating over
the course of several weeks, starting from the week of February 29,
2020. We find many studies targeted at understanding the adverse
effects
of hydroxychloroquine. Remdesivir and
the
lopinavir/ritonavir drug combination are the earliest drugs
discussed in the corpus.

Figure 3 The most relevant diseases in hierarchy structure. The font size of the disease reflects the frequency.

Table 1 The most frequent genes, cell lines and variants in the LitCovid collection, with their frequencies (in parentheses).
Human variant
Covid19 variant
Top
Human
SARS-CoV-2
Corresponding
Corresponding
Concepts
gene
gene
Variant
Variant
Gene
gene
1

ACE2
(1127)

2

CRP (680)

3

Il-6
(528)

4

ACE (373)

5

TNF-a
(318)

Spike
(236)
Orf1a/b
(193)
Nucleocapsid
(166)
Envelope
(76)
Membrane
(72)

K479N
(3)
S487T
(3)
rs143936283
(E329G) (2)
rs2285666
(8790G>A) (2)
rs755691167
(K68E) (2)

The diseases most frequently mentioned are illustrated in Figure 3
and categorized into 12 high-level groups. Most of the frequently
mentioned diseases (other than COVID-19 itself) are respiratory
disorders (e.g. respiratory insufficiency, pneumonia and lu ng
injury) that are common effects of COVID-19, or related viral
infections (e.g. SARS, MERS and arbovirus infections). The
remainder include diseases that raise the risk of developing severe
complications – primarily cardiovascular diseases (e.g.,
hypertension), metabolic diseases (e.g., diabetes) – and pathologies
caused by severe COVID-19 – renal failure, liver damage, and
complications associated with thrombosis (blood clots) such as
stroke. Less frequently mentioned are diseases that require special
management during COVID-19 (especially cancers, though also
diabetes and cardiovascular diseases), associated conditions used

CellLine

ACE2

D614G (7)

Spike

Vero E6
(99)

ACE2

V553L (5)

Orf1a/b

HeLa (40)

ACE2

L3606F (5)

Orf1a/b

MRC5 (37)

ACE2

G251V (5)

ORF3a

Hussain SY
(30)

ACE2

F476L
(4)

Orf1a/b

Huh7 (29)

to predict severity (such as lymphopenia) and mental health
conditions caused by the pandemic. Rheumatoid arthritis and lupus
are mentioned primarily because hydroxychloroquine is an
established treatment for both.
Table 1 lists the five most frequently mentioned genes, genetic
variants and cell lines. Analysis of these entities reflects both the
current knowledge regarding SARS-CoV-2 infection and current
areas of investigation. ACE2 (angiotensin-converting enzyme 2) is
the receptor SARS-CoV-2 uses to enter cells (Zhou, Yang et al.
2020); it is the human gene most frequently mentioned, and the
only gene associated with any of the five most frequent human
genetic variations. Levels of CRP (c-reactive protein), IL-6
(interleukein-6), and TNF-alpha (tumor necrosis factor alpha) are
used as markers of SARS-CoV-2 infection severity (Ni, Tian et al.

Table 2 Article mentions of selected symptoms in the LitCovid
collection. Symptoms are from the MeSH C23 tree and can be either a
result of the disease or a pre-existing condition. We distinguish frequent,
moderate and rare symptoms.
Article Mentions
559
390
174
153
113
<100

Symptom
Fever
Cough
Inflammation
Fatigue
Diarrhea
Headache, Olfaction Disorders, Infarction,
Hypoxia, Asymptomatic Infection, Neurologic
Manifestations

<10

Fetal Distress, Obesity, Morbid, Taste
Disorders, Overweight,
Hyperventilation,
Death, Sudden, Weight Loss, Hearing Loss,
Lethargy

2020). The use of ACE (angiotensin-converting enzyme)
inhibitors, normally used to treat hypertension, has been
investigated as potentially increasing the probability of severe
disease (Diaz 2020) Four of the most frequently mentioned SARSCoV-2 genes refer to structural proteins: spike, nucleocapsid,
envelope and membrane (Khailany, Safdar et al. 2020) spike is the
protein used to bind ACE2 to gain entry to the cell (Lan, Ge et al.
2020) and it is the gene associated with the most frequent SARSCoV-2 genetic variant. ORFa/b refers to an open reading frame; it
is under investigation for clinically significant genetic variants;
accordingly, it is the SARS-CoV-2 gene associated with the
majority of frequent SARS-CoV-2 genetic variants. The most
frequently mentioned cell line is Vero E6, which is frequently used
as host cells in viral studies, as is HuhH7. HeLa and MRC5 are
common cell lines. Considering the most frequently mentioned
entities as a whole, it becomes apparent that the current primary
focus of genetic research related to COVID-19 is how SARS-CoV2 functions – and by extension, what interventions might interrupt
critical functions – with a secondary focus on clinical markers of
disease severity and the genetic variants that influence it.

Table 3 Comparison of symptoms in the COVID and SARS literature
sets. Selected symptoms that either appear in only one set, or appear
significantly more frequently in one set. Symptoms are from the MeSH
C23 tree and can result from the disease or a pre-existing condition.

COVID Only
Olfaction Disorders // Myocardial Infarction
Abdominal Pain // Dizziness
SARS Only
Carcinogenesis // Chromosome Aberrations
COVID Significantly More Frequent
Death // Inflammation // Diarrhea
Chronic Disease // Recurrence
SARS Significantly More Frequent
Osteonecrosis
No Significant Difference in Mentions
Communicable
Diseases
//
Sneezing
Convalescence

//

Figure 4 The most frequent pathological findings in chest radiograph
and computed tomography studies

3

Symptoms and findings in LitCovid collection.

One of the most frequently asked questions in the media is “What
are the symptoms of this disease?”. MeSH (Medical Subject
Headings) is the controlled vocabulary thesaurus at the National
Library of Medicine used for indexing articles. Article mention
counts were collected using the Pathological Conditions, Signs and
Symptoms branch (C23) of MeSH as a dictionary of symptoms.
Counts for MeSH entry terms (synonyms) were added to the count
of each MeSH Heading. Mentions are detected in 7,975 of the
articles in the LitCovid collection. Table 2 illustrates examples of
symptoms ranging from frequent through moderate and rare. It is
important to note that some of these symptoms are caused by
COVID-19. Others are related to underlying conditions that make
patients more susceptible or increase the chance of a serious case.
Comparison of the LitCovid collection symptoms with the
symptom mentions of a similar disease, SARS, allows detection of

symptoms specific for COVID-19. For the SARS collection we
chose all 9,085 PubMed articles mentioning SARS through June
2019. Even though this set includes years of research, it is smaller
than the LitCovid set. This reflects the volume and intensity of
COVID-19 research. We computed 95% confidence intervals
around the frequencies of symptoms appearing in both sets. If the
intervals did not overlap, the frequency differences are significant.
Table 3 reports selected symptoms that are unique to each corpus
as well as some that have significantly different frequencies.
Further, we examined the common pathological findings in chest
x-ray and computed tomography (CT) studies reported in the
LitCovid collection. The findings are based on common thoracic
disease pathology types, which are expanded from NIH Chest Xray 14 labels (Wang et al., 2017). Specifically, we used our
previous tool, NegBio, to extract these from the figure caption of

Figure 5 Human organ intensity heat map illustrating the
frequency of mentions in the LitCovid collection.
chest x-ray and CT images in the full-length PMC OA articles in
the LitCovid collection (Peng et al., 2017). Figure 4 illustrates the
passage-level co-mentions of the top ten findings: Ground Glass
Opacities (GGO), Consolidation, Lung Opacity, Infiltration,
Pneumonia, Pleural Effusion, Edema, Mass, Nodule, and Fibrosis.
The most notable mention co-occurrence is between Lung Opacity
and Consolidation, appearing in 139 articles .

4

Human organs affected by SARS-CoV-2.

COVID-19 has been linked to causing multi-system organ failure.
In this experiment, we wanted to illustrate and summarize the
research literature as localized by the human organ mentioned.
Organ mentions are extracted using the en_ner_bionlp13cg_md
model from SciSpacy (Neumann, King et al. 2019), and entities
labelled
{'ORGAN',
'ANATOMICAL_SYSTEM',
'IMMATERIAL_ANATOMICAL’,
'DEVELOPING_ANATOMICAL_STRUCTURE'}

mapped to UMLS terms
using the UMLS normalizer from SciSpacy, with a similarity
threshold of 0.9. Matching terms were ordered by length, and the
shortest was used. Figure 5 is a human organ intensity map
illustrating the number of article mentions of the top 10 organs.

5

Clustering the LitCovid literature collection

Clustering methods can be useful for automatically grouping
documents into clusters and/or terms into meaningful topics,
improving human comprehension of a document collections. In this
work we rely on the Probabilistic Distributional Clustering (PDC)
algorithm (Islamaj, Yeganova et al. 2020) to generate topics and
associated document clusters for the LitCovid literature collection.
Given a document collection, the algorithm computes disjoint term
sets representing topics in the collection. The algorithm relies on
the analysis of words and two-word phrases and their frequencies

and co-occurrences in the free text. It partitions the set of terms
appearing in the collection of documents into disjoint groups of
related terms in an unsupervised way. This algorithm is useful in
that it does not require a user-provided input for the number of
topics/clusters and does not require any pre-existing knowledge or
vocabulary for a given body of literature, which is ideal for
applying to a newly emerged corpus.
Using this algorithm, we discover meaningful topics that arise from
the dataset, including both large-size topics defined by many terms
and retrieving many relevant articles, as well as smaller peaks in
data representing emerging topics or trends. For each topic, we
generate titles from the top scoring terms using intuitive rule-based
techniques. Given a topic we also score all documents in the
collection by computing a topic-document score based on presence
of the topic terms in the document. For clarity, we will refer to the
term sets as topics, and groups of retrieved relevant pmids as
clusters.
The PDC-identified clusters on the LitCovid collection provide a
comprehensive overview of the disease, as reconstructed from the
literature, as shown in Figure 6. These clusters correspond to
general and specific topics in dealing with the new disease. We
observe clusters on treatment options, and case reports, patient
characteristics and categories. There are clusters of documents
describing both general topics, as well as specific ones associated
with different ongoing conditions, such as cardiovascular diseases,
ongoing cancer treatments etc. We see reports and analysis on
different drugs, studies on the disease mechanism, testing options
and other observed challenges and lessons learned. In addition,
there are clusters of documents on the quality of life and issues of
mental health in such a situation where life has been disrupted for
many people.

5.1 Significant topics in the LitCovid collection.
The PDC algorithm applied to the LitCovid collection resulted in
289 clusters with 10 terms or more (we use the threshold of ten
terms following the choice of parameters in (Islamaj, Yeganova et
al. 2020)). Topics containing less than 10 terms are usually very
specific and are considered separately in Section 3.2.
The significance of a cluster generated by the PDC algorithm is
naturally correlated with the number of terms in the topic. The most
term-rich topics produced by the algorithm are: “severe acute
respiratory syndrome”, “personal protective equipment”,
“angiotensin converting enzyme”. A large term size generally
signifies a set of vocabulary terms that are closely related and are
used together in the literature. Large topics naturally retrieve more
documents because they contain more terms. However, the results
also contain many documents returned for topics with a small
number of terms, describing highly specific aspects of a disease.
This is expected when we consider the highly specific terms that
are discussed with the COVID-19 phenomena, which scientists are
still trying to understand. For example, highly specific term groups
that retrieve many documents are: “cytokine storm”,
“lopinavir/ritonavir”, “critically ill patients”, “ethical resource
allocation”, etc. Here we discuss dominant clusters for the

Clusters in Time Infographic: visualizing the emergence of new topics.
COV Main Protease; RNAdependent RNA
polymerase; vero E6 Cells

Bat sl Covzc45;
Therapeutic use of
Ritonavir

1-Feb

8-Feb

Cutaneous Manifestations;
Northern Italy; Daily
Situation Report
Covid Lockdown Period;
Hydroxychloroquine HCQ;
Post-covid Era; Olfactory
Dysfunction

Diagnostic Imaging of
Coronavirus Infections;
Malayan Pangolins;
Chinese Medical Staff;
School Closures

Outbreak in
United States;
Neonatal
Management …

15-Feb

Economics of Viral
Pneumonia; Critically Ill
Patients; Epidemiology of …

22-Feb

29-Feb

Virology of Nasopharynx;
Resource-Limited
Circumstances

7-Mar

14-Mar

Cerebellar Neurobiology;
Respiratory Rehabilitation
Guidence

21-Mar

28-Mar

4-Apr

11-Apr

18-Apr

25-Apr

Personal Protective
Equipment; N95
Respirators; Face Masks;
Loop Mediated Isothermal
Amplifications

Angiotensin Converting
Enzyme; Flow Nasal
Cannula; Ventilation amid
Covid

Digestive Symptoms;
Disseminated Intravascular
Coagulation

Figure 6 Computed clusters are illustrated along the timeline of the 100-day period starting Feb 1, 2020. Each point on the x-axis
represents a week starting that day.
LitCovid collection, both in relation to the term size, as well as in
relation to the number of documents they retrieve.
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome. The topic contains 290
unique terms and retrieves 295 pmids. Documents in this cluster are
focused on the terms:
{ respiratory // sars // acute respiratory // cov // sars cov // syndrome
// severe // acute // severe acute // respiratory syndro me}.
Top scoring articles identified to be relevant to this cluster are very
much related to each other and to the topic terms:
•
•

•

•

•

Epidemiology, virology, and clinical features of
severe acute respiratory syndrome -coronavirus-2
(SARS-CoV-2; Coronavirus Disease-19).
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2) and coronavirus disease-2019 (COVID19): The epidemic and the challenges.
Asymptomatic carrier state, acute respiratory
disease, and pneumonia due to severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2):
Facts and myths.
The origin, transmission and clinical therapies
on coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak an update on the status.
The Coronavirus Pandemic: What Does the Evidence
Show?

Angiotensin Converting Enzyme. The topic is focused on terms
related to angiotensin converting enzyme and understanding of the
disease mechanism. This topic is one of the most dominant topics

of the corpus and consists of 115 unique terms and 278 relevant
articles. Ten top scoring terms in the topic and relevant retrieved
documents are:
{ angiotensin // converting enzyme // converting // angiotensin //
converting // ace2 // renin // renin angiotensin // enzyme ace2 //
blockers }
•

Hypothesis:
angiotensin-converting
enzyme
inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers may
increase the risk of severe COVID-19.

•

ACE2, COVID-19, and ACE Inhibitor and ARB Use
during the Pandemic: The Pediatric Perspective.

•

Renin-Angiotensin System Blockers and the COVID19 Pandemic: At Present There Is No Evidence to
Abandon Renin-Angiotensin System Blockers.

Pediatric Covid. What about the pediatric patients? What are the
special considerations, and how should the dosages be adjusted?
This topic builds on the unique terms listed below, and retrieves 80
articles:
{ pediatric // pediatric covid // pediatric cases // overwhelm
available // sras cov // total infected // preparedness efforts // sras //
cumulative numbers }
•

Pediatric Airway Management in COVID-19 patients
- Consensus Guidelines from the Society for
Pediatric
Anesthesia's
Pediatric
Difficult
Intubation
Collaborative
and
the
Canadian
Pediatric Anesthesia Society.

•

Brief report: International perspectives on the
pediatric COVID-19 experience.

•

COVID-19 in Children in the United States:
Intensive
Care
Admissions,
Estimated
Total
Infected,
and
Projected Numbers of
Severe
Pediatric Cases in 2020.

•

Pediatric Airway Management in COVID-19 patients
- Consensus Guidelines from the Society for
Pediatric
Anesthesia's
Pediatric
Difficult
Intubation
Collaborative
and
the
Canadian
Pediatric Anesthesia Society.

•

Special considerations for the management of
COVID-19 pediatric patients in the operating room
and pediatric intensive care unit in a tertiary
hospital in Singapore.

•

Chloroquine dosing recommendations for pediatric
COVID-19 supported by modeling and simulation.

These examples illustrate the value of the computed topics and
related document clusters for both the broad view of the literature,
as well as ability to navigate to and explore a document cluster of
interest.
For the illustration in Figure 6, we have selected a subset of
significant topics containing more than twenty terms and computed
the onset of the topic from the earliest publication date among the
most relevant documents. A week when the earliest and most
relevant retrieved documents date to is considered as a topic onset.
The topics in Figure 6 are organized by weeks. By studying the
topics one can reconstruct the focus of published COVID-19

literature as a function of time. Some examples of early clusters are
“outbreak in United States” and “air travel”. As the outbreak
evolves, clusters such as “Diagnostic Imaging of Coronavirus
Infection” and “Therapeutic use of Ritonavir” start to emerge. In
late March, topics “Personal Protective Equipment”, “N95
respirators”, and “Face masks” dominate the space. At the same
time the community is actively exploring the “Hydroxychloroquine
HCQ” treatment, and later we have clusters discussing the side
effects of the treatment with HCQ.

5.2 Specific topics in the LitCovid collection.
Specific topics, as discussed above, consist of few terms (less than
10). However, this does not necessarily mean that they contain a
small number of documents. As seen in Figure 7, clusters of topics
“Critically Ill Patients”, or “Lopinavir/Ritonavir”, contain more
than 50 PMIDs and they are spread throughout the 100 days. This
shows that such topics remain of significant interest to researchers,
and they are active research areas. However, most specific topics
consist of a small set of very closely related documents. In this
figure we illustrate several such specific clusters grouped into these
larger categories:
1) COVID-19 and Other Diseases. In this category we illustrate
specific cluster of documents discussing issues of patients
diagnosed with COVID-19, who simultaneously suffer other
conditions such as: Fulminant Myocarditis, Acute Pulmonary

Figure 7 Small specific topics of LitCovid collection illustrated along the timeline. The figure illustrates small topics defined by few topic terms and the
temporal spread of the document clusters: COVID-19 and a) other diseases, b) the diagnostic signs and testing procedures, c) different treatment options
and their studies, and d) safety and prevention. The spread of the cluster reflects the publication dates of the documents co llected in a cluster. The depth
of color signifies the number of documents.

Embolism, Lung Lesions, Guillain Barre Syndrome, and
Psoriasis.
2) COVID-19 Signs and Testing. In this category we have a specific
topic, with many documents titled “Cytokine Storm”. This
active research area highlights the fact that this virus causes
some patients to show a heightened immune response
compared to others, and the factors that make some people
more susceptible than others is still unknown. Other clusters
in this category are: GGO plus bronchus distortion,
Gastrointestinal and liver manifestations, and COVIDinduced pneumonia. Some small clusters also reflect research
on testing mechanisms.
3) COVID-19 treatment. This category shows an emerging set of
papers on Crispr-Cas and research on using it for treatment
purposes, and interesting questions related to the DPP4
inhibitors and the effect they could have on some patients
with COVID-19, etc.
4) Safety and Prevention. Here we find a selection of small clusters
discussing topics such as: Hand sanitizer, Aerosol Box, how
to Minimize droplet spread, Biosafety and the impact of
Travel ban.
In general, specific topics contain a smaller number of documents
when compared to the most significant topics. The number of
documents in these clusters is small because, for a document to be
assigned to a cluster, it gets weighted with all the topic terms, and
the combined weight should be above a certain threshold. What we
see is that these could be highly specific areas of interest to
physicians and researchers and that they discuss different aspects
of COVID-19.

5.3 Associating clusters with the main categories.
By considering labels of the highest scoring documents retrieved
for each cluster, we can associate every clusters with the category
where most of its highest scoring documents fit. We collect all
labels assigned to the top scoring five documents and associate a
cluster with the most frequent label in that set. Here we refer the
reader back to Figure 2, which illustrates some of these clusters and
their mapping to general categories. For example, “therapeutic use
of ritonavir” is assigned to treatment, “reported olfactory
dysfunction” and “glass lesions” are attributed to diagnosis class.
As documents are frequently labeled with more than one class, so
are the clusters. Understandably, we observe clusters that
frequently discuss treatment and mechanism together, and
prevention and transmission. For example, “angiotensin converting
enzyme” is attributed to the mechanism class but has a considerable
number of documents that are assigned to both mechanism and
treatment. The heatmap in Figure 8 illustrates this phenomenon by
reflecting the percentage of clusters assigned to a topic with
significant number of documents that are also assigned to the next
most relevant class.

6 Conclusions
In this study we analyzed the LitCovid collection, 13,369 COVID19 related articles (as of May 15, 2020). The purpose of this study
is to provide a convenient and visual access for researchers and

Figure 8 Heatmap represents the distribution of computed
clusters across the eight main categories.
others to navigate the landscape of the COVID-19 literature. We
present a bird eye’s view of the literature as it spans broad
categories and more specific topics in time. We identify the most
frequently mentioned diseases, the most frequently mentioned
organs, and both the most frequent and the most unusual symptoms,
which we also compare with the published literature on SARS. In
addition to the state-of-the-art named entity recognition tools, we
also applied state of the art clustering methods. We computed
topics represented by groups of related terms and corresponding
clusters of documents associated with the topic terms. Among the
topics we observe several that persist through the duration of
multiple weeks and have numerous associated documents, while
others appear as emerging topics with fewer documents. We further
classify each of these topics into the major categories for easy
information comprehension. This work is limited by the accuracy
of the different tools that are used, as well as the human efforts
required in the analysis. Our goal is to have this analysis available
on the LitCovid website to benefit Covid -19 researchers
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/research/coronavirus/). All the
tools and data are publicly available, and this framework can be
applied to any literature collection. For the Covid-19 research,
taken together, these analyses produce a comprehensive, and
synthesized view to facilitate knowledge discovery from literature.

Funding
This work was supported by the Intramural Research Program of
the National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health.

REFERENCES
Brainard, J. (2020). Scientists are drowning in COVID -19 papers. Can new tools keep
them afloat? https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2020/05/scientists-are-drowningcovid-19-papers-can-new-tools-keep-them-afloat.
Bras, P. L., et al. (2020). "Visualising COVID-19 Research." arXiv:2005.06380.
Chen, Q., et al. (2020). "Keep up with the latest coronavirus research." Nature
579(193).
Diaz, J. H. (2020). "Hypothesis: Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors and
Angiotensin Receptor Blockers May Increase the Risk of Severe COVID -19." J Travel
Med.
Islamaj, R., et al. (2020). PDC – a probabilistic distributional clustering algorithm: a
case study on suicide articles in PubMed. AMIA Informatics Summit.
Khailany, R. A., et al. (2020). "Genomic Characterization of a Novel SARS-CoV-2."
Gene Rep.
Lan, J., et al. (2020). "Structure of the SARS-CoV-2 Spike Receptor-Binding Domain
Bound to the ACE2 Receptor." Nature.

Leaman, R. and Z. Lu (2016). "TaggerOne: joint named entity recognition and
normalization with semi-Markov Models." Bioinformatics 32(18): 2839-2846.
Neumann, M., et al. (2019). "ScispaCy: Fast and Robust Models for Biomedical
Natural Language Processing." arXiv:1902.07669 [cs]. ArXiv: 1902.07669.
Ni, M., et al. (2020). "Characteristics of inflammatory factors and lymphocyte subsets
in patients with severe COVID‐19." Journal of Medical Virology.
Peng, Y., et al. (2019). Transfer Learning in Biomedical Natural Language Processing:
An Evaluation of BERT and ELMo on Ten Benchmarking Datasets. Proceedings of
the 2019 Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing (BioNLP 2019): 5865.
Wang, X., et al. (2020). "Automatic Textual Evidence Mining in COVID-19
Literature." arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.12563.
Wang, X., et al. (2020). "Comprehensive Named Entity Recognition on CORD-19
with Distant or Weak Supervision." ArXiv, abs/2003.12218.
Wei, C. H., et al. (2019). "PubTator central: automated concept annotation for
biomedical full text articles." Nucleic Acids Res 47(W1): W587-W593.
Wei, C. H., et al. (2012). "SR4GN: a species recognition software tool for gene
normalization." PLoS One 7(6): e38460.
Wei, C. H., et al. (2015). "GNormPlus: An Integrative Approach for Tagging Genes,
Gene Families, and Protein Domains." Biomed Res Int 2015: 918710.
Wei, C. H., et al. (2018). "tmVar 2.0: integrating genomic variant information from
literature with dbSNP and ClinVar for precision medicine." Bioinformatics 34(1): 8087.
Zhou, P., et al. (2020). "A pneumonia outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of
probable bat origin." Nature 579: 270-273.

