S MART H EALTHCARE FOR D IABETES :
A COVID-19 P ERSPECTIVE

arXiv:2008.11153v1 [q-bio.OT] 29 Jul 2020

A P REPRINT
Amit M. Joshi
Dept. of ECE
MNIT, Jaipur, India.
Email: amjoshi.ece@mnit.ac.in

Urvashi P. Shukla
Dept. of ECE
MNIT, Jaipur, India.
shuklaurvashiec50@yahoo.com

Saraju P. Mohanty
Computer Science and Engineering
University of North Texas, USA
Email: saraju.mohanty@unt.edu

August 26, 2020

A BSTRACT
Diabetes is considered as an critical comorbidity linked with the latest coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) which spreads through Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARSCov-2). The diabetic patients have higher threat of infection from novel corona virus. Depending
on the region in the globe, 20% to 50% of patients infected with COVID-19 pandemic had diabetes.
The current article discussed the risk associated with diabetic patients and also recommendation
for controlling diabetes during this pandemic situation. The article also discusses the case study of
COVID-19 at various regions around the globe and the preventive actions taken by various countries
to control the effect from the virus. The article presents several smart healthcare solutions for the
diabetes patients to have glucose insulin control for the protection against COVID-19.
Keywords Smart Healthcare, Healthcare Cyber-Physical System (H-CPS), Internet-of-Medical-Things (IoMT),
Glucose Level, Diabetes, Coronavirus, Glucose Insulin Control, COVID-19, SARS-CoV-2

1

Introduction

Diabetes occurs when the body of a person finds the difficulty to balance glucose level during various prandial states
[1]. Diabetes cases has exponentially increased in the past decades around the world [2, 3]. The unhealthy lifestyle
is the prominent factor in magnifying the chance of being a diabetic patient. The unbalanced diet is one of the main
factors for the occurrence of diabetes Mellitus [4]. An estimated 463 million adults worldwide have diabetes and
addressing their quality of life through smart healthcare technologies can have significant social impact [5, 6]. The
main cause of the diabetes is deficiency of insulin level in the body against the generated glucose. The diabetes
problem may lead to the reduction of blood pressure and other cardiovascular disease.
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has infected millions of people around the globe
leading to a large number of deaths [7]. The Corona Virus Disease (COVID-19) has been spreading among the people
worldwide at an exponential rate. SARS-CoV2 affects population of various age groups and person with underneath
health conditions. The relation of COVID-19 with underneath disease is as shown in Fig. 1.
The diabetes was associated as the major risk for the past severe disease such as Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
(SARS), Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) types of infections from the corona virus and the severe influenza
A H1N1 pandemic in 2009 [8]. The diabetes persons are in bigger threat for the infection of the novel corona virus
disease (COVID-19) [9]. In general, the mortality rate of diabetes patients are 2 to 3 times more than other and the
chances of intensive care is also higher than non diabetic patients. It is observed that the diabetes patients area at
higher risk (up to 50 %) from the virus [10].
The studies show higher mortality rates of COVID-19 patients with pre-existing diabetes condition. It is difficult to
provide the treatment for diabetic patients due to fluctuating of blood glucose levels. The reasons for diabetic patients
serious infections by COVID-19 include the following [11]:

Diabetes
(9.2%)

Chronic Respiratory
Disease
(8.0%)

SARS-CoV-2
(COVID-19)
Cardiovascular
Disease
(13.2 %)

Hypertension
(8.4%)

Figure 1: Comorbidities with Pre-existing medical conditions for COVID-19.

1. The high blood sugar would affect the immunity of the patient which made him vulnerable against the Corona
virus infection as well lead to longer recovery period.
2. The virus would thrive in an environment of the increase blood glucose.
The rest of the article is organized in the following manner: Section 2 discusses the reasons for high risk for diabetic
patients. Section 3 discusses the challenges for diabetic patients during COVID-19. A summary of various case studies
for COVID-19 with respect to diabetic patients is provided in Section 4. Section 5 presents some thought on diabetes
management during pandemic outbreak to improve quality of life. We discuss the potential roles of selected emerging
technologies in Section 6. Section 7 presents some solutions for the diabetic population during pandemic outbreak
like COVID-19. We present concluding thoughts in Section 8.

2

Why Are Diabetes Patients at High Risk

COVID-19 has fostered various challenges for the most vulnerable group of society “diabetic patients” [12]. Human
body with underlying infection and high temperature inhabits the normal production of insulin. The role of insulin is
undoubted in controlling the level of glucose in the blood. This results in a serious diabetes complication known as
Diabetic Ketoacidosis (DKA). Here, the body cell don’t get the glucose needed for energy, whereby the body begins
to burn down the body fat for the same which results in production of excess blood acids (known as ketones) [13]. The
impact of virus on the diabetes patients is shown in Fig. 2.

Unbalance
Glucose Insulin

Increase the level of
DKA

SARS CoV2
Connect with ACE2

Figure 2: Impact of COVID-19 on Diabetes Patients.

High Blood Sugar

Studies have showed that Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2 (ACE2) acts as a cellular receptor for SARS-CoV-2
having 10 to 20 times higher binding affinity than the previous existing SRAS-CoV. ACE2 is a natural occurring
enzyme present in the cell membrane of lung and enterocytes of small intestine. This duo forms a bond with their
protein along with a sugar molecule. This dependency of virus leads to hyperglycemia wherein a damage is caused to
pancreas islets (known as the islet cell of the pancreas) which plays a prominent role for insulin generation for blood
sugar control [14].
Hyperglycemia is a characteristic of diabetes and when this chronic metabolic disorder is left untreated causes various
other serious complication like kidney failure, cardio disorders and respiratory complications. This hyperglycemia
environment increases the virulence of some pathogens make the patients at high risk. It is reported that phagocytes
and chenotaxis are also impaired. Overall immune response is hampered which plays a vital role in fighting COVID19. Therefore, a good monitoring over the glucose blood levels in patients with COVID-19 is essential [15].

3

Challenges for Diabetic Patients during COVID-19 Pandemic

The current epidemic has influenced psychological well being of people around the world [16, 17]. It has massively
affected mental state of the people. With thoughts like anxiety of being infected by the virus, trauma of locked down
and being away from the loved ones over a long period. At the same time, depression have crept in due to news of social
damage done by COVID-19 around the globe. Moreover, diabetics people already suffers from anxiety and various
forms of negative emotions that naturally gets intensified amid epidemic situation [18]. The non well being state of
mind would somehow has been reflected in unbalanced glycemic control of diabetes people during this COVID-19
period. Therefore continuous counselling is required for self management of blood glucose control during the ongoing
pandemic through collaboration with endocrinologists, psychiatrists, physician, nutritionists and diabetes educators.
However, the diabetes patients have to take few self-measures and take appropriate consulting through teleconsultation
mode for close coordination with physicians ensuring proper care during COVID-19 pandemic.
3.1

Diabetes Self-Management Amid COVID-19 Pandemic

The COVID-19 has come out as global pandemic which has affected millions of lives around the globe [19].
The diabetes mellitus (DM) has appeared as serious comorbidity factor for increased mortality of infected people.
Nevertheless, DM has played major role towards the invasive ventilation and/or intensive care unit of COVID-19
infected case [20]. The lock down and imposed restriction on the movement by higher authority has made difficult
condition for diabetic patients to control their glycemic profile.
3.2

Diabetes Self-Management: Barriers and Solutions

The various challenges faced by diabetes care during COVID-19 include the following:
• Lack of Confidence in Self-care: It has been difficult choice to have belief on self-care device for diabetes
management. A proper counselling is required that could address to each and individual’s requirement.
• Technology Awareness: The patient should be aware of information and communication technologies (ICT)
for the use of e-health, mhealth and telemedicine technologies which are clubbed under a big theme of
Internet-of-Medical-Things (IoMT) leading to healthcare Cyber-Physical System (H-CPS) [6]. There should
be good scientific materials available in the form of books or video to guide them properly.
• Proper Diet Plan: The usage of high carbohydrate and saturated fats should be avoided in their regular meal.
One has to set their own diet plan to maintain their calorie goals.
• Economic and Social Obstruction: The proper actions from the Government to ensure cost-effective
therapeutic materials and provision of essential medical care should be main focus from the country
government.
• Legal Barrier: The healthcare providers have been always sceptical for the remote monitoring and
telemedicine due to legal barrier in many counties like India. Many Government agencies have issued
guidelines to enable teleconsultations service for the chronicle diseases such as diabetes.

4
4.1

Case Study of Diabetic Patients in COVID-19 Around the World
In Asia

India has an estimated 77 million people with diabetes [21]. There are several reasons to have better control of
diabetes during the pandemic times as compared to normal situations. First, doing so will almost certainly improve the
outcomes in case someone does contract the COVID-19. All diabetes is not the same. Poorly controlled diabetes in an
elderly person with heart and kidney issues is very different from well-controlled diabetes in a fit, active 40-year-old.
The outcome of COVID-19 in the latter’s case could well be compared to those infected but without diabetes. The
seriousness of COVID-19 infection is very likely to get attenuated with better control of diabetes [22]. This itself is
enough reason to ensure good sugar readings.
The second reason why diabetes control is important is the usual one - It is necessary to have a fix on our numbers
(sugar, blood pressure, cholesterol) to prevent long-term complications [23]. With population 1.3 billion, it is very
difficult to maintain social distancing and also stay in lockdown state (or stay-at-home) for a longer period. It is really
difficult to take precautions like social distancing and staying home for the prevention of COVID-19 spread, specially
for diabetes patients. The diabetic people are at higher risk of COVID-19 infection, and have bigger threat in-terms
of mortality as well as morbidity. The extra precaution are required for such people to avoid any exposure to outside
world.
A study of patients at China showed that diabetes patients had higher risk in terms of mortality as 7.3% in comparison
of overall rate of 2.3% [24]. Another study in China shows that the infected people of COVID-19 with diabetes
reported worse results in comparison with the gender- and age-matched patients without diabetes [25]. The different
analysis from overall six study from China have observed that out of overall COVID-19 patients the average 9.7%
(6.9%-12.5%) patients were pre-existing diabetic patients. There was separate meta analysis was carried out on
thousands COVID-19 infected people where around 8% had historical background of diabetes. The main observation
was made that diabetic people of COVID-19 infection have more mortality rate.
Russia has thousands of COVID-19 infected people along with the USA, Brazil and India. However, it has the lower
death rates. A report suggested that in Russia, the diabetes was observed one of main chronic disease along with heart
disease and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease among the corona virus victims who are in intensive care [26].
4.2

In Australia

The threat for COVID-19 pandemic has been addressed in Australia [27]. The products for diabetic people have been
provided along with insulin supply and important medicines under National Diabetes Services Scheme (NDSS) to
reduce the risk of infection. The people with underneath diabetes have suggested to obtain their regular medicines.
Australia has already planned against COVID-19 risk for medical support with tele-healthcare, special assistance for
old-age people, home delivery of the medication and better service of remotely located people.
The tele-healthcare would be provided by pharmacies to the participant who seeks any service via call. The consultancy
service for telehealth would be provided to all the needed people (pregnant women, aged people over 65 and parents
of new born child) for chronic disease like diabetes. The government Australia provides assistance to diabetic patient
for their safety and health related issues. The government has created one web page for the health related guidelines
which is updated regularly [28].
New Zealand has announced some specific guidelines for diabetes patients [29]. The diabetic people can consult
their personal doctor or general practitioner for their individual recommendation during the COVID-19 situation. It
is advisable for diabetes people to have flu vaccination to reduce the any risk for co-infection. It is recommended to
maintain the glycaemic control for minimizing the threat of COVID-19 contraction. The age has also been considered
as additional factor for corona virus risk.
4.3

In Europe

It is estimated over 59 millions people being diabetic across 44 countries and territories [30]. A study shows that out
of total death in UK due to COVID-19, approximately 26 % suffered from either type-1 or type-2 diabetes [31]. Thus,
making recovery of these patients a challenging task.
Italy is one of the most affected countries from the COVID-19 pandemic [32]. As per a study of the hospitalized
patients at University Hospital of Padova suffering from COVID-19, the diabetic people had a 8.9% prevalence rate.
Thus, the recovery of such type of people was really a challenging task.

The study carried out in Finland have evidently shown that prevention can certainly control the infection to a extend
in people being overweight and suffering from glucose metabolism [33]. It also revealed that higher threat among
diabetic people could able to reduce upto 58% with their daily physical activity and by proper managing their diet.
The preventive actions of diabetes could be easily applicable to other non communicable disease like (Cancer and
Chronic respiratory) which are also at equal risk with diabetes. There are over 60 million diabetes patients in European
countries [34]. Out of which about 10.3% of those are male and around 9.6% are female of 25 years and older.
However, the rate of prevalence has been increased from past several years among all age people which are at greater
risk in this COVID-19 epidemic. The studies revealed that daily life style greatly accompanied with unhealthy diet,
obesity, overweight and lesser physical movement. These factors have even made difficult to easily recover from
corona virus.
Spain is also one of the most affected country in Europe from COVID-19 along with Italy. As per a study, few thousand
deaths were reported in Spain whereas the rate of prevalence of diabetes was around 12% [35]. As per same report,
In Romania, approximately 50% of people who died in COVID-19 were suffering either cardiovascular diseases or
diabetes mellitus [35].
Table 1: Pre-existing Health Condition of hospitalised ICU patients in COVID-19.
Underlying Condition
Italy
USA Sweden Spain
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
Diabetes
17
32
23
17
Hypertension
49
NA
34
NA
Chronic lung Disease
4
21
16
6
Cardiovascular Disease
21
23
11
30
4.4

In North America

In USA, more than 34.2 million people are suffering either diabetes or pre-diabetes including 14.3 millions senior
citizen as per report in 2018 [36]. Elderly patients having pre-existing health condition such as diabetes, heart diseases
and chronic lung disease have been reported. It was observed that 32 % patients in Intensive Care Unit (ICU) due to
COVID-19 had diabetes whereas 24 % hospitalized patients had diabetes [37]. Moreover, only 6% diabetes patients
who were COVID-19 infection did not require any kind medical attention. There is no conclusive evidence about
the fact that whether type-1 or type-2 diabetes patients are at more risk for COVID-19. The improper blood sugar
management is more so ever reason for COVID-19 infection.
People living with diabetes require uninterrupted access to essential medicines, supplies, technologies, and care.
Without insulin, a person with type-1 diabetes can potentially fatal health issues in a few days of time, and the lack,
or irregular supply, of other diabetes medication, supplies, devices and/or technologies will also adversely affect the
ability of all people with diabetes to manage their diabetes optimally and prevent the development of potentially fatal,
short- and long-term complications.
4.5

In South America

Brazil is one of the most affected countries in the world due to COVID-19 infection. As per report of 2019, there
are approximately 16.8 million (around 11.4%) of people in Brazil have Diabetes between age 20 to 79 years, which
is the fourth highest in the world [38]. Diabetes has been identified as one of the main threat along with other
Non Communicable Disease (NCD) by SARS-CoV-2. There are approximately 71.2% of diabetes patients in Brazil
suffering for hyperglycemia which would put them in higher threat of infection from COVID-19 [39].

5

Diabetes Management during COVID-19

A continuous monitoring of blood glucose level in diabetic patient is required [40,41] for proper diagnosis. The person
infected with virus and having underlying condition of diabetes will find it difficulty in balancing their glycemia profile
during the aliment [42]. Proper insulin dosage becomes essential to mange the glucose level in order to protect against
COVID-19 infection. With this vision many countries have presented certain guidelines about the self-management
for diabetes patients.
Moreover, due to pandemic around certain self-care practices need to be followed by the homebound diabetes patients
who are unable to carry out their routine visits [43]. One has to be extremely careful with the old ages diabetes patients

during this COVID-19 crisis who are suffering from comorbidities as renal diseases, pulmonary, cardiovascular and
kidney. However, management of diabetes would be a real challenge in such cases and further precaution should be
taken for such genre of people [44]. The people with all types (type-1, type-2 and gestational), with some illness are
more prone towards COVID-19.
There are several recommendations formulated for diabetic patients during COVID-19 by various as follows [45, 46]:
• One has to drink substantial volume of fluid in order to avoid any sort of dehydration.
• The glycemic profile has to be maintained by everyone to the target value suggested by concerned doctor.
Especially, the female patient with Gestational Diabetes needs a continuous measurement of glucose level
that could be beneficial to control the glucose profiles [47].
• Continuous monitoring of blood glucose level throughout the day inhibits ketoacidosis and hypoglycemic
condition. In case of type-1 diabetes patients if the value goes beyond 180 mg/dl then it is recommended to
pump insulin into the blood for maintaining the glucose level.
• Personal and surrounding hygienic are inevitable in any circumstances. Specifically, repeated hand washing
and proper cleaning all medical equipment’s such as glucometer and insulin pump with alcohol based sanitiser
and soap water are important.

Measure Blood Glucose Value

Maintain Proper
Diet Control

If Blood Glucose
>180 mg/dl
No
Yes

Take Carbohydrates and Sugar Free meal For
glucose Insulin Balance

Insulin Dosage as per Prescribed by Doctor

Figure 3: Balance of Glycemic Profile for Diabetes Patients during COVID-19.
It is a fact that certain medicine dose could play a crucial role in glucose control [48]. This medicine may work towards
blocking the binding of sugars and proteins. Thereby, high blood sugar value is avoided. This would theoretically
impede the virus from interacting with its receptor and modulate the inflammatory response to the virus. Pre-diabetes
patients are also requested to have glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) test which calculates the average glucose level over
period of 3 months [49].
High blood glucose keeps body in a low-inflammation state, thus recovery process in diabetics patients tends to be
slower as compared to others. Therefore, the recommendation enlisted above are most important for diabetes people
and for those who are in close contact with such people. The balanced glycemic profile is imperative as it would help
to improve the immunity [50].
Diabetes patient has to take precautions in order to avoid major impact of virus by monitoring the blood glucose at
regular interval at home and scheduled proper diet plan accordingly [12]. The good control of glycemic profile would

help to boost the immune system of vulnerable population against COVID-19 [51] (see Fig. 3). The insulin secretion
would help in developing immune system with balancing glucose by reducing risk of infection against the virus.
The poor control of glycaemic profile may result in serious issues and also make treatment difficult for the patient.
Glycaemic control of the infected person may lead to hyperglycaemia stage which makes hard to cure in presence
of high fever and abnormal respiratory issues. Thus, there is a need of continuous monitoring of glucose and taking
antidiabetic medication.

6
6.1

The Roles of Emerging Technologies during Pandemic Outbreak
Role of Robotics

The robotic applications have been used extensively in hospitals, restaurants, transportation, airports, hotels, in various
ways to ensure the minimum human contact to avoid the spread of COVID-19 (see Fig. 4). A simple example,
even robots serving as waiters in the restaurants. The autonomous vehicles, drones and intelligent robots help in
sterilising public area, delivering materials, the measurement of body temperature, collection of samples from corona
virus patients, providing value added service to patients, and also looking towards security or safety aspects. The
advancement of technology and various intelligence techniques have helped in tourism and hospitality management.
They are useful in providing service such as food delivery, housekeeping, concierge service and other related tasks
during this pandemic situation. Tele robot help in sensing environment and consequently taking necessary reactive
action automatically through various machine and deep learning algorithms. They are useful in placing and picking
the things, delivering and cleaning actions. Teleoperator type of robots can be very useful in such epidemic situation
where tasks can be performed with robotic control mechanism from human. Social robot aid in social activities with
interacting human in an acceptable manner [52]. They can also assist in healthcare, entertainment industry, teaching
and providing comfort communal services. If the growth of robotic based application continues with same pace then
it has been predicted that approximately 600 millions jobs around the world and one quarter hospital staff in the USA
would be replaced with robots [53]. The role of robot is very crucial in tourism and hospitality during this crisis
situation to improve the quality of service, safety measures and expectations. The embracing of robotic technology
in such situation where social distancing from the human is desired is welcomed. The self-belief in such technology
from the people would gradually grow with more trust and minimal risk. The spread of COVID-19 has shown growth
of robotic application all over the world. Their role in various field is expected to grow in many areas to improve the
sustainability and quality of life.

Tele
Robots

Robotics in
Tourism/
Hospitality

Robots in
Healthcare

Robotic in
COVID-19

Transportation
with Robotics

Social
Robot

Figure 4: Role of Robotic during pandemic outbreak.

6.2

Role of Industry 4.0

The outburst of COVID-19 has evolved the demand of necessary healthcare equipment (insulin pump, glucometer)
for diabetes patient who are at higher risk than others (see Fig. 5). The fourth generation industry revolution industry
4.0 has potential to cater the demand with advanced digital technology. It would be beneficial to provide smart
system where real-time information would be processed through Artificial Intelligence (AI), machine learning (ML),
intelligent data analytic techniques and Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) [54]. The automation of technology has
been possible with aid smart manufacturing. The development of any medical device/system could be done rapidly
with advances in manufacturing technologies such as 3D printing. The industry 4.0 has made possibility of connected
environment where all the technologies are fasten to exchange information for the development of vaccine, healthcare
facility, surveillance systems and necessary measures without much human involvement. Industry 4.0 could detect
and predict the prevalence of COVID-19 with acquiring data from the smart systems. It can also allow to tackle the
diabetes management in better way through intelligent technological solutions. The security solution with block chain
technology, through cryptography approaches for peer-to-peer system has resolved the security concerns at various
physical locations with suitable traceable mechanism.

Data Processing

Big Data

Intelligent Techniques

Decision Making

Information
For control

Data
Generation
Communication

Smart Manufacturing

Smart Transportation

Smart Production

Figure 5: Role of Industry 4.0 during pandemic outbreak.

6.3

Trusted Food Supply Chain Management

Food supply chain is a part of Internet-of-Agro-Things (IoAT) based Agriculture Cyber-Physical System (A-CPS) that
makes smart agriculture [55]. However, food or diet is important part of smart healthcare and needs discussion. The
consumption of counterfeit and adulterated foods can also affect the immunity of person and may act as a gateway
of COVID-19 [56]. The good quality of food is really important for the consumers and required some technology to
identify them easily. This is very crucial in this pandemic situation where healthy diet could always help to maintain
good immunity against any kind of virus infection. There are number of food product of fraudulent category which
are available in order to get some financial benefits. It has also been observed that the food contents of packaged food
may not be the similar as it mention. While in some cases the product itself is counterfeit. In present scenario, people
are trying to consume immune boosting product to maintain their strong immunity but quality of the same product is
compromised. Therefore, it is required to develop such kind of technology that can identify a safe and authentic food
product. It is really challenging task to find such kind of cost-effective solution which will not increase the cost of
product.

It is essential to develop portable and economical device to provide the quality assurance of food throughout its life
cycle from the production to final consumption stage. This kind of solution would be not only useful in such pandemic
situation but could be useful all the time to have proper diet management. This device should be compact and user
friendly product at consumer end. The solution is also required to be robust in order to its usage at various stages of
the supply chain. There is not such type of solution is available in the market till date, however few researchers have
attempted with Surface Enhanced Raman scattering (SERS). The days are not far where such type of solutions would
be available in the market.

Consumption
By Patient

Trading
Retails Service of
Food
Transportation
Processing

Farming &
Growing

Figure 6: A Vision of Trusted Food Supply Chain: from Farm to the Dinning Table.
The blockchain has a potential to make great impact in the food supply chain for smart agriculture [57–59]. The
technology could be useful to analyse the quality of the food product through the reliable supply chain management
framework. The sustainable system would be developed using block chain technology which is helpful to develop
trust and transparency from its production to consumption. This would be beneficial for diabetes patients to maintain
their proper healthy diet plan during this COVID19 outbreak.

7

Smart Healthcare for Diabetes during Pandemic Outbreak

There is some prediction that the novel corona virus SARS-CoV-2 may not go from the world in near future. Therefore,
each and individual has to change their life style and take all the preventive actions against the virus. A diabetes patients
are more susceptible, they have to adopt some healthcare measure in their daily life. There are few smart healthcare
solutions which are useful during this COVID-19 crisis is discussed in the current Section.
7.1

Telemedicine for Diabetes Patients

The COVID-19 pandemic has made the impact drastically on healthcare organizations all over the globe. Consequences of this lockdown for diabetic patients would result in reduced values of insulin and antihyperglycemic
components. The mandate on social distancing has also posed the restrictions on routine visits for the patients to
doctors. The role of telemedicine is significant during such unparalleled situation which allow patient to manage their
health profile for the diabetes alike chronic diseases [60].
The telemedicine service could be classified as per the time frame and mode of communication with health service
provider (See Fig. 7). The telemedicine could be provided through text emails, Fax, short messaging service, emails,
Fax and conversion by chat on social network platforms. There are several video conferencing software. There are few
traditional way of taking proper medication such as voice over internet protocol, phone etc. This kind of telemedicine

service would be important for situations where less numbers of doctors per person available and would be able to
reach rural area where it is scarcity of the health service. The service of telemdicine would be also popular gradually
with the increase of smart-phones day by day. This kind of service for diabetes patients is considered as blessing
where the vulnerability gets reduced from COVID-19 infection.

Continuous Glucose
Monitoring

Tele Consultancy

Glucose Insulin
Balance

Medication for
Glycemic profile control

Tele Prescription For
Glucose Control

Figure 7: Role of Teleedicine during Pandemic Outbreak.
Through this any physician can connect with the patient and give him advice by examining his various medical
diagnosis like prevailing history, self-monitored blood glucose charts (SMBG) and self-monitored blood pressure
(SMBP) values. Tele medicine has come a long way and its usage guided diabetic patients. A small study, where 35
randomised controlled trials (RCTs) done with aid of telemedicine (like video, phone and email) in China (where a
pool of (n,3514) population) was given the consultancy for 36 months. This experimentation demonstrated decrease in
HbA1c by 0.37% (p < 0.001) in group telemedicine as compared to other. Similar review was conducted by Flodgren
and colleagues,this was done on 21 RCTs of patient with diabetes (n,2768). They were given an interactive session
through (real time video or remote monitoring) in an appendage to only standard care alone. With this measure a
overall decrease of HbA1c by 0.31% (p < 0.001) in patients on telemedicine as set side by side with controls. A
review article recently published showed by 46 studies including both the types of diabetes with patients of type-2
diabetes mellitus (T2DM, n, 24000) and type-1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM n, 2052) were experimented with different
modes of telemedicine. This investigation reported an overall reduction in mean value of HbA1c by T1DM (0.12 to
0.86%) and T2DM (0.01% to 1.13%) patients, respectively.
India is in its early stage of research on telemedicine and diabetes. The Pilot project known as “Diabetes Rath” (Hindi
name of Mobile Vehicle) was started with aiming of spreading knowledge of diabetes care using mobile van facilitated
with telemedicine (like computer and video conferencing app for transmitting retinal images to ophthalmologist,
consult with diabetes foot specialist and diabetologist at a tertiary care centre ) especially in underprivileged areas [61].
This study has shown positive results in screening and managing diabetes through telemedicine.
There are several general guidelines for telemedicine service as follows:
• The confidential and private information should be maintained properly.
• The personal information related to patient such as name,age, address should be maintained.
• The medical history and records for the patient medical records should be kept with their prescription along
with the any testing records.
• The consultancy charge of the patient could be decided as per his/her medical prescription and the procedure
of getting tele-consultancy.

Telemedicine would allow the possibility to expand the medical facility and healthcare sector every part of the world
without any kind of geographic barrier. Consequently, telemedicine platform can help to reach the health related
services to places where there is any constraint of physical structures. It would gain massive popularity in the current
epidemic where social distancing is the need of the society. The remote consulting with doctor is really attractive
solution for urban tertiary where medical centres faces real challenge to accommodate each patient with proper point
of care facilities. Telemedicine option is also useful when it is required to coordinate complex multidisciplinary care
via a tumour board conference format among specialists that are geographically separated.
7.2

Non-Invasive measurement glucose measurement and automatic glucose control

The non-invasive glucose measurement device (such as iGLU, see Fig. 8) would be the state of art solution for frequent
glucose measurement [3, 6, 40, 41, 62]. The proposed solution will be useful for continues glucose monitoring and its
control with insulin secretion along with integration of Internet of Medical Things (IoMT) based healthcare CyberPhysical System (H-CPS) framework. iGLU would help to provide instant diagnosis to remote located diabetes patient
through telemedicine in this crisis situation. The conventional blood picking process would not be an ideal choice for
frequent measurement for older population and children. It has also associated risk with trauma and touching the
needle could be source for infection. For diabetes patients, if the blood sugar goes above 250, then it would be at
risk for ketones. The ketones is considered as the poison for body. During this pandemic, it is very vital to keep
these ketone levels down. The continues monitoring solution would help to balance the glucose profile in the body.
The glucose insulin model has been proposed to analyse the plasma insulin variation with proper insulin secretion
plan. The proposed insulin delivery system is integrated with IoMT to have prescribed diet and insulin plan under the
supervision of remotely located doctor. The insulin pump would be helpful to have the proper glucose-insulin level
that is important to improve the immune system to avoid COVID-19 infection.
Continuous Glucose Monitoring through
Non invasive Glucometer iGLU

Doctor/Care Giver

Cloud Datacenter
Insulin Secretion
through Pump

Hospital

Figure 8: Our Intelligent Non-Invasive Glucose Monitoring with Insulin Control Device (iGLU) [3, 6, 40, 41].
7.3

Intelligent Diet Control for Glucose Insulin Balance

Unhealthy diet can also cause several health issues. The diabetes patient has to plan their diet to control glycemic
profile. Automatic IoMT-based mechanisms which allow user to monitor their food intake and help to create awareness
about the right kind of food with suggestions for next diet (see Fig. 9) can be crucial for diabetic people. iLog educate
users for Normal-Eating and Stress-Eating, where Stress Eating defines the uncontrollable consumption of high caloric
foods. It also provide a fully-automated edge level device which is useful to detect automatic stress variation in
healthy lifestyle. The iLog framework uses a mobile platform as a user interface. The images of foods are being
detected automatically and subsequently quantified foods are compared with the images of stored database [63, 64].

The proposed approach could be helpful to have proper glucose-insulin balance for diabetes patients which ultimately
helps to minimize the chances of COVID-19 infection. It provides a fully-automated platform for healthy life style
with monitoring the stress behavioural by virtue of no input from user end.

Reference Image

Automatic Food Intake Quantification
Food Plate Image
Classification
Feature
Extraction

Food Item
Database

Food Object
Detection
IoMT- Cloud

Nutrition
Dataset

Automatic Next Diet Suggestion
Nutrition Deficit
Calculation

Next Meal
Suggestion

Mobile App Interface

Figure 9: Diet Automatic Monitoring and Control for Blood Glucose Control [63, 64].
7.4

Rapid Detection of COVID-19

The development of rapid, accurate and portable diagnostic technique for corona virus is also required for the
diabetes patients. If complications of diabetic patients increase then they are in more danger. The near infrared
(NIR) spectroscopy could be the breakthrough for this purpose. The focus is to develop a system for the Novel
Coronavirus (COVID-19) detection using optical technique (see Fig. 10). The proposed system shall use light with
specific wavelengths for instant measurement. The proposed technology would help to sense the novel coronavirus
from saliva of the patient. The proposed system is on chip (SoC) with specific emitters and detectors, analog-todigital converter (ADC) and acquisition module be embedded to process the sample through saliva. The acquired
values would be then processed through machine learning models to detect the presence of corona virus. The obtained
values require to be calibrated with standard reference value. The novel system would have higher precision level and
stability in measurement compared to traditional measurement. The system would be capable to test patients within
few minutes. The system is to be integrated with an IoT framework for data storage where remote instant diagnosis
is possible through shared server data of the patient. The proposed solution shall be cost-effective and provide instant
measurement of COVID-19 infection. The similar technology was applied successfully for rapid detection of Zika
virus and hepatitis B and C virus infection [65, 66].
Emitter for
Specific
Wavelength

Saliva
Sample
of Subject

Detector of
Specific
Wavelength

NIR Spectroscopy (Reflectance, Absorption and
Transmission)
Calibration
with
Machine
Learning
Models

Data
Acquisition
ADC with
Noise
Filtering

Post Processing using Machine
Learning Models

Figure 10: Rapid Detection of COVID-19 using NIR Spectroscopy.

7.5

Wearable Safety-Aware Mobility Tracking Device

An IoMT device easy-band based sensors is useful to sense the presence of another COVID-19 patient within a radius
of 6 to 13 feet [67] (See Fig. 11). It is wearable, accurate and cost effective solution of monitoring COVID-19 patient
and would be integrated with IoMT/H-CPS framework. The diabetic patients are of great need of such type of device
which would help to track their health in this COVID-19 outbreak.

Easy Band
Green Color

Easy Band
Green Color

Critical
Warning

No
Warning

Careful
Warning

Easy Band
Red Color
Easy Band
Yellow Color

Figure 11: Wearable wristband for contact tracing [68].
All must have to wear this device for safety aware mobility tracking purpose. The device comprises of three LED
colors mainly as red (highly suspected), Green (safe) and yellow (mildly suspected) [68]. Every device is capable of
storing the local information such as timestamp, time period and device ID of those devices which are in contact of
the present device within area of 6 feet zone. The device is able to store these information upto last 14 days. The
healthy tested persons (with diabetes or pre-diabetes) would have the access of this device as mobility pass with active
green light. The person has to wear the device once having the possession of this device and will not attempt for the
removal. In case of such any efforts of tempering, it will be directly reported to concerned authority. If any person
comes in close contact of another COVID-19 person then the device comes at red light state and record the details of
patient. The information are updated on server at regular basis. Device automatically starts vibrating to alert when
it come in an area of 4 meters (13 feet) in vicinity of yellow or red device. Another alert is generated by a beep
sound (critical warning) when it comes in contact with yellow or red device. When a green device spends a long time
in close contact with a yellow/red device, its status will automatically change to yellow. This device will also have
a temperature sensor (e.g. infrared/IR sensor) to sense the body temperature and measure respiratory of the person
for issuing necessary preventive actions and changes status from green to yellow. This way the device will help the
diabetic patients (or any citizen) to stay safe by automatically sensing the suspects. The battery life of the devices has
been enhanced with ultra low power operation. To social distance while traveling, one has to sense the colour that pop
up on the device which can warns people through their signals.
With the pandemic around, quarantining a potential carrier of COVID-19 can curb the spread to a certain extend.
However, with the difficulty in pinpointing a carrier of virus many countries are adhering to other measures like shelterin-place, stay-at-home, and lockdown. Prolonged stay-at-home measure has created many other problem such as
economical crises, unemployment, food scarcity, and mental health problems of individuals etc. Again contact tracing
of positive cases and isolating them will be a hectic, unreliable and error prune task. As a result again re-imposition
of lockdown is essential. Nevertheless, if the mentioned solution is controlled with a technological approach, it would
help in stabilizing the current scenario. SARS-CoV2 effects more to elderly people, children and person with preexisting diseases, such pre-diabetes, and diabetes. Such type of safety aware device would be really helpful to diabetic
community for their self-care measurement.

8

Conclusion and Future Directions

The article attempts to spread awareness among the people (specially diabetes patients) with possible recommendation
and future technologies for smart healthcare. The case studies around the globe suggest that diabetic people are
more vulnerable to COVID-19 infection and also suffer from more severity in terms of medical complications. The
underneath diabetic patients have higher risks of two to three times compared to non-diabetic person. The studies show
that a better control over glycemia can be advantageous to the patient simultaneously suffering from both diabetes and
viral respiratory diseases such as COVID-19. The proper diabetic care of the person would help in reducing the
prevalence of COVID-19 infection. The balance glucose insulin profile could improve the morbidity rate as well
as mortality rate against SARS-CoV-2. It has potentials to reduce length of stay in the infected COVID-19 patients
and also useful in avoiding the wide spared of virus among the community. We have discussed many devices and
techniques available for diet management, stress management, and glucose-level management which can be helpful.
Presently, significant effort going on around the globe for the development of vaccine and medicines against novel
corona virus COVID-19 and many agencies across the world are working for the success of the same. However, there is
requirement to have proper planning so it have early access of most vulnerable people such as diabetic, cardiovascular
disease, hyper tension people. Although there has been substantial development of technological solution, there is a
need for smart long term strategy that would require to fight against such pandemic in future in order to minimize the
social and economical impact. In this respect, IoMT driven healthcare Cyber-Physical System (H-CPS) will play a
major role [69].

References
[1] H. Yin, B. Mukadam, X. Dai, and N. Jha, “DiabDeep: Pervasive Diabetes Diagnosis based on Wearable
Medical Sensors and Efficient Neural Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing, no.
10.1109/TETC.2019.2958946, pp. 1–1, 2019.
[2] P. Zhang, X. Zhang, J. Brown, D. Vistisen, R. Sicree, and J. Shaw, “Global healthcare expenditure on diabetes
for 2010 and 2030,” Diabetes Research and Clinical Practice, vol. 87, no. 3, pp. 293–301, 2011.
[3] P. Jain, A. M. Joshi, and S. P. Mohanty, “iGLU 1.1: Towards a glucose-insulin model based closed loop iomt
framework for automatic insulin control of diabetic patients,” in Proceedings of the 6th IEEE World Forum on
Internet of Things (WF-IoT), 2020, p. in Press.
[4] N. P. Balakrishnan, G. P. Rangaiah, and L. Samavedham, “Review and analysis of blood glucose (bg) models
for type 1 diabetic patients,” Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research, vol. 50, no. 21, pp. 12 041–12 066,
2011.
[5] I. D. Federation, “IDF Diabetes Atlas - Diabetes is rising worldwide... and is set to rise even
further,” 2019, last Accessed on 21 March 2020. [Online]. Available: https://diabetesatlas.org/en/sections/
worldwide-toll-of-diabetes.html
[6] A. M. Joshi, P. Jain, and S. P. Mohanty, “Secure-iGLU: A secure device for noninvasive glucose measurement
and automatic insulin delivery in iomt framework,” in Proceedings of the 19th IEEE Computer Society Annual
Symposium on VLSI (ISVLSI), 2020, p. in Press.
[7] World Corona Meter, last Accessed on 15 July 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.worldometers.info/
coronavirus/?utm_campaign=homeAdvegas1?
[8] A. Hussain, B. Bhowmik, and N. C. do Vale Moreira, “COVID-19 and diabetes: Knowledge in progress,”
Diabetes Research and Clinical Practice, vol. 162, p. 108142, 2020.
[9] R. Gupta, A. Hussain, and A. Misra, “Diabetes and COVID-19: evidence, current status and unanswered research
questions,” European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, pp. 1–7, 2020.
[10] E. Dong, H. Du, and L. Gardner, “An interactive web-based dashboard to track COVID-19 in real time,” The
Lancet Infectious Diseases, vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 533–534, 2020.
[11] M. A. Hill, C. Mantzoros, and J. R. Sowers, “Commentary: COVID-19 in patients with diabetes,” Metabolism
Clinical and Experimental, vol. 107, p. 154217, 2020.
[12] I. Huang, M. A. Lim, and R. Pranata, “Diabetes mellitus is associated with increased mortality and severity
of disease in COVID-19 pneumonia – a systematic review, meta-analysis, and meta-regression,” Diabetes &
Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research & Reviews, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 395–403, July-August 2020.
[13] R. Pal and A. Bhansali, “COVID-19, diabetes mellitus and ACE2: The conundrum,” Diabetes Research and
Clinical Practice, vol. 162, p. 108132, 03 2020.

[14] R. Muniyappa and S. Gubbi, “COVID-19 pandemic, coronaviruses, and diabetes mellitus,” American Journal of
Physiology-Endocrinology and Metabolism, vol. 318, no. 5, pp. E736–E741, 2020.
[15] G. Iacobellis, “COVID-19 and diabetes: Can DPP4 inhibition play a role?” Diabetes Research and Clinical
Practice, vol. 162, p. 108125, 03 2020.
[16] G. Velikic, B. Todorovic, and D. Kukolj, “Post COVID-19 thoughts: Controversies and merits of the technology
progress,” IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine, no. 10.1109/MCE.2020.3002521, pp. 1–1, 2020.
[17] S. Mohanty, “COVID-19: A crisis or a springboard,” IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine, no.
10.1109/MCE.2020.3003042, pp. 1–1, 2020.
[18] S. Cuschieri and S. Grech, “COVID-19 and diabetes: The why, the what and the how,” Journal of Diabetes and
its Complications, p. 107637, 2020.
[19] A. Shenoy, M. Ismaily, and M. Bajaj, “Diabetes and COVID-19: A global health challenge,” BMJ Open Diabetes
Research and Care, vol. 8, no. 1, 2020.
[20] S. Nachimuthu, R. Vijayalakshmi, M. Sudha, and V. Viswanathan, “Coping with diabetes during the COVID–19
lockdown in india: Results of an online pilot survey,” Diabetes & Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research &
Reviews, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 579 – 582, 2020.
[21] P. Saeedi, I. Petersohn, P. Salpea, B. Malanda, S. Karuranga, N. Unwin, S. Colagiuri, L. Guariguata, A. A.
Motala, K. Ogurtsova et al., “Global and regional diabetes prevalence estimates for 2019 and projections for
2030 and 2045: Results from the international diabetes federation diabetes atlas,” Diabetes research and clinical
practice, vol. 157, p. 107843, 2019.
[22] S. Mukherjee, O. Banerjee, S. Singh, and B. K. Maji, “COVID-19 could trigger global diabetes burden–a
hypothesis,” Diabetes & Metabolic Syndrome, vol. 14, no. 5, p. 963, 2020.
[23] P. Jain, R. Maddila, and A. M. Joshi, “A precise non-invasive blood glucose measurement system using NIR
spectroscopy and huber’s regression model,” Optical and Quantum Electronics, vol. 51, no. 2, p. 51, 2019.
[24] Z. Wu and J. M. McGoogan, “Characteristics of and important lessons from the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid19) outbreak in china: summary of a report of 72 314 cases from the chinese center for disease control and
prevention,” Jama, vol. 323, no. 13, pp. 1239–1242, 2020.
[25] Q. Shi, X. Zhang, F. Jiang, X. Zhang, N. Hu, C. Bimu, J. Feng, S. Yan, Y. Guan, D. Xu, G. He, C. Chen,
X. Xiong, L. Liu, H. Li, J. Tao, Z. Peng, and W. Wang, “Clinical characteristics and risk factors for mortality of
COVID-19 patients with diabetes in wuhan, china: A two-center, retrospective study,” Diabetes Care, vol. 43,
no. 7, pp. 1382–1391, 2020.
[26] Russia’s Health Care System, Demographics Present Unique Advantages, Disadvantages in Fighting
COVID-19, last Accessed on 30 April 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.russiamatters.org/analysis/
russias-health-care-system-demographics-present-unique-advantages-disadvantages-fighting
[27] R. Abbas and K. Michael, “COVID-19 Contact Trace App Deployments: Learnings from Australia and
Singapore,” IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine, vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 65–70, Sep 2020.
[28] ADS, “Australian diabetes society communique for diabetes health professionals regarding COVID19 pandemic,” 2020, published 29 March, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://diabetessociety.com.au/
covid-19-updates.asp
[29] NZ
Diabetes
COVID-19
Special,
last
Accessed
on
15
July
2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.researchreview.co.nz/nz/Clinical-Area/Internal-Medicine/Diabetes-Obesity/
NZ-Diabetes-Covid-19-Special.aspx
[30] S. Godbole and S. Godbole, “Reducing the risk of heart failure in diabetes mellitus: review of new therapeutics,”
International Journal of Basic & Clinical Pharmacology, vol. 9, no. 4, p. 660, 2020.
[31] A. Banerjee, M. Katsoulis, A. G. Lai, L. Pasea, T. A. Treibel, C. Manisty, S. Denaxas, G. Quarta,
H. Hemingway, J. Cavalcante, M. Nousardeghi, and J. C. Moon, “Clinical academic research in the time
of corona: a simulation study in England and a call for action,” medRxiv, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.medrxiv.org/content/early/2020/04/17/2020.04.14.20065417
[32] A. Remuzzi and G. Remuzzi, “COVID-19 and italy: what next?” The Lancet, vol. 395, no. 10231, pp. 1225 –
1228, 2020.
[33] S. Kumar, P. Renjith, C. Priscilla, S. K. Ganesan, and N. Rajesh, “A normalized mortality rate showed the diverse
severity of COVID-19 and its association with other chronic diseases,” no. 10.20944/preprints202004.0308.v5,
2020.

[34] World Health organization for Europe, published on 15 July 2020. [Online]. Available:
//www.euro.who.int/en/health-topics/noncommunicable-diseases/diabetes/data-and-statistics

https:

[35] A. P. Stoian, Y. Banerjee, A. A. Rizvi, and M. Rizzo, “Diabetes and the COVID-19 pandemic: how insights from
recent experience might guide future management,” Metabolic Syndrome and Related Disorders, vol. 18, no. 4,
pp. 173–175, 2020.
[36] CDC, “National diabetes statistics report, 2020,” 2020, centers for Disease Control and Prevention and others,
Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, US Department of Health and Human Services.
[Online]. Available: https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/library/features/diabetes-stat-report.html
[37] N. Chow, K. Fleming-Dutra, R. Gierke, A. Hall, M. Hughes, T. Pilishvili, M. Ritchey, K. Roguski, T. Skoff, and
E. Ussery, “Preliminary estimates of the prevalence of selected underlying health conditions among patients with
coronavirus disease 2019 - United States, february 12–march 28, 2020,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report,
vol. 69, no. 13, p. 382, 2020.
[38] B. d. A. Pititto and S. R. G. Ferreira, “Diabetes and COVID-19: more than the sum of two morbidities,” Revista
de Saúde Pública, vol. 54, p. 54, 2020.
[39] M. T. U. Barone, S. B. Harnik, P. V. de Luca, B. L. de Souza Lima, R. J. P. Wieselberg, B. Ngongo, H. C. Pedrosa,
A. Pimazoni-Netto, D. R. Franco, M. d. F. M. de Souza et al., “The impact of COVID-19 on people with diabetes
in brazil,” Diabetes Research and Clinical Practice, 2020.
[40] P. Jain, A. M. Joshi, and S. P. Mohanty, “iGLU: An Intelligent Device for Accurate Non-Invasive Blood GlucoseLevel Monitoring in Smart Healthcare,” IEEE Consum. Electron. Mag., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 35–42, January 2020.
[41] P. Jain, A. M. Joshi, N. Agrawal, and S. Mohanty, “iGLU 2.0: A new non-invasive, accurate serum glucometer
for smart healthcare,” arXiv Electrical Engineering and Systems Science, no. arXiv:2001.09182, January 2020.
[42] A. K. Singh, R. Gupta, A. Ghosh, and A. Misra, “Diabetes in COVID-19: Prevalence, pathophysiology, prognosis
and practical considerations,” Diabetes & Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research & Reviews, vol. 14, no. 4, pp.
303 – 310, 2020.
[43] S. R. Bornstein, F. Rubino, K. Khunti, G. Mingrone, D. Hopkins, A. L. Birkenfeld, B. Boehm, S. Amiel, R. I.
Holt, J. S. Skyler et al., “Practical recommendations for the management of diabetes in patients with COVID-19,”
The Lancet Diabetes & Endocrinology, vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 546–550, 2020.
[44] A. Kumar, A. Arora, P. Sharma, S. A. Anikhindi, N. Bansal, V. Singla, S. Khare, and A. Srivastava, “Is
diabetes mellitus associated with mortality and severity of COVID-19? a meta-analysis,” Diabetes & Metabolic
Syndrome: Clinical Research & Reviews, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 535–545, 2020.
[45] G. Rayman, A. Lumb, B. Kennon, C. Cottrell, D. Nagi, E. Page, D. Voigt, H. Courtney, H. Atkins, J. Platts,
K. Higgins, K. Dhatariya, M. Patel, P. Narendran, P. Kar, P. Newland-Jones, R. Stewart, O. Burr, and S. Thomas,
“Guidelines for the management of diabetes services and patients during the COVID-19 pandemic,” Diabetic
Medicine, 2020.
[46] I. Kyrou, T. Robbins, and H. S. Randeva, “COVID-19 and diabetes: No time to drag our feet during an untimely
pandemic,” Journal of Diabetes and its Complications, 2020.
[47] P. Jain, S. Pancholi, and A. M. Joshi, “An IoMT based non-invasive precise blood glucose measurement system,”
in Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Smart Electronic Systems (iSES), 2019, pp. 111–116.
[48] N. Prasad, A. Kumar, and M. Tripathi, “Novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic in India: A review,”
Eurasian Journal of Medicine and Investigation (EJMI), vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 279–283, 2020.
[49] S. K. Singh, R. Jain, and S. Singh, “Vitamin D deficiency in patients with diabetes and COVID-19 infection,”
Diabetes & Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research & Reviews, vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 1033 – 1035, 2020.
[50] R. C. W. Ma and R. I. G. Holt, “COVID-19 and diabetes,” Diabetic Medicine, vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 723–725, 2020.
[51] M. A. Hill, C. Mantzoros, and J. R. Sowers, “Commentary: COVID-19 in patients with diabetes,” Metabolism,
vol. 107, p. 154217, 2020.
[52] L. Aymerich-Franch and I. Ferrer, “The implementation of social robots during the COVID-19 pandemic,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2007.03941, 2020.
[53] Z. Zeng, P.-J. Chen, and A. A. Lew, “From high-touch to high-tech: COVID-19 drives robotics adoption,”
Tourism Geographies, pp. 1–11, 05 2020.
[54] S. P. Mohanty, “Advances in Transportation Cyber-Physical System (T-CPS),” IEEE Consumer Electronics
Magazine, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 4–6, July 2020.

[55] V. Udutalapally, S. P. Mohanty, V. Pallagani, and V. Khandelwal, “sCrop: A Internet-of-Agro-Things (IoAT)
Enabled Solar Powered Smart Device for Automatic Plant Disease Prediction,” arXiv Electrical Engineering
and Systems Science, no. arXiv:2005.06342, May 2020.
[56] F. Naja and R. Hamadeh, “Nutrition amid the COVID-19 pandemic: a multi-level framework for action,”
European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, pp. 1–5, 2020.
[57] L. Rachakonda, A. K. Bapatla, S. P. Mohanty, and E. Kougianos, “SaYoPillow: Blockchain-Enabled PrivacyAssured Framework for Stress Detection, Prediction and Control Considering Sleeping Habits in the IoMT,”
arXiv Computer Science, no. arXiv:2007.07377, July 2020.
[58] A. J. Alkhodair, S. P. Mohanty, E. Kougianos, and D. Puthal, “McPoRA: A multi-chain proof of rapid
authentication for post-blockchain based security in large scale complex cyber-physical systems,” in Proceedings
of the 19th IEEE Computer Society Annual Symposium on VLSI (ISVLSI), 2020, p. in Press.
[59] S. Köhler and M. Pizzol, “Technology assessment of blockchain-based technologies in the food supply chain,”
Journal of Cleaner Production, p. 122193, 2020.
[60] R. Joshi, S. Atal, Z. Fatima, S. Balakrishnan, S. Sharma, and A. Joshi, “Diabetes care during covid-19 lockdown
at a tertiary care centre in india,” Diabetes Research and Clinical Practice, 2020.
[61] H. S. Gopalan, I. Haque, S. Ahmad, A. Gaur, and A. Misra, ““Diabetes care at doorsteps”: A customised mobile
van for the prevention, screening, detection and management of diabetes in the urban underprivileged populations
of Delhi,” Diabetes & Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research & Reviews, vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 3105–3112, 2019.
[62] A. M. Joshi, P. Jain, S. P. Mohanty, and N. Agrawal, “iGLU 2.0: A new wearable for accurate non-invasive
continuous serum glucose measurement in iomt framework,” IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics, no.
10.1109/TCE.2020.3011966, pp. 1–1, 2020.
[63] L. Rachakonda, S. P. Mohanty, and E. Kougianos, “iLog: An Intelligent Device for Automatic Food Intake
Monitoring and Stress Detection in the IoMT,” IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics, vol. 66, no. 2, pp.
115–124, May 2020.
[64] P. Sundaravadivel, K. Kesavan, L. Kesavan, S. P. Mohanty, and E. Kougianos, “Smart-Log: A Deep-Learning
Based Automated Nutrition Monitoring System in the IoT,” IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics, vol. 64,
no. 3, pp. 390–398, Aug 2018.
[65] S. Roy, D. Perez-Guaita, S. Bowden, P. Heraud, and B. R. Wood, “Spectroscopy goes viral: Diagnosis of hepatitis
B and C virus infection from human sera using ATR-FTIR spectroscopy,” Clinical Spectroscopy, vol. 1, p.
100001, 2019.
[66] J. N. Fernandes, L. M. Dos Santos, T. Chouin-Carneiro, M. G. Pavan, G. A. Garcia, M. R. David, J. C. Beier,
F. E. Dowell, R. Maciel-de Freitas, and M. T. Sikulu-Lord, “Rapid, noninvasive detection of Zika virus in Aedes
aegypti mosquitoes by near-infrared spectroscopy,” Science advances, vol. 4, no. 5, p. eaat0496, 2018.
[67] K. Michael and R. Abbas, “Getting Behind COVID-19 Contact Trace Apps: The Google-Apple Partnership,”
IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine, vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 71–76, Sep 2020.
[68] A. K. Tripathy, A. G. Mohapatra, S. P. Mohanty, E. Kougianos, A. M. Joshi, and G. Das, “EasyBand: A Wearable
for Safety-Aware Mobility during Pandemic Outbreak,” IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine, vol. 9, no. 5, pp.
57–61, Sep 2020.
[69] S. P. Mohanty, “Healthcare Cyber-Physical System is More Important Than Before,” IEEE Consumer Electronics
Magazine, vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 6–7, September 2020.

Authors’ Biographies
Amit M. Joshi (M’08) has completed his M.Tech (by research) in 2009 and obtained
Doctoral of Philosophy degree (Ph.D) from National Institute of Technology, Surat in
August 2015. He is currently an Assistant Professor at National Institute of Technology,
Jaipur since July 2013. His area of specialization is Biomedical signal processing, Smart
healthcare, VLSI DSP Systems and embedded system design. He has published six
book chapters and also published 50+ research articles in peer reviewed international
journals/conferences. He has served as a reviewer of technical journals such as IEEE
Transactions, Springer, Elsevier and also served as Technical Programme Committee
member for IEEE conferences. He also received UGC Travel fellowship, SERB DST Travel
grant and CSIR Travel fellowship to attend IEEE Conferences in VLSI and Embedded
System. He has served session chair at various IEEE Conferences like TENCON -2016,
iSES-2018, ICCIC-14. He has supervised 18 M.Tech projects and 14 B.Tech projects in the
field of VLSI and Embedded Systems and VLSI DSP systems. He is currently supervising six Ph.D. students.

Urvashi P. Shukla received her bachelor’s degree in Electronics & Communication
Engineering from C. K . Pithawala College of Engineering and Technology, affiliated
under Veer Narmad South Gujarat University, Gujarat, India. She pursued her M.E from
Sarvajanik College of Engineering and Technology, Surat, Gujarat, India under Gujarat
Technological University. She completed her Ph.D from NIT, Jaipur, Rajasthan, India. She
has published papers in reputed journals and conferences. Her research interests revolves to
obtain solution for problems associated with hyperspectral Images by incorporating various
optimization algorithms based on heuristic approach.

Saraju P. Mohanty (SM’08) received the bachelor’s degree (Honors) in electrical
engineering from the Orissa University of Agriculture and Technology, Bhubaneswar, in
1995, the master’s degree in Systems Science and Automation from the Indian Institute of
Science, Bengaluru, in 1999, and the Ph.D. degree in Computer Science and Engineering
from the University of South Florida, Tampa, in 2003. He is a Professor with the University
of North Texas. His research is in “Smart Electronic Systems” which has been funded by
National Science Foundations (NSF), Semiconductor Research Corporation (SRC), U.S. Air
Force, IUSSTF, and Mission Innovation. He has authored 350 research articles, 4 books, and
invented 4 U.S. patents. His Google Scholar h-index is 36 and i10-index is 134 with 5800+
citations. He introduced the Secure Digital Camera (SDC) in 2004 with built-in security
features designed using Hardware-Assisted Security (HAS) or Security by Design (SbD)
principle. He is widely credited as the designer for the first digital watermarking chip in
2004 and first the low-power digital watermarking chip in 2006. He is a recipient of 12
best paper awards, Fulbright Specialist Award in 2020, IEEE Consumer Electronics Society
Outstanding Service Award in 2020, the IEEE-CS-TCVLSI Distinguished Leadership Award in 2018, and the PROSE
Award for Best Textbook in Physical Sciences and Mathematics category in 2016. He has delivered 9 keynotes and
served on 5 panels at various International Conferences. He has been serving on the editorial board of several peerreviewed international journals, including IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics (TCE), and IEEE Transactions
on Big Data (TBD). He is the Editor-in-Chief (EiC) of the IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine (MCE). He has
been serving on the Board of Governors (BoG) of the IEEE Consumer Electronics Society, and has served as the
Chair of Technical Committee on Very Large Scale Integration (TCVLSI), IEEE Computer Society (IEEE-CS) during
2014-2018. He is the founding steering committee chair for the IEEE International Symposium on Smart Electronic
Systems (iSES), steering committee vice-chair of the IEEE-CS Symposium on VLSI (ISVLSI), and steering committee
vice-chair of the OITS International Conference on Information Technology (ICIT). He has mentored 2 post-doctoral
researchers, and supervised 12 Ph.D. dissertations, 26 M.S. theses, and 10 undergraduate projects.

