IEEE INTERENT OF THINGS MAGAZINE

1

Blockchain-enabled Internet of Medical Things to
Combat COVID-19

arXiv:2008.09933v1 [cs.CY] 23 Aug 2020

Hong-Ning Dai, Senior Member, IEEE, Muhammad Imran, Senior Member, IEEE, Noman Haider, Member, IEEE

Abstract—We are experiencing an unprecedented healthcare
crisis caused by the newly-discovered corona-virus disease
(COVID-19). The outbreaks of COVID-19 reveal the frailties of
existing healthcare systems. Therefore, the digital transformation
of healthcare systems becomes an inevitable trend. During this
process, the Internet of Medical Things (IoMT) plays a crucial
role while intrinsic vulnerabilities of security and privacy deter
the wide adoption of IoMT. In this article, we present a
blockchain-enabled IoMT to address the security and privacy
concerns of IoMT systems. We also discuss the solutions brought
by blockchain-enabled IoMT to COVID-19 from five different
perspectives. Moreover, we outline the open challenges and future
directions of blockchain-enabled IoMT.
Index Terms—Blockchain, Internet of Medical Things,
COVID-19, Security, Privacy

I. I NTRODUCTION

W

E have experienced an unprecedented health crisis due
to the pandemic of the newly-discovered corona-virus
disease (COVID-19). The COVID-19 crisis has caused severe
impacts on both the socio-economy and healthcare systems.
Our normal life is affected by city lockdown and flight
cancellation. Moreover, the eruption of the disease is not only
carrying intense pressure to healthcare professionals (such as
doctors and nurses) but also revealing the vulnerabilities of
healthcare systems. Healthcare workers have to work overtime
for months to deal with overwhelming infectious patients in
hospitals. Senior citizens and chronic patients are required
to stay at home to avoid possible infections in healthcare
institutions.
Fortunately, the recent advances in Information and communications technology (ICT) such as the Internet of Things (IoT)
and artificial intelligence (AI) bring us opportunities to win the
battle against the COVID-19 crisis. In particular, the availability of diverse bio-sensors, medical devices, and wearable
devices as well as the advances of wireless communications
technologies lead to the advent of the internet of medical
things (IoMT) [1]. IoMT can be widely adopted in healthcare
scenarios such as telemedicine, pandemic quarantine, social
distancing, and smart hospitals. IoMT has generated massive
medical and healthcare data from diverse IoMT devices and
medical facilities in healthcare institutions. After analyzing
the IoMT data, we can diagnose and identify diseases, consequently giving appropriate treatments. However, IoMT is also
H.-N. Dai is with Faculty of Information Technology, Macau University of
Science and Technology, Macau. e-mail: hndai@ieee.org.
M. Imran is with College of Applied Computer Science, King Saud
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. email: dr.m.imran@ieee.org.
N. Haider is with College of Engineering and Science at Victoria University,
Australia. email: noman90@ieee.org.

faced with security and privacy vulnerabilities, which deter
healthcare agencies from widely adopting IoMT.
The emerging blockchain technologies can potentially address the security and privacy issues in IoMT. Integrated
with security mechanisms such as asymmetric cryptographic
schemes and digital signature, blockchain can provide IoMT
with certain security protection. Moreover, the decentralization
of blockchain systems also mitigates the risks of the failures
due to single-point-failure and malicious attacks. After introducing privacy-preservation mechanisms, such as homomorphic obfuscations and differential privacy, blockchain can also
preserve the privacy of IoMT data. Moreover, blockchain has
intrinsic merits, such as traceability and immutability, which
can further improve the data provenance of IoMT. Therefore,
blockchain is an ideal carrier for IoMT. As a result, the indepth integration of blockchain and IoMT can further enhance
the IoMT systems.
In this article, we investigate the integration of blockchain
and IoMT, which is named as blockchain-enabled IoMT.
We explore the opportunities brought by blockchain-enabled
IoMT, especially in combating COVID-19. In particular, we
first briefly review blockchain technologies and IoMT. We
then present an architecture of blockchain-enabled IoMT
and discuss the opportunities brought by blockchain-enabled
IoMT. We next analyze the solutions of blockchain-enabled
IoMT to COVID-19 from five perspectives including 1) tracing
pandemic origin, 2) quarantine and social distancing, 3) smart
hospital, 4) medical data provenance, and 5) remote healthcare
and telemedicine. Moreover, we also discuss open challenges
and future directions in blockchain-enabled IoMT.
II. OVERVIEW OF B LOCKCHAIN AND I O MT
This section presents an overview of blockchain and Internet
of Medical Things.
A. Blockchain
Blockchain consists of a number of blocks as shown in
Fig. 1. In this structure, except for the first block (i.e., genesis
block), every block is essentially connected to its previous
block through a backward reference, which is the hash value
of its previous block. For instance, block i + 1 contains the
hash value of its previous block i. Each block also contains
other data fields, such as a timestamp, a cryptographic nonce
(a.k.a. a random number used once), a root hash of all the
transactions, and a root hash of all the contracts [2]. The fixedsize root hash values of both transactions and contracts are

IEEE INTERENT OF THINGS MAGAZINE

Block

Block

Healthcare
practitioners

Genesis block

2

TX

TX

Contract
root-hash

Nounce

Smart contract
func()
func()
func()
func()
func()

Fig. 1. Blockchain consisting of a number of blocks.

Data
management

TX

Transaction
root-hash

Computing facilities

IoMT
communications

Timestamp

B. Internet of Medical Things
The recent advances in bio-sensors, medical devices and
communications technologies lead to the advent of IoMT,

Data analytics

Robot
Robot
IoT Gateway

nearly immutable since even one-bit modification can result
in a totally different hash value.
Besides blockchain, smart contracts are another disrupting
technology driven by the advent of blockchain. Smart contracts
running on top of blockchain can automate the execution of
contractual terms and clauses when certain conditions (e.g.,
delivery delay or breach of contract) are triggered. After
being compiled into bytecode (or machine code) and stored
in blockchains, smart contracts are immutable due to the
immutability of blockchain and the root hash of all the smart
contracts. Smart contracts can simplify the administration
process, enhance the efficiency of business activities, mitigate
the potential risks [3].
Blockchain technologies have the following key features:
(i) Immutability means that falsifications on data stored in
blockchain are extremely difficult because any slight modifications can lead to invalid data (invalid hash values). (ii)
Non-repudiation of transactions can be assured by digital signatures, asymmetric cryptographic algorithms, and distributed
consensus mechanisms. (iii) Traceability implies that the origins of data can be traced through analyzing the publicly
available blockchain data with the associated timestamps. (iv)
Decentralization of blockchain allows the transactions to be
validated by the majority of peers distributed in the entire
system without the central agency. In this way, the bureaucratic
cost can be saved and the system reliability can be enhanced.
Blockchain systems can be typically categorized into three
types [4]: 1) public (permissionless) blockchains; 2) private
(permissioned) blockchains and 3) consortium blockchains.
Public blockchains including Bitcoin, Ethereum, and EOSIO
can be publicly accessible by every user in the blockchain
network while private blockchains have strict access control
to limit the accessibility of users. Consortium blockchains
lie between permissionless and permissioned blockchains.
Typically, public blockchains have poorer scalability than
private blockchains due to the lower throughput of consensus
algorithms where the throughput denotes the number of transactions being confirmed every second. Consortium blockchains
achieve the performance lower than private blockchains while
higher than public blockchains.

IoMT data

Base station

Sensor/IoT device

Wireless link

Wired link

Fig. 2. Overview of IoMT.

which can be deployed in diverse healthcare scenarios such as
telemedicine, remote rehabilitation, and pandemic quarantine.
IoMT that connects diverse medical devices and facilities with
healthcare institutions has generated massive heterogeneous
medical data. Through analyzing the massive IoMT data, medical professionals (such as doctors and nurses) can diagnose,
identify, and make appropriate treatments. Fig. 2 presents an
overview of the existing IoMT systems. In this architecture,
diverse IoMT devices generate massive IoMT data, which can
be collected, processed, and analyzed, thereby being used by
healthcare practitioners [5].
Although IoMT has the potential to offer reliable and
effective healthcare services to both patients and medical
practitioners, the advent of IoMT also poses the following
challenges: 1) absence of interoperability across different
IoMT sectors; 2) privacy and security vulnerabilities of IoMT
devices and systems. IoMT consists of diverse biomedical
sensors, medical devices, IoT gateways, and base stations,
thereby leading to the heterogeneity of IoMT systems. Meanwhile, the diversity of IoMT also exhibits the diversity of
various wireless protocols, such as Near-field communication
(NFC), Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE), Low-Power Wireless
Personal Area Networks (LoWPAN), LoRa and NB-IoT. The
heterogeneity of decentralized IoMT systems results in the
poor interoperability across different systems, consequently
forming a number of information silos. Thus, it is difficult
to exchange medical information across different medical facilities and institutions. However, medical information sharing
is crucial for medical professionals, especially in prophylaxis
and treatment of pandemic outbreaks, such as COVID-19.
Moreover, IoMT is also faced with rising concerns on
security and privacy [6]. On the one hand, biomedical sensors
and medical devices that are often resource-limited (i.e., low
computational capability and limited battery power) have
intrinsic vulnerabilities to malicious attacks, such as wiretapping, jamming, backdoor, and worm attacks. On the other
hand, IoMT data is quite privacy-sensitive compared with
other types of IoT data. Particularly, IoMT data often requires
to be outsourced to remote cloud servers, which are owned
by third parties. During the data collection, processing, and

IEEE INTERENT OF THINGS MAGAZINE

3

Off-chain data

AI and ML/DL algorithms

Data analytics layer
Data storage
Cloud computing
Blockchain node

Blockchain network layer
Virtual mapping

Blockchain (on-chain) data
Off-chain data

Edge computing layer
BS

Thermal camera

IoT Gateway

WiFi AP
Edge node
Wristband sensor

Device layer
Thermometer

Robot

Fig. 3. Architecture of blockchain-enabled IoMT consisting of device layer,
edge computing layer, blockchain network layer and data analytics layer.

analytics of IoMT data, the data privacy of patients may be
intentionally or accidentally leaked.
III. B LOCKCHAIN - ENABLED I O MT
This section presents an architecture of blockchain-enabled
IoMT and discusses the opportunities brought by blockchainenabled IoMT.
A. Architecture of blockchain-enabled IoMT
The integration of blockchain with IoMT can potentially address security and privacy concerns. We name such integration
of blockchain with IoMT as blockchain-enabled IoMT. Fig. 3
presents an architecture of blockchain-enabled IoMT. In this
architecture, there are four layers from bottom to up: 1) device
layer, 2) edge computing layer, 3) blockchain network layer
and 4) data analytics layer.
At the bottom of this multi-layer framework, there are
diverse IoMT devices, such as heat sensors, thermal cameras,
wristband sensors, thermometers, and RFID tags in the device
layer. In the middle, the edge computing layer is essentially an
integration of communication networks and edge computing
facilities. Edge computing nodes deployed at base stations,
WiFi access points (APs), and IoT gateways can collect and
preprocess IoMT data. Moreover, the blockchain network layer
plays a crucial role as a middleware to offer trustworthy
management of diverse resources across the underlying layers.
The data analytics layer on the top consists of cloud computing
facilities, data storage servers, and AI and Machine Learning
(ML) or Deep Learning (DL) algorithms. It is worth mentioning that either edge computing facilities in the edge computing
layer or entities in the data analytics layer are all mapped
to nodes in the blockchain network layer. In this manner,
blockchain-enabled IoMT can achieve effective authentication
and access control on both the edge computing layer and the
blockchain network layer.
This multi-layer architecture has the following merits:
• Offering the abstraction from underlying layers. The
edge computing layer and the blockchain network layer

essentially play a role as a middleware so that the
complexity of IoMT devices and the heterogeneity of
IoMT communications can be hidden. Meanwhile, the
blockchain network layer can provide other applications
(such as data analytics applications) with blockchainbased services so as to facilitate application development.
• Improving the interoperability of IoMT systems. The
blockchain network layer leverages blockchain’s built-in
overlay peer-to-peer (P2P) network to connect different
IoMT sub-networks throughout the entire IoMT system.
In this way, the fragmented IoMT components are integrated as a whole so as to offer seamless services to
other applications (e.g., data analytics). As a result, the
interoperability of IoMT systems can be improved.
We next discuss the opportunities brought by blockchainenabled IoMT.
B. Opportunities of blockchain-enabled IoMT
As discussed in Section II-B, IoMT is faced with security
and privacy concerns. Blockchain-enabled IoMT has brought
opportunities to address these challenges in IoMT. We next analyze the opportunities brought by blockchain-enabled IoMT
in the following aspects.
1) Security improvement of IoMT: The introduction of
blockchain to IoMT can significantly improve the security of
IoMT. First, the built-in security mechanisms of blockchain,
such as asymmetric encryption/decryption schemes as well
as the digital signature can offer certain protection to IoMT
data. Second, the integration of blockchain with other security
schemes, such as authentication and access control can further
enhance system security. Third, smart contracts embedded in
IoT devices can automatically trigger the auto-upgrading programs to upgrade IoT devices firmware automatically, thereby
enhancing the system security [3]. Moreover, the decentralization of blockchain can also mitigate the risks of system
failures due to single-point-failures or other malicious attacks
(e.g., distributed denial-of-service attack), thereby improving
system security and reliability.
2) Privacy preservation of IoMT data: Blockchain intrinsically can achieve somewhat privacy preservation through hiding blockchain account addresses and encrypting blockchain
transaction data. The integration of blockchain with other
privacy-preservation schemes, such as homomorphic obfuscations and other cryptographic schemes, blockchain-enabled
IoMT can provide users with better privacy preservation.
Moreover, as shown in the architecture of blockchain-enabled
IoMT (in Fig. 3), edge computing nodes in the edge computing
layer can undertake data collection and processing tasks in
approximation to users. In this manner, the privacy-sensitive
IoMT data can be stored and processed locally before being
outsourced to remote clouds. Consequently, data privacy can
be preserved via the introduction of the edge computing layer.
3) Traceability of IoMT data: In blockchain-enabled IoMT,
IoMT data can be categorized into on-chain data and off-chain
data depending on whether the IoMT data is stored at the
blockchain or not. The on-chain data stored at blockchain is essentially traceable throughout the entire system. The traceability and non-repudiation of on-chain data can be achieved by

IEEE INTERENT OF THINGS MAGAZINE

4

Nucleic acid test

A. Tracing pandemic origin

Blockchain-enabled IoMT
B. Quarantine and social distancing

Robot

Robot

C. Smart hospital

D. Medical data provenance

E. Remote healthcare and telemedicine

Fig. 4. Solutions of blockchain-enabled IoMT to COVID-19.

the decentralized consensus algorithms and asymmetric cryptographic schemes (i.e., digital signature) of blockchain. However, it is impractical to store all IoMT data into blockchain
considering the massive volumes of IoMT data, especially for
medical images and videos. Therefore, IoMT data such as
images and videos should be stored in an off-chain manner
while blockchain may only store meta-data or hash values
of the off-chain IoMT data. Moreover, the introduction of
digital signatures and access control schemes can improve
the traceability of off-chain IoMT data in blockchain-enabled
IoMT. For example, storing hash values of off-chain IoMT
data in blockchain can also ensure the traceability of IoMT
data while saving the storage cost at blockchain.
We next discuss the solutions blockchain-enabled IoMT to
address the limitations of existing IoMT systems and combat
the COVID-19 crisis.
IV. S OLUTIONS OF BLOCKCHAIN - ENABLED I O MT TO
COVID-19
Blockchain-enabled IoMT can potentially solve the rising
challenges amid COVID-19. Fig. 4 presents an overview of
solutions of blockchain-enabled IoMT to COVID-19. We next
discuss these solutions in detail.
A. Tracing pandemic origin
It is crucial to trace the origin of pandemics like COVID19 before the effective prevention and control countermeasures
being made. Blockchain-enabled IoMT can offer an effective
solution to this challenge, meanwhile offering a certain privacy
protection of suspicious contacts.

On the one hand, the wide adoption of thermal cameras and
heat sensors in public places, such as hospitals, restaurants,
and schools can offer early warnings. For example, it is
reported in [7] that thermal cameras have been adopted in
airports and other transportation hubs to identify potentiallyinfected persons. The diverse thermal cameras and heat sensors are essentially connected with blockchain-enabled IoMT,
which can guarantee data traceability and protect data privacy.
Moreover, the introduction of thermal cameras to unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs) can provide flexible surveillance on
certain regions, which however may not be accessible to
medical professionals [8]. On the other hand, the proliferation
of nucleic acid tests and other COVID-19 test systems can help
to identify infectious persons in a rapid manner. Thereafter, the
interconnected IoMT systems can offer a ubiquitous data accessing services to various medical institutions, consequently
identifying the origin of the virus.
B. Quarantine and social distancing
Both quarantine and keeping social distance are effective
countermeasures to prevent a pandemic of contagious diseases.
Blockchain-enabled IoMT can offer effective quarantine, isolation, and social distancing during outbreaks of contagious
diseases such as COVID-19.
In particular, many cities have also implemented compulsory quarantine for persons returning from overseas. However, the quarantine for massive inbound travelers may bring
substantial burdens on public healthcare institutions during
the outbreaks of the pandemics. Alternatively, home or hotel
quarantine can be adopted, especially in densely populated
cities. In this aspect, blockchain-based IoMT can offer a

IEEE INTERENT OF THINGS MAGAZINE

promising solution to the home or hotel quarantine, consequently reducing the loads on public medical resources. For
example, a traveler who is required to wear a wristband since
his/her arrival from overseas. The wristband can periodically
send back the quarantined person’s accurate location to disease
control centers. Meanwhile, the introduction of blockchain and
other cryptographic schemes can also protect the privacy of
quarantined persons.
Moreover, the introduction of blockchain-based IoMT can
also help to keep a social distance. For example, persons who
wear specific wristband sensors (or tags) will be automatically
alerted if their distance is too close (e.g., less than 6 feet).
Furthermore, it is also reported that both Apple and Google
released APIs for application developers to trace social distance and offer necessary warnings1 . The in-depth integration
of these services with blockchain can further preserve user
privacy and ensure data traceability.
C. Smart hospital
This COVID-19 crisis also reveals the potential vulnerabilities of existing medical institutions. In particular, hospitals
are less resilient to the proliferation of infected persons. For
example, many hospitals are incapable of handling normal
pathologies since most doctors are summoned to treat COVID19 patients.
Blockchain-enabled IoMT can potentially address these
issues. First, the introduction of diverse RFID tags and IoMT
devices to hospitals can help to track and monitor the status of medical assets, such as the availability of beds and
ambulances, breakdowns or malfunctions of medical devices
(e.g., respirators). The status data can be stored in blockchainenabled IoMT for further prescriptive and predictive analysis. Second, blockchain-enabled IoMT can also be deployed
with hospital buildings to provide real-time monitoring on
air quality, temperature, and environmental hygiene. Note
that IoMT devices include not only passive devices (e.g.,
sensors and tags) but also active devices like robots, which
are responsible for cleaning hospitals, disinfecting wards,
or public places. Third, blockchain-enabled IoMT can also
ensure the traceability and non-repudiation of IoMT data. For
example, the sterilization of medical devices is crucial for
the treatment of contagious diseases while the conventional
sterilization records that are recorded by humans can be
falsified. The introduction of blockchain-enabled IoMT can
effectively address this issue due to the traceability and nonrepudiation of blockchain data.
D. Medical data provenance
There are rising cases on fabrication or falsification of
medical or healthcare data [9]. The fabricated data may
affect the treatment of patients and cause a huge loss of
medical insurance systems. Therefore, the data provenance
is introduced to improve the trustworthiness of medical data.
The main initiative of data provenance is to store the metadata of the medical data including the data source (origin),
1 https://www.zdnet.com/article/the-worlds-first-contact-tracing-app-usinggoogle-and-apples-api-goes-live/

5

reproduction (derivation), and final clinic report covering the
entire life cycle of medical data.
Thanks to the traceability and immutability of blockchain,
blockchain-enabled IoMT can well preserve data provenance,
consequently mitigating the fabrication risk of healthcare
data [10]. In particular, the work [11] presents a blockchainbased data provenance system, which stores the encrypted
data. Once there are any modifications to the stored data,
the embedded smart contracts will be automatically triggered,
consequently reporting the possible fabrications. Moreover,
it is shown in [12] that the blockchain-based framework is
designed to improve the data provenance of IoT networks.
E. Remote healthcare and telemedicine
Both the aging population and limited medical resources
bring burdens to conventional healthcare services. The outbreaks of pandemics make this situation more serious. Many
senior citizens and chronic patients have to stay at home due
to overwhelming patients in hospitals.
Blockchain-based IoMT can potentially address this challenge. On the other hand, the proliferation of various IoMT
wearable healthcare devices, such as embedded biosensors,
medical sensors, and wristbands, leads to the feasibility of
remote healthcare and telemedicine services at home. Thus,
the advent of IoMT can potentially relieve the pressure of
healthcare resources. For example, senior citizens in their
homes or nursing centers can wear medical or healthcare
devices, which can continuously take the measurements of
their physiology information, such as heartbeat rate, blood
pressure, and blood sugar. Through IoMT, doctors and their
families can access their health records at any time and
anywhere. In addition to the data generated from wearable
devices, ambient information is also important because the
environment factors (e.g., temperature and pressure) can also
affect the analysis of doctors. Moreover, robots can also be
leveraged for logistics (e.g., pill dispensers).
Despite the merits of IoMT, many healthcare and medical
agencies refuse to adopt IoMT due to the risks of privacy
breaches of patient data. In contrast to conventional IoMT,
blockchain-based IoMT can well preserve the data privacy of
patients and senior citizens via privacy-preservation schemes.
Moreover, the appropriate authentication settings on top of
blockchain can also eliminate the misuse (or abuse) of medical
data [13]. In this manner, unauthorized data access can be
rejected. In summary, the introduction of blockchain-based
IoMT can help to realize remote healthcare and telemedicine,
consequently reducing the burdens at hospitals and saving the
cost of scarce medical resources.
Summary. Table I summarizes the blockchain-enabled
IoMT solutions to COVID-19.
V. F UTURE DIRECTIONS
Although blockchain-enabled IoMT is promising to combat
the COVID-19 crisis, some challenges need to be addressed
before the formal adoption of blockchain-enabled IoMT solutions in healthcare systems. We discuss several future directions in this section.

IEEE INTERENT OF THINGS MAGAZINE

6

TABLE I
S UMMARY OF BLOCKCHAIN - ENABLED I O MT SOLUTIONS TO COVID-19
Blockchain-enabled IoMT solutions

Issues
IoMT

Blockchain

A. Tracing pandemic origin

Thermal cameras, heat sensors and nucleic acid test

Traceability, privacy protection

B. Quarantine and social distancing

Wristband sensor and tags

Traceability, privacy protection

C. Smart hospital

Medical asset management (RFID tags, sensors)

Traceability, immutability

D. Medical data provenance

IoT nodes, tags

Traceability, anti-falsification

E. Remote healthcare and telemedicine

Wearable body sensors

Traceability, privacy preservation, authentication

A. Scalability of blockchain
One of the main limitations of current blockchain systems
is the poor scalability, which limits the wide adoption of
blockchains in IoMT. The scalability of blockchain systems
can be typically measured by transaction throughput, i.e.,
the number of transactions per second (tps). Compared with
mature commercial payment systems, such as VISA and
PayPal, which can reach 2,000 tps and 170 tps, respectively,
Bitcoin (one of the most representative public blockchains)
only has 7 tps. The throughput of public blockchains needs to
be improved to handle the massive transactions and realtime
requests in IoMT.
The countermeasures to the scalability of blockchain mainly
include 1) leveraging more scalable consensus algorithms to
improve the throughput; 2) adopting private or consortium
blockchains, which are more scalable than public blockchains.
With respect to 1), recent studies leverage the localization of
the consensus strategies (such as sharding) to reach the consensus faster. Regarding the second types of solutions, private
and consortium blockchains can process transactions faster
than public blockchains mainly owing to the permissioned
systems, which can reach the consensus more easily than
public blockchains. Thus, private and consortium blockchains
may be more suitable for IoMT.
B. Deep learning to enhance blockchain-enabled IoMT
The massive available IoMT data contains huge values.
Data analytics on the data generated by blockchain-enabled
IoMT cannot only extract useful information but also enhance
blockchain-enabled IoMT itself. We can identify potential
system faults, vulnerabilities, and performance bottlenecks
after analyzing IoMT data and blockchain data. However,
conventional machine learning data analysis methods often
require extensive feature engineering to extract features. The
emerging deep learning algorithms that have less requirement
on feature engineering can directly learn from the raw data.
Therefore, deep learning approaches are more expected in the
future for blockchain-enabled IoMT.
Meanwhile, the heterogeneity of IoMT data poses challenges on data analytics. Thus, different deep learning approaches may be adopted to handle different types of IoMT
data. For example, deep convolutional neural networks (CNN)
having the strengths in analyzing images can be used for

biomedical images (such as X-Ray and MRI images) while
recurrent neural networks (RNN) and the variants of RNN
can be used for time-series data, such as electroencephalogram
(EEG) data. In the future, the fusion of multiple deep learning
algorithms will be an inevitable trend for data analytics in
blockchain-enabled IoMT.
C. Trustworthy AI for IoMT
Despite the advances of deep learning and AI, they also
bring trustworthy concerns, mainly on security and privacy
vulnerabilities of AI models. In particular, it is reported
in [14] that AI models can be stolen, falsified, and poisoned
(or contaminated). Meanwhile, IoMT data often needs to be
outsourced to cloud servers which have the stronger computational capability to process and analyze IoMT data. However,
cloud servers are often owned by untrusted third parties, which
may accidentally or intentionally leak privacy-sensitive data to
others.
In this regard, the integration of blockchain and AI might
be a solution to this issue. In particular, blockchain systems
may effectively authenticate and authorize data accessing
when IoMT data is outsourced to cloud servers. Meanwhile,
the authentication and authorization mechanisms can be also
applied to the management of cloud servers which are required
to be validated through the decentralized blockchain system.
Moreover, the recent advances in federated learning algorithms
bring opportunities to solve this issue from a different perspective. Instead of uploading IoMT data to remote cloud servers,
federated learning algorithms [15] can train AI models from
the collected IoMT data locally at edge nodes, which are
deployed at base stations or IoT gateways in approximation
to users. Thereafter, the trained AI models can be merged
together. In this manner, the risk of privacy leakage is reduced
since no IoMT data is transferred to cloud servers which are
often owned by untrusted third parties. It will be a future direction to integrate federated learning with blockchain, thereby
further enhancing the trust of IoMT systems.
VI. C ONCLUSION
We have been experiencing an unprecedented crisis caused
by COVID-19 while the recent ICT advances also bring opportunities to combat this crisis. Specifically, the wide adoption of
the Internet of medical things (IoMT) in healthcare institutions

IEEE INTERENT OF THINGS MAGAZINE

can help to collect massive medical and healthcare data, which
can be used by medical practitioners to diagnose and identify
diseases, consequently offering appropriate treatments. Therefore, the introduction of IoMT can undertake the burdens of
healthcare systems while IoMT also is also faced with security
and privacy vulnerabilities. On the other hand, blockchain
technologies can potentially enhance security and protect the
privacy of IoMT systems.
Therefore, this article presents a study on the integration
of blockchain and IoMT amid the COVID-19 crisis. In this
article, we first give an overview of blockchain and IoMT.
We then put forth a multi-layer framework for blockchainenabled IoMT. Moreover, we discuss the solutions brought by
blockchain-enabled IoMT to COVID-19 from five perspectives
such as tracing the pandemic origin, quarantining and social
distancing, smart hospital, medical data provenance, and remote healthcare and telemedicine. We finally outline the future
directions in blockchain-enabled IoMT. We believe that we
can finally win the battle against COVID-19 with the aid of
blockchain-enabled IoMT and other technologies.
R EFERENCES
[1] M. Shen, Y. Deng, L. Zhu, X. Du, and N. Guizani, “Privacy-Preserving
Image Retrieval for Medical IoT Systems: A Blockchain-Based Approach,” IEEE Network, vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 27–33, 2019.
[2] H.-N. Dai, Z. Zheng, and Y. Zhang, “Blockchain for internet of things: A
survey,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 8076–8094,
2019.
[3] Z. Zheng, S. Xie, H.-N. Dai, W. Chen, X. Chen, J. Weng, and
M. Imran, “An Overview on Smart Contracts: Challenges, Advances
and Platforms,” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 105, pp. 475–
491, April 2020.
[4] M. Ahmed and A. K. Pathan, “Blockchain: Can It Be Trusted?”
Computer, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 31–35, 2020.
[5] Y. A. Qadri, A. Nauman, Y. B. Zikria, A. V. Vasilakos, and S. W.
Kim, “The future of healthcare internet of things: A survey of emerging
technologies,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 22, no. 2,
pp. 1121–1167, 2020.
[6] C. Boudagdigue, A. Benslimane, A. Kobbane, and J. Liu, “Trust
management in industrial internet of things,” IEEE Transactions on
Information Forensics and Security, pp. 1–1, 2020.
[7] B. Udugama, P. Kadhiresan, H. N. Kozlowski, A. Malekjahani, M. Osborne, V. Y. Li, H. Chen, S. Mubareka, J. B. Gubbay, and W. C. Chan,
“Diagnosing COVID-19: the disease and tools for detection,” ACS nano,
vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 3822–3835, 2020.
[8] B. Chen, M. Imran, N. Nasser, and M. Shoaib, “Self-Aware Autonomous
City: From Sensing to Planning,” IEEE Communications Magazine,
vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 33–39, 2019.
[9] M. Herland, T. M. Khoshgoftaar, and R. A. Bauder, “Big data fraud
detection using multiple medicare data sources,” Journal of Big Data,
vol. 5, no. 1, p. 29, 2018.
[10] T. K. Mackey, T.-T. Kuo, B. Gummadi, K. A. Clauson, G. Church,
D. Grishin, K. Obbad, R. Barkovich, and M. Palombini, “fit-forpurpose?–challenges and opportunities for applications of blockchain
technology in the future of healthcare,” BMC medicine, vol. 17, no. 1,
pp. 1–17, 2019.
[11] A. Ramachandran and M. Kantarcioglu, “SmartProvenance: a distributed, blockchain based data provenance system,” in Proceedings of
the Eighth ACM Conference on Data and Application Security and
Privacy, 2018, pp. 35–42.
[12] D. Liu, J. Ni, C. Huang, X. Lin, and X. Shen, “Secure and Efficient Distributed Network Provenance for IoT: A Blockchain-based Approach,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, pp. 1–1, 2020.
[13] M. Baza, M. M. Fouda, M. Nabil, A. T. Eldien, H. Mansour, and
M. Mahmoud, “Blockchain-based distributed key management approach
tailored for smart grid,” in Combating Security Challenges in the Age
of Big Data. Springer, 2020, pp. 237–263.

7

[14] D. J. Miller, Z. Xiang, and G. Kesidis, “Adversarial Learning Targeting
Deep Neural Network Classification: A Comprehensive Review of
Defenses Against Attacks,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 108, no. 3,
pp. 402–433, 2020.
[15] Z. M. Fadlullah and N. Kato, “HCP: Heterogeneous Computing Platform
for Federated Learning Based Collaborative Content Caching Towards
6G Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing,
pp. 1–1, 2020.

Hong-Ning Dai is currently with Faculty of Information Technology at Macau
University of Science and Technology as an associate professor. He obtained
the Ph.D. degree in Computer Science and Engineering from Department
of Computer Science and Engineering at the Chinese University of Hong
Kong. His current research interests include Internet of Things and blockchain
technology. He has served as editors for IEEE Access, Ad Hoc Networks
and Connection Science, guest editors for IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Informatics, IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing and IEEE
Open Journal of the Computer Society.

Muhammad Imran is working as an associate professor in the College
of Applied Computer Science, King Saud University. His research interests
include mobile and wireless networks, Internet of Things, cloud and edge
computing, and information security. He has published more than 200 research
articles in reputable international conferences and journals. His research is
supported by several grants. He serves as an associate editor for many top
ranked international journals. He has received various awards.

Noman Haider is a working as a lecturer in the College of Engineering and
Science at Victoria University, Australia. He received his Ph.D. in engineering
from the University of Technology Sydney, Australia in 2019. His research
interests include mobile and wireless networks, Internet of Things, data
science, and information security.

