Exo-SIR: An Epidemiological Model to Analyze the Impact of
Exogenous Infection of COVID-19 in India
Nirmal Kumar Sivaraman1 , Manas Gaur2 , Shivansh Baijal1 , Ch V Radha Sai Rupesh1
Sakthi Balan Muthiah1 , Amit Sheth2

1 Department

arXiv:2008.06335v2 [cs.SI] 19 Sep 2020

of Computer Science and Engineering, The LNM Institute of Information Technology, Jaipur, India
2 AI Institute, University of South Carolina, USA
{nirmal.sivaraman,shivansh.baijal.y16,chvradhasairupesh.y17,sakthi.balan}@lnmiit.ac.in
mgaur@email.sc.edu,amit@sc.edu

ABSTRACT

1

Epidemiological models are the mathematical models that capture
the dynamics of epidemics. The spread of the virus has two routes exogenous and endogenous. The exogenous spread is from outside
the population under study, and endogenous spread is within the
population under study. Although some of the models consider
the exogenous source of infection, they have not studied the interplay between exogenous and endogenous spreads. In this paper,
we introduce a novel model - the Exo-SIR model that captures both
the exogenous and endogenous spread of the virus. We analyze to
find out the relationship between endogenous and exogenous infections during the Covid19 pandemic. First, we simulate the Exo-SIR
model without assuming any contact network for the population.
Second, simulate it by assuming that the contact network is a scale
free network. Third, we implemented the Exo-SIR model on a real
dataset regarding Covid19. We found that endogenous infection is
influenced by even a minimal rate of exogenous infection. Also, we
found that in the presence of exogenous infection, the endogenous
infection peak becomes higher, and the peak occurs earlier. This
means that if we consider our response to a pandemic like Covid19,
we should be prepared for an earlier and higher number of cases
than the SIR model suggests if there are the exogenous source(s) of
infection.

The Susceptible, Infected and Recovered model (SIR model) is considered as one of the seminal models of pandemics [9]. The model
describes how the spread of the virus from people to people within
the population under consideration. However, the spread of infection is not only from within the community but also from the
external sources. According to WHO, the causes of infection within
the population and external to the population are called as Local
transmission and Imported cases, respectively. We call them as an
endogenous and exogenous spread of infection, respectively.
If we consider the Covid19 pandemic in India as an example, a
major sub-event of Covid19 spread happened – the Tablighi Jamaat
religious congregation. It was held in Delhi from 1st March to 21st
March 20201 despite the Government of India imposed nationwide
restrictions on holding a meeting with a large number of people.
Over 9000 people participated in that event2 . 4291 cases have been
reported that can be traced to the event3 . As of 18th April 2020,
30% of the cases in India were due to this event 4 . The mobility of
people who attended this event to their states during Covid19 has
been causative phenomena that propelled the spread of the virus.
Another major sub-event is the mass movement of migrated
workers across the country, as we are writing this paper5 . These
migrant workers who are returning to their home states are the
exogenous source of infection for the population in those states.
Hence, while studying, modeling the exogenous sources of infection is essential. As can be seen from the examples discussed here,
not modeling the external sources of contamination could give rise
to an inaccurate estimation of the scenario. However, in the SIR
model [11, 13], sources of infection exogenous to the population
under study are not considered. These models assume that there
are a finite number of infections in the closed community itself at
the initial stage. With that assumption, it predicts the number of
people infected at a later instant of time.
Another issue with the SIR model is that it assumes that in the
initial state, there is a set of nodes that have already been infected.
Also, the SIR model is extremely dependent on the initial state. It

KEYWORDS
Exo-SIR model, Epidemiological Model, Covid19, Epidemiological
Data Science
ACM Reference Format:
Nirmal Kumar Sivaraman1 , Manas Gaur2 , Shivansh Baijal1 , Ch V Radha
Sai Rupesh1 and Sakthi Balan Muthiah1 , Amit Sheth2 . 2020. Exo-SIR: An
Epidemiological Model to Analyze the Impact of Exogenous Infection of
COVID-19 in India. In Proceedings of ACM Conference (Conference’17). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 9 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
© 2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

INTRODUCTION

1 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2020_Tablighi_Jamaat_coronavirus_hotspot_in_

Delhi
2 "Coronavirus: About 9000 Tablighi Jamaat members, primary contacts quarantined
in-country, MHA says". The Times of India. Press Trust of India. 2nd April 2020.
3 "Coronavirus | Nearly 4300 cases were linked to Tablighi Jamaat event, says Health
Ministry". The Hindu. Press Trust of India. 18t h April 2020.
4 ABP News Bureau (18 April 2020). "Tablighi Jamaat Responsible For 30% Total Coronavirus Cases in India: Health Ministry". ABP News.
5 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indian_migrant_workers_during_the_COVID19_pandemic

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Nirmal Kumar Sivaraman1 , Manas Gaur2 , Shivansh Baijal1 , Ch V Radha Sai Rupesh1 and Sakthi Balan Muthiah1 , Amit Sheth2

considers the entire population to be susceptible except a few that
are infected. It then predicts the spread. If there are no infected
people in the initial state, then the model will predict that no one
will ever be infected.
Addressing these concerns, we propose the Exo-SIR model that
extends the SIR model to consider the endogenous and exogenous
spread. We simulate the model in two ways; 1) assuming that the
contact network of people is a scale free network, 2) assuming no
network (a well-mixed population). We simulate the coefficients’
different values to figure out the relationship between the exogenous and endogenous spreads. We also apply the Exo-SIR model
on a real dataset regarding the spread of the Covid19 pandemic in
the Indian states of Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, and Kerala. Exogenous
spread dominates endogenous spread in Tamil Nadu, whereas the
contrary is true in the case of Rajasthan. In Kerala, both the endogenous and exogenous spread have roughly the same prevalence.
The trends in the theoretical analysis, results of the simulations,
and the analysis of the real dataset are consistent. The summary
of our approach is given in Figure 1. The details of the dataset that
we used to infer these relations are given in Section 8.1.
This paper is structured as follows. The next two sections, discuss
related works and preliminaries. In Section 4, we describe the ExoSIR model. Next we compare the Exo-SIR model with the SIR model.
In Section 6, we discuss the relationship between endogenous and
exogenous spreads. In the section after that, we explain the two
types of simulations and explain the results. In Section 7, we discuss
the analysis on real data.

2

RELATED WORKS

Here, we discuss the works that are related to the idea of exogenous
influence to the population under study.

2.1

Epidemiological Models

Two popular epidemiological models are SEIR model [5] and SEYAR
model [2]. In case of SEIR model, users are classified into four states.
In SEIR model, users are classified into four – Susceptible (who are
prone to infection), Exposed (who are infected, but not infectious),
Infected and Recovered.
In case of SEYAR model, there are more states compared to SEIR
model. In SEYAR model, users are classified into five – Susceptible (who are prone to infection), Exposed (who are infected, but
not infectious), Infected and symptomatic (shows the symptoms),
Infected asymptomatic (shows no symptoms) and Recovered.
Even though the SEIR model and SEYAR model are popular models, they do not consider any external source of infection. Also, the
state Exposed (who are infected, but not infectious) is not appropriate in case of Covid19 as there is no latency [10].
Also, we can see in [10, 17] the following:
In a small number of case reports and studies, presymptomatic transmission has been documented through
contact tracing efforts and enhanced investigation
of clusters of confirmed cases. This is supported by
data suggesting that some people can test positive for
COVID-19 from 1-3 days before they develop symptoms. Thus, it is possible that people infected with

COVID-19 could transmit the virus before significant
symptoms develop.
Even though we cannot rule out the possibility of pre-symptomatic
and asymptomatic transmission, we can see from the quoted text
that they are very small. Hence, we assume that pre-symptomatic
and asymptomatic transmission are negligible in case of Covid 19.

2.2

Models of External Influence on online
social networks

Information diffusion in online social networks is similar to the way
the virus spreads in a population. There are a few recent works in
the literature that attempt to model the external influence in information diffusion in online social networks [15]. [15] and [14] propose information diffusion model on the network. In these works,
they assume that the information flows through an underlining network. Also, they consider links from other web sites as the external
sources of information. The internal diffusion are those when the
messages that are shared do not have any external links.
The work described in [15] uses very specific parameters like
the following:
• probability of any node receiving an exposure at time t
• the random amount of time it takes an infected node to
expose its neighbors
• how the probability of infection changes with each exposure
• the probability that the node i has received n exposures by
time t
Whereas, the work described in [14] trace the cascade and reconstruct the graph as much as possible. Also, they conclude that
external influence has bigger impact on the network when compared to the influence of the social media influencers.
The model that is closest to our work is Yang et al’s model [18, 22],
which is an extension of the SIR model (explained in Section 3) to
include the external influence to the network.
s +i +r = 1

(1)

ds
= −p1ksi − ((1 − p1 )p3 + p4 )θs − (1 − p1 )p5ksi
dt

(2)

di
= p1ksi + p4θs − p2i
dt

(3)

dr
= p2i + (1 − p4 )p3θs + (1 − p1 )p5ksi
(4)
dt
There are two possible transitions from the state S to I. One
path is the normal endogenous path, and the second one is due
to external influence. These transitions have probabilities p1 and
p4, respectively. Similarly, there are two possible transitions from
the state S to R – one through endogenous and the other through
external influence. Their probabilities are p5 and p3 , respectively.
However, the transition from state I to R does not affect external
influence(s).
Although the exogenous infection is modeled in Yang et al.’s
model, it fails to capture the dynamics between the endogenous
and exogenous infections.

Exo-SIR: An Epidemiological Model to Analyze the Impact of Exogenous Infection of COVID-19 in India

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

Figure 1: Summary of our approach to study the relationship between exogenous and endogenous spread.

3

PRELIMINARIES

In this section, we briefly review the SIR epidemiological model. It
describes how epidemics spread through a population. This model
is used for the study of information diffusion approximating that
the way epidemics spread and the way information gets diffused in
a population are similar.
In this model, the population is classified into three – Susceptible
(who are prone to infection), Infected (who contain the infection),
and Recovered (who do not have the infection and its associated
symptoms). In the limit of sizeable total population N that does not
change over time, the given equations models the dynamics of the
spread [3]:

Figure 2: State transition diagram of the diffusion mechanisms in Yang et al’s model. Diagram taken from [22].

2.3

Other Studies of Endogenous and
Exogenous Information Diffusion

The dual nature of message flow over the online social network
is studied and verified in [7]. Here, the dual nature refers to the
injection of exogenous opinions to the network and the endogenous influence-based dynamics[19]. In [8], the authors propose a
method for extracting the relative contributions of exogenous and
endogenous contents. In [1], the authors postulate that the nature
of the information plays a crucial role in the way it spreads through
the network. They quantify two properties of the information –
endogeneity and exogeneity. Endogeneity refers to its tendency
to spread primarily through the connections between nodes and
exogeneity refers to its tendency to spread to the nodes, independently of the underlying network. In [16], the authors study the
bursts that originate from endogenous and exogenous sources and
their temporal relationship with baseline fluctuations in the volume of tweets. The study reported in [6] classifies the bursts into
endogenous and exogenous. According to this study, those bursts
that reach the peak almost instantaneously after the diffusion starts
and then go down slowly are exogenous burst. Also, those bursts
that gradually increase and slowly decrease are endogenous.

s(t) + i(t) + r (t) = 1

(5)

ds
= −βsi
dt

(6)

di
= βsi − γi
dt

(7)

dr
= γi
(8)
dt
where the fraction of Susceptible, Infected and Recovered people
at time t are represented by s(t), i(t) and r (t) respectively. β is the
rate of infection, and γ is the rate of recovery.

4

THE MODEL

The Exo-SIR model is an extension of SIR model in which the nodes
have Susceptible, Infected and Recovered states. It differs from SIR
model in the following ways:
• It classifies infected nodes into two different types – Infected from exogenous source and Infected from endogenous
source.
• It differentiates between the spread from endogenous and
exogenous sources.
Susceptible nodes become infected with a certain probability
called the rate of infection. This rate could be different for endogenous and exogenous infections. The nodes that got affected
by endogenous source and exogenous sources move into different
states. We assume that susceptible nodes get infected from only
one of these sources and never from both the sources. Hence, even

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Nirmal Kumar Sivaraman1 , Manas Gaur2 , Shivansh Baijal1 , Ch V Radha Sai Rupesh1 and Sakthi Balan Muthiah1 , Amit Sheth2

when some nodes are susceptible to both endogenous and exogenous infection, they become infected by either an endogenous or
an exogenous source. The infected nodes recover with a certain
probability called the recovery rate. These nodes move into the recovered state. The advantage of the Exo-SIR model compared to the
SIR model is that we can observe the endogenous and exogenous
diffusion separately.
We use the following notations:
S state of susceptible
I x state of infected from exogenous source
Ie state of infected from endogenous source
R state of recovered
i x Fraction of nodes that are infected from exogenous source
i e Fraction of nodes that are infected from endogenous source
r Fraction of nodes that are recovered
β x Rate at which the exogenous source infects the nodes
βe Rate at which the nodes infects other nodes
γ Rate at which the nodes get recovered
We use the words infection, diffusion and spread interchangeably according to the context.
The state transition diagram of the Exo-SIR model is given in
Figure 3.

Change in r depends on the number of infected people in the
network.
dr
= γi
(14)
dt

5

COMPARISON WITH SIR MODEL

Mirroring the rate of change of s(t), i(t), and r(t) in the SIR model
(Section 2), we find the expressions for the rate of change of s(t),
i(t), and r(t) for the Exo-SIR model.
5.0.1

Rate of Change of s:

5.0.2

ds
= −β x s − βe si
dt
Rate of Change of r:

dr
= γi
(16)
dt
5.0.3 Rate of Change of i: Differentiating Equation 9 with respect
to time, we get
di
di e di x
=
+
dt
dt
dt

(17)

di
= βe si − γi e + β x s − γi x
dt

(18)

di
= βe si + β x s − γ (i x + i e )
dt
Applying Equation 9 on Equation 19, we get

Figure 3: State transition diagram of the nodes in the ExoSIR model
We classify infected nodes into two different types – infected
from exogenous source and infected from endogenous source.
ie + ix = i

(9)

We assume that the total population remains constant.
s +i +r = 1

(10)

a fraction of the susceptible people (s) gets infected by exogenous source and another fraction of s gets infected by endogenous
sources. For endogenous infection, the population that is infected
plays a big role. Hence, we can say that:
ds
= −β x s − βe si
(11)
dt
Change in i x is influenced by all the susceptible nodes that are
prone to the exogenous influence.
di x
= β x s − γi x
(12)
dt
Change in i e is influenced by all the susceptible nodes and infected nodes.
di e
= βe si − γi e
dt

(13)

(15)

(19)

di
= βe s(i x + i e ) + β x s − γ (i x + i e )
(20)
dt
Here, even if we assume that there is no infected people in the
beginning – i.e. i e = 0 and i x = 0, we get the following.
Applying Equation 9 on Equation 19, we get
di
= βx s
(21)
dt
This shows that unlike the SIR model, the Exo-SIR model models
the situation if no one is infected initially. SIR model assumes that
there is an initial outbreak size i 0 . This means i 0 people are infected
in the beginning and i 0 > 0 [12]. Our work addresses this limitation
of the SIR model. Note that, the Exo-SIR model would behave the
same way as the SIR model if we assume that i x = 0 and β x = 0.

6

DYNAMICS OF EXOGENOUS SPREAD AND
ENDOGENOUS SPREAD

In this section, we find the relationship between the cumulative
e
exogenous infections (i x ) and the daily endogenous infections ( di
dt ).
Applying Equation 9 on Equation 13, we get

At i x = 0,

di e
= βe s(i e + i x ) − γi e
dt

(22)

di e
= βe s(i e + i x ) − γi e
dt i x >0

(23)

di e
= βe si e − γi e
dt i x =0

(24)

Exo-SIR: An Epidemiological Model to Analyze the Impact of Exogenous Infection of COVID-19 in India

Since all βe , s, i e , andγ are positive,
di e
di e
<
dt i x =0
dt i x >0

(25)

Algorithm 1 Algorithm to perform the simulations and analysis by
assuming that the contact network in the population is scale-free

2:

7

4:

SIMULATION

7.1

Initialize β x , βe and γ with 3 different values, i.e., 0.1, 0.5 and
0.9. Henceforth, we have 27 different combination of these
parameters.
For each of the combinations of β x , βe , and γ , iterate over steps
3 and 4 fifty times.
Setup a Barabási-Albert network of 150 nodes having an average node degree of 2 [4].
Simulate and predict the values of S, Ie , I x , and R using the
Exo-SIR model.
Extract the values of endogenous peak and its time slice, exogenous peak, and time slice from each of the simulations.
Calculate the mean peak value and peak tick of Exo and Endo
nodes so that we have one value per combination of β x , βe ,
and γ .

1:

e
This shows that di
dt increases in the presence of i x . In other
words, this shows that the presence of exogenous diffusion causes
endogenous diffusion to increase. In the next section, we discuss
simulations that we did to verify this.

We simulate the Exo-SIR model to determine its behavior for a
variety of scenarios that are represented by the different values of
its parameters. We simulated the model in two ways:
(1) By assuming that the people network is scale free network.
Within this network, the susceptible nodes can catch the
infection from only those infected nodes, which they are
connected to through an edge, i.e., their immediate neighbors
(2) By assuming no network (well-mixed population). Contrary
to the above, in this scenario, a susceptible node can get
infected from any of the infected nodes in the population
under consideration.
We chose Barabási-Albert network because there are pieces of
evidence that the human disease network could be scale free [20].
The results of these are discussed in the following section.

3:

5:
6:

Table 1: Impact of βe , β x and γ on ln(ie_peak)

βe
βx
γ

Using Scale free Network

The analysis presented in this section has been done considering a
scale free contact network for the population under study, which is
called Barabási-Albert network [4]. Under this scenario, the susceptible nodes can catch the infection from only those infected nodes,
which they are connected to through an edge, i.e., their immediate
neighbors. We have predicted the values for various combinations
of β x , βe , and γ using the Exo-SIR model in the network mentioned
above. We used NetLogo Simulation tool [21] to carry out the predictions. Sample simulation results are shown in Figures 4a and 4b.
Figure 4a shows the SIR model’s simulation results with no exogenous influence, and Figure 4b shows the simulation results with
exogenous influence.
Here we can see that, when we consider exogenous factors, the
peak of the distribution of the number of the infected population
shows significant changes in the following ways:
• the height of the peak (peak value) increases
• the peak (peak tick) occurs early
7.1.1 Dynamics of Exogenous Spread on Endogenous Spread. Next,
we would like to determine the changes in endogenous spread with
the change in exogenous factors. The step by step methodology
adopted to carry out the simulation, and the analysis is given in
Algorithm 1.
In the above algorithm, we have carried out 50 simulations for
each combination of the parameters and averaged it out to address the bias that might get introduced due to the structure of the
network since the setting up of a network in step 3 in the above
algorithm is random each time.
Figures 5a and 5b are a result of simulation and analysis done as
described in Algorithm 1 and provide us with the following insights:

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

coef
0.6319
0.6319
−0.4390

std err
0.006
0.006
0.006

confidence interval
0.6204 to 0.6434
0.6204 to 0.6434
−0.4505 to −0.4274

• Peak Value: Figure 5a shows that β x (exogenous factors) influence the peak value of endogenous infections. The endogenous peak value increases with increase in β x
• Peak tick: On the other hand, Figure 5b shows that endogenous peak tick decreases with increase in β x
We can conclude that exogenous source and its infection impacts
the spread in the network by advancing the peak and increasing
the height of the endogenous peak.

7.2

With No Network

In this section, we determine the relative effects of β x , βe and γ on
the endogenous peak statistically and measure the impact of β x on
endogenous infections, which is consistent with the results shown
above. Here, we did not assume any network for our population,
and the objective of these simulations was to determine the impact
of β x , βe and γ on endogenous peak value and peak tick (see Table
1). To achieve this, we took a sample of 27000 simulations and
analyzed them as described in Algorithm 2.
The following inferences can be drawn from the results of Regression Analysis.
(1) The p-value for all the three variables is less than 0.05. This
means we would reject the null hypothesis, and adopt the
alternate hypothesis that the impact of all the three parameters on the peak endogenous infection’s peak is statistically
significant.
(2) The adjusted R-squared value is maximum(0.70) when all the
three parameters are considered while fitting the regression
model. This means that we can better explain the variation
in the dependent variable when considering all three, i.e.,
βe , β x and γ . Removing any one of them would decrease the

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Nirmal Kumar Sivaraman1 , Manas Gaur2 , Shivansh Baijal1 , Ch V Radha Sai Rupesh1 and Sakthi Balan Muthiah1 , Amit Sheth2

(a) plot of s, i and r with no exogenous source

(b) plot of s, i and r with exogenous source

Figure 4: Plots of the simulation. In the presence of exogenous source, the peak is becoming more significant and occurring
early. Accordingly, the humanitarian authorities can leverage the Exo-SIR model to estimate the peak more precisely than
the SIR model. While ignoring exogenous factors due to the adoption of the traditional SIR model, the authorities would be
caught off guard as they will be preparing for a later and smaller peak.

(a) impact of β x on peak tick

(b) impact of β x on peak value

Figure 5: Plots of the impact of β x on i e . Each dot represents the average of the values obtained from 50 iterations
Algorithm 2 Algorithm to perform the simulations and analysis
by assuming no contact network in the population.
Note: If we look at the differential equations, the system is not a
linear one, but rather exponential. Therefore, we took ln(Ie_peak)
as the dependent variable. Table 1 shows the impact of the above
three independent variables on the dependent variable.
1:
2:

3:

4:
5:

Initialize β x , βe and γ with 30 random values between 0 and 1
uniformly.
Initialize the initial number of susceptible, infected(endo and
exo) and recovered nodes experimentally as: N = 1000000.0, S 0
= 999996.0, I x 0 = 3.0, Ie0 = 1.0 and R 0 = 0.0.
For each of the 27000 combinations of β x , βe , and γ , with
the above initial condition, we predicted the endogenous and
exogenous peak value and peak tick using the Exo-SIR model.
Then, we computed the natural logarithm of the peak value
and scaled it between 0 and 1.
Finally, we fitted an OLS Regression Model with β x , βe and γ as
the independent variable and ln(Ie_peak) and the independent
variable and analysed the coefficients statistically.

adjusted R-squared value. Also, the confidence interval of
each parameter is mentioned in Table 1.

(3) β x impacts endogenous infections as much as βe (the contribution of both is almost equal), which is an important
observation. This means that exogenous factors also have
a considerable impact on the endogenous infection and ignoring the exogenous factors would not give an accurate
estimate of the endogenous infections.

8

ANALYSIS USING REAL DATA

In this section, we describe the data and the analysis of the implementation of SIR model and Exo-SIR model on the Covid19
pandemic. We analyzed the data of three states in India – Tamil
Nadu, Rajasthan and Kerala. The reason for choosing these states
is that i e ≪ i x in Tamil Nadu, i e ≫ i x in Rajasthan and i e ≈ i x in
Kerala.

8.1

Datasets

The data pipeline is given in Figure 6. We constructed our dataset
from three different sources6 for our analysis – covid19india.org,
the Government web site of Tamil Nadu for their press release to
find the daily number of Tablighi cases and Wikipedia page on state
wise daily data.
6 The code and all the data used in our experiments are publicly available at https:
//github.com/baijalshivansh/Exo-SIR-Model.

Exo-SIR: An Epidemiological Model to Analyze the Impact of Exogenous Infection of COVID-19 in India

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

Table 2: Impact of I x on Ie in the state of Tamil Nadu

Exo SIR with i x
Exo SIR without i x

peak value
0.17142523
0.17104498

peak tick
907 Days
1351 Days

Table 3: Impact of I x on Ie in the state of Rajasthan

Exo SIR with i x
Exo SIR without i x

peak value
0.3487077
0.3486663

peak tick
143 Days
147 Days

Figure 6: The data pipeline
Table 4: Impact of I x on Ie in the state of Kerala
covid19india.org is a publicly available volunteer-driven dataset
of Covid19 statistics in India7 . There are multiple files in this dataset.
One of which is called raw data that captures the anonymised details
of the patients. In the raw data, the columns of interest for us are
DateAnnounced, DetectedState and TypeOfTransmission.
Another file from same source is called states_daily. In this
file the columns of interest are states_daily/status, states_daily/kl,
states_daily/rj, states_daily/tn and states_daily/date. kl, rj and tn
are the codes used in this dataset for the states of Kerala, Rajasthan
and Tamil Nadu respectively.
Here, status can have the following values: infected, recovered
and diseased. From these columns, we prepared the time series
dataset for each state. The columns available in the dataset that we
created are daily confirmed, daily deceased, daily recovered, date,
total confirmed, total deceased, total recovered and daily imported
cases.
Another dataset that we used is the compilation of the press
releases (news bulletins) from the Governments of the states under
study. This is to get the daily number of cases due to a major
sub event of Covid19 spread in Inidia – Tablighi Jamaat religious
congregation. We manually went through the press releases and
collected the data.

8.2

Mapping

In this section, we discuss how the values in the dataset is mapped
on to the variables in the Exo-SIR model. On a particular day, say
day k,
s(t) + i(t) + r (t) = 1
ds
di dr
= −( + )
dt
dt dt
di e
dt = daily confirmed cases on day k

(26)
(27)

di x
dt

= daily imported cases on day k + daily cases due to Tablighi
event on day k .
di e
di x
di
dt = dt + dt .
dr =(daily recovered + daily deceased) on day k
dt
daily con f irmed on day 0
(28)
N
where N is the total population who are prone to the infection.
s =1−

7 https://covid19india.org/

Exo SIR with i x
Exo SIR without i x

peak value
0.0842470797
0.0841428705

peak tick
608 Days
715 Days

i = total con f irmed

(29)

r = total deceased + total recovered

(30)

Algorithm 3 Algorithm to plot the Exo-SIR model.
1:
2:
3:
4:
5:

8.3

di and dr from
For each time slice, we calculate the values of dt
dt
the dataset.
We consider s as the susceptible people from the population of
the state under study.
We calculate the cumulative values i and r .
We find γ , βe and β x using values of the time for which the
data is available.
We ran the Exo-SIR model with these values as the initial values
and plotted i e in the presence of i x and i e in the absence of i x

Applying Exo-SIR model on real data

In this section, we analyze the data from the states of Tamil Nadu,
Rajasthan, and Kerala. We compare the peak tick and peak value
of the plot of i e in the presence and absence of i x . This would give
information about the impact of i x on i e . For this purpose, we used
Algorithm 3.
For the state of Tamil Nadu, the Exo-SIR model plots in the
presence and absence of i x are plotted in Figure 7a and Figure 7b
respectively. For the state of Rajasthan, the plots of the Exo-SIR
model in the presence and absence of i x are plotted in Figure 8a
and Figure 8b respectively. For the state of Kerala, the plots of the
Exo-SIR model in the presence and absence of i x are plotted in
Figure 9a and Figure 9b, respectively. In all these plots, we can see
that i x is very small compared to i e . Yet, i x is having an impact on
i e . I x is plotted separately in Figure 9c, Figure 8c and Figure 7c.
The peak tick and peak values corresponding to the Exo-SIR
model in the presence and absence of i x for Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan
and Kerala are mentioned in Table 2, Table 3 and Table 4 respectively.
In all the tables, we can see that the peak value of i e is higher when

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Nirmal Kumar Sivaraman1 , Manas Gaur2 , Shivansh Baijal1 , Ch V Radha Sai Rupesh1 and Sakthi Balan Muthiah1 , Amit Sheth2

(a) Exo-SIR model with i x . The values of i x are
very small for the scale of this plot. Hence it is
plotted separately. Please refer the Figure 7c

(b) Exo-SIR model without i x

(c) i x in Exo-SIR model. Please note that y axis
is in the scale of 10−4 .

Figure 7: plots for the state of Tamil Nadu. Even for the small values of i x , the peak of the i e is larger and occurs early.

(a) Exo-SIR model with i x . The values of i x are
very small for the scale of this plot. Hence it is
plotted separately. Please refer the Figure 8c

(b) Exo-SIR model without i x

(c) i x in Exo-SIR model. Please note that the y
axis is in the scale of 10−6 .

Figure 8: plots for the state of Rajasthan. Even for the small values of i x , the peak of the i e is larger and occurs early.

(a) Exo-SIR model with i x . The values of i x are
very small for the scale of this plot. Hence it is
plotted separately. Please refer the Figure 9c

(b) Exo-SIR model without i x

(c) i x in Exo-SIR model. Please note that the y
axis is in the scale of 10−5 .

Figure 9: plots for the state of Kerala. Even for the small values of i x , the peak of the i e is larger and occurs early.
the case of i x is present. Also, we can see that the peak tick of i e is
earlier for the instance when i x is present.

9

CONCLUSION

In this evidential study, we introduced the Exo-SIR model. Unlike
the SIR model, the Exo-SIR model differentiates between the endogenous and exogenous spread of virus/information. We studied
the model in the following ways:
(1) Theoretical analysis
(2) Simulation with considering the contact network of the population is a scale free network
(3) Simulation without considering the contact network
(4) Implementation of the Exo-SIR model on real data about the
spread of Covid19 in India.

We found that all the four analyses mentioned here converge
to the same result: the peak comes early with higher value when
the exogenous source is present. This shows that if a Government
is preparing to handle a pandemic in the presence of exogenous
sources, then Exo-SIR will predict the peak to be earlier and larger
compared to the prediction using the SIR model. This information
is crucial for the Government because if they follow the SIR model,
they will be caught off guard as they will be preparing for a later and
smaller peak. Also, we studied the impact of exogenous diffusion
on endogenous virus/information diffusion.
We found that exogenous diffusion impacts endogenous diffusion. If there are exogenous sources of infection like in the case
of Covid19, then we should use the Exo-SIR model to estimate the
scenario better. This will help the government allocate its resources

Exo-SIR: An Epidemiological Model to Analyze the Impact of Exogenous Infection of COVID-19 in India

in a better way as the endogenous and exogenous spread needs
different actions to stop them.
As of now, we have compared our model only with SIR model.
As future work, we would like to compare our model with more
sophisticated methods like SEIR model and SEYAR model. Also, we
would like to study the difference between the asymptomatic and
symptomatic infected population. Also, we would like to analyze
the impact of a sub-event in India – the mass movement of migrated
laborers across the states in India.

10

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

Amit Sheth and Manas Gaur are supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) award EAR 1520870: Hazards SEES: Social and Physical Sensing Enabled Decision Support for Disaster
Management and Response. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions/recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the NSF.

REFERENCES
[1] Rakesh Agrawal, Michalis Potamias, and Evimaria Terzi. 2012. Learning the
nature of information in social networks. In Sixth International AAAI Conference
on Weblogs and Social Media.
[2] Jacob B Aguilar, Jeremy Samuel Faust, Lauren M Westafer, and Juan B Gutierrez.
2020. Investigating the impact of asymptomatic carriers on COVID-19 transmission. medRxiv (2020).
[3] NTJ Bailey et al. 1975. The mathematical theory of infectious diseases and its
applications. The mathematical theory of infectious diseases and its applications.
2nd edition. 2nd ediition (1975).
[4] Albert-László Barabási. 2013. Network science. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 371, 1987 (2013),
20120375.
[5] Md Haider Ali Biswas, Luís Tiago Paiva, and MDR De Pinho. 2014. A SEIR model
for control of infectious diseases with constraints. Mathematical Biosciences &
Engineering 11, 4 (2014), 761.
[6] Riley Crane and Didier Sornette. 2008. Robust dynamic classes revealed by
measuring the response function of a social system. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 105, 41 (2008), 15649–15653.
[7] Abir De, Sourangshu Bhattacharya, and Niloy Ganguly. 2018. Demarcating
endogenous and exogenous opinion diffusion process on social networks. In
Proceedings of the 2018 World Wide Web Conference. 549–558.
[8] Kazuki Fujita, Alexey Medvedev, Shinsuke Koyama, Renaud Lambiotte, and
Shigeru Shinomoto. 2018. Identifying exogenous and endogenous activity in
social media. Physical Review E 98, 5 (2018), 052304.
[9] Adrien Guille, Hakim Hacid, Cecile Favre, and Djamel A Zighed. 2013. Information diffusion in online social networks: A survey. ACM Sigmod Record 42, 2
(2013), 17–28.
[10] FA Binti Hamzah, C Lau, H Nazri, DV Ligot, G Lee, CL Tan, et al. 2020. CoronaTracker: worldwide COVID-19 outbreak data analysis and prediction. Bull World
Health Organ 1 (2020), 32.
[11] Herbert W Hethcote. 1989. Three basic epidemiological models. In Applied
mathematical ecology. Springer, 119–144.
[12] Herbert W Hethcote. 2000. The mathematics of infectious diseases. SIAM review
42, 4 (2000), 599–653.
[13] William Ogilvy Kermack and Anderson G McKendrick. 1927. A contribution to
the mathematical theory of epidemics. Proceedings of the royal society of london.
Series A, Containing papers of a mathematical and physical character 115, 772
(1927), 700–721.
[14] Jiang Li, Jiagui Xiong, and Xiaojie Wang. 2015. Measuring the external influence
in information diffusion. In 2015 16th IEEE International Conference on Mobile
Data Management, Vol. 2. IEEE, 92–97.
[15] Seth A Myers, Chenguang Zhu, and Jure Leskovec. 2012. Information diffusion
and external influence in networks. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM SIGKDD
international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining. 33–41.
[16] Mizuki Oka, Yasuhiro Hashimoto, and Takashi Ikegami. 2014. Self-organization
on social media: Endo-exo bursts and baseline fluctuations. PLoS One 9, 10 (2014),
e109293.
[17] SUN Peiliang and Kang Li. 2020. An SEIR Model for Assessment of Current
COVID-19 Pandemic Situation in the UK. medRxiv (2020).

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

[18] B Shayak, Mohit M Sharma, and Manas Gaur. 2020. A New Delay Differential Equation Model for COVID-19. In ACM SIGKDD Workshop on Knowledgeinfused Mining and Learning for Social Impact (KDD-KiML 2020) (CEUR Workshop Proceedings), Manas Gaur, Alejandro Jaimes, Fatma Ozcan, Srinivasan
Parthasarathy, Sameena Shah, Amit Sheth, and Biplav Srivastava (Eds.). Aachen,
30–34. http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-2657/#short4
[19] Nirmal Kumar Sivaraman, Sakthi Balan Muthiah, Pushkal Agarwal, and Lokesh
Todwal. 2017. On Social Synchrony in Online Social Networks. In Proceedings of
the 2017 ACM on Web Science Conference. 417–418.
[20] Gyula M Szabó. 2020. Propagation and mitigation of epidemics in a scale-free
network. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.00067 (2020).
[21] Seth Tisue and Uri Wilensky. 2004. Netlogo: A simple environment for modeling
complexity. In International conference on complex systems, Vol. 21. Boston, MA,
16–21.
[22] Dingda Yang, Xiangwen Liao, Jingjing Wei, Guolong Chen, and Xueqi Cheng.
2019. Modeling Information Diffusion with the External Environment in Social
Networks. Journal of Internet Technology 20, 2 (2019), 369–377.

