A New Mathematical Model for Controlled Pandemics Like
COVID-19 : AI Implemented Predictions
Liam Dowling Jones1 , Malik Magdon-Ismail2 , Laura Mersini-Houghton1 and Steven Meshnick3
August 25, 2020

arXiv:2008.10530v1 [q-bio.PE] 24 Aug 2020

1 Department

of Physics and Astronomy and COSMS Institute, UNC- Chapel Hill, NC 27599,
USA
2 Computer Science Department, Rensselauer Polytechnic Institute,110 8th Street, Troy, NY
12180, USA
3 UNC Gillings School of Global Public Health, UNC-Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7435, USA

Abstract
We present a new mathematical model to explicitly capture the effects that the three
restriction measures: the lockdown date and duration, social distancing and masks, and,
schools and border closing, have in controlling the spread of COVID-19 infections i(r, t).
Before restrictions were introduced, the random spread of infections as described by the
SEIR model grew exponentially. The addition of control measures introduces a mixing of
order and disorder in the system’s evolution which fall under a different mathematical class
of models that can eventually lead to critical phenomena. A generic analytical solution is
hard to obtain. We use machine learning to solve the new equations for i(r, t), the infections
i in any region r at time t and derive predictions for the spread of infections over time as
a function of the strength of the specific measure taken and their duration. The machine is
trained in all of the COVID-19 published data for each region, county, state, and country in
the world. It utilizes optimization to learn the best-fit values of the model’s parameters from
past data in each region in the world, and it updates the predicted infections curves for any
future restrictions that may be added or relaxed anywhere. We hope this interdisciplinary
effort, a new mathematical model that predicts the impact of each measure in slowing down
infection spread combined with the solving power of machine learning, is a useful tool in the
fight against the current pandemic and potentially future ones.

1

Introduction

It is the first time in recent human history where the spread of a novel virus is not allowed
to be random but strict control measures like: locking down countries, closing borders, masks
and social distancing, closing schools, and quarantining are undertaken at such a massive global
scale. New measures require a new mathematical model which transcends the traditional SEIR
model used in epidemiology to study the spread of viral diseases: a model which will allow us to
predict and prepare for pandemics well in advance by enabling us to evaluate the combination
of restrictions with the highest impact.
When a virus diffuses unrestricted through a population, it spreads randomly. Therefore,
the number of infections grows exponentially with time, obeying a nearly Gaussian distribution
curve, the hallmark of randomness. The distribution of random infections in each region before
control measures are introduced, map human social behavior (contact rate) as well as population
density and demographics. The epidemiological model which has been used to describe the
spreading of viruses through a population with N people is the class of SEIR models. The
1

driving force of infections in the SEIR type models is a coupling between the susceptibles
and infected groups where their coupling strength β is directly proportional to the now famous
contagion parameter R0 .
In this work we propose a stochastic mathematical model for the infection spread which,
in addition to the driving force of infections β term of the SEIR model, explicitly adds the
impact of each of the three measures (lockdown, social distancing plus masks, and school and
border closing) imposed worldwide in disrupting exposure and breaking the transmission of the
pandemic have on the diffusion of infection through population. Since time is of essence during
a pandemic, we implement our new model and solve its equations using an AI approach to
predict what will happen for the rest of the year in any region. The machine is trained in all
the Covid − 19 data available from Johns Hopkins University for any region, county, state, or
country before and after restrictions were imposed.
Data from the early phase of the pandemic when the spread of infection was unrestricted
is very useful in training the machine to learn, and include in its estimate for the restrictions
parameters introduced in our model, the population distribution and demographics as well as
the characteristic social behavior (contact rates) of each region. This advanced approach allows
us to estimate and predict in a matter of seconds how the infections may spread for the rest of
the year in any region as a function of the time and type of control measures being introduced
and their population characteristics.
Furthermore, we offer an estimate of the number of infection cases undetected for each
confirmed positive test in a region, a parameter we call γ(~r, t). Through this parameter we can
convert the confirmed daily infection curves for any region into a knowledge of the ’reservoir’,
that is, the total number of the infected population in that region at any time whether they are
tested or not. The machine also learns to account for the time delay between infection and its
reported tested confirmation. However, since the machine is trained on historic public data, the
findings reported here are limited by the accuracy of the reported data: the time lapse between
the true first case of infection in a region and the first confirmed positive test, as well as the noise
in the reported data, i.e. the amount of uncertainty in the public data for confirmed positives.
Let us first review the basics and terminology of the SEIR model before replacing it with
a new model which adds new terms to include the restrictions measures. The letters in SEIR
stand for ’number of people susceptible S to the virus, number of people exposed E to it, the
number of infected people I, and the number of people removed or recovered R’, within that
population of size N . In its simplest form it is mathematically described by [1, 4]:

ds


= −βsi, s = S/N


dt



di
(1)
= βsi − ν̃i, i = I/N

dt




dr


= ν̃i, r = R/N
dr
The parameters (ν̃, β), the removal rate and effective contact rate parameters respectively,
are in general time dependent. Without loosing generality, the exposed e = E/N and infected
i = I/N percentages of the population in the above equations are grouped together into i for
simplicity. An explicit equation for E mathematically obeys the same first order differential
equation sourced by the susceptible population on the right hand side.
Combining the above and recalling that e is included in i, gives:
d(i + r)
ds
= βsi = −
(2)
dt
dt
Not surprisingly, as can be seen from the opposite signs in the time derivative terms of s and
(i + r) in Eqn.2 what is a driving force for infections, Fseir = βsi, is a damping force with the
same strength for the susceptible population. We will make use of Eqn.2 in our model below.
2

Traditionally, Eqns. 1 are combined in a different way, in the manner of Eqn. 3 below:
di
ν̃
1
= −1 +
= −1 +
,
ds
βs
R0 s

(3)

because of the explicit dependence on the crucial parameter R0 , the viral reproduction number, defined as
β
1
= τ c̃
ν̃
ν̃
where the terms on the right hand side are respectively’:
Ro =

(4)

τ = Transmissibility given contact of s with i,

(5)

c̃ = rate of contact between i and s,

(6)

and,
1
= duration of infection
(7)
ν̃
It is clear from Eqn.4 and Eqn. 3 that Ro describes how infectious a virus is since it gives the
average number of people who will get the disease from one infected person. As such its value is
crucial in estimating how fast the infection can spread uncontrolled. It should also be noted that
in the early stages when the virus spreads unrestricted, this parameter depends on the population
density and social behaviour of the region. We report R0 dependence on a region’s characteristics
for three such examples in Section 4. For the case of COVID-19 epidemiological studies indicate
that when the virus is spreading unrestricted at t = 0, R0 (t = 0) can range from 2.4 [1] to 5.7
[5]. Additionally, R0 is an effective parameter since it changes over time. Integrating Eqn.3
highlights the well known fact that damping the spread of infections translates into bringing R0
to stable values of one or less. Mathematically, β(t) = ν̃R0 (t) contains the same information as
R0 on how the spread of the disease changes over time because ν̃ is on average i an unchanging
characteristic of the virus. Therefore, any changes introduced by restrictions on the effective
reproduction number R0 of a region over time translate into changes in β(t).
The SEIR model has been further compartmentalized in a SEj ...Ij ...R by breaking down the
number of exposed “Ei ” and infected “Ij ” cases in sub-classes of the different stages of exposure,
infection and quarantine, as studied in [6, 1, 2, 4]). Understanding these compartments is
important for epidemiological contact tracing and surveillance and for clinical purposes when
studying the probability of infection of a region. However, we won’t need the details of the
compartmentalized SEIR models in what follows, as their net effect is absorbed in the β driving
force term already embedded in the new model below, and implicitly contained in the data on
which the machine is trained and which it uses to optimize the best fit for β(t) in real time.
The paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 we introduce the new mathematical model
and describe the long term behavior of the model. In Section 3 we describe the method for
obtaining the solutions using machine learning. In Section 4 we present the results of our AI
implemented model and illustrate them for the case of three US states by showing the predicted
curves of infection growth as a function of a representative combination of control measures
given by their three parameters. We also estimate and show the number of true infections, the
reservoir, for each confirmed infection, a number which for example in the US varies from 4
to 11 depending on the state. We are making the mathematical model and the code publicly
available here [3]. This will allow users to instantly derive how the predicted growth of infections
changes in their region any time a measure or a combination of them may be introduced and of
T =

i

Perhaps different strains of the virus may have different removal rates or their mutation may change ν̃.

3

the time chosen to impose those measures in the future. We summarize our findings and their
usefulness for public health in Section 5.
We hope that the interdisciplinary approach and the tools offered here, that is, a combination
of a realistic mathematical model with the speed of AI implemented predictions in the code
provided will be useful in epidemiology, economics and public health considerations.

2

The Mathematical Model For A Controlled Pandemic As A
Universal Critical Phenomenon

To account for the order introduced by the new global measures in slowing the random virus
spreading anywhere in space and time, we enhance the SEIR type models by adding new
force terms to Eqns. 1 which capture the damping forces of infections imposed by lockdowns,
masks and social distancing, and schools and border closings. The remaining random source
of infection spread, not contained in the above, is given by a white noise and captured by a
diffusion parameter. These terms are in addition to the βsi term of Eqn. 2, the driving force
of infections which describes the contagion spread through random contact rate between the
infected and susceptible populations in the SEIR model.
As described below, the addition of the new forces to Eqn. 2 leads to a new stochastic model
which is in a completely different mathematical class from the SEIR models. Let’s promote the
nonsusceptibles, i.e. the part of the population exposed to the virus at any level of infection,
into an ’infection field’: ĩ(~x, t) = i(~x, t) + e(~x, t) + r(~x, t) ii spreading on (2 + 1) − D (two spatial
dimensions ~x and one temporal dimension t).
In this model we make the following assumptions: a) no vaccine will become massively
available until next year; b) the recovered, infected and exposed (the EIR part in SEIR) will
gain some immunity, therefore will not be susceptible to being sick again this year or until the
vaccine is available. The latter is expected on general grounds on how our immunity system
protects us from viruses, but it is not verified to be true for the novel COVID-19 virus. (Indeed,
recent medical findings [8] seem to indicate COVID-19 may be unique in the sense that those
who recovered from it may not have a long lasting immunity to reinfection.)
The infection field ĩ(~x, t) is a restricted self-avoiding random walker on a two dimensional
space and in time. The restricted feature on the random walk of the infection seeping through
the population of some region of space ~x with density ρ(~x, t) at some time t is due to the
control measures taken in restricting the virus spreading. The self-avoiding feature is related to
the assumption of immunity, namely a person who has already been infected once will not be
infected again during the time interval from now to until a vaccine is available. Typically, this
class of models is expected to lead to critical phenomena of polynomial growth of infections at
large times which display a universal scale-free behavior described by what in critical phenomena
are known as critical exponents ν, µ iii . In two spatial dimensions ν provides the fractal critical
dimension of the fractal space available to the restricted random walker ĩ(~x, t) for that region.
According to Flory’s theory [9, 10, 11] for critical exponents, analytically the fractal dimension
ν in two dimensions is expected to be about 2ν ∼ 3/2 instead of 2. That is, without vaccines
at large times ĩ(~x, t) asymptotically is expected to approach a stable fractal distribution of self
similar ’hot’ and ’cold’ infection clusters on a space of dimension less than 2. Despite a vast
literature on the subject, analytical results in a closed form for this class of critical phenomena
for a restricted self avoiding (SAW) random walker in two spatial dimensions do not exist even
for the simpler case of time independent parameters. Our model therefore has an additional
ii

We changed notation for spatial coordinates from ~r to ~
x here to avoid any confusion of the SEIR variable
r for the recovered population with the spatial coordinate ~r. However both ~r and ~
x have the same meaning,
region’s location on a two dimensional surface and are used interchangeably.
iii
The critical exponent ν here should not be confused with the removal rate parameter ν̃ in Eqns. 1 of the
SEIR model

4

layer of complexity to the mathematical results cited here for a two dimensional restricted SAW
random walker: the restrictions on our random walker ĩ(~x, t) are time dependent. Therefore we
will use machine learning for solving these equations to predict the late time growth of infection
spreading as a function of restriction measures.

2.1

The Mathematical Model For Restricted Infection Spread

Consider the infection variable ĩ to be our system. We promoted it into a field i(~x, t) random
walking through a ’host’ environment field s(~x, t) living on a two dimensional region over time.
In what follows, we will also make use of the parameter γ mentioned in Section 1, defined
in Eqn.8 as the ratio between the confirmed infections i(~x, t) and the actual reservoir of the
non-susceptible population ĩ(~x, t).
γ(~x, t) =

i(~x, t)
,
ĩ(~x, t)

(8)

Clearly, γ(~x, t) is a space and time dependent parameter since it quantifies the true number
of infections in a population located at ~x per each confirmed case there by testing, at any time
t.
The Force of Lockdown:
Let us now model the effect of the lockdown measure on reducing the infection spread with
a quadratic confining potential Vi (ĩ). A single well potential for a field, in our case the active
infections, describes the effect of lockdown in a region located at ~r because such a potential drives
the active confirmed infection field i(~r, t) to eventually rolls down to zero. iv The strength of the
confinement potential camptures the impact of the lockdown in damping active infections and is
given by its space and time dependent coupling constant α = α[(tf − ti ), t, r], which varies with
region ~r and depends on ti , tf , the initial and final date (duration) of the lockdown of the region,
respectively. Since our system is ĩ(~r, t) then, using the rescaling between confirmed infection i
and ĩ of Eqn. 8, we can rewrite the lockdown potential in restricting the random walker in terms
of ĩ by absorbing γ(~r, t) into the strength α(~r, t) of the lockdown potential Vi .
With these considerations the lockdown potential becomes
α̃ ĩ2
(9)
2
where the rescaled lockdown strength is: α̃ = γα2 . The damping force of the lockdown on
Vi =

i
infections is simply the derivative of its potential Fi = − dV
. From now we will suppress showing
dĩ
the symbols ti , tf in α for ease of notation.
The Force of Social Distancing and Masks:
The purpose of masks and social distancing is to eliminate the possibility of exposure to the
virus, in other words to minimize the chance that susceptibles are physically close to the path of
droplets from others, or to block their flux with a mask altogether. We here assume that the part
of the population which follows guidelines for eliminating exposure to the virus is equally likely
to engage both methods to block exposure, masks and social distancing, therefore the impact of
the social distancing potential in slowing down infection spread discussed here includs the effect
of masks as well. While we don’t include any of the biological or clinical parameters such as
the role of viral load in infecting susceptibles, the risk from potential airborne properties, or a
variation in the size and trajectory of droplets, we gauge the net effect of social distancing in
eliminating exposure to droplets by i(~r, t) as a damping force on infections growth by relying on
a simple physics based approximation: the trajectory of a flux of droplets ejected by i (through
breathing, coughing and sneezing) follows a typical classical projectile motion described by
iv

A quartic or any type of concave single well confining potential function would work equally well as the
quadratic type of Eqn.9, so we don’t loose any information by choosing the simplest such potential.

5

Newtonian gravity. While estimating the projectile distance a droplet may travel before hitting
the ground as a function of its weight, size and ejection speed is not hard, such details are not
important on the solution and stochastic evolution of our system. Therefore in what follows, we
ignore droplet size effects. We average over the size and initial speed of droplets and consider
them collectively as a flux of particles moving together under the gravitational force, along the
same projectile trajectory.
Normally, the ’contagion interaction’ between a j th susceptible person sj and droplets flux
s i
from a k th infected person ik would take the form Vsi = −δ̃Σ jζ k , where δ̃ is the strength
rjk

parameter of the potential, rjk is the distance between them, and the sum is over all (j, k). For
the purely gravitational forces on the droplets motion ζ = 2. For a more detailed analysis which
may account for changes in the projectile motion due to other forces on the droplets such a
drifting force from wind and other weather elements, or an air buoyancy force on the droplets
inducing floating, we could allow ζ to be an additional parameter ζ 6= 2 the value of each would
be determined by simulations. Since the susceptible part of the population is much larger than
the infected part so far in all the reported data for any region, we replace the sum over j of
sj with an averaged value s(~r, t) = (1 − ĩ), up to a proportionality constant which depends on
the population distribution and social behavior absorbed in δ̃ for each region, through machine
learning. As before, the re-scaling factor γ between i and ĩ of Eqn.8 is included in δ̃. As
mentioned the machine is trained to learn and include the information about the population
density distribution ρ(~r, t) and social interactions from earlier times data when the spread was
random of each region within radius ~r at time t into the coupling constants α, δ̃ of each potential.
This allows us to further approximate the typical average distance r ≈< rjk > between infected
and susceptible people from different households on a two dimensional surface with an ensemble
averaged distance r ≈ ĩ−1/2 for that region’s population density.Any numerical factors that
arise from this approximation are roughly ĩ( − 1/2) and are also absorbed by δ̃. Therefore, we
denote the rescaled strength parameter of this potential by δ. Under the above simplifications,
the potential VD capturing the effect of social distancing and masks restriction designed to
avoid contact between droplets from the infected and susceptibles of Vs,i interactions takes the
following form
δ ĩ s
rζ

(10)

s = (1 − ĩ)

(11)

VD =
where

To reduce the number of parameters the machine needs to estimate and best fit to data, we
now take ζ = 2. The damping force on infections from the masks and social distancing potential,
then is FD = − dVdĩD . Similarly the coupling strength β for the driving force of infection spread
depends on space and time.
Collecting all the restriction forces acting on the infection field ĩ leads to
dĩ
δ(1 − 2ĩ)
≈ β̃(1 − i)ĩ − α̃ĩ −
+ f (t) = β̃ s ĩ − Vi0 − VD0 + f (t)
(12)
dt
r2
The prime denotes ddĩ . The first term in Eqn.12 is the familiar SEIR driving force of
infections, which in our model presented here corresponds to a potential function, VSEIR =
2
−β si2 . β̃ is the space and time dependent coefficient of β which is rescaled by γ and by
population demographics and social behavior; the second term is the damping force with finite
duration due to the lockdown; the third term is the damping force on infections from the percent
of population which follow rules on masks and social distancing.
The Noise Term from the Environment and Diffusion:
The last term f (t) in Eqn.12 is an important one which deserves some explanation. This
term is a source of noise from the background s(~r, t) acting on the system ĩ, a random local
6

force driving infection spreading details of which are not known. The only information known
about the noise term f (t) is its averaged values, such that on average < f (t) >= 0 and <
f (t)f (t0 ) >= Dδ(t − t0 ), where D is the diffusion parameter. The noise from the environment
f (t) onto our system gauges the fact that for as long as there are hosts s(r, t) on which the virus
can feed, then some random diffusion of the infection seeping through a population may still
persist and escape restrictions or detection despite efforts carried out to control it. This term
quantifies what percentage of the population, may not or can not follow the control measures or
any accidental exposure to the virus despite best efforts.
With the noise term f (t) included, Eqn. 12 becomes a stochastic differential equation known
as the Langevin equation [12]
Given ĩ = e + i + r and its relation to i through the scaling factor γ, from Eqn. 12 we
could also rewrite the Langevin equation 12 as an equation for the rate of decrease of the ’hosts’
environment, the susceptible population
ds
0
= −[β̃ s ĩ − Vi0 − VD0 + f (t)] = −[Vtotal
+ f (t)].
(13)
dt
Eqn.13 relates how decreasing the “driving” force of infection through these measures slows
down the “damping” rate of the susceptibles background. v
Let’s collect all the potential terms, except the random force f (t), acting on ĩ(r, t), that
contribute to driving and damping infections in Eqn.12 under a Vtotal such that
0
0
= VSEIR
+ Vi0 + VD0
Vtotal

(14)

Control measures are switched on and off at certain times ti , tf and can be imposed more than
once. We account for their duration and time dependence by introducing a memory function
in these potentials, a time window function θ(t − ti ). An adiabatic (gradual) change of the
restriction over time can be captured by a smooth hyperbolic tangent T anh(ti , t) function, a
sudden change by a Gaussian window function, and a change with a fixed start time but indefinite
in the future is captured by a step function Θ(t − ti ). By allowing the starting and ending time
of these measures to be variable we can predict how the daily infection curves would change
accordingly as a function of the time and duration of a control measure being imposed again
the future. For example, a measure starting at ti but thereafter lasting indefinitely vi , would be
described by a step function for their time window function.
Vi −→ Vi Θ(t − ti )

(15)

We allow the diffusion parameter D = D(t) to vary with time in each region, rather than
be a constant. Moreover, a detailed analysis of the impact of border closings by region would
require we introduce a function g(~r) which multiplies the noise term f (t) so that f (t) → g(~r)f (t)
and hg(~r)f (t)g(r~0 )f (t0 )i = D(~r, t)δ(t − t0 )δ 2 (~r − r~0 ).
The stochastic differential Langevin equation, with all the time dependent parameters described above is the equation the machine learns to solve in predicting the infection curves as a
function of time for each region. Coefficients β̃, D(t) the diffusion parameter for random noise,
α̃ the lockdown confining potential, and δ the masks and social distancing parameter, are figured
out by best fitting the solution with data provided daily by Johns Hopkins University. These
learned parameters are then used to predict future daily infection curves for each region as a
function of the restriction measures that may be introduced or relaxed in a region in the next
twelve months. We illustrate the predicted daily infection curves given a particular choice of
v
dĩ
The relation ds
= − dt
between the susceptible background s and the infection random walker ĩ for the
dt
stationary case eventually leads to the distribution of ’hot’ and ’cold’ clusters of infection in the fractal structure
should the system reach equilibrium at large times.
vi
By indefinitely we mean time scales from now to until we are immune to the virus

7

future measures (α̃, δ, β̃, γ) as function of time for three US states below, and plan to post the
predicted curves for any region in [7].
As a first step in using AI to implement this model, to gain in speed at the expense of
complexity, we set the white noise term in the Langevin equation f (t) to zero when solving
Eqn.12. All the results shown in the next section and made available in [7] are based on the
simplified Eqn.12. Without diffusion, the Langevin equation becomes a deterministic equation
of ’motion’ which takes far less time to solve numerically. We will report the results for the case
f (t) 6= 0 in a sequel paper [13].
In the absence of the diffusion term at this stage, we account for the impact of closed borders
by imposing absorbing boundary conditions, meaning no incoming or outgoing flux of people in
a population at ~r = Rcountry = the border of states and countries. With the noise term taken to
be zero in step one, to account for the part of diffusion of infection through a population that
school openings may have contributed the machine absorbs its effect in the time dependence
of the Vtotal parameters β̃, α̃, δ. It should be noted that setting diffusion to zero converts the
Langevin equation in a deterministic equation. As will be seen in the plots below, ignoring
0
diffusion predicts the infection curves to drop to zero when the total force of infections Vtotal
=0
in Eqn.14 and therefore ignores the probability that the danger of infection spread may persist
even when restriction measures remain intact.
Epidemiological studies and data have already shown the impact masks and distancing have
on damping infection transmission. School kids below 18 years old make up 23% of the population. To get an intuitive idea on how the machine in the absence of the diffusion term estimates
the school effect and absorbs it as an increase in infection spread on the predicted curves, assuming that younger kids cannot effectively follow the guidelines or facilities are such that it is
harder to social distance, then any increase β̃ can be attributed to school openings. Currently
we do not have a sufficient amount of data to isolate this effect in increasing the daily infection
curves. However, given that all the other measures where adult population is concerned remain
the same, then any increase in our predicted daily infection would be due to school openings.
We plan to train the machine when more data on school openings is available and to use our
model to quantify and report the increase in β from school openings when all other restrictions
are in place.

2.2

The Probability Distribution Function For The Complete Stochastic
Model

A more accurate description of the system’s evolution ĩ(~r, t) is given by the complete stochastic
mathematical model of a controlled pandemic of Eqn.12 which includes the diffusion of infection
through a random white noise term f (t) for our restricted SAW random walker.
For completeness let us provide the mathematical details of the model for the stochastic case
when diffusion is included. We will show its AI implemented predictions in a future publication
[13]. We expect that with diffusion included the relative weights of the other parameters in Vtotal
as a function of time reported here may change. In contrast to the deterministic type Eqn. 12 of
D = 0 solved in this work, in the case of a diffusive system the solution is given by a probability
distribution function (PDF) of infections ĩ(~r, t) is given by Eqn.16, due to it stochastic nature.
Let us denote the probability that our system ĩ(~r, t) which started at some initial position r~0 , t0
is found at location ~r at some later time t by P [ĩ(~r, t); ĩ(~r0 , t0 )] = P (~r, t) for short, regardless of
how it got there. The equation for the PDF derived from the above Langevin Eqn.12 in (2 + 1)D
is known as the Fokker Planck equation.
The Fokker Planck equations for the probability distribution function P (~r, t) of our self
avoiding walker ĩ moving on a two dimensional space and restricted by the control measure
contained in Vtotal of Eqn.14 at any moment in time is given by (see [12])

8

∂P (~r, t)
= ∇ĩ [∇ĩ Vtotal P + D(t)∇ĩ P ] = ∇ĩ J.
∂t

(16)

where again,
d
(17)
dĩ
and Vtotal is given by Eqn.14 which enters the Langevin Eqn.12. The combination of the
potential and diffusion terms on the right hand side of Eqn.16, J, denotes the probability current
of infection given by
∇ĩ =

J = [∇ĩ Vtotal P + D(t)∇ĩ P ]

(18)

It should be noted that the probability of infection remains non zero when D(t) 6= 0 even
when the total force of infection Eqn.14 in the Langevin equation is driven to zero from the
impact of restrictions.
If equilibrium is achieved at large times, then ∇ĩ J = 0 (see [9, 12, 19]). It is only in this
situation when the gradient of the infection current ∇J = 0 that the risk of infection spreading
goes.
The initial conditions for Eqn. 16 are defined at t = 0 when the first positive test is confirmed
are denoted by ĩ(t = 0) = i0 , s(t = 0) = s0 . By training the machine on previous data the machine
estimates the time derivative of the initial data (i˜0 , dĩ(t=0
dt , s0 ) despite limited testing. Since the
growth is exponential early on than the time derivative of ĩ at initial time t = 0 has a simple
relation to ĩ given by the slope of that curve.
Note that for D(t) = 0 if [β̃ − α̃ − δ] ≤ 0 in the Langevin equation, Eqn.12, than the control
measures introduce in Vtotal of Eqn.14 effectively shut down the spread of infections (see plots in
section 4). However this is not strictly the case in a stochastic model where diffusion introduces
a nonzero probability that some amount of re−infection can enter a region through travel or may
still be present and diffuse through a population. The reason for this behavior is the fact that
the random diffusion captures the unknown and unreported elements in the population which
somehow escaped the healthcare net, who should have been quarantined but weren’t, such as
some people who may be asymptomatic and careless in following the measures Vtotal introduces,
or those who cannot afford to go to the doctor or miss work, as well as any accidental exposure
to infection through touching an infected surface or airborne particles. Since diffusion captures
all the random elements that cannot be anticipated in Vtotal , the stochastic model gives a more
realistic description of the spread of infection, than the deterministic model.
No analytical solution exists for this class of stochastic models of a restricted self avoiding
random walker in two spatial dimensions. Due to their complexity these models are also notoriously hard to solve numerically within a short time. Therefore, during an unfolding pandemic
when time is of essence, AI implemented results of Eqn.16 which we will show in the sequel
paper [13] offer a powerful way for obtaining numerical solutions for the PDF of infection and
for the diffusion parameter D(t) within a reasonable time, at any point (r, t) in spacetime.
It is well known that, for the case when the potential parameters β̃, α̃, δ are constants, these
stochastic models lead to critical phenomena [9, 10] at t− > ∞. In this case, for ∇J = 0 the
infection spread ĩ(r, t) would follow a fractal structure of self similar ’hot’and ’cold’ clusters of
infections of dimension less than two. In the limit of large times t → ∞, the solutions to Eqn.16
have a universal scaling behavior and for large populations, N → ∞, they approach a scale
free network. In two dimensions, critical exponents are known numerically but not rigorously
derived analytically. Furthermore, in equilibrium ∇J = 0 the diffusion parameter D of infection
and the dissipation of infection µ are related by a form of the fluctuation dissipation theorem
(the Einstein-Schomlowsky relation) as D
µ ≈ constant.

9

A way to understand the above relation between diffusion and dissipation of infection is
to recall the relation between the rate of change of the infected field ĩ (our system) and the
dĩ
susceptible parts of the population (the ’background’) dt
= − ds
dt of Eqns.(2, 13, 12).
The scaling behavior at large times for the ’mean square distance’ (MSD) for these systems
in two dimensions in terms of the critical exponents expected to go as
hĩ2 i = (4Dt)2ν = (4Dt)3/2

(19)

q
hĩi = hĩ2 i ∼ hĩi0 t3/4

(20)

Note that for a diffusive stochastic system, the infection growth at late times is polynomial
with time rather than exponential growth like the in the SEIR model. In this section we reported
the known characteristic features and scaling behavior in literature [14] for these stochastic
models as t → ∞ when the system reaches equilibrium ∇J = 0. However we should caution
that the results for the large time evolution of the system and the values of critical exponents
studied in literature, do not have time dependent parameters in Vtotal as we have here. The time
dependence of the coupling constants, in addition to diffusion, adds an extra layer of complexity
to the stochastic system. Furthermore, non-stationary solutions ∇J 6= 0 for P [ĩ(r, t)] for a SAW
model with time dependent parameters are extremely hard and can only be solved numerically
by powerful machines. This is a highly complex system which will require considerably more time
and computing power. We are currently preparing to train the machine for the full stochastic
model with the time dependent coefficients presented here. We will report the solutions of Eqn.16
for the probability distribution function of infections and estimate the diffusion parameter D(t)
as a function of time in a future publication [13].

3

Methods

The model in (12) has several parameters which are unknown: β̃, α̃, δ, for ease of notation from
here we will take β̃, α̃, δ to be β, α, δ and drop the tilde, but we emphasize that future references
of β, α, δdo absorb and reflect the region and time dependent version of the parameters. To
use the model for forecasting and scenario analysis requires us to identify these parameters. To
identify these parameters, we fit the model to observed daily confirmed infections obtained from
John’s Hopkins University, [15]. The parameters may vary from one region to another, hence
we train the machine and best fit the parameters of the model independently to each region’s
data. To fit the model to data, we make two practical modifications: (i) Infections data is
reported daily, so we convert the differential equations to finite difference equations. (ii) Data
only reports confirmed (usually symptomatic) infections. An infection is only confirmed after a
time-lag k-days, and further, only a fraction γ of the infections are confirmed. The parameter
k corresponds approximately to the incubation time of the virus and we set it to 8 [16]. The
parameter γ is important in linking the observed infections to the resevoir of all infections. To
expedite the fitting process, in this paper we only consider the diffusionless D(t) = 0 simplified
version of the model presented in the above section. Taking D = 0 removes the f (t) term in
(12). We also set ζ = 2 and take r ≈ i−1/2 (see the discussion in section 2). Let us first discuss
the finite difference model with a lag.
Finite Difference Model:
It is convenient to introduce a new state variable q(t) to denote the number of newly created
infections at time t in region r. q(t) approximately corresponds to the rate dĩ/dt of Eqn. (12)
in region r. Recall that ĩ(t) is the cumulative total number of individuals up to time t in
who have been infected by the disease (including those who have recovered), and e(t) is the
number of exposed and currently infectious individuals at time t. At time t, let s(t) be the
number of susceptible individuals. We introduce two additional variables rs (t) and x(t), which
10

have no exact counterpart in the standard SEIR model. rs (t) is the cumulative number of
individuals up to time t who contracted the disease at some earlier time and have now silently
recovered. Silently means without detection, usually because there were no symptoms. x(t) is
the cumulative number of confirmed infections up to time t. The contribution to x(t) at time
t comes from the fraction of new infections at time t − k which get confirmed at time t (the
remaining fraction silently recover). Although we did not explicitly show the ~r dependence in
the variables defined above it should be understood that they are functions of space as well as
time. The coupled finite difference equations are:
q(t) = βe(t − 1)s(t − 1) − αe(t − 1) − δe(t − 1)(1 − 2e(t − 1))

(21)

s(t) = s(t − 1) − q(t)

(22)

e(t) = e(t − 1) + q(t) − q(t − k)

(23)

x(t) = x(t − 1) + γq(t − k)

(24)

rs (t) = rs (t − 1) + (1 − γ)q(t − k)

(25)

Equation (21) contains the infectious force and damping potentials from (12) which control the
rate at which new infections are produced, q(t). Equation (22) merely says that the susceptible
population decreases by the new infections. Equation (23) says that the infectious individuals
increase by the new infections minus the infectious individuals who recovered silently or who
became symptomatic and got discovered (and quarantined). Due to the lag k the loss of infectious
individuals is exactly q(t − k). Equations (24) and (25) say that a fraction γ of the infectious
get symptomatic and discovered and the other (1 − γ)-fraction silently recover without serious
symptoms. Recall that ĩ(t) = e(t) + x(t) + rs (t). It is only x(t) which is observed.
The parameters (β, α, δ, γ) are unknown. From data provided by John’s Hopkins University
[15], we observe very noisy estimates {x̂(0), x̂(1), x̂(2), . . . , x̂(T )}, where timestep 0 indicates the
first confirmed infection. We set i(−k) = x(0)/N where N is the population of the region being
analysed, and correspondingly s(−k) = 1−i(−k), q(−k) = i(−k), x(−k) = 0, rs (−k) = 0. Given
these initial conditions, the trajectory of x(t) is determined given (β, α, δ, γ) and Equations (21)–
(25). Hence we identify (β ∗ , α∗ , δ ∗ , γ ∗ ) as the parameters which minimize the mean squared error
between the observed trajectory x̂ and the model’s trajectory x(β, α, δ, γ). That is,
(β ∗ , α∗ , δ ∗ , γ ∗ ) = argmin

T
X
(x(t|β, α, δ, γ) − x̂(t))2 .

(26)

(β,α,δ,γ) t=0

Lockdown, Social Distancing and Masks:
Again, to address the practical situation with COVID-19, we have to address the effects of
lockdown, social distancing and masks. Indeed, this is one of the advantages of our model, that
it gives us simple switches for turning on and off various social distancing measures. We assume
that lockdown begins at some time τ and lasts till τ + L. In general fitting of the data, the
lockdown period L is about 90 days for all USA regions. Naturally, this parameter L is tuned to
each specific region and it is calculated by the machine learning algorithm from JHU data [15].
The start of the lockdown, τ , is determined by a robust changepoint (A sample or time instant
at which some statistical property of a signal changes abruptly) analysis in the time-series (for
example see [18]).
Parameters representing the strength of each measure on any region vary with time and
duration. Being trained on past data, the machine learns the time and strength of these measures
α, δ and the remaining degree of randomness β and the time when they were introduced suddenly
in the past. Therefore, we include that time dependence in β, α, δ in (21) by breaking down
their time dependence in three time intervals, namely: the ’random spread time’,i.e. the time
before the lockdown t < τ when all restrictions are zero and the virus is spreading randomly,
i.e. when β = βmax ; the ’lockdown duration’, i.e. the time interval during the first full lockdown
α = αmax being in effect τ < t < τ + L in a region. L should be understood to be a function of
11

space and time L(~r, t since the lockdown time and duration varies by region, and the machine
can learn to read this parameter from data. Social distancing and masks restriction δ = δmax
are also in full effect during this time and can extend beyond. As a result, β drops from its
maximum value by a factor λpm β where the reduction parameter λpm in this interval is estimated
from past data from the machine; and, future time interval which can extend for two years, i.e.
t > τ + L when some of the restrictions are relaxed or not followed rigorously. For example,
although lockdown officially ended in May, the machine estimates that its impact parameter α on
infection spread was still at half its strength until August because many people were encouraged
and continued to work remotely, schools were closed during summer, and travel and hospitality
industries were at a minimum, therefore many people stayed home. The future increase or
decrease in β is captured by the parameter λm and it depends on future decisions taken on
restrictions in any region. The strength of social distancing follows similar patterns in past data
and it is learned by the machine. The change, for example decrease, in the strength of lockdown
and social distancing restrictions that can be imposed in the future on any region is captured
by the region and time dependent parameters λL (t), λsd (t) respectively. The time dependence
on these parameters allows us the freedom to predict what happens to the daily infection curves
if restrictions are introduced at certain times in the future. All past data parameters are best
fitted by the machine. With these definitions, we have


βmax t < τ ;
β(t) =
(27)
λpm β τ ≤ t ≤ τ + L;


λm β t > τ + L.


t < τ;
0
α(t) =
(28)
α(t)
τ ≤ t ≤ τ + L;


λL (t)α t > τ + L.


t < τ;
0
δ(t) =
(29)
δ(t)
τ ≤ t ≤ τ + L;


λsd (t)δ t > τ + L.
Equation (27) captures the effects of control measures of α and δ in reducing β after lockdown
and in the future. Although β does not return to its maximum initial value in the future, it
increases by a percentage defined by the factor λm when restrictions ease. Equations (28) and
(29) capture changes over time in the impact of lockdown and social distancing potentials on
damping infection spread.
The step functions in Equations (27)–(29) can be smoothened to better approximate reality, since control measures are not instantly adopted throughout the whole population (except perhaps a government mandated lockdown or curfew). A transition from say a function a(t) to another function b(t) at time t0 can be compactly written as a single function
a(t)+Θ(t−t0 )(b(t)−a(t)), where Θ(·) is the Heaviside threshold function. One can smoothen this
by replacing Θ(t−t0 ) with any smooth approximation, such as Θ(t−t0 ) ≈ (1+tanh(c(t−t0 )))/2
for c > 0 (smaller c is smoother) and the machine can be set to determine the value of c.
In summary, the lockdown start-time τ is determined by the first changepoint in a robust
changepoint analysis of the time series of confirmed infections. For example, in the US the
lockdown duration is about L = 90 days, but the machine learns this duration from data for any
region. We fit the parameters β(~r, t), α(~r, t), δ, γ(~r, t), λi (~r, t) (where i stands for m, L, sd ) to
the data by minimizing the MSE in (26) using an exhaustive search over the ranges β ∈ [0.1, 1],
α ∈ [0, 0.3], δ ∈ [0, 0.2], γ ∈ [0, 0.3] and λm ∈ [0.5, 0.7].
By changing future strength of restrictions given α(t), δ(t) and β, allows us to predicts
and investigate future scenarios in which the different social distancing measures are relaxed at
certain times. We will demonstrate some of these scenarios next in the Results section.
12

4

Results

In addition to the new mathematical model we present in this paper, we have made the code
publicly available in [3], including the machine learning algorithm. Data file is available daily
from [15]. The machine is trained in every region of the world, therefore our model implemented
by the deposited code can be used for predicting daily infection curves for any region in the
world. We plan to post infection curves for every region in the world on our website [7], for the
two future control measure scenarios described below. Here, we discuss in detail the results for
three states:North Carolina, New York and Florida.
These results are obtained by fitting the model to the region’s reported data in [15], shown
by the red dots in the figures below, to obtain the coupling parameters β(t), α(t), δ(t), γ, λm .
We show predicted curves in these three states by considering these two hypothetical future
scenarios:
(a) Scenario A. The official lockdown of last Spring ends. However population remains in a
semi lockdown state with a decrease of 50% in the impact of this restriction in slowing down
infection spread, that is α → α/2. Social distancing is extended for a short time interval
(approximately from the end of lockdown until August 2020) after official lockdown ends,
before this restriction too decreases to about 50% . The exact time intervals when these
measures are reduced can be seen in the plots below. The reduction in these restrictions
occurs around the anticipated start of K-12 schooling in each state, assuming that social
distancing measures will consequently decrease and β, λm will increase due to the difficulty
enforcing these measures in schools.
(b) Scenario B. The same as above but social distances is maintained for a longer extension
of time (extension past August 2020 into January 2021) before being reduced to 50%
impact. In this scenario the reduction in social distancing and therefore increase in β starts
happening in January 2021. This is done under the assumption that states can maintain
restrictions such as social distancing and masks without a strict lockdown through January,
for example by moving K-12 schools to a remote learning model for the Fall Semester. This
assumption does not include the possibility of universities operating in person classes, if
we were to assume that college students would follow guidelines like the rest of the adult
population.
We are not proposing that these scenarios be adopted by policy makers, we are simply using
these two examples to illustrate the predictive power of our mathematical model and its machine
learning implementation.
One could instead analyze any combination of future restrictions such as additional lockdowns, partial mask compliance, etc.
Note that a different choice and/or duration of future restrictions in a region will obviously
produce very different daily infection curves. The danger of infection spread can be postponed
but will continue to loom over the susceptible population until a vaccine is developed. Hence,
it is up to health-economists to evaluate the human and economic loss of different scenarios to
come up with the optimal redistribution of the infection counts to tradeoff healthcare-system
overload against prolonged economic slump. Our Ai implemented predictive model can help
in this effort by efficiently determining months in advance the infection spread dynamics as a
function of future decisions on the schedule and strength of control measures.
We illustrate these predictions next.

4.1

North Carolina, New York and Florida

The infection plots for the three states are in Figure 1 (North Carolina), Figure 2 (New York)
and Figure 3 (Florida). We show the two scenarios, Scenario A and Scenario B. In each figure, we
first show the past confirmed daily infections (red circles) from JHU data [15] and the infection
curves predicted by our new mathematical model (solid black line). Uncertainties in the infection
13

curves are represented by gray uncertainty bands. To determine the uncertainty in the model
predictions the algorithm was set to search for all models which have a fit-error within 5% of
the optimal. The gray uncertainty bands represent the set of possible outcomes from this set
of models, and then the model (solid black line) is the average of these models. The largest
source of uncertainty in our predictions is most likely due to noise in the publicly reported data.
Because the machine learns from past data, any noise or uncertainty in that data is reflected
as uncertainty in the future, and the farther the model projects into the future the larger the
region of uncertainty. We then show the time dependent learned coupling parameters α(t), δ(t),
β(t) (normalized to their maximum value), and γ(t), see Equations (27), (28), (29) and (8).
Recall the definition of γ as the reservoir parameter which in the variable definitions from Finite
Difference model is computed as γ(t) = x(t)/(e(t) + x(t) + rs (t)) from Equations (23)-(25). In
our illustration below, we choose not to initiate a future full lockdown as such a drastic measure
seems unlikely. Instead, we focused on extending social distancing and mask mandates which
are more practical control measures. Our results show these are even more effective in reducing
infection curves than the lockdown.
We highlight several points from the figures.
i Each region and state has very different population densities and social interactions, hence
the machine learning produces very different coupling parameters for each state. In contrast to SEIR model, this finding emphasizes the importance of space and time dependent
restriction parameters contained in our model and the usefulness of machine learning in
finding out this regional dependence. On our website [7], we will show result to the county
level.
ii The strength of the implemented control measures is determined by the level of social
compliance. Since we do not know how compliant the population of a region is, it is
necessary for the machine learning to automatically infer this from the observed past data
during the phase when the virus spreading is completely random. This knowledge can be
useful for other medical and viral diseases that rely on regional characteristics. The results
vary considerably from county to county, once again underlining the value of heteregeonity.
iii Despite limited testing, we have here developed the tools to estimate the true number of
non susceptible population, the ’reservoir’, as a function of time in the past and for any
predicted future scenario through parameter γ(~r, t) shown for the three states below.

14

(a) Scenario A.
(b) Scenario B.
Figure 1: North Carolina (NC). (Left) Scenario A relaxes control measures in accordance
with real time policy decisions from each state [15, 17]. This results in relaxation of the lockdown
measures on May 8, with social distancing and λm being relaxed around 80 days later, resulting
in the spike of infections seen around October. (Right) Scenario B extends social distancing and
λm an additional 120 days, accounting for a scenario in which K-12 schools move to a remote
learning model (as is the case in NC) in the fall 2020, and so the spike in infections is delayed
until March 2021 should measures be relaxed next Spring. Prolonging restrictions reduces β
and daily infection curves. The multiplying parameter for the reservoir γ is also shown below.In
both scenarios R0 = 3.07, αmax = 0.01, δmax = 1.05e − 08, γtoday = 0.063, which corresponds to
roughly 1 in 15 infections being confirmed.

15

(a) Scenario A.

(b) Scenario B.

Figure 2: New York (NY). (Left) Scenario A relaxes control measures in accordance with
real time policy decisions from each state [15, 17]. This results in relaxation of the lockdown
measures on May 8, with social distancing relaxing around 80 days later and λm relaxing 43
days after the extension in social distancing. This is in accordance with the NY’s current plan to
delay school openings until September 23. (Right) Scenario B extends social distancing and λm
an additional 200 days after lockdown is relaxed, accounting for a scenario in which schools move
to a remote learning model for the fall semester, and so the spike in infections is delayed until
March 2021. In NY R0 = 6.24, αmax = 0.052, δmax = 0.051, γtoday = 0.09, which corresponds to
1 in 11 infections being confirmed.

16

(a) Scenario A.

(b) Scenario B.

Figure 3: Florida (FL). (Left) Scenario A. In this case all control lockdown is relaxed around
early May, while social distancing and λm measures are extended 80 days to the beginning
of August and this seems to match the data in the confirmed infection curve very closely,
predicting a spike in infections if social distancing restrictions are not extended past August
(Right) Scenario B. In this case for Florida we extend social distancing and the λm measures
for an additional 90 days in comparison to Scenario A, meaning social distancing and λm are
now relaxed around early December. This not only pushes the second peak of back but reduces the peak height while increasing peak width, further spreading out infections. In FL
R0 = 3.56, αmax = 0.22, δmax = 0.003, γtoday = 0.06, which, similar to NC corresponds to approximately 1 in 15 infections being confirmed. For both of these scenarios we note the gray
uncertainty bands are present but cannot be seen in the plots due to a relatively small value in
the uncertainty.
The area under the curve in all the plots shown gives the total confirmed number of infected,
which through the parameter γ of each region can be converted into a total number of non
suscpetibles of each region.

17

5

Conclusions

The impact of the Covid − 19 pandemic on countries around the world and on the daily life
of citizens is unprecedented. The traditional class of models used by epidemiologists to study
viral infections spreading randomly through a population has been the SEIR model we briefly
reviewed in Section 1. The latter cannot account for the impact of global restriction measures on
the pandemic, quantify the reservoir, or the space time dependence of these restrictions on the
pandemic. We here offer a new and predictive mathematical model for the pandemic dynamics
which combined with machine learning includes the space and time dependence in the pandemic
dynamics.
In contrast to previous viral diseases, the type and extent of global measures taken to contain
the spread of Covid − 19 to prevent a health crisis are new. In this new situation, part of the
challenge is finding a predictive model for the evolution of the pandemic which describes the
mix of order given by global restrictions, to the disorder of a random spreading of virus, and
quantifies the impact of these control measures (their duration and the time they are introduced)
in constraining the spread over extended periods of time.
In this work we presented an interdisciplinary approach to predicting the dynamics of future
infections. Firstly in Section 2 we develop a mathematical model which using physics based
considerations to capture the effect of individual restrictions on the infection spread as a function
of space and time. In our model the infection spread is a restricted self avoiding random walker
through a population. Our model belongs in a different mathematical class from SEIR type
models. It is stochastic and its probability distribution function P (~r, t) on any region at any time
is found by solving a Fokker Planck type equation (Eqn. 16). The strength of the lockdown and of
social distancing and masks on the infection curves in our model are given by the time dependent
parameters α(~r, t), δ(~r, t) respectively. These restrictions introduce order in the random walk.
The amount of disorder in the random walk which may persist through a population (for example
a random mixing of susceptible and infectious groups through school openings) is still described
by the SEIR type term with strength β(t), however note that in contrast to the SEIR models,
β is a function of space and time and captures population demographics and social behavior.
The diffusion of the infection through a population not captured in the above terms, (infections
which somehow escape detection or the set of restrictions and quarantine) is given by a diffusion
parameter D(t) sourced by a noise term f (t). This model can be applied to potential future
pandemics, although of course we hope there wont be any.
Secondly, given the complexity of the model, we take full advantage of the benefits of AI
in Section 3 in implementing our model in order to estimate future infection curves for any
region within a short time. Viruses need hosts to feed and multiply, therefore their unrestricted
spreading phase depends on population demographics and human social behavior, in addition
to the virus characteristic reproductive rate Ro . We take advantage of this feature in training
the machine. The machine learns the population density and social behavior networks for any
region, state and country from the pre lockdown data (March 2020) when the virus spread
unconstrained. The machine then applies these learned characteristics when estimating future
infections curves from our model and estimates the ratio of true infections for each confirmed
infection γ(~r, t). In this work we implemented a simplified version of our stochastic model by
taking diffusion to zero and solving the Langevin equation of Eqn. 12. We deposited the code
in Github [3] and will post examples of the predicted infection curves for each region located at
r as a function of a particular choice of restrictions α(t), δ(t), β(t), γ(t) in our website [7].
For the case of time independent parameters, restricted SAW models in two dimensions can
lead to critical phenomena of self similar hot and cold clusters of infections at large times. In
reality, control measure parameters in our model are time dependent as restrictions change with
time and country. Therefore, it is not clear whether the evolution of this pandemic mathematically would be in the same universality class, have the same fractal properties and polynomial

18

growth at late times, as its well studied stationary SAW model. We plan to show our AI implemented infection curves for complete mathematical model presented here including diffusion in
a sequel paper. Among other elements, diffusion is an important indicator of the possibility of
re infection when travel is freely opened. In the present work we included the effect of border
closing by imposing absorbing boundary conditions on our equations, meaning by taking the
flux of population crossing boundaries in and out of a region to be zero.
How to interpret our results: Our new AI implemented model predicts future infection curves
for any region as a function of the time and the restriction measures taken in that region. It
explicitly quantifies the impact of each control measure on future infection curves over extended
periods of time. It also quantifies the ’reservoir’, through the parameter γ which tells us the
number of undetected infections for each confirmed one in every region. Different scenarios,
such as the choice of one restriction over another or a combination of them as well as the time
they are imposed in the future, result in different predicted infection curves for the rest of the
year. An added benefit is the speed of the machine in deriving these predictions. We illustrate
the comparison of different outcomes for the same region in Section 4 by showing the predicted
infection curves for a few regions under two different scenarios, one with schools closed and
partial future lockdown and and social distancing rules, and one with schools open and no
second lockdown but extended social distancing. The model can be applied to any pandemic
or disease where the spreading of a disease is restrained by control measures. We hope that an
advanced knowledge of the predicted infection curves as a function of regional restrictions given
by our model will be useful in public health and economic considerations on the duration and
combination of future restrictions which is optimal to the needs of their region.

Acknowledgements
LMH would like to thank Dr. C. Carothers and Dr. B. Yener for their readiness to help with
AI resources available at RPI, and Dr. S. Alexander and Dr. J. Engel for useful discussions in
the early stage of this project. We thank Dr. D. Budenz and Dr. D. Peterson for their time
and expert advice on the public health and medical applications of our results. We are grateful
to Dr. K. Simon and Dr. A. Bento fo their feedback on our work. LMH acknowledges support
from the Bahnson funds.
? We are saddened that one of our colleagues and a co-author in this paper, Steven Meshnick,
passed away shortly before our paper was finished.

References
[1] Imperial College London-MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis. News/Wuhan
Coronavirus. Available online: https://www.imperial.ac.uk/mrc-global-infectious-diseaseanalysis/news-wuhan-coronavirus/ (accessed on August 25, 2020).
[2] Eikenberry, S., Mancuso, M., Iboi, E., Phan, T., Eikenberry, K., Kuang, Y., Kostelich,
E., Gumel, A. (2020). To mask or not to mask: Modeling the potential for face mask use
by the general public to curtail the COVID-19 pandemic Infectious Disease Modelling 5(),
293-308. https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.idm.2020.04.001
[3] https://github.com/ldjones15/Stochastic-Covid-19
[4] Feng, Z. (2007). Final and peak epidemic sizes for SEIR models with quarantine and isolation. Mathematical Biosciences and Engineering 4(4), 675-686.
https://dx.doi.org/10.3934/mbe.2007.4.675

19

[5] Sanche, S., Lin, Y., Xu, C., Romero-Severson, E., Hengartner, N., & Ke,
R. (2020). High Contagiousness and Rapid Spread of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 26(7), 1470-1477.
https://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2607.200282.
[6] Ngonghala, C., Iboi, E., Eikenberry, S., Scotch, M., MacIntyre, C., Bonds, M., Gumel,
A. (2020). Mathematical assessment of the impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions on
curtailing the 2019 novel Coronavirus. Mathematical Biosciences 325(), 108364.
[7] Under construction.
[8] Long, Q., Tang, X., Shi, Q. et al. (2020). Clinical and immunological assessment of asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infections. Nat Med.
[9] Guillotin-Plantard, N., Schott, R. (8). Dynamic Random Walks
[10] Kardar, M., Parisi, G., Zhang, Y. (1986). Dynamic Scaling of Growing Interfaces. Physical
Review Letters 56(9), 889-892. https://dx.doi.org/10.1103/physrevlett.56.889; Kardar, M.,
Zhang, Y. (1987). Scaling of Directed Polymers in Random Media. Physical Review Letters
58(20), 2087-2090. https://dx.doi.org/10.1103/physrevlett.58.2087
[11] Flory, P., (1971). Principles of Polymer Chemistry, Chap. XII (Cornell University Press,
Ithaca, N. Y.)
[12] Pascucci, A., & Pesce, A. (2019). On stochastic Langevin and Fokker-Planck equations: the
two-dimensional case. arXiv: Probability
[13] “AI implemented predictions of a stochastic diffusive model”, in progress.
[14] Perkins, T., Foxall, E., Glass, L. et al. (2014). A scaling law for random walks on networks.
Nat Commun 5, 5121. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms6121
[15] CSSE, J. H. U. (2020). 2019 novel Coronavirus COVID-19 (2019-nCoV) data repository,
Available at https://github.com/CSSEGISandData/COVID-19. (accessed on August 25,
2020).
[16] Jing, Q., You, C., Lin, Q., Hu, T., Yu, S., Zhou, X. (2020). Estimation of incubation period distribution of COVID-19 using disease onset forward time: a novel crosssectional and forward follow-up study. medRxiv : the preprint server for health sciences
https://dx.doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.06.20032417
[17] Atlantic (2020), âĂĲThe COVID tracking project data,âĂİ
https://covidtracking. com/api. (accessed on August 25, 2020).

Available

online:

[18] Magdon-Ismail, M. (2020). Machine Learning the Phenomenology of COVID-19 From Early
Infection Dynamics arXiv https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.07602
[19] Liu, Shu & Li, Wuchen & Zha, Hongyuan & Zhou, Haomin. (2020). Neural Parametric
Fokker-Planck Equations.
[20] UMass-Amherst Influenza Forecasting Center of Excellence (2020). COVID-19 Forecast
Hub. Available online: https://github.com/reichlab/covid19-forecast-hub(accessed on August 25, 2020) https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-020-0965-6
[21] Um, J., Song, T., Jeon, J. (2019). Langevin Dynamics Driven by a Telegraphic Active Noise
Frontiers in Physics 7(), 143. https://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fphy.2019.00143

20

[22] Verity, R., et al. (2020). Estimates of the severity of coronavirus disease 2019: a model-based
analysis The Lancet Infectious Diseases 20(6), 669-677. https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/s14733099(20)30243-7

21

