arXiv:2008.05644v1 [cs.CY] 9 Aug 2020

A Deep Learning Approach for COVID-19 Trend Prediction
Tong Yang∗

Long Sha∗

Department of Physics
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts, USA

Department of Computer Science
Brandeis University
Waltham, Massachusetts, USA

Justin Li

Pengyu Hong

Del Norte High School
San Diego, California, USA

Department of Computer Science
Brandeis University
Waltham, Massachusetts, USA

ABSTRACT
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, due to the novel coronavirus
SARS-CoV-2, has affected not only the healthcare system but the
whole society worldwide. While a large number of medical works
and researchers are battling the pandemic crisis on the front line,
with large amount of accessible epidemic information, data-driven
research and learning based approaches could provide rich insights
about the challenge on the population and society level. In this work,
we apply a recurrent-network based model to study the epidemic
data in the United States. By incorporating both the epidemic time
series and socioeconomic characteristic data, our model provides
both a promising predictive power in forecasting the trend of new
confirmed cases, and an illustrative description about the interplay
between the local epidemic evolution and demographic features.
ACM Reference Format:
Tong Yang, Long Sha, Justin Li, and Pengyu Hong. 2020. A Deep Learning
Approach for COVID-19 Trend Prediction. In epiDAMIK 2020: 3rd epiDAMIK
ACM SIGKDD International Workshop on Epidemiology meets Data Mining
and Knowledge Discovery. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 7 pages. https://doi.
org/xx.xxxx/xxxxxxxxx.xxxxxxx

1

INTRODUCTION

In late 2019, the COVID-19 outbreak initially detected and reported
in Wuhan (Hubei, China) due to the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), spread rapidly, firstly across
regions in China and east-Asian countries, and then, since late February, to nearly all continents in the world. As of June 15, 2020,
there have been more than 7.91 million cases confirmed across
225 countries and regions, associated with 433 thousands deaths
[22, 26]. Declared as a pandemic by the World Health Organization
on March 11, the COVID-19 outbreak has brought severe challenges
to not only local healthcare systems (especially in underdeveloped
areas) but our society as a whole. At the same time, a large number
∗ Equal

Contribution

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
epiDAMIK 2020, Aug 24, 2020, San Diego, CA
© 2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-xxxx-XXXX-X. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/xx.xxxx/xxxxxxxxx.xxxxxxx

of related research have been emerging recently in various subjects
and fields, attempting to contribute to the battle against COVID-19.
Beside pharmacologic and genomics studies on the SARS-CoV-2
virus, data-driven research both on the spread of COVID-19 among
local population and on general social impacts brought by the pandemic have been providing valuable insights especially for local
policy makers.
On the one hand, various types of sequential models have been
implemented to study the spreading behavior of COVID-19 in
a generic population, including compartmental model based approaches [3, 5, 12, 18], which are motivated by conventional dynamical models in epidemiology, and deep learning based nonparametric
approaches [19, 24]. While the second class, i.e., artificial-learning
base approaches, might produce better predictions on disease related statistics, it lacks interpretability for the most part due to the
black-box nature of neural network estimators.
On the other hand, the interaction between social environments
and the local COVID-19 outbreak remains an important topic. The
identification of highly related exogenous factors that impact the
local epidemic evolution significantly, e.g., the local population
density and the local age structures, is of great importance. In
addition to understanding dominant environmental factors that
govern the outbreak, the relation between the epidemic evolution
and socioeconomic characteristics could potentially also reveal the
inverse impact of the COVID-19 on a local community [1].
In the current work, we apply a learning-based approach both to
produce an accurate prediction about a near future, and to reveal
the interplay between environmental factors and the epidemic evolution. To accomplish this, we implement a neural-network based
sequential model, and integrate the time-varying epidemic information, i.e., related statistics including confirmed cases and deceased
records, with environmental factors including both dynamical ones,
e.g., local restriction policies, and static ones, such as demographic
features. Environmental factors enter the model via an "kick-start"
mechanism 1 , which, after being fixed through training, offers a
smoking-gun for the relevance of different factors to the epidemic
evolution.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the ongoing pandemic situation and mentions some related
works which motivate our study. In section 3, we enumerate several
candidate factors that could potentially affect the epidemic evolution process significantly and discuss the potential epidemiological
1 See

Section 4 for details.

epiDAMIK 2020, Aug 24, 2020, San Diego, CA

dependence, along with other important socioeconomic characteristics, which could be used to analyze the inverse social impact of
the ongoing public health crisis. Section 4 elaborates our application approach in details, explaining both the information flow in
the model and the way to extract the relevance of environmental
factors to the local epidemic outbreak. Section 5 explains model
training, including data sources, model structures, and training
results. In section 6, we firstly demonstrate the prediction power of
the trained model, and then discuss the relevance of different environmental factors to the epidemic emergence extracted from the
trained representation. Finally, we summarize our work in Section
7 and discuss potential directions for further investigations with
more data and complex models.

2

Tong Yang, Long Sha, Justin Li, and Pengyu Hong

roughly capture the epidemic law of a generic disease spreading
behavior, there are two major problems in practice:
• ODE systems capture continuous dynamics, howbeit reallife epidemic data is usually collected in discrete time. There
are also delays in case reporting, which, even worse, never
uniform in time 3 . Therefore, there exists a significant mismatch between the true ongoing epidemic process, which
can be approximately described by ODEs, and the reported
data, which highly depends on human-involved operations.
• SIR and its variants only take into account the lowest-order
dynamics, which includes the linear terms describing population transitions between compartments and product terms
describing interaction/contact between compartments, while
keeping transition parameters constants. In reality, however, human responses would also evolve along with the
epidemic evolution, which, reversely, could remarkably affect the transmission (due to restriction policies and change
in crowd behaviors) and the fatality (due to the improved
medical response) of the disease.

THE ONGOING PANDEMIC AND RELATED
WORKS

As of June 15, 2020, the COVID-19 has hit countries worldwide. We
summarize the latest pandemic situation in Table 1.
Category
Statistics
Number of countries reporting COVID-19 cases
225
Number of confirmed cases reported worldwide 7,912,426
Number of deceased cases reported worldwide
433,391
Number of recovered cases reported worldwide
377,131
Currently estimated fatality rate
5.5%
Table 1: Summary statistics of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic situation worldwide. Data is from the CovidNet
project [26].

Governments and organizations across the world have been taking measures at different levels in response to this pandemic crisis.
Extreme measures were adopted by the Chinese government in
Wuhan, where a complete lock-down of the whole city was implemented. This has been proved later to be very effective to slow
down the spread of SARS-CoV-2, the contagious level of which was
later revealed to be much higher than two previous deadly viruses,
i.e., MERS and SARS. The response in Wuhan then inspired other
countries and regions, including South Korea, Thailand, Italy and
etc., addressing the importance of social distancing. In spite of the
fact that extreme measures have been proven to be effective in fighting against the coronavirus spread, regional lock-down remains
a difficult decision to be made for any local government taking
into account the economic expense. Therefore, it is of extreme importance to provide policy makers necessary tools to both predict
the future trend and understand the social impacts brought by the
public health emergency [7, 13, 20].
On the prediction side, conventional Susceptible Infectious Recovered 2 (SIR) model based approaches have been widely implemented [3, 12, 18], with model parameters estimated from regional
epidemic data. Motivated by the data-driven estimation process,
deep-learning models have also been hybridized into prediction
models [5]. While the SIR model and its variants indeed could
2 Or

Susceptible Infectious Removed in some literature, which also considered deceased
cases.

Above problems, especially the first one due to human operations,
make the task of prediction with compartmental models impractical.
Beside the predictive power, another drawback of ODE based
compartmental models is the absence of environmental factors. The
trend prediction alone is not enough for designing policy. Instead,
understanding the interplay between environmental factors and the
epidemic evolution could benefit local policy makers [7, 13, 20], and
the dependence of the local outbreak on demographic features and
transportation data is essential to calibrate restriction/reopening
strategies [6]. At the same time, it is also of great importance to
examine the social impact of the public health emergence on the
local community, especially on different population groups characterized by genders, races, and ages. Most recent works only provide
either qualitative arguments [21] or simple statistical analysis, e.g.,
the linear regression [1], which has limited modeling capability.
Compared with above methods, our current approach attempts
to incorporate environmental factors into the prediction module
directly. The explicit factor-dependence and therefore interpretability of the model are available via a proper analysis on the learnt
representation. Details of our modeling and training can be found
in Section 4 and 5.

3

THE INTERPLAY BETWEEN
ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS AND THE
COVID-19 EPIDEMIC

Before introducing specific model structures and training designs,
it is necessary to discuss and distinguish candidate environment
factors, which either directly govern the epidemic evolution process,
a.k.a. exogenous factors, or reveal the social impact of COVID-19
from essential perspectives.

3.1

Dominant factors of the transmission

In reality, many exogenous factors would affect the transmission
beside disease characteristics. Most intuitively, there is a higher
3 For

example, the obvious periodic (week-wise) pattern in the U.S. death data is due to
the reporting schedule of the official departments.

A Deep Learning Approach for COVID-19 Trend Prediction

probability in regions with denser population distributions that a
fast outbreak would emerge. New York City, being the most densely
populated county-equivalence in the United States, would serve
as a typical example. The outbreak in NYC evolved rather rapidly
from the beginning and, as of May 30, 2020, NYC has accounted for
than 55 percents of cumulatively confirmed cases across the whole
state.
Another dominating factor for transmission would be the restrictive order issued by the local government. Restrictions have been
implemented onto various industry/business activities as well as
local residents’ daily life. While industry/business restrictions differ
region by region, and are usually difficult to study quantitatively, in
the present work we instead use the restriction on local residents’
daily life, i.e. the stay-at-home order or its equivalencies, as an aggregated representation of the local restriction level to capture the
overall impact of local policies4 . Importantly, the change of the restrictive level, from the no-restriction stage, to the restrictive-order
stage, and finally to the reopen stage, results into a time-varying
transmission behavior of COVID-19, which is in contrast to ODEbased compartmental models that assume a constant transmission
factor β.
More generally, the interaction within a local population contributes significantly to the transmission. We therefore adopt the
average annual enplanements per capital [16] to capture the active
level of human interactions.

3.2

Vulnerable Population Groups and
Descriptive Factors

It has been confirmed by data from multiple countries and regions
[9, 14, 17] that the patient’s age is highly related to the development
of severe pneumonia symptoms. Aged people are in general more
vulnerable to the virus. We therefore incorporate the age structure
as an important demographic category.
More generally, the physical condition of individuals would result into differences in the probability of infection. For instance,
people with poor respiratory condition experience higher risk of
being infected. We therefore include the population with high risk
[10] as an input feature of modeling.

3.3

Smoking-gun factors for social impact
analysis

While above mentioned environmental factors focus more on the
biological aspects of the epidemic evolution, there are also other
socioeconomic characteristics, which, although not biologically relevant, could be potentially correlated with the evolution behavior.
For example, a study [1] focusing on the New York data has
shown that a higher probability of positive testing rate is in poorer
neighborhoods, in neighborhoods where large numbers of people
reside together, and in neighborhoods with a large black or immigrant population. At the same time, however, people residing in
poorer or immigrant neighborhoods were less likely to be tested.
As a result, an understanding of which types of neighborhoods are

4 Practically,

public

this is also the only consistent data category accessible to the general

epiDAMIK 2020, Aug 24, 2020, San Diego, CA

disproportionately affected by the pandemic requires an examination of how socioeconomic characteristics correlate with different
epidemic statistics.
Motivated by the above discussion, we selected several socioeconomic characteristics, which are not only related to the epidemic
statistics from the pure data perspective, but also important in
revealing potential disproportions of the COVID-19 impacts, including local gross domestic product (GDP) per capita and local
race compositions.

4

A LEARNING BASED APPROACH

Now we introduce our learning based approach which, in a nutshell, implements a recurrent-neural-network model for the trend
prediction along with an embedding of environmental factors to
extract relevant information. There are two classes of inputs: the
epidemic time series, including both confirmed cases and deceased
cases, and environmental socioeconomic factors.
The epidemic time series data enters the learning module through
a stacked Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) model, which is well-known
for both its power in dealing with sequential data by incorporating
history information properly, and its efficiently simplified structure.
We cast a fixed-length (L) sequence with recent history information to predict each subsequent data point, by implementing a
sliding window on the full time series. Importantly, we would like
to address that this GRU-based model structure is powerful in the
following sense:
(1) Firstly, this GRU model structure, at least, is capable of capturing the dynamics of compartmental models in the discretetime regime of compartmental models, where the value of
the next time-step only relies on the current state. For instance, this can be easily shown through the following set
of difference equations:
st +1 − st = −β · st · i t ,
i t +1 − i t = β · st · i t − γ · i t ,
r t +1 − r t = γ · i t ,

(1)

where {st , i t , r t } represent susceptible, infectious, and removed population fractions respectively, and {β, γ } describe
transmission rate and removal rate of the disease. This set
of equations can be viewed as a discrete version of a SIR
model [2], and they clearly only depend on the current snapshot of epidemic statistics; The above dynamics, in the ideal
scenario, can be captured by a GRU model with only L = 1
sliding-window length.
(2) Mathematically, the above difference equations in Eqs.1 are
not always a legitimate format. Indeed, a rigorous transformation from the continuous time regime to the discrete one
requires much more caution, and the exact solution form
would bring in more complicated terms with both longer
history dependence and higher-order polynomial terms. To
confront this difficulty, we apply both a sliding window with
longer length L > 1, and more layers in the GRU module to
capture complicated nonlinear terms.
Another input feature with time-varying values is the status of
the local restriction policy, i.e., the stay-at-home policy or similar

epiDAMIK 2020, Aug 24, 2020, San Diego, CA

Tong Yang, Long Sha, Justin Li, and Pengyu Hong

Figure 1: The 1-step-ahead prediction task on testing states: NJ, MI, SC, AZ, the data from which has never been accessible to
the model. The predicted curves follow the true values closely. The 95% confidence interval regions are obtained by bootstrap
re-sampling from the training set.
measures 5 , which, different from numeric data, is categorical with
a binary status: "stay-at-home" or "reopen". It is naturally expected
that the epidemic evolution would be different under different restriction statuses. Therefore, we apply a "double-channel" structure
in the GRU module: a sequential data point would enter channel-1
if there is a restriction policy on the corresponding date, and would
enter channel-2 otherwise.
In addition to time-series data, we have also integrated the following list of environmental factors as static input features:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

local population density;
local GDP per capita;
local age structure (fractions of 6 non-overlapping age groups);
local race structure (fraction of 7 different race categories);
high risk population;
local annual enplanements per capital;
local restrictive order level;

where all factors are summarized and represented on state level. Different from the sequential data of epidemic statistics which enters
the model via a black-box, although reasonable, as explained above,
model structure, we would like to investigate the interplay between
the epidemic evolution and various socioeconomic characteristics.
Therefore, when we incorporate the input of environmental factors,
we apply a linear embedding, which produces interpretable weights
on each input dimension. Technically, the embedded representation
of environmental factors is taken as the initialization of the hidden
state in the GRU model, which we call as a "kick-start" mechanism.
Through the above design of the information flow, we implicitly construct a desired interaction between environmental factors
and the epidemic time series data: these two input-categories are
conducted to interact with each other via various gates in the GRU
module. From an epidemic perspective, within the GRU structure,
the hidden state could be regarded as an evolving "environment",
whose initial status, i.e., before the first infectious case emerges,
5 This

includes the stay-at-home advisory issued in Massachusetts, the curfew issued
in Puerto Rico, and so on

only depends on exogenous demographic factors of the local community.

5

MODEL TRAINING

In this section, we elaborate the practice of model implementation,
including data sources, hyperparameters of implemented model,
and details of the training procedure.
Sources of Different Data Categories.
• COVID-19 case data: Case data is from the CovidNet project
[26], including confirmed and deceased counts of 50 U.S.
states and the District of Columbia, ranging from January
21, 2020, to June 14, 2020.
• State restriction policy: Restriction policy information is
collected from "The Coronavirus Outbreak" forum on the
New York Times [23].
• Population and density: We have used population data
from the U.S. Census Bureau [25].
• Population with higher risk: Population in each state
with higher risk to develop severe symptoms are estimated
in [10], and used as an exogenous factor in our application.
• Age structure data: We have used the age structure dataset
built by the Kaiser Family Foundation [11].
• Race structure data: Race structure data is collected from
the COVID Tracking Project [4].
• Annual enplanements data: We collected the data of annual enplanements per capital in each states (not including
D.C.) from the U.S. Department of Transportation [16].
• Gross domestic product per capita: We collect the data
from the United States Census Bureau [25]
Hyper-parameters of the Implemented Model. Our model is
implemented with an embedding module, recurrent module and
output module. The embedding module sparsely encodes the 21dimension state-specific demographic vector into a 100-dimension
vector; the recurrent module is using 3 stacked GRU layers with 100dimension hidden states, the recurrent module takes the previous

A Deep Learning Approach for COVID-19 Trend Prediction

embedding result as its first latent state and the windowed state
total confirmed cases and new cases as inputs; a dense layer is
used for the output layer in order to predict the target. We trained
the model using Adam optimizer [15] with 1e-4 learning rate and
discounted the learning rate with a factor of 0.3 if the training loss
didn’t decrease over 20 epochs. The model is trained on an MacBook
Pro with 6-Core CPU.
Details on the Training Design and Process. The detailed model
architecture is demonstrated in Figure. 3. We use a five-day window
time-series historical data and use recurrent module for prediction. The input data for recurrent module are total confirmed cases
(cc) and new confirmed cases (dc), we pro-process each of them
into two series: one contains value only when there is restriction
policy undergoing (cc_res and dc_res) and another only contains
value when there is no restriction policy (cc_nores and dc_nores) as
shown in the model architecture. The processed state demographic
data feeds into the state demographic embedding layer, and we use
Sigmoid activation function inside the layer. All three layers of GRU
receive the embedding output as its first hidden state h 0 . Root mean
squared error(RMSE) is chosen as the loss function. We separate
our data firstly withholding 5 states as test data. The others are
processed as windowed input-output pairs and separated into a
proportion of 80% for training and 20% for evaluation. The model
is learned via back-propagation utill convergence.

6

RESULT ANALYSIS

As mentioned earlier, the current work targets both a prediction
of the epidemic evolution, and an understanding of the interplay
between environmental factors and the local epidemic outbreak. In
this section, we discuss the two aspects with the trained model.

6.1

Prediction of the Epidemic Evolution

As we have applied the random shuffling during training6 among
the training data, which is transformed into sequence-to-point pairs,
we would demonstrate the prediction power in two ways:
(1) "1-step-ahead prediction" on testing states: during the training stage, we have randomly eliminated several states from
the complete dataset 7 . We would test the performance of the
trained model on these states, whose history records have
never been acknowledged by the model;
(2) Long-term prediction from an auto-regressive process: the
model was trained for 1-step-ahead prediction only during
the training stage, therefore long term prediction would be
a non-trivial demonstration for the model’s capability of
capturing the true dynamics.
Figure 1 shows the performance of the model on the 1-step-ahead
prediction task. Clearly, even though data from testing states have
never been accessible to the model, the trained model can still
predict the future value very well. It is therefore reasonable to state
that, rather than over-fitting the given data during the training
stage, the model instead capture the general law of the epidemic
evolution in a generic population. The existence of such a law is

epiDAMIK 2020, Aug 24, 2020, San Diego, CA

not a surprise, and has already been hypothesised in conventional
compartmental-model methods. However, the general law could
easily become intractable from real data due to the human operation
in reporting schemes 8 . By applying the proposed learning-based
method, we extract this general law from the noisy real-life data.
Compared with the 1-step-ahead prediction task, the long-term
prediction is much more challenging, in the sense that the task
nature has deviated from the training stage. The performance of
long-term predictions is shown in Figure 2. While in some states,
the deviation from the true data become visible, the overall trend
has still been well captured by the auto-regressive process, except
noisy fluctuations. In practice, the long-term prediction could provide more timely information to policy makers, and hence is more
valuable than 1-step-ahead predictions.

6.2

Relevance of Environmental Factors

To reveal the interplay between environmental factors and the
epidemic evolution, we start from an analysis on the relevance of
each input feature to the dynamics. As introduced in Section 4,
static environmental factors, after being embedded through a linear
transformation, enter the model via the "kick-start" mechanism.
Due to the simple structure of this embedding module, we could
easily identify the relevance of input features by examining the
Frobenius norm of each embedding vector.
Firstly, there are two classes of population structure data: the
age structure and the race structure. Figure 4(a) and 4(b) show the
relevance of different age groups and race groups respectively.
In the age group relevance chart, it is clear that the two youngage groups, i.e., age from 19 to 25 and 26 to 34, show the highest
relevance. This is consistent with the demographic report released
by CDC on age distribution [8], where the age group 18 − 44 contributes the largest portion to the confirmed cases.
Among all race groups, the two groups, Asians and Black or
African American alone, appear to be more relevant in epidemic
dynamics, while both White (non-Hispanic) and Hispanic/Latino
show lower relevance. On the other hand, it is interesting to note
that, according to the report released by CDC [8], White (nonHispanic) and Hispanic/Latino contribute largest portion in the
confirmed cases. While the share in confirmed cases may be more
related to the absolute population size of different race groups,
our relevance analysis, instead, focuses on the fraction of each
race group in a certain state. The above mismatch between the
results obtained via the two descriptive perspectives suggests a
potentially existing disproportional impacts of the COVID-19 on
different groups. While the above argument does not provide a
rigorous causal analysis, it illustrates the importance of diversity
of perspectives when studying the social impact of COVID-19.
Beside the above two types of population structures, we also
notice a high relevance (1.6810614) of enplanements data to the
epidemic dynamics. This confirms our earlier hypothesis that the
enplanements data could be used as a nice indicator for the active
level of local socioeconomic activities.

6 See
7 In

SC.

details explained in Section 5
our practice, we have randomly selected 4 states for testing purpose: AZ, MI,NJ,
8 See

Section 2 for detailed discussions.

epiDAMIK 2020, Aug 24, 2020, San Diego, CA

Tong Yang, Long Sha, Justin Li, and Pengyu Hong

(a) Long-term prediction of Hawaii data.

(c) Long-term prediction of Iowa data.

(b) Long-term prediction of New York data.

(d) Long-term prediction of South Dakota.

Figure 2: The long-term prediction task with 4 instantiating states. The solid vertical blue line represents the starting point of
the auto-regressive running. The 95% confidence interval regions are obtained by bootstrap re-sampling from the training set.

(a) Age-group relevance.

Figure 3: Model architecture

7

CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSIONS

We have demonstrated the predictive power of the proposed recurrentnetwork based model, and discussed the relevance of different environmental factors by studying the embedding vector of each
socioeconomic characteristic.
On the prediction side, the proposed model performs well in both
1-step-ahead prediction on new states and long-term prediction tasks.
One could conclude that the recurrent structure has successfully
extracted and captured a general law of the epidemic evolution in
a generic population, from the real-life noisy data.
On the other hand, studying the relevance of environmental
factors to the epidemic dynamics enables us both to identify potential factors that contribute most to the disease spreading, and to
understand the social impact of COVID-19 on the local community.
More specifically, we noticed that young age groups and average
emplacements are highly relevant to the dynamics, verifying the
fact that socioeconomic activities contribute significantly to the

(b) Race-group relevance.

Figure 4: Relevance of different age-group fractions 4(a) and
race-group fractions 4(b). The relevance index is defined as
the Frobenius norm of the embedding vector of each input
feature.

disease spread; besides, there might exist a disproportion of the
social impact on different race groups brought by the COVID-19.
In general, one could expect that more insights about the ongoing public health crisis could be gained through data-driven
research. Besides medical and clinical studies that directly battle
the COVID-19 emergence, it is also important to obtain a more complete understanding about general social impacts of the pandemic
on the population and society level. This does not only assist local
policy makers in decision making, but also helps the whole society
to confront the challenge together.

8

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Funding for the shared GPU-computing facility used in this research
was provided by NSF OAC 1920147.

A Deep Learning Approach for COVID-19 Trend Prediction

REFERENCES
[1] George J. Borjas. 2020. Demographic Determinants of Testing Incidence and
COVID-19 Infections in New York City Neighborhoods. (2020). https://www.
nber.org/papers/w26952
[2] Fred Brauer. 2008. Compartmental Models in Epidemiology. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 19–79. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-789116_2
[3] Ben-Hur Francisco Cardoso and Sebasti’an Gonccalves. 2020. Urban Scaling of
COVID-19 epidemics. arXiv: Populations and Evolution (2020).
https://
[4] Covid Tracking Project Team. 2020. Covid Tracking Project.
covidtracking.com/
[5] Raj Dandekar and George Barbastathis. 2020. Quantifying the effect of quarantine
control in Covid-19 infectious spread using machine learning. medRxiv (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.03.20052084
[6] Jennifer Beam Dowd, Liliana Andriano, David M. Brazel, Valentina Rotondi, Per
Block, Xuejie Ding, Yan Liu, and Melinda C. Mills. 2020. Demographic science
aids in understanding the spread and fatality rates of COVID-19. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 117, 18 (2020), 9696–9698. https://doi.org/10.
1073/pnas.2004911117
[7] Samuel Engle, John Stromme, and Anson Zhou. 2020. Staying at Home: Mobility
Effects of COVID-19. (2020). https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3565703
[8] Center for Diseases Control and Prevention. 2020. Coronavirus Disease 2019
(COVID-19): Cases in U.S. https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/casesupdates/cases-in-us.html
[9] National Center for Health Statistics. 2020. Weekly Updates by Select Demographic and Geographic Characteristics. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nvss/vsrr/
covid_weekly/index.htm#AgeAndSex
[10] KAISER FAMILY FOUNDATION. 2018.
KFF analysis of 2018 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System.
https://www.kff.org/other/stateindicator/adults-at-higher-risk-of-serious-illness-if-infected-withcoronavirus/?currentTimeframe=0&sortModel=%7B%22colId%22:%22Location%
22,%22sort%22:%22asc%22%7D#notes
[11] KAISER FAMILY FOUNDATION. 2018.
Population Distribution by
Age.
https://www.kff.org/other/state-indicator/distribution-byage/?currentTimeframe=0&sortModel=%7B%22colId%22:%22Location%22,
%22sort%22:%22asc%22%7D#notes
[12] Giulia Giordano, Franco Blanchini, Raffaele Bruno, Patrizio Colaneri, Alessandro
Di Filippo, Angela Di Matteo, and Marta Colaneri. 2020. Modelling the COVID-19
epidemic and implementation of population-wide interventions in Italy. Nature
Medicine (2020), 1–6.
[13] Lawrence O. Gostin and Lindsay F. Wiley. 2020. Governmental Public Health
Powers During the COVID-19 Pandemic: Stay-at-home Orders, Business Closures,
and Travel Restrictions. JAMA 323, 21 (06 2020), 2137–2138. https://doi.org/10.
1001/jama.2020.5460
[14] Wei-jie Guan, Zheng-yi Ni, Yu Hu, Wen-hua Liang, Chun-quan Ou, Jian-xing He,
Lei Liu, Hong Shan, Chun-liang Lei, David S.C. Hui, Bin Du, Lan-juan Li, Guang
Zeng, Kwok-Yung Yuen, Ru-chong Chen, Chun-li Tang, Tao Wang, Ping-yan
Chen, Jie Xiang, Shi-yue Li, Jin-lin Wang, Zi-jing Liang, Yi-xiang Peng, Li Wei,
Yong Liu, Ya-hua Hu, Peng Peng, Jian-ming Wang, Ji-yang Liu, Zhong Chen,
Gang Li, Zhi-jian Zheng, Shao-qin Qiu, Jie Luo, Chang-jiang Ye, Shao-yong Zhu,
and Nan-shan Zhong. 2020. Clinical Characteristics of Coronavirus Disease
2019 in China. New England Journal of Medicine 382, 18 (2020), 1708–1720.
https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2002032
[15] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2014. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 (2014).
[16] U.S. Department of Transportation. 2019. Passenger Boarding (Enplanement)
and All-Cargo Data for U.S. Airports. https://www.faa.gov/airports/planning_
capacity/passenger_allcargo_stats/passenger/
[17] Graziano Onder, Giovanni Rezza, and Silvio Brusaferro. 2020. Case-Fatality Rate
and Characteristics of Patients Dying in Relation to COVID-19 in Italy. JAMA
323, 18 (05 2020), 1775–1776. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2020.4683
[18] Nicola Picchiotti, Monica Salvioli, Elena Zanardini, and Francesco Missale. 2020.
COVID-19 pandemic: a mobility-dependent SEIR model with undetected cases
in Italy, Europe and US. arXiv: Populations and Evolution (2020).
[19] Narinder Singh Punn, Sanjay Kumar Sonbhadra, and Sonali Agarwal. 2020.
COVID-19 Epidemic Analysis using Machine Learning and Deep Learning Algorithms. medRxiv (2020). https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.20057679
[20] Brendon Sen-Crowe, Mark McKenney, and Adel Elkbuli. 2020. Social distancing
during the COVID-19 pandemic: Staying home save lives. American Journal of
Emergency Medicine (2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajem.2020.03.063
[21] Kaiyuan Sun, Jenny Chen, and Cécile Viboud. 2020. Early epidemiological analysis of the coronavirus disease 2019 outbreak based on crowdsourced data: a
population-level observational study. The Lancet Digital Health 2, 4 (2020), e201 –
e208. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2589-7500(20)30026-1
[22] 1Point3Acres COVID-19 Tracker Team. 2020. 1Point3Acres COVID-19 Tracker.
https://coronavirus.1point3acres.com/

epiDAMIK 2020, Aug 24, 2020, San Diego, CA

[23] The New York Times. 2020. The Coronavirus Outbreak: See How All 50 States
Are Reopening. https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/us/states-reopenmap-coronavirus.html
[24] Shreshth Tuli, Shikhar Tuli, Rakesh Tuli, and Sukhpal Singh Gill. 2020. Predicting
the growth and trend of COVID-19 pandemic using machine learning and cloud
computing. Internet of Things 11 (2020), 100222. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iot.
2020.100222
[25] U.S. Census Bureau. 2019. State Population Totals and Components of Change:
2010-2019. https://www.census.gov/
[26] Tong Yang, Kai Shen, Sixuan He, Enyu Li, Peter Sun, Lin Zuo, Jiayue Hu, Yiwen
Mo, Weiwei Zhang, Ping-Ying Chen, Haonan Zhang, Jingxue Chen, and Yu Guo.
2020. CovidNet: To Bring the Data Transparency in Era of COVID-19. ArXiv
abs/2005.10948 (2020).

