The optimal design for cylindrical tubes used as acoustic stethoscopes for auscultation in
COVID-19 diagnosis

Chuanyang Jiang1, Jiaqi Zhao2, Jiao Yu3*
1

College of Mechanical Engineering, Liaoning Shihua University, Fushun, Liaoning Province,

113001, P. R. China.
2

Department of Ultrasound, Changzheng Hospital, Second Military Medical University,

Shanghai, 200003, P. R. China
3

College of Science, Liaoning Shihua University, Fushun, Liaoning Province, 113001, P. R.

China

E-mail: yujiaojoy@hotmail.com

ABSTRACT
During the COVID-19 outbreak, the auscultation of heart and lung sounds has played an
important role in the comprehensive diagnosis and real-time monitoring of confirmed cases.
With clinicians wearing protective clothing in isolation wards, a potato chip tube stethoscope,
which is a secure and flexible substitute for a conventional stethoscope, has been used in the
first-line treatment of COVID-19 by Chinese medical workers. In this study, an optimal design
for this simple cylindrical stethoscope is proposed based on the fundamental theory of acoustic
waveguides. Analyses of the cut-off frequency, sound power transmission coefficient, and sound
wave propagation in the uniform lossless tube provide theoretical guidance for selecting the
geometric parameters for this simple cylindrical stethoscope. In addition, relevant suggestions
about surface treatments for the inner wall as well as the use of noise-reduction earplugs are also
part of this optimal design.

1

KEYWORDS: COVID-19 pandemic; auscultation; potato-chips-tube stethoscope; optimal
design; acoustic waveguide

2

1. INTRODUCTION
The COVID-19 pandemic has become an enormous public health concern, attracting intense
attention not only in China but also around the globe. Given the high contagiousness of SARSCoronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2),1 strict personal protective measures have been implemented by
the Chinese medical workers who have worked in infection isolation wards. In addition, the
rigorous use of personal protective equipment, especially protective clothing, makes auscultation
with conventional acoustic stethoscopes impossible.2 However, it is essential to use stethoscopes
to assess the subtleties of the heart and lung sounds and to monitor the progression of pneumonia
with COVID-19 dynamically.

Under the circumstances, Gao2 reported that a simple, disinfected cylindrical stethoscope made
from an empty potato chip tube was applied during the first-line treatment of COVID-19.
Though economical and safe, it is absolutely essential that this type of stethoscope, which is
directly used in auscultation, is subjected to acoustic analysis and designed to obtain a more
reliable acoustic performance. Hence, it is the aim of the present investigation to provide a
theoretically optimal design for this alternative stethoscope.

2. ANALYTICAL STUDY
A. Cut-off Frequency Analysis
In this study, a potato chip tube (Fig. 1) is modeled as a cylindrical rigid-walled waveguide with
a diameter d = 6.530 cm. According to the basic theory of acoustic waveguides in constant cross
section3, the cut-off frequency of the plane wave in the hollow cylindrical waveguide is
.

.
.

3087.1

，

(1)

2

where

is the radius of the circular cross section and

is the speed of sound in air at 20

.

Considering that all the physiologically crucial heart and lung sounds range from 20 Hz to 1000
Hz,4,5 which is evidently less than the

in Eq. 1, the sounds used for auscultation will propagate

only in plane-wave mode. Therefore, this pure propagation mode can greatly assist physicians
and particularly cardiologists in dynamically monitoring as well as making accurate judgments
regarding individual cardiopulmonary function.

Fig. 1. A potato chip tube modeled as an acoustic waveguide when used as a simple stethoscope.

Notably, because the sounds that are valuable in the effective diagnosis of cardiac and
pulmonary diseases by thoracic auscultation range from 20 Hz to 1000 Hz,4,5 we were inspired to
design the diameter dimension of the cylindrical stethoscope, and using Eq. 1, we obtain
d

.

0.2

.

(2)

3

B. Diameter Selection Analysis of the Cylindrical Stethoscope
In addition to meeting the cut-off frequency requirements, the sound transmission to the external
auditory canal must be considered in the design. To explore the essence of this research, slight
differences in external auditory canal shapes and diameters between individuals are ignored.
Moreover, because we are discussing the low frequency range below 1000 Hz, standing wave
patterns in the human auditory canal do not need to be considered here because they occur at
much higher frequencies6-8.

Within the scope of the above approximation, the acoustic model that describes a circular
waveguide with a sudden change in the cross-section is illustrated in Fig. 2 to analyze the sound
transmission during auscultation.

Fig. 2. Transmission and reflection of planar sound waves in the vicinity of a junction between
two waveguides where the cross-sectional area changes from

to

.

4

It is assumed that the coordinate origin is precisely at the junction between these two waveguides
that represent the simple cylindrical stethoscope of cross-sectional area
external auditory canal of cross-sectional area

and a physician’s

. It should be noted that the boundary conditions

must include continuity in pressure and continuity in volume velocity. As a result, the sound
power transmission coefficient in the simplified acoustic duct of the varied cross section9 is
.

Using the first-order derivative of

with regards to

(3)

yields

.

From Eq. 4, the extreme point of function

and the second-order derivative of

(4)

occurs when
1,

(5)

with regard to

is negative, indicating that the sound

power transmission coefficient reaches the largest value when

equals

in this application. In

a real clinical situation, the size of the chest piece of the acoustic stethoscope, regardless of the
diaphragms or the bells, is not as small as that of the cross-section of the external auditory canal
(typically approximately 0.8 cm in diameter10), but it ranges from approximately 3.3 cm - 4.4
cm11 due to a couple of factors that influence the picking up of sounds and vibration, including
the effective auscultation area of heart and lung sounds as well as the curvature of the human
body surface.

C. Length Selection Analysis of the Cylindrical Stethoscope

5

For the optimal length of the cylindrical stethoscope, the fundamental equations that describe the
sound wave propagation in the uniform, lossless waveguide are as follows12
∙

,
∙

where

(6)
,

(7)

is the sound pressure, ρ is the density of air in the waveguide, A is the cross-sectional

area, is the speed of sound in air, and u is the volume velocity at (x,t).

After using the Laplace transform, the transfer function of the cylindrical acoustic waveguide12 is
V
where

Ω

∙

,

(8)

Ω is angular frequency . To calculate the formant frequency, when the

denominator is zero,
∙

1

0,

(9)

we find
.

(n=0, 1, 2, …)

(10)

(n=0, 1, 2, …)

(11)

Then rejecting the negative value yields,
.
First, we used

0 to discuss the fundamental frequency of the formant. From Ref. [2], the

length of the commercially available potato chip tube ranges from 20.0 cm - 30.0 cm. When
30 cm, the fundamental frequency is
.

Hz

286.7 Hz.

(12)

6

Then, when

1 and

2, the values of the corresponding frequencies are

860 Hz and

1433.3 Hz. According to Eq. 12, to obtain a formant at a lower frequency, such as 100 Hz,
a longer tube should be used.

3. DISCUSSION
Based on the analysis and calculation above, we can summarize the basic results on the optimal
design of this simple cylindrical stethoscope. First, a diameter of less than 0.2 m will ensure the
sound below 1000 Hz, which is physically important for cardiopulmonary function auscultation,
to transmit in plane-wave mode within the cylindrical tube structure. Second, the diameter of this
hollow cylindrical stethoscope is from 3.3 cm - 4.4 cm, which is believed to have a relative
potential advantage over the current diameter of the potato chip tube stethoscope, partly because
this size is suitable for picking up heart and lung sounds and partly because this design makes the
difference between

and

smaller, contributing to the sound transmission to the external

auditory canal. Third, the use of the current length (30 cm) of the cylindrical stethoscope should
cover the medium and high frequency ranges of physically important heart and lung sounds (300
Hz - 1000 Hz). In using Eq. 11 at n = 0, we derive that if the length of the cylindrical stethoscope
increases to 0.8 m - 0.9 m, the low frequency heart sounds of 95.6 Hz - 107.5 Hz will be
amplified via the formant effect, to reach a level that is easy to hear. However, given the
flexibility and convenience of the device operation, lengths longer than 0.9 m are not
recommended during real auscultation when using this simple diagnostic tool.

Moreover, instead of using the original material from the inner wall of the cylindrical
stethoscope, which is to some degree infiltrated by oil, an appropriate substitute, such as a coat

7

of enamel, should be painted smoothly and uniformly on the surface to reduce the frictional loss
of sound due to viscosity. In addition, a great deal of attention must be paid to the fact that
medical workers who intend to conduct auscultations using this simple device ought to wear a
single earplug in the ear that is not being used during auscultation to reduce the impact of
ambient noise during diagnosis.

Dating back to 1816, the French doctor Laennec, who invented the world’s first stethoscope,
successfully conducted a cardiac auscultation using a cylindrical paper stethoscope.13,14 After
continuous optimization and improvement, modern stethoscopes now possess better acoustic
performance during cardiac and pulmonary auscultation. Nevertheless, strict personal protective
equipment use makes auscultation using modern stethoscopes impossible in diagnosing
confirmed COVID-19 cases. Given the pressing situation, this simple cylindrical stethoscope,
which has advantages similar to those of Laennec’s original invention, inspires us to complete
the acoustic calculation and design herein and to reflect on the reductionism as well as
pragmatism in the design and use of diagnostic tools during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Last but not least, it should be noted that the above calculation and analysis of the fundamental
frequency and the high-order formant frequency are based on the basic theory of acoustic
waveguides. Therefore, further experimental investigations should be performed by practitioners
in clinical settings to validate the sensitivity and applicability of our improved simple
stethoscope.

4. CONCLUSIONS

8

In conclusion, during the COVID-19 pandemic, simple cylindrical stethoscopes have been
applied to cardiac and pulmonary function auscultation in China, and this economical instrument
is considered as a suitable diagnostic tool when conventional stethoscopes cannot be used by
medical workers in protective clothing, or when medical resources are extremely scarce in
poverty-stricken areas of developing countries. The cut-off frequency analysis indicates that a
hollow cylindrical tube with a diameter of less than 0.2 m allows the heart and lung sounds
within the auscultation frequency range to propagate in plane-wave mode. Compared with the
potato chip tube stethoscope, we propose an optimization of this simple stethoscope by reducing
the diameter to 3.3 cm - 4.4 cm. For a simple cylindrical stethoscope measuring 30 cm in length,
the medium and high frequencies of the heart and lung sounds can induce acoustic resonance
when transmitted down the tubing of the simple stethoscope which is considered to be beneficial
for auscultation. The acoustic performance of the simple stethoscope for low-frequency chest
sounds requires further experimental confirmations from clinicians, and it could be improved by
increasing its length.

5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(81501492), the Natural Science Foundation of Liaoning Province of China (2019-MS-219), the
Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai of China (20ZR1457900), Liaoning Revitalization
Talents Program (XLYC1907034).

REFERENCES AND LINKS

9

1

F. Wu and W. Huang, “COVID-19 diagnostic process in mainland China: The math beyond

pneumonia,” J. Allergy Clin. Immun. 146(1), 64-66 (2020).
2

J. Zhu, Y. Tan, B. Huang, Y. Zhu, and X. Gao, “Don’t throw the stethoscope away!” Eur. Heart

J. ehaa343 (2020).
3

A. D. Pierce, Acoustics: An Introduction to its Physical Principles and Applications (The

Acoustical Society of America, 1989), pp. 313–317.
4

J. B. Dawson, “Auscultation and the stethoscope,” Practitioner 193, 315-322 (1964).

5

P. J. Hollins, “The stethoscope: Some facts and fallacies,” J. Hosp. Med. 5, 509-516 (1971).

6

B. W. Lawton and M. R. Stinson, “Standing wave patterns in the human ear canal used for

estimation of acoustic energy reflectance at the eardrum,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 79(4), 1003-1009
(1986).
7

E. A. G. Shaw and M. R. Stinson, “Network concepts and energy flow in the human middle-

ear," J. Acoust. Soc. Am. Suppl. 1 69, S43 (1981).
8

M. R. Stinson, E. A. G. Shaw, and B. W. Lawton, “Estimation of acoustical energy reflectance

at the eardrum from measurements of pressure distribution in the human ear canal," J. Acoust.
Soc. Am. 72, 766-773 (1982).
9

L. E. Kinsler, A. R. Frey, A. B. Coppens, and J. V. Sanders, Fundamentals of Acoustics, 4th Ed

(John Wiley & Sons, Singapore, 2009), pp. 288–289.
10

D. Hammershøi and H. Møller, “Sound transmission to and within the human ear canal,” J.

Acoust. Soc. Am. 100(1), 408-427 (1996).
10

11

L. J. Nowak and K. M. Nowak, “Acoustic characterization of stethoscopes using auscultation

sounds as test signals,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 141(1), 1940-1946 (2017).
12

M. R. Portnoff, “A quasi-one-dimensional digital simulation for the time-varying vocal tract,”

M.S. thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Massachusetts, 1973.
13

I. R. Hanna and M. E. Silverman, “A history of cardiac auscultation and some of its

contributors,” Am. J. Cardiol. 90(3), 259-267 (2002).
14

T. O. Cheng, “How Laennec invented the stethoscope,” Int. J. Cardiol. 118(3), 281-285 (2007).

Figure Captions
Fig. 1. A potato chip tube modeled as an acoustic waveguide when used as a simple
stethoscope
Fig. 2. Transmission and reflection of planar sound waves in the vicinity of a junction between
two waveguides where the cross-sectional area changes from

to

11

