Power and the Pandemic: Exploring Global Changes
in Electricity Demand During COVID-19
Elizabeth Buechlera,+, Siobhan Powella,+, Tao Sunb,+, Chad Zanoccob,+, Nicolas Astierc,+, Jose Bolorinosb,
June Florab,d, Hilary Boudete,*, Ram Rajagopalb,*
a

Mechanical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 USA
Civil and Environmental Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 USA
c
Economics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 USA
d
Stanford Solution Science Lab, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 USA
e
School of Public Policy, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331 USA
b

+

These authors contributed equally to this research

* Corresponding Authors:
Hilary Boudet, School of Public Policy, Oregon State University, Hilary.Boudet@oregonstate.edu
Ram Rajagopal, Civil and Environment Engineering, Stanford University, ramr@stanford.edu
Abstract
Understanding how efforts to limit exposure to COVID-19 have altered electricity demand provides
insights not only into how dramatic restrictions shape electricity demand but also about future electricity
use in a post-COVID-19 world. We develop a unified modeling framework to quantify and compare
electricity usage changes in 58 countries and regions around the world from January-May 2020. We find
that daily electricity demand declined as much as 10% in April 2020 compared to modelled demand,
controlling for weather, seasonal and temporal effects, but with significant regional variation. Clustering
techniques show that four impact groups capture systematic differences in timing and depth of electricity
usage changes, ranging from a mild decline of 2% to an extreme decline of 26%. These groupings do not
align with geography, with almost every continent having at least one country or region that experienced a
dramatic reduction in demand and one that did not. Instead, we find that such changes relate to
government restrictions and mobility. Government restrictions have a non-linear effect on demand that
generally saturates at its most restrictive levels and sustains even as restrictions ease. Mobility changes,
though more consistent across countries regardless of government restrictions, are also linked to demand
changes. Steep declines in electricity usage are associated with workday hourly load patterns that
resemble pre-COVID weekend usage. Quantifying these impacts using a unified modeling framework is a
crucial first step in understanding the impacts of crises like the pandemic and the associated societal
response on electricity demand.
Significance Statement
Understanding how efforts to slow the spread of COVID-19 may be linked to changes in electricity
demand can provide insights about future electricity use during and after COVID-19. We develop a unified
modeling framework, allowing us to quantify and compare electricity usage changes in 58 countries and
regions around the world from January-May 2020. We also explore how such changes relate to
government restrictions and mobility. We find that global electricity demand declined by as much as 10%
in April compared to modelled demand, controlling for weather, seasonal and temporal effects, but with
significant variation that can be characterized into four groups, ranging from mild change of 2% to an
extreme decline of 26%.
Keywords: Electricity demand; COVID-19, coronavirus, confinement, mobility, global analysis
Preprint Manuscript
August 10, 2020

1

Abstract
Understanding how efforts to limit exposure to COVID-19 have altered electricity demand provides
insights not only into how dramatic restrictions shape electricity demand but also about future electricity
use in a post-COVID-19 world. We develop a unified modeling framework to quantify and compare
electricity usage changes in 58 countries and regions around the world from January-May 2020. We find
that daily electricity demand declined as much as 10% in April 2020 compared to modelled demand,
controlling for weather, seasonal and temporal effects, but with significant regional variation. Clustering
techniques show that four impact groups capture systematic differences in timing and depth of electricity
usage changes, ranging from a mild decline of 2% to an extreme decline of 26%. These groupings do not
align with geography, with almost every continent having at least one country or region that experienced a
dramatic reduction in demand and one that did not. Instead, we find that such changes relate to
government restrictions and mobility. Government restrictions have a non-linear effect on demand that
generally saturates at its most restrictive levels and sustains even as restrictions ease. Mobility changes,
though more consistent across countries regardless of government restrictions, are also linked to demand
changes. Steep declines in electricity usage are associated with workday hourly load patterns that
resemble pre-COVID weekend usage. Quantifying these impacts using a unified modeling framework is a
crucial first step in understanding the impacts of crises like the pandemic and the associated societal
response on electricity demand.
Significance Statement
Understanding how efforts to slow the spread of COVID-19 may be linked to changes in electricity
demand can provide insights about future electricity use during and after COVID-19. We develop a unified
modeling framework, allowing us to quantify and compare electricity usage changes in 58 countries and
regions around the world from January-May 2020. We also explore how such changes relate to
government restrictions and mobility. We find that global electricity demand declined by as much as 10%
in April compared to modelled demand, controlling for weather, seasonal and temporal effects, but with
significant variation that can be characterized into four groups, ranging from mild change of 2% to an
extreme decline of 26%.
Main Text
Introduction
Choices made to stop the spread of COVID-19 – by individuals, local entities and national governments –
have the potential to profoundly impact electricity usage patterns. Moreover, changes taking place during
the pandemic may persist long after the public health crisis subsides. We develop a unified modeling
framework to quantify and compare electricity usage changes across countries and regions. This
framework provides a crucial – and previously missing – first step in drawing meaningful insights about
the pandemic’s impact on electricity use. It also creates a valuable tool for researchers and other
stakeholders in the electricity sector to quantify and compare changes in demand in the wake of past and
future events on a global scale.
We apply this framework to electricity demand data from 58 countries and regions around the world,
representing about 60% of the world’s population and 75% of global electricity demand (1), from JanuaryMay 2020. For the 53 countries with daily data, we find that total electricity demand declined by as much
as 10% in April 2020 compared to modelled demand, controlling for weather, seasonal and temporal
effects. This dramatic decline is on par with some estimates of the effect of the 2008 global financial crisis
(2). Yet, it masks significant variation among countries and regions in our sample – variation that is
missed in studies that focus on specific regions or countries (3-10). Surprisingly, despite much diversity in
the countries and regions studied, we are able to characterize this variation using four impact groups
based on the depth and timing of decreases in electricity demand – extreme, severe, moderate and mild
– but these groups do not align with traditional geographic distinctions (e.g., developed vs. developing;
east vs. west; continents). Instead, we explore how government restrictions and mobility patterns relate to

2

electricity demand changes, finding these linkages to be most pronounced in the extreme and severe
impact groups and less so in the moderate and mild ones.
Crises like COVID-19 can serve as focusing events (11-13), creating windows of opportunity for change.
Indeed, large-scale power outages have triggered significant policy and regulatory changes aimed at
shoring up aging infrastructure and “smartening” the grid (14-16). Some energy analysts have called on
world leaders to seize the “opportunity” created by the pandemic to implement lasting policy and
structural changes to transform existing energy systems and address the climate crisis (17-19) – to which
electricity generation from fossil fuels is a major contributor. Our results help to clarify our understanding
of the link between COVID-19 pandemic-related social and economic restrictions and electricity demand.
This, in turn, can provide important lessons going forward, not only helping utilities, companies that
purchase power directly, and public officials to respond more effectively to the impacts of future viral
outbreaks, but also ongoing efforts to build more resilient, sustainable infrastructure systems (20-22).
Existing analyses of COVID-19’s impacts on electricity demand have been limited either by their
geographic scope or an incomplete accounting of seasonal, weather and temporal effects (3-8, 10, 2326). Recent global studies have been more focused on impacts to carbon emissions than electricity
demand (17, 23, 27). More importantly, these studies have yet to develop a clear, open framework that
allows for broad comparisons of changes in electricity demand worldwide. The International Energy
Agency’s recent report, Global Energy Review 2020, represents the most comprehensive effort to date to
analyze COVID-19’s global impact on energy use but is limited in scope for electricity (28). Our unified
modeling framework learns accurate region-specific regression models for electricity consumption despite
heterogeneity in load behavior. In contrast to previous studies (3, 5, 8, 23, 25, 26, 29), we also use
extensive out-of-sample validation for both model selection and to verify the generalization capability of
the learned models to new datasets.
As both a product and recipient of change, electricity demand does not take place in a vacuum. The
Great Depression, World War II, the postwar period, and the 2008 global economic recession all had
profound and lasting impacts on electricity use – and power systems – in the U.S. and around the world
(30-32). There is every reason to believe that COVID-19 is an event of similar importance. Yet, we have
few global, comparative studies of the effects of these and other types of events on electricity
consumption. This study is designed not only to provide valuable insights into the relationship between
the pandemic and electricity use on a global scale but also to provide a strong, enduring framework for
future studies.
Results and Discussion
Changes in Electricity Demand at Scale
Our examination of changes in electricity demand across 58 countries and regions reveals significant
variation in the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on electricity use (Fig. 1). Estimated daily electricity
reductions in demand range from the extreme (e.g., India’s March to May reductions average 15%) to
little impact at all (e.g., Australia’s 2% average daily drop over the same period). These declines roughly
align with the timing and severity of government restrictions, or confinement index (CI) levels, as
measured by Le Quere et al. (17) (SI Appendix, Table S2). The most drastic reductions in demand occur
in April, when policies were most restrictive, except in China where restrictions were most severe in
February. Impacts subside in May, as countries began to reopen.
Focusing on the U.S. and Europe specifically, European countries – particularly a group of highly
impacted countries in Southern Europe (e.g., Italy, France, Spain, among others) – generally showed
larger decreases in demand than U.S. regions, with the exception of Northern Europe (e.g., Sweden,
Denmark, Finland) where little change occurred. In Asia, both China and India experienced substantial
decreases when restrictions were put in place, while Japan experienced a more muted change. For
countries in South America (Argentina and Brazil), North America (Mexico) and Africa (South Africa), we
also see examples of steep reductions, alongside countries with little impact (e.g., Chile). Some of this
variation could be due to more restrictive government policies and enforcement; cultural differences in

3

acceptance and compliance with these policies; electricity demand composition (e.g., industrial,
commercial, residential); or a combination of these and other factors. The result is a patchwork of
electricity use impacts that vary widely in magnitude across continents and hemispheres with almost
every continent having at least one country that experienced a dramatic reduction in demand and one
that did not.
Clusters of Electricity Demand Change
Despite global diversity in the economy, policy, and culture in the countries and regions studied, we
surprisingly discover that changes in electricity demand for the 53 countries and regions in our sample for
which daily electricity demand is available cluster into four discrete groups, each distinguished by how
early demand changes start and how deep they go (Fig. 2a).
The “Extreme” impact group, comprised of Italy and India, experienced the steepest change in weekly
electricity demand (averaging 26% at their lowest point in late March). The “Severe” impact group
includes the most countries and regions in our sample (N=23) – many European countries, two U.S.
regions (Tennessee and North / South Carolina), New Zealand, Brazil, and Mexico – and exhibited
average electricity use reductions of as much as 12%. The “Moderate” impact group had electricity use
reductions averaging as much as 7%, generally occurring later in mid-April, and includes many U.S. and
Canadian regions, several European countries (e.g., Denmark and Switzerland), Japan, Chile, Russia,
and Singapore. We note that a 7% decrease is similar to some estimates of the impact on electricity
demand during the 2008 global financial crisis (2), indicating that many of the electricity-demand
reductions that we see in relation to the COVID-19 pandemic are unprecedented. Finally, the “Mild”
impact group consists of Scandinavia, Latvia, Ukraine, Australia, and three U.S. regions (Northwest,
Southwest and Florida). These areas experienced lesser, though still sizable, reductions in electricity
demand, averaging 2% at its lowest point, generally occurring in late April, though some members of this
group had no impacts or even increases during the period.
Even more surprisingly, countries with very diverse economies and cultures group together, reinforcing
our finding that global geography has a limited role in determining COVID-19’s grid impacts. Instead,
government restrictions and how the population responds to them could be key indicators of demand
change, which we turn to now.
Relationship to Government Restrictions
One factor that is likely to account for differences in electricity use responses to COVID-19 is the severity
of government restrictions introduced during the pandemic. To analyze the role of COVID-19 restrictions,
we used the confinement index (CI) developed by Le Quere et al. (17), which orders restrictions into three
(increasing) levels of severity (SI Appendix, Table S2). Because most countries in our sample moved
progressively in and out of CI levels (from CI 1 to CI 2 to CI 3 and back out to CI 2 and then CI 1) during
the period under examination, we further delineated CI 1 and CI 2 periods as early (pre-CI 3) and late
(post-CI 3).
Bivariate regressions of each country’s or region’s 2020 daily electricity use change and its time-varying
CI level (N=50 countries and regions with both datasets available) show that the relationship between
government policies (CI levels) and electricity demand is generally larger in countries and regions in the
Extreme and Severe groups (e.g., average CI level 3 decreases of 18% and 10%, respectively) than
those in the Moderate and Mild groups (e.g., average CI level 3 decreases of 5% and 2%, respectively)
(Fig. 2b; SI Appendix, Table S3a). We also find that, the magnitudes of the decrease during CI 1 and CI
2 periods are smaller in earlier than later periods, as the impact of the peak restrictions appears to
continue into the later periods.
In addition to overall impact of CI level captured by these indicators, we used multi-adaptive regression
splines (MARS) techniques (33) to examine the effect of each additional day in a particular CI level on
electricity demand. The model fit improves on the simple CI regressions, with R2 values ranging from 0.25
to 0.91 (SI Appendix, Table S3b). For most countries and regions, the impact of government restrictions

4

achieves a saturation effect after several days at each level beyond which increasing days at that CI level
result in little change in demand. If saturation is defined as a non-significant deviation from zero of per
day impact, 86% of countries and regions experience saturation during at least one CI level; and, of the
countries and region that spend time in CI 3, more than 48% achieve saturation during this period (SI
Appendix, Fig. S4a).
Prior to saturation, the per day reduction in demand has different patterns for each impact group. In the
Extreme group, the per day impact of CI 3 (1.24) is higher than that of the early CI 2 period (0.84). In the
Severe cluster, this is reversed: the per day impact of the early CI 2 period (0.87) is higher than CI 3
(0.41). In the Moderate and Mild group, the per day impact is similar for both early CI 2 (0.25 and 0.08,
respectively) and CI 3 (0.32 and 0, respectively) (SI Appendix, Fig. S4b). The breakpoints (or knots)
identified by the model also reveal delays between the transition to a new CI level and a change in
demand: many regions enter the early CI 1 period two to four weeks before demand drops. In contrast, CI
3 and early CI 2 restriction periods are the most likely to have an immediate impact (SI Appendix, Fig.
S4c). Moreover, recovery is limited through the late CI 2 and CI 1 periods, particularly in the Severe and
Moderate impact clusters (SI Appendix, Fig. S4d). Taken together, our findings indicate that CI 2
restrictions are linked to the steepest declines in electricity demand in most countries and regions, and CI
3 appears to have the most impact in countries in the Extreme group, where enforcement of restrictions
was likely more intense (SI Appendix, Fig. S4b).
Yet, variation in electricity demand is not fully explained by government restrictions. For example, the
timelines of CI restriction levels in Australia and New Zealand are very similar, but their changes in
electricity demand are very different, placing them in two different impact groups: Mild and Severe,
respectively. To better understand these differences, we explore changes in daily travel patterns or
human mobility.
Relationship to Changes in Mobility
Government restriction levels do not measure variations in compliance, enforcement, or the true impact of
these restrictions on human behavior. Changes in mobility patterns (34) can serve as one proxy for these
differences.
Overlaying changes in mobility, electricity use, and government restriction levels for each of our countries
and regions arranged by electricity impact grouping (Fig. 3a; SI Appendix, Fig. S5), two key insights
emerge. First, all regions show roughly similar changes in some types of mobility (~50% decreases in
workplace mobility; 20-30% increases in residential mobility), regardless of CI intensity or electricity use
change. Such declines are evident even in places like Florida with no visible electricity use change.
Second, while mobility declines usually coincide with electricity use reductions, there are some
exceptions. In California and New York, for example, workplace mobility starts to decrease in early March,
one to two weeks before government restrictions reach CI 3 levels or electricity use declines.
These findings suggest a complex and heterogeneous relationship between mobility and electricity use,
potentially linked to changes in workplace policies prior to government restrictions, individual decisions to
limit mobility as a precautionary measure, or other grid-related factors, such as the presence of distributed
generation and/or electricity demand composition.
Estimating the demand elasticity of each country’s or region’s 2020 daily electricity use change with
respect to its daily mobility change in each category, shows that increases in residential mobility (i.e.,
staying home more, an indication of more effective confinement policies) are most directly related to
decreases in electricity demand, while increases in all other types of mobility are linked to increases in
electricity demand (Fig. 3b; SI Appendix, Fig. S5). Decreases in workplace mobility are the next most
tightly linked to demand reductions, though several other mobility categories (e.g., grocery/pharmacy,
transit) seem to have quite similar effects. Our electricity impact groups also align quite well with mobility
changes: the relationship between electricity and mobility change is most pronounced for the Extreme
group and least pronounced for the Mild group.

5

R2 values for country models (Fig. 3c; SI Appendix, Table S2b) show that – even if changes in mobility
patterns were roughly similar across most of the countries and regions in our sample – small differences
in day-to-day mobility changes are able to capture finer grained electricity use changes than CI levels.
The link between mobility and demand is also stronger in Extreme and Severe groups. This finding
suggests that mobility itself may be a suitable proxy for a range of human responses to the COVID-19
pandemic, some of which may not be related to the level of government-imposed restrictions.
Changes in Daily Electricity Demand Patterns
For some countries/regions, we observe a change in load shape patterns (hourly electricity demand over a
day)1 that has been noted in the media (24): workday load shapes in April 2020 resemble weekend load
shapes in previous years (Fig. 4). The extent to which this observation matches observed load patterns,
however, varies by impact group (Fig. 4; SI Appendix, Fig. S6). The workday-to-weekend shift prevails in
the Extreme and Severe groups. The other groups are more heterogenous: some countries and regions in
the Moderate impact group exhibit this shift; most countries in the Mild impact group do not. These
differences could be due to more extensive limits on industrial and commercial operations in the more
impacted groups, leaving residential users to drive demand on workdays.
Such deep changes in load patterns can have a major impact on baseload and peak demand, respectively
defined as the minimum and maximum hourly load levels on a given day. For example, low baseload levels
can trigger curtailments in excess generation and make it more difficult to meet peak demand (29).
Comparing workdays in April 2020 to those in previous years (April 2016 to April 2019), we find that the
average drop in baseload and peak demand aligns well with our impact groups, ranging from little to no
average impact in the Mild group to average decreases in baseload and peak of 3% and 6%, respectively,
for the Moderate group, 10% and 12% for the Severe group, and 17% and 20% for the Extreme group
(without correcting for temperature differences). In terms of timing, peak demand was more affected than
baseload. Particularly in countries and regions where electricity demand previously peaked in the morning,
it shifted later in the day, either the late morning (e.g., France, Germany, Spain) or the evening (e.g., Italy,
Belgium, Ireland, New-Zealand, United Kingdom).
These dramatic changes in load shapes also affected the ability of grid operators to predict future demand.
Comparing week-ahead forecasts to actual demand where this data is available (27 European
countries and California), we find many over-predictions during this period, which took approximately 3-5
weeks to correct (SI Appendix, Fig. S7).
Conclusions
COVID-19’s impact on electricity demand in some places (i.e., Italy and India) has been unprecedented,
but not everywhere. Instead, responses can be grouped into four categories, with maximum reductions
ranging from 26% (Extreme Impact) to 2% (Mild Impact). Variation in these responses within global
regions is often greater than between them, even if notable regional differences remain (e.g., impacts in
Europe were generally larger than in the U.S.).
Links between government restriction levels and electricity demand change are most pronounced in the
Extreme and Severe impact groups and less so in the Moderate and Mild impact groups. Such variation is
likely due to many factors, including differences in sectoral loads, behavioral choices in terms of
compliance with restrictions, and perhaps even COVID-related deaths and media coverage of the
pandemic (which could change behavior absent restrictions). Government restrictions generally have a
non-linear effect on demand that begins slowly, accelerates as restrictions tighten but then generally
saturates at its most restrictive levels and sustains even as restrictions ease. CI level 2 restrictions are
1

Hourly consumption data is generally published net of distributed generation, so observed load
shape changes may not always be driven by COVID-19 restrictions, especially in regions and
countries that have recently experienced increases in solar PV generation (e.g. California,
Australia).

6

key in demand reductions, suggesting that mandatory closure of educational institutions, public buildings,
and non-essential businesses is largely responsible for demand decreases. Mobility offers a sharper
focus on electricity demand change with workplace and residential mobility strongly linked at the daily
level. In fact, mobility could be utilized to anticipate demand changes for grid operations and planning.
Analysis of hourly load patterns and reductions in average daily load levels and baseloads shows that
many system operators have faced unprecedented changes and have had to make significant
adjustments in operations and planning.
This work represents an ongoing effort to characterize the pandemic’s impacts on electricity use.
Understanding changes in electricity demand in the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic can provide
valuable insights into how to respond to critical challenges energy systems are likely to face in the future.
As the pandemic reaches new stages on a path toward global recovery, energy systems will continue to
face an uncertain future. They will undoubtedly be struck by other crises driven, for example, by extreme
weather events or dramatic shifts in the economy. Our unified modelling framework provides a valuable
tool for quantifying and comparing the impact of these events now and in the future. These estimated
regional responses serve as a predictor of future impacts due to changes in confinement policies as the
pandemic progresses or as a guideline for events that result in reduced consumption activity.
Data availability remains a significant challenge to complete a global picture, and we will continue to add
geographic regions. We also plan to expand our analysis in multiple, policy-relevant ways: incorporating
sectoral level (i.e., residential, commercial, industrial) impacts, comparing recoveries across countries,
further examining impact group and policy relationships, and assessing impacts on sources and carbon
emissions from electricity generation.
The long-term influence of the pandemic on electricity demand and our energy systems remains
uncertain. COVID-19 is likely to have profound societal and economic impacts that continue to reshape
the global community in untold ways. Electricity demand and access are likely to experience significant
changes in a post-COVID-19 world (35, 36). Whether policy makers will seize the “opportunity” created by
the crisis to reimagine and reinvent energy and power systems remains an open question. While no one
can anticipate when the next global crisis will strike or what it may bring, one critical crisis is lurking in
plain sight: climate change. With its intricate connections to energy systems, understanding changes in
electricity use in response to the COVID-19 pandemic could provide valuable lessons in our climatechanged world.
Methods
Overall Approach
We developed a unified modeling framework to explore relationships between changes in electricity
demand, mobility, and government restrictions (SI Appendix, Fig. S8). We first estimated region-specific
regression models to predict electricity consumption without the pandemic, accounting for weather,
seasonal and temporal effects. Then, we calculated changes in daily electricity demand by comparing the
baseline demand estimates from our learned regression models with actual demand data. We used
cluster analysis to uncover common patterns in demand change over time across countries and regions.
We then regressed the estimated daily electricity demand change on indicators of government restrictions
and mobility changes to explore relationships between these factors. Finally, we examined changes in
hourly load shape patterns and week-ahead forecasts.
Demand Change Estimation
The effects of different factors on electricity consumption vary substantially by region. This heterogeneity
depends on climate, sectoral load composition, and various other societal factors. Our unified modeling
framework learns accurate region-specific regression models for electricity consumption despite this
heterogeneity. The regression models account for weather, seasonal, and temporal effects by using
region-specific data for electricity consumption, population-weighted weather data, and a holidays

7

database. We also used out-of-sample validation for both model selection and to verify the generalization
capability of the learned models to new datasets.
Model parameters were identified using ordinary least squares (OLS) regression. The polynomial order of
weather terms for each country was selected using k-fold cross validation with 10-folds. Higher order
terms account for non-linear temperature dependence observed in the data but neglected in other studies
(5, 23, 25, 26, 29). Validation errors were defined in terms of the root mean squared error (RMSE) of the
predictions, normalized by the average demand for each region. The final regression model was fit using
the combined dataset from all folds. Holidays were manually included in the model based on observations
of the sensitivity of demand to each holiday in historical data. Daily out-of-sample validation errors for
each country ranged between 1.27-4.91% RMSE. Model errors over longer time periods (e.g., weekly,
monthly) are substantially lower (SI Appendix, Demand Change Estimation).
Cluster Analysis
We applied K-Means clustering to the weekly electricity demand reductions to investigate similarities in
the response between different countries. We utilized the elbow curve of cluster inertia to select K = 4
clusters (SI Appendix, Fig. S2).
Modeling the Relationship between Electricity and CI/Mobility
We used our calculations of daily electricity use change and OLS regression to model the relationship
between changes in electricity, CI level, and mobility. The Multivariate Adaptive Regression Spline
(MARS) model was fit using the cumulative number of days in each CI level to estimate the additional
impact of time spent at each level.
Statistical Analysis of Forecasting Accuracy
Week-ahead forecast and actual demand data from 27 European countries and California was used to
measure how well system operators predicted electricity demand. We used t-tests to test for the significance
of the difference between week-ahead forecasted and actual demand in each country, region and week.
Acknowledgments
We thank Arun Majumdar and Gustavo Cezar for their valuable insights about this research. We are
grateful to the organizations that provided open access to data about electricity demand, mobility, and
weather, without which this research would not have been possible. Funding was provided by the
National Science Foundation through the Smart & Connected Communities program (#1737565), the
CONVERGE COVID-19 Working Groups for Public Health and Social Sciences Research, a CAREER
award (#1554178) and a Graduate Research Fellowship, as well as a Stanford Graduate Fellowship.

8

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.

21.
22.
23.
24.
25.

The World Bank (2020) World Development Indicators. Electric power consumption (kWh per
capita), Population, total. Retrieved from http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/
EG.USE.ELEC.KH.PC and https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.POP.TOTL
International Energy Agency (2020) Global energy demand to plunge this year as a result of the
biggest shock since the Second World War.
Leach A, Rivers N, & Shaffer B (2020) Canadian electricity markets during the COVID-19
pandemic: An initial assessment. Canadian Public Policy COVID-19.
Benatia D (2020) Electricity Markets Under Lockdown: Insights From New York. in IAEE Energy
Forum, Covid-19 Issue 2020, pp 55-58.
Cicala S (2020) Early Economic Impacts of COVID-19 in Europe: A View from the Grid.
Englund W (April 19) See how covid-19 is reshaping the electric rhythms of New York City. The
Washington Post.
Grunfeld B (May 11) Uncertainty of European Electricity Demand Through COVID-19 Recovery.
Forbes.
Narajewski M & Ziel F (2020) Changes in electricity demand pattern in Europe due to COVID-19
shutdowns. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.14864.
Ruan G, et al. (2020) Tracking and Analyzing the Short-Run Impact of COVID-19 on the US
Electricity Sector. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.06631.
Edomah N & Ndulue G (2020) Energy transition in a lockdown: An analysis of the impact of
COVID-19 on changes in electricity demand in Lagos Nigeria. Global Transitions 2:127-137.
Birkland TA (1998) Focusing events, mobilization, and agenda setting. Journal of public policy
18(01):53-74.
Birkland TA & Schwaeble KL (2019) Agenda Setting and the Policy Process: Focusing Events.
(Oxford University Press).
Boudet H, Giordono L, Zanocco C, Satein H, & Whitley H (2020) Event attribution and
partisanship shape local discussion of climate change after extreme weather. Nature Climate
Change 10(1):69-76.
Bie Z, Lin Y, Li G, & Li F (2017) Battling the Extreme: A Study on the Power System Resilience.
Proceedings of the IEEE 105(7):1253-1266.
van der Vleuten E & Lagendijk V (2010) Interpreting transnational infrastructure vulnerability:
European blackout and the historical dynamics of transnational electricity governance. Energy
Policy 38(4):2053-2062.
Amin M (2013) The smart-grid solution. Nature 499(7457):145-147.
Le Quéré C, et al. (2020) Temporary reduction in daily global CO2 emissions during the COVID19 forced confinement. Nature Climate Change.
Anonymous (2020) A new opportunity to tackle climate change: Countries should seize the
moment to flatten the climate curve. in The Economist.
Kanda W & Kivimaa P (2020) What opportunities could the COVID-19 outbreak offer for
sustainability transitions research on electricity and mobility? Energy Research & Social Science
68.
IPCC (2014) Summary for policymakers. Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and
Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth
Assessment Report of theIntergovernmental Panel on Climate Change., eds Field CB, Barros
VR, Dokken DJ, Mach KJ, Mastrandrea MD, Bilir TE, Chatterjee M, Ebi KL, Estrada YO, Genova
RC, et al. (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY USA), pp 1-32.
Linkov I, et al. (2014) Changing the resilience paradigm. Nature Climate Change 4(6):407-409.
Cohen J, Moeltner K, Reichl J, & Schmidthaler M (2018) Effect of global warming on willingness
to pay for uninterrupted electricity supply in European nations. Nature Energy 3(1):37-45.
Gillingham KT, Knittel CR, Li J, Ovaere M, & Reguant M (2020) The Short-run and Long-run
Effects of Covid-19 on Energy and the Environment. Joule.
Morison R, Malik NS, & Wade W (March 11) Global Lockdowns Slam Energy Demand.
Bloomberg.
McWilliams B & Zachmann G (2020) Bruegel electricity tracker of COVID-19 lockdown effects.
Bruegel Datasets.

9

26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.

McWilliams B & Zachmann G (2020) Electricity Consumption as a Near Real-time Indicator of
COVID-19 Economic Effects. (IAEE Energy Forum, Covid-19 Issue 2020).
Declercq B, Delarue E, & D’haeseleer W (2011) Impact of the economic recession on the
European power sector’s CO2 emissions. Energy Policy 39(3):1677-1686.
International Energy Agency (2020) Global Energy Review 2020: The impacts of the Covid-19
crisis on global energy demand and CO2 emissions.
Graf C, Qualgia F, & Wolak FA (2020) Learning about Electricity Market Performance with a
Large Share of Renewables from the COVID-19 Lock-Down.
Bakke G (2016) The Grid: the fraying wires between Americans and our energy future
(Bloomsbury Publishing USA).
Carley S, Nicholson-Crotty S, & Fisher EJ (2015) Capacity, Guidance, and the Implementation of
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act. Public Administration Review 75(1):113-125.
Hecht G (2009) The radiance of France: Nuclear power and national identity after World War II
(MIT press).
Milborrow S & Derived from mda:mars by T. Hastie and R. Tibshirani (2018) earth: Multivariate
Adaptive Regression Splines).
Google (2020) COVID-19 Community Mobility Reports.
Graff M & Carley S (2020) COVID-19 assistance needs to target energy insecurity. Nature
Energy 5(5):352-354.
Castán Broto V & Kirshner J (2020) Energy access is needed to maintain health during
pandemics. Nature Energy 5(6):419-421.

10

Fig. 1. Estimated difference in modeled and actual electricity demand for countries and regions
across the world, February - May 2020. Color intensity corresponds to change from modeled electricity
demand (+/- 2.5% per labeled midpoint in legend) and hatched fill the number of days under Confinement
Index (CI) Level 3 (i.e., national policies that substantially restrict the daily routine of all but key workers)
in each month. Gray areas indicate missing data.

11

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 2. Electricity demand impact groups during COVID-19 and relationships to government
restriction levels
(a) Clustering countries and regions by the percent change in modeled and actual weekly electricity
demand, with four clusters, Jan 1 - May 31, 2020. Black lines represent mean change in electricity use
per cluster; light blue lines are each country or region within the cluster. Vertical dashed lines indicate
when the cluster mean reached its minimum, with the value noted.
(b) Beta coefficients for CI 1 early/late, CI 2 early/late, and CI 3 from ordinary least squares regression
models of daily electricity change and CI level for each country/region from February 15 - May 31, 2020.
No bar indicates the country/region spent zero days in the given CI level. All betas are significant at
p<0.05 except Norway for CI 3; Norway, US Northwest, US Central, and US Florida for CI 2 late;
Australia, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, France, Greece, New Zealand, Poland, Slovakia,
Slovenia, US Midwest, US New England, US Northwest, US Central, US Tennessee and US Texas for CI
2 early; Norway and Ukraine for CI 1 late; and CAN British Columbia, CAN Ontario, Greece, India,
Sweden, Russia, US Midwest, and US California for CI 1 early. Country-specific models are provided in
the Supplementary Information.
(c) Distributions of R2 values of the CI level regressions for the countries in each cluster. R2 values
suggest that this modeling approach provides a relatively strong model fit for the Extreme and Severe
impact groups (R2 values range from 0.58-0.82 and 0.19-0.85, respectively) with weaker fit for the
Moderate and Mild groups (R2 values range from 0.04 to 0.81 and 0.05 to 0.39, respectively) (SI
Appendix, Table S3a).

12

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 3. Electricity demand change impact groups during COVID-19 and relationship to changes in
mobility (a) Percent change in mobility and electricity demand across selected countries and regions by
demand impact group. Orange lines represent cluster means for weekly average percent changes
between forecasted and actual demand; other colored lines represent mean mobility changes for each
location type.
(b) Elasticity coefficients measuring the relationship between changes in workplace, residential, and
grocery/pharmacy mobility and changes electricity use. Elasticities for all metrics are included in the
Supplementary Information (SI Appendix, Fig. S5). Error bars show the standard error for estimated
elasticity coefficients. All are statistically significant (p<0.05) except Australia, Finland, US Florida,
Norway, and US Southwest for workplace mobility; Finland, Australia, Serbia, US Florida, Norway, and
US Southwest for residential mobility; and Greece, Germany, Japan, Bulgaria, Denmark, US New
England, Serbia, Sweden, Finland, and Australia for grocery/pharmacy mobility. Country-specific models
are provided in the Supplementary Information.
(c) Distribution of R-squared values for regression models predicting electricity demand using all six
mobility metrics as regressors for each country and region in the cluster.

13

Extreme

Severe

Moderate

Mild

Fig. 4. Comparison between April 2020 daily load curves and historic load curve patterns.
Range of observed daily load shapes for a sample of countries and regions (see Supplementary
Information for other countries and regions), aligned by impact group. Blue depicts historic observations
during the months April 2016, 2017, 2018 and 2019; red depicts observations in April 2020. Solid lines
represent workdays; dashed lines weekends (holidays excluded). The plotted line corresponds to the
median load level observed for this hour over the period of interest. Sleeves show the range between the
10th and 90th quantiles. Load levels have not been corrected for differences in temperature.

14

Supplemental Information for:

Power and the Pandemic: Exploring Global Changes
in Electricity Demand During COVID-19
Elizabeth Buechlera,+, Siobhan Powella,+, Tao Sunb,+, Chad Zanoccob,+, Nicolas Astierc,+, Jose Bolorinosb,
June Florab,d, Hilary Boudete,*, Ram Rajagopalb,*
a

Mechanical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 USA
Civil and Environmental Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 USA
c
Economics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 USA
d
Stanford Solution Science Lab, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 USA
e
School of Public Policy, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331 USA
b

+

These authors contributed equally to this research

* Corresponding Authors:
Hilary Boudet, School of Public Policy, Oregon State University, Hilary.Boudet@oregonstate.edu
Ram Rajagopal, Civil and Environment Engineering, Stanford University, ramr@stanford.edu

Preprint Manuscript
August 10, 2020

Extended Data and Methods
Data Sources. Hourly electricity consumption for the United States was obtained for 13 different
subregions [D1], which each represent an aggregation of multiple grid balancing authorities defined by
the US EIA (Energy Information Agency). Hourly or sub-hourly electricity data was obtained at the
country-level for the majority of European countries [D2]. We excluded Cyprus, Montenegro,
Luxembourg, and Bosnia from the analysis due to a combination of a high percentage of anomalous
values in the demand data and high model validation errors, leaving us with 29 countries. The hourly data
for Australia [D3] represents the electricity consumption for five states (New South Wales, Queensland,
South Australia, Tasmania, and Victoria) which make up the majority (~90%) of the country’s population.
Hourly data was obtained for two Canadian regions: Ontario [D4] and British Columbia [D5]. Data for
Japan (hourly) is limited to the TEPCO utility [D6], which serves 35% of the population.1 Data for New
Zealand [D7], Russia [D8], Mexico [D9], Brazil [D10], and Chile [D11] are reported at the country-level
with hourly resolution. Electricity data for India is reported at the country-level with daily resolution [D12].
Data for Singapore is reported at 30-minute intervals [D13]. Mean daily demand was calculated from all of
these datasets for use in the regression model. Additionally, there are five countries included in our study
where only monthly electricity consumption data was available from public sources: China [D14], South
Africa [D15], Thailand [D16], Argentina [D17], and Kenya [D18].
Population-weighted daily heating degree day (HDD) and cooling degree day (CDD) data for US states
and census regions were applied in the models for the US regions [D19]. Population-weighted HDD and
CDD statistics were generated for all remaining regions using temperature data from weather stations in
the ASOS Network [D20] (located in cities with more than 100,000 inhabitants) and for which
measurements were available over the full 2015-2020 period.
We obtained a database of holiday dates for each country [D21], and then manually selected which
holidays were included in the model based on observations of the sensitivity of demand to each holiday in
the historical data. Dummy variables were also added for specific days of the year that typically
experience reduced demand but are not official national or religious holidays, such as the days between
Christmas and New Year’s Eve and days in the first week of the year.
For metrics of human mobility patterns we used daily data published by Google in their COVID-19
Community Mobility Report [D22]. This dataset includes changes in mobility related to workplaces, transit
stations, grocery stores and pharmacies, residences, parks, and retail or recreational activities. The
Google data is made available at the state- or country-level, with a limited number of missing days which
were removed by Google to preserve anonymity. Each metric is given as a percent change over a
baseline from January 3rd to February 6th, 2020, accounting for the day of the week.
For measures of the severity of COVID-19 restrictions we use the confinement index (CI) dataset
developed by [D23]. The CI levels range from 0 to 3: CI 0 for no restrictions, CI 1 includes travel
restrictions and bans on mass gatherings, CI 2 includes measures such as school closures and border
closures, and CI 3 is a lock-down. Further details are included in Table S2.
Demand Change Estimation. To estimate changes in electricity demand, we developed region-specific
regression models for predicting typical electricity consumption. Demand reductions were calculated on a
daily basis, by comparing the model estimate with actual demand from January to May 2020. The
regression model for predicting daily mean demand is given by:
Equation 1. Regression model predicting daily average demand
%!

%!
"

''

+

%" -'

%#

"

𝑑 = 𝛼! + % 𝛼",$ ℎ + % 𝛼",( 𝑐 + % 𝛼",) 𝑚" % 𝛼",* 𝑤" + % 𝛼",, 𝑦" + % 𝛼",. 𝑠"
"&'

1

"&'

"&'

"&'

"&'

https://www.tepco.co.jp/en/corpinfo/illustrated/business/business-scale-area-e.html

"&'

where 𝑑 is the mean daily demand, ℎ is the number of daily heating degree days (HDD), 𝑐 is the number
of daily cooling degree days (CDD), and 𝑚$ , 𝑦$ ,𝑤$ , and 𝑠$ are dummy variables for the month of the year,
year, day of the week, and holidays, respectively. HDD and CDD values were calculated using a base
temperature of 65ºF. 𝑛% is equal to the number of years of data included in the training, validation and test
sets and 𝑛& is the number of different holidays included in the model. The last month of the year, day of
the week, and year in the dataset were used as a baseline, which is why the corresponding dummy
variables are omitted in the model. The yearly dummy variables account for long-term, consistent load
growth patterns and the monthly dummy variables account for seasonal effects not captured by the HDD
and CDD terms. The holiday dummy variables account for demand reductions typically observed on
national and religious holidays. The datasets used for training daily models include region-specific data
for electricity consumption, weather, and holidays. The temporal resolution of the raw electricity
consumption data ranges between 15-minute and daily granularity for different countries.
The parameters of the regression model were identified using ordinary least squares regression. The
order of the polynomial HDD and CDD terms 𝑛𝑤 (between 1 and 4) was selected based on the out-ofsample validation error using k-fold cross validation with 10 folds. For most regions, the 10 folds were
randomly selected from data between January 2016 and the end of February 2020. For some regions,
data was only available beginning in January 2017 or January 2018. Therefore, at least two years of data
was used for training and validation for each region. Validation errors for each fold were defined in terms
of the root mean squared error (RMSE) of the predictions, expressed as a percent of the average
demand in the dataset. The average validation error over all folds of the 10-fold cross-validation was used
for model selection. For most regions, 𝑛𝑤 = 4 was selected. The final regression model was fit using the
combined dataset from all 10 folds.
Mean validation errors for each country range between 1.27-4.91% RMSE. In-sample training errors and
out-of-sample validation errors for each individual country are shown in Fig. S1. Note that errors over
longer time periods than one day, such as over a week or month, are substantially smaller than the daily
errors shown. Daily training and validation errors are similar for each region, indicating that negligible
model overfitting occurred.
Changes to electricity demand during the time when COVID restrictions were in place were estimated for
each country by comparing the baseline demand estimates from the learned regression model with actual
demand data. Confidence intervals for the estimated change in demand were estimated using the
prediction intervals from the regression model.
The regression model defined in Equation 1 describes the relationship between daily demand and
temperature variation, day of the week, seasonal factors, load growth, and holiday effects. These are the
primary factors that affect demand for all regions and countries considered. However, the individual effect
of each of these factors on demand varies considerably by region around the world. For example, the
effect of holidays on the magnitude of electricity demand is generally much more pronounced in Europe
than in the US. The dependence of demand on weather variables is much stronger for regions with more
extreme climates, such as Russia. Our empirical results show that our unified modeling framework can
accurately predict baseline demand despite heterogenous demand behaviors of different regions.
There are additional variables, such as economic factors, that may affect demand in specific regions, but
not to a large enough degree to significantly affect the conclusions drawn in this study. Preliminary
analysis indicates that the electricity demand for India may have some correlation with country-level
exports and other economic variables. Additionally, demand for regions with irregular demand growth
rates may not be fully captured using yearly fixed effects. Some regions have increasing behind-themeter distributed PV generation that is incorporated in the electricity demand data, and not explicitly
accounted for in the modeling framework. Certain small effects observed in our results, such as the
slightly increasing demand trend for the US Southwest region during the end of our COVID-19 analysis
period, may be partially attributed to some of these factors which were not accounted for in the modeling
framework.

For five of the countries included in our study, only monthly electricity consumption data was available from
public sources (China, South Africa, Thailand, Argentina, and Kenya). For these countries, our estimates
rely solely on monthly observations from either January 2012 (South Africa, Thailand), 2015 (China) or
2017 (Argentina, Kenya) to December 2019. We fit a linear regression model with monthly dummy variables
and make country-specific and parsimonious model adjustments based on observed historical patterns.
First, for countries that experience substantial growth in their electricity consumption (China, Kenya,
Thailand), we add a time trend linear in the number of months since the beginning of our dataset. Second,
if a correlation between temperature and electricity consumption is observed in the dataset, we include
either monthly CDD (Thailand) or both monthly CDD and HDD (Argentina, China and South Africa)
regressors in the model. Finally, for China we include a dummy variable for the month of the year during
which the Spring Festival occurred (either January or February) which was found to improve model
performance.
As a result, monthly model estimates for the 2020 monthly electricity consumption are based on the average
consumption during the corresponding month over the past few years, with some corrections for
temperature and load growth with historical load patterns, suggest such corrections are necessary. These
estimates are not as accurate as our estimates derived from more granular load data. Confidence intervals
typically range from +/- 3% (South Africa, Thailand), +/-5% (Argentina, China) or +/-6% (Kenya).
Modeling the Relationship between Electricity and Government Restrictions or Changes in
Mobility. Data with daily intervals were used to model the relationship between changes in electricity,
confinement index (CI) level, and mobility (see Data Sources section). For the electricity data in the
regressions, we used the daily outputs of the model for change in electricity demand for each
country/region. For the US electricity regions which include counties from multiple states, population
weighted averages were used to calculate regional series from the state-level CI and mobility data.
Ordinary least squares (OLS) regression was used to model the relationship between CI or mobility and
electricity change:
Equation 2. Regression model predicting electricity demand using CI level
𝛥𝑑(𝑡) = 𝛼11 𝛿(𝐶𝐼(𝑡) = 𝐶𝐼11 ) + 𝛼21 𝛿(𝐶𝐼(𝑡) = 𝐶𝐼12 ) + 𝛼3 𝛿(𝐶𝐼(𝑡) = 𝐶𝐼3 ) + 𝛼22 𝛿(𝐶𝐼(𝑡) = 𝐶𝐼22 )
+ 𝛼12 𝛿(𝐶𝐼(𝑡) = 𝐶𝐼12 ) + 𝛽
Equation 3. Elasticity of electricity demand against metrics of mobility
𝛥𝑑 = 𝛼𝑀𝑖 𝑀 + 𝛽
𝑖

Equation 4. Regression of electricity demand against all metrics of mobility
Δ𝑑 = 5 𝛼-" 𝑀$ + 𝛽
$

Where 𝑡 represents time in days and 𝛽 represents the intercept coefficient. The dependent variable, Δ𝑑, is
the percent change in daily electricity demand. The independent variables are a mobility metric, 𝑀𝑖 ,
where 𝑖 indexes the six different mobility metrics, or indicators for whether the country/region was under
CI level 1, 2, or 3 on that day. We differentiate between tightening and loosening periods as early/late,
indicating whether the period occurred before or after the peak confinement level. We denote CI 1 early
as 𝐶𝐼.. , CI 2 early as 𝐶𝐼/. , CI 3 as 𝐶𝐼0 , CI 2 late as 𝐶𝐼// , and CI 1 late as 𝐶𝐼./ . The coefficients in the
regression, 𝛼, are indexed similarly.
Equation 3 gives the calculation of elasticities with mobility, 𝛼-" , as presented in Fig. S5. Equation 4
regresses electricity demand against all six mobility metrics together. These results are included in the
Supplementary Information for each country.
In the CI regressions, for regions where CI level 0 was included in the dataset, CI level 0 was taken as
the baseline. For regions where the timeframe included no dates at CI level 0, CI level 1 was used as the
baseline and the constant was taken to represent its effect over CI level 0.

Multivariate adaptive regression splines (MARS) was used to model the relationship with time spent in
each CI level. A cumulative series was created for each CI level:
Equation 5. Cumulative measure of CI level

2

𝑆$1 (𝑡) = 5 𝛿(𝐶𝐼(𝜏) = 𝐶𝐼$1 )
34.

for 𝑖𝑗 in the set 𝑇 = {11, 12, 21, 22, 3} to indicate the CI level as in Equation 2. Using the cumulative series,
𝑆$1 , as independent variables, the MARS model fit the electricity demand using a set of linear and linearhinge functions:
Equation 6. MARS model predicting electricity demand using CI level cumulative metrics
Δ𝑑(𝑡) = 5 𝛼.,$1 𝑆$1 (𝑡) + 𝛼/,$1 max(𝑆$1 (𝑡) − 𝛾/,$1 , 0) + 𝛼0,$1 max (𝛾0,$1 − 𝑆$1 (𝑡), 0)
$1∈7

where 𝛼8,$1 are the slopes and 𝛾8,$1 are the hinge function knots, visible as breakpoints in the prediction.
The MARS terms are selected and pruned using a forward and backward pass. Implemented with the
Earth package in R [3], an R-squared threshold of 0.01 limited the addition of terms in the forward pass.
The backward pass used generalized cross validation (GCV) as a form of regularization to choose the
best subset of terms [4]. The residuals were used to calculate the standard error in each coefficient, and
the relative magnitude of the slope compared with the error used to judge whether the slope significantly
deviated from zero during each period. We defined a plateau as occurring where the slope of the
prediction was not significantly different from zero. One type of plateau we observed was a delayed
impact, where a new CI period would initially have zero slope before starting to affect change in the
electricity demand. The other type of plateau we observed indicated saturation, where a section with zero
slope occurred after the start of the CI period. For the special case where the only slope through a CI
period was zero, we considered that saturation as well, since it showed that additional days at that CI had
no additional impact.
Statistical Analysis of Forecasting Accuracy. Week-ahead demand forecast data and actual demand
data from 27 European countries and California (where week-ahead forecast data was available) was
used to evaluate the load prediction performance of system operators during the COVID-19 period. The
time resolution of the week-ahead forecast is at the hourly level for California and at the daily level
(min/max daily demand) for all European countries. Using the week-ahead forecast and actual demand
for each country or region for each week, we applied a t-test to the difference to test if the forecast errors
were statistically different from 0 based on the p-value obtained. If the difference was statistically
significant, we further categorized whether the system operator had over- or under-predicted for that
week (depending on the sign of the t-statistic). The threshold of the p-value for significance was set to 0.2
due to the limited number of measurements in European countries (only 14 per week). These results are
shown in Fig. S7. Data shows that day-ahead forecasts (as opposed to week-ahead forecasts) were
corrected within several days.
Clustering. K-Means clustering was used to segment the regions based on electricity demand impacts.
Use of the Euclidean distance metric allows these clusters to capture similarities in both the timing and
magnitude of the response. To select the number of clusters we consulted the elbow curve of K-Means
cluster inertia shown in Fig. S2. The groupings were robust to the random initialization of the K-Means
algorithm.
Extended Results
Relationship to Government Restrictions. The OLS regression of daily change in electricity demand
against CI level presented in Fig. 2 was run for each country separately. To consider the effect of cluster
groupings on the coefficient values, the mean over countries in each cluster is presented in Fig. S3. The
range of values in each cluster is presented in Table S3a. Details on the R-squared values for these
regressions are included in Table S4a. For the MARS regression, further results are presented in Fig. S4

and R-squared values are included in Table S4b. We consider saturation specifically in Fig. S4a, where
saturation is defined by a plateau which occurs after the first slope in the period. We use the first slope in
each CI period in Fig. S4b to study the initial impact of the new CI level. In CI levels 2 and 3 this captures
the drop before saturation. We show the timing of the breakpoints in each CI period in Fig. S4c. Finally,
the value achieved by the end of a period shows the cumulative effect of all CI days leading up to that
date, as shown in Fig. S4d.
Relationship to Changes in Mobility. The elasticity of daily change in electricity demand with respect to
each of the six mobility metrics is presented in Fig. S5: residential, workplace, retail and recreation,
grocery and pharmacy, transit stations, and parks. The range of these values within each cluster is
presented in Table S3b, and the corresponding R2 results are presented in Table S4c.
Changes in Daily Electricity Demand Patterns. To further investigate the change in load shapes, in
Fig. S6 we compare the Euclidian distances 1) between April 2020 workday and historic April weekend
load curves and 2) between April 2020 workday and historic April workday load curves. Grid operators’
forecasting error during this period is studied in Fig. S7.

Fig. S1. Mean in-sample training errors and out-of-sample validation errors for the demand
regression model for predicting the daily demand of each region. Values represent the mean RMSE
over all 10 folds of the 10-fold cross validation and are expressed as a percent of the mean demand for
each region.

Fig. S2. Elbow curve for K-means clustering of electricity demand impact. For each value of K, the
model inertia is the sum of the squared distances between the samples and their closest cluster center.
This curve shows a kink at K=4.

Fig. S3. Mean coefficients by demand impact group for three different regressions of government
restrictions. Indicators for CI levels 1, 2, and 3 separating the early period of tightening restrictions from
the late period of loosening restrictions. All four clusters are shown in red (Extreme), orange (Severe),
light blue (Moderate), and dark blue (Mild). The error bars indicate the range of values across all
countries in the cluster, and the bar presents the mean. Countries which did not experience a particular
level are excluded from the regression.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. S4. MARS regression plots of daily changes in electricity demand with CI level. (a) Fraction of
countries in a cluster which experience a plateau within each CI level (right), or a saturation (left). A
plateau is defined as a segment with slope not significantly different from 0, which indicates that each with
additional day under the CI level during that segment it is not impacting the demand. Saturation is defined
as a plateau which occurs after the first slope of the period, if there are multiple slopes. Each fraction
includes only countries which spend time at that CI. (b) The first slope of the MARS fit within each CI
period, for each country in the cluster. The box covers the middle two quartiles of the data with a line at
the median. The whiskers extend to the smaller of the range of the data, or the farthest point within 1.5
times the box height. Datapoints beyond that distance from the box are presented as separate dots. In
the Severe cluster in the CI 2 – early period, one outlier out of the range of the plot occurs for Austria at 12.4. (c) Histograms showing all significant breakpoints which occur in each CI period, defined as a point
where the slope of the MARS prediction changed by greater than 0.1. (d) The value achieved at the end
of each CI period by the MARS model fit, for countries in each cluster. The box plot boxes, lines, and
whiskers are defined as in (b).

Fig. S5. Coefficients for mobility metrics from the elasticity calculation (Equation 3). Bars depict
estimates from regressed percent change in daily electricity demand from February 15 to May 25, 2020
against each mobility metric. Colors represent impact groups. All coefficients are significant at p<0.05
except: Australia (all); Greece, Japan, and Bulgaria, (Grocery and Parks); Germany, Switzerland, Latvia,
Czechia, Hungary, US Carolinas, Slovenia, United Kingdom, Croatia, CAN Ontario, US Mid-Atlantic, US
New York, US Tennessee, US Texas, and US Northwest (Parks); Denmark and US New England
(Grocery); Finland (Workplaces, Retail, Grocery, Transit, and Residential); Norway (Workplaces, Transit,
and Residential); US Florida (Retail, Parks, Transit, Workplaces, and Residential); US Southwest (Retail,
Transit, Workplaces, and Residential); Serbia (Retail, Grocery, Parks, and Residential); Sweden (Retail
and Grocery).

Fig. S6. Histograms of the ratio of the distance between April 2020 workday and historic April
weekend load curves to the distance between April 2020 workday and historic April workday load
curves, by impact group. Distances are computed as the L2 distance between the load curve of median
hourly load levels in April 2020 and the load curve of median hourly load levels for the historic period of
interest (April weekends in 2016 to 2019 for the numerator and April workdays in 2016 to 2019 for the
denominator). Ratios lower than 1 indicate a closer proximity to historic weekends than to historic
workdays.

Fig. S7. Weekly demand forecast accuracy. Gray line segments represent accurate week-ahead
forecasts (not significantly different from actual demand, p<0.20); red over-predictions; and blue underpredictions from Jan 1 to May 20, 2020. Black lines represent missing data.

Fig. S8. Diagram depicting overall analytic framework

Table S1. Data information.
Coverage / description
[D1] United States subregional (13 regions)
[D2] European country-level
(29 countries)
[D3] Australia (5 states)

Data type
Electricity, hourly interval

[D4] Ontario, Canada
[D5] British Columbia

Electricity, hourly interval
Electricity, hourly interval

[D6] Japan (TEPCO utility
only)
[D7] New Zealand

Electricity, hourly interval

[D8] Russia
[D9] Mexico

Electricity, hourly interval
Electricity, hourly interval

[D10] Brazil

Electricity, hourly interval

[D11] Chile

Electricity, hourly interval

[D12] India
[D13] Singapore

Electricity, daily interval
Electricity, 30-minute interval

[D14] China

Electricity, monthly interval

[D15] South Africa

Electricity, monthly interval

[D16] Thailand

Electricity, monthly interval

[D17] Argentina

Electricity, monthly interval

https://portalweb.cammesa.com/Memnet1/default.aspx

[D18] Kenya

Electricity, monthly interval

https://www.knbs.or.ke/?wpdmpro=leading-economic-indicatorsmay-2020

[D19] NOAA climate data
(US)

Degree days

https://www.cpc.ncep.noaa.gov/products/analysis_monitoring/cdu
s/degree_days/

[D20] ASOS weather system
network (global)

Temperature, daily

https://mesonet.agron.iastate.edu/request/download.phtml

[D21] Public holidays and
observances (global)
[D22] Google Community
Mobility Report: changes in
human mobility patterns
(global)
[D23] COVID-19 Confinement
Index (global), Le Quéré et al.
(2020)

Selected dates

https://www.timeanddate.com/holidays/

% change from baseline, daily

https://www.google.com/covid19/mobility/

Daily

https://www.icos-cp.eu/gcp-covid19
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41558-020-0797-x

Electricity, hourly/ sub-hourly
interval
Electricity, hourly interval

Electricity, hourly interval

Source
https://www.eia.gov/beta/electricity/gridmonitor/dashboard/elec
tric_overview/US48/US48
https://transparency.entsoe.eu/
https://www.aemo.com.au/energy-systems/electricity/nationalelectricity-market-nem/data-nem/aggregated-data
http://www.ieso.ca/en/power-data/data-directory
https://www.bchydro.com/energy-inbc/operations/transmission/transmission-system/balancingauthority-load-data.html
https://www.tepco.co.jp/en/forecast/html/download-e.html
https://www.emi.ea.govt.nz/Wholesale/Reports/W_GD_C?DateFr
om=20100101&DateTo=20161231&_si=_dr_DateFrom%7C2015
0101,_dr_DateTo%7C20151231,_dr_RegionType%7CNZ,v%7C
4
http://www.so-cdu.ru/index.php?id=972&tx_ms1cdu_pi1
http://www.ons.org.br/Paginas/resultados-da-operacao/historicoda-operacao/curva_carga_horaria.aspx
http://www.ons.org.br/Paginas/resultados-da-operacao/historicoda-operacao/curva_carga_horaria.aspx
https://www.coordinador.cl/operacion/graficos/demanda/demand
a-real-demanda/
https://posoco.in/reports/daily-reports/daily-reports-2020-21/
https://www.ema.gov.sg/TemStatistic.aspx?pagesid=20140926w
bNYp2Yh8iqy&pagemode=live&sta_sid=20140826Y84sgBebjwK
V
http://www.cec.org.cn/menu/index.html?541
https://southafrica.opendataforafrica.org/wsblplg/electricitygenerated-and-available-for-distribution-of-south-africa-monthlyupdate
http://www.eppo.go.th/index.php/en/enenergystatistics/electricity-statistic

Table S2. Definition of the CI levels from [1] available at [2].
Level
0
No restrictions

Description

Policy examples

Policies targeted at long distance travel or
groups of individuals where outbreak first
nucleates

Isolation of sick or symptomatic individuals
Self-quarantine of travelers arriving from
affected countries
Screening passengers at transport hubs
Ban of mass gatherings >5,000
Closure of selected national borders and
restricted international travel
Citizen repatriation

2

Regional policies that restrict an entire city,
region or ~50% of society from normal daily
routines

Closure of all national borders
Mandatory closure of schools, universities,
public buildings, religious or cultural buildings,
restaurants, bars and other non-essential
businesses within a city or region
Ban of public gatherings >100
Perhaps also accompanied by recommended
closures at a broader or national level
Mandatory night curfew

3

National policies that substantially restrict the
daily routine of all but key workers

Mandatory national ‘lockdown’ that requires
household confinement of all but key workers
Ban public gatherings and enforce social
distancing >2 m

1

Table S3. Coefficients for ordinary least square regression models predicting change in electricity
demand for individual countries/regions with confinement index indicators (A) and changes in workplace
mobility (B). Both regressions are restricted to the period 2/15/20-5/31/20.
(A)
Independent
Variable
Mean
CI 1 Min
early
Max
Mean
CI 2 Min
early
Max
Mean
CI 3
Min
Max
Mean
CI 2 Min
late
Max
CI 1 Mean
late
Min
Max

Extreme
-3.063
-4.978
-1.148
0.154
-5.640
5.948
-17.776
-22.845
-12.707
-9.688
-10.225
-9.151
-

Cluster
Severe
Moderate
0.678
-0.634
-3.549
-3.085
6.105
5.375
-3.096
-2.759
-10.699
-7.325
2.341
1.270
-9.928
-5.341
-13.548
-7.672
-4.818
-3.576
-9.500
-5.447
-14.049
-9.612
-5.298
-2.010
-8.914
-5.025
-11.507
-6.748
-2.064
-3.738

Mild
0.659
-1.468
2.832
-2.334
-7.581
2.256
-1.828
-3.662
0.242
0.512
-1.422
3.106
-2.187
-5.182
0.120

All Countries
-0.092
-4.978
6.105
-2.720
-10.699
5.948
-8.018
-22.845
0.242
-7.062
-14.049
3.106
-6.260
-11.507
0.120

(B)
Independent
Variable
(Mobility)
Workplace
Mean
Min
Max
Transit
Mean
Min
Max
Residential
Mean
Min
Max
Retail and
Mean
Recreation
Min
Max
Grocery and Mean
Pharmacy
Min
Max
Parks
Mean
Min
Max

Extreme
0.322
0.310
0.334
0.283
0.250
0.317
-0.721
-0.775
-0.667
0.233
0.228
0.239
0.301
0.212
0.391
0.231
0.175
0.287

Cluster
Severe
Moderate
0.176
0.113
0.247
0.163
0.088
0.236
-0.435
-0.621
-0.248
0.145
0.081
0.217
0.164
0.007
0.416
0.052
-0.053
0.218

0.120
0.042
0.190
0.115
0.038
0.203
-0.281
-0.452
-0.064
0.104
0.028
0.175
0.132
0.024
0.318
0.013
-0.051
0.162

Mild
0.034
-0.004
0.070
0.032
-0.010
0.074
-0.102
-0.270
0.034
0.023
-0.026
0.083
0.041
-0.037
0.153
0.008
-0.030
0.068

All Countries
0.137
-0.004
0.334
0.128
-0.010
0.317
-0.334
-0.775
0.034
0.113
-0.026
0.239
0.137
-0.037
0.416
0.037
-0.053
0.287

Table S4. R-squared results for the ordinary least squares regressions presented in Table S2. (A) for
regression with confinement indices, (b) for MARS model, (c) for mobility elasticity regressions
(a)
Cluster
Extreme

Severe Moderate

Mild

All Countries

Min R2

0.584

0.195

0.043 0.047

0.043

Max R2

0.824

0.855

0.806 0.388

0.855

(b)
Cluster
Extreme

Severe Moderate

Mild

All Countries

Min R2

0.850

0.648

0.357 0.250

0.250

Max R2

0.905

0.908

0.840 0.665

0.908

(c)
Independent
Variable
(Mobility)
Workplace

Transit

Residential

Retail
Recreation
Grocery
Pharmacy
Parks

Cluster
Extreme

Severe

Moderate

Mild

All Countries

Min

0.716

0.230

0.066

0.000

0.000

Max

0.795

0.804

0.895

0.334

0.895

Min

0.615

0.191

0.075

0.000

0.000

Max

0.803

0.760

0.902

0.306

0.902

Min

0.732

0.147

0.021

0.003

0.003

Max

0.804

0.788

0.880

0.255

0.880

Min

0.651

0.191

0.039

0.000

0.000

Max

0.673

0.804

0.900

0.295

0.900

Min

0.362

0.001

0.009

0.000

0.000

Max

0.855

0.600

0.560

0.253

0.855

Min

0.579

0.001

0.001

0.000

0.000

Max

0.592

0.627

0.860

0.171

0.860

SI References
1. C. Le Quéré, R. B. Jackson, M. W. Jones, A. J. Smith, S. Abernethy, R. M. Andrew, A. J. De-Gol,
D. R. Willis, Y. Shan, J. G. Canadell, P. Friedlingstein, Temporary reduction in daily global CO2
emissions during COVID-19 forced confinement. Nature Climate Change 1-7 (2020).
2. C. Le Quéré, R. B. Jackson, M. W. Jones, A. J. Smith, S. Abernethy, R. M. Andrew, A. J. De-Gol,
D. R. Willis, Y. Shan, J. G. Canadell, P. Friedlingstein, Data from “Temporary reduction in daily
global CO2 emissions during COVID-19 forced confinement.” Available at
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41558-020-0797-x/tables/1.
3. S. Milborrow. Derived from mda:mars by T. Hastie and R. Tibshirani. earth: Multivariate Adaptive
Regression Splines, 2011. R package.
4. J. H. Friedman, Multivariate adaptive regression splines. The annals of statistics 1-67 (1991).

