At Your Service:
Coffee Beans Recommendation
From a Robot Assistant
Jacopo de Berardinis∗ , Gabriella Pizzuto† , Francesco Lanza‡ , Antonio Chella ‡ , Jorge Meira § , Angelo Cangelosi∗
∗ School

of Engineering, The University of Manchester
of Informatics, The University of Edinburgh
‡ Department of Engineering, University of Palermo
§ Department of Computer Science and Information Technologies, University of A Corua

arXiv:2008.13585v1 [cs.IR] 26 Aug 2020

† School

Abstract—With advances in the field of machine learning, precisely algorithms for recommendation systems, robot assistants
are envisioned to become more present in the hospitality industry.
Additionally, the COVID-19 pandemic has also highlighted the
need to have more service robots in our everyday lives, to
minimise the risk of human to-human transmission. One such
example would be coffee shops, which have become intrinsic
to our everyday lives. However, serving an excellent cup of
coffee is not a trivial feat as a coffee blend typically comprises
rich aromas, indulgent and unique flavours and a lingering
aftertaste. Our work addresses this by proposing a computational
model which recommends optimal coffee beans resulting from
the user’s preferences. Specifically, given a set of coffee bean
properties (objective features), we apply different supervised
learning techniques to predict coffee qualities (subjective features). We then consider an unsupervised learning method to
analyse the relationship between coffee beans in the subjective
feature space. Evaluated on a real coffee beans dataset based
on digitised reviews, our results illustrate that the proposed
computational model gives up to 92.7 percent recommendation
accuracy for coffee beans prediction. From this, we propose how
this computational model can be deployed on a service robot
to reliably predict customers’ coffee bean preferences, starting
from the user inputting their coffee preferences to the robot
recommending the coffee beans that best meet the user’s likings.

I. I NTRODUCTION
The field of artificial intelligence has received increasing
attention as it has the potential to improve different domains,
for example the hospitality industry [1], [2]. As robots are
envisioned to become more present in our everyday lives,
there is a growing interest to use service robots. Also, as
we started realising with the COVID-19 pandemic, there is
an accelerated need of service robots to minimise human to
human transmission in such scenarios [3]. Service robots are
becoming more present. Precisely, service robots should be
capable of adapting to users’ preferences, by understanding
their needs to provide a more personal interaction [4]. For
example, robots in restaurants, or specifically coffee shops,
Corresponding Email: jacopo.deberardinis@manchester.ac.uk. The authors
Jacopo de Berardinis, Gabriella Pizzuto, Francesco Lanza and Jorge Meira
contributed equally.

would greatly enhance customer satisfaction with a more
personalised experience [5]. Witnessing this, an important
challenge to address would be the deployment of an intelligent
coffee recommender system1 on a humanoid robot in a coffee
shop, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Recommendation systems are increasingly being used [6].
In the hospitality industry, recommendation systems are being
used to recommend healthy food options [7] or the perfect
bottle of wine [8]. Their strengths lie in their ability to
perceive customers’ food desires and recommend suggestions
from computational analysis of users’ interaction and related
past information. Specifically, an intelligent recommender
system builds a personalised experience when given specific
characteristics. For example, in a coffee shop, the humancentred recommendation of coffee beans would rely on coffee
bean qualities (subjective features) and coffee bean properties
(objective characteristics).
Although recommender systems have gained popularity in
the hospitality domain [7], [9], to the best of our knowledge,
no coffee recommender system exists, and even more so, one
which can be integrated with a robot. Hence, we aim to build
a coffee recommendation system which suggests beans when
the user expresses his or her subjective preferences. In this
paper, we contribute to this by formulating the coffee bean
recommendation problem as a multi-target regression problem.
In future work, we plan on carrying human-agent interaction
experiments and here we give an overview of how the overall
system would work on a humanoid robot and propose the
integration of this for a coffee recommender system. Beyond
the recommendation itself, other factors (such as the modality)
influence the user’s overall experience. We envision that the
use of an embodied agent to deliver the coffee bean choice
would enhance the overall perception of the recommendation.
In this paper, we present a computational model for a coffee
bean recommendation engine (Section III), extending our work
presented in [10]. Precisely, we show how given a list of
1 In this paper, we use the terms recommender and recommendation systems
interchangeably.

Fig. 1. An illustration of how our coffee bean recommendation system would be deployed in a coffee shop. The humanoid robot, Pepper, invites the user to
input his or her coffee preferences. Using our proposed recommendation system, Pepper suggests the perfect coffee blend for the customer.

objective features (species, country of origin, region, variety,
colour, category one and two defects, processing method,
moisture) we can predict subjective traits (uniformity, sweetness, balance, body, flavour, acidity, aftertaste, aroma) using
regression methods such as random forests (RFs), support
vector regression (SVR) and multi-layer perceptron (MLP),
to automate the coffee review process. Then, we also show
that by using the nearest neighbour method, input data given
by users can be compared to both predicted and available
subjective components to recommend the most favourable
coffee. Our computational model is evaluated on the Coffee
Quality Institute database, comprising digitised reviews from
arabica and robusta coffee beans (Section IV). Given this
computational model, we explain qualitatively how this would
be embodied on a real robot in a coffee shop to improve overall
experience and provide a more tailored user experience.
II. R ELATED W ORK
There has been several research efforts to improve user
experience in gastronomy, both from the machine learning and
robotics communities. Since coffee is such a staple beverage
in our everyday lives and it has been shown that coffee
provides several health benefits [11], numerous attempts have
been made to improve its quality. Goyal et al. illustrated how
an artificial neural network (ANN) model can predict shelf
life of roasted coffee flavoured drinks, given data samples
from 50 observations (colour, appearance, flavour, viscosity,
sediment) [12]. The best result achieved was with a MLP
with a single hidden layer of 12 neurons. Ribeiro et al. used
partial least squares regression to show how the chemometric
analysis of coffee beverage sensory data with the respective
chromatographic profiles of volatile roasted coffee compounds
can predict acidity, bitterness, flavour, cleanliness, body, and
overall quality [13]. Their results were congruent with the

mean score of human coffee experts. The data used for our
work is more similar to the one by Goyal et al. [12] rather
than by Ribeiro et al. [13] due to the dataset we had available.
The quality of coffee can also be improved by using
computer vision techniques. This field has seen remarkable
progress with the introduction of neural networks, specifically
to address the challenge of classifying coffee beans’ roast
level. Different roast levels, from light to dark, give different
preservation of the coffee bean’s natural aroma and flavour.
As a result, there has been efforts to standardise this process.
One of the works used a backpropagation neural network and
obtained an accuracy of 97.5% [14]. The colour of coffee
beans also illustrates their roast level. Morais de Oliveira et
al. have focused on classifying coffee beans based on their
colour. They combined ANNs with a Bayes classifier to reach
100% accuracy in classifying the beans into four colour groups
[15]. Our research effort differs from these as we do not use
machine learning models to monitor the quality of the coffee
beans, but more as a tool for recommendation.
Recommender systems have received an increasing surge of
attention, due to their attractive benefits of assisting the user
during decision making when overloaded with information
[16]. Considering how important food choices are at this day
and age, it is remarkable that only a small number efforts have
been put towards deploying more gastronomy-related recommender systems. Tran et al. [7] give an overview of different
systems and methods for recommending healthy food. The
methods ranged from collaborative filtering to content and
constraint-based recommendations. These systems focus on
adapting recommendations to individuals, when considering
users’ food preferences and nutritional needs, or alternatively
focus more on healthy contributions for group scenarios.
With respect to beverage recommendation, most efforts have
revolved around recommending wine [9]. Although this is

Subjective features
prediction model

Dataset

Unreviewed
coﬀee

coﬀee properties
(objective features)

Reviewed
coﬀee

coﬀee qualities
(subjective features)
user’s coﬀee qualities
(subjective features)

coﬀee qualities

predicted coﬀee qualities
(subjective features)
ranked coﬀee beans

recommended coﬀee beans

User

Robot

Recommender
System

Coﬀee Beans
Recommendation Model

Fig. 2. Illustration of the coffee bean recommendation system. Objective features from the dataset are fed into a regression model to predict subjective traits.
The predictions, together with user input fed into the robot’s tablet, are compared to obtain the coffee suggestion. In turn, this is given by the robot.

beneficial to consumers, considering the similarities in their
respective smells and flavours [17], coffee recommender systems are vital to aide consumers in their choices. Our work
aims to address this open gap.
When it comes to robot deployment, current systems adapt
the behaviour of the agent towards users’ preferences through
crowdsourcing and collaborative filtering to learn and predict
task preferences, such as prioritising tidying-up tasks when
given a scene [18]. Service robots are also being used as baristas for remembering previous orders [19] or to show neutral,
entertaining, and emphatic behaviours when suggesting drinks
and taking orders from customers [20]. There have also been
research efforts to develop a service robot in a bar setting
[21], [22] depicting social behaviours in response to states,
affects, and when dealing with uncertainty of the customers
during interaction. However, these works fail to address the
personalisation problem from a multi-user perspective and in
reality the user experience would be greatly improved if the
robot relies on a recommender system that also takes into
account users with similar preferences.
In this paper, we bridge insights from these fields to address
the real-world challenge of personalised coffee bean recommendation. Our work thus mainly focuses on how machine
learning can be used to recommend coffee beans and how a
robot would be used to deploy the system in the real world.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
Our work addresses the challenge of tailoring the choice
of coffee to the user’s preferences. To do so, we propose a
computational model (Section III-A) which relies on supervised and unsupervised learning techniques. An overview of
our solution is illustrated in Figure 2. The user inputs his or
her coffee likings through the tablet on the robot, which uses

the recommender system to return the coffee suggestion. In
Section III-B, we explain how we implemented this idea, the
important role which the robot plays in such a scenario, and
how we would deploy this in the real world.
A. Coffee beans recommendation model
Given that the coffee review process is expensive and requires expert domain knowledge, it is essential to consider that
a portion of the coffee beans available in the market at a certain
time might not yet have been reviewed. The unavailability
of official reviews is indeed a practical concern in the coffee
industry, as it occurs every time a novel blend is introduced or
in case of local and niche products. Nevertheless, with the goal
of providing the user with the best experience, a recommender
system should also be able to suggest unreviewed coffee in
case the expected coffee qualities (those that would result
from an actual review process) match the user’s preferences.
With these premises, we aim for a system supporting this
functionality in the context of an informative and authoritative
dataset that we can use for coffee recommendation.
1) Dataset and pre-processing: The Coffee Quality Institute (CQI) is a nonprofit organization working internationally
to improve the quality of coffee and the lives of the people
who produce it. CQI provides training and technical assistance to coffee producers and other individuals in the supply
chain to increase the value, volume and sustainability of high
quality coffee production. CQI also works toward building
institutional capacity in coffee producing countries by creating
systems and infrastructure that encourage a focus on quality
that leads to higher farmer incomes.
The dataset considered for of our system is based on the

Fig. 3. Pearson’s correlation between the attributes considered during the last
step of feature selection.

Coffee Quality Institute database2 . More precisely, a previously
scraped version of the coffee quality dataset added to this
repository3 was used. This dataset comprises 1340 digitised
reviews from 1312 arabica and 28 robusta coffee beans. For
each review, the dataset shows 44 features divided into quality
measures given by reviewers on a 1-10 scale, beans metadata
and farms metadata. The 44 features were cleaned and divided
into objective and subjective features.
TABLE I
O BJECTIVE FEATURES ( COFFEE PROPERTIES ) AND SUBJECTIVE FEATURES
( COFFEE QUALITIES ) AFTER FEATURE SELECTION .
Objective Features
Species
Country of Origin
Region
Variety
Color
Category One Defects
Category Two Defects
Processing Method
Moisture

Subjective Features
Aroma
Flavour
Body
Sweetness
Acidity
Balance
Uniformity
Aftertaste

Two feature selection strategies were adopted: (i) univariate
feature selection, identifying the most optimal features using
univariate statistical tests; (ii) tree-based feature selection to
compute feature importance. From our analysis, the altitude attributes were discarded as they did not contribute significantly
to the regression model. Finally, by inspecting the correlation
between the selected features (Figure 3), we ended up with
17 attributes. These are species, country of origin, region,
variety, color, category one defects, category two defects,
2 All

credits to Coffee Quality Institute for the data.
to the repository: https://github.com/jldbc/coffee-quality-database

3 Link

processing method, moisture illustrated in Table I, with their
characterisation into objective features (coffee properties) and
aroma, flavour, body, sweetness, acidity, balance, uniformity,
aftertaste for subjective features (coffee qualities).
For each feature, we give a brief description to understand
the dataset, as shown in Table I, in objective feature we have:
• Species indicates the kind of the coffee beans. The values
of this feature are arabica or robusta;
• CountryOfOrigin indicates the country of origin of beans;
• Region indicates the region of the country of origin;
• Variety indicates the variety of coffee.
• Color indicates the color of the greens.
• CategoryOneDefects and CategoryTwoDefects indicates
the major and the minor defects in the beans.
• ProcessingMethod indicates the method whereby the
beans were handled and processed;
• Moisture indicates the moisture percentage given by a
green analysis.
Instead, for subjective features the system calculates scores,
as human reviewers do, to quantify in a range of 1-10 a quality
measure for each feature considered. The terms to convey
subjective features are self-explanatory.
2) Subjective features prediction and recommender system:
To simulate the realistic scenario mentioned before, we randomly select a subset of observations from the dataset and
assume their subjective features to be unknown. As illustrated
in Figure 2, this partition is thus intended to represent unreviewed coffee. We use regression methods to predict the
subjective features given the objective ones from the isolated
observations. This step corresponds to automating the review
process of coffee beans on those coffee beans for which only
the objective features are available. Since the predicted subjective features are in the (0, 10] range interval, we experimented
with three different models that are suitable for multi-target
regression, i.e., RFs, SVR and a MLP. A thorough evaluation
of these models to find the best one for our application will
be presented in Section IV-A, where the average RMSE for
each attribute was selected as the metric for evaluation.
Following the prediction step, both the predicted and the
human-elaborated subjective features of the coffee beans in
our dataset are combined together in the recommendation
space. Using a simple yet effective approach – the k-nearest
neighbour (kNN), our model recommends coffee beans by
matching users’ preferences in the recommendation space.
B. Integration with the robot
Our coffee bean recommender system would be deployed
on a humanoid robot such as Pepper4 . Using a graphical
user interface with visual sliders on Pepper’s tablet, the user
would choose how they would like their coffee, with varying
degrees of sweetness and acidity, different aromas, flavours
and aftertastes. After passing these through the coffee bean
recommendation model discussed in the previous section, a
list of coffee recommendations would be shown on Pepper’s
4 https://www.softbankrobotics.com/emea/en/pepper

tablet. In reality, our system would also work on a tablet, and
integration with the robot is not strictly necessary for the actual
implementation. However, using a robot to complete such a
task is important to enhance the user experience by introducing
a service robot to help customers in a more natural way.
Perspectives and analyses on implementing humanoid robot
applications as interactive systems for customer engagement
have been significantly tested in different scenarios such as
the hospitality industry [23]. It has been repeatedly shown
that human engagement tends to be more evident when an
anthropomorphic robot interacts with the customer [24]. One
such study has shown that people interacting with an emphatic
robot showed a higher attention to the task amongst people
who interacted with a static robot (or non-engaging devices)
[24]. Here, the authors believe that an emphatic robot creates
an affective bond between the robot and the user, which keeps
the user engaged for a longer period of time. These results
motivated our choice for using a robot instead of a tablet to
deploy our coffee bean recommendation system.
IV. E XPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
To validate our approach, we propose an experimental setup
where we evaluated different stages of the overall system. We
carried out quantitative experiments on the subjective features
prediction model and the overall recommendation system.
A. Subjective features prediction model
The first stage comprises the regression model for predicting
the subjective features. As outlined in the previous section, RF,
SVR and MLP were used as regression models for comparison.
The results for each regressor are cross validated (with 10folds) using the RMSE as performance metric (the lower the
better). For the RF, twenty decision trees were generated.
For the SVR, a radial basis was used as kernel, with the
penalty and gamma parameters having different values for
each subjective feature. We used random search as the hyperparameter optimisation strategy to find the optimal architecture
and configuration of our MLP. The resulting model consists
of three fully connected hidden layers with 256 neurons each,
and rectified linear units [25] as activation function. We also
used a dropout mask [26] between successive layers to prevent
overfitting and improve the generalisation capabilities of the
model. The MLP was trained to minimise the RMSE of the
model’s predictions with the Adam optimiser [27].
As illustrated by Table IV-B, the average RMSE for the RF
across all attributes was 0.3562. For the best MLP configuration, the average RMSE achieved was 0.3580. With the SVR,
an average RMSE across all attributes of 0.3750 was obtained.
As the lowest RMSE attained was for the RF, this was chosen
as the best model for our system.
B. Recommender system
To evaluate the recommender system as a whole, we measured the accuracy of the recommendations. In particular, we
fitted a kernel density estimator on the subjective features of
our dataset from which we sampled 100 new observations in

TABLE II
T HE RESULTS TABULATED ILLUSTRATE THE AVERAGE RMSE FOR THE
SEVEN PREDICTED SUBJECTIVE FEATURES .
Model
Random Forest (RF)
Multilayer Perceptron (MLP)
Support Vector Regression (SVR)

Average RMSE
0.3562
0.3580
0.3750

TABLE III
R ECOMMENDATION ACCURACY WITH DIFFERENT SIZES OF THE DATASET
PARTITION FOR WHICH SUBJECTIVE FEATURES HAVE TO BE PREDICTED .
Prediction Size
10%
20%
33%
50%

Recommendation Accuracy
0.927000
0.860600
0.778667
0.695500

order to simulate users’ inputs from Pepper. First, we run
the kNN to identify the k most similar coffee beans to the
users’ inputs. Since we expect our system to be deployed in
a transductive setting, where the quality measures of some
coffee beans are not available, we repeat the same procedure
on a processed version of the full dataset. This is realised by
considering a partition of it as unknown, so that we can use
the regression model to obtain the subjective features needed
by the kNN algorithm. In this way, we can compare the coffee
recommendations from the kNN by using the full dataset
(i.e. the groundtruth) with those obtained by considering a
partition from the predictions, to see how the latter ones
diverge from the former. This allows to compute a measure of
recommendation accuracy as the cardinality of the intersection
between the recommendations from the full dataset and those
from the dataset with predicted features. More formally, given
a user’s input u = [u1 , u2 , . . . , u8 ] where ui is a subjective
feature in Table I, we denote the groundtruth recommendations
from the kNN on the full dataset D as recground (u, Df ull ) =
[r1 , r2 , . . . , rk ], and the recommendations from the kNN on the
dataset with m×|D| (0 ≤ m ≤ 1) observations with unknown
subjective features as recpred (u, Dm ) = [p1 , p2 , . . . , pk ]. The
recommendation accuracy for the user input u is computed as:
|recground ∩ recpred |
(1)
k
As reported in Table IV-B, we tested different values of m,
and used cross-validation to obtain a more reliable estimate
of the recommendation accuracy. This ensures that our results
are not biased by the dataset partitioning.
rec acc(u) =

V. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In our work, we proposed a coffee bean recommendation
system which to the best of our knowledge has not been
addressed before. Whilst human coffee connoisseurs excel at
such a task, modelling this recommender trait using artificial
intelligence is non-trivial. We showed how supervised and
unsupervised models can be applied for coffee bean recommendation. The aim of this work is to define regression
models which can be used to predict subjective attributes,

given objective ones. Using the random forests model, we
obtained a RMSE of 0.3562. We also combined this with
the k-nearest neighbours method to identify the most similar
coffee beans to the users’ inputs. In conjunction, we proposed
an overview of how our model can be deployed on a service
robot. As future work, we plan to deploy our model on a real
robot and study how users would interact with the system.
Specifically, an exciting research direction would be to study
the role the robot would play to improve human-robot interaction and whether using a personalised coffee bean recommendation system would encourage return customers. Moreover,
given the COVID-19 pandemic we have been experiencing,
we would be interested to study whether using humanoid
robots versus humans to recommend coffee would attract more
customers as they would perceive the environment to be safer
with less human interaction. We believe our presented work
is a promising step in the direction of having service robots
providing more personalised human-robot interaction.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Prof. Gavin Brown for
supporting this project through constructive feedback.
R EFERENCES
[1] J. Bowen and C. Morosan, “Beware hospitality industry: the robots are
coming,” Worldwide Hospitality and Tourism Themes, 2018.
[2] L. N. Cain, J. H. Thomas, and M. Alonso Jr, “From sci-fi to sci-fact: the
state of robotics and ai in the hospitality industry,” Journal of Hospitality
and Tourism Technology, 2019.
[3] G.-Z. Yang, B. J. Nelson, R. R. Murphy, H. Choset, H. Christensen,
S. H. Collins, P. Dario, K. Goldberg, K. Ikuta, N. Jacobstein et al.,
“Combating covid-19the role of robotics in managing public health and
infectious diseases,” 2020.
[4] C. Fu, Y. Yoshikawa, T. Iio, and H. Ishiguro, “Sharing experiences to
help a robot present its mind and sociability,” International Journal of
Social Robotics, pp. 1–12, 2020.
[5] J. Nakanishi, I. Kuramoto, J. Baba, K. Ogawa, Y. Yoshikawa, and
H. Ishiguro, “Continuous hospitality with social robots at a hotel,” SN
Applied Sciences, vol. 2, 03 2020.
[6] I. Portugal, P. Alencar, and D. Cowan, “The use of machine learning algorithms in recommender systems: A systematic review,” Expert Systems
with Applications, vol. 97, pp. 205 – 227, 2018. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0957417417308333
[7] T. N. Trang Tran, M. Atas, A. Felfernig, and M. Stettinger, “An
overview of recommender systems in the healthy food domain,” Journal
of Intelligent Information Systems, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 501–526, Jun
2018. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10844-017-0469-0
[8] C. Cruz, L. Gautier, and C. Nguyen Van, “Word embeddings for wine
recommender systems using vocabularies of experts and consumers,”
vol. 5, pp. 23–30, 09 2018.
[9] A. Parsons and A.-M. Kennedy, “Wine recommendations: Who do i
believe?” British Food Journal, vol. 111, pp. 1003–1015, 09 2009.
[10] J. de Berardinis, G. Pizzuto, F. Lanza, A. Chella, J. Meira, and
A. Cangelosi, “At your service: Coffee beans recommendation from
a robot assistant,” in Proceedings of the 8th International Conference
on Human-Agent Interaction (HAI 20). Association for Computing
Machinery, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3406499.
3418765
[11] J.-H. Bae, J.-H. Park, S.-S. Im, and D.-K. Song, “Coffee and
health,” Integrative Medicine Research, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 189 –
191, 2014, gathering, Connecting, and Integrating. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2213422014000456
[12] S. Goyal and G. Goyal, “Machine learning ann models for
predicting sensory quality of roasted coffee flavoured sterilized
drink,” ADCAIJ: Advances in Distributed Computing and Artificial
Intelligence Journal, vol. 2, no. 3, 2013. [Online]. Available: http:
//revistas.usal.es/index.php/2255-2863/article/view/ADCAIJ201426913

[13] J. Ribeiro, F. Augusto, T. Salva, and M. Ferreira, “Prediction models for
arabica coffee beverage quality based on aroma analyses and chemometrics,” Talanta, vol. 101, pp. 253 – 260, 2012. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0039914012007783
[14] T. Nasution and U. Andayani, “Recognition of roasted coffee bean levels
using image processing and neural network,” IOP Conference Series:
Materials Science and Engineering, vol. 180, p. 012059, 03 2017.
[15] E. M. de Oliveira, D. S. Leme, B. H. G. Barbosa, M. P. Rodarte,
and R. G. F. A. Pereira, “A computer vision system for coffee beans
classification based on computational intelligence techniques,” Journal
of Food Engineering, vol. 171, pp. 22 – 27, 2016. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0260877415300108
[16] F. Ricci, L. Rokach, and B. Shapira, Recommender Systems Handbook,
10 2010, vol. 1-35, pp. 1–35.
[17] I. Croijmans and A. Majid, “Not all flavor expertise is equal: The
language of wine and coffee experts,” PLOS ONE, vol. 11, no. 6,
pp. 1–21, 06 2016. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0155845
[18] N. Abdo, C. Stachniss, L. Spinello, and W. Burgard, “Collaborative
filtering for predicting user preferences for organizing objects,” The
International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 35, 12 2015.
[19] B. Irfan, M. Hellou, A. Mazel, and T. Belpaeme, “Challenges of a realworld hri study with non-native english speakers: Can personalisation
save the day?” 03 2020, pp. 272–274.
[20] S. Rossi, E. Dell’Aquila, G. Maggi, and D. Russo, “What would you
like to drink?: Engagement and interaction styles in hri,” 03 2020, pp.
415–417.
[21] M. Giuliani, R. P. Petrick, M. E. Foster, A. Gaschler, A. Isard,
M. Pateraki, and M. Sigalas, “Comparing task-based and socially
intelligent behaviour in a robot bartender,” in Proceedings of the 15th
ACM on International Conference on Multimodal Interaction, ser. ICMI
13. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery,
2013, p. 263270. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/2522848.
2522869
[22] M. E. Foster, S. Keizer, and O. Lemon, “Towards action selection
under uncertainty for a socially aware robot bartender,” in Proceedings
of the 2014 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot
Interaction, ser. HRI 14. New York, NY, USA: Association
for Computing Machinery, 2014, p. 158159. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/2559636.2559805
[23] J. Nakanishi, I. Kuramoto, J. Baba, O. Kohei, Y. Yoshikawa, and
H. Ishiguro, “Can a humanoid robot engage in heartwarming interaction
service at a hotel?” in Proceedings of the 6th International Conference
on Human-Agent Interaction, ser. HAI 18. New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2018, p. 4553. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3284432.3284448
[24] S. Rossi, E. DellAquila, G. Maggi, and D. Russo, “What would
you like to drink? engagement and interaction styles in hri,” in
Companion of the 2020 ACM/IEEE International Conference on
Human-Robot Interaction, ser. HRI 20. New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2020, p. 415417. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3371382.3378343
[25] V. Nair and G. E. Hinton, “Rectified linear units improve restricted boltzmann machines,” in Proceedings of the 27th international conference on
machine learning (ICML-10), 2010, pp. 807–814.
[26] N. Srivastava, G. Hinton, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and R. Salakhutdinov, “Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting,” The Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 15, no. 1, pp.
1929–1958, 2014.
[27] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.

