Changes in mobility patterns in Europe during the
COVID-19 pandemic: Novel insights using open source data
Anna Sigrı́dur Islind1Y Marı́a Óskarsdóttir1Y* Harpa Steingrı́msdóttir1Y

arXiv:2008.10505v1 [cs.CY] 24 Aug 2020

1 Department of Computer Science, Reykjavı́k University, Reykjavı́k, Iceland
YThese authors contributed equally to this work.
* mariaoskars@ru.is

Abstract
The COVID-19 pandemic has changed the way we act, interact and move around in the
world. The pandemic triggered a worldwide health crisis that has been tackled using a
variety of strategies across Europe. Whereas some countries have taken strict measures,
others have avoided lock-downs altogether. In this paper, we report on findings
obtained by combining data from different publicly available sources in order to shed
light on the changes in mobility patterns in Europe during the pandemic. Using that
data, we show that mobility patterns have changed in different counties depending on
the strategies they adopted during the pandemic. Our data shows that the majority of
European citizens walked less during the lock-downs, and that, even though flights were
less frequent, driving increased drastically. In this paper, we focus on data for a number
of countries, for which we have also developed a dashboard that can be used by other
researchers for further analyses. Our work shows the importance of granularity in open
source data and how such data can be used to shed light on the effects of the pandemic.

Introduction
In December 2019, a severe respiratory disease emerged in Whuan, China [1]. Since the
first identified case of the virus COVID-19 was reported on 8. December 2019 [2, 3], the
virus has spread quickly, causing a worldwide health crisis. Since the crisis broke,
different types of crisis management strategies have been actualised, impacting the way
people in different countries act and interact in ways that have not yet fully been
realised [4]. The pandemic has affected people living in various countries in different
ways, since each country has had its own approach and policy for handling the crisis
situation. This goes for testing strategies, requirements around quarantine, imposing
lock-downs, social-distancing and closing of schools to name a few [5]. Additionally, as
the virus was spreading around the globe, countries were effected by it to a different
extent, and took longer or shorter time to respond to the imminent threat. In Europe
alone, the response to the pandemic has varied greatly. For example, although Spain
and the United Kingdom both reported their first COVID-19 case on January 31, Spain
imposed a lock-down nine days before the United Kingdom (43 and 52 days,
respectively, after the first diagnosed case). In contrast, Norway and Denmark reported
their first cases on February 26 and 27, and waited only 15 days to significantly restrict
the travels to, from and within their countries by imposing a lock-down. Since these
measures were taken, it has become clear that non-pharmaceutical interventions
significantly and substantially slowed the growth of the pandemic [6].

Notice: This is a preprint of a work currently in submission.

1/12

Previous studies have shown the benefits of developing and researching information
systems with the aim of pursuing grand challenges such as natural disasters, public
health issues, dealing with poverty, climate change and the ageing society [7–13].
Following that stream of research on grand challenges, and in light of the new grand
challenge that we are now facing with the ongoing pandemic, we suggest that providing
knowledge and developing information systems based on open source data can provide
new insights on the pandemic and its effects. There is a related call for research on the
aggregated flow of people during the pandemic in order to show the impact of different
measures taken during the state of crisis [14]. This paper directly contributes to that
call, and that gap in the literature.
In this paper we more specifically report on our findings from using open source data
from different resources, including the Apple Maps Mobility Trend data set and the
COVID-19 Flight data set provided by OpenSky, for the purpose of developing a
dashboard which shows the changes in mobility patterns in Europe and analyse the data
with the purpose of shedding light on mobility trends following the pandemic. Our
research questions are two-fold: i) How has the COVID-19 pandemic changed mobility
patterns in Europe; and ii) What conclusions can be drawn from open source data
about the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on well-being of individuals in Europe in
relation to strategy steps taken by the various countries. Using the data and our
dashboard, we show the impact of the different strategies put into place in Europe
during the pandemic and show how mobility patterns changed in different counties. The
findings show how the majority of Europeans walked less during the lock-downs and
social distancing periods, and that even though flights were less frequent, driving
increased drastically instead. The main contribution of our research is firstly an analysis
of mobility patterns in relation to measures taken to mitigate the effects of the
pandemic in different countries in Europe and secondly an information system –the
dashboard– with data and visualisations showing changes in mobility patterns in
Europe. The dashboard will be made available online upon publication of this paper.
Additionally, we illustrate how novel use of open source data can elucidate various
aspects of the pandemic which indicates the importance of granularity in open source
data, and the significance of updating open source data frequently so that it can be
used to tackle grand challenges such as this one.
The rest of this paper is organized in the following way. In the next section we
discuss the related literature on mobility, crisis management, predicting the spread of
the pandemic and the effect of imposed restriction on general population, followed by an
explanation of our proposed methods and materials in Section . In Section we present
the results of our analyses and discuss their implications in Section . We conclude the
paper with some final remarks and directions for future research in Section .

Related Work
Human mobility has been a popular research topic for over a decade. With increased
availability of granular, geo-located mobility data research has revealed that people tend
to follow simple and reproducible patterns; they are likely to return to a few highly
frequented locations and their trajectories are highly regular both in terms of time and
space [15]. Recently, there is a growing interest in understanding mobility patterns and
social interactions in healthcare situations through a data-driven approach [16]. Such
data has also been used to assess population displacement following disasters [17]. In
light of that and with the COVID-19 disease spreading around the globe, mobility
research has gain new heights, whereby researchers, on the one hand, strive to
understand and predict the spread of the virus using geo-located data, and, on the other
hand, to understand the effects of the pandemic on human mobility through the use of

Notice: This is a preprint of a work currently in submission.

2/12

data.
The first line of research is focused on understanding and predicting how the virus
spreads, which includes estimating its basic reproduction number R0 . Over the years,
advanced epidemic and compartment models that rely on detailed mobility data have
been developed to simulate and investigate epidemic spread. These and alternative
techniques have successfully been used for H1N1 as well as seasonal influenza. [18–20].
With a new, unknown infectious disease, estimation of the basic reproduction number
often outlines a first step, and furthermore to model the virus’s spread and effect of
management strategies. Early studies of the spread of COVID-19 in China and its
origin in Wuhan, indicated that the basic reproduction number could be as high as
R0 = 6.47, and that with strict travel restrictions, the disease would peak in about 2
weeks time [21]. In an effort to estimate the latent infection ratio in Wuhan before the
lock-down, a study showed that a significant number of infected people had left the city
at that time, and gave an estimate of R0 = 3.24 [22]. Strict control measures proved
effective in China. The lock-down in Wuhan delayed the spread of the virus to other
cities in China by almost 3 days, and cities that implemented restrictions preemptively
reported fewer cases in the first weeks than cities that started control later [23]. An
advanced epidemic simulation model with real-time mobility data from Wuhan
furthermore established that the drastic control measures substantially mitigated the
spread of the virus [24]. Moreover, taking global mobility data into account, including
flights, showed that the travel ban in Wuhan only postponed the spread by 3-5 days in
China, but case importation of infections globally was reduced by 80% until mid
February [25]. Researchers are currently also starting to use geo-located mobility data
coupled with census and demographic data in the USA to predict the effects of a second
wave of the pandemic, concluding that social distancing, high levels of testing,
contact-tracing and household quarantine will be most effective in keeping the infection
rate low [26].
The second viewpoint of using mobility data to understand the effects of the
pandemic on human mobility, has been researched to a less extent. However, even
though the current literature on the effects of COVID-19 on mobility patterns shows the
detection of dramatic changes in mobility in the wake of COVID-19, most of the
research is focused on the changes within the USA [27], in Italy [28], and in China [29].
Neither analysing more general mobility trends cross continents nor a general level
comparison between countries have thereby been attempted to date.
Bushfires, tornadoes, avalanches, floods and earthquakes are all non-routine events
that can be classified as unpredictable extreme situations which call for shifts from
routine practice [30]. These types of situations, put unfamiliar demands and strains on
both individuals, and on policy-makers [17, 31]. What has characterised the situation
surrounding COVID-19 is that no-one was prepared [32]. As a result, we can see the
situation surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic as a crisis situation due to its
unpredictable non-routine nature where different countries have activated different
strategies for handling the crisis. The crisis handling of COVID-19 has an impact on
mobility patterns since a lock-down is bound to affect how people move about in that
particular country in their day to day lives. The different countries have enforced and
followed different rules and policies. When comparing the different strategies, the
research to date has for instance showed the effects of the different reactions, and crisis
management strategies. For instance, [33] investigate the effect of major inventions in
eleven European countries from February to May. They show that interventions made
at the time were sufficient to drive basic reproduction number (R0 ) below one and thus
gain control of the pandemic. According to their study, between 3.2% to 4% of the
inhabitants in those eleven countries had been infected by May 4. In their study, they
show that lock-downs in particular had a large impact on reducing transmission.

Notice: This is a preprint of a work currently in submission.

3/12

The literature on the basic reproduction number and on which strategies have
proven most effective is growing and will continue to grow as more and more is known
about the virus, its spread as well as short and long term effects. Only when the whole
pandemic period is examined will the effects of the pandemic be clear. However, the
literature listed herein gives a view of the first wave of the strategies, spread and
mobility during the first responds of crisis mode.

Methods & Materials
In our study, we use only open source and publicly available data. As the pandemic was
spreading and to this day, several organisations are sharing aggregated data publicly,
often with daily updates. Furthermore, individual counties share additional and specific
data and information for their citizens.
To investigate changes in mobility, we considered walking, driving and flying as
means of travel. For the first two, we use Apple Map Mobility Trends (MT) 1 which
show the changes in routing requests from day to day, since January 13. These trends
show a considerable drop in requests in most countries as the virus started spreading
and governments took action, enforcing or requiring social distancing. Similarly, the
number of requests is gradually increasing since June/July. For flights we use the
OpenSky COVID-19 Flight Dataset 2 . The OpenSky Network is a non-profit association
which provides open access to real-world air traffic control data for research [34]. Due to
high demand, they created a data set with detailed information about all flights in 2019
and 2020. It was made publicly available in April 2020 and is currently updated
monthly. The data set is amongst others being used by the Bank of England to
now-cast economic indicators during the crisis [35]. To compare the flights data with
the MT data, we count the number of flights to and from each country per day relative
to a predefined baseline during the same period, see Section . In addition to the
mobility data, we look at the number of confirmed cases and deaths per day in each
country. These data originate from the World Health Organization3 . Finally, for each of
the considered countries, we gathered information about the policies taken, such as
when a lock-down was put in place. These data came from country specific official
information websites.
The time frame we look at in the data starts on January 13, which is the first day
available in the MT data set, and the data presented herein ends on July 31, as the
flight data is released in monthly batches. Overall we have over six months of data
reported on a daily basis.
For the purpose of this paper, we chose to consider only countries in Europe in
addition to New Zealand, where response to the pandemic was fast and policies were
very effective. With this data we created a mobility dashboard using the shiny package
in R. The mobility dashboard will be available online upon publication of this paper4 .

Results
We are interested in knowing more about general mobility trends and well-being in
Europe during the pandemic. The following analysis is based on data from Apple (as
described above) as well as from the flight data set (also described above). The data is
compiled in our dashboard.
1 See:

https://www.apple.com/covid19/mobility

2 https://opensky-network.org/community/blog/item/6-opensky-covid-19-flight-dataset
3 See:
4 here

https://covid19.who.int/table
we put a link

Notice: This is a preprint of a work currently in submission.

4/12

Fig 1. Changes is walking mobility of selected countries

Mobility Trends
Figs. 1, 2 and 3 show, respectively, the changes in walking, driving and flying mobility
in ten European countries as well as in New Zealand (black line). The figures show a
seven-day moving average of the daily mobility given in the MT and flight datasets. The
baseline (0%) is the mobility of the respective country on the first day of the period.
A general conclusion that can be drawn from this data is that there is a significant
decrease in all types of mobility in Europe in March 2020, which gradually increases
again although some countries have to date, not gotten back to their normal level of
physical activity. Flights are still under the baseline, whereas driving has instead
increased significantly.
Notably, the mobility in Italy (yellow line) dropped a few days before the other
countries. The countries Italy and Spain (grey) drop lower in walking and driving
mobility than the other countries, which can be explained by the strict lock-down which
was imposed in these countries due to the rapid spread of the virus in March. Clearly,
their mobility is also recovering more slowly, since restrictions were only lifted gradually.
Sweden (light green) shows a different behaviour from the other countries. Their
walking and driving mobility dropped less and recovered faster. The other Scandinavian
countries, Denmark (light orange) and Norway (dark orange) have rather similar curves
to begin with since they responded to the pandemic with similar measures at a similar
time, but we see that mobility in Norway is recovering faster than in Denmark,
especially regarding driving and flying.
At the end of February, there is small peak in the flying mobility, which reflects the
number of people that were rushing to reach their destinations or home countries before
restrictions were imposed at a global scale.
Finally, although the pandemic started residing, at least during the summer months
in Europe, the imminent second wave and reaction to it, shows that mobility is trending
down at the end of July, at least in some of the countries.

Notice: This is a preprint of a work currently in submission.

5/12

Fig 2. Changes is driving mobility of selected countries

Fig 3. Changes is flying mobility of selected countries

Notice: This is a preprint of a work currently in submission.

6/12

Action & Reaction
We now attempt to put the mobility trends in perspective with the threat imposed by
the spread of the virus and the actions taken by the various governments to contain it.
Table 1 shows important dates for each of the eleven countries we focus on in this paper.
These are the date of the first confirmed infection, the date on which a lock-down was
imposed, the date where the number of confirmed cases started decreasing and the date
of the first death caused by the virus. In addition, the number of days from the first
confirmed infection, is shown in parenthesis. This roughly shows how quickly
governments responded, how long it took to slow down the spread of the virus and how
quickly it escalated.
Table 1. Important dates by country. The numbers in parenthesis () show the number of days from the
first confirmed case in each country.
Country
Date of first Date of lock-down Date of downwards Date of first death
confirmed
(#Days)
trend (#Days)
(#Days)
case
Belgium
February 4
March 18 (43)
April 12 (68)
March 11 (36)
Denmark
February 27
March 13 (15)
April 9 (42)
March 14 (16)
Hungary
March 5
March 30 (25)
April 11 (37)
March 20 (15)
Iceland
February 28
March 16 (17)
April 4 (36)
March 21 (22)
Italy
January 31
March 9 (38)
March 28 (57)
February 24 (24)
Norway
February 26
March 12 (15)
March 29 (32)
March 12 (15)
Poland
March 4
March 13 (9)
–b
March 13 (9)
Spain
January 31
March 14 (43)
April 4 (64)
March 6 (35)
Sweden
January 31
–a
June 24 (145)
March 11 (40)
United Kingdom January 31
March 23 (52)
May 8 (98)
March 10 (39)
New Zealand
February 28
March 23 (24)
March 29 (30)
March 28 (29)
(a) Sweden never imposed any form of a lock-down.
(b) The number of confirmed cases is still rising in Poland.
In addition, Table 2 shows the amount of cases at the end of the time period we
consider in this paper. The table shows the number of confirmed infections, the number
per one hundred thousand inhabitants, the confirmed number of deaths and the
confirmed number of deaths per one hundred thousand inhabitants.
Table 2. Number of confirmed cases and deaths
Country
Total number of infections
(per 100k)
Belgium
69756 (609)
Denmark
13789 (237)
Hungary
4535 (46)
Iceland
1907 (534)
Italy
248070 (411)
Norway
9208 (173)
Poland
46894 (123)
Spain
288522 (615)
Sweden
80422 (786)
United Kingdom 304699 (457)
New Zealand
1217 (25)

Total number of deaths
(per 100k)
9845 (86)
615 (11)
597 (6)
10 (3)
35154 (58)
255 (5)
1731 (5)
28445 (61)
5743 (56)
46201 (69)
22 (0.5)

Comparing countries that impose a lock-down before and after they experience the
first death due to the virus, we have on one hand Denmark, Iceland, Norway, Poland

Notice: This is a preprint of a work currently in submission.

7/12

and New Zealand, and on the other hand, Belgium, Hungary, Italy, Spain, Sweden and
the United Kingdom. In the first group, there have been fewer deaths per 100k
inhabitants as well as fewer number of confirmed infections per 100k inhabitants
(excluding Hungary and Iceland). For the countries in the first group, less than 50 days
passed before the number of daily new infections started to decrease, where as the
countries that took longer to react also had to wait longer for the virus to start residing.
It is worth mentioning that we are only looking at lock-downs as a form of
government response. However, alongside this, governments insisted on social
distancing, hand washing, ban on social gatherings over a certain size, closing of schools
etc. that also had an effect on the spread. What is clear from these observations,
however, is that timely response was crucial. This is inline with [6].

Discussion
Time plays a pivotal role in a crisis situation, and that is also true about this particular
pandemic [8]. Using open source data, and pulling together data from different sources
which shows the importance of when actions were taken and to what extent, and we see
that as an important contribution in the wake of the pandemic. Technology and the
development of information systems such as the dashboard presented herein which relies
on open source data and shows actions in a transparent way, is, as we see it, at the
essence of our role as researchers, alongside the ability to analyse vast amounts of data
around the unprecedented upheaval that COVID-19 has posed. Those two aspects
thereby outline the main contribution of this paper. There are several insights we can
obtain from the data presented in the previous section and here we will discuss the
following aspects: i) changes in mobility trends, ii) flying versus driving, iii) specific
countries in relation to the level of harshness in policy taken across Europe iv) long
term effects on well-being and the role of habit and rules on everyday activity, v) the
use of open source data and the importance of granularity and accuracy of open data.
A general conclusion that can be drawn from our analyses of the open source data is
that there is a significant decrease in all types of mobility in Europe. The drop starts in
March 2020, and gradually increases again although some countries have to date, not
gotten back to their normal level of physical activity. Regarding flights, they are to date
still under the baseline. The sudden drop in mobility is not surprising given the heavy
restrictions in most countries. What is more interesting is how differently these trends
increase again.
Even though flying has decreased significantly, driving has in turn increased,
especially after the ease on travel restrictions. An assumption that can be made is
thereby that even though we are flying less, we are not really travelling less, or at least
we are not catering to the sustainable aspect of flying less in general. Instead we
compensate flying less with driving more. Behavioural changes like travelling less, and
acting in an increasingly sustainable way in everyday activities are rooted in our human
behaviour and a pandemic can staple that type of behaviour short term. In contrast,
acting in an increasingly sustainable way long term, is something that needs to happen
in smaller steps over a longer period of time. Travel restrictions were eased in Europe
with summer and summer holidays around the corner, so it is logical to assume that
people drove to their holiday destination instead of flying. To shed further light on this,
it would be interesting to know where people went on holiday, that is, how far away
from their homes.
Notably, the mobility in Italy dropped a few days before the other countries. The
countries Italy and Spain drop lower in walking and riving mobility than the other
countries over the period examined, which can be explained by the strict lock-down
which was imposed in these countries due to the rapid spread of the virus in March.

Notice: This is a preprint of a work currently in submission.

8/12

Clearly, their mobility is also recovering slower, since restrictions were only lifted slowly.
In the data, Sweden shows a different behaviour in comparison to the other countries.
Sweden did not use lock-down strategies and as a result, the data shows a different
trend. Their walking and driving mobility dropped less and recovered faster. The other
Scandinavian countries show rather similar curves to begin with, as their respond to the
pandemic and their strategy included similar measures at a similar time whereas the
mobility in Norway recovering faster than in Denmark, especially when looking towards
driving and flying. This particular aspect –which strategy is the best– will likely remain
an open research question for a long time after the pandemic has passed. Even though
lock-downs and social distancing are accepted as effective measures, we can not know
what the long term economic and public health consequences will be [6].
As mentioned above, the long term effects of the pandemic remain unknown.
Millions of people were restricted to their homes for weeks, which caused drastic
changes in daily routines as we have demonstrated with the mobility data. In addition,
according to open source data from Withings5 , the average person in France has gained
.19 lbs (.084 kg), in Spain .26 lbs (.117 kg), in United Kingdom .35 lbs (.16 kg), in
Germany .41 lbs (.189 kg), in Italy .42 lbs (.195 kg) and in China .55 lbs (.25 kg). Data
on steps taken on a daily basis from China shows a decrease by over half (56%) in
Hubei during the lock-down period. According to the same data set from Withings,
daily step count decreased by 8% in the United Kingdom, by 28% in Italy, 27% in
France and an increase of 1% during self-isolation in Germany. What this data shows, is
that the impact of the measures taken, differs greatly in the countries listed here above
and bear in mind that this data is only from Withings. This data from Withings, in
combination with the mobility data shows that during the lock-down period, there is a
short-term effect on weight, and a connection between reduced walking. The data from
Withings is however only from a short period of time and in additon to that, the
numbers are based on data from a limited part of the population (only those that own a
Withings wearable) whereas the long-term effects on well-being in general need to be
studied further, using larger data sets over an extended period of time.
The analysis herein, which is based on open and publicly available data, shows the
importance of opening up the data that is already being gathered across different
platforms. What we would therefore like to emphasise is the importance of granularity
and accuracy of open source data. There is much added value in combining data from
different sources, and presenting it in an intuitive and clear manner, as we have done
here. Links and correlations that were unknown before can easily be seen and
interpreted. As data privacy and ethics of data usage are currently widely being
discussed and disputed, it is important to emphasise that data in its most aggregate
form –as we used here– can come to great use, when presented correctly. With the vast
and widespread data collection that is taking place at every front, for example by social
media platforms, there is a call for stronger incentives for these organizations to share
insights and preserve historically significant data [36].

Conclusion
The COVID-19 pandemic has triggered a worldwide health crisis and the strategies
taken across Europe have differed where some countries have taken strict measures,
while others have avoided lock-downs. In this paper we report on findings from putting
together open data from different sources in order to shed light on the changes in
mobility patterns in Europe during the pandemic. Using that data we show the impact
of the different strategies put into place in Europe during the pandemic and how
5 Withings produces activity tracking devices such as watches and Bluetooth scales and compiled
weight data from the pandemic time: https://blog.withings.com/tag/health-data/

Notice: This is a preprint of a work currently in submission.

9/12

mobility patterns changed in different counties. Our data shows how the majority of
Europe walked less during the lock-downs, which is bound to have a long-term effect on
well-being. Also, while flights were less frequent, driving increased drastically. Through
our analysis we show the importance of data granularity and accuracy through our
novel study of using open source data to shed light on mobility trends in the pandemic
of COVID-19.
Our research offers several opportunities for future work. As the summary statistics
about weight gain during lock-down indicate, analysing other sources of data alongside
what we do in this paper would be an interesting way of continuing this line of work.
Especially in regards to data describing health and well-being in order to examine the
long-term effects of the pandemic. The OpenSky data set only provided information
about flights, not the quantity of people on each flight. These numbers could be
interesting to take into account, since during the travel restrictions, relatively few
people were on each flight. In our results, we described the variation in the impact of
the pandemics with respect to temporal factors, such as the delay between first infection
and imposing of lock-downs in Europe. In our future work, we will investigate such
correlations to a greater extent at a global level in order to contribute to an
understanding what measures were the most effective when designing strategies during
a fight against a pandemic.

References
1. Wu F, Zhao S, Yu B, Chen YM, Wang W, Song ZG, et al. A new coronavirus
associated with human respiratory disease in China. Nature.
2020;579(7798):265–269.
2. Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, Ren L, Zhao J, Hu Y, et al. Clinical features of patients
infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China. The lancet.
2020;395(10223):497–506.
3. Zhu N, Zhang D, Wang W, Li X, Yang B, Song J, et al. A novel coronavirus from
patients with pneumonia in China, 2019. New England Journal of Medicine.
2020;.
4. Shangguan Z, Wang MY, Sun W. What caused the outbreak of COVID-19 in
China: From the perspective of crisis management. International Journal of
Environmental Research and Public Health. 2020;17(9):3279.
5. Kissler SM, Tedijanto C, Lipsitch M, Grad Y. Social distancing strategies for
curbing the COVID-19 epidemic. medRxiv. 2020;.
6. Hsiang S, Allen D, Annan-Phan S, Bell K, Bolliger I, Chong T, et al. The effect
of large-scale anti-contagion policies on the COVID-19 pandemic. Nature. 2020; p.
1–9.
7. Braa J, Monteiro E, Sahay S. Networks of action: sustainable health information
systems across developing countries. MIS quarterly. 2004; p. 337–362.
8. Ågerfalk PJ, Conboy K, Myers MD. Information systems in the age of pandemics:
COVID-19 and beyond; 2020.
9. Heeks R, Arun S. Social outsourcing as a development tool: The impact of
outsourcing IT services to women’s social enterprises in Kerala. Journal of
International Development: The Journal of the Development Studies Association.
2010;22(4):441–454.

Notice: This is a preprint of a work currently in submission.

10/12

10. Rajão R, Hayes N. Conceptions of control and IT artefacts: an institutional
account of the Amazon rainforest monitoring system. Journal of Information
Technology. 2009;24(4):320–331.
11. Tim Y, Pan SL, Ractham P, Kaewkitipong L. Digitally enabled disaster response:
the emergence of social media as boundary objects in a flooding disaster.
Information Systems Journal. 2017;27(2):197–232.
12. Islind AS, Lundh Snis U. From co-design to co-care: designing a collaborative
practice in care. Systems, Signs & Actions. 2018;11(1):1–24.
13. Pan SL, Zhang S. From fighting COVID-19 pandemic to tackling sustainable
development goals: An opportunity for responsible information systems research.
International Journal of Information Management. 2020; p. 102196.
14. Buckee CO, Balsari S, Chan J, Crosas M, Dominici F, Gasser U, et al.
Aggregated mobility data could help fight COVID-19. Science (New York, NY).
2020;368(6487):145.
15. Gonzalez MC, Hidalgo CA, Barabasi AL. Understanding individual human
mobility patterns. nature. 2008;453(7196):779–782.
16. Óskarsdóttir M, Íslind AS. Interaction with Medical Venues in Megacities.
Studies in health technology and informatics. 2020;270:996–1000.
17. Wilson R, zu Erbach-Schoenberg E, Albert M, Power D, Tudge S, Gonzalez M,
et al. Rapid and near real-time assessments of population displacement using
mobile phone data following disasters: the 2015 Nepal Earthquake. PLoS
currents. 2016;8.
18. Balcan D, Gonçalves B, Hu H, Ramasco JJ, Colizza V, Vespignani A. Modeling
the spatial spread of infectious diseases: The GLobal Epidemic and Mobility
computational model. Journal of computational science. 2010;1(3):132–145.
19. Bajardi P, Poletto C, Ramasco JJ, Tizzoni M, Colizza V, Vespignani A. Human
mobility networks, travel restrictions, and the global spread of 2009 H1N1
pandemic. PloS one. 2011;6(1):e16591.
20. Kishore N, Mitchell R, Lash TL, Reed C, Danon L, Sigmundsdóttir G, et al.
Flying, phones and flu: Anonymized call records suggest that Keflavik
International Airport introduced pandemic H1N1 into Iceland in 2009. Influenza
and other respiratory viruses. 2020;14(1):37–45.
21. Tang B, Wang X, Li Q, Bragazzi NL, Tang S, Xiao Y, et al. Estimation of the
transmission risk of the 2019-nCoV and its implication for public health
interventions. Journal of clinical medicine. 2020;9(2):462.
22. Cao Z, Zhang Q, Lu X, Pfeiffer D, Wang L, Song H, et al. Incorporating human
movement data to improve epidemiological estimates for 2019-nCoV. medRxiv.
2020;.
23. Tian H, Liu Y, Li Y, Wu CH, Chen B, Kraemer MU, et al. An investigation of
transmission control measures during the first 50 days of the COVID-19 epidemic
in China. Science. 2020;368(6491):638–642.
24. Kraemer MU, Yang CH, Gutierrez B, Wu CH, Klein B, Pigott DM, et al. The
effect of human mobility and control measures on the COVID-19 epidemic in
China. Science. 2020;368(6490):493–497.

Notice: This is a preprint of a work currently in submission.

11/12

25. Chinazzi M, Davis JT, Ajelli M, Gioannini C, Litvinova M, Merler S, et al. The
effect of travel restrictions on the spread of the 2019 novel coronavirus
(COVID-19) outbreak. Science. 2020;368(6489):395–400.
26. Aleta A, Martı́n-Corral D, y Piontti AP, Ajelli M, Litvinova M, Chinazzi M, et al.
Modelling the impact of testing, contact tracing and household quarantine on
second waves of COVID-19. Nature Human Behaviour. 2020; p. 1–8.
27. Warren MS, Skillman SW. Mobility changes in response to COVID-19. arXiv
preprint arXiv:200314228. 2020;.
28. Cartenı̀ A, Di Francesco L, Martino M. How mobility habits influenced the
spread of the COVID-19 pandemic: Results from the Italian case study. Science
of The Total Environment. 2020; p. 140489.
29. Jia JS, Lu X, Yuan Y, Xu G, Jia J, Christakis NA. Population flow drives
spatio-temporal distribution of COVID-19 in China. Nature. 2020; p. 1–5.
30. Schmidt S, Galea E. Behaviour-security-culture human behaviour in emergencies
and disasters: a cross-cultural investigation. Pabst Science Publishers; 2013.
31. Karanasios S, Cooper V, Adrot A, Mercieca B. Gatekeepers Rather than
Helpless: An Exploratory Investigation of Seniors’ Use of Information and
Communication Technology in Critical Settings. In: Proceedings of the 53rd
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences; 2020.
32. Spinelli A, Pellino G. COVID-19 pandemic: perspectives on an unfolding crisis.
The British journal of surgery. 2020;.
33. Flaxman S, Mishra S, Gandy A, Unwin HJT, Mellan TA, Coupland H, et al.
Estimating the effects of non-pharmaceutical interventions on COVID-19 in
Europe. Nature. 2020; p. 1–5.
34. Schäfer M, Strohmeier M, Lenders V, Martinovic I, Wilhelm M. Bringing up
OpenSky: A large-scale ADS-B sensor network for research. In: IPSN-14
Proceedings of the 13th International Symposium on Information Processing in
Sensor Networks. IEEE; 2014. p. 83–94.
35. Bank of England. Monetary Policy Report and Interim Financial Stability Report
- May 2020; 2020. https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/report/2020/monetarypolicy-report-financial-stability-report-may-2020.
36. Öhman C, Aggarwa N. What if Facebook goes down? Ethical and legal
considerations for the demise of big tech. Internet Policy Review,. 2020;9(3).
doi:10.14763/2020.3.1488.

Notice: This is a preprint of a work currently in submission.

12/12

