Quantifying the Effects of COVID-19 on Mental Health Support Forums
Laura Biester∗, Katie Matton∗, Janarthanan Rajendran,
Emily Mower Provost, Rada Mihalcea
Computer Science & Engineering, University of Michigan, USA
{lbiester,katiemat,rjana,emilykmp,mihalcea}@umich.edu

arXiv:2009.04008v1 [cs.CL] 8 Sep 2020

Abstract
The COVID-19 pandemic, like many of the
disease outbreaks that have preceded it, is
likely to have a profound effect on mental health. Understanding its impact can inform strategies for mitigating negative consequences. In this work, we seek to better understand the effects of COVID-19 on mental
health by examining discussions within mental
health support communities on Reddit. First,
we quantify the rate at which COVID-19 is
discussed in each community, or subreddit, in
order to understand levels of preoccupation
with the pandemic. Next, we examine the volume of activity in order to determine whether
the quantity of people seeking online mental
health support has risen. Finally, we analyze
how COVID-19 has influenced language use
and topics of discussion within each subreddit.

1

Introduction

The implications of COVID-19 extend far beyond
its immediate physical health effects. Uncertainty
and fear surrounding the disease and its effects, in
addition to a lack of consistent and reliable information, contribute to rising levels of anxiety and
stress (Torales et al., 2020). Policies designed to
help contain the disease also have significant consequences. Social distancing policies and lockdowns
lead to increased feelings of isolation and uncertainty (Huremović, 2019). They have also triggered
an economic downturn (ahin et al., 2020), resulting
in soaring unemployment rates and causing many
to experience financial stress. Therefore, in addition to the profound effects on physical health
around the world, psychiatrists have warned that
we should also brace for a mental health crisis as a
result of the pandemic (Qiu et al., 2020; Greenberg
et al., 2020; Yao et al., 2020; Torales et al., 2020).
∗

Denotes equal contribution.

Indeed, the literature on the impact of past epidemics indicates that they are associated with a
myriad of adverse mental health effects. In a review of studies on the 2002-2003 SARS outbreak,
the 2009 H1N1 influenza outbreak, and the 2018
Ebola outbreak, Chew et al. (2020) found that
anxiety, fear, depression, anger, guilt, grief, and
post-traumatic stress were all commonly observed
psychological responses. Furthermore, many of
the factors commonly cited for inducing these responses are applicable to the situation with COVID19; these include: fear of contracting the disease,
a disruption in daily routines, isolation related to
being quarantined, and uncertainty regarding the
disease treatment process and outcomes, the well
being of loved ones, and one’s economic situation.
While disease outbreaks pose a risk to the mental health of the general population, research suggests that this risk is heightened for those with preexisting mental health concerns. People with mental health disorders are particularly susceptible to
experiencing negative mental health consequences
during times of social isolation (Usher et al., 2020).
Further, as Yao et al. (2020) warns, they are likely
to have a stronger emotional response to the feelings of fear, anxiety, and depression that come
along with COVID-19 than the general population.
Given the potential for the COVID-19 outbreak
to have devastating consequences for mental health,
it is critical that we work to understand and mitigate its negative psychological effects. In this work,
we use Reddit, a popular social media platform, to
study how COVID-19 has impacted the behavior
of people who express mental health concerns. We
focus on three Reddit sub-forums, referred to as
subreddits, that are designed to offer peer support
for users who are struggling with specific types of
mental illness. We first measure changes in the
amount of activity on these subreddits to determine
whether, for a subset of the population, the need for

online mental health support has increased or decreased. We then analyze the content of subreddit
discussions, gaining insight into how the pandemic
affects what people choose to discuss when seeking support and what types of issues push people
to seek support. Our findings provide insights into
how and when COVID-19 related stressors affect
people dealing with mental health concerns. Critically, we believe that this information can help to
better understand the nature of a potential COVID19 related mental health crisis.

2
2.1

Related Work
Studying Mental Health via Social Media

In the past decade, social media has emerged as
a powerful tool for understanding human behavior, and correspondingly mental health. A growing number of studies have applied computational
methods to data collected from social media platforms in order to characterize behavior associated
with mental health illnesses and to detect and forecast mental health outcomes (see Chancellor and
De Choudhury (2020) for a comprehensive review).
Reddit is a particularly well-suited platform for
studying mental health due to its semi-anonymous
nature, which encourages user honesty and reduces inhibitions associated with self-disclosure
(De Choudhury and De, 2014). Additionally,
Reddit contains subreddits that act as mental
health support forums (e.g., r/Anxiety, r/depression,
r/SuicideWatch), which enable a more targeted
analysis of users experiencing different mental
health conditions. A number of existing works have
focused on characterizing patterns of discourse
within these mental health communities on Reddit. These include studies that have analyzed longitudinal trends in topic usage and word choice
(Chakravorti et al., 2018), the relationship between
user participation styles and topic usage (Feldhege
et al., 2020), and the discourse patterns specific
to self-disclosure, social support, and anonymous
posting (Pavalanathan and De Choudhury, 2015;
De Choudhury and De, 2014).
Other studies of Reddit mental health communities have aimed to quantify and forecast changes
in user behavior. De Choudhury et al. (2016) presented a model for predicting the likelihood that
users transition from discussing mental health generally to engaging in suicidal ideation. Li et al.
(2018) analyzed linguistic style measures associated with increasing vs decreasing participation in

mental health subreddits over the course of a year.
Kumar et al. (2015) examined how posting activity
in r/SuicideWatch changes following a celebrity
suicide. Our work similarly focuses on analyzing
temporal patterns in user activity, but we aim to
characterize changes associated with COVID-19.
2.2

Mental Health and COVID-19

Since the first cases of COVID-19 were reported in
December 2019, there have been a few preliminary
studies of its impact on mental health. In a survey
of the general public of China during the initial outbreak, a majority of respondents perceived the psychological impact of the outbreak to be moderateto-severe and about one-third reported experiencing moderate-to-severe anxiety (Wang et al., 2020).
Studies of the impact of COVID-19 among residents of Liaoning Province, China (Zhang and Ma,
2020) and the adult Indian population (Roy et al.,
2020) also found notable rates of mental distress.
There is a small set of studies that have examined
the mental health consequences of COVID-19 by
analyzing online behaviors. Jacobson et al. (2020)
explored the short-term impact of stay-at-home orders in the United States by analyzing changes in
the rates of mental health-related Google search
queries immediately after orders were issued. Their
results showed that rates of mental health queries increased leading up to the issuance of stay-at-homeorders, but then plateaued after they went into effect; however they did not consider the longer-term
implications of the stay-at-home orders on mental
health. Li et al. (2020) measured psycholinguistic attributes of posts on Weibo, a Chinese social
media platform, before and after the Chinese National Health Commission declared COVID-19 to
be an epidemic. Their findings showed that expressions of negative emotions and sensitivity to social
risks increased following the declaration. Wolohan
(2020) used a LSTM model to classify depression
among Reddit users in April 2020, finding a higher
than normal depression rate.
Our work similarly aims to measure changes
in online behavior as a means of understanding
the relationship between COVID-19 and mental
health. However, two notable differences are: (1)
instead of analyzing the short-term impact of a
specific COVID-related event, we examine more
general changes that have occurred during a threemonth period of the outbreak; and (2) we focus our
analysis on activity within mental health forums,

2017
2018
2019
2020

r/Anxiety

r/depression

r/SuicideWatch

95
164
211
243

279
449
622
618

91
188
285
370

Table 1: Average number of posts per day across the
three subreddits in our dataset.

which allows us to examine the impact of COVID19 specifically on individuals who have expressed
mental health concerns.

3

Data

We collect Reddit posts from three mental health
subreddits using the Pushshift API 1 (Baumgartner et al., 2020): r/Anxiety, r/depression, and
r/SuicideWatch, from January 2017 to May 2020.
The reasons for analyzing these three subreddits
are twofold: first, over the three and a half years
represented in our data, these subreddits have a
significant amount of activity (≥ 50 posts almost
every day), making it feasible to treat daily values
as a time series. Second, because the subreddits
provide support for different mental health disorders, their users may have been affected differently
by COVID-19. We separate the data into two time
periods: pre-COVID (January 1, 2017 - February
29, 2020) and post-COVID (March 1, 2020 - May
31, 2020), roughly delineating when COVID-19 began to have a serious impact on those in the United
States, where the majority of Reddit users are concentrated.2 This choice of dates was informed by
our analysis of the rates at which COVID-19 related words were discussed in each subreddit (see
Section 5.1), which we found hovered around 0-5%
before rising sharply near the beginning of March.
We exclude posts where the author or text
is marked as ‘[removed]’ or ‘[deleted]’. Table
1 shows the average number of daily posts for
r/Anxiety, r/depression, and r/SuicideWatch.

4

Methodology

4.1

Reddit Activity Metrics

We begin by creating a lexicon of words that are
commonly used to refer to COVID-19. This al1

As with other social media datasets, there may be noise
in the form of API changes and data removed after collection.
For the dates involved in our study, static Pushshift dump files
were not yet available.
2
https://www.alexa.com/siteinfo/reddit.com

lows us to determine the extent to which users in
each subreddit are discussing COVID-19, and also
gives us a clearer idea of when COVID-19 began
to directly affect discussion in the mental health
subreddits. We based the lexicon on fifteen twitter search keywords from Huang et al. (2020), and
added six additional words that we believed would
be indicative of discussion about COVID-19.3
To study changes in the number of users seeking
mental health support in subreddits, we record the
author usernames for each post in our dataset. We
note that, since individuals can create multiple accounts under different usernames, the number of
unique usernames associated with posts is likely
not equal to the true number of unique users; however, we believe it is a reasonable proxy.
To study changes in content that occur during the
pandemic, we use the Linguistic Inquiry and Word
Count (LIWC) lexicon (Pennebaker et al., 2015)
and Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) topic modeling (Blei et al., 2003). The LIWC lexicon consists
of seventy-three hierarchical psycholinguistic word
categories, encapsulating properties including linguistic categories (e.g. 1st person plural pronouns,
verbs), emotions (e.g. anxiety, sadness), time (e.g.
present, future), and personal concerns (e.g. work,
money, death). To capture the discussion topics
that are common in the r/Anxiety, r/depression, and
r/SuicideWatch subreddits specifically, we train a
topic model on posts from these subreddits. We
ensure that discussions from each of the subreddits are equally represented in our training dataset
by downsampling the posts from the subreddits
with more data. We use the implementation of
LDA topic modeling provided in the MALLET
toolkit (McCallum, 2002) and train models with
k = 5, 10, .., 40 topics. We select a single model
to use in our analysis by examining their coherence
scores, a measure of the semantic similarity of high
probability words within each topic (Mimno et al.,
2011). As coherence tends to increase with increasing k, we select k as the first local maxima of
coherence scores, which we found to be k = 25.
In Appendix A, we show the 25 topics obtained
from our topic model, along with the highest probability words associated with each topic. We also
provide labels that summarize the essence of each
topic, which we created by examining their representative words. Common themes of discussion include: daily life concerns (e.g. school, work, sleep
3

corona, outbreak, pandemic, rona, sars-cov-2, virus

and routine), personal relationships (e.g. friends,
family, relationships), and mental health struggles
(e.g. anxiety, suicide, medical treatment).
When using text from posts, we remove special
characters and sequences, such as newlines, quotes,
emails, and tables. To represent the text of a post,
we concatenate the title with the text content, as
was done in prior work (Chakravorti et al., 2018).
We apply additional pre-processing steps for our
topic modeling analysis: (1) we remove a set of
common stopwords that do not appear in the LIWC
dictionary (we kept these as they have been found
to have psychological meaning), (2) we form bigrams from pairs of words that commonly appear
together, and (3) we lemmatize each word.
4.2

Time Series Analysis

We treat the task of identifying changes in subreddit activity patterns as a time series intervention
analysis problem. Our basic approach involves: (1)
fitting a time series model to the pre-COVID observations for each of the metrics described above and
then (2) examining how the values forecasted by
the model compare to the observed values during
the post-COVID time period. It is worth noting
that the one existing study we found examining the
impact of an event on activity within mental health
subreddits employs a different approach: they use
a t-test to compare the observations from “before”
vs“after” the event (Kumar et al., 2015). However,
their problem setup differs from ours in that they
consider a much shorter period of time (4 weeks
total), so the effects of seasonality and longer-term
trends are likely reduced. In contrast, we find that
there is often a strong trend over time and seasonal
component in our data, making a direct comparison
of two time periods with a t-test unreliable.
We smooth each time series and remove day-ofweek related fluctuations by computing a sevenday rolling mean over the time series. We use the
Prophet model (Taylor and Letham, 2018) to create
a model of the period before COVID-19. This
model was initially created by Facebook to forecast
time series on their platform, such as the number
of events created per day or the number of active
users; we find that our time series, also compiled
from social media, have many similar properties.
The Prophet model is an additive regression model
with three components:
y(t) = g(t) + s(t) + h(t) + t

(1)

The trend is encapsulated by g(t), a piecewise
linear model. The seasonality of the data is captured by s(t), which is approximated using a
Fourier series; as we smooth our data on a weekly
basis, we utilize only yearly seasonality, excluding
the optional weekly and daily seasonality components. The third term, h(t), represents holidays;
we find that adding a list of US holidays reduces
error for most our our time series in the pre-COVID
period, likely because the Reddit population is centered in the United States. Finally, t represents the
error, in this case fluctuations in the time series that
are not captured by the model.
After training the model on the pre-COVID data,
we predict values for the post-COVID period. If
we assume that there is no change during this time
period, we would expect the predicted values to be
near the true values, given that the model does a
good job fitting the trend and seasonal components.
The model computes uncertainty intervals over the
predicted values by simulating ways in which the
trend may change during the period of the forecast;
we use this method to compute the 95% prediction
interval. Our null hypothesis is that there has been
no change in trend; in this case, we would expect
5% of the data in the post-COVID period to fall
outside of the prediction interval. Our alternate
hypothesis is that there was a change in the trend
of the time series (which may be attributable to
COVID-19); in this case, more than 5% of the
data in the post-COVID period will fall outside
of the prediction interval. We apply a one-sample
proportion test to assess whether the proportion of
observations outside of the prediction interval in
the post-COVID period is significantly greater than
5%. The details of this test are in Appendix B.

5
5.1

Findings
Do people in different mental health
subreddits discuss COVID-19 at different
rates?

Using our COVID-19 lexicon (Section 4.1), we
compute the percentage of posts per day that mention any words related to COVID-19, as shown in
Figure 1.
When choosing the date to consider as the beginning of the post-COVID period in our time series
analysis, we considered March 1st, 2020 as a sensible date, as it aligns with the period at which the
United States (where the majority of Reddit users
reside) began to take COVID-19 seriously. March

Figure 1: Percent of posts mentioning COVID-19 related words across mental health subreddits.

1st directly followed the first announced COVID19 death on February 28th, 2020, and preceeded
state lockdowns and school closures. Our analysis
also offers compelling evidence that COVID-19
began to have a serious impact on discussions in
all three analyzed subreddits around the beginning
of March 2020, as is clear in the spikes in Figure 1.
Notably, we also see a stark difference in the volume of discussion involving COVID-19 in the three
subreddits; in r/Anxiety, discussion of COVID19 is more frequent than it is in r/depression or
r/SuicideWatch, and begins earlier; users who come
to Reddit to discuss anxiety disorders clearly began to feel some impact from COVID-19 in late
January, when reports of lockdowns in China first
appeared in the news. We conclude that the discussions in r/Anxiety are likely to more strongly be
affected by COVID-19, and proceed to analyze the
nature of those effects.
5.2

Has COVID-19 changed the number of
users seeking support in mental health
subreddits?

We report the daily number of unique users who
post in each subreddit in Figure 2. We observe
a significant increase in the number of users who
post in the r/Anxiety subreddit during the postCOVID period. This finding is consistent with
prior work that has found that epidemics often
lead to increased rates of anxiety (Torales et al.,
2020). Meanwhile, in both the r/depression and
r/SuicideWatch subreddits, we find that there are
significant decreases in the number of users posting. In r/depression, we observe a substantial drop
in posting rates around mid-March. Activity in this
subreddit remains abnormally low into late-April,
when it starts to revert back towards the forecasted
values. In r/SuicideWatch, the drop in user activity is less extreme, and we see that the activity
levels eventually return to their predicted values.
Our findings contrast with prior work that found
that depressive symptoms are commonly observed
during pandemics (Chew et al., 2020). However,
research also indicates that delayed depression is
a common symptom trajectory following disaster
events (Pennebaker and Harber, 1993; Nandi et al.,
2009); therefore, future analysis of how these patterns change in the longer-term may help to better
understand the current trends.
5.3

To determine what changes have occurred in conversations surrounding mental health, we use two
types of features: LIWC categories and topics obtained from an LDA model. The LIWC features
give us a better idea of how common language dimensions have changed, while the LDA-derived
topics allow us to explore areas of discussion that
are typically of concern in these subreddits. For
each of the metrics, we examine changes that have
occurred since COVID-19 by computing the proportion of outliers produced by our forecasting
model (see Section 4.2) in the post-COVID period.
5.3.1

Figure 2: Daily active users over time. The grey line is
the Prophet forecast, the shaded area is the 95% prediction interval, and the black line is the true value.
Subreddits marked with * have a statistically significant
percentage of outliers (α = 0.05).

Has COVID-19 led to changes in the
discussions users have surrounding
mental health?

LIWC Analysis

In Table 2, we show the ten LIWC categories with
the most outliers (outside of the 95% prediction
interval) from March to May of 2020. We observe a
lack of consistency between the subreddits, both in
the number of outliers and the outliers themselves.
One category that decreases significantly across
r/Anxiety and r/depression is M OTION; this makes
intuitive sense as people are traveling and moving

(a) W E category

(b) I category

(c) W ORK category

Figure 3: Average daily percent of words across posts from a selection LIWC categories over time. The grey line is
the Prophet forecast, the shaded area is the 95% prediction interval, and the black line is the true value. Subreddits
marked with * have a statistically significant percentage of outliers (α = 0.05 before Bonferroni correction).
r/Anxiety

r/depression

Category

% Outliers

MOTION*
WORK*
I*
BODY*
PPRON*
RELATIV*
WE*
BIO*
PERCEPT*
CERTAIN*

79
73
68
61
54
54
50
49
42
41

↓
↓
↓
↑
↓
↓
↑
↑
↑
↑

r/SuicideWatch

Category

% Outliers

YOU*
CONJ*
MOTION*
QUANT*
FAMILY*
ARTICLE*
PRONOUN*
REWARD*
FEEL*
FOCUSPAST *

55
51
45
43
40
39
38
36
35
33

↓
↓
↓
↑
↑
↓
↑
↓
↓
↑

Category

% Outliers

PREP*
SPACE*
NETSPEAK*
ASSENT*
INFORMAL*
CAUSE*
AFFILIATION
FOCUSFUTURE
NEGEMO
CONJ

33
33
23
23
22
20
17
16
15
15

↑
↑
↑
↓
↑
↑
↓
↓
↑
↓

Table 2: Ten LIWC categories with the highest proportion of outliers in each subreddit. Arrows mark the direction in which the mean of the outliers shifted from
the predicted mean. Categories marked with * have a
statistically significant percentage of outliers (α = 0.05
before Bonferroni correction).

around far less. Categories such as B IO and B ODY
tend to increase in r/Anxiety, where people may
fret more over the direct implications of COVID19 on their physical health; however, this pattern
is not present in other subreddits, suggesting that
the posts may focus less on the physical health implications. We also see consistent changes in time
orientation (e.g. F OCUS PAST, F OCUS F UTURE)
across subreddits; a higher focus on the past in
r/depression, and a lower focus on the future in
r/SuicideWatch. While it is not among the categories with the most outliers, there is a statistically
significant drop in F OCUS F UTURE on r/Anxiety
and r/depression, indicating that users are less inclined to speak about their concerns for the future
in light of the more pressing current concerns.
We also see changes in pronoun usage; the most
notable and consistent change across the subreddits
is that the usage of W E increases significantly, especially in the early period of COVID-19 (Figure 3a).
This indicates a general feeling of community and

togetherness, which speaks positively to the support that those in these mental health communities
are getting during the pandemic. Similarly, a study
on the effects of COVID-19 on mental wellbeing
in China found that participants received increased
support from friends and family during the pandemic (Zhang and Ma, 2020), and seeking social
support was listed as a common coping strategy
during infections disease outbreaks by Chew et al.
(2020). Simply by posting on Reddit, users are
seeking social support, but the increase in first person plural pronouns indicates that they likely are
also getting support elsewhere in life. An increase
in “we” is not specific to mental health communities; researchers have found increases in usage of
the pronoun during the early stages of COVID-19
on other subreddits (Ashokkumar and Pennebaker,
2020).
While there is a significant decrease in I words in
r/Anxiety, there is in fact an increase in r/depression
(Figure 3b). One explanation for this is that those
posting in r/Anxiety may be engaging in more discussion related to what is going in the world around
them than those in r/depression, who are to a larger
extent sharing their own experiences. The increase
of usage of the I pronoun is concerning because it
has been shown to correlate with depression, indicating that an increase in its use could be related to
worsening symptoms (Rude et al., 2004).
Finally, we see a notable drop in the W ORK category (Figure 3c), which suggests that up to this
point, the stress and change associated with adapting to working from home, or worse, losing one’s
job, has not been a frequent topic of discussion in
these forums. The drop in discussion of work is un-

expected, as we believed that the economic downturn would be a significant motivator of posts as
people lost jobs. We believe that this drop could be
due to a decrease in work related stressors, which
have been shown to cause anxiety and depression
(Melchior et al., 2007; Cherry, 1978). It is also
possible that compared to the general population,
Reddit users are more likely to have jobs that can
be done remotely during the pandemic, as they are
more likely to have college degrees.4
5.3.2 Topic Analysis
We report the ten topics with the highest proportion
of outliers for each subreddit during the COVID19 period (March to May 2020) in Table 3. One
noteable trend is an increase in the amount of discussion related to family; we find that the FAM ILY AND H OME topic increased significantly in
all three subreddits and the FAMILY AND C HIL DREN topic increased significantly in r/depression.
This observation is largely expected, as quarantine
policies implemented to help contain COVID-19
have resulted in many people spending more time
at home and with family than they had previously.
Figure 4b shows how the usage of the FAMILY
AND H OME topic has changed since January 2019
within each subreddit. While there are noticeable
increases in all three subreddits, we a see particularly large spike in r/Anxiety starting around midMarch. Prior studies on disease outbreaks have
found that uncertainty regarding the well-being of
loved ones is common source of anxiety during
epidemics, which may help to explain this finding
(Chew et al., 2020). Another contributing factor
may be the emergence of new family responsibilities, such as childcare and home-schooling, that
many people have had to take on in the face of
closures caused by the pandemic.
Several of the results in Table 3 seem to reflect the disruption to normal daily life caused by
COVID-19 and the resulting quarantine measures.
Within all subreddits, we see a significant decrease
in the T RANSPORT AND DAILY L IFE topic (see
Figure 4c), which is associated with words such
“drive,” “car,” “time,” and “day”. This finding is intuitive; quarantine practices following COVID-19
have led to a large reduction in driving and other
forms of transportation (Domonoske and Adeline,
2020) and, more generally, to a disruption in daily
lifestyles. To the extent that these results indicate
4
https://www.statista.com/statistics/517222/reddit-userdistribution-usa-education/

an abandonment of routine, they are also somewhat
concerning, as evidence from prior outbreaks suggests that getting back into normal routines helps
to reduce loneliness and anxiety during quarantines (Huremović, 2019). Mirroring the reduction
of W ORK-related language we observed in Section 5.3.1, we also find that there has been a significant decrease in discussion of the S CHOOL and
W ORK topics within the r/Anxiety and r/depression
subreddits. This may indicate that these previously
common sources of stress have now become secondary concerns compared to the more immediate
concerns associated with COVID-19.
We observe significant changes in topics that are
explicitly related to mental health. One of the most
prominent trends is a significant increase in discussions of A NXIETY and its symptoms (keywords
include: “panic,” “heart,” and “chest”). As seen
in Figure 4a, we see a spike in A NXIETY in midMarch in all three subreddits; however, whereas we
see a return to a typical level in both r/depression
and r/SuicideWatch, within the r/Anxiety, A NX IETY discussion rates have remained abnormally
high all the way through the end of May. These
findings are aligned with existing research that has
found that anxiety and the somatic symptoms associated with it are common psychological responses
to epidemics (Chew et al., 2020). Further, studies
of prior epidemics have found that feelings of anxiety and fear can persist even after the disease itself
has been contained (Usher et al., 2020).
We find that both I NFORMATION S HARING (keywords include: “post,” “read,” “share,” “find,” and
“hope”) and C OMMUNICATION (keywords include:
“talk,” “call,” and “message”) have become more
frequent topics of discussion. This finding may be
tied to the effects of social distancing measures,
which have limited in-person interactions and led
people to increasingly turn to digital methods of
communication. These observations may also reflect a desire to seek out information related to
COVID-19; individuals who experience health anxiety are more likely to exhibit online health information seeking behavior (McMullan et al., 2019).
The increase in mentions of words related to social
media (e.g. “post,” “share”) is somewhat worrisome; studies of disaster events have found that
both more frequent social media use and exposure to conflicting information online (a widely
acknowledged issue with COVID-19 (Kouzy et al.,
2020)) lead to higher stress levels (Torales et al.,

r/Anxiety
Topic

r/depression
% Outliers

Transport and Daily Life*
Anxiety*
Information Sharing*
School*
Family and Home*
Life and Philosophy*
Work*
“Game-over” Mentality and Swearing*
Experience and Mental State*
Motivation*

88
75
68
62
48
34
33
29
27
22

Topic
↓
↑
↑
↓
↑
↑
↓
↓
↑
↓

r/SuicideWatch
% Outliers

Family and Home*
Transport and Daily Life*
Information Sharing*
Work*
Suicide*
Sleep and Routine*
Communication*
“Game-over” Mentality and Swearing*
Medical Treatment*
Family and Children*

83
82
62
55
50
50
48
39
36
34

Topic
↑
↓
↑
↓
↓
↓
↑
↑
↓
↑

Transport and Daily Life*
Family and Home*
Friends*
Anxiety*
Family and Children
“Game-over” Mentality and Swearing
Suicide
Worry
Communication
People and Behavior

% Outliers
70
50
32
28
22
15
14
14
13
13

↓
↑
↓
↑
↑
↑
↓
↑
↑
↑

Table 3: Ten topics with the most outliers for r/Anxiety, r/depression, and r/SuicideWatch. Arrows mark the direction in which the mean of the outliers shifted from the predicted mean. Topics marked with * have a statistically
significant percentage of outliers (α = 0.05 before Bonferroni correction).

(a) Anxiety topic

(b) Family and Home topic

(c) Transport and Daily Life topic

Figure 4: Average daily posterior probability of selected topics in posts over time. The grey line is the Prophet
forecast, the shaded area is the 95% prediction interval, and the black line is the true value. Subreddits marked
with * have a statistically significant percentage of outliers (α = 0.05 before Bonferroni correction).

2020). However, the rise of the I NFORMATION
S HARING topic, especially in it’s relation to words
like “share,” “hope,” and “story,” could also be indicative of a collective coping process, in which
individuals come together for social support. As
noted in Section 5.3.1, this type of coping strategy
has frequently been observed during past disease
outbreaks (Chew et al., 2020) and may also be reflected by the increase in the usage of W E we saw
for discussions in r/Anxiety.

6

Conclusions

In this study, we examined how COVID-19 has
influenced the online behavior of individuals seeking support for mental health concerns by analyzing activity within the r/Anxiety, r/depression, and
r/SuicideWatch communities on Reddit. We found
substantial evidence of increases in anxiety; we
observed significant increases in user activity in
r/Anxiety, as well as significant increases in discussions of anxiety and the symptoms associated
with it. Interestingly, we observed a decrease in
activity within the r/depression and r/SuicideWatch

subreddits. The literature on the impact of disease
outbreaks on depression rates contains somewhat
contradictory findings; we therefore believe that
this is an interesting area for future work.

We also observed interesting changes in the content of discussions within each subreddit. Our
results suggest that concerns related to COVID19, such as health and family, have become more
prominent discussion topics compared to other
common concerns, such as work and school, which
have generated less discussion since the outbreak.
While our findings largely confirm the warnings
offered by psychiatrists regarding the potential for
COVID-19 to have an adverse effect on mental
health, we also found some reason for optimism;
increases in the usage of “we as well as the I NFOR MATION S HARING topic (associated with words
such as “story” and “hope”), suggest a heightened sense of community and shared experience,
which may help individuals cope with these stressful times.

References
Ashwini Ashokkumar and James W Pennebaker. 2020.
Turning inward during crises: How COVID is
changing our social ties.
https://trackingsociallife.wordpress.
com/. Accessed: 2020-05-05.

Jason Baumgartner, Savvas Zannettou, Brian Keegan,
Megan Squire, and Jeremy Blackburn. 2020. The
Pushshift Reddit Dataset.
David M Blei, Andrew Y Ng, and Michael I Jordan.
2003. Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of machine Learning research, 3(Jan):993–1022.
Dante Chakravorti, Kathleen Law, Jonathan Gemmell,
and Daniela Raicu. 2018. Detecting and characterizing trends in online mental health discussions. In
2018 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining Workshops (ICDMW), pages 697–706. IEEE.
Stevie Chancellor and Munmun De Choudhury. 2020.
Methods in predictive techniques for mental health
status on social media: a critical review. NPJ digital
medicine, 3(1):1–11.
Nicola Cherry. 1978. Stress, anxiety and work: A longitudinal study. Journal of Occupational Psychology, 51(3):259–270.
QH Chew, KC Wei, Shawn Vasoo, HC Chua, and Kang
Sim. 2020. Narrative synthesis of psychological and
coping responses towards emerging infectious disease outbreaks in the general population: practical
considerations for the COVID-19 pandemic. Singapore Medical Journal, (April):1–31.
Munmun De Choudhury and Sushovan De. 2014. Mental health discourse on reddit: Self-disclosure, social support, and anonymity. In Eighth international
AAAI conference on weblogs and social media.
Munmun De Choudhury, Emre Kiciman, Mark Dredze,
Glen Coppersmith, and Mrinal Kumar. 2016. Discovering shifts to suicidal ideation from mental
health content in social media. In Proceedings of
the 2016 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems, pages 2098–2110.
Camila Domonoske and Stephanie Adeline. 2020. The
pandemic emptied american roads. but driving is
picking back up. NPR.
Johannes Feldhege, Markus Moessner, and Stephanie
Bauer. 2020. Who says what? content and participation characteristics in an online depression community. Journal of Affective Disorders, 263:521–527.
Neil Greenberg, Mary Docherty, Sam Gnanapragasam,
and Simon Wessely. 2020. Managing mental health
challenges faced by healthcare workers during covid19 pandemic. bmj, 368.

Xiaolei Huang, Amelia Jamison, David Broniatowski, Sandra Quinn, and Mark Dredze. 2020.
Coronavirus Twitter Data:
A collection of
COVID-19 tweets with automated annotations.
Http://twitterdata.covid19dataresources.org/index.
Damir Huremović. 2019. Psychiatry of Pandemics:
A Mental Health Response to Infection Outbreak.
Springer International Publishing, Cham.
Nicholas C Jacobson, Damien Lekkas, George Price,
Michael V Heinz, Minkeun Song, A James OMalley, and Paul J Barr. 2020. Flattening the mental
health curve: COVID-19 stay-at-home orders are
associated with alterations in mental health search
behavior in the united states. JMIR mental health,
7(6):e19347.
Ramez Kouzy, Joseph Abi Jaoude, Afif Kraitem,
Molly B El Alam, Basil Karam, Elio Adib, Jabra
Zarka, Cindy Traboulsi, Elie W Akl, and Khalil Baddour. 2020. Coronavirus goes viral: quantifying
the COVID-19 misinformation epidemic on twitter.
Cureus, 12(3).
Mrinal Kumar, Mark Dredze, Glen Coppersmith, and
Munmun De Choudhury. 2015. Detecting Changes
in Suicide Content Manifested in Social Media Following Celebrity Suicides. In Proceedings of the
26th ACM Conference on Hypertext & Social Media
- HT ’15, volume 176, pages 85–94, New York, New
York, USA. ACM Press.
Sijia Li, Yilin Wang, Jia Xue, Nan Zhao, and Tingshao
Zhu. 2020. The impact of COVID-19 epidemic declaration on psychological consequences: a study on
active weibo users. International journal of environmental research and public health, 17(6):2032.
Yaoyiran Li, Rada Mihalcea, and Steven R Wilson. 2018. Text-based detection and understanding of changes in mental health. In International
Conference on Social Informatics, pages 176–188.
Springer.
Andrew Kachites McCallum. 2002. Mallet: A machine
learning for language toolkit.
Ryan D McMullan, David Berle, Sandra Arnáez, and
Vladan Starcevic. 2019. The relationships between
health anxiety, online health information seeking,
and cyberchondria: Systematic review and metaanalysis. Journal of affective disorders, 245:270–
278.
Maria Melchior, Avshalom Caspi, Barry J Milne, Andrea Danese, Richie Poulton, and Terrie E Moffitt.
2007. Work stress precipitates depression and anxiety in young, working women and men. Psychological medicine, 37(8):1119–1129.
David Mimno, Hanna Wallach, Edmund Talley,
Miriam Leenders, and Andrew McCallum. 2011.
Optimizing semantic coherence in topic models. In
Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
262–272.

Arijit Nandi, Melissa Tracy, John R Beard, David Vlahov, and Sandro Galea. 2009. Patterns and predictors of trajectories of depression after an urban disaster. Annals of epidemiology, 19(11):761–770.
Umashanthi Pavalanathan and Munmun De Choudhury.
2015. Identity management and mental health discourse in social media. In Proceedings of the 24th
International Conference on World Wide Web, pages
315–321.
James Pennebaker and Kent Harber. 1993. A social
stage model of collective coping: The loma prieta
earthquake and the persian gulf war. Journal of Social Issues, 49.
James W Pennebaker, Ryan L Boyd, Kayla Jordan, and
Kate Blackburn. 2015. The development and psychometric properties of liwc2015. Technical report.
Jianyin Qiu, Bin Shen, Min Zhao, Zhen Wang, Bin
Xie, and Yifeng Xu. 2020. A nationwide survey of
psychological distress among chinese people in the
COVID-19 epidemic: implications and policy recommendations. General psychiatry, 33(2).
Deblina Roy, Sarvodaya Tripathy, Sujita Kumar Kar,
Nivedita Sharma, Sudhir Kumar Verma, and Vikas
Kaushal. 2020. Study of knowledge, attitude, anxiety & perceived mental healthcare need in indian
population during COVID-19 pandemic. Asian
Journal of Psychiatry, page 102083.
Stephanie S. Rude, Eva Maria Gortner, and James W.
Pennebaker. 2004. Language use of depressed and
depression-vulnerable college students. Cognition
and Emotion, 18(8):1121–1133.
Sean J. Taylor and Benjamin Letham. 2018. Forecasting at Scale. The American Statistician, 72(1):37–
45.
Julio Torales, Marcelo OHiggins, João Mauricio
Castaldelli-Maia, and Antonio Ventriglio. 2020.
The outbreak of COVID-19 coronavirus and its impact on global mental health. International Journal
of Social Psychiatry, page 0020764020915212.
Kim Usher, Navjot Bhullar, and Debra Jackson. 2020.
Life in the pandemic: Social isolation and mental
health. Journal of Clinical Nursing.
Cuiyan Wang, Riyu Pan, Xiaoyang Wan, Yilin Tan,
Linkang Xu, Cyrus S Ho, and Roger C Ho. 2020.
Immediate psychological responses and associated
factors during the initial stage of the 2019 coronavirus disease (COVID-19) epidemic among the general population in china. International journal of environmental research and public health, 17(5):1729.
JT Wolohan. 2020. Estimating the effect of covid-19
on mental health: Linguistic indicators of depression
during a global pandemic. In ACL 2020 Workshop
on Natural Language Processing for COVID-19. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Hao Yao, Jian-Hua Chen, and Yi-Feng Xu. 2020. Patients with mental health disorders in the covid-19
epidemic. The Lancet Psychiatry, 7(4):e21.
Yingfei Zhang and Zheng Feei Ma. 2020. Impact of
the COVID-19 pandemic on mental health and quality of life among local residents in liaoning province,
china: A cross-sectional study. International journal of environmental research and public health,
17(7):2381.
Francis W Zwiers and Hans Von Storch. 1995. Taking
serial correlation into account in tests of the mean.
Journal of Climate, 8(2):336–351.
Ayegül ahin, Murat Tasci, and Jin Yan. 2020. The
Unemployment Cost of COVID-19: How High and
How Long? Economic Commentary (Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland), pages 1–7.

A

Topics identified by LDA Model

Table 4 shows the topics identified by the LDA
model.
Topic Label

High Probability Words

School

school, year, college, high, class, fail, parent, study, grade, start

Relationships

love, relationship, girl, guy, good, girlfriend, break, date, meet, find

Experience and Mental State

experience, situation, mind, part, brain, lead, state, feeling, sense, learn

Communication

talk, call, time, phone, send, text, give, back, speak, message

People and Behavior

people, make, person, care, thing, understand, problem, wrong, act, attention

Feelings

happy, tired, cry, anymore, sad, make, hurt, depressed, stop, feeling

Game-over Mentality and Swearing

hate, fuck, shit, fucking, die, wanna, stupid, kill, literally, idk

Transport and Daily Life

drive, time, back, car, drink, start, walk, home, run, day

Time

year, month, start, time, back, ago, day, week, past, couple

Worry

thought, mind, fear, worry, head, afraid, scared, scare, stop, happen

Friends

friend, talk, people, good, social, play, make, close, hang, group

Anxiety

anxiety, attack, panic, anxious, heart, symptom, calm, chest, experience, stress

Medical Treatment

anxiety, medication, doctor, therapy, med, therapist, experience, week, mg, work

Body and Food

eat, body, eye, face, hand, head, sit, food, weight, walk

-

bad, thing, make, time, lot, happen, pretty, good, stuff, kind

Life and Philosophy

life, world, hope, exist, dream, human, live, pain, love, real

Depression and Mental Illness

depression, mental, issue, health, problem, struggle, deal, bad, suffer, year

Life Purpose

life, live, end, anymore, point, family, reason, care, worth, future

Motivation

thing, time, make, good, find, hard, work, enjoy, change, motivation

Work

work, job, money, pay, quit, find, afford, interview, company, month

Family and Children

year, family, mother, kid, parent, child, life, father, young, age

Information Sharing

post, read, write, find, hope, give, share, story, reddit, long

Family and Home

leave, mom, home, move, house, dad, family, live, parent, stay

Sleep and Routine

day, sleep, night, hour, wake, today, bed, morning, work, week

Suicide

kill, die, suicide, pain, suicidal, end, attempt, cut, plan, dead

Table 4: Topics identified by the LDA topic model. For each topic, we provide a summary label and the ten most
probable words. We omit labels for topics whose keywords did not have a clear interpretation.

B

Statistical Significance Test

We apply a one-sample proportion test to assess
whether the proportion of observations outside of
the prediction interval in the post-COVID period
is significantly greater than 5%. This test assumes
that the observations are independent; however,
we find that there is order-1 autocorrelation in our
data. We therefore apply a correction for order1 autocorrelation (Zwiers and Von Storch, 1995)
when computing the z-test statistic. The corrected
test statistic is:
p̂ − p0
z=p
p0 (1 − p0 )(1 + r)/n(1 − r)

(2)

where p̂ is the proportion of observations outside of
the prediction interval in the post-COVID period,
p0 = .05, n is the number of observations in the
post-COVID period, and r is the lag-1 correlation
coefficient of the pre-COVID data.
We use a Bonferroni correction when determining statistical significance for our discussion content metrics, as we ran almost 300 tests. M = 294,
which is the number of LIWC categories and topics, multiplied by the number of subreddits. Our
corrected α = 0.05/294 = 1.7 × 10−5 .

