Infection Risk Score: Identifying the risk of infection
propagation based on human contact
Rachit Agarwal

rachitag@iitk.ac.in
IIT Kanpur, India

arXiv:2009.12588v1 [cs.CY] 26 Sep 2020

ABSTRACT
A wide range of approaches have been applied to manage the spread
of global pandemic events such as COVID-19, which have met with
varying degrees of success. Given the large-scale social and economic impact coupled with the increasing time span of the pandemic, it is important to not only manage the spread of the disease
but also put extra efforts on measures that expedite resumption
of social and economic life. It is therefore important to identify
situations that carry high risk, and act early whenever such situations are identified. While a large number of mobile applications
have been developed, they are aimed at obtaining information that
can be used for contact tracing, but not at estimating the risk of
social situations. In this paper, we introduce an infection risk score
that provides an estimate of the infection risk arising from human
contacts. Using a real-world human contact dataset, we show that
the proposed risk score can provide a realistic estimate of the level
of risk in the population. We also describe how the proposed infection risk score can be implemented on smartphones. Finally, we
identify representative use cases that can leverage the risk score to
minimize infection propagation.

KEYWORDS
Infection risk score, Contact Tracing, Mobile Computing, Internet
of Things, Mobile Health
ACM Reference format:
Rachit Agarwal and Abhik Banerjee. 2020. Infection Risk Score: Identifying
the risk of infection propagation based on human contact. In Proceedings of
1st SIGSPATIAL International Workshop on Modeling and Understanding the
Spread of COVID-19, Seattle, Washington, November 03, 2018 (IWMUSC’20),
9 pages.
DOI: 10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

1

INTRODUCTION

21st century has already been witness to multiple pandemics in
the first two decades, with the biggest being COVID-19 caused by
the SARS-CoV-2 virus. The unprecedented spread of the COVID-19
has led to global efforts by governments to contain the pandemic
and to limit the impact of the virus on human society. As with
any other infectious disease, the efforts to contain the virus largely
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
IWMUSC’20, Seattle, Washington
© 2020 ACM. 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM. . . $15.00
DOI: 10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

Abhik Banerjee

abanerjee@swin.edu.au
Swinburne University, Australia
focus on (i) minimizing human-to-human contact by enforcing
people to maintain a certain distance with others (also known as
social distancing), (ii) minimizing economic activity (also known
as lockdown) for a certain period in geographical regions, such
as cities, states or even entire countries, and (iii) by performing
contact tracing, which involves tracking the disease spread by
identifying the contacts of the confirmed cases. However, these
efforts have been met with varying degrees of success, and the
authorities have been trying to use technology as much as possible
to elevate their efforts [13].
With the rise of the Internet of Things (IoT) and mobile health [33]
(also referred to as mHealth), there has been a growth in the number
of possibilities related to not only understanding the environment
but also detecting diseases early. With regards to the COVID-19
pandemic in particular, governments around the world have looked
to leverage the use of smartphone applications for limiting the
spread of the disease, given the ubiquity of smartphone usage.
While many of these applications focus on providing up-to-date
information about the spread of the disease, other applications aim
to notify users in real-time when they come in contact with an
infected person [11]. These infection tracking applications use a
variety of sensors embedded in a smartphone to help detect the
transmission in real-time. A common type of sensor used is Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE), which can be used for proximity detection.
Multiple applications that leverage BLE for the purpose of monitoring the growth of the COVID-19 pandemic have been introduced
in various countries. In India, the Aarogya-Setu Application [20]
informs how many infected people are within a certain distance of
a person using the application by matching with national database
of the infected people. In Australia, the COVIDSafe application [2]
provide notifications to the users if their contact is detected with
a confirmed infected person. Similar applications have been developed by the governments of many other countries. Further, a
collaboration between Apple Inc. and Google has led to the development of an Exposure API that enables developers to build various
applications using which application users can know if they came
into contact with other infected people [6]. Apart from smartphone
applications, other types of technologies are also used to help in the
cause of containing pandemic. These include the use of SwipeSense
technology to track use of medical equipment and to track whether
hospital staff wash their hands regularly1 .
Despite the technological innovations and advancements, the
use of applications, such as those described above, and technologies for managing and controlling the spread of the infection is
challenging due to multiple reasons. Firstly, a person carrying
the disease may not show any symptoms for a long period (e.g.
1 https://www.cnbc.com/2020/08/02/hospitals-tracking-covid-19-with-badge-sensors-

swipesense-technology.html

IWMUSC’20, November 03, 2018, Seattle, Washington
when the infection is in the incubation period). As a result, any
close contacts with other people would not be detected as being
risky by infection tracking applications, and hence would not help
in containing the spread of the infection. Indeed, in the case of
COVID-19, a significant fraction of cases have been identified as
asymptomatic for the entire duration of infection [8]. These also
contribute to community spread of the disease, which can lead to
exponential growth in the number of infections. Secondly, once
someone is confirmed as infected, he/she is typically isolated and
is not allowed to get involved in any social activities until fully
recovered. Thirdly, existing methods for managing infection spread
are primarily reactive. Counter-measures are often taken after a
person is confirmed to be infectious. Subsequently, authorities
proceed with counter measures such as lockdown of the specific
geographical region. Thus, currently, the scope for detection of the
infection spread and its management is limited. Therefore, there is
a need for an early estimate of the potential risk in a geographical
region to enable authorities to act quickly.
For risk estimation to be effective, it needs to identify people
who have greater exposure to the infection, quarantine the exposed
people, identify regions with potentially high exposures, and declare a region as hot-spot even before the outbreak happens in that
region. Additionally, the risk estimation measure should also be
able to identify situations which are likely to lead to transmissions
even when there are not any confirmed presence of the known
infections. Finally, any such risk estimation needs to be adaptable
to a wide range of technology platforms. While a notion of risk
score has been introduced as part of the Exposure API by Apple
Inc and Google, its main drawbacks is that it only provides a risk
measure based on confirmed exposures to infections.
In this paper, we present a risk score that can be used to assess
the risk for individuals based on their contact events. A key novelty
of the proposed risk score is that it estimates the risk propagation,
unlike existing literature that only assess immediate risk. The
proposed risk score can be used to assess the level of risk within
geographical regions, enabling authorities to act early to contain a
potential outbreak. Further, monitoring the risk score can also help
individuals take actions. In particular, the key contributions of this
paper are as follows:
• Infection risk score: We introduce a risk score that estimates infection propagation by monitoring contact events
among individuals.The risk score takes into consideration
factors such as the contact proximity, transmission likelihood and vulnerability to a disease.
• Evaluation using realistic dataset: We evaluate the infection risk score using a real-world human contact dataset
that has previously been using to study infection propagation. Our results show that potentially risky situations are
well captured using the infection risk score.
• Adaption of risk score using smartphones: We provide
detailed description on how smartphones can be used to
implement the infection risk score to track infections.
Finally, we also discuss how the accuracy of infection risk score
can be improved by incorporating contextual information, and also
present a discussion on potential use cases of the risk score for
managing infection spread.

Agarwal and Banerjee
The rest of the paper is organised as follows. Section 2 provides
detailed survey of related techniques and existing metrics used
to quantify risk and exposure. Section 3 provides details of the
proposed risk model. In Section 4 we evaluated the model using
real data. Section 5 provides the details on the propose version of
the smartphone application. This is followed by perspective uses of
the risk score in section 6. We finally conclude in Section 7.

2

RELATED WORK

Recent studies focusing on containing pandemic can be mainly
classified into three broad groups: survey based studies, IoT based
studies and epidemic model based studies.
In survey based studies, in [19], authors report that factors such
as contact with infected person, work overload, medical history of
the person, and if the person wore Personal Protective Equipment
(PPE) or not play an important role in determining the risk of
infection transmission of COVID-19. Similarly, to identify potential
exposure, WHO uses risk assessment forms to determine the risk
of exposure. Here they ask questions related to if the person wore
the PPE as recommended or not [34].
In IoT based studies, there is increased focus on smartphone
based infection detection. Many applications and IoT Devices are
available that perform contact tracing using proximity checks. A
survey of some of these application is present in [11]. We do not survey these applications again and instead present, in brief, new applications and devices that have come-up since the publication of [11].
Recent applications and devices includes EasyBand, a wearable device that vibrates when a marked (infected) Easyband comes in close
proximity [27]. Nonetheless, it has issues related to centralized control and communication. In [12], authors used magnetometer based
proximity detection, while in [22] authors used multiple sensors to
improve the distance estimation accuracy. Such techniques fail in
the case when a smartphone lacks certain required sensor. Further,
these applications achieve privacy by architecture and not privacy
by design. Many recent application and IoT devices claim to follow
privacy guidelines such as those mentioned in [27]. These applications and devices include: (i) Pan European Privacy-Preserving
Proximity Tracing (PEPP-Pt)2 that uses anonymized ID for communication, (ii) TraceSecure that uses secret sharing technique to
identify proximity [4], and (iii) proximity-based privacy-preserving
contact tracing (P3 CT) that uses ambient signature protocol [21].
Again, while these applications are privacy preserving, they achieve
privacy by architecture. In summary, these studies model risk using
factors such as distance [4, 12, 20, 22, 27] and duration [6]. These
works mainly use either BLE or magnetometer to estimate distance
from neighbor. Nonetheless, these works do not quantify the risk,
and instead, just provide an estimate of whether a person was in
contact with some other person or not.
On the other hand, from epidemic modeling point of view, there
are many studies that quantify risk using different parameters
such as: size of cough droplets, rate of cough, volume of particles generated, concentration of pathogens, max distance covered
by pathogen in air, pathogen particles lost due to temperature and
humidity, time an infected person stayed at a given location, duration of contact with susceptible person, and his pulmonary rate [26].
2 https://www.pepp-pt.org

Infection Risk Score: Identifying the risk of infection propagation based on human contact
IWMUSC’20, November 03, 2018, Seattle, Washington
Most of these factors, until now, cannot be estimated using smartphone. Instead, disease specific average values for these factors can
be used as constants while modeling risk score. In [26], authors estimated risk as an aggregation of risk score for both when a person
comes in direct contact with other person and when a person gets
infected indirectly (a case of community spreading).

3

of pathogens are exhaled, and (iii) between two consecutive temporal snapshots of the graph (i.e., G(Vt , Et ) and
G(Vt −∆t , Et −∆t )), a person i stays in contact with person
j for the ∆t time. In such a scenario, the exposure to an
infectious disease of the person i at time t with respect to
a particular neighbor j is given by Ei, j,t = ∆t × ni, j,t .
In ideal conditions, if a neighbor j is not infected, i.e.,
he/she does not cough, and wears proper protective gears
such as face mask or face shields, Ei, j,t = 0 because there
are no pathogens exhaled by j. In such a case, the whole
idea of maintaining social distancing even when people
are not infected would fail and susceptible people would
be deemed harmless. On the other hand, if some neighbor
is infected and coughing badly, Ei, j,t >> 0. In this case,
other people would ideally limit from meeting the infected
person. In such a situation also, barring the infected person,
other susceptible people would continue their physical social activities. Let r j,t −∆t be the risk score of the neighbor
at time t − ∆t. To account for above mentioned aspects and
ensure that social distancing is enforced between susceptible people also, we add the previous instance risk score of
the neighbor to the exposure caused due to the neighbor,
i.e., Ei, j,t = ∆t × ni, j,t + r j,t −∆t .
(2) Neighbor weight: We define the neighbor weight as the
likelihood that an individual in the vicinity is infectious.
Since we aim to estimate the risk even in situations where
confirmed infections are not known, the neighbor weight
can be estimated based on multiple contextual parameters.
For instance, in the case of communicable diseases such
as COVID-19, if a neighbor is from a hot-spot area or has
a history of the disease then the risk of getting infection
from the neighbor is high because the neighbor is coming
from a containment zone. Further, impact of diseases like
COVID-19 is high on people who have a weak immunity
either due to age or have chronic diseases like kidney failure and diabetes. On top, if a person is staying indoor, with
a poor ventilation chances of spreading the disease and getting infected increases manyfold [28, 32]. In [28], authors
recommend that proper ventilation indoor can reduce infections up-to 60%. Nonetheless, for COVID-19, different
countries have different statistics, for example, India having relatively younger population, middle age people are
more infected while more older people have died. Let w j,t
be the weight such that w j,t ∈ [0, 1] that identifies such
contextual information of the neighbor. Summed over all
the neighbors of the person i at time t, the total exposure
of i from its neighbors j ∈ Ni,t is thus given by equation 1.

INFECTION RISK SCORE

In this section, we present the infection risk score that quantifies risk
of catching an infection. Our score considers exposure to pathogen
and context in a social network setting. For convenience, infection
risk score is referred by the term risk score in the remainder of the
paper.

3.1

Network model: Modeling the population
as a temporal network

For any geographical area, we consider the population to be represented by a temporal graph G such that G(Vt , Et ) is a temporal
snapshot at time t that is created by individuals in a given area
Aa . For the purpose of this paper, we consider that the risk score
computation for individuals is done using mobile apps, and hence,
each individual is represented using smartphones. Here Vt is the
set of smartphones communicating and active at time t and Et is
the set of edges that exists between smartphones in Vt . Let ∆t be
the time difference between two consecutive temporal snapshots
of G. For our model we assume that if two people are in contact,
for say 10 epochs, then the edge between them is persistent over
10
∆t snapshots of the graphs. Each person i ∈ Vt has a location, l t ,
marked by latitude and longitude pair such that lt = (lai,t , loi,t ).
Given the interactions, at time t, each person i has a neighborhood,
Ni,t where each person j ∈ Ni,t has an edge (in Et ) to the person i
and is di, j,t distance apart. Here di, j,t < θd i.e., i and j are within
communication range and at maximum θd distance apart.

3.2

Risk score parameters

In this section, we identify the key factors that impact infection
propagation.
(1) Exposure caused by a neighbor: Communicable diseases such as COVID-19 generally spread when a person
i ∈ Vt comes in close proximity with a infected person
(person j) or touches the surface that infected person has
touched [26]. In such a case, the person i is exposed to
pathogens from the infected person, which can lead to infection spread. The exposure to a neighboring individual is
an key factor determining the likelihood of a transmission
event from a neighbor, and we term this as the neighbor
exposure. For the scope of the current paper, we limit our
discussion to the the exposure caused when an infected
person come in close proximity, although this may easily
be extended to include other modes of propagation.
To determine how the neighbor exposure impacts the
spread of infection, we consider that an infected neighbor
j exhales ni, j,t ∈ R+ pathogens and these pathogens are
homogeneously distributed within the permissible θd distance. Further, we consider the following assumptions: (i)
there is no loss in pathogens, (ii) each time same number

Ei,t =

Õ

w j,t × (Ei, j,t + r j,t −∆t )

(1)

j ∈N i, t

3.3

Risk score formulation

In addition to the neighbor weight and exposure, we define vulnerability as the likelihood that an individual exposed to risky
situations continues to be at risk. At any time t the risk score of
an individual i is the dependent on the risk score at t − ∆t, his

IWMUSC’20, November 03, 2018, Seattle, Washington

Agarwal and Banerjee

vulnerability , and the exposure from the neighbors at t. The total
risk, thus, is given by equation 2.
r i,t =

vi,t × r i,t −∆t +

Í

w j,t × (Ei, j,t + r j,t −∆t )
j ∈N i, t w j,t

j ∈N i, t

1+

Í

(2)

Here the denominator is the normalization factor. A disease
usually has a period between when the person i gets infected from
the disease and time when he becomes an active spreader of the
disease. For example, for COVID-19, the median incubation period
is around 5 to 6 days3 . In our scenario, even if a person comes in
contact with a person for whom the disease is still in incubation
period, the risk exposure is equally high as compared to meeting a
person who is an active spreader. Thus, our model does not consider
the incubation period.
From the equation (2), the value of r i,t ∈ R+ . If the person
is taken into isolation (i.e., no interaction with neighbors) after
getting infected, his risk score will decrease with a factor vi,t and
r
will eventually decay and reach minimum in t = d i,vti,−∆t
e time
t
instances. This accounts for the fact that risk to and from such
people is minimized when they are in isolation. For simplicity, at
t = 0 (or the initial condition) for all people we assign them as
susceptible and their risk score to r i,0 = 1. As the actual infection
state of a person is unknown, the idea of social distancing mandates
to maintain a certain distance even if the person is susceptible.
Maintaining social distancing reduces the possibility of getting
infected. We assign a non zero value to r i,0 to ensure that social
distance is maintained and our model captures it. For simplicity,
let r i,0 = 1. As and when a person is officially tagged infected, we
assign r i,t = 2. Note that, a low value of r i,t , is achieved when
all the neighbors are susceptible. For a new person joining in, we
assume that he is a susceptible person.
Our method only considers ego network of a person for the
calculation of the risk score. This enables all the smartphones
involved to compute their individual risk scores simultaneously.

4

with the room ID they are in at a particular epoch. We consider
that contact events occur between individuals whenever they are
in the same room, and all individuals present in a particular room
at a given epoch are connected to each other.
The temporal distribution of individuals in the dataset is shown
in Fig. 1. Fig. 1(a) shows the heatmap of number of people present in
a room at different epochs. The white color represents that nobody
was present in a room at the particular epoch. Fig. 1(b) presents
total number of people in a school at a given epoch. A sudden
increase and a sudden drop in the number of people accounts for
the beginning of the school in the morning when people arrive,
and the end of the day, when they went back from school. Fig. 1(c)
presents the maximum number of rooms occupied by people. Note
that at maximum only ≈62% rooms are occupied. Fig. 1(d) presents
ratio between number of people in the school and rooms occupied
at a given time. The maximum average density of people in a room
is 9. A sudden increase at the end of the day is because most of the
people were present in a single room. Fig. 1(e) presents number
of times a given room was occupied during the data collection
period. From the figure we infer that (i) some rooms were always
empty and nobody went to those rooms, (ii) the entire population
is concentrated in only a few rooms and after certain time period
there is an exponential decrease in the population indicating the
end of classes in the school, (iii) during the day, rooms gradually
start to fill up and there is an exponential rise in the population
size.

EVALUATION AND VALIDATION

In this section we provide an evaluation and validation of our risk
model using a real-world dataset.

4.1

Dataset

While there are many datasets which have previously been used to
study epidemic spread, specially smartphone based datasets that
use Call Detail Records (CDRs) and GPS location information, [5],
they are (i) not widely used [23], and (ii) mostly generated from a
random population sample which do not reflect true neighborhood
size. Instead, we use a dataset of 789 individuals (including students
and teachers) obtained on a single day in an American high school
that has 158 rooms [25], which has previously been used to study
spread of infectious diseases [28]. Here each point of interest (POI)
is considered to be a room in the school. The dataset is mainly used
to study human contact network for infectious disease transmission.
The dataset is collected between 6AM to 4:30PM at an interval of
20 seconds. The granularity of positioning information available
is at the level of rooms, and hence, each individual is geo-tagged
3 https://www.mohfw.gov.in/pdf/DGSOrder04of2020.pdf

Figure 1: Temporal distribution of people in the rooms. (a)
Heatmap showing number of people in each room over time.
The white color represents empty room at the particular
epoch. (b) Total number of people present in the school over
time. (c) Total number of room occupied in the school over
time. (d) average density of each room. (e) Number of times
a room is occupied.

4.2

Dynamics of epidemic spread on the
contact network

We evaluate the proposed risk score using both SI (SusceptibleInfected) and SIS (Susceptible-Infected-Susceptible) models.

Infection Risk Score: Identifying the risk of infection propagation based on human contact
IWMUSC’20, November 03, 2018, Seattle, Washington
Let Si,t be the fraction of people that are susceptible in a region
i at time t, Ii,t be the fraction of population that is infected in a
region i at time t, Ni,t = 1 be the faction of total population in
the region at time t, βi be the infection rate in the region i, and
γi be the recovery rate in the region i. Note that at any given
point of time Ni,t = Si,t + Ii,t because we consider only two states,
susceptible and infected. The change in the fraction of susceptible
and infected people over time is given by equation (3) [10]. Here the
underlying assumptions are that there is a homogeneous mixing of
the population and no birth and death happens (the total population
is fixed).
dS i, t
dt
d I i, t
dt

4.3

=
=

βS

I

− Ni,i,t ti, t + γ Ii,t
dS
− dti, t

(3)

Results

Currently, the exact behavior of exposure and vulnerability parameters for pandemics such as COVID-19 is not known. Further, as the
dataset is POI based, actual distances are also not available in the
dataset. Thus, we assume that the exposure parameter for each person is normally distributed with µ = 0.5 and σ = 0.1. Further, the
vulnerability parameter is also normally distributed with µ = 0.5
and σ = 0.2.
For our analysis we study following three aspects using different
initial condition, infection rate, and recovery rate. First, we identify
fraction of people who are identified infected using the SIS and SI
epidemic models. This helps us understand the infection spread
over time in the population and understand the dynamics on the
contact network. Second, we measure the ratio between the median
risk scores of infected people and susceptible people. A ratio more
than one indicates that the risk score of infected people is more,
as intended. A higher ratio implies that the risk score can be used
to better identify people who are exposed to infection and have
high probability to get infected. When there are no infections in a
neighborhood, this value tends to 0. Third, we study the fraction of
people that are alerted using our model.
To test and study the above-mentioned aspects, as an initial
condition, the values for Ii,0 , βi and γi used are Ii,0 ∈ {0.0, 0.01, 0.5},
βi ∈ {0.0, 0.5, 1.0} and γi ∈ {0.0, 0.75}. Ii,0 = 0.0 states that there
are no initial infections in the region. βi = 0.0 states there are no
transmission happening and the disease does not spread via contact.
On the other hand, βi = 1.0 would state that the disease is highly
contagious. Similarly, γi = 0.0 would state that there is no recovery
which is equivalent to SI type epidemic model. γi = 0.75 would
mean that the recovery rate is 75% (i.e. similar to the recovery rate
of COVID-19 patients in India4 ). The results presented here are
averaged over 50 simulations runs and conducted using python.
Figures 2 and 3 present results obtained for the above-mentioned
aspects when different values of Ii,0 , βi and γi are used for SIS and
SI models respectively. The βi and γi values are assumed to not
vary across rooms. Fig. 2 is obtained when γ = 0.75 while Fig. 3 is
obtained when γ = 0.0. From the Fig. 2, as per SIS model, when
there is no infection, dissemination of infection does not occurs
because subsequent dIi,t /dt = 0 (see fig. 2(a)). This lead to ratio of
4 https://www.financialexpress.com/lifestyle/health/indias-covid-19-recovery-rate-

nears-75-case-fatality-rate-one-of-the-lowest-globally-at-1-86/2063108/

median risk scores (represented as rm, I nf ect ed /rm,Suscept ibl e ) to
be 0 as there are no infected people (see fig. 2(b)). The inset fig. 2(b’)
shows the median risk scores of susceptible people (rm,Suscept ibl e )
and indicates that, even when there are no confirmed infections,
crowded situations which carry high risk can be identified as having
high risk scores. As our risk model is not dependent on βi , γi , and
initial infection, via risk score, we are able to detects potential risky
situations (see fig. 2(c), 2(f), and 2(i)) which epidemic models such
as SIS model are not able to detect. For cases when Ii,0 ≥ 0.01
and βi ∈ {0.0, 0.5, 1.0}, we observe that infections either die off
(for βi = 0.0) or achieve stability (for βi ∈ {0.5, 1.0}, see fig. 2(d)
and 2(g)). The reason for reduction in infections is the recovery
rate, while for stability it is the low number of people present when
epoch > 1500. The ratio of median risk scores for different βi and
Ii,0 ≥ 0.01 is shown in fig. 2(e) and 2(h)) where we observe that after
few epochs the ratio is < 2 and even reaches < 1 in short duration.
This behavior is because (a) the median value of infected identified
by SIS model is less than the median value that of susceptible people
and (b) the number of infected is less that number of susceptible.
From the fig. 2(f) and 2(g) we also see that, irrespective of the
epidemic state, most of the people are at high risk.
On the other hand, from Fig. 3, we see that when there is no
recovery (i.e., γi = 0.0) and when Ii,0 = 0, the behavior is similar
to previous scenario (see fig. 3(a), 3(b), 3(b’), 3(c), 3(f), and 3(i)).
Nonetheless, when Ii,0 > 0.0 and βi , 0.0, the infections eventually
reach entire population which is true as there is no recovery (see
fig. 3(d) and 3(g)). Further, in this case, due to the above-mentioned
reason, ratio of median risk scores is also high (see fig. 3(e) and 3(h)).
Ratio equal to 1 is achieved when βi = 0.

5

RISK SCORE IMPLEMENTATION USING
SMARTPHONES

In this section, we demonstrate how the proposed risk score is
implemented as part of a smartphone based infection tracking applications. There are two main components required for estimation
of the risk score on a smartphone - (a) aggregation of risk scores of
neighboring smartphones, and (b) computation of the risk score of
the smartphone itself. Similar to the infection tracking applications
used for COVID-19, we consider that estimation of the exposure is
done using BLE. However, unlike existing applications which use
centralized data repositories to obtain risk scores of neighboring
smartphones (i.e. if they are confirmed to be infected), using our
approach, each smartphone (a) periodically broadcasts its own risk
score value, by embedding this value in the BLE advertising packets,
and (b) periodically updates its own risk score by aggregating the
risk scores of all other smartphones in its neighborhood. Such an
approach has the following advantages:
• The risk score computation does not need to depend on a
centralized database containing information about infected
individuals, which might be outdated.
• The risk score reflect encounters not just with confirmed
individuals, but also present environments that are risky
from the perspective of infection spread.
• Our approach is better suited for privacy preservation,
since no information pertaining to the identity of individuals is stored or communicated.

IWMUSC’20, November 03, 2018, Seattle, Washington

Agarwal and Banerjee

Figure 2: Results for SIS epidemic model, β ∈ {0.0, 0.5, 1.0}, γi = 0.75 and Ii,0 ∈ {0.0, 0.01, 0.5}
Next, we provide details on the design of the BLE advertising
packet as well as how risk score computation is done individually
by the smartphone application. For the purpose of this discussion,
we refer to the smartphone performing the risk computation as
the ego node, and all other smartphones in its vicinity as neighbor
nodes.

5.1

BLE advertising packet

Existing infection tracking techniques record the BLE Media Access
Control (MAC) addresses of nearby smartphones [14] and compare
them with a centralized database of infected individuals. Instead,
we discuss how we use the BLE advertising packet to communicate
risk score values.

The BLE advertising packet allows including optional payload of
up to 31 bytes [17]. We use these available bytes for broadcasting
the risk score. Our payload includes:
(1) A 128-bit unique identifier (UUID) which is a fixed value
used to identify the service, enabling each smartphone to
filter out all nearby beacons broadcasting the risk score.
(2) A 6 bytes long Risk score which includes the risk score
value rounded to two decimal places and prefixed by “r”.
(3) A 5 bytes long weight of the neighbor which includes
the neighbor weight value rounded to two decimal places
and prefixed by “w”.
Fig. 4 shows the payload format of the BLE advertising packet.

Infection Risk Score: Identifying the risk of infection propagation based on human contact
IWMUSC’20, November 03, 2018, Seattle, Washington

Figure 3: Results for SI epidemic model, β ∈ {0.0, 0.5, 1.0}, γi = 0.0 and Ii,0 ∈ {0.0, 0.01, 0.5}

Figure 4: BLE Packet Format

5.2

Risk score computation

In addition to the risk scores obtained from the BLE advertisements
from the neighbors, the weight of the neighbors, and exposure
caused by the neighbors are also required for the purpose of risk
score computation, along with the vulnerability of the node itself.
Note that here “node” means the smartphone.

RSSI
Neighbor weight
> -55 dbm
0.8
> -63 & ≤ -55 dbm 0.5
> -75 & ≤ -63 dbm 0.1
≤ -75 dbm
0.0
Table 1: Neighbor exposure estimation from RSSI values of
BLE advertisements received from neighbors

5.2.1 Neighbor exposure. The exposure from a neighbor is an
estimation of the likelihood of a transmission event from a neighbor. For infectious diseases such as COVID-19, the likelihood of

IWMUSC’20, November 03, 2018, Seattle, Washington
transmission increases with close contacts. While BLE signal characteristics, such as received signal strength indication (RSSI) and
attenuation, can be used for distance estimation, they are known be
noisy estimators [18]. Hence, for the purpose of estimation of exposure from the neighbor, we use a coarse grained mapping, similar
to those used in the Exposure API [7]. Based on the existing studies,
table 1 shows how the exposure values can be mapped from the
RSSI values [15]. A higher RSSI values maps to a higher exposure
from a neighbor.
5.2.2 Neighbor weight. The neighbor weight is an estimate of
the likelihood of a neighboring node to be infectious, which can
depend on a range of factors, such as the prevalence of preexisting
diseases, age, etc. If such information is available, the derived
neighbor weight is included in the BLE advertising packet. However,
while such information may not always be available at an individual
level, approximate measures are often available at a population
level, which can be used as fixed values for all smartphones in a
geographic region. For instance, neighbor weight may be derived
from the basic reproduction number (R0 ) [9] value for a particular
epidemic for a given geographical region.
5.2.3 Vulnerability. The vulnerability of the ego node is an estimate of how quickly an individual can recover when exposed
to infection, and as with the neighbour weight, this depends on a
range of factors such as preexisting conditions, age, etc, as well as
the nature of the disease itself [3]. When available, such information is incorporated in the computation of the risk score by the ego
node.
Currently, the only data shared between the smartphones are
the neighbor weights and risk score values. These values are computed on individual smartphones and shared with the neighbors.
As no other parameter is shared other than computed values of
neighbor weights and risk score and no other information about
the neighbor is shared, we enable privacy by design. As a proof of
concept implementation, we can also provide an alpha version of a
smartphone application upon request for the readers to test.

6

FUTURE DIRECTIONS

The proposed risk score can be developed further, both in terms of
increasing it’s accuracy towards risk estimation, as well as applying
it to individual use cases, which we highlight in this section.

6.1

Increasing accuracy of risk score

The accuracy of the risk score proposed in this paper can also
be increased by incorporating additional contextual information,
where available. Some examples of this are:
• Indoor and Outdoor location detection: The likelihood
of infection spread has been known to be higher in indoor
environments compared to outdoor [28]. This can be incorporated into the risk score by first, automatically detecting
the indoor/outdoor context [1], and secondly, by incorporating it into the risk score itself.
• Identification of exposure context: As outlined previously in section 5.2, by identification of the infection context in real-time, the risk score computation can be made

Agarwal and Banerjee
more accurate. This can include detection of respiratory
symptoms to better estimate the exposure [16, 29].
In addition to the points above, a general challenge with all infection tracking applications is that they do not cater to the entire
population, since people may not always have access to smartphones and other IoT devices.

6.2

Use cases

The proposed risk score is applicable towards monitoring and managing the spread of infection for population groups, such as over a
geographical region, as well as for individuals.
(1) Risk score at different spatial scale: The proposed risk
score, in addition to computing score of an individual can
be used to compute the risk score at any spatial scale (i.e.,
a country, a city, a building, a house, a room). For instance,
considering Aa be the area for which risk score has to be
computed, such as a district, and let La be the group of
people in that region at time t. The risk score of region Aa
at time t is defined as equation 4.
Í
∀i ∈L a r i,t
(4)
r tAa =
||La ||
Here, ||La || represents the number of people in Aa . Consider a region, R to be comprised of many As, the total
Í
population at time t, N t is thus i ∈R ||Li ||. Some examples include:
(a) Monitoring of geographical regions by government
authorities: As evidenced by the COVID-19 pandemic, the infection spread often starts from small
geographical regions, which can grow exponentially
if early actions are not taken. Our proposed risk score
can be used to obtain an early estimate of the likelihood of infection transmissions within a geographical
region. Subsequently, preventative actions, such as increased testing, can be taken, without even resorting
to lockdowns that have economic and social impacts.
(b) Monitoring of individual buildings: An important
aspect of managing the spread of infections is to reduce the likelihood of spread in controlled environments, such as office buildings, hotels, hospitals, etc.
In such scenarios, risk score can be used to monitor
behavior of individuals within such a region, and take
quick actions even before any infection is confirmed.
Some examples of such use cases are:
(i) Hotels: Guest movements and interactions among
guests at hotels can have significant consequences
to the infection spread in a pandemic, as has
been seen in the case of COVID-19 [30]. The
risk score can be used to act quickly by enforcing close monitoring of the individuals who are
found to be in risky situations.
(ii) Hospitals: In order to handle increasing case
loads during a pandemic, hospitals typically
have dedicated wards. In such cases, it is critical to minimize the likelihood of transmission
from such dedicated wards to other wards in the

Infection Risk Score: Identifying the risk of infection propagation based on human contact
IWMUSC’20, November 03, 2018, Seattle, Washington
hospital [24], which can be done through monitoring of the risk scores of patients, doctors and
other hospital staff.
(iii) Office buildings: Managing the recovery from
a pandemic is equally important to managing
it’s spread, and the risk score can be used as a
part of the plans used for businesses and office
buildings [31].
Similar scenarios may be envisioned for other closed
environments, such as residential buildings, supermarkets, shopping malls, airports, etc.
(2) Individual monitoring: Risk score can also be used to
provide real-time alerts to individuals to take action. For
instance, it can be used to provide prompts to wear mask
if one is detected to move from a less risky region to more
risky one. Further, risk score can be used to provide personalized alerts for individuals. For instance, vulnerable
people (i.e. who are likely to be affected more due to preexisting conditions), can be alerted early by using a lower
alert threshold.

7

CONCLUSION

In this paper, we introduced a risk score that estimates infection
propagation by leveraging the neighborhood of an individuals at
a given time. On top, our risk score also takes into consideration
factors transmission likelihood and vulnerability to a disease. Our
results show that our risk score is able to capture potential risky situations. To further leverage our risk score we demonstrate how our
risk score can be implemented in a contact tracing applications and
as a proof of concept make it available upon request. Nonetheless,
as future directions, we provide use cases and potential parameters
that can be included in the risk score to make it more robust.
.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors contributed equally in the research.

REFERENCES
[1] R. Agarwal, S. Chopra, V. Christophides, N. Georgantas, and V. Issarny. 2019.
Detecting Mobile Crowdsensing Context in the Wild. In 20th IEEE International
Conference on Mobile Data Management (Hong Kong). IEEE, 170–175.
[2] Australian Government Department of Health. 2020. COVIDSafe App.
https://www.health.gov.au/resources/apps-and-tools/covidsafe-app (Accessed
06/09/2020).
[3] BBC. 2020. Coronavirus: How long does it take to recover? https://www.bbc.
com/news/health-52301633 (Accessed on 09/22/2020).
[4] J. Bell, D. Butler, C. Hicks, and J. Crowcroft. 2020. TraceSecure: Towards Privacy
Preserving Contact Tracing. arXiv (April 2020), 1–22. arXiv:2004.04059 [cs.CR]
[5] V. Blondel, A. Decuyper, and G. Krings. 2015. A survey of results on mobile
phone datasets analysis. EPJ Data Science 4, 1 (Aug. 2015), 1–55.
[6] J. Clover. 2020. Apple’s Exposure Notification System: Everything You Need to
Know. https://www.macrumors.com/guide/exposure-notification/ (Accessed
13/07/2020).
[7] Google. 2020. Define meaningful exposures: Google API for Exposure Notifications.
https://developers.google.com/android/exposure-notifications/
meaningful-exposures (Accessed on 09/19/2020).
[8] J. He, Y. Guo, R. Mao, and J. Zhang. 2020. Proportion of asymptomatic coronavirus
disease 2019: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of Medical Virology
Early Access (2020), 1–11.
[9] J. M. Heffernan, R. J. Smith, and L. M. Wahl. 2005. Perspectives on the basic
reproductive ratio. Journal of The Royal Society Interface 2, 4 (Sept. 2005), 281–293.
https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2005.0042

[10] H. Hethcote. 2000. The Mathematics of Infectious Diseases. SIAM Rev. 42, 4
(2000), 599–653.
[11] M. Islam, I. Islam, K. Munim, and A. Islam. 2020. A Review on the Mobile
Applications Developed for COVID-19: An Exploratory Analysis. IEEE Access 8
(Aug. 2020), 145601–145610.
[12] S. Jeong, S. Kuk, and H. Kim. 2019. A Smartphone Magnetometer-Based Diagnostic Test for Automatic Contact Tracing in Infectious Disease Epidemics. IEEE
Access 7 (Jan. 2019), 20734–20747.
[13] O. Khazan. 2020. The Most American COVID-19 Failure Yet. https://www.
theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2020/08/contact-tracing-hr-6666-working-us/
615637/ (Accessed 12/09/2020).
[14] P. Kindt, T. Chakraborty, and S. Chakraborty. 2020. How Reliable is Smartphonebased Electronic Contact Tracing for COVID-19? arXiv (May 2020), 1–13.
[15] D. Leith and F. Stephen. 2020. Coronavirus Contact Tracing: Evaluating the
Potential Of Using Bluetooth Received Signal Strength for Proximity Detection.
arXiv (May 2020), 1–11. arXiv:2006.06822 [eess.SP]
[16] D. Liaqat, R. Wu, T. Son, A. Gershon, H. Alshaer, E. de Lara, and F. Rudzicz.
2018. Towards Ambulatory Cough Monitoring using Smartwatches. In C41
Health Services Research in Pulmonary Disease: Thematic Poster Session. American
Thoracic Society, A4929–A4929.
[17] Joakim Lindh. 2016. Bluetooth Low Energy Beacons (Rev. A). https://www.ti.
com/lit/an/swra475a/swra475a.pdf. (Accessed on 09/24/2020).
[18] A. Mackey, P. Spachos, L. Song, and K. Plataniotis. 2020. Improving BLE beacon
proximity estimation accuracy through bayesian filtering. IEEE Internet of Things
Journal 7, 4 (April 2020), 3160–3169.
[19] M. Mhango, M. Dzobo, I. Chitungo, and T. Dzinamarira. 2020. COVID-19 Risk
Factors Among Health Workers: A Rapid Review. Safety and Health at Work 11,
3 (Sept. 2020), 262–265.
[20] National Informatics Center, India. 2020. Aarogya Setu Mobile App. https:
//www.mygov.in/aarogya-setu-app/ (Accessed 06/07/2020).
[21] P. Ng, P. Spachos, S. Gregori, and K. Plataniotis. 2020. Epidemic Exposure
Notification with Smartwatch: A Proximity-Based Privacy-Preserving Approach.
arxiv (July 2020), 1–11. arXiv:2007.04399 [cs.CR]
[22] K. Nguyen, Z. Luo, and C. Watkins. 2020. Epidemic contact tracing with smartphone sensors. Journal of Location Based Services 14, 2 (Sept. 2020), 92–128.
[23] N. Oliver, B. Lepri, H. Sterly, et al. 2020. Mobile phone data for informing public
health actions across the COVID-19 pandemic life cycle. Science Advances 6, 23
(April 2020), 1–6.
[24] T. Oraby, M. Tyshenko, H. Balkhy, et al. 2020. Analysis of the Healthcare
MERS-CoV Outbreak in King Abdulaziz Medical Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia,
June-August 2015 Using a SEIR Ward Transmission Model. International journal
of environmental research and public health 17, 8 (2020), 2936.
[25] M. Salathé, M. Kazandjieva, J. Lee, P. Levis, M. Feldman, and J. Jones. 2010.
A high-resolution human contact network for infectious disease transmission.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107, 51 (Dec. 2010), 22020–22025.
[26] M. Shahzamal, R. Jurdak, R. Arablouei, M. Kim, K. Thilakarathna, and B. Mans.
2017. Airborne Disease Propagation on Large Scale Social Contact Networks. In
Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Social Sensing (Pittsburgh, PA,
USA). ACM, 35–40.
[27] M. Shukla, M. Rajan, S. Lodha, G. Shroff, and R. Raskar. 2020. Privacy
Guidelines for Contact Tracing Applications. arXiv (April 2020), 1–10.
arXiv:2004.13328 [cs.LG]
[28] T. Smieszek, G. Lazzari, and M. Salathé. 2019. Assessing the Dynamics and Control of Droplet- and Aerosol-Transmitted Influenza Using an Indoor Positioning
System. Scientific Reports 9, 1 (Feb. 2019), 1–10.
[29] X. Sun, Z. Lu, W. Hu, and G. Cao. 2015. SymDetector: Detecting sound-related
respiratory symptoms using smartphones. In Proc. of ACM International Joint
Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing (Osaka, Japan). ACM, 97–108.
[30] J. Taylor. 2020. Hotel quarantine linked to 99% of Victoria’s Covid cases,
inquiry told.
https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2020/aug/18/
hotel-quarantine-linked-to-99-of-victorias-covid-cases-inquiry-told (Accessed
on 09/23/2020).
[31] Business Victoria. 2020. COVIDSafe Plan.
https://www.business.vic.gov.
au/coronavirus-covid-19/covid-safe-business/covid-safe-plan (Accessed on
09/23/2020).
[32] V. Vuorinen, M. Aarnio, M. Alava, and Others. 2020. Modelling aerosol transport and virus exposure with numerical simulations in relation to SARS-CoV-2
transmission by inhalation indoors. Safety Science (Early Access) 130 (Oct. 2020),
1–23.
[33] C. Wood, M. Thomas, J. Budd, T. Mashamba-Thompson, K. Herbst, D. Pillay,
R. Peeling, A. Johnson, R. McKendry, and M. Stevens. 2019. Taking connected
mobile-health diagnostics of infectious diseases to the field. Nature 566, 7745
(Feb. 2019), 467–474.
[34] World Health Organization. 2020. Health workers exposure risk assessment and
management in the context of COVID-19 virus: interim guidance, 4 March 2020.
Technical Report. World Health Organization. 1–8 pages. https://apps.who.int/
iris/handle/10665/331340

