Black Lives Matter discourse on US social media during COVID:
polarised positions enacted in a new event
Centre for Democratic Engagement, University of Leeds, 21 August 2020
Gillian Bolsover
University of Leeds
g.bolsover@leeds.ac.uk
Abstract
Black Lives Matter has been a major force for social change in the US since 2014, with social
media playing a core role in the development and proliferation of the movement. The largest
protests in US history occurred in late May and early June 2020, following the death of George
Floyd at the hands of Minneapolis police. This incident reignited widespread support for the
BLM movement. The protests were notable not only for their size but also that they occurred
at a time the US was still struggling to control the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic, with
more than 20,000 new cases per day. With protest conditions and police crowd control tactics
exacerbating disease spread and with COVID disproportionately affecting minority
populations, it was hypothesised that participation in and support for the protests would
involve a balancing act between the risks of systemic racism and of disease spread. However,
social media data suggest that this was not the case, with discussion of the BLM movement
replacing discussion of COVID on US social media. Neither supporters or opposers of the
BLM movement or protest action mentioned COVID as a factor. Framings of the movement by
BLM supporters largely replicated those of earlier studies, with new frames emerging
surrounding the opposition the movement has received from racism, police militarisation and
President Donald Trump. Discourse evidenced worrying levels of polarisation, hate, incivility
and conspiracy content and bore many similarities to previously studied COVID discourse.
This suggests that George Floyd's death, as yet another example of an African American man
killed by US police, was largely seen through established, polarised identity positions that
made reactions to the incident and resulting protest largely a foregone conclusion, established
and articulated without reference to the ongoing pandemic.
COVID and systemic racism: twin challenges
In the summer of 2020, the US was rocked by two
very different political issues associated with
opposite forms of individual political response.
On the one hand, the country faced an
unprecedented challenge posed by COVID-19, a
novel and highly infectious respiratory illness,
that has, to date, infected more than five million
Americans. Compared to stringent restriction
measures to control the spread of the virus in other
countries, the US has seen a slow and limited
response. There has been much resistance to social
and economic controls to limit the spread of the
virus in the US (Bolsover, 2020). President
Donald Trump has largely opposed controls and
has spread misinformation about virus treatments
and preventative measures (Bolsover & Tokitsu
Tizon, 2020).

In the midst of this public health crisis,
longstanding issues of systemic racism once again
hit a crisis point. This came at the end of May in
response to the killing of 46-year-old father of five
George Floyd. Police officers responding to a call
about someone using a counterfeited $20 note
ended up kneeling on Floyd's neck for close to
eight minutes as he lay face down on the street
restrained by several police officers. He died at the
scene.
The widely circulated videos of the incident
documented the latest in a number of deaths of
black Americans at the hands of the police,
including Eric Garner who suffocated in a police
chokehold after repeating "I can't breathe," 12year-old Tamir Rice who was holding a toy gun
when he was shot dead by police, 18-year-old
Michael Brown who was unarmed and shot six

1

times after he stole a box of cigars and Breonna
Taylor who was shot dead in her home while
police officers executed a "no knock" search
warrant (no drugs were found on the premises).
These deaths, among countless others, have
mobilised Americans, under the Black Lives
Matter movement, to protest the unequal
treatment of black Americans at the hands of the
police and justice system.
The Black Lives Matter movement was founded
in 2013 in response to the acquittal of a white man
who fatally shot 17-year-old Trayvon Martin in an
affluent Florida gated-community. Social media
has played a key role in the foundation and
building of the Black Lives Matter movement
(Ince et al., 2017), particularly as the
documentation on cell phone video has been
crucial in building visibility and credibility for
cases of excessive use of force by police. In the
days following Floyd's death on 25 May 2020, the
US saw protests across the country numbering
between 15 and 26 million people, potentially the
largest in US history (Buchanan et al., 2020).
However, these protests came at a time that the US
was still trying to control the COVID pandemic,
with 20,000 new cases a day (CDC, 2020).
This case raises important questions about how
different risks are being balanced by individuals
engaging in these protests. Was participation in
these protests underpinned by an active
calculation that the risks of systemic racism
outweighed the risks of disease spread? Did
participants consciously recognise and attempt to
mitigate disease spread at the protests? Were
COVID and BLM viewed as separate issues or
was the intersectionality of risk for African
Americans discussed as part of protest discourse?
What role did social media play in the building of
the movement under changed risk conditions?
The BLM movement and social media
Over the past decade, social media has been an
important tool in the organisation and
proliferation of social movements. This has been
especially true for the BLM movement that grew
out of a Facebook post and was conceived as a
social media movement around the hashtag
#BlackLivesMatter (Ince et al., 2017). Social
media, and Twitter in particular, allowed the
stories of these individuals and the narratives of

the movement to be distributed across the country
without relying on mainstream media (Freelon et
al., 2016). Social media has been important in
distributing both the documentation of cases of
police violence against individual African
Americans and the documentation of violent
police reactions to the BLM protests, instigating
expressions of disbelief among casual observers
on social media (ibid). Social media has also been
a major source of information about the
movement for the wider public (Cox, 2017) and
the affect, behaviour and language associated with
the movement on social media can predict on the
ground protest participation (Choudhury et al.,
2016).
As a distributed social movement, however, a
variety of individuals interact with and contribute
to discourse about BLM on social media,
including individuals who oppose the BLM
movement, appropriating and deploying the
movements phraseology for their own goals (Ince
et al., 2017). For instance, the hashtags
#AllLivesMatter and #BlueLivesMatter were
used by those who opposed or criticised the BLM
movement, used (respectively) to deny specific
violence against black Americans and to suggest
lack of attention to the importance of police safety
by BLM supporters (Carney, 2016).
During the first eleven months of the BLM
movement in 2014, research found that discourse
on social media using the BLM hashtag fell into
five groups: expressions of solidarity and
affirmations of the goals of the movement;
discussion of tactics and actions of the movement;
reports, documentation and reactions to police
violence; discussions of the protests in Ferguson,
Missouri following the shooting of Michael
Brown; and counter protest messages blocking the
goals, tactics and ideology of the movement (Ince
et al., 2017).
The protests and riots that emerged following the
shooting of Brown in August 2014 shocked the
country. Photos of military-grade weapons being
used on unarmed civilians, the shooting of
wooden pellets and tear gas, and the arrest of two
journalists legally filming these actions sparked
debates about the militarisation of the police and
excessive use of force by police not just against
individual black people but also against those
protesting in these cases (Li, 2014).
2

These tactics were repeated in the 2020 protests
following the death of George Floyd. However,
the ongoing coronavirus threat posed a new
complication in this case. Not only would protest
conditions facilitate the spread of the virus but the
use of tear gas and crowd control and containment
tactics by the police would aid the spread and
worsen the symptoms of the virus (Harvey, 2020).
BLM activists and allies faced an unprecedented
challenge of balancing the risks of the virus
against the risk of systemic racism, complicated
by the intersectionality of these risks that has left
ethnic minority populations disproportionately
affected by the virus as well as local control
measures that target areas in which the virus is
actively spreading.
COVID, minorities and intersectional impacts
The COVID pandemic, which has to date killed
more
than
170,000
Americans,
has
disproportionally impacted ethnic minorities.
Although racial data on COVID impacts is still
incomplete, analysis of available data in the US
found African American deaths from COVID
were almost twice as much as would be expected
based on their share of the population (Godoy &
Wood, 2020). Similarly, in the UK, mortality rates
for black men and women are 1.4 to 2 times higher
than for white groups and individuals with south
Asian backgrounds are 20% more likely to die
after being admitted to hospital than white
individuals (Haque, 2020).
A report by Public Health England concluded that
in the UK these differences were not due to
biological causes but rather the effects of
structural inequalities, marginalisation and racism,
moderated through lower socioeconomic status,
occupation, living conditions and poorer health
(Public Health England, 2020). As such, both the
police violence that underpins the BLM
movement and the threat of COVID for minority
populations share root causes that the BLM
movement aims to address.
With this in mind, the 2020 BLM protests present
a unique case to understand how individuals
approach and balance different forms of risk and
engage in complicated calculations about political
responses to societal issues. It is also an important
step in the evolution of the BLM movement,
representing the largest and most widespread

protests on the US taking place under conditions
of increased risk for protestors and increased
public resistance to large-scale gatherings due to
disease transmission risk.
In analysing this case, we are particularly
interested to understand how individuals are
balancing different forms of risk in their thinking
about the protest movement. Do they feel the risks
of police racism outweigh the risks of COVID?
Do the systemic root causes of the impacts of
these issues on black communities strengthen the
arguments of the movement? Will there be
increased pushback against the protests due to the
COVID transmission risks incurred by protest
action? Do the frames used by individuals in
discussing the movement match those found in
previous research or has the issue evolved in light
of the current pandemic? Given the core role that
social media has played in the BLM movement
and in political discussions more widely in the US,
we focus this analysis on online discourse on
Twitter.
Examining Twitter discourse
Many research projects intending to monitor
social media discourse on Twitter collect data
from within a group of pre-selected hashtags and
keywords. However, this strategy risks missing
emergent or unselected topics. It is thus severely
limited in its ability to speak to the body of online
discourse, particularly during fast-moving events,
and is subject to significant researcher bias based
on the selection of hashtags and keywords to
follow.
To avoid this limitation, this project collected a
sample of data from all trending topics within the
US between 25 May and 31 May, 2020. This
period therefore captures the initial reaction,
discussion and organisation of the protests, which
occurred in the days following Floyd's death on 25
May.
Using custom Python scripts to interface with the
Twitter API, the project collected the most recent
100 tweets associated with each of the top 50
trending topics in the 64 locations for which
Twitter collates trends (including one for the
entire country) every 15 minutes during the target
period. This data collection captured 3,434 unique
trending topics across the week-long period.
3

We then undertook a content analysis of each
hashtag or keyword that had trended at least 50
times across the 64 locations. This means, for
example, a coded topic could have been trending
in almost all US locations in one 15-minute period
or in just one US location for more than half a day.
The content analysis employed an established
coding frame used in previous research to
determine the broad content of social media posts
in a variety of political contexts and events
(Bolsover, 2017, 2018). A total of 324 hashtags or
keywords trended more than 50 times across the
64 locations during the period.
Of these 324 trends, 184 were political (57%), 106
were commercial (33%), 30 were informational
(9%) and four were personal (1%). Of political
trends, 116 explicitly concerned the Black Lives
Matter protests and catalysing events and 24
concerned COVID. We conducted intercoder
reliability checks on the 100 most popular of these
trends. Percentage agreement for trend topic was
78% with a Kappa of 63.46%. Percentage
agreement for being about BLM was 87.21% with
a Kappa of 74.22%. Percentage agreement for
being about COVID was 89.95% with a Kappa of
42.96%. The Kappa for being about COVID is
lower due to the fact that COVID trends were
infrequent in the dataset (7%), meaning that
expected agreement for this code is very high
(81.19%).
The relative paucity of COVID discourse in the
dataset is also notable for this research project. We
can compare the focus of trending topics during
this weeklong period to two periods analysed in
previous research using the same dataset and
methods. During the period 22 through 26 April,
13% of the top 200 trends on US Twitter
concerned COVID and during the period 27 April
through 3 May 19% of the top 200 trends
concerned COVID (Bolsover, 2020; Bolsover &
Tokitsu Tizon, 2020). However, during the weeklong period after the death of George Floyd only
10% of the top 200 trends concerned COVID
(almost half that of the week 27 April through 3
May).
During the week of 25 to 31 May, hashtags and
keywords associated with the BLM movement
made up almost one third of the top 200 trending
topics. Only one of these trends (0.5%) was coded
as concerning both the BLM movement and

COVID. This research set out to understand how
protestors balanced and negotiated the twin but
linked issues of BLM and COVID, but, these data
suggest that Twitter discourse about the BLM
movement crowded out or replaced discourse
about COVID. However, we need to look in detail
at the content of individual posts in order to
understand this in more depth.
Nature of political posts during the period
We examined a random selection of 250 tweets
from within top political trending topics in the
week-long period after Floyd's death. We consider
the content of all 184 trends that concerned
political issues from within the 324 that were
trending more than 50 times during the week
rather than focus on COVID or BLM trends
specially. This is because we are interested in the
potential intersection of political, COVID and
BLM discourse and the place of BLM discourse
within a wider system.
Of these 250 posts, 187 (74.8%) were about
politics in the US and 148 (59.2%) were about the
BLM movement. Only 13 of the 250 posts were
about the coronavirus in the US (5.2%). This is
dramatically lower than the period 22 to 26 April
in which 35% of 250 randomly selected tweets in
the top 200 trends about politics concerned
COVID in the US (Bolsover & Tokitsu Tizon,
2020). This, again, suggests that rather than
discussing protest action occurring within the
context of a global pandemic, discussion of the
BLM protests replaced discussion of the
coronavirus, despite the ongoing threat of the
disease and the potential for discussing the similar
root causes of risk that has meant African
American communities have disproportionally
suffered both from police violence and COVID.
Of the 250 tweets, only one was coded as
concerning both COVID in the US and the
🖤"BLM
protests and it only did so in a cursory way,
writing Raw Footage but Necessary
#BlackLivesMater
#JusticeForGeorgeFloyd
#minneapolisriots #AllLivesMatters #coronavirus
with an attached video showing various acts of
police brutality against African Americans and
footage from the protests, with audio of a speech
by Trump. Although using the coronavirus
hashtag, the content of the tweet did not concern
the disease and it is therefore likely that this
4

hashtag was used to raise the prominence of the
tweet rather than to indicate COVID-topical
content.
This tweet also contains two discursive elements
worthy of note. Firstly, here we see the
AllLivesMatter hashtag being used alongside
BlackLivesMatter and JusticeforGeorgeFlyod
hashtags. This contrasts with the use of the
hashtag discussed in research by Carney (2016) in
which AllLivesMatter was largely used by those
opposing the BLM movement to suggest that
BLM was devaluing other lives and to mask racist
claims with colour-blind rhetoric. This is clearly
not true for this tweet and, perhaps, suggests that
this hashtag has been co-opted to support rather
than oppose BLM aims.
A second interesting point is the use of the
MinneapolisRiots hashtag. As discussed in the
previous memo in this series (Bolsover, 2020),
labelling is often used on Twitter to assign
polarised identity positions to a particular issue.
However, we more frequently see the word riot
applied to political activity by those who oppose
that activity than by those who support that
activity (who would more frequently use terms
like protest). This, again, suggests a co-opting of
oppositional language by supporters of the BLM
movement and also, perhaps, support for and
admission of an escalation in movement tactics
towards violent and unlawful (riot) rather than
peaceful and lawful (protest). The experiences of
previous BLM protests, such as those in Ferguson
after the death of Michael Brown, may have
hardened the response of BLM protestors towards
violent and uncontrollable protest action.
Returning to the main focus of this research, the
fact that this was the only post from 250 to
mention, even in passing, both the BLM protests
and COVID is notable. This, again, indicates that
evidence of an attempt to balance the risks of
disease spread against the risks of systemic racism
and police violence were not present in BLM
discourse on social media. However, this risk
balancing might not be overly stated but rather
evidenced in the orientation of posts. If a post
supported the BLM movement but not protest
action, it could be seen as an attempt to find
alternative avenues for protests in the time of a
global pandemic.

Of the 148 posts concerning the BLM movement,
93 (63%) supported the movement, 17 (12%)
opposed the movement and 38 neither supported
nor opposed the movement (26%). This is
consistent with previous research that found that
there was wide support for the movement on
social media (Freelon et al., 2016) but is also
notable that this support continued during a period
where the protest activities of the movement
would have increased risk of virus transmission.
Of the 93 posts that supported the BLM movement,
70 (75.3%) explicitly supported protest action.
None of these mentioned modifying protest action
to restrict the spread of COVID. Of the 51 posts
that opposed protest action by the BLM
movement, none mentioned COVID as a reason.
The hypothesis put forward that protestors would
balance risks of disease transmission and systemic
racism, and consider the intersectionality of these
risks finds no support based on the evidence in this
dataset. Rather support or opposition to protest
action aligned with support or opposition to the
BLM movement more generally. A number of
BLM supportive posts contained elements of
opposition to protest action, however, this
opposition focused entirely on the levels of
violence at the protests not on disease risk.
For instance, one tweet showed an Afro-Latino
CNN reporter being arrested by police on air,
another showed a video of police aggressively
approaching the protest line and a third from LA
Times reporter Brittny Mejia stated “I’ve covered
protests involving police in Ferguson, Mo., Baton
Rouge, La., Dallas and Los Angeles. I’ve also
covered the U.S. military in war zones, including
Iraq and Afghanistan. I have never been fired at
by police until tonight.”
Several posts mentioned the need to stay safe, but
this was always about staying safe from the police
not from an infectious respiratory disease:
"Finally home from the Miami protests in Bayside.
We were thousands strong and peaceful as fuck
and then shit got rowdy a bit after I left and people
are being tear gassed, rubber bullets are flying
from snipers and police are in FULL gear.
Another post shared a photo of what look like two
men in battle fatigues with a sniper rifle and other
military equipment on the roof of a building,
5

saying: this is on the corner of 72nd and dodge at
omaha. please stay safe
Throughout the posts, disease risk was not present
in discussions with the focus on the risks of
violence (largely from the police) at protests. This
suggests implicitly that police violence against
protestors was seen as the greatest (and perhaps
only) risk, with police violence against individual
African Americans (against which the protests
were mobilised) the second greatest risk. Posters
either did not believe the risks of COVID were
relevant compared to these other risks, or largely
did not think of COVID risk as the focus of media
and popular discourse shifted to the BLM
movement, or, perhaps, did not wish to discuss or
be seen to consider the risks of the disease for fear
of detracting or being seen to underplay the risks
of police violence and systemic racism towards
African Americans in the US.
Common framings within BLM discourse
Of the 93 posts that supported the BLM movement,
by far the largest proportion (42 posts, 45%)
expressed solidarity with the movement's aims
and messages. Eleven posts (12%) discussed
protest and movement tactics and 10 (11%)
criticised police violence and militarisation. A
further four posts concerned police violence and
militarisation but praised the actions of particular
police departments in support of protestors as
examples of desirable and possible alternatives.
These categories mirror those found in a study of
BLM Twitter discourse in 2014 (Ince et al., 2017).
However, there were a further two significant
categories of posts that were not prominent in this
work. The first category specifically called out
white racism and white racist reactions to the
BLM movement and black people more generally.
Of these nine posts (10%), a number specifically
concerned another incident on 25 May in which a
white woman in New York called the police after
a black birdwatcher approached her to attempt to
get her to leash her dog in an area where leashing
is required. Others took a more general tone, such
as sharing old footage of white children driving
black children out of "their" neighbourhood or
contemporary footage of a white man in a private
gym calling building security because he believed
the black men using the gym did not have the right
to be there. These posts were considered different

from the solidarity posts category as they focus on
white racism more generally rather than the
specific issue of structural racism in the law
enforcement and judiciary towards which the
BLM movement is orientated.
A second category of posts also not found in the
2014 research specifically framed their pro-BLM
discourse around anti-Trump positions. Both of
these categories speak to the opposition and
challenges the BLM movement has faced.
Of the 17 posts that opposed the BLM movement
protests, the most prominent category was
conspiracy content. Interestingly, this evidenced
both pro- and anti-BLM sentiments. On the antiBLM side, two posts argued that the protests had
been organised by George Soros, a common
scapegoat of far-right voices. Another post wrote:
Minnesota State Police arresting the CNN clown
was 100% staged This entire thing is staged by the
Democrats to cause chaos and division in our
Country Dems won’t stop until they’ve burned our
Country to the ground #MinneapolisRiot
#minneapolisriots
In this post, we see much of the same information
being repeated in anti-BLM commentary on
Twitter as was found in Trump-supporting and
anti-lockdown discourse in previous data memos
(Bolsover, 2020; Bolsover & Tokitsu Tizon,
2020). George Soros, the Democrats and the
traditional media are seen as the enemies and these
posts appear to see each new event as a renewed
chance to find evidence for this narrative and
repeat familiar accusations of the parties behind
societal events. This kind of discourse is typical of
authoritarian populism that is based on strict inand out-group constructions and a simplified and
visible out-group that threatens the safety of the
in-group.
Interestingly, conspiracy-style content was also
shared by pro-BLM voices, who alleged that the
violence seen at the BLM protest was orchestrated
by white people, possibly as a way to discredit the
protestors and instigate more widespread violence.
Two posters put forward the idea that far-right
extremists were attempting to turn the BLM
protests into a "New Civil War." Two other posts
recounted stories of violence against police cars
being instigated by white individuals. One of
these posts alleged that these individuals were
6

"plants" trying to bait the crowd into violence and
disorder.
This perspective dovetails with the wider
commentary on police violence and militarisation,
protest tactics and white racism. It evidences a
tension among BLM supporting posts between a
desire to maintain or evidence a peaceful protest
and the feeling of a need for - and even a joy in lawlessness and violence. Many individuals
shared pictures of large groups of orderly and
peaceful protesters with captions such as "this
needs to be just as viral as the Target video" (of
individuals looting a Target store). Another
similar post, with an attached picture, wrote:
POWERFUL! Don’t let the news media only show
one side of this. A group of black men protecting
a police officer who was separated from his group.
#riots2020 #protests #JusticeForGeorgeFlyod
Implicit in these framings are two key and linked
narratives which run through wider BLM
discourse in the dataset. The first relates to a
critique of news media that they will focus largely
on the violence of protestors (rather than peaceful
and lawful protest) and that they will not show
acts of police brutality against protestors.
Typifying this perspective, one poster wrote:
they don’t show any of this on the news. spread it
all #LAProtests #NashvilleProtest #protest
#BlacklivesMaters
#pittsburghprotest
#phillyprotest #seattleprotest #georgesfloyd
#NewarkProtest #buffaloprotest
The post shared a compilation video of 14 clips of
police violence and apparently excessive use of
force against protestors, including several scenes
of driving into protestors with police cars,
trampling a protestor with a police horse and a
number of apparently unprovoked physical
attacks
against
protestors.
This
again
demonstrates the importance of cell phone video
and social media distribution as documentation of
the events that have driven the BLM movement.
A second implicit narrative in these posts is a
comparison of police violence against protestor
violence. Many posts seem to acknowledge that
protestors have acted violently, some even openly
embracing the idea of rioting. However, this is
held up against documented cases of police

violence as a legitimate and necessary response to
current conditions. Other posts, such as the
aforementioned post of black men protecting a
lone white police officer, juxtaposes the nonviolent actions of BLM protestors against the
violent and militarised police response.
However, it is also important to remember here
that a number of posts mentioned cases of police
solidarity with protestors – in Camden, New
Jersey and Flint, Michigan. These posts
demonstrate a path towards a solution for the
underlying issues of the movement in which
police and activists work together to address
issues of systemic racism.
New issue, same polarised positions
This data memo set out to investigate, using social
media data, how individuals balanced the risks of
systemic racism with disease transmission during
the major protests that swept the US following the
death of George Floyd at a time in which the
country was trying to control the spread of
COVID-19.
Considering both the spread of trending topics and
a random selection of posts in political trends, we
find almost no discussion of COVID. The
hypothesised balancing of risks is present neither
explicitly nor implicitly in either pro- or anti-BLM
discourse. The volume of discourse about COVID
in trending topics and within political trends
dropped from previously examined periods,
suggesting discussion of the BLM protests
crowded out or replaced discussion of COVID.
However, while the content of these posts does not
intersect topically, they evidence the same
polarised lenses and the same common enemies of
previously analysed COVID discourse. The same
arguments that were present in (right-wing) antilockdown discourse – alleging conspiracy by the
Democrat Party and donors like George Soros,
and holding up small business owners as the real
victims – were transferred to opposition to the
BLM protests.
Similarly, practices of documentation and witness
and holding up these behaviours as patently
unjustifiable in BLM posts without engaging
discussion about why this is the case, were also
common practices in previously analysed (left7

wing) pro-COVID restriction discourse. One new
aspect of BLM case, however, was a shared
distrust of traditional media and shared spreading
of conspiracy-style allegations on both sides,
compared to previous cases in which this content
was much more prevalent in right-wing
perspectives.
Like our two previous data memos considering
reactions to health misinformation about COVID
and pro- and anti-COVID restriction discourse,
both sides also evidenced worrying levels of
divisiveness and hate. Of the 93 posts that
supported the BLM movement, 37 (40%) saw
distinct opposing groups in society (other than
those of political parties). Of these, 31 (84%)
appeared to be directing hate at the opposing
group. Of the 17 posts that opposed the BLM
movement, 8 (47%) saw distinct opposing groups
in society and all of these (100%) directed hate
towards these groups. Similarly, of the 93 proBLM posts 38 (41%) attempted to prevent others
from speaking or undermine the value of their
words. Thirteen of the 17 anti-BLM posts (76%)
attempted to prevent others from speaking or
undermine the value of their words. These levels
of polarisation, divisiveness, hate and incivility
mean that discussion, interaction and productive
discourse would be unlikely.
Concluding remarks and further directions
This short data memo set out to investigate online
discourse about the May 2020 Black Lives Matter
protests in the US and to understand how
individuals balanced risks of disease transmission
against risks of systemic racism in discussing
these protests. It found no evidence of this kind of
risk balancing occurring or evidence of
engagement with the intersectionality of these two
risks for African American and ethnic minorities
in the US.
Instead, discussion of the BLM protests appeared
to replace COVID discussion on the platform,
with the number of posts about COVID in political
trending topics falling from 35% the week of 27
April to 3 May to 5% in the week following the
death of George Floyd. During this period, 59% of
posts in political trends concerned the BLM
movement. This could have occurred for many
reasons: individuals on both sides could see issues
of systemic racism and race relations in the US as

much more important than COVID. They could
also simply be bored of COVID discussion and
eager to engage in this new political issue. This
also mirrors traditional media coverage, which
had previously been dominated by COVID, but
turned its focus to the BLM protest during this
period. It could also have been the case that the
risks of COVID transmission were also on the
minds of those participating in and discussing the
BLM movement on social media but that they did
not want to detract attention away from the issues
of system racism and police violence by
considering COVID risks and the intersectionality
of these risks for minority populations.
However, while the topical focus turned to the
BLM protests, replacing discussion of COVID on
Twitter, the content of these discussions showed
many similarities to COVID discourse in the
weeks prior. Discourse on both sides evidenced
high levels of polarisation, divisiveness, incivility
and hate.
Right-wing political voices blamed a conspiracy
by the democratic party, traditional media and
democratic donors such as George Soros for the
ongoing protests in a very similar way to how
right-wing voices understood COVID, COVID
control restrictions, and reactions to health
misinformation spread by Donald Trump. ProBLM voices also included some conspiracy-style
content as well as evidencing similar positioning
practices as in pro-lockdown discourse (with an
assumption rather than argumentation of the
rightness of the position).
Compared to studies of BLM discourse from
earlier years, pro-BLM discourse during the May
2020 period appeared to have gained new
concerns associated with the opposition to the
movement from some white Americans, President
Trump, and police militarisation and responses to
the BLM protests.
In this, we see how structurally as well as
discursively the 2020 BLM protests saw existing
divisions and polarised positions repeated in a
new event. This entrenched positioning, in which
each new event is simply a replication of existing
divisions in society which predictably align in the
new event and play out according to an already
familiar story, this is extremely detrimental to the
8

possibility of political progress and potential
solution to ongoing political issues.
It is understandable that African Americans,
having lived their lives under conditions of
systemic racism, would feel a sense of forgone
conclusion in these events. However, the posts
holding up examples of solidarity and deescalation tactics from American police
departments show some hope for solution in this
area. With BLM discourse on Twitter inciting a
similar playbook of accusations of Democratic,
media and socialist conspiracy from BLM
opposers, social media likely will not be a place
where issues raised by the BLM movement can be
addressed. The platform will likely continue to
remain important in distributing documentary
evidence of cases of racism and excessive use of
force by police, which in turn maintain high levels
of support for the movement among the general
population. However, especially under the
divisive rhetoric of President Trump that has
empowered far-right voices, the platform is not
one in which discussions seem to be possible that
would help solve issues of racism (structural or
otherwise) in the general population. Neither was
it a place where the complicated balance or risks
between systemic racism and disease transmission
could be addressed.
Based on this finding, we suggest that it will be
difficult to solve either the issues associated with
COVID or those highlighted by the BLM
movement until the underlying polarisation of
these discussions is addressed. Solutions to these
entrenched positions, through which new events
are perceived as opportunities for the same
polarised rhetoric, are essential in addressing the
events through which this polarisation is
channelled.
It is important to remember, however, that this
data memo has focused on a small random sample
of social media posts, from a single weeklong
period on a single social media platform. It is not
intended to provide the final word on these
complex issues but rather to form a basis for
discussion and further investigation. The US
faces many serious and conflicting structural
issues, of which only two were addressed here. It
is hoped that research such as this that can
illuminate how individual Americans are
discussing these complicated issues can provide

some evidential basis to construct equitable
solutions to these ongoing challenges.

Acknowledgements
I wish to thank Emma Briones, Rhian Hughes and
Janet Tokitsu Tizon for their content analysis
work on these data; the University of Leeds
Strategic Research Investment Fund for helping
pay for Emma Briones' and Rhian Hughes' work
on the project; and the Laidlaw Scholarship
program for funding and facilitating Janet Tokitsu
Tizon's work on the project. I also wish to thank
Google for providing Cloud Computing research
credits that allowed data collection and processing
to be undertaken for this research at a time when
research funding has been severely curtained due
to COVID-related financial uncertainty.
References
Bolsover, G. (2017). Technology and political
speech: Commercialisation, authoritarianism
and the supposed death of the Internet’s
democratic potential [University of Oxford].
https://ora.ox.ac.uk/objects/uuid:f63cffbaa186-4a6c-af9cdbc9ac6d35fb/download_file?file_format=pdf
&safe_filename=__Bolsover_PhD_6_for%2B
printing%2Band%2Bbinding.pdf&type_of_w
ork=Thesis
Bolsover, G. (2018). Slacktivist USA and
Authoritarian China? Comparing Two
Political Public Spheres With a Random
Sample of Social Media Users: Microblog
Users in the United States and China. Policy
& Internet, 10(4).
https://doi.org/10.1002/poi3.186
Bolsover, G. (2020). Balancing freedoms, rights
and responsibilities during COVID in US: a
study ofanti-and pro-restriction discourse.
Centre for Democratic Engagement,
University of Leeds.
https://cde.leeds.ac.uk/wpcontent/uploads/sites/93/2020/08/20200807Pro-and-Anti-Lockdown-Discourse-onSocial-Media.pdf
Bolsover, G., & Tokitsu Tizon, J. (2020). Social
Media and Health Misinformation during the
US COVID Crisis. Centre for Democratic
9

Engagement, University of Leeds.
https://cde.leeds.ac.uk/wpcontent/uploads/sites/93/2020/08/20200722Social-Media-and-Health-Misinformationduring-the-US-COVID-Crisis.pdf
Buchanan, L., Bui, Q., & Patel, J. K. (2020, July
2). Black Lives Matter May Be the Largest
Movement in U.S. History. The New York
Times.
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/07/
03/us/george-floyd-protests-crowd-size.html
Carney, N. (2016). All Lives Matter, but so Does
Race: Black Lives Matter and the Evolving
Role of Social Media. Humanity and Society,
40(2), 180–199.
CDC, C. for D. C. and P. (2020). Coronavirus
Disease 2019: Cases in the U.S.
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019ncov/cases-updates/cases-in-us.html
Choudhury, M., Jhaver, S., Sugar, B., & Weber,
I. (2016, May). Social Media Participation in
an Activist Movement for Racial Equality.
Proceedings of the International AAAI
Conference on Weblogs and Social Media.
International AAAI Conference on Weblogs
and Social Media.
Cox, J. (2017). The source of a movement:
Making the case for socialmedia as an
informational source using Black LivesMatter.
Ethnic and Racial Studies, 40(11), 1847–
1854.
Freelon, D., McIlwain, C. D., & Clarke, M.
(2016). Beyond the Hashtags: #Ferguson,
#Blacklivesmatter, and the Online Struggle
for Offline Justice.
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstra
ct_id=2747066
Godoy, M., & Wood, D. (2020, May 30). What
Do Coronavirus Racial Disparities Look Like
State By State? NPR.
https://www.npr.org/sections/healthshots/2020/05/30/865413079/what-docoronavirus-racial-disparities-look-like-stateby-state?t=1598018589328
Haque, Z. (2020, June 22). Why does Covid-19
affect ethnic minorities so badly? It isn’t to do
with biology. The Guardian.
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/
2020/jun/22/covid-19-britain-ethnicminorities-government-race-inequalityepidemic
Harvey, J. (2020, June 5). Using Tear Gas On
Protesters May Worsen Coronavirus Spread.

The Huffington Post.
https://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/entry/teargas-effects-ofcoronavirus_n_5ed9b63dc5b61f14824b8180?
ri18n=true&guccounter=1&guce_referrer=aH
R0cHM6Ly9jb25zZW50LnlhaG9vLmNvbS9
2Mi9wYXJ0bmVycz9zZXNzaW9uSWQ9M1
9jYy1zZXNzaW9uXzhmOTliOTVhLTg4Mj
UtNDZiZi1hNmQxLWFjMzMwMjA4ODAx
Yg&guce_referrer_sig=AQAAAM_j4QZwW1pfrVnQHZyWAY9cfRuf4Bks0iP1
2v5IC40PyCJMYqOS71IupUxbsoEk2d07WVH
tus48G3wsF2nYeYkLiVcuEavXVkFMCfpH
Qk9-C7mHFk-0ForhI8SOsjpRiWSAPnD2DZfUZEwAl6cZ7SjTCLZ1z5Lqq07M1B
UrJ
Ince, J., Rojas, F., & Davis, C. (2017). The social
media response to Black Lives Matter: How
Twitter users interact with Black Lives Matter
through hashtag use. Ethnic and Racial
Studies, 40(11), 1814–1830.
Li, S. (2014, August 15). The Evolution of Police
Militarization in Ferguson and Beyond. The
Atlantic.
https://www.theatlantic.com/national/archive/
2014/08/the-evolution-of-policemilitarization-in-ferguson-andbeyond/376107/
Public Health England. (2020). Beyond the
data:Understanding the impact of COVID-19
on BAME groups.
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/gover
nment/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_da
ta/file/892376/COVID_stakeholder_engagem
ent_synthesis_beyond_the_data.pdf

10

