Understanding User Experience of COVID-19 Maps through Remote
Elicitation Interviews
Damla Çay*

Till Nagel†

Koç University

Mannheim University
of Applied Sciences

arXiv:2009.01465v1 [cs.HC] 3 Sep 2020

A BSTRACT
During the coronavirus pandemic, visualizations gained a new level
of popularity and meaning for a wider audience. People were bombarded with a wide set of public health visualizations ranging from
simple graphs to complex interactive dashboards. In a pandemic
setting, where large amounts of the world population are socially distancing themselves, it becomes an urgent need to refine existing user
experience evaluation methods for remote settings to understand
how people make sense out of COVID-19 related visualizations.
When evaluating visualizations aimed towards the general public
with vastly different socio-demographic backgrounds and varying
levels of technical savviness and data literacy, it is important to understand user feedback beyond aspects such as speed, task accuracy,
or usability problems. As a part of this wider evaluation perspective,
micro-phenomenology has been used to evaluate static and narrative
visualizations to reveal the lived experience in a detailed way. Building upon these studies, we conducted a user study to understand how
to employ Elicitation (aka Micro-phenomenological) interviews in
remote settings. In a case study, we investigated what experiences
the participants had with map-based interactive visualizations. Our
findings reveal positive and negative aspects of conducting Elicitation interviews remotely. Our results can inform the process of
planning and executing remote Elicitation interviews to evaluate
interactive visualizations. In addition, we share recommendations regarding visualization techniques and interaction design about public
health data.
Index Terms:
Human-centered computing—Visualization—
Visualization design and evaluation methods
1

I NTRODUCTION

Data visualization is becoming an important part of daily life as
more and more people commonly encounter data-driven online
platforms and tools in contexts ranging from journalism to urban
spaces [1, 6, 20, 27]. The SARS-CoV-2 pandemic further increased
this importance by putting data visualization in the center of everyday life [3, 23, 30]. In this urgent situation, many organizations
started to create visualizations to better explore and communicate
the global effects of the pandemic. This created many challenges
including designing visualizations with complex data for wide audiences, including experts, policymakers, and lay people with different
levels of data literacy.
To understand the impact of these visualizations, it becomes critical to investigate the experiences people have using them while
the pandemic is still ongoing. People use these visualizations to
learn more about the subject, and inform their decisions about their
personal life. Additionally, it is a topic that has a strong emotional
* e-mail:
† e-mail:

dcay13@ku.edu.tr
t.nagel@hs-mannheim.de
‡ e-mail: eyantac@ku.edu.tr

Asım Evren Yantaç‡
Koç University

aspect. These conditions put COVID-19 visualizations in a unique
position where there is an opportunity to learn interesting and relevant information about how people interact with these visualizations
in the course of their everyday life, and learn from their experience
to drive visualization design decisions accordingly.
For a phenomenon that affects many people deeply on a personal level, we believe it is important to investigate user experiences
beyond performance measures to capture the richness of their experience. Traditionally, evaluation methods for visualization are mostly
based on usability and performance [12, 16]. Recent studies have
been introducing methods from other fields to capture the richness
of the user experience further [4,7,9,15]. Hogan et al. [9] introduced
Micro-Phenomenological Interviews for visualization studies and
described it as the Elicitation Interview (EI), that aims to capture
personal experiences with great detail and with less risk of bias
and post-rationalization [26]. They suggest that visualizations can
trigger associations with past experiences, therefore affect the users
experience heavily. We believe COVID-19 visualizations are especially good cases for EI as the reading and usage might be strongly
influenced by the user’s personal experience and knowledge.
To understand the user experience with data visualizations during
the pandemic, we need to adapt co-located evaluation methods for
remote settings, due to the existing mobility disruptions, and because
a large portion of the population is social-distancing or even quarantined at home. In the last decade, researchers started to conduct
remote interviews to understand their advantages and disadvantages
over physical interviews. Remote interviews have many advantages
in terms of reducing cost and increasing accessibility by removing
geographical and mobility constraints [13]. On the other hand, challenges were reported regarding connectivity and rapport [29]. Poor
internet connection can cause calls or recordings to be disrupted
[5]. While studies found remote interviews supportive for building
rapport, they caution against a deceptive closeness between the participant and researcher [5], and point out that the lack of intimacy in
remote interviews may cause problems for sensitive questions [29].
More recent literature reports that remote interviews resemble inperson interviews in rapport [14]. Remote interviews in the literature
span all types of interviews from structured, to semi-structured, to
open-ended interviews. We are not aware of any studies that applied
the Elicitation interview technique remotely.
In this paper, we describe how we conducted a remote user study
on two COVID-19 visualizations with seven participants. We selected the WHO Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Dashboard [23]
and the COVID-19 Dashboard by the Center for Systems Science
and Engineering (CSSE) at Johns Hopkins University (JHU) [30],
as both are from reputable sources, present similar types of information, have comparable views, yet use distinct visual styles. In
the literature of elicitation interviews used for data visualizations,
the method has been applied in a co-located setting with static visualizations [9]. Nowak et al. [21] used the EI method for narrative
visualizations and conducted two of the six interviews remotely,
yet did not discuss the challenges or advantages. We aim to build
upon these previous studies on Elicitation Interviews by expanding
the method to a remote setting and applying it to interactive visualizations. With our study, we contribute considerations on how to

conduct remote elicitation interviews for interactive visualizations
and design recommendations for public health visualizations.
2

BACKGROUND

As visualizations become more important for our daily lives, evaluating and understanding how people interact with these visualizations
becomes more critical to create better visualization tools. Previous
studies have extensively analyzed different evaluation methods for
different types of visualization scenarios [12, 16]. The visualization
literature has a growing pool of evaluation methods for different
visualization stages and purposes [12, 16, 19]. Yet, visualization
evaluation studies still mostly focus on user performance, through assessing objectively measured metrics like time on task and accuracy
[9, 12, 16].
Some more recent studies move beyond performance-related objectives, including metrics like enjoyment [4], engagement [7, 15],
memorability [2, 28], and emotion [8, 32]. Wang et al. [32] argue
that researchers typically concentrate on performance, comprehension, or insights when determining the importance of visualizations.
In their work, they expand these definitions by emphasizing emotional responses and including different forms of engagement. They
propose an alternative way to value data representations: by their
creativity and their ability to engage. They expand engagement
further by defining different dimensions of it, which are affective
engagement, physical engagement through touch and movement,
intellectual engagement, and social engagement. In another study
focused on visualization engagement, Kennedy et al. [15] explored
subjective indicators of engagement through a diary study and a set
of focus groups. Some of the indicators were provoking questions,
creating empathy, generating curiosity, provoking surprise, changing
minds, or provoking a strong emotional response.
There are different methods and metrics to get a deeper understanding of the users experience of interacting with a visualization.
One of the most common methods is the interview method, which
is generally structured, semi-structured or open-ended interviews
with a focus on the usability aspects [16]. These types of interviews
fall short when we want to get a deep understanding of the users
experience at the moment of using the visualization, as they carry
the risk of post-rationalization [9]. To overcome this, recent studies
used the Elicitation Interview technique on visualizations [9, 21]. It
is a method of descriptive phenomenology, developed by the psychologist Vermersh [31], as he was aiming to transfer the implicit
knowledge of experts to non-experts. Later on, this method was used
with any type of lived experience by the cognitive scientist Varela
[24]. The method was also used in the HCI field for understanding
text entry experiences [17], tactile experiences [22] and recently in
the visualization field to understand the experience of making sense
of data displays [9, 10, 21]. For static and narrative visualizations,
the method was found useful as it allows understanding users subjective experiences beyond their attitudes and judgments [9, 21].
In these studies, Hogan et al.s [9] focus was on static visualizations while Nowak et al.s [21] focus was on narrative visualizations
with limited interactivity. However, there have been no studies on
more complex interactive visualizations. We believe applying EI to
complex interactive visualizations is important, as interactivity is an
important element for visualizations.
The importance of remote methods increased as the COVID-19
Pandemic limited the mobility of societies worldwide. Before this
situation, research on remote interviews gained speed with the rapid
developments in technology and the wide usage of available tools.
Online interviews have an immense strength that overcomes temporal, financial, geographical, and mobility constraints [13]. As a
result, remote interviews contribute to inclusion and diversity of
participants [11]. However, they introduce new types of challenges.
One important challenge is connectivity problems [5]. Even though
connectivity problems decreased significantly over the years of re-

mote interview literature, even small problems can still affect the
flow state negatively for EI. Another challenge identified by several
studies [5, 29], is related to rapport. Seitz [29] notes that it is hard to
build rapport in remote interviews as there is no physical, in-person
relationship. On the other hand, Brown [5] states that remote interviews can create a deceptive closeness, as the tools used (e.g. Skype)
are usually used with family and friends. We believe this perception
might be shifted due to the widely applied remote working situations.
Additionally, a more recent study by Jenner et al. [14] reports that
remote interviews resemble in-person interviews in rapport and the
depth of information shared.
Hogan et al. [9] uses the Elicitation Interview in a co-located
setting and even described how the physical adjustments should be
to assist the desired mental state. Nowak et al. [21] conducted two of
the six interviews in a remote setting, however, they note that it was
done for convenience and did not discuss it further. We believe it is
important to understand and highlight the advantages and challenges
of remote elicitation interview methods on interactive visualizations.
3

METHODOLOGY: E LICITATION I NTERVIEWS

An elicitation interview requires a mental state that enables the
evocation of the lived experience. The participant should feel as if
they were living that moment. This state enables acquiring details
that would otherwise go unnoticed. To create such a mental state,
an elicitation interview uses a special questioning technique and
interview structure. The interview is conducted in a quiet place
without any distractions. During the interview, open-ended and
content-empty questions are asked in the present tense, to evoke the
experience. The questions are What and How questions, no Why
questions are asked to avoid judgments and post-rationalization. The
interviewer observes specific cues to understand if the participant
is in an evocation state. Speaking in the present tense, gazing into
space, taking pauses, and slurring speech are some of the cues that
indicate the participant is in the evocation state [24].
We primarily use Hogan et al.s [9] detailed elicitation interview
guide where the phases and the question types are explicitly framed
for visualization studies. The questioning technique has an iterative
structure, the level of detail increases through the interview. The
questions themselves are content-empty, they dont introduce new information, but they aim to reveal the actions, sensations, and feelings
of the participant at an increasing level of granularity. An important
pre-interview consideration is selecting a particular experience. The
elicitation interview requires focusing on a singular experience, it is
not suitable for general experiences. The common case for visualization studies has been creating that experience by providing users
with a visualization to view, either a week before the interview [9],
or right before the interview [10, 21].
The interview structure has six phases. The first phase is notifying the participant about the aim of the study, and the nature of
the interview, that it can go deeper into experiences than regular
interviews. The participant should be aware that they can stop the
interview at any point. The second phase is commencing the interview using the phrase, If you agree, I would like to go back to the
time when you started to experience X. Then the questions of when
and where the experience happened are asked. After this, the third
phase begins where the evocation state is induced through visual,
auditory, kinesthetic, and emotional questions. Some examples of
these questions are: When you are there, what do you see? At this
moment, what are you hearing? At that time, what is the position of
your body?, At that time, what are you feeling?. The fourth phase
is called the diachronic stage. It aims to understand the temporal
structure of the experience, how it unfolded over time. Example
probing questions that mark the key moments of the experience are:
How do you start?, What do you do then?, What happens at the end?,
How do you know you have finished? [25].
After the temporal structure is defined, the fifth phase begins. It

Figure 1: Main pages of two websites that were explored by the participants. A.WHO Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Dashboard [23]
B.COVID-19 Dashboard by the Center for Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE) at Johns Hopkins University (JHU) [30] Red dashed line
indicates the page fold of the main pages of both websites.

is called the synchronic structure and it aims to deepen the episodes
defined in the previous phase. Thus, probing questions are more
fine-tuned versions of the evocation stage (third stage) questions,
that aim to reveal visual, auditory, kinesthetic, and emotional sensations in greater detail. At the sixth and last phase, the interviewer
reformulates the entire interview and asks the participant if they
have anything to add.
Our work expands the previous works on elicitation interviews
by applying the method in a remote context. In addition to the
elicitation interview about the experience, we asked post-interview
questions to understand the implications of the method being remote.
We discuss how the non-verbal cues that indicate an evoked state is
translated to a remote context. Furthermore, the visualizations we
selected are tools where the users can freely explore the collection
of visual information. This creates a challenge of understanding the
navigation behavior precisely since there are no visual records but
only the remarks of the user. We believe that elicitation interviews
can still be useful without a visual record, and we discuss the level
of insights that this type of information can induce. We see our
work as a probe investigating the elicitation interview methodology
in a remote setting, and intend this paper to function as a case
study. Through describing our methodologies and reflecting on what
worked and what did not, we hope to provide some insightful lessons
for others to plan and conduct their elicitation interviews remotely,
and to benefit future studies.

in terms of visual style. WHO Coronavirus Disease (COVID - 19)
Dashboard has a choropleth map with blue shades on a light grey
background (See Figure 1.A). On the bottom, a label displays total
confirmed cases and total deaths. On the left, a small widget allows
the user to switch to a graduated circle map (referred as bubble map
in the website) view, or switch to see deaths instead of cases. Small
line charts show new cases and confirmed cases over time. The map
is not scrollable with a mouse. When the user scrolls down, there are
bar graphs of confirmed cases over time, for continents and different
countries. Johns Hopkins Universitys COVID-19 Map has a bubble
map with red circles on a dark grey background (See Figure 1.B).
On the left side, there is the number of total confirmed cases and a
list of confirmed cases by countries. On the right side, there is the
number of global deaths and a list of deaths per country. Next to it,
deaths and recovered are listed at the US State level. On the right
bottom, there is a line chart of total confirmed cases by time.
We used Zoom for the video call, a free video-conferencing tool
with a recording option [33]. When planning the video call, we
asked participants to select a time and space where they can be away
from distractions. The interview started with a brief introduction
to the study. We followed Hogan et al.s interview guide [9]. After
the elicitation interview finished, we asked post-interview questions
about their general experience during the pandemic process, their
experience with remote activities, and what they think about the
interview being remote.

3.1

3.2

Participants and Procedure

Seven participants (5 female, 1 male, 1 prefers not to say) participated in the study. The range of their ages was between 22 and 43
(Median: 25). Participants rated their experience with data visualizations and introspective practices from 1 to 5 (1 Not experienced - 5
Very experienced). On average, participants rated 2.8 (SD: 1.6) for
their data visualization experience and 3 (SD: 1.5) for their introspective experiences. The participants had diverse professions, including
a florist, an industrial engineer, a mechanical engineer, a clinical
psychologist, an architecture student, a human-computer interaction
researcher, and an academic. The interviews were conducted in June
2020. Five of the participants were located in Istanbul, Turkey and
two of them were located in Glasgow, UK. Pandemic measures for
both countries were started to ease down for both countries starting
from June.
For recruitment, we created an open call through our research
groups Instagram page. We sent a survey to the participants and
asked them to complete the survey from their laptop or desktop computers before the video call. The survey had questions about their
background, experience about their introspective practices (meditation, yoga, mindfulness, and cognitive behavioral therapy), and
data visualization. We asked their experience about introspective
practices because, in previous micro-phenomenological studies, researchers found that participants with experience in introspective
practices were more successful in focusing on, and communicating
their inner thoughts, actions, and feelings [21]. After these questions, the survey presented the link of the first visualization website
and asked the participants to explore it until they felt they gained
as much information as possible. As the last step of the survey, the
participants explored the second website. We randomized the shown
order of websites for each participant to balance order bias.
We selected two visualizations to be used by participants. The
first one is the World Health Organizations (WHO) COVID-19 map
visualization [23]. The second one is Johns Hopkins Universitys
COVID-19 map visualization [30]. We focused on these visualizations as the topic is urgent and the previous studies havent explored
this method with exploratory, interactive visualizations. We selected
these specific visualizations as they were both from reputable and
well-known sources, both included similar types of information,
both had a prominent spatial visualization, yet two websites differed

Data Analysis

For analyzing the EI data, we used thematic analysis as suggested
by previous studies [9, 21]. Our approach included three stages, (1)
familiarization, (2) thematic coding, and (3) creating and refining
themes. At the first stage, the researcher who conducted the interview also transcribed them to familiarize themselves with the data.
The same researcher coded the data using open coding. After the
primary researcher finished the initial coding, another researcher
reviewed them and the codes were revised after discussions. The
same two researchers collaboratively created themes from the codes.
We used the remote collaboration tool Miro [18] for this step. After
three iterations, we defined and named the four final themes.
4

R ESULTS

In this section, first, we will present the themes that emerged from
the remote EI. Then we will present our observations from the interviews and results of the post-interview questions about participants
remote social experiences and their relationship with data during
the COVID-19 pandemic. We will use the abbreviations WHO for
World Health Organizations Coronavirus Map, and JHU for Johns
Hopkins Universitys website while presenting our results. We will
use identifiers in square brackets for distinguishing participants’
statements.
4.1

Elicitation Interview Themes

We present findings of how users explore a map, interact with rich
data, and complete their exploration. The interviews also revealed
issues that could be improved in terms of user experience. We share
our results building on the findings of Hogan et al. and Nowak et
al. Some of the themes that emerged from applying EI to static and
narrative visualizations were also evident in our study. More specifically, mentioning colors, comparing data with previous knowledge,
finishing viewing when one has a general understanding, and finding
personal connections were common points with previous results on
static and narrative visualizations.
4.1.1

Visual Impressions

This theme includes participants common impressions regarding
visual elements such as the use of color, general layout, and interface
elements. In all interviews, color was the first visual variable to be

Table 1: List of themes emerged from the thematic analysis of the remote elicitation interview. Numbers in parenthesis indicate the number of
participants the code was applied.

Themes
Visual Impressions:
Color (7), Layout (5), Ambiguous
details (5)

Interactive Exploration:
Spatial Exploration(4), Engaging
with text (3), Previous knowledge
(4), Completing Exploration (5)

Information Overload:
Refraining Depth (7), Losing meaning (5), Feelings about subject (3)

Expectations of Functionality:
Map (5), General Functionality (4)

Description

Illustrative Quote

Experiences and feelings that were
influenced by the visual variables
like color, general layout or interface elements

It’s all red on black, the colors make
me feel like the world is getting
worse.[P4, JHU](Fig 1.B.1)

Experiences of open-ended exploration processes

I have a planned flight for a wedding so Im looking at both countries
numbers.[P1, WHO](Fig 1.A)

Feelings caused by the amount, visual form, or content of data

I feel like I can go on forever on
this website. I don’t want to confuse myself so stay on the main
page and don’t search anything.[P3,
WHO](Fig. 1.A.1)

Experiences of functionality expectations that are not being met and
causing negative feelings like boredom and frustration

I wanted to see more layers on map
but it wasn’t working the way I
wanted, then I experimented with
the U.S. Map page(Fig 1.B.2)but I
was bored easily because of my disappointment with the main page(Fig
1.B.1)[P5, JHU]

mentioned for both websites. For WHO, the color blue and white
were noticed first. The color theme was perceived positively by all
participants. Participants described the colors as nice and pleasant.
One participant noted that WHO does not have a crisis feeling[P2].
On the other hand, for JHU, participants noted that it is pessimistic,
it shows danger, and its tiresome. One participant noted, It’s all red
on black, the colors make me feel like the world is getting worse.[P6].
This theme is similar to the Interpretation Processes of Visuals theme
from Hogan et al.s [9] work and Experiences of Aesthetics and
Design theme from Nowak et al.’s work [21]. Similar to Hogan
et al.s findings, color was the most prominent visual variable to be
mentioned.
In terms of interface layout, the general theme for WHO was
clarity. Five participants noted that WHO has a clear, spacious interface that feels lighter. For JHU, five participants found the interface
crowded and cramped. One participant compared two websites with
the following quote: WHO is more clear and focused, JHU presents
more data and more information to support the interpretation.[P3].
Another prominent visual element was the total number of cases
and deaths for both websites. JHU presented the number of cases at
the top left corner with red text. Three participants initially thought
this was the total number of deaths instead of cases because it was
written in red.
When explaining their actions, participants were able to describe
the general interface layout when they were asked to describe what
they saw and address specific interface elements during the interview

in most cases. However, there were instances where some details
were lost, overlooked, or confused with something else. Two participants could not remember what was on the left side, and one
participant could not remember what was on the right side of JHU.
During the JHU interview, One participant noted, I click a toggle
and switch to choropleth from bubble map, the color also changes to
blue, I think?[P4]. However, the toggle they mentioned actually belongs to WHO, so they remember the blue map of WHO. Similarly,
P7 said that they scrolled down to see more details of countries on
JHUs main page, which was not scrollable.
4.1.2

Interactive Exploration

Both WHO and JHU had an interactive map as the main element.
Participants explored the data according to global events, local situations, and personal connections. Four participants supported their
existing knowledge of global events from the map. An illustrative
remark is: Brazils cases are rising so I check it out.[P4]. Four participants explored the data of the country they live in. P1 noted,
We are in a 3-week trial, so I look at the UK to see if there is an
increase.[P1]. Three participants explored the countries they have
a personal connection, either the countries that they have family or
friends, or planned events. An example to illustrate the latter is: I
have a planned flight for a wedding so Im looking at both countries
numbers.[P1]. Finding personal connections is a recurring theme
in previous studies, Hogan et al. described this theme as Active
Seeking for Personal connections.

We asked participants to explore the websites freely. Even though
they mostly mentioned the opening pages, some of them briefly explored other pages on the websites. The page called Critical Trends
in JHU (see Figure 1.B.3), had headlines of specific questions like
Have countries flattened the curve? and a Learn More button that led
to a page with a brief introduction along with a collection of related
visualizations. Three participants mentioned this page, two of them
assumed the Learn more button leads to long articles which they did
not want to dive in. P3 stated that the headlines made them curious,
yet they did not click the button.
During their exploration, three participants stated that they compare the information they see with what they already know. This
theme of Using previous knowledge has been recurring in both
Hogan et al.s and Nowak et. al.s work. Lastly, two participants
stated that they might browse the website (WHO) superficially because they saw it before.
Participants expressed that they finish their exploration when they
have a general idea, they think they spent enough time or when they
are bored. Five participants finished their exploration when they
thought they understood the general message. Two participants were
finished based on time. One participant noted: I feel like I can go
on forever on this site.[...] At a point, I decided to stop myself from
spending too much time.[P3]. Lastly, two participants stated that
they finish when they start to feel bored.
4.1.3

Information Overload

At different stages of exploration, all participants avoided detailed
analysis either to avoid confusion, out of disinterest or avoiding
spending too much time. Except for P5, all participants only briefly
viewed pages other than the main pages. One participant expressed: I
dont want to distract myself, so I stayed on the main page mostly.[P3].
On the other hand, P5 explored the Explorer page on WHO in detail,
yet they noted, Too much control confused me. about their experience
on that page. Two participants found the bar graphs on WHO, to be
too detailed. P3 also noted they deliberately refrained from searching
while exploring WHO because they dont want to confuse themselves.
P6 expressed their disinterest saying that they explored both websites
briefly since they dont normally look at data or statistics.
Another common theme was about participants negative feelings
towards seeing total numbers of cases or deaths. Five participants
expressed that numbers dont mean anything to them, either because
they are bad with numbers, they dont trust the sources, or they dont
have a frame of reference. P2 expressed their need to see other
information to form a frame of reference with the following quote:
I think numbers dont give any information, I cannot make a comparison without knowing how many people die from other diseases
every day. Two participants expressed that they prefer looking at
trends rather than total numbers. To illustrate their reasoning, one
participant noted: I havent shown much interest in total numbers
since I know that countries report them differently, so they cant be
fully trusted, I trust trends more.[P1].
In terms of timing, our interviews were conducted around the end
of the quarantine period. Some participants expressed their negative
feelings about the subject. P1 and P3 expressed that they feel tired
because of the subject. P2 noted that they dont feel curious about
the subject because it affects them negatively.
4.1.4

Expectations of Functionality

The map was one of the first elements that participants saw and
interacted with. However, five participants had negative experiences
with maps on both websites. On WHO, P7 was annoyed because they
could not zoom in using the touchpad, and four other participants
felt disappointment and fatigue while using JHUs map (See Figure
1.B). Three participants found zooming in and out on JHU, to be
laborious. An illustrative quote is: The dots overlap and the visual
mess pushes me away, I cant understand unless I constantly zoom in

and out, and that is tiring.[P1]. Another participant who expected
more functionality from the map noted: Map wasnt interesting to
me, I looked to the left and right to display different data on the
map but nothing happened.[P5]. Additionally, there were remarks
about the general functionality of both websites. Three participants
commented on the long load time of JHU, expressing that this caused
impatience and boredom.
4.2
4.2.1

Observations and Post-Interview Questions
Observations

Non-verbal cues are important indicators to understand if the participants are in a mindset for evocation [9]. In a physical setting,
participants breaking eye contact to look away is considered to be
an indicator of them remembering their actual lived experiences,
and not creating new details that are not part of the experience [9].
Hogan et al. even suggest the researcher not to sit right across the
participant to leave an empty space they can gaze at. In remote interviews, eye contact works differently than physical interviews. There
is no direct eye contact since both parties look at their screens to see
each other, not the camera. Previous studies on remote interviews
[11] reported that this difference did not cause major problems. We
also observed that it did not cause problems for our study. Participants consistently looked away from the screen, when they were
remembering their experiences, so we were able to identify the
evocation mindset easily.
Secondly, we asked the participants to use the websites from their
laptop or desktop computers since we wanted to focus on the web
experience, not mobile. All participants also joined interviewed
sessions from their laptops. So, data exploration and interviews happened through the same medium, laptop computer. Two participants
asked if they could open the websites during the interview, out of
the frustration of not remembering details, but we asked them not to.
After the interview, one other participant noted: I felt the urge to just
open the websites to remember. We observed that using the same
medium, laptop computers, both for the data exploration experience
and the interview might have hindered the evocation mindset.
Lastly, we chose a heterogeneous group of participants with varying levels of introspective practices. These ranged from having no
prior experience (1 participant), to some brief experiences (2), to
regularly practicing meditation (2), to having professional background of educating others about mindfulness (1). Even though a
study on micro-phenomenology advises to select participants having experience in introspective practices [21], we did not observe
major differences in terms of the depth or length of interviews. The
interviews were not overly deep, generally, yet they created useful
insights to identify reoccurring patterns and other interesting aspects
of user experience.
4.2.2

Post Interview Questions

After finishing the elicitation interviews, we asked participants additional questions on their thoughts about the interview being remote
and their other remote social experiences. We also asked what type
of information sources they have followed during the COVID-19
pandemic process.
In terms of their thoughts about the interview being remote, all
participants found remote interviews to be similar or better than
an interview in a physical setting. Two participants said that at the
beginning of the COVID-19 process, they felt awkward or nervous,
but they are very comfortable with remote experiences now. One
participant stated that they even feel safer in a remote setting.
When asked about their remote social experiences during the
COVID-19 process, all participants expressed that they had remote
social experiences for both work and personal life. Two participants already worked remotely before the pandemic but the rest of
them started to continue their work meetings, job interviews, and
educations remotely after the pandemic. In terms of social life, all

participants expressed that after the pandemic, they started using
remote settings for socialization. Participants participated in a wide
range of social activities that included small family events, webinars,
movie events, yoga or musical instrument classes, and virtual nightclubs. One participant stated that they feel work and social life are
intertwined.
All participants followed a source of data during the COVID-19
Pandemic. These included infographics from news, social media
posts, and data visualization websites. All participants stated that
they were searching for information more frequently when the pandemic started. Four of the participants previously visited WHO and
two of them visited JHU.
5
5.1

D ISCUSSION
Elicitation interviews give rich insights for complex
interactive visualizations

Both WHO and JHU are widely used data visualizations. Yet, our
study revealed user experience issues related to both of them. The
findings from the interviews include emotional responses, such as
where participants felt negative about the systems. While evaluating
interactive visualizations with EI is laborious (cf. [21]), we found it
to be useful for uncovering important aspects of the user experience
of exploring interactive data visualizations.
Our finding that color is the primary visual element participants
tried to interpret, is in line with that of previous studies [9]. In addition, our study reveals color has the power to evoke an optimistic
or pessimistic feeling about the subject, at first glance. Layout and
visual hierarchy were two further visual aspects that were mentioned
as highly relevant. Frequently, participants remarked how the spatial
positioning of visual elements affected their impression of clarity or
crowdedness. One important difference to previous studies was the
higher level of interactivity and complexity of the examined visualizations. Even though all participants used the websites directly
before the interviews, some of them had trouble remembering all
details. While this can be seen as an interesting insight revealing
which parts of the visualization are more and which are less memorable, we suggest future studies to combine EI with additional data
collection methods like screen capturing or activity logging in order
to mitigate this loss of details.
Another common theme was how participants explored the map
to confirm certain aspects of global pandemic events, learn about
local effects, and look into data about personally relevant places. All
these relate to how people contextualize data based on their personal
experiences, which corroborate similar findings of previous studies
by Hogan et al. and Nowak et al. In addition, the use of color, style
and level of geospatial granularity were important factors driving
the users towards, or away from using the map views.
5.2

Conducting elicitation interviews remotely

All of our participants visited the websites from their homes, and
joined the interviews remotely. This setting fits the recommendation
for conducting Eliciation interviews in a quiet place, as well as using
the same environment where the original experience happened. All
participants stated they were comfortable with remote social settings
for both professional and personal activities, especially since the
pandemic. All participants expressed that it was not overly different
from a physical setting for the context of the study, and some even
expressed their feeling of heightened safety and comfort.
Hogan et al. suggest that showing the data visualization under
investigation during the interview part might introduce bias or post
rationalization. Therefore, we instructed the participants to rely on
their memories during the interview. Still, some mentioned their
urge to open the websites during the interview when they could
not remember certain details. The utilized setting with participants
using the same medium (i.e. their laptop) for experiencing and for
the interview might hinder reaching the state of evocation fully. In

such settings if the participant is distracted or frustrated, we suggest
bringing the participant’s attention back to their experience by using
the questions to induce evocation state from Hogan et al.s interview
guide [9]. In future studies, it might be worthwhile to investigate how
the use of different mediums (such as a laptop for the experience,
and a mobile phone for the interview) affects the outcome.
At the recruitment stage, we initially tried to set up a date for
interviews with all participants. From these ten participants, five
participants rescheduled once and six participants requested to be
interviewed spontaneously. In the end, three participants canceled
the interview due to their schedule and we ended up interviewing
the remaining seven. While we can not compare cancellation and
rescheduling rates to physical interviews, we believe that remote
interviews enabled more room for leeway. This might have negative
aspects when the study employs additional more structured methods,
or when multiple interviewers need to coordinate. However, if the
study design is flexible and open to spontaneity, remote interviews
can allow adjusting to participants schedules, therefore requiring
less effort for them, and thus resulting in a more accommodating
environment.
Lastly, for the case of investigating interactive visualizations
for the general public, we observed no major differences between
participants with or without prior introspective practices. In any
case, it is important to communicate that the aim of the interview is
not about the participants performance but about bringing attention
to the sensory, emotional, and hedonistic aspects of the experience
which might stay unnoticed during the experience itself.
5.3

Visualizing complex pandemic data for a global audience

Investigating the subjective experience people have with visualizations has been identified as one major evaluation scenario [16].
These types of studies are critical in order to understand the personal
relations people have with data visualizations that affect us all.
We observed that the choice of colors and design can greatly
impact users perception of the topic even when the data is the same
or very similar. In general, participants found the WHO to paint a
positive picture while JHU created a sense of danger. We conducted
the interviews in June 2020, and most of our participants have been
in self-quarantine for several months. The pessimistic feeling JHU
evoked disturbance for the participants who wanted to see some
positivity. One participant suggested that the look and feel of such a
visualization should be different at the beginning of the pandemic,
where it is more important to draw attention to the severity of the
subject and through the end it should have a more positive look and
feel to create hope.
We observed that participants were prone to be easily overwhelmed by the data. During the interviews, they limited their
time and mostly refrained from deeper analysis. When they engaged
in deeper analysis, too much control in adjusting the visualized data
created confusion (e.g. Explorer page in WHO, see Figure 1.A.2).
We learned that it is useful to make the main takeaway very clear. A
good example is the summarizing sentence at the bottom of WHO
(see Figure 1.A.1), which helped users to grasp the general situation
easily. Lastly, many participants stated that they do not fully trust
numbers. Instead of making numbers a strong visual element as it is
common in dashboards, trend lines and descriptive text such as well
designed labels and help texts that support interpreting data can be
helpful for users.
6

C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we presented a case study on remotely gathering
subjective feedback of people’s experience with interactive data
visualizations in the context of the coronavirus pandemic. Elicitation
Interviews aim to reveal hedonistic, sensory, and emotional aspects
of using data visualizations, with previous studies mostly focusing

on static or narrative visualizations [9, 21]. We conducted remote
elicitation interviews with two major data-driven dashboards. The
two systems in our study were complex interactive visualizations
about the COVID-19 pandemic data, a global and current topic that
affects many people on a personal level. Therefore we believe it is
important to understand the user experience beyond performance
measures and explore the personal driving factors of open-ended
exploration.
Our findings indicate that spatial exploration can be driven by a
user’s existing knowledge about global events, curiosity about the
user’s local situation, and personal connections with places. For both
visualizations, users were commonly interested in the overall picture
and refrained from deeper analysis. Users also generally preferred
seeing trends over absolute numbers of cases and deaths. Supporting
previous findings, we identified color as an important element that
enables users to interpret data. Furthermore, we observed that color
can induce positive or negative feelings towards the visualized topic.
In terms of conducting Elicitation Interviews remotely, our observations indicate that users felt safe and comfortable with remote
interviews due to their increased experience in remote activities for
work, school, and social life during the pandemic. However, we also
noticed that sustaining an evocation state can be challenging in remote settings. Our work is a step towards understanding the human
experience with data more thoroughly, in settings where conducting
in-person studies are not possible. We aim to investigate combining
remote elicitation interviews with additional objective methods like
activity logging or screen capturing in the future.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We wish to thank all participants that volunteered for our study.
R EFERENCES
[1] J. Bird and Y. Rogers. The pulse of tidy street: Measuring and publicly
displaying domestic electricity consumption. In workshop on energy
awareness and conservation through pervasive applications (Pervasive
2010), 2010.
[2] M. A. Borkin, Z. Bylinskii, N. W. Kim, C. M. Bainbridge, C. S. Yeh,
D. Borkin, H. Pfister, and A. Oliva. Beyond memorability: Visualization recognition and recall. IEEE transactions on visualization and
computer graphics, 22(1):519–528, 2015.
[3] M. N. K. Boulos and E. M. Geraghty. Geographical tracking and mapping of coronavirus disease covid-19/severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) epidemic and associated events around the
world: how 21st century gis technologies are supporting the global
fight against outbreaks and epidemics, 2020.
[4] M. Brehmer and T. Munzner. A multi-level typology of abstract visualization tasks. IEEE transactions on visualization and computer
graphics, 19(12):2376–2385, 2013.
[5] N. Brown. Video-conference interviews: Ethical and methodological
concerns in the context of health research. SAGE Research Methods,
2018.
[6] D. Çay, T. Nagel, and A. E. Yantaç. What is happening in the city? a
case study for user-centred geovisualisation design. Journal of Location
Based Services, 13(4):270–292, 2019.
[7] S. Haroz, R. Kosara, and S. L. Franconeri. Isotype visualization:
Working memory, performance, and engagement with pictographs. In
Proceedings of the 33rd annual ACM conference on human factors in
computing systems, pp. 1191–1200, 2015.
[8] L. Harrison. The role of emotion in visualization. PhD thesis, The
University of North Carolina at Charlotte, 2013.
[9] T. Hogan, U. Hinrichs, and E. Hornecker. The elicitation interview technique: Capturing people’s experiences of data representations. IEEE
transactions on visualization and computer graphics, 22(12):2579–
2593, 2015.
[10] T. Hogan, U. Hinrichs, and E. Hornecker. The visual and beyond:
Characterizing experiences with auditory, haptic and visual data representations. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Designing
Interactive Systems, pp. 797–809, 2017.

[11] V. L. Iacono, P. Symonds, D. H. Brown, et al. Skype as a tool for
qualitative research interviews. Sociological Research Online, 21(2):1–
15, 2016.
[12] T. Isenberg, P. Isenberg, J. Chen, M. Sedlmair, and T. Möller. A
systematic review on the practice of evaluating visualization. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 19(12):2818–
2827, 2013.
[13] R. Janghorban, R. L. Roudsari, and A. Taghipour. Skype interviewing:
The new generation of online synchronous interview in qualitative
research. International journal of qualitative studies on health and
well-being, 9(1):24152, 2014.
[14] B. M. Jenner and K. C. Myers. Intimacy, rapport, and exceptional
disclosure: a comparison of in-person and mediated interview contexts.
International Journal of Social Research Methodology, 22(2):165–177,
2019.
[15] H. Kennedy, R. L. Hill, W. Allen, and A. Kirk. Engaging with (big)
data visualizations: Factors that affect engagement and resulting new
definitions of effectiveness. First Monday, 21(11), 2016.
[16] H. Lam, E. Bertini, P. Isenberg, C. Plaisant, and S. Carpendale. Empirical studies in information visualization: Seven scenarios. IEEE
transactions on visualization and computer graphics, 18(9):1520–1536,
2011.
[17] A. Light. Transports of delight? what the experience of receiving
(mobile) phone calls can tell us about design. Personal and Ubiquitous
Computing, 12(5):391–400, 2008.
[18] Miro. Miro: the collaborative whiteboard platform for distributed
teams, June 2020. https://miro.com/app/.
[19] T. Munzner. A nested model for visualization design and validation.
IEEE transactions on visualization and computer graphics, 15(6):921–
928, 2009.
[20] T. Nagel. Visually analysing urban mobility: Results and insights
from three student research projects. KN-Journal of Cartography and
Geographic Information, pp. 1–8, 2020.
[21] S. Nowak, L. Bartram, and T. Schiphorst. A micro-phenomenological
lens for evaluating narrative visualization. In 2018 IEEE Evaluation
and Beyond-Methodological Approaches for Visualization (BELIV), pp.
11–18. IEEE, 2018.
[22] M. Obrist, S. A. Seah, and S. Subramanian. Talking about tactile
experiences. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 1659–1668, 2013.
[23] W. H. Organization. Who coronavirus disease (covid-19) dashboard,
June 2020. https://covid19.who.int/.
[24] C. Petitmengin. Describing ones subjective experience in the second person: An interview method for the science of consciousness.
Phenomenology and the Cognitive sciences, 5(3-4):229–269, 2006.
[25] C. Petitmengin et al. The validity of first-person descriptions as authenticity and coherence. Journal of Consciousness studies, 16(10-11):252–
284, 2009.
[26] C. Petitmengin, A. Remillieux, B. Cahour, and S. Carter-Thomas.
A gap in nisbett and wilsons findings? a first-person access to our
cognitive processes. Consciousness and cognition, 22(2):654–669,
2013.
[27] Z. Pousman, J. Stasko, and M. Mateas. Casual information visualization: Depictions of data in everyday life. IEEE transactions on
visualization and computer graphics, 13(6):1145–1152, 2007.
[28] B. Saket, C. Scheidegger, S. G. Kobourov, and K. Börner. Map-based
visualizations increase recall accuracy of data. In Computer Graphics
Forum, vol. 34, pp. 441–450. Wiley Online Library, 2015.
[29] S. Seitz. Pixilated partnerships, overcoming obstacles in qualitative
interviews via skype: A research note. Qualitative Research, 16(2):229–
235, 2016.
[30] J. H. University. Covid-19 dashboard by the center for systems science
and engineering (csse) at johns hopkins university, June 2020. https:
//coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html.
[31] P. Vermersch. L’entretien d’explicitation. ESF Sciences Humaines,
2019.
[32] Y. Wang, A. Segal, R. Klatzky, D. F. Keefe, P. Isenberg, J. Hurtienne,
E. Hornecker, T. Dwyer, and S. Barrass. An emotional response to
the value of visualization. IEEE computer graphics and applications,
39(5):8–17, 2019.

[33] Zoom. Video conferencing, web conferencing, webinars, screen sharing, June 2020. https://zoom.us/.

