Volume Control of Low-Cost Ventilator with
Automatic Set-Point Adaptation

arXiv:2009.01530v1 [eess.SY] 3 Sep 2020

Lukas Hewing* , Marcel Menner* , Nikolaos Tachatos, Marianne Schmid Daners,
Cosima du Pasquier, Thomas S. Lumpe, Kristina Shea, Andrea Carron, and Melanie N. Zeilinger

Abstract— This paper considers the control design for a lowcost ventilator that is based on a manual resuscitator bag (also
known as AmbuBag) to pump air into the lungs of a patient
who is physically unable to breathe. First, it experimentally
shows that for accurately tracking tidal volumes, the controller
needs to be adapted to the individual patient and the different
configurations, e.g., hardware or operation modes. Second, it
proposes a set-point adaptation algorithm that uses sensor
measurements of a flow meter to automatically adapt the
controller to the setup at hand. Third, it experimentally shows
that such an adaptive solution improves the performance of
the ventilator for various setups. One objective of this paper
is to increase awareness of the need for feedback control using
sensor measurements in low-cost ventilator solutions in order
to automatically adapt to the specific scenario.

Index Terms—COVID-19, low-cost ventilator, volumecontrolled mechanical ventilation, patient-adaptive control.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is an ongoing pandemic, which is caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). The viral spread of the disease
has dramatically increased the demand for medical devices
needed in hospitals to treat patients. Mechanical ventilators
are one example of medical devices that are currently in
short supply and that are critical for the treatment of patients
suffering from COVID-19, cf. [1]. To meet the peak ventilator demands, a series of low-cost and modular solutions
have been proposed, e.g., in [2], [3]. In order to provide
guidelines on their design, the Medicines and Healthcare
products Regulatory Agency [4] has introduced requirements
that a low-cost ventilator solution ought to satisfy. These
guidelines include hardware requirements, operation modes,
and settings, as well as alarms for the malfunctioning of the
ventilator.
This work was supported by ETH Zurich, financially and through lab
access.
* Co-first authorship.
L. Hewing, M. Menner, A. Carron, and M. N. Zeilinger are with
the Institute for Dynamic Systems and Control, ETH Zurich, 8092
Zurich, Switzerland (e-mail: lhewing@ethz.ch; mmenner@ethz.ch; carrona@ethz.ch; mzeilinger@ethz.ch).
N. Tachatos and M. Schmid Daners are with the Product Development
Group Zurich, ETH Zurich, 8092 Zurich, Switzerland (e-mail: tachaton@ethz.ch; marischm@ethz.ch).
C. du Pasquier, T. S. Lumpe, and K. Shea are with the Engineering Design
and Computing Laboratory, ETH Zurich, 8092 Zurich, Switzerland (e-mail:
cosimad@ethz.ch; tlumpe@ethz.ch; kshea@ethz.ch).

A popular class of low-cost mechanical ventilators is a
design that relies on squeezing a manual resuscitator bag
(AmbuBag) with paddles to pump air into the lungs of a
patient. Such a ventilator solution is mechanically flexible
enough to satisfy the operational requirements but depends
on an adequate control design to actuate the paddles. This
paper addresses the controller design for a bag-based ventilator building on [5] design where we particularly focus on
satisfying the following four requirements:
i. Positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP). The ventilator
must provide a range of 5–20 mBar during expiration,
adjustable in 5 mBar increments.
ii. Inspiratory:Expiratory ratio (I:E). The ventilator must
provide a ratio of 1:2, and additionally could provide
a range of 1:1–1:3.
iii. Breaths per minute (BPM). The ventilator must provide
a respiratory rate of 10–30 BPM, adjusted in 2 BPM
increments.
iv. Tidal volume. The ventilator must provide a tidal volume
of 400 mL. Additionally, it should provide tidal volumes
of 350 and 450 mL.
For an extensive list of all requirements, the reader is referred
to [4].
We investigate the influence of different patients and
different settings on the operation of a bag-based lowcost ventilator. In particular, we show experimentally that
feedforward control of the paddles may not be sufficient
to achieve accurate tidal volume tracking (requirement iv.)
for different operational settings (e.g., along requirements i.iii.) or patient characteristics, due to varying compression
and leakage losses. Instead, we propose to utilize feedback
from a flow meter to adapt the controller to the individual
patient and the specific operational settings, as well as small
deviations in the mechanical set-up (bag placement, tubing,
etc.).
The experiments were conducted using a mechanical lung
(TestChest V2, Organis GmbH, Landquart, Switzerland) that
is capable of simulating different patients and healthy persons. With this study, we want to emphasize the importance
of a flow meter and an adaptation of the controller, regarding
patient safety and alarm signals. Related ventilator designs
do not mention the implementation of a flow meter or an
adaptive scheme to cope with a patient’s pathophysiology,
cf. [2], [3], [5]–[9].

paddels
AmbuBag
intubation tube

exhale

HEPA filter
patient valve

PEEP valve

motor

inhale

Fig. 1.
Functional prototype of the Breathe ventilator. A resuscitator
bag is squeezed by two paddles, which are actuated by an electric motor.
The ventilator pushes air into the patient’s lungs, where the breath cycle is
adjusted by a range of settings. Not shown: Flow sensor (placed between the
patient valve and high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter) and pressure
sensor (attached to HEPA filter), cf. Fig. 2. (Photograph: Nicola Pitaro/ETH
Zurich)

II. M ETHODS
A. The Breathe Ventilator
Breathe1 is a ventilator solution whose design has been
adapted from [5]. It is based on a resuscitator bag (Ambu
Mark IV, Ambu, Ballerup, Denmark), which is squeezed
by two paddles actuated by an electric motor, see Fig. 1.
The system is controlled with an Arduino Mega 2560. The
breathing system, i.e., the airway to the patient, consists of
medical-grade tubing and includes a bi-directional patient
valve (included in the Ambu SPUR II Disposable Resuscitator, Ambu, Ballerup, Denmark), a passive PEEP valve
(Ambu PEEP Valve, Ambu, Ballerup, Denmark) and a highefficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter. The connection to the
patient is realized by an intubation tube.
1) Actuator: The system uses a brushed 12 V DC electric motor and a 1/212 gearbox (IG420504-SY5513, Conrad Electronic, Hirschau, Germany) with a 5.5 A nominal
current. The motor-driver is a full H-bridge that accepts
ultrasonic PWM frequencies to regulate the motor voltage. It
also embeds an analog current-sense feedback and a digital
incremental encoder that are used in the motor controller.
2) Sensors: The ventilator uses two sensors: a flow meter
and a pressure sensor. The flow meter (SFM3019, Sensirion,
Staefa, Switzerland) is a 16-bit digital sensor able to measure
an airflow between −10 and 240 standard liter per minute.
The sensor is temperature-calibrated and offers a 2% accuracy and 1% repeatability, which makes the measurements
very reliable. The tidal volume is calculated by integrating
the positive airflow (from the ventilator to the lung) during
one breath. The pressure sensor is a Freescale Semiconductor
(MFPX5010DP, NXP Semiconductors, Eindhoven, Netherlands), which is an analog, temperature-calibrated, and preamplified sensor that can measure pressures in the range
between 0 to 100 mBar. The modularity of the system
1 A short video of the Breathe ventilator and its functionalities can be
found here: breathe.ethz.ch.

allows the sensors (flow meter and pressure sensor) to be
implemented at any position of the patient’s airway. In this
study, we placed the flow meter between the HEPA filter
and the patient valve and connected the pressure sensor to
the Luer lock port of the HEPA filter.
Remark 1 (Sensor Placement): The placement of sensors
(in particular the flow sensor) is a difficult problem on its
own. We placed the flow sensor to increase the accuracy of
tidal volume measurements by including potential leakage
of the patient valve in the measurements. For the final
placement further analysis will have to be performed in
extensive device testing.
3) Alarms: The implementation of alarms is a crucial
component for low-cost ventilator solutions as outlined in
the guidelines by the Medicines and Healthcare products
Regulatory Agency [4]. We use the flow meter and the
pressure sensor to trigger the following three alarms:
(a) tidal volume (as integral of positive flow) not achieved,
(b) minute volume (as one minute moving average tidal
volume) not achieved,
(c) maximum inspiratory airway pressure exceeded, and
(d) minimum inspiratory pressure not achieved,
where excess of the pressure levels in alarm (c) also stops
the current breath early to prevent overpressure, and alarm
(d) also serves as a disconnection alarm.
B. Control Design for the Breathe Ventilator
The basis of the control design is a reference trajectory
generation for the motor position. The reference trajectory
is a sawtooth signal composed of piecewise linear functions,
whose slopes are adjusted based on the I:E and the BPM
settings, as well as on the setting for the tidal volume. The
slopes, i.e., the motor velocities are given by
φ̇inhale =

φsp − φ0
,
I
I+E Tb

φ̇exhale =

φ0 − φsp
,
E
I+E Tb

60 s
is the duration of one breath cycle, I and E
where Tb = BPM
define the I:E ratio, φ0 is the motor position at the beginning
of the inhalation phase, and φsp is the motor position at
the end of the inhalation—the set-point (sp). Throughout
the paper, numeric values for the motor position are stated
after gearbox reduction. The reference trajectory is tracked
using a position-velocity-current cascade of proportionalintegral (PI) controllers. This ensures that the I:E and the
BPM requirements are satisfied. The realized tidal volume
depends on correctly choosing φsp (with fixed φ0 ). However,
for variations in patients and settings of the ventilator, φsp
has to be adapted to achieve the desired tidal volume, which
will be shown with an empirical study in this paper.
In order to allow for accurate tracking of the tidal volume,
we propose to use a set-point adaptation, i.e., the end-point of
the position reference is altered adaptively. Mathematically,
we assume that the tidal volume of each breath, V (k), results
from

V (k) = fθ (φsp (k)),

(1)

where k is a time index that refers to the kth breath cycle,
φsp (k) is the motor target position of the kth breath cycle,
and fθ is a bounded and strictly monotonically increasing
function that relates the motor target position to the tidal
volume. We denote with θ the uncertainties arising due to
patient variations, hardware variations (e.g., different resuscitator bags), or operational variations (parameter settings). An
approximation of the function fθ based on geometric considerations is provided in Appendix A. Strict monotonicity
of fθ implies that the more the bag is squeezed, the higher is
the achieved tidal volume, which is a reasonable assumption
and was observed to be satisfied in our experiments.
The goal of the set-point adaptation algorithm is to
successively adjust the target position φsp (k) to achieve
the reference tidal volume Vref , as quickly as possible but
without overshoot. Hence, we want to find φref for which
Vref = fθ (φref ).

(2)

We propose to use a set-point adaptation that is based on
integrating the difference between the reference tidal volume
and the achieved one, with
φsp (k+1) = φsp (k) + gI (Vref − V (k)),

dV = max
θ,φsp

∂fθ (φ)
∂φ

,

2,500

1
dV

with
(4)

φ=φsp

ensures that the set point, and therefore also the tidal volume,
converge to the reference value monotonically, i.e.,

2,000

if φref ≥ φsp (k)

(5a)

φref ≤ φsp (k+1) ≤ φsp (k)

if φref ≤ φsp (k)

(5b)

and asymptotically, i.e.,
φsp (k) → φref as k → ∞,

(6)

which is formally shown in Theorem 1 with proof in Appendix B. Note that dV denotes the best Lipschitz constant
or the maximum sensitivity (the steepest gradient) of the
tidal volume function for all possible variations, θ, and all
possible positions, φ.
Empirically, we approximate the maximum sensitivity as
dV ≈ max
i,j

fθi (φj + ∆φ) − fθi (φj )
∆φ

from a grid over a set of test cases {θi } and motor target
positions {φj } with step size ∆φ.
Theorem 1: Consider the relation between set-point and
tidal volume as in (1) with the strictly monotonically increasing function fθ . Using the set-point adaptation in (3) with
1
gI = dV
and dV as in (4), φsp converges monotonically and
asymptotically, i.e., (5) and (6) hold.

LIP

1,500

Crs

C1
FRC at ZEEP

1,000
500
0

φref ≥ φsp (k+1) ≥ φsp (k)

UIP
C2

(3)
VL [ml]

where gI can be interpreted as a gain. Setting gI =

Fig. 2. Experimental setup of the Breathe ventilator (center) with the
TestChest (left) and the user interface (right). The ventilator was connected
to the TestChest with standard medical components. The breathing system
is constructed in the following order. A medical-grade air hose was used
to connect the patient valve (including the positive endexpiratory pressure
(PEEP) valve) to the resuscitator bag and another, identical air hose to
connect the flow sensor and the high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter
in line to the PEEP valve. The pressure sensor is connected to the Luer lock
port of the HEPA filter. The intubation tube was attached to the HEPA filter
with an adapter. In the experiments, the inhalation path from the bag to the
intubation tip had a total length of 1000 mm and a volume of approximately
195 mL. The exhalation path from the intubation tip to the PEEP valve had
a length of 765 mm and a volume of approximately 120 mL.

0

10

20
30
paw [mBar]

40

Fig. 3. Illustration of the basic lung mechanics, relating the lung volume
(VL ) to the airway pressure (paw ), see [10]. C1 is the respiratory compliance
below the lower inflection point (LIP), C2 is the respiratory compliance
above the upper inflection point (UIP), and Crs is the respiratory compliance
between the LIP and the UIP. FRC at ZEEP denotes the functional residual
capacity at zero end-expiratory pressure.

C. Experimental Setup and Protocol
For the experimental testing, the ventilator was connected
to a mechanical lung, the TestChest via intubation with an
inflated cuff, see Fig. 2. The TestChest is specially designed
for ventilator training and has an underlying lung model
integrated. The basic lung mechanics are defined by the
pressure-volume curve for static conditions in Fig. 3 and the
airway resistance, Raw . The respiratory compliance, Crs , is
determined by the chestwall compliance, Cw , and the lung
compliance, CL , as 1/Crs = 1/Cw + 1/CL .
Table I shows two sets of TestChest settings, one set
modeling a healthy person and one set modeling a patient
suffering from COVID-19. All physiological values were
provided by [11] and were implemented in the physiological

Parameter

[Unit]

Healthy

ARDS

Cw
Raw
FRC at ZEEP
LIP
UIP
C1
Crs
C2

[mL/mBar]
[mBar/(L/s)]
[mL]
[mBar]
[mBar]
[mL/mBar]
[mL/mBar]
[mL/mBar]

200
Rp5
2000
5
35
25
60
20

93
Rp5
1102
12
35
8
35
8

lung model of the TestChest. The basic reference values of
lung characteristics of simulated patients were summarized
by [12]. The assumption that late-stage COVID-19 type H
patients match the severe acute respiratory distress syndrome
(ARDS) criteria was emphasized by [13].
In order to show the required set-point adaptation for
individual lung characteristics, the following base settings
were chosen for the experiments. The tidal volume was
measured as the time integral of the flow meter on the
disconnected ventilator and on both patient models of the
TestChest (healthy and ARDS) with a PEEP of 5 mBar.
Additionally, the PEEP valve was set to 10 mBar for the
ARDS patient to highlight that different ventilator settings
require an adaptation of the set-point.
III. R ESULTS
A. Parameter Study with fixed Set-Point
In a parameter study, we investigated the implications of
different settings and different patients on the tidal volume
for a fixed set-point, φsp . The resulting tidal volumes for the
various test scenarios of different patient settings, PEEP settings, and set-points are reported in Table II. The parameter
study showed that the tidal volume varied greatly for a fixed
set-point. For small set-points, the tidal volume varied more
than 30% with different patient characteristics and PEEP
settings, e.g., 101 mL/58 mL ≈ 174% for φsp = 0.2 rad
or 161 mL/118 mL ≈ 136% for φsp = 0.25 rad. For
higher set-points, the tidal volume varied more than 10%,
e.g., 503 mL/453 mL ≈ 111% for φsp = 0.5 rad or
444 mL/397 mL ≈ 111% for φsp = 0.45 rad. Fig. 4
illustrates tidal volume changes for the test scenarios as in
Table II by displaying the difference to the ARDS case with
5 mBar PEEP. It highlights that the tidal volumes for various
patients or settings with a fixed set-point vary by more than
±15 mL. This analysis indicates that there is no single fixed
set-point to achieve a given tidal volume for the various
setups considered in the study.
B. Set-Point Adaptation
In the second study, we investigated the implications of the
set-point adaptation on the achieved tidal volume. We estimated dV in (4) with the results in Table II, resulting in gI =
5.6 · 10−4 [rad/mL], which we rounded down to 5 · 10−4 for
additional safety. Table III shows the tracking performance

TABLE II
Tidal volumes for varying set-points, different configurations (disconnected
from the TestChest, healthy TestChest patient, acute respiratory distress
syndrome (ARDS) TestChest patient), and PEEP valve settings, as average
values over 10 breath cycles (20 breaths per minute (BPM), Inspiratory:Expiratory ratio (I:E) = 1:2).

φsp [rad]

discon.

0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
0.50

197
260
340
428
488
506
517

Tidal Volume [mL]
Healthy
ARDS
5 mBar
5 mBar
101
161
225
292
365
444
503

Healthy, 5 mBar
ARDS, 5 mBar

78
136
200
268
338
412
474

ARDS
10 mBar
58
118
176
243
315
397
453

ARDS, 10 mBar

40
Volume Difference [mL]

TABLE I
Lung Mechanics setting in the TestChest to simulate a healthy subject and
a patient suffering from acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) due to
COVID-19.

20
0
−20
−40

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

φsp [rad]
Fig. 4. Tidal volume difference to acute respiratory distress syndrome
(ARDS) patient with 5 mBar over the target motor position set-points for
variation in positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) and patient specifications (20 breaths per minute (BPM), Inspiratory:Expiratory ratio (I:E) =
1:2). The gray-shaded area shows that all scenarios considered in the study
are separated by more than 15 mL. The scenario in which the ventilator was
disconnected from the TestChest is not displayed as the volume differences
are greater than 40 mL for all target motor positions.

with the set-point adaptation, i.e., φsp was adjusted according
to (3). For all combinations of tidal volumes and BPM, the
tidal volume was tracked very closely with low mean error
and root mean squared error (RMS) of approximately 1 mL
and a maximum deviation of the tidal volumes from the
target of less than 4 mL (absolute value). In order to better
judge the maximum and the RMS values, we conducted one
experiment without adaptation using representative settings
(ARDS patient, 100 breath cycles, Vref = 400 mL, 20 BPM),
which resulted in a maximum deviation of 2.24 mL and
RMS of 0.71 mL. We therefore observed repeatability of
tidal volume measurements within 0.2%.
To illustrate the transient behavior of the adaptation mechanism, we changed the operating condition in the ARDS
patient setting through a manual adjustment of the PEEP
valve from 5 to 10 mBar. Fig. 5 displays the resulting tidal

TABLE III
Tidal volume tracking error for different target tidal volumes and breaths per
minute (BPM), averaged over 100 breath cycles for each setting (Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) patient, 5 mBar, Inspiratory:Expiratory
ratio (I:E) = 1:2).

BPM

350

10
20
30

0.01
-0.01
0.03

1.12
0.78
0.74

3.26
1.90
1.80

400

10
20
30

-0.04
0.06
-0.01

1.05
0.83
0.84

2.83
3.69
2.85

450

10
20
30

-0.24
-0.0
0.03

1.14
0.90
0.77

3.58
2.84
2.51

V [mL]

Vref [mL]

390
380

20
10
0

volumes of 5 breath cycles following the change with and
without set-point adaptation. It shows that the adaptation
required roughly two to three breath cycles to achieve the
desired tidal volume.
Remark 2: Results for further BPM and I:E settings were
qualitatively similar, but are not reported here.
IV. D ISCUSSION
Low-cost mechanical ventilator solutions that use paddles
to squeeze a resuscitator bag (AmbuBag) offer sufficient
flexibility to provide a wide range of operating settings.
However, the requirements for their medical usage render a
ventilator design without a flow meter and a pressure sensor
difficult, e.g., for triggering alarms and for the controller.
In this study, we used a high-fidelity experimental testbed
to show that variations in patient pathophysiology, in the
hardware, or in operational parameter settings cause significant differences in the tidal volume if the controller is
not adjusted accordingly. These differences are likely due
to varying compression and leakage losses in the breathing
system, which will tend to be particularly pronounced and
irregular in a low-cost and modular solution as we consider
here. In particular, the parameter study showed that no two
test scenarios with different settings or patients were within a
range of ±15 mL, with maximum deviations of 50 mL. The
results indicate that the feeding back of sensor measurements
is necessary to adjust the controller in order to accurately
track the desired tidal volume for different patients and
operating conditions.
The proposed set-point adaptation was shown to cope with
different settings and patients by automatically adapting the
controller to achieve the desired tidal volume. The controller
using the set-point adaptation was able to stay within a
tolerated range of ±10 mL for all breath cycles test scenarios.
The variations over the experiments (RMS and maximum
tracking errors) were found to be on a similar scale both
with and without set-point adaptation, which indicates that
the set-point adaptation is not sensitive to noise. Furthermore,
the analysis of transients due to changes in the operating

fixed set-point

400

p [mBar]

Tidal volume tracking error
∆V = Vref − V (k) [mL]
Mean
RMS
Max. (abs.)

set-point adaptation

-3

0

3

6
9
time [s]

12

15

Fig. 5. Effects of positive End-Expiratory Pressure (PEEP) valve change
from 5 to 10 mBar on tidal volume and pressure with and without setpoint adaptation, with 10 repetitions of the experiment (acute respiratory
distress syndrome (ARDS) patient, tidal volume setpoint Vref = 400 mL,
20 breaths per minute (BPM), Inspiratory:Expiratory ratio (I:E) = 1:2). The
change occurred at time 0 s. Top: Statistics of the measured tidal volume,
V , computed as the time integral of the positive flow for each breath and
represented as boxplots. The diamond symbol and the vertical line represent
the mean and the median, respectively; the box edges represent the 75th and
the 25th percentiles, and the whiskers represent the maximum as well as the
minimum value. Note that the high variance during the first breath after the
change is likely due to inaccuracies during the manual adjustments of the
PEEP valve. Bottom: Mean over all pressure trajectories as an indication of
PEEP.

conditions indicate that the set-point adaptation is sufficiently
fast to react within two to three breath cycles.
In principle, it would be possible to store different setpoints for different operating conditions, different resuscitator bags, and different patients. However, providing a setpoint for all possible combinations and to select them for
each patient separately would be a great overhead for the
engineer of the ventilator and the doctors/nurses.
V. C ONCLUSION
This paper experimentally investigated the implications of
different patient pathophysiologies and different operating
conditions on low-cost ventilator solutions that compress
a bag to pump air into a patient’s lungs. A parameter
study highlighted the need for flow measurements and an
adaptive solution for a controller to achieve the high accuracy
for different patients and different operating conditions, in
particular the tidal volume. Furthermore, this paper proposed
a set-point adaptation algorithm to automatically adjust the
controller to different scenarios. The set-point adaptation
algorithm was shown to achieve the desired set points within
a tolerance of less than 10 mL. The results indicate that such
an adaptive scheme is able to cope with hardware and patient
variations and should be considered when designing low-cost
ventilators based on a bag-squeezing mechanism.

x

2
Area: rbag
ψ(x)

A PPENDIX B: P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1
Proof: As fθ is a monotonically increasing function and
θ (φ)
for any φ and θ,
dV ≥ ∂f∂φ

rbag
Paddle
Fig. 6. Illustration of geometric resuscitator bag model. The bag is modeled
as cylindrical object, which is squeezed by two paddles. The resulting
volume is the volume of a cylinder minus the volume displaced by the
two paddles.

V1 + dV (φ2 − φ1 ) ≥ V2

if φ2 ≥ φ1

V1 + dV (φ2 − φ1 ) ≤ V2

if φ2 ≤ φ1

for any two V2 = fθ (φ2 ) and V1 = fθ (φ1 ). In particular,
V (k) + dV (φref − φsp (k)) ≥ Vref

if φref ≥ φsp (k)

V (k) + dV (φref − φsp (k)) ≤ Vref

if φref ≤ φsp (k),

which is equivalently written as
1
(Vref − V (k)) if φref ≥ φsp (k)
dV
1
(Vref − V (k)) if φref ≤ φsp (k)
φref ≤ φsp (k) +
dV
as dV > 0. Finally, choosing φsp (k+1) as in (3) with gI =
1
dV and dV as in (4), we can conclude that (5) holds, with
φsp (k+1) = φsp (k) ⇐⇒ φsp (k) = φref , which proves (6).
φref ≥ φsp (k) +

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We gratefully acknowledge Sara Mettler and Dario Fenner
from the Product Development Group Zurich, ETH Zurich
for their technical support; Adrian Marty and the team from
the Simulation Center at the University Hospital Zurich
for providing medical knowledge and the testing platform
”TestChest”; as well as Martin Meier from the Zürcher
Hochschule der Künste.
A PPENDIX A: G EOMETRIC M ODEL FOR R ESUSCITATOR
BAG
We model the bag as a cylindrical object, with radius rbag
and length lbag , and the lung as a constant volume, VL . Let
x be the horizontal distance of one paddle to the outside of
the cylindrical object, see Fig. 6 for an illustration of the
r
−x
geometry. Further, let x̄ = bag
rbag . Then, the volume of the
cylindrical object with paddle position x is
2
Vbag (x) = lbag rbag
(π − 2ψ(x))
p
ψ(x) = arccos x̄ − x̄ 1 − x̄2 .

Approximating the horizontal position as x = lpad φ with the
length of the paddle lpad (distance of outside of bag to the
paddle’s rotation axis) and the motor position φ, the tidal
volume is given by
fθ (φsp ) = Vbag (lpad φ0 ) − Vbag (lpad φsp ).
Remark 3: This geometric model can also be used to
approximately predict the pressure and the flow rate, as well
as the torque transmitted from the paddles to the motor. The
pressure, the flow rate, and the torque of one paddle are given
by
VL + Vbag (0)
VL + Vbag (lpad φ)
p
2 ˙
= 4lbag rbag
x̄ 1 − x̄2

p = p∞
V̇bag

τ = lpad Apad p
with the √surface of the paddle computed as Apad =
2lbag rbag 1 − x̄2 .

R EFERENCES
[1] J. M. Pearce, “A review of open source ventilators for covid-19 and
future pandemics,” F1000Research, vol. 9, 2020.
[2] H. Li, E. Li, D. Krishnamurthy, P. Kolbay, B. Chacin, S. Hoehne,
J. Cybulski, L. Brewer, T. Petelenz, J. Orr et al., “Utah-Stanford
ventilator (Vent4US): Developing a rapidly scalable ventilator for
COVID-19 patients with ARDS,” medRxiv, 2020.
[3] C. Galbiati, W. Bonivento, M. Caravati, S. De Cecco, T. Dinon,
G. Fiorillo, D. Franco, F. Gabriele, C. Kendziora, I. Kochanek et al.,
“Mechanical Ventilator Milano (MVM): A novel mechanical ventilator
designed for mass scale production in response to the COVID-19
pandemics,” arXiv:2003.10405, 2020.
[4] Medicines
and
Healthcare
products
Regulatory
Agency,
Rapidly
Manufactured
Ventilator
System,
2020,
accessed
June
17,
2020.
[Online].
Available:
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/
system/uploads/attachment data/file/879382/RMVS001 v4.pdf
[5] MIT E-Vent. (2020, accessed June 25, 2020) MIT emergency
ventilator project. [Online]. Available: https://e-vent.mit.edu/
[6] Apollo BVM. (2020, accessed June 25, 2020) ApolloBVM emergency
use ventilator. [Online]. Available: http://oedk.rice.edu/apollobvm/
[7] Coventor. (2020, accessed June 25, 2020) Coventor emergency use
ventilator. [Online]. Available: https://med.umn.edu/covid19Ventilator
[8] A. Husseini, H. J. Lee, J. Negrete, S. Powelson, A. Servi, A. Slocum,
and J. Saukkonen, “Design and prototyping of a low-cost portable
mechanical ventilator,” Journal of Medical Devices-transactions of The
Asme, vol. 4, 2010.
[9] Spiro Wave. (2020, accessed June 25, 2020) Spiro wave emergency
use ventilator. [Online]. Available: https://ventilatorresponse.com/
[10] Neosim AG, TestChest Physiological Model, 2020, accessed June 28,
2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/
321462100 TestChest Physiological Model
[11] ——,
Using
COVID-19
ICU
Respiratory
Training
Simulators,
2020,
accessed
June
22,
2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.news-medical.net/whitepaper/20200617/
Using-COVID-19-ICU-Respiratory-Training-Simulators.aspx
[12] J. M. Arnal, A. Garnero, M. Saoli, and R. L. Chatburn, “Parameters
for simulation of adult subjects during mechanical ventilation,” Respiratory Care, vol. 63, no. 2, pp. 158–168, 2018.
[13] L. Gattinoni, D. Chiumello, P. Caironi, M. Busana, F. Romitti,
L. Brazzi, and L. Camporota, “COVID-19 pneumonia: different respiratory treatments for different phenotypes?” Intensive Care Medicine,
vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 1099–1102, 2020.

