arXiv:2009.02999v2 [physics.soc-ph] 22 Feb 2021

Predictive and retrospective modelling of airborne infection
risk using monitored carbon dioxide
Henry C. Burridge∗,1 , Shiwei Fan2 , Roderic L. Jones2 , Catherine J. Noakes3 , and P.
F. Linden4
1

Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Imperial College London,
Skempton Building, South Kensington Campus, London SW7 2AZ, UK.

2

Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, Lensfield Road, Cambridge
CB2 1EW, UK.
3
4

School of Civil Engineering, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, UK.

Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, University of

Cambridge, Centre for Mathematical Sciences, Wilberforce Road, Cambridge CB3
0WA, UK.
∗

h.burridge@imperial.ac.uk

February 24, 2021

Abstract
The risk of long range, herein ‘airborne’, infection needs to be better understood
and is especially urgent during the current COVID-19 pandemic. We present a method
to determine the relative risk of airborne transmission that can be readily deployed with
either modelled or monitored CO2 data and occupancy levels within an indoor space.

1

For spaces regularly, or consistently, occupied by the same group of people, e.g. an
open-plan office or a school classroom, we establish protocols to assess the absolute
risk of airborne infection of this regular attendance at work or school. We present a
methodology to easily calculate the expected number of secondary infections arising
from a regular attendee becoming infectious and remaining pre/asymptomatic within
these spaces. We demonstrate our model by calculating risks for both a modelled openplan office and by using monitored data recorded within a small naturally ventilated
office. In addition, by inferring ventilation rates from monitored CO2 we show that
estimates of airborne infection can be accurately reconstructed; thereby offering scope
for more informed retrospective modelling should outbreaks occur in spaces where CO2
is monitored. Our modelling suggests that regular attendance at an office for work is
unlikely to significantly contribute to the pandemic but only if relatively quiet deskbased work is carried out in the presence of adequate ventilation (i.e. at least 10 l/s/p
following UK guidance), appropriate hygiene controls, distancing measures, and that
all commuting presents minimal infection risk. Crucially, modelling even moderate
changes to the conditions within the office, or basing estimates for the infectivity of
the SARS-CoV-2 variant B1.1.7 current data, typically results in the prediction that
for a single infector within the office the airborne route alone gives rises to more than
one secondary infection.

Keywords: Infection modelling, Airborne infection risk, Monitored CO2 , R-number, COVID19, Coronavirus SAR-CoV-2.
Practical implications Our readily deployable model enables the risk of infection from
airborne diseases, including COVID-19, to be robustly assessed from either monitored
CO2 or modelled data. This contribution, enables calculations of an expected number of
secondary infections arising within indoor spaces regularly attended by the same/similar
group of people, e.g. school classrooms and open-plan offices. Finally, we note that our
model can be generically applied to all infectious airborne diseases and consideration should

2

be given to the application of our model to indoor beyond those regularly attended spaces.

1

Introduction

The novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19), which causes respiratory symptoms, was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization (WHO) on the 11th March 2020
— thereby marking its global impact. Transmission of such respiratory infections occurs
via virus-laden particles (in this case the virus SARS-CoV-2) formed in the respiratory
tract of an infected person and spread to other humans, primarily, via three routes: the
droplet (or spray) route, the contact (or touch) route and the airborne (or aerosol) route
(e.g. see Mittal et al., 2020; Milton, 2020; Li, 2021). According to the WHO, “Airborne
transmission is defined as the spread of an infectious agent caused by the dissemination
of droplet nuclei (aerosols) that remain infectious when suspended in air over long distances and time” (WHO, 2014). After some initial resistance, and significant pressure
from the scientific community (e.g. Morawska et al., 2020; Morawska & Milton, 2020), the
WHO finally acknowledged the possibility of airborne infection for COVID-19 on the 8th
July 2020 (The Independent, 2020). In the latter part of 2020 multiple mutations to the
SAR-CoV-2 virus conspired to give rise to a new variant, named B1.1.7 (see, for example,
Kupferschmidt, 2021, for a more detailed discussion). This variant is currently thought
to be significantly more infectious than pre-existing strains (SAGE et al., 2020) and is
increasingly prevalent within the UK and other parts of Europe. At the start of 2021,
with new more successful variants arising, COVID-19 infection levels remain worryingly
high around much of the world. In our present article, we focus on assessing the risk of
infection of respiratory diseases via the airborne route, taking COVID-19 as an example;
ultimately, deriving a methodology for calculating the expected number of secondary infections that might arise within any indoor space that is regularly attended by the same
group of people, applicable to any airborne disease (with estimates for the duration over
3

which infectors remain pre/asymptomatic.) We comment on the airborne infection risk
for COVID-19 within open-plans offices under a variety of environmental conditions and
include consideration of the variant B1.1.7.
The pioneering work of Wells (1955) and that which followed by Riley et al. (1978)
established methods, commonly referred to as the Wells-Riley model, for quantifying the
risk of airborne infection of respiratory diseases. Unlike dose-response models, which assess
the likely infection response to some (frequently cumulative) dose, Wells-Riley models typically report the complementary probability that no-one becomes infected. As such, these
models do not rely on assessing the cumulative exposure which could prove problematic
when assessing the infection risk over durations of varied occupancy. Early formulations
(e.g. Riley et al., 1978) were restricted to indoor spaces which were in a steady-state with
a known constant rate of ventilation of outdoor air. The requirement of steady-state
is avoided by the formulation of the model presented by Gammaitoni & Nucci (1997).
Rudnick & Milton (2003) further extended the practical application of the Wells-Riley
model by negating the need to assess nor assume the rate of ventilation of outdoor air –
a notoriously difficult quantity to measure directly (see Appendix B for a detailed discussion). Rudnick & Milton (2003) achieved this via the realisation that the risk of airborne
infection could be directly inferred via measurements of CO2 “if the airspace is well mixed”.
We generalise the model of Rudnick & Milton (2003) relaxing the assumption of a wellmixed space and to further account for occupation profiles and activity levels which vary
in time.
For many airborne infections the likelihood of spread within the vast majority of indoor
spaces, even over periods of a few hours, is reasonably low (as we show for the coronavirus
SARS-CoV-2 and the resulting disease COVID-19). However, we suggest that there exists
a significant proportion of indoor spaces which are, for the majority of each working day,

4

attended by the same/similar group of people (e.g. open-plan offices and school classrooms), herein ‘regularly attend spaces’. Our model enables the likelihood of the spread of
infection via the airborne route to be calculated (from either easily obtainable monitored
data or modelled data) over multiple day-long durations. Hence, in the case of COVID-19
(for which infectors are estimated to remain pre-asymptomatic for 5-7 days) our model
calculates the likely number of people that become infected during a period in which a
pre/asymptomatic infector regularly attends the space.
We derive an extended airborne risk model in §2, assess the risk of infection in a
modelled open-plan office in §3, and use monitored data from naturally ventilated office in
§4 to estimate the infection risk. We describe retrospective modelling of an office in §5,
and we draw conclusions in §6.
1.1

The Wells-Riley approach to airborne infection risk

The pioneering work of Riley et al. (1978) defined the infectivity rate as

λ=

I pq
,
Q

(1)

where I is the number of infected people, p is the breathing (pulmonary ventilation) rate,
Q is the ventilation (outdoor air supply) rate, and q is the unit of infection, quantum (see
Riley et al., 1978, for discussion), which varies significantly between disease, with activity
level, and (as with all biologically derived parameters) with individual human beings. For
many diseases and relevant activity levels, appropriate values of q have been determined
and are reported in the literature (e.g. Noakes et al., 2012; Bueno de Mesquita et al., 2020;
Miller et al., 2020) – however, significant uncertainties are associated with these values.
Moreover, the variability due to individuality is challenging to reflect, see §3 for more
discussion. In particular, high values of risk are obtained from quanta generation rates

5

derived from so called ‘superspreading events’ (e.g. see Miller et al., 2020) — we choose
not to focus on such cases but note that should we have done so then the risks reported
herein would be dramatically increased (see, for example, table 1). For a given demographic
and activity level within the space the breathing rate p can be taken as constant and values
are widely reported in the literature, the number of infected people I is an input to the
model usually taken to be constant.
Riley et al. (1978) were no doubt aware of the significant challenges in measuring, or
even inferring, the outdoor air supply rate to a given indoor space (see Appendix B).
Instead, it was chosen to report the model in a form that can only be applied to indoor
spaces for which the air is relatively well-mixed and the flows are in steady-state. Under
these restrictive assumptions the classical Wells-Riley equation is recovered, namely that
the likelihood, P , that infection spreads within a given indoor space during a time interval
T is


I pq
P = 1 − exp −
T
Q

2



.

(2)

A model for airborne infection risk in transient spaces with variable
occupancy and activity levels

We present a simple model to estimate airborne infection risk capable of both exploiting data of the environmental conditions concerning the ventilation (i.e. CO2 measurements), and accounting for occupancy levels that vary in time. As the insightful work
of Rudnick & Milton (2003) highlighted, airborne infection can only occur through the
breathing of rebreathed air that is infected. It is important to note that respiratory activity, e.g. breathing, results in a complex multi-phase flow being exhaled. Relative to inhaled
air, exhaled air is typically warmer, of higher moisture content (both in the form of vapours
and droplets), richer in CO2 , and contains more bioaerosols of which some may be viral

6

particles. The fate of viral particles is of particular relevance to estimating infection risk,
and determines via which of the three routes (droplet, contact or airborne) infection might
occur, see Milton (2020); Li (2021). Those virus particles held in larger droplets may either
be directly sprayed onto another individual (risking transmission via the droplet route) or
fall to surfaces (potentially giving rise to transmission via the contact route). Following
the WHO (2014) definition, virus particles that might give rise to transmission via the
airborne route must remain “suspended in air over long distances and time”. Therefore,
the viral aerosols that can give rise to airborne infection (transmission via the airborne
route) will be largely carried with the gaseous emissions exhaled. Directly detecting the
presence of viral aerosols within air is challenging, costly and impractical to implement at
scale. However, gaseous emissions exhaled by persons are relatively rich in CO2 , and CO2
sensors of suitable accuracy (say ±50 ppm) are easily obtained for a moderate cost. Hence
monitoring CO2 as a proxy for air that has the potential to be carrying viral aerosols,
whilst being far from a perfect tracer, has not only legitimate scientific grounds but is also
practical to implement at scale.
Within most indoor spaces human breathing is the dominant source CO2 and so the
fraction f of rebreathed air can be inferred from the ratio of the CO2 concentration within
the space (above outdoor levels, C0 ) to the concentration of CO2 added to exhaled breath
during breathing, Ca , giving
f=

C − C0
,
Ca

(3)

where C in the measured CO2 within the space. Denoting the number of people n within
the space and taking the occupancy to be constant gives the fraction of rebreathed air
that is infected as f I/n. Note that estimating the likelihood of airborne infection via
monitored CO2 , from which the fraction of infected rebreathed air is estimated (e.g.
Rudnick & Milton, 2003), makes no stronger assumptions than are already implicit within
7

the classical formulation of the Wells-Riley equation (2). Within the Wells-Riley equation
the ratio, (I p)/Q, is the fraction of infected air estimated to be within the space while the
formulation of Rudnick & Milton (2003) expresses it as (f I)/n. In both formulations the
estimate of the fraction of infected air is translated into a likelihood of infection rate via
the quanta generation rate. The quanta generation rates utilised in most studies (including the present study) are deduced from data concerning actual far-field infection events.
Obviously, these infection events occur as a result of the full physics governing the complex transport of viral particles. As such, the empirical data (underlying the estimates of
quanta generation rates) implicitly accounts for some of the differing physics expected to
arise between the transport of hypothesised gaseous infectious air (required by Wells-Riley
based models) and the actual transport of infectious particles — which for airborne infection to occur must (by the definition of the transmission route) be able to be ‘suspended
in air over long distances and time’.
Rudnick & Milton (2003) chose to express their result as


I
P = 1 − exp − q
n

Z

T

f dt

0





I
= 1 − exp − q f T
n



.

(4)

As they point out, this result “has very general applicability; it is valid for both steady-state
and non-steady-state conditions and when the outdoor air supply rate varies with time”.
Furthermore, we highlight that their assumption of a well-mixed space is unnecessary. The
fraction of rebreathed air, f , is based on a point measurement of CO2 which, assuming
human respiration is the dominant source of CO2 (entirely reasonable in the absence of
other sources, e.g. unvented combustion), provides, at any instant, a good estimate of the
fraction of air at that point within the space that has already been breathed by another
individual. This point measurement can be integrated according to (4) to give the likelihood that a person (at the same location as the CO2 sensor within the space) becomes
8

infected assuming only that the infected air is relatively well-mixed within the uninfected
rebreathed air, i.e. it does not require that all the air within the space is well-mixed. This
implies that, where multiple CO2 sensors within a single indoor space (inevitably) give
different readings, airborne infection risk can be assessed without violation of the modelling assumption being implied; in fact, the different readings within the space could be
exploited to obtain estimates of the spatial variation in risk.
We wish to extend the generality of (4) with greater application in mind, in particular
to account for occupancy levels that vary in time (see §2.2). The likelihood that airborne
infection occurs within a given space can be determined from
 Z
P = 1 − exp −

0

T

λ dt



 Z
= 1 − exp −

0

T



σ(n) fi q dt ,

(5)

with, in the general case, the fraction of infected air fi within the space being determined
by solution of
dfi
I p fi Q
=
−
,
dt
V
V

(6)

where V is the volume of the indoor space which is typically easily estimated, and σ(n)
is determined based on whether the space is occupied or unoccupied: σ(n) = 1 for n > 0
and σ(0) = 0. For a derivation of (5) from first principles see Appendix A. With suitable
selection of the time at which to initiate investigation, the initial condition fi (0) = 0 will
frequently be suitable; typically values for the breathing (pulmonary ventilation) rate p
can be sourced from the literature, and from monitored CO2 and occupancy levels the
ventilation rate Q can be estimated from (18), although as discussed in Appendix B such
estimates are subject to considerable noise. In spite of this noise, when CO2 is monitored
and occupancy levels are available then solution of (5) is only lacking knowledge of the time
series of the number of infectors I within the space. Note that solution of the full system

9

of equations, e.g. (18), (5) and(6), does require the assumption that the air within the
space be approximated as well-mixed because one is required to calculate the ventilation
rates explicitly; unlike simpler models e.g. (4) and (7) which do not. Where retrospective
modelling is being undertaken to assess a particular outbreak, or spreading event, estimates
of these data may be available and attempts to apply the above might prove useful and
we turn our attention to informing these cases in §5. However, with a focus on predictive
modelling which, by definition, requires some assumption regarding the presence of infectors
I(t), we now consider some appropriate assumptions.
We will either assume that occupants arrive and leave over realistic periods of time (i.e.
we model them to not all arrive and leave at once), or our monitored data show this to be so,
and thus there exists at least two reasonable principles by which to establish the presence
of infectors, I(t). At one extreme, assume that the infector is always the first to arrive
and the last to leave. Alternatively, one could assume that there is always a constant
proportion of the (current) occupants infected such that when the space is occupied to
design capacity there is a single infector (this results in the number of infectors, I, taking
non-integer values outside full design occupancy which is inconsequential). Should one
choose to assume the former, there is potential that risks are over estimated reported for
scenarios in which occupancy is decreased, or equivalently by allowing more occupants one
could under report the risk of the space since a lesser proportion of the occupants are
infected — in the absence of knowledge as to who is infected, this cannot be reasonable
for comparison of risk with different occupancy levels. As such, we choose to make the
latter assumption, i.e. there is always a constant proportion, α, of the (current) occupants
infected, i.e. I(t) = α n(t). Doing so renders I(t)/n(t) = α as constant or, alternatively,
that the proportion α of rebreathed air that is infected remains constant, and as such we
can write the likelihood of airborne infection in a far simpler form that still allows for

10

variable occupancy, namely
 Z
P = 1 − exp −

T
0


I
σ(n) f q dt ,
n

(7)

where we choose to include presentation with the fraction I/n within the integral to emphasise that both the numerator and the denominator vary in time. Making the assumptions
that result in (7) being valid not only seems reasonable for predictive modelling but it enables the work of Rudnick & Milton (2003) to be extended to predict the airborne infection
risk, based on either modelled or monitored CO2 data, within indoor spaces that also have
variable occupancy levels, crucially, without need to solve the more general equation (5).
To generally solve (5), on is required to solve (18) to estimate the volume flux as an input
to then enable solution of (6); doing so requires monitored occupancy levels, CO2 levels,
and relies on the (temporal) gradients in monitored CO2 levels. Presented in the form (7)
and noting I(t)/n(t) = α, highlights that precise occupancy levels are not required for the
assessment of infection risk, only knowledge of the occupied periods is required.
Throughout this study we choose to set α such that there is a single infector present, i.e.
I(t) = 1, when the space is occupied to design capacity, Nd , which gives α = I(t)/n(t) =
1/Nd . Doing so is as reasonable choice as any other but we note that should comparison
of airborne infection risk between separate indoor spaces of differing design capacity be
desired then alternate choices should be made. The applicability of the choices to enable
predictive modelling via (7) will be highlighted throughout §4, and we return to solving
the more general equations in §5.
2.1

Quantifying the relative risk for changes in environmental management

To examine the effects of a particular change in conditions within a given indoor space,
e.g. change in ventilation rate, occupancy level/behaviour, etc., it is informative to define a

11

‘base case’ scenario for which the likelihood of infection during a time interval T is P0 and
quantify the airborne infection risk of chosen scenarios relative to the base case. We can
then define the risk of some test scenario relative to the base case as RR = P/P0 , denoting
this relative risk as RRA when a pre/asymptomatic is investigated, i.e. T = TA . It is worth
noting that the relative risk can be written as a ratio of Taylor series expansions of the
RT
exponential terms. Doing so can aid approximation since, when the integral 0 s σf nI q dt,

is small, the leading order terms in the expansion dominate and the relative risk ceases to be
dependent on the quanta generation rate — a notoriously difficult quantity to parameterise
which also varies widely between diseases. Hence for airborne infection risk assessment the
leading order expansion for the relative risk can be reported as valid for all diseases (note
that the duration T for which the approximation remains valid does change with disease).
Moreover, for any given disease results for the relative risk can be reported with a greater
degree of certainty, irrespective of the duration.
2.2

Defining absolute risk and the expected number of secondary infections
for a given indoor space

An indoor space can be considered as contributing to the spread of a disease if an infected
person attends the space for a duration over which it is more likely than not that they infect
others. In the case that someone is showing symptoms of the disease it is reasonable to
assume that they cease attending the space or that they be required to do so. Individuals
can remain infectious and asymptomatic/presymptomatic for time periods of multiple days
(which we denote as TA ) and this renders (4) unsuitable for quantifying this likelihood for
most indoor spaces. However, for regularly attended spaces e.g. open plan offices and school
classrooms, the probability PA that someone becomes infected via the airborne transmission
route (assuming an infected person attends the space) can be robustly determined via our
formulation (7). To do so, time series data for the rebreathed air fraction (monitored or
12

modelled), the occupancy level and quanta generation rate are required over the duration
TA . For a given disease, assuming the activity levels (per capita) remain broadly the
same within the space, the quanta generation rate can be assumed constant. For realworld assessment, f and n can be obtained from monitored CO2 and occupancy data,
respectively. Moreover, for model cases this can easily be calculated. We demonstrate
examples of this for model building spaces (§4.1), and using monitored data an existing
open plan office (§4.2) taking COVID-19 as a case study.
As elegantly pointed out by Rudnick & Milton (2003) their formulation (4) can be used
to determine what they term a ‘basic reproductive number’ for an airborne infectious disease within an indoor space. Herein, we describe this as the expected number of secondary
infections via the airborne route, SI , that arise within an indoor space when an infectious
individual is attending the space and everyone else is susceptible. For regularly attended
spaces, this is simply calculated from the probability of someone becoming infected over
the pre/asymptomatic period multiplied by the number of susceptible people, giving


 Z
SI = (Na − 1) 1 − exp −

0

TA

I
σ(n)f q dt
n



,

(8)

where Na is the total number of people that regularly attend the space. We earlier pointed
out that calculations of the likelihood of infection via either (4) or via (7) do not require
the assumption that all the air within the indoor space is well-mixed. However, for the
expected number of secondary infections to be a meaningful estimate then (8) requires
that the likelihood of infection to be representative of the risk through the occupied indoor
space. If all the air within the space is well-mixed then this is simply satisfied; otherwise,
multiple CO2 measurements should be taken, within the breathing zone, to assess the
degree of variation.

13

To summarise our modelling, we have developed practical statistics to assess airborne
infection via relative risk based scenario testing (RR), the absolute probability of infection
(PA ), and the expected number of secondary infections for an indoor space (SI ). All
of these can be calculated by obtaining/modelling representative CO2 data. Moreover,
for measured/modelled CO2 distributions within the space, on assuming the infected &
uninfected rebreathed air are mixed, these statistics can be calculated and their variation
within the space investigated.

3

Determining appropriate quanta generation rates

As with all Wells-Riley based infection modelling an input parameter for which great
uncertainty abounds is the quanta generation rate, q — with the novelty of COVID-19 this
uncertainty in compounded. Given the uncertainty, we include results of scenario tests at
various feasible levels of q, which span nearly four orders of magnitude based on the data
of Buonanno et al. (2020). As a base case, which we deem appropriate for the regularly
attended spaces on which we focus (namely, open-plan offices and class rooms) we take a
value of q = 1 quanta/hr — this is obtained by taking cx = ci cv ≈ 7 × 106 RNA/ml, where
ci = {0.1, 0.01} is the ratio between infectious quantum and the infectious dose expressed in
viral RNA copies, and cv = {7×107 , 7×108 } RNA/ml is the viral load measured in sputum.
These values obtained by consideration that for most of the time, in most open-plan offices
and classrooms, most of the occupants are sitting breathing with perhaps a small number
vocalising — the data for whispered counting falls between these two activities and is rather
more close to breathing — as such, for our base case, we take data for whispered counting
from Buonanno et al. (2020) and use their results to map our selected values of cx to values
of quanta generation rates q. Moreover, we consider a scenario in which the occupants
within the open-plan office or classroom are (on average) all vocalising/talking (e.g. a
call-centre or noisy classroom), taking again cx ≈ 7 × 106 RNA/ml gives q ≈ 5 quanta/hr.
14

In addition, we consider a scenario in which the viral load in sputum is somewhat reduced,
i.e. cv ≈ {2 × 107 , 2 × 108 } RNA/ml, giving q ≈ 0.3 quanta/hr.
Mutations of the SARS-CoV-2 virus have given rise to a new variant, named B.1.1.7,
which has become widely detected in certain geographical regions (within the UK in particular) in the latter part of 2020 (see Kupferschmidt, 2021, for details). This variant,
which has already spread across international borders, is believed to be potentially around
70% more transmissible than the, herein, ‘pre-existing’ strains of the virus (SAGE et al.,
2020; Tang et al., 2020). It is, as yet, unclear by which mechanisms the transmission of the
new variant is increased; however, it is an important development which demands analysis. We therefore include estimates for the airborne infection of variant B1.1.7 within our
results. To do so, we assume the increase in transmission of B1.1.7 via the airborne route
might be proportional to the total increase and, for the various scenarios considered, take
quanta generation rates for the variant, qv , to be 70% higher than those corresponding to
pre-existing strains of the virus, i.e. qv = 1.7q.

4

Predictive modelling of airborne infection using COVID-19 as an example

4.1

Application to a model open-plan office

By way of example, we first consider a moderately sized open-plan office, of floor area
400 m2 and (a generous) floor-to-ceiling height 3.5 m, which is designed to be occupied by
40 people (CIBSE, 2006). We assume that occupants arrive steadily between 08:00 and
09:00 each morning, each take a one hour lunch break during which they leave the office,
and leave steadily between 17:00 and 18:00 each day. While within the office we assume
that (on average) each occupant breathes at a rate of approximately p = 8 l/min with a
CO2 production rate of 0.3 l/min, giving Ca = 0.038 and we take the outdoor CO2 level
to be 400 ppm (Rudnick & Milton, 2003). As a base case we assume ventilation provision
15

inline with UK guidance for office spaces, i.e. Qpp = 10 l/s/p (CIBSE, 2006), or a total
ventilation rate of Q = 400 l/s.
Our model run for this open-plan office gives, for the base case, the absolute risk of
infection during a period of pre/asymptomatic COVID-19 infection as PA = 1.1%. If one
had have taken the classical Wells-Riley model (2), taking there to always be a single
infector present and T to be the simple sum of occupied hours (i.e. T = 40 hrs), the level
of risk reported would have been P = 1.3%, around 20% higher. We note the key benefit
of our model is the ability to use monitored CO2 and occupancy data as we show in §4.2.
4.1.1

The impact of varied quanta generation rates

We first examine the impact of varied quanta generation levels; namely, q = {1, 0.3, 5}
(see §3 for a fuller discussion) on the likelihood of airborne infection. Figure 1 plots the
absolute likelihood that someone becomes infected within the office via the airborne route
over the period during which an infector is expected to remain pre/asymptomatic, i.e. 5
working days (since the period of pre/asymptomaitc infectivity for COVID-19 is estimated
as 5–7 days). The plot shows that in the base case the absolute risk, PA , of airborne
infection within this open-plan office is just around 1.1% (or assuming a lower viral load is
appropriate the risk drops to around PA = 0.3%). However, if the open-plan were a callcentre then this risk that someone becomes infection through attending work increases to
above 5%. These results correspond to estimates for the quanta generation rates based on
the work of Buonanno et al. (2020) on data for ‘pre-existing’ strains of the SARS-CoV-2
virus. In the latter part of the year 2020 mutations have gave rise to a new variant of
the virus B1.1.7 which is already prevalent in some geographical regions. Within figure 1
dashed lines show estimates for the likelihood of airborne infection for the B1.1.7 variant
based on the current data which suggest this variant may be 70% more effectively spread.
Since for the scenarios being tested the likelihoods remain relatively linear in response to
16

0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

Figure 1: The variation in the likelihood of infection with time over the five day pre/asymptomatic period
with ventilation inline with UK guidance, i.e. Qpp = 10 l/s/p. Solid curves mark the risk with differing
quanta generation rates assumed for the pre-existing SARS-CoV-2 strains: blue denotes q = 0.3 quanta/hr,
red denotes q = 1 quanta/hr, and black denotes q = 5 quanta/hr. The correspondingly coloured dashed
curves mark estimates for the variant B1.1.7 for which we take the quanta generation rates to be qv = 1.7q.

17

changes in infectivity the risks are increased by a factor of around 1.7 in all three scenarios,
i.e. the for the base case scenario with variant B1.1.7 the airborne infection is predicted to
be nearly 2%.
One can, of course, examine the relative risk of airborne infection; as expected from
from consideration of Taylor series expansions of the exponential terms, the results are
broadly constant in time, with the relative risk taking an initial value of q/q0 (or qv /q0 ),
and then remaining dominated by the ratio of the quanta generation rate between the
scenarios and/or variants. For example, in this office at the end of a pre/asymptomatic
period, examining the scenario that the open-plan office changes to become equivalent to
a call-center gives the relative risk as RRA = 4.9 (for q/q0 = 5, and taking qv = 1.7q
gives RRA = 8.2), and imagining that the appropriate viral load for the disease, for some
reason, becomes lower gives RRA = 0.3 (for q/q0 = 0.3). One can see that for these
cases the relative risk is well predicted by a linear approximation (taking only the first
order terms in the Taylor series expansion of the probabilities), i.e. the relative risk is
approximately equal to the ratio of quanta generation rates between the scenarios.
4.1.2

The importance of ventilation/outdoor air supply rates

The qualitative increase in the airborne infection risk within the office during a period of
pre/asymptomatic infection for varied outdoor air supply rate per person, Qpp , is broadly
similar to that shown in figure 1. Over the full pre/asymptomatic period the base case (of
course) again gives PA = 1.1% for pre-existing strains of the SARS-CoV-2 virus. Doubling
the ventilation rate per person to Qpp = 20 l/s/p decreases the likelihood to PA = 0.6%,
and decreasing the outdoor air supply rate per person to Qpp = 4 l/s/p results in PA = 2.2%
(see table 1).
Examining the relative risk RR, for scenarios of changing ventilation rates, then RR
takes an initial value of unity and only over time does the ventilation alter the accumu18

1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

Figure 2: The variation in the relative risk, RR, of infection with time over the five day pre/asymptomatic
period. The different curves highlight different scenarios, namely: the base case, Qpp = 10 l/s/p (red),
increased vent, Qpp = 20 l/s/p (blue), and decreased vent, Qpp = 4 l/s/p (black). The periodic deviations
from the steady-state values of RR arise due to transient effects as the office is reoccupied each day.

lation of infected re-breathed air within the space. In this open-plan office, in the case
that the ventilation is doubled from one scenario to the next, the relative risk reaches an
approximately steady value of RR ≈ 0.55 around 6 hours after being occupied (see figure
2), and in the case of decreased ventilation (Qpp /Q0 = 0.4) then RR ≈ 2.0 is reached after
approximately 10 hours. At the start of each working day, as the office is reoccupied, the
relative risk can be seen to deviate from, then return back to, its steady-state value (figure
2), this is as a consequence of transient effects — as the fraction rebreathed air increases
at different rates in each scenario (due to the differing ventilation rates). Transient effects
that occur at the end of the day do not affect the infection risk since the office is unoccupied. These deviations lessen each day as the transients have a smaller impact on the
integral risk; the deviations are also more pronounced in the case that the ventilation is
reduced, i.e. the black curve in figure 2.
19

4.1.3

The expected number of secondary infections for an open-plan office

We run our model for the expected number of secondary airborne infections (8) for a period
of pre/asymptomatic infectivity (5–7 days, i.e. spanning 5 working days) varying both the
quanta generation rate (of ‘pre-existing’ virus strains q = {0.3, 1.0, 5.0} quanta/hr) and
the outdoor air supply rate air supply rate (Qpp = {4, 10, 20} l/s/p). The results are
presented in table 1 and suggest that, for these environmental conditions with quiet deskbased work being conducted, it is unlikely that an employee’s time within the office will
significantly contribute to the spread of COVID-19 via the airborne route. However, if
the RNA copies/viral load are as expected by Buonanno et al. (2020), i.e. q ≈ 1 for quiet
desk-based work, but the office is poorly ventilated then the expected number of secondary
infections arising within this office may hover dangerously close to unity for pre-existing
virus strains; should the B1.1.7 variant become prevalent then a single infection within the
office could be expected to give rise to around 1.4 new infections just via the airborne route.
Alternatively, if the office is used for particularly vocal activities, e.g. a call-center or sales
office (i.e. making q ≈ 5 more appropriate for pre-existing strains), then just through their
occupation these spaces may significantly contribute to the spread of COVID-19 via the
airborne route even when ventilated inline with current UK guidance — with the situation
only worsened in the presence of the B1.1.7 variant.
To end this section, we note that Buonanno et al. (2020) report far higher quanta
generation rates for ‘superspreaders’. The definition of a superspreader is unclear and
far from unanimous. We note that the term may refer to specific combinations of the
particular activity being undertaken, the environmental quality, and the biological response
of individuals. Within table 1, we include two sets of scenarios (based on q = 20 quanta/hr
and q = 100 quanta/hr, respectively) which report the expected number of secondary
infections that might arise within our office should some superspreading event occur within.
20

Secondary infections, SI
q = 0.3 quanta/hr
Variant B1.1.7
q = 1.0 quanta/hr
Variant B1.1.7
q = 5.0 quanta/hr
Variant B1.1.7
q = 20 quanta/hr
Variant B1.1.7
q = 100 quanta/hr
Variant B1.1.7

Qpp = 4 l/s/p
0.25
[0.43]
0.84
[1.4]
4.0
[6.6]

Qpp = 10 l/s/p
0.13
[0.22]
0.42
[0.72]
2.1
[3.5]

Qpp = 20 l/s/p
0.07
[0.12]
0.24
[0.40]
1.2
[2.0]

14
[20]
35
[38]

7.6
[12]
26
[33]

4.4
[7.3]
18
[25]

Table 1: The expected number of secondary airborne infections, SI , for COVID-19 arising within an openplan office (floor plan of 400 m2 and floor-to-ceiling height of 3.5 m) occupied by 40 people for 8 hrs each
day over the period that a pre/asymptomatic person remains attending work. Bold text highlights the
scenario (based on quiet desk-based work) taken herein as the base case; scenarios of q = 5 quanta/hr
are intended to be representative of of more vocal office environments, and higher quanta generation rate
are intended to be indicative of superspreading scenarios. Values within square brackets provide estimates
for the SARS-CoV-2 variant B1.1.7 at quanta generation rates qv relative to the pre-existing strains, i.e.
qv = 1.7q.

The results are worrisome with the majority of employees becoming infected from the
presence of a single infector in many of the scenarios examined. We hope that the conditions
that might be required to give rise to superspreader events are unlikely to occur over
durations comparable to a full pre/asymptomatic periods; if so, these scenarios may prove
to be overly pessimistic.
4.1.4

The benefits of reduced occupancy

The above results suggest, under certain conditions, occupation of an open-plan office may
contribute to the spread of COVID-19 just by the airborne route. This is troubling as the
airborne route is perhaps the most difficult transmission route to mitigate against with
appropriate ventilation being the primary mitigation strategy. Employers should help to
mitigate the airborne spread of COVID-19 by ensuring ventilation systems are sufficient to
comply with guidance and that they are properly maintained. However, large scale changes

21

to the ventilation provision, for example to double the supply of outdoor air, are costly
and will take time to implement appropriately (e.g. ensuring that the heating provision,
and other factors, are also adequately adjusted or upgraded). One course of action that
may be more immediately appealing is to consider keeping the occupancy reduced. For
example, introducing week-in week-out working would result in the occupancy being halved.
However, the ventilation system can be set to keep running at the full design capacity
(which in our model office was Q = 400 l/s in the base case scenario). Doing so results in
the expected number of secondary infections that might arise via the airborne route within
our office being reduced by a factor of about four, because, all else being equal, in this
example the probability of an infector being present is roughly halved compounded by the
fact that there are half the number of people to infect. This fourfold reduction in secondary
airborne infections is significant while the strategy provides opportunities for employees to
attend the office in a manner which might be of practical benefit to themselves and their
employer alike. Reducing the occupancy by a factor of r results in the expected number of
secondary infections that might arise via the airborne route being reduced by a factor r 2
for all the scenarios considered herein.
4.2

Airborne infection risk from monitored data in open plan offices

To demonstrate the application of our model to indoor spaces with monitored CO2 and
occupancy data we were provided access to data recorded by the ‘Managing Air for Green
Inner Cities (MAGIC)’ project (http://www.magic-air.uk). The data were recorded in
a small office which had a design capacity of eight people, although during the times for
which we were provided data never more than six people attended the office. The office
is naturally ventilated with openable sash windows on opposite sides of the building. The
floor area is approximately 37.6 m2 and the floor-to-ceiling height is 2.7 m; Song et al.
(2018) provide full details of the monitored space and the monitoring equipment used but
22

it should be noted the monitored office is not of a modern design and is not well-sealed nor
well-insulated. For monitored data it is worth considering how to appropriately select the
ambient CO2 concentration, C0 , since atmospheric levels do vary slightly and CO2 sensors
can exhibit a base-line drift over time. For all our analysis based on monitored CO2 data
we decided to allow the ambient CO2 concentration to vary taking its value each day to
be the mean value observed between 05:00 and 06:00.
4.2.1

The role of opening windows in reducing risk

Figure 3 a) and b) show the occupancy profiles during two days in 2017. During 29th
Sep the windows were opened on both sides of the building (providing an opened area of
0.24 m2 ) at around 09:00 and remained so until after 20:00; whilst on 5th Oct the windows
remained closed all day and we note that the spike in CO2 at around 16:15 on this day
corresponds to a brief visit during which 22 people were in the office. The monitored CO2
profiles (figure 3 c) and d)) were obtained at six locations of differing heights (between 73 cm
and 242 cm from the floor) and positions within the office. It is most striking that the CO2
levels are markedly higher on 5th Oct when the windows remained closed. Crucially, these
elevated CO2 levels translate into increased risk of airborne infection for the occupants – in
this case the risk of infection being approximately doubled on the day when the windows
remained shut. In addition, at times (e.g. between about 14:00 and 17:00 on 25th Sep)
there is a marked variation in measured CO2 levels dependent on location. It follows that
this variation in CO2 is reflected in the infection risk levels which indicates that the location
within the office at which one was breathing affected the risk of infection by around 20%
on the day the windows were closed and a much more substantial variation on the day the
windows were open.
Figure 4 a) shows the occupancy data for the monitored office over a five day period
in September 2017. During this five day period the office windows were open for some
23

5

4

3

2

1

0
1400

1200

1000

800

600

400
0.02

0.015

0.01

0.005

0
08:00

10:00

12:00

14:00

16:00

18:00
20:00
Sep 29, 2017

08:00

10:00

12:00

14:00

16:00

18:00
20:00
Oct 05, 2017

Figure 3: The intra-day variation in occupancy (upper panes, a) and b)), monitored CO2 (middle panes,
c) and d)) and the corresponding risk of airborne spread of COVID-19 (lower panes, e) and f)) during 29th
Sep 2017 (left-hand panes, a), c) and e)) and 5th Oct 2017 (the right-hand panes, b), d) and f)). Data are
plotted from six CO2 monitors placed at various locations and heights (between 73 cm and 242 cm from the
floor). On the 29th Sep (left-hand panes) windows on opposite sides of the room were opened (creating an
opened area of around 0.24 m2 ) from 08:00 until 20:00 whilst on the 5th Oct (right-hand panes) the windows
remained closed all day.

24

Figure 4: The variation in a) occupancy, b) monitored CO2 , and c) the corresponding risk of airborne
spread of COVID-19, over a period of pre/asymptomatic occupancy of the monitored office. Data are
plotted from six CO2 monitors placed at various locations and heights (between 73 cm and 242 cm from the
floor).

25

significant portion of each day. The accompanying monitored CO2 data is shown in figure 4
b) and it should be noted that data are missing between 13:30 and 19:00 on 27th September.
The risk of airborne infection for COVID-19 is shown in the lower-pane with the risk rising
gradually over the period of pre/asymptomatic infectivity reaching an absolute risk 0.059 ≤
PA ≤ 0.064 depending on where within the office the occupant would have been located.
We note that two of the sensors were positioned very close to the windows. However,
perhaps surprisingly, for the five day period the CO2 concentrations measured in these
positions were not significantly below that measured elsewhere within the office and the
airborne infection risk estimated from the sensors near the windows was not systematically
lower than those positioned in the centre of the room. One of the sensor placed close to the
window, the data marked in orange in figures 3c), 3e), 4b), and 4c) does show levels which
are significantly below the other sensors during 29th Sep — however, as figure 4c) shows
over the five day period (25th –29th Sep) the impact is not drastic with the risk inferred from
all sensors lying within ±5% of the mean. The expected number of secondary infections
for the monitored office over this period is 0.3 ≤ SI ≤ 0.32 – reassuringly below unity and
indicating that this naturally ventilated office was likely to have been receiving somewhere
between 10 l/s/p and 20 l/s/p (see table 1). From examination of the monitored office
during periods when the windows were closed the expected number of secondary infections
might approximately double to SI ≈ 0.6. We note however, that these risks might be
considerably higher for more modern well-sealed offices.

5

Retrospective modelling using COVID-19 as an example

In the following section we chose to examine a full pre/asymptomatic period within an
open-plan office. However, the methodology we present is applicable to any shared indoor
space for durations over which the population of occupants remains the same/similar.
Where retrospective modelling of an outbreak is desired it is natural to assume that
26

0.06

0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0
Sep 25

Sep 26

Sep 27

Sep 28

Sep 29

Sep 30
2017

Figure 5: The variation in the likelihood of airborne infection risk, P , over a five day period based on
CO2 data from one sensor within the monitored office. The black curve shows the likelihood based on the
predictive methodology (7), i.e. the same data from this sensor shown in figure 4. Estimates of the airborne
infection risk, taking the same disease parameterisation and occupancy, but reconstructing the risk using
the full equations using the raw CO2 data are marked with by the red curve. Estimates of the airborne
infection risk reconstructed using the full equations and CO2 data subjected to a low-pass filter are marked
with by cyan curves for infinite-duration impulse response filter and magenta curves for the Savitzky-Golay
filter. Data are shown for passband frequencies, and filtering windows, based on Tf = 20 min (dotted
curves) and Tf = 240 min (dashed curves).

27

the infector’s occupancy profile may be known (or at least estimated) and so invoking the
simplifying assumptions that lead to our predictive model, (7), is likely to be inappropriate.
In order to account for bespoke infector occupancy profiles one must return to the general
equation for the likelihood of airborne infection, i.e. (5), which requires solution of both
(18), to determine the ventilating flow though the space, and (6), to determine the amount
of infectious airborne material present. This retrospective modelling requires that the
ventilating flows are inferred from the monitored CO2 and that these flows are then utilised
to determine the dilution of the airborne infectious material being emitted by any infectors
as and when they are present. As such, for this retrospective modelling it is necessary to
assume that all of the air within the space is well-mixed. Where indoor concentrations
are expected to vary spatially within a single space then multiple CO2 monitors can be
deployed to establish estimates of the errors introduced by the necessity to assume wellmixed air. The CO2 data presented herein is one such case, a naturally ventilated office
with no mechanical means to generate a well-mixed environment. However, despite having
sensors positioned both in the centre of the room and near the windows, over the full five
day period (figure 4) the spatial variation in CO2 concentration alone only changes the risk
inferred from any sensor by at most ±5% of the mean; this despite the fact that for certain
periods CO2 concentrations varied considerably between the sensors.
To test the methodology of retrospectively inferring the risk from CO2 measurements
we select the data from one sensor (plotted in green in figures 4), which is relatively typical
within the set recorded. We note that the results reported hereinafter have been tested
for each of the six sensors with no notable differences arising. In order to establish the
validity to enable comparison of the results from the retrospective analysis to be compared
to the ‘true’ predicted previously. Within figure 5 the results of the risk from the predictive method are plotted as the black curve resulting in PA = 0.054. However, when

28

the same CO2 data are used to solve (18) and (6), which are then substituted into (5)
and integrated, i.e. the retrospective method (with the proportion of infectors, I/n, taken
to be constant solely to enable direct comparison to the predictive method), the airborne
infection risk (marked by the red curve) is significantly lower with PA = 0.044. This difference arises because the retrospective methods requires discrete observational data to be
differentiated. Passing these data, which were recorded every minute, through a low-pass
filter reduces much of this difference. For all our data, the airborne infection risk implied
by the retrospective method was relatively insensitive to the choice of low-pass filter (we
tested the finite-duration impulse response, infinite-duration impulse response (IIR), and
a third-order Savitzky-Golay filter in Matlab) and also to the passband frequencies Tf−1
with 20 min≤ Tf ≤ 240 min (or filtering windows of Tf in the case of the Savitzky-Golay
filter).
Figure 5 also shows the retrospective airborne infection risk inferred from the CO2 data,
with a passband frequency and filtering window set by Tf = 20 min, for an IIR (dotted cyan
line) and a Savitzky-Golay filter (dotted magenta line), and with Tf = 240 min for an IIR
(dashed cyan line) and a Savitzky-Golay filter (dashed magenta line) — all of which result
in PA = 0.053 (when rounded to two significant figures). As such, we can report that with
appropriate filtering, airborne infection risk can be reconstructed retrospectively based on
monitored CO2 data. Based on all available data, the method appears to provide good
accuracy when the CO2 data is subjected to a low-pass filter, irrespective of the choice of
filter, and exhibits an adequately low sensitivity to the choice of passband frequency, or
filtering window.
For completeness, each night the CO2 concentration within the office notionally reached
ambient levels and these levels varied slightly from day-to-day, and we observed singularities
in the implied flow rate when the denominator of the right hand term of (18), namely

29

(C − C0 ), became zero. These could have either been avoided by setting the ambient CO2
concentration artificially low but that would result in artificially high risk being reported.
Instead, we replaced the denominator with max(C − C0 , 10−6 ) which both avoided the
singularities and did not overstate the risk — this insertion can be justified upon realising
that the tolerance of CO2 monitors typically far exceeds 10−6 or 1 ppm. It is interesting
to note that irrespective of the filtering we were never able to obtain estimates of the
instantaneous ventilation flow rates, these typically fluctuated unreasonably in the range
±100 ACH (air changes per hour). However, since these instantaneous ventilation flow
rates only affect the likelihood via (6) which is then integrated twice, with respect to time,
such unreasonable fluctuations do not, in practice, significantly affect estimates of airborne
infection risk.
In order to demonstrate the flexibility of this method, we could examine the effects
on the likelihood of airborne infection of a particular arrival and departure schedule of an
infector during the five day period. However, what is perhaps more interesting is to consider
a case in which the infectivity of the disease varies during the pre/asympomatic period, as
is thought to be the case for COVID-19. We parameterise this variation in infectivity via
the quanta generation rate q(t), and for reasonable comparison we ensure that the intergral
of q(t) over the five days remains unchanged. Consider the case that on day 3 the disease
was particularly infectious with q(t) = 3 quanta/hr, while selecting q(t) = 0.5 quanta/hr
for the other fours days, thus ensuring that an average of q = 1 quanta/hr. In order to
properly account for varied quanta generation rates the subject of the integral in (5) needs
to be evaluated via
I p q fi q Q
dfi q
=
−
.
dt
V
V

(9)

The results are shown in figure 6. For reference the likelihood of airborne infection with
constant q = 1 quanta/hr are shown for the predictive method, by the black curve, and
30

0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
Sep 25

Sep 26

Sep 27

Sep 28

Sep 29

Sep 30
2017

Figure 6: The variation in the likelihood of airborne infection risk, P , over a five day period based on CO2
data from one sensor within the monitored office. For constant quanta generation rate of q = 1 quanta/hr:
the black curve shows the likelihood based on the predictive methodology (7) and the dashed magenta
curve the likelihood reconstructed from the low-pass filtered CO2 data. The blue curves show the results
assuming the disease is such that the infectivity on day 3 is greater than on the other four days but for
fair comparison we parameterise the disease such that integral quanta over the five day period remains
unchanged. In this case we chose values of q = 0.5 quanta/hr for the fours days, rising to q = 3 quanta/hr
on the more infectious day. The plot shows the final risk can be either above (when q = 3 quanta/hr on the
second day, i.e. 27th Sep) or below (when q = 3 quanta/hr on the third day, i.e. 28th Sep) the results for
the constant quanta case; with this being simply determined by whether rebreathed air was more prevalent
(than the average over the full duration, here five days) during the more infectious period, or not.

31

the retrospective method (based on low-pass filtered CO2 data), by the dashed magenta
curve — both assuming I/n is constant, purely to enable comparison. Two blue curves
mark the results for the case of variable infectivity being considered. For one, the more
infectious day was taken to be the third day (27th Sep), and for the other in was taken
to be the forth day (28th Sep). Both blue curves initially indicate lower risk, for the days
on which q(t) = 0.5 quanta/hr, and then show marked increases in the risk on the more
infectious day before continuing to increase (at a rate less than that of the constant quanta
generation rate). The risk for the case where the disease was more infectious on the 27th
Sep finishes significantly above the risk of the constant quanta generation rate case; the
opposite is true for the case where disease was assumed more infectious on the 28th Sep.
This is simply because the integral CO2 levels during 27th Sep were above the average
for the five days and those on the 28th Sep were below the average. This is in line with
expectations based on inspection of the system of equations since the risk is determined
by the integral of fi q over time. Crucially, these results provide successful demonstration
of the principles of retrospectively evaluating the airborne infection risk for a general case
based on actual CO2 measurements.

6

Conclusion

Taking COVID-19 as an example relatively simple models have been derived to estimate
the likelihood of airborne infection within indoor spaces which can account for variable
occupancy levels, bespoke infector behaviours, and diseases for which the infectivity varies
in time during the infectious period. Our models require only monitored or modelled data
for CO2 , occupancy & infector levels, and estimates of appropriate quanta generation
rates (which in the most general case can vary in time). A modelled office and, separately,
monitored data were used to demonstrate results.
We conclude that for open-plan offices, regularly attended by the same/simliar peo32

ple, which have ventilation provision in-line with UK guidance (e.g. CIBSE, 2006) then
attendance of quiet desk-based work is unlikely to significantly contribute to the spread of
COVID-19 via the airborne route. However, this changes should these spaces be poorly
ventilated (e.g. 4 l/p/s) since then, through a single infected person attending the office,
the expected number of people becoming infected via the airborne route is close to unity,
and estimates rise well above for the SARS-CoV-2 variant B1.1.7.. Even for adequately
ventilated spaces if the occupants are very vocal (e.g. a call-centre) then, in the presence
of a single infector, one could expect attendance of the office to give rise to between two
and four new COVID-19 infections, and so for these spaces we conclude that attendance
could significantly contribute to the spread of COVID-19 via the airborne route. Due to
their ill-defined nature, we choose not to focus on superspreader scenarios but instead we
primarily considered conditions more in-line with the median of the population. Should we
have chosen to examine superspreaders then our results would have been more alarming.
Crucially, the above conclusions highlight that just by making readily achievable changes
to the indoor environment can alter whether, or not, the attendance of work within an
open-plan office might significantly contribute to the spread of COVID via the airborne
route. These changes include, altering ventilation between rates that might actually be
supplied to working offices, and changes in behaviours that can be expected to occur with
different office usage. More successful variants of the virus, e.g. B1.1.7, may only result
in a greater number of the environmental scenarios giving rise to significant numbers of
secondary infections. This highlights that as, and when, communal workplace practices are
re-established there is a need to better mitigate against the airborne spread of COVID-19,
while maintaining every effort to reduce the spread by other transmission routes.
Assessing and maintaining existing ventilation provision is the primary step in understanding the mitigation needs within an indoor space against for the airborne spread of

33

COVID-19. To that end, we recommend that more widespread monitoring of CO2 is carried out within occupied spaces. Doing so will provide a step towards practically assessing
the actual ventilation provision being supplied to these spaces. Where these spaces can
be considered to broadly conform to our definition of a regularly attended space then we
further recommend that occupancy profiles are recorded. In so doing, we provide a simple
methodology with which to calculate the expected number of secondary COVID-19 infections arising, via the airborne route, within the monitored space. Irrespective of this, we
believe that an indication of the rate of increase in infection risk (see (13)) should be considered for all indoor spaces; this can expressed for the general case as λ(1 − P ) = fi q(1 − P ).
In cases where estimates of the likelihood P area being recorded then the term, (1 − P ),
can be included. Otherwise, a ‘worst case’ estimate can be easily obtained by taking the
rate of increase in infection risk to be fi q. However, there is no easily measurable proxy
for fi q but where some predictive measure is required then an estimate can be obtained
from consideration of our model, (7), giving λ = (C − C0 ) α q/Ca . For any given disease
and chosen indoor space this shows that excess CO2 determines the rate at which airborne
infection risk is increasing, i.e. λ ∝ (C − C0 ) with all other variables being independent of
environmental conditions. Hence monitoring the excess CO2 within spaces, for which occupants are enabled to make appropriate change, may be of significant benefit in mitigating
airborne infection risk.
From a practical perspective it may be challenging to increase ventilation provision
without significant time and investment, or without compromising occupants thermal comfort (which risks causing unwanted interventions). However, the formulation of our model
makes it simple to demonstrate that reducing occupancy by a factor r and keeping the ventilation provision unchanged reduces the expected number of secondary infections by a factor
r 2 for all of the scenarios considered. This observation may aid the safer re-establishment

34

of open-plan offices where partial occupancy is of benefit and their environmental design
is appropriate then introducing week-in week-out working may result in tolerable airborne
infection risks for COVID-19 while offering benefits to both employees and employers.
Finally, we conclude that our model indicates that the risk of COVID-19 being spread
by the airborne route is not insignificant and varies widely with activity level and environmental conditions which are predominantly determined by the bulk supply of outdoor
air.

References
Buonanno, G., Stabile, L. & Morawska, L. 2020 Estimation of airborne viral emission: quanta emission rate of SARS-CoV-2 for infection risk assessment. Environment
International p. 105794.
CIBSE 2006 Chartered Institution of Building Services Engineers (CIBSE) Guide A: Environmental design.
Dopico, X. C., Evangelou, M., Ferreira, R. C., Guo, H., Pekalski, M. L.,
Smyth, D. J., Cooper, N., Burren, O. S., Fulford, A. J. & Hennig, B. J. i.
2015 Widespread seasonal gene expression reveals annual differences in human immunity
and physiology. Nature communications 6 (1), 1–13.
Gammaitoni, L. & Nucci, M. C. 1997 Using a mathematical model to evaluate the
efficacy of TB control measures. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 3 (3), 335.
Kupferschmidt, K. 2021 Fast-spreading U.K. virus variant raises alarms. Science
371 (6524), 9–10.
Li, Y. 2021 Basic routes of transmission of respiratory pathogens — a new proposal for
transmission categorization based on respiratory spray, inhalation, and touch.
35

Bueno de Mesquita, P. J., Noakes, C. J. & Milton, D. K. 2020 Quantitative aerobiologic analysis of an influenza human challenge-transmission trial. Indoor air 30 (6),
1189–1198.
Miller, S. L., Nazaroff, W. W., Jimenez, J. L., Boerstra, A., Buonanno, G.,
Dancer, S. J., Kurnitski, J., Marr, L. C., Morawska, L. & Noakes, C. 2020
Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 by inhalation of respiratory aerosol in the Skagit valley
chorale superspreading event. Indoor air .
Milton, D. K. 2020 A Rosetta stone for understanding infectious drops and aerosols. J.
Pediat. Inf. Dis. Soc. 9 (4), 413–415, arXiv: https://academic.oup.com/jpids/articlepdf/9/4/413/33761831/piaa079.pdf.
Mittal, R., Ni, R. & Seo, J.-H. 2020 The flow physics of COVID-19. J. Fluid Mech.
894.
Morawska, L. & Milton, D. K. 2020 It is time to address airborne transmission of
COVID-19. Clinical Infectious Diseases .
Morawska, L., Tang, J. W., Bahnfleth, W., Bluyssen, P. M., Boerstra, A.,
Buonanno, G., Cao, J., Dancer, S., Floto, A., Franchimon, F., Haworth, C.,
Hogeling, J., Isaxon, C., Jimenez, J. L., Kurnitski, J., Li, Y., Loomans, M.,
Marks, G., Marr, L. C., Mazzarella, L., Melikov, A. K., Miller, S., Milton,
D. K., Nazaroff, W., Nielsen, P. V., Noakes, C., Peccia, J., Querol, X.,
Sekhar, C., Seppänen, O., Tanabe, S., Tellier, R., Tham, K. W., Wargocki,
P., Wierzbicka, A. & Yao, M. 2020 How can airborne transmission of COVID-19
indoors be minimised? Environment International 142, 105832.

36

Noakes, C. J., Sleigh, P. A. & Khan, A. 2012 Appraising healthcare ventilation
design from combined infection control and energy perspectives. HVAC&R Res. 18 (4),
658–670.
Riley, E. C., Murphy, G. & Riley, R. L. 1978 Airborne spread of measles in a
suburban elementary school. American journal of epidemiology 107 (5), 421–432.
Rudnick, S. N. & Milton, D. K. 2003 Risk of indoor airborne infection transmission
estimated from carbon dioxide concentration. Indoor air 13 (3), 237–245.
SAGE, The Environmental Modelling Group (EMG), the Scientific Pandemic Insights Group on Behaviours (SPI-B) & the Transmission Group
(TWEG) 2020 Mitigations to reduce transmission of the new variant SARSCoV-2 virus. https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/emgspi-btweg-mitigationsto-reduce-transmission-of-the-new-variant-sars-cov-2-virus-22-december-2020.
Song, J., Fan, S., Lin, W., Mottet, L., Woodward, H., Wykes, M. D., Arcucci,
R., Xiao, D., Debay, J.-E., ApSimon, H., Aristodemou, E., Birch, D., Carpentieri, M., Fang, F., Herzog, M., Hunt, G. R., Jones, R. L., Pain, C., Pavlidis,
D., Robins, A. G., Short, C. A. & Linden, P. F. 2018 Natural ventilation in cities:
the implications of fluid mechanics. Build. Res. Inf. 46 (8), 809–828.
Tang, J. W., Tambyah, P. A. & Hui, D. S. 2020 Emergence of a new SARS-CoV-2
variant in the UK. J. Infect. .
The Independent 2020 Airborne transmission of coronavirus cannot be ruled
out, WHO says. https://www.independent.co.uk/news/health/coronavirus-airbornewho-cases-deaths-a9607206.html.

37

Wells, W. F. 1955 Airborne Contagion and Air Hygiene. An Ecological Study of Droplet
Infections.. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press.
WHO 2014 Infection prevention and control of epidemic - and pandemic - prone acute
respiratory infections in health care. World Health Organization.

A

Modelling from first principles

In order to demonstrate the underlying assumptions and highlight the limits of applicability
we revisit the formulation of the Wells-Riley equation (Wells, 1955; Riley et al., 1978). We
wish to determine the likelihood, P , that infection spreads within a given indoor space
during a time interval T . Denoting the probability that no one becomes infected during
this time P (0, T ) gives that
P = 1 − P (0, T ) .

(10)

The number of infected people, I, is discrete (i.e. an integer) and since time is continuous
we can consider a small period of time, δt, during which either no one becomes infected
or one person becomes infected. Defining the infectivity rate λ (see below for a detailed
discussion) gives the likelihood that one person becomes infected during this small time
period as
P (1, δt) = λ δt .

(11)

Assuming that each infection occurs independently of the last

P (0, t + δt) = P (0, t)[1 − P (1, δt)] = P (0, t)[1 − λ δt] .

(12)

Rearranging and taking the limit δt → 0 gives
P (0, t + δt) − P (0, t)
dP (0, t)
≡
= −λP (0, t) ,
δt
dt
38

(13)

integrating and substituting into (10) gives
 Z
P = 1 − exp −

T



λ dt .

0

(14)

Hence the likelihood P can be evaluated for any known functional form of λ, crucially, as
we go on to demonstrate, this can inferred from data measured within indoor spaces which
records occupancy level profiles and CO2 concentrations.

B

The challenges of measuring ventilation rates or inferring ventilation
rates from monitored CO2

The original formulation of the Wells-Riley equation requires parameterisation of not only
the quanta generation rate, q, but also evaluation of the infectivity rate which in the general
case must be evaluated via the integral
Z

T
0

I pq
dt .
Q

(15)

Assuming broadly constant activity levels within a space the breathing rate, p, and (for a
given disease) the quanta generation rate can be regarded as time independent. Furthermore it may be reasonable to assume the number of infected people within space remains
unchanged if one is examining the likelihood of spread. Moreover, if the ventilation rate Q
can be assumed constant and if the space is in steady-state then the probability of infection
occurring during the period T can be simply expressed as


I pq
T
P = 1 − exp −
Q



.

(16)

However, it is this last assumption that is most troubling since it is only reasonable if for
a time exceeding the transient ventilation effects (which typically remain significant for

39

multiple hours): the opened area of all connections to the space (windows, doors, vents,
etc...) remain unchanged, infiltration rates remain constant (or negligible), and the outdoor
air supply rates are insensitive to changes that arise in the pressure differences between
indoors and outdoors due to changes in temperature and wind — this makes application
of (16) difficult. As we will discuss, measuring or inferring the ventilation rate within an
operational occupied space is non trivial and hence evaluating (15) is impractical. The
insightful work of Rudnick & Milton (2003) solved many of these challenges in assessing
airborne infection risk and forms the basis for the modelling described in §2.
The magnitude of infection risk changes with the seasons for numerous viral infections
(including influenza) and these may arise for a variety of factors. These might include:
changes in the viability of the virus if typical temperatures and/or humidity of indoor
environments vary with the season, or if changing levels of natural UV light are significant
and effect viability; changes in behaviour, for example, staying indoors more during colder
seasons; changes due to the seasonal variations that occur in immunity (Dopico et al.,
2015); and, crucially for the airborne transmission route changes in ventilation (i.e. outdoor
air supply) rates that occur as moderated indoor temperatures are demanded once outdoor
temperatures vary with the season. We assert that this last factor, changing outdoor air
supply rates, is highly significant yet it is poorly evidenced.
Outdoor air may enter an indoor space via a ventilation system, windows, doors, vents,
cracks in the building fabric or, indeed, though the very fabric itself (i.e. many building
materials, e.g. bricks, are porous). As such, there is significant scope for both intentional
and unintended supply of outdoor air. Directly measuring the air flow through all of the
potential pathways for any given indoor space in impractical. Pressure testing can be used
to measure infiltration rates but cannot assess the ventilation rates in operational settings.
Indoors, human activity is typically the major source of CO2 while outdoor CO2 levels

40

remain broadly constant. Therefore, if the rate of CO2 production from human activity
within a space can be estimated, CO2 provides a suitable proxy from which to attempt
inference of the ventilation/outdoor air supply rate within the space. Consider an indoor
space in which both occupancy levels and CO2 are monitored. If the activity levels of individuals remains broadly similar and the CO2 monitored, C, can be regarded as indicative
of the CO2 levels throughout the space, i.e. the CO2 is relatively well-mixed within the
indoor air (note that only point measurements of CO2 are practically possible), then since
CO2 is inert its conservation requires that

V

dC
= n p Ca − Q (C − C0 ) ,
dt

(17)

where n is the number of people in the space and Ca is the volume fraction of CO2 added
to exhaled breath during breathing. As discussed, it is unwise to regard the ventilation
rate as constant for most indoor spaces, i.e. Q = Q(t), and this renders (17) non trivial to
integrate analytically. Thus if one wishes to examine the ventilation rate

Q = np

dC
V
Ca
−
,
(C − C0 ) (C − C0 ) dt

(18)

can be evaluated with monitored occupancy and CO2 data, assuming a reasonable estimate
of individuals CO2 flux, p Ca , can be made (which in practice varies, in particular, with
age, gender, and activity levels). However, as with all real-world data, the CO2 signal is
likely to contain some non-negligible level of noise and the dependence on dC/dt will, in
most cases, render evaluation of ventilation/outdoor air supply rate via (18) unsuitable.
An alternate approach is to examine the monitored occupancy data to determine the
time at which the room becomes unoccupied. Assuming that the ventilation rate remains
unchanged thereafter (which will only be the case if ventilation systems are left operational,

41

and any changes in the ventilation/outdoor air supply rate due to the effects of wind and
temperature variations are negligible) the CO2 concentration within the space, assuming
the air within remains relatively well-mixed, will decay exponentially. By exponential
fitting to the monitored data during this period a ventilation/outdoor air supply rate can
be inferred. However, curve fitting to real-world data is prone to variability due to choices
of the input parameters (e.g. the period over which exponential decay to determine to be
observed) and subject to influence from noise within the data, thereby rendering the results
unreliable. Moreover, this process is hard to automate and so typically requires significant
manual intervention, making it unsuitable for the analysis of large data sets.

In summary, direct or inferred measurements of ventilation/outdoor air supply rates
are extremely challenging. For this reason, and those described in §2, we council that
to assess airborne infection risks no attempts be made to directly assess outdoor air supply/ventilation rates to indoor spaces. Instead, we suggest widespread monitoring of CO2
within spaces combined with measured/estimated occupancy profiles, which with application of our extensions (§2) to the work of Rudnick & Milton (2003) can be used to directly
assess the airborne infection risk within a given space. Where required, simple modelling
can be carried out to inform and assess practical mitigation strategies.

Author Contributions
We all work hard and produced this article together.
Acknowledgements
This work was undertaken as a contribution to the Rapid Assistance in Modelling the
Pandemic (RAMP) initiative, coordinated by the Royal Society, and was supported by the

42

UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) Grand Challenge grant
‘Managing Air for Green Inner Cities’ (MAGIC) grant number EP/N010221/1. HCB acknowledges insightful conversations with Dr Marco-Felipe King, and the debugging support
of Carolanne Vouriot.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

43

