Can pandemics transform scientific novelty? Evidence from COVID-19
Meijun Liu1,2, Yi Bu3, Chongyan Chen4, Jian Xu5, Daifeng Li5, Yan Leng4, Richard Barry
Freeman6,7, Eric Meyer4, Wonjin Yoon8, Mujeen Sung8, Minbyul Jeong8, Jinhyuk Lee8,
Jaewoo Kang8,9, Chao Min10, Min Song11, Yujia Zhai12,13, Ying Ding 4,14*
1

Institute for Global Public Policy, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

2

Faculty of Education, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.

3

Department of Information Management, Peking University, Beijing, China.

4

School of Information, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA.

5

School of Information Management, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.

6

Department of Economics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA.

7

National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), Cambridge, MA, USA.

8

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea

9

Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Bioinformatics, Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea

10

School of Information Management, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China

11

Department of Library and Information Science, Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea

12

Department of Information Resource Management, School of Management, Tianjin Normal University, Tianjin,
China.

13

School of Information Management, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.

14

Dell Medical School, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA.

*Corresponding author: E-mail: ying.ding@austin.utexas.edu

Abstract
Assessing the response of the scientific community to pandemics is of great significance to
generate medical breakthroughs that could cure infectious diseases, reduce mortality, and
mitigate other negative impacts. Scientific novelty drives the efforts to invent new vaccines
during the pandemic. Our analysis of 58,728 coronavirus papers show that coronavirus research
has become dramatically novel since the outbreak of the COVID-19. Subsequent analyses
indicate that the proportion of internationally collaborative papers sharply decreased, while the
fraction of parachuting collaboration defined as collaboration between two authors without
prior collaboration in scientific teams showed growth during the pandemic. Papers with more
parachuting collaboration and internationally collaborative papers are found to be more novel
in the COVID-19 period. This research suggests the unprecedented shock of COVID-19
influences the scientific community by reshaping scientific novelty and changing the way
scientists collaborate. The findings indicate the necessity of reaching out for distant resources
and the importance of maintaining a collaborative scientific community beyond nationalism
during a pandemic.

Newton developed the basis for his groundbreaking work during the Great Plague,
having far-reaching impacts on classical physics and beyond. The experience of Newton has
been repeatedly raised in the 2020 context of the global COVID-19 pandemic. Will scientists
be more novel during the pandemic like Newton? Truly breakthrough ideas rarely occur
overnight 1, while novelty is sometimes sparked by extreme time pressure and urgent needs 2.
These two points of view provide contrasting possibilities regarding the association between
scientific novelty and the disruption of a pandemic.
As the seed of innovation 3,4, scientific novelty could be considered the recombination
of prior knowledge components in an unfamiliar or atypical fashion 5-8. Novel research is more
likely to advance the frontier of scientific discoveries 5,9, and becomes more salient during the
pandemic because of the urgent need for new vaccines for public health.
Scientific teams’ search activities that are important for scientific novelty might be
reshaped during the pandemic, while it is unknown whether parachuting collaboration and
international collaboration that are closely associated with teams’ “search space” are
accelerated or reversed. Nearly 83% of coronavirus-related papers are non-single author papers
from 1951 to 2020, suggesting that a majority of papers in this domain is a result of scientific
teamwork. Broadening the scope of searching and reconfiguration of diverse recourses from
distant sources are considered crucial for performance and innovation 10-12, while search
processes are often bounded 13,14. During the pandemic, the lack of central laboratories or
access to datasets requires a broader scope of data, expertise, and other resources that might be
only available in special localities or persons to address the global challenge, which might
motivate scientific teams to overcome the constraints of localized search by collaborating
outside their established networks and across national borders 15,16. On the other hand, the novel
global challenge and the urgent need for effective vaccines might encourage the adjustment of
team assembly towards effective teamwork that sparks new ideas by including newcomers
beyond team members’ pre-existing relationships and reaching out to international networks 1719
. Given the importance of international collaboration and parachuting collaboration measured
by the faction of team members without prior collaboration in a team, in reaching out for distant
resources and producing novel knowledge 17-19, these two types of collaboration patterns might
increase during the pandemic. However, the urgent pandemic situation might lead to a
reduction in search and outreach 15 and increased costs of communication and coordination,
which thus causes a decline in these two collaboration patterns.
A disaster of global scale, as of 14 October 2020, COVID-19 has infected at least 38.1
million people, proving deadly to 1.09 million individuals. We use this unexpected outbreak as
a natural experiment and find that during the pandemic (1) coronavirus research became far
more novel; and (2) scientific teams involved more parachuting collaboration defined as
collaboration between two authors without prior collaboration, while the proportion of
internationally collaborative papers suddenly decreased; and (3) papers with a higher
parachuting ratio, and internationally collaborative papers are predicted to be more novel.
Building on the “knowledge recombination” theory 8 and the combinatorial perspective
of novelty 6,20,21, we assess papers’ scientific novelty by quantifying how extraordinary a
combination of bio-entities is in a coronavirus-related paper using BioBERT (Bidirectional
Encoder Representations from Transformers for Biomedical Text Mining) 22, a language model
that is pre-trained on 29 million PubMed articles. In medicine, represented by bio-entities (e.g.,
drug, disease, and gene) in publications, knowledge is combined to form new ideas; especially
uncommon combinations of bio-entities form especially novel ideas 23. In this study, when the
distance between two bio-entities is in the upper 10th percentile in the distribution of the
distance of all entity pairs extracted from 58,728 coronavirus research articles, the combination
of two bio-entities is considered novel. We vary the threshold of the location of the distance
between two entities in a novel entity pair and get consistent results (see Supplementary Note

2). Paper’s novelty score is measured by the fraction of novel entity combinations extracted
from the paper, ranging between 0 and 1. The higher paper’s novelty score, the more novel
entity combinations in the paper.1 The framework and an illustrative example of calculating
papers’ novelty scores are shown in Supplementary Fig. S9.
We treat the outbreak of COVID-19 as a natural experiment to explore how scientific
novelty, parachuting collaboration, and international collaboration evolve during such a
disaster. We use a difference in differences (DID) approach based on 11,678 coronavirus
articles published from January 2018 to April 2020 by the top 50 prolific countries ranked by
the number of coronavirus papers published during the study period. April 2020 has been
chosen because the following reasons: 1) Jan 2020 to April 2020 can be considered as a unique
period that COVID-19 hit the world for the first time and most of the countries were under
lockdown during this period; and 2) After April 2020, some countries have lifted up the
lockdown which can generate biases for our comparison.

Results
Our findings suggest that coronavirus research has become more novel since the outbreak of
the COVID-19. After 2019, the year of the COVID-19 outbreak, there is a dramatic increase in
the average novelty score of global coronavirus research relative to the earlier years (see Fig.1a).
Since the global first COVID-19 case was officially confirmed in December 2019, the average
novelty score of global coronavirus papers sharply went up (see Fig.1b).
The results of the DID regression show that “treated” countries (i.e., countries with an
infection) have a 0.038 (p-value<0.01) higher novelty score than “untreated” countries (i.e.,
countries without infection)—this is an increase of 28.51% standard deviation (see column 1
in Supplementary Table 8). The estimated dynamic impact of a COVID-19 outbreak in a
country on the country’s scientific novelty score of coronavirus literature is shown in Fig.2a,
which illustrates a jump in countries’ average novelty scores in the first month (i.e., t+1 where
t refers to the month the first COVID-19 case was confirmed in a country) after the occurrence
of the first COVID-19 case in a country, while there is no significant difference between treated
and untreated countries before the first COVID-19 case in the country. The regression results
show that more COVID-19 cases and deaths in a month predict a higher scientific novelty (see
Supplementary Table 8), suggesting that the increased scientific novelty might be associated
with the severity of the local outbreak.
After the global first COVID-19 case, Fig.1b presents a sudden decrease in global
coronavirus papers’ international collaboration ratio. DID estimates suggest that countries’
parachuting collaboration ratio increased by 3.1% (coefficient: 0.031, p-value < 0.01 in column
3 in Supplementary Table 10) after the report of the first COVID-19 case in a country. This
suggests that after the first case confirmed in the country, more parachuting collaboration is
found in coronavirus research for the country. We further find that country’s proportion of
internationally collaborative papers in coronavirus research shrunk by 9.2% (coefficient: 0.092, p-value < 0.01 in column 5 in Supplementary Table 10) after the occurrence of the first
COVID-19 case in a country. The dynamic impact of the first COVID-19 case in the country
on its average parachuting collaboration and international collaboration ratio is estimated in
1

Creative ideas could be reflected by two dimensions, namely usefulness and novelty. Novelty is the key distinguish feature
of creativity beyond ideas that are well conceived. The notion that considers novelty as a process of recombination has bene
shown as valuable, while some criticized that many unusual configurations might be worthless. In this study, we only consider
the aspect of novel recombination of knowledge as for recently published papers, the time is too short to receive citations from
subsequent research. We conduct analyses of the relationship between coronavirus papers’ novelty and citation, and do not
found that papers’ novelty is significantly negatively related to citations papers gained, which suggests that at least, novel
papers according to our definition, are not useless papers. The details of the relationship between papers’ novelty score and
citations paper received are illustrated in Supplementary Note 3.

columns 4 and 6 in Supplementary Table 10, respectively, and is illustrated in Fig.2b and c.
We also observe a sudden change in scientific novelty, international and parachuting
collaboration ratio around the year of the outbreak of SARS, with the same direction we find
during the COVID-19 (see Fig.1a). This might suggest that the pattern we observed is possible
to be generalizable during the pandemic period.
Papers with a higher parachuting collaboration ratio and internationally collaborative
papers are predicted to be more novel during the pandemic. Fig.3 illustrates papers’ predicted
novelty score estimated by a regression model including interaction terms between papers’
parachuting collaboration ratio or international collaboration and the occurrence of the first
global COVID-19 case. It suggests that before COVID-19, papers’ parachuting collaboration
ratio is significantly negatively related to papers’ novelty scores. However, this relationship
turns significantly positive for papers published during the COVID-19. This pattern holds for
the association between papers’ international collaboration and novelty scores (see Fig.3). The
subsample analyses also confirm these findings (see columns 1 and 2 in Supplementary Table
9).

Discussion
Our results show that in the initial period following a coronavirus outbreak, scientific novelty
dramatically increased, which suggests scientists’ efforts to try novel recombination of existing
knowledge to combat this global pandemic. The fraction of parachuting collaboration, i.e.,
collaboration between team members without prior collaboration, in the scientific teams of
coronavirus research grew, while the proportion of internationally collaborative papers sharply
decreased.
In the pre-COVID19 period, parachuting collaboration is significantly negatively
associated with paper’s novelty score, while this relationship turns significantly positively
related to paper’s novelty during the pandemic. Teams’ characteristics are important
determinants of team efficiency and the production of novel knowledge. Parachuting
collaboration, the foil of repeat collaboration, entails both advantages and costs that influence
teams’ novelty, making its contribution to scientific novelty not straightforward. Unlike repeat
collaboration, parachuting collaboration involves more search, coordination and innovation
costs, less risk-sharing, trust and reciprocity, which might dampen scientific novelty 15,17,24.
However, parachuting collaboration allows pooling together a broader scope of information,
data and resources outside the preexisting relationships and conflicts that might improve
scientific novelty 19,25,26. During the pandemic, papers produced by teams with a larger
proportion of parachuting collaboration are more novel, which suggests greater importance of
a broader scope of search activities and quick access to non-local information that is only
available outside teams’ pre-existing networks in tackling global challenges timely.
We find that internationally collaborative papers are more novel than their counterparts
during the pandemic. International collaboration trends to produce more conventional
knowledge combinations since transaction costs and communication barriers to international
collaboration might hinder novelty 18. This is consistent with what we find in the normal science
period. However, during COVID-19, producing novel knowledge might require collaborative
efforts across national borders that pool global resources more than ever. The best example is
the discovery of the causative agent of SARS, a result of close international collaboration
among 13 laboratories from 10 countries.
Most science of science studies assume that the research system operates with
institutional stability, in the framework of “normal science” 27. With rapidly developing
globalization and the increasing complexity of economic, societal, political, and environmental
issues, the traditional perception of normal science is no longer sufficient to address issues or

problems in the scientific community. Local and even global research systems could be
immediately influenced by exogenous and unexpected events 28. This study provides evidence
on how science progresses differently during a pandemic from a normal science period.

Methods
Measuring scientific novelty of papers
Bio-entities extraction
Entities extracted from CORD-19 papers’ titles and abstracts are the basic elements
used for calculating novelty scores of entity combination in each CORD-19 paper and thus
allow capturing the changes in the sampled countries’ novelty score of coronavirus research by
month. We extract bio-entities from titles and abstracts of CORD-19 papers from January 1951
to
April
2020
using
PubTator
Central
(PTC)
(accessible
at
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/research/pubtator/), a web-based application that automatically
tags the input text with standardized biological entities 29. As PTC has annotated entities for all
the papers indexed by PubMed, for those CORD-19 papers that have PubMed IDs, we
programmatically retrieved their annotations by submitting PubMed IDs, in batches of 100 to
PTC. For those not having a PubMed ID, we first submitted the request with their abstracts and
titles, in which entities will be annotated by PTC server, then retrieve the annotated files by
submitting the session ID returned by the previously submitted request. 39,882 unique bioentities from 38,787 CORD-19 papers were identified by PTC and were automatically
categorized into four types: species, disease, gene and chemical. The major reason why PTC
fails to extract any entities from titles and abstracts of 33% CORD-19 papers is that terms in
those papers’ titles and abstracts do not include any standardized bio-concepts detected by PTC.
The distribution of entities extracted from CORD-19 papers by type is illustrated in
Supplementary Fig.S4.
Measuring papers’ novelty score from the perspective of combinatorial novelty
Building on the knowledge recombination theory 8 and the perspective of combinatorial
novelty 5,18, an indicator that measures the degree of novelty to which knowledge entities are
combined in a paper has been proposed. In medicine, these knowledge entities can be
represented by biological entities (e.g., drug, disease, and gene) in publications. Innovative
discoveries and creative ideas usually stem from the recombination of more distant and diverse
sources5,6,30. Novelty is a recombination of pre-existing knowledge components in an atypical
way 5,6. The key idea of the entity-based approach proposed in this study is that two entities
that are more distant in the preexisting knowledge base, i.e., 29 million PubMed articles, their
combination is perceived more novel.
Mapping bio-entities into contextual embeddings using BIOBERT
To measure the novelty of entity combination of CORD-19 papers, we use BioBERT
(Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers for Biomedical Text Mining) to
capture the distance between two bio-entities in each entity pair extracted from CORD-19
papers. BioBERT is a language model pre-trained on biomedical literature, PubMed articles 22.
Following the structure of BERT by Devlin et al.31. BioBERT consists of multi-layer bidirectional transformers and is pre-trained by masked language model and next sentence
prediction tasks. BioBERT can generate a contextual representation for biomedical corpora,
which allows different embeddings for the same word in different contexts, instead of

producing context-independent word embeddings like Word2Vec 32 or GloVe 33 does. BioBERT
has 13 hidden layers. The first layer, also known as input embedding or sub-word embedding
layer, is the sum of token embeddings that are obtained from the WordPiece tokenizer 34, the
segmentation embeddings and the positional embeddings. The last layer is the contextual (subword) representations (token-level).
BioBERT has five versions (accessible at https://github.com/dmis-lab/biobert) 22,
among which we use the version of BioBERT-Base v1.1 that is pre-trained on PubMed 29
million articles with titles and pre-trained for one million steps based on BERT-base-Cased
with the same vocabulary. The batch size for this model is set to 32 and the maximum sequence
length is set to 32 tokens. In the former stage, we recognized bio-entities using PubTator and
generated entity pairs from CORD-19 papers. We generate a sub-word representation for each
bio-entity extracted from CORD-19 papers. The pipeline is shown in Supplementary Fig.S5.
Then we calculate bio-entities’ distance between the two sub-word representations for each
bio-entities pair generated from CORD-19 papers.
In Supplementary Fig.S5, entity n is segmented by the WordPiece tokenizer 34 into a
sequence of sub-words to mitigate the out-of-vocabulary (OOV) problem. (CLS) is added at
the beginning and (SEP) is added at the end of, and get sub-words S={
, , , ..., ,
}.
For example, Entity “coronaviruses” is transformed into “(CLS) Co##rona##virus##es (SEP)”.
The segmented entity S is then fed into the BioBERT. We use the last layer of BioBERT as the
contextual representation, which generates a sequence of sub-word representations V in
×(
)
where d denotes the 768 dimensions of a hidden layer in BioBERT and i indicates
the number of tokens except CLS and SEP for entity n. For instance, for the entity of
“coronaviruses”, the model generates a vector, with 6 × 768 dimensions. The sub-word
representations of CLS and SEP are ignored and the rest of the sequence of sub-word
representations V are fed into average pooling that is used to calculate the average for each
patch of the feature map with the kernel size of (number of tokens, 1) to get the final vector V
in
. Based on the embedding of bio-entities extracted from CORD-19 papers, we calculate
the cosine distance defined in Equation 1 between two resulting vectors corresponding to each
entity in an entity pair extracted from CORD-19 dataset.
∙
(1)
, = 1−
‖‖ ‖‖
Where and indicate two entities in an entity pair; ∙ refers to the dot product of
and ; ‖ ‖ ‖ ‖ means the product of 's Euclidean norm and 's Euclidean norm.
Calculating papers’ novelty score
We extract 39,882 unique bio-entities using Pubtator Central from titles and abstracts
of CORD-19 papers published from January 1951 to April 2020 and pair them up (i.e., −
,
, …). The cosine distance of two entities in each of 596,495 entity pairs detected in
CORD-19 paper is captured from the resulting embedding using BioBERT that is pre-trained
on 29 million PubMed articles. The distribution of the distance between two entities in entity
pairs extracted from CORD-19 papers is shown in Supplementary Fig.S6a. We consider an
entity pair in which the distance of two entities is in the upper 10th percentile of this distribution
as a novel entity combination. The novelty score for each paper is measured by the proportion
of novel entity pairs according to our definition of novelty entity combination to the possible
number of entity pairs in a paper. The formula used to calculate the novelty score for a paper
is shown in Equation 2.
=

(2)

where denotes paper ; indicates the number of bio-entities extracted from paper ;
refers to the number of combinations of two that can be drawn from the set of n bio-entities

extracted from paper , i.e., the number of entity pairs generated by n bio-entities; denotes
the number of entity pairs in which two entities’ distance is in the upper 10th percentile of the
distribution of the distance of two entities in all entity pairs generated from CORD-19 papers.
For example, for a paper that contains three bio-entities (i.e., entity a, b and c), the number of
entity pairs for this paper is three. If the distance between a and b is in the upper 10th percentile
of the distribution shown in Supplementary Fig.S6a, the novelty score for this paper is 1/3.
The higher the novelty score, the more novel entity combination in a paper. The
distribution of CORD-19 papers’ novelty scores is indicated in Supplementary Fig.S6b,
suggesting that most of CORD-19 papers include no novel entity combination.

Variables
This study investigates the relationship between the country-level monthly change in
scientific novelty regarding entity combination of coronavirus papers and the occurrence of the
first COVID-19 case in the country in a given month from January 2018 to April 2020.
The major independent variable is whether the first case of COVID-19 (COVID19) has
been confirmed in the country by the month. We identify the month when the first case of
COVID-19 is officially confirmed in each of 50 sampled countries according to the patient data
from the website of Our World in Data. For example, China is the country where the first case
of COVID-19 in the world was found in December 2019, followed by the US (Jan 2020), the
UK (Jan 2020) and so forth. Once the first COVID-19 case has been confirmed in the country,
the country gets treated in the month and the succeeding months. The distribution of treated
countries (i.e., the countries where the first COVID-19 case has been confirmed) and untreated
countries (i.e., the countries where the first COVID-19 case has not been confirmed) by the
month is indicated in Supplementary Fig.S7, suggesting that for most of the sampled countries,
the first case was detected in either Jan 2020 or Feb 2020. All sampled countries have been
exposed to COVID-19 by the end of the study period.
Paper-level variables
The way to generate the novelty score of each paper is explained in Measuring Papers’
Novelty Score using BioBERT and the formula to calculate a paper’ novelty score is shown in
Equation 2. Besides papers’ novelty scores, we are also interested in the change of papers’
parachuting collaboration ratio and international collaboration before and during the pandemic.
Parachuting collaboration is defined as a co-authorship in which two authors never collaborated
in the past. Parachuting collaboration ratio for a paper indicates the fraction of author pairs
where two authors did not collaborate in the past to the total number of author pairs in a paper,
measuring the degree to which parachuting collaboration is involved in the team, which is
defined in Equation 3
ℎ

=

(3)

where denotes paper ;
refers to the number of combinations of two that can be
drawn from the set of authors listed in paper ; indicates the number of author pairs in
which two authors have no prior collaboration. The higher the parachuting collaboration ratio
for a paper, the more parachuting collaboration involved in the team of the paper.
International collaboration for a paper is a binary variable that is determined by
whether authors listed in a paper are from at least two countries. It is one if at least two authors
are from different countries, and zero otherwise.
We also calculate team size for each paper defined as the number of authors listed in a
paper as a control for papers’ novelty score, since team size is considered an influential factor
of scientific novelty from prior literature 18,35-37.
Country-level variables

All paper-level variables need to be aggregated to the country level since this study
examines the relationship between countries’ scientific novelty and the occurrence of the first
COVID-19 case in the country. Based on a full counting method 38, we use an example to
demonstrate how paper-level variables are calculated to country-level variables. As shown in
Supplementary Fig.S8, there are two papers, P1 by five authors from three countries (i.e., C1,
C2 and C3), and P2 by three authors from two countries (C2 and C3), respectively. A1 who is
an author of P1, and A2 who is in the author lists for P1 and P2, both belong to the country, C1.
We generate a vector, { ,
,…,
}, for P1, and a vector, { ,
,…,
}, for P2. The
element in the vector represents a variable for a paper, such as paper’s novelty score ( ),
parachuting collaboration ratio ( ), whether or not the paper is internationally collaborative
( ) and team size ( ). For example,
and
indicate novelty score for P1 and P2,
respectively. C1’s average novelty score is the sum of
,
and
weighted by the unique
number of author-paper pairs (i.e., A1-P1, A2-P1 and A2-P2), three. Similarly, C3’s average
novelty score is equal to the sum of
,
and
weighted by the unique number of authorpaper pairs (i.e., A4-P1, A5-P1 and A6-P2), three. The country-level versions for the remaining
three paper-level variables are shown in the table in Supplementary Fig.S8.
The dependent variable is a country’s average novelty score (novelty score) of entity
combination for papers by this country published in a given month, which quantifies the
monthly average extent to which entities are combined rarely for knowledge production of the
country. The higher the novelty score, the more novel countries’ knowledge production in a
month.
We are also interested in the association between new COVID-19 cases and deaths, and
countries’ scientific novelty. Therefore, the daily numbers of new COVID-19 cases (COVID19
case) and deaths (COVID19 death) confirmed in each sampled country are aggregated to the
month level and considered two explanatory variables.
Various characteristics of scientific teams might be related to novelty, such as team size
35,36
, international collaboration 18 and collaboration of two authors who have not collaborated
with each other before 25. To control these influential factors, the following control variables
are introduced to the model. The country’s monthly average number of authors in CORD-19
papers is used to measure the average team size (team size) of coronavirus papers in a country.
The proportion of internationally collaborative papers in a country in a given month is used to
reflect the degree to which the papers are internationally collaborative (international
collaboration ratio). The country’s average parachuting collaboration ratio (parachuting
collaboration ratio) is used to measure the extent to which parachuting collaboration is
involved in teams for CORD-19 papers published in the month.
Summary statistics of variables and the correlation matrix across variables are shown
in Supplementary Tables 2 and 3, respectively.

A difference in differences strategy
We use the unexpected outbreak of COVID-19 as a natural experiment to explore how
scientific novelty evolves before and during the pandemic by using a difference in differences
approach based on the data on 50 sampled countries over 28 months from 2018 January to 2020
April. Our major goal is to estimate the association between the countries’ monthly average
novelty scores of entity combinations for all papers published in a given month and whether
the first COVID-19 case in a country has been confirmed by that month.
To estimate the potential impact of the outbreak of COVID-19 in the country on
scientific novelty of entity combination, we regress the dependent variables, i.e., novelty score,
on whether the first case of COVID-19 in the country (COVID19) has been confirmed by the
month and other covariates that might influence scientific novelty as shown in Equation 4. We
apply an OLS linear model that contains fixed effects for country, , those for month, , to

control the time-invariant and country-invariant factors. The coefficient on COVID19 is a
before-after estimate of the impact of the pandemic on scientific novelty.
,

=

+

19 , +

,

+

+

+ (4)

To investigate the dynamic effect of the outbreak of COVID-19 in the country on
countries’ novelty, we introduce a set of dummies variables that reflect the timing of the
occurrence of the first cases. If the outbreak of COVID-19 in month t truly impacts countries’
novelty, we expect to find the effect coming solely after the first cases are confirmed with
similar patterns of change for the treatment and control groups before the first cases are
detected. Following the strategy proposed in a study 39, we test this by replacing COVID19 in
Equation 4 by a set of dummies variables that relate countries’ novelty score to the outbreak of
COVID-19 in the prior, current and succeeding years:
,

=

+∑

−

+ 0 +∑
(5)

+

+

,

+

+

+

Where T0 refers to the month when the first case is confirmed: T-n indicates whether
the observation occurs n month(s) before the month of the first case; and T+n represents
whether the observation occurs n month(s) after the month of the first case. The outbreak of
the COVID-19 that causes an effect in a given month can be effective in T0 or later years, but
it cannot have an impact before the month of the outbreak. Controls include variables that might
be related to scientific novelty: countries’ monthly average parachuting collaboration ratio, the
fraction of internationally collaborative papers by the country in the month, the average team
sizes of papers by the country in the month and countries’ monthly productivity in coronavirus
research.
Similarly, using the DID strategy, we investigate the association between countries’
parachuting collaboration ratio in the month/the fraction of internationally collaborative papers
by the country in the month and the outbreak of the COVID-19 in the country. The fixed effects
of countries and months are included.
To explore the relationship between the severity of COVID-19 in the country and the
country’s novelty score, we regress the country’s average novelty score in the month on the
monthly number of new COVID-19 cases and deaths. Control variables are the same with those
in Equation 4. Fixed effects of country and month are included.

Sub-sample analyses and regression analyses including interaction terms
By conducting sub-sample analyses and regression analyses including interaction terms,
we investigate the association between the occurrence of the first global COVID-19 case and
papers’ novelty score, as well as the relationship between papers’ novelty score and two
collaboration patterns (i.e., papers’ parachuting collaboration ratio and whether the paper is
internationally collaborative) at the paper level in the normal science period and during
COVID-19. The association between papers’ novelty scores and the occurrence of the first
global COVID-19 case is estimated by Equation 6:
=

+

19 +

ℎ
+

+
+

+ (6)

Where i denotes a paper; novelty score indicates the proportion of entity pairs that are
highly distant to the possible entity pairs in a paper; COVID19 is a binary variable that is one
if the paper is published in and after December 2019, and zero otherwise; parachuting ratio

indicates the proportion of author pairs in which two authors have no prior collaboration in the
past to the possible author pairs in a paper; international collaboration is a binary variable that
is one if the team includes authors from at least two countries, and zero otherwise; team size
indicates the number of authors listed in a paper; fixed effects regarding papers’ publication
year (
) is included; to explore the relationship between parachuting/international
collaboration and papers’ novelty score before and during the COVID19, the interaction terms
between parachuting/international collaboration ratio and the occurrence of the outbreak of
COVID-19 are introduced to the model, i.e.,
ℎ
×
19, and
×
19.
Sub-sample analyses are conducted to confirm the relationship between papers’ novelty
score and two collaboration patterns before and during the pandemic by separating all
coronavirus papers into two groups, with papers published before the occurrence of the first
global COVID-19 case, i.e., December 2019, and those published after that month. Then, we
estimate the relationship between papers’ novelty and two collaboration patterns based on these
two groups of papers, separately.

Fig 1. The trend of average novelty score and parachuting/international collaboration ratio for global
coronavirus research. The left vertical axis in each sub-figure indicates the novelty score of papers and the right
one refers to parachuting/international collaboration ratio. International collaboration ratio indicates the
proportion of internationally collaborative papers, and parachuting collaboration ratio refers to the fraction of
parachuting collaboration defined as collaboration between two authors without prior collaboration in scientific
teams. In sub-figure b, the study period is from January 2018 to April 2020, with a total of 28 months. The shaded
areas represent upper and lower bounds of 95% CIs.

Fig 2. The DID estimates of the relationship between the occurrence of the first case of COVID-19 in the
country and countries’ average novelty scores, parachuting collaboration ratio and international
collaboration ratio in a month. International collaboration ratio indicates the proportion of internationally
collaborative papers by the country in a month, and parachuting collaboration ratio refers to the fraction of
parachuting collaboration defined as collaboration between two authors without prior collaboration in scientific
teams by the country in a month. T-n indicates n month(s) before the month (t0) when the first COVID-19 case
was confirmed in the country, and t+n indicates n month(s) after t0. ***, ** and * represent significance at the
1%, 5%, and 10% level. The shaded areas represent upper and lower bounds of 95% CIs.

Fig. 3. The linear prediction of papers’ novelty score before and during COVID-19. The X-axis in subfigure a and b indicates the level of papers’ parachuting collaboration ratio and whether the paper is
internationally collaborative, respectively. The Y-axis indicates the predicted novelty scores of papers for
levels of variables in the X-axis before (the orange line) and during COVID-19 (the blue line) when all other
covariates are set to their means. The shaded areas represent upper and lower bounds of 95% CIs.

Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgement This research was supported supported by NSF-RAPID-2028717:
Dashboard for COVID-19 Scientific Development and Amazon Machine Learning Grant, – in
part – by the Lilly Endowment Inc. through its support for the Indiana University Pervasive
Technology Institute, and – in part – by the Indiana METACyt Initiative. The Indiana
METACyt Initiative at Indiana University was also supported – in part –by the Lilly
Endowment Inc.
Supplementary Information
Supplementary Information (SI) is available for this paper.

References
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

13

14
15
16
17
18

19

20
21
22
23
24

Amabile, T. M., Hadley, C. N. & Kramer, S. J. Creativity under the gun. Harvard business review
80, 52-63 (2002).
Andrews, F. M. & Farris, G. F. Time pressure and performance of scientists and engineers: A fiveyear panel study. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance 8, 185-200 (1972).
Amabile, T. M. Creativity and innovation in organizations. (1996).
Gilmartin, M. J. Creativity: The fuel of innovation. Nursing Administration Quarterly 23, 1-8
(1999).
Uzzi, B., Mukherjee, S., Stringer, M. & Jones, B. Atypical combinations and scientific impact.
Science 342, 468-472 (2013).
Fleming, L. Recombinant uncertainty in technological search. Management science 47, 117-132
(2001).
Burt, R. S. Structural holes and good ideas. American journal of sociology 110, 349-399 (2004).
Nelson, R. R. & Winter, S. G. An evolutionnary theory of economic change. Cambridge, Mass.
and London, Belknap Harvard (1982).
Veugelers, R. & Wang, J. Scientific novelty and technological impact. Research Policy 48, 13621372 (2019).
Rosenkopf, L. & Almeida, P. Overcoming local search through alliances and mobility.
Management science 49, 751-766 (2003).
Rosenkopf, L. & Nerkar, A. Beyond local search: boundary-spanning, exploration, and impact in
the optical disk industry. Strategic management journal 22, 287-306 (2001).
Smith, K. G., Collins, C. J. & Clark, K. D. Existing knowledge, knowledge creation capability, and
the rate of new product introduction in high-technology firms. Academy of Management
Journal (2005).
Jaffe, A. B., Trajtenberg, M. & Henderson, R. Geographic Localization of Knowledge Spillovers as
Evidenced by Patent Citations*. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 577-598,
doi:10.2307/2118401 (1993).
Toby et al. Local search and the evolution of technological capabilities. Strategic Management
Journal (1996).
Fry, C. V., Cai, X., Zhang, Y. & Wagner, C. Consolidation in a Crisis: Patterns of International
Collaboration in COVID-19 Research. Available at SSRN 3595455 (2020).
Gostin, L. O. & Friedman, E. A. Ebola: a crisis in global health leadership. The Lancet 384, 13231325 (2014).
Guimera, R., Uzzi, B., Spiro, J. & Amaral, L. A. N. Team assembly mechanisms determine
collaboration network structure and team performance. Science 308, 697-702 (2005).
Wagner, C. S., Whetsell, T. A. & Mukherjee, S. International research collaboration: Novelty,
conventionality, and atypicality in knowledge recombination. Research Policy 48, 1260-1270
(2019).
Porac, J. F. et al. Human capital heterogeneity, collaborative relationships, and publication
patterns in a multidisciplinary scientific alliance: a comparative case study of two scientific teams.
Research Policy 33, 661-678 (2004).
Kogut, B. & Zander, U. Knowledge of the firm, combinative capabilities, and the replication of
technology. Organization science 3, 383-397 (1992).
Weitzman, M. L. Hybridizing growth theory. The American Economic Review 86, 207-212 (1996).
Lee, J. et al. BioBERT: a pre-trained biomedical language representation model for biomedical
text mining. Bioinformatics 36, 1234-1240 (2020).
Foster, J. G., Rzhetsky, A. & Evans, J. A. Tradition and innovation in scientists’ research strategies.
American Sociological Review 80, 875-908 (2015).
Granovetter, M. Economic action and social structure: The problem of embeddedness. American

journal of sociology 91, 481-510 (1985).
25
26
27
28

29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36

37
38
39

Skilton, P. F. & Dooley, K. J. The effects of repeat collaboration on creative abrasion. Academy of
Management Review 35, 118-134 (2010).
Yong, K., Sauer, S. J. & Mannix, E. A. Conflict and Creativity in Interdisciplinary Teams. Small
Group Research 45, 266-289 (2014).
Kuhn, T. S. The structure of scientific revolutions. (University of Chicago press, 2012).
Mryglod, O., Holovatch, Y., Kenna, R. & Berche, B. Quantifying the evolution of a scientific topic:
reaction of the academic community to the Chornobyl disaster. Scientometrics 106, 1151-1166
(2016).
Wei, C.-H., Allot, A., Leaman, R. & Lu, Z. PubTator central: automated concept annotation for
biomedical full text articles. Nucleic acids research 47, W587-W593 (2019).
Mueller, J. S., Melwani, S. & Goncalo, J. A. The bias against creativity: Why people desire but
reject creative ideas. Psychological science 23, 13-17 (2012).
Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K. & Toutanova, K. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional
transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805 (2018).
Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G. & Dean, J. Efficient estimation of word representations in vector
space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781 (2013).
Pennington, J., Socher, R. & Manning, C. D. in Proceedings of the 2014 conference on empirical
methods in natural language processing (EMNLP). 1532-1543.
Wu, Y. et al. Google's neural machine translation system: Bridging the gap between human and
machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.08144 (2016).
Lee, Y.-N., Walsh, J. P. & Wang, J. Creativity in scientific teams: Unpacking novelty and impact.
Research policy 44, 684-697 (2015).
Hülsheger, U. R., Anderson, N. & Salgado, J. F. Team-level predictors of innovation at work: a
comprehensive meta-analysis spanning three decades of research. Journal of Applied
psychology 94, 1128 (2009).
Wu, L., Wang, D. & Evans, J. A. Large teams develop and small teams disrupt science and
technology. Nature 566, 378-382 (2019).
Waltman, L. A review of the literature on citation impact indicators. Journal of informetrics 10,
365-391 (2016).
Agrawal, A. K. The impact of investor protection law on corporate policy and performance:
Evidence from the blue sky laws. Journal of Financial Economics 107, 417-435 (2013).

Supplementary Information for

Can pandemics transform scientific novelty? Evidence from COVID-19
Meijun Liu1,2, Yi Bu3, Chongyan Chen4, Jian Xu5, Daifeng Li5, Yan Leng4, Richard Barry
Freeman6,7, Eric Meyer4, Wonjin Yoon8, Mujeen Sung8, Minbyul Jeong8, Jinhyuk Lee8,
Jaewoo Kang8,9, Chao Min10, Min Song11, Yujia Zhai12,13, Ying Ding 4,14*

1

Institute for Global Public Policy, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

2

Faculty of Education, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.

3

Department of Information Management, Peking University, Beijing, China.

4

School of Information, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA.

5

School of Information Management, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.

6

Department of Economics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA.

7

National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), Cambridge, MA, USA.

8

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea

9

Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Bioinformatics, Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea

10

School of Information Management, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China

11

Department of Library and Information Science, Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea

12

Department of Information Resource Management, School of Management, Tianjin Normal University, Tianjin,
China.

13

School of Information Management, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.

14

Dell Medical School, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA.

*Corresponding author: E-mail: ying.ding@austin.utexas.edu

Table of Content
Supplementary Note 1: Data description .......................................................................................... 19
Data source ...................................................................................................................................... 19
Sample selection .............................................................................................................................. 20
Supplementary Note 2: robustness check ......................................................................................... 20
Supplementary Note 3: The relationship between papers’ novelty scores/teams’ characteristics
and citations......................................................................................................................................... 21
Supplementary Note 4: Related work ............................................................................................... 22
Scientific community under disasters ........................................................................................... 22
Existing approaches that measure scientific novelty ................................................................... 23
Supplementary Figures ...................................................................................................................... 24
Supplementary Tables ........................................................................................................................ 29
Supplementary references .................................................................................................................. 36

Supplementary Note 1: Data description
Data source
Two major datasets are used in this study, with one including publication data on coronavirus
research that is used to measure an individual paper’s scientific novelty and capture authors’
country information, and another including country-by-country patient data about COVID-19
that is used to identify the timing when the first COVID-19 case is confirmed in a country.
Publication data on coronavirus.
Publication data on coronavirus research is collected from the COVID-19 Open Research
Dataset (accessible at https://www.kaggle.com/allen-institute-for-ai/CORD-19-researchchallenge, hereafter CORD-19) that covers 58,728 research articles about COVID-19 and
related historical coronaviruses, such as SARS and MERS, that were published during the
1951-April 2020 period. This dataset was downloaded on May 8, 2020. This dataset includes
title, abstract, author name, DOI, PubMed ID, and publication date. This dataset is constructed
by the Allen Institute for AI and other leading research groups to facilitate researchers to
discover relevant information more quickly from the literature. CORD-19 papers are sourced
from PubMed Central, bioRxiv and medRxiv, with titles, abstracts or full text including the
following keywords:
“COVID-19” OR “Coronavirus” OR “Corona virus” OR “2019-nCoV” OR “SARS CoV” OR
“MERS-CoV” OR “Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome” OR “Middle East Respiratory
Syndrome”.
CORD-19 dataset has been recently used in analyzing coronaviruses literature 1-4, and is viewed
as a reliable data source to map coronavirus-related research. The distribution of papers per
year in CORD-19 is illustrated in Supplementary Fig.1a, which indicates a sudden growth of
papers in the years of significant pandemics.
Identifying country information for authors in CORD-19 dataset
We identify authors’ country information based on authors’ address information provided by
CORD-19 dataset and the 29 million PubMed dataset that covers 1800-2020 with author names
disambiguated. The algorithms of PubMed dataset’s author name disambiguation and the
validation are shown in a recent study 5. Based on DOI and PubMed ID provided in CORD-19
dataset, 51,726 CORD-19 papers are linked to their versions in the PubMed dataset where all
author names have been disambiguated and thus the following information of CORD-19 papers
was obtained: authors’ unique identifiers and authors’ address information. Authors' unique
identifiers allow us to know whether authors in a paper have collaborated in the past according
to their publications records in the PubMed database, which enables us to identify parachuting
collaboration. Authors’ affiliation information helps us to identify country names from authors’
address information in each article by manually merging variations (e.g., ISO two-letter or
three-letter country codes, alternative country names, country names in other languages, and
country names with typos) of country names into the same country. Finally, standard country
names corresponding to authors’ locations in 45,470 CORD- papers are found. 17 Papers with
the number of authors larger than 100 have been removed as the inclusion of papers with hyperauthorship might make the calculation of team variables biased because of the outliers.

Patient data on COVID-19
Additionally, we use the patient data on COVID-19 derived from the website of Our World in
Data that covers 211 countries from December 2019 to 2020 May (accessible at
https://ourworldindata.org/covid-cases, downloaded on May 9th,2020), to capture the timing
when the first COVID-19 case is officially confirmed, and the daily number of new COVID19 cases and deaths in each sampled country during the December 2019- April 2020 period.
There are rumors on suspected cases earlier than November 1, 2019 at different places around
the world. In this study, we only consider cases officially reported in mainstream media. The
50 sampled countries account for 92.85% of cases and 97.24% of deaths related to COVID-19
from December 2019 to April 2020. The distribution of COVID-19 cases and deaths in each
month is illustrated in Supplementary Fig.2.

Sample selection
The final dataset used for the regression analysis includes 11,678 research articles published
from January 2018 to April 2020 by the top 50 prolific countries that are ranked by the number
of coronavirus-related papers published during the study period.
The research goal of this study is to compare monthly changes in countries’ scientific novelty
before and during the COVID-19. The period of 2018 Janurary-2019 November is considered
a sufficient time window to present scientific novelty in the pre-COVID-19 period1. To
measure the country’s productivity, we use a full counting method 6 based on the authors’
address information. For example, for a paper authored by two scientists with Chinese
affiliations, one scientist with a US affiliation and three scientists with UK affiliations, China,
the US and the UK get two, one and three papers, respectively. For scientists with several
affiliations belonging to different countries, we take into account the country information of
the affiliation listed as the first. Hence, overall six publications are allocated to these three
countries. More than 108 countries published coronavirus research during the study period,
among which the top 50 prolific countries are selected as the sampled countries. The variable
that measures the monthly average novelty score for countries that did not publish any or
publish very few coronavirus papers would be missing. The observations that have a missing
value for any one of the variables used in the regression model would be dropped by Stata.
This is why we limit the regression analysis to the top 50 most prolific countries, which account
for more than 98.8% of the total coronavirus-related research articles over the study period.
The productivity of the 50 sampled countries/regions is shown in Supplementary Table 1. The
distribution of CORD-19 papers by month and country from January 2018 to April 2020 is
indicated in Supplementary Fig.3.

Supplementary Note 2: robustness check
We use multiple strategies to confirm the major findings of this study. First, we change to the
95th percentile as the threshold of the location of the distance between two entities in a novel
entity pair discard bio-entities that appeared less than five times in CORD-19 papers, and
conduct all the analyses.

72.07% of bio-entities only appear once in CORD-19 papers, and the inclusion of bio-entities
with a small frequency might make the distance between entities unreliable. We discard bioentities with a total frequency lower than five, with 121,615 entity pairs remaining. We still
use the BioBERT model pre-trained on 29 million PubMed articles to calculate the distance
between entities for each entity pair obtained. Besides, we use the 95th percentile as the
threshold of the location of the distance between two entities in a novel entity pair. Generally,
we obtain consistent results shown in Supplementary Tables 5 to 7.

Supplementary Note 3: The relationship between papers’ novelty
scores/teams’ characteristics and citations
We explore the association between paper’s novelty scores and citations the paper received in
a two-year (citation_2), five-year (citation_5), ten-year citation (citation_10) window and
whether or not the paper is the top 1% highly cited papers (top1% citation) among the papers
published in the same year. CORD-19 articles are linked to their versions in Microsoft
Academic Graph dataset (MAG) according to papers’ DOI and PubMed ID. MAG includes
more than 220 million publication records and their metadata (e.g., DOI, title,
journal/conference, keywords, fields/disciplines, abstract, authors and their affiliations, etc.),
as well as the more than 1.41 billion citation relationships among them. We found that 32,316
CORD-19 papers get at least one citation.
Equation 1 is used to estimate how papers’ novelty scores and teams’ characteristics are related
to papers’ citations.
=

+

+

ℎ
+

+
+

+ + (1)

Where i denotes a paper; citation indicates citation counts papers received in a two-year, fiveyear or ten-year citation window; novelty sore indicates the proportion of entity pairs that are
highly distant to the possible entity pairs in a paper; parachuting collaboration ratio indicates
the proportion of author pairs in which two authors never collaborated in the past to the possible
author pairs in a paper; international collaboration is a binary variable that is one if the team
includes authors from at least two countries, and zero otherwise; team size indicates the number
of authors listed in a paper; fixed effects regarding papers’ publication year is included. The
equation is estimated by ordinary least squares regression models (OLS).
The results are shown in Supplementary Table 4. Papers’ novelty scores are insignificantly
negatively related to citations of papers in different time windows, and whether the paper is the
top 1% receivers of citations among papers published in the same year. This result suggests
that papers in which entity combinations are novel are not “useless” papers, i.e., papers that are
less cited. Besides, papers’ parachuting collaboration ratio, and whether the paper is
international collaborative are significantly negatively related to citations papers received,
irrespective of the length of the citation window. Papers’ team size is significantly positively
correlated to citations of papers.

Supplementary Note 4: Related work
Scientific community under disasters
Most studies on science of science assume that the system operates under the condition of
institutional stability. The current studies on the scientific community are restricted to the
framework of “normal science” 7 which is analogous to a gradually evolving ecological system
proposed by Charles Darwin. But what would the scientific community react if the stable social
and institutional conditions are punctuated by unexpected and exogenous events, such as
natural or human-made disasters? The on-going COVID-19 pandemic leads to significant
disruptions on every aspect of economy and society, while little is known about whether and
how extreme events or shocks, such as pandemics, reshapes the scientific community and
scientific production, especially collaboration and innovation, as well as the nature and
magnitude of this impact.
Most studies that evaluate disasters mainly focus on the impacts on economy 8,9, politics,
public health system 10,11, psychology 12,13, human life 14, social infrastructure, environment 15
and so forth. As an important component of society, science should be also impacted, whereas
how science responds to disasters remains open. The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic
stimulates the emerging studies on this topic, while neither survey-based research nor studies
that focus on the short-term effect of a particular event 16,17 fails to capture an overview
landscape of the effect of pandemics on science in the long run.
There is a lack of understanding of how disasters influence collaboration and innovation,
with only a few studies providing initial evidence on both disruptive and positive changes in
research productivity after disasters. On the one hand, disasters increase knowledge production
linked to the disaster 18,19 and lead to changes in research topics. On the other hand, evidence
shows a negative impact of disasters on research outside the related topics. A recent study
shows the expansion of knowledge related to the disaster after the Fukushima Daiichi accident
18
. The analysis of terrorism studies from 1991 to 2011 presents a positive relationship between
the occurrence of terrorism events and productivity in the domain, with a declining trend of
this productivity 18. This study also indicates after the 9/11 attacks, the terrorism-related
academic literature has grown substantially in the US. However, using the data on 107 journals
in material science, Magnone 16 find the number of submitted papers and the number of
contributing authors in the areas affected by disaster decrease immediately after Japan’s triple
disaster. An analysis of the evolution of research topics pertaining to the Chernobyl accidents
suggests that disasters could generate new scientific trends by motivating scientists to identify
the important research problems caused by the disaster that requires solutions 17. Specifically,
in the early years following the disaster, publications tend to address research questions in
biochemistry, genetics and molecular biology, while the topics change to humanity- and
environment-related topics in later years 17. A recent survey including 4,500 PIs in the US and
European countries shows how scientific workforce is affected by the outbreak of the COVID19, as well as how research output is influenced in the near future 20. This survey finds a
dramatic decline in time spent on research on average, especially on laboratory-based research
after the onset of the pandemic with significant heterogeneities due to differences in fields,
genders and individual characteristics.
Another strand of the literature shows that the structure of scientific collaboration is
impacted by disasters in both directions. With several exceptions, most literature provides
descriptions of collaboration patterns after the disasters, failing to show a comparison between

pre- and post-disaster periods 17,18,21. A study found that scientific teams become more
collaborative and more productive with new collaborative relationships developed following
natural disasters 22. However, a recent study reveals smaller-sized teams on coronavirus-related
research during the pandemic relative to those before the outbreak of the COVID-19 1. This
study also indicates scientific teams with fewer nations, despite an increasing level of
collaboration between China and the US.
Existing approaches that measure scientific novelty
As one aspect that reflects the core value in science, creativity or novelty is of great
importance for scientific progress 23-25. Innovation is highly recognized in the research system
and is often associated with critical criteria based on which decisions of funding allocation,
hiring, promotion and scientific awards are made 26. Because of its significant importance,
extensive efforts have been made to measure the degree to which a scientific discovery
provides unique knowledge that is unavailable from prior studies, and explore factors that
influence the creation of innovation.
In the early years, novelty is often evaluated through peer reviews or surveys 27-29, which
is practical only on a small scale. The development of computing power and enriched
bibliometric data encourage the advancement in measuring various aspects of scientific
discoveries including novelty. The first approach considers novelty as the degree to which
scientific discovery is reused by subsequent literature regardless of the intrinsic quality of the
study 30. Therefore, it is argued that citations could be a measure of usefulness and thus a proxy
for creativity 31. Integrating the quality aspect of research articles, the second approach focuses
on either the newness or the diversity of knowledge, with the first one related to the introduction
of a new concept or objective in a study, and another linked to a broader range of knowledge
embedded in research. For example, the novelty of a life sciences study is measured based on
the age of keywords assigned to the article, which captures the extent to which a scientist’s
work is novel relative to the world’s research frontier 32. In the field of biochemistry, another
strategy to measure novelty is based on the introduction of a new chemical entity in research
33
. The second strategy that focuses on the quality of scientific discovery is to measure the
diversity of technological domains a patent cites using Herfindahl-type index of patent class
cited by the focal patent 34,35.
The combinatorial perspective of novelty is often applied in measuring scientific novelty
or originality. Novelty in science, technology and artistic creation, is often conceptualized as
recombination of antecedent knowledge elements in an atypical way 36-41, which has become
standard in the study of innovation. For example, according to Schumpeter 42, “innovation
combines components in a new way, or that it consists in carrying out new combinations.”
From Nelson and Winter 38, the creation of novelty in various fields ranging from art, science
to practical life, is a result of the recombination of pre-existing conceptual and physical
materials. An invention is considered as either a new combination of components or a new
relationship between previously combined components 43. Building upon the perspective of
combinatorial novelty, some researchers view novelty as a new or unusual combination of preexisting knowledge components that could be operationalized by patent classes 36, keywords
44,45
, referenced articles 46,47, referenced journals 37,48 and chemical entities 33.

Supplementary Figures

Fig. S1. The distribution of papers per year and by country in CORD-19 dataset from January
1951 to April 2020.

Fig. S2. The global distribution of COVID-19 cases and deaths by month.
Data source: https://ourworldindata.org/covid-cases. This dataset is downloaded on May 9th,2020.

Fig. S3. The distribution of papers per month and by country in CORD-19 dataset from January
2018 to April 2020. The number in X-axis in sub-figure a indicates n month(s) since January 2018. For
example, 24 indicates December 2019, when the first global COVID-19 case is officially confirmed.

Fig. S4. The distribution of entities extracted from CORD-19 papers’ titles and abstracts from
January 1951 to April 2020 by type and the top five entities in each type.

Fig. S5. The pipeline of generating sub-word representation for each bio-entity extracted from
CORD-19 papers using BioBERT.

Fig. S6. The distribution of the distance between two entities in entity pairs in CORD-19 papers
and that of CORD-19 papers’ novelty scores. The Y-axis indicates the frequency.

Fig. S7. The distribution of treated countries and untreated countries by month.

Fig. S8. An example demonstrating the procedure to aggregate four paper-level variables to the
country level. The element in the vector represents a variable for paper , such as paper’s novelty score
( ), parachuting collaboration ratio ( ), whether or not the paper is international collaborative ( )
and team size ( ).

Fig. S9. An example of calculating a paper’s novelty score. and indicate papers and entities
respectively. The formula used to calculate the novelty score for a paper is shown in the following
equation.
=
where denotes paper ; indicates the number of bio-entities extracted from paper ;
refers to the
number of combinations of two that can be drawn from the set of n bio-entities extracted from paper ,
i.e., the number of entity pairs generated by n bio-entities; denotes the number of entity pairs in which
two entities’ distance is in the upper 10th percentile of the distribution of the distance of two entities in
all entity pairs generated from CORD-19 papers. For example, for paper that contains three bioentities (i.e., ,
and ), the number of entity pairs for this paper is three. If the distance between
and
is in the upper 10th percentile of the distribution of the distance of two entities in all entity
pairs generated from 58,728 coronavirus-related research articles, the combination of
and
is
considered novel and thus the novelty score for this paper is 1/3.

Supplementary Tables
Table 1. The productivity of the 50 sampled countries/regions and the timing when the first COVID19 case is confirmed in the country.

December 2019

January 2020

China

USA

13187

Brazil

1008

Turkey

236

UK

2688

Netherlands

933

Poland

182

South Korea

2370

Switzerland

696

South Africa

137

France

2109

Iran

489

Argentina

113

Italy

2071

Belgium

334

Portugal

105

Germany

1801

Israel

273

Hungary

86

Japan

1313

Egypt

264

Colombia

86

Canada

1271

Denmark

194

Bangladesh

69

Spain

1230

Mexico

180

Kenya

50

Australia

1090

Greece

170

Czechia

45

India

1008

New Zealand

124

Chile

38

Taiwan

754

Norway

123

Peru

31

Sweden

340

Austria

120

Thailand

245

Ireland

106

Finland

216

Nigeria

93

Singapore

206

Croatia

53

Malaysia

201

Pakistan

47

Vietnam

151

Russia

147

Philippines

21

16467

February 2020

March 2020

Notes: the numbers in the table indicates the total number of papers by countries during the January
2018-April 2020 period.

Table 2. Statistics summary of variables

Variable

Observations

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

Novelty score

944

0.092

0.133

0

1

COVID19

1,400

0.114

0.318

0

1

COVID19 case

1,400

0.714

2.324

0

13.682

COVID19 death

1,400

0.381

1.489

0

10.965

Team size

1,152

2.26

0.445

0.693

4.108

Parachuting collaboration ratio

1,089

0.826

0.122

0.028

1

International collaboration ratio

1,160

0.54

0.334

0

1

Productivity

1,158

2.825

1.354

0.693

7.961

Productivity, COVID19 case, COVID19 death and team size are logged transformed (log e).

Table 3. Correlation matrix of variables

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(1)

Novelty score

1

(2)

COVID19

0.072**

(3)

COVID19 case

0.123***

0.856***

(4)

COVID19 death

0.113***

0.713***

0.947***

(5)

Team size

0.05

0.058*

0.087***

0.093***

(6)

Parachuting collaboration ratio

0.005

-0.092***

-0.107***

-0.102***

(7)

International collaboration ratio

0.055*

-0.009

0.037

(8)

Productivity

0.037

(7)

(8)

1

0.182***

1

0.252***

1
1
-0.015

0.049*
0.274***

0.026
-0.081***

1
0.362***
-0.284***

1
0.261***

Table 4. The estimated relationship between papers’ novelty score and citations papers
received.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Citation_2

Citation_5

Citation_10

Top1% citation

-0.051

-0.020

-0.036

0.010

(0.061)

(0.061)

(0.062)

(0.008)

-0.239***

-0.211***

-0.212***

-0.002

(0.036)

(0.037)

(0.037)

(0.005)

-0.086***

-0.083***

-0.085***

-0.002

(0.025)

(0.026)

(0.026)

(0.003)

0.040***

0.040***

0.038***

0.002***

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.000)

Year fixed effect

Y

Y

Y

Y

Constant

0.628

1.686**

2.721***

0.495

Novelty score

Parachuting collaboration ratio

International collaboration

Team size (log e)

(0.419)

(0.689)

(0.927)

(0.355)

Observations

13,307

13,307

13,307

13,307

R-squared

0.130

0.276

0.362

0.027

Fixed effects regarding publication year are included; robust standard errors are in parentheses; ***, **
and * represent significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.

Table 5. The DID estimates of the relationship between the occurrence of the first COVID-19 case
in the country and countries’ novelty scores in the month when using the 95th percentile as the
threshold of the location of the distance between two entities in a novel entity pair.

(1)
Variables
COVID19

(2)
Novelty score

0.021**
(0.010)

Three months before the first case(t_3)

-0.003
(0.017)

Two months before the first case(t_2)

0.004
(0.014)

One month before the first case(t_1)

-0.011
(0.006)

The month of the first case(t0)

-0.000
(0.008)

One month after the first case(t+1)

0.041**
(0.019)

Two months after the first case(t+2)

0.024
(0.018)

Three months after the first case(t+3)

0.028
(0.025)

Parachuting collaboration ratio

0.009
(0.032)

International collaboration ratio

-0.017
(0.046)

Productivity (log e)

-0.000
(0.005)

Team size (log e)

-0.010**
(0.005)

Month fixed effects

Y

Y

Country fixed effects

Y

Y

Constant

0.067

0.067

(0.064)

(0.065)

Observations

834

834

R-squared

0.093

0.098

The independent variable in columns 1 is whether the first COVID-19 case in the country has been
confirmed by the month; fixed effects regarding month and country are included; robust standard errors
clustered by countries are in parentheses; ***, ** and * represent significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
level.

Table 6. The OLS estimates of the relationship between the logged number of new COVID-19
cases and deaths in the country and countries’ novelty score in a month when using the 95th
percentile as the threshold of the location of the distance between two entities in a novel entity
pair.

(1)
Variables
COVID-19 case (log e)

(2)
Novelty score

0.005***
(0.002)

COVID-19 death (log e)

0.006***
(0.002)

Parachuting collaboration ratio

0.006

0.007

(0.033)

(0.033)

0.002

-0.009

(0.048)

(0.045)

-0.002

-0.001

(0.005)

(0.005)

-0.010**

-0.010**

(0.005)

(0.005)

0.004

0.013

(0.064)

(0.062)

Month fixed effects

Y

Y

Country fixed effects

Y

Y

Observations

834

834

R-squared

0.098

0.096

International collaboration ratio

Productivity (log e)

Team size (log e)

Constant

The independent variables in columns 1 and 2 are the monthly logged transformed number of new
COVID-19 cases and that of death, respectively; fixed effects country are included; robust standard
errors clustered by countries are in parentheses; ***, ** and * represent significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% level.

Table 7. The estimated relationship between papers’ novel scores and teams’ characteristics when
using the 95th percentile as the threshold of the location of the distance between two entities in a
novel entity pair.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Novelty score

Variables
Team size (log e)

International collaboration ratio

Parachuting collaboration ratio

Papers published

Papers published

before COVID19

during COVID19

All papers

All papers

-0.002

-0.002

-0.002

-0.002

(0.003)

(0.013)

(0.002)

(0.002)

0.000

0.022

0.000

0.000

(0.004)

(0.014)

(0.004)

(0.004)

-0.004

0.050**

-0.004

-0.003

(0.006)

(0.025)

(0.006)

(0.006)

-0.046**

-0.023*

(0.020)

(0.013)

COVID19

Parachuting ╳COVID19

0.055**
(0.026)

International╳COVID19

0.024
(0.014)

Year fixed effect

Y

Y

Y

Y

0.044***

-0.024

0.044***

0.043***

(0.007)

(0.035)

(0.007)

(0.007)

Observations

12,059

378

12,437

12,437

R-squared

0.000

0.007

0.000

0.000

Constant

Fixed effects regarding publication year are included; robust standard errors are in parentheses; ***, **
and * represent significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.

Table 8. The OLS estimates of the relationship between the logged number of new COVID-19
cases and deaths in the country and countries’ novelty scores in a month.

(1)

(2)

Variables

Novelty score

COVID-19 case (log e)

0.008***
(0.002)

COVID-19 death (log e)

0.009***
(0.003)

Productivity (log e)

-0.011

-0.007

(0.011)

(0.012)

0.041*

0.039*

(0.021)

(0.021)

0.032

0.036

(0.050)

(0.049)

0.007

0.009

(0.020)

(0.020)

Country fixed effects

Y

Y

Month fixed effects

Y

Y

Constant

-0.054

-0.062

(0.055)

(0.055)

Observations

919

919

R-squared

0.126

0.121

Team size (log e)

Parachuting collaboration ratio

International collaboration ratio

The independent variables in columns 1 and 2 are the monthly logged transformed number of new
COVID-19 cases and that of death, respectively; fixed effects of country and month are included; robust
standard errors clustered by countries are in parentheses; ***, ** and * represent significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% level.

Table 9. The estimated relationship between papers’ novel scores and teams’ characteristics.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Novelty score

Sample
Team size (log e)

International collaboration ratio

Papers published

Papers published

before COVID19

during COVID19

All papers

All papers

0.001

-0.008

0.001

0.001

(0.002)

(0.012)

(0.002)

(0.002)

-0.001

0.036***

-0.001

-0.001

Parachuting collaboration ratio

(0.003)

(0.008)

(0.003)

(0.003)

-0.011**

0.081***

-0.011**

-0.009*

(0.005)

(0.023)

(0.005)

(0.005)

-0.081***

-0.040***

(0.023)

(0.012)

COVID19

Parachuting ╳COVID19

0.095***
(0.024)

International╳COVID19

0.043***
(0.008)

Year fixed effect

Y

Y

Y

Y

0.002

-0.050*

0.002

0.002

(0.004)

(0.030)

(0.004)

(0.004)

Observations

16,421

503

16,924

16,924

R-squared

0.005

0.019

0.005

0.005

Constant

Fixed effects regarding publication year of papers are included; robust standard errors are in parentheses;
***, ** and * represent significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level. The direction of coefficient (-0.001,
p>0.1 in column 1 of Table 2) on international collaboration ratio on novelty score for papers published
before COVID-19 is opposite to that (0.036, p<0.01 in column 2 of Table 2) for papers published during
COVID-19. Furthermore, the coefficient (-0.011, p<0.01 in column 1 of Table 2) of parachuting
collaboration ratio on novelty score is significantly negative for papers published in the normal science
period, whereas it (0.081, p<0.01 in column 2 of Table 2) becomes significantly positive for papers
published during the pandemic.

Supplementary references
1
2
3
4

5
6
7
8

9

10
11
12

13
14

Fry, C. V., Cai, X., Zhang, Y. & Wagner, C. Consolidation in a Crisis: Patterns of
International Collaboration in COVID-19 Research. Available at SSRN 3595455 (2020).
Wang, L. L. et al. CORD-19: The Covid-19 Open Research Dataset. ArXiv (2020).
Wang, X., Song, X., Guan, Y., Li, B. & Han, J. Comprehensive named entity recognition
on cord-19 with distant or weak supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.12218 (2020).
Zhang, E., Gupta, N., Nogueira, R., Cho, K. & Lin, J. Rapidly deploying a neural search
engine for the covid-19 open research dataset: Preliminary thoughts and lessons
learned. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.05125 (2020).
Xu, J. et al. Building a PubMed knowledge graph. Scientific Data 7, 205,
doi:10.1038/s41597-020-0543-2 (2020).
Waltman, L. A review of the literature on citation impact indicators. Journal of
informetrics 10, 365-391 (2016).
Kuhn, T. S. The structure of scientific revolutions. (University of Chicago press, 2012).
Atkeson, A. What will be the economic impact of covid-19 in the us? rough estimates of
disease scenarios. Report No. 0898-2937, (National Bureau of Economic Research,
2020).
Guerrieri, V., Lorenzoni, G., Straub, L. & Werning, I. Macroeconomic Implications of
COVID-19: Can Negative Supply Shocks Cause Demand Shortages? Report No. 08982937, (National Bureau of Economic Research, 2020).
Remuzzi, A. & Remuzzi, G. COVID-19 and Italy: what next? The Lancet (2020).
Rothan, H. A. & Byrareddy, S. N. The epidemiology and pathogenesis of coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) outbreak. Journal of autoimmunity, 102433 (2020).
Briere, J. & Elliott, D. Prevalence, characteristics, and long-term sequelae of natural
disaster exposure in the general population. Journal of traumatic stress 13, 661-679
(2000).
Goldmann, E. & Galea, S. Mental health consequences of disasters. Annual review of
public health 35, 169-183 (2014).
Liu, M., Zangerle, E., Hu, X., Melchiorre, A. & Schedl, M. in International Society for

Music Information Retrieval Conference 2020.
15
16
17

18
19
20
21

Almond, D., Du, X. & Zhang, S. Did COVID-19 Improve Air Quality Near Hubei? Report
No. 0898-2937, (National Bureau of Economic Research, 2020).
Magnone, E. An analysis for estimating the short-term effects of Japan's triple disaster
on progress in materials science. Journal of Informetrics 6, 289-297 (2012).
Mryglod, O., Holovatch, Y., Kenna, R. & Berche, B. Quantifying the evolution of a
scientific topic: reaction of the academic community to the Chornobyl disaster.
Scientometrics 106, 1151-1166 (2016).
Kaur, K. et al. Knowledge generation in the wake of the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear
power plant disaster. Scientometrics 119, 149-169 (2019).
Magnone, E. The extreme case of terrorism: a scientometric analysis. Scientometrics
101, 179-201 (2014).
Myers, K. R. et al. Unequal effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on scientists. Nature
Human Behaviour 4, 880-883, doi:10.1038/s41562-020-0921-y (2020).
Klingelhöfer, D., Groneberg, D. A., Braun, M., Brüggmann, D. & Jaque, J. Fifteen years

22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34

35

36
37
38
39
40
41

42
43

after September 11: Where is the medical research heading? A scientometric analysis.
Scientometrics 117, 45-60 (2018).
Rotolo, T. & Frickel, S. When disasters strike environmental science: a case–control study
of changes in scientific collaboration networks. Scientometrics 120, 301-317 (2019).
Merton, R. K. The sociology of science: Theoretical and empirical investigations.
(University of Chicago press, 1973).
Hagstrom, W. O. Competition in science. American sociological review, 1-18 (1974).
Gaston, J. Originality and competition in science: A study of the British high energy
physics community. (1973).
Stephan, P. E. The economics of science. Journal of Economic literature 34, 1199-1235
(1996).
Chubin, D. E., Hackett, E. J. & Hackett, E. J. Peerless science: Peer review and US science
policy. (Suny Press, 1990).
Dirk, L. A measure of originality: The elements of science. Social Studies of Science 29,
765-776 (1999).
Guetzkow, J., Lamont, M. & Mallard, G. What is Originality in the Humanities and the
Social Sciences? American Sociological Review 69, 190-212 (2004).
Shibayama, S. & Wang, J. Measuring originality in science. Scientometrics 122, 409-427
(2020).
Wang, J. Knowledge creation in collaboration networks: Effects of tie configuration.
Research Policy 45, 68-80 (2016).
Azoulay, P., Graff Zivin, J. S. & Manso, G. Incentives and creativity: evidence from the
academic life sciences. The RAND Journal of Economics 42, 527-554 (2011).
Foster, J. G., Rzhetsky, A. & Evans, J. A. Tradition and innovation in scientists’ research
strategies. American Sociological Review 80, 875-908 (2015).
Harrigan, K. R., Di Guardo, M. C., Marku, E. & Velez, B. N. Using a distance measure to
operationalise patent originality. Technology Analysis & Strategic Management 29,
988-1001 (2017).
Trajtenberg, M., Henderson, R. & Jaffe, A. University versus corporate patents: A window
on the basicness of invention. Economics of Innovation and new technology 5, 19-50
(1997).
Fleming, L. Recombinant uncertainty in technological search. Management science 47,
117-132 (2001).
Uzzi, B., Mukherjee, S., Stringer, M. & Jones, B. Atypical combinations and scientific
impact. Science 342, 468-472 (2013).
Nelson, R. R. & Winter, S. G. An evolutionnary theory of economic change. Cambridge,
Mass. and London, Belknap Harvard (1982).
Weitzman, M. L. Hybridizing growth theory. The American Economic Review 86, 207212 (1996).
Kogut, B. & Zander, U. Knowledge of the firm, combinative capabilities, and the
replication of technology. Organization science 3, 383-397 (1992).
Simonton, D. K. Thematic fame, melodic originality, and musical zeitgeist: A biographical
and transhistorical content analysis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 38,
972 (1980).
Schumpeter, J. A. Business cycles. Vol. 1 (McGraw-Hill New York, 1939).
Henderson, R. M. & Clark, K. B. Architectural innovation: The reconfiguration of existing

44

45
46
47
48

product technologies and the failure of established firms. Administrative science
quarterly, 9-30 (1990).
Boudreau, K. J., Guinan, E. C., Lakhani, K. R. & Riedl, C. Looking across and looking
beyond the knowledge frontier: Intellectual distance, novelty, and resource allocation in
science. Management Science 62, 2765-2783 (2016).
Chai, S. & Menon, A. Breakthrough recognition: Bias against novelty and competition
for attention. Research Policy 48, 733-747 (2019).
Trapido, D. How novelty in knowledge earns recognition: The role of consistent
identities. Research Policy 44, 1488-1500 (2015).
Dahlin, K. B. & Behrens, D. M. When is an invention really radical?: Defining and
measuring technological radicalness. research policy 34, 717-737 (2005).
Wang, J., Veugelers, R. & Stephan, P. Bias against novelty in science: A cautionary tale
for users of bibliometric indicators. Research Policy 46, 1416-1436 (2017).

