Predictors of Social Distancing and Mask-Wearing
Behavior: Panel Survey in Seven U.S. States☆
Plamen Nikolovabcd

Andreas Papea

Ozlem Tonguca

Charlotte Williamsa

September 2020
Abstract
This paper presents preliminary summary results from a longitudinal study of
participants in seven U.S. states during the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition
to standard socio-economic characteristics, we collect data on various
economic preference parameters: time, risk, and social preferences, and risk
perception biases. We pay special attention to predictors that are both
important drivers of social distancing and are potentially malleable and
susceptible to policy levers. We note three important findings: (1)
demographic characteristics exert the largest influence on social distancing
measures and mask-wearing, (2) we show that individual risk perception and
cognitive biases exert a critical role in influencing the decision to adopt social
distancing measures, (3) we identify important demographic groups that are
most susceptible to changing their social distancing behaviors. These findings
can help inform the design of policy interventions regarding targeting specific
demographic groups, which can help reduce the transmission speed of the
COVID-19 virus. (JEL I11, I12, I18, D81, D91, D62, D64)
Keywords: COVID-19, social distancing, masks, mask-wearing, health
markets, health economics, cognitive biases, exponential growth, behavioral
economics

______________________________________________

We thank Ariunzaya Oktyabri, Alan Adelman, Ancilla Inocencio, Xu Wang, Sharon Itin, Dylan Saez, and Hannah
Werner for outstanding research support. We thank Jacob Hanna, Andrea Youngken, Jefferey Yan, Anthony
DeMaria, Farris Bienstock, and Zachary Pinto for assisting with the data collection process. We thank Zoe
McLaren, Lulu Garcia-Navarro, Hanna Tesfasyone, Matthew Bonci, Robin Schilling, Susan Wolcott, Nusrat Jimi,
Agnitra Roy Choudhury, and Leila Salarpour for constructive feedback and helpful comments. This research was
made possible thanks to grants from The State University of New York Research Seed Grant Program, Binghamton
University’s SSEL, and the Health Sciences and Sustainable Communities Transdisciplinary Areas of Excellence.
We gratefully acknowledge their support. All errors are our own, please let us know about them.
☆
Corresponding Author: Plamen Nikolov, Department of Economics, State University of New York
(Binghamton), Department of Economics, 4400 Vestal Parkway East, Binghamton, NY 13902, USA. Email:
pnikolov@post.harvard.edu
a

State University of New York (at Binghamton)
IZA Institute of Labor Economics
c
Harvard Institute for Quantitative Social Science
d
Global Labor Organization
b

I. Introduction
Absent a vaccine or antiretroviral drugs to curb the spread of the COVID-19 virus, the
only immediately available and possibly effective tools to decrease transmission are
preventive measures, via individual behaviors. Government guidelines quickly pointed to two
specific measures: social distancing and mask-wearing.1,2 In this paper, we examine what
factors predict the tendency to adopt social distancing measures. Although many Americans
have adopted these measures, many have not opted to do so (Saad, 2020). For social
distancing to be effective against the spread of the disease, its adoption must be widespread
and consistent.
What are the most important drivers for social distancing? Are any of them subject to
policy changes? We use longitudinal data, based on an online field experiment from seven
U.S. states collected between May and July 2020, to address these questions. We recruited
participants via online platforms who completed weekly surveys. Participants completed five
surveys (two in the first week: an initial baseline and a follow-up survey, and surveys for each
consecutive week for three weeks). The weekly surveys collected data on social distancing
behaviors, general health, social preferences, time preferences, risk attitudes, cognitive
assessment, attitudes towards COVID-19, perception biases, and personality traits. Based on
four individual-level proxies of social distancing –days outside of one’s home in the past
week, whether one left one’s home, whether one maintained at least six feet of distance, and
the number non-essential reasons for leaving one’s home – we create a comprehensive social
distancing index. Using the survey data, we take a reduced-form approach as we attempt to
shed light on the relationship between the above factors and the demand for social distancing
and mask-wearing.
The classical economic model of individual demand for health, based on Grossman
(1972), posits that individuals view health and preventive health measures as investments.
1

On March 16th, 2020, President Donald Trump issued the first White House Coronavirus guidelines in which it was officially
recommended that citizens avoid gatherings in groups of more than ten people at a national level (White House, 2020).
2
Social distancing describes the practice of keeping a safe distance of at least six feet between yourself and those not from
your household (CDCb, 2020). This guideline aims to reduce the potential for physical transmission of the virus from the
infected to the non-infected. This practice is recommended in conjunction with the use of personal protective equipment (PPE)
(face masks, gloves, etc.). PPE aims to limit respiratory transmission of the disease through breathing, coughing, and talking.

1

Consumers adopt better health behaviors by comparing the benefits and costs associated with
these behaviors. This framework places the role of individual incentives front and center:
viewing health in an inter-temporal framework, individuals make health investment decisions
(e.g., exercise, nutrition) in the present to maximize their lifetime well-being. Changes to
individual behavior in the present are associated with disutility (e.g., most changes to habits
and behavior require some or a considerable degree of effort), and the adoption of new health
behaviors requires a considerable amount of time investment or additional monetary costs.3
Social distancing and mask-wearing are no different. Understanding how individuals make
decisions regarding social distancing is further complicated by the fact that COVID-19 is an
infectious disease and that preventive measures affect not only individual health, but also the
health of others. In other words, individual decisions regarding optimal preventive measures
could be socially suboptimal if people only care about their own health and not about how
their behaviors affect the spread of disease to others, a classic case of a negative externality.
Using data on various economic preference parameters, such as willingness to take on
gambles, willingness to delay gratification, pro-social attitudes, and personality traits, we shed
light on the determinants of individual decisions to adopt social distancing or mask-wearing.
We pay special attention to factors that either exert a considerable influence on social
distancing or are potentially malleable and susceptible to policy levers.
In addition to individual economic preferences, we focus on the impact of two
perception-related variables. The perceptual biases that we examine, risk misperception, and
exponential growth bias (EGB), can affect decision-making and individual behaviors.4 By risk
misperception, we refer to the difference between the subjective assessment of a disease risk
versus the objective disease severity risk. In the context of COVID-19 risks, we specifically
focus on the role of the mortality risk (or the so-called case fatality rate). We also examine the
effect of EGB, the psychological phenomenon in which individuals tend to linearize
exponential growth. This tendency leads to underestimating the future growth of a particular
3

Strulik and Trimborn (2018) find that individuals continuously revise their life behaviors in order to increase health investment
as they are driven by the desire for a long life, they note that these revisions are failed to be adhered to due to changing external
biases.
4
Conceptually, at least two behavioral biases predict that people may not engage in optimal levels in preventive health
measures, such as social distancing: present bias (PB) and exponential growth bias (EGB). Present bias (PB) is the tendency to
underweight future utility relative to present utility in a dynamically inconsistent way (Strotz 1955; Laibson 1997; O’Donoghue
and Rabin 1999).4 Previous studies document that in intertemporal models, present bias can lead to lower demand for health
relative to an unbiased person who shares the same long-run discount factor (Dupas 2011, Laibson 1997, Angeletos et al. 2001).
A person with present-biased preferences may intend to invest more in health in the future but never do so (Dupas 2011).

2

variable, which leads to suboptimal decisions. In the context of COVID-19, exhibiting EGB
simply means that people underestimate the speed at which the epidemic spreads. Although
the implications of EGB for individuals making health decisions are immense, previous
studies have exclusively focused on the welfare consequences of the phenomenon in the
context of savings and debt (Wagenaar and Sagaria 1975; Wagenaar and Timmers 1979;
Keren 1983; Benzion, Granot and Yagil 1992; Eisenstein and Hoch 2007; Alemberg and
Gerdes 2012). In this paper, we examine whether people exhibit exponential growth bias in
the health domain and whether its presence relates to lower willingness to adopt social
distancing measures.5
Understanding the mechanisms behind what drives suboptimal health decisions and
social distancing, in particular, can inform the design of better policies. Although many
factors may affect social distancing, we explore the possibility that for at least some people,
the low adoption may be the result of low demand due to low perceived risks associated with
COVID-19. If perceptual biases are the main reason behind the low adoption of social
distancing, reducing such biases could lead to better health behaviors and higher social
welfare. It is especially important to understand the role policies can play in mitigating such
potential biases. Identifying which biases influence the decision to social distance can help
inform the design of better policy interventions, from a welfare standpoint.
Our analyses yield several interesting results. First, and controlling for other factors,
political affiliation is a strong predictor of individual views on how various governmental
levels handled the response to the epidemic. Democrats and Independents are more likely to
view Federal, State, and Local government responses as not sufficiently aggressive compared
to the views on the same topic by Republicans. This finding is consistent with recent survey
evidence from smartphone data (Allcott et al., 2020), documenting that areas with more
Republicans engaged in less social distancing. From a theoretical standpoint, the fact that
political affiliation, in contrast to economic preference parameters, is a strong driver of the

5

Levy and Tasoff (2016) show in the context of savings behaviors that EGB can lead to under-saving for retirement under
certain conditions. A large body of evidence suggests that this bias is widespread and robust (Wagenaar and Sagaria 1975;
Wagenaar and Timmers 1979; Keren 1983; Benzion, Granot and Yagil 1992; Eisenstein and Hoch 2007; Almenberg and Gerdes
2012).

3

decision to social distance could demonstrate the usefulness of economic models related to the
formation of social norms in the context of health behaviors.6
Second, of all the variables included in our analyses, demographic characteristics are
the greatest drivers of social distancing measures. Information on demographic factors that
predict social distancing and mask-wearing can inform targeting of potential policies.
Specifically, being Caucasian, a Republican affiliation, and higher household income are
associated with lower adoption of social distancing measures. Living in a densely populated
area, being currently married, and being highly concerned about own health are positively
associated with higher rates of social distancing. Demographic characteristics also influence
mask-wearing. Higher age and being female are both associated with more mask-wearing. In
contrast, being Caucasian is associated with lower rates of mask-wearing. Among the
economic preference factors, we find that exhibiting higher risk aversion is a strong predictor
of social distancing and mask-wearing. We find no evidence of time preference per se
influencing social distancing measures. However, we find a surprising relationship between
time preferences and mask-wearing: individuals who exhibit higher patience (higher
willingness to delay gratification) are less likely to wear a mask.
Third, in addition to demographic and economic factors, we specifically examine the
roles that perception and cognitive biases play in influencing the decision to adopt social
distancing measures. We estimate the prevalence of the exponential growth bias in our
sample. Numerous studies have addressed the theoretical relationship between standard time
preferences and health behaviors (Grossman, 2017). However, surprisingly few attempts
focus on the empirical relationship between EGB and health behaviors. Based on our sample,
we establish an empirical link between the tendency to exhibit exponential growth bias and
social distancing. We control for income, education, risk preference, time preference, a
measure of cognitive skills, and a host of other characteristics, and find that that EGB is a
statistically significant predictor of social distancing. On the aggregate social distancing
index, people who misunderstand exponential growth (i.e., exhibit higher exponential growth

6

Social norms provide informal rules that govern our actions within groups across various situations. A key feature of a social
norm is the desire to conform to the majority in a group, as noted by Bicchieri (2017, p. 35). Brock and Durlauf (2001) model
the development of norms within a group; building on the model of Brock and Durlauf (2001), Smerdon et al. (2020) design
an experiment in which they investigate the role that information about others’ preferences on the development of “bad” norms.
They find that the strength of social interactions is a critical factor for a bad norm to persist.

4

bias) report a lower tendency to social distance. We also find suggestive evidence that
individuals who misperceive the risk associated with COVID-19 are less likely to wear a
mask.
We note several important limitations of our analyses. The findings reported in our
study rely on econometric specifications that should be interpreted with some caution from a
causal standpoint. Although we find important predictors of social distancing behaviors, the
variation in these predictors is not driven by an exogenous source of variation. However,
many of the predictors are either demographic characteristics or economic preference
characteristics that recent empirical studies have documented to exhibit stability over time: for
risk preferences (Dohmen, Lehmann, and Pignatti, 2016; Chuang and Schechter, 2015;
Nikolov, 2018), time preferences (Meier and Sprenger, 2015), personality traits (Roberts,
2009), or social preferences (Carlsson et al., 2014). Furthermore, establishing a causal
relationship between economic preference parameters and social distancing measures would
be a challenging task because behavioral parameters cannot be exogenously varied. Finally,
our analysis relies on a small sample from seven states that exhibits important differences
compared to the general population. Therefore, there may be difficulty extrapolating our
findings to the general populations or other settings.
The structure of the paper is as follows. Section II describes the survey data and
specific survey measures. Section III presents analyses on the most important predictors of
adherence to social distancing and mask-wearing. Section IV discusses key takeaways from
the analysis and provides some concluding remarks.
II. Design and Survey Data
A. Study Design and Survey Data
To examine the determinants of social distancing behavior, we conducted a
longitudinal survey as part of an ongoing online field experiment (results from which we do
not report here). The field experiment aimed to examine how random assignment to
informational treatment influenced economic preference parameters and subsequent tendency
to adopt social distancing and mask-wearing behaviors. Requirements to participate in the
experimental study were: 1) being 18 years of age or over, and 2) current residence in one of
5

seven states7: Connecticut, Florida, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Jersey, and New
York, and 3) consent to be contacted by the study team for follow-up purposes.8
Recruitment and data collection for the study was executed remotely. Starting in May
2020, participants were invited to participate in the study through recruitment ads posted on
the Binghamton University Experimental Economics Lab, online postings, and word of
mouth. Upon invitation to participate in the study, individuals filled out a brief online
screening form to ensure they met the study’s eligibility criteria. Once enrolled, participants
were invited to complete weekly surveys for seven weeks. The surveys collected information
regarding social distancing behaviors, general health, social, time, and risk preferences, and
exponential growth knowledge at that particular period in time.9 Participants completed five
surveys (two in the first week: an initial baseline and a follow-up survey, and three weekly
surveys for three consecutive weeks). The follow-up surveys covered questions, also elicited
during the baseline, to enable an analysis of changes in behaviors over the study period.
The baseline study instrument comprises the following modules: (a) sociodemographic information, (b) mask-wearing and social distancing, (c) exponential growth
assessment, (d) social, time, and risk preferences, (e) health outcomes, (f) cognitive
assessment, and (g) attitudes. We detail the definition of the critical variables in Section II.C.
We first report, in Table 1, the average characteristics of the study participants. Our
overall sample is 42.40 years of age. The study sample is majority female, a split of 713
females and 188 males. The male sample reports a lower average age as compared to the
female sample, with a reported average age of 32.99 and 44.88 years, respectively. The
sample is primarily of Caucasian ethnicity, with an annual household income of
approximately $116,000. In terms of educational attainment, over half of the participants (61
percent) report receiving a degree from a four-year college program. Approximately a tenth
(nine percent) of the sample is obtaining an educational degree. In terms of employment, 48
percent of the sample reports being currently employed. It is worth noting that in terms of risk

7
These states collected daily data updates on the number of cases and number of deaths related to COVID-19 within state
borders at the county level.
8
Weekly follow-up phone interviews were conducted with respondents where the research team discovered inconsistency in
responses.
9
Data collection was executed on the oTree platform, designed by Chen et al. (2016). Participants received incentive payments
related to the incentive-based measurements of specific survey tasks (e.g., risk preferences and exponential growth bias
measurements).

6

and time preferences, our sample was on average risk-neutral and consisted of individuals
who are more likely to be patient than impatient regarding financial decisions.10

[Insert Table 1]

Table 2 reports the summary characteristics by the state of residence. The majority of
the sample resides in New York State. The average participant that resides in New York is
significantly younger and more likely to be a full-time student than those in the other six
states. Although the majority of the sample is Caucasian, it is interesting to point out that the
subsample residing in New York is the most ethnically diverse, with 4 percent of participants
reporting to be African American. In contrast, Florida and Pennsylvania are the least diverse
states in the sample, with no reported African Americans. We also report political affiliation
by the state of residence: Florida (0.18) and Pennsylvania (0.18) tend to have the most
Republican-voting participants in our sample. In contrast, participants in the following states
of residence are more likely to report Democratic affiliation: Connecticut (.69), Massachusetts
(.67), Maryland (.67), and New Jersey (.68).

[Insert Table 2]
B. Social Distancing and Mask Wearing Behaviors
Since the primary objective of the study is understanding the determinants of social
distancing and mask-wearing behaviors, we collect the various proxies of social distancing
collected.

Proxies of Social Distancing. We collect data on social distancing and mask-wearing
behaviors. We rely on four different proxy measures of social distancing: (1) a quantitative
measure of the days outside of one’s home in the past week, (2) whether one left one’s home,
(3) whether one maintained at least six feet of distance, and (4) a quantitative measure of nonessential reasons for leaving one’s home. We measure the number of days one indicated

10

The risk aversion index, based on the switching point, is measured from 1 to 10 (1 indicates a very risk averse respondent;
10 a very risk-tolerant respondent).

7

having been outside of one’s home based on the following question: “during the past seven
days, how many days did you leave home?” We quantify this variable using a 7-point scale; 7
indicates that a person left the house every day in the past seven days. We measure whether
one left one’s home the day prior to taking the survey with a binary indicator, set to 1 if the
person indicated they left the house.11 We measure whether one maintained two meters (or six
feet) from other people also based on a binary variable, set to 1 if the person did not maintain
at least six feet from other people. Our final proxy measures the number of non-essential
outings outside of the house.
Based on these four variables, we created an aggregated social distancing index which
was generated based on a principle component procedure. The social distancing index is
continuous and negatively coded (i.e., an increase in the index denotes less social distancing).
Although we report information on how factors correlate with the primary index, we also
report analyses based on the distinct proxy indicators of social distancing discussed above.
We report, in Table 3, how these proxies of social distancing (measured at the
baseline12) vary by socio-economic characteristics.

[Insert Table 3]

We detect some differences by race for two specific proxies of social distancing.
African Americans report a higher number of non-essential outings per week than Caucasians,
although Caucasians leave the house significantly more days per week than African
Americans, 3.22 and 0.21 days, respectively. Despite the difference in the specific measures,
the overall social distancing index is very similar for both ethnicities at 0.07 for Caucasians
and 0.08 for African Americans.

11

For the variable “did not stay home,” we used the following survey question: “In the past week, I stayed at home”. Survey
respondents responded on a scale from 0 to 100 (in increments of 10) with 0 indicating “does not apply at all” and 100 indicating
“applies very much,” with values of 100 indicating complete adherence (=1 for the binary indicator) on this proxy measure.
For the variable “did not maintain six feet,” we used the following question: “In the past week, I kept a distance of at least two
meters (six feet) to other people.” Values of 100 (out of a scale from 0 to 100) indicated completed adherence to the six-feet
rule and were set to 1 for the binary indicator for this proxy measure. The number of non-essential outings was based on survey
responses for the following question: “What are reasons for you to leave your home (select all that apply)?” Respondents could
select among 13 choices regarding reasons to leave the home spanning from going to work and exercising to getting bored and
exercising their freedom. We classified the following responses as “non-essential” reasons: getting tired of being inside the
home, getting bored, getting adrenaline (from breaking the law), and exercising my freedom. The continuous measure can take
on values up to 4.
12
The baseline survey was collected prior to the Black Lives Matter protests, which started the last week of May 2020.

8

Proxies of Mask-Wearing. We also collected information on mask-wearing. We
measure mask-wearing behaviors with two binary indicators. The first indicator measures
whether a person wears a mask (or personal protective equipment) at all times outside of the
home or not. The second indicator measures whether a person reported wearing a mask or
personal protective equipment (PPE) when conducting daily business, shopping, or running
errands.13 Although the two indicators are related, the second indicator captures behaviors
when a person wears a mask only when conducting essential activities and not necessarily
wearing it at all times.
Table 4 reports descriptive analysis on mask-wearing behaviors by demographic
characteristics: Caucasians tend to wear masks more frequently than African Americans in
our sample when accounting for both daily use and use when shopping. However, over the
two weeks (between the baseline and the second follow-up wave), African Americans
indicated a considerably higher increase in mask usage than the change in mask-wearing
behaviors among Caucasians. 14

[Insert Table 4]

The results reported in Tables 3 and 4 show that Republicans in our sample tend to
adopt social distancing significantly less than Democrats or Independents. Individuals who
self-identify as Republican, and relative to individuals who self-identify with other political
parties, report lower mask-wearing (both on the daily measure and when shopping). These
results are consistent with a recent report based on observational data from Allcott et al.
(2020). Average social distancing (based on the comprehensive index) increases with
education level. Individuals with a high school diploma only social distance less, whereas
individuals with a graduate school degree report social distancing at higher rates. Notably, this

13

The two mask-wearing binary indicators were based on two survey questions. The first question was based on a survey
question “When I leave my home, I use personal protective equipment.” Individuals indicating complete adherence (responses
=100) were coded as wearing a mask. The second question was based on the following question “Under which circumstances
do you use any personal protective equipment (PPE) (such as face mask and gloves)?” When the respondent selected the option
“Daily business for example shopping, mailing, pharmacy”, the indicator for mask-wearing when shopping was set to 1, and 0
otherwise. Data for this indicator was only available during the baseline week as participants were not asked the same question
in the follow-up surveys. As a result, we are unable to subsequent behavior changes for this question only.
14
Our sample based on changes in the variables is smaller due to attrition of subjects.

9

pattern among education groups does not align with the adoption of mask-wearing; graduate
degree holders tend to wear masks the least.15 We return to the issue of other correlates of
social distancing and mask-wearing, once we account for other individual-level factors, such
as individual economic preferences.
C. Survey Data of Economic Preferences
We also collect rich information on an array of economic preferences variables, such as
risk preferences, time preferences, social preferences, hyperbolic time-inconsistent behavior,
and the tendency to exhibit exponential growth bias.

Time Preferences. Given the conceptual link between economic models on health
investments and time preferences, we elicit respondents’ time preferences. As is common in the
related literature, we measure time preferences by asking participants to choose either a smaller
amount of monetary compensation sooner or a larger amount in the future (Tversky and
Kahneman 1986; Benzion et al., 1989; Shelley 1993, Ashraf et al., 2006).16
We use two distinct staircase procedures.17 The procedure presented the same
questions for two assessments, with one presented in the near frame and one in the distant
temporal frame. For the near-frame question, we elicit the respondent’s willingness to choose
the smaller reward immediately versus receiving a larger reward in 12 months. Participants
were asked to choose either $160 today or $246 in twelve months. If they chose the smaller
amount today, the next question would offer them the same amount today ($160), but an
amount higher than $246 in 12 months. If they chose $246 in 12 months, the next question
offers them the same amount today ($160), and an amount smaller than $246 in 12 months.
The participant responds to a maximum of five questions, and each time their future payoff is
adjusted based on earlier responses. The respondent is then asked the same initial question
regarding a future time frame (12 months versus 24 months but with the same monetary
rewards) to identify time-preference reversals. Based on the multiple time-preference
questions, we created a continuous index from 0 to 32, with increasing numbers indicating
15

A recent Gallup poll contradicts this pattern and finds that college graduates tend to wear masks more compared to individuals
without a college degree (Brenan, 2020).
16
Anderson et al. (2002) and Frederik et al. (2002) review elicitation methods for time preferences.
17
The procedures used was based on Falk et al. (2016) and Holzmeister (2017). The staircase procedure streamlines the
elicitation process by requiring considerably fewer questions, in contrast to MPL elicitations.

10

higher patience (32 on the index denoted extreme tendency to delay gratification and
preference for the delayed reward). If an individual chooses to take a smaller amount of
money today for the first question, we define them as impatient in the near frame (with the
same process repeated in the distant frame). To do so, we use binary indicators based on nearframe questions. Specifically, we denote individuals as “very patient” (set to 1) if they have a
score of 32 on the preference index. We use a binary indicator to denote individuals as “very
impatient” (the binary indicator is set to 1) if the individual has a score of 1 on the preference
index).
Based on the time-preference indices of the near and distant frames, we can also
observe time-inconsistent choices. We define a participant to be “hyperbolic timeinconsistent” based on the choice of the immediate reward in the near-term frame combined
with the choice of the delayed reward in the distant frame since the implied discount rate in
the near-term frame is higher than that of the distant frame. We also identify inconsistencies
in the other direction, where individuals are patient now but in 12 months are not willing to
wait; we refer to these as individuals as “patient now and impatient later.”18
Risk Preferences. We elicit risk tolerance based on an incentivized risk elicitation
task, the multiple price list (MPL), based on Holt and Laury (2002)19. In such activity,
participants are prompted with two options, Option A and Option B, with Option B being
“riskier.”20 The individual chooses which option they prefer. When the probability associated
with the high payoffs increases sufficiently (as the individual moves down the table), a riskaverse person should cross over to Option B. We use this switching point to Option B to
quantify one’s risk tolerance—participants with a higher risk-tolerance switch at lower

18

Individuals are defined as time-inconsistent if their switching row value is lower in the near frame than in the far frame
(indicating they are more patient in the near frame than in the far frame).
19
Charness et al. (2013) reviews limitations of non-incentivized tasks for risk-preference elicitations.
20
In the MPL, participants are presented with two lists of options: Option A and Option B. Each option represents a gamble:
Option A offers 1/10 a chance of winning $2 and 9/10 chance of winning $1.60 while Option B offers 1/10 chance of winning
$3.85 and 9/10 chance of winning $0.10. The participants marked which of the two options they would prefer, with Option B
indicating an individual with a higher tolerance for risk. The questions continue with the chances of winning the higher dollar
value in both rising until a 100% chance is offered for winning both $2 and $3.85 in Option A and B respectively. The question
at which the player switches from Option A to Option B is denoted as their switching row.

11

switching row values. In contrast, more risk-averse participants tend to switch at higher
switching row values.21

Objective COVID-19 Mortality Risk and Perceived Mortality Risks. We elicited
subjective assessments of mortality risks associated with COVID-19. Quantifying perceptions
of risk related to COVID-19 is difficult, especially with young respondents. Valuable
summaries of methods for eliciting expectations for a range of outcomes can be found in
Manski (2004) and Delavande, Gine, and McKenzie (2008). Therefore, in this survey, we
only elicited risk perceptions based on simple questions about the perceived risk of mortality
related to COVID-19. Individuals were prompted to provide a subjective assessment
regarding the fatality rate of COVID-19. Specifically, each respondent reported a subjective
estimate for a hypothetical set of 1000 individuals in their county of residence who are
infected with COVID-19. We use this proxy measure to serve as a subjective assessment of
the so-called case fatality rate (CFR), measuring the severity of a disease. The CFR is the
proportion of people who die from a specified disease among all individuals diagnosed with
the disease over a certain period.
These simple questions eliciting the subjective assessment of the CFR rate have
several evident and significant limitations. They are not precise in specifying the meaning of
“expected.” The measure does not elicit uncertainty. The questions also deal with an abstract
and hypothetical situation.
Based on data obtained from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC),
we also collect data on the objective risk, capturing the weekly CFR rate at the county level.
This data is merged with our longitudinal panel survey based on the county of residence of
each respondent.
We also calculate the difference between the subjective perception and the objective
risk, a measure which we call subjective misperception (positive values indicate overperception of the CFR rate; negative values indicate under-perception of the CFR rate). In
summary, the misperception measure indicates whether personal subjective assessment about
the mortality risk considerably deviates from the objective risk data related to COVID-19.
21

The elicitation method is complex for some participants as noted in Dave et al. (2010) and Holt and Laury (2002). Therefore,
some participants switched more than once between the two options. We address this issue following the approach in Engel
and Kirchkamp (2016).

12

Social Preferences. We also collect data on two proxies of social preferences: positive
reciprocity and altruism.22 Positive reciprocity is the tendency for an individual who receives
a positive benefit from an action to reciprocate with an action that has at least an equal
amount of complimentary benefit (Suranovic, 2001).23 We proxy positive reciprocity with two
measures, a quantitative and a qualitative measure. The qualitative question asks individuals
to self-reflect on how much the following statement applies to them: ‘When someone does me
a favor, I am willing to return it.” The quantitative question poses a hypothetical scenario in
which the participant is in an area they do not know and their phone is about to run out of
battery. The participant is then prompted to indicate the monetary value of a gift they would
be willing to gift to a hypothetical stranger who presented them with a charging cable worth
$40.
We also collect data on proxies of altruism, the concept of one’s capacity for
unconditional kindness. Altruism does not reflect reciprocity in response to someone else’s
altruism (Fehr and Gächter, 2000). We proxy altruism with a qualitative survey question;
respondents were asked to self-reflect on how much the following statement applies to them:
“How willing are you to give to good causes without expecting anything in return?”24

Exponential Growth Bias. Exponential growth bias (EGB) is the tendency of people
to exhibit a perceptual bias to underestimate exponential growth. The phenomenon refers to
peoples’ tendency to linearize exponential growth. Individuals who exhibit EGB
underestimate the future value of a variable growing at a constant rate. Previous economics
studies explore the importance of this phenomenon for savings decisions and for
underestimating exponential growth due to compound interest (i.e., a person who exhibits
EGB underestimates the returns to savings and the costs of holding debt).25 Because people
who exhibit EGB underestimate the speed at which the spread of the epidemic grows, we
22

Social preferences were elicited based on the procedures adopted by Falk et al. (2016).
We also measure negative reciprocity. Positive and negative reciprocity are weakly correlated (Dohmen et al., 2008).
24
We collect information based on the following question: “Today you unexpectedly received 1,600 U.S.dollars. How much
of this amount would you donate to a good cause?”
25
Starting with Stango and Zinman (2009), several studies find evidence of exponential growth bias (EGB) in financial
decisions based on laboratory or field experiments. Levy and Tasoff (2015) document that EGB can lead to under-saving for
retirement. Other studies document the existence of this bias in numerous settings (Wagenaar and Sagaria 1975; Wagenaar and
Timmers 1979; Keren 1983; Benzion, Granot and Yagil 1992; Eisenstein and Hoch 2007; Almenberg and Gerdes 2012). No
empirical evidence exists on the existence of EGB in the context of disease spread.
23

13

collect data to proxy EGB so we can examine whether the magnitude of the EGB is related to
the adoption of social distancing measures.
To proxy the prevalence of exponential growth bias, we ask participants a series of
five questions similar to the approach adopted by Stango and Zinman (2009) and Levy and
Tasoff (2016). Questions covered growth phenomena in several domains: epidemic growth,
population growth, and financial asset growth. In the elicitation method, participants are asked
to calculate the final value given the initial value, growth rate, and period.26 For example, in
the context of financial assets, we asked participants to calculate how much an investment of
a certain amount would be worth after a specified period with a given interest. Similar
questions are asked about the growth of a disease: information is provided about the initial
number of people infected by an infectious disease and the number of new infections in a
specified period (growth rate); participants are prompted to provide their assessment on the
number of total infections within a given timeframe. Among the five questions, three
questions referred to the growth of an amount in a bank account at a given interest rate, and
two questions referred to the growth of a disease spread. Each response is marked as correct
or not. Based on standardized measures from these five binary indicators, we generate a
comprehensive index. We use the aggregated EGB index (higher and more positive values are
associated with a higher tendency for EGB) to examine how it relates to the study outcomes.
Assessment of Cognitive Skills and Personality Traits. We use an abbreviated version
of the Raven’s Progressive Matrices. The Raven test, which consists of non-verbal multiple
choice questions, is recognized as a leading measure of analytic intelligence (Carpenter et al.,
1990; Gray and Thompson, 2004). Each question asks the subjects to identify the missing
element that completes a visual pattern. The test was not incentivized, a method consistent
with the approach adopted in recent psychology studies (Gill and Prowse, 2014).27
We also collected data on the “Big Five” personality traits: openness,
conscientiousness, extraversion, agreeableness, and neuroticism (John and Srivastava,
1999).28 Cobb-Clark and Schurer (2012) show that personality traits can influence economic
decisions.
26

Subjects were not prohibited from using calculators or online tools to help them answer the questions.
The Raven’s cognitive assessment consisted of four tasks with time allocation 120 seconds. Based on the number of correct
answers and the time finished, we generated a variable for the number of correct responses per time taken to complete the task.
28
Openness measures creativity and imagination, conscientiousness measures care and self-discipline, extraversion measures
sociability and energy, agreeableness measures tendency to adhere to social harmony, and neuroticism measures negativity and
27

14

III. Factors Predicting Social Distancing Behaviors

In this Section, we examine the participants’ views on the government’s responses by political
affiliation. For these analyses, we use data from the baseline. We also use the panel feature of
the survey design to examine changes in individual behaviors. Specifically, we analyze
predictors of the social distancing measures, with a particular focus on the economic
preferences and the perception-related variables to predict the decision to adopt social
distancing measures.
A. Views on Government Response by Political Affiliation
We analyze the respondents’ views, by political affiliation, of the government’s
response to COVID-19. Respondents provided their assessment on the reaction of various
levels of the government based on the following question: “Do you think the reaction of the
Federal/State/Local government to the current coronavirus outbreak is appropriate, too
extreme, or not sufficient?” We measure the reaction to the government’s response to
COVID-19, on a scale of one to five, with 1 being “much too extreme” and five being “not
sufficient at all.” Based on the scale used for this question, a response of 3 indicated “the
reaction is appropriate” for all questions.
Table 5 reports the aggregated results. The most favorable views are associated with
the State government’s response. In contrast, the least favorable views relate to how the
Federal government handled the response to the epidemic.

[Insert Table 5]

Political affiliation is a strong predictor of individual views on how various
governmental levels handled the response to the epidemic. Democrats and Independents are

self-doubt (John and Srivastava, 1999). We elicited the traits based on a Likert-style scale using the following prompts: “I see
myself as (trait).” Each trait is related to two survey questions, which then are standardized and used to generate a continuous
index measurement for each trait.

15

more likely to view Federal, State, and Local government responses and the general public’s
response, as not sufficiently aggressive compared to views on the same topic by Republicans.
For example, the average Republican indicates a score of 3.15 relating to the Federal
government response. In contrast, Democrats score 4.54, and Independents score 4.04.
Republicans, compared to individuals who indicate affiliation with the other two groups, view
the Federal government as acting appropriately.29

B. Predictors of Social Distancing

To document the associations between individual characteristics and health behaviors, we
estimate the following regression:

=

where

+

+

+

is a measure of individual i’s social distancing behavior,

characteristics,

is a constant term,

is a vector of individual

is the county of residence fixed effects, and ε is the

error term. We note changes to the set of individual characteristics included in the
specifications as we present the results.30
Demographic Factors. Table 6 reports the relationships between individual characteristics
and various proxies of social distancing behaviors, based on the baseline data. Column (5)
reports the results based on the aggregated social distancing index (higher values on the index
indicate a lower tendency to social distance). We focus on the findings based on the aggregate
social distancing index, as it comprises the four distinct proxies of social distancing (staying
at home, non-essential outings, days outside the home in the past seven days, and the
tendency to maintain at least six feet of distance from others). Columns (6)-(7) report the
results on the two proxies for mask-wearing.

29

These findings are consistent with polls conducted at the same time as our baseline by Pew Research, reporting that 77
percent of Republicans respond favorably to Trump’s responses to the outbreak. In contrast, only 11 percent of Democrats
approve of Trump’s responses (Pew Research Center, 2020).
30
We estimate linear models for continuous variables. For dichotomous variables, we estimate linear probability models.

16

[Insert Table 6]

The results indicate the critical role that individual demographic characteristics play in
influencing social distancing. Of all the variables included in our analyses, demographic
characteristics exert the most considerable influence on social distancing measures. Being
Caucasian, being a Republican, and a higher household income are statistically significant
predictors of and are negatively associated with social distancing. In contrast, being currently
married is associated with higher rates of social distancing. In terms of effect sizes, it is
noteworthy that ethnicity, political affiliation, and household income exert the most
substantial influence on social distancing measures. For example, Caucasians are considerably
less likely to socially distance themselves and wear masks than other ethnicities (significant at
the one percent level). Republicans report lower rates of social distancing, a result significant
at the five percent level, as compared to the group of individuals reporting non-Republican
affiliation.
Marital status and household income are significant correlates of social distancing.
Being married is associated with a higher likelihood for individuals to both have fewer nonessential outings (significant at the five percent level) and wearing a mask when shopping
(significant at the five percent level). This pattern is likely related to lower demand for social
contacts as married people already have more social contacts due to having a partner present
within the home. Unmarried individuals may feel a greater inclination to leave home to get
interaction not received inside the household. We find that those who have higher earnings are
more likely to leave the house more frequently and participate in non-essential outings
(significant at the five percent and one percent level, respectively).
Demographic characteristics also influence mask-wearing. Age and being female exert
a positive effect on the tendency to wear a mask. Being Caucasian is negatively associated
with the tendency to wear a mask. When we compare the results in Columns (5) and (7), we
note a pattern: groups (ethnicity, gender, marital status, and political affiliation) that report
higher mask-wearing also report lower social distancing tendencies.
We do not detect a consistent effect of educational attainment on social distancing or
mask-wearing. The continuously defined education variable negatively affects mask-wearing.
However, the binary indicator for a college education has a positive effect on mask-wearing
17

(imprecisely estimated) and a positive effect on mask-wearing when shopping (significant at
the five percent level).31 We do not detect any statistically significant effect of the cognitive
performance task on the social-distancing measures or mask-wearing.32

Economic Preference Parameters. Among the economic preference factors, we find that risk
aversion is a strong predictor of social distancing and mask-wearing. The findings in Column
(5) of Table 6 show that more risk-averse people socially distance more. Specifically, more
risk-averse people are also less likely to leave the house less and report more days outside the
home (both are significant at the one percent level). This pattern is consistent with recent
economic studies, which also document that higher risk aversion reduces the incidence of
risky health behaviors, such as cigarette smoking, heavy drinking, obesity, and seat-belt use
(Anderson and Miller, 2008; de Oliveira et al., 2016).
We find no evidence of time preference influencing social distancing measures.
However, we find a surprising relationship: people with lower willingness to delay
gratification (i.e., higher impatience) exhibit a higher tendency to wear a mask, controlling for
other factors. A similar pattern is documented by Scharff and Viscusi (2011) in the context of
time discounting and smoking status. Scharff & Viscusi (2011) find that current smokers have
a higher implied rate of time preference than nonsmokers. Chapman (2005) argues that the
strength and the direction of the association between better health behaviors and time
discounting depend critically on the specific preventive health behavior.33
We find strong evidence that personality traits are significant predictors of social
distancing measures. The three most crucial traits for more social distancing are higher
positive reciprocity, higher openness, and being more agreeable.34

31

Cutler and Lleras-Muney (2010) find a large and persistent positive association between education and health. They find that
the positive effect of education increases with increasing years of education, with no evidence of a sheepskin effect.
32
Bijwaard et al. (2016) examine the importance of cognitive skills for health outcomes. The study finds that for most ages,
cognitive ability explains around half of the raw differences in health outcomes (mortality) across educational groups.
33
Based on a meta-analysis study, Chapman (2005) shows that ‘hot’ or addictive health behaviors such as smoking, are more
likely to associated with time preference than ‘cold’ behaviors such as vaccination. Other prevention behaviors designed to
prevent cervical and breast cancer are associated with individuals with higher life expectancy, lower time preference, and more
risk aversion (Picone et al. 2004).
34
Bogg & Roberts (2004) find that individuals who are conscientious engage in less risky health-behaviors. Other studies (Post,
2005; Borgonovi, 2008) also find a positive correlation between higher altruism and better health outcomes. Bessey (2018)
finds that agreeableness is negatively related to the probability of drinking and engaging in physical activity. Brummett et al.,
(2006) finds that personality traits are a significant predictor of BMI; the study finds that extraversion, neuroticism, and
conscientiousness determine weight gain in adulthood.

18

The Role of Misperception. We examine the possibility that exponential growth bias (EGB)
could influence social distancing behavior. Specifically, we regress the proxies of social
distancing on the exponential growth bias index, controlling for all other socio-economic
characteristics and economic preference factors. On the aggregate social distancing index,
people who misunderstand exponential growth (i.e., exhibit higher exponential growth bias)
report a lower tendency to social distance. Specifically, higher EGB strongly predicts the
number of days one leaves the house per week. EGB influences the other proxies of social
distancing (in Table 6), but the effect size estimates are imprecise. Given the importance of
EGB in predicting social distancing outcomes, we return to examining what factors predict
the presence of EGB itself.
We collect detailed information on the CFR (as defined in Section II.C) associated
with COVID-19 at the county level. Therefore, we can conduct additional analyses on
people’s subjective assessments of the disease risk associated with this dimension of the
disease. The average CFR for counties associated with the place of residence for people in our
sample and at the time of the baseline (i.e., the last week of May 2020) is 0.06. This rate
mirrors the average rate for the United States during the last week of May (European Centre
for Disease Prevention and Control, 2020).
Using data from the panel survey, we examine the accuracy of the respondents’
assessment regarding the CFR in their county of residence. Despite the limitations of the
measures of the subjective assessment of the CFR, it is worth exploring whether they predict
social distancing decisions. The average subjective assessment of the CFR, associated with
the respondent’s county of residence in our sample, is 0.07 (slightly higher than the average
objective county-level CFR for the counties of the individuals in our sample). In contrast, the
median subjective assessment is 0.03. These numbers imply that a considerable number of
respondents underestimate the risks associated with COVID-19 (67 percent of the sample
reports a subjective assessment that is lower than the objective CFR in their county of
residence) and that a small fraction overstates the risks by a lot.
We examine how the accuracy of risk perception associated with COVID-19 predicts
social distancing behavior. Table 6 reports the results. We do not detect statistically
significant effects on the aggregate social distancing index, based on the percent definition of
the risk misperception variable. Based on the same specifications, we also conduct additional
19

analyses based on binary definitions for subgroups with wildly inaccurate misperceptions
(i.e., more than 10 percent difference from the objective CFR). Results, based on these
subgroups, are suggestive of negative effects on the aggregate social distancing index, but
they are not statistically significant at conventional levels. Table 6 (Column 6) also reports the
results for the mask-wearing outcome: the results show that individuals who misperceive the
CFR risk associated with COVID-19 are considerably less likely to wear a mask.

Predictors to Changes of Own Behavior. Because we rely on longitudinal data from the same
people, we can also examine whether any variables predict changes to individual behavior. An
important caveat to this analysis is that it relies on a limited time-period (three weeks) and
fewer observations due to some panel attrition. On the other hand, examining longitudinal
differences can be useful for policies that aim at influencing changes to behavior. Table 7
reports the findings of this analysis.

[Insert Table 7]

We find that six factors are significant predictors of changes to one’s behavior regarding
social distancing. Specifically, being currently married, being Caucasian, intense COVID-19
fears35, living in a more densely populated county, higher cognitive performance, and being
more agreeable36 (the Big Five index) are important drivers of changes in social distancing
outcomes.

C. Determinants of Risk Misperception and Exponential Growth Bias

35

We constructed a COVID-19 fear indicator as a binary measure. The variable is based on the respondent indicating that
he/she worries on daily to the following question: “How frequently have you feared being infected with COVID-19 in the past
month?”
36
This finding is consistent with a meta-analysis study, conducted by Kline et al. (2019), showing that agreeableness is a
consistent and significant predictor of increased prosocial behavior.

20

As we noted earlier, the two perception variables, risk misperception and EGB, predict
social distancing or mask-wearing. Therefore, we examine the drivers of the EGB and risk
misperception. A better understanding of the predictors of these two phenomena will shed
light on mechanisms that will help the design of policies geared towards reducing EGB and
risk misperception. Tables 8 and 9 report the findings.
The strongest predictors of individual misperceptions relate to gender, ethnicity,
political affiliation, population density, and concerns about their health. We find that females
are more likely to overstate the risk of COVID-19 (related to the CFR measure defined in
Section II). Caucasians and people who reported Republican affiliation exhibit lower risk
perception (significant at the one percent level). The same two demographic groups are not
only the ones reporting lower subjective risk perception, but also the ones considerably
understating the COVID-19 risk in areas where the COVID-19 risks (associated with the
CFR) are objectively much higher than the subjective assessments.

[Insert Table 8] [Insert Table 9]

Exponential growth bias is best predicted by age, gender, schooling, cognitive skills,
and neuroticism. In terms of the effect size estimates related to the predictors, gender,
cognitive score, and schooling exert the largest effect on the EGB. Older individuals, being
female, and the neuroticism trait positively predict EGB. In contrast, higher educational
attainment, better cognitive performance, and higher earnings considerably reduce the
magnitude of EGB.37 Although not reported here, a related online field experiment examines
the role informational provision can play in influencing EGB and subsequent behaviors.

IV. Concluding Remarks
Understanding the determinants of what influences preventive measures against the
COVID-19 virus is paramount for effective policies to be successful in encouraging people to
adopt social distancing measures and mask-wearing. Absent a vaccine, the best we can do is
structure policy aimed at those failing to adhere to preventive health measures to curb the
37

It is noteworthy that the EGB measure is also highly correlated with higher risk aversion and higher patience (time preference
index).

21

spread of COVID-19. However, if people do not have the incentives to do so on their own, the
implementation of policies or mandates are unlikely to succeed. To this end, we note several
important lessons from the preliminary analysis based on the panel data from participants in
our study.
First, the key drivers of social distancing measures are demographic ones, even when
we control for numerous other factors. Of all the variables included in our analyses,
demographic characteristics exert the most considerable influence on social distancing
measures. Being Caucasian, being a Republican, and higher household income are statistically
significant predictors of lower rates of social distancing. In contrast, being currently married
is positively associated with higher rates of social distancing.
The importance of demographic variables for influencing social distancing is
somewhat puzzling. They may account for critical, unobservable characteristics that are hard
to measure. For example, the demographic characteristics may pick up mechanisms related to
how well-informed individual decision-makers are, or how information about the virus, the
risks associated with, or about the effectiveness of social distancing measures gets shared
across social networks. On the other hand, it is also possible that the decision to adopt social
distancing is much more related to demographic characteristics or political affiliation due to
the enormous politicization of the issue.
Second, and based on the longitudinal data collected between the follow-up surveys
and the baseline data, it seems that demographic factors are also some of the factors that can
explain changes among individuals who reported changes in their behaviors. Based on our
analyses, females, currently married people, and people living in densely populated areas are
especially prone to change their social distancing behaviors. Knowledge of what demographic
groups are more prone to making changes to their social distancing and mask-wearing can be
enormously beneficial from a policy targeting perceptive.
Finally, we document the importance of two factors that are especially prone to
information barriers, and that can also influence social distancing behaviors: risk
misperception and exponential growth bias. Highlighting the role these factors play on
influencing behaviors underscores the potential use for policies geared towards correcting
these perception biases.

22

Policies that target demographic groups known to understate the risks associated with
COVID-19 or misinterpreting the speed at which it spreads can be effective.38 The findings
from this study are informative for crafting such policies. Notwithstanding some limitations,
the present study offers additional direct evidence on what demographic groups could be
particularly suitable for such interventions.

38

Lammers et al. (2020) discuss the effectiveness of such policies.

23

References
Alemberg, Johan, and Christer Gerdes. 2012. “Exponential Growth Bias and Financial
Literacy.” Applied Economics Letters 19 (March): 1693–1696.
https://doi.org/10.1080/13504851.2011.652772.
Allcott, Hunt, Levi Boxell, Jacob Conway, Matthew Gentzkow, Michael Thaler, and David
Yang. 2020. “Polarization and Public Health: Partisan Differences in Social Distancing
during the Coronavirus Pandemic.” NBER Working Paper No. 26946, August.
https://doi.org/10.3386/w26946.
Anderson, Lisa R., and Jennifer M. Mellor. 2008. “Predicting Health Behaviors with an
Experimental Measure of Risk Preference.” Journal of Health Economics 27 (5): 1260–
74. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2008.05.011.
Angeletos, George-Marios, David Laibson, Andrea Repetto, Jeremy Tobacman, and Stephen
Weinberg. 2001. “The Hyperbolic Consumption Model: Calibration, Simulation, and
Empirical Evaluation.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 15 (3): 47–68.
https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.15.3.47.
Ashraf, Nava, Dean Karlan, and Wesley Yin. 2006. “Tying Odysseus to the Mast: Evidence
From a Commitment Savings Product in the Phillipines.” The Quartely Journal of
Economics 121 (2): 635–672. https://doi.org/10.1162/qjec.2006.121.2.635.
Benzion, Uri, Alon Granot, and Joseph Yagil. 1992. “The Valuation of the Exponential
Function and Implications for Derived Interest Rates.” Economics Letters 38 (3): 299–
303. https://doi.org/10.1016/0165-1765(92)90074-9.
Benzion, Uri, Ammom Rapoport, and Joseph Yagil. 1989. “Discount Rates Inferred from
Decisions: An Experimental Study.” Management Science 25: 270–284.
Bessey, Donata. 2018. “Preferences, Personality and Health Behaviors: Results from an
Explorative Economic Experiment.” International Journal of Health Economics and
Management 18 (4): 437–56. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10754-018-9236-1.
Bicchieri, Cristina. 2016. Norms in the Wild: How to Diagnose, Measure, and Change Social
Norms. Oxford University Press.
Bijwaard, Govert E., Hans van Kippersluis, and Justus Veenman. 2015. “Education and
Health: The Role of Cognitive Ability.” Journal of Health Economics 42 (July): 29–43.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2015.03.003.
Bijwaard, Govert, and Hans Van Kippen. 2016. “Efficieny of Health Investment: Education
or Intelligence?” Health Economics, 1056–1072. https://doi.org/10.1002/hec.3356.
Bogg, Tim, and Brent W. Roberts. 2004. “Conscientiousness and Health-Related Behaviors:
A Meta-Analysis of the Leading Behavioral Contributors to Mortality.” Psychological
Bulletin 130 (6): 887–919. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.130.6.887.
Borgonovi, Francesca. 2008. “Doing Well by Doing Good. The Relationship between Formal
Volunteering and Self-Reported Health and Happiness.” Social Science & Medicine 66
(11): 2321–34. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2008.01.011.

24

Brenan, Megan. 2020. Americans’ Face Mask Usage Varies Greatly by Demographics.
Gallup. https://news.gallup.com/poll/315590/americans-face-mask-usage-varies-greatlydemographics.aspx.
Brock, William A., and Steven N. Durlauf. 2001. “Discrete Choice with Social Interactions.”
The Review of Economic Studies 68 (2): 235–60. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467937X.00168.
Brummett, Beverly H., Michael A. Babyak, Redford B. Williams, John C. Barefoot, Paul T.
Costa, and Ilene C. Siegler. 2006. “NEO Personality Domains and Gender Predict Levels
and Trends in Body Mass Index over 14 Years during Midlife.” Journal of Research in
Personality 40 (3): 222–36. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrp.2004.12.002.
Carlsson, Fredrik, Olof Johansson-Stenman, and Pham Khanh Nam. 2014. “Social
Preferences Are Stable over Long Periods of Time.” Journal of Public Economics 117
(September): 104–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2014.05.009.
Carpenter, Patricia, Marcel Just, and Peter Shell. 1990. “What One Intelligence Test
Measures: A Theoretical Account of the Processing in the Raven Progressive Matrices
Test.” Psychological Review 97 (3): 404–431. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033295X.97.3.404.
CDC. 2020. Geographic Differences in COVID-19 Cases, Deaths, and Incidents. Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention.
https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/69/wr/mm6915e4.htm.
CDCb. 2020. Social Distancing. https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-gettingsick/social-distancing.html.
Chapman, Benjamin P. 2009. “Can the Influence of Childhood SES on Men and Women’s
Adult Body Mass Be Explained by Adult SES or Personality? Findings From a National
Sample.” Health Psychology : Official Journal of the Division of Health Psychology,
American Psychological Association 28 (4): 419–27. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0015212.
Chapman, Gretchen B. 2005. “Short-Term Cost for Long-Term Benefit: Time Preference and
Cancer Control.” Health Psychology, Basic and Applied Decision Making in Cancer
Control, 24 (4, Suppl): S41–48. https://doi.org/10.1037/0278-6133.24.4.S41.
Charness, Gary, Uri Gneezy, and Alex Imas. 2013. “Experimental Methods: Eliciting Risk
Preferences.” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 87 (March): 43–51.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jebo.2012.12.023.
Chen, Daniel L., Martin Schonger, and Chris Wickens. 2016. “OTree—An Open-Source
Platform for Laboratory, Online, and Field Experiments.” Journal of Behavioral and
Experimental Finance 9 (March): 88–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbef.2015.12.001.
Chuang, Yating, and Laura Schechter. 2015. “Stability of Experimental and Survey Measures
of Risk, Time, and Social Preferences: A Review and Some New Results.” Journal of
Development Economics 117 (November): 151–70.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jdeveco.2015.07.008.

25

Cobb-Clark, Deborah A., and Stefanie Schurer. 2012. “The Stability of Big-Five Personality
Traits.” Economics Letters 115 (1): 11–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.econlet.2011.11.015.
Cutler, David M., and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2010. “Understanding Differences in Health
Behaviors by Education.” Journal of Health Economics 29 (1): 1–28.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2009.10.003.
Dave, Chetan, Catherine Eckel, Cathleen Johnson, and Christian Rojas. 2010. “Eliciting Risk
Preferences: When Is Simple Better?” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 41 (3): 219–243.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11166-010-9103-z.
Delavande, Adeline, Xavier Giné, and David McKenzie. 2011. “Measuring Subjective
Expectations in Developing Countries: A Critical Review and New Evidence.” Journal
of Development Economics 94 (2): 151–63.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jdeveco.2010.01.008.
Dohmen, Thomas, Armin Falk, David Huffman, and Uwe Sunde. 2008. “Representative Trust
and Reciprocity: Prevalence and Determinants.” Economic Inquiry 46 (1).
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1465-7295.2007.00082.x.
Dohmen, Thomas, Hartmut Lehmann, and Norberto Pignatti. 2016. “Time-Varying Individual
Risk Attitudes over the Great Recession: A Comparison of Germany and Ukraine.”
Journal of Comparative Economics, Ukraine\: Escape from Post-Soviet Legacy, 44 (1):
182–200. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jce.2015.10.002.
Dupas, Pascaline. 2011. “Health Behavior in Developing Countries.” Annual Review of
Economics 3 (1): 425–49. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-economics-111809-125029.
Eisenstein, Eric, and Stephen Hoch. 2007. “Intuitive Compounding: Framing, Temporal
Perspective, and Expertise (No. Cornell University, Mimeo).” Cornell University, Ithaca,
NY, December.
Engel, Christoph, and Oliver Kirchkamp. 2016. “Risk and Punishment Revisited. Errors in
Variables and in the Lab.” Jena Economic Research Papers, no. 11.
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2808363.
European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. 2020. “Mortality Risk of COVID-19 Statistics and Research.” Mortality Risk of COVID-19. September 10, 2020.
https://ourworldindata.org/mortality-risk-covid.
Falk, Armin, Anke Becker, Thomas Dohmen, David B. Huffman, and Uwe Sunde. 2016.
“The Preference Survey Module: A Validated Instrument for Measuring Risk, Time, and
Social Preferences.” IZA DP No. 9674. Bonn, Germany: IZA Institute of Labor
Economics. https://www.iza.org/publications/dp/9674/the-preference-survey-module-avalidated-instrument-for-measuring-risk-time-and-social-preferences.
Fehr, Ernst, and Simon Gächter. 2000. “Fairness and Retaliation: The Economics of
Reciprocity.” Nal of Economic Perspectives 14 (3): 159–181.
https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.14.3.159.

26

Foltice, Bryan, and Thomas Langer. 2017. “In Equations We Trust? Formula Knowledge
Effects on the Exponential Growth Bias in Household Finance Decisions.” Decision
Analysis 14 (3): 170–86. https://doi.org/10.1287/deca.2017.0351.
Frederick, Shane, George Loewenstein, and Ted O’Donoghue. 2002. “Time Discounting and
Time Preference: A Critical Review.” Journal of Economic Literature 40 (2): 351–401.
Gill, David, and Victoria Prowse. 2014. “Cognitive Ability, Character Skills, and Learning to
Play Equilibrium: A Level-K Analysis.” Journal of Political Economy 124 (6): 1619–
1676.
Granot, Alon, and Joseph Yagil. 1992. “The Valuation of the Exponential Function and
Implications for Derived Interest Rates.” Economics Letters 3: 299–303.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0165-1765(92)90074-9.
Gray, Jeremy, and Paul Thompson. 2004. “Neurobiology of Intelligence:” Nature Reviews
Neuroscience 5 (6): 471–482. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn1405.
Grossman, Michael. 1972. “On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health.”
Journal of Political Economy, no. 80: 223–255. https://doi.org/10.1086/259880.
———. 2017. The Demand for Health: A Theoretical and Empirical Investigation. New
York, NY: Columbia University Press.
Holt, Charles, and Susan Laury. 2002. “Risk and Punishment Revisited. Errors in Variables
and in the Lab.” American Economic Review 92 (5): 1644–1655.
https://doi.org/10.1257/000282802762024700.
Holzmeister, Felix. 2017. “OTree: Ready-Made Apps for Risk Preference Elicitation
Methods.” Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Finance 16 (December): 33–38.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbef.2017.08.003.
John, O.P., and S. Srivastava. 1999. “The Big-Five Trait Taxonomy: History, Measurement,
and Theoretical Perspectives.” In Handbook of Personality: Theory and Research, edited
by L.A. Pervin and O.P. John, 2:102–138. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Keren, G. 1983. “Cultural Differences in the Misperception of Exponential Growth.”
Perception & Psychophysics 34: 289–293. https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03202958.
Kline, Reuben, this link will open in a new window Link to external site, Alexa Bankert,
Lindsey Levitan, and Patrick Kraft. 2019. “Personality and Prosocial Behavior: A
Multilevel Meta-Analysis.” Political Science Research and Methods; Cambridge 7 (1):
125. http://dx.doi.org.proxy.binghamton.edu/10.1017/psrm.2017.14.
Laibson, David. 1997. “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting.” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 112 (2): 443–78. https://doi.org/10.1162/003355397555253.
Lammers, Joris, Jan Crusius, and Anne Gast. 2020. “Correcting Misperceptions of
Exponential Coronavirus Growth Increases Support for Social Distancing.” National
Academy of Sciences 117 (28). https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2006048117.
Levy, Matthew, and Joshua Tasoff. 2016. “Exponential-Growth Bias and Lifecycle
Consumption.” Journal of the European Economic Association 14: 545–583.
https://doi.org/10.1111/jeea.12149.
27

Manski, Charles F. 2004. “Measuring Expectations.” Econometrica 72 (5): 1329–76.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0262.2004.00537.x.
Meier, Stephan, and Charles D. Sprenger. 2014. “Temporal Stability of Time Preferences.”
The Review of Economics and Statistics 97 (2): 273–86.
https://doi.org/10.1162/REST_a_00433.
Nikolov, Plamen. 2018. “Time Delay and Investment Decisions: Evidence from An
Experiment in Tanzania.” Economics Bulletin 38 (2): 1–15.
O’Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin. 1999. “Doing It Now or Later.” American Economic
Review 89 (1): 103–24. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.89.1.103.
Oliveira, Angela C. M. de, Tammy C. M. Leonard, Kerem Shuval, Celette Sugg Skinner,
Catherine Eckel, and James C. Murdoch. 2016. “Economic Preferences and Obesity
among a Low-Income African American Community.” Journal of Economic Behavior &
Organization, Experimental and Behavioral Economics of Healthcare, 131 (November):
196–208. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jebo.2015.11.002.
Pew Research Center. 2020. “Most Americans Say Federal Government Has Primary
Responsibility for COVID-19 Testing.” Most Americans Say Federal Government Has
Primary Responsibility for COVID-19 Testing. May 2020.
https://www.pewresearch.org/politics/2020/05/12/most-americans-say-federalgovernment-has-primary-responsibility-for-covid-19-testing/.
Picone, Gabriel, Frank Sloan, and Donald Taylor. 2004. “Effects of Risk and Time Preference
and Expected Longevity on Demand for Medical Tests.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty
28 (1): 39–53. https://doi.org/10.1023/B:RISK.0000009435.11390.23.
Post, Stephen G. 2005. “Altruism, Happiness, and Health: It’s Good to Be Good.”
International Journal of Behavioral Medicine 12 (2): 66–77.
https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327558ijbm1202_4.
Roberts, Brent W. 2009. “Back to the Future: Personality and Assessment and Personality
Development.” Journal of Research in Personality, Personality and Assessment at Age
40: Reflections on the Past Person–Situation Debate and Emerging Directions of Future
Person-Situation Integration, 43 (2): 137–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrp.2008.12.015.
Saad, Lydia. 2020. Americans Still Social Distancing, but Less Vigilant. Gallup.
https://news.gallup.com/poll/309611/americans-social-distancing-less-vigilant.aspx.
Scharff, Robert L., and W. Kip Viscusi. 2011. “Heterogeneous Rates of Time Preference and
the Decision to Smoke.” Economic Inquiry 49 (4): 959–72.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1465-7295.2009.00191.x.
Shelley, Marjorie K. 1993. “Outcome Signs, Question Frames and Discount Rates.”
Management Science 39 (7): 806–15. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.39.7.806.
Smerdon, David, Theo Offerman, and Uri Gneezy. 2020. “‘Everybody’s Doing It’: On the
Persistence of Bad Social Norms.” Experimental Economics 23 (2): 392–420.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10683-019-09616-z.

28

Stango, Victor, and Jonathan Zinman. 2009. “Exponential Growth Bias and Household
Finance.” The Journal of Finance 64 (6): 2807–49. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.15406261.2009.01518.x.
Strotz, R. H. 1955. “Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility Maximization.” The
Review of Economic Studies 23 (3): 165–80. https://doi.org/10.2307/2295722.
Strulik, Holger, and Trimborn Timo. 2018. “Hyperbolic Discounting Can Be Good for Your
Health.” Journal of Economic Psychology 69 (December): 44–57.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joep.2018.09.007.
Suranovic, Steven. 2001. Positive Reciprocity. International Trade Theory and Policy.
http://internationalecon.com/Trade/Tch125/T125-7.php.
The White House. 2020. “The President’s Coronavirus Guidelines.” Center for Disease
Control and Prevention and The White House. https://www.whitehouse.gov/wpcontent/uploads/2020/03/03.16.20_coronavirus-guidance_8.5x11_315PM.pdf.
Tversky, Anos, and Daniel Kahneman. 1986. “Rational Choice and the Framing of
Decisions.” Journal of Business, 251–278.
Wagenaar, William, and Sabato Sagaria. 1975. “Misperception of Exponential Growth.”
Perception & Psychophysics 18: 416–422.
Wagenaar, William, and Han Timmers. 1979. “The Pond-and-Duckweed Problem : Three
Experiments on the Misperception of Exponential Growth.” Acta Psychologica 43 (3):
239–251. https://doi.org/10.1016/0001- 6918(79)90028-3.

29

Table 1. Summary Statistics

Socioeconomic Characteristics:
Age
Years of Schooling
Four-Year College Graduate (=1 if yes)
Current Full-time Student (=1 if yes)
Caucasian (=1 if yes)
African American (=1 if yes)
Female (=1 if yes)
Currently Married (=1 if yes)
Republican (=1 if yes)
Democrat (=1 if yes)
Currently Employed (=1 if yes)
Household Annual Income (in USD)
Health Statusa
Ever smoked before outbreak (=1 if yes)
Current smoker (=1 if yes)
Alcohol frequency (before outbreak) b
Alcohol currently b
Concern about own health c
COVID-19-related Characteristics:
Likelihood contracting COVID-19 (percent)
Chance of severe symptoms after COVID-19 infection (percent)
Subjective Assessment Case Fatality Rate of COVID-19 (percent)
Subjective Assessment Case Fatality Rate of COVID-19 in own
demographic category (percent)
County of Residence Case Fatality Rate (percent)
Other Characteristics:
Cognitive Score d
Time Preferences Indexe
Risk-Preference Indexf
Patient (=1 if yes)
Impatient (=1 if yes)
Time-Inconsistent (=1 if yes) g

Full Sample
(1)

Women
(2)

Men
(3)

42.40 (19.14)
15.35 (2.42)
0.61 (0.49)
0.09 (0.28)
0.80 (0.40)
0.02 (0.14)
0.79 (0.41)
0.41 (0.49)
0.11 (0.32)
0.60 (0.49)
0.48 (0.50)
115924.00
(75520.69)
4.04 (0.78)
0.27 (0.44)
0.05 (0.23)
1.61 (1.80)
1.75 (2.13)
4.29 (2.65)

44.88 (18.83)
15.53 (2.37)
0.65 (0.48)
0.08 (0.27)
0.82 (0.38)
0.02 (0.14)
0.45 (0.50)
0.11 (0.31)
0.61 (0.49)
0.50 (0.50)
115701.30
(74505.39)
4.02 (0.79)
0.28 (0.45)
0.06 (0.24)
1.59 (1.80)
1.78 (2.16)
4.39 (2.68)

32.99 (17.36)
14.68 (2.46)
0.46 (0.50)
0.12 (0.33)
0.70 (0.46)
0.03 (0.16)
0.24 (0.43)
0.13 (0.33)
0.55 (0.50)
0.42 (0.49)
116768.60
(79453.96)
4.11 (0.75)
0.24 (0.43)
0.04 (0.19)
1.67 (1.79)
1.68 (2.04)
3.89 (2.52)

0.34 (0.26)
0.48 (0.30)
0.08 (0.12)
0.05 (0.11)

0.35 (0.26)
0.51 (0.30)
0.07 (0.12)
0.06 (0.11)

0.30 (0.27)
0.39 (0.30)
0.08 (0.13)
0.04 (0.09)

0.06 (0.03)

0.06 (0.03)

0.06 (0.03)

0.94 (0.48)
20.61 (10.43)
5.10 (2.97)
0.23 (0.42)
0.11 (0.31)
0.25 (0.44)

0.90 (0.45)
20.63 (10.26)
5.01 (3.04)
0.21 (0.41)
0.10 (0.30)
0.25 (0.43)

1.09 (0.54)
20.56 (11.06)
5.47 (2.69)
0.27 (0.45)
0.12 (0.33)
0.27 (0.45)

901

713

188

Observations

Notes: Standard deviations are reported in parenthesis. Behavior outcomes based on baseline wave of survey. (a) Health Status: 1 being “very poor” and 5
being “excellent” (b) Alcohol consumption is the number of days per week in which the respondent reported having a drink (c) Worry about own health:
0=not at all, 10=a lot. (d) Cognitive score is derived based on total possible correct answers (=4) on a Raven’s Matrices test divided by the time allotted to
task (two minutes). (e) Time preference index from 1 (extremely impatient) to 32 (extremely patient) based on a near-frame question. Impatient (=1 if time
preference index is 1). Patient (=1 if time preference index is 32). (f) Risk preference index from 0 (extremely risk tolerant) to 10 (extremely risk averse). (g)
“Time-inconsistent” is defined with respect to two “money” questions: 1) a near-frame question prompting individuals to choose between 160 USD today and
a larger amount of USD in 12 months. 2) a distant-frame question prompting individuals to choose between 160 USD in 12 months and a larger amount of
USD in 24 months. Individuals were identified as “hyperbolic” time-inconsistent if they preferred the immediate reward in the near-term frame combined
with the choice of the delayed reward in the distant frame.

1

Table 2. Summary by Study States

Socioeconomic Characteristics:
Age
Years of Schooling
Four-Year College Graduate (=1 if yes)
Current Full-time Student (=1 if yes)
Caucasian (=1 if yes)
African American (=1 if yes)
Female (=1 if yes)
Currently Married (=1 if yes)
Republican (=1 if yes)
Democrat (=1 if yes)
Currently Employed (=1 if yes)
Household Annual Income (in USD)
Health Statusa
Ever smoked before outbreak (=1 if yes)
Current smoker (=1 if yes)
Alcohol frequency (before outbreak) b
Alcohol currently b
Concern about own health c
Respondents Beliefs Regarding COVID-19:
Likelihood contracting COVID-19 (percent)
Chance of severe symptoms after COVID-19 infection (percent)
Subjective Assessment Case Fatality Rate of COVID-19 (percent)
Subjective Assessment Case Fatality Rate of COVID-19 in own
demographic category (percent)
Other Characteristics:
Cognitive Score d
Time Preferences Indexe
Risk-Preference Indexf
Patient (=1 if yes)
Impatient (=1 if yes)
Time-Inconsistent (=1 if yes) g
Observations

CT
(1)

FL
(2)

MA
(3)

MD
(4)

NJ
(5)

NY
(6)

PA
(7)

50.83 (16.06)
16.31 (2.47)
0.77 (0.42)
0.08 (0.28)
0.92 (0.28)
0.02 (0.14)
0.83 (0.38)
0.46 (0.50)
0.10 (0.31)
0.69 (0.47)
0.54 (0.50)
135572.90
(69975.75)
4.00 (0.88)
0.15 (0.36)
1.63 (1.92)
1.92 (2.24)
4.79 (2.58)

60.29 (11.41)
16.14 (2.05)
0.79 (0.41)
0.95 (0.21)
0.85 (0.36)
0.68 (0.47)
0.18 (0.39)
0.54 (0.50)
0.48 (0.50)
114023.80
(72582.43)
4.01 (0.70)
0.38 (0.49)
0.10 (0.31)
2.10 (2.31)
2.39 (2.49)
4.87 (2.77)

52.51 (15.76)
16.51 (2.21)
0.82 (0.39)
0.94 (0.24)
0.01 (0.12)
0.90 (0.31)
0.55 (0.50)
0.67 (0.47)
0.64 (0.48)
125074.60
(72156.93)
3.97 (0.90)
0.33 (0.47)
0.06 (0.24)
1.93 (2.12)
2.15 (2.35)
4.58 (3.07)

52.17 (14.61)
16.47 (1.74)
0.86 (0.35)
0.02 (0.13)
0.91 (0.28)
0.02 (0.13)
0.90 (0.31)
0.66 (0.48)
0.16 (0.37)
0.67 (0.47)
0.71 (0.46)
144137.90
(68831.97)
4.12 (0.75)
0.22 (0.42)
0.05 (0.22)
1.55 (1.63)
2.29 (2.24)
4.28 (2.66)

47.04 (16.16)
16.15 (2.46)
0.75 (0.44)
0.03 (0.16)
0.84 (0.37)
0.01 (0.11)
0.88 (0.33)
0.59 (0.50)
0.08 (0.27)
0.68 (0.47)
0.58 (0.50)
151062.50
(67088.85)
3.98 (0.76)
0.25 (0.44)
0.04 (0.19)
1.56 (1.73)
1.89 (2.01)
4.76 (2.61)

28.29 (14.13)
14.05 (2.04)
0.36 (0.48)
0.17 (0.38)
0.62 (0.49)
0.04 (0.19)
0.70 (0.46)
0.13 (0.34)
0.09 (0.29)
0.56 (0.50)
0.35 (0.48)
99658.23
(77372.85)
4.09 (0.74)
0.24 (0.43)
0.05 (0.22)
1.43 (1.51)
1.27 (1.79)
3.88 (2.45)

53.70 (13.67)
16.57 (2.17)
0.82 (0.38)
0.02 (0.14)
0.97 (0.16)
0.84 (0.36)
0.67 (0.47)
0.18 (0.39)
0.59 (0.49)
0.61 (0.49)
120118.20
(71450.20)
3.99 (0.86)
0.31 (0.46)
0.05 (0.21)
1.65 (1.96)
2.08 (2.34)
4.43 (2.77)

0.34 (0.23)
0.54 (0.25)
0.05 (0.07)
0.03 (0.04)

0.31 (0.24)
0.60 (0.31)
0.04 (0.06)
0.06 (0.10)

0.37 (0.32)
0.55 (0.33)
0.06 (0.10)
0.07 (0.14)

0.36 (0.26)
0.47 (0.24)
0.04 (0.08)
0.05 (0.14)

0.33 (0.26)
0.52 (0.31)
0.07 (0.13)
0.05 (0.10)

0.34 (0.27)
0.42 (0.29)
0.11 (0.15)
0.05 (0.10)

0.32 (0.25)
0.52 (0.30)
0.04 (0.07)
0.06 (0.12)

0.81 (0.48)
22.66 (9.87)
4.38 (3.27)
0.31 (0.47)
0.08 (0.28)
0.19 (0.39)

0.88 (0.44)
20.53 (10.13)
5.06 (2.90)
0.21 (0.41)
0.09 (0.28)
0.14 (0.35)

0.94 (0.47)
22.75 (9.09)
4.94 (2.90)
0.18 (0.39)
0.06 (0.24)
0.28 (0.45)

0.87 (0.46)
22.59 (11.04)
5.42 (2.67)
0.40 (0.49)
0.10 (0.31)
0.19 (0.40)

0.92 (0.42)
21.49 (10.07)
4.80 (3.29)
0.20 (0.40)
0.10 (0.30)
0.30 (0.46)

1.01 (0.51)
19.09 (10.85)
5.20 (2.95)
0.19 (0.40)
0.13 (0.34)
0.28 (0.45)

0.86 (0.41)
21.86 (9.70)
5.24 (3.00)
0.26 (0.44)
0.08 (0.27)
0.26 (0.44)

48

105

67

58

80

395

148

Notes: Standard deviations are reported in parenthesis. Behavior outcomes based on baseline wave of survey. (a) Health Status: 1 being “very poor” and 5 being “excellent” (b) Alcohol consumption is the number of
days per week in which the respondent reported having a drink (c) Worry about own health: 0=not at all, 10=a lot. (d) Cognitive score is derived based on total possible correct answers (=4) on a Raven’s Matrices test
divided by the time allotted to task (two minutes). (e) Time preference index from 1 (extremely impatient) to 32 (extremely patient) based on a near-frame question. Impatient (=1 if time preference index is 1). Patient
(=1 if time preference index is 32). (f) Risk preference index from 0 (extremely risk tolerant) to 10 (extremely risk averse). (g) “Time-inconsistent” is defined with respect to two “money” questions: 1) a near-frame
question prompting individuals to choose between 160 USD today and a larger amount of USD in 12 months. 2) a distant-frame question prompting individuals to choose between 160 USD in 12 months and a larger
amount of USD in 24 months. Individuals were identified as “hyperbolic” time-inconsistent if they preferred the immediate reward in the near-term frame combined with the choice of the delayed reward in the distant
frame.

2

Table 3. Summary Social Distancing by Demographic Characteristics
Did not
Maintain Six
Feet (=1 if yes)
(1)
All
High School Diploma (=1 if yes)
Some College (=1 if yes)
College Degree (=1 if yes)
Graduate School (=1 if yes)
Democrat (=1 if yes)
Republican (=1 if yes)
Independent or Other (=1 if yes)
Caucasian (=1 if yes)
African American (=1 if yes)
Hispanic (=1 if yes)
Other Ethnicity (=1 if yes)
Observations

Social Distancing Behavior (Baseline)
Did not Stay
NonDays Out
Home (=1 if
essential
Past Week
yes)
Outings (#)
(#)
(2)
(3)
(4)

Social
Distancing
Indexb
(5)

Social Distancing Behavior (Change)a
Did not
Did not
Days Out
Social
Maintain
Stay
Past Week
Distancing
Six Feet
Home
(#)
Indexb
(6)
(7)
(9)
(10)

0.47 (0.47)
0.51 (0.50)
0.52 (0.50)
0.44 (0.50)
0.40 (0.49)
0.43 (0.49)
0.53 (0.50)
0.52 (0.50)
0.48 (0.50)
0.53 (0.51)
0.43 (0.50)
0.44 (0.50)

0.70 (0.46)
0.69 (0.47)
0.74 (0.44)
0.68 (0.46)
0.62 (0.49)
0.69 (0.46)
0.81 (0.39)
0.68 (0.47)
0.73 (0.44)
0.74 (0.45)
0.64 (0.49)
0.55 (0.50)

0.74 (1.03)
1.08 (1.20)
0.98 (1.16)
0.56 (0.88)
0.51 (0.84)
0.66 (0.95)
0.90 (1.19)
0.85 (1.11)
0.69 (0.99)
1.16 (1.30)
1.11 (1.20)
0.83 (1.11)

3.03 (2.10)
2.64 (1.85)
2.88 (2.07)
3.19 (2.15)
3.04 (2.23)
3.03 (2.11)
3.21 (2.06)
2.97 (2.11)
3.22 (2.09)
0.21 (0.42)
2.93 (2.32)
2.14 (1.82)

0.00 (1.33)
0.01 (1.32)
0.13 (1.33)
-0.06 (1.34)
-0.23 (1.43)
-0.07 (1.28)
0.25 (0.43)
0.04 (1.40)
0.07 (1.31)
0.08 (1.69)
-0.04 (1.49)
-0.42 (1.25)

0.17 (0.55)
0.13 (0.54)
0.12 (0.52)
0.19 (0.56)
0.20 (0.53)
0.17 (0.55)
0.24 (0.47)
0.13 (0.57)
0.17 (0.55)
0.25 (0.62)
0.19 (0.40)
0.12 (0.61)

0.16 (0.51)
0.11 (0.55)
0.12 (0.49)
0.19 (0.50)
0.17 (0.50)
0.15 (0.49)
0.17 (0.48)
0.19 (0.55)
0.16 (0.49)
0.00 (0.00)
0.19 (0.56)
0.18 (0.59)

0.49 (1.70)
0.35 (1.83)
0.47 (1.65)
0.53 (1.69)
0.65 (1.85)
0.46 (1.67)
0.67 (1.94)
0.49 (1.68)
0.53 (1.66)
0.17 (1.70)
0.07 (1.99)
0.43 (1.84)

8.09e-09 (1.89)
-0.14 (1.34)
-0.09 (1.17)
0.07 (1.15)
0.10 (1.19)
-0.03 (1.13)
0.14 (1.19)
0.01 (1.29)
0.02 (1.16)
-0.24 (0.85)
-0.09 (1.38)
-0.03 (1.34)

901

901

901

901

901

623

623

623

623

Notes: Education levels: Graduate school includes the following degrees: MD, DDS, DVM, LLB, JD, and Doctorate Degrees (ex: PhD, EdD). (a) Represents the change in behavior from the baseline to the week
two follow-up survey. (b) The social distancing index is based on a PCA procedure based on the four distinct proxies (did not maintain six feet in previous week; did not stay home in previous week; number of
non-essential outings; days out of home in previous week) of social distancing.

3

Table 4. Summary Mask Wearing by Demographic Characteristics
(1)
0.68 (0.47)
0.64 (0.48)
0.67 (0.47)
0.70 (0.46)
0.61 (0.49)
0.71 (0.46)
0.63 (0.49)
0.65 (0.48)
0.67 (0.47)
0.63 (0.50)
0.73 (0.45)
0.71 (0.45)

Wears a Mask when
Shopping (=1 if yes)
(2)
0.91 (0.28)
0.86 (0.35)
0.89 (0.31)
0.93 (0.25)
0.88 (0.33)
0.91 (0.28)
0.87 (0.34)
0.93 (0.26)
0.92 (0.27)
0.84 (0.37)
0.93 (0.25)
0.88 (0.32)

Wears a Mask
(Change) a
(3)
-0.01 (0.49)
0.00 (0.47)
-0.05 (0.53)
0.00 (0.47)
-0.06 (0.53)
-0.02 (0.50)
0.02 (0.54)
0.01 (0.46)
0.01 (0.48)
0.17 (0.58)
-0.15 (0.53)
-0.06 (0.53)

901

901

623

Wears a Mask (=1 if yes)
All
High School Diploma (=1 if yes)
Some College (=1 if yes)
College Degree (=1 if yes)
Graduate School (=1 if yes)
Democrat (=1 if yes)
Republican (=1 if yes)
Independent or Other (=1 if yes)
Caucasian (=1 if yes)
African American (=1 if yes)
Hispanic (=1 if yes)
Other Ethnicity (=1 if yes)
Observations

Notes: Graduate school includes the following degrees: MD, DDS, DVM, LLB, JD, and Doctorate Degrees (ex: PhD, EdD). (a) Represents the change in
behavior from the baseline to the week two follow-up survey.

4

Table 5. Summary Opinion of Government Response by Political Affiliation

All
Republican (=1 if yes)
Democrat (=1 if yes)
Independent and Other (=1 if yes)
Observations

Federal Government
Reaction
(1)
4.24 (0.94)
3.15 (1.02)
4.54 (0.68)
4.04 (0.99)

State Government
Reaction
(2)
3.22 (0.78)
2.74 (1.08)
3.35 (0.66)
3.15 (0.78)

Local Government
Reaction
(3)
3.29 (0.75)
2.86 (0.91)
3.40 (0.64)
3.24 (0.83)

General Public
Reaction
(4)
3.77 (1.00)
3.14 (1.21)
3.95 (0.88)
3.64 (1.04)

892

898

849

885

Notes: The attitude questions were scale-based, using scale the following scale: 1=reaction is much too extreme to 5=reaction is not at all sufficient. The
questions are: reaction to federal government’s response (“Do you think the reaction of the federal government to the current coronavirus outbreak is appropriate,
too extreme, or not sufficient?”), reaction to state government’s response (“Do you think the reaction of your state government to the current coronavirus outbreak
is appropriate, too extreme, or not sufficient?”), reaction to local government’s response (“Do you think the reaction of your local government to the current
coronavirus outbreak is appropriate, too extreme, or not sufficient?”), reaction to the general public’s response (“Do you think the reaction of most people in the
United States is appropriate, too extreme, or not sufficient?”).

5

Table 6. Determinants of Proxy Measures of Social Distancing

Age
Female (=1 if yes)
Currently Married (=1 if
yes)
Caucasian (=1 if yes)
Schooling
College Graduate (=1 if
yes)
Republican (=1 if yes)
Earnings (Logged)
Population Density
(Logged)
Concerned About
Healthb
COVID19 Infection
Fears on a Daily Basisc
Number Comorbidities
Cognitive Scored
Risk Aversion Indexe
Time Preference Indexf
Time Inconsistent (=1 if
yes)g
Positive Reciprocity
Index
Altruism Index

Did not Stay
Home (=1 if yes)
(1)
0.00*
(0.00)
0.00
(0.04)
-0.03
(0.04)
0.13***
(0.04)
-0.02*
(0.01)
0.01
(0.06)
0.10**
(0.05)
0.01
(0.02)
-0.01
(0.01)
-0.01**
(0.01)
-0.04
(0.04)
0.02
(0.03)
0.00
(0.02)
-0.02***
(0.01)
0.00
(0.00)
0.04
(0.04)
-0.01
(0.01)
-0.01
(0.01)

Non-essential
Outings (#)
(2)
-0.00**
(0.00)
-0.20**
(0.09)
-0.18**
(0.08)
0.06
(0.10)
0.01
(0.03)
-0.19
(0.13)
0.26**
(0.11)
0.13***
(0.04)
-0.00
(0.02)
0.01
(0.02)
-0.04
(0.09)
-0.12*
(0.07)
-0.03
(0.04)
-0.02
(0.01)
0.00
(0.00)
0.06
(0.08)
-0.04*
(0.02)
0.00
(0.02)

Days out past
week (#)
(3)
0.01
(0.01)
-0.21
(0.18)
-0.23
(0.18)
0.41**
(0.21)
-0.03
(0.06)
0.14
(0.27)
0.04
(0.23)
0.18**
(0.08)
-0.07**
(0.04)
-0.06**
(0.03)
0.37**
(0.18)
-0.36**
(0.15)
-0.05
(0.07)
-0.05**
(0.03)
0.00
(0.01)
0.04
(0.18)
-0.07
(0.04)
0.00
(0.04)

Did not Maintain
Six Feet (=1 if yes)
(4)
-0.00*
(0.00)
0.05
(0.04)
-0.07
(0.04)
0.09*
(0.05)
-0.01
(0.01)
-0.01
(0.07)
0.05
(0.05)
0.03
(0.02)
-0.01*
(0.01)
-0.00
(0.01)
-0.04
(0.04)
-0.00
(0.03)
0.01
(0.02)
-0.00
(0.01)
0.00*
(0.00)
-0.00
(0.04)
-0.01
(0.01)
-0.01
(0.01)

(Continued on next page)

6

Social Distancing
Indexa
(5)
-0.00
(0.00)
-0.09
(0.11)
-0.20*
(0.11)
0.38***
(0.13)
-0.04
(0.04)
-0.02
(0.17)
0.28**
(0.14)
0.11**
(0.05)
-0.05**
(0.02)
-0.03**
(0.02)
-0.00
(0.11)
-0.11
(0.09)
-0.01
(0.05)
-0.05***
(0.02)
0.01
(0.00)
0.09
(0.11)
-0.05*
(0.03)
-0.03
(0.03)

Wears a Mask
(=1 if yes)
(6)
0.00***
(0.00)
0.12***
(0.04)
0.04
(0.04)
-0.12***
(0.04)
-0.02*
(0.01)
0.07
(0.06)
-0.05
(0.04)
-0.01
(0.02)
0.01
(0.01)
0.01*
(0.01)
0.05
(0.04)
0.04
(0.03)
-0.01
(0.02)
0.00
(0.01)
-0.00**
(0.00)
-0.04
(0.04)
0.02**
(0.01)
0.02**
(0.01)

Wears a Mask when
Shopping (=1 if yes)
(7)
0.00*
(0.00)
0.03
(0.02)
0.05**
(0.02)
0.02
(0.03)
-0.01
(0.01)
0.08**
(0.03)
-0.05
(0.03)
-0.00
(0.01)
0.00
(0.01)
0.01*
(0.00)
-0.01
(0.02)
0.01
(0.02)
0.02
(0.01)
0.00
(0.00)
0.00
(0.00)
0.01
(0.02)
-0.00
(0.01)
0.00
(0.01)

Table 6 (Continued): Determinants of Social Distancing
Did not Stay
Home (=1 if yes)
(1)
0.01
(0.02)
0.13
(0.13)
0.03
(0.02)
-0.00
(0.02)
-0.01
(0.02)
-0.03
(0.02)
-0.01
(0.02)

Non-essential
Outings (#)
(2)
0.01
(0.02)
0.39
(0.28)
0.03
(0.04)
0.01
(0.03)
0.02
(0.04)
-0.08**
(0.04)
-0.02
(0.04)

Days Out Past
Week (#)
(3)
0.11**
(0.04)
-0.13
(0.60)
0.16**
(0.07)
-0.03
(0.07)
-0.03
(0.07)
-0.11
(0.07)
-0.04
(0.08)

Did not Maintain
Six Feet (=1 if yes)
(4)
0.01
(0.01)
0.07
(0.14)
0.00
(0.02)
-0.00
(0.02)
-0.02
(0.02)
-0.04**
(0.02)
-0.02
(0.02)

Social Distancing
Index
(5)
0.05*
(0.02)
0.33
(0.38)
0.09*
(0.05)
-0.01
(0.05)
-0.04
(0.05)
-0.13***
(0.05)
-0.05
(0.05)

Wears a Mask
(=1 if yes)
(6)
0.01
(0.01)
-0.26**
(0.13)
0.03*
(0.02)
0.02
(0.02)
0.03*
(0.02)
0.02
(0.02)
0.02
(0.02)

Wears a Mask when
Shopping (=1 if yes)
(7)
-0.01*
(0.01)
-0.03
(0.08)
0.02*
(0.01)
-0.01
(0.01)
-0.01
(0.01)
0.00
(0.01)
0.01
(0.01)

Baseline Mean
Controls
R-squared

0.70
Yes
0.05

0.74
Yes
0.12

3.03
Yes
0.06

0.47
Yes
0.03

0.00
Yes
0.06

0.70
Yes
0.10

0.91
Yes
0.02

Observations

901

901

901

901

901

901

901

Exponential Growth Bias
Indexh
Risk Misperception (in
percent)i
Openness Indexj
Extraversion Indexj
Conscientiousness Indexj
Agreeableness Indexj
Neuroticism Indexj

Notes: Clustered standard errors are reported in parenthesis. All models include state and regional fixed effects. Behavior outcomes based on baseline wave of survey. (a) The social
distancing index is based on a PCA procedure based on the four distinct proxies (did not maintain six feet in previous week; did not stay home in previous week; number of non-essential
outings; days out of home in previous week) of social distancing. (b) Worry about own health: 0=not at all, 10=a lot. (c) COVID-19 Fear is constructed as a binary measure based on the
respondent indicating that he/she worries on daily to the following question “How frequently have you feared being infected with COVID-19 in the past month?” (d) Cognitive score is
derived based on total possible correct answers (=4) divided by time allocation for task (two minutes). (e) Risk preference index from 0 (extremely risk tolerant) to 10 (extremely risk
averse). (f) Time preference index from 1 (extremely impatient) to 32 (extremely patient) based on a near-frame question. Impatient (=1 if time preference index is 1). Patient (=1 if time
preference index is 32). (g) “Time-inconsistent” is defined with respect to two “money” questions: 1) a near-frame question prompting individuals to choose between 160 USD today and a
larger amount of USD in 12 months. 2) a distant-frame question prompting individuals to choose between 160 USD in 12 months and a larger amount of USD in 24 months. Individuals
were identified as “hyperbolic” time-inconsistent if they preferred the immediate reward in the near-term frame combined with the choice of the delayed reward in the distance frame. (h)
The exponential growth bias index is based on the number of incorrect responses on five exponential growth-related questions. Higher values on the index indicate higher exponential
growth bias. (i) Risk misperception is the difference between the subjectively elicited case fatality rate in own county minus the actual case fatality rate at the time of the interview based on
data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (j) The five variables (openness, extraversion, conscientiousness, agreeableness, neuroticism) are based on a taxonomy from
psychology theory for the “Big Five” personality traits. They are indices (higher values on the index indicate increased tendency of the particular trait).
***Significant at the 1 percent level.
**Significant at the 5 percent level.
*Significant at the 10 percent level

7

Table 7: Personal Characteristics and Change in Social Distancing Measures

Age
Female (=1 if yes)
Currently Married (=1
if yes)
Caucasian (=1 if yes)
Schooling
College Graduate (=1 if
yes)
Republican (=1 if yes)
Earnings (Logged)
Population Density
(Logged)
Concerned About
Healthb
COVID19 Infection
Fears on a Daily Basisc
Number Comorbidities
Cognitive Scored
Risk Aversion Indexe
Time Preference Indexf
Time Inconsistent (=1 if
yes)g
Positive Reciprocity
Index
Altruism Index

Did not Stay
Home (=1 if yes)
(1)
-0.00
(0.00)
-0.02
(0.05)
0.08
(0.06)
-0.01
(0.06)
-0.00
(0.02)
0.09
(0.08)
0.01
(0.07)
-0.00
(0.03)
-0.01
(0.01)
0.01
(0.01)
0.08
(0.06)
-0.04
(0.04)
0.03
(0.03)
0.01
(0.01)
-0.00
(0.00)
0.04
(0.05)
-0.01
(0.01)
-0.00
(0.01)

Days out past
week (#)
(2)
-0.00
(0.00)
0.17
(0.18)
0.40**
(0.18)
0.41**
(0.21)
-0.00
(0.06)
0.32
(0.28)
0.06
(0.24)
-0.10
(0.08)
-0.02
(0.04)
-0.01
(0.03)
-0.26
(0.19)
0.05
(0.16)
-0.01
(0.08)
-0.01
(0.03)
0.00
(0.00)
0.11
(0.18)
-0.07*
(0.04)
-0.00
(0.04)

(Continued on next page)

8

Did not Maintain
Six Feet (=1 if yes)
(3)
-0.00
(0.00)
0.04
(0.06)
0.06
(0.06)
0.01
(0.07)
0.00
(0.02)
0.07
(0.09)
0.10
(0.08)
-0.02
(0.03)
-0.01
(0.01)
0.00
(0.01)
0.11*
(0.06)
0.04
(0.05)
0.01
(0.03)
0.00
(0.01)
0.00
(0.00)
0.01
(0.06)
-0.01
(0.01)
0.01
(0.01)

Social Distancing
Indexa
(4)
-0.01
(0.00)
0.07
(0.13)
0.28**
(0.13)
0.14
(0.15)
-0.00
(0.04)
0.29
(0.20)
0.12
(0.17)
-0.05
(0.06)
-0.02
(0.03)
0.01
(0.02)
0.10
(0.13)
0.01
(0.11)
0.04
(0.06)
0.01
(0.02)
0.00
(0.01)
0.10
(0.12)
-0.04
(0.03)
0.00
(0.03)

Wears a Mask
(=1 if yes)
(5)
0.00
(0.00)
-0.04
(0.05)
-0.11*
(0.05)
0.04
(0.06)
-0.02
(0.02)
0.06
(0.08)
0.01
(0.07)
-0.03
(0.03)
-0.03***
(0.01)
0.01
(0.01)
0.00
(0.05)
-0.02
(0.05)
-0.04*
(0.02)
0.00
(0.01)
0.00
(0.00)
0.04
(0.05)
-0.00
(0.01)
0.01
(0.01)

Table 7 (Continued): Personal Characteristics and Change in Social Distancing Measures

Exponential Growth Bias
Indexh
Risk Misperception (in
percent)i
Openness Indexj
Extraversion Indexj
Conscientiousness Indexj
Agreeableness Indexj
Neuroticism Indexj
Baseline Mean
Controls
R-squared
Observations

Did not Stay
Home (=1 if yes)
(1)
-0.02
(0.01)
-0.00
(0.18)
-0.00
(0.02)
-0.02
(0.02)
-0.01
(0.02)
-0.01
(0.02)
0.01
(0.02)
0.70
Yes
0.01

Days Out Past
Week (#)
(2)
-0.05
(0.45)
0.50
(0.60)
-0.12
(0.08)
0.10
(0.07)
0.13*
(0.07)
-0.21***
(0.08)
-0.03
(0.08)
3.03
Yes
0.01

Did not Maintain
Six Feet (=1 if yes)
(3)
0.00
(0.01)
0.10
(0.20)
0.02
(0.02)
0.02
(0.02)
0.01
(0.02)
-0.02
(0.03)
-0.00
(0.03)
0.47
Yes
0.02

Social Distancing
Index
(4)
-0.04
(0.03)
0.25
(0.43)
-0.02
(0.05)
0.03
(0.05)
0.04
(0.05)
-0.10*
(0.06)
0.00
(0.6)
0.00
Yes
0.01

Wears a Mask
(=1 if yes)
(5)
-0.01
(0.01)
0.21
(0.18)
-0.04*
(0.02)
0.00
(0.02)
0.02
(0.02)
0.02
(0.02)
-0.01
(0.02)
0.70
Yes
0.01

623

623

623

623

623

Notes: Clustered standard errors are reported in parenthesis. All models include state and regional fixed effects. Behavior outcomes based on
baseline wave of survey. (a) The social distancing index is based on a PCA procedure based on the four distinct proxies (did not maintain six
feet in previous week; did not stay home in previous week; days out of home in previous week) of social distancing. (b) Worry about own
health: 0=not at all, 10=a lot. (c) COVID-19 Fear is constructed as a binary measure based on the respondent indicating that he/she worries on
daily to the following question “How frequently have you feared being infected with COVID-19 in the past month?” (d) Cognitive score is
derived based on total possible correct answers (=4) divided by time allocation for task (two minutes). (e) Risk preference index from 0
(extremely risk tolerant) to 10 (extremely risk averse). (f) Time preference index from 1 (extremely impatient) to 32 (extremely patient) based
on a near-frame question. Impatient (=1 if time preference index is 1). Patient (=1 if time preference index is 32). (g) “Time-inconsistent” is
defined with respect to two “money” questions: 1) a near-frame question prompting individuals to choose between 160 USD today and a larger
amount of USD in 12 months. 2) a distant-frame question prompting individuals to choose between 160 USD in 12 months and a larger amount
of USD in 24 months. Individuals were identified as “hyperbolic” time-inconsistent if they preferred the immediate reward in the near-term
frame combined with the choice of the delayed reward in the distance frame. (h) The exponential growth bias index is based on the number of
incorrect responses on five exponential growth-related questions. Higher values on the index indicate higher exponential growth bias. (i) Risk
misperception is the difference between the subjectively elicited case fatality rate in own county minus the actual case fatality rate at the time of
the interview based on data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (j) The five variables (openness, extraversion,
conscientiousness, agreeableness, neuroticism) are based on a taxonomy from psychology theory for the “Big Five” personality traits. They are
indices (higher values on the index indicate increased tendency of the particular trait).
***Significant at the 1 percent level.
**Significant at the 5 percent level.
*Significant at the 10 percent level

9

Table 8. Determinants of Risk Perception of Case Fatality Rate in County of Residence
Subjective Risk
Perception
(Percent)
(1)
-0.00
(0.00)
0.02*
(0.01)
-0.01
(0.01)
-0.06***
(0.01)
-0.00
(0.00)
-0.00
(0.01)
-0.02**
(0.01)
-0.01**
(0.00)
0.00
(0.00)
0.00***
(0.00)
-0.00
(0.01)
-0.01
(0.01)
0.00
(0.01)
-0.00
(0.00)
0.00
(0.00)
0.00
(0.00)
-0.00*
(0.00)
-0.01
(0.01)
-0.00
(0.00)
0.00
(0.00)
0.01***
(0.00)
0.00
(0.00)
0.00
(0.00)
0.01*
(0.00)
-0.00
(0.00)
0.00
(0.00)

Risk Misperception,
Subjective-Objective
(Percent)
(2)
-0.00
(0.00)
0.02*
(0.01)
-0.01
(0.01)
-0.06***
(0.01)
-0.00
(0.00)
-0.00
(0.02)
-0.03**
(0.01)
-0.01
(0.00)
-0.00*
(0.00)
0.00**
(0.00)
-0.00
(0.01)
-0.00
(0.01)
0.00
(0.01)
-0.00
(0.00)
0.00
(0.00)
0.00
(0.00)
-0.00
(0.00)
-0.01
(0.01)
-0.00
(0.00)
0.00
(0.00)
0.01***
(0.00)
0.00
(0.00)
0.00
(0.00)
0.01
(0.00)
-0.00
(0.00)
0.00
(0.00)

Baseline Mean
Controls
R-squared

0.08
Yes
0.15

0.01
Yes
0.13

Observations

901

901

Age
Female (=1 if yes)
Currently Married (=1 if yes)
Caucasian (=1 if yes)
Schooling
College Graduate (=1 if yes)
Republican (=1 if yes)
Earnings (Logged)
Population Density (Logged)
Concerned About Health
COVID19 Infection Fears on a Daily
Basis
Number Comorbidities
News Source Fox/MSNBC (=1 if yes)
COVID-19 Cases in Social Circle
Cognitive Score
Risk Aversion Index
Time Preference Index
Time-inconsistent (=1 if yes)
Positive Reciprocity
Altruism
Exponential Growth Bias Index
Openness Index
Extraversion Index
Conscientiousness Index
Agreeableness Index
Neuroticism Index

Notes: Clustered standard errors in parenthesis. All models include state and regional fixed effects. Full
details on variable definitions are in the notes to Table VI. ***Significant at the 1 percent level.
**Significant at the 5 percent level. *Significant at the 10 percent level.

10

Table 9. Determinants of Exponential Growth Bias Index
Exponential Growth Bias Index
(1)
(2)
(3)
Age
Female (=1 if yes)
Currently Married (=1 if yes)
Caucasian (=1 if yes)
Schooling
Earnings (Logged)
Population Density (Logged)
Concerned About Health
COVID19 Infection Fears on a
Daily Basis
Number Comorbidities

0.02***
(0.00)
0.50***
(0.13)
-0.14
(0.14)
-0.03
(0.10)
-0.07**
(0.03)
-0.18***
(0.06)
-0.03
(0.03)
-0.00
(0.02)
0.17
(0.14)
0.08
(0.12)

0.02***
(0.00)
0.43***
(0.14)
-0.10
(0.14)
-0.01
(0.16)
-0.07**
(0.03)
-0.15***
(0.06)
-0.03
(0.03)
-0.01
(0.02)
0.11
(0.14)
0.09
(0.11)
-0.16***
(0.06)
-0.05**
(0.02)
-0.02***
(0.01)
-0.16
(0.13)
-0.04
(0.03)
0.05
(0.03)

0.02***
(0.00)
0.32**
(0.14)
-0.09
(0.14)
-0.03
(0.16)
-0.06**
(0.03)
-0.13***
(0.06)
-0.02
(0.03)
-0.02
(0.02)
0.06
(0.14)
0.10
(0.11)
-0.16***
(0.06)
-0.06**
(0.02)
-0.02***
(0.01)
-0.14
(0.14)
-0.04
(0.03)
0.04
(0.03)
1.33***
(0.45)
0.04
(0.06)
0.06
(0.06)
0.07
(0.05)
0.08
(0.06)
0.17***
(0.06)

3.13e-08
Yes
0.12

3.13e-08
Yes
0.12

3.13e-08
Yes
0.12

901

901

901

Cognitive Score
Risk Aversion Index
Time Preference Index
Time-inconsistent (=1 if yes)
Positive Reciprocity
Altruism
Risk Misperception (in percent)
Openness Index
Extraversion Index
Conscientiousness Index
Agreeableness Index
Neuroticism Index
Baseline Mean
Controls
R-squared
Observations

Notes: Clustered standard errors in parenthesis. All models include state and regional fixed
effects. Full details on variable definitions are in the notes to Table VI. ***Significant at the
1 percent level. **Significant at the 5 percent level. *Significant at the 10 percent level.

11

