Modelling Threat Causation for Religiosity and Nationalism in Europe
Dr. Josh Bullock, Kingston University, London
Dr. Justin E. Lane, ALAN Analytics; Slovakia, NORCE Center for Modeling Social
Systems, Kristiansand, Norway
Dr. Igor Mikloušić, Pilar Institute, Zagreb, Croatia
Professor F. LeRon Shults, University of Agder, Norway; NORCE Center for Modeling
Social Systems, Kristiansand, Norway
Introduction
Europe’s contemporary political landscape has been shaped by massive shifts in recent
decades caused by geopolitical upheavals such as Brexit and now, COVID-19. The way in
which policy makers respond to the current pandemic could have large effects on how the
world looks after the pandemic subsides. A region that has been defined by liberalism and
freedom for the better part of a century has experienced a rise in nationalism and populism
that has not been seen since after World War I. Historically, limitations on individual
freedoms and new waves of legislation impeding freedom have accompanied the rise of
nationalism and populism in Europe. These developments have also been accompanied by
increased xenophobia and out-group distrust, which have negative effects on economic
cooperation globally and economic mobility locally. Therefore, understanding what
motivates and drives populist and nationalist movements from a psychological and social
perspective is critical to promoting policies that can promote individual freedom in
Europe.
There are still significant gaps in the scholarly literature on populism and nationalism, and
psychological studies all too often neglect the evolutionary basis for human psychological
tendencies and motivations that are necessary for nationalist and populist movements. In
particular, there is a lack of attention to the role of evolved human psychology in
responding to persistent threats, which can fall into four broad categories in the literature:
predation (threats to one’s life via being eaten or killed in some other way), contagion
(threats to one’s life via physical infection), natural (threats to one’s life via natural
disasters), and social (threats to one’s life by destroying social standing; exile from a group
would have been equivalent to a death penalty in ancient ancestral environments) (Liénard
& Boyer, 2006;; Shults, Gore, et al., 2018). These threats have been discussed in light of
their effects on religion and other forms of behaviour, but they have not been employed to
study nationalist and populist behaviours.
In what follows, two studies are presented that begin to fill this gap in the literature. The
first is a survey used to inform our theoretical framework and explore the different
possible relationships in an online sample. The second is a study of a computer simulation.
Both studies described below (completed in 2020) found very clear effects among the
relevant variables, enabling us to identify trends that require further explanation and call
for additional research as we move toward models that can adequately inform policy
discussions.
Theoretical Background
Although many theories from a variety of disciplines bear on the relationships between
threat and populism/nationalism studied in this paper, two sets of sometimes overlapping
literatures are particularly important for our purposes here. The first is identity fusion theory
(Bonin & Lane, n.d.; Jong et al., 2016; Swann et al., 2012; Whitehouse et al., 2017;
Whitehouse & Lanman, 2014), which is closely linked to the concept of “sacred values”.
Gómez (2020) points out that the current challenge of the Covid-19 pandemic is

1

converting some citizens into “devoted actors” and increasing fusion with various groups.
When contagion threats strengthen nationalism, this intensified sense of unity may make
an in-group stronger, but it also poses a number of potential problems for out-group
dynamics and intergroup conflict. Gomez argues these changes may include “denial of the
group’s wrongdoings… willingness to participate in extreme forms of protest on behalf of
the group; maximizing the ingroup’s advantage over the outgroup even at one’s personal
expense; protecting the group’s reputation… relative intergroup formidability… and the
desire to retaliate against outgroup members” (p.2-3). All of this contributes to out-group
hostility. In the US context, culpability has sometimes been consigned to the Chinese with
major media outlets and government officials, including the president, repeatedly using the
term “Chinese virus”, which further entrenches the notion that the pandemic is the fault
of “others.” This perpetuates the idea that “foreigners are also associated with semantic
concepts that connote disease” (Faulkner et al. 2004: p.333).
A second body of literature that is relevant for our current purposes is the literature on
moral foundations theory. The basic idea here is that human morality evolved with five distinct
“foundations,” which are differentially distributed within human populations. Some
combination of these five emotionally charged moral foundations form the basis of each
individual’s normative preferences: care/harm, fairness/cheating, loyalty/betrayal,
authority/subversion, and purity/degradation. The first two foundations are sometimes
referred to as “individualizing,” while the latter three are considered “binding.” Liberals
tend to be guided primarily by the first two of these dyads, suppressing the other three,
while conservatives rely on all five when making moral judgments (Alizadeh et al., 2019;
Graham et al., 2009; Iyer et al., 2012). Previous research testing this theory suggests that
“individualizing” moral foundations can have a negative relationship with negative
behavioural intentions (and a positive relation with positive intentions), while “binding”
moral foundations are correlated oppositely. This is relevant for our purposes because
both of our studies were motivated by our interest in discovering the causal interactions
among threats (of the four types mentioned above), religiosity, nationalism, and intergroup
conflict. However, our evolutionary framework focuses on the role of threat perception,
rather than moral belief commitments, as a factor in differences between poles in the
political spectrum.
Study 1
Study 1 collected data on the relationships between nationalism, religiosity, national and
religious identification, threat perception, and sentiment toward different groups (using the
same measures as the World Values Survey), particularly focusing on immigrants. Data was
also collected on social media use and consumption of TV based media. Participants were
also asked about their experience during the Covid-19 pandemic and their infection status.
Methods
An online survey was developed and deployed online with SurveyGizmo. Participants
(N=2000) were recruited online through posting on forums and sharing in online social
networks. Most participants were recruited on MTurk.
Measures
There were many survey measures used to assess our key variables. These are described
here:
Covid-19 infection status
Participants were asked if they had tested negative for Covid-19, if they had symptoms and
weren’t tested, if they currently had it, and if they had recovered.

2

Nationalism
We utilized an adapted version of the Nationalism Scale first put forward by Mansillo
(2016). The key addition was an additional item with the prompt “to be truly part of my
nation, one must be a specific race or ethnicity”. We found the original scale items to have
acceptable reliability (α = .88; 95%CI = [.87;.89]), as well as the extended scale with our
additional item (α = .90; 95%CI = [.89;.90]).
Social Identification
Participants were asked to state their nationality. They were then prompted to complete
the Postmes 4-item social identification scale where the target group was their nation
(Postmes et al., 2005). We found the scale items to have acceptable reliability (α = .92;
95%CI = [.91;.93]). Participants were asked to state their religious affiliation. They were
then prompted to complete the Postmes 4-item social identification scale where the target
group was their religious group. We found the scale items to have acceptable reliability (α
= .94; 95%CI = [.93;.95]).
Fusion
Individuals were also asked to state their nationality. They were then prompted to
complete the verbal fusion scale where the target group was their nation (Gómez et al.,
2011). We found the scale items to have acceptable reliability (α = .95; 95%CI =
[.945;.953]). Participants were also asked to state their religious affiliation. They were then
prompted to complete the verbal fusion scale where the target group was their religious
group. We found the scale items to have acceptable reliability (α = .96; 95%CI = [.95;.96]).
Supernatural Belief
To measure supernatural beliefs, an adapted version of the Supernatural Belief Scale (Jong
et al., 2013) was used. The amendment involved the inclusion of two additional items. The
first presented the prompt “There exists a universal force of justice that you could call
karma”. The second was that “The universe has the ability to affect the events in our lives
and provide balance.” We found the original scale items to have acceptable reliability (α =
.98; 95%CI = [.975;.978]), as well as the extended scale with our additional item (α = .98;
95%CI = [.975;.978]).
Threat
Threat was assessed with a scale that we devised in our team to measure 4 key evolutionary
threats (predation, contagion, social, and natural hazards). We added the additional
dimension of financial threats because of the likelihood that participants’ key concern
during the Covid-19 pandemic could be the loss of their job. All items were based on a 5
item Likert scale (strongly disagree to strongly agree). The items were as follows:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

I feel financially secure
I worry about my financial situation
I am concerned about natural disasters
Natural disasters are not a threat
I am secure in my social standing
My social standing is threatened
I will contract COVID-19 (coronavirus) or another ailment
I am confident that I will not contract COVID-19 (coronavirus) or another ailment
I worry that I might be killed by another person (or animal)
I am confident that I will not be killed by another person (or animal)

In this measure, item 1, 4, 5, 8, and 10 are reverse coded. Items 1, 2 address financial
threats. Items 3, 4 address natural threats. Items 5, 6 address social threats. Items 7, 8

3

address contagion threats. Items 9, 10 address predation threats. There were two additional
threat questions that were asked but not included in the threat measures.
Our way of life is under threat because of COVID-19 (coronavirus)
Our way of life is threatened because of the number of foreigners or immigrants
I believe the world will never be the same because of COVID-19 (coronavirus)
We found that the scale items addressing the 4 key threats (predation, natural, social,
contagion) did not have acceptable reliability (α = .42; 95%CI = [.37;.46]), and that adding
the financial threat measure did not change this conclusion (α = .55; 95%CI = [.51;.58]).
To investigate whether there is a multidimensional structure to this scale we analysed the
dimensionality of the scale. Using factor analysis, we found that there are multiple
dimensions to the measure. A scree plot analysis suggests that 4 dimensions are optimal.

4

A mapping of the principle components analysis suggests that there is a common
directionality to the items (after the appropriate reverse coding).

As such, later analyses will treat the treat measure as a multi-component scale, not a single
dimensional scale.
Personality
We used a standard 10-item Big-5 measure. We tested whether there was a significant fit
for the 5-factor model and did find a significant fit (.78) using varimax rotation. The
resulting root mean square of the residuals was found to be 0.09 (chi squared = 1516.21
p<.01). As such we utilize the 5-factor measure as intended.
Religious attendance
Participants were asked how frequently they attend religious services using a 10-item
ordinal scale from daily to never.
Social media use
Participants were asked how much time they spend on social media (from rarely, to more
than 2 hours a day).
Brexit
Participants from the UK were asked how they voted in the 2016 EU referendum and if
they still support that decision.

5

Politics
Participants were first asked to report how liberal or conservative they are on economic
issues using a visual slider anchored at very liberal and very conservative.
They were then asked to report how liberal or conservative they are on social issues using a
visual slider anchored at very liberal and very conservative.
Lastly, they were asked what party they voted for in the last election, if any.
Outgroups
Using a Likert scale from very negative to very positive, participants were prompted to
answer how they feel toward the following groups: Jews, Immigrants, Atheists, people of
other races than their own, Christians, and Muslims. We also used questions taken from
the world values survey which prompted the participant with “On this list are various
groups of people. Could you please mark any that you would not like to have as
neighbours?” Participants are then presented with the options: “drug addicts; people of a
different race; people who have aids; immigrants/foreign workers; homosexuals; people of
a different religion; heavy drinkers; unmarried couples living together; people who speak a
different language”.
Media use
Participants were asked how frequently they watch or read the news online (from less than
once a day to 3+ times a day)
News Sources
Participants were also asked to list the news sources they follow.
Participants
After removing invalid responses, we were left with N=2,018 participants. Invalid
responses were deemed to be those that were too incomplete for use or did not follow
directions.
The sample had 1038 males, 970 females, and 10 other.

6

Participants had a mean age of 39.06 (sd = 13.00). Their age distributions are visualized
above.
Results
Religious Demographics
Generally, we found that we have oversampled atheists, with far more people reporting
that they do not attend religious services than expected.

7

This distribution is consistent with the categorical self-identification responses:
Religion
Frequency
Agnostic
169
Atheist
485
Buddhist
33
Catholic
481
Church of England/Anglican
37
Evangelical/Pentecostal/Charismatic
40
Hindu
64
Humanist
70
Jewish
26
Muslim
35
None
174
Other
39
Protestant (misc.)
246
Spiritual but not religious
119

8

Religious Identity and Beliefs
Responses on the supernatural belief scale, however, suggested that supernatural belief was
still strong. Nevertheless, the clear signature of non-belief can be readily observed, and the
addition of our two amended items did not change this distribution.

In addition to the standard supernatural belief scale, we added two items for karma and
universal force (described in the measures section). The variation of support for those two
beliefs was interesting because it reveals that these beliefs are held by individuals who are
otherwise “nonreligious”.
Regarding the idea of a universal force there was general acceptance but significant
differences between groups (F(13,2000) = 89.47, p < .01)). Atheists had a long-tail
distribution ranging from no support to a tailing off of support, but we see fairly normal
distributions in this belief for Agnostics, Humanists and nones. The Spiritual but not
Religious have a similar signature to Protestants, trending toward acceptance of the idea.

9

A similar pattern can be seen for the idea of karma, which appears to be more universally
acceptable among all groups. However, we did find significant differences in the strength
of support between religious groups (F(13,2000) = 80.55, p < .01)). This is particularly
interesting because it is a hallmark of eastern religions but appears acceptable to some
western nonreligious individuals. The distribution of belief in karma is presented in the
figure below.

10

Political Identity and Beliefs
We found that our sample had a nearly uniform distribution of economic values, with
there being a slight overrepresentation of people stating that they are “very liberal” in
economic values, and a lower number of those stating that they are “very conservative”.

11

This over-representation of very liberal participants was exacerbated when it comes to the
participants’ self-reports on social values, where the distribution began to resemble a long
tail distribution weighted toward very liberal social values. While this may not appear
consistent with a general population, it is consistent with many online communities. To
date, we are not aware of any investigation of the MTurk population in this regard;
however, it is telling that it was overweighted in our sample. We do not believe that the
recruitment of participants from social networks, which are well-known to lean more
liberal in political persuasion, can explain this overall distribution.

12

To further explore the political dimensions of the dataset we also mapped the social and
economic dimensions along two axes to create a general heatmap of how these two
variables correlate.

13

As expected, there is generally a strong correlation between the two dimensions of political
ideologies. However, there is a sparser representation of individuals who say that they are
very social conservative but economically liberal, whereas there is a well distributed
segment of our sample that describe themselves as socially liberal but economically
conservative. This is generally consistent with the political makeup of those in the online
community, particularly from the UK and US, where a non-negligible, but small, group of
people appear to adhere to ideologies that could be described as “classically liberal” or
libertarian. This was further bolstered by the question of which political party they have
supported; we found that there were many who supported third party candidates that
aligned with those ideologies.
The table below shows frequency of support for all parties who reported support from
more than 15 participants in our sample.
Party
Frequency of support
Democrat
639
Republican
316
Labour
71
BIB
64
Conservative
39
Liberal
35
Green Party
33
Libertarian
30
Independent
25
Social Democrats
24
Lib Dem
16

14

In assessing the responses of those who voted in the UK referendum we found the
following:
Position
I voted leave and I still support my
decision
I voted leave but regret my decision
I voted remain and I regret my decision
I voted remain and I still support my
decision

Frequency
30
10
3
75

Nationalism
We captured a wide distribution of responses to the nationalism scale. While the
distribution appears normal, it is also possible that because of the social unrest
surrounding COVID-19 that we are seeing a muted distribution where national identity
might be suppressed or re-evaluated, causing there to be more individuals on the extremes
of the distribution than in the middle, effectively flattening our normal distribution.

15

Generally, we found that there were significant differences between religious groups
regarding nationalism. The tendency for some religious groups to be more nationalistic
than others indicates that the nonreligious are also more likely to be non-nationalist;
however, this varies by group, because humanists, for example, are not that different from
Protestants generally.

16

One pattern that we found interesting was the levels of nationalism by age. Graphing the
participants’ nationalism responses by age, we see that nationalism appears to peak among
those in their mid 20s.

We further investigated the nationalism measure by looking at males and females
separately. For males, we find that the hotspot tends to hold where the greatest nationalist
cluster appears at around the age of 25. But nationalism continues well into middle age for
men.

17

For females, we see a far less even distribution of nationalism; females tend to cluster
lower in the nationalism scale, but the most nationalist females are found around the age
of 30. Generally, female nationalism clusters in the lower levels of nationalism with the
greatest number appearing below the midpoint; in opposition to the pattern exhibited by
males.
Future research is needed to investigate why it is that nationalist tendencies appear
different for each gender, and largely correspond to periods of life that are implicated in
biological reproduction.

18

19

When assessing our threat measures, we found that there was a normal distribution of
threat responses in our sample and that the additional financial threat measure did increase
the overall threat perception.
When attempting to predict nationalism as a function of threat, we also found that the
different threats had very different effects on nationalism, and that controlling for the
threat that they believed COVID-19 posed to their way of life increased the model’s
predictability significantly (p<.01).

20

Threat

One of the things that stood out to us was that, as a scale, our threat measure did not have
good validity as a single measure. Therefore, future analyses will need to investigate threat
in relation to the sub-components of the measure; namely: contagion, predation, social,
natural, and financial.
Our analysis uncovered a significant difference in perceived threat by gender.

21

An ANOVA revealed that there was a significant difference between groups (F(2,2002) =
10.25, p < .01)). A posthoc test revealed that the effect was driven by all genders having
significant differences (in all pairwise comparisons in a Tukey test P<.01).
When analysing the difference in threat perception by nationality, we did find that there
was a significant difference between nationalities (F(10,1994) = 1.84, p = .05)) but a
posthoc analysis revealed that the finding is driven exclusively by the difference between
Spain and Canada. As such, we are inclined to reject the findings of that model as spurious
and continue analyses as pooled given the small sample sizes drawn from those countries
and their lesser relevance to the overall research question. We found no significant
differences in threat perception by political party support (p = .56).
Given the interesting threat patterns discerned in earlier phases of the analyses, we
explored the extent to which threat can explain other aspects of the survey results.
Using a General Linear Model (GLM) to assess the extent to which participant responses
were affected by threat perceptions, we found that contagion and financial threats have a
significant negative relationship with positive attitudes toward immigrants, while social
threats have a positive relationship (reminder: the immigration question was binary 0 = no
issue; 1 = would not want immigrant neighbours). This suggests that those who perceive
more social threats are less likely to want immigrant neighbours, but those who perceive
more contagion or financial threats are not.

22

In addition, we wanted to explore the effects that different threats had on supernatural
beliefs. We found that threats have significantly different kinds of effects on different
beliefs overall. Although all threats were found to be significant, predation and social
threats were found to have a positive effect on supernatural beliefs, while contagion,
financial, and natural threats were found to have a negative effect (results for both the
original SBS and our extended SBS, where we added items for karma and universal force,
are found below).

Lastly, we investigated the extent to which threats predicted the strength of different
religious and national identification styles (namely, identification and fusion). We found an
interesting pattern of results whereby for identification (with both religious and national
affiliations) contagion and financial threats had a negative effect on identification, while
social threats had a positive effect. Natural threats had a negative effect on national
identification, but not religious identification; although it should be noted that this effect
was extremely weak. All of the threats significantly predicted fusion, with predation and
social threats having a positive effect on fusion with both religion and national groups,
while contagion, financial, and natural threats had negative effects.

23

In addition to aspects of identification, we also investigated the role of threats in different
personality traits. The regressions for each personality trait and each threat are presented in
the table below.

24

No further analysis was undertaken because all of the relationships are relatively weak.
Explanatory power is therefore low. Moreover, there are debates as to what causal
directions, or even feedback loops, might be proposed theoretically. It is very clear that
further research is needed.
Structural Equation Model
To further asses the data and begin to find structure in the data that could be usable for
informing our system dynamics model, we utilized structural equation modelling to test
several models that we deemed as theoretically interesting or plausible. Variations on
models were found as an interesting pattern about the threat systems. We found in our
analysis that threat does not operate well as a single measure—as suggested above.
However, we found that threat does function acceptably well as a multi-dimensional scale,
with two clusters. In our structural equation modelling, we found that two clusters of
threats have two different and opposing effects on social and economic conservativism.
The model that we used to inform a great deal of our system dynamics model is depicted
below.

25

Along the top we have the 5 threats as well as supernatural beliefs and identity. The two
large circles in the middle are latent variables constructed to capture the co-variance in the
sub-items of the threat measure. Along the bottom we have nationalism, social and
economic conservativism. Lastly, on the lower right we have the WVS measure for antiimmigrant values. As indicated in the figure, social and predation threats form one cluster,
which has a positive effect on social and economic conservativism. Meanwhile, financial,
contagion and natural threats have a negative effect, predicting higher levels of liberal
political beliefs. These two effects had similar directional effects on nationalism, which
also had a negative effect on social conservativism, but a positive effect on anti-immigrant
sentiment.
Statistical analysis of the model above found that it has an acceptable fit (statistical analyses
provided in the table below). This model performed better than most of the other models
that we tested (and had an AIC of 55566.78); therefore, we felt that it was the most
generalizable theoretical model of those investigated for this pilot study.

26

27

In addition to the SEM, we also provide a full correlation heat map of all of the
independent correlations found in our dataset (see above).
Lastly, we utilized a machine learning system to highlight what features could help us
classify participants based on their responses to the WVS immigrant question. The results
were as follows:

28

Study 2
Study 2 utilized the results of Study 1 to create a system dynamics model that aims to add
causal propositions and links to the variables in a way that allows us to capture complex
feedback dynamics and changes over time, as well as the way in which the system can be
affected by psychologically realistic mechanisms, such as habituation to the threats that
were so important in the earlier model.
Methods
To construct this system dynamics model, we utilized the software platform AnyLogic 8
(The AnyLogic Company, 2017). The model was written in that platform and functions
were added in raw Java in order to allow for more accurate calculations and testing.
The simulation effectively has two subsystems that work in concert throughout the run of
any given simulation.
The first system is designed to capture threat perception dynamics. The general form of
the model is similar to the one presented and discussed in Shults, Lane, et al. (2018). It
utilizes a system dynamics model that allows for habituation dynamics to be instantiated
that can mimic the habituation system described by Rescorla & Wagoner. This threat
perception system has 5 subsystems, one for each dimension of threat measured in this
study. It is visually depicted in the figure below.

29

As the different levels of engagement with threats are calculated, their respective levels are
then aggregated into two dynamic variables, mimicking the latent variables in the structural
equation model presented in Study 1. These were then posited to interact with the
different socio-political variables in the model and psychological tendencies and other
individual level variables and patterns listed in the parameters in the model description
below. The structure of the model is depicted in the figure below.

Most of the variables in the figure are self-explanatory, but two require brief clarification
(for a more detailed description, see. As in the article on modelling terror management
theory mentioned above (Shults, Lane, et al., 2018), we are operationalizing “religiosity” in
this context to designate “socially shared cognitive and ritual engagement with axiologically
relevant supernatural agents postulated within one’s in-group.” This sort
of imaginative engagement, which promotes cooperation, commitment, and cohesion in
the face of out-group threats and environmental challenges, is fostered by two reciprocally

30

reinforcing evolved dispositions: the tendency to infer human-like supernatural causes and
the tendency to prefer coalition-favouring moral prescriptions when confronted
with ambiguous or frightening phenomena. In other words, religiosity involves
the intensification and integration of a hyper-active propensity toward detecting gods as
hidden agents and a hyper-active propensity toward protecting in-group norms. We refer
to these as “anthropomorphic promiscuity” and “sociographic prudery” respectively (for
theoretical background, see Shults, 2014, 2018).
A list of the stocks, parameters, and dynamic variables are presented in the table below.
Full source code for the model can be found on GitHub1 (currently a private repository
until publication).
Variable Type
Parameter

Variable Name
Big_5_agreeableness
Big_5_conscientiousness
Big_5_extraversion
Big_5_neuroticism
Big_5_openness
energyDecay
habituationRate
Hazard_intensity_contagion
Hazard_intensity_financial
Hazard_intensity_natural
Hazard_intensity_predation
Hazard_intensity_social
Initial_concern_1
Initial_concern_2
Initial_concern_3
Initial_concern_4
Initial_concern_5
LHS_RUN
Rel_frequency
socialMediaUse
ThreatPctOfMedia
tvMediaUse

Description

Design of Experiment
To test our model, we utilized a parameter sweep of the theoretical space of the model.
This was achieved by selecting 20,000 uniformly distributed sets of variables for all of the
parameters listed in the table above. This allowed us to statistically test the model for all
theoretically relevant settings to better understand the causal links proposed in the model
and explore the relations among the variables.
Each parameter set was input into the model when a simulation run started and was run
once. Because of the non-stochastic nature of the system dynamics model we specified
each parameter set only needed to be run once.
At the end of each run, data on the input parameters, as well as for each of the following
outputs was saved for analysis: hazard_event_count_contagion,
hazard_event_count_financial, hazard_event_count_natural,
hazard_event_count_predation, hazard_event_count_social, nationalism_level,
1

https://github.com/cogijl/kingstonThreatStudy

31

economic_conservativism, social_conservativism, anthropomorphic_promiscuity,
sociographic_prudery, anti_immigrant_sentiment, threat_con_fin_nat, threat_soc_pred,
engagement_1, engagement_2, engagement_3, engagement_4, engagement_5, energy_1,
energy_2, energy_3, energy_4, energy_5, addedEnergy_1, addedEnergy_2,
addedEnergy_3, addedEnergy_4, addedEnergy_5,
Results
The data output by the experimental parameter sweep described above was analysed in
order to better understand the theoretical space of what “could be” using a combination of
correlations, regressions, and visualizations. Not all the correlations from the survey are
expected to be present in the simulated data because the latter is the result of a specifically
defined complex computational model that is reflective of, but not matched by, the
complexity of the real world from which the survey data was drawn.
The first analysis that was run was a correlation plot between all of the variables, similar to
what was presented for the survey data.

One of the ways that the simulation data can be investigated is through visual
representations of relationships under certain partitions. For example, when visualizing
immigrant sentiment (x axis) and social conservativism (y axis), but only for simulations
where the nationalism was within the lowest quartile, we find that there are instances
where extreme anti-immigrant sentiment is possible, but only among individuals who are
socially hyper-liberal. This is a fascinating finding insofar as it challenges common sense,
and the survey data to an extent, but it is consistent with the rise of xenophobia found
historically in hyper-left Marxist states, for example. However, in the simulated data, as in
history, that is generally rare.
As a point of validation, we wanted to see a clustering of causal effects reflected in our
simulated data similar to those found in the survey data. Using a regression to test the

32

effects of different threats on anti-immigrant sentiment, we did see the sort of clustering
that we expected.

33

In addition, further extremes can be found in the relationship between anti-immigrant
sentiment and media use. Among those who are the least frequent consumers of social
media, it seems that social conservativism can be extremely high, as can anti-immigrant
sentiment.

However, among the superusers of social media in the simulated data, we see that antiimmigrant sentiment can be both positive and negative, depending on the parameters of
the simulation. The observed levels of social liberalism (the opposite of social
conservativism in the model) are far more extreme than among those who use little social
media. This was an unintended outcome but aligns well with earlier surveys and literature
suggesting an over-representation of socially liberal ideological frameworks present in
online social networks such as Twitter.

34

In our simulated data, we found a normal distribution of anthropomorphic promiscuity,
with a central tendency toward a relatively low, but positive number. This suggests that
given the total theoretical space, most simulations resulted in some god belief, but some
simulations exhibiting extreme anti-or-pro god beliefs. This seems to reflect real world
patterns as well.

35

Generally, engagement with different threats represented a long tail distribution, where
most people engaged very rarely with threats; however, on rare occasions individuals
engaged with extreme numbers of threats. An example from contagion threats is depicted
below.

36

Since previous research has found nationalism to be a key indicator of anti-immigrant
sentiment, we investigated levels of nationalism in the simulated data. Due to the
correlation between nationalism and religious attendance in the survey data, we
investigated this relationship in our simulated data (visualized below).

37

Generally, there is a clear trend where more frequent religious attendance can result in
higher levels of nationalism. However, in all cases, the levels of nationalism tend to be
relatively low. This suggests that, in our simulation, even though there is a positive
relationship between religious attendance and nationalism, that it is not a key driver of
nationalism, but has a relatively small effect on the system.
Additional regressions revealed several interesting patterns by sub-setting the data as being
either high or low in nationalism. One of the results is that when nationalism is low, there
is a significant effect on financial threats on anti-immigrant sentiment, but when
nationalism is high there is no significant effect. This suggests that there is need for more
research on the effect of the specific beliefs of a group on its members’ acceptance of
immigrants, and on the way in which individuals’ framing of their national identity informs
the extent to which they'll accept immigrants.
Results of these regressions can be found in the table below. In the table, model 1 is the
entire sample of simulated data, model 2 is only those simulations resulting in low
nationalism, and model 3 is only those simulations resulting in high nationalism.

38

To further investigate these relationships, we graphed the two nationalism clusters (high
and low) and their effects on anti-immigrant sentiment as a function of how intense the
different threat clusters are.

39

What is notable here is that there is a wide range of results, but very clear clusters for the
two settings. When visualizing the same dynamics for social and predatory threats, we
observed a similar pattern.

40

In addition, there is a correlation between media use and anti-immigrant values, but its
only significant when religiosity is low. This suggests that religious values are guiding antiimmigrant values in some (but not all) circumstances. The data also seem to suggest that
secular ideologies can also have an effect although that effect is different when looking at
religious beliefs vs. religious identities.
In addition, those simulations resulting in high anthropomorphic promiscuity (likelihood
of attributing things to supernatural agents) are not as affected by the media. But for those
who have low anthropomorphic promiscuity, there is a significant negative effect on antiimmigrant sentiment from the percentage of the media that is negative.
In the table below, statistical results for all 4 regressions are presented in full. The data is
subset as follows: model 1-low sociographic prudery, model 2-high sociographic prudery,
model 3, low anthropomorphic promiscuity, model 4, high anthropomorphic promiscuity.

41

42

Key Findings
The goal of these studies was to assess complex questions during the COVID-19
pandemic around the relationships between nationalism, religiosity, and anti-immigrant
sentiment from a socio-cognitive perspective. The intent of the project was to develop and
test a system dynamics model that theoretically integrated and investigated these
relationships, serving as a foundation for future research on the destabilizing effects of
contagion threats. The importance of these issues is evident from daily news about the
struggle between relatively liberal pan-European institutions and neo-nationalist parties.
Many of the latter portray religion as an important source of their values, which shapes our
increasingly socially and politically polarized environment.
Our simulation results suggest that the negative effect of the media and social media on
anti-immigrant values is highest when religiosity is low, not when religiosity is high. So,
while there is a correlation there between media and anti-immigrant values, it is only
significant for people with lower religiosity. This indicates that religious values are guiding
anti-immigrant values in some (but not all) circumstances.
Another important finding was that when nationalism is low, there is a significant effect of
financial threats on anti-immigrant sentiment, but when nationalism is high there is no
significant effect of financial threats on anti-immigrant sentiment. As noted above, this
suggests that there is need for more research on the effect of the specific beliefs of a group
on its members’ acceptance of immigrants, and on the way in which individuals’ framing
of their national identity informs the extent to which they'll accept immigrants.
In assessing our threat measures, one of the things that stood out was that, as a scale, our
threat measure did not have good validity as a single measure. We found that contagion
and financial threats have a significant negative relationship with immigrant attitudes, while
social threats have a positive relationship. This suggests that those who perceive more
social threats are less likely to want immigrant neighbors, but those who perceive more
contagion or financial threats are less likely to respond negatively to questions about
having immigrant neighbors.
Directions for Further Research
The survey data leaves several unanswered questions for future research. First, there is a
well-documented effect of moral values being correlated with different political
persuasions, as discussed briefly in the theoretical background section above. The pattern
discovered here between the different threats suggests that evolved human responses to
environmental threats and contexts also help to explain social and economic beliefs. It is
possible that threats are an underlying cause for the moral domains that are observed in
the literature. Future research needs to investigate the relationship between threat and
moral domains as causal forces in political ideologies. Ideally, this would be done using
controlled or quasi-experimental methods in order to better untangle the possible causal
directions.
The relationships among different styles of identity fusion and nationalism and religiosity
should also be investigated. In particular, more careful, structured, qualitative research
could help to uncover the role of beliefs and semiotically distinct ways of self-identification
as potentially important causal factors shaping support for immigration policies. The
results of the survey were consistent with earlier literature demonstrating the extreme
“groupishness” that exists for fused individuals, as discussed briefly above, but also shed
light on previously undocumented effects of media use and content on fusion. Future
research can utilize previously deployed methods for analysing fusion as it pertains to
ingroup beliefs, which can be inferred from texts and qualitative fieldwork interviews.

43

The survey data suggested an interesting correlation between religiosity and nationalism.
This should be further investigated as both appear to be correlated with anti-immigrant
values, although the relationship can be moderated depending on religious group. This
indicates that there is a critical role of religious beliefs in that relationship, and the extent
to which they are informed by environmental threats is an open question.
The data from the simulation also provide a foundation for further research. For example,
the simulated data brought to light a very strong negative relationship between openness as
a personality trait and anthropomorphic promiscuity. Previous research has shown that
some personality variables do correlate with different patterns of belief/non-belief and
religious affiliation. However, the extent to which these affect specific dimensions of
religiosity, such as anthropomorphic promiscuity and sociographic prudery, is still
underexplored.
Both the survey and the simulation suggest that nationalism and religion are affected by
the same variables. As such, religion might not be a cause of nationalism (or nationalism
the cause of religion), but they could be correlated because of mutual causation. Generally,
however, there is a clear trend where more frequent religious attendance can result in
higher levels of nationalism. This is probably the most pressing unanswered question of
this research. If in fact religion and nationalism are correlated, it could be because they
both have some of the same underlying causes. It could be that the same underlying
cognitive capacities or tendencies are the foundation for both religion and nationalism, but
that religion and nationalism per se have independent effects on anti-immigrant sentiment.
If so, it would be problematic to assume that the religious and nationalist effects on antiimmigrant support should be addressed in exactly the same way.

44

References
Faulkner, J., Schaller, M., Park, J. H., & Duncan, L. A. (2004). Evolved disease-avoidance
mechanisms and contemporary xenophobic attitudes. Group Processes and Intergroup
Relations, 7, 333 353.
Gómez, A. (2020): What doesn’t kill us makes us stronger: the COVID-19 pandemic
transforms anonymous citizens into devoted actors. International Journal of Social
Psychology, DOI: 10.1080/02134748.2020.1783838
Alizadeh, M., Weber, I., Cioffi-Revilla, C., Fortunato, S., & Macy, M. (2019). Psychology
and morality of political extremists: Evidence from Twitter language analysis of
alt-right and Antifa. EPJ Data Science, 8(1), 17.
https://doi.org/10.1140/epjds/s13688-019-0193-9
Bonin, K., & Lane, J. E. (n.d.). Identity Fusion, Devoted Actor Theory, and Extremism. In
Routledge Handbook of Evolution and Religion. Routledge.
Gómez, Á. (2020). What doesn ’ t kill us makes us stronger: The COVID-19 pandemic
transforms anonymous citizens into devoted actors ( Lo que no nos mata nos
hace más fuertes: La pandemia de COVID-19. International Journal of Social
Psychology, 00(00), 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1080/02134748.2020.1783838
Gómez, Á., Brooks, M. L., Buhrmester, M. D., Vázquez, A., Jetten, J., & Swann, W. B.
(2011). On the nature of identity fusion: Insights into the construct and a new
measure. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 100(5), 918–933.
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0022642
Graham, J., Haidt, J., & Nosek, B. A. (2009). Liberals and Conservatives Rely on Different
Sets of Moral Foundations. Personality Processes and Individual Differences, 96(5), 1029–
1046. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0015141
Iyer, R., Koleva, S., Graham, J., Ditto, P., & Haidt, J. (2012). Understanding libertarian
morality: The psychological dispositions of self-identified libertarians. PLoS ONE,
7(8). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0042366

45

Jong, J., Bluemke, M., & Halberstadt, J. (2013). Fear of death and supernatural beliefs:
Developing a new supernatural belief scale to test the relationship. European Journal
of Personality, 27(5), 495–506. https://doi.org/10.1002/per.1898
Jong, J., Whitehouse, H., Kavanagh, C., & Lane, J. E. (2016). Shared Trauma Leads to
Identity Fusion via Personal Reflection. PLoS ONE, 10(12), e0145611.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0145611
Liénard, P., & Boyer, P. (2006). Whence Collective Rituals? A Cultural Selection Model of
Ritualized Behavior. American Anthropologist, 108(4), 814–827.
Mansillo, L. (2016). Loyal to the Crown: Shifting public opinion towards the monarchy in
Australia. Australian Journal of Political Science, 51(2), 213–235.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10361146.2015.1123674
Postmes, T., Spears, R., Lee, A. T., & Novak, R. J. (2005). Individuality and social
influence in groups: Inductive and deductive routes to group identity. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 89(5), 747–763. https://doi.org/10.1037/00223514.89.5.747
Shults, F. L. (2014). Theology after the birth of God: Atheist conceptions in cognition and culture.
Palgrave Macmillan.
Shults, F. L. (2018). Practicing Safe Sects: Religious Reproduction in Scientific and Philosophical
Perspective. Brill Academic.
Shults, F. L., Gore, R., Wildman, W. J., Christopher, J., Lane, J. E., & Toft, M. D. (2018).
A Generative Model of the Mutual Escalation of Anxiety Between Religious
Groups. Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation, 21(4).
https://doi.org/10.18564/jasss.3840
Shults, F. L., Lane, J. E., Diallo, S., Lynch, C., Wildman, W. J., & Gore, R. (2018).
Modeling Terror Management Theory: Computer Simulations of the Impact of
Mortality Salience on Religiosity. Religion, Brain & Behavior, 8(1), 77–100.

46

Swann, W. B., Jetten, J., Gómez, Á., Whitehouse, H., & Bastian, B. (2012). When group
membership gets personal: A theory of identity fusion. Psychological Review, 119(3),
441–456. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0028589
The AnyLogic Company. (2017). AnyLogic 8.2.3 (8.2.3). The AnyLogic Company.
Whitehouse, H., Jong, J., Buhrmester, M. D., Bastian, B., Kavanagh, C. M., Newson, M.,
Matthews, M., Lanman, J. A., & Gavrilets, S. (2017). The evolution of identity
fusion and extreme cooperation. Nature Scientific Reports, 7(44292), 1–10.
https://doi.org/10.1038/srep44292
Whitehouse, H., & Lanman, J. A. (2014). The Ties that Bind US: Ritual, Fusion, and
Identification. Current Anthropology, 55(6), 674–695.

47

