Steering a Historical Disease Forecasting Model Under a Pandemic:
Case of Flu and COVID-19
Alexander Rodríguez*§ , Nikhil Muralidhar†§ , Bijaya Adhikari‡ , Anika Tabassum*† ,
Naren Ramakrishnan† , B. Aditya Prakash*

arXiv:2009.11407v2 [cs.LG] 24 Dec 2020

*

College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA
†
Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech, Arlington, USA
‡
Department of Computer Science, University of Iowa, Iowa City, USA
{arodriguezc, badityap}@gatech.edu, {nik90, anikat1, naren}@cs.vt.edu, bijaya-adhikari@uiowa.edu

Abstract
Forecasting influenza in a timely manner aids health organizations and policymakers in adequate preparation and decision making. However, effective influenza forecasting still
remains a challenge despite increasing research interest. It is
even more challenging amidst the COVID pandemic, when
the influenza-like illness (ILI) counts are affected by various
factors such as symptomatic similarities with COVID-19 and
shift in healthcare seeking patterns of the general population.
Under the current pandemic, historical influenza models carry
valuable expertise about the disease dynamics but face difficulties adapting. Therefore, we propose C ALI -N ET, a neural
transfer learning architecture which allows us to ’steer’ a historical disease forecasting model to new scenarios where flu
and COVID co-exist. Our framework enables this adaptation
by automatically learning when it should emphasize learning
from COVID-related signals and when it should learn from
the historical model. Thus, we exploit representations learned
from historical ILI data as well as the limited COVID-related
signals. Our experiments demonstrate that our approach is
successful in adapting a historical forecasting model to the
current pandemic. In addition, we show that success in our
primary goal, adaptation, does not sacrifice overall performance as compared with state-of-the-art influenza forecasting
approaches.

1

Introduction

Influenza is a seasonal virus which affects 9–45 million people annually in the United States alone resulting in between
12,000–61,000 deaths. Forecasting flu outbreak progression
each year is an important and non-trivial task due to many
confounding social, biological, and demographic factors. Accurate forecasts of the onset, peak and incidence can all aid
significantly toward informing personalized policy roll out to
minimize the effects of the flu season. To this end, the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has been organizing the FluSight challenge for the past several years, where
the goal is to predict weighted influenza-like-illness counts
(wILI) throughout the flu season in the United States (Biggerstaff et al. 2016). wILI measures the percentage of healthcare
§

equal contribution
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

seekers who show influenza like symptoms. Estimating various measures related to the progression of a flu season (such
as future incidence) gives policymakers valuable lead time to
plan interventions and optimize supply chain decisions.
Moreover, the world has also been experiencing the devastating impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic which has sharply
illustrated our enormous vulnerability to emerging infectious
diseases. Hence in addition to being affected by various biological and demographic factors, wILI counts may now get
further ‘contaminated’ in the current (and possibly future) influenza seasons, in part due to symptomatic similarities with
COVID. Such miscounting manifests as significant changes
in wILI seasonal progression as observed in Fig. 1(a). Here
the wILI curve for the current season 2019-2020 (contaminated by COVID, bold black) clearly shows a very different
pattern compared to the previous seasons (in grey). To capture the deviance of the current wILI season and to forecast
it in presence of COVID, we require a novel approach. Accurate forecasts of these unexpected trends in the current season
are very helpful for resource allocation and healthcare worker
deployment. Additionally, predicting wILI can also be used
to help with indirect COVID surveillance (Castrofino et al.
2020; Boëlle et al. 2020) - specially useful at the early stages
of the pandemic, when there were no well established surveillance mechanisms for COVID. Finally, it is widely believed
that COVID may be in circulation for a long period of time.
Additionally, wILI itself models a mix of flu strains (CDC
2020). Hence, more generally, such a method can be used
to disambiguate trends between historical strains and new
emerging strains during a flu season.
There has been a recent spate of work on flu forecasting
using statistical approaches usually trained on historical wILI
data (Adhikari et al. 2019). However, this new forecasting
problem of adapting to a new emerging pandemic scenario
is complex and cannot be addressed by traditional historical
wILI methods alone. See Fig. 1(b); current methods based on
historical wILI cannot predict the uptrend, while our method
(in red) can. The atypical nature of our ‘COVID-ILI’ season
may be caused by multiple co-occurring phenomena, e.g., the
actual COVID-19 infections, the corresponding shutdowns
and societal lock-downs and also changes in the healthcareseeking behaviors of the public. This leads to the peak in

Figure 1: (a) A novel forecasting scenario due to an emerging pandemic. Note the difference between the current and past
seasons. (b) Established influenza forecasting methods are not able to adapt to uptrend caused by COVID. (c) Exogenous COVID
related signals correlate better with wILI trend changes (due to contamination), which we exploit for more accurate forecasting.
COVID-ILI cases to be “out of step” with traditional wILI
seasonal trends. As this feature is exclusive to this season,
capturing the new trend is a major challenge.
Note that using only the historical wILI seasons is not
sufficient to overcome it. Hence for this novel problem, we
propose to leverage external COVID-related signals such as
confirmed cases, hospitalizations, and emergency room visits
as well. This leads us to the second challenge, viz. how to
effectively model the COVID-ILI curve with new COVIDrelated signals, while also leveraging past prior knowledge
present in the previous wILI seasons? However, note that
these external signals are not available for historical wILI
seasons. How do we address the imbalance in data to leverage both of these data sources? Further, as the contaminated
COVID-ILI is a very new phenomenon which has suddenly
emerged, there is limited data regarding the same from external signals and hence, a significant challenge is also to learn
to model it effectively under data paucity.
To address these challenges, we propose C ALI -N ET
(COVID Augmented ILI deep Network), a principled way to
‘steer’ flu-forecasting models to adapt to new scenarios where
flu and COVID co-exist. We employ transfer learning and
knowledge distillation approaches to ensure effective transfer
of knowledge of the historical wILI trends. We incorporate
multiple COVID-related data signals all of which help capture the complex data contamination process showcased by
COVID-ILI. As shown in Fig. 1(c), these exogenous signals
correlate better with the anomalous trends caused by COVID.
Finally, in order to alleviate the data paucity issue, we train a
single global architecture with explicit spatial constraints to
model COVID-ILI trends of all regions as opposed to previous approaches which have modeled each region separately
leading to a superior forecasting performance (See Sec. 5).
Our contributions are as follows:
1. We develop C ALI -N ET, a novel heterogeneous transfer
learning framework to adapt a flu forecasting historical
model into the new scenario of COVID-ILI forecasting.
2. We embed C ALI -N ET with a recurrent neural network
including domain-informed spatial constraints to capture
the spatiotemporal dynamics across different wILI regions.
3. We also employ a Knowledge Distillation scheme to explic-

itly transfer historical wILI knowledge to our target model
in C ALI -N ET, thereby alleviating the effect of paucity of
COVID-ILI data.
4. Finally, we show how C ALI -N ET succeeds in adaptation, and also perform a rigorous performance comparison
of C ALI -N ET with several state-of-the-art wILI forecasting baselines. In addition, we perform several quantitative
and qualitative experiments to understand the effects of
various components of C ALI -N ET.
Overall, more broadly, our work is geared towards adapting
a historical model to an emerging disease scenario, and we
specifically demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in
the context of wILI forecasting in the COVID-19 emerging
disease scenario. Appendix, code, and other resources can be
found online1.

2

Related Work

To summarize, we are the first to address the problem of
adapting to shifting trends using transfer learning and knowledge distillation in an epidemic forecasting setting, leveraging exogenous signals as well as historical models. Our
research draws from multiple lines of work.
Epidemic Forecasting: Several approaches for epidemic
forecasting have been proposed including statistical (Tizzoni
et al. 2012; Adhikari et al. 2019; Osthus et al. 2019; Brooks
et al. 2018), mechanistic (Shaman and Karspeck 2012; Zhang
et al. 2017), and ensemble (Reich et al. 2019b) approaches.
Several approaches rely on external signals such as environmental conditions and weather reports (Shaman, Goldstein, and Lipsitch 2010; Tamerius et al. 2013; Volkova et al.
2017), social media (Chen et al. 2016; Lee, Agrawal, and
Choudhary 2013), search engine data (Ginsberg et al. 2009;
Yuan et al. 2013), and a combination of multiple sources
(Chakraborty et al. 2014). Recently, there has been increasing
interest in deep learning for epidemic forecasting (Adhikari
et al. 2019; Wang, Chen, and Marathe 2019; Rodriguez et al.
2020). These methods typically exploit intra and inter seasonal trends. Other approaches like (Venna et al. 2017) are
limited to specific situations, e.g., for military populations.
1

Resources website: https://github.com/AdityaLab/CALI-Net

However, to the best of our knowledge, there has been no
work on developing deep architectures for adapting to trend
shifts using exogenous data.
Time Series Analysis: There are several data driven, statistical and model-based approaches that have been developed
for time series forecasting such as auto-regression, Kalmanfilters and groups/panels (Box et al. 2015; Sapankevych and
Sankar 2009). Recently, deep recurrent architectures (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) have shown great promise in
learning good representations of temporal evolution (Fu,
Zhang, and Li 2016; Muralidhar, Muthiah, and Ramakrishnan
2019; Connor, Martin, and Atlas 1994).
Transfer Learning within heterogeneous domains: This
challenging setting of transfer learning with heterogeneous
domains (different feature spaces) aims to leverage knowledge extracted from a source domain to a different but related
target domain. (Moon and Carbonell 2017) proposed to learn
feature mappings in a common-subspace, and then apply
shared neural layers where the transfer would occur. (Li et al.
2019) proposed transfer learning via deep matrix completion. (Yan et al. 2018) formulated this problem as an optimal
transport problem using the entropic Gromov-Wasserstein
discrepancy. We adapt the classification method in (Moon
and Carbonell 2017) to our regression setting, for effectively
transferring knowledge from the source to the target model
in our COVID-ILI forecasting task. Knowledge Distillation
(KD) is also a popular transfer learning method, to develop
shallow neural networks capable of yielding performance
similar to deeper models by learning to "mimic" their behavior (Ba and Caruana 2014; Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015).
(Saputra et al. 2019) inspects KD for deep pose regression.
The authors propose two regression specific losses, namely
the hint loss and the imitation loss which we adapt in this
work for COVID-ILI forecasting. Unlike our paper, most
KD work has been applied to classification and efforts for
adapting KD for regression have been sparse (Saputra et al.
2019; Takamoto, Morishita, and Imaoka 2020).

3

Background

COVID-ILI forecasting task: Here we consider a short term
forecasting task of predicting the next k wILI incidence given
the data till week t − 1 for each US HHS region and the national region. This corresponds to predicting the wILI values
for week {t, t + 1, . . . , t + k} at week t (matching the exact
real-time setting of the CDC tasks) for each region.
We are given a set of historical annual wILI time-series,
Yi = {yi1 , yi2 , . . . , yit−1 } for each region i. The wILI values
have been contaminated by COVID-19 for all weeks t ≥ w.
We also have various COVID-related exogenous data signals
w+1
Xi = {xw
, . . . , xt−1
}, where each feature vector xji
i , xi
i
is constructed using various signals such as COVID line list
data, test availability, crowd-sourced symptomatic data, and
social media. Our task is to forecast the next k wILI incidence
for all regions i ∈ I. Specifically, our novel problem is:
Problem 1 COVID-ILI Forecasting Problem
Given: a set of historical annual wILI time-series Yi =
{yi1 , yi2 , . . . , yit−1 } for regions i ∈ I and the set of COVIDw+1
related exogenous signals Xi = {xw
, . . . , xt−1
} for
i , xi
i

the current season and regions i ∈ I.
j
Predict: next k wILI incidences ∀t+k
j=t yi for each region i ∈ I.
Epideep for wILI forecasting. E PI D EEP (Adhikari et al.
2019) is a deep neural architecture designed specifically for
wILI forecasting. The core idea behind E PI D EEP is to leverage the seasonal similarity between the current season and
historical seasons to forecast various metrics of interest such
as next incidence values, onset of current season, the seasonal
peak value and peak time. To infer the seasonal similarity
between current and the historical season, it employs a deep
clustering module which learns latent low dimensional embeddings of the seasons.

4

Our Approach

In this section, we describe our method C ALI -N ET, which
models COVID-ILI by incorporating historical wILI knowledge as well as the limited new COVID-related exogenous
signals. Next we give an overview of how our approach
uses heterogeneous transfer learning (HTL), overcomes data
paucity issues, and controls the transfer of only useful knowledge and avoids negative transfer.

4.1

Exploiting Learned Representations from
Historical wILI via HTL

We leverage recent advances in HTL to incorporate the rich
historical wILI data. To that end, we use the E PI D EEP model
as our base model. E PI D EEP was designed to learn representations from historical wILI that embed seasonal and temporal
patterns. Here, we adapt the CTHL framework (Moon and
Carbonell 2017) to transfer knowledge from E PI D EEP.
In our HTL setting, a modified version of the E PI D EEP
model is the source model and we design a feature module
(discussed in Sec. 4.2) to be the target model. As depicted
in Fig. 2, the embeddings of the source and target are each
transformed by modules s and t respectively, such that the
latent embeddings of the source and target model are placed
into a common feature space. In this way, we are projecting
knowledge extracted from both heterogeneous feature spaces
into a shared latent space. Formally, the transformations may
be expressed as s : RMS → RMJ and t : RMT → RMJ ,
where MS and MT are the dimensions of the source and
target embeddings, respectively, and MJ is the dimension
of the joint latent feature space. After projecting representations from the source and the target models into a joint
latent feature space, a sequence of shared transformations
f1 : RMJ → RMA and f2 : RMJ → R is applied on them,
thereby transporting them both into the same latent space. On
top of this architecture, we employ a denoising autoencoder
to reconstruct the input data as we find it improves our latent
representations. These modules are depicted as s0 and t0 .

4.2

COVID-Augmented Exogenous Model
(C AEM)

Our target model from Sec. 4.1 could be a simple feedforward
network. Instead, to alleviate the data paucity that exists for
the COVID-related exogenous data, we develop the COVIDAugmented Exogenous Model (C AEM) which jointly models

Figure 2: Our proposed model C ALI -N ET. Our heterogeneous transfer learning architecture is designed to transfer knowledge
from E PI D EEP -CN about historical wILI trends to the C AEM module (using exogenous signals) for COVID-ILI forecasting
while addressing the challenges of negative transfer, spatial consistency and data paucity.
all regions exploiting regional interplay characteristics. Such
an approach allows us to extract the most out of our limited
training data enabling us to employ more sophisticated sequential architectures. To enable model awareness of multiple
regional patterns, we explicitly encode each region embedding r ∈ R1×hr , and pass to C AEM along with the exogenous
input data of the region for a particular week. The region embeddings are produced by an autoencoder whose task is to
reconstruct one-hot encodings of each region.
The data we consider exhibit sequential dependencies. In
order to model these dependencies, we employ the popular
GRU recurrent neural architecture (Cho et al. 2014). The
GRU is trained to encode temporal dependencies using data
from week t − W to week t − 1 and predict values for
week t + k. At each step of recurrence, the GRU receives as
input, exogenous data signals xt−λ
∈ R1×l (for week t − λ
i
with λ ∈ {W, W − 1, . . . , 1} and region i) and the region
embedding ri , both concatenated to form the full GRU input.
For simplicity, henceforth, we consider xt−λ
∈ R1×l+hr to
i
represent this concatenated input to the GRU (l is the number
of different data signals we employ and hr is the dimension
of the latent region embedding obtained from the C AEM
Region Embedding autoencoder).
Laplacian Regularization: Infectious diseases like COVID
and flu naturally also show strong spatial correlations and to
capture this aspect of the wILI season evolution across different regions effectively, we incorporate spatial constraints using Laplacian Regularization (Belkin, Matveeva, and Niyogi
2004) and predict COVID-ILI values for all regions jointly.
Let us consider the region graph G(V, E) where V (vertices)
indicates the number of regions (11 in our case including the
national region) and E indicates edges between the vertices.
Two regions are considered to have an edge between them
if they are bordering each other. We construct G based on
region demarcations provided by the HHS/CDC and connect

the national region to all other regions.
The optimization objective for C AEM is as follows:
minΘRE ΘF ||F (Xt−W :t−1 ; ΘF ) − Y t ||22 +
RE(E; ΘRE ) + T r(hT Lh)

(1)

In Eq. 1, ΘRE , ΘF represent the model parameters for
region embedding (RE) function and the recurrent forecasting (F) function respectively. The input to F, Xt−W :t−1 ∈
R|V |×l+hr , is the historical COVID-related exogenous data
for the past W weeks for all 11 regions (along with the regional embedding for each). The output of F, Y t ∈ R|V |×1
for week t includes forecasts for all 11 regions. The region
embedding is generated using an autoencoder which accepts
the one-hot encoding for all regions E ∈ B|V |×|V | . Finally,
h ∈ R1×hr is the hidden representation of the input sequence generated by the forecasting model F at the end of the
recurrence which is used to enforce regional representation
similarity governed by the normalized Laplacian (L) of graph
G. Laplacian regularization has been shown to systematically
enforce regional similarity, effectively capturing spatial correlations (Subbian and Banerjee 2013). Both the RE and F
modules of C AEM are jointly trained coupled with Laplacian
regularization. It must be noted that when integrated into
C ALI -N ET, the function F includes the GRU parameters and
the parameters for transformations t, f1 , f2 employed to yield
the final k-week ahead predictions.

4.3

Attentive Knowledge Distillation Loss

A mechanism for the target model to exercise control over
knowledge transfer and prevent negative transfer is necessary
in our setting to avoid the transfer of possibly erroneous
predictions made by E PI D EEP for the atypical portions of the
current influenza season. To enable this, we employ attentive
knowledge distillation (KD) techniques. Recently, (Saputra

et al. 2019) has employed KD in deep pose estimation. We
noticed that our modification to this method is capable of
not only transferring knowledge from E PI D EEP (our source
model) to C AEM (our target model) but also showcases how
to selectively transfer knowledge based on the quality of
source model predictions.
Adapting E PI D EEP: In order to achieve effective transfer of
knowledge from E PI D EEP to C AEM, we modify the existing
E PI D EEP architecture. E PI D EEP, by design, requires a different model to be trained for each week in the season which
is not ideal for effective knowledge transfer. Hence, to prevent this, we modify E PI D EEP into E PI D EEP -CN (EpiDeepC ALI -N ET) which incrementally re-trains the same model
for each week in the season, thereby allowing the KD losses
to be applied to the same set of E PI D EEP -CN parameters, enabling more efficient knowledge transfer to C AEM. Specifics
about E PI D EEP -CN are in our appendix.
The training datasets for E PI D EEP -CN and C AEM are
not the same, however they share an overlapping subset of
data, from January 2020 onward when the COVID pandemic
started. Therefore, we enforce the KD loss only on this subset
of the training data. Our KD loss is composed of two terms:
imitation loss LIm and hint loss LHint , described mathematically as follows,
n

LKD = α

1X
2
2
Φi kŷs − ŷt k + Φi kΨs − Ψt ki
n i=1 | {z }i
|
{z
}
LIm

where Φi =


1−

kŷs −yk2i
η



(2)

LHint

, and Ψs and Ψt are the out-

put embeddings of s and t, respectively; i ∈ {1, . . . , n}
is the index for each training observation, and n the
batch size; η = max (es ) − min (es ) is a normalizing factor (i.e
n range of squared error losses
o of source model) and
2
es = ky − ŷs kj : j = 1, . . . , N , the actual set of squared
errors between the source predictions and ground truth. N is
the total number of observations in the overlap training data;
Φi is the attention weight assigned to the ith training observation. The attention is a function of how well the source model
is able to predict (ŷs ) a particular ground truth target y. The
attention weights are applied over the imitation loss between
the source predictions (ŷs ) and the ground truth (ŷt ) as well
as over the hint loss between the latent output embeddings
Ψs and Ψt to ensure transfer of knowledge at multiple levels
in the architecture from the source E PI D EEP -CN to the target
C AEM. The goal of KD is to enforce a unidirectional transfer
from the source (E PI D EEP -CN) to the target (C AEM) model.
Hence KD losses do not affect the representations learned by
E PI D EEP -CN and module s.

5

Experiments

Setup. All experiments are conducted using a 4 Xeon E74850 CPU with 512GB of 1066 Mhz main memory. Our
method implemented in PyTorch (implementation details in
the appendix) is very fast, training for one predictive task in
about 3 mins. Here, we present our results for next incidence
prediction (i.e. k = 1). We present results for next-two incidence predictions in the appendix, which are similar. Note

that we define T1 as the period of non-seasonal rise of wILI
due to contamination by COVID-19 related issues (EWs 911), T2 as the time period when COVID-ILI trend is declining
more in tune with the wILI pattern (EWs 12-15), and T as
the entire course (EWs 9-15).
Data. We use the historical weighted Influenza-like Illness
(wILI) data released by the CDC which collects it through
the Outpatient Influenza-like Illness Surveillance Network
(ILINet). ILINet consists of more than 3,500 outpatient
healthcare providers all over the US. We refer to wILI from
June 2004 until Dec 2019 as historical wILI, and wILI from
January 2020 as COVID-wILI. Next, Table 1 details the various signal types we employ for COVID-related exogenous
data. A more detailed description of each data signal can be
found in the appendix. All datasets are publicly available and
were collected in May 2020.
Goals. In our experiments we aim to demonstrate that our
method C ALI -N ET can systematically steer a historical
model to the new COVID-ILI scenario by enabling it to
learn from Covid-related signals, when appropriate. We are
interested in determining whether our model can transfer
useful information from the historical model (i.e. E PI D EEP)
when required and if it can prevent transfer of detrimental
information. Specifically, our questions are:
Transfer Learning
Q1. Is C ALI -N ET able to achieve successful positive transfer
to model the contamination of wILI values?
Q2. Does C ALI -N ET prevent negative transfer by automatically recognizing when wILI and COVID-19 trends deviate?
Forecasting Performance
Q3. Does C ALI -N ET’s emphasis on transfer learning sacrifice
overall performance with respect to state-of-the-art methods?
Ablation Studies
Q4. How does each facet of C ALI -N ET affect COVID-ILI
forecasting performance?
Q5. What data signals are most relevant to COVID-ILI forecasting?
Q1 and Q2, which are about transfer learning, are aligned
with the main goal of this paper. In Q3, we are interested in determining whether C ALI -N ET sacrifices any overall forecasting performance, as compared to the state-of-the art (SOTA)
baselines, by being too focused on balancing the transfer of
knowledge? In Q4 and Q5, we analyze the importance of
different components and data signals to performance.
Training and Optimization. For training C ALI -N ET, we do
the following. We found that, for practical purposes, it is
convenient to pre-train E PI D EEP -CN, and then remove its
last feedforward layers (decoder). Hence the concatenated
output of the RNN encoder and the embedding mapper are
input to module s. During joint training, we do not modify
E PI D EEP -CN’s pre-trained parameters. As recommended in
(Moon and Carbonell 2017), we train the HTL architecture
in an alternating fashion.
Baselines. We use traditional historical wILI forecasting
methods used in literature (Reich et al. 2019a): E PI D EEP,
extended D ELTA D ENSITY from Delphi Group (Brooks et al.
2018) (which is SOTA as the top performing method in recent
CDC influenza forecasting challenges (Reich et al. 2019a)),
SARIMA from ReichLab (Ray et al. 2017) (seasonal autore-

Table 1: Overview of COVID-Related Exogenous Data.
Type of signal
(DS1) Line list
based

Description
They are a
direct function
of the disease spread

(DS2) Testing
based

Related to social
policy and behavioral
considerations
Crowdsourced symptomatic
data from personal devices
Social media activity

(DS3) Crowdsourced
symptoms based
(DS4) Social media

Signals
1. Confirmed cases; 2. UCI beds;
3. Hospitalizations; 4. People on
ventilation; 5. Recovered; 6. Deaths;
7. Hospitalization rate;
8. ILI ER visits; 9. CLI ER visits
10. People tested; 11. Negative cases;
12. Emergency facilities reporting;
13. No. of providers;
14. Digital thermometer readings;

Source
(COVID-Tracking 2020; CDC 2020)
(JHU 2020)

15. Health Related Tweets

(Dredze et al. 2014)

gressive method, top performing in recent CDC challenges),
and E MPIRICAL BAYES (Brooks et al. 2015) (which leverages transformation of historical seasons to forecast the current season), and HIST (common persistence baseline which
forecasts based on weekly average of the historical seasons).

5.1

Q1: Leveraging positive transfer for
Covid-contaminated wILI

The effect of contamination is most pronounced in T1 , leading to the COVID-ILI curve exhibiting uncharacteristic nontrivial progression dynamics. Therefore, to effectively steer
our historical model, C ALI -N ET automatically leverages positive transfer of Covid-related signals into E PI D EEP. The
effect of this automatic positive transfer is shown in Fig. 3(a)
where we see that C ALI -N ET significantly outperforms E PI D EEP across all regions, thanks to our architecture.

5.2

(b) Negative transfer stage

Figure 3: (a) Our C ALI -N ET framework effectively achieves
good forecasts of the uncharacteristic trend in period T1
by steering our influenza forecasting historical model E PI D EEP with knowledge learned from Covid-related signals. (b)
Shows forecasting errors from period T2 , when the COVIDILI trend is declining more in tune with the traditional wILI
pattern. We notice that C ALI -N ET is competitive with E PI D EEP, also outperforming it in 6 out of 11 regions while
remaining competitive in the rest of the regions.

(Miller et al. 2018)

Q2: Does C ALI -N ET prevent negative
transfer automatically?

Having showcased the adaptation of C ALI -N ET in T1 , we
now show in Fig. 3(b) that our method is effective at preventing negative transfer when wILI is no longer aligned
with the exogenous COVID signals (i.e., period T 2). In the
first place, in some regions the wILI trajectory was never
significantly affected by COVID as confirmed COVID cases
started to increase significantly only once the influenza season ended. Second, COVID-affected wILI trajectories of
regions displayed a subsequent downtrend after a few weeks.
This may be due to the change in care-seeking behavior of
outpatients (Kou et al. 2020). In this stage, preventing negative transfer from COVID-related signals is needed, such
that our model displays more characteristics of traditional
influenza models. From Fig. 3(b), we see that C ALI -N ET is
better than E PI D EEP in a majority of the regions indicating
that it is able to effectively stop knowledge from misaligned
COVID signals from adversely affecting forecasting accuracy
thereby effectively preventing negative transfer.

5.3

(a) Positive transfer stage

(COVID-Tracking 2020; CDC 2020)

Q3: Does C ALI -N ET sacrifice overall
performance?

Sec 5.1 and 5.2 show that C ALI -N ET successfully achieves
the main goal of the paper i.e. steering a historical model in a
novel scenario. We now study if we sacrifice any performance
in this process. To this end, we compare C ALI -N ET with
the traditional SOTA wILI forecasting approaches for the
entire course T . Specifically, we quantify the number of
regions (among all 11), where each method outperforms all
others. Fig. 4 showcases our findings. Overall, C ALI -N ET is
able to match the performance of the SOTA historical wILI
forecasting models in forecasts for the entire course T and is
the top performer in 5 of 11 regions and is one of top 2 best
models in 10 out of 11 regions. Note that the traditional wILI
baselines do not capture the non-seasonal rise of wILI due to
COVID contamination in T1 (see Fig. 1 and the appendix).
Hence, we note that C ALI -N ET is the best-suited approach
for real-time forecasting in a novel scenario as it captures the
non-seasonal patterns while maintaining overall performance.
Moreover, we also noticed that C ALI -N ET outperforms all
baselines in regions worst affected by COVID (see appendix).

Figure 4: Overall results of C ALI -N ET compared to Empirical Bayes and SOTA baseline DeltaDensity. We show number
of regions in which each model yields best performance and
notice C ALI -N ET outperforms other models in 5 out of 11
regions, on par with DeltaDensity which also yields best performance in 5 other regions with SARIMA being the best in
a single region (i.e., Region 9). Models performing within
1% of the best model per region are considered equivalent
best performers. Hence C ALI -N ET yields competitive performance across the entire course T .

5.4

Q4 and Q5: Module, Data and Parameter
Importance and Sensitivity

Justification for C AEM Architecture. We conducted an ablation study testing the three components of C AEM: (a) regional reconstruction, (b) Laplacian regularization, and (c)
the recurrent model. We found that removing each of them
degrades performance showing their individual effectiveness.
Module Performance Analysis. The figure below
showcases RMSE evolution over period T2 for the
national region
for C ALI -N ET
and sub-models
of
C ALI -N ET
that do not have
transfer learning
capability. Both
GRU (standard
gated recurrent
unit model) and
the standalone C AEM model use exogenous data as C ALI N ET does. C ALI -N ET is the only model able to adapt quickly
to the downtrend in period T2 , due to the effect of the HTL
framework which prevents negative transfer of knowledge
from COVID related signals, while other models fail to adapt
and, in fact, predict rising or flat wILI forecasts.
From Sec. 5.1 - 5.3, we see that C ALI -N ET is the only
method capable of capturing both the initial uptrend of
COVID-ILI and the subsequent decline effectively, showing its usefulness for emerging diseases.
Effect of KD. We perform an ablation study to understand the
contribution of the proposed KD losses. Often the usefulness
of source (E PI D EEP -CN) and target (C AEM) modules vary
depending on the usefulness of the historical and exogenous
data sources. Our attentive KD distillation losses provide
structure and balance to the transferred knowledge.
We
compare
1-week
ahead
forecast-

ing performance of C ALI -N ET and a variant of C ALI -N ET with KD losses removed.
Specifically, see Fig. right;
each box is colored by
the ratio of RMSE of
C ALI -N ET and its variant
(capped at -1 and 1 to
help visualization). Green
cells indicate that C ALI N ET does better while red
cells indicate that C ALI N ET w/o KD losses does
better. We see that for 1-week ahead forecasting, structuring
the knowledge transferred from E PI D EEP proves to be valuable for most EWs. However, for long-term forecasting, KD
losses seem to downgrade guidance of E PI D EEP -CN (results
in appendix). This may be because the season seems to revert
to typical behavior in the time-frame predicted in long-term
forecasts.
Contribution of Exogenous Signals. In the figure below,
we can see the average overall RMSE obtained when a single
data bucket was removed during the training of C ALI -N ET.
We noticed that line list based
data (DS1) is very helpful in
COVID-ILI forecasting while
the effectiveness of testing
(DS2) and crowdsourced based
(DS3) data is slightly more varied across regions, an observation that resolves Q5. This also
suggests that data closer to the
disease is more reliable. More
detailed results (regional breakdown) are in the appendix.
Parameter Sensitivity. For the hyperparameters of C ALI N ET, we perform thorough experiments and demonstrate the
robustness of our method. Details in the appendix.

6

Discussion

Here we introduced the challenging COVID-ILI forecasting task, and proposed our novel approach C ALI -N ET. We
show the usefulness of a principled method to transfer relevant knowledge from an existing deep flu forecasting model
(based on rich historical data) to one relying on relevant
but limited recent COVID-related exogenous signals. Our
method is based on carefully designed components to avoid
negative transfer (by attentive KD losses), promote spatial
consistency (via Laplacian losses in a novel recurrent architecture C AEM), and also handle data paucity (via the global
nature of C AEM and other aspects). C ALI -N ET effectively
captures non-trivial atypical trends in COVID-ILI evolution
whereas other models and baselines do not. We also demonstrate how each of our components and data signals is important and useful for performance. These results provide
guidance for steering forecasting models in an emerging disease scenario. In future, we believe our techniques can be
applied to other source models (in addition to E PI D EEP -CN),
as well as designing more sophisticated architectures for the
target C AEM model. We can also explore adding interpretability to our forecasts for additional insights.

Acknowledgments
This paper is based on work partially supported by the NSF
(Expeditions CCF-1918770, CAREER IIS-2028586, RAPID
IIS-2027862, Medium IIS-1955883, NRT DGE-1545362,
IIS-1633363, OAC-1835660), CDC MInD program, ORNL
and funds/computing resources from Georgia Tech and GTRI.
B. A. was in part supported by the CDC MInD-Healthcare
U01CK000531-Supplement.

References
Adhikari, B.; Xu, X.; Ramakrishnan, N.; and Prakash, B. A. 2019.
Epideep: Exploiting embeddings for epidemic forecasting. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, 577–586.
Ba, J.; and Caruana, R. 2014. Do deep nets really need to be deep?
In Advances in neural information processing systems, 2654–2662.
Belkin, M.; Matveeva, I.; and Niyogi, P. 2004. Regularization
and semi-supervised learning on large graphs. In International
Conference on Computational Learning Theory, 624–638. Springer.
Biggerstaff, M.; Alper, D.; Dredze, M.; Fox, S.; Fung, I. C.-H.;
Hickmann, K. S.; Lewis, B.; Rosenfeld, R.; Shaman, J.; Tsou, M.H.; et al. 2016. Results from the centers for disease control and
prevention’s predict the 2013–2014 Influenza Season Challenge.
BMC infectious diseases 16(1): 357.
Boëlle, P.-Y.; Souty, C.; Launay, T.; Guerrisi, C.; Turbelin, C.; Behillil, S.; Enouf, V.; Poletto, C.; Lina, B.; van der Werf, S.; et al.
2020. Excess cases of influenza-like illnesses synchronous with
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) epidemic, France, March 2020.
Eurosurveillance 25(14): 2000326.
Box, G. E.; Jenkins, G. M.; Reinsel, G. C.; and Ljung, G. M. 2015.
Time series analysis: forecasting and control. John Wiley & Sons.
Brooks, L. C.; Farrow, D. C.; Hyun, S.; Tibshirani, R. J.; and Rosenfeld, R. 2015. Flexible modeling of epidemics with an empirical
Bayes framework. PLoS computational biology 11(8): e1004382.
Brooks, L. C.; Farrow, D. C.; Hyun, S.; Tibshirani, R. J.; and
Rosenfeld, R. 2018. Nonmechanistic forecasts of seasonal influenza with iterative one-week-ahead distributions. PLOS Computational Biology 14(6): e1006134. ISSN 1553-7358. doi:
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006134.
Castrofino, A.; Del Castillo, G.; Grosso, F.; Barone, A.; Gramegna,
M.; Galli, C.; Tirani, M.; Castaldi, S.; Pariani, E.; and Cereda, D.
2020. Influenza surveillance system and Covid-19. European
Journal of Public Health 30(Supplement_5): ckaa165–354.
CDC. 2020. Weekly U.S. Influenza Surveillance Report. URL
https://cdc.gov/flu/weekly/index.html.
Chakraborty, P.; Khadivi, P.; Lewis, B.; Mahendiran, A.; Chen, J.;
Butler, P.; Nsoesie, E. O.; Mekaru, S. R.; Brownstein, J. S.; Marathe,
M. V.; et al. 2014. Forecasting a moving target: Ensemble models
for ILI case count predictions. In Proceedings of the 2014 SIAM
international conference on data mining, 262–270. SIAM.

Connor, J. T.; Martin, R. D.; and Atlas, L. E. 1994. Recurrent neural
networks and robust time series prediction. IEEE transactions on
neural networks 5(2): 240–254.
COVID-Tracking. 2020. The COVID Tracking Project. URL https:
//covidtracking.com.
Dredze, M.; Cheng, R.; Paul, M. J.; and Broniatowski, D. 2014.
HealthTweets. org: a platform for public health surveillance using
Twitter. In Workshops at the Twenty-Eighth AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence.
Fu, R.; Zhang, Z.; and Li, L. 2016. Using LSTM and GRU neural
network methods for traffic flow prediction. In 2016 31st Youth
Academic Annual Conference of Chinese Association of Automation
(YAC), 324–328. IEEE.
Ginsberg, J.; Mohebbi, M. H.; Patel, R. S.; Brammer, L.; Smolinski,
M. S.; and Brilliant, L. 2009. Detecting influenza epidemics using
search engine query data. Nature 457(7232): 1012.
Hinton, G.; Vinyals, O.; and Dean, J. 2015. Distilling the knowledge
in a neural network. arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531 .
Hochreiter, S.; and Schmidhuber, J. 1997. Long short-term memory.
Neural computation 9(8): 1735–1780.
JHU. 2020. JHU CSSE COVID-19 Dashboard.
//coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html.

URL https:

Kou, S.; Yang, S.; Chang, C.-J.; Ho, T.-H.; and Graver, L. 2020.
Unmasking the Actual COVID-19 Case Count. Clinical Infectious
Diseases .
Lee, K.; Agrawal, A.; and Choudhary, A. 2013. Real-time disease
surveillance using twitter data: demonstration on flu and cancer. In
Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGKDD international conference on
Knowledge discovery and data mining, 1474–1477. ACM.
Li, H.; Pan, S. J.; Wan, R.; and Kot, A. C. 2019. Heterogeneous
Transfer Learning via Deep Matrix Completion with Adversarial
Kernel Embedding. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence 33: 8602–8609. ISSN 2374-3468, 2159-5399.
doi:10.1609/aaai.v33i01.33018602.
Miller, A. C.; Singh, I.; Koehler, E.; and Polgreen, P. M.
2018. A smartphone-driven thermometer application for real-time
population-and individual-level influenza surveillance. Clinical
Infectious Diseases 67(3): 388–397.
Moon, S.; and Carbonell, J. G. 2017. Completely Heterogeneous
Transfer Learning with Attention-What And What Not To Transfer. In Proceedings of the 26th International Joint Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, volume 1, 2508–2514. AAAI Press.
Muralidhar, N.; Muthiah, S.; and Ramakrishnan, N. 2019. DyAt
nets: dynamic attention networks for state forecasting in cyberphysical systems. In Proceedings of the 28th International Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 3180–3186. AAAI Press.
Osthus, D.; Gattiker, J.; Priedhorsky, R.; Del Valle, S. Y.; et al. 2019.
Dynamic Bayesian influenza forecasting in the United States with
hierarchical discrepancy (with discussion). Bayesian Analysis 14(1):
261–312.

Chen, L.; Hossain, K. T.; Butler, P.; Ramakrishnan, N.; and Prakash,
B. A. 2016. Syndromic surveillance of Flu on Twitter using weakly
supervised temporal topic models. Data mining and knowledge
discovery 30(3): 681–710.

Ray, E. L.; Sakrejda, K.; Lauer, S. A.; Johansson, M. A.; and Reich,
N. G. 2017. Infectious disease prediction with kernel conditional
density estimation: Infectious disease prediction with kernel conditional density estimation. Statistics in Medicine 36(30): 4908–4929.
ISSN 02776715. doi:10.1002/sim.7488.

Cho, K.; Van Merriënboer, B.; Gulcehre, C.; Bahdanau, D.;
Bougares, F.; Schwenk, H.; and Bengio, Y. 2014. Learning phrase
representations using RNN encoder-decoder for statistical machine
translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.1078 .

Reich, N. G.; Brooks, L. C.; Fox, S. J.; Kandula, S.; McGowan,
C. J.; Moore, E.; Osthus, D.; Ray, E. L.; Tushar, A.; Yamana, T. K.;
Biggerstaff, M.; Johansson, M. A.; Rosenfeld, R.; and Shaman,
J. 2019a. A collaborative multiyear, multimodel assessment of

seasonal influenza forecasting in the United States. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 201812594. ISSN 0027-8424,
1091-6490. doi:10.1073/pnas.1812594116.
Reich, N. G.; McGowan, C. J.; Yamana, T. K.; Tushar, A.; Ray,
E. L.; Osthus, D.; Kandula, S.; Brooks, L. C.; Crawford-Crudell,
W.; Gibson, G. C.; et al. 2019b. Accuracy of real-time multi-model
ensemble forecasts for seasonal influenza in the US. PLoS computational biology 15(11).
Rodriguez, A.; Tabassum, A.; Cui, J.; Xie, J.; Ho, J.; Agarwal, P.;
Adhikari, B.; and Prakash, B. A. 2020. DeepCOVID: An Operational Deep Learning-driven Framework for Explainable Real-time
COVID-19 Forecasting. medRxiv .
Sapankevych, N. I.; and Sankar, R. 2009. Time series prediction
using support vector machines: a survey. IEEE Computational
Intelligence Magazine 4(2).
Saputra, M. R. U.; de Gusmao, P. P.; Almalioglu, Y.; Markham, A.;
and Trigoni, N. 2019. Distilling knowledge from a deep pose regressor network. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference
on Computer Vision, 263–272.
Shaman, J.; Goldstein, E.; and Lipsitch, M. 2010. Absolute humidity
and pandemic versus epidemic influenza. American journal of
epidemiology 173(2): 127–135.
Shaman, J.; and Karspeck, A. 2012. Forecasting seasonal outbreaks
of influenza. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
109(50): 20425–20430.
Subbian, K.; and Banerjee, A. 2013. Climate multi-model regression using spatial smoothing. In Proceedings of the 2013 SIAM
International Conference on Data Mining, 324–332. SIAM.
Takamoto, M.; Morishita, Y.; and Imaoka, H. 2020. An Efficient
Method of Training Small Models for Regression Problems with
Knowledge Distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.12597 .
Tamerius, J. D.; Shaman, J.; Alonso, W. J.; Bloom-Feshbach, K.;
Uejio, C. K.; Comrie, A.; and Viboud, C. 2013. Environmental
predictors of seasonal influenza epidemics across temperate and
tropical climates. PLoS pathogens 9(3): e1003194.
Tizzoni, M.; Bajardi, P.; Poletto, C.; Ramasco, J. J.; Balcan, D.;
Gonçalves, B.; Perra, N.; Colizza, V.; and Vespignani, A. 2012.
Real-time numerical forecast of global epidemic spreading: case
study of 2009 A/H1N1pdm. BMC medicine 10(1): 165.
Venna, S. R.; Tavanaei, A.; Gottumukkala, R. N.; Raghavan, V. V.;
Maida, A.; and Nichols, S. 2017. A novel data-driven model for
real-time influenza forecasting. bioRxiv 185512.
Volkova, S.; Ayton, E.; Porterfield, K.; and Corley, C. D. 2017.
Forecasting influenza-like illness dynamics for military populations
using neural networks and social media. PloS one 12(12): e0188941.
Wang, L.; Chen, J.; and Marathe, M. 2019. DEFSI: Deep learning
based epidemic forecasting with synthetic information. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 33,
9607–9612.
Yan, Y.; Li, W.; Wu, H.; Min, H.; Tan, M.; and Wu, Q. 2018. SemiSupervised Optimal Transport for Heterogeneous Domain Adaptation. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2969–2975. Stockholm, Sweden:
International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organization. ISBN 978-0-9992411-2-7. doi:10.24963/ijcai.2018/412.
Yuan, Q.; Nsoesie, E. O.; Lv, B.; Peng, G.; Chunara, R.; and Brownstein, J. S. 2013. Monitoring influenza epidemics in china with
search query from baidu. PloS one 8(5): e64323.

Zhang, Q.; Perra, N.; Perrotta, D.; Tizzoni, M.; Paolotti, D.; and
Vespignani, A. 2017. Forecasting seasonal influenza fusing digital
indicators and a mechanistic disease model. In Proceedings of
the 26th International Conference on World Wide Web, 311–319.
International World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee.

