Invited article
Hosting Journal/Specialty: Frontiers in Molecular Biosciences - Section Biological Modeling
and Simulation

Topic: “Understanding Protein Dynamics, Binding and Allostery for Drug Design”
Editors: Guang Hu, Pemra Doruker, Hongchun Li, Ebru Demet Akten

Title: Surveying the side-chain network approach to protein structure and
dynamics: The SARS-CoV-2 spike protein as an illustrative case
Anushka Halder1, Arinnia Anto2, Varsha Subramanyan3, Moitrayee Bhattacharyya1*, Smitha
Vishveshwara3*, Saraswathi Vishveshwara2*
1

Department of Pharmacology, Yale University, New Haven, United States

2

Molecular Biophysics Unit, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India

3

*

Department of Physics, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, United States

Corresponding

authors:

saraswathi@iisc.ac.in

moitrayee.bhattacharyya@yale.edu,

smivish@illinois.edu,

Abstract
Network theory-based approaches provide valuable insights into the variations in global
structural connectivity between differing dynamical states of proteins. Our objective is to
review network-based analyses to elucidate such variations, especially in the context of subtle
conformational changes. We present technical details of the construction and analyses of
protein structure networks, encompassing both the non-covalent connectivity and dynamics.
We examine the selection of optimal criteria for connectivity based on the physical concept of
percolation. We highlight the advantages of using side-chain based network metrics in contrast
to backbone measurements. As an illustrative example, we apply the described network
approach to investigate the global conformational change between the closed and partially open
states of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. This conformational change in the spike protein is
crucial for coronavirus entry and fusion into human cells. Our analysis reveals global structural
reorientations between the two states of the spike protein despite small changes between the
two states at the backbone level. We also observe some differences at strategic locations in
the structures, correlating with their functions, asserting the advantages of the side-chain
network analysis. Finally we present a view of allostery as a subtle synergistic-global change
between the ligand and the receptor, the incorporation of which would enhance the drug design
strategies.

A. Introduction
The concept of allostery has evolved for more than half a century (Monod et al., 1965;
Koshland et al., 1966; Cui and Karplus, 2008; Motlagh et al., 2014; Cooper and Dryden, 1984;
Changeux, 2011). This word in simple terms means ‘action at a distance’ and implies long
distance communication within and across the three-dimensional structures of proteins.
Fundamental understanding of the principles guiding allostery in proteins came from two
classical models, the concerted Monod-Wyman-Changeux (MWC) (Monod et al., 1965) model
and the sequential Koshland-Nemethy-Filmer (KNF) model (Koshland et al., 1966), with the
structural insights coming from one of the earliest crystal structures of haemoglobin (Perutz,
1970). An exponential increase in the availability of protein structures in different functional
states has improved our comprehension of the phenomenon of allostery (Greener and
Sternberg, 2018; Liu and Nussinov, 2016). Studies over the past decades have associated
allostery in proteins with accompanying conformational variations. Such conformational
changes range from dramatic alterations at protein backbone-level to subtle re-orchestrations
involving protein side-chains in the absence of appreciable backbone variations (Tsai and
Nussinov, 2014; Bhattacharyya and Vishveshwara, 2011; Salamanca Viloria et al., 2017;
Motlagh et al., 2014). It is this latter mode of conformational fluctuations and long-range
signaling that are more challenging to capture.
Current advances in both experimental and theoretical techniques have started shedding light
into these subtle conformational variations. In particular, long-range molecular dynamics (MD)
simulations, providing equilibrium conformational ensembles, have offered extensive
computational characterization of the conformational dynamics in proteins/protein-complexes
(Lindorff-Larsen et al., 2016; Mysore et al., 2020; Lindorff-Larsen et al., 2010; Karandur et
al., 2020). The goal of these studies ranges from understanding the fundamental biophysical
principles to more practical applications for drug design (De Vivo et al., 2016; Borhani and
Shaw, 2012). Over the past decades, this topic has been extensively discussed in many excellent
articles and reviews (Cui and Karplus, 2008; Bhattacharyya et al., 2016; De Ruvo et al., 2012;
Verkhivker et al., 2020; Bagler and Sinha, 2005; Ghosh and Vishveshwara, 2007; Astl et al.,
2019; Zhang et al., 2020; Zhang and Nussinov, 2019).
Network theory-based analyses of protein structures (Bagler and Sinha, 2005; Atilgan et al.,
2012) and dynamics have provided unprecedented insights into the global structural
connectivity of proteins and its complexes in the context of allostery and many other biological
processes (Atilgan et al., 2012; Krieger et al., 2020; Verkhivker et al., 2020; Bhattacharyya et

al., 2016; Gadiyaram et al., 2019; Di Paola et al., 2013). When combined with information
obtained from conformational variations as obtained from molecular dynamics, network
approaches have elucidated several examples of protein structure-function relationships
(Bhattacharyya et al., 2013; Papaleo, 2015; Doshi et al., 2016; Tse and Verkhivker, 2015;
Doruker et al., 2000; Sethi et al., 2009).
In essence, it has become possible to obtain a better perception of biological phenomena at
molecular level, such as allostery, evolutionary effects, transport phenomenon, mediated
through macromolecules, by employing two major concepts: (1) viewing macromolecules,
such as proteins, as one single connected entity, where perturbations can affect the
conformations at the local or at the global level, and (2) considering the dynamically accessible
conformations of proteins and the inter-conversion of their populations under different
conditions as a key to biological functions. Regarding the concept of viewing proteins as a
single unit, the connections at the non-covalent level play an important role since these are
pliable for minor perturbations that are encountered at normal physiological conditions, unlike
the covalently stitched polymer chains.
A number of approaches available in the literature (some of them referenced above) differ in
how we view the protein structure as a single unit, connected through non-covalent interactions.
One can focus on backbone connectivity alone, or connectivity at the level of side-chains
(explicit atoms or a representation through centroids) (Greene, 2012; Kayikci et al., 2018;
Bhattacharyya et al., 2016). There are a number of ways to define the connectivity criteria and
assign strengths of interactions. Similarly, the dynamical conformational landscape can be
obtained at the explicit atomic level or indirectly achieved through methods like ENM, which
provides cooperative modes of motion (Krieger et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020). The atomic
level description can be obtained experimentally through biophysical techniques such as X-ray
crystallography, cryo-EM, NMR, and computationally through molecular dynamics (MD)
simulations.
The identification of specific regions responsible for the overall perturbation and the reorganization of interactions to yield a different conformation in the landscape has received
great attention. This is a crucial step in the process of making the connection between molecular
events and protein functions. The methods range from direct analysis of the structures to the
ones developed based on the physical, mathematical, and engineering principles. Many such
concepts are integrated together in computational programs to obtain critical biological insights

(Verkhivker et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020; Greener and Sternberg, 2018). Network theory is
a widely used approach which provides explicit information on the role of constituent amino
acids on the stability of structure networks at a global level (Gadiyaram et al., 2018; Atilgan et
al., 2010; Brown et al., 2017). A vast range of experimental and computational studies have
taken up the challenge of correlating biological cellular functions to the molecular level
changes. Understanding protein connectivity and dynamics can provide molecular mechanistic
insights into the various biological processes, like allostery (Verkhivker et al., 2020; Atilgan et
al., 2007; Wang et al., 2020a), protein-protein or protein-nucleic acids interactions (Brinda and
Vishveshwara, 2005; Keskin et al., 2005; Sathyapriya et al., 2008; Sethi et al., 2009), and
ligand/perturbation-induced conformational variations (Csermely et al., 2013; Bandaru et al.,
2017; Creixell et al., 2018). Such calculations may also aid the identification of epitopes for
drug-binding and capture drug-induced conformational changes in proteins and proteincomplexes (Csermely et al., 2013; Krieger et al., 2020).
The focus of this review is to provide a brief account of the different network theory-based
techniques targeted at i) characterizing protein structures as a single entity connected by noncovalent interactions, and ii) integrating with conformational dynamics, for which several
comprehensive reviews are available (Verkhivker et al., 2020; Hu et al., 2017; Atilgan et al.,
2012). The main emphasis here is on the development and application of protein side-chain
network approaches (Bhattacharyya et al., 2016; Salamanca Viloria et al., 2017; Kayikci et al.,
2018), which have been shown to capture subtle conformational differences that are sometimes
elusive to conventional analyses, such as the root mean square deviation (RMSD) at the
backbone level. Here, we have considered the SARS-CoV-2 Spike glycoprotein (Zhu et al.,
2020) as an illustrative example to demonstrate the capabilities of side-chain network studies.
Our focus on analysing SARS-CoV-2 in particular stems from its critical role in COVID19 and
the immediacy posed by the global pandemic caused by this highly infectious coronavirus.
In order to appreciate the relevance of side-chain network studies on the SARS-CoV-2 spike
protein, here we provide an introduction to this protein in the context of its structure-dynamics
and function. SARS-CoV-2 belongs to the family of β-coronaviruses and is closely related to
the earlier pathogens, such as SARS-CoV, and MERS-CoV, which caused severe respiratory
diseases in 2004 and 2013, respectively. To develop promising therapeutic strategies, we need
a clear understanding of the mechanism of action of the SARS-CoV-2 virus. A succinct
summary of the structures of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein and its interactions with the host
cell membrane has been recently provided (Zhu et al., 2020; Xia et al., 2020a; Wang et al.,

2020b). These studies highlight how the recognition of the human ACE2 receptor by the spike
protein mediates viral entry into the host cell. A simplified version of the interaction between
the human ACE2 receptor and the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein, with an emphasis on the
structure of the spike protein, shows the steps that lead to viral fusion to the host cell membrane
(Figure 1). Long timescale MD simulations of the viral spike protein in different conformations
have been recently made available under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
Public License (D. E. Shaw Research, 2020). Further, a few computational studies on the
SARS-CoV-2 spike protein, to explore putative allosteric binding sites (Di Paola et al., 2020)
and the role of glycans (Casalino et al., 2020) have also been recently published.
The SARS-CoV-2 spike protein is a homotrimeric complex that is pivotal to the coronavirus
entry into host cells and one of the key drug targets for COVID-19 (Hoffmann et al., 2020;
Huang et al., 2020). In this article, we have selected the closed (PDB_ID: 6VXX) and the
partially open (PDB_ID: 6VYB) structures of the spike protein (Walls et al., 2020) as examples
to explicitly elucidate the protein side-chain network concepts. Each subunit in the spike
protein is organized into an S1 and S2 domain (Figure 2a-b) (Zhu et al., 2020; Xia et al., 2020a).
The S1 domain hosts the receptor-binding domain (RBD) that recognizes the human ACE2
receptor (Figure 2a-b) and the N-terminal domain (NTD). In order to engage the ACE2
receptor, the RBD undergoes a conformational change much like the opening and closing of a
hinge (Figure 2c). It is either in the receptor inaccessible state (closed state) or receptor
accessible state (open state), governing access to the factors that control ACE2 binding (Figure
2c). The S2 domain hosts the TMPRSS2 cleavage site and the heptad repeat 1 and heptad repeat
2 (HR1/HR2) domains, which are the targets for fusion inhibitors (Xia et al., 2020a, 2020b).
Backbone alignment of a closed structure (PDB_ID: 6VXX) and a partially open structure
(PDB_ID: 6VYB) reveals small structural differences except that in the partially opened state
the receptor binding domain of one subunit swings outward as compared to the closed state
(Figure 2c). This is an ideal model system to apply protein side-chain based network
calculations, as the observed backbone changes are small, but carries important functional
information. The availability of long-scale MD simulation trajectories of the closed and
partially open states of the spike protein (D. E. Shaw Research, 2020) further emboldened our
choice of using the spike protein as our model system. This data allows us to demonstrate the
capabilities of the dynamically stable protein side-chain network, correlating structural
connectivity with conformational dynamics.

In Section B, an overview of network theory in the context of protein side-chain network,
connectivity criteria for the protein backbone (PBN) and the side-chain (PScN) networks,
selection of optimal strength of interaction from percolation theory perspective, and the cluster
identification from graph spectral analysis are presented. In Section C, the method for
integrating the network analysis with dynamically stable conformational landscapes is
introduced. And the differences between the closed and the open trimeric states of the SARSCoV-2 spike protein are elucidated through chosen network metrics. A Summary and Outlook
is presented in Section D.
B. Protein Structure Network (PSN) perspective into structural organisation
B.1. Network theory-based representation of protein structures
The overall shape of protein structures at a molecular level is captured elegantly through
secondary structures, such as helices, beta strands and sheets, and loops, formed by the
backbone atoms of the polypeptide chain. Based on the non-covalent interactions, the
Ramachandran map characterized the allowed regions of the backbone torsion angles (ϕ,ψ) and
demonstrated that the allowed conformational space of the polypeptide chain mainly consists
of the compact secondary and super-secondary structures, stabilized by backbone hydrogen
bonds (Ramachandran et al., 1963). However, there are also numerous examples where despite
insignificant differences at the protein backbone level, subtle conformational changes at the
protein side-chain level guide a plethora of biological functions (Ghosh and Vishveshwara,
2007; Sethi et al., 2009). Such examples have motivated the development of techniques to
completely map structural connectivity of proteins at both the backbone and at the side-chain
interactions levels, enabling us to correlate even subtle structural variations that elude
backbone-based alignments with biological functions.
The study based on the mathematical principles of network theory enables us to view the
protein structures with non-covalent interactions as a single, global network. Numerous studies
have formulated the backbone and the side-chain structural connectivity in proteins using
adjacency matrices and analysed them using various network metrics (Bhattacharyya et al.,
2016; Verkhivker et al., 2020; Kayikci et al., 2018; De Ruvo et al., 2012; del Sol et al., 2006;
Astl et al., 2019; Krieger et al., 2020). While protein backbone networks (PBN) capture the
non-covalent connectivity at the level of the backbone atoms, protein side-chain networks
(PScN/PSN) capture the structural connectivity at the level of non-covalent interactions
between side-chain atoms. A representation of the global connectivity across the protein

structure in terms of networks can capture the effect of perturbations at the local level and also
across the entire protein structure network. This property is key to the understanding of how
ligand or mutation-induced local conformational changes affect the global structure of a
protein, and therefore its function.
An analysis of the metrics from such a connectivity matrix allows the identification of allosteric
communication pathways within a protein structure network by affording insights into the
interconnected global architecture of proteins. A variety of network metrics can be used to
analyse these protein structure networks (both PBN and PScN). The choice of the network
metric being used depends on the question of interest. Briefly, metrics such as hubs and
clustering coefficient indicate the degree of a residue and its connectivity to neighbouring
residues. The percolation behaviour of a network can be captured in terms of clusters and
cliques/communities (Deb et al., 2009; Palla et al., 2005). The molecular details of pathways
responsible for allosteric signaling can be examined using the algorithms to identify shortest
paths of communication (Tse and Verkhivker, 2015; Ghosh et al., 2011).
B.2. Protein Structure Network based on backbone (PBN) and the side-chain (PScN)
connectivity
Protein Structure Network refers to the representation of the three dimensional structural
connectivity in a protein in terms of a connectivity or adjacency matrix. In network theory
language, individual amino acid residues are termed nodes and the connections between them
are defined as edges. In case of the protein backbone network (PBN), C atoms are generally
considered as the representative of nodes and a distance of about 6.5Å or less (based on the
radial distribution of C atoms in protein structures) between any two sequentially nonadjacent residues are considered as an edge (Miyazawa and Jernigan, 1985; Patra and
Vishveshwara, 2000). The construction and application of PBN has been extensively discussed
in earlier reviews (Greene, 2012; Di Paola et al., 2015). Here, our focus is on the technical
details of construction and the subsequent application of amino acid side-chain-based protein
structure networks denoted as PScN (or PSN). There are different ways of measuring sidechain connectivity, such as the distance between the centroids of the side chains, or all atomatom pairwise distances. Pairwise distances between all atoms of the side-chain of residues i
and j (𝑛𝑖𝑗 ) and values within a distance of 4.5 Å (related to the sum of atomic radii (Heringa
and Argos, 1991)) capture explicit atomic level connectivity. A normalization value of the total
number of interactions (𝑛𝑖𝑗 ) with respect to the maximum values (Ni and Nj) observed from a

large dataset of high-resolution crystal structures of proteins provides a uniform basis of
evaluation as shown in (Eqn. 1) (Kannan and Vishveshwara, 1999; Sathyapriya et al., 2008).

𝐼𝑖𝑗 =

𝑛𝑖𝑗
√𝑁𝑖 𝑁𝑗

∗ 100

…. (Equation 1)

This expression allows us to weigh the strength of the interactions (edge weights) in a
systematic manner, which can be uniformly applied to all protein structures. Edge weight (𝐼𝑖𝑗 )
can range from a value of zero to one. Values close to zero and one represent weak and strong
side-chain connections, respectively. In general, strong connections can be related to nucleation
centres formed by the interactions between the residues pairs such as, oppositely charged,
stacked aromatic residues, or polar residues involved in hydrogen bonds. The weak interactions
on the other hand, usually emerge from a smaller number of non-covalent interactions (𝑛𝑖𝑗 )
between pairs of hydrophobic amino acid residues. Generally these interactions aid in bridging
the strongly connected nucleation centres and in organizing the overall tertiary structure of the
proteins. A PScN is constructed based on a user-defined value of Iij (termed Imin) and an edge
is drawn when the calculated Iij between a pair of residues exceeds Imin.
B.3. Percolation profile for the largest connected sub-network as a function of edge weight
To formalize the effect of the edge weight cut-off (Imin) on the properties of PScN for protein
structures, the concept of the largest connected sub-network (cluster or cliques/communities)
transition profile was established and has been applied to a wide range of biological problems
(Brinda et al., 2010; Deb et al., 2009). The PScN constructed from low values of Imin, results
in a dense matrix with a large fraction of the residues in the protein getting connected yielding
the largest cluster of the size approximately 80-90% of the amino acid residues in the protein.
The PScN at higher Imin values consists only of strongly connected edges, leading to a sparse
matrix. The largest cluster in such a case does not cover a major fraction of the residues in the
protein structure. On the other hand, the largest cluster from a PScN of low Imin, although
encompasses a large fraction of residues, the ratio of signal/noise is low in this network. It is
therefore important to identify an optimal Imin to construct the PScN, without losing information
from a sparse graph or encountering low signal/noise from a dense graph.
The identification of the optimal Imin to construct the PScN has been addressed from the
concepts of percolation within a system, as defined by percolation transition point. In these
studies, the PScN is characterized by a macroscopically connected sub-network obtained from

Imin, around the transition point. The sizes of the largest cluster (LClu) or the largest
clique/community (LCli) in the protein structure network are measured as a function of network
connectivity at various Imin values. Plotting the values of LClu or LCli as a function of Imin leads
to a sigmoidal curve. The transition point of this sigmoidal curve is identified as the percolation
transition point at which a giant connected cluster still permeates the protein structure network.
Interaction strength (Imin) around this transition point balances the problems of identifying nonspecific, weak interactions at smaller Imin values and discontinuous, sparse network
connectivity across the structure at high Imin values. From earlier studies, it is shown that
generally the transition point occurs in the range of 𝐼𝑚𝑖𝑛 values 0.2 to 0.4 (Brinda et al., 2010).
This transition point is noted to be a common feature in most protein structures.
In this study, we have analyzed the largest cluster percolation profile for the partially open and
the closed states of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. The plots of Imin versus LClu are generated
from the dynamically stable adjacency matrices (the generation of which is described in section
C) corresponding to the closed (PDBID: 6VXX) and partially open structure (PDBID: 6VYB)
of the spike protein (Figure 3). A noteworthy feature is that the profiles of the closed and the
partially open states show some differences in the percolation transition point. These
differences are specifically located in the transition regions of Imin (between 0.2 to 0.3), with
the closed state exhibiting a plateau of the LClu consisting of about 2000 residues, whereas, in
the partially-open state, the plateau is around a 1000 residue cluster. Structurally, this is
reminiscent of the conformational variations between the two states, with more residues held
together as the largest cluster in the closed state, in comparison with the partially-open state in
the transition region. Based on this study and the earlier ones, we infer that the results obtained
from the interaction strengths around the percolation transition point, Imin value of 0.3, are more
sensitive and also provide a global view of the structural connectivity in proteins. In the
analysis described in subsequent sections, we have used an Imin value of 0.3 to generate the
networks.
B.4. Network parameters of the PScN
With an increase in availability of data in various fields, the advancement in the research area
of large-complex network studies has moved in different directions, such as problem and data
driven approaches, development of efficient algorithms, and availability of computational
packages (Newman and Girvan, 2004; Newman, 2001; Palla et al., 2005). As we have seen
above, the crucial input to obtain a solution to the graph is the connectivity or adjacency matrix

in which the nodes and edges are defined based on the chosen application. The connectivity
matrices (PBN/PScN) can be analyzed using well-established algorithms and network metrics,
which can be used to describe various structural and functional properties of the protein. Some
of the frequently used network metrics for analyzing protein/macromolecular structures are
hub, clustering coefficient, cluster, cliques and communities, and shortest paths of
communication rely on well-established mathematical algorithms (Palla et al., 2005; Newman,
2004, 2001; Dijkstra, 1959). Details of these individual parameters and their physical
significance have been extensively discussed in past reviews. A brief description of the
parameters and their physical significance follows.
Hubs represent highly connected residues in the protein structure network, which essentially
refer to the degree of a node. In some general networks, the degree of certain nodes can be very
large (Newman, 2001; Tsai et al., 2009). However, the degree of any residue in PScN generally
does not exceed 10 due to the steric constraints. The hubs are key in maintaining structural
stability and information flow in the protein structure network and are often termed as ‘hot
spots’ in the structure (del Sol et al., 2006; Amitai et al., 2004). Clusters, commonly identified
using the depth first search (DFS) algorithm (Cormen et al., 2001), are a set of residues that are
connected in a way that the number of intra-cluster connections is higher than the number of
inter-cluster connections, involving these residues. Clusters evaluated at different Imin values
are used to predict the strength of connectivity within a network as well as studying interfacial
interactions in protein complexes (Brinda and Vishveshwara, 2005).
Cliques are defined as completely connected subgraphs in a network such that every residue is
connected to every other residue in this sub-graph. An assemblage of cliques that share
common edges are termed communities (Palla et al., 2005). Cliques and communities are used
to identify regions of rigidity and higher order connectivity in protein structures (Ghosh and
Vishveshwara, 2008). Like LClu, described in Section B.3, the largest identified communities
(LCli) can also provide insights into the percolation behaviour of strongly connected
components within a protein as a function of Imin (Deb et al., 2009). Floyd-Warshall and
Dijkstra algorithms for computing the shortest paths of communication has been widely used
to determine the critical residues involved in allosteric communication in proteins, and for
mapping ligand-induced conformational changes (Bhattacharyya and Vishveshwara, 2011;
Pandini et al., 2012; Atilgan et al., 2007). The specific choice of a network metric used for
analysing a protein structure network is therefore determined by the structural-biological
insight we plan to seek. In Section C, we will demonstrate the application of some of these

parameters, by comparing the hubs and cliques/communities between the closed and the
partially open states of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein, in their dynamical equilibrium states.
B.5. Graph Spectra of PScN
The graph spectral methods based on analysing eigenvalues and eigenvector components of
the connectivity matrices is another approach that has been extensively used to analyze protein
structure networks (Hall, 1970). Graph spectral analysis on such a network is performed by
studying the eigenspace of the Laplacian matrix associated with it. For a network with n nodes,
the Laplacian L is an n x n matrix that satisfies equation 2.
2

𝑋 𝑇 𝐿𝑋 = ∑𝑢∼𝑣 𝑤𝑢𝑣 (𝑥(𝑢) − 𝑥(𝑣)) ....... Equation (2)

Where, the summation is over every pair of nodes (u,v) connected by an edge with weight
𝑤𝑢𝑣 for some vector X in the space of nodes. It is shown that the Laplacian may be expressed in

terms of the degree matrix D and the adjacency matrix A as equation 3 (Hall, 1970; Chung,
1997).
𝐿𝑢𝑣 = 𝐷𝑢𝑣 − 𝐴𝑢𝑣

....... Equation (3)

The eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the Laplacian matrix contain information about the
connected components or clusters of the network (Gadiyaram et al., 2016). The eigenvector
corresponding to the lowest non-zero eigenvalue of the Laplacian, called the Fiedler vector,
contains the clustering information. Sorting the Fiedler vector by value (FVC) (the components
range from values -1 to +1) identifies nodes that are part of the same cluster. In this manner,
all the clusters in the graph, ranging from the largest cluster with maximum number of residues
to isolated edges, can be obtained as an analytical solution to the Laplacian matrix of the graph.
We have considered the example of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein receptor binding domain
(RBD) (Figure 2a-b) to demonstrate the capability of the graph spectral analysis from the
Laplacian matrix. Specifically, we have extracted the clusters from the sorted Fiedler vector of
the receptor binding domain (RBD) of the spike protein (PDB_ID: 6LZG), which is complexed
with the target ACE2-Receptor (Wang et al., 2020b). The adjacency matrix is constructed as a
binary matrix with Iij ≥ 0.3, with the elements taking values one and zero, respectively. A plot
of sorted Fiedler components (FVC) as a function of the nodes (residue details given in Table
S1) is shown in Figure 4a. The slope of the FVC plot is also shown in this Figure, which
provides a clearer indication of cluster separation (Sistla et al., 2005). The clusters with the
number of residues four and above are plotted on the structure of the RBD (Figure 4b). Thus,

the graph spectral analysis is a powerful analytical method to extract the clustering information
in protein structure networks.
It should be noted that there are limitations of performing graph spectral calculations, such as
on large datasets (e.g., long MD simulation trajectories), as they are computationally expensive.
However, the method provides unique information which is difficult to obtain directly from
other methods. For instance, information can be extracted not only for clusters within a protein,
but also on the interfaces between domains in a single protein or across subunits in multimeric
proteins (Brinda et al., 2005; Sistla et al., 2005). Graph spectral studies can also be performed
on weighted networks, improving the accuracy. Further, it lends itself for quantitative
comparison of networks by providing a score and allows us to identify the regions of the
network which are dissimilar. A brief review of these aspects has been presented earlier
(Gadiyaram et al., 2019).
C.

Protein Structure Network (PScN) for dynamically accessible conformational

ensembles
Biological systems exist in a dynamic equilibrium which alters under different conditions of
temperature,

ionic

strengths,

and

in

complex

with

endogenous

ligands/small

molecules/drugs/interacting proteins and so on. A glimpse of the accessible conformational
landscape can be obtained by studying a large number of experimentally solved structures in
different conditions or through long timescale molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. The
network properties that we described above for a single structure of proteins can also be
extended to study dynamically average properties of conformational ensembles. Depending on
the objective, a judicious choice has to be made as to whether to get the averages from all the
structural snapshots along the MD trajectory or from selected structures representing various
local minima along the trajectory.
C.1. Dynamically stable protein structure network (PScN) for conformational ensembles
Analyses of protein conformational ensembles have been facilitated by the development of
multiple open-source program packages (Bhattacharyya et al., 2013; Brown et al., 2017;
Chakrabarty and Parekh, 2016; Felline et al., 2020; Eargle and Luthey-Schulten, 2012) that
analyze multiple structural snapshots in dynamically accessed conformational states. The
critical element in many of these open-source software is the ability to implement network
theory-based calculations to analyze MD simulation trajectories. Some of these packages

(PSN-Ensemble, webPSN v2.0, and NetworkView) also enable the use of residue pairwise
interaction energies to weigh the connectivity matrix.
In this review, we discuss the general concepts of network theory-based analysis of protein
conformational ensembles, specifically using PSN-Ensemble as an example software package.
The basic principles and capabilities of PSN-Ensemble have been described before
(Bhattacharyya et al., 2013). Briefly, PSN-Ensemble provides a consolidated and automated
analysis platform, bridging network studies with protein conformational dynamics. Taking the
coordinates of structural snapshots from conformational ensembles (MD simulations, NMR
studies, or multiple crystal structures) as input, the program computes protein side-chain
connectivity matrices (PScN). The individual matrices can be averaged by imposing a userdefined cut-off for dynamic stability (say X%). This ‘dynamically-stable’ PScN retains any
interaction that appears in greater than X% of the structural ensemble, highlighting interactions
that persist in a user-defined fraction of the ensemble.
Network parameters and metrics, as described in section B, can be used to analyze the
dynamically stable PScN. Using the dynamically stable matrix, PSN-Ensemble can compute
structural hotspots (e.g., hubs/cliques) and analyse structural rigidity or flexibility (e.g.,
cliques/communities) (Ghosh and Vishveshwara, 2008; Bhattacharyya and Vishveshwara,
2011), percolation properties of the network (e.g., clusters and largest cluster transition profile)
(Deb et al., 2009; Brinda et al., 2010), molecular determinants of allosteric signaling (e.g.,
shortest paths of communication) (Ghosh and Vishveshwara, 2007), and ligand/perturbationinduced conformational variations (e.g., hubs/cliques/communities) (Sukhwal et al., 2011;
Creixell et al., 2018).
Here we provide an example of the application of network theory to analyze MD simulation
trajectories. Using PSN-Ensemble, we analyze the long timescale MD simulation trajectories
(10 s each) of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein in the closed and partially open states (D. E. Shaw
Research, 2020). Based on the fact that the interaction strength around the percolation transition
point is most sensitive while providing a global view of the structural connectivity (Figure 3),
an 𝐼𝑚𝑖𝑛 value of 0.3 is chosen to construct the PScN for the two states of the spike protein.
Further, the dynamically stable PScN for the MD conformational ensemble is computed at a
cut-off of 50%. We compared the hubs and cliques/communities from the dynamically stable
PScN for the closed and the partially open states of the spike protein. The results of these

analyses on the spike protein are summarized in the subsequent sections as an example of
network theory-based comparison of different conformational states.
C.2 Analysis of dynamically stable metrics of PScN for the closed and the partially open
states of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein
In this section we compare the side chain network properties related to rigidity/flexibility (hubs,
cliques/communities) from the long timescale MD trajectories on the closed and the partially
open states of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein (10 s each) (D. E. Shaw Research, 2020). In
order to engage the host cell receptor (ACE2), the receptor binding domain (RBD) of the spike
protein undergoes conformational changes, much like the opening of a hinge (Walls et al.,
2020). The closed state of the spike protein (PDB_id: 6VXX) is receptor inaccessible. A
partially open structure, with one of the subunits exhibiting RBD opening (PDB_id: 6VYB), is
representative of the receptor accessible states of the protein. Using PSN-Ensemble on the MD
simulation trajectories, we analyzed the global conformational changes between these closed
and partially open states.
The root mean square deviation resulting from a backbone alignment of the closed (PDB_ID:
6VXX) and the partially open (PDB_ID:6VYB) structures of the spike protein is ~0.5 Å. In
addition, each subunit in the trimeric spike protein shows less than ~0.5 Å root mean square
deviation when compared to each other, either within or between the two conformational states
(closed and partially open). This indicates highly symmetric trimeric organization in the
starting structures used for the long MD simulations, in terms of backbone superposition. The
two states mainly differ in the conformations of the RBD in one subunit, with the rest of the
domains relatively unchanged at the backbone level (Figure 2c) (Walls et al., 2020). Subtle
conformational changes that differentiate these two states elude backbone-based structural
comparisons, which cannot efficiently capture re-orientations at the protein side-chain level.
These factors make the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein conformational states an ideal model
system to highlight the benefits of side-chain based network (PScN) analysis.
To compute the dynamically stable PScN, we extracted conformational snapshots every 100
ns from the two MD simulation trajectories of the spike protein in its closed and partially open
states (D. E. Shaw Research, 2020). About 100 snapshots from each trajectory are used as an
input to the software package PSN-Ensemble to calculate network metrics that persist in atleast
50% of the structural ensemble. A comparison of the dynamically stable hub and
cliques/communities between the closed and partially open states of the spike protein shows

how the conformational change in the RBD leads to global structural rearrangements, which
percolates into the membrane-binding domains of the spike protein. Through this highly
relevant example, we reaffirm the advantages of using protein side-chain network-based
calculations in capturing the changes in structural connectivity and conformational dynamics
in proteins, under different conditions of activity, ligand binding, environmental stimulus, and
allosteric communication.
C.2.1 Comparison of dynamically stable hubs between the closed and partially open states of
spike protein
As mentioned in Section B.4, the residues that form four or more connections with other
residues are defined as hubs and these are considered as dynamically stable, if they appear as
hubs in at least 50% of the MD simulation snapshots. These hubs are considered structural
hotspots. A change in the number and location of the dynamically stable hub residues in the
closed and partially open states of spike protein capture the differences in structural
connectivity between these two states. The three subunits in the closed and partially open states
of the trimeric SARS-CoV-2 spike protein show a total of 187 common dynamically stable
hubs (Table S2). The common hubs between the two states represent the structural connectivity
in the PScN that remains unchanged between the two conformational states. The three subunits
exhibit mostly symmetrical distribution of these common hubs, both in terms of number of
hubs as well as the participating residues (Table S2).
The distinctive structural features of the closed and partially open states are shown by the hubs
that are unique to each conformational state. A comparison of these unique hubs reveals
striking differences between the closed (64 unique hubs) and the partially open states (74
unique hubs). The number and distribution of these dynamically stable unique hubs show large
variations between corresponding subunits of the trimeric spike protein, in going from the
closed to the partially open state (Figure 5, Table S2). Strikingly, the number and distribution
of the unique hubs among the three subunits within a particular conformational state also show
significant differences. This indicates asymmetry between the three subunits of the spike
protein, both in the closed and the partially open states. This asymmetry is exhibited at the sidechain network level, despite the highly symmetric nature of the spike protein structure in terms
of backbone alignment of every subunit with every other subunit (RMSD less than 0.5 Å).
Depiction of these unique hubs on each subunit of the respective conformational states reveals
structural rewiring in the entire SARS-CoV-2 spike protein as the RBD goes from the closed

to the open conformation. Here, we discuss the differences observed in chain A (detailed
differences for all the three subunits are summarized in Figure 5). In chain A, the partially open
state of the spike protein shows an increased number of hubs in the NTD as well as in the region
connecting the HR1 and HR2 domains (Figure 5). The increased number of dynamically stable
hubs suggests enhanced connectivity in these regions as the spike protein transitions into a
partially open state. Our results also suggest that the conformational changes in RBD between
the two states induce significant reorganization in the dynamically stable PScN. These global
side-chain conformational changes are reflected as differences in the distribution of hubs
(Figure 5), especially at sites distant from the RBD, despite minimal backbone reorganisation
between the two states.
C.2.2 Comparison of dynamically stable cliques and communities between the closed and
partially open states of spike protein
Cliques represent a subset of residues within a protein structure network where each residue is
connected to every other residue (Palla et al., 2005). Cliques represent higher order
connectivity in a network, highlighting regions of structural rigidity in the context of protein
structures. An assemblage of cliques through shared edges/interactions is defined as
communities (details in Section B.4). Communities capture the percolation of structural rigidity
through the protein structure network. Together, comparison of cliques/communities reflects
subtle conformational changes that alter regions of rigidity/flexibility in protein structural
organisation.
We compared the dynamically stable cliques and communities obtained from the SARS-CoV2 trimeric spike protein in the closed and the partially open states (Figure 6, Table S3a-c). The
conformational changes that accompany the transition between the two states of the spike
protein are reflected by the cliques/communities that are unique to each state. For clarity, we
will only focus on the dynamically stable cliques/communities formed at the trimeric interface
between the three subunits (also see supplemental Table S3a-c for a comparison of all
cliques/communities between partially open and closed states of the spike protein).
Interfacial cliques/communities are an excellent metric to measure changes in connectivity or
interaction between subunits for multimeric proteins. In the closed state of the spike protein, a
large number of unique interfacial cliques are seen within the RBD of the three subunits (Figure
6, Table S4). A total of 32 unique interfacial cliques are identified in the closed state, involving
residues in the RBD, NTD, SD1, S2, and HR1 domains in the spike protein. This suggests a

tightly packed trimeric interface in the closed state with rigid connections between the residues
across the three subunits. In contrast, only 21 unique interfacial cliques are observed in the
partially open state, with marked alterations in the domains participating in the cliques. Only 8
common interfacial cliques are shared between the two conformational states, indicating
significant variations in the trimeric interface packing.
Interestingly, most interfacial cliques formed by the RBD residues are lost in the partially open
state. This, as expected, may be due to opening of the RBD in one of the subunits in the spike
protein, which leads to a weakening of the interfacial connections involving the RBD residues
across the trimer. Interestingly, this conformational change percolates to domains that are
distant from the RBD, with cliques altering across the entire spike protein (Figure 6, Table S4).
A slight increase in the number of interfacial cliques is noted near the HR1/HR2 domain,
especially in the region connection the cores of HR1 and HR2.
In this section we have demonstrated the utility of side-chain network metrics like hubs,
clusters, cliques/communities by correlating the function of partial RBD opening to global
conformational changes at the side-chain interaction level. We have shown that the local
conformational changes at the RBD lead to extensive re-orchestration of the entire spike protein
side-chain network.
D. Summary and Outlook
The term “allostery” was coined more than half a century ago, to characterize the action of
proteins away from the classically identified binding site (Monod et al., 1965; Koshland et al.,
1966; Changeux, 2011). The mechanism of action was described through lock-and-key or
induced fit models. Our understanding of protein structure-function relationship has increased
with advancement in structural biology. Today there is an exponential increase of structural
data from experiments such as X-ray crystallography, NMR, and Cryo Electron Microscopy
(Nitta et al., 2018; Structural biology shapes up | Science | AAAS). In parallel, computational
biology has reached a mature level to explore the conformational space of large protein
assemblies through MD simulations (Lindorff-Larsen et al., 2016; Mysore et al., 2020; Wang
et al., 2019).
The data from experimental structural biology and the MD simulations have become a rich
source of information to investigate macromolecular systems in atomic details. Mining such
valuable data for protein conformation and dynamics, in order to unravel biological function at
a molecular level and provide meaningful and reliable predictions for experimental biologists,

has been a challenge. This has led to multidisciplinary approaches and adaptation of different
domain expertise to investigate the importance of specific amino acids towards the stability
and functions of proteins from various perspectives. Some of the computational concepts and
methods that have made their way to address biological systems are network theory, accessible
modes, machine learning, percolation phenomenon, in combination with highly valuable
chemical and biological inputs.
Here we have presented a focussed review of the protein structures from a network perspective.
Specifically, we have focused on the networks of side-chain connectivity to highlight the
unique benefits of this approach. We have described the method of quantifying connectivity
and identifying optimal connectivity criteria from the corresponding transition point by
employing concepts from percolation theory. We have also discussed the global connectivity
of the protein side-chains and clustering of interacting residues from the graph spectral
perspective. We have pointed out that the highly similar backbone conformations of proteins
can host a repertoire of conformational landscapes, which subtly differ in their side-chain
interactions. Thus mild perturbations to proteins can lead to side-chain reorganizations that
elude backbone-based structural studies and drive allosteric communication. We have briefly
touched upon a variety of approaches to investigate allostery, on which excellent recent reviews
are available.
Molecular dynamics simulations can yield an ensemble of protein conformations, which can
capture both the backbone and the side-chain level differences in interactions. Analysis of MD
simulation trajectories using side-chain network formalism provides a global view of protein
structural connectivity from a dynamic perspective. We have reviewed the methodology for
such integration of MD simulation with network theory-based analyses.
Due to the global pandemic caused by the highly infectious COVID-19, we have chosen the
SARS-CoV-2 spike protein as an example to illustrate the dynamic PScN perspective. We have
investigated the molecular dynamics trajectories of the closed and partially open states of the
trimeric spike protein that are made available by D.E. Shaw Research (D. E. Shaw Research,
2020). Backbone-based structural comparison between the closed and partially open states
reveals minimal structural changes. Highlighting the importance of side-chain network
analyses, a dynamic PScN-based comparison reveals key differences between the two
conformational states. The present investigation highlights the differences at the side chain
interaction level, between the two states such as: (1) the differences in the size of the largest
connected clusters (LClu) in the percolation transition region, with the closed state being more

stable than the open state, and (2) the differences in the network parameters such as hubs,
cliques and communities.
A comparison of the network properties of the partially open and the closed forms of the SARSCoV-2 spike protein reaffirms that different functional states of proteins can adopt very close
backbone topology. While substantial side-chain network parameters like hubs, cliques and
communities are also common to both the forms, the unique ones are strategically located in
various parts of this multimeric protein. For example, the local conformational changes during
the RBD opening leads to extensive re-orchestration of the entire spike protein network, more
pronounced in the interfacial region of the trimeric contacts. The different functional states are
carefully balanced through the re-organization of side-chain connectivity to mediate
interactions with the ACE2 receptor, and ultimately viral fusion to host cell membrane. A
detailed study of these interactions between the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein and ACE2 receptor
or relevant antibodies/drugs from a side-chain network perspective will be the subject of future
investigations.
In addition to offering insights into the structure-function correlation in proteins at the side
chain connectivity level, the dynamic network-based studies also provide a new perspective
of allostery. The flexibility of the protein involved in interaction with ligand/drug or other
proteins are as important as their interacting partners, to have a productive signaling output.
Allostery should be viewed as a synergistic-global interaction between the ligand (or the
environment) and the receptor. The mechanism of long-distance communication involves
specific routes and subtle changes in the communication paths, in order to signal at a distance.
Analysis of PScN reveals allosteric communication paths via side-chain interactions even
without substantial backbone reorganisation. A stimulus at the ligand binding pocket may be
transmitted to the desired destination through subtle reorganization of the side-chain
interactions that are allowed in the equilibrium dynamical state. Comparison between the two
states of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein reveals significant changes in the hubs and
cliques/communities in regions distant from the RBD. The global reorganisation of the sidechain connectivity between the two states of the spike protein could also influence the
communication paths within and across proteins. Thus, one can consider the conformational
landscape as being made up of various side-chain network paths.
Finally, in the context of treatment of infections, the antibodies, and the vaccines are produced
in response to the global topology of the host protein or receptor. They complement the
naturally evolved receptor more globally around the binding sites. The drugs on the other hand,

which are designed based mainly on the binding site information may not be highly effective.
As we have seen here, the binding site residues are held loosely or tightly by the residue
clusters, firmly anchoring some of the interacting residues deep within the pocket. The drug
developing strategies would benefit by incorporating the side-chain network connectivity
information into their design, thus providing a rationale for incorporating the effects of
variations in global structural connectivity in proteins.

Figure Legends
Figure 1: Sars-Cov-2 employs the spike glycoprotein to enter its host cell. The spike protein
is composed of two domains, the S1 domain that hosts the receptor-binding domain (RBD),
and an S2 domain. The S2 domain arbitrates the fusion of the viral and host cell membranes.
Activation of the spike protein happens by cleavage at two sites (S1/S2 and S2’) by the Furin
TMPRSS2 protease. The spike protein initially binds to the ACE2 receptor on the host cell
through its RBD. On activation, it sheds the S1 domain, enabling the S2 to fuse to the host cell
membrane. Figure 1 has been adapted from SARS-CoV-2 cell entry: structural & functional
mechanism | Abcam (https://www.abcam.com/content/structural-and-functional-mechanismof-sars-cov-2-cell-entry).
Figure 2: Sequence and structural organization of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. (a) Domains
of SARS-Cov2 spike protein are depicted along with the two critical sites of cleavage. (b)
These domains are shown on the structure of the spike protein (PDB_ID: 6VXX, only chain A
is shown for clarity). The backbone is represented as a cartoon and the domains are color-coded
based on as in Figure 2a. The first residue at the two cleavage sites are highlighted as spheres
and labeled. (c) Backbone alignment (chain B only) of the closed and partially open states of
the spike protein reveal conformational changes at the RBD (shown by the arrow), with the
rest of the domains showing RMSD less than 0.5Å (a low backbone RMSD of less than 0.5Å
is also observed for chain A/C between the closed and partially open states).
Figure 3: Percolation profile for the largest connected cluster as a function of edge weight for
the closed and partially open structures of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. The differences
between these conformational states manifest as deviations in the connectivity profile in the
region around the percolation point (0.2-0.3).
Figure 4: Graph spectral analysis of RBD from SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. (a) Side-chain
cluster plot of the RBD obtained from the sorted Feidler Vector Components (FVC-at Iij=0.3),
Y-axis: Sorted FVC; X-axis: Nodes corresponding to FVC (node details in Table 1). Nodes

with identical FVC belong to a cluster. The red dotted line represents the slope of the FVC plot.
The constant zero values of slope correspond to clusters and spikes in the slope indicate the
separation between clusters. (b) Representation of the side-chain clusters identified through
FVC on the structure of RBD. The clusters are color-coded green (largest), blue (2nd largest),
yellow (6 residue cluster), orange (5 residue cluster), and cyan (4 residue cluster).
Figure 5: Depiction of dynamically stable unique hub residues in the three subunits (Chain
A/B/C) for the (a) closed and (b) partially open conformational states of the trimeric SARSCov2 spike protein. The protein backbone is shown in cartoon representation and each subunit
is color coded. The unique hub residues in each subunit for the two conformational states are
represented as spheres and these residues are labeled.
Figure 6: Depiction of dynamically stable unique cliques at the interface between the three
subunits (Chain A/B/C) for the (a) closed and (b) partially open conformational states of the
trimeric SARS-Cov2 spike protein. The protein backbone is shown as cartoon and each subunit
is color coded. The interfacial cliques are highlighted as spheres. A zoomed in view of each
interfacial clique is provided with the participating residues labeled.

Acknowledgements
M.B. and A.H. thanks NIGMS (R00GM126145) for funding. S.V. and A.A. thanks NASI for
fellowships. S.V. and V.S. acknowledges the Institute for Condensed Matter Theory at the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.

References
Amitai, G., Shemesh, A., Sitbon, E., Shklar, M., Netanely, D., Venger, I., and Pietrokovski, S. (2004).
Network analysis of protein structures identifies functional residues. J. Mol. Biol. 344, 1135–
1146. doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2004.10.055.
Astl, L., Tse, A., and Verkhivker, G. M. (2019). Interrogating regulatory mechanisms in signaling
proteins by allosteric inhibitors and activators: A dynamic view through the lens of residue
interaction networks. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 1163, 187–223. doi:10.1007/978-981-13-87197_9.
Atilgan, A. R., Turgut, D., and Atilgan, C. (2007). Screened nonbonded interactions in native proteins
manipulate optimal paths for robust residue communication. Biophys. J. 92, 3052–3062.
doi:10.1529/biophysj.106.099440.
Atilgan, C., Gerek, Z. N., Ozkan, S. B., and Atilgan, A. R. (2010). Manipulation of conformational
change in proteins by single-residue perturbations. Biophys. J. 99, 933–943.

doi:10.1016/j.bpj.2010.05.020.
Atilgan, C., Okan, O. B., and Atilgan, A. R. (2012). Network-based models as tools hinting at
nonevident protein functionality. Annu. Rev. Biophys. 41, 205–225. doi:10.1146/annurevbiophys-050511-102305.
Bagler, G., and Sinha, S. (2005). Network properties of protein structures. Physica A: Statistical
Mechanics and its Applications 346, 27–33. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2004.08.046.
Bandaru, P., Shah, N. H., Bhattacharyya, M., Barton, J. P., Kondo, Y., Cofsky, J. C., Gee, C. L.,
Chakraborty, A. K., Kortemme, T., Ranganathan, R., et al. (2017). Deconstruction of the Ras
switching cycle through saturation mutagenesis. Elife 6. doi:10.7554/eLife.27810.
Bhattacharyya, M., Bhat, C. R., and Vishveshwara, S. (2013). An automated approach to network
features of protein structure ensembles. Protein Sci. 22, 1399–1416. doi:10.1002/pro.2333.
Bhattacharyya, M., Ghosh, S., and Vishveshwara, S. (2016). Protein Structure and Function: Looking
through the Network of Side-Chain Interactions. Curr Protein Pept Sci 17, 4–25.
doi:10.2174/1389203716666150923105727.
Bhattacharyya, M., and Vishveshwara, S. (2011). Probing the allosteric mechanism in pyrrolysyltRNA synthetase using energy-weighted network formalism. Biochemistry 50, 6225–6236.
doi:10.1021/bi200306u.
Borhani, D. W., and Shaw, D. E. (2012). The future of molecular dynamics simulations in drug
discovery. J. Comput. Aided Mol. Des. 26, 15–26. doi:10.1007/s10822-011-9517-y.
Brinda, K. V., Surolia, A., and Vishveshwara, S. (2005). Insights into the quaternary association of
proteins through structure graphs: a case study of lectins. Biochem. J. 391, 1–15.
doi:10.1042/BJ20050434.
Brinda, K. V., and Vishveshwara, S. (2005). Oligomeric protein structure networks: insights into
protein-protein interactions. BMC Bioinformatics 6, 296. doi:10.1186/1471-2105-6-296.
Brinda, K. V., Vishveshwara, S., and Vishveshwara, S. (2010). Random network behaviour of protein
structures. Mol. Biosyst. 6, 391–398. doi:10.1039/b903019k.
Brown, D. K., Penkler, D. L., Sheik Amamuddy, O., Ross, C., Atilgan, A. R., Atilgan, C., and Tastan
Bishop, Ö. (2017). MD-TASK: a software suite for analyzing molecular dynamics
trajectories. Bioinformatics 33, 2768–2771. doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btx349.
Casalino, L., Gaieb, Z., Goldsmith, J. A., Hjorth, C. K., Dommer, A. C., Harbison, A. M., Fogarty, C.
A., Barros, E. P., Taylor, B. C., McLellan, J. S., et al. (2020). Beyond Shielding: The Roles of
Glycans in the SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein. ACS Cent. Sci. doi:10.1021/acscentsci.0c01056.
Chakrabarty, B., and Parekh, N. (2016). NAPS: network analysis of protein structures. Nucleic Acids
Res. 44, W375-82. doi:10.1093/nar/gkw383.
Changeux, J.-P. (2011). 50th anniversary of the word “allosteric”. Protein Sci. 20, 1119–1124.
doi:10.1002/pro.658.
Chung, F. R. K. (1997). Spectral Graph Theory . 2nd ed. Providence, RI: American Math. Soc.

Cooper, A., and Dryden, D. T. (1984). Allostery without conformational change. A plausible model.
Eur Biophys J 11, 103–109. doi:10.1007/BF00276625.
Cormen, T. H., Leiserson, C. E., Rivest, R. L., and Stein, C. (2001). “Depth first search,” in
Introduction to Algorithms, 540–549.
Creixell, P., Pandey, J. P., Palmeri, A., Bhattacharyya, M., Creixell, M., Ranganathan, R., Pincus, D.,
and Yaffe, M. B. (2018). Hierarchical Organization Endows the Kinase Domain with
Regulatory Plasticity. Cell Syst. 7, 371–383.e4. doi:10.1016/j.cels.2018.08.008.
Csermely, P., Korcsmáros, T., Kiss, H. J. M., London, G., and Nussinov, R. (2013). Structure and
dynamics of molecular networks: a novel paradigm of drug discovery: a comprehensive
review. Pharmacol. Ther. 138, 333–408. doi:10.1016/j.pharmthera.2013.01.016.
Cui, Q., and Karplus, M. (2008). Allostery and cooperativity revisited. Protein Sci. 17, 1295–1307.
doi:10.1110/ps.03259908.
D. E. Shaw Research (2020). Molecular Dynamics Simulations Related to SARS-CoV-2
http://www.deshawresearch.com/resources_sarscov2.html. D. E. Shaw Research Technical
Data. Available at: http://www.deshawresearch.com/resources_sarscov2.html [Accessed
April 8, 2020].
De Ruvo, M., Giuliani, A., Paci, P., Santoni, D., and Di Paola, L. (2012). Shedding light on proteinligand binding by graph theory: the topological nature of allostery. Biophys Chem 165–166,
21–29. doi:10.1016/j.bpc.2012.03.001.
De Vivo, M., Masetti, M., Bottegoni, G., and Cavalli, A. (2016). Role of molecular dynamics and
related methods in drug discovery. J. Med. Chem. 59, 4035–4061.
doi:10.1021/acs.jmedchem.5b01684.
Deb, D., Vishveshwara, S., and Vishveshwara, S. (2009). Understanding protein structure from a
percolation perspective. Biophys. J. 97, 1787–1794. doi:10.1016/j.bpj.2009.07.016.
Di Paola, L., De Ruvo, M., Paci, P., Santoni, D., and Giuliani, A. (2013). Protein contact networks: an
emerging paradigm in chemistry. Chem. Rev. 113, 1598–1613. doi:10.1021/cr3002356.
Di Paola, L., Hadi-Alijanvand, H., Song, X., Hu, G., and Giuliani, A. (2020). The Discovery of a
Putative Allosteric Site in the SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein Using an Integrated
Structural/Dynamic Approach. J. Proteome Res. doi:10.1021/acs.jproteome.0c00273.
Di Paola, L., Platania, C. B. M., Oliva, G., Setola, R., Pascucci, F., and Giuliani, A. (2015).
Characterization of Protein-Protein Interfaces through a Protein Contact Network Approach.
Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 3, 170. doi:10.3389/fbioe.2015.00170.
Dijkstra, E. W. (1959). A Note on Two Problems in Connexion with Graphs. Numerische Mathematik
1, 269–271.
Doruker, P., Atilgan, A. R., and Bahar, I. (2000). Dynamics of proteins predicted by molecular
dynamics simulations and analytical approaches: application to alpha-amylase inhibitor.
Proteins 40, 512–524. doi:10.1002/1097-0134(20000815)40:3<512::AIDPROT180>3.0.CO;2-M.

Doshi, U., Holliday, M. J., Eisenmesser, E. Z., and Hamelberg, D. (2016). Dynamical network of
residue-residue contacts reveals coupled allosteric effects in recognition, catalysis, and
mutation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 113, 4735–4740. doi:10.1073/pnas.1523573113.
Eargle, J., and Luthey-Schulten, Z. (2012). NetworkView: 3D display and analysis of protein·RNA
interaction networks. Bioinformatics 28, 3000–3001. doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bts546.
Felline, A., Seeber, M., and Fanelli, F. (2020). webPSN v2.0: a webserver to infer fingerprints of
structural communication in biomacromolecules. Nucleic Acids Res. 48, W94–W103.
doi:10.1093/nar/gkaa397.
Gadiyaram, V., Dighe, A., and Vishveshwara, S. (2018). Identification of crucial elements for
network integrity: a perturbation approach through graph spectral method. Int. J. Adv. Eng.
Sci. Appl. Math., 1–14. doi:10.1007/s12572-018-0236-7.
Gadiyaram, V., Ghosh, S., and Vishveshwara, S. (2016). A graph spectral-based scoring scheme for
network comparison. Journal of Complex Networks, cnw016. doi:10.1093/comnet/cnw016.
Gadiyaram, V., Vishveshwara, S., and Vishveshwara, S. (2019). From quantum chemistry to networks
in biology: A graph spectral approach to protein structure analyses. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 59,
1715–1727. doi:10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00002.
Ghosh, A., Sakaguchi, R., Liu, C., Vishveshwara, S., and Hou, Y.-M. (2011). Allosteric
communication in cysteinyl tRNA synthetase: a network of direct and indirect readout. J.
Biol. Chem. 286, 37721–37731. doi:10.1074/jbc.M111.246702.
Ghosh, A., and Vishveshwara, S. (2007). A study of communication pathways in methionyl- tRNA
synthetase by molecular dynamics simulations and structure network analysis. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 104, 15711–15716. doi:10.1073/pnas.0704459104.
Ghosh, A., and Vishveshwara, S. (2008). Variations in clique and community patterns in protein
structures during allosteric communication: investigation of dynamically equilibrated
structures of methionyl tRNA synthetase complexes. Biochemistry 47, 11398–11407.
doi:10.1021/bi8007559.
Greene, L. H. (2012). Protein structure networks. Brief. Funct. Genomics 11, 469–478.
doi:10.1093/bfgp/els039.
Greener, J. G., and Sternberg, M. J. (2018). Structure-based prediction of protein allostery. Curr.
Opin. Struct. Biol. 50, 1–8. doi:10.1016/j.sbi.2017.10.002.
Hall, K. M. (1970). An r -Dimensional Quadratic Placement Algorithm. Manage. Sci. 17, 219–229.
doi:10.1287/mnsc.17.3.219.
Heringa, J., and Argos, P. (1991). Side-chain clusters in protein structures and their role in protein
folding. J. Mol. Biol. 220, 151–171. doi:10.1016/0022-2836(91)90388-m.
Hoffmann, M., Kleine-Weber, H., Schroeder, S., Krüger, N., Herrler, T., Erichsen, S., Schiergens, T.
S., Herrler, G., Wu, N.-H., Nitsche, A., et al. (2020). SARS-CoV-2 Cell Entry Depends on
ACE2 and TMPRSS2 and Is Blocked by a Clinically Proven Protease Inhibitor. Cell 181,
271–280.e8. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.052.

Hu, G., Di Paola, L., Pullara, F., Liang, Z., and Nookaew, I. (2017). Network Proteomics: From
Protein Structure to Protein-Protein Interaction. Biomed Res. Int. 2017, 8929613.
doi:10.1155/2017/8929613.
Huang, Y., Yang, C., Xu, X.-F., Xu, W., and Liu, S.-W. (2020). Structural and functional properties
of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein: potential antivirus drug development for COVID-19. Acta
Pharmacol Sin 41, 1141–1149. doi:10.1038/s41401-020-0485-4.
Kannan, N., and Vishveshwara, S. (1999). Identification of side-chain clusters in protein structures by
a graph spectral method. J. Mol. Biol. 292, 441–464. doi:10.1006/jmbi.1999.3058.
Karandur, D., Bhattacharyya, M., Xia, Z., Lee, Y. K., Muratcioglu, S., McAffee, D., McSpadden, E.
D., Qiu, B., Groves, J. T., Williams, E. R., et al. (2020). Breakage of the oligomeric CaMKII
hub by the regulatory segment of the kinase. Elife 9. doi:10.7554/eLife.57784.
Kayikci, M., Venkatakrishnan, A. J., Scott-Brown, J., Ravarani, C. N. J., Flock, T., and Babu, M. M.
(2018). Visualization and analysis of non-covalent contacts using the Protein Contacts Atlas.
Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 25, 185–194. doi:10.1038/s41594-017-0019-z.
Keskin, O., Ma, B., and Nussinov, R. (2005). Hot regions in protein--protein interactions: the
organization and contribution of structurally conserved hot spot residues. J. Mol. Biol. 345,
1281–1294. doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2004.10.077.
Koshland, D. E., Némethy, G., and Filmer, D. (1966). Comparison of experimental binding data and
theoretical models in proteins containing subunits*. Biochemistry 5, 365–385.
doi:10.1021/bi00865a047.
Krieger, J. M., Doruker, P., Scott, A. L., Perahia, D., and Bahar, I. (2020). Towards gaining sight of
multiscale events: utilizing network models and normal modes in hybrid methods. Curr.
Opin. Struct. Biol. 64, 34–41. doi:10.1016/j.sbi.2020.05.013.
Lindorff-Larsen, K., Maragakis, P., Piana, S., and Shaw, D. E. (2016). Picosecond to millisecond
structural dynamics in human ubiquitin. J. Phys. Chem. B 120, 8313–8320.
doi:10.1021/acs.jpcb.6b02024.
Lindorff-Larsen, K., Piana, S., Palmo, K., Maragakis, P., Klepeis, J. L., Dror, R. O., and Shaw, D. E.
(2010). Improved side-chain torsion potentials for the Amber ff99SB protein force field.
Proteins 78, 1950–1958. doi:10.1002/prot.22711.
Liu, J., and Nussinov, R. (2016). Allostery: an overview of its history, concepts, methods, and
applications. PLoS Comput. Biol. 12, e1004966. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004966.
Miyazawa, S., and Jernigan, R. L. (1985). Estimation of effective interresidue contact energies from
protein crystal structures: quasi-chemical approximation. Macromolecules 18, 534–552.
doi:10.1021/ma00145a039.
Monod, J., Wyman, J., and Changeux, J. P. (1965). On the nature of allosteric transitions: a plausible
model. J. Mol. Biol. 12, 88–118. doi:10.1016/S0022-2836(65)80285-6.
Motlagh, H. N., Wrabl, J. O., Li, J., and Hilser, V. J. (2014). The ensemble nature of allostery. Nature
508, 331–339. doi:10.1038/nature13001.

Mysore, V. P., Zhou, Z.-W., Ambrogio, C., Li, L., Kapp, J. N., Lu, C., Wang, Q., Tucker, M. R.,
Okoro, J. J., Nagy-Davidescu, G., et al. (2020). A structural model of a Ras-Raf signalosome.
BioRxiv. doi:10.1101/2020.07.15.165266.
Newman, M. E. (2001). Scientific collaboration networks. II. Shortest paths, weighted networks, and
centrality. Phys. Rev. E, Stat. Nonlin. Soft. Matter. Phys. 64, 016132.
doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.64.016132.
Newman, M. E. J. (2004). Detecting community structure in networks. The European Physical
Journal B - Condensed Matter 38, 321–330. doi:10.1140/epjb/e2004-00124-y.
Newman, M. E. J., and Girvan, M. (2004). Finding and evaluating community structure in networks.
Phys. Rev. E, Stat. Nonlin. Soft. Matter. Phys. 69, 026113. doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.69.026113.
Nitta, R., Imasaki, T., and Nitta, E. (2018). Recent progress in structural biology: lessons from our
research history. Reprod. Syst. Sex. Disord. doi:10.1093/jmicro/dfy022.
Palla, G., Derényi, I., Farkas, I., and Vicsek, T. (2005). Uncovering the overlapping community
structure of complex networks in nature and society. Nature 435, 814–818.
doi:10.1038/nature03607.
Pandini, A., Fornili, A., Fraternali, F., and Kleinjung, J. (2012). Detection of allosteric signal
transmission by information-theoretic analysis of protein dynamics. FASEB J. 26, 868–881.
doi:10.1096/fj.11-190868.
Papaleo, E. (2015). Integrating atomistic molecular dynamics simulations, experiments, and network
analysis to study protein dynamics: strength in unity. Front. Mol. Biosci. 2, 28.
doi:10.3389/fmolb.2015.00028.
Patra, S. M., and Vishveshwara, S. (2000). Backbone cluster identification in proteins by a graph
theoretical method. Biophys Chem 84, 13–25. doi:10.1016/s0301-4622(99)00134-9.
Perutz, M. F. (1970). Stereochemistry of cooperative effects in haemoglobin. Nature 228, 726–739.
doi:10.1038/228726a0.
Ramachandran, G. N., Ramakrishnan, C., and Sasisekharan, V. (1963). Stereochemistry of
polypeptide chain configurations. J. Mol. Biol. 7, 95–99. doi:10.1016/S0022-2836(63)800236.
Salamanca Viloria, J., Allega, M. F., Lambrughi, M., and Papaleo, E. (2017). An optimal distance
cutoff for contact-based Protein Structure Networks using side-chain centers of mass. Sci.
Rep. 7, 2838. doi:10.1038/s41598-017-01498-6.
Sathyapriya, R., Vijayabaskar, M. S., and Vishveshwara, S. (2008). Insights into protein-DNA
interactions through structure network analysis. PLoS Comput. Biol. 4, e1000170.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000170.
Sethi, A., Eargle, J., Black, A. A., and Luthey-Schulten, Z. (2009). Dynamical networks in
tRNA:protein complexes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106, 6620–6625.
doi:10.1073/pnas.0810961106.
Sistla, R. K., K V, B., and Vishveshwara, S. (2005). Identification of domains and domain interface

residues in multidomain proteins from graph spectral method. Proteins 59, 616–626.
doi:10.1002/prot.20444.
del Sol, A., Fujihashi, H., Amoros, D., and Nussinov, R. (2006). Residue centrality, functionally
important residues, and active site shape: analysis of enzyme and non-enzyme families.
Protein Sci. 15, 2120–2128. doi:10.1110/ps.062249106.
Structural biology shapes up | Science | AAAS Available at:
https://www.sciencemag.org/features/2016/07/structural-biology-shapes [Accessed October
13, 2020].
Sukhwal, A., Bhattacharyya, M., and Vishveshwara, S. (2011). Network approach for capturing
ligand-induced subtle global changes in protein structures. Acta Crystallogr. Sect. D, Biol.
Crystallogr. 67, 429–439. doi:10.1107/S0907444911007062.
Tsai, C.-J., Ma, B., and Nussinov, R. (2009). Protein-protein interaction networks: how can a hub
protein bind so many different partners? Trends Biochem. Sci. 34, 594–600.
doi:10.1016/j.tibs.2009.07.007.
Tsai, C.-J., and Nussinov, R. (2014). A unified view of “how allostery works”. PLoS Comput. Biol.
10, e1003394. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003394.
Tse, A., and Verkhivker, G. M. (2015). Molecular Dynamics Simulations and Structural Network
Analysis of c-Abl and c-Src Kinase Core Proteins: Capturing Allosteric Mechanisms and
Communication Pathways from Residue Centrality. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 55, 1645–1662.
doi:10.1021/acs.jcim.5b00240.
Verkhivker, G. M., Agajanian, S., Hu, G., and Tao, P. (2020). Allosteric regulation at the crossroads
of new technologies: multiscale modeling, networks, and machine learning. Front. Mol.
Biosci. 7, 136. doi:10.3389/fmolb.2020.00136.
Walls, A. C., Park, Y.-J., Tortorici, M. A., Wall, A., McGuire, A. T., and Veesler, D. (2020).
Structure, Function, and Antigenicity of the SARS-CoV-2 Spike Glycoprotein. Cell 181, 281–
292.e6. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.058.
Wang, J., Jain, A., McDonald, L. R., Gambogi, C., Lee, A. L., and Dokholyan, N. V. (2020a).
Mapping allosteric communications within individual proteins. Nat. Commun. 11, 3862.
doi:10.1038/s41467-020-17618-2.
Wang, Q., Pechersky, Y., Sagawa, S., Pan, A. C., and Shaw, D. E. (2019). Structural mechanism for
Bruton’s tyrosine kinase activation at the cell membrane. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 116,
9390–9399. doi:10.1073/pnas.1819301116.
Wang, Q., Zhang, Y., Wu, L., Niu, S., Song, C., Zhang, Z., Lu, G., Qiao, C., Hu, Y., Yuen, K.-Y., et
al. (2020b). Structural and Functional Basis of SARS-CoV-2 Entry by Using Human ACE2.
Cell 181, 894–904.e9. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.03.045.
Xia, S., Liu, M., Wang, C., Xu, W., Lan, Q., Feng, S., Qi, F., Bao, L., Du, L., Liu, S., et al. (2020a).
Inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 (previously 2019-nCoV) infection by a highly potent pancoronavirus fusion inhibitor targeting its spike protein that harbors a high capacity to mediate
membrane fusion. Cell Res. 30, 343–355. doi:10.1038/s41422-020-0305-x.

Xia, S., Zhu, Y., Liu, M., Lan, Q., Xu, W., Wu, Y., Ying, T., Liu, S., Shi, Z., Jiang, S., et al. (2020b).
Fusion mechanism of 2019-nCoV and fusion inhibitors targeting HR1 domain in spike
protein. Cell Mol Immunol 17, 765–767. doi:10.1038/s41423-020-0374-2.
Zhang, J., and Nussinov, R. eds. (2019). Protein allostery in drug discovery. Singapore: Springer
Singapore doi:10.1007/978-981-13-8719-7.
Zhang, Y., Doruker, P., Kaynak, B., Zhang, S., Krieger, J., Li, H., and Bahar, I. (2020). Intrinsic
dynamics is evolutionarily optimized to enable allosteric behavior. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol.
62, 14–21. doi:10.1016/j.sbi.2019.11.002.
Zhu, G., Zhu, C., Zhu, Y., and Sun, F. (2020). Minireview of progress in the structural study of
SARS-CoV-2 proteins. Current Research in Microbial Sciences.
doi:10.1016/j.crmicr.2020.06.003.

