Dynamic causal modelling of immune heterogeneity
Thomas Parr1*, Anjali Bhat1, Peter Zeidman1, Aimee Goel2, Alexander J. Billig3, Rosalyn Moran4,
Karl J. Friston1
1

Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, Queen Square Institute of Neurology, UK
2 Royal Stoke University Hospital, UK
3UCL Ear Institute, University College London, UK
4Centre for Neuroimaging Science, Department of Neuroimaging, IoPPN, King's College London, UK
*

Correspondence: thomas.parr.12@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
An interesting inference drawn by some Covid-19 epidemiological models is that there exists a
proportion of the population who are not susceptible to infection – even at the start of the current
pandemic. This paper introduces a model of the immune response to a virus. This is based upon the
same sort of mean-field dynamics as used in epidemiology. However, in place of the location, clinical
status, and other attributes of people in an epidemiological model, we consider the state of a virus, B
and T-lymphocytes, and the antibodies they generate. Our aim is to formalise some key hypotheses as
to the mechanism of resistance. We present a series of simple simulations illustrating changes to the
dynamics of the immune response under these hypotheses. These include attenuated viral cell entry,
pre-existing cross-reactive humoral (antibody-mediated) immunity, and enhanced T-cell dependent
immunity. Finally, we illustrate the potential application of this sort of model by illustrating variational
inversion (using simulated data) of this model to illustrate its use in testing hypotheses. In principle,
this furnishes a fast and efficient immunological assay – based on sequential serology – that provides
a (i) quantitative measure of latent immunological responses and (ii) a Bayes optimal classification of
the different kinds of immunological response (c.f., glucose tolerance tests used to test for insulin
resistance). This may be especially useful in assessing SARS-CoV-2 vaccines.
Keywords: Dynamic causal modelling; Variational Bayes; Covid-19; Immunity; Resistance;
Antibodies; T-cells

1 – Introduction
Recently, we produced a series of technical reports applying dynamic causal modelling (DCM) to
epidemiological data to illustrate how this might be applied to understanding the Covid-19 pandemic
[1-4]. This is an approach developed in neuroimaging research that attempts to find the best
explanations for observed timeseries data [5]. An interesting outcome of this work is that the best
explanations of data from the current pandemic appeal to there being sizeable portions of the population
who either are not susceptible to the virus, or who have such a mild course of illness that they are
unlikely to pass it on. The term ‘immunological dark matter’ has found some media purchase1 in
describing this finding. However, the idea behind this phrase is simple. The implication is that one or
more unmeasured variables confer a degree of non-susceptibility or resistance to severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). This may be partly due to demographic factors,
such as geographical isolation or shielding. In addition, it is likely that heterogeneity in the immune
response people mount to the virus contributes to this [6-9].

1

https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/may/31/covid-19-expert-karl-friston-germany-may-have-moreimmunological-dark-matter

1

This raises the question as to what the differences in immunity may be and how we could test this. In
this paper, we formalise some of the hypotheses raised as to the immunological factors conferring
resistance. We have no pretensions of answering this question – which almost certainly has several
different concurrently correct answers – but hope to illustrate how the variational methods used in the
epidemiological DCM could be repurposed to test hypotheses about the causes of resistance. This may
be particularly salient in the setting of vaccine trials, in which a great deal of immunological data may
be collected following a timed exposure to viral antigens – and in which the immunity conferred by a
vaccine may transcend purely antibody mediated immunity [10,11], which appears to have a relatively
low prevalence [12]. As such, the model presented here is designed to include antibody mediated
immunity, but also to allow for alternative (e.g., T-cell mediated) forms of resistance. The use of
variational inference procedures in this setting allows for fast and efficient inferences at the individual
level, quantification of the uncertainty surrounding these estimates, and hypothesis testing as to the best
explanation for individual serology results.
The DCM approach relies upon the notion of a generative or forward model that generates measurable
data. The idea here is that, by adjusting the parameters of this model, we can find the parameter
configurations that minimise any discrepancy between synthetic and measured data, subject to prior
beliefs about the plausibility of those configurations. Practically, this proceeds using variational
Bayesian inference [13,14]. We make use of a variational Laplace procedure [15] that maximises a
lower bound on the marginal likelihood (or model evidence) of data. The bound is known variously as
an evidence lower bound (ELBO) or negative free energy. The benefit of the forward modelling
approach is that it appeals directly to the mechanisms that generate data. We are interested in measures
of immunity that include the viral load, antibody levels, and T-cell responses (as indicated by interferonγ secretion by CD4 and CD8 positive T-cells). This approach allows us to make inferences about
immunity that can arise from interacting and multifactored immune responses.
In the following sections, we first set out a generative model of immune responses. Like many
epidemiological models [16] – and existing immunological models [17] – this is a compartment model.
This means each component of the immune system exists in one of several alternative states that they
may transition between. As in the location, infection, symptom, testing (LIST) DCM [1], our generative
model appeals to different factors, corresponding to different arms of the immune system. After
introducing this model, we set out formalisations of hypotheses as to the causes of resistance. We then
illustrate the fitting of this model to (synthetic) data highlighting how these alternative hypotheses could
be tested for a specific resistant individual. Finally, we discuss the potential implications of this
approach – including the importance of not overinterpreting negative antibody tests [18].

2 – A mean-field model of the immune response
The approach we pursue here is based upon a mean-field approximation that separates an immune
response into five different factors or modules [19-21]. These are the antibodies (which subdivide into
IgG and IgM types), B-cells, T-cells, and the virus itself. Figure 1 summarises the key aspects of the
model dynamics. Each factor has a number of levels, with some probability assigned to each level. The
dynamics of the model are formulated in terms of the move of probability mass between these levels.
For example, antibody synthesis is the process of moving probability mass from the ‘absent’ level to
the neutralising or non-neutralising antibody states. The dashed arrows between factors in Figure 1
show the direction of influence of factors on one another. We will unpack the model by going through
these, starting from the reciprocal influence of the virus on T-cells, followed by T-cell mediation of the
B-cell response. We then outline the interaction between B-cells and the virus, B-cells and antibodies,
and antibodies and virus.

2

Figure 1 – The generative model. This schematic sets out the five factors of the generative
model and the data modalities they generate. There are two antibody factors (IgG and IgM). For
these factors, the absent antibody can become either neutralising or non-neutralising, and each of
these can decay back to being absent. Similarly, the T-cell factor allows for transitions between
being naïve to either CD4+ or CD8+ cells. These decay back to naïve, under the assumption that
the production of naïve T-cells occurs at approximately the same rate as the death rate of
specialised T-cells to maintain a roughly constant T-cell population. The viral dynamics include
an absent state, which transitions to being extracellular depending upon the amount of
intracellular virus. This represents the intracellular replication and shedding of virus into the
extracellular compartment. The extracellular virus then moves into the intracellular compartment
– where further replication and shedding can take place. The B-cell factor is slightly more
complex as this includes five different levels. Naïve B-cells become either IgM plasma cells or
immature memory cells. Immature (I) memory cells develop into mature (M) memory cells,
which themselves can become IgG plasma cells. Mature memory cells and plasma cells decay
into naïve cells over time. The dashed connections between factors with round arrows express
the directed influences between factors, as described in more detail in the main text. The influence
of one factor over another is to increase or decrease the rates of transition between selected levels
of that factor. The three numbers in black circles indicate the parameters we will manipulate to
augment or attenuate the immune response.

The influence of the virus on the T-cells is to increase the rate at which naïve T-cells specialise [22].
Some proportion (θCD4) of naïve cells transition to being CD4+ cells each hour, scaled by the probability
of the virus being extracellular. Similarly, some proportion (θCD8) of naïve cells transition to being
CD8+ cells each hour, scaled by the probability of the virus being intracellular. Our definition of the
term ‘naïve’ T-cells is deliberately broad, to account for any T-cell that has the potential to become an
activated CD4+ or CD8+ cell selective for a viral antigen. This might include CD4+ or CD8+ cells that
have not become activated or started to secrete cytokines like interferon-γ (INF-γ), in addition to cells
that have yet to express CD4 or CD8 surface markers [23].
The influence of the T-cells on the viral factor are as follows. In proportion to the number of CD4+ Tcells, the extracellular virus moves to the absent state. This stands in for the effect of CD4+ cell
3

mediated activation of parts of the innate immune system – for example, the activation of macrophages
that phagocytose and kill pathogens [24]. Responses mediated by these cells are known to have a role
in influenza virus and coronavirus infections [25,26]. The CD8+ cell causes a move of intracellular
virus to the absent state. This represents the cytotoxic activity of these cells, prompting apoptosis of
infected cells [27]. The proportion moving to the absent state is given by the probability of a T-cell
being a CD8+ cell multiplied by 0.5(θTCP + θdpi), where the first parameter deals with the effect of the
cytotoxic (CD8+) cell on the pathogen, and the second is the decay of the intracellular pathogen due to
T-cell independent mechanisms. The latter is invariant to the T-cell state. We have not specified the
mechanism of decay of intracellular and extracellular virus here, such that these variables could
encompass innate immunity, non-functional viral mutations, and host cell death [28,29].
In addition to their direct effects on the virus, the T-cells promote a B-cell response [30]. Specifically,
in the presence of CD4+ cells, naïve B-cells become (immature) memory cells [31] or IgM-secreting
plasma cells. The proportion of B-cells specialising is proportional to the number of CD4+ cells, with
proportionality constant θBC. The proportion of specialising B-cells becoming memory cells is
parameterised as θBCm. The decay of the (IgM and IgG) plasma cells is parameterised as θdpB and is
independent of T-cells. Similarly, there is a constant move of immature memory cells into the mature
memory cell state (θmba) and a decay of mature memory cells (θdmB) – neither of which depends upon
the T-cells or presence of pathogen. The viral influence on B-cells is to cause the mature memory cells
to transition to the IgG plasma cell state (parameterised by θBmp) [32].
The B-cell factor exerts an influence over the antibody factors, with IgM plasma cells leading to a move
from absent to neutralising or non-neutralising proportional to θpAb (where the proportion that are
neutralising is given by θnAb) in the IgM antibody factor, and IgG plasma cells leading to the equivalent
dynamics in the IgG antibody factor. Regardless of the B-cell factor, antibodies decay to the absent
state with rate parameterised by θdAb for IgM antibodies and the slower θdAbG for IgG antibodies. Finally,
the antibodies exert an influence over the viral population, with extracellular virus moving to the absent
state in proportion to the antibodies in the neutralising state. The overall structure of these dynamics is
given in Equation 1, where the Δτ used for the simulations is one hour.

p( +  )i = T( )i ( p( )V  p( )TC  p( ) BC  p( ) IgM  p( ) IgG )
i  {V , TC , BC , IgM , IgG}
p(0)V = 1 − e −8 m

e −8 m

0 

T

p(0)TC = 1 0 0

T

p(0) BC = 1 − e −4 n

(1)

0 0 e −4 n

0 

T

p(0) IgM = 1 0 0

T

p(0) IgG = 1 0 0

T

Each p is a vector of probabilities, with superscripts indexing the factor that these probabilities pertain
to. T is a transition matrix that updates these probabilities for a given time interval. The order of states
shown in these probability vectors are as follows. The viral states are absent, extracellular, and
intracellular. The T-cell states are naïve, CD4+, and CD8+. The B-cell states are naïve, plasma (IgM),
immature memory, mature memory, plasma (IgG). Both sets of antibody states are absent, nonneutralising, neutralising. Note that a very small amount of virus can be present in the extracellular
4

space at the start, and that a small proportion of B-cells exist in the mature memory B-cell state at the
start.
For a generative model to be useful, it should be able to generate data of the sort that can be measured.
The model in Figure 1 generates antibody levels, extracellular viral load, and the proportion of activated
CD4+ [33,34] and CD8+ cells [7]. These are generated by summing the proportions of neutralising and
non-neutralising antibodies, and taking the proportions of the other variables, and then scaling these by
the maximum values we expect them to take. The scaling factors include a fixed and a random
component. The fixed component determines the maximum value when the random component takes
its prior expected value of 1. The random variables are θ-parameters as detailed in Table 1, meaning
these could be estimated from measured data. These measurements are relative to some baseline which
is likely to be zero for viral load but may be higher for the other variables. IFN-γ secretion is generally
accepted as a measure of activation of CD4+ and CD8+ cells [35]. Evidence from H7N9 influenza virus
infections suggests that recovery from the viral infection is positively associated with IFN-γ secretion
by CD4+ and CD8+ cells [35]; emphasising the importance of these ‘activated’ cells as measures of the
immune response. Put formally, the process generating data is as follows:

y ( ) IgM = 27 ( p( ) 2IgM + p( )3IgM ) Abm
y ( ) IgG = 27 ( p( ) 2IgG + p( )3IgG ) Abm
y ( )VL = 104 p( )V2 VLm

(2)

y ( )CD 4 = p( )TC
2  IFN
y ( )CD 8 = p( )TC
3  IFN

Each of these data modalities (y) are multiplied by a constant and a scaling parameter, which may be
estimated during model inversion. By inversion, we mean the process of inferring the parameters that
caused the data. We do not assume data are generated every hour (the rate of update of latent dynamics).
Instead, we assume measurements are only available every 24 hours. This is perhaps a little optimistic,
but the model is formulated such that the measurement timings can be arbitrarily set, to account for
when measurements are available. Table 1 provides the parameters used in the simulations that follow.
It is important to emphasise that the priors chosen here are largely heuristic. These will vary with
infection between different organisms, and between hosts. This means the simulations that follow
should not be taken as making any comment on any specific infection. Ideally these would be estimated
from empirical data. In the absence of these data, we have selected parameters such that the relative
timing of each response is broadly consistent with that observed in biology, and that is consistent with
a self-limiting infection that is largely cleared within about three weeks. We discuss this consistency in
relation to the time course of measurements during SARS-CoV-2 infections below. While this allows
us to illustrate general principles, these illustrations should be taken as qualitative as opposed to
quantitative.

Table 1 – Priors for normal immune response (log parameters)
Parameter
Scaling for initial immunity

Symbol

Scaling for initial viral load

5

ln  n

Expectation
-2

Variance
1

ln m

0

1/256

Decay of IgM antibodies

ln dAb

-6

1/1024

Decay of IgG antibodies

ln dAbG

-8

1/1024

Production of antibodies by plasma cells

ln  pAb

0

1/1024

Proportion of antibodies that are neutralising

ln nAb

-1

1/1024

Decay of plasma B-cells

ln dpB

-2

1/1024

Decay of memory B-cells

ln dmB

-32

1/1024

Activation of memory B-cells

ln  mba

-4

1/1024

Proportion of mature memory cells becoming plasma cells
in presence of infection
Specialisation of naïve B-cells in the presence of CD4+ Tcells
Proportion of B-cells specialising as memory cells

ln  Bmp

-1/2

1/1024

ln  BC

-3

1/1024

ln  BCm

-1

1/1024

Decay of CD4+ cells

ln  dT 4

-4

1/1024

Decay of CD8+ cells

ln dT 8

-5

1/1024

Production of CD4+ cells in presence of extracellular
pathogen
Production of CD8+ cells in presence of intracellular
pathogen
Neutralisation of intracellular pathogen by T-cell mediated
apoptosis
Neutralisation of extracellular pathogen by antibody
independent CD4+ mechanisms
Viral entry into cells

ln CD 4

-3

1/1024

ln CD8

-3

1/1024

ln TCP

-2

7/32

ln T 4 P

-8

1/1024

ln int

-2

1/16

Viral shedding into extracellular space (absorbing
replication rate)
Decay of extracellular pathogen (independent of adaptive
immunity)
Decay of intracellular pathogen (independent of adaptive
immunity)
Scaling of antibody titre measures

ln ext

-1

1/1024

ln dpe

-2

1/1024

ln  dpi

-2

1/1024

ln  Abm

0

1/256

Scaling of viral load measures

ln VLm

0

1/256

Scaling of IFN-γ T-cell assays

ln  IFN

0

1/256

While the variances in Table 1 may seem very small, it is important to remember that we are working
with log parameters – so small changes can result in large changes once exponentiated. We will see the
large confidence intervals in subsequent figures reflecting this. Secondly, many of the parameters we
deal with play the role of probabilities, which means tight priors are required so that these parameters
do not exceed a sum total of one2. We use these tighter priors for simulation purposes; we relax the
variances later, when demonstrating model fitting. It is worth drawing attention to the variances for the
initial immunity, the viral cell entry, and the T-cell mediated apoptosis parameters. The variances for
these are chosen to be very wide as these are the key parameters we will be varying later. Specifically,
2

This highlights a trade-off in our decision to use normally distributed priors. An alternative would be to use
Dirichlet distributed priors, which ensure summation to one. However, the flexibility afforded by the use of
normal distributions, and the simplicity of variational inference under a Laplace assumption, favours the use of
normally distributed log parameters.

6

these are chosen such that the modifications we will make to these parameters amount to a change of
approximately one standard deviation each3.
Figure 2 illustrates an immune response generated from the prior expectations in Table 1. Here we see
the rapid increase in viral load as the initial extracellular virus enters the cells enabling intracellular
replication and shedding into the extracellular space. As the extracellular viral load increases, this
initiates a helper (CD4+) T-cell response that increases the number of plasma B-cells and causes a rapid
increase in antibody levels. Later peaks are seen in the populations of cytotoxic (CD8+) T-cells and
memory B-cells. As the viral load is suppressed, the immune cell populations decay, with the exception
of the mature memory cells. This is because, in the presence of the virus, mature memory cells rapidly
transition into plasma cells. This means they are the only cell type to decrease in number during the
initial phase of the infection but increase later on from the immature memory cells acquired during the
infection. In the antibody response plot, note the early IgM response, followed by a slower but more
sustained IgG response. This reflects the characteristic role of these isotypes in fast and long-lasting
immunity, respectively.
Figure 2 also illustrates some face validity of this approach in relation to the emerging data on the
immune response in Covid-19. The time-course and magnitude of the antibody response is broadly
consistent with data suggesting peak antibody titres in the region of about 26 [36] (measured as
chemiluminescence levels relative to some cut-off), consistent with the upper bound approaching 60 in
the antibody plot in Figure 2, and an increase in IgG relative to IgM over time, both plateauing at around
day 20 following symptom onset. This is slightly earlier than in our simulation but may reflect the time
it takes for the viral load to reach a level that causes symptoms. For ease of comparison with empirical
reports we plot the viral load (yVL), generated according to Equation 2, after transforming into the cycle
threshold for detection using a polymerase chain reaction (PCR). See the legend of Figure 2 for details.
The viral load appears to decline from a cycle threshold (Ct) of about 30 to 40 over the space of about
10 days [37], consistent with the lower left plot in Figure 2. In the lower right plot, the percentage of
CD4+ and CD8+ cells producing IFN-γ peaks at around 0.2 per hundred cells (with upper limit around
0.5), consistent with the kinds of ranges reported in some empirical studies [38]. While these
comparisons are heuristic and will almost certainly vary with laboratory equipment and local
measurement procedures, they illustrate face validity in the sense that the data generated broadly
resemble measurable data.

3

This accounts for the variances of 1, 7/32, and 1/16, which are much larger than those for other priors. The
reason for this will become more obvious in Section 4. Briefly, they are chosen to avoid biasing our model
fitting towards one phenotype or another.

7

Figure 2 – A synthetic immune response. The upper left plot shows the latent variables in terms
of the different types of antibody. This distinguishes between the faster IgM response, and the
more prolonged IgG response, and between the neutralising and non-neutralising variants of
each. The upper right plot shows the cellular latent variables, with an initial increase in the
activated T-cell proportions that leads to a later increase in plasma and memory cells, with a
persistent memory response developing. The middle left plot shows the viral states, subdivided
into intracellular and extracellular components. The middle right plot shows the total antibody
level, including both neutralising and non-neutralising. The lower left plot shows the viral load
in terms of the ‘threshold cycle’ (Ct) which indicates the number of cycles of polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) required before the viral nucleic acids are detectable. A greater number of cycles
indicates a greater dilution (i.e., a smaller concentration). To generate these data, we took the
negative log [39,40] of y(τ)VL, scaled it by a factor of 4, and added a constant 50 – under the
assumption that more than 40 cycles implies a negligible viral concentration, based on
fluorescence amplification results for a typical qPCR run [41]. These scale factors and constants
could in principle be fit to empirical data. Here they are used only for the plotting and have no
8

influence on model inversion. Finally, the lower right plot shows the proportion of CD4+ and
CD8+ cells releasing IFN-γ.

3 – Routes to resistance
Figure 3 provides an overview of the mechanisms for resistance that we address here. This is not
exhaustive but highlights three important ways in which the immune system might vary between
individuals. We will take each of these in turn and demonstrate the influence they have on the dynamics
of the immune response under our model. Figure 4 offers a comparison between the dynamics of latent
states under each manipulation for ease of comparison between the time course of antibody, cellular,
and viral responses. The same plots will be shown in subsequent figures, which we will unpack in detail.

Figure 3 – Mechanisms of resistance. In what follows, we will illustrate various modifications
to the model simulated in Figure 2, by changing model priors. The graphics in this figure provide
an overview of the three manipulations we will pursue in terms of the associated biological
mechanisms. These mechanisms are reduced viral entry into host cells, pre-existing memory Bcells, and enhanced T-cell dependent killing of infected cells.

9

Figure 4 – Latent variables. This figure takes the latent variable plots from Figure 2 and
supplements them with those that will appear in Figures 5-7. The format is as described in Figure
2. We will unpack the details of these plots as they are introduced in subsequent figures.
However, the highlights are (i) the attenuation of peak viral load in the second to fourth row of
plots, relative to the first row, (ii) the smaller antibody response required to suppress the infection
in the second and fourth rows of plots, (iii) the earlier peak in IgG plasma cells and antibodies in
the third row of plots. The key message from this figure is that there are several different
dimensions along which immune responses may vary, with consequences for viral suppression.

10

The first route to resistance is a reduced capacity for viral entry into cells. In the context of SARS-CoV2, this could be due to polymorphisms in the cell surface ACE-receptors targeted by the virus [42] – or
to age-dependent differences in expression [43]. In terms of the model outlined above, this is an
attenuation of the rate at which extracellular virus becomes intracellular. Specifically, we changed the
expectation of lnθint from -2 to -2.2. Figure 5 shows a simulation of this scenario. Given that viral
reproduction occurs in the intracellular compartment, slower entry into this compartment leads to a
failure to increase the viral population. This leads to a viral load that is lower at its peak than in Figure
2 – possibly suggesting people with this phenotype are less infectious (note the differences in y-axis
scales between Figures 2 and 5). However, the most obvious difference between Figures 2 and 5 is the
magnitude of the immune response required to clear the virus. In Figure 5, we see a much smaller
response, and might anticipate a failure to detect antibodies post-infection in such individuals. In
addition, a smaller immune response might mean fewer symptoms during the course of the infection.
The second route is pre-existing cross-reactivity of antibodies, which we simulate through assuming a
larger population of memory cells capable of rapid specialisation into plasma cells that target the virus.
By cross-reactivity, we mean that antibodies developed to some previous infection may also be effective
against the current infection [8,44]. Specifically, we formalise this by increasing lnθn from -2 to 2.
Figure 6 illustrates the rapid drop in mature memory cell populations as they become IgG plasma cells,
and the resulting increase in IgG antibodies. Note that the plasma IgG cells never reach the same level
as the original memory cell population. This is because their rate of decay is considerably faster than
that of memory cells. The key differences between this simulation and that reported in Figure 2 are the
earlier and more dramatic IgG response, which now precedes the attenuated IgM response, and the
decrease in peak viral load. Longitudinal studies of these antibodies in Covid-19 show this pattern in
patients with low severity disease, compared to an earlier IgM response (as in Figure 2) in more severe
disease [45].
Third, the response could be mediated by antibody independent T-cell mechanisms [7,46] that suppress
the virus before the viral load is sufficient to promote plasma cell proliferation. A similar hypothesis
could be advanced for a purely innate immune response, by increasing the rate of decay of the virus
independently of the states of the other three factors. Cell-mediated immunity is well recognised to vary
with age [47,48] and could account for the relative resistance of younger members of the population.
Suggestive evidence in favour of the relevance of CD8+ dependent mechanisms comes from genomic
studies that have identified loci associated with lung CD8+ cells as differing between those with severe
Covid-19 and the control population (people without a known diagnosis of Covid-19) [49]. Some Tcells in the respiratory system are thought to have a role in immunological memory, which may be
independent of B-cell memory systems [50,51]. This is one possible interpretation for a more vigorous
T-cell response in some people, whose T-cells have encountered similar antigens in the past. There are
also emerging data suggesting SARS-CoV-2 itself induces a memory T-cell response [38], in addition
to there being T-cells reactive to viral antigens in people who have yet to be exposed [7]. Although we
have formalised this in terms of CD8+ responses (by increasing lnθTCP from -2 to -1/8), there is also
evidence in favour of a role for CD4+ responses in rapid suppression of influenza viruses in some
individuals – something that has been proposed as a mechanism for the difference in disease severity
between successive infections in individuals [26]. Figure 7 shows the influence of increasing the
effectiveness of T-cell dependent killing on the immune response, which appears to reduce viral load
and dampen and prolong antibody and cell mediated responses.

11

Figure 5 – Attenuating viral entry into cells. This figure uses the same layout as Figure 2. Here,
the proportion of extracellular virus entering the intracellular compartment per hour has been
decreased, remembering that the production of extracellular virus depends upon there being
intracellular virus that can use the cellular machinery to manufacture and secrete new virus
particles. Decreasing the rate of cell entry therefore slows the growth of the viral population,
leading to a smaller peak with a smaller immune response required to suppress the infection. Note
the decrease in antibody titre, which might mean that people exhibiting this immune phenotype
may not have detectable antibodies in serological testing post-infection.

12

Figure 6 – Pre-existing immunity. This figure uses the same layout as Figure 2. Here, the
proportion of mature memory cells at the start of the infection has been increased, to simulate the
scenario that immunological memory may have been instantiated by exposure to related viruses
in the past. Note the rapid increase in the IgG response, in contrast to the early IgM response we
saw in Figure 2. Like in Figure 5, the virus is suppressed and never reaches as high a viral load
as in Figure 2. However, here we see a sustained increase in serum immunoglobulin in the latent
(upper left) and measurable (middle right) antibody response plots. This pattern of response
might be associated with a very mild illness, not prompting testing for the virus (or possibly even
an undetectable viral load on being tested) but would be associated with positive serological tests
later on.

13

Figure 7 – Cell mediated immunity. This figure uses the same layout as Figure 2. The scenario
simulated here is one in which the proportion of intracellular virus destroyed through T-cell
mediated mechanisms is increased. This could be interpreted as a memory T-cell mediated
response. Here we see a smaller viral load and a flattened antibody response.

Clearly there are many other phenotypes we could have considered [52]. These could include mixtures
of the above, or more extreme values of the parameters. For example, if we reduce the viral cell entry
sufficiently, the viral load never rises at all, but immediately decays to zero – with a negligible immune
response. In contrast, if we sufficiently attenuate the immune response (e.g., by reducing activation of
T and B cells), the viral load increases to its carrying capacity and stays there. There are a range of other
intermediate scenarios, like a small but persistent viral load that is never fully suppressed (perhaps more
consistent with some hepatitis viruses [53]), or even second waves (without reinfection) if the antibodies
decay sufficiently quickly. These parameter settings might be more appropriate in modelling viruses
14

with latent phases that reactivate when immunity decays. For example, varicella zoster virus causes
chickenpox before being suppressed, but can re-emerge later as shingles [54].

4 – Immunological phenotyping
In this section, we attempt to do two things. The first is to find out whether the three phenotypes
identified above (lower proportion of extracellular virus entering cells; higher proportion of mature
memory cells on infection; and higher proportion of intracellular virus destroyed through T-cell
mediation) may be disambiguated from one another based upon the data that we assume they generate.
This rests on the idea that an individual has one, rather than a mixture, of these phenotypes. However,
it would be simple to extend this analysis by specifying additional phenotypes that comprise mixtures
of those outlined in Section 3. The second aim in this section is to ask whether we could identify
interactions between demographic factors – such as whether or not someone has received a Bacillus
Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccine – and parameters of the models above – for example, T-cell dependent
killing of pathogen [55]. We will use the BCG hypothesis, that T-cell dependent killing is enhanced by
the BCG vaccine, as an example to aid intuition. This is not intended to endorse or refute this hypothesis,
but to show how DCM may be used to formulate and test hypotheses of this sort.
For the first of these aims, we took the outputs of the above simulations assuming one measurement per
day for the first three weeks, added univariate random fluctuations with a variance of 1/8 to the square
roots of the data. We then fit each synthetic dataset – comprising daily measurements of the viral load,
antibody levels, and proportion T-cells releasing of IFN-γ – to the model with the prior expectations in
Table 1, but with variances multiplied by 16. Model fitting here means finding approximate posterior
probabilities Q that maximise a lower bound on model evidence (the marginal likelihood of the data
given the model):

Q( | m) = arg max 
Q ( |m )

Q ( |m )

ln P( , y | m) − ln Q( | m)  P( | y, m)

Q ( |m )  ln P ( , y | m) − ln Q( | m)   ln P( y | m)

(3)

In Equation 3, θ are the parameters, y the data, and m is the model. Maximisation of the model evidence
ensures an optimal trade-off between the accuracy with which data can be explained and the simplicity
of that explanation – penalising excessively complex explanations. This maximisation was achieved
using a standard software routine (spm_nlsi_GN.m4). We then used Bayesian model reduction (BMR)
– a method for efficient post-hoc model comparison [56,57] – to evaluate the relative evidence for
alternative models with the prior expectations set out in Table 1, with expectations modified as
described in Section 3. The reason for the more uncertain priors used during fitting of the full model is
that BMR treats each alternative model as a reduced version of the ‘full’ model. By setting the variances
in the full model to be much larger than those in any of the reduced models, we ensured that the
expectations of the reduced priors would be plausible under the full prior distribution. The principle
that underwrites BMR is that, when only the priors differ between models, the relative evidence of two
models is given by the following equation – which only requires inversion of one of the two:

4

Freely available as part of the SPM12 package at https://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/software/spm12/

15

ln P(y | m) − ln P( y | m) =

P ( |m , y )

 P( | m) 
ln P( | m) 



(4)

The graphic on the left of Figure 8 shows a confusion matrix, whose rows correspond to the model used
to fit the data, and whose columns correspond to the model that generated those data. Each element of
the matrix is shaded by the posterior probability of the model given the data, with white indicating a
probability of one and black zero. Posterior probabilities are obtained through using a softmax
(normalised exponential) operator on the log model evidence given by BMR for each column. The
lighter shading along the diagonal elements compared to the off-diagonal elements in the same column
implies it is possible to recover the mechanism generating observed timeseries – albeit with varying
degrees of confidence. The implication of this is that, in principle, it is possible to use empirical data to
assign individuals to the immunological phenotype that best explains their measured serology.

Figure 8 – Immunological phenotyping. This figure illustrates two ways in which this
modelling approach may be used. The left panel shows a confusion matrix that plots the posterior
probability of each model given each dataset. White indicates a probability of one, while black
indicates a probability of zero, with grey being intermediate values. The diagonal elements of
this matrix represent the posterior probability of a model given the data that it was used to
generate, and these probabilities are reassuringly higher than those for other models. The models
are ordered such that 1-4 correspond to The rows of Figure 4. The idea here is that alternative
hypotheses may be posed to data from an individual’s immune response, and that we hope to be
able to recover which model best represents that individual’s immune response. The second use
of this approach is shown on the right, where a synthetic group level analysis has been used to
test hypotheses about the role of demographic factors (e.g., whether or not someone has received
a BCG vaccine) on parameters of the model (e.g., the cytotoxic T-cell response). The plots
labelled log-posterior and model posterior show the probability associated with group level
models that include various combinations of constant (β0) and linear (β1) effects on the θTCP
parameter. The constant effect is the expected value for all those without a BCG vaccine, while
16

the linear effect is the amount added to the log expected parameter when someone has had this
vaccine. The presence or absence of these parameters (where absence means set to zero) for each
model is shown in the model space plot with white indicating presence and black absence. The
posterior plot shows the probability of each parameter being present. The MAP plot shows
maximum a posteriori estimates for the model including all parameters (with 90% credible
intervals) while the MAP (reduced) plot shows these when averaged under the relative probability
of each reduced model.

The plots shown on the right of Figure 8 illustrate an alternative application of this approach to answer
a question at the level of between subject effects. Here, we generated 32 immune responses, as if from
32 different subjects. Each subject was assigned to the BCG group or the unvaccinated group with a
probability of ½. The priors were all as in Table 1, except for the θTCP parameter whose expectation was
sampled from a normal distribution for each individual. The mean of this distribution was set at -2, with
2 added for those with a BCG. In this synthetic example, this implies the BCG vaccine confers some Tcell mediated immunity. We then fit each of the 32 synthetic datasets using the priors of Table 1, and
used a parametric empirical Bayes scheme (spm_dcm_peb.m) to estimate the parameters of a second
level linear model [56,58], which predicted the θTCP parameter based upon the presence or absence of
the BCG. This second level model has the form:

i
ln TCP
= 0 + X i 1 +  i

(5)

Here, the superscript i indicates the subject, the β0 is a constant value for those with no BCG, and the
β1 is the effect of having had the BCG. Xi is one if a subject has had the BCG, and zero otherwise. The
ω term indicates normally distributed, zero-mean, fluctuations. The plots on the right of Figure 8 show
that a model in which both β parameters are allowed to be non-zero provides the best explanation for
the synthetic data. Furthermore, the maximum a posteriori estimates are consistent with the -2 for the
absence of a BCG and the positive effect associated with this vaccine used to generate the synthetic
data. This illustrates that, if it were true that the BCG vaccine enhances T-cell-mediated immunity, we
could recover this information using this sort of analysis. Again, this is not to suggest that this
hypothesis is correct (or incorrect). Instead, our aim is to show that it could be demonstrated if it were
true.

5 – Discussion
How does this sort of modelling relate to epidemiology? Drawing from theoretical neurobiology, we
could think of immunological and epidemiological models as simply different levels of parcellation –
just as we have the option of parcellating the brain on the level of regions or on the level of networks,
depending upon the question at hand. Recent work [59] in this direction makes use of renormalisation
groups [60] to translate between these scales. In brief, this works by identifying functional units at small
spatial scales (e.g., individuals at different stages of viral exposure) and extracting low dimensional
summaries of their dynamics based upon the system’s Jacobian. These are typically along the direction
of the eigenvectors with the smallest negative eigenvalues – effectively omitting dynamics that dissipate
very quickly [61]. This procedure may be applied recursively to move to high level summaries in a
population (e.g., the proportion of individuals at each stage). A key feature of these analyses is that
increases in spatial scales are accompanied by slower dynamics. Consistent with this, the course of
infection for an individual – lasting for a period of a few days to weeks – is much shorter than that of
an epidemic (a few months) or a pandemic (potentially years). This method affords the possibility of
17

using inferences drawn at the level of individual immune responses to nuance models used at an
epidemiological level.
It is important to emphasise that none of the hypotheses considered above are ‘new’. All have been
advanced in the context of the current pandemic or in other infections. What is offered here is a
formalisation of these hypotheses, and a generative model that could be used to evaluate them. In
addition, generative models may be used to simulate interventions (e.g., pharmacological treatments)
to try to understand what might happen before moving to more expensive or risky empirical tests. The
generative modelling approach has been employed in the past to assess models of the immune response
to dengue virus [62]. The authors used temporally dense measurements of viral load and antibody titre
to fit a ‘target-cell’ model – highlighting the utility of dynamic modelling of immunity. The approach
pursued in this paper is closely related to the target-cell approach to modelling viral infections but
differs in a few important ways [63]. Target-cell models – in their simplest manifestation – describe the
dynamics of an infection in much the same way Susceptible-Exposed-Infectious-Recovered (SEIR)
models describe an epidemic. In place of the number of individuals at various stages of being infected
by a pathogen, target-cell models deal with the number of cells infected. Our approach here differs from
this in that it factorises the immune response into several interacting modules. This affords the
opportunity for richer generative models which, using variational Bayes and Bayesian model reduction,
may be inverted relatively quickly.
It is interesting that the mechanisms of resistance illustrated here tend to flatten, as opposed to fully
suppress, the viral load curve. This could mean one of (or some combination of) two things. A lower
load may make someone less able to transmit the infection. Alternatively, a prolonged period of having
a non-negligible viral load may increase the period for which they are infectious. Each of these has
important consequences in SEIR (or LIST) epidemiological models. The former favours resistance both
to the infection itself, and to passing it on. The latter might be more consistent with the notion of a
super-spreader, who has an insufficient viral load to cause symptoms that would prompt testing or
isolation but is infectious for longer.
Clearly a major limitation of the work presented here is that it is based upon purely synthetic data. As
such, this should be viewed as a proof-of-principle whose priors will require refinement as data from
longitudinal studies [38] and vaccine trials become available [64]. Related to this are the temporally
dense (daily) measurements assumed in the model fitting. In the presence of more precise prior beliefs
derived from such studies, it should be possible to achieve posterior estimates with greater certainty and
less data per individual. Another limitation is the relative coarseness of the immune model. There are
many nuances that could be incorporated into a model of this sort. Relevant to the current SARS-CoV2 pandemic is the direct influence of the virus on T-cell populations. Some stages of the SARS-CoV-2
infection are associated with a decrease in the functional CD8+ cell population [9] and lymphopenia
[65]. There is precedent for thinking about targeting of lymphocytes by viral pathogens, with the most
obvious example being the reduction in CD4 counts mediated by human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
[66]. However, the pattern in Covid-19 seems to be more a skew in the sorts of cells naïve T-cells
differentiate into [67] – a viral effect on T-cell transition probabilities that could be explicitly
parameterised using this approach.
One possible extension to this work would be to consider separate anatomical compartments. Here, the
same mean-field model could be replicated for different parts of the body. This would be similar to the
connection of multiple neural mass models in neuroscience – to model effective connectivity between
different brain regions [68] – or to connectivity between multiple LIST models as was used to model
SARS-CoV-2 propagation between parts of the United States [3]. This would allow for modelling of
the transfer of virus between different anatomical sites (e.g., between the nasopharynx and the lungs)
in addition to transfer of immune cells (e.g., between lymphoid organs and the lungs) [69]. Including
this anatomical dimension may also be of use in modelling the effect of Covid-19 on specific body
systems, including the increasingly recognised neurological manifestations, enabling measurements in
the cerebrospinal fluid to inform the same parameters as serological measures. However, it is worth
noting that there is little evidence so far for cerebrospinal viral load playing a direct role in neurological
disease [70].
18

Finally, having discussed the translation of analysis tools from neuroscience to immunology, it is worth
briefly considering other points of contact that could be exploited in future work. One of these is the
importance of immunological processes in neurological disease. Another is the relationship between
the brain and immune system in health. Regarding the former, there is an opportunity to combine
neurobiological and immunological models. Recently, DCM for neuroimaging has been extended to
accommodate fusion of several different imaging modalities [71]. This raises the possibility of fusing
immunological and neurobiological DCMs, to model conditions – like multiple sclerosis [72,73] or
autoimmune encephalitides [74] – in which the immune and nervous systems interact. Here the aim
would be to generate both neurophysiological and immunological measurements. Given serial
electroencephalograms and serological tests, it might be possible to measure the influence of immune
system compartments on neural connectivity over time.
The relationship between the nervous and immune systems in health is another important topic. Here
there is another opportunity to translate between theoretical neurobiology and immunology. A
prominent approach in the former is active inference, which frames the internal dynamics of the nervous
system as solving an inference problem based upon sensory data – where these inferences direct
behaviour through effector systems [75]. From this perspective, it suffices to define the problem being
solved. The optimal solution emerges from identification of this problem. This has been successful in
accounting for a range of neurophysiological and behavioural observations [76-78]. Like the nervous
system, the immune system exhibits complex internal dynamics [69], and interfaces with foreign agents
via (molecular) receptors and effectors. It follows that the immune system may be amenable to similar
approaches, which could help uncover the principles from which the interactions simulated above could
emerge. Given extensive interfaces between neural and immune tissue – both directly [79-83] and via
the neuroendocrine system [84] – it may be possible to take this further, through identifying the problem
that these systems jointly solve. We hope to explore this avenue of theoretical neuroimmunology in
future work.

6 – Conclusion
Ultimately, the simulations above are not designed to draw any specific conclusions about the nature of
‘immunological dark matter’, but to show how dynamic causal modelling could be applied to
understand which mechanisms of resistance (i.e., attenuation of viral load) might be in play. However,
one conclusion that can be drawn from this is the importance of not over-interpreting serological results.
If alternative immunological phenotypes like those simulated above exist in populations affected by
Covid-19, serological measures alone are likely to underestimate the effective immunity (or resistance)
in the population. We have illustrated the use of a dynamic model of immune responses to supplement
empirical and conceptual analyses of responses to viral pathogens or vaccines. In addition, we found
that – using synthetic data – it is possible to recover the models that generate immune responses and to
test hypotheses about the relationship between demographic factors and parameters of these models.

Software note
The simulations presented here may be reproduced and customised using the DEM_Immune.m demo
which will be available as part of the next public release of SPM12. This academic freeware may be
downloaded from https://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/software/spm12/.

Acknowledgements
The Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging is supported by core funding from Wellcome
[203147/Z/16/Z]. AB is supported by a Medical Research Council doctoral studentship
[D79/543369/D-OTH/170890]. KJF is a Wellcome Principle Research Fellow [088130/Z/09/Z].

19

References
1. Friston K, Parr T, Zeidman P, Razi A, Flandin G, Daunizeau J, Hulme O, Billig A, Litvak V, Moran
R, et al.: Dynamic causal modelling of COVID-19 [version 1; peer review: 1 not approved].
Wellcome Open Research 2020, 5.
2. Friston K, Parr T, Zeidman P, Razi A, Flandin G, Daunizeau J, Hulme O, Billig A, Litvak V, Price
C, et al.: Testing and tracking in the UK: A dynamic causal modelling study [version 1;
peer review: awaiting peer review]. Wellcome Open Research 2020, 5.
3. Friston K, Parr T, Zeidman P, Razi A, Flandin G, Daunizeau J, Hulme O, Billig A, Litvak V, Price
C, et al.: Second waves, social distancing, and the spread of COVID-19 across America
[version 1; peer review: awaiting peer review]. Wellcome Open Research 2020, 5.
4. Friston KJ, Parr T, Zeidman P, Razi A, Flandin G, Daunizeau J, Hulme OJ, Billig AJ, Litvak V, Price
CJ: Effective immunity and second waves: a dynamic causal modelling study. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2006.09429 2020.
5. Friston KJ, Harrison L, Penny W: Dynamic causal modelling. NeuroImage 2003, 19:1273-1302.
6. Bunyavanich S, Do A, Vicencio A: Nasal Gene Expression of Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2
in Children and Adults. JAMA 2020, 323:2427-2429.
7. Grifoni A, Weiskopf D, Ramirez SI, Mateus J, Dan JM, Moderbacher CR, Rawlings SA, Sutherland
A, Premkumar L, Jadi RS, et al.: Targets of T Cell Responses to SARS-CoV-2 Coronavirus
in Humans with COVID-19 Disease and Unexposed Individuals. Cell 2020, 181:14891501.e1415.
8. Ng K, Faulkner N, Cornish G, Rosa A, Earl C, Wrobel A, Benton D, Roustan C, Bolland W,
Thompson R, et al.: Pre-existing and &lt;em&gt;de novo&lt;/em&gt; humoral immunity
to SARS-CoV-2 in humans. bioRxiv 2020:2020.2005.2014.095414.
9. Zheng M, Gao Y, Wang G, Song G, Liu S, Sun D, Xu Y, Tian Z: Functional exhaustion of antiviral
lymphocytes in COVID-19 patients. Cellular & Molecular Immunology 2020, 17:533-535.
10. Akondy RS, Monson ND, Miller JD, Edupuganti S, Teuwen D, Wu H, Quyyumi F, Garg S, Altman
JD, Del Rio C, et al.: The Yellow Fever Virus Vaccine Induces a Broad and Polyfunctional
Human Memory CD8&lt;sup&gt;+&lt;/sup&gt; T Cell Response. The Journal of
Immunology 2009, 183:7919.
11. Gilbert SC: T-cell-inducing vaccines - what's the future. Immunology 2012, 135:19-26.
12. Pollán M, Pérez-Gómez B, Pastor-Barriuso R, Oteo J, Hernán MA, Pérez-Olmeda M, Sanmartín
JL, Fernández-García A, Cruz I, Fernández de Larrea N, et al.: Prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 in
Spain (ENE-COVID): a nationwide, population-based seroepidemiological study. The
Lancet.
13. Beal MJ: Variational algorithms for approximate Bayesian inference. Edited by: University of
London United Kingdom; 2003.
14. Winn J, Bishop CM: Variational message passing. Journal of Machine Learning Research 2005,
6:661-694.
15. Friston K, Mattout J, Trujillo-Barreto N, Ashburner J, Penny W: Variational free energy and the
Laplace approximation. Neuroimage 2007, 34:220-234.
16. Wu JT, Leung K, Leung GM: Nowcasting and forecasting the potential domestic and
international spread of the 2019-nCoV outbreak originating in Wuhan, China: a
modelling study. The Lancet 2020, 395:689-697.
17. Baccam P, Beauchemin C, Macken CA, Hayden FG, Perelson AS: Kinetics of Influenza A Virus
Infection in Humans. Journal of Virology 2006, 80:7590.
18. Bermingham WH, Wilding T, Beck S, Huissoon A: SARS-CoV-2 serology: Test, test, test, but
interpret with caution! Clinical Medicine 2020, 20:365-368.
19. Weiss P: L'hypothèse du champ moléculaire et la propriété ferromagnétique. J. Phys. Theor.
Appl. 1907, 6:661-690.
20. Kadanoff LP: More is the Same; Phase Transitions and Mean Field Theories. Journal of
Statistical Physics 2009, 137:777.
21. Parr T, Sajid N, Friston KJ: Modules or Mean-Fields? Entropy 2020, 22:552.
20

22. Korenkov D, Isakova-Sivak I, Rudenko L: Basics of CD8 T-cell immune responses after
influenza infection and vaccination with inactivated or live attenuated influenza vaccine.
Expert Review of Vaccines 2018, 17:977-987.
23. Adkins B, Mueller C, Okada CY, Reichert RA, Weissman IL, Spangrude GJ: Early Events in TCell Maturation. Annual Review of Immunology 1987, 5:325-365.
24. Swain SL, McKinstry KK, Strutt TM: Expanding roles for CD4⁺ T cells in immunity to viruses.
Nature reviews. Immunology 2012, 12:136-148.
25. Channappanavar R, Zhao J, Perlman S: T cell-mediated immune response to respiratory
coronaviruses. Immunologic Research 2014, 59:118-128.
26. Kelso A: CD4+ T cells limit the damage in influenza. Nature Medicine 2012, 18:200-202.
27. Harty JT, Tvinnereim AR, White DW: CD8+ T Cell Effector Mechanisms in Resistance to
Infection. Annual Review of Immunology 2000, 18:275-308.
28. Koyama S, Ishii KJ, Coban C, Akira S: Innate immune response to viral infection. Cytokine 2008,
43:336-341.
29. Thomson BJ: Viruses and apoptosis. International journal of experimental pathology 2001, 82:6576.
30. Parker DC: T Cell-Dependent B Cell Activation. Annual Review of Immunology 1993, 11:331360.
31. Weisel F, Shlomchik M: Memory B Cells of Mice and Humans. Annual Review of Immunology
2017, 35:255-284.
32. Kurosaki T, Kometani K, Ise W: Memory B cells. Nature Reviews Immunology 2015, 15:149-159.
33. Havenar-Daughton C, Reiss SM, Carnathan DG, Wu JE, Kendric K, Torrents de la Peña A, Kasturi
SP, Dan JM, Bothwell M, Sanders RW, et al.: Cytokine-Independent Detection of AntigenSpecific Germinal Center T Follicular Helper Cells in Immunized Nonhuman Primates
Using a Live Cell Activation-Induced Marker Technique. The Journal of Immunology 2016,
197:994.
34. Dan JM, Lindestam Arlehamn CS, Weiskopf D, da Silva Antunes R, Havenar-Daughton C, Reiss
SM, Brigger M, Bothwell M, Sette A, Crotty S: A Cytokine-Independent Approach To
Identify Antigen-Specific Human Germinal Center T Follicular Helper Cells and Rare
Antigen-Specific CD4&lt;sup&gt;+&lt;/sup&gt; T Cells in Blood. The Journal of
Immunology 2016, 197:983.
35. Wang Z, Wan Y, Qiu C, Quiñones-Parra S, Zhu Z, Loh L, Tian D, Ren Y, Hu Y, Zhang X, et al.:
Recovery from severe H7N9 disease is associated with diverse response mechanisms
dominated by CD8+ T cells. Nature Communications 2015, 6:6833.
36. Long Q-X, Liu B-Z, Deng H-J, Wu G-C, Deng K, Chen Y-K, Liao P, Qiu J-F, Lin Y, Cai X-F, et
al.: Antibody responses to SARS-CoV-2 in patients with COVID-19. Nature Medicine 2020,
26:845-848.
37. He X, Lau EHY, Wu P, Deng X, Wang J, Hao X, Lau YC, Wong JY, Guan Y, Tan X, et al.:
Temporal dynamics in viral shedding and transmissibility of COVID-19. Nature Medicine
2020, 26:672-675.
38. Sekine T, Perez-Potti A, Rivera-Ballesteros O, Strålin K, Gorin J-B, Olsson A, Llewellyn-Lacey S,
Kamal H, Bogdanovic G, Muschiol S, et al.: Robust T cell immunity in convalescent
individuals with asymptomatic or mild COVID-19. bioRxiv 2020:2020.2006.2029.174888.
39. Karlen Y, McNair A, Perseguers S, Mazza C, Mermod N: Statistical significance of quantitative
PCR. BMC bioinformatics 2007, 8:131-131.
40. Rutledge RG, Côté C: Mathematics of quantitative kinetic PCR and the application of standard
curves. Nucleic acids research 2003, 31:e93-e93.
41. McCall MN, McMurray HR, Land H, Almudevar A: On non-detects in qPCR data. Bioinformatics
2014, 30:2310-2316.
42. Hoffmann M, Kleine-Weber H, Schroeder S, Krüger N, Herrler T, Erichsen S, Schiergens TS,
Herrler G, Wu N-H, Nitsche A, et al.: SARS-CoV-2 Cell Entry Depends on ACE2 and
TMPRSS2 and Is Blocked by a Clinically Proven Protease Inhibitor. Cell 2020, 181:271280.e278.
43. Xie X, Chen J, Wang X, Zhang F, Liu Y: Age- and gender-related difference of ACE2 expression
in rat lung. Life sciences 2006, 78:2166-2171.
21

44. Chan KH, Chan JF, Tse H, Chen H, Lau CC, Cai JP, Tsang AK, Xiao X, To KK, Lau SK, et al.:
Cross-reactive antibodies in convalescent SARS patients' sera against the emerging novel
human coronavirus EMC (2012) by both immunofluorescent and neutralizing antibody
tests. J Infect 2013, 67:130-140.
45. Seow J, Graham C, Merrick B, Acors S, Steel KJ, Hemmings O, O'Bryne A, Kouphou N, Pickering
S, Galao R: Longitudinal evaluation and decline of antibody responses in SARS-CoV-2
infection. medRxiv 2020.
46. Herati RS, Muselman A, Vella L, Bengsch B, Parkhouse K, Del Alcazar D, Kotzin J, Doyle SA,
Tebas P, Hensley SE, et al.: Successive annual influenza vaccination induces a recurrent
oligoclonotypic memory response in circulating T follicular helper cells. Science
Immunology 2017, 2:eaag2152.
47. Chakravarti B, Abraham GN: Aging and T-cell-mediated immunity. Mechanisms of Ageing and
Development 1999, 108:183-206.
48. Ponnappan S, Ponnappan U: Aging and immune function: molecular mechanisms to
interventions. Antioxidants & redox signaling 2011, 14:1551-1585.
49. Ellinghaus D, Degenhardt F, Bujanda L, Buti M, Albillos A, Invernizzi P, Fernández J, Prati D,
Baselli G, Asselta R, et al.: Genomewide Association Study of Severe Covid-19 with
Respiratory Failure. New England Journal of Medicine 2020.
50. Wein AN, McMaster SR, Takamura S, Dunbar PR, Cartwright EK, Hayward SL, McManus DT,
Shimaoka T, Ueha S, Tsukui T, et al.: CXCR6 regulates localization of tissue-resident
memory CD8 T cells to the airways. Journal of Experimental Medicine 2019, 216:2748-2762.
51. Zens KD, Farber DL: Memory CD4 T cells in influenza. Current topics in microbiology and
immunology 2015, 386:399-421.
52. Mathew D, Giles JR, Baxter AE, Oldridge DA, Greenplate AR, Wu JE, Alanio C, Kuri-Cervantes
L, Pampena MB, D’Andrea K, et al.: Deep immune profiling of COVID-19 patients reveals
distinct immunotypes with therapeutic implications. Science 2020, 369:eabc8511.
53. Fallet B, Hao Y, Florova M, Cornille K, de los Aires AV, Girelli Zubani G, Ertuna YI, Greiff V,
Menzel U, Hammad K, et al.: Chronic Viral Infection Promotes Efficient Germinal Center
B Cell Responses. Cell Reports 2020, 30:1013-1026.e1017.
54. Markus A, Lebenthal-Loinger I, Yang IH, Kinchington PR, Goldstein RS: An In Vitro Model of
Latency and Reactivation of Varicella Zoster Virus in Human Stem Cell-Derived
Neurons. PLOS Pathogens 2015, 11:e1004885.
55. O’Neill LAJ, Netea MG: BCG-induced trained immunity: can it offer protection against
COVID-19? Nature Reviews Immunology 2020, 20:335-337.
56. Friston KJ, Litvak V, Oswal A, Razi A, Stephan KE, van Wijk BCM, Ziegler G, Zeidman P:
Bayesian model reduction and empirical Bayes for group (DCM) studies. Neuroimage
2016, 128:413-431.
57. Friston K, Parr T, Zeidman P: Bayesian model reduction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.07092 2018.
58. Kass RE, Steffey D: Approximate Bayesian inference in conditionally independent hierarchical
models (parametric empirical Bayes models). J Am Stat Assoc. 1989, 407:717-726.
59. Friston KJ, Fagerholm ED, Zarghami TS, Parr T, Hipólito I, Magrou L, Razi A: Parcels and
particles: Markov blankets in the brain. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.09704 2020.
60. Schwabl F: Phase Transitions, Scale Invariance, Renormalization Group Theory, and
Percolation. In Statistical Mechanics. Edited by: Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 2002:327-404.
61. Haken H: Synergetics: An introduction. Non-equilibrium phase transition and self-selforganisation
in physics, chemistry and biology. Berlin: Springer Verlag; 1983.
62. Clapham HE, Quyen TH, Kien DTH, Dorigatti I, Simmons CP, Ferguson NM: Modelling Virus
and Antibody Dynamics during Dengue Virus Infection Suggests a Role for Antibody in
Virus Clearance. PLOS Computational Biology 2016, 12:e1004951.
63. Zitzmann C, Kaderali L: Mathematical Analysis of Viral Replication Dynamics and Antiviral
Treatment Strategies: From Basic Models to Age-Based Multi-Scale Modeling. Frontiers
in Microbiology 2018, 9.
64. Folegatti PM, Ewer KJ, Aley PK, Angus B, Becker S, Belij-Rammerstorfer S, Bellamy D, Bibi S,
Bittaye M, Clutterbuck EA, et al.: Safety and immunogenicity of the ChAdOx1 nCoV-19
22

vaccine against SARS-CoV-2: a preliminary report of a phase 1/2, single-blind,
randomised controlled trial. The Lancet 2020.
65. Chen Z, John Wherry E: T cell responses in patients with COVID-19. Nature Reviews
Immunology 2020.
66. Okoye AA, Picker LJ: CD4(+) T-cell depletion in HIV infection: mechanisms of immunological
failure. Immunological reviews 2013, 254:54-64.
67. De Biasi S, Meschiari M, Gibellini L, Bellinazzi C, Borella R, Fidanza L, Gozzi L, Iannone A, Lo
Tartaro D, Mattioli M, et al.: Marked T cell activation, senescence, exhaustion and skewing
towards TH17 in patients with COVID-19 pneumonia. Nature Communications 2020,
11:3434.
68. Moran R, Pinotsis DA, Friston K: Neural masses and fields in dynamic causal modeling.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience 2013, 7:57.
69. De Boer RJ, Perelson AS, Kevrekidis IG: Immune network behavior—I. From stationary states
to limit cycle oscillations. Bulletin of Mathematical Biology 1993, 55:745-780.
70. Paterson RW, Brown RL, Benjamin L, Nortley R, Wiethoff S, Bharucha T, Jayaseelan DL, Kumar
G, Raftopoulos RE, Zambreanu L, et al.: The emerging spectrum of COVID-19 neurology:
clinical, radiological and laboratory findings. Brain 2020.
71. Wei H, Jafarian A, Zeidman P, Litvak V, Razi A, Hu D, Friston KJ: Bayesian fusion and
multimodal DCM for EEG and fMRI. NeuroImage 2020, 211:116595.
72. Baecher-Allan C, Kaskow BJ, Weiner HL: Multiple Sclerosis: Mechanisms and
Immunotherapy. Neuron 2018, 97:742-768.
73. Cooray GK, Sundgren M, Brismar T: Mechanism of visual network dysfunction in relapsingremitting multiple sclerosis and its relation to cognition. Clinical Neurophysiology 2020,
131:361-367.
74. Rosch RE, Wright S, Cooray G, Papadopoulou M, Goyal S, Lim M, Vincent A, Upton AL,
Baldeweg T, Friston KJ: NMDA-receptor antibodies alter cortical microcircuit dynamics.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2018, 115:E9916-E9925.
75. Friston KJ, Daunizeau J, Kilner J, Kiebel SJ: Action and behavior: a free-energy formulation.
Biological Cybernetics 2010, 102:227-260.
76. Friston K, Samothrakis S, Montague R: Active inference and agency: optimal control without
cost functions. Biological Cybernetics 2012, 106:523-541.
77. Friston KJ, Rosch R, Parr T, Price C, Bowman H: Deep temporal models and active inference.
Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews 2017, 77:388-402.
78. Moutoussis M, Trujillo-Barreto NJ, El-Deredy W, Dolan RJ, Friston KJ: A formal model of
interpersonal inference. Front Hum Neurosci 2014, 8:160.
79. Kenney MJ, Ganta CK: Autonomic nervous system and immune system interactions.
Comprehensive Physiology 2014, 4:1177-1200.
80. Barrios-Payán J, Revuelta A, Mata-Espinosa D, Marquina-Castillo B, Villanueva EB, Gutiérrez
MEH, Pérez-Sánchez G, Pavón L, Hernandez-Pando R: The contribution of the sympathetic
nervous system to the immunopathology of experimental pulmonary tuberculosis. Journal
of Neuroimmunology 2016, 298:98-105.
81. Alaniz RC, Thomas SA, Perez-Melgosa M, Mueller K, Farr AG, Palmiter RD, Wilson CB:
Dopamine β-hydroxylase deficiency impairs cellular immunity. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 1999, 96:2274-2278.
82. Rosas-Ballina M, Tracey KJ: The Neurology of the Immune System: Neural Reflexes Regulate
Immunity. Neuron 2009, 64:28-32.
83. Tracey KJ: Reflex control of immunity. Nature Reviews Immunology 2009, 9:418-428.
84. Raony Í, de Figueiredo CS, Pandolfo P, Giestal-de-Araujo E, Oliveira-Silva Bomfim P, Savino W:
Psycho-Neuroendocrine-Immune Interactions in COVID-19: Potential Impacts on
Mental Health. Frontiers in Immunology 2020, 11.

23

