arXiv:2009.05044v1 [stat.AP] 10 Sep 2020

Modelling COVID-19 - I
A dynamic SIR(D) with application to Indian data
Arup Bose†
Stat-Math Unit, Kolkata
Indian Statistical Institute
203 B.T. Road
Kolkata 700108
India
email: bosearu@gmail.com

Madhuchhanda Bhattacharjee∗
School of Mathematics and Statistics
University of Hyderabad
Gachibowli
Hyderabad 500046
India
email: mbsm@uohyd.ernet.in
September 14, 2020
Abstract

We propose an epidemiological model using an adaptive dynamic three compartment (with
four states) SIR(D) model. Our approach is similar to non-parametric curve fitting in spirit
and automatically adapts to key external factors, such as interventions, while retaining the
parsimonious nature of the standard SIR(D) model.
Initial dynamic temporal estimates of the model parameters are obtained by minimising
the aggregate residual sum of squares across the number of infections, recoveries, and
fatalities, over a chosen lag period. Then a geometric smoother is applied to obtain the
final time series of estimates. These estimates are used to obtain dynamic temporal robust
estimates of the key feature of this pandemic, namely the “reproduction number”.
We illustrate our method on the Indian COVID-19 data for the period March 14–August
31, 2020. The time series data plots of the 36 states and union territories shows a clear
presence of inter-regional variation in the prognosis of the epidemic. This is also bourne
out by the estimates of the underlying parameters, including the reproduction numbers
for the 36 regions. Due to this, an SIR(D) model, dynamic or otherwise, on the national
aggregate data is not suited for robust local predictions.
The time series of estimates of the model enables us to carry out daily, weekly and also
long term predictions, including construction of predictive bands. We obtain an excellent
agreement between the actual data and the model predicted data at the regional level.
Our estimates of the current reproduction number turn out to be more than 2 in
three regions (Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra and Uttar Pradesh) and between 1.5 and
2 in 13 regions. Each of these regions have experienced an individual trajectory, which
typically involves initial phase of shock(s) followed by a relatively steady lower level of the
reproduction number.
Keywords. COVID-19, dynamic SIR(D) model, differential equation, least squares, estimation, prediction, reproduction number, curve-fitting, geometric smoothing, robust estimator, R-code.
AMS 2000 Subject Classification. Primary 62P10, Secondary 92D30
∗
†

Research supported by a SERB-MATRICS grant for COVID-19.
Research supported by J.C. Bose National Fellowship, Dept. of Science and Tech., Govt. of India.

1

1

Introduction

The basic deterministic SIR(D) (susceptible-infected-removed) model for the evolution
of an epidemic over time was proposed by Kermack and McKendrick in 1927 and has
been widely used and accepted. It is a three compartment model that focuses on the
effective contact rate β, the recovery rate ν, and the fatality rate µ, which are all assumed
to remain constant throughout the epidemic. While this model has been very fruitful,
there have been numerous variations of it, spurred by a need to accommodate factors
specific to a given epidemic.
Like all models, SIR(D) envisages an ideal situation and hence some of the primary assumptions governing the spread would always be violated in any real-life epidemic, and
COVID-19 is no exception. For instance, there have been periodic local and national
interventions as well as different levels of compliance to safety precautions. Many variations of the SIR(D) have been proposed and used in the context of COVID-19. See for
example, Kucharski et al. (2020), Liu et al. (2020) and Sun et al. (2020).
In particular, for India, there is clear evidence that the nature and extent of spread of
COVID-19 has been varied widely across its 36 states and union territories (henceforth
collectively referred as “regions”). This is evident from the various time series plots that
we shall exihibit later. See also, for example, the recent article of Ranjan (2020). As
a consequence, any modelling and analysis must be done at least region-wise, which is
what we attempt in this article.
It is also important to investigate the spatio-temporal dependence in COVID-19 data.
Cliff and Ord (1981) showed how taking spatial dependence into consideration can be
useful in the statistical analysis of epidemics. One may be able to “borrow strength”
from connected (not necessarily geographically) regions for an improved analysis. This
significantly more challenging issue is not addressed in the present article.
We stick to the basic tenets of the time tested SIR(D) model. However, as mentioned
above, there are underlying movers that disturb the ideal SIR(D) world. For India,
primary among these are—various lockdowns and unlocks, migration of people at different levels and, level of compliance with the guidelines. Further, there are issues with
the collected data—under-reporting; delayed reporting; change in the methodology of
reporting; evolution of medical/clinical methods for case identification over time, including method of sample collection and laboratory testing procedure. There have been
attempts by researchers to incorporate at least some of these factors into an SIR(D)
model. See for example Ansumali and Meher (2020) and Kotwal et al. (2020).
However, we do not try to delineate the effects of these external factors. We take
a parsimonious approach and do not add further controlling parameters. We continue
with the SIR(D) model but let it evolve adaptively with the temporal data. It is possible
to do so in this case since, unlike other epidemics, for COVID-19, in addition to number
of infections, time series data is also available on number of recoveries and fatalities. In
a broad sense our approach is akin to non-parametric curve fitting.
2

In Section 2, we give a brief background on the history and nature of spread of COVID19 in India. In Section 3 we first introduce the concept of the reproduction number.
Then we explain briefly the basic SIR(D) model and the formula for the reproduction
number for this model in terms of the model parameters. We also present our extension
of this model, inspired by non-parametric curve fitting techniques, and present methods
of estimating the relevant parameters. In Section 4 we provide a detailed description of
the findings based on our analysis of the region-wise Indian data. Section 5 concludes
with discussions and some observations for future work.

2

Material: COVID-19 in India

We have used the daily data on number of confirmed, recovered and deceased cases
from the 36 states and union territories (in short, regions) of India, for analyses and
illustrations of our proposed model. Our primary data source is the volunteer-driven,
crowd-sourced database https://api.covid19india.org for COVID-19 statistics and
patient tracing in India. We have used the same abbreviated initials for the names of
the regions as in this website. The full names are given in Table 1.
Table 1: Names and codes of regions of India
Code
AP
BR
DL
GJ
HR
KA
LD
MN
NL
PY
TG
UP

Region
Andhra Pradesh
Bihar
Delhi
Gujarat
Haryana
Karnataka
Lakshadweep
Manipur
Nagaland
Puducherry
Telangana
Uttar Pradesh

Code
AR
CH
DN
JH
KL
MH
MP
OR
RJ
TN
UT

Region
Arunachal Pradesh
Chandigarh
Dadra and Nagar Haveli,
Daman and Diu
Jharkhand
Kerala
Maharashtra
Madhya Pradesh
Odisha
Rajasthan
Tamil Nadu
Uttarakhand

Code
AS
CT
GA
HP
JK
LA
ML
MZ
PB
SK
TR
WB

Region
Assam
Chhattisgarh
Goa
Himachal Pradesh
Jammu and Kashmir
Ladakh
Meghalaya
Mizoram
Punjab
Sikkim
Tripura
West Bengal

The first infection in India was reported on January 30, 2020. Prior to March 14,
there were only sporadic and stray appearances, of at most 100 confirmed cases across
entire India, whose conclusive regional breakup is not clear. An overwhelming number
of regions had none to a very low number of infections till then. Figure 1 gives the
dates of “first appearance” and the counts for different regions in the early period since
March 14, when the number of infections saw a rapid increase. The extent and speed
of spread across regions have been quite varying. See Figures 2 and 3. We thus restrict
our analysis to daily regional data for the period March 14–August 31, 2020.
It is not the goal of this paper to identify and quantify the factors governing this regional
heterogeneity. Nevertheless, we present a short review of some of the more important
factors that are relevant, borrowing from Wikipedia (2020), The Print (2020) and HT
(2020a).
3

Figure 1: Regional pattern of “initial” appearance of COVID-19.
(i) Lock and unlock: salient features. The Central and State Governments announced and implemented different containment measures such as complete and partial
national lockdowns, local lockdowns, closure and re-opening of certain offices, businesses,
schools, closure and partial reopening of domestic and international transport, prohibition on travel and outdoor activities. Table 2 summarises the key intervention dates.
We give some of the salient features of these interventions below.

Figure 2: Distribution of daily infections, 12 first-hit regions, March 14–August 31, 2020
Phase 1 (March 25 to April 14): On March 22, Indian Railways suspended passenger
operations and on March 25, nearly all services and factories were suspended by a central
Govt notification.
Phase 2 (April 15 to May 03): On April 16, lockdown areas were classified as “red
4

Figure 3: Regional cumulative infection counts till August 31, 2020
Table 2: Locks and unlocks
Phase
Lock 1
Lock 2
Lock 3
Lock 4
Unlock 1
Unlock 2
Unlock 3

From
March 25
April 15
May 04
May 18
June 01
July 01
August 01

To
April 14
May 03
May 17
May 31
June 30
July 31
August 31

zone” which had infection hotspots, “orange zone” with moderate amount of infection,
and “green zone” with no infections. On April 20, reopening was allowed for: agricultural businesses, aquaculture, plantations and farming supplies shops; public works
programmes with social distancing; cargo transportation; banks and government centres
distributing benefits. On April 25, opening of small retail shops was allowed with half
the staff and social distancing. On April 29, inter-state movement of stranded persons
were allowed under suitable guidelines.
Phase 3 (May 04 to May 17): The three zones were redefined: red (130 districts) with
high COVID-19 cases and a high doubling1 rate; orange (284 districts) with comparatively fewer cases than red; green (319 districts) without any cases in the past 21 days.
The red zones remained under lockdown, only private and hired vehicles were allowed
in orange zones, and normal movement was permitted in green zones with buses limited
to 50% capacity. The zone classification was monitored once a week.
1

Defined as the further number of days in which the current total number of infections will double.

5

Phase 4 (May 18 to May 31): Regions were given a larger say in the demarcation of the
three zones and their implementation. Red zones were further divided into containment
and buffer zones and local bodies were given the authority to demarcate these.
Unlock 1.0 (June 01 to June 30): Lockdown restrictions were imposed only in containment zones, while activities were permitted in other zones in a phased manner. From
June 08, there was reopening of shopping malls, religious places, hotels and restaurants.
Large gatherings were not permitted. Inter-state travel was permitted. Nightly curfew
was imposed from 9 p.m. to 5 a.m. in all areas. State governments were allowed to
impose suitable restrictions on all activities.
Unlock 2.0 (July 01 to July 31): Lockdown measures were imposed only in containment
zones. In all other areas, most activities were permitted. Nightly curfew period was
modified slightly. State governments continued to be at liberty to impose suitable restrictions. State borders remained open. Inter- and intra-state travel was permitted.
Limited international travel was permitted as part of the Vande Bharat Mission (see
below). Shops were permitted to allow more than five persons at a time. Educational
institutions, metros, recreational activities remained closed till July 31. Only essential activities were permitted in containment zones, while maintaining strict parameter
control and “intensive contact tracing, house-to-house surveillance, and other clinical
interventions”.
Unlock 3.0 (August 01 to August 31): Night curfews were removed and gymnasiums
and yoga centres were permitted to reopen from August 05. Educational institutions
remained closed till August 31. All inter- and intra-state travel and transportation
was permitted. Independence Day celebrations was permitted with social distancing.
Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu imposed a lockdown for the whole month, while West
Bengal imposed lockdowns twice a week and later made some adjustments.
In addition to the above, there have been other restrictions and guidelines that have
affected the spread. For instance, the movement across Myanmar border along Mizoram
and Manipur was restricted since March 09.
(ii) Migration: It appears that no definitive data is available on the (reverse) migration
of workers who were left stranded in their places of work as businesses and other activities
came to a standstill after the first lockdown was announced.
We gather from different news sources that soon after the national lockdown was announced, a first wave of migration begun around March 24, 2020 and lasted for about
two weeks. Much of the inter-region migration appears to have taken place initially from
Delhi, Gujarat, Haryana, Maharashtra and Punjab, to Assam, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh,
Orissa, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, and West Bengal.
Later the migration occurred between additional states; for example from Karnataka,
Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal to Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya and Tripura.
This wave started around May 04, 2020 and again lasted for about two weeks.

6

After the first phase of unlock, many of the returnees began to go back to their places
of work in different regions.
Estimates of the total number of people that moved during these migrations in the last
six months vary widely, but all of these run into several hundred thousands. There is
evidence that the first group of returnees had an extremely low percentage of infected
persons and hence had extremely low risk of spreading the virus. The later group
of returnees had a much higher percentage of infected people and the risk of spread
increased significantly. See for example Mohan and Amin (2020) for a report on a limited
study in Rajasthan and The Wire (2020) for news on spike in cases in the North-eastern
states after May 04, 2020.
(iii) International flights: Vande Bharat Mission: Regular international flights to
and from India remain suspended since March 22 till August 31, 2020 (see HT (2020b)).
However, later about 2500 flights of foreign carriers were allowed to and from India,
particularly for stranded foreign passengers.
The Vande Bharat mission of the Government of India was launched on May 07, 2020 to
bring back stranded Indians from around the world. Special flights, both of Government
and private airlines, to and from designated cities, were flown for this purpose in five
phases—May 07–15, 2020; May 17–June 10; June 11–July 02; July 15–31; August 01–31.
A sixth phase is planned from September 01–October 24, 2020. Economic Times (2020)
reports that as of August 20, over 11.2 lakh Indian nationals have returned from abroad
on these flights. Stranded Indians have also returned by land from the neighbouring
countries.
Again, the regional variation in the count of returning Indians have been significant.
While quarantine protocols have been in place for incoming passengers, there have been
laxity of varying degrees in adherence to the restrictions, thereby introducing another
level of variation between the regions.
Additionally, there have been other measures such as, mandatory quarantine for interstate travellers, home isolation for infected individuals and restriction of human movement around places of infections. Orders and advisories issued by local authorities were
guided by local situations and hence were also varied. There have also been variations in
the implementation of, and compliance to, all the different orders over time. Moreover,
it is commonly accepted that there is non-uniformity in the manner the data has been
collected as well as in its coverage and quality. Thus, the growth and spread has been
quite varying across the 36 regions. The models we shall propose shortly, are thus going
to be implemented regionally.

3

Model

Before we explain our model and procedures, we give a brief introduction to the basic
SIR(D) model, including how the crucial concept of the reproduction number relates to
7

the model parameters.

3.1

Reproduction number and the SIR(D) model

We may consider three essential parameters that drive any epidemic:
–the transmissibility parameter τ . This is the probability of infection, given contact
between a susceptible and an infected individual;
–the average rate of contact between susceptible and infected individuals, say c̃;
–the duration of infectiousness, d.
Simply put, the basic reproduction number, usually denoted by R0 is the expected number of secondary cases produced by a single (typical) infection in a completely susceptible
population. It is a dimensionless quantity and can be interpreted as
R0 ∝ τ c̃d.
Its importance stems from the fact that it can be related to key quantities that dictate
whether an epidemic progresses or dies off.
The reproduction number has a direct interpretation in an SIR(D) model (SusceptibleInfected-Removed (Deceased)). The “removed” group consists of those individuals who
have recovered or have succumbed. This model for the propagation of an epidemic
was originally introduced by Kermack and McKendrick in 1927, and along with several
variations, have been reprinted as Kermack and McKendrick (1991a, b, c) due to their
immense importance and use. Here is a brief introduction to this model.
Assumption I.
a. The epidemic propagates in a closed, completely susceptible, well mixed population
of a constant size. There is no demographic change (no net births/deaths) during the
course of the propagation.
b. The propagation happens at constant rates of infection, recovery and fatalities.
Let N be the size of the population. At any time point t, let
S(t) = cumulative number of susceptible individuals
I(t) = cumulative number of infections
R(t) = cumulative number of recoveries
D(t) = cumulative number of fatalities.
Note that Assumption I(a) implies that
N = S(t) + I(t) + R(t) + D(t) for all t.
8

Often these counts are expressed as proportions and then we can assume that N is
normalized to 1.
The SIR(D) model governing the propagation (over continuous time) of the epidemic
honouring Assumption I is given by a simultaneous differential equation:
dS(t)/dt = −β(S(t)/N )I(t)

(1)

dI(t)/dt = β(S(t)/N )I(t) − νI(t) − µI(t)

(2)

dR(t)/dt = νI(t)

(3)

dD(t)/dt = µI(t).

(4)

Note that the four equations (1)–(4) add up to 0, reflecting Assumption I(a). The
parameters β, ν and µ which govern the nature of the epidemic are constants, reflecting
Assumption I(b). They are known as the effective contact rate, recovery rate and the
fatality rate respectively. It is clear that the epidemic shall progress if the number of
infected individuals increases over time:
dI(t)/dt > 0 ⇐⇒ βS(t)I(t) − (ν + µ)I(t) > 0
⇐⇒ βS(t)/(ν + µ) > 0.

(5)
(6)

Initially, everyone, except the first infected case is susceptible. Hence S(0) ≡ 1 So from
(6), for the epidemic to progress we must necessarily have
β
> 1.
ν+µ
On the other hand, it is easy to see that in this SIR(D) model,
τ c̃ = β, and d = (ν + µ)−1 .
This implies that in the SIR(D) model, the reproduction number is nothing but
R0 =

β
ν+µ

(7)

and thus the epidemic progresses if this quantity is > 1. Therein lies the importance of
the reproduction number.
Note that for the SIR(D) model, the reproduction number is a function of the three
parameters and does not change over time. For more complicated models, the definition
and interpretation of the reproduction number is necessarily much more involved. It may
also evolve over time, specially if there are interventions (such as locks and unlocks).

3.2

Estimation, model fitting and prediction

As mentioned earlier, we do not try to build a model with components that explicitly
accounts for the factors inducing changes to the underlying epidemiological system. Our
9

approach is to start with the standard SIR(D) model and allow it to automatically
respond and adjust to the underlying dynamics that arise from such factors.
With respect to the SIR(D) model, note that the data is obtained only at discrete points
(in our case daily). Let
s(t) = increment in susceptible individuals in the tth time period,

(8)

i(t) = increment in number of infections in the tth time period,

(9)

r(t) = increment in number of recoveries in the tth time period,

(10)

d(t) = increment in number of fatalities in the tth time period.

(11)

Moreover, for any choice of the values of β, ν and µ, the SIR(D) differential equation
can be solved numerically.
How should an SIR(D) be fitted? Many examples of implementation of SIR(D) available
in the public domain minimise the residual sum of squares (RSS) of the number of
infections, to estimate the parameters. This is probably due to the fact that in general,
information is available only on this variable. However, for COVID-19, information on
recoveries and fatalities are also being collected globally. Thus there are other natural
candidate RSS. At any given time point, we use an aggregated RSS over number of
infections, number of recoveries and number of fatalities. Details are explained below.
Estimate of the parameters β, ν and µ. As mentioned above we use the RSS. This is done
adaptively over a few lagged time points. Since there are three parameters, one needs
data for at least three periods. However, since the data in the initial time periods are
sketchy, and also there are smoothness issues, as a general principle, we use a window
of past seven days in our estimation procedures. When we are at time point T , the
initial estimates are obtained by using the least squares on the data for the periods,
T − 6, T − 5, T − 4, T − 3, T − 2, T − 1, T —minimizing the sum of squares:
T
X



ˆ 2 ,
(i(t) − î(t))2 + (r(t) − r̂(t))2 + (d(t) − d(t))

(12)

t=T −6

ˆ
where î(t), r̂(t) and d(t),
are the observed values of infections, recoveries and fatalities
in the t-th period. The values of i(t), r(t) and d(t) for given parameter choices (over a
grid) are obtained by numerically solving the differential equations as mentioned above.
The various shocks that the system experiences would also be reflected in the time series
of the underlying parameters and hence in their estimates. Thus, after obtaining the
initial estimates, we use a smoother: we chose a weighted average over the last 7 days’
estimates with geometrically decreasing weights 0.75T −j at time points j = T − 6, . . . , T .
Other smoothers could also be used. After trial and error, we settled on the value 0.75.
We thus arrive at our robustified final estimates say, βT , νT and µT at the time point T .
Estimate of the reproduction number R0 : As mentioned earlier, the reproduction number
R0 is a key quantity that governs the spread of an epidemic and provides a one number
10

summary of the state of the epidemic—even in a situation such as ours where we apply
penalization methods and work with a modification of the basic model. The magnitude
of this number indicates whether the epidemic shall spread or die down, and how fast.
Due to the dynamic nature of our model and estimation process, this parameter too is
now a time series and requires appropriate estimation procedure.
Recall the relation (7) between R0 and the three SIR(D) model parameters. Once
estimates of β, ν and µ are obtained as described above, an estimate of R0 at any time
point can be obtained from (7) by plugging in the above estimated SIR(D) parameters.
However, this produces a lot of spikes in the estimates. We robustify this estimate by
using the median of a moving window of seven past values to obtain our final estimate
R0T . This window can be the entire past (conservative) or the recent past (more adaptive
but less conservative). We could have used other means of robustification too.
This completes our estimation procedure. Note that the final estimates βT , νT , µT and
R0T continue to evolve over time. Moreover, at any given time T , they do not necessarily
satisfy equation (7). This should not be a cause for concern since after all, the SIR(D)
model is not expected to be a perfect model for the epidemic and hence equation (7) is
not sacrosanct.
Point prediction of I(·), R(·) and D(·): Given the estimated parameters, the SIR(D)
model can then be solved numerically. So, we use our estimates βT −1 , µT −1 and νT −1
obtained at time T − 1 to calculate the 1-step ahead predicted (solved) values of I(T ),
R(T ) and D(T ). We can also calculate the k-step ahead predicted values. While solving
this, we found it extremely useful to add the obvious but crucial constraint R(T ) +
D(T ) ≤ I(T ).
Prediction bands for I(·), R(·) and D(·): Our SIR(D) model, even though dynamic, has
no random component. Thus it does not automatically facilitate calculation of prediction
bands. We fall back on a non-parametric method for this purpose. At any given time
point T , and for any specific variable (infection/recovery/death), we have the past errors
(say, from one-step prediction). We can consider the empirical distribution of these T −1
error values (or some suitable robust version). A predictive interval is then obtained by
building an interval around the point prediction value using this empirical distribution.
It may be noted that if we wish to have a predictive band for the k-step ahead predicted
value, the width of the band remains same as there is no updated empirical distribution
available.

4

Results

We wish to illustrate our model/method on the COVID-19 data for India. For the
national aggregate level data, multiple data sources are available. Figure 4 exhibits
the three time series of number of infections, recoveries and fatalities in India and also
illustrates the inadequacy of the traditional unmodified SIR(D) model for this data.
11

Figure 4: Aggregated daily counts for India, March 14-August 31, 2020: infections (left); recoveries (middle); fatalities (right) against number of days. Solid lines: fitted SIR model.

In contrast, with regard to data availability, regional data for finer administrative units
(for example the 739 districts of India) is scattered in heterogeneous and/or incompatible
formats across numerous local sources. It can be an onerous task to authenticate, clean
and collate this data to bring it to a common platform for analysis. Thus, we have
used regional data available from https://api.covid19india.org. While this data is
updated daily, it has idiosyncrasies such as, missing values, negative counts, delay in
updating, change in the reporting format, all of which are expected in a situation as
complex as COVID-19. Thus some preliminary consistency checks and cleaning were
carried out before proceeding to analyse the data. In Figure 5 we have plotted the

Figure 5: Daily count of infections (left), recoveries (middle) and fatalities (right) for 36 regions.
12

daily count data after dividing the regions into three groups with cumulative infections
till August 31, 2020 as: less than 10,000 (12 regions), between 10,000 and 100,000 (13
regions) and above 100,000 (11 regions).
As mentioned earlier, due to known and hidden factors, a simple SIR(D) model cannot
be a good fit and one needs to be adaptive to the changes in the spread. Figure 6
illustrates this on Delhi data. The solid line in the left panel corresponds to the fitted
values obtained using a single SIR(D) and overlayed with the observed data clearly shows
model inadequacy. The middle and right panels use a modified SIR(D) to accommodate
a single (known) change point—at the 100th day (middle panel) and at the 101th day
(right panel). While the fit improves somewhat, vulnerability to the choice of change
point is evident and moreover, the fit is still unsatisfactory.

Figure 6: Performance of different SIR(D) on Delhi data. Left: single SIR(D). Middle and right:
SIR(D) with change points at 100-th day and 101-th day respectively.

Figure 7: Fit with different RSS criteria. Top panel: partial RSS. Bottom panel: total RSS.
Left and right panels: number of daily infections and recoveries respectively.

13

As already pointed out, making the model dynamically adaptive alone may not be sufficient. Figure 7 on the Delhi data illustrates the improved performance as we incorporate
additional penalties for lack of model fit. The plots in the bottom panel, obtained by our
proposed method, are in sharp contrast to those in the top panels which were obtained by
commonly used partial penalty methods. These plots clearly demonstrate the advantage
of optimising over the combined RSS with respect to all three variables, over a window
of data, yielding a dynamic SIR(D) model. The observed and the fitted values are seen
to be in excellent agreement while this dynamic SIR(D) continues to be parametric.
Since the proposed SIR(D) model is allowed to evolve over time, estimate of these parameters are updated daily by refitting the model taking into account the additional
observations for the day.
As explained in Section 2, there are several local and general shocks and perturbations
that the underlying epidemiological system experiences. These are naturally reflected in
the time series of the underlying parameters. Our dynamic model captures these and
we notice some changes in the parameter estimates as well. Thus, after obtaining the
initial estimates, we use a weighted average over the estimates from the past week with
decreasing weights. As an illustration, the spiky and smoothed estimates of the three
parameters and the robust estimate of R0 for Delhi are plotted in Figure 8.

Figure 8: Initial (in red) and final (in black) estimates of β, ν, µ and R0 .
.
14

We implemented the above in the software R. For solving the primary differential equations of the SIR(D) model numerically, we used the standard library, desolve within
R. Additional codes required to carry out robust estimation and prediction were also
implemented in R. The entire programme takes a few minutes to run on an Intel core i3,
2.4GHz computer with past 6 months data on all 36 Indian regions. Detailed plots and
figures are given in the Supplementary file. We present briefly the highlights:
(i) Reproduction number: Figure 9 gives the estimate for the current reproduction
number, as on 31-Aug-2020, for all the regions.

Figure 9: Region-wise estimate of the reproduction number as on August 31, 2020.
Table 3 gives a summary frequency distribution. Three regions, Maharashtra, Andhra
Pradesh, and Uttar Pradesh are currently the worst placed.
Table 3: Summary distribution of reproduction number as on August 31, 2020
Estimated R0
Effectively zero
0 < R0 ≤ 0.5
0.5 < R0 ≤ 1
1 < R0 ≤ 1.5
1.5 < R0 ≤ 2
R0 > 2
Total

Number of regions
02
02
10
06
13
03
36

15

Figure 10: Estimated time series of R0 with moderate and conservative methods for some
regions with highest infections.

Plots for the time varying estimates of R0 for nine regions with highest number of infections are given in Figure 10. Plots for all the regions can be found in the Supplementary
file. We have robustified our basic estimate by considering the median over the previous
two weeks. We also tried a more conservative version by taking the median over the
entire past. We have already noted that most regions seem to have evolved in their
individual ways and this observation continues with respect to R0 . However there are
similarities. For instance, there is typically an initial phase of shock(s) followed by a
relatively steady (and lower) level of R0 . For some regions it appears that there is a
gradual decreasing trend as well, indicating that the peak of the pandemic may be in
sight over the coming months in these regions.
As we mentioned above, the regions have evolved differently over time and this becomes
evident when we carry out a time series clustering. We use the method of Ward (1963)
which minimises the between-cluster Euclidean distance at each sequential step. The
height of the fusion given on the Y -axis, indicates the dissimilarity between two observations. The proximity of two observations along the horizontal axis does not signify any
closeness. Figure 11 shows the clusters of regions based on the time series of reproduction
numbers.
16

Figure 11: Dendrogram showing clusters based on time series of reproduction number.
(ii) Prediction: We have calculated the daily predicted values of the infected, recovered
and deceased, along with 99% predictive intervals. Note that the derivation of the
predictive interval requires estimation of the error distribution. This has been done
non-parametrically by using the past errors in prediction. We illustrate this with the
Delhi data since this region shows sharp turns in the daily values and thus is relatively
difficult to predict. Prediction for all the regions is available in the Supplementary file,
along with the estimated predictive error distribution in each case.

Figure 12: Predictive band of daily counts for Delhi: infections (left), recoveries (middle) and
fatalities (right).

We have also carried out one full year’s prediction to assess the time and extent of future
peaks. Figure 13 gives the plots for nine regions. These regions were chosen since they
have the maximum number of infections as of August 31. See the Supplementary file for
values for all regions.
17

Figure 13: Long term predicted counts as of August 31, 2020, of infections (solid lines), recoveries
(long-dashed lines) and fatalities (short-dashed lines) for some regions.

It may be noted that in several regions, the number of infections and fatalities are
predicted to rise significantly. The heterogeneity in these figures across regions is also
very noticeable. In several regions, the pandemic is far from over and have not seen their
peaks. However, there is reason for optimism since in some regions the spread seems to
be slowing down.

5

Discussion

We have considered a dynamic version of the time tested SIR(D) model and fitted it to
the Indian regional COVID-19 data. This has been done by minimising aggregated RSS
dynamically over sliding windows. Appropriate smoothers and robustification methods
have been used to obtain time series estimates of the effective contact rate, the recovery
rate, the fatality rate and the reproduction number. We have illustrated our method
on the COVID-19 Indian regional data. Out of the 36 regions, 20 have a reproduction
number higher than 1.0 and three of these are higher than 2.0. We also use the fitted
model for short and long term prediction of the number of infection, recoveries and
fatalities. The projected pattens are quite varying by regions and while the prognosis is
good for some regions in others a sharp rise is foreseen.
18

Progression of COVID-19 in India is impacted by spatial dependence and it would be
pertinent to develop a spatio-temporal model with regions or even districts as the primary units. We plan to investigate this by developing a suitable spatio-temporal model.
Studying the effects of migration is a particularly challenging task.
References
Data source: https://api.covid19india.org (also at https://github.com/covid19india)
Supplementary file (supplementary.pdf): Six plots for each of the 34 regions with nontrivial counts:
(a) daily infections: observed value and one-step prediction with 99% prediction band.
(b) daily infections: predictive error distribution.
(c) daily recoveries: observed value and one-step prediction with 99% prediction band.
(d) reproduction number estimates: smoothed over past 14 days, and the entire past.
(e) daily fatalities: observed value and one-step prediction with 99% prediction band.
(f) cumulative infected, recovered, fatalities: predicted values till one year, beginning
September 01, 2020.
Ansumali, Santosh and Prakash, Meher K. (2020). A very flat peak: why standard SEIR
models miss the plateau of COVID-19 infections and how it can be corrected. MedarXiv.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.07.20055772
Clif, A. D. and Ord, J. K. (1981). Spatial processes: models and applications. Pion.
ET (2020). Over 11.2 lakh Indians have returned from abroad under Vande Bharat Mission: MEA. News item, August 20, 2020. Economic Times. https://economictimes.
indiatimes.com/news/politics-and-nation/over-11-2-lakh-indians-havereturned-from-abroad-under-vande-bharat-mission-mea/articleshow/77661541.
cms. [Accessed August 25, 2020.]
Ghosh, Abantika and Kapoor, Shipra (2020). 45,720 new cases in 24 hrs, 13% positivity, single-day toll 1,129 after Tamil Nadu update. News item. The Print. https://
theprint.in/health/45720-new-cases-in-24-hrs-13-positivity-single-daytoll-1129-after-tamil-nadu-update/466882/ [Accessed August 17, 2020.]
HT (2020a). Indias death toll soars past 10K, backlog deaths raise count by 437 in Delhi,
1,409 in Maharashtra. News item. Hindustan Times. https://www.hindustantimes.
com/india-news/india-s-death-toll-soars-past-10k-backlog-deaths-raisecount-by-437-in-delhi-1-409-in-maharashtra/story-9GNbe7iMBKLsiHtByjRKCJ.
html. [Accessed August 17, 2020.]
HT (2020b). India extends ban on international flights till August 31. News item, July
31, 2020. Hindustan Times. https://www.hindustantimes.com/india-news/india-

19

extends-ban-on-international-flights-till-august-31/storyervIbqmVguo9xNEQxozWJL.html. [Accessed August 25, 2020.]
Kermack, W.O., McKendrick, A.G. (1991a). Contributions to the mathematical theory
of epidemics–I. Bulletin of Mathematical Biology 53, 33–55 (1991). https://doi.org/
10.1007/BF02464423.
Kermack, W.O., McKendrick, A.G. (1991b). Contributions to the mathematical theory
of epidemics–II. The problem of endemicity. Bulletin of Mathematical Biology 53, 57–87.
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02464424.
Kermack, W.O., McKendrick, A.G. (1991c). Contributions to the mathematical theory
of epidemics–III. Further studies of the problem of endemicity. Bulletin of Mathematical
Biology 53, 89–118. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02464425.
Kotwal, Atul; Yadav, Arun Kumar; Yadav, Jyoti; Kotwal, Jyoti and Khune, Sudhir
(2020). Predictive models of COVID-19 in India: A rapid review. Medical Journal
Armed Forces India. To appear in print. Available online June 17, 2020. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.mjafi.2020.06.001.
Kucharski, A. J., et al. (2020). Early dynamics of transmission and control of COVID19: a mathematical modelling study. The Lancet Infectious Diseases, doi:10.1016/
S1473-3099(20)30144-4.
Liu, Y. , Gayle, A. A., Wilder-Smith, A., and Rocklov, J. (2020). The reproductive
number of COVID-19 is higher compared to SARS coronavirus. Journal of Medical
Virology, 27(2), doi:10.1093/jtm/taaa021.
Mohan, Pavitra and Amin, Arpita (2020). Forcing migrants to stay back in cities during
lockdown worsened spread of coronavirus, study shows. News item, July 03, 2020.
Scroll.in. https://scroll.in/article/966123/forcing-migrants-to-stay-backin-cities-during-lockdown-worsened-spread-of-coronavirus-study-shows.
[Accessed August 25, 2020.]
Ranjan, Rajesh (2020). COVID-19 spread in India: dynamics, modeling, and future
projections. Journal of the Indian Statistical Association, Vol.58 No.1, 47-65.
Sun, K., Chen, J. and Viboud, C. (2020). Early epidemiological analysis of the coronavirus disease 2019 outbreak based on crowd sourced data: a population-level observational study. The Lancet Digital Health, doi:10.1016/S2589-7500(20)30026-1.
Ward, J. H., Jr. (1963). Hierarchical Grouping to Optimize an Objective Function.
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 58, 236-244.
The Wire (2020). Here’s why phase 4 of lockdown has seen a sudden surge in cases in the
Northeast. News item. https://thewire.in/government/covid-19-case-surgenortheastCOVID-19. [Accessed August 25, 2020.]
Wikipedia (2020). Timeline of COVID-19 in India (2020). https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Timeline_of_the_COVID-19_pandemic_in_India. [Accessed August 25, 2020.]

20

