© 2020 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in the proceedings of IEEE Visualization
conference. The final version of this record is available at: 10.1109/BELIV51497.2020.00008

Distributed Synchronous Visualization Design:
Challenges and Strategies
Tatiana Losev*

Sarah Storteboom†

Sheelagh Carpendale‡

Søren Knudsen§

Simon Fraser University

University of Calgary

Simon Fraser University

University of Calgary

Member Past Collaborations This Collaboration: Time Spent in Zoom Meetings by Team Member
A
B
C
D
E
F

arXiv:2009.02306v3 [cs.HC] 5 Jan 2021

March 16

March 23

March 30

April 6

April 13

Legend (Hours):

April 20

April 27

May 4

May 11

0.05

2.00

May 18

4.00

May 25

6.00

8.00

Total
70h
6h
58h
50h
48h
51h

June 1

Figure 1: Overview of time spent video conferencing from March 16 to June 4 with concentrated synchronous design activities visible
from late March to mid May; pivot points in the design process seen on April 2 when members C and D met for a prolonged design
session using dual cameras as discussed in Section 7. See Table 2 for team roles.

A BSTRACT

decision-makers during the pandemic. We formed our design team
of six members (see Figure 1, members A-F) to support the local
health authorities’ pandemic response in collaboration with our
colleagues at the Centre for Health Informatics at the University of
Calgary. As we were a newly acquainted multi-disciplinary team, we
found it more beneficial to learn and to discuss the data together in a
synchronous environment in the beginning of the project. We worked
on the design of visualizations of provincial and national COVID-19
data for a public-facing website showing data visualizations of case
and policy data. The intention with this site was to inform cityand province-level leaders to assist them in making sense of the
status of the public health crisis and the associated data. While our
team had visualization design expertise, our colleagues provided
a wider set of skills and knowledge in fields such as public health,
epidemiology, and data science. Due to the pandemic, we were
unable to meet face-to-face. Instead and against our common work
practice, all design team members worked from their home. This
situation intensified challenges of distributed collaboration caused
by distracting at-home work spaces and a sense of urgency amidst
civic lockdown measures.
Through an auto-ethnographic approach [9, 14, 40, 41, 43], we
reflect on our experiences of distributed, primarily synchronous
ideation and prototyping as a way to identify some challenges in our
process of remote visualization design. Our main contribution is an
articulation of challenges and strategies for dealing with these while
doing distributed visualization design centered on the potential for
doing activities, using technologies, and processes for communicating early and often, in order to reduce friction in visualization design
teams.
We relied on remote design tools and methods to actively design
in real-time, often for two hours per day. We aimed to preserve
the richness and diversity of co-located collaboration; specifically,
the facilitation of face-to-face presence with the ability to view
responsive body gestures, facial expressions, and the making and
sharing of physical and digital artifacts.

We reflect on our experiences as designers of COVID-19 data visualizations working in a distributed synchronous design space during
the pandemic. This is especially relevant as the pandemic posed
new challenges to distributed collaboration amidst civic lockdown
measures and an increased dependency on spatially distributed teamwork across almost all sectors. Working from home being ‘the new
normal’, we explored potential solutions for collaborating and prototyping remotely from our own homes using the existing tools at
our disposal. Since members of our cross-disciplinary team had
different technical skills, we used a range of synchronous remote
design tools and methods. We aimed to preserve the richness of colocated collaboration such as face-to-face physical presence, body
gestures, facial expressions, and the making and sharing of physical
artifacts. While meeting over Zoom, we sketched on paper and used
digital collaboration tools, such as Miro and Google Docs. Using
an auto-ethnographic approach, we articulate our challenges and
strategies throughout the process, providing useful insights about
synchronous distributed collaboration.
1

I NTRODUCTION

In this paper, we describe and discuss our experiences of forming
and working in a distributed visualization design team. While prior
work has discussed visualization design processes [51], it tended
to focus on how the visualization community works during faceto-face (co-located) design activities and processes for including
users or domain experts. Less attention has been paid to how team
collaboration works within teams of visualization designers, be
they distributed or co-located. We discuss our experiences of the
differences between co-located and distributed visualization design
work specific to our unique needs and experiences in light of an
increased reliance on spatially distributed teamwork across almost
all sectors.
Our work was set in motion as part of a provincial response to the
COVID-19 pandemic. We were a small team within a broader group
of public health researchers who were providing data to government

2

R ELATED W ORK

This work relates to literature on how to design visualizations; on
how to support collaboration through visualizations; and on how to
support design in technology-mitigated collaboration.

* e-mail:
† e-mail:

tatiana losev@sfu.ca
sstorteboom@gmail.com
‡ e-mail: sheelagh@sfu.ca
§ e-mail: sknudsen@ucalgary.ca

2.1

Designing Visualizations

Making use of design methodology is widely recognized as important for creating useful and usable visualizations [42, 51]. This
echoes the broader discussions about design [51], which span a

1

© 2020 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in the proceedings of IEEE Visualization
conference. The final version of this record is available at: 10.1109/BELIV51497.2020.00008
Table 1: CSCW matrix for consideration in visualization design.

wide array of concerns and advice about concrete design activities.
Some examples that focus on co-located activities include the use of
sketching [10, 17, 48, 54]; prototyping with a range of media [53],
and the use of cards to support ideation [27]. A considerable amount
of this design work is collaborative in nature ranging from the sharing of work in progress in design critiques [65], through how people
design together such as with co-creating artifacts [2], to ideas about
how to involve people that are affected by a design, for example,
through human-centered design [44] and participatory design [2]. In
addition, there are discussions about how to communicate designs,
for example, in creating hand-off documents [35] — many of which
people colloquially refer to as design (studio) praxis. In visualization, people have considered how to design for the intended audience
such as specific experts or the general public (for example, design
study methodology [37, 41, 51]), and how to design with these people (for example, user-centered visualization design [16, 31]). Also
there are suggestions of potentially useful concrete design activities
(for example: those based on constructive visualization [26], those
conducted as speculative design workshops [8, 30], and the use of
pencil-and-paper based sketching of data visualizations [62]). There
is also advice on how to structure design processes, for example, how
to teach visualization design to computer science students using five
design sheet method [48]), and how to more clearly communicate
visualization designs (for example, in designers communicating visualization designs to developers as part of a hand-off process [61]).
These are all extremely informative when at least some of the activities can happen co-located, however, they are less applicable for
synchronous distributed design activities. In synchronous distributed
design activities, they serve more as goals than as methods. These
ideas will need to be re-interpreted in the context of synchronous
distributed design work.
2.2

Same time
(synchronous)

Different time
(asynchronous)

Same place
(co-located)

same place same time

same place different
time

Different place
(distributed)

different place same
time

different place different time

collaborative visualization design, the CSCW matrix helps conceptualizing the space of synchronous distributed collaboration in relation
to other collaborative contexts. There are also relevant similarities
between collaborative visualization-based analysis and visualization
design. For example, being able to point to a visualization or part of
one is both important when designing and using visualizations [22].
Supporting collaborative use of visualization is an important research
direction. However, supporting visualization design in synchronous
distributed settings has not yet been discussed.
2.3

Collaborative Design of Visualizations

While the visualization literature includes many discussions about
design [3,5,16,20,31,37–39,41,42,51,61], the focus is on the design
processes rather than the collaborative process. The collaborations
discussed tend to focus on how visualization researchers collaborate
in long-term projects with domain experts. For example, while the
term “collaboration” (and related forms) is used 34 times in the
design studies paper [51], it is only used a single time in the section
that discusses the “core phase” of the design study methodology.
Discussions about collaborative design thinking seem to be missing.
Similarly, in CSCW literature, while there are discussions about
many different types of work, the focus has been on distributed
asynchronous and co-located synchronous. We are interested in
distributed synchronous design activities.

Collaboration and Visualization

There is a rich body of literature on collaboration in related fields
such as human-computer interaction (HCI) and computer supported
cooperative work (CSCW). The CSCW matrix (see Table 1), which
separates collaborative work along space time axes is useful for
understanding this area [18]. Two main areas of the CSCW matrix
have been purposefully considered in visualization: co-located synchronous collaboration (Table 1, top-left quadrant) and distributed
asynchronous collaboration (Table 1, bottom-right quadrant). Although these two modes of collaboration have primarily been studied
in isolation — perhaps due to their different technological basis —
they share many challenges (see for example Isenberg et al. [28]).
Research exploring co-located collaborative visualization includes
the use of tabletops for collaborative information access, for example, Scott et al. [49, 50], the consideration of tabletop displays for
collaborative browsing of hierarchical layouts of photographs [59],
for analysis of scientific data [57], and for exploration of book
collections [56]. More recently, people have considered large, highresolution displays for supporting collaborative visual analytics (for
example, Langner et al. [32] and Knudsen & Hornbæk [29]).
Research on visualization for communicating across both space
and time (asynchronous distributed) have led to ideas about democratizing visualization by making it accessible to all and to the
increasing inclusion of visualizations as a way to communicate data
in news media. Sense.us [23] and ManyEyes [60] introduced the
collaborative possibilities for visualizations on the web. This type
of research situates visualizations in a broader social and societal
context. Based on these kinds of systems, Heer & Agrawala [21] provide design considerations for collaborative visualization on the web
more broadly. Later, work has shown that structuring the processes
in collaborative asynchronous visual analysis can lead to increased
analysis quality [63, 64], which might provide ideas for subsequent
visualization designs [25].
While collaborative visualization-based analysis is distinct from

2.4

Collaborative Design Processes

There is CSCW literature about collaborative design processes (for
some examples see [1, 7, 15, 24, 45, 55, 66]). However, the focus is
still about collaborative design when co-location is part of the design
process. For example, some have explored technology mitigated
collaborations through tabletop display tools [7, 24], and through
investigating the impact of technology based feedback about the
group creative design process [55]. One suggestion is to explore
the use of the crowd in design processes [66]. Visualization has
been used to provide feedback on speaking times and speaking turns
during collaboration [4].
There is some exploration of the space we are interested in – the
space of how to re-kindle the benefits of co-located collaboration in
a technology-supported, synchronous distributed situation. Arias et
al. [1] start by acknowledging the complex design problems often
require group solutions and articulates needed design support for
urban design problems. Both Fischer [15] and Obendorf et al. [45]
consider the complexity of team-based design needs where teams
must cope with difference in time, space, and knowledge and make
a call for deeper exploration of the needs of these types of design
teams. Our work, which describes our experiences of the challenges
of collaborative synchronous, distributed technology-mediated design, and a range of strategies for dealing with these challenges,
contributes to this larger call for research.
3

S YNCHRONOUS D ISTRIBUTED V ISUALIZATION D ESIGN

Amid the COVID-19 lockdown, we were faced with the urgent
challenge to design a useful COVID-19 visualization. We were
confronted with the reality that our familiar co-located team-based
collaboration design approaches could not be directly applied in

2

© 2020 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in the proceedings of IEEE Visualization
conference. The final version of this record is available at: 10.1109/BELIV51497.2020.00008
Table 2: Overview of our team.

our enforced distributed but synchronous realm. While this was a
challenge in many ways, we managed to reach an effective design
process. Through the use of a reflective auto-ethnographic research
approach, we have obtained a deeper understanding of these challenges. We first describe our research approach.
3.1

Methodology: Reflective Auto-Ethnography

We conducted a team-based self-study for this project by combining
an auto-ethnographic research approach [12] with hermeneutic phenomenology [58]. Auto-ethnographic research is befitting because
its evidence base is the direct narrative of the people involved [12].
Hermeneutic phenomenology complements this as it studies the
meanings of lived experience through self-reflection, writing, and
discussion [33, 58]. Together, these approaches deepened our understanding of our experience as a team of designers creating visualizations together in a synchronous distributed context. Though
more commonly seen in the social sciences, we benefit from these
qualitative research approaches. They enable us to focus on our
unique experiences of designing visualizations in a synchronous
distributed setting through the discovery of themes that occurred in
our non-linear collaborative practice.
3.2

Role

Expertise in use

A

PI

B
C
D
E
F

PI
Design lead
Designer
Intern
Intern

Visualization, design, programming,
management, communication
Visualization, design
Visualization, design
Public health, design
Visualization, programming
Visualization, programming

to validate the findings. Lastly, we wrote this paper by detailing
our experiences and findings by repeatedly going through the steps
above.
3.4

Our Context

March 13, 2020, two days before a local state of emergency was announced, the office of the mayor requested help from the Centre for
Health Informatics to get a better sense of non-clinical interventions
of COVID-19 locally, nationally, and internationally. At that time
there was a generalized sense of fear and widespread sensationalism
that was broadcast via a multitude of media. A team of 37 members
of researchers in health and data sciences from the centre assembled
on Slack to create a “COVID-19 Working Group” determined to
research COVID-19 data in response to the urgent call for information. The hope was to help by contributing critical information to aid
informed decision-making about managing the pandemic. Working
under an immense sense of urgency, the team collected cumulative
and daily case numbers, researched global COVID-19 policies, and
worked on epidemiological disease models that informed the status of the pandemic on a local and national scale. This research
was used by municipal and provincial policy-makers. Two team
members promptly responded by using open COVID-19 data and
a web charting library to, within a few days, assemble a website
that tracked the changing local and provincial COVID-19 data. This
website became known within the team as the “COVID-19 Tracker”
[11]. During the first 8 weeks, the site garnered 15,000 page views.
While delighted about the speed of this action, the need for a
more carefully designed response was noted and a different team
member assembled a smaller design team. It is this smaller group
that is our design team and it is our actions in this team that we focus
on. Our initial conversations in the design team were via a specifically formed Slack channel. Our design team’s dedicated channel
decreased the amount of notifications to members of the COVID-19
Working Group and helped focus our discussions. Additionally, our
design team started to meet using video conferencing. We discussed
COVID-19 design issues to better understand the impact of design
on a broader cross-section of people. Our design team delved into
the intricacies of the available public COVID-19 data with the goal
of designing data visualizations that would support a broad crosssection of the population, which the working group had identified as
important: provincial and municipal decision makers, public health
officers, as well as the general public. We met frequently — often several hours a day and still met more than once a week with
the COVID-19 Working Group to align with the project needs and
direction in response to the status of the pandemic.

Demographics: Our Team Members

Our group of designers worked together, as a team, for the first
time, though some team members (AB, AEF, ABC, BC, and BD —
also shown in Figure 1) had worked together previously on separate
projects. The team dynamics and the social setting of the lockdown
were novel to the whole team. The domain specific data and the
needs of the project had yet to be learned. Thus, the team needed to
get acquainted with one another as well as the data. We found that
spending more time together in a synchronous setting facilitated an
immediate peer-to-peer learning, and improved our communication
–– in our experience, this was the most suitable way for us to connect,
to build personal relationships in our group, and to improve group
synergy. Initially, team members A, E, and F discussed the project
for about two weeks, followed by members A and B discussing
possible additional members to balance skills in data visualization,
design, public health, and programming (see Table 2). Team member
A assembled the team and called the first team meeting.
3.3

Team member

Our Process, Data, and Analysis

Following an auto-ethnographic approach, the data is both a result of
our process and fueled it; therefore, we discuss them as intertwined.
We looked closely into the process of our visualization project by
analyzing our own experiential data and project artifacts [12, 13, 33].
In auto-ethnography we are both the participants and the researchers
— through a self-reflexive process [12, 58], we examine our shared
experience as a multi-disciplinary team of designers working towards gaining a deeper understanding of our experience. Doing
so, we questioned: how has distributed collaboration shaped our
experience of synchronous design processes?
Our process was as follows: We continuously collected process
data and members of the team kept regular day-by-day written team
notes; the team’s visualization sketches were collectively stored on a
Miro board; our design brief on Google Docs and the Slack history
texts were gathered and reviewed; we created a visual timeline from
our Slack history; we formulated questions to guide our inquiry and
reflection based on our collected data and previous personal experiences relevant to visualization design and health communications;
we characterized, analyzed and reflected on our texts, discussed the
texts, and generated new texts; we held reflective discussions and
documented this in our notes in Google Docs; themes that emerged
in our text and from our reflective dialogue were grouped; through
our reflections, we interpreted our documented themes and continued
to write these reflections on our account; we corroborated collective written experiences with one another through further discussion

4

D ESCRIBING O UR D ESIGN P ROCESS E XPERIENCES

In this section we describe how we experienced the activities that
we engaged in as the design team. In keeping with our autoethnographic and phenomenological methodologies, rigor in this
report means staying true to the reality of our experiences in our
team via detailed descriptions and iterative reflections on our texts
and artifacts [13, 33]. In starting our distributed design process, we
consulted with the literature. However, we discovered only limited

3

© 2020 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in the proceedings of IEEE Visualization
conference. The final version of this record is available at: 10.1109/BELIV51497.2020.00008
advice on how to organize collaborative synchronous distributed
visualization design processes. While we considered our readings
about visualization design and distributed design in CSCW, we
largely relied on our own, largely face-to-face, experience of prior
design processes in visualization design and beyond. Here, we describe how we experienced synchronous distributed visualization
design. By articulating challenges and strategies, we discuss the factors that arose in our experiences that may prove useful to consider
when doing synchronous distributed visualization design.
4.1

as to not suggest causation where correlations might exist. For example, it became clear that juxtaposing policy data with case numbers
could be misconstrued as a causal relationship.
4.3

The goal of our synchronous online meetings during the ideation
phase was to generate many ideas and sketches, while gaining an
understanding of COVID-19 data. We spent a lot of time considering
and exploring the data; understanding testing rates, positive case
numbers, hospitalization cases, and disease transmission along with
policies and correlations. We formed questions through repeated
discussions, which, in consultation with members of the COVID-19
Working Group, provided a rich method for developing an in-depth
understanding of the data and issues of interest.
Sketching was a valuable activity that helped us to think through
concepts, envision a story, and share ideas. Sketching enabled
our team to see the data and gain a shared sense of our individual
perspectives. During the meetings, and while apart, we sketched
on paper and tablets. The sketches were the main artifacts that we
each created and showed to each other either through presenting our
physical sketch to the device camera or posting it onto our Miro
board. The sketches served as the foundation for our discussions.
The design meeting notes and artifacts were stored, categorized
by date, and accessible to the team. The cache of sketches along
with inspiration clippings and meeting notes proved very useful. We
were able to refer to previously posted resources and sketches during
design meetings, enhancing our ability to recall our previous work
and build on it. However, we found the lag time when posting our
paper sketches onto our virtual whiteboard to be challenging. We
dealt with this by holding sketches up to the camera, but they were
not easily referenced until they were scanned and added to the board.

Establishing Meetings and Technologies

The design team met to discuss and to sketch together for two hours
a day, five days a week and attended half hour meetings with the
broader team a few times per week. We mostly used Zoom 1 for
meetings, Slack 2 for short asynchronous communications, Google
Docs 3 for written notes and records, and Miro Board 4 for collaborative design.
Daily 2-hour meetings over Zoom brought the team together and
allowed for developing an awareness of each other and established a
social dynamic and rapport among the team members. The meetings
were a time to convene and establish project expectations, sketch,
and design together. Most of us had device cameras positioned to
show our face during the Zoom meetings. The team also participated
in the larger Zoom meetings with the COVID-19 Working Group to
gain feedback on our visualization ideas and sketches, and to hear
of new developments or requests from senior leadership. A Slack
channel was the main hub to set up meeting times, to share reading
and video materials about COVID-19 data and visualization design,
and to inform each other of online events such as webinars. We also
used the Slack channel to post our design ideas. Our visualization
design team made use of a collaborative digital whiteboard (Miro).
This provided digital space for the group to post sketches, PDF’s,
and virtual sticky notes during design meetings. Meeting notes and a
design brief were created and stored in Google Docs and were used
concurrently during our team meetings with one team member taking
notes. After five weeks of daily Zoom meetings, our team reduced
meeting times over a collective sense that meetings needed to be
more directed and convergent — the ideation phase was wrapping
up and the team was keen to implement the design.
4.2

Regular Sketching Sessions

4.4

Software Prototyping

Illustrator versions of our design were produced by the lead designer
so we could view a pixel-perfect design. After several iterations, the
Illustrator file was handed off to three team members who implemented the design using D3 [6]. Several iterations of the software
prototype were critiqued during collaborative design team sessions
and subsequently tweaked. The design phase for the data visualization continued through implementation as updating data sources
presents new challenges to be solved. When prototypes were polished and reflected live data sources, they were presented in a Zoom
meeting to the COVID-19 Working Group for feedback.

Defining a Purpose and Setting a Direction

To reach a shared understanding of the project expectations, including timelines and target audiences, we collaboratively authored a
design brief. This document directed some of our discussions as we
considered the purpose of the site, our audience, and their familiarity
with the data. The ideation process began with a distributed faceto-face critique of the COVID-19 visualizations that were already
available on our site and across all of the provincial sites in Canada.
Screenshots of the various visualizations were compiled on a Miro
board along with suggestions for improvements. This in turn led to
ideas for improvements to the COVID Tracker website. The activity
of critiquing visual elements of other visualizations was a beneficial
learning exercise that focused our sketching sessions and informed
our design choices. This activity enabled an engaged exploration
of the data, of the end-user audience, and the purpose and messaging of the visualizations. Importantly, this activity presented the
complexity of the data and enabled us to identify further questions
and consultations necessary to validate our findings. While we were
interested in helping people understand relationships between otherwise disparate data sets, such as case numbers and policies, we
recognized that separating certain aspects of the data was critical so

5

E MERGING FACTORS
D ESIGN

IN

O UR V IRTUAL V ISUALIZATION

Our purpose was to think critically about how to communicate the
complexity of the pandemic and the data while ensuring that our
visualization would not be misinforming. Our process, however,
started by identifying the missing factors in our distributed design
situation. The familiar lab environment facilitated serendipity, natural discussion, and a tangible sense of togetherness that allowed
for ideas to spontaneously emerge. In order to support the process
of ideation and data discovery in our distributed environment, we
wished to collaborate via real-time sketching and discussion akin
to a collocated design environment such as a lab. We searched for
useful tools and materials to enable the team members to communicate ideas about interactions for the design and to share them, as we
normally would, “in-person”.
We note that being distributed forced us to be upfront about the
process. This in turn supported later reflection because our distributed work had been logged through the various tools used in the
design process. This design experience was distinct as a result of
distributed collaboration under the time sensitive demands of a public health emergency. Furthermore, remoteness posed a perceived
risk of misunderstanding and miscommunication, more so given a

1 https://zoom.com/
2 https://slack.com/
3 https://docs.google.com/
4 https://miro.com/

4

© 2020 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in the proceedings of IEEE Visualization
conference. The final version of this record is available at: 10.1109/BELIV51497.2020.00008
flux of ever-changing public health data that decision makers were
relying upon. This design experience elucidated several factors for
re-consideration. Notably, these factors were initially experienced
as challenges but sometimes, through working with these challenges,
we also noted potential strategies and opportunities.
In the following, we describe eleven factors that emerged from
an auto-ethnographic exploration of our distributed visualization
design process. While the design factors encompass a wide array
of considerations, we recognize that there are more opportunities
and strategies possible through re-purposing current software and
hardware tools.
5.1

device cameras. Human communication and connections are an
interplay of nuanced cultural mannerisms that may not be visible
or as obvious through a webcam. Nonetheless, seeing each other
through webcams and computer screens established a collective
awareness and a sense of attendance within the team though we
were not co-located. However, eye-to-eye contact differed from
being co-located. We tended to look at each other’s faces on the
screen and not directly into our cameras, often seeming as though
eye contact was averted during conversations. We found that group
etiquette naturally developed in our online work space such as muting the microphone during excessive background noise, putting up a
hand to speak, and waving goodbye into the camera. A couple of
the team members chose to keep their cameras off during all online
meetings but remained audible, which created a barrier to gaining an
understanding of their affect and their level of engagement because
gestures, facial expressions, and eye contact were not visible. We
found that members who had their cameras turned on often dominated and contributed more to the discussion and invested more time
throughout the project.

Pandemic Challenges

First and unsurprisingly, the pandemic lockdown led to challenges.
These are important to recognise as they heavily influenced our
ability to carry out work.
C1. Negotiating Time and Resources
Coordinating time and access to physical space for some team members was a challenge amidst the social lockdown. This challenge
is important because the pandemic brought forward some social
constraints to distributed work from home such as interruptions in
each member’s home environment, lack of physical working space,
and faulty hardware that played a role in how the team managed
to design together remotely. For example, some collaborators were
forced to leave meetings in order to take care of their children and at
times their children showed themselves to the camera during design
meetings. There were instances when team members had to move
their device to a different room during meetings because their small
shared living spaces were prioritized based on homeschooling needs
of children or for other family members who were working from
home. We contended with web cams that did not function, so some
team members were not visible during camera-to-camera meetings.
Purchasing web cameras at the time was difficult due to a high demand in the market with increased remote work. As a team, we
resolved to continue meetings during these circumstances. Audio
was muted for a moment when children interrupted our online meetings and we waited until family disruption ended. We persisted with
meetings though some members were not visible, interacting only
via audio. Additionally, this work provided an opportunity to “be
with” other people and to “contribute” in a way that was a cathartic
exercise for several team members in the midst of this pandemic.
6

C3. Understanding Team Members’ Progress
The challenge was to determine the progress of individuals on the
team so that we could move forward with project goals. It was important to understand where team members were in their work to ensure
that we were completing our goals. The team was rapidly assembled;
some members were volunteers. They were unfamiliar with each
other’s skills and were unsure if it was okay to ask others given the
circumstances. Some work needed to be done asynchronously and,
from time to time, team members were not able to follow through
with tasks. For example, we decided to assign tasks such as to scope
nationwide provincial sites for visualizations of COVID-19 data
and compile the findings in an Excel file, while another member
was reviewing other information outside of our team meetings. It
was also valuable to prepare some information before our design
team meetings to bolster our discussions about visualization design.
To ensure that everyone was aware of the status of each task, team
member A would check on the progress via Slack, which was visible
to the whole team. This method was useful to ensure transparency
and clear expectations for individual task completion within our
design process. Some members, notably team members C and D
often self-assigned tasks while other members relied upon A for task
assignment and review.

C OMMUNICATION B REAKDOWNS

C4. Diversity of Software and Sketching Expertise

This group of challenges focus on how our adaptation to distributed
collaborations caused several types of communication challenges —
some of which we learned how to mitigate.

There was considerable variation in levels of skill when sketching
ideas or visualizing data, meaning that some of the team members struggled more than others with design activities and required
guidance. As a solution to some of these differences, the lead visualization designer mentored willing team members who were less
experienced in designing data visualizations. For example, we held
optional group sketching sessions via Zoom as a way to learn and
to practice sketching apart from our team meetings. To bypass software knowledge gaps, we photographed physical paper sketches
and shared them on the Miro board because everyone was able to
use their device cameras comfortably. However, photographing our
sketches stifled the natural flow of sketching and sharing during
meetings, so we reverted to sketching and presenting our sketches
through the camera. This method led to more productive discussions
and more sketching to take place during the meetings. We also saw
a benefit in the virtual environment because sketches could be easily
seen by everyone at the same time provided the camera was set up
in such a way that the sketch was well lit and in focus. We would
often scan sketches using a phone app or transfer them to the digital
whiteboard, where we could continue to review the sketches. After
reviewing the sketches and discussing their features we decided on
the best sketch to prototype. We also found screen sharing to be a

C2. Establishing Team Cohesion
The sense of uncertainty that arose steeply during the initial COVID19 lockdown, along with our own perceived challenges of remote
collaboration, posed risks of miscommunication and possible difficulties in establishing a spirit of team trust and cohesion. This was
a challenge we were particularly aware of, because, while most of us
were in the same geographical region, we designed synchronously
from our homes. Our intention was to recreate the familiar “face-toface” co-located communication flow even though we were working
in a distributed virtual setting. We chose frequent synchronous virtual collaboration as a way to 1) align our ideas and learn 2) mitigate
a sense of uncertainty during a pandemic with frequent feedback 3)
establish team cohesion and rapport. This virtual space was a new
reality for many collaborators. Seeing one another brought a sense
of togetherness and co-presence that was conducive to successful
and natural synchronous teamwork. Notably, it was possible for
our virtual interaction to achieve a similar communication workflow
with the team’s facial expressions and gestures visible through our

5

© 2020 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in the proceedings of IEEE Visualization
conference. The final version of this record is available at: 10.1109/BELIV51497.2020.00008
C7. Understanding Design Ideas

benefit during the polishing stage of a working prototype. While
designers might want to adjust some of the positioning and style of
elements in a working prototype, they may not have a development
space set up or the skills to make those adjustments. The programming team members utilized screen sharing to collaboratively make
those adjustments in real time with the designers.

Working in a distributed design team adds friction to the process
of understanding other collaborator’s perspective throughout the
design process [19]. In our case, it took more time to establish understanding when sharing diverse ideas in the process of interpreting
domain-specific data and creating data visualizations. Typically, a
co-located physical space that facilitates the sharing of ideas through
face-to-face team activities is used during ideation and iteration
phases of the design process. For example, we would compile our
sketches on the wall of a meeting room for all members to view
and discuss. We adapted this activity to our online synchronous
setting by posting sketches to an online collaborative whiteboard in
Miro while simultaneously meeting via Zoom. Despite the learning
curve of adopting the software, we found this strategy allowed us
to share and discuss our ideas productively. Working in the virtual
whiteboard environment opened up new opportunities that would not
be as feasible when working with the physical counterpart. Endless
space offered in the virtual whiteboard allowed the team a great deal
of flexibility in how the content was laid out. Items on the board
could be arranged linearly, and grouped and regrouped as the design
process unfolded. The team was able to quickly reference previously shared content, which aided in clarifying how assumptions
and misunderstanding had arisen. The ability to use virtual pointing
and to jump to another’s pointing location played a beneficial role
in the virtual work space. While pointing is possible in the physical
environment, this can at times lack accuracy or require people to
physically move closer to the item they are pointing at, which is
time-consuming and may occlude it. There is also the limitation that
only so many people can be close to a small clipping or sketchbook
page. The virtual space permits all collaborators to have an optimal
view of where the speaker is pointing and an equal opportunity to
point at things. Iteration was an integral part of the design process,
and for this it was often useful to markup existing sketches and design outputs. The digital environment offered the ability to quickly
duplicate and markup as many copies of something as needed without compromising the integrity of the original. This was especially
enabling when one team member wanted to iterate on another team
member’s sketch because doing so was immediate and essentially
risk-free.

C5. Understanding and Sharing Data
Learning about the project needs and the health data was foundational to our visualization design, so we spent considerable time
reviewing and discussing policy data, testing data, health care system capacity, social determinants of health, studying COVID-19
visualizations across Canadian jurisdictions, and in regular consultations with the COVID-19 Working Group in a remote setting.
As COVID-19 data was being visualized broadly across the world,
we knew how the data was typically shown, so we considered the
clarity and lack of clarity in existing visualizations. Therefore, we
looked for new ways to visualize the same data that would not perpetuate the same issues. Information gathering was crucial to our
design process because it enabled us to identify relationships and
assumptions within the data as we sketched data visualizations in
the early design stage. Notably, this process provided a fruitful
distributed design environment with a serendipitous sense of data
discovery. This collaborative online knowledge seeking provided
a generative online learning space. Additionally, this activity allowed us to deepen our collective understanding of the data and
cultivated team rapport. This is an area where we identified a clear
benefit to working in a distributed environment. We were able to
work independently and then quickly share our findings when identifying something interesting. For example, we considered critical
discussions of visualization, such as the understanding that positive
cases were indicative of testing capacity. We followed this insight
by brainstorming ways to visualize this relationship in a more clear
manner as part of a larger visualization product.
C6. Sharing and Acquiring Knowledge
It was challenging to share and introduce knowledge and background skills to other team members. Likewise, it was challenging to
acquire new understanding from other team members. Distributed
modes of collaboration introduce more friction in sharing knowledge. It is more difficult to find and share resources and point to
specific parts of a resource as it is prone to error and requires time.
This is particularly relevant in a visualization context. In contrast,
in co-located situations pointing, body language, and using artifacts
such as laptops to communicate “see this” is easy and affords a
low-friction possibility for understanding whether you have caught
peoples’ attention. In extension, these situations allow the receiving
side to see exactly what is meant and allow for clarifying questions
to a specific aspect. For example, we discussed story-telling aspects
of our design. However, discovering the depth and subtlety of the
data and how it fits with storytelling concepts appeared overwhelming. Especially as we intended to deepen a shared understanding of
this data through visualizations and storytelling, and further, from an
interaction perspective, to use scrollytelling to show the complexity
of COVID-19 data. We considered literature on using storytelling elements in visualization [47] to prompt meaningful discussions about
the data. For example, we referred to the Martini Glass structure [52]
as a potential way to scaffold the complexity of the data and to create
cohesion between COVID-19 charts. However, while all team members attempted to grasp these concepts, some team members had a
sense of superficially understanding these ideas and found it difficult
to use them when thinking about designs. Despite these challenges,
working remotely also poses benefits for knowledge exchange. By
working in a distributed team, resources will typically be shared
through a medium that allows people to return to them, which is
particularly beneficial when acquiring new knowledge.

7

S TRATEGIES

FOR

D ISTRIBUTED D ESIGN

The intensity of the pandemic situation coupled with the team’s
general willingness to experiment led us to explore alternative uses of
hardware and software. Next, we discuss current potential strategies
and potential opportunities that lie ahead.
S1. Simulating a Co-located Design Space for Sketching
It is difficult to gain a full view of group sketching in a distributed
setting because online meetings are generally limited to one view
per participant. In an attempt to create a real-time collaborative
sketching experience, two team members tested a setup of two device
cameras per person during a Zoom meeting. The setup included
signing into the meeting twice with two separate devices; one device was a PC camera aimed at the face of each participant and a
second device was a phone camera that was directed on their paper
and pen. Though it was awkward to find a suitable angle and stabilize the phone, facial expressions, gestures and gaze were captured
along with a view of real time sketching. This method allowed
the conversation to be held concurrently with a view of sketching
practice as it was unfolding within the discussion. This remote
sketching activity was seamless in a virtual distributed design setup
that simulated a co-located design environment. It supported conversational and visual communication, however, it was cumbersome to
recreate this physical setup and it was not attempted after a single
trial. There is considerable potential for developing better and easier
ways to set up this type of distributed collaboration. For instance,

6

© 2020 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in the proceedings of IEEE Visualization
conference. The final version of this record is available at: 10.1109/BELIV51497.2020.00008

Figure 2: An excerpt of our Miro board that captures a design session for lo-fi prototyping of visualization interaction. During the session all
participants were able to duplicate and arrange assets to mimic paper prototyping.

this approach could bypass knowledge gaps or inaccessibility to
using digital sketching tools such as a Wacom tablet. Likewise, we
imagine specialised software might provide support for this purpose.

we think we would have pointed to sketches in a co-located mode
of collaboration instead of moving our hands in mid-air in front of
the camera. We see the hand gestures as adding an extra barrier to
communicating about interactions.

S2. Screen-Sharing to Collaborate in Software Applications
S4. Lo-fi Prototyping for Visualization Interaction

Different team members can use their software fluency and bring
different skills to the table. With the goal of including everyone
throughout the design process, we used screen-sharing via Zoom to
collaborate in specialized environments such as designing in Adobe
Illustrator or editing code. What made this method particularly useful was when there was skill cross-over in the team because meeting
participants could control the mouse during a screen-sharing session.
For example, a team member shared their design on the screen of
an open Adobe Illustrator workspace during the Zoom meeting. Another team member controlled the mouse from a separate location
on their shared Adobe Illustrator workspace. This process allowed
for real-time manipulation of visual components of our design and
to share skills between multiple team members. Even in cases where
collaborators were not manipulating the software remotely, we found
sharing specialized environments to be useful as it mimicked casual
co-located collaboration. For example, designers might often gather
around the work space of the person implementing a design to tweak
position, padding, and other style details. We simulated this experience with screen-sharing and being able to grant remote access to
the mouse meant that team members could point out these details
with accuracy.

It was challenging to find optimal tools to enable all of us to test
interactions in a digital format given our variable programming
expertise. We aimed to re-create the use of paper prototyping in
a digital format. To set this up, we used a digital whiteboard in
Miro as a “table top” space and exported assets from Illustrator
to use as “paper” clippings. Teleconferencing via Zoom enabled
gesturing and speaking into the camera, while all team members
could simultaneously copy, resize, and rearrange assets in Miro.
Team members were able to collaboratively create UI mock-ups
(Figure 2) and animate them by clicking and dragging. We found
this method to be quick and inclusive to all members, regardless
of skill. Additionally, we found the ability to duplicate elements
and groups of elements without disrupting the integrity of previous
models provided a benefit over traditional paper prototyping.
8

D ISCUSSION

As a team of information visualization designers we described and
studied our experience using an auto-ethnographic approach in order to explore how we experienced visualization design methods
in our project. Iterative reflection and thematic organization of our
experiences presented us with overarching themes of challenges and
strategies. During our pursuit to create a vibrant online collaboration in the early stages of visualization design, we were constantly
reminded of situations that needed to be addressed, and that we felt
were essential to maintain our co-located design process even though
we were no longer able to meet in person. In doing so, we identified
challenges and strategies that arose through our process, leading us
to try new ways to conduct distributed synchronous collaboration.
Our account may offer an example to the members of the visualization community who may identify with similar experiences that they
too have had. This may serve to inform future visualization research
and methodology in this domain.
We found that tools for designing, creating, and using visualizations such as Adobe Illustrator, RAW graphs [36], Tableau, Data
Illustrator [34], and Charticulator [46] did not offer the support
we were looking for in our synchronous collaboration. We more
frequently relied on external web applications to collaborate both
independently and together during our design sessions. We found

S3. Using Hand Gestures for Discussing Interaction
Animating designs using video or animation software is difficult for
team members that lack such technical skills. Not everyone in the
group knew how to digitally animate a design, which excluded some
team members. We discovered that the most accessible way for each
team member to show their ideas was by talking camera-to-camera
similar to a face-to-face co-located setting. The software knowledge
gap was resolved by relying on hand gestures and moving static
design artifacts with our hands while remaining visible in the camera.
Everyone in the team with access to a web camera could speak to
their ideas and show how they imagined the design would move with
intuitive hand motions, facial expressions, sounds, pointing to, or
moving their own sketches or cut outs while explaining their idea
in front of the camera. This emphasized a fuller presence within a
remote collaborative experience similar to that of a lab. We reflected
on our choice of communicating about interactions and compared
it to our previous visualization design experiences. Based on this,

7

© 2020 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in the proceedings of IEEE Visualization
conference. The final version of this record is available at: 10.1109/BELIV51497.2020.00008
the combined use of multiple applications such as teleconferencing
(in our case, Zoom), virtual whiteboards (in our case, Miro), and
collaborative word processors (in our case, Google Docs) provided
considerable flexibility. However, constantly switching between
applications became cumbersome at times, particularly when coordinating these between several team members during a teleconferencing session. Improved orchestration and integration between these
applications, as well as more fine-tuned support for collaborative
online sketching would be interesting directions to investigate and
welcome improvements in such contexts.
In many design processes there are often activities that require
the use of web tools or computing environments and for these we
felt the shift to remote work did not hinder our performance of these
activities. Research, data understanding, collaborative writing, finessing of high fidelity designs and prototypes are activities that
often require the use of a computer. In a co-located scenario, we
often have team members gather in a conference room with personal
laptops that they must attach to an external display to properly share
with the group, or gather at the shoulder of one team member while
they informally demo something on their desktop. These types of
in-person collaborative moments can be cumbersome. However, we
found they happened more rapidly and comfortably over teleconferencing by utilizing built in tools such as screen sharing, or in
combination with external collaborative software.
We struggled more to adapt in the ideation and early iteration
phases because our process relied on brainstorming, sketching, and
rapid paper prototyping. We tried to mimic real-time collaborative
sketching by setting up a dual screen conference, or by holding
sketches up to the webcam. To some extent, we were able to sustain
spontaneity of brainstorming and idea sharing similar to those of colocated collaboration by continuing to use mostly physical sketching
materials like pen and paper. The transfer of physical sketches to the
virtual whiteboard was cumbersome and we see this as an area for
potential improvement. However, once the sketches are on a digital
whiteboard they continue to be accessible for all future discussions
and are easily duplicated and iterated on much more easily than their
physical counterparts. While we discussed access to equipment and
distraction as being primarily a pandemic related challenge, we also
see this as being potentially more widely problematic. Improvements
we could make for our sketching sessions might involve high-quality
webcams and sketching tablets for all team members. However, the
cost and learning curve associated with adopting such technology
is high considering that low-fi technology such as pen and paper
work very efficiently and with more versatility. Likewise, having
dedicated space and time to do one’s work is essential for focus, and
offloading the responsibility to the individual to carve it out of their
domestic space is understandably challenging for remote workers.
Where we saw the largest challenge for remote work was communication and social dynamics. Working in a co-located environment
facilitates serendipity, natural discussion, and a tangible sense of
togetherness that allows for ideas to emerge spontaneously. We
found some team members engaged in prolonged teleconferencing
sessions to experience the sense of community and to concurrently
share ideas as more of a “hangout” rather than a meeting. However,
other team members who neither could nor chose to utilize video
and did not engage in the “hangouts” slowly drifted away from the
project likely because they felt excluded. In a co-located environment, it is quite clear that an individual is committed to working
because they have physically arrived at work, and likewise one can
pick up on how busy or idle a co-worker might be when they are colocated. Being disconnected to these physical cues, in conjunction
with voluntary roles in our particular project, made assigning tasks
or setting expectations challenging. We discovered that social dynamics that seamlessly sort themselves out in a co-located scenario
require a lot more facilitation and management effort. We imagine
that this may require an additional role or skill set added to a team, or

better integration of a person’s status (“available”, “busy”, “away”)
into the collaborative environments. Messaging applications such
as Slack provide status information, but in our experience, they lack
nuance and integration with realistic highly synchronous workflows.
There is no shortage of collaborative software that aims to increase
productivity and facilitate focus sessions, but few that fulfill the
sense of community and spontaneous collaboration that happens in
co-located work environments.
Finally, it is worth noting that the ability to reflect on our experience of synchronous distributed design is largely due to the fact that
we were distributed. We were forced to put every piece of inspiration
and every sketch into Miro. All of our notes and communications
are documented on Slack and in Google docs. Having this detailed
repository at every stage allowed us to reflect and gain insight into
our process and learn from our experience.
9

C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we reflected on our experiences doing distributed visualization design in a remote synchronous design space during the
pandemic. We based our reflections on our work on designing a
COVID-19 visualization as part of a larger team effort on supporting
city- and provincial-level decision-making. We discussed how the
pandemic posed new challenges to remote collaboration amidst civic
lockdown measures and imposed an increased dependency on spatially distributed teamwork across almost all sectors. As a response
to the barriers of working from home being “the new normal”, we
used various synchronous remote design tools and methods with
an aim to preserve the richness of co-located collaboration such
as face-to-face physical presence with the ability to view real-time
body gestures, facial expressions, and the making and sharing of
physical artifacts. Based on these, we articulated issues in team
composition and communication, both of which affected our visualization design process. We discussed the challenges of working in
a distributed visualization design team, such as creating a sense of
a shared work environment, which we liken to the idea of a design
studio, and how to share data and potential ideas for visualization
data. Finally, we offered potential solutions and benefits to working
remotely. Our discovery of the challenges and strategies throughout the process provide useful insights about enabling a more fluid
distributed collaboration.
While descriptions and discussions of visualization design tended
to assume co-located design teams, designers clearly need to carry
out some work independently and in different locations. Prior work
in other fields have shed light on this. However, there is important
work to be done in considering these contexts for visualization design
processes. As a step towards developing a better understanding of
distributed, synchronous visualization design, this paper provides an
experiential understanding and conceptualization of this area.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Jackie Yu, Neil Chulpongsatorn and
the Centre for Health Informatics, Cumming School of Medicine at
the University of Calgary for their contributions to the process. This
research was supported in part by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) and the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under
the Marie Sklodowska-Curie grant agreement No. 753816.
R EFERENCES
[1] E. Arias, H. Eden, G. Fischer, A. Gorman, and E. Scharff. Transcending the individual human mind—creating shared understanding
through collaborative design. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human
Interaction (TOCHI), 7(1):84–113, 2000.
[2] L. Bannon and P. Ehn. Design matters in participatory design. In
Routledge International Handbook of Participatory Design. Routledge,
2012.

8

© 2020 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in the proceedings of IEEE Visualization
conference. The final version of this record is available at: 10.1109/BELIV51497.2020.00008
[3] R. Beecham, J. Dykes, C. Rooney, and W. Wong. Design Exposition
Discussion Documents for Rich Design Discourse in Applied Visualization. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
pp. 1–1, 2020. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2020.2979433
[4] T. Bergstrom and K. Karahalios. Conversation clock: Visualizing
audio patterns in co-located groups. In 2007 40th Annual Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’07), pp. 78–78.
IEEE, 2007.
[5] A. Bigelow, S. Drucker, D. Fisher, and M. Meyer. Reflections on How
Designers Design with Data. In Proceedings of the 2014 International
Working Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces, AVI ’14, pp. 17–24.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2014. doi: 10.1145/2598153.2598175
[6] M. Bostock, V. Ogievetsky, and J. Heer. D³ data-driven documents. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
17(12):2301–2309, 2011.
[7] T. Bratteteig and I. Wagner. Spaces for participatory creativity. CoDesign, 8(2-3):105–126, 2012.
[8] N. Bressa, K. Wannamaker, H. Korsgaard, W. Willett, and J. Vermeulen.
Sketching and Ideation Activities for Situated Visualization Design. In
Proceedings of the 2019 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference,
DIS ’19, pp. 173–185. Association for Computing Machinery, San
Diego, CA, USA, June 2019. doi: 10.1145/3322276.3322326
[9] R. V. Bullough and S. Pinnegar. Guidelines for Quality in Autobiographical Forms of Self-Study Research. Educational Researcher,
30(3):13–21, Apr. 2001. doi: 10.3102/0013189X030003013
[10] B. Buxton. Sketching User Experiences: Getting the Design Right and
the Right Design. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco,
CA, USA, 2007.
[11] Centre for Health Informatics, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary. The COVID-19 Response: How is Canada doing and what should we be doing next?
2020. Available at:
https://www.chi-csm.ca/ (accessed on September 2, 2020).
[12] H. Chang. Individual and collaborative autoethnography as method.
Handbook of autoethnography, pp. 107–122, 2013.
[13] J. W. Creswell and C. N. Poth. Qualitative inquiry and research design:
Choosing among five approaches. Sage publications, 2016.
[14] M. Duncan. Autoethnography: Critical Appreciation of an Emerging
Art. International Journal of Qualitative Methods, 3(4):28–39, Dec.
2004. doi: 10.1177/160940690400300403
[15] G. Fischer. Social creativity: turning barriers into opportunities for
collaborative design. In Proceedings of the eighth conference on Participatory design: Artful integration: interweaving media, materials
and practices-Volume 1, pp. 152–161, 2004.
[16] S. Goodwin, J. Dykes, S. Jones, I. Dillingham, G. Dove, A. Duffy,
A. Kachkaev, A. Slingsby, and J. Wood. Creative User-Centered Visualization Design for Energy Analysts and Modelers. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 19(12):2516–2525,
Dec. 2013. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2013.145
[17] S. Greenberg, S. Carpendale, N. Marquardt, and B. Buxton. Sketching
User Experiences: The Workbook. Elsevier, 2011.
[18] J. Grudin. Computer-supported cooperative work: History and focus.
Computer, 27(5):19–26, May 1994. doi: 10.1109/2.291294
[19] C. Gutwin and S. Greenberg. Design for individuals, design for groups:
Tradeoffs between power and workspace awareness. In Proceedings
of the 1998 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative
Work, CSCW ’98, pp. 207–216. Association for Computing Machinery,
Seattle, Washington, USA, Nov. 1998. doi: 10.1145/289444.289495
[20] K. W. Hall, A. J. Bradley, U. Hinrichs, S. Huron, J. Wood, C. Collins,
and S. Carpendale. Design by Immersion: A Transdisciplinary Approach to Problem-Driven Visualizations. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 26(1):109–118, Jan. 2020. doi: 10.
1109/TVCG.2019.2934790
[21] J. Heer and M. Agrawala. Design Considerations for Collaborative
Visual Analytics. Information Visualization, 7(1):49–62, Mar. 2008.
doi: 10.1057/palgrave.ivs.9500167
[22] J. Heer, F. van Ham, S. Carpendale, C. Weaver, and P. Isenberg. Creation and Collaboration: Engaging New Audiences for Information
Visualization. In A. Kerren, J. T. Stasko, J.-D. Fekete, and C. North,
eds., Information Visualization: Human-Centered Issues and Perspectives, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 92–133. Springer, Berlin,

Heidelberg, 2008. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-70956-5 5
[23] J. Heer, F. B. Viégas, and M. Wattenberg. Voyagers and voyeurs: Supporting asynchronous collaborative information visualization. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, CHI ’07, pp. 1029–1038. Association for Computing Machinery, San Jose, California, USA, Apr. 2007. doi: 10.1145/1240624.
1240781
[24] O. Hilliges, L. Terrenghi, S. Boring, D. Kim, H. Richter, and A. Butz.
Designing for collaborative creative problem solving. In Proceedings
of the 6th ACM SIGCHI conference on Creativity & cognition, pp.
137–146, 2007.
[25] J. Hullman, N. Diakopoulos, E. Momeni, and E. Adar. Content, Context, and Critique: Commenting on a Data Visualization Blog. In
Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work & Social Computing, CSCW ’15, pp. 1170–1175.
Association for Computing Machinery, Vancouver, BC, Canada, Feb.
2015. doi: 10.1145/2675133.2675207
[26] S. Huron, S. Carpendale, J. Boy, and J.-D. Fekete. Using VisKit:
A Manual for Running a Constructive Visualization Workshop. In
Pedagogy of Data Visualization Workshop at IEEE VIS 2016, Oct.
2016.
[27] IDEO. Method cards: 51 ways to inspire design. Palo Alto, CA, USA,
2003. Available at: https://www.ideo.com/post/method-cards
(accessed on August 7, 2020).
[28] P. Isenberg, N. Elmqvist, J. Scholtz, D. Cernea, K.-L. Ma, and H. Hagen. Collaborative visualization: Definition, challenges, and research
agenda. Information Visualization, 10(4):310–326, Oct. 2011. doi: 10.
1177/1473871611412817
[29] S. Knudsen and K. Hornbæk. PADE: Supporting Collaborative Visual Analysis of Patient Administrative Systems Data with a Large
Touch Display System. In 2019 IEEE Workshop on Visual Analytics in
Healthcare (VAHC), pp. 9–16, Oct. 2019. doi: 10.1109/VAHC47919.
2019.8945039
[30] S. Knudsen, M. R. Jakobsen, and K. Hornbæk. An exploratory study
of how abundant display space may support data analysis. In Proc
NordiCHI, pp. 558–567. ACM, 2012.
[31] L. C. Koh, A. Slingsby, J. Dykes, and T. S. Kam. Developing and
Applying a User-Centered Model for the Design and Implementation of
Information Visualization Tools. In 2011 15th International Conference
on Information Visualisation, pp. 90–95, July 2011. doi: 10.1109/IV.
2011.32
[32] R. Langner, U. Kister, and R. Dachselt. Multiple Coordinated Views
at Large Displays for Multiple Users: Empirical Findings on User
Behavior, Movements, and Distances. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 25(1):608–618, Jan. 2019. doi: 10.
1109/TVCG.2018.2865235
[33] S. M. Laverty. Hermeneutic phenomenology and phenomenology: A
comparison of historical and methodological considerations. International journal of qualitative methods, 2(3):21–35, 2003.
[34] Z. Liu, J. Thompson, A. Wilson, M. Dontcheva, J. Delorey, S. Grigg,
B. Kerr, and J. Stasko. Data illustrator: Augmenting vector design tools
with lazy data binding for expressive visualization authoring. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, CHI ’18, p. 1–13. Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 2018. doi: 10.1145/3173574.3173697
[35] N. Maudet, G. Leiva, M. Beaudouin-Lafon, and W. Mackay. Design
Breakdowns: Designer-Developer Gaps in Representing and Interpreting Interactive Systems. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference
on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing,
CSCW ’17, pp. 630–641. Association for Computing Machinery, Portland, Oregon, USA, Feb. 2017. doi: 10.1145/2998181.2998190
[36] M. Mauri, T. Elli, G. Caviglia, G. Uboldi, and M. Azzi. Rawgraphs:
A visualisation platform to create open outputs. In Proceedings of the
12th Biannual Conference on Italian SIGCHI Chapter, CHItaly ’17.
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2017.
doi: 10.1145/3125571.3125585
[37] N. McCurdy, J. Dykes, and M. Meyer. Action Design Research and
Visualization Design. In Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop on Beyond
Time and Errors on Novel Evaluation Methods for Visualization, BELIV ’16, pp. 10–18. Association for Computing Machinery, Baltimore,

9

© 2020 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in the proceedings of IEEE Visualization
conference. The final version of this record is available at: 10.1109/BELIV51497.2020.00008
MD, USA, Oct. 2016. doi: 10.1145/2993901.2993916
[38] S. McKenna, A. Lex, and M. Meyer. Worksheets for Guiding Novices
through the Visualization Design Process. arXiv:1709.05723 [cs], Sept.
2017.
[39] S. McKenna, D. Mazur, J. Agutter, and M. Meyer. Design Activity
Framework for Visualization Design. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 20(12):2191–2200, Dec. 2014. doi: 10.
1109/TVCG.2014.2346331
[40] M. Meyer and J. Dykes. Reflection on Reflection in Applied Visualization Research. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 38(6):9–16,
Nov. 2018. doi: 10.1109/MCG.2018.2874523
[41] M. Meyer and J. Dykes. Criteria for Rigor in Visualization Design
Study. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
26(1):87–97, Jan. 2020. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2019.2934539
[42] T. Munzner. Visualization Analysis and Design. AK Peters/CRC Press,
2014.
[43] C. Neustaedter and P. Sengers. Autobiographical design in hci research:
designing and learning through use-it-yourself. In Proceedings of the
Designing Interactive Systems Conference, pp. 514–523, 2012.
[44] D. A. Norman and S. W. Draper. User Centered System Design; New
Perspectives on Human-Computer Interaction. L. Erlbaum Associates
Inc., USA, 1986.
[45] H. Obendorf, M. Janneck, and M. Finck. Inter-contextual distributed
participatory design. Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems,
21(1):2, 2009.
[46] D. Ren, B. Lee, and M. Brehmer. Charticulator: Interactive construction of bespoke chart layouts. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, 25(1):789–799, 2019.
[47] N. H. Riche, C. Hurter, N. Diakopoulos, and S. Carpendale. Datadriven storytelling. CRC Press, 2018.
[48] J. C. Roberts, C. Headleand, and P. D. Ritsos. Sketching Designs
Using the Five Design-Sheet Methodology. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, 22(1):419–428, Jan. 2016. doi:
10.1109/TVCG.2015.2467271
[49] S. D. Scott, M. S. T. Carpendale, and K. M. Inkpen. Territoriality
in Collaborative Tabletop Workspaces. In Proc CSCW, pp. 294–303.
ACM, 2004. doi: 10.1145/1031607.1031655
[50] S. D. Scott, K. D. Grant, and R. L. Mandryk. System Guidelines for
Co-located, Collaborative Work on a Tabletop Display. In K. Kuutti,
E. H. Karsten, G. Fitzpatrick, P. Dourish, and K. Schmidt, eds., ECSCW
2003, pp. 159–178. Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht, 2003. doi: 10.
1007/978-94-010-0068-0 9
[51] M. Sedlmair, M. Meyer, and T. Munzner. Design Study Methodology:
Reflections from the Trenches and the Stacks. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, 18(12):2431–2440, Dec. 2012.
doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2012.213
[52] E. Segel and J. Heer. Narrative Visualization: Telling Stories with
Data. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
16(6):1139–1148, Nov. 2010. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2010.179
[53] C. Snyder. Paper Prototyping. Morgan Kaufmann, 1st ed., 2003.
[54] M. Sturdee and J. Lindley. Sketching & Drawing as Future Inquiry in
HCI. In Proceedings of the Halfway to the Future Symposium 2019,
pp. 1–10. ACM, Nottingham United Kingdom, Nov. 2019. doi: 10.
1145/3363384.3363402
[55] S. Tausch, F. Steinberger, and H. Hußmann. Thinking like disney:
Supporting the disney method using ambient feedback based on group
performance. In IFIP Conference on Human-Computer Interaction,
pp. 614–621. Springer, 2015.
[56] A. Thudt, U. Hinrichs, and S. Carpendale. The bohemian bookshelf:
Supporting serendipitous book discoveries through information visualization. In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM Annual Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’12, p. 1461. ACM Press,
Austin, Texas, USA, 2012. doi: 10.1145/2207676.2208607
[57] M. Tobiasz, P. Isenberg, and S. Carpendale. Lark: Coordinating Colocated Collaboration with Information Visualization. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 15(6):1065–1072, Nov.
2009. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2009.162
[58] M. Van Manen. Researching lived experience: Human science for an
action sensitive pedagogy. Routledge, 2016.
[59] F. Vernier, N. Lesh, and C. Shen. Visualization techniques for circular

[60]

[61]

[62]

[63]

[64]

[65]

[66]

10

tabletop interfaces. In Proceedings of the Working Conference on
Advanced Visual Interfaces, AVI ’02, pp. 257–265. Association for
Computing Machinery, Trento, Italy, May 2002. doi: 10.1145/1556262
.1556305
F. B. Viegas, M. Wattenberg, F. van Ham, J. Kriss, and M. McKeon.
ManyEyes: A Site for Visualization at Internet Scale. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 13(6):1121–1128, Nov.
2007. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2007.70577
J. Walny, C. Frisson, M. West, D. Kosminsky, S. Knudsen, S. Carpendale, and W. Willett. Data Changes Everything: Challenges and Opportunities in Data Visualization Design Handoff. IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 26(1):12–22, Jan. 2020. doi:
10.1109/TVCG.2019.2934538
J. Walny, S. Huron, and S. Carpendale. An Exploratory Study of
Data Sketching for Visual Representation. Computer Graphics Forum,
34(3):231–240, 2015. doi: 10.1111/cgf.12635
W. Willett, J. Heer, and M. Agrawala. Strategies for crowdsourcing
social data analysis. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’12, pp. 227–236. Association for Computing Machinery, Austin, Texas, USA, May 2012. doi:
10.1145/2207676.2207709
W. Willett, J. Heer, J. Hellerstein, and M. Agrawala. CommentSpace:
Structured support for collaborative visual analysis. In Proceedings of
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI
’11, pp. 3131–3140. Association for Computing Machinery, Vancouver,
BC, Canada, May 2011. doi: 10.1145/1978942.1979407
T. V. Wolf, J. A. Rode, J. Sussman, and W. A. Kellogg. Dispelling
”design” as the black art of CHI. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’06, p. 521.
ACM Press, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, 2006. doi: 10.1145/1124772.
1124853
L. Yu and J. V. Nickerson. Cooks or cobblers? crowd creativity
through combination. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on
human factors in computing systems, pp. 1393–1402, 2011.

