Data Requests and Scenarios for Data Design of
Unobserved Events in Corona-related Confusion
Using TEEDA
Teruaki Hayashi, Nao Uehara, Daisuke Hase, Yukio Ohsawa
School of Engineering,
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan
hayashi@sys.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp, {nao221997vegas, daisuke00815}@gmail.com, ohsawa@sys.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract—Due to the global violence of the novel coronavirus,
various industries have been affected and the breakdown
between systems has been apparent. To understand and
overcome the phenomenon related to this unprecedented crisis
caused by the coronavirus infectious disease (COVID-19), the
importance of data exchange and sharing across fields has
gained social attention. In this study, we use the interactive
platform called treasuring every encounter of data affairs
(TEEDA) to externalize data requests from data users, which is
a tool to exchange not only the information on data that can be
provided but also the call for data–what data users want and for
what purpose. Further, we analyze the characteristics of missing
data in the corona-related confusion stemming from both the
data requests and the providable data obtained in the workshop.
We also create three scenarios for the data design of unobserved
events focusing on variables.
Keywords—data exchange, data design, scenario, COVID-19,
corona related confusion.

I. INTRODUCTION
Due to the global violence of the novel coronavirus,
various industries have been affected and the breakdown
between systems has been apparent. To understand and
overcome the phenomenon related to this unprecedented crisis
caused by the coronavirus infectious disease (COVID-19), the
importance of data exchange and sharing across fields has
gained social attention. In fact, Johns Hopkins University uses
data from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
World Health Organization, and Chinese authorities to
visualize the spread of COVID-19 and disseminate
information1. In addition, local governments and companies,
such as the Tokyo Metropolitan Government, are making
efforts to disclose data and technology using GitHub 2 .
Moreover, the COVID-19 Data Exchange Initiative3, the pro
bono effort launched against the COVID-19 pandemic, has
applied their respective expertise, experience, and network to
create the largest community of private and public
organizations in support of data exchange.

background of such data acquisition are often unclear, to the
extent that there is insufficient context to grasp the facts and
make appropriate decisions. Regarding COVID-19, Silver
said, “the number of reported COVID-19 cases is not a very
useful indicator of anything unless you also know something
about how tests are being conducted” [1]. He warns against
looking at statistical data without understanding how and why
the data were obtained. Although many international
organizations and companies publish some of their data, the
data we want are kept fully closed. In other words, it is limited
to unilateral information provision from data providers, and
there has been almost no discussion about creating data of
unobserved events and the methodologies for supporting it.
In this study, we use the platform TEEDA (Treasuring
Every Encounter of Data Affairs) [2] to externalize the
information from data users. TEEDA is a tool that is
specifically developed to exchange not only the information
about data that can be provided but also the call for data—
what is wanted by data users, and for what purpose. Using
TEEDA, we collect data items (data requests and providable
data) in the corona-related confusion in the workshop, discuss
the characteristics of missing data, and create three scenarios
for data design of unobserved events focusing on variables.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section 2, we explain the methodology of TEEDA based on
the descriptions of data requests and providable data, as well
as demonstrate the functions of the platform. In Section 3, we
present the experimental details of this study. In Section 4, we
discuss the results obtained from our experiment. Finally, we
conclude the paper in Section 5.
II. TEEDA

However, the new issue arisen in the corona related co
However, the new issue arising in the corona-related
confusion is the discussion to determine what types of data are
missing. Apparently, cross-disciplinary data sharing and
utilization are essential for understanding and controlling
unknown phenomena. For this reason, the data published by
many institutions are attracting attention, but the intention and

With the development of data catalogs and portal sites in
the data exchange ecosystem, such as data marketplaces, data
users have more opportunities to learn about the publications
of data holders or providers [3,4]. In the context of coronarelated confusion, open platforms for sharing data across
crises and organizations, such as the Humanitarian Data
Exchange 4 or the World Bank 5 , collect and publish many
types of data from different domains. However, it is hard to
discover information about what types of data the users want,
and for what purpose, as this type of detail is not often
sufficiently shared. Therefore, data providers are unable to

1

3

2

4

https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html
https://github.com/tokyo-metropolitan-gov/covid19/blob/
development/docs/en/README.md

https://www.covid19-dataexchange.org/
https://data.humdata.org/event/covid-19
5
https://data.worldbank.org/

learn what types of data are required, and there is a risk that
only those data that do not meet the user requests are provided
on the platform. TEEDA facilitates communication and
matching between data holders and users by capturing and
presenting requests for data (call for data) that users desire in
the data exchange ecosystem. The data holders register the
information about the data (metadata), and the data users
provide information about the purpose and structure of the
data in the form of data requests in TEEDA. The collected data
items (the data request and providable data) are processed by
a matching algorithm and visualized to facilitate data
exchange between data holders and users.
Each data request has three description items: data name,
variables, and the purpose of data use. The data name is an
item to express the data that the users want. Examples include
“the rate of self-restraint due to COVID-19” and “behavioral
history of those infected with COVID-19.” The second
description item, variables, is a set of logical data attributes
[5,6]. For example, in the case of meteorological data, “area
name,” “maximum temperature,” “minimum temperature,”
“average temperature,” or “date” are the variables. The third
description item captures an expression of the purpose of data
use. In this study, this item will be useful for understanding
what types of data and variables are needed and for what
purpose in regard to corona-related confusion. As an existing
part of TEEDA, the records of providable data already have
some description items in an element known as the “data
jacket” (DJ). A DJ is a framework for summarizing data
information while keeping the data itself confidential [7]. The
summary information of the data includes explanatory text
about the data. A DJ enables an understanding of the types of
data that exist on different platforms and the information
included in the data, even if the contents of the data cannot be
made public. In the TEEDA format for providable data, we
used data name, data outline, variables, types, formats, and
sharing conditions of data. The sharing condition is the list of
terms and conditions imposed by data providers to exchange
data with, or provide data to, other parties.
We used variables to examine the relationships and
matching possibilities of data requests and providable data,
based on the assumption that the completeness of the variables
is the condition for data users. Therefore, we can represent the
relationships between data requests and providable data in the
network format, where the data items are the nodes and the
links are established when the data items have common
variables. Figure 1 shows the TEEDA interface and the
network of data items input in the experiment (explained in
detail in the next section). The green nodes represent the data
requests, and the orange nodes are the providable data. To
encourage data users and providers to understand the
relationships between their own data items as well as others’,
links are also established between data requests and between
providable data. TEEDA runs on a Web browser, and the input
data items are reflected on the screens of other users in realtime.
TEEDA will automatically highlight neighboring nodes
when browsing the data item details of a clicked node. In
addition, there is an interface between the dashboard and the
toolbox shown on the right side of Fig. 1, where the input data
items and variables are displayed. The network layout can be
changed manually by dragging and dropping.

Fig. 1. TEEDA interface and collected data items (data requests and
providable data) with their relationships.

In this study, we focus on the function of call for data of
TEEDA and externalize the needs for data in corona-related
confusion as data requests. In addition, we analyze the degree
to which data requests are satisfied by comparing with the data
that have been released during corona-related confusion as
providable data. Subsequently, we propose and discuss three
scenarios of data consisting of what types of variables should
be newly designed and acquired.
III. EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
The aim of the experiment was to understand the
characteristics of data requests and providable data in the
corona-related confusion and create scenarios for new data
design of unobserved events focusing on variables. The
experiment involved 14 men and women (students and
professionals) 20 years and older. Initially, they were taught
how to use TEEDA for approximately 15 min. Subsequently,
participants input the information on the data requests and the
providable data about corona-related confusion on TEEDA
for 45 min via discussion with other participants.
According to the specifications of the TEEDA platform,
when data requests are entered, only the description items of
‘data name’ and ‘variables’ are required. The ‘purpose of data
use’ description item is optional. All items are written in
natural language, and there is no upper limit to the number of
words entered. When entering providable data, the data name
and variables are required, and the data outline is optional. As
before, all items are written in natural language with no upper
limit to the word count. There are nine recognized datatypes:
“time series,” “numerical value,” “text,” “table,” “image,”
“graph,” “movie,” “sound,” and “other,”. TEEDA can deal
with nine file formats: “CSV,” “txt,” “RDB,” “markup,”
“RDF,” “weka,” “shape,” “PDF,” and “other.” Users can
select multiple checkboxes for these items because some data
have multiple data types and are provided in several file
formats. By contrast, users select one sharing condition with a
radio button from seven predefined types: “generally
shareable,” “conditions/negotiations are required,” “shareable
within a limited range,” “non-shareable,” “shareable by
purchased,” “not yet decided,” and “other conditions.”

Note that the providable data externalized in the workshop
did not necessarily cover all the available data in coronarelated confusion. Since the experiment was conducted on
June 15th, 2020, it should be noted that the results obtained
and the attributes of some data may have changed after this
paper was published. In addition, the input information about
data in the workshop was written in English and Japanese, and
in the analysis, we unified them into English.
IV. RESULT AND DISCUSSION
A. Characteristics of Data Request and Providable Data
Sixty-one data items—divided approximately evenly into
33 data requests and 28 providable data entries—were input
during the workshop. Tables I and II show examples of data
requests and providable data, respectively. First, we discuss
what types of data and for what purposes they are required in
corona-related confusion. In the data requests, a lot of data are
necessary for understanding the measures to prevent infection
by social distancing or quarantine, such as “Behavioral history
of those infected with COVID-19” and “Measures against
COVID-19 implemented at stores.” In addition, there are
many lifestyle-related data including data for managing
anxiety such as “Coping with anxiety during COVID-19
pandemic by age, sex, and prefecture,” “Changes in the
lifestyle caused by COVID-19,” or “People’s preference
changed after the COVID-19 pandemic.” By contrast, to
recognize the facts, there were the need for new statistical data
for supplementing the published data, such as “Needs of
countries in the world during COVID-19 pandemic” and
“Number of tests in countries around the world.” Typical
purposes of these data were “To analyze the situations of
different countries because it is hard to compare with current
published data.”
Most of the providable data were statistical data on the
attributes of infected persons, such as “Number of COVID-19
cases by country,” or “Number of positive cases in Tokyo
Metropolis (by city).” These data were mainly published by
governments and international institutions. In addition to
statistical data, there were publicly available data for academic
purposes, such as “Image datasets for COVID-19 related
physicians”, as well as survey data provided by the
investigation company, such as “A survey on coping with
anxiety during COVID-19 pandemic” related to staying home
or working from home.

TABLE I.
Item

EXAMPLE OF DATA REQUEST
Content

Data name

Needs of countries in the world during COVID19 pandemic

Variables

Country, needs, product name, service name,
reason, age, age group, address

Purpose of data use

There was hoarding and a toilet paper shortage.
We must clarify what products were really
needed and lacking in practice.

TABLE II.

EXAMPLE OF PROVIDABLE DATA

Item

Content

Data name

Trends in the number of positive cases by date of
confirmation

Variables

Total number of cases, daily number of cases, date

Data outline

Open data provided by the Tokyo Metropolitan
Government. For more accurate analysis of the
trends of new COVID-19 cases, information on
new COVID-19 cases reported from public health
centers was organized by the date of confirmation
by physicians through PCR testing.

Types

Time series, number, table, image

Formats

CSV, others

Sharing conditions

Generally shareable

Figure 2(a) shows a comparison of the providable data
collected using TEEDA in the past and the data in coronarelated confusion by sharing conditions. We used 234 cases
whose sharing conditions are described in the past providable
data. Consequently, the proportion of shareable data provided
in corona-related confusion was about 90%, whereas the ratio
before Corona was only 35%. In other words, a large amount
of ‘generally shareable’ data are externalized as being relevant
to corona-related confusion. It is known that the ratio of
generally shareable data in the data exchange platform is about
50%[8], and institutions and companies may tend to be more
open with their data related to problems with high public
interest, such as corona-related confusion.
By contrast, the comparisons of data types and formats are
shown in Fig. 2(b) and (c). Note that one piece of data can
have multiple types and formats. The ratios of data types are
almost the same for “time series,” “numerical value,” “text,”
“table,” and “image,” but it can be seen that the proportion of
the “graph” under the corona-related confusion is significantly
larger than that before corona. This is because the data related
to this topic are often provided in a graph format so that even
a person who is not a specialist in the data can read it and
understand the trend and the situation of the number of
infected persons. In fact, 13 of the 14 data that have “time
series” also have the data type “graph.” In addition, tabular
data are also an excellent format for reading and comparing as
well as the graph data, and many data on the number of
infected persons by prefectures include the type “table.”
By contrast, regarding data formats, there are many data in
CSV and RDB formats, which easily handle time-series data
in the tabular form, and TXT of the language corpus in the
data before corona. However, for the data since corona, “other”
format is the most frequent with 11 cases. All 11 of the “other”
data are the image format (such as jpeg or png), including
“image” or “graph” for the data types, also peculiar to the
corona situation. Image formats are good at visually
conveying information to the public. By contrast, it seems that
too much emphasis is placed on just communicating the
information because the data that allow secondary use, such
as CSV, are seen less often since the pandemic began. The
data provided in PDF, which is human-friendly but has poor
machine readability, also exists in a certain proportion under
the corona situation, and it is required to provide data in a
format that makes it easy for secondary use.

(a)

: Generally shareable

: Conditions/negotiations
are required

: Shareable by
purchase

: Non-shareable

: Not yet decided

: Other conditions

: Shareable within
a limited range

Providable data under
corona related confusion
(! = 28)
Providable data before
corona related confusion
(! = 234)
0%

(b)

20%

40%

60%

80%

100%

: Time series

: Numerical value

: text

: table

: Image

: Graph

: Movie

: Sound

: Other

Providable data under
corona related confusion
(! = 28)
Providable data before
corona related confusion
(! = 238)
0%

(c)

20%

40%

60%

80%

100%

: CSV

: Txt

: RDB

: Markup

: RDF

: Weka

: Shape

: PDF

: Other

Providable data under
corona related confusion
(! = 28)
Providable data before
corona related confusion
(! = 219)
0%

20%

40%

60%

80%

100%

Fig. 2. Comparisons of providable data under/before corona-related
confusion by (a) sharing conditions, (b) data types, and (c) data formats.

TABLE III.

CHARACTERISTIC VALUES OF DATA REQUESTS AND
PROVIDABLE DATA WITH VARIABLES
All data

Data
request

Providable
data

No. of data items

61

33

28

No. of variables

315

156

159

Types of variables

193

100

113

5.16

4.73

5.68

18

8

18

2

2

2

Average no. of variables in
each data item
Maximum no. of variables
in each data item
Minimum no. of variables
in each data item

Table III presents the details of the input data items. The
types of variables in the providable data were 113, which is
slightly larger than those of data requests. In addition, the
average number of variables is larger at 5.68 in providable
data than that of data requests at 4.73, which varies from 2 to
18. In contrast, the number of data that the data users want to
obtain is as large as 33, but both the average number and the
types of variables are less than those of providable data. These

results suggest that data users may not need the data composed
of many variables and do not require variables as diverse as
the providable data. This is an important point when
considering data design scenarios, and will be discussed in
detail in the next subsection. As for the frequency of variables,
79 of 100 types of variables appear only once in the data
requests and 94 of 113 types of providable data appeared once.
In other words, the frequency of appearance of most variables
is approximately once in both data requests and providable
data. In a previous study, the frequency distributions of the
variables of both data requests and providable data show
power distributions [8]. Although the number of samples in
this experiment is small, it is considered that both data
requests and providable data are composed of a variety of
variables with low frequency.
Next, we compared the details of the types of variables in
the data items that appeared in corona-related confusion.
Figure 2 shows the top-15 variables of (a) all data items, (b)
data requests, and (c) providable data. The variable “date”
appeared the most; while “number”, “prefecture name”, and
“area name” of the patients consistently occupied the top ranks.
When discussing the variables, it is debatable whether to use
well-defined schemata or natural language concepts. Studies
on ontology matching [9,10] or ontology-based data access
[11,12] have defined schemata for heterogeneous data
integration. Because corona-related confusion is an
unprecedented crisis, the types of data that are providable or
needed remain unclear. To allow diverse data with a variety of
variables to understand and make decisions during the crisis,
although “address” and “location” are almost synonymous, in
this study, we did not unify the notation fluctuation of
variables.
As we explained, most of the providable data were
statistical data concerning the attributes of infected persons
(patient’s place of residence, city name, the degree of
seriousness) along with other variables, such as the number of
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests or the event names,
which are orderable in a time series by the inclusion of the
variable “date.” By contrast, some data such as “Image
datasets for COVID-19 related physicians” and “A survey on
coping with anxiety during COVID-19 pandemic” do not have
“date”, and are unique compared with other providable data.
In the data requests, “area name” and “address” whose
granularities are higher than “prefecture name” or “city name”
appeared frequently, which are not included in the statistical
data in the providable data. These variables are included in the
data such as “Measures against COVID-19 implemented at
stores” and “Number of cases by hospital in Japan”, and the
reasons why these data were required are “To use them as best
practices.” The rate of infection to the number of healthcare
workers is investigated to identify the risk of overwhelming
hospitals,” which were desired for grasping the current
situation of the corona and taking measures. By contrast, not
only the high granularity variables such as “address” or “area
name” but also it is interesting that there is a large-meshed
variable such as “country name.” As described above, it is a
central variable for accurately understanding the global
situation of COVID-19 rather than individual decision making.
Furthermore, looking at the breakdown of the types of
variables, there were only 20 types of variables common
between data requests and providable data. This result means
that the providable data do not contain enough variables for
the data that users want to obtain. It can be said that there is a
big mismatch here.

(a) 25

ate
D
N

A

um
be
ro

fp

eo

re ple
an
am
e
Co
Ev
u
N ntr e nt
um y
b na
Pr er o me
f
ef
ec c as
tu
es
D re n
ate a m
an e
d
ti m
A e
dd
re
ss
A
ge
Se
x
Ti
Po m
pu e
lat
io
n
N
ee
Re d
as
on

20
15
10
5
0

B. What kinds of data should we design?
The results in the last subsection suggest that although the
data provided under the corona-related confusion are varied in
the types of variables, there are relatively few data that satisfy
the data requests, leading to a mismatch. What types of data
need to be newly designed and obtained in corona-related
confusion? There are various purposes for using data in data
requests, and we categorized them into the following three
types:
l Phenomenon understanding: for verifying the facts that
have affected society, such as business or medical
fields

(b) 25

l Individual decision-making: to obtain evidence for
making decisions in one’s life, such as going out or
staying home

A

D

ate
r
Co ea n
un a m
try e
na
N
um A me
be dd
r o res
fp s
eo
pl
e
A
ge
N
um
be
r o Sex
f
O c as
cc
es
D upa
ate
tio
n
a
S e nd t
i
rv
ic me
Pr e n
od am
uc
e
tn
am
e
N
ee
d
Pe
rio
Re d
as
on

20
15
10
5
0

(c) 25
20
15
10
5
0
fp

D

ate

eo
pl
Pr
e
ef
E
ec
ve
tu
n
t
r
To e n
ta am
ln
e
um
Pr be
ef r
ec
tu
re
D
Ci
a
ty y
na
m
e
Ti
N
um Po me
be pul
r o at i
f i on
nf
ec
t
La ed
tit
Lo ude
ng
i tu
de
N
um
be Ar
r o ea
fc
as
es

Table IV shows the number of categorized data requests
with examples. We analyzed the types of variables in each
category and discussed possible scenarios for data acquisition.

um
be
ro
N

l Organizational decision-making: for learning the
social demands and changes in the post-corona society
and formulating business and organizational
guidelines

Fig. 3. The top 15 variables (a) in the data requests and providable data, (b)
in the data requests, and (c) in the providable data.

TABLE IV.

Category

Phenomenon
Understanding

Individual
decision-making

Organizational
decision-making

NUMBER OF CATEGORIZED DATA REQUESTS WITH
EXAMPLES
# of data
requests

15

Examples
• Needs of countries in the world
during COVID-19 pandemic
• Number of tests in countries
around the world
• Business status impacted by
COVID-19
• MeSH population by time of day

7

• Recommended frequency of going
out
• Data on the number of contacts
• Behavioral history of those
infected with COVID-19
• Travel records of infected persons

11

• Impact of the postponement of the
2020 Olympics on society
• The rate of self-restraint due to
COVID-19
• Coping with anxiety during
COVID-19 pandemic by age, sex,
and prefecture
• People’s preference changed after
the COVID-19 pandemic

1) Scenario 1 (Phenomenon understanding)
Fifteen data requests are categorized as “phenomenon
understanding,” which was the most numerous compared with
the other two categories. The variables “country names (6
times),” “area names (4 times),” and “date (4 times)” appeared
frequently, and the requests contained both the detailed and
global variables lacking in the data provided by local
governments and institutions. In particular, many variables for
understanding what types of needs from which ages in coronarelated confusion have received much attention. In
understanding the phenomena, it is better to acquire the data
with missing variables included in the data requests, using
“date,” “area name,” and “address.” In addition, although we
understood that many companies were affected by the
COVID-19 pandemic, there are few data on the types of
companies in which industries were affected. It is considered
important to collect data to understand the kinds of impacts
with the variables “area name,” “type of business.”
2) Scenario 2 (Individual decision-making)
There are seven data requests related to “individual
decision-making,” least numerous compared with the other
two categories. Among the variables, “date (3 times)” is the
most common, “address (twice)” is the second most common,
and all others appeared only once, with the ratio of variables
that appear only once being the highest among the three
categories. Variables such as “recommended frequency of
going out,” “acceptance of COVID-19 patients,” “item people
touch,” and “number of people touching it per day” are the
unique events that have not been observed yet. It is difficult to
extract common interests because of the diversity of needs in
individual decision-making, but there seems to be a need to
obtain data that are deeply related to our lives, such as the data
on the number of contacts or the infected information in the
area where we live.
3) Scenario 3 (Organizational decision-making)
In the decision-making of the organization, “sex (4 times),”
“age (4 times),” “area name (3 times),” and “date (3 times)”
appeared frequently. Based on these common variables, there
are the data including variables to try to change their business

policies such as “increased activity due to self-restraint,”
“whether to continue it or not after self-restraint life,” and the
variables to create new businesses such as “type of anxiety”
or “consultation content.” For companies and institutions to
adapt to social changes in people’s lives in the wake of the
corona pandemic, we consider there to be a need for extended
statistical questionnaire data beyond that, which has not been
widely provided yet.
Although there were differences in the types of variables
required for each category, it can be said that “date” is the
central variable in the data design of unobserved events in all
categories. In particular, “date” plays an important role not
only as statistical data but also as it captures people’s interests
and business conditions that change from moment to moment
in corona-related confusion. Moreover, it is notable that the
number of variables in each data request are few and it
suggests that users want the data with just those variables
specialized to their own interests, which is hardly included in
the providable data. In addition, from the analysis of
providable data, it can be said that data formats that are not
only human-friendly, such as PDF or images, but also
machine-readable and easy for secondary use, such as CSV or
JSON, are strongly required.
V. CONCLUSION
A. Summary
In this study, to discuss the data design of unobserved
events in corona-related confusion, we used TEEDA to
externalize the information about data items from data users
and data providers and analyzed their characteristics. Via
experiments, we found different structures across data
requests and providable data and the large mismatch between
them. Based on the discussion, we created three possible
scenarios for data design, focusing on variables in data
requests divided into three categories: phenomenon
understanding,
individual
decision-making,
and
organizational decision-making. In our future work, we will
obtain data according to these scenarios and verify via
demonstration experiments whether the results meet the needs
of data users in the society.
B. Future Work
In this study, we obtained data requests and providable
data from the participants in the form of the workshop, but it
was not possible to cover all the available data provided in the
actual corona pandemic. There are more data and various
variables in the world. To find out more information about
providable data, it is important to collect them differently and
discuss their characteristics.
Moreover, from the viewpoint of data design, the variables
contained in data other than corona-related data are also
considered useful. Variable Quest (VQ) is an algorithm with

the knowledge base for estimating sets of variables of
unknown events from data outlines [13]. Using the knowledge
base of VQ for external information about data and variables,
it may be possible to construct data for unobserved events. In
addition, since major file exchange formats such as JSON
were not yet supported by TEEDA, these specification
changes are possible considerations for the future.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This study was supported by JSPS KAKENHI
(JP20H02384), the “Startup Research Program for PostCorona Society” of Academic Strategy Office, School of
Engineering, the University of Tokyo, and the Artificial
Intelligence Research Promotion Foundation. We wish to
thank Editage (www.editage.jp) for providing English
language editing.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]
[6]
[7]

[8]

[9]
[10]
[11]

[12]

[13]

N. Silver, “Coronavirus Case Counts Are Meaningless,”
FiveThirtyEight, https://fivethirtyeight.com/features/coronavirus-casecounts-are-meaningless/ (last access: 13th August, 2020), 2020.
T. Hayashi and Y. Ohsawa, “TEEDA: An Interactive Platform for
Matching Data Providers and Users in the Data Marketplace,”
Information, 11(4), 218, 2020.
F. Stahl, F. Schomm, and G. Vossen, ‘‘Data marketplaces: An
emerging species,’’ in Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and
Applications, IOS Press, pp.145–158, 2014.
F. Liang, W. Yu, D. An, Q. Yang, X. Fu, and W. Zhao, “A survey on
big data market: Pricing, trading and protection,” IEEE Access, Vol.6,
pp.15132–15154, 2018.
E.R. Babbie, The basics of social research (7th Edition), Cengage
Learning, 2016.
G. Ridder and R. Moffitt, “The econometrics of data combination,”
Handbook of Econometrics, Vol.6, pp.5469–5547, 2007.
Y. Ohsawa, H. Kido, T. Hayashi, and C. Liu, “Data Jackets for
Synthesizing Values in the Market of Data,” 17th International
Conference in Knowledge Based and Intelligent Information and
Engineering Systems, Procedia Computer Science, Vol.22, pp.709–
716, 2013.
T. Hayashi, Y. Ohsawa, “Understanding the Structural Characteristics
of Data Platforms Using Metadata and a Network Approach,” IEEE
Access, Vol.8, pp.35469–35481, 2020.
L. Zhao, and R. Ichise, “Ontology Integration for Linked Data,”
Journal on Data Semantics, Vol.3, No.4, pp.237–254, 2014.
J. Euzenat, and P. Shvaiko, “Ontology Matching,” Springer, 2007.
A. Poggi, D. Lembo, D. Calvanese, G. De Giacomo, M. Lenzerini, R.
Rosati, “Linking data to ontologies,” Journal on Data Semantics X,
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol.4900, Springer, 2008.
C. Nikolaou, C.B. Grau, V.E. Kostylev, M. Kaminski, I. Horrocks,
“Satisfaction and implication of integrity constraints in ontology-based
data access,” the 28th International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, pp.1829–1835, 2019.
T. Hayashi and Y. Ohsawa, “VARIABLE QUEST: Network
Visualization of Variable Labels Unifying Co-occurrence Graphs,”
International Conference on Data Mining Workshops, pp. 577–583,
2017.

