Understanding the Spatio-temporal Topic Dynamics
of Covid-19 using Nonnegative Tensor
Factorization: A Case Study
Thirunavukarasu Balasubramaniam, Richi Nayak, Md Abul Bashar

arXiv:2009.09253v1 [cs.SI] 19 Sep 2020

Centre for Data Science, School of Computer Science
Queensland University of Technology
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia
{thirunavukarasu.balas, r.nayak, m1.bashar}@qut.edu.au

Abstract—Social media platforms facilitate mankind a datadriven world by enabling billions of people to share their
thoughts and activities ubiquitously. This huge collection of data,
if analysed properly, can provide useful insights into people’s
behavior. More than ever, now is a crucial time under the
Covid-19 pandemic to understand people’s online behaviors
detailing what topics are being discussed, and where (space)
and when (time) they are discussed. Given the high complexity
and poor quality of the huge social media data, an effective
spatio-temporal topic detection method is needed. This paper
proposes a tensor-based representation of social media data and
Non-negative Tensor Factorization (NTF) to identify the topics
discussed in social media data along with the spatio-temporal
topic dynamics. A case study on Covid-19 related tweets from
the Australia Twittersphere is presented to identify and visualize
spatio-temporal topic dynamics on Covid-19.
Index Terms—Covid-19, Social media analysis, Topic modelling, Nonnegative Tensor Factorization, Spatio-temporal pattern
mining

I. I NTRODUCTION
The Covid-19 pandemic in 2020 has brought a never seen
challenge to humankind and has impacted our lives drastically.
It has changed the way we live and interact with each
other. With physical distancing and isolation, social media
has become a common portal for communication. The recent
statistics show that there has been a 30% to 45% increase in
social media consumption during this period1 . Understanding
peoples behavior during this pandemic will become a basis for
many social and economical studies.
The data generated in social media platforms like Twitter
are text-based contents (tweets) and they are usually associated
with space (location) and time. The topic modeling on the
tweets can help identify emerging topics in the tweets, while
space and time information can reveal the spatial and temporal
dynamics of those topics [1]. Identifying these saptio-temporal
topic dynamics, that highlights peoples mindset, is beneficial
to policymakers. It allows them to take necessary actions for
the well-being of people.
1 https://blog.twitter.com/en us/topics/company/2020/An-update-on-ourcontinuity-strategy-during-Covid-19.html

Social media data includes unstructured phrases that result
in a huge variance in traditional text vocabulary. Traditional
topic modelling methods such as Latent Dirichlet Allocation
(LDA) [2] are challenged with short text data and face
sparsity and low word co-occurrence issues. Factorization
methods like Non-negative Matrix Factorization (NMF) [3]
map the high-dimensional (sparse) text representation to a
lower-dimensional representation. These methods have become popular in text mining due to their capability to capture
the patterns in the lower dimensional representation of the
data [4]. NMF decomposes a high-dimensional (tweet × term)
matrix into two low-rank factor matrices that represent tweet
and term clusters. It produces a part-based representation by
allowing only additive combinations of basis components [4].
Non-negative Tensor Factorization (NTF) [5], an extension
of NMF for high-dimensional data, can identify associations
among multiple dimensions [6]. This brings an added advantage to NTF over NMF as the patterns can be interpreted with
associations. NTF based methods have been used for spatiotemporal patterns elicitation on traditional (i.e. structured)
data. NTF for spatio-temporal pattern elicitation on social
media (i.e. unstructured) data brings multiple challenges.
Firstly, representing this unstructured text data and spatiotemporal information in a single tensor representation model
is challenging when there is a need to preserve the association
among them. Secondly, the short texts from social media like
Twitter can induce sparseness to the tensor representation. The
state-of-the-art factorization algorithms may fail to effectively
learn the spatio-temporal patterns in the presence of noise
and sparsity present in social media data [7], [8]. Finally, the
larger data size introduces efficiency issues in factorization
process [9]. Therefore, a proper data representation and selection of a suitable factorization algorithm is crucial to deal
with social media data.
In this paper, we present a novel NTF based spatio-temporal
topic dynamics discovery method. We focus on applying the
best-suited data representation model and the factorization
algorithm to understand the spatio-temporal distribution of topics emerging from users’ interactions on social media related
to Covid-19. We present a case study analysing a large tweet

collection of the Australian Twittersphere2 containing certain
keywords relating to Covid-19. Extensive insights explaining
the spatio-temporal topic dynamics around Covid-19 have
been identified. To our best of knowledge, for the first time,
this paper demonstrates the capability of NTF in discovering
the spatio-temporal topic dynamics in social media.
II. R ELATED WORK
The massive amounts of data are generated by users in social
media platforms nowadays and mining it for insights can bring
many advantages in many domains [10]. For instance, authors
in [11] attempted to detect influenza outbreak by analyzing
500,000 Twitter messages. It is based on a predictive model
that classifies the Twitter messages with flu-related terms
like fever, cough, and sore throat to a potential influenza
discussion. In a recent study [12] related to Covid-19, the
social media data from Sina-Weibo which is Twitter-like short
text was analyzed using the LDA, a topic modeling technique
by which the common topics in the texts were identified. These
kinds of insights are timely and can help the government
and emergency authorities to act effectively, and are socially
important. In addition to the topics, the identification of spatiotemporal patterns is also vital to get a broader understanding
of the topics.
Spatial and temporal pattern mining is a much studied
research area and there exist multiple factorization based
techniques [13]–[16]. NMF has been extensively used to
understand the spatial or temporal patterns independently. In
[13], the location-time information of taxi trips is represented
in a matrix and NMF is used to discover the spatio-temporal
patterns. With a similar representation, authors in [14] applied
NMF to identify the traffic patterns from the road-network
data. While all of these techniques are capable of extracting
spatial or temporal patterns existing in the data, similar to
LDA, they can not associate the spatial and temporal patterns concurrently with the additional dimension like users
or drivers. This is due to the matrix representation capability
which supports a two-dimensional association only.
NTF based methods can represent the associations between
spatial and temporal patterns due to the NTF’s ability to
represent the multi-dimensional data with multi-dimensional
associations preserved. In [15], the Tokyo city mobility data
is represented as a tensor form (region × day × time) and NTF
is used to understand the mobility patterns involving spatial
and temporal behaviors. In [17], a structurally regularized
NTF is proposed for spatio-temporal pattern discoveries in
the traffic flow data. In another work, a modified NTF with
sparsity constraint is proposed for the extraction of spatiotemporal patterns with reduced noise [16]. Recently, tensor
modelling with NTF was proposed to extract spatio-temporal
patterns of Singapore’s elderly people using the multi-context
data collected using sensors [9].
While NTF has been used in many applications generating
spatio-temporal patterns in the last 5 years, it has rarely been
2 Location of author or tweet or a location mentioned in the tweet is
Australia or any of its cities

(a) term × location
matrix

(b) term × time matrix

Fig. 1: (a) term × location, and (b) term × time matrix
representation of tweets; 0 indicates the absence of term and
non-zero entries indicate the frequency of the term.

used to generate topics based on spatio-temporal patterns from
social media data. This is mainly because of three challenges.
1) Representation of text data along with spatio-temporal
information in the tensor model. 2) The NTF on sparse data
tends to produce patterns with a simultaneous elimination
problem (inability to avoid learning repetitive patterns) [16].
3) The social media data is a huge collection and NTF is
computationally expensive due to multiple complex matrices
and tensor products involved.
As the spatio-temporal topic dynamics of social media is
itself a fairly new research area [18], and the development
of NTF for spatio-temporal pattern mining is also emerging,
this paper is a first attempt to bridge this gap. This paper
proposes a novel method based on a tensor representation of
social media data and solving it using NTF for understanding
spatio-temporal topic dynamics.
III. NTF BASED SPATIO - TEMPORAL TOPIC DISCOVERY
The proposed NTF based spatio-temporal topic dynamics
discovery method consists of the following three components:
1) Data representation, 2) Non-negative Tensor Factorization,
and 3) Spatio-temporal topic dynamics.
A. Data representation
The social media exhibit the data in multifaceted nature [19]. Each tweet (collection of terms) is associated with
additional contexts like time of the tweet and location of the
user. Therefore, a total of three attributes, terms, time, and
location has to be simultaneously analyzed for identifying
common patterns.
Existing Data Models: Matrix representation
The existing methods represent this information in a matrix
form, e.g., (term × location) and (term × time) matrices. Fig. 1
shows a toy example with 6 unique terms representing a set of
tweets, associated with 3 unique locations and 3 unique time
slots. The time can be set depending on the type of analysis
conducted, such as day, week, and year.
From the matrix representation, as shown in Fig. 1, the
spatial and temporal patterns can be learned using NMF. While
this kind of pattern mining is the state-of-the-art [13]–[16], it
does have a disadvantage of losing association among location

and time dimensions. For example, the spatial patterns learned
from Fig. 1a can help to devise the collection of common
terms used in specific locations, however, it fails to learn the
associations such as how the collection of terms are used in
different locations for a different time. This is due to the
independent handling of location and time under two different
matrix representations. A high-dimensional representation of
this data is essential to identify patterns with the capability of
learning the associations among all the modes or dimensions
(term, location, and time).
In pandemic situations like Covid-19, it is useful to learn
the dependencies of the spatial and temporal patterns. For
instance, a specific temporal pattern may be noticed only in
a specific country (i.e. location) and not necessarily noticed
in all the countries as a common pattern. Therefore, learning
the association within the time and location is important.
Consider a real example. During the early days of the Covid19 outbreak, conversations revolve around China, a single
location. However, this has changed over time. Currently, it is
widespread and each country is having a different time period
of Covid-19 peak. Therefore, patterns highlighting the proper
association of time and location will only be useful.
Proposed Tensor based data model
To address this, we propose to use the tensor model to
represent multiple dimensions inherent with social media data.
Tensor is an extension of vector to present higher-order data
that describes the elements of the multi-linear space. We
present a three-dimensional tensor model to record the term,
location, and time in a single representation by preserving the
association among them.
Let U = {u1 , u2 , ..., uM }, L = {l1 , l2 , ..., lN } and T =
{t1 , t2 , ..., tO } be the set of unique terms, locations and time
periods in the tweets collection, respectively. Consider term
4 from Fig. 1 that is associated with locations 1, 2 and
times 2, 3. In the matrix representation, it is unclear that
at what time, term 4 associated with location 1. Suppose,
term 4 is associated with locations 1 and 2 at time period
2, this can be captured using a tensor model as, X 4,1,2 =
(u4 , l1 , t2 ) and X 4,2,2 = (u4 , l2 , t2 ), where X is the tensor
of size R(M ×N ×O) . Instead of representing the data with two
independent matrices as in Fig. 1, we represent the data with
a single multidimensional tensor representation.
B. Non-negative Tensor Factorization
Once the data is represented as a tensor model, the spatiotemporal topic dynamics can be learned using NTF. Factorization, a dimensionality reduction technique, is the process of
decomposing the high-dimensional data into factor matrices
learning the dependencies within the data.
Candecomp/Parafac (CP) [20] factorization decomposes the
tensor into multiple rank-1 tensors.
The CP factorization can be defined as,
X ∼
= JU, L, TK =

R
X
r=1

ur ◦ lr ◦ tr ,

(1)

where U ∈ R(M ×R) , L ∈ R(N ×R) and T ∈ R(O×R) are
factor matrices with R hidden features (rank), R ∈ Z+ . ur ,
lr and tr are the rth column of U, L and T respectively.
Unlike Tucker factorization, the CP factorization should have
the same number of rank value for all the factor matrices.
The optimization minimization problem of CP factorization
can be defined as,
2

f (U, L, T) = kX − JU, L, TKk ,
(M ×R)

(N ×R)

(2)
(O×R)

where U ∈ R
, L ∈ R
and T ∈ R
are
factor matrices with R hidden features (rank), R ∈ Z+ . ur , lr
and tr are the rth column of U, L and T respectively.
It has been shown that introducing non-negative constraints
on factor matrices will improve the accuracy of the approximation of matrix and tensor [3]. The optimization minimization
function of CP-based NTF can be defined based on (2) as,
2

f (U, L, T) = kX − JU, L, TKk , s.t., U ≥ 0, L ≥ 0, T ≥ 0.
(3)
The next task is to solve the given optimization minimization problem using a factorization algorithm. Since Eq. (3)
is a non-convex optimization, the Alternating Least Squares
(ALS) algorithm which solves the one-factor matrix by fixing the other factor matrix is ideal [21]. However, due to
its poor convergence speed and high memory requirement,
Coordinate Descent (CD) based algorithms are proposed as
alternatives [22]. Moreover, the usage of existing factorization
algorithms like ALS is not ideal for the sparse and multidimensional social media data as they are prone to generate
denser factor matrices that include noise. This can negatively
affect the quality of patterns learned from the sparse input.
Unlike other factorization algorithms, a recent CDbased factorization algorithm, Saturating Coordinate Descent
(SaCD) [23] is capable of learning the factor matrices with
minimal noise, and hence the quality of patterns is relatively
higher. SaCD is formulated in such a way that it can solve
the NTF optimization problem efficiently for the social media
data that is large in size and sparser in representation.
C. Spatio-temporal topic dynamics using NTF
The factorization process using SaCD factorizes the input
tensor X into factor matrices U, L, and T. Each factor matrix
represents the lower-dimensional representation of a mode
(i.e., term/location/time) of X . Each column in a factor matrix
represents a feature/component as shown in Fig. 2. The features are learned such that they reveal the latent relationships in
the data and the values present in the feature show the strength
of each mode’s membership towards that feature [4]. The rank
value (R) assigned during factorization determines the number
of features and each feature learns different relationships. For
example, the factor matrix representing the time mode (T)
consists of columns/features that represent the relationships of
each hour concerning the terms and locations. For each hour,
a distinct relationship is possible. Hence, each of them can be
considered a temporal pattern.
While the features of location and time modes represent the
spatial and temporal patterns respectively, the features of the

Fig. 2: Spatio-temporal patterns of topics using NTF output.
Each column in a factor matrix represents a pattern.

spanning a timeline of 133 days. Tweets are associated with
multiple attributes and to understand spatio-temporal dynamics
for each tweet, the respective user location and time are
collected. The tweets with non-English languages and stopwords are removed for a better understanding of the output.
The location of the user consists of many non-location entities
and the proper location name is extracted using Named Entity
Recognition (NER) [24]. For the tweets that do not have user
location information, the tweets are searched for any location
entity within them to populate missing locations.
Using the unique values, a tensor of size (15637 terms ×
1568 locations × 133 days) is populated with the count of a
term’s appearance at a given location at a given time. A rank
R = 10 has been set to identify 10 spatio-temporal patterns
of 10 topics. Setting a R value higher >10 gives repetitive
patterns and lower <10 misses the distinctive patterns.
B. Spatio-temporal patterns: NMF vs NTF

term mode represent the topics. The topics are differentiated
based on the values assigned to the terms. In each topic, a
different set of terms will appear with high weights, which
states that those terms are representative of the topic. For the
example given in Fig. 2, the representative terms are help,
need, govern, school, time, day, close. This gives insights on
a topic. For example, this topic in Fig. 2 is about the closer of
schools and the need for government support. Similarly, the
spatial and temporal patterns are differentiated based on the
weight each location and time is assigned for each column.
In the same example, the selected column from the temporal
factor matrix T has the high weights towards the end. And,
the Australian cities like Sydney and Brisbane have a high
weight as shown in the same column of location factor matrix
L. It shows that the popularity of the topic is high in these
cities at the given temporal pattern.
An important aspect that brings the advantage to NTF over
NMF is the formation of rank-1 tensors as shown in Fig. 2.
Each rank-1 tensor is a collection of the same rank features
of all the modes; and the linear combination of these rank1 tensors for all the rank is the approximation of the input
tensor. This formation of rank-1 tensors makes the factorization algorithm to learn the features to be associated with
each other. For example, the rank-1 tensor of rth feature/rank
will associate the rth feature of all modes and hence they
collectively represent the rth feature of the input. Therefore,
the spatio-temporal patterns from location and time mode can
be associated with topics from term mode.
IV. C ASE S TUDY
A. Dataset
The dataset used in this case study on Covid-19 consists
of 2.7 million tweets (tweets that contains at least one
of the following keywords: coronavirus, covid19, covid-19,
covid 19, coronovirusoutbreak, covid2019, covid, and coronaoutbreak) from Australian Twitter users that is collected
from the start of Covid-19 (November 27th , 2019) to April 7th ,

Suppose NMF was used to extract the spatio-temporal
patterns of topics identified from this dataset. Two matrices
(M1 and M2) need to be created, one representing (term ×
time) and another representing (term × location) information.
Applying NMF, temporal patterns of topics are learned from
M1 (Fig. 3a) and spatial patterns of topics are learned
from M2 (Fig. 3b). The spatial patterns within Australia are
presented in Fig. 3c.
On the other hand, the same data can be represented as a
single tensor (term × time × location) and the spatio-temporal
patterns can be learned simultaneously from it. Fig. 4 shows
the spatio-temporal patterns of topics learned using NTF.
The advantages of NTF over NMF can be seen by trying
to interpret these two figures. For instance, the black topic
(Topic 10) seen in Fig. 3a is the earliest temporal pattern.
However, it cannot be interpreted from Fig. 3b which are
the locations associated with this pattern. This is because the
spatial patterns are not learned in association with temporal
patterns. Instead, they are learned independently along with
the terms represented in two different matrices.
In summary, NMF on M1 and M2 can learn the topics
and its associated temporal and spatial patterns respectively,
but not the both. Whereas, the spatio-temporal patterns learned
from NTF can be associated. For example, the yellow topic
(Topic 7) in Fig. 4a is the earliest temporal pattern identified
and they can be associated with the yellow spots in Figs. 4b
and 4c. Next, we will indulge in discussing the topics and
patterns learned using NTF in detail.
C. Patterns identified by NTF
Fig. 4 highlights the following insights:
1) People in Australia did not tweet much for the first 60
days (until Jan 4th week) from the first known case of
Covid-19.
2) Topic 7 (yellow color) is the first pattern that has been
found in the early days. All other patterns approximately
get started only from the 90th day (Feb 4th week).

3) The active period is from the 100th day to 120th day
(the month of March) and then it gets less intense.
4) Topic 3 has seen only one high peak approximately on
the 105th day (March 2nd week).
All the topics and their spatial patterns are shown in Fig. 4b.
Some interesting observations are: 1) Topic 9 (brown) is more
spread across the world (Australian Twitter users tweeting
from these locations) when compared to other topics. 2) Some
countries in Africa shows only the Topic 7 (yellow) pattern.
Based on Fig. 4a, Topics 3, 6, 7, and 10 can be identified as
highly deviated ones or very popular ones for a short period of
time. Similarly, Fig. 4c shows some interesting spatial patterns
like the green color (Topic 2) that is referring to a port on the
western coast of Australia. So it could be linking to cruises that
were one of the main Covid-19 clusters in Australia. While the
main Australian cities like Sydney and Melbourne are showing
many topics, a few topics are popular in other regional areas.
Therefore, it is worth relating all these ten topics concerning
spatial and temporal patterns and it is shown in Figs. 5 to 14.
Figs. 5a to 14a shows the spatial patterns of 10 topics with
each pattern showing a distinctive patterns within Australia.
By relating the topics (Figs. 5c to 14c) with the spatial (5a to
14a) and the temporal (5b to 14b) patterns, more interesting
insights can be identified.
The main advantage of NTF is its ability to represent the
associations among the modes. While existing techniques can
elicit spatial or temporal patterns individually, they cannot
preserve the association. Whereas in NTF, it is possible to
associate the patterns. For example, in Topic 3, the sudden
peak in the temporal pattern as shown in Fig. 4a can be directly
associated with the locations marked in Figs. 4b and 4c.
V. C ONCLUSION
Understanding the spatio-temporal topic dynamics from
social media can be helpful to make some decisions for
governments or organizations. Especially with the Covid-19
crisis, a better understanding of people’s behavior can help
to take action by quickly grasping the people’s expectations.
Those actions can be very important like controlling panic
buying, providing more medical and healthcare facilities, or
focused attention on certain locations. The social media data
representation and NTF based spatio-temporal topic dynamics
extraction as proposed in this paper can bring a more sophisticated understanding of people concerning their space and time.
This elicitation of patterns reduces much workload for users
and highlights the associations automatically that are otherwise
very difficult to identify by human observations.
R EFERENCES
[1] A. Saha and V. Sindhwani, “Learning evolving and emerging topics in
social media: a dynamic nmf approach with temporal regularization,” in
Proceedings of the fifth ACM international conference on Web search
and data mining, 2012, pp. 693–702.
[2] D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan, “Latent dirichlet allocation,”
Journal of machine Learning research, vol. 3, no. Jan, pp. 993–1022,
2003.

[3] M. W. Berry, M. Browne, A. N. Langville, V. P. Pauca, and R. J.
Plemmons, “Algorithms and applications for approximate nonnegative
matrix factorization,” Computational statistics & data analysis, vol. 52,
no. 1, pp. 155–173, 2007.
[4] D. D. Lee and H. S. Seung, “Learning the parts of objects by nonnegative matrix factorization,” Nature, vol. 401, no. 6755, p. 788, 1999.
[5] T. G. Kolda and B. W. Bader, “Tensor decompositions and applications,”
SIAM review, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 455–500, 2009.
[6] L. Sun and K. W. Axhausen, “Understanding urban mobility patterns
with a probabilistic tensor factorization framework,” Transportation
Research Part B: Methodological, vol. 91, pp. 511–524, 2016.
[7] Y. Oktar and M. Turkan, “A review of sparsity-based clustering methods,” Signal Processing, vol. 148, pp. 20–30, 2018.
[8] T. Balasubramaniam, R. Nayak, and C. Yuen, “Nonnegative coupled
matrix tensor factorization for smart city spatiotemporal pattern mining,”
in Machine Learning, Optimization, and Data Science. Cham: Springer
International Publishing, 2019, pp. 520–532.
[9] T. Balasubramaniam, R. Nayak, C. Yuen, and Y.-C. Tian, “Columnwise element selection for computationally efficient nonnegative coupled
matrix tensor factorization,” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data
Engineering, 2020.
[10] P. Gundecha and H. Liu, “Mining social media: a brief introduction,” in
New Directions in Informatics, Optimization, Logistics, and Production.
Informs, 2012, pp. 1–17.
[11] A. Culotta, “Towards detecting influenza epidemics by analyzing twitter messages,” in Proceedings of the first workshop on social media
analytics, 2010, pp. 115–122.
[12] X. Han, J. Wang, M. Zhang, and X. Wang, “Using social media to mine
and analyze public opinion related to covid-19 in china,” International
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, vol. 17, no. 8,
p. 2788, 2020.
[13] Y. Gao, J. Liu, Y. Xu, L. Mu, and Y. Liu, “A spatiotemporal constraint
non-negative matrix factorization model to discover intra-urban mobility
patterns from taxi trips,” Sustainability, vol. 11, no. 15, p. 4214, 2019.
[14] X. Ma, Y. Li, and P. Chen, “Identifying spatiotemporal traffic patterns
in large-scale urban road networks using a modified nonnegative matrix
factorization algorithm,” Journal of Traffic and Transportation Engineering (English Edition), 2018.
[15] Z. Fan, X. Song, and R. Shibasaki, “Cityspectrum: a non-negative tensor
factorization approach,” in International Joint Conference on Pervasive
and Ubiquitous Computing. ACM, 2014, pp. 213–223.
[16] T. Balasubramaniam, R. Nayak, and C. Yuen, “Sparsity constraint
nonnegative tensor factorization for mobility pattern mining,” in Pacific
Rim International Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Springer, 2019,
pp. 582–594.
[17] K. Takeuchi, Y. Kawahara, and T. Iwata, “Structurally regularized nonnegative tensor factorization for spatio-temporal pattern discoveries,”
in Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge
Discovery in Databases. Springer, 2017, pp. 582–598.
[18] B. Resch, F. Usländer, and C. Havas, “Combining machine-learning
topic models and spatiotemporal analysis of social media data for
disaster footprint and damage assessment,” Cartography and Geographic
Information Science, vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 362–376, 2018.
[19] D. Darmon, E. Omodei, and J. Garland, “Followers are not enough:
A multifaceted approach to community detection in online social networks,” PloS one, vol. 10, no. 8, 2015.
[20] J. D. Carroll and J.-J. Chang, “Analysis of individual differences in
multidimensional scaling via an n-way generalization of eckart-young
decomposition,” Psychometrika, vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 283–319, 1970.
[21] A. Cichocki, R. Zdunek, A. H. Phan, and S.-i. Amari, Nonnegative
matrix and tensor factorizations: applications to exploratory multi-way
data analysis and blind source separation. John Wiley & Sons, 2009.
[22] A. Cichocki and A.-H. Phan, “Fast local algorithms for large scale
nonnegative matrix and tensor factorizations,” IEICE transactions on
fundamentals of electronics, communications and computer sciences,
vol. 92, 2009.
[23] T. Balasubramaniam, R. Nayak, and C. Yuen, “Efficient nonnegative tensor factorization via saturating coordinate descent,” ACM Transactions
on Knowledge Discovery from Data (TKDD), 2020.
[24] J. R. Finkel, T. Grenager, and C. Manning, “Incorporating non-local
information into information extraction systems by gibbs sampling,” in
Proceedings of the 43rd annual meeting on association for computational linguistics. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2005,
pp. 363–370.

(a) Temporal pattern.

(b) Spatial pattern

(c) Spatial pattern within Australia

Fig. 3: The spatio-temporal topic dynamics using NMF.

(a) Temporal pattern.

(b) Spatial pattern

(c) Spatial pattern within Australia

Fig. 4: The spatio-temporal topic dynamics using NTF that can associate between the spatial and temporal patterns.

(b)

(a)
(c)

Fig. 5: Topic 1. Summary: The closer of schools and the need for government support. Popular after 100 days and lasts for
20 days. Mainly centered in Sydney and Brisbane.

(b)

(a)
(c)

Fig. 6: Topic 2. Summary: The start of more Covid-19 positive test results and stay at home slogan emerges. Popular after
120th day to 125th day. Mainly centered in Melbourne, Perth, Cairns, and Adelaide. While it is normal to expect Sydney in
the list, it is not captured here as it has a different temporal pattern and more topics to it. Refer Topic 5 in Fig. 9.

(b)

(a)
(c)

Fig. 7: Topic 3. Summary: Peter Dutton, the Home Affairs minister of Australia tested positive for Covid-19. It is a short
pattern that lasts only for a few days with a high peak for just one day. The topic is widely spread across all major cities in
Australia.

(b)

(a)
(c)

Fig. 8: Topic 4. Summary: Reports on new cases and deaths associated with Covid-19. Most of the tweets are originated from
the capital city of Canberra. This makes sense as the government and news media releases reports on Covid-19 cases from the
capital territory.

(b)

(a)
(c)

Fig. 9: Topic 5. Summary: This topic can be considered as same as Topic 2, but the temporal pattern is approximately 10 days
earlier than Topic 3. Moreover, the topic is spread across all major cities during this time. This also indicates how the same
topic is temporally traveling across different locations.

(b)

(a)
(c)

Fig. 10: Topic 6. Summary: This topic is similar to Topic 5, but it is widespread across the nation, while Topic 4 is more
focused on capital territory.

(b)

(a)
(c)

Fig. 11: Topic 7. Summary: The Covid-19 outbreak in China and the earlier flight disruptions. This is the earliest pattern that
emerged that gets to increase in a wider talk from 55th day (month of January) all over the nation. It is interesting to see how
the topic suddenly dropped its peak when Covid-19 starts to hit Australia from 100th day.

(b)

(a)
(c)

Fig. 12: Topic 8. Summary: The start of panic buying toiler paper and Covid-19 case reports. The panic buying of toilet paper
was seen everywhere in the nation and lasts for a while. Both the spatial and temporal patterns reflect it.

(b)

(a)
(c)

Fig. 13: Topic 9. Summary: A general pattern on daily/weekly Covid-19 cases and tests conducted. It was steadily increasing
from day 85 and starts to drop after the 115th day. This topic is also widespread across the nation.

(b)

(a)
(c)

Fig. 14: Topic 10. Summary: Hollywood actor Tom Hanks tested positive for Covid-19 in Gold coast, Australia. It is a short
pattern that lasts only for a few days and a small peak again when he was cured. This topic is widely spread across all major
cities in Australia.

