Using Nudges to Prevent Student Dropouts in the Pandemic
Guilherme Lichand1* & Julien Christen2*
The impacts of COVID-19 reach far beyond the hundreds of thousands of lives lost to the disease; in
particular, the pre-existing learning crisis is expected to be magnified during school shutdown. Despite
efforts to put distance learning strategies in place, the threat of student dropouts, especially among
adolescents, looms as a major concern. Are interventions to motivate adolescents to stay in school effective
amidst the pandemic? Here we show that, in Brazil, nudges via text messages to high-school students, to
motivate them to stay engaged with school activities, substantially reduced dropouts during school
shutdown, and greatly increased their motivation to go back to school when classes resume. While such
nudges had been shown to decrease dropouts during normal times, it is surprising that those impacts
replicate in the absence of regular classes because their effects are typically mediated by teachers (whose
effort in the classroom changes in response to the nudges). Results show that insights from the science of
adolescent psychology can be leveraged to shift developmental trajectories at a critical juncture. They also
qualify those insights: effects increase with exposure and gradually fade out once communication stops,
providing novel evidence that motivational interventions work by redirecting adolescents’ attention.

1 Department

of Economics, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. 2 Center for Child Well-Being and Development, University of Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland. * e-mail: guilherme.lichand@econ.uzh.ch; julien.christen@econ.uzh.ch

The COVID-19 pandemic has forced over 1.5 billion children and adolescents across 160 countries
to stay at home while schools were shut down on sanitary grounds1. Research on the impacts of
similar historical events, such as the Spanish flu, Ebola and the H1N1 epidemics, has documented
that pandemics not only cost lives and employment, but also substantially deteriorate learning
outcomes of school-age children2,3,4, with persistent impacts on their future labor market
outcomes2. Multiple forces combine to push children out of school in such settings: lower returns
to education in face of the economic crunch, demand for child labor among poor families,
violence against children in a context of stress and with children at home, and loss of motivation
to go to school in the absence of face-to-face interactions with teachers and peers5,6,7,8,9,10,11. As
such, a surge in student dropouts is expected to take place in 2020 unless drastic actions are put
in place12,13.
While significant attention has been devoted to interventions that can support distance
learning, particularly to mitigate learning deficits when children come back to school14,15,16,17, a
large fraction of children and adolescents might actually never go back1. That concern is
particularly acute among middle- and high-school students, inspired by insights from a large
literature on adolescent psychology. This literature documents that neuro-biological changes
during puberty redirect adolescents’ attention and motivational salience18, with status-seeking
behaviors, romantic interests and peer pressure18 often getting in the way of attending classes.
As a result, adolescents are the ones most likely to drop out in normal times6, and presumably
even more in the context of the COVID-19 crisis.
If insights from adolescent psychology suggest that this population is the one most at risk
of dropping out amidst the pandemic, they also lay out opportunities to intervene. In fact,
motivational interventions have been shown to successfully improve adolescents’ choices, from
healthy eating19 to school effort20, with the potential to shift developmental trajectories. Could
motivational interventions also be used effectively to encourage adolescents to stay in school
amidst the pandemic, particularly in poor countries, where pressures to drop out of school might
be amplified?
Recent evidence shows that, in developing countries, nudges to motivate public school
students to engage with school activities have the potential to not only significantly improve
learning outcomes21,22, but also to drastically decrease dropouts during normal times23. Having
said that, it would be surprising if those effects replicated in the absence of regular classes,
because they are typically mediated by teachers, whose effort in the classroom changes in
response to the nudges23.
Here we show that an intervention to motivate high-school students to stay engaged with
school activities during the pandemic substantially prevented student dropouts in Brazil even in
the absence of regular classes.
Research Design and Intervention
To study this question, we undertook a Randomized Control Trial in the State of Goiás, Brazil (preregistered as trial 5986 at the AEA RCT Registry), in partnership with Instituto Sonho Grande and
the Goiás State Secretariat of Education in the context of their full-time high school program,
“Ensino Médio em Tempo Integral”. In Goiás, face-to-face classes were suspended in March 2020,
and are not expected to resume until October (and even then, only if new COVID-19 cases in the
1

State are kept under control). During the school shutdown, classes switched to online, delivered
through a video conferencing and team collaboration platform. Students were assigned daily
exercises that they had to hand in through the platform. For those without internet access,
schools handed out assignments in plastic bags hung at the school front door, and students had
to hand them back in the same way.
The intervention, powered by Movva (the implementing partner of Eduq+, the
educational nudgebot evaluated in the interventions mentioned above21,23), consisted of sending
nudges twice a week over text messages (SMS) to high-school students or their primary
caregivers. Whenever there were multiple phone numbers on record for a student, we
randomized which would be targeted by the intervention. Nudges comprised encouragement
messages meant to have students engage in distance learning activities (online and offline) and
to keep them motivated about staying enrolled in school when face-to-face classes resume. In
total, 12,056 high-school students across 57 public schools received nudges between June 9th and
July 3rd, while other 6,200 high-school students across 30 public schools received no nudges or
other SMS from their schools. The intervention ended after roughly one month because of the
winter break.
Definition of Outcomes and Estimation
In order to evaluate the effectiveness of the intervention, we monitored (1) student dropouts
during school shutdown, based on administrative records shared by the Education Secretariat,
equal to 1 if a student has no attendance on record for two weeks in a row right before the winter
break, and 0 otherwise; and (2) lack of motivation to return to school once they reopen, based on
students’ self-reports, equal to 1 if a student states no intention of going back to school once
regular classes resume, and 0 otherwise. We elicited the latter over SMS, from rotating subsamples of students in the treatment and control groups every week – from the week after the
intervention started until 3 weeks after it ended.
We estimate treatment effects on those two outcomes, and leverage weekly selfreported data to study how effects vary with exposure to the nudges, and the extent to which
they persist or fade-out after communication ceases. Since we cannot verify whether students
effectively received messages as intended, all estimates presented are intention-to-treat (ITT)
analyses.
While the Secretariat had information on whether phone numbers belonged to the
students or to their primary caregivers, we found out ex-post that records were often inaccurate
and that handsets were often shared within the household; as such, we do not explore
heterogeneous treatment effects by who was targeted by the intervention. Since there is no data
on learning outcomes (as standardized tests are not planned for the remainder of the school
year, given the exceptional circumstances), we cannot evaluate treatment effects on student
proficiency.
Effects on Student Dropouts during School Shutdown and Motivation to Return to School
Figure 1 displays average treatment effects on student dropouts during school shutdown (based
on administrative data, in Panel A) and on their lack of motivation to return to school once they
reopen (using self-reported data only while the intervention lasted, in Panel B). Panel A
2

showcases that while nearly 6% of students in the control group had dropped out of distance
learning activities right before the winter break, that figure was only 1.4% in the treatment group
– a 77.3% reduction (p-value = 0.006). Next, Panel B documents that while nearly 24% of students
in the control group lacked motivation to go back to school when regular classes resume, that
figure was about 13.5% in the treatment group – a 43.7% reduction (p-value = 0.000).

Figure 1 – Panel A: Treatment effects of SMS nudges on student dropouts during school
shutdown (based on administrative data)
Notes: ITT estimate from an Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regression with dropouts = 1 if
a student had no attendance on record over the last two weeks before the winter break,
and 0 otherwise. 90% confidence intervals in light grey brackets; p-value in dark grey
brackets from a test of equality of proportions between the treatment and control
groups, with standard errors clustered at the school level. In the Supplementary
Materials, Table S1 shows that student characteristics are balanced across the treatment
and control groups; Table S4 documents that results are robust to defining dropouts
alternatively as no attendance on record over the last week or over the last three weeks
before the winter break.

3

Figure 1 – Panel B: Treatment effects of SMS nudges on students’ lack of motivation to return to
school once they reopen (based on self-reported data)
Notes: ITT estimate from an Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regression with expected
dropouts = 1 if the student states that s/he does not think s/he will be back in school when
regular classes resume, and 0 otherwise. 90% confidence intervals in light grey brackets;
p-value in dark grey brackets from a test of equality of proportions between the
treatment and control groups, with standard errors clustered at the school level. In the
Supplementary Materials, Table S1 shows that student characteristics are balanced across
the treatment and control groups; Table S2 shows that the probability of responding to
SMS surveys is not systematically affected by the treatment.
Attention or Information? The Onset and Persistence of the Effects of the Intervention
While the intervention is designed with the goal of redirecting adolescents’ attention to the
benefits of remaining engaged with school activities amidst the pandemic, it could be that its
effects on motivation and behavior work through alternative mechanisms. For instance, it could
be that messages make students believe that their teachers care more about them than they
originally thought.
We take advantage of our unique data on students’ motivation, available at a weekly
basis, to study this question. We do so by estimating how quickly the effects of the intervention
4

kick in after it starts, and the extent to which they persist after communication ceases. If the
intervention works by inducing students to update beliefs based on information they infer from
school communication (as in the example of students being surprised about how much teachers
seem to care about them), motivation should respond immediately to the nudges, and their
effects should persist even after communication ceases. In contrast, if the intervention works by
redirecting students’ attention, then motivation should gradually build up after the intervention
starts, and gradually die out once it stops.
Figure 2 displays the prevalence of students’ lack of motivation to return to school, week
by week, across the treatment and control groups (Panel A), and week-by-week treatment effects
(Panel B). Panel A documents a striking pattern for expected dropouts in the control group, which
increased by nearly 2-fold in little over a month (starting from 15% by the 2nd week of June and
reaching nearly 40% by the 3rd week of July). Panel A also shows that expected dropouts not only
started from a lower level in the treatment group already by week 2, but also increased at slower
rates while the intervention lasted. Panel B confirms those patterns: nudges decreased expected
dropouts by over 30% already by week 2, and effect sizes increased with the length of exposure,
reaching a 50% reduction by week 4 (significant at the 1% level).

Figure 2 – Panel A: Students’ lack of motivation to return to school once they reopen (based on
self-reported data) for the treatment and control groups, week by week

5

Notes: Weekly sample averages for expected dropouts (= 1 if the student states that s/he
does not think s/he will be back in school when regular classes resume, and 0 otherwise)
for the treatment group (in black) and the control group (in light grey). Self-reports based
on SMS surveys from rotating sub-samples of students in the treatment and control
groups every week – from the week after the intervention started until 3 weeks after it
ended. Standard errors clustered at the school level. The shaded area corresponds to the
weeks after communication ceased.

Figure 2 – Panel B: Treatment effects of SMS nudges on students’ lack of motivation to return to
school once they reopen (based on self-reported data), week by week
Notes: ITT estimates from Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regressions week by week with
expected dropouts = 1 if the student states that s/he does not think s/he will be back in
school when regular classes resume, and 0 otherwise. 90% confidence intervals in dark
grey brackets, with standard errors clustered at the school level. The shaded area
corresponds to the weeks after communication ceased. In the Supplementary Materials,
Table S1 shows that student characteristics are balanced across the treatment and control
groups for all weeks except week 3; for this reason, we control for student characteristics
in all regressions week by week. Table S3 shows that the probability of responding to SMS
surveys is not systematically affected by the treatment at any week.

6

After the intervention ended, treatment effects gradually receded. Panel A in Figure 2
shows that expected dropouts increased nearly by the same rate across treatment and control
groups after communication ceased. Panel B documents that, while treatment effects were still
large and statistically significant (at the 5% level) one week after the end of the intervention,
effect sizes quickly declined, reaching 20% two weeks later, no longer statistically different from
zero.
Discussion
Results document that simple motivational interventions to support and engage adolescents
while schools are shut down – largely overlooked by policy-makers amidst efforts to keep
curricular activities running in the absence of face-to-face classes – can effectively prevent
student dropouts. The intervention that we evaluate could be implemented at scale almost
anywhere, as cell phone penetration is very high worldwide24, and as SMS does not require
smartphones or internet access. Even in face of illiteracy challenges, there is recent evidence that
nudges over text messages can work just as well as audio messages23. Our findings provide
important lessons to address the global education crisis in the context of the pandemic: above
and beyond focusing on curricular knowledge to address learning deficits, public school systems
should reach out to families to provide support and encouragement during challenging times.
The patterns of how effect sizes vary with exposure to the treatment, gradually building
up as the nudges continue and gradually fading out once they stop, provide novel evidence
connecting the effects of motivational interventions to findings from the literature on adolescent
psychology. While seminal work notes that the influence of pubertal maturation on neurobehavioral development leads to a re-orientation of adolescents’ attention and motivational
salience, studies evaluating motivational interventions in this context typically cannot distinguish
whether they work because they redirect subjects’ attention to desirable goals or because of
alternative mechanisms (e.g. because they induce subjects to update beliefs based on what they
infer from the intervention). Our results showcase first-hand that, as with adult populations, and
as in other decision domains25,26,27, motivational nudges to keep adolescents in school work by
affecting what issues are top-of-mind and changing behavior accordingly.
That distinction matters not only for understanding the scientific underpinnings of
behavior change, but also for policy design. This result suggests that if, on the one hand, quickly
rolling out nimble interventions to engage public school families amidst the pandemic could allow
for quick wins, on the other hand, once those interventions are discontinued, their impacts are
likely to gradually die out. As such, public school systems would be better-off setting up
institutional programs to support families’ and students’ engagement over a longer time frame,
rather than putting in place short-lived interventions that cannot be embedded in their regular
activities.

7

1. Azevedo, J. P., Hasan, A., Goldemberg, D., Iqbal, S. A. & K. Geven. Simulating the potential
impacts of covid-19 school closures on schooling and learning outcomes: A set of global
estimates. Policy Research Working Paper Series 9284 © World Bank. (2020).
https://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/abs/10.1596/1813-9450-9284
License: Creative Commons Attribution CC BY 3.0.
2. Percoco, M. Health shocks and human capital accumulation: the case of Spanish flu in
Italian regions. Regional Studies 50 (9), 1496-1508 (2016).
3. Elston, J. W. T., Cartwright, C., Ndumbi, P. & Wright, J. The health impact of the 2014–15
Ebola outbreak. Public Health 143, 60-70 (2017).
4. Amorim, V., Piza, C. & Lautharte Junior, I. J. The Effect of the H1N1 Pandemic on Learning:
What to Expect with COVID-19. © World Bank (2020).
https://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/abs/10.1596/33997
License: Creative Commons Attribution CC BY 3.0.
5. Atkin, D. Endogenous skill acquisition and export manufacturing in Mexico. American
Economic Review 106 (8), 2046-85 (2016).
6. Duryea, S., Lam, D. & Levison D. Effects of economic shocks on children's employment
and schooling in Brazil. Journal of development economics 84 (1), 188-214 (2007).
7. Diette, T. M., Goldsmith, A. H., Hamilton, D. & Darity Jr, W. A. Child abuse, sexual assault,
community violence and high school graduation. Review of Behavioral Economics 4 (3),
215-240 (2017).
8. Kiefer, S. M., Alley, K. M. & Ellerbrock, C. R. Teacher and peer support for young
adolescents’ motivation, engagement, and school belonging. Rmle Online 38 (8), 1-18
(2015).
9. Allen, J. P., Pianta, R. C., Gregory, A., Mikami, A. Y. & Lun, J. An interaction-based approach
to enhancing secondary school instruction and student achievement. Science 333 (6045),
1034-1037 (2011).
10. Wentzel, K. R. Social relationships and motivation in middle school: The role of parents,
teachers, and peers. Journal of educational psychology 90 (2), 202 (1998).
11. Goodenow, C., Grady, K. E. The relationship of school belonging and friends' values to
academic motivation among urban adolescent students. The Journal of Experimental
Education 62 (1), 60-71 (1993).
12. Roger, F. H., Sabarwal, S. The COVID-19 Pandemic: Shocks to Education and Policy
Responses. Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group (2020).
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/804001590734163932/The-COVID-19Pandemic-Shocks-to-Education-and-Policy-Responses
13. Vegas, E. School closures, government responses, and learning inequality around the
world during COVID-19. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution (2020).
https://www.brookings.edu/research/school-closures-government-responses-andlearning-inequality-around-the-world-during-covid-19/

8

14. Asanov, I., Flores, F., Mckenzie, D. J., Mensmann, M. & Schulte, M. Remote-learning, TimeUse, and Mental Health of Ecuadorian High-School Students during the COVID-19
Quarantine. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 9252 (2020).
https://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/abs/10.1596/1813-9450-9252
15. Hasan, S., Rehman, A. & Zhang, W. Who Can Work and Study from Home in Pakistan:
Evidence from a 2018-19 Nationwide Household Survey. Economics Working Papers
20010, Department of Economics, Iowa State University (2020).
https://lib.dr.iastate.edu/econ_workingpapers/105/
16. Doss, C., Fahle, E. M., Loeb, S. & York, B. N. Supporting Parenting through Differentiated
and Personalized Text-Messaging: Testing Effects on Learning during Kindergarten.
Stanford Center for Education Policy Analysis CEPA Working Paper 16-18 (2017).
http://cepa.stanford.edu/wp16-18
17. Angrist, N., Bergman, P., Brewster, C. & Matsheng, M. Stemming Learning Loss During the
Pandemic: A Rapid Randomized Trial of a Low-Tech Intervention in Botswana. CSAE
Working Paper Series 2020-13, Centre for the Study of African Economies, University of
Oxford (2020).
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/Papers.cfm?abstract_id=3663098
18. Dahl, R. E., Allen, N. B., Wilbrecht, L. & Suleiman, A. B. Importance of investing in
adolescence from a developmental science perspective. Nature 554 (7693), 441-450
(2018).
19. Bryan, C. J., et al. Harnessing adolescent values to motivate healthier eating. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Science 113 (39), 10830-10835 (2016).
20. Yeager, D. S., et al. A national experiment reveals where a growth mindset improves
achievement. Nature 573 (7774), 364-369 (2019).
21. Bettinger, E., Cunha, N., Lichand, G. & Madeira, R. Are the Effects of Informational
Interventions Driven by Salience? Working Paper Series 350, Department of Economics,
University of Zurich (2020).
http://www.econ.uzh.ch/static/wp/econwp350.pdf
22. Bergman, P. How behavioral science can empower parents to improve children's
educational outcomes. Behavioral Science & Policy 5 (1), 52-67 (2019).
23. G. Lichand, S. Wolf, Arm-Wrestling in the Classroom: The Non-Monotonic Effects of
Monitoring Teachers. Working Paper Series 357, Department of Economics, University of
Zurich (2020).
http://www.econ.uzh.ch/static/wp/econwp357.pdf
24. World Bank. World Development Indicators. https://databank.worldbank.org/Mobilepenetration-/id/5494af8e (2020).
25. Thaler, R. H., Sunstein, C. R. Nudge: Improving Decisions about Health, Wealth, and
Happiness. (Penguin Books, New York, NY, 2009).
26. Karlan, D., McConnell, M., Mullainathan, S. & Zinman, J. Getting to the top of mind: How
reminders increase saving. Management Science 62 (12), 3393-3411 (2016).

9

27. Bordalo, P., Gennaioli, N., Shleifer, A. Memory, Attention, and Choice. Quarterly Journal
of Economics 135 (3), 1399–1442 (2020).
METHODS
Ethics Approval. Approval for this study was obtained from the Institutional Review Board of the
Department of Economics at the University of Zurich (2020-033). This experiment was conducted
in the context of the full-time high school program "Ensino Médio em Tempo Integral" of the
Goiás State Secretariat of Education. When it comes to informed consent, since participants are
minors, broad consent was obtained from their legal guardians directly by the Education
Secretariat (at the time of school enrollment), allowing researchers to use secondary information
from administrative records without eliciting further consent. Our implementing partner Movva
further obtained students’ assent directly via text messages (SMS): participants were informed
and reminded of the fact that they could opt-out from the intervention and SMS surveys at any
point (by simply replying ‘STOP’ or ‘CANCEL’, free of charge), without consequence.
Participants. Participants consist of public school students enrolled in grades 10-12; typical age
is 15-18 years old. All contacts were provided to Movva by the Goiás State Secretariat of
Education. The total number of contacts in the database correspond to 18,256 students, 12,056
of which randomly assigned, across 57 schools, to receive SMS nudges between June 9th and July
3rd, and 6,200 across 30 schools assigned not to receive nudges or any other SMS communication
from their schools. Power calculations before the onset of the intervention pointed out this
sample size was large enough to detect relevant minimum effects on the outcomes of interest.
Data collection. Before the start of the intervention, the contacts’ database was shared with the
authors to complete the randomization at the school level, stratified by gender, grade and phone
ownership. Schools were randomly assigned to either a treatment or a control group, following
the group sizes above and using the statistical software Stata. The database including a treatment
assignment indicator was then returned to Movva such that SMS nudges could be sent
accordingly to the treatment group, but not to the control group.
Data on online access to the platform and participation in offline school activities was shared by
the Secretariat of Education with Movva, while data on motivation to return to regular classes
once they resume was collected by Movva directly over SMS surveys, from rotating sub-samples
of approximately 280 students in the treatment and control groups every week – from the week
after the intervention started until 3 weeks after it ended. Weekly sub-samples were also
randomly drawn from the subject pool. Balance tests using Wald tests of simple and composite
linear hypotheses were conducted to ensure that each treatment group is comparable with
respect to students' characteristics that are gender, grade in which the student is enrolled, and
individual phone ownership. These tests and results are detailed in the supplementary material
to this paper in Table S1.
Outcome data was shared weekly with the authors, and analyzed following a pre-analysis plan
pre-registered as trial 5986 at the AEA RCT Registry (included as supplementary material to this
paper). All analyses were conducted by the authors using the statistical software Stata.
Finally, collecting information on human participants over time is subject to attrition. Participants
were free to leave the study at any time, which creates a risk of biasing the results if such attrition
is correlated with treatment assignment. In this context, we tested whether the probability of
10

students responding to the SMS surveys was affected by the treatment. The results, which are
reported in the supplementary material to this paper in Tables S2 and S3, indicate that the
probability of responding to SMS surveys is not systematically affected by the treatment.
Intervention. Movva, the start-up that powered the intervention evaluated in this study,
specializes in promoting behavior change by sending frequent reminders and encouragement
messages directly to users’ cell phones. The concept of nudges – interventions that modify the
choice architecture by changing the way decisions are framed to mitigate or amplify behavioral
biases, inducing certain decisions while preserving subjects’ freedom of choice – lies at the heart
of the contributions of Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences winner Richard Thaler and coauthors. Nudges have been shown to effectively change behaviors across various contexts, from
education to preventive health care to savings25. Eduq+, the intervention evaluated in this study,
has been shown to improve educational outcomes in an environment of regular classes across
different settings21,23. In the context of this study, two nudges per week were sent over text
messages (SMS) to high-school students or their primary caregivers, depending on phone
ownership, in the treatment group. Nudges were organized in 2-week sequences of 4 messages,
as follows (translated from Portuguese):
• Sequence 1
Ø Fact: « EDUQ+: It is normal to be afraid in times of uncertainty. Use this
scenario to your advantage: take the opportunity to develop the ability to
focus on your plans for the future. »
Ø Activity: « EDUQ+: How about summarizing your life project? Highlight which
dreams you would regret NOT realizing. Plan step by step how to get there. »
Ø Interactivity: « EDUQ+: Tell us! From 0 to 10, what is your level of confidence
that completing high school will help with your plans for the future? SMS free
of charge. »
Ø Growth: « EDUQ+: One step at a time! That's how we build our story. Be the
protagonist of yours and focus on your studies to finish the school year. »
• Sequence 2
Ø Fact: « EDUQ+: Connect! 80% of your colleagues believe in high school to help
them do well in the future. To get there, you need to be a friend of the clock
when studying! »
Ø Activity: « EDUQ+: Time to study and marathon! Make a schedule of the day,
setting time to wake up, study, do activities and, of course, catch up on video
lessons. »
Ø Interactivity: « EDUQ+: A day used to study gets you closer to the degree. How
has your time management been? 1. Good 2. Regular 3. Bad. SMS free of
charge. »
Ø Growth: « EDUQ+: Deserved holidays! Time to rest, but without losing focus
on the future. Between one leisure activity and another, pay attention to what
you like and helps with learning. »

11

Measures. Student dropouts during school shutdown. The Secretariat of Education shared
administrative records with Movva, which then shared it with the authors. This dataset contained
information on access to the online platform and participation in offline school activities at the
student level, an indicator variable equal to 0 if the student logged in to the platform or
participated in offline school activities on a given day and 1 in case she/he did not. Based on this
information, we created a measure of dropouts which was equal to 1 if a student had no
attendance on record for two weeks in a row right before the winter break (between June 15th
and June 26th), and 0 otherwise. To ensure that the results presented in the paper are robust to
alternative definitions of dropouts, we constructed analogous measures of dropouts as no
attendance on record for the last week before holidays or for the last three weeks before
holidays. Results, which are very robust to using alternative definitions of dropouts, are reported
as supplementary material to this paper, in Table S4.
Motivation to return to school once they reopen. Each week, students assigned to be surveyed by
text message reported their motivation to return to school once regular classes resume by
answering the following question: "Do you plan on returning to school once regular classes
resume?". Movva coded lack of motivation to return as a binary indicator based on SMS replies,
equal to 1 if the reply was “No” or similar, and zero otherwise, and shared that information with
the authors.
Analysis method. All results presented in the paper use intention-to-treat analyses by linking
student identification numbers to the treatment condition they were assigned to before the start
of the intervention. The reason for restricting our analyses to intention-to-treat analyses is that
we had no means of verifying whether students effectively received messages as intended.
Throughout the paper, we report intention-to-treat effects obtained from Ordinary Least Squares
(OLS) regressions, by regressing each outcome on a binary indicator equal to 1 if the student was
assigned to treatment and 0 otherwise. In Panel B of Figure 2, effect sizes are standardized by
dividing the treatment effect coefficients by the standard deviation in the control group for this
outcome, providing effect sizes in % terms. Last, since for one of the weeks of our SMS surveys,
student characteristics were not balanced across respondents in the treatment and control
groups, we control for gender, grade in which the student is enrolled and phone ownership in
this figure. All p-values are obtained from two-tailed tests of equality of proportions between the
treatment and control groups, with standard errors clustered at the school level in each case.
Reporting summary. Further information on research design is available in the Research
Reporting Summary linked to this paper.
Data Availability
The data that support the findings of this study are available at https://osf.io/3sqfr/ or upon
reasonable request to the authors.
Code Availability
Syntax can be found at https://osf.io/3sqfr/ or upon reasonable request to the authors.

12

Acknowledgements
This manuscript uses administrative data on students’ attendance, granted by the Goiás
Secretariat of Education. Funding towards the intervention evaluated in this study was provided
by Instituto Sonho Grande. We acknowledge helpful comments during the preparation of the
manuscript from Ernst Fehr, Johannes Haushofer, Brad Wible and David Yeager. The content is
solely the responsibility of the authors.
Author contributions
G.L. conceived the study and led the design, analysis and writing; J.C. was involved in every phase
of the study, particularly the conception of the study, the study design, the interpretation of
analyses and the writing of the manuscript.
Author information
G.L. is a co-founder and chairman at Movva, the implementing partner of the intervention
evaluated in this study.

13

Supplementary Materials
Figure S1 – Histogram of data availability for students’ attendance based on
administrative records

Notes: Histogram of data availability for students’ attendance based on administrative
records, for the school days after the start of the intervention (June 9-26; except June 1112, which were school holidays). The distribution is left-skewed, with full records available
for nearly 90% of students. The % of days is computed by dividing the number of
observations for each student after the start of the intervention by 12 and multiplying by
100.

14

Table S1 – Balance tests
Panel A – All students
Sub-sample means
Variables
Gender
Grade
Student owns phone
F-test

Treatment

Control

0.46
1.83
0.43

0.48
1.84
0.41

Diff.=0 [p- Number of
value] observations

0.197
0.710
0.690
0.515

18,256
18,256
18,256
18,256

Notes: Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regressions of student characteristics on treatment
assignment at the time of randomization. P-values from a test of equality of means of the
treatment and control groups for each covariate (jointly for the F-test), with standard errors
clustered at the school level. Results indicate that student characteristics are balanced across the
treatment and control groups.
Panel B – Students with valid outcome data (used in regressions)
Diff.=0 [p- Number of
Sub-sample means
value] observations
Treatment Control
Administrative data
Gender
0.46
0.48
0.192
18,157
Grade
1.83
1.84
0.706
18,157
Student owns phone
0.42
0.41
0.661
18,157
F-test
0.501
18,157
Self-reported data (weeks 2 to 4)
Gender
0.45
0.40
0.243
828
Grade
1.81
1.84
0.637
828
Student owns phone
0.20
0.23
0.481
828
F-test
0.505
828
Self-reported data – week 2
Gender
0.43
0.40
0.645
284
Grade
1.74
1.95
0.074
284
Student owns phone
0.17
0.16
0.845
284
F-test
0.387
284
Self-reported data – week 3
Gender
0.44
0.39
0.377
249
Grade
1.88
1.78
0.311
249
Student owns phone
0.12
0.29
0.035
249
F-test
0.055
249
Self-reported data – week 4
Gender
0.48
0.42
0.332
295
15

Grade
Student owns phone
F-test
Self-reported data – week 5
Gender
Grade
Student owns phone
F-test
Self-reported data – week 6
Gender
Grade
Student owns phone
F-test
Self-reported data – week 7
Gender
Grade
Student owns phone
F-test

1.81
0.29

1.79
0.25

0.841
0.486
0.629

295
295
295

0.42
1.83
0.26

0.46
1.66
0.21

0.334
0.049
0.372
0.140

289
289
289
289

0.42
1.74
0.27

0.49
1.8
0.23

0.243
0.544
0.478
0.506

319
319
319
319

0.41
1.75
0.28

0.37
1.90
0.29

0.557
0.148
0.870
0.395

273
273
273
273

Notes: Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regressions of student characteristics on treatment
assignment for students with valid outcome data. P-values from a test of equality of means of
the treatment and control groups for each covariate (jointly for the F-test), with standard errors
clustered at the school level. Results indicate that student characteristics are balanced across the
treatment and control groups when data are pooled together and for all weeks except week 3.
For this reason, we control for student characteristics in all week-by-week regressions in Figure
2 – Panel B.

16

Table S2 – Selective non-response tests for self-reported data, weeks 2 to 4
Responds to SMS survey
(Weeks 2 to 4)
(1)
Treatment
-0.0052
(0.0061)
Control group mean
0.051
Treatment = 0 [p-value]
0.3987
Observations
17,428
R-squared
0.0001
Notes: Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regression with outcome variable = 1 if the student
responded to the SMS surveys during the intervention (i.e. between weeks 2 and 4), and
0 otherwise. P-value from a test of equality of proportions between the treatment and
control groups, with standard errors clustered at the school level. Results show that the
probability of responding to SMS surveys is not systematically affected by the treatment.

17

Table S3 – Selective non-response tests for self-reported data, week by week
Responds to SMS survey
Week 2
Week 3
Week 4
Week 5
Week 6
Week 7
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Treatment
-0.0011
-0.0028
-0.0016
-0.0016
-0.0006
-0.0038
(0.0025) (0.0022) (0.0033) (0.0028) (0.0030) (0.0027)
Control group mean
0.018
0.017
0.019
0.018
0.019
0.019
Treatment = 0 [p0.6725
0.1967
0.6189
0.5628
0.8519
0.1586
value]
Observations
16,872
16,828
16,876
16,872
16,899
16,852
R-squared
0.0000
0.0001
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0002
Notes: Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regressions with outcome variable = 1 if the student
responded to the SMS survey in each week, and 0 otherwise. P-values from tests of
equality of proportions between the treatment and control groups, with standard errors
clustered at the school level. Results show that the probability of responding to SMS
surveys is not systematically affected by the treatment at any week.

18

Table S4 – Treatment effects on student dropouts during school shutdown,
for alternative definitions of the outcome variable
No attendance over the
last X days
5 days
15 days
(1)
(2)
Treatment
-0.0704***
-0.0455***
(0.0256)
(0.0166)
Control group mean
0.096
0.058
Treatment = 0 [p-value]
0.0074
0.0074
Observations
963,985
963,985
R-squared
0.0059
0.0040
Notes: ITT estimates from Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regressions with dropouts = 1 if
a student had no attendance on record over the last week (column 1) or over the last
three weeks (column 2) before the winter break, and 0 otherwise. P-values from a test of
equality of proportions between the treatment and control groups, with standard errors
clustered at the school level. Results show that the patterns showcased by Figure 1 - Panel
A are robust to alternative definitions of student dropouts during the school shutdown.
Pre-Analysis Plan
This randomized controlled trial was pre-registered as trial 5986 at the American Economic
Association's registry for randomized controlled trial (AEA RCT Registry). The uploaded plan is
detailed below.

19

Does Nudging Students Decrease Learning Deficits
and Dropouts During and After a Pandemic?
Experimental Evidence from Covid-19
Responses in Brazil
Pre-analysis Plan
The covid-19 pandemic has forced 1.5 billion schoolchildren in 160 countries to stay at
home while schools were shut down on sanitary grounds. While several distance
learning tools have been put in place in developing countries, a variety of factors raise
critical concerns about learning deficits and school dropouts when schools are back,
particularly amongst the most vulnerable students. This paper investigates whether
sending reminders and encouragement messages to high-school students in Brazil
during the pandemic increases attendance and assignment completion when it comes
to distance learning, and decreases grade repetition and dropout rates in the
aftermath.
I.

Introduction

The covid-19 pandemic has forced 1.5 billion schoolchildren in 160 countries to stay at home while schools
were shut down on sanitary grounds. Brazil is no exception. The nationwide decision to shut down schools
for almost the entirety of the 2020 school year in order to limit the spread of the covid-19 pandemic has
forced all schools to switch to distance learning. Such rapid transition, combined with a mismatch
between delivery channels and access conditions – as several State Secretariats of Education switched to
online, while nearly 70 million households have no or only precarious access to internet –, are expected
to severely impact learning, and potentially lead to a spike in school dropouts (Brookings, 2020; World
Bank, 2020).
Schools have been trying to keep contact with their students by sending personal letters via post or by
creating an online platform with tools that students can use. However, the attendance of the students,
whether on the platform with the online tools or at school to pick up printed class material, is reported to
be remarkably low. São Paulo State has reported that only 50% of its 3.5 million students are accessing
the online learning platform daily as expected.*
The State Secretariat also broadcasts content on television. It is much harder to gather data on the share of students following classes
on this format daily.
*

20

With the goal of increasing engagement in distance learning – and, particularly, online attendance and
assignment completion – during the pandemic, as well as limiting its effects on learning gaps and school
dropouts once schools are back, the Goiás State Secretariat of Education is testing various strategies in
partnership with Instituto Sonho Grande.† As part of those strategies, they are interested in evaluating
nudges (reminders and encouragement messages) sent twice a week to high school students, directly on
their mobile phones via text messages (SMS). Towards that goal, they have hired Eduq+, an educational
nudgebot that has been shown to improve educational outcomes (during normal times) in Brazil and Ivory
Coast.
Eduq+ nudges users twice a week with motivating facts and suggested activities to engage them in the
daily school life. It also allows schools to broadcast messages to all users weekly. The intervention has
been evaluated in the context of regular schooling, targeted at parents of primary school children. The
nudgebot has been shown to promote large impacts on school attendance, test scores and grade
promotion rates (Bettinger et al., 2020), and to decrease school dropouts by 50% across multiple primary
grades (Lichand and Wolf, 2020).
The version of Eduq+ to be evaluated in this study is, however, different from that in those studies,
since nudges will be sent directly to students themselves.‡ Moreover, the context of distance learning is
also much more challenging. Whether the intervention is still able to improve educational outcomes under
those conditions is an empirical question.
This pre-analysis plan summarizes the design of a field experiment to test the following primary
hypotheses:
1. Does nudging students increase usage of online learning tools by high school students?
•

Hypothesis: SMS nudges increase the share of students who access the online platform daily, and
the share of students who hand in assignments (online or not).

2. Does nudging students mitigate the negative effects of the school shutdown on learning outcomes?
•

Hypothesis: SMS nudges improve attendance and grades, and decrease grade repetition and
dropouts once face-to-face classes resume.
II.

Intervention and experimental design

Goiás a relatively poor state located in the Center-West region of Brazil. Instituo Sonho Grande is a non-profit organization
committed to improving high-school educational outcomes in Brazilian public school.
‡ In case they do not have their own phone, messages will be sent to the mobile phone of their primary caregivers.
†

21

The intervention has been designed by Instituto Sonho Grande and the Goiás State Secretariat of
Education, with the help of Movva (the implementing partner that powers Eduq+).§ It will take place
during the months of June and July/2020, when public high schools will be randomly assigned to have
their students receive two messages per week from Eduq+. 57 schools have been assigned to the
treatment group, and 30 to the control group (which receives no intervention). Randomization is stratified
by gender, grade and phone ownership. In case the student does not own a phone, messages will be sent
to the mobile phone of his/her primary caregiver. The intervention is scheduled to be rolled out on June
9th.

Table 1: Randomization strategy - Treatment vs. Control
Treatment

Control

57 schools
12,056 students

30 schools
6,200 students

Table 1 above summarizes the randomization strategy for the first phase of intervention. Within the
sample of 12,056 students assigned to receive nudges, less than half (5,188) own their own mobile phone
and will receive messages directly. It is also important to note that not all students in the sample have
access to the internet and that those who do not can pick up the printed class material once every week
and hand in assignments the following week. For the purpose of this study however, we will be able to
measure their outcomes in different ways.
At the end of July, we will be able estimate treatment effects on access to the online platform, and
assignment completion, from administrative data provided by the Secretariat. Concretely, we have
requested weekly student-level data on log in activity – or face-to-face pick-up of class materials – as well
as assignment completion (again, online or offline). For those with online access, we hope to get access
to daily data, which would allow us to also estimate high-frequency treatment effects through event
studies. Last, after face-to-face classes resume, we will have access to administrative records on studentlevel attendance, grades, grade repetition and enrollment status.
The interpretation of these long-term effects will vary depending on the choice made by the Education
Secretariat to continue or not the intervention after short-term results are made available. Depending on
the short-term impacts of the nudges, the Education Secretariat might decide to keep testing Eduq+ for a
longer period, to scale it up or to scale it down. As such, three scenarios can emerge after the first phase

§

One of the authors (Guilherme) is a co-founder and chairman at Movva (http://movva.tech).

22

of the intervention: (1) the intervention continues for a longer period, keeping the treatment assignment
fixed; (2) the control group starts receiving the nudges; or (3) the treatment group stops receiving the
nudges. In case (1), long-term effects will reflect a combination of nudges sent during and after the school
shutdown; in case (2), long-term effects will only reflect differences in the intensity of the treatment; and
in case (3), long-term effects will capture persistence of treatment effects (if any).
With the number of schools and the number of students presented in Table 1, and assuming an intracluster correlation of 0.16 (SARESP, 2014a, 2014b) as well as conservative variance estimation for binary
outcomes (assuming that 50% of students access the online platform and hand in assignments, in the
control group)-, we could detect treatment effects of at least 0.8 percentage points on those outcomes**.
Since the typical treatment effect of nudges on binary decisions is 1.7 percentage points (Dellavigna and
Linos, 2020), we conclude that the design is well powered to detect relevant short-term effect sizes.
III.

Outcomes

We will document the effects of the treatments on the following categories of outcomes for students
enrolled in high school (age 15 to 18):
A. Short-term outcomes: probability of logging into the online platform or picking up the material in
school, probability of handed in of assignments, as measured by administrative records;
B. Long-term outcomes: attendance, grades, probability of grade repetition and probability of
dropout, as measured by administrative records.
Since some students will receive messages on their own mobile phones, while for others it is their
caregivers who will be nudged by Eduq+, we will estimate treatment effects within those two subgroups.
Power calculations indicate that we could detect treatment effects of at least 1 and 0.9 percentage point
for these two subsamples, respectively.
Since there are siblings in the data, we will remove from the main analysis cases when not all siblings are
assigned to the same treatment conditions. Depending on how many siblings there are, we also plan to
estimate within-family's externalities of the nudges, taking advantage of that sub-sample.
IV.

**

Empirical analysis

These power calculations have been computed by clustering at the school level.

23

Since the intervention is randomly assigned, comparing treatment and control groups yields treatment
effects of the SMS nudges on the outcomes of interest (Section III). Using ordinary least squares
regressions, we will estimate:
$
𝑌!"#
= 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 𝑇!" + 𝜃! + 𝑢!"#

Where:
•

$
𝑌!"#
: Outcome variable j for student i at school m and stratum s;

•

𝑇" : Indicator variable equal to 1 if students I in school m and stratum s is assigned to receive SMS

nudges, 0 otherwise;
•

𝜃! : stratum fixed effects.

We cluster standard errors at the school level, since that is the level at which the intervention is randomly
assigned. We are interested in testing 𝛽1 = 0.

REFERENCES
Bettinger, E., Cunha, N., Lichand, G., & Madeira, R. (2020). “Are Effects of Informational Interventions
Driven by Salience?”. Working Paper.
DellaVigna, S., & Linos, E. (2020). RCTs to Scale: Comprehensive Evidence from Two Nudge Units. Working
Paper, UC Berkeley.
Lichand, G., & Wolf, S. (2020). “Are Parenting Interventions Transferable Across Settings? Evaluating Key
Constraints in Sub-Saharan Africa”. Working Paper.
Rogers, F. H., & Sabarwal, S. (2020). The COVID-19 Pandemic: Shocks to Education and Policy
Responses (No. 148198, pp. 1-0). The World Bank.
SARESP (2014a). Relatório Pedagógico. Língua Portuguesa.
SARESP (2014b). Relatório Pedagógico. Matemática.

24

Vegas, E. (2020). School closures, government responses, and learning inequality around the world
during COVID-19. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.

25

