How Political is the Spread of COVID-19 in the United States?
An Analysis using Transportation and Weather Data
Karan Vombatkere, 1 Hanjia Lyu, 1 Jiebo Luo 1
1

arXiv:2009.04612v1 [cs.SI] 10 Sep 2020

University of Rochester
kvombatk@u.rochester.edu, hlyu5@ur.rochester.edu, jluo@cs.rochester.edu

Abstract
We investigate the difference in the spread of COVID-19 between the states won by Donald Trump (Red) and the states
won by Hillary Clinton (Blue) in the 2016 presidential election, by mining transportation patterns of US residents from
March 2020 to July 2020. To ensure a fair comparison, we
first use a K-means clustering method to group the 50 states
into five clusters according to their population, area and population density. We then characterize daily transportation patterns of the residents of different states using the mean percentage of residents traveling and the number of trips per person. For each state, we study the correlations between travel
patterns and infection rate for a 2-month period before and
after the official states reopening dates. We observe that during the lock-down, Red and Blue states both displayed strong
positive correlations between their travel patterns and infection rates. However, after states reopened we find that Red
states had higher travel-infection correlations than Blue states
in all five state clusters. We find that the residents of both
Red and Blue states displayed similar travel patterns during
the period post the reopening of states, leading us to conclude
that, on average, the residents in Red states might be mobilizing less safely than the residents in Blue states. Furthermore,
we use temperature data to attempt to explain the difference
in the way residents travel and practice safety measures.

of daily confirmed infections in Trump vs. Clinton states
shown in Figure 2 was publicized by CNN2 in July 2020 and
caught our attention. The goal of the analysis in this paper
is to use transportation patterns along with weather data to
provide insight into why COVID-19 cases might be growing
at a higher rate in the Red states than the Blue states, after
states started to officially reopen in May 2020.

Figure 1: 2016 US presidential election results.

Introduction
There have been many analyses done recently on investigating the spread of COVID-19 in relation to the state policies,
political ideology regarding travel guidelines, mask-usage
and state-specific reopening rules. Both news media 1 and
academic researchers (Rothgerber et al. 2020; Blagov 2020)
have intended to investigate the relationship between the
difference of infection growth and the politicization across
residents’ behaviours and psychological factors.

Figure 2: Evolution of daily confirmed cases (Red vs. Blue
States). Source: CNN.

Figure 1 shows a map of US states with the results of
the 2016 presidential election, where Hillary Clinton won
21 (Blue) states and Donald Trump won 30 (Red) states. We
intend to study the spread of COVID-19 in these two sets
of states by mining transportation patterns and attempting
to correlate them with the daily infection rate. The graph

Preliminary analysis of the transportation data indicates
that both the Red and Blue states showed a sharp decrease
in travel once the official stay-at-home order was passed on
March 13, 2020. Figure 3 shows the 7-day moving average of the mean percentage of residents traveling daily from

1
https://www.cnn.com/2020/07/08/politics/what-matters-july8/index.html

2
https://www.cnn.com/2020/07/08/politics/what-matters-july8/index.html

February 2020 to August 2020. We see a relatively consistent travel pattern that correlates with the increases and decreases in travel based on other national guidelines, such
as the opening of businesses such as restaurants and bars.
While a higher percentage of residents of the Red states appear to travel daily, it is important to note that this was also
the case prior to COVID-19. The slight increase in the difference of travel between the Red and Blue states after the
stay-at-home order was passed is marginal (about 2%) and
was not shown to correlate with the much larger difference
in infection growth rates.

Related Work
Data from two MTurk studies with US respondents revealed
an ideological divide in adherence to social distancing
guidelines during the COVID-19 pandemic (Rothgerber
et al. 2020). Studies have been conducted to find the
relationship between personality and the compliance of the
social distancing order (Blagov 2020). The last eight stayat-home orders were issued by Republican leaders.3 Some
elected Republican officials encouraged their constituents to
patronize restaurants and bars precisely when federal health
officials urged the opposite.4 Political ideology represents
shared beliefs, opinions, and values held by an identifiable
group or constituency (Freeden 2004; Knight 2006), and it
endeavors to describe and interpret the world and envision
the world as it should be (Jost, Federico, and Napier 2009).
Many studies have been done to investigate the relationship between travel restrictions and the spread of
COVID-19. Chinazzi et al. (2020) used a global metapopulation disease transmission model to project the impact
of travel limitations on the national and international
spread of the pandemic. Linka et al. (2020) found that an
unconstrained mobility would have significantly accelerated
the spreading of COVID-19.

Figure 3: 7-Day moving average of daily percent travel (Red
vs. Blue states)
There are a variety of pandemic growth models that have
been studied, and almost all models involve exponential
growth. Exponential growth can have vastly difference
outcomes depending on the starting conditions and the
exponential infection growth factor, and it is known that
the infection growth depends on several factors such as
travel guidelines, mask-usage, social-distancing, quarantine
measures, indoor transmission (Courtemanche et al. 2020).
Our approach to studying the spread of COVID-19 focuses
primarily on transportation data: we examine the percentage
of residents traveling and the number of trips taken per
person, as well as the number of trips under 25 miles per
person and number of trips under 10 miles per person.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• We use transportation data to analyze the difference in the
spread of COVID-19 between the states won by Donald
Trump (Red) and the states won by Hilary Clinton (Blue)
in the 2016 presidential election.
• We study the correlations between travel patterns and infection rates before and after the states’ reopening dates.
• We discover that there are differences in the correlations
before and after the states reopened, and temperature
might have affected how people traveled.

In our investigation, we use publicly available transportation data provided by the US Department of Transportation
to study the transportation patterns of state residents. We use
the John Hopkins COVID-19 reporting data to study the infection rate for each state.

Data Collection
We use two primary data sources for the analysis conducted
in this paper. We also augment our analysis with data from a
couple of other sources, which are mentioned below.

Department of Transportation Data
This data set is publicly available and can be accessed
through the Socrata API5 . The travel statistics are produced
from an anonymized national panel of mobile device data
from multiple sources, and a weighting procedure expands
the sample of millions of mobile devices, so the results are
representative of the entire population in a nation, state, or
county.
For our analysis we use the state-level transportation data,
which contains rich information about the number of people
travelling on a daily basis. Some of the key features in the
raw data that we use are the population staying at home and
the total number of trips taken of different distances. We
use these to compute the following travel feature vectors,
3

https://fivethirtyeight.com/features/democratic-and-gopgovernors-enacted-stay-at-home-orders-on-the-same-timeline-butall-holdouts-are-republicans/
4
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/15/us/stay-home-go-outcoronavirus.html
5
https://data.bts.gov/resource/w96p-f2qv.json

which are then normalized by population, i.e. per person basis. Trips under 25 miles and 10 miles are chosen to examine
the local mobility of residents, to better capture characteristics of community transmission.
• Mean percentage of the total population that traveled on a
given day, m1 (t)
• Mean number of trips taken, per person, n(t)
• Number of under 10 mile trips taken, per person, n10 (t)
• Number of under 25 mile trips taken, per person, n25 (t)

JHU CSSE COVID-19 Dataset
This is the data repository for the 2019 Novel Coronavirus
Visual Dashboard operated by the Johns Hopkins University
Center for Systems Science and Engineering (JHU CSSE6 ).
We used the time series reported data to obtain the daily confirmed cases data for each state for the period from March
to July 2020. We use this dataset to calculate the daily exponential infection growth rate, r(t) for each state.

Other Sources
We leverage the US Census 2010 data7 to obtain Area and
Population data for each state. We also use data from the
BallotPedia8 to get the official states reopening dates used
in our analysis.

Methodology
K-Means Clustering
We use the K-means clustering algorithm to cluster all
US states based on their population, area and population
density. The rationale behind using these features to cluster
is to create clusters of similar states based on only the area
and population, in an attempt to create a more even and
fair comparison baseline for travel within the Red and Blue
states.
The optimal number of clusters, K is determined using a combination of both the Silhouette Score and the Elbow method so as to have a balance between the sum-ofsquared error of the clustering and the ratio of intra-cluster
to nearest-cluster distances.

Calculating Infection Rate
We use a simple logistic model for the infection growth
rate (Ma 2020). The cumulative number of confirmed cases,
C(t) at time t can be approximated by

d
C(t)
C(t) = rC(t)(1 −
)
dt
K

(1)

where r is the exponential infection growth rate of interest
to us, and K = limt→∞ C(t).
6

https://github.com/CSSEGISandData/COVID-19
https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/decennialcensus/data.html
8
Data available at: https://ballotpedia.org
7

We see that a solution to this model for the number of
confirmed cases C(t) is proportional to ert , so in the discrete case where t is measured in days we can calculate the
daily infection growth rate by taking the ratio of the daily
difference in cumulative confirmed cases data. For a given
day t, the number of new cases N (t) for that day can be
calculated by
N (t) = C(t) − C(t − 1)

(2)

The daily exponential growth rate, r(t) can then be calculated for each day by taking the ratio of successive N (t),
i.e.
N (t)
r(t) =
(3)
N (t − 1)
This method is used to calculate the daily infection growth
rate, r(t) for each state from the cumulative confirmed
COVID-19 case JHU dataset from March 2020 through July
2020. The r(t) vector for each state was then used as the
input to the correlation analysis conducted with the transportation pattern data.

Correlation Analysis
We use the Pearson correlation coefficient as a measure
of the similarity between the time series data for our
analysis. We set a p-value threshold of 0.05 to ensure a 95%
confidence interval for all correlations reported.
It is well accepted that there is a leader-follower relationship between travel and infection, since the infection growth
caused by travel would only manifest itself in confirmed
cases data after a delay of at least 2-3 weeks based on the
incubation period of COVID-19 (Lauer et al. 2020). Thus,
in all correlation analysis we use a lag factor of 21 days to
account for this incubation period and the time needed for
an individual to obtain a confirmed test result. Based on
empirical tests with the data with different lag factors we
are able to confirm this pattern.
Based on the graph of daily confirmed cases in Figure 2,
we observe the daily cases for Red states start to increase
in early June 2020. Since almost all states opened officially
in late April - May 2020, we investigate travel patterns
before and after these reopening dates, to attempt to explain
the increase in spread of COVID-19 in Red states. This
rationale defines our methodology for correlation analysis,
and is outlined below.
For each state, within each state cluster, we perform the
following steps. Note that a lag factor of 21 days is applied
to the infection growth rate data.
1. Calculate the correlations between daily travel feature
vectors (m1 (t), n(t), n10 (t), n25 (t)) and the infection
growth rate vector r(t) from March 01, 2020 to the state’s
official reopening date.
2. Calculate the correlations between daily travel feature
vectors (m1 (t), n(t), n10 (t), n25 (t)) and the infection
growth rate vector r(t) from the state’s official reopening
date to July 15, 2020.

We then examine the difference between the correlation
coefficients calculated by step 1 and 2 for Red and Blue
states on a cluster-wise basis. The time period for both step 1
and 2 is approximately 60 days, since early May 2020 serves
as the mean time during which US states officially reopened.

Analysis Results

Correlation Analysis
Correlation analysis is done between the mined transportation patterns and the COVID-19 infection rate for each
state. We examine the difference in correlations between
Red and Blue states within each cluster for an approximate
two month period before and after each state’s reopening
date.

Clustering US States
The K-means clustering algorithm is used to cluster the
states into five clusters based on their area, population and
population density. Note that Washington DC and Alaska
are identified as outliers and are not included in the original
clustering model, but are added back into our analysis by
using the resulting model to assign them to the nearest
cluster.
1. Cluster 1

March 1, 2020 to States Reopening Dates It is observed
that during the quarantine period from March 1, 2020
to the states reopening dates, Red and Blue states both
displayed strong positive correlations between their travel
feature vectors: m1 (t), n(t), n10 (t), n25 (t) and infection
growth rate vectors, r(t).9 Figure 5 shows a geographic
distribution of the correlations between m1 (t) and r(t)
across all US states, and the bar plot in Figure 6 visualizes
this relationship for the mean value of the correlation within
each of the five state clusters.

• Red States: FL
• Blue States: NY
2. Cluster 2
• Red States: GA, IN, TN, MI, NC, OH, PA
• Blue States: IL, MA, NJ, VA, WA
3. Cluster 3
• Red States: TX
• Blue States: CA
4. Cluster 4
• Red States: WV, SC
• Blue States: CT, DC, DE, HI, MD, ME, NH, RI, VT
5. Cluster 5
• Red States:AK, AL, AR, AZ, IA, ID, KS, KY, LA,
MO, MS, MT, ND, NE, OK, SD, UT, WI, WY
• Blue States: CO, MN, NM, NV, OR

Figure 5: Correlation between m1 (t) and r(t) from March
1, 2020 to states reopening dates.

The choice of k = 5 optimal clusters is empirically determined by using the Silhouette Score and the Elbow Method
together to find an appropriate grouping of states, and this
clustering is visualized on a map in Figure 4.

Figure 4: K-Means clustering of US states into k = 5 clusters.

Figure 6: Cluster-wise correlations between m1 (t) and r(t)
from March 1, 2020 to states reopening dates.
9
The correlation coefficient of WY is the only one that is not
statistically significant. (p > 0.05)

The heat-map in Figure 7 shows the consistency of the
mean correlations calculated between the travel feature
vectors m1 (t), n(t), n10 (t), n25 (t) and the infection growth
rate r(t). It becomes readily apparent that travel patterns in
both Red and Blue states exhibit a strong correlation with
the infection growth rate r(t) across all five state clusters.

Figure 8: Cluster-wise correlations between m1 (t) and r(t)
from states reopening dates to July 15, 2020

Figure 7: Heat-map of correlations between travel feature
vectors and r(t) from March 1, 2020 to states reopening
dates.
States Reopening Dates to July 15, 2020 After states
were officially reopened, correlation analysis between the
travel feature vectors m1 (t), n(t), n10 (t), n25 (t) and the
infection growth rate r(t) yielded a very different result for
Red and Blue States. These correlations are computed for
the time period between the states’ official reopening dates
to July 15, 2020. We observe that, while travel patterns for
Red States continued to display weaker positive correlations
with the infection growth rate r(t), there is either no
correlation or negative correlations for Blue States within
the same clusters. The bar plot in Figure 8 captures this
relationship for the mean value of the correlation within
each of the five state clusters. A similar relationship is
observed for the correlations of n(t), n10 (t), n25 (t) and
r(t) in this time period.
The heat-map in Figure 9 shows the mean correlations
calculated between the travel feature vectors m1 (t), n(t),
n10 (t), n25 (t) and the infection growth rate r(t) for the
time period between the states’ official reopening dates to
July 15, 2020. From the heat-map, we observe that there is
a distinct difference between the correlations coefficients
of the Red states and the correlation coefficients of the
Blue states, for all four travel feature vectors and across all
five clusters. We do see that for cluster 5, this difference
is less significant. This could perhaps be attributed to the
slower spread of infection in the Midwestern states due
to low population density and hence lower community
transmission rates.

Figure 9: Heat-map of correlations between travel feature
vectors and r(t) from states reopening dates to July 15, 2020

Further Analysis for Travel Patterns after States’
Reopening Dates
To better understand the difference of the correlation
coefficients during the periods before and after the states
reopening dates, we separate the states into four groups
according to the growth pattern of the number of newly
confirmed cases and the travel pattern.
We apply the K-means algorithm to the relative growth
rates of the newly confirmed cases of all the states, and
the highest Silhouette Score (0.522) is achieved when
the number of clusters is set to two. Figure 10 shows the
patterns of the relative growth rates of newly confirmed
cases for both clusters. Green lines represent the states of
cluster 1 and red lines represent the states of cluster 2.
The dark lines represent the mean relative growth rates
of each cluster. The difference of the relative growth
patterns of the two clusters is clear where the relative

Figure 11: The daily percent of people who traveled post
reopening for the two clusters formed according to traveling
people, i.e. a cluster with more traveling people and another
cluster with fewer traveling people. Note that here we do not
differentiate the Red and Blue States.
Figure 10: The patterns of the relative growth rate of newly
confirmed cases for the two clusters formed according to the
newly confirmed cases, i.e. a cluster that was trending up
and another cluster that was trending down. Note that here
we do not differentiate the Red and Blue States.

growth rates of the newly confirmed cases of cluster 1 was
trending down between May 30 and June 20, while that
of the cluster 2 was trending up. Due to the difference
of the pattern of relative growth rates, we separate the
states into two groups: one contains the states that had a
decreasing trend and the other displayed an increasing trend.
By applying K-means to the percent of people who traveled during reopen, we separate the states into two groups.
Two clusters yield the highest Silhouette Score (0.569).
Figure 11 shows the patterns of the percent of people who
traveled during reopening (roughly from May 5 to May 25).
Two sets of lines represent the states that are clustered by
2-means. The dark lines are the mean percentage of each
cluster. The lines for both clusters are periodic which is
expected since people might travel differently on weekdays
and weekends. However, on average, there are more people
who traveled in the states that are represented by the green
lines and fewer people in the ones that are represented
by the red lines. Thus, we separate all the states into two
groups based on the difference of the travel pattern.
Using this clustering, we split the states into four groups
according to the combination of the pattern of relative
growth rate and the travel pattern. Figure 12 shows the
splitting results. Take the bottom left section as an example:
this section represents the states that had a decreasing
relative growth rate and a lower percent of people who
traveled post reopening. The red states are the states won
by Trump in the 2016 presidential election and the blue
states are the states won by Clinton. Except for the top right
section where the states’ relative growth rate were trending

up and had a higher percent of people who traveled, the
other three sections contain both Blue States and Red
States. There are Blue and Red States in the top left and
the bottom right sections providing an explanation for the
difference of the correlation coefficients during the periods
before and after the start of reopening. One the one hand,
there are Red States that had a higher percent of people
who traveled during reopen and meanwhile they had a
decreasing relative growth rate. On the other hand, Blue
States such as California, Oregon and Nevada had a lower
percent of people who traveled, but they still suffered an
increasing relative growth rate.
To obtain a better insight into the patterns of the relative
growth rate, we compare the states of the first row and
the second row and find that most states in the first row
are in the southern part of the country and the majority
states in the second row are in the northern part of the
country. This leads to a hypothesis that the difference of
the relative growth rate could be related to the temperature.
Figure 13 shows the average temperature in May 202010 .
The temperature map roughly corresponds to the patterns
of the relative growth rate where in the south, states were
warmer and they displayed an increasing relative growth
rate, while in the north, states were cooler and they had a
decreasing relative growth rate.
Previous study has also shown that there is no evidence
supporting that case counts of COVID-19 could decline
when the weather becomes warmer (Xie and Zhu 2020). We
think the relative growth rate increases in the warmer states
because the higher temperature could change how people
behave and interact outdoors - people in the warmer states
might stay outdoors for a longer period of time increasing the chance of interacting with others. In addition, peo10

https://www.climate.gov/maps-data/datasnapshots/averagetemp-monthly-cmb-2020-0500?theme=Temperature

Figure 12: Combination of the pattern of relative growth rate and the travel pattern.
infection growth rates. However post-reopening, we observe
that the Red states continue to correlate at a significantly
higher level than the Blue states.

Figure 13: Average temperature by state in May, 2020.
ple might also find it less comfortable to wear a mask in
warmer weather which potentially reduces the value in curtailing community transmission and the burden of the pandemic (Eikenberry et al. 2020).

Conclusions and Future Work
Through our analysis of the mined transportation data and
the daily confirmed cases COVID-19 infection data, we gain
a better understanding of the spread of COVID-19 in the
US states along the political lines. We observe that during
the quarantine period, when stay-at-home orders were
imposed nationally, both the Red and Blue states exhibit a
similar level of correlation between their travel patterns and

Upon investigating post-reopening travel and infection
data further, we find that both sets of states display similar
travel patterns (there are Blue states with increasing travel
trends as well). This leads us to conclude that the spread
of COVID-19 post-reopening might be less dependent on
travel, but perhaps more on the way residents mobilize.
This could be related more to safety measures taken while
mobilizing, such as mask-usage and social distancing, etc.
Another factor explored was that of warmer temperatures
in the southern part of the country allowing residents in the
Red states to spend more time outdoors interacting with
others.
There is scope for future work to analyze how these two
sets of states acted in previous pandemics and the relationship between the state governments and the federal government. In particular, it would be valuable to quantitatively measure the adherence to the safety measures when
people travel in different states. This could be studied in
terms of mask-usage, indoor versus outdoor interactions and
safety regulations imposed by different states. It would also
be valuable to investigate the spread of COVID-19 at the
county level, to understand community transmission and
socio-economic factors that could help explain the increase
in growth rate for Red states.

References
Blagov, P. S. 2020. Adaptive and Dark Personality Traits
in the Covid-19 Pandemic: Predicting Health-behavior Endorsement and the Appeal of Public-health Messages.
PsyArXiv Preprints 10.
Chinazzi, M.; Davis, J. T.; Ajelli, M.; Gioannini, C.; Litvinova, M.; Merler, S.; y Piontti, A. P.; Mu, K.; Rossi, L.; Sun,
K.; et al. 2020. The effect of travel restrictions on the spread
of the 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak. Science 368(6489): 395–400.
Courtemanche, C.; Garuccio, J.; Le, A.; Pinkston, J.; and
Yelowitz, A. 2020. Strong Social Distancing Measures In
The United States Reduced The COVID-19 Growth Rate:
Study evaluates the impact of social distancing measures on
the growth rate of confirmed COVID-19 cases across the
United States. Health Affairs 10–1377.
Eikenberry, S. E.; Mancuso, M.; Iboi, E.; Phan, T.; Eikenberry, K.; Kuang, Y.; Kostelich, E.; and Gumel, A. B. 2020.
To mask or not to mask: Modeling the potential for face
mask use by the general public to curtail the COVID-19 pandemic. Infectious Disease Modelling .
Freeden, M. 2004. Reassessing political ideologies: The
durability of dissent. Routledge.
Jost, J. T.; Federico, C. M.; and Napier, J. L. 2009. Political ideology: Its structure, functions, and elective affinities.
Annual review of psychology 60: 307–337.
Knight, K. 2006. Transformations of the Concept of Ideology in the Twentieth Century. American Political Science
Review 619–626.
Lauer, S. A.; Grantz, K. H.; Bi, Q.; Jones, F. K.; Zheng, Q.;
Meredith, H. R.; Azman, A. S.; Reich, N. G.; and Lessler,
J. 2020. The incubation period of coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) from publicly reported confirmed cases: estimation and application. Annals of internal medicine 172(9):
577–582.
Linka, K.; Peirlinck, M.; Sahli Costabal, F.; and Kuhl, E.
2020. Outbreak dynamics of COVID-19 in Europe and the
effect of travel restrictions. Computer Methods in Biomechanics and Biomedical Engineering 1–8.
Ma, J. 2020. Estimating epidemic exponential growth rate
and basic reproduction number. Infectious Disease Modelling 5: 129–141.
Rothgerber, H.; Wilson, T.; Whaley, D.; Rosenfeld, D. L.;
Humphrey, M.; Moore, A.; and Bihl, A. 2020. Politicizing
the covid-19 pandemic: Ideological differences in adherence
to social distancing .
Xie, J.; and Zhu, Y. 2020. Association between ambient temperature and COVID-19 infection in 122 cities from China.
Science of The Total Environment 724: 138201.

