arXiv:2009.10018v1 [q-bio.PE] 21 Sep 2020

Data-driven modeling for different stages of pandemic response
Aniruddha Adiga1 , Jiangzhuo Chen1 , Madhav Marathe1,3
Henning Mortveit1,2 , Srinivasan Venkatramanan1 and Anil Vullikanti1,3
1
Biocomplexity Institute and Inititiative
2
Department of Systems Engineering and Environment
3
Department of Computer Science
University of Virginia

Abstract
Some of the key questions of interest during the COVID-19 pandemic (and all outbreaks) include:
where did the disease start, how is it spreading, who is at risk, and how to control the spread. There are
a large number of complex factors driving the spread of pandemics, and, as a result, multiple modeling
techniques play an increasingly important role in shaping public policy and decision making. As different
countries and regions go through phases of the pandemic, the questions and data availability also changes.
Especially of interest is aligning model development and data collection to support response efforts at
each stage of the pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has been unprecedented in terms of real-time
collection and dissemination of a number of diverse datasets, ranging from disease outcomes, to mobility,
behaviors, and socio-economic factors. The data sets have been critical from the perspective of disease
modeling and analytics to support policymakers in real-time. In this overview article, we survey the
data landscape around COVID-19, with a focus on how such datasets have aided modeling and response
through different stages so far in the pandemic. We also discuss some of the current challenges and the
needs that will arise as we plan our way out of the pandemic.

1

Introduction

As the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic has demonstrated, the spread of a highly infectious disease is a complex
dynamical process. A large number of factors are at play as infectious diseases spread, including variable
individual susceptibility to the pathogen (e.g., by age and health conditions), variable individual behaviors
(e.g., compliance with social distancing and the use of masks), differing response strategies implemented by
governments (e.g., school and workplace closure policies and criteria for testing), and potential availability of
pharmaceutical interventions. Governments have been forced to respond to the rapidly changing dynamics
of the pandemic, and are becoming increasingly reliant on different modeling and analytical techniques to
understand, forecast, plan and respond; this includes statistical methods and decision support methods using
multi-agent models, such as: (i) forecasting epidemic outcomes (e.g., case counts, mortality and hospital
demands), using a diverse set of data-driven methods e.g., ARIMA type time series forecasting, Bayesian
techniques and deep learning, e.g., [1–5], (ii) disease surveillance, e.g., [6,7], and (iii) counter-factual analysis
of epidemics using multi-agent models, e.g., [8–13]; indeed, the results of [11, 14] were very influential in the
early decisions for lockdowns in a number of countries.
The specific questions of interest change with the stage of the pandemic. In the pre-pandemic stage, the focus
was on understanding how the outbreak started, epidemic parameters, and the risk of importation to different
regions. Once outbreaks started– the acceleration stage, the focus is on determining the growth rates, the
differences in spatio-temporal characteristics, and testing bias. In the mitigation stage, the questions are
focused on non-prophylactic interventions, such as school and work place closures and other social-distancing
∗ To

appear in the “Journal of the Indian Institute of Science,” Volume 100.

1

strategies, determining the demand for healthcare resources, and testing and tracing. In the suppression
stage, the focus shifts to using prophylactic interventions, combined with better tracing. These phases are
not linear, and overlap with each other. For instance, the acceleration and mitigation stages of the pandemic
might overlap spatially, temporally as well as within certain social groups.
Different kinds of models are appropriate at different stages, and for addressing different kinds of questions.
For instance, statistical and machine learning models are very useful in forecasting and short term projections.
However, they are not very effective for longer-term projections, understanding the effects of different kinds
of interventions, and counter-factual analysis. Mechanistic models are very useful for such questions. Simple
compartmental type models, and their extensions, namely, structured metapopulation models are useful for
several population level questions. However, once the outbreak has spread, and complex individual and
community level behaviors are at play, multi-agent models are most effective, since they allow for a more
systematic representation of complex social interactions, individual and collective behavioral adaptation and
public policies.
As with any mathematical modeling effort, data plays a big role in the utility of such models. Till recently,
data on infectious diseases was very hard to obtain due to various issues, such as privacy and sensitivity of
the data (since it is information about individual health), and logistics of collecting such data. The data
landscape during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic has been very different: a large number of datasets are becoming
available, ranging from disease outcomes (e.g., time series of the number of confirmed cases, deaths, and
hospitalizations), some characteristics of their locations and demographics, healthcare infrastructure capacity
(e.g., number of ICU beds, number of healthcare personnel, and ventilators), and various kinds of behaviors
(e.g., level of social distancing, usage of PPEs); see [15–17] for comprehensive surveys on available datasets.
However, using these datasets for developing good models, and addressing important public health questions
remains challenging. The goal of this article is to use the widely accepted stages of a pandemic as a guiding
framework to highlight a few important problems that require attention in each of these stages. We will aim
to provide a succinct model-agnostic formulation while identifying the key datasets needed, how they can be
used, and the challenges arising in that process. We will also use SARS-CoV-2 as a case study unfolding in
real-time, and highlight some interesting peer-reviewed and preprint literature that pertains to each of these
problems. An important point to note is the necessity of randomly sampled data, e.g. data needed to assess
the number of active cases and various demographics of individuals that were affected. Census provides
an excellent rationale. It is the only way one can develop rigorous estimates of various epidemiologically
relevant quantities.
There have been numerous surveys on the different types of datasets available for SARS-CoV-2, e.g., [15–18],
as well as different kinds of modeling approaches. However, they do not describe how these models become
relevant through the phases of pandemic response. An earlier similar attempt to summarize such responsedriven modeling efforts can be found in [19], based on the 2009-H1N1 experience, this paper builds on their
work and discusses these phases in the present context and the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. Although the paper
touches upon different aspects of model-based decision making, we refer the readers to a companion article
in the same special issue [20] for a focused review of models used for projection and forecasting.

2

Background

Multiple organizations including CDC and WHO have their frameworks for preparing and planning response
to a pandemic. For instance, the Pandemic Intervals Framework from CDC1 describes the stages in the
context of an influenza pandemic; these are illustrated in Figure 1. These six stages span investigation,
recognition and initiation in the early phase, followed by most of the disease spread occurring during the
acceleration and deceleration stages. They also provide indicators for identifying when the pandemic has
progressed from one stage to the next [21]. As envisioned, risk evaluation (i.e., using tools like Influenza
Risk Assessment Tool (IRAT) and Pandemic Severity Assessment Framework (PSAF)) and early case identification characterize the first three stages, while non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) and available
1 https://www.cdc.gov/flu/pandemic-resources/national-strategy/intervals-framework.html

2

Figure 1: CDC Pandemic Intervals Framework and WHO phases for influenza pandemic
therapeutics become central to the acceleration stage. The deceleration is facilitated by mass vaccination programs, exhaustion of susceptible population, or unsuitability of environmental conditions (such as
weather). A similar framework is laid out in WHO’s pandemic continuum2 and phases of pandemic alert3 .
While such frameworks aid in streamlining the response efforts of these organizations, they also enable effective messaging. To the best of our knowledge, there has not been a similar characterization of mathematical
modeling efforts that go hand in hand with supporting the response.

3

Modeling for stages of a pandemic

For summarizing the key models, we consider four of the stages of pandemic response mentioned in Section 2:
pre-pandemic, acceleration, mitigation and suppression. Here we provide the key problems in each stage, the
datasets needed, the main tools and techniques used, and pertinent challenges. We structure our discussion
based on our experience with modeling the spread of COVID-19 in the US, done in collaboration with local
and federal agencies.
• Pre-pandemic (Section 4): in the initial time period, there are few human infections, and the key questions involve understanding the epidemiological parameters, and the risks of importation to different
countries. The primary sources of data used in this stage include line lists, clinical investigations and
prior literature on similar diseases (for the former question), and mobility data such as airline flows,
and information on travel restrictions.
• Acceleration (Section 5): this stage is relevant once the epidemic takes root within a country. There
is usually a big lag in surveillance and response efforts, and the key questions are to model spread
2 https://www.cdc.gov/flu/pandemic-resources/planning-preparedness/global-planning-508.html
3 https://www.who.int/csr/disease/swineflu/phase/en/

3

Figure 2: Summary of the data needs in different stages described in Section 3.
patterns at different spatio-temporal scales, and to derive short-term forecasts and projections. A
broad class of datasets is used for developing models, including mobility, populations, land-use, and
activities. These are combined with various kinds of time series data and covariates such as weather
for forecasting.
• Mitigation (Section 6): in this stage, different interventions, which are mostly non-pharmaceutical in
the case of a novel pathogen, are implemented by government agencies, once the outbreak has taken
hold within the population. This stage involves understanding the impact of interventions on case
counts and health infrastructure demands, taking individual behaviors into account. The additional
datasets needed in this stage include those on behavioral changes and hospital capacities.
• Suppression (Section 7): this stage involves designing methods to control the outbreak by contact
tracing & isolation and vaccination. Data on contact tracing, associated biases, vaccine production
schedules, and compliance & hesitancy are needed in this stage.
Figure 2 gives an overview of this framework and summarizes the data needs in these stages. These stages also
align well with the focus of the various modeling working groups organized by CDC which include epidemic
parameter estimation, international spread risk, sub-national spread forecasting, impact of interventions,
healthcare systems, and university modeling. In reality, one should note that these stages may overlap, and
may vary based on geographical factors and response efforts. Moreover, specific problems can be approached
prospectively in earlier stages, or retrospectively during later stages. This framework is thus meant to
be more conceptual than interpreted along a linear timeline. Results from such stages are very useful for
policymakers to guide real-time response.

4

parameter
transmissibility (R0 )
incubation period
latent period
percent symptomatic
infectious period
infection detection rate
serial interval
onset to hospitalization
hospitalization to ventilation
duration hospitalized
duration ventilated
percent hospitalized
percent ventilated

values
2.5 [2.0,3.0]
5 days
3 ∼ 5 days
65%
5 ∼ 6 days
15%
7 days
6.2 days
1 ∼ 2 days
3 ∼ 8 days
2 ∼ 7 days
5.5%
13%

description
basic reproduction number
time from infection to onset
time from infection to infectious
infected people that exhibit symptoms
duration of infectiousness
1 confirmed case corresponds to 7 cases
time from infection to next generation infection
time from symptoms to hospitalization
time from hospitalization to ventilation
time spent in the hospital
time spent on a ventilator
symptomatic individuals becoming hospitalized
hospitalized patients that require ventilation

Table 1: COVID-19 specific parameters that we currently use in our modeling and studies. Please note that
the estimated values evolve in time; the values in the table are based on the best guess 2020-04-14 version
of “COVID-19 Pandemic Planning Scenarios” document prepared by the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) SARS-CoV-2 Modeling Team [23].

4

Pre-pandemic stage

Consider a novel pathogen emerging in human populations that is detected through early cases involving
unusual symptoms or unknown etiology. Such outbreaks are characterized by some kind of spillover event,
mostly through zoonotic means, like in the case of COVID-19 or past influenza pandemics (e.g., swine flu
and avian flu). A similar scenario can occur when an incidence of a well-documented disease with no known
vaccine or therapeutics emerges in some part of the world, causing severe outcomes or fatalities (e.g., Ebola
and Zika.) Regardless of the development status of the country where the pathogen emerged, such outbreaks
now contains the risk of causing a worldwide pandemic due to the global connectivity induced by human
travel.
Two questions become relevant at this stage: what are the epidemiological attributes of this disease, and
what are the risks of importation to a different country? While the first question involves biological and
clinical investigations, the latter is more related with societal and environmental factors.

4.1

Epidemiological parameter estimation

One of the crucial tasks during early disease investigation is to ascertain the transmission and severity of
the disease. These are important dimensions along which the pandemic potential is characterized because
together they determine the overall disease burden, as demonstrated within the Pandemic Severity Assessment Framework [22]. In addition to risk assessment for right-sizing response, they are integral to developing
meaningful disease models.
Formulation Let Θ = {θT , θS } represent the transmission and severity parameters of interest. They can
be further subdivided into sojourn time parameters θ·δ and transition probability parameters θ·p . Here Θ
corresponds to a continuous time Markov chain (CTMC) on the disease states. The problem formulation
can be represented as follows:
Given Π(Θ), the prior distribution on the disease parameters and a dataset D, estimate the posterior distribution P(Θ|D) over all possible values of Θ. In a model-specific form, this can be expressed as P(Θ|D, M)
where M is a statistical, compartmental or agent-based disease model.

5

Data needs In order to estimate the disease parameters sufficiently, line lists for individual confirmed cases
is ideal. Such datasets contain, for each record, the date of confirmation, possible date of onset, severity
(hospitalization/ICU) status, and date of recovery/discharge/death. Furthermore, age- and demographic/comorbidity information allow development of models that are age- and risk group stratified. One such crowdsourced line list was compiled during the early stages of COVID-19 [24] and later released by CDC for US
cases [25]. Data from detailed clinical investigations from other countries such as China, South Korea, and
Singapore was also used to parameterize these models [26]. In the absence of such datasets, past parameter
estimates of similar diseases (e.g., SARS, MERS) were used for early analyses.
Modeling approaches For a model agnostic approach, the delays and probabilities are obtained by
various techniques, including Bayesian and Ordinary Least Squares fitting to various delay distributions. For
a particular disease model, these are estimated through model calibration techniques such as MCMC and
particle filtering approaches. A summary of community estimates of various disease parameters is provided
at https://github.com/midas-network/COVID-19. Further such estimates allow the design of pandemic
planning scenarios varying in levels of impact, as seen in the CDC scenarios page4 . See [27–29] for methods
and results related to estimating COVID-19 disease parameters from real data. Current models use a large
set of disease parameters for modeling COVID-19 dynamics; they can be broadly classified as transmission
parameters and hospital resource parameters. For instance in our work, we currently use parameters (with
explanations) shown in Table 1.
Challenges Often these parameters are model specific, and hence one needs to be careful when reusing
parameter estimates from literature. They are related but not identifiable with respect to population level
measures such as basic reproductive number R0 (or effective reproductive number Reff ) and doubling time
which allow tracking the rate of epidemic growth. Also the estimation is hindered by inherent biases in
case ascertainment rate, reporting delays and other gaps in the surveillance system. Aligning different data
streams (e.g., outpatient surveillance, hospitalization rates, mortality records) is in itself challenging.

4.2

International importation risk

When a disease outbreak occurs in some part of the world, it is imperative for most countries to estimate
their risk of importation through spatial proximity or international travel. Such measures are incredibly
valuable in setting a timeline for preparation efforts, and initiating health checks at the borders. Over
centuries, pandemics have spread faster and faster across the globe, making it all the more important to
characterize this risk as early as possible.
Formulation Let C be the set of countries, and G = {C, E} an international network, where edges (often
weighted and directed) in E represent some notion of connectivity. The importation risk problem can be
formulated as below:
Given Co ∈ C the country of origin with an initial case at time 0, and Ci the country of interest,
using G, estimate the expected time taken Ti for the first cases to arrive in country Ci .
In its probabilistic form, the same can be expressed as estimating the probability Pi (t) of seeing the first
case in country Ci by time t.
Data needs Assuming we have initial case reports from the origin country, the first data needed is a
network that connects the countries of the world to represent human travel. The most common source of
such information is the airline network datasets, from sources such as IATA, OAG, and OpenFlights; [30]
provides a systematic review of how airline passenger data has been used for infectious disease modeling.
These datasets could either capture static measures such as number of seats available or flight schedules,
4 https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/planning-scenarios.html

6

or a dynamic count of passengers per month along each itinerary. Since the latter has intrinsic delays in
collection and reporting, for an ongoing pandemic they may not be representative. During such times,
data on ongoing travel restrictions [31] become important to incorporate. Multi-modal traffic will also be
important to incorporate for countries that share land borders or have heavy maritime traffic. For diseases
such as Zika, where establishment risk is more relevant, data on vector abundance or prevailing weather
conditions are appropriate.
Modeling approaches Simple structural measures on networks (such as degree, PageRank) could provide
static indicators of vulnerability of countries. By transforming the weighted, directed edges into probabilities, one can use simple contagion models (e.g., Independent Cascades) to simulate disease spread and
empirically estimate expected time of arrival. Global metapopulation models (GLEaM) that combine SEIR
type dynamics with an airline network have also been used in the past for estimating importation risk.
Brockmann and Helbing [32] used a similar framework to quantify effective distance on the network which
seemed to be well correlated with time of arrival for multiple pandemics in the past; this has been extended
to COVID-19 [8, 33]. In [34], the authors employ air travel volume obtained through IATA from ten major
cities across China to rank various countries along with the IDVI to convey their vulnerability. [35] consider
the task of forecasting international and domestic spread of COVID-19 and employ Official Airline Group
(OAG) data for determining air traffic to various countries, and [36] fit a generalized linear model for observed number of cases in various countries as a function of air traffic volume obtained from OAG data to
determine countries with potential risk of under-detection. Also, [37] provide Africa-specific case-study of
vulnerability and preparedness using data from Civil Aviation Administration of China.
Challenges Note that arrival of an infected traveler will precede a local transmission event in a country.
Hence the former is more appropriate to quantify in early stages. Also, the formulation is agnostic to
whether it is the first infected arrival or first detected case. However, in real world, the former is difficult to
observe, while the latter is influenced by security measures at ports of entry (land, sea, air) and the ease of
identification for the pathogen. For instance, in the case of COVID-19, the long incubation period and the
high likelihood of asymptomaticity could have resulted in many infected travelers being missed by health
checks at PoEs. We also noticed potential administrative delays in reporting by multiple countries fearing
travel restrictions.

5

Acceleration stage

As the epidemic takes root within a country, it may enter the acceleration phase. Depending on the
testing infrastructure and agility of surveillance system, response efforts might lag or lead the rapid growth
in case rate. Under such a scenario, two crucial questions emerge that pertain to how the disease may spread
spatially/socially and how the case rate may grow over time.

5.1

Sub-national spread across scales

Within the country, there is need to model the spatial spread of the disease at different scales: state,
county, and community levels. Similar to the importation risk, such models may provide an estimate of
when cases may emerge in different parts of the country. When coupled with vulnerability indicators (socioeconomic, demographic, co-morbidities) they provide a framework for assessing the heterogeneous impact
the disease may have across the country. Detailed agent-based models for urban centers may help identify hotspots and potential case clusters that may emerge (e.g., correctional facilities, nursing homes, food
processing plants, etc. in the case of COVID-19).
Formulation Given a population representation P at appropriate scale and a disease model M per entity
(individual or sub-region), model the disease spread under different assumptions of underlying connectivity

7

C and disease parameters Θ. The result will be a spatio-temporal spread model that results in Zs,t , the time
series of disease states over time for region s.
Data needs Some of the common datasets needed by most modeling approaches include: (1) social
and spatial representation, which includes Census, and population data, which are available from Census departments (see, e.g., [38]), and Landscan [39], (2) connectivity between regions (commuter, airline,
road/rail/river), e.g., [30, 31], (3) data on locations, including points of interest, e.g., OpenStreetMap [40],
and (4) activity data, e.g., the American Time Use Survey [41]. These datasets help capture where people
reside and how they move around, and come in contact with each other. While some of these are static, more
dynamic measures, such as from GPS traces, become relevant as individuals change their behavior during a
pandemic.
Modeling approaches Different kinds of structured metapopulation models [8, 42–45], and agent based
models [46–50] have been used in the past to model the sub-national spread; we refer to [13, 51, 52] for
surveys on different modeling approaches. These models incorporate typical mixing patterns, which result
from detailed activities and co-location (in the case of agent based models), and different modes of travel
and commuting (in the case of metapopulation models).
Challenges While metapopulation models can be built relatively rapidly, agent based models are much
harder—the datasets need to be assembled at a large scale, with detailed construction pipelines, see, e.g., [46–
50]. Since detailed individual activities drive the dynamics in agent based models, schools and workplaces
have to be modeled, in order to make predictions meaningful. Such models will get reused at different stages
of the outbreak, so they need to be generic enough to incorporate dynamically evolving disease information.
Finally, a common challenge across modeling paradigms is the ability to calibrate to the dynamically evolving
spatio-temporal data from the outbreak—this is especially challenging in the presence of reporting biases
and data insufficiency issues.

5.2

Growth rate and time series forecasting

Given the early growth of cases within the country (or sub-region), there is need for quantifying the
rate of increase in comparable terms across the duration of the outbreak (accounting for the exponential
nature of such processes). These estimates also serve as references, when evaluating the impact of various
interventions. As an extension, such methods and more sophisticated time series methods can be used to
produce short-term forecasts for disease evolution.
Formulation Given the disease time series data within the country Zs,t until data horizon T , provide
scale-independent growth rate measures Gs (T ), and forecasts Ẑs,u for u ∈ [T, T + ∆T ], where ∆T is the
forecast horizon.
Data needs Models at this stage require datasets such as (1) time series data on different kinds of disease
outcomes, including case counts, mortality, hospitalizations, along with attributes, such as age, gender and
location, e.g., [53–57], (2) any associated data for reporting bias (total tests, test positivity rate) [58], which
need to be incorporated into the models, as these biases can have a significant impact on the dynamics, and
(3) exogenous regressors (mobility, weather), which have been shown to have a significant impact on other
diseases, such as Influenza, e.g., [59].
Modeling approaches Even before building statistical or mechanistic time series forecasting methods,
one can derive insights through analytical measures of the time series data. For instance, the effective
Reproductive number, estimated from the time series [60] can serve as a scale-independent metric to compare
the outbreaks across space and time. Additionally multiple statistical methods ranging from autoregressive
models to deep learning techniques can be applied to the time series data, with additional exogenous variables
8

as input. While such methods perform reasonably for short-term targets, mechanistic approaches as described
earlier can provide better long-term projections. Various ensembling techniques have also been developed
in the recent past to combine such multi-model forecasts to provide a single robust forecast with better
uncertainty quantification. One such effort that combines more than 30 methods for COVID-19 can be found
at the COVID Forecasting Hub5 . We also point to the companion paper for more details on projection and
forecasting models.
Challenges Data on epidemic outcomes usually has a lot of uncertainties and errors, including missing
data, collection bias, and backfill. For forecasting tasks, these time series data need to be near real-time, else
one needs to do both nowcasting, as well as forecasting. Other exogenous regressors can provide valuable
lead time, due to inherent delays in disease dynamics from exposure to case identification. Such frameworks
need to be generalized to accommodate qualitative inputs on future policies (shutdowns, mask mandates,
etc.), as well as behaviors, as we discuss in the next section.

6

Mitigation stage

Once the outbreak has taken hold within the population, local, state and national governments attempt to
mitigate and control its spread by considering different kinds of interventions. Unfortunately, as the COVID19 pandemic has shown, there is a significant delay in the time taken by governments to respond. As a result,
this has caused a large number of cases, a fraction of which lead to hospitalizations. Two key questions in
this stage are: (1) how to evaluate different kinds of interventions, and choose the most effective ones,
and (2) how to estimate the healthcare infrastructure demand, and how to mitigate it. The effectiveness
of an intervention (e.g., social distancing) depends on how individuals respond to them, and the level of
compliance. The health resource demand depends on the specific interventions which are implemented. As
a result, both these questions are connected, and require models which incorporate appropriate behavioral
responses.

6.1

Intervention analyses

In the initial stages, only non-prophylactic interventions are available, such as: social distancing, school
and workplace closures, and use of PPEs, since no vaccinations and anti-virals are available. As mentioned
above, such analyses are almost entirely model based, and the specific model depends on the nature of the
intervention and the population being studied.
Formulation Given a model, denoted abstractly as M, the general goals are (1) to evaluate the impact
of an intervention (e.g., school and workplace closure, and other social distancing strategies) on different
epidemic outcomes (e.g., average outbreak size, peak size, and time to peak), and (2) find the most effective
intervention from a suite of interventions, with given resource constraints. The specific formulation depends
crucially on the model and type of intervention. Even for a single intervention, evaluating its impact is
quite challenging, since there are a number of sources of uncertainty, and a number of parameters associated
with the intervention (e.g., when to start school closure, how long, and how to restart). Therefore, finding
uncertainty bounds is a key part of the problem.
Data needs While all the data needs from the previous stages for developing a model are still there,
representation of different kinds of behaviors is a crucial component of the models in this stage; this includes:
use of PPEs, compliance to social distancing measures, and level of mobility. Statistics on such behaviors are
available at a fairly detailed level (e.g., counties and daily) from multiple sources, such as (1) the COVID19 Impact Analysis Platform from the University of Maryland [56], which gives metrics related to social
distancing activities, including level of staying home, outside county trips, outside state trips, (2) changes
5 https://covid19forecasthub.org/

9

in mobility associated with different kinds of activities from Google [61], and other sources, (3) survey data
on different kinds of behaviors, such as usage of masks [62].
Modeling approaches As mentioned above, such analyses are almost entirely model based, including
structured metapopulation models [8, 42–45], and agent based models [46–50]. Different kinds of behaviors
relevant to such interventions, including compliance with using PPEs and compliance to social distancing
guidelines, need to be incorporated into these models. Since there is a great deal of heterogeneity in such
behaviors, it is conceptually easiest to incorporate them into agent based models, since individual agents are
represented. However, calibration, simulation and analysis of such models pose significant computational
challenges. On the other hand, the simulation of metapopulation models is much easier, but such behaviors
cannot be directly represented— instead, modelers have to estimate the effect of different behaviors on the
disease model parameters, which can pose modeling challenges.
Challenges There are a number of challenges in using data on behaviors, which depends on the specific
datasets. Much of the data available for COVID-19 is estimated through indirect sources, e.g., through cell
phone and online activities, and crowd-sourced platforms. This can provide large spatio-temporal datasets,
but have unknown biases and uncertainties. On the other hand, survey data is often more reliable, and
provides several covariates, but is typically very sparse. Handling such uncertainties, rigorous sensitivity
analysis, and incorporating the uncertainties into the analysis of the simulation outputs are important steps
for modelers.

6.2

Health resource demands

The COVID-19 pandemic has led to a significant increase in hospitalizations. Hospitals are typically
optimized to run near capacity, so there have been fears that the hospital capacities would not be adequate,
especially in several countries in Asia, but also in some regions in the US. Nosocomial transmission could
further increase this burden.
Formulation The overall problem is to estimate the demand for hospital resources within a population—
this includes the number of hospitalizations, and more refined types of resources, such as ICUs, CCUs, medical
personnel and equipment, such as ventilators. An important issue is whether the capacity of hospitals within
the region would be overrun by the demand, when this is expected to happen, and how to design strategies
to meet the demand—this could be through augmenting the capacities at existing hospitals, or building new
facilities. Timing is of essence, and projections of when the demands exceed capacity are important for
governments to plan.
Data needs The demands for hospitalization and other health resources can be estimated from the epidemic models mentioned earlier, by incorporating suitable health states, e.g., [43, 63]; in addition to the
inputs needed for setting up the models for case counts, datasets are needed for hospitalization rates and
durations of hospital stay, ICU care, and ventilation. The other important inputs for this component are hospital capacity, and the referral regions (which represent where patients travel for hospitalization). Different
public and commercial datasets provide such information, e.g., [64, 65].
Modeling approaches Demand for health resources is typically incorporated into both metapopulation
and agent based models, by having a fraction of the infectious individuals transition into a hospitalization
state. An important issue to consider is what happens if there is a shortage of hospital capacity. Studying
this requires modeling the hospital infrastructure, i.e., different kinds of hospitals within the region, and
which hospital a patient goes to. There is typically limited data on this, and data on hospital referral
regions, or voronoi tesselation can be used. Understanding the regimes in which hospital demand exceeds
capacity is an important question to study. Nosocomial transmission is typically much harder to study, since
it requires more detailed modeling of processes within hospitals.
10

Challenges There is a lot of uncertainty and variability in all the datasets involved in this process, making its modeling difficult. For instance, forecasts of the number of cases and hospitalizations have huge
uncertainty bounds for medium or long term horizon, which is the kind of input necessary for understanding
hospital demands, and whether there would be any deficits.

7

Suppression stage

The suppression stage involves methods to control the outbreak, including reducing the incidence rate
and potentially leading to the eradication of the disease in the end. Eradication in case of COVID-19 appears
unlikely as of now, what is more likely is that this will become part of seasonal human coronaviruses that
will mutate continuously much like the influenza virus.

7.1

Contact tracing, testing and isolation

Contact tracing problem refers to the ability to trace the neighbors of an infected individual. Ideally,
if one is successful, each neighbor of an infected neighbor would be identified and isolated from the larger
population to reduce the growth of a pandemic. In some cases, each such neighbor could be tested to see
if the individual has contracted the disease. Contact tracing is the workhorse in epidemiology and has
been immensely successful in controlling slow moving diseases. When combined with vaccination and other
pharmaceutical interventions, it provides the best way to control and suppress an epidemic.
Formulation The basic contact tracing problem is stated as follows: Given a social contact network
G(V, E) and subset of nodes S ⊂ V that are infected and a subset S1 ⊂ S of nodes identified as infected,
find all neighbors of S. Here a neighbor means an individual who is likely to have a substantial contact
with the infected person. One then tests them (if tests are available), and following that, isolates these
neighbors, or vaccinates them or administers anti-viral. The measures of effectiveness for the problem
include: (i) maximizing the size of S1 , (ii) maximizing the size of set N (S1 ) ⊆ N (S), i.e. the potential
number of neighbors of set S1 , (iii) doing this within a short period of time so that these neighbors either
do not become infectious, or they minimize the number of days that they are infectious, while they are still
interacting in the community in a normal manner, (iv) the eventual goal is to try and reduce the incidence
rate in the community—thus if all the neighbors of S1 cannot be identified, one aims to identify those
individuals who when isolated/treated lead to a large impact; (v) and finally verifying that these individuals
indeed came in contact with the infected individuals and thus can be asked to isolate or be treated.
Data needs Data needed for the contact tracing problem includes: (i) a line list of individuals who are
currently known to be infected (this is needed in case of human based contact tracing). In the real world,
when carrying out human contact tracers based deployment, one interviews all the individuals who are known
to be infectious and reaches out to their contacts.
Modeling approaches Human contact tracing is routinely done in epidemiology. Most states in the US
have hired such contact tracers. They obtain the daily incidence report from the state health departments
and then proceed to contact the individuals who are confirmed to be infected. Earlier, human contact tracers
used to go from house to house and identify the potential neighbors through a well defined interview process.
Although very effective it is very time consuming and labor intensive. Phones were used extensively in the
last 10-20 years as they allow the contact tracers to reach individuals. They are helpful but have the downside
that it might be hard to reach all individuals. During COVID-19 outbreak, for the first time, societies and
governments have considered and deployed digital contact tracing tools [66–70]. These can be quite effective
but also have certain weaknesses, including, privacy, accuracy, and limited market penetration of the digital
apps.

11

Challenges These include: (i) inability to identify everyone who is infectious (the set S) — this is virtually
impossible for COVID-19 like disease unless the incidence rate has come down drastically and for the reason
that many individuals are infected but asymptomatic; (ii) identifying all contacts of S (or S1 ) – this is hard
since individuals cannot recall everyone they met, certain folks that they were in close proximity might have
been in stores or social events and thus not known to individuals in the set S. Furthermore, even if a person
is able to identify the contacts, it is often hard to reach all the individuals due to resource constraints (each
human tracer can only contact a small number of individuals.

7.2

Vaccine allocation

The overall goal of the vaccine allocation problem is to allocate vaccine efficiently and in a timely manner
to reduce the overall burden of the pandemic.
Formulation The basic version of the problem can be cast in a very simple manner (for networked models):
Given a graph G(V, E) and a budget B on the number of vaccines available, find a set S of size B to vaccinate
so as to optimize certain measure of effectiveness. The measure of effectiveness can be (i) minimizing the total
number of individuals infected (or maximizing the total number of uninfected individuals); (ii) minimizing
the total number of deaths (or maximizing the total number of deaths averted); (iii) optimizing the above
quantities but keeping in mind certain equity and fairness criteria (across socio-demographic groups, e.g.
age, race, income); (iv) taking into account vaccine hesitancy of individuals; (v) taking into account the fact
that all vaccines are not available at the start of the pandemic, and when they become available, one gets
limited number of doses each month; (vi) deciding how to share the stockpile between countries, state, and
other organizations; (vii) taking into account efficacy of the vaccine.
Data needs As in other problems, vaccine allocation problems need as input a good representation of
the system; network based, meta-population based and compartmental mass action models can be used.
One other key input is the vaccine budget, i.e., the production schedule and timeline, which serves as the
constraint for the allocation problem. Additional data on prevailing vaccine sentiment and past compliance
to seasonal/neonatal vaccinations are useful to estimate coverage.
Modeling approaches The problem has been studied actively in the literature; network science community has focused on optimal allocation schemes, while public health community has focused on using
meta-population models and assessing certain fixed allocation schemes based on socio-economic and demographic considerations. Game theoretic approaches that try and understand strategic behavior of individuals
and organization has also been studied.
Challenges The problem is computationally challenging and thus most of the time simulation based
optimization techniques are used. Challenge to the optimization approach comes from the fact that the
optimal allocation scheme might be hard to compute or hard to implement. Other challenges include fairness
criteria (e.g. the optimal set might be a specific group) and also multiple objectives that one needs to balance.

8

Discussion

While the above sections provide an overview of salient modeling questions that arise during the key
stages of a pandemic, mathematical and computational model development is equally if not more important
as we approach the post-pandemic (or more appropriately inter-pandemic) phase. Often referred to as peace
time efforts, this phase allows modelers to retrospectively assess individual and collective models on how
they performed during the pandemic. In order to encourage continued development and identifying data
gaps, synthetic forecasting challenge exercises [71] may be conducted where multiple modeling groups are
invited to forecast synthetic scenarios with varying levels of data availability. Another set of models that

12

are quite relevant for policymakers during the winding down stages, are those that help assess overall health
burden and economic costs of the pandemic.
Acknowledgments. The authors would like to thank members of the Biocomplexity COVID-19 Response
Team and Network Systems Science and Advanced Computing (NSSAC) Division for their thoughtful comments and suggestions related to epidemic modeling and response support. We thank members of the
Biocomplexity Institute and Initiative, University of Virginia for useful discussion and suggestions. This
work was partially supported by National Institutes of Health (NIH) Grant R01GM109718, NSF BIG DATA
Grant IIS-1633028, NSF DIBBS Grant OAC-1443054, NSF Grant No.: OAC-1916805, NSF Expeditions in
Computing Grant CCF-1918656, CCF-1917819, NSF RAPID CNS-2028004, NSF RAPID OAC-2027541, US
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 75D30119C05935, DTRA subcontract/ARA S-D00189-15-TO01-UVA. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the funding agencies.

References
[1] Bijaya Adhikari, Xinfeng Xu, Naren Ramakrishnan, and B. Aditya Prakash. Epideep: Exploiting embeddings for epidemic forecasting. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, KDD ’19, page 577–586, New York, NY, USA, 2019. Association
for Computing Machinery. https://doi.org/10.1145/3292500.3330917.
[2] Gaetano Perone. An arima model to forecast the spread and the final size of covid-2019 epidemic in
italy (first version on ssrn 31 march). SSRN Electronic Journal, 03 2020.
[3] Angel Desai, Moritz Kraemer, Sangeeta Bhatia, Anne Cori, Pierre Nouvellet, Mark Herringer, Emily
Cohn, Malwina Carrion, John Brownstein, Lawrence Madoff, and Britta Lassmann. Real-time epidemic
forecasting: Challenges and opportunities. Health Security, 17:268–275, 08 2019.
[4] Nicholas G. Reich, Craig J McGowan, Teresa K. Yamana, Abhinav Tushar, Evan L. Ray, Dave Osthus,
Sasikiran Kandula, Logan C. Brooks, Willow Crawford-Crudell, Graham Casey Gibson, Evan Moore,
Rebecca Silva, Matthew Biggerstaff, Michael A. Johansson, Roni Rosenfeld, and Jeffrey L Shaman. Accuracy of real-time multi-model ensemble forecasts for seasonal influenza in the u.s. PLoS Computational
Biology, 15, 2019.
[5] Sebastian Funk, Anton Camacho, Adam J. Kucharski, Rosalind M. Eggo, and W. John Edmunds. Realtime forecasting of infectious disease dynamics with a stochastic semi-mechanistic model. Epidemics,
22:56 – 61, 2018. The RAPIDD Ebola Forecasting Challenge.
[6] Healthmap. https://healthmap.org/en/.
[7] Isaac Fung, Zion Tse, and King-wa Fu. The use of social media in public health surveillance. Western
Pacific surveillance and response journal : WPSAR, 6:3–6, 04 2015.
[8] Matteo Chinazzi, Jessica T. Davis, Marco Ajelli, Corrado Gioannini, Maria Litvinova, Stefano Merler,
Ana Pastore y Piontti, Kunpeng Mu, Luca Rossi, Kaiyuan Sun, Cécile Viboud, Xinyue Xiong, Hongjie
Yu, M. Elizabeth Halloran, Ira M. Longini, and Alessandro Vespignani. The effect of travel restrictions
on the spread of the 2019 novel coronavirus (covid-19) outbreak. Science, 368(6489):395–400, 2020.
https://science.sciencemag.org/content/368/6489/395.
[9] Tom Britton. Basic prediction methodology for covid-19: estimation and sensitivity considerations.
medRxiv, 2020. https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.03.27.20045575v2.
[10] Joacim Rocklöv, Henrik Sjödin, and Annelies Wilder-Smith. Covid-19 outbreak on the diamond princess
cruise ship: estimating the epidemic potential and effectiveness of public health countermeasures. Journal of travel medicine, 27(3):taaa030, 2020.
13

[11] Neil Ferguson, Daniel Laydon, Gemma Nedjati Gilani, Natsuko Imai, Kylie Ainslie, Marc Baguelin,
Sangeeta Bhatia, Adhiratha Boonyasiri, ZULMA Cucunuba Perez, Gina Cuomo-Dannenburg, et al.
Report 9: Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (npis) to reduce covid19 mortality and healthcare demand. Imperial College Technical Report, 2020. https://www.imperial.ac.uk/media/
imperial-college/medicine/mrc-gida/2020-03-16-COVID19-Report-9.pdf.
[12] Stephen Eubank, Hasan Guclu, V. S. Anil Kumar, Madhav Marathe, Aravind Srinivasan, Zoltan
Toroczkai, and Nan Wang. Modelling disease outbreaks in realistic urban social networks. Nature,
429:180–184, 2004.
[13] Madhav Marathe and Anil Vullikanti. Computational epidemiology. Communications of the ACM,
56(7):88–96, 2013.
[14] IHME COVID, Christopher JL Murray, et al. Forecasting covid-19 impact on hospital bed-days, icudays, ventilator-days and deaths by us state in the next 4 months. MedRxiv, 2020. https://www.
medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.03.27.20043752v1.
[15] Teodoro Alamo, Daniel G Reina, Martina Mammarella, and Alberto Abella. Open data resources for
fighting covid-19. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.06111, 2020. https://arxiv.org/pdf/2004.06111.pdf.
[16] Teodoro Alamo, DG Reina, and Pablo Millán. Data-driven methods to monitor, model, forecast and
control covid-19 pandemic: Leveraging data science, epidemiology and control theory. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.01731, 2020. https://arxiv.org/pdf/2006.01731.pdf.
[17] Junaid Shuja, Eisa Alanazi, Waleed Alasmary, and Abdulaziz Alashaikh. Covid-19 datasets: A survey
and future challenges. medRxiv, 2020. https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.05.19.
20107532v2.full.pdf+html.
[18] Reza Sameni. Mathematical modeling of epidemic diseases; a case study of the covid-19 coronavirus.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.11371, 2020. https://arxiv.org/pdf/2003.11371.pdf.
[19] Joseph T Wu and Benjamin J Cowling. The use of mathematical models to inform influenza pandemic
preparedness and response. Experimental Biology and Medicine, 236(8):955–961, 2011.
[20] Aniruddha Adiga, Devdatt Dubhashi, Bryan Lewis, Madhav Marathe, Srinivasan Venkatramanan, and
Anil Vullikanti. Mathematical models for covid-19 pandemic: a comparative analysis. Journal of IISc,
2020.
[21] Rachel Holloway, Sonja A Rasmussen, Stephanie Zaza, Nancy J Cox, Daniel B Jernigan, and Influenza
Pandemic Framework Workgroup. Updated preparedness and response framework for influenza pandemics. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report: Recommendations and Reports, 63(6):1–18, 2014.
[22] Carrie Reed, Matthew Biggerstaff, Lyn Finelli, Lisa M Koonin, Denise Beauvais, Amra Uzicanin, Andrew Plummer, Joe Bresee, Stephen C Redd, and Daniel B Jernigan. Novel framework for assessing
epidemiologic effects of influenza epidemics and pandemics. Emerging infectious diseases, 19(1):85, 2013.
[23] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Covid-19 pandemic planning scenarios. https://www.cdc.
gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/planning-scenarios-h.pdf, 2020. [Online, accessed September
14, 2020].
[24] Bo Xu, Bernardo Gutierrez, Sumiko Mekaru, Kara Sewalk, Lauren Goodwin, Alyssa Loskill, Emily L
Cohn, Yulin Hswen, Sarah C Hill, Maria M Cobo, et al. Epidemiological data from the covid-19
outbreak, real-time case information. Scientific data, 7(1):1–6, 2020.
[25] CDC. Covid-19 case surveillance public use data — data — centers for disease control and prevention.
https://data.cdc.gov/Case-Surveillance/COVID-19-Case-Surveillance-Public-Use-Data/
vbim-akqf. (Accessed on 08/24/2020).
14

[26] Long-quan Li, Tian Huang, Yong-qing Wang, Zheng-ping Wang, Yuan Liang, Tao-bi Huang, Hui-yun
Zhang, Weiming Sun, and Yuping Wang. Covid-19 patients’ clinical characteristics, discharge rate, and
fatality rate of meta-analysis. Journal of medical virology, 92(6):577–583, 2020.
[27] Tapiwa Ganyani, Cécile Kremer, Dongxuan Chen, Andrea Torneri, Christel Faes, Jacco Wallinga, and
Niel Hens. Estimating the generation interval for coronavirus disease (covid-19) based on symptom
onset data, march 2020. Eurosurveillance, 25(17):2000257, 2020.
[28] Stephen A Lauer, Kyra H Grantz, Qifang Bi, Forrest K Jones, Qulu Zheng, Hannah R Meredith,
Andrew S Azman, Nicholas G Reich, and Justin Lessler. The incubation period of coronavirus disease
2019 (covid-19) from publicly reported confirmed cases: estimation and application. Annals of internal
medicine, 172(9):577–582, 2020.
[29] Joseph T Wu, Kathy Leung, Mary Bushman, Nishant Kishore, Rene Niehus, Pablo M de Salazar,
Benjamin J Cowling, Marc Lipsitch, and Gabriel M Leung. Estimating clinical severity of covid-19 from
the transmission dynamics in wuhan, china. Nature Medicine, 26(4):506–510, 2020.
[30] Margaux Marie Isabelle Meslé, Ian Melvyn Hall, Robert Matthew Christley, Steve Leach, and
Jonathan Michael Read. The use and reporting of airline passenger data for infectious disease modelling:
a systematic review. Eurosurveillance, 24(31):1800216, 2019.
[31] Srini Venkatramanan. Flight cancellations related to 2019-nCoV (COVID-19). University of Virginia
Dataverse, 2020.
[32] D. Brockmann and Dirk Helbing. The hidden geometry of complex, network-driven contagion phenomena. Science (New York, N.Y.), 342:1337–1342, 12 2013.
[33] Aniruddha Adiga, Srinivasan Venkatramanan, James Schlitt, Akhil Peddireddy, Allan Dickerman, Andrei Bura, Andrew Warren, Brian D Klahn, Chunhong Mao, Dawen Xie, Dustin Machi, Erin Raymond, Fanchao Meng, Golda Barrow, Henning Mortveit, Jiangzhuo Chen, Jim Walke, Joshua Goldstein,
Mandy L Wilson, Mark Orr, Przemyslaw Porebski, Pyrros A Telionis, Richard Beckman, Stefan Hoops,
Stephen Eubank, Young Yun Baek, Bryan Lewis, Madhav Marathe, and Chris Barrett. Evaluating the
impact of international airline suspensions on the early global spread of covid-19. medRxiv, 2020.
[34] Isaac I Bogoch, Alexander Watts, Andrea Thomas-Bachli, Carmen Huber, Moritz UG Kraemer, and
Kamran Khan. Potential for global spread of a novel coronavirus from China. Journal of Travel
Medicine, 2020.
[35] J.T. Wu, K. Leung, and G.M. Leung. Forecasting the potential domestic and international spread of
the 2019-nCoV outbreak originating in Wuhan, China: A modelling study. The Lancet, 2020.
[36] P.M. De Salazar, R. Niehus, A. Taylor, C.O. Buckee, and M. Lipsitch. Using predicted imports of
2019-nCoV cases to determine locations that may not be identifying all imported cases. medRxiv, 2020.
https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.02.04.20020495v2.
[37] M. Gilbert, G. Pullano, F. Pinotti, E. Valdano, C. Poletto, P.Y. Boelle, E. D’Ortenzio, Y. Yazdanpanah,
S.P. Eholie, M. Altmann, and B. Gutierrez. Preparedness and vulnerability of African countries against
introductions of 2019-nCoV. medRxiv, 2020.
[38] R. Beckman, J. Baggerly, A. Keith, and M. McKay. Creating synthetic baseline populations. Transportation Research-A, 30:415–429, 1996.
[39] Landscan. https://landscan.ornl.gov/landscan-datasets.
[40] Openstreetmap. https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Downloading_data.
[41] American time use survey. https://www.bls.gov/tus/.
15

[42] Duygu Balcan, Vittoria Colizza, Bruno Gonçalves, Hao Hu, José J. Ramasco, and Alessandro Vespignani. Multiscale mobility networks and the spatial spreading of infectious diseases. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 106:21484 – 21489, 2009.
[43] Srinivasan Venkatramanan, Jiangzhuo Chen, Arindam Fadikar, Sandeep Gupta, Dave Higdon, Bryan
Lewis, Madhav Marathe, Henning Mortveit, and Anil Vullikanti. Optimizing spatial allocation of seasonal influenza vaccine under temporal constraints. PLoS computational biology, 15(9):e1007111, 2019.
[44] Marcelo F. C. Gomes, Ana Pastore y Piontti, Luca Rossi, Dennis L Chao, Ira M. Longini, M. Elizabeth
Halloran, and Alessandro Vespignani. Assessing the international spreading risk associated with the
2014 west african ebola outbreak. PLoS Currents, 6, 2014.
[45] Qian Zhang, Kaiyuan Sun, Matteo Chinazzi, Ana Pastore y Piontti, Natalie E. Dean, Diana Patricia
Rojas, Stefano Merler, Dina Mistry, Piero Poletti, Luca Rossi, Margaret Bray, M. Elizabeth Halloran,
Ira M. Longini, and Alessandro Vespignani. Spread of zika virus in the americas. PNAS, 114(22):E4334–
E4343, 2017.
[46] Stephen Eubank, VS Anil Kumar, Madhav V Marathe, Aravind Srinivasan, and Nan Wang. Structure
of social contact networks and their impact on epidemics. DIMACS Series in Discrete Mathematics and
Theoretical Computer Science, 70:181, 2006.
[47] Christopher L Barrett, Richard J Beckman, Maleq Khan, V. S. Anil Kumar, Madhav V Marathe,
Paula E Stretz, Tridib Dutta, and Bryan Lewis. Generation and analysis of large synthetic social
contact networks. In Winter Simulation Conference, pages 1003–1014. Winter Simulation Conference,
2009.
[48] Stephen Eubank, Hasan Guclu, VS Anil Kumar, Madhav V Marathe, Aravind Srinivasan, Zoltan
Toroczkai, and Nan Wang. Modelling disease outbreaks in realistic urban social networks. Nature,
429(6988):180–184, 2004.
[49] Ira M. Longini, Azhar Nizam, Shufu Xu, Kumnuan Ungchusak, Wanna Hanshaoworakul, Derek A.
Cummings, and Elizabeth M. Halloran. Containing pandemic influenza at the source. Science,
309(5737):1083–1087, August 2005.
[50] Neil Ferguson, Daniel Laydon, Gemma Nedjati Gilani, Natsuko Imai, Kylie Ainslie, Marc Baguelin,
Sangeeta Bhatia, Adhiratha Boonyasiri, Zulma Cucunuba Perez, Gina Cuomo-Dannenburg, et al. Report 9: Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (npis) to reduce covid19 mortality and healthcare
demand. Imperial College Technical Reports, 2020.
[51] Linda JS Allen, Fred Brauer, Pauline Van den Driessche, and Jianhong Wu. Mathematical epidemiology,
volume 1945. Springer, 2008.
[52] Mark EJ Newman. The structure and function of complex networks. SIAM review, 45(2):167–256, 2003.
[53] Amazon Web Services. A public data lake for analysis of COVID-19 data. https://aws.amazon.com/
blogs/big-data/a-public-data-lake-for-analysis-of-covid-19-data/, 2020.
[54] MIDAS network.
MIDAS 2019 novel coronavirus repository, 2020.
midas-network/COVID-19.

https://github.com/

[55] The New York Times. Coronavirus (Covid-19) Data in the United States, 2020. https://github.com/
nytimes/covid-19-data.
[56] Covid-19 impact analysis platform. https://data.covid.umd.edu/.
[57] Biocomplexity Institute. COVID-19 Surveillance Dashboard, 2020. http://ncov.bii.virginia.edu/
dashboard/.
16

[58] The covid tracking project. https://covidtracking.com/.
[59] Jeffrey Shaman, Virginia Pitzer, Cécile Viboud, Bryan Grenfell, and Marc Lipsitch. Absolute humidity
and the seasonal onset of influenza in the continental united states. PLoS biology, 8:e1000316, 02 2010.
[60] A Cori. Epiestim: a package to estimate time varying reproduction numbers from epidemic curves. R
package version, pages 1–1, 2013.
[61] Google covid-19 community mobility reports. https://www.google.com/covid19/mobility/.
[62] Mask-wearing survey data. https://github.com/nytimes/covid-19-data/tree/master/mask-use.
[63] Xutong Wang, Remy F Pasco, Zhanwei Du, Michaela Petty, Spencer J Fox, Alison P Galvani, Michael
Pignone, S Claiborne Johnston, and Lauren Ancel Meyers. Impact of social distancing measures on
coronavirus disease healthcare demand, central texas, usa. Emerging infectious diseases, 26(10), July
2020.
[64] Current hospital capacity estimates
report-patient-impact.html.

—snapshot.

https://www.cdc.gov/nhsn/covid19/

[65] Total hospital bed occupancy (covid-19). https://www.scdhec.gov/infectious-diseases/viruses/
coronavirus-disease-2019-covid-19/hospital-bed-capacity-covid-19.
[66] Lars Lorch, William Trouleau, Stratis Tsirtsis, Aron Szanto, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Manuel GomezRodriguez. Quantifying the effects of contact tracing, testing, and containment. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.07641, 2020.
[67] Marcel Salathé, Christian L Althaus, Richard Neher, Silvia Stringhini, Emma Hodcroft, Jacques Fellay,
Marcel Zwahlen, Gabriela Senti, Manuel Battegay, Annelies Wilder-Smith, et al. Covid-19 epidemic in
switzerland: on the importance of testing, contact tracing and isolation. Swiss medical weekly, 150(1112),
2020.
[68] Luca Ferretti, Chris Wymant, Michelle Kendall, Lele Zhao, Anel Nurtay, Lucie Abeler-Dörner, Michael
Parker, David Bonsall, and Christophe Fraser. Quantifying sars-cov-2 transmission suggests epidemic
control with digital contact tracing. Science, 2020.
[69] Mirjam Kretzschmar, Ganna Rozhnova, and Michiel van Boven. Isolation and contact tracing can tip
the scale to containment of covid-19 in populations with social distancing. Available at SSRN 3562458,
2020. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3562458.
[70] Justin Chan, Shyam Gollakota, Eric Horvitz, Joseph Jaeger, Sham Kakade, Tadayoshi Kohno, John
Langford, Jonathan Larson, Sudheesh Singanamalla, Jacob Sunshine, et al. Pact: Privacy sensitive
protocols and mechanisms for mobile contact tracing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.03544, 2020. https:
//arxiv.org/pdf/2004.03544.pdf.
[71] Cécile Viboud, Kaiyuan Sun, Robert Gaffey, Marco Ajelli, Laura Fumanelli, Stefano Merler, Qian
Zhang, Gerardo Chowell, Lone Simonsen, Alessandro Vespignani, et al. The rapidd ebola forecasting
challenge: Synthesis and lessons learnt. Epidemics, 22:13–21, 2018.

17

