1

Duality between Coronavirus Transmission and
Air-based Macroscopic Molecular Communication

arXiv:2009.04966v3 [eess.SP] 23 Dec 2020

Max Schurwanz, Peter Adam Hoeher, Sunasheer Bhattacharjee, Martin Damrath, Lukas Stratmann,
and Falko Dressler

Abstract—This contribution exploits the duality between a
viral infection process and macroscopic air-based molecular
communication. Airborne aerosol and droplet transmission
through human respiratory processes is modeled as an instance
of a multiuser molecular communication scenario employing
respiratory-event-driven molecular variable-concentration shift
keying. Modeling is aided by experiments that are motivated
by a macroscopic air-based molecular communication testbed.
In artificially induced coughs, a saturated aqueous solution
containing a fluorescent dye mixed with saliva is released by
an adult test person. The emitted particles are made visible by
means of optical detection exploiting the fluorescent dye. The
number of particles recorded is significantly higher in test series
without mouth and nose protection than in those with a wellfitting medical mask. A simulation tool for macroscopic molecular
communication processes is extended and used for estimating
the transmission of infectious aerosols in different environments.
Towards this goal, parameters obtained through self experiments
are taken. The work is inspired by the recent outbreak of the
coronavirus pandemic.
Index Terms—Aerosols, biological system modeling, computer
simulation, digital modulation, fluid flow measurements, fluorescence, infection diseases, molecular communication, multiuser
channels

I. I NTRODUCTION

T

HE recent outbreak of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has led to an increased interest in the spread of infectious aerosols, generated
by respiratory events of humans. Airborne aerosols are able to
carry pathogens, for example in the form of viral ribonucleic
acid (RNA), that might infect other humans when inhaled
into the respiratory tract [1], [2]. An important factor in
assessing the risk of infection is a good understanding of the
propagation behaviour of aerosols in the air. Recent research
corresponding to the coronavirus outbreak has largely dealt
with the distribution of different-sized aerosols in the human
airways [3] and the distribution of aerosols following air
drifts in defined environments [4] to assess different preventive
techniques to control infection. Several publications have
investigated the size distributions of aerosols in respiratory
events like breathing and talking [5], [6] as well as coughing
and sneezing [7]–[9]. Other parameters like the emission angle
and initial velocity of particles have also been determined [10],
ruling the distance that aerosols can travel [11]. Several studies
M. Schurwanz, P. A. Hoeher, S. Bhattacharjee, and
with the Faculty of Engineering, Kiel University, Kiel,
{masc,ph,sub,md}@tf.uni-kiel.de.
L. Stratmann and F. Dressler are with the School
gineering and Computer Science, TU Berlin, Berlin,
{stratmann,dressler}@ccs-labs.org.

M. Damrath are
Germany, e-mail:
of Electrical EnGermany, e-mail:

have been conducted regarding the stability and concentrations
of pathogenic aerosols on various surfaces [12], [13]. Further
research was conducted to determine the viral load in collected
samples of particles from surfaces [14]–[16], as well as the
influence of varying activity loads on the human body by the
emitted viral load [17].
The literature uses the term “aerosol” for a wide range of
particles, starting with aerosols of a few hundred nanometers in
diameter up to droplets with a diameter of about 100 µm [18].
In this paper, we follow the same approach as the literature
for the descriptions of the scenario. In the evaluation of the
measurement results, a distinction is made between droplets
and cloud-like aerosols. When a distinction is not needed,
however, reference is made to aerosols in general throughout
the article.
The viral infection spread through aerosols and droplets
can be seen from the perspective of molecular communication
(MC). MC is often described as a nature-inspired approach to
information transfer [19], [20]. Molecules are used as carriers
to transmit information between a transmitter and a receiver.
From an evolutionary perspective, this concept has proven to
be effective and can be observed in the communication of
unicellular organisms via molecules in fluid environments [21],
or in macroscopic communication through pheromones in
the air [22]. Starting from the microscopic domain with
application areas inside the human body like targeted drug
delivery [23], improved diagnosis and treatment with lab-ona-chip devices to accelerate and refine the medical procedure [24], [25], in the domain of bio-sensors and intelligent
materials [26], and even beyond in-body applications [27], MC
is believed to improve a wide range of applications. In addition
to the theoretical discussions of MC application areas, there is
currently a lack of practical implementations, as this requires
a high degree of cooperation between engineers from different
disciplines [28]. The macroscopic domain of MC mainly
focuses on industrial and smart city applications for instance,
where traditional radio communication might be challenging
to accomplish. In order to understand the underlying principles
and the overall system better, several testbeds have been developed [29] based for example on magnetic nanoparticles [30],
alcohol molecules [31], or fluorescent dyes [32]–[34] using a
fluid-based or air-based environment.
First foundations of aerosol transmission from a communications point of view have recently been established in [35],
[36]. In [35], a general concept is proposed and the duality
between MC and aerosol transmission is highlighted. The
transmission behavior of airborne pathogens is modeled by a
macroscopic air-based MC scenario consisting of a transmit-

2

ter, a distorted channel, and a receiver. This communication
scenario has been described by Shannon in his landmark
paper [37], nowadays dubbed “mother of all models.” In the
context of interest, the molecular transmitter is represented
by an infected human, emitting virus-bearing aerosols into
the environment. Different respiratory events like breathing,
speaking, coughing, or sneezing define the properties of the
aerosol emission process. These include the amount of particles released with a certain probability distribution of different
particle sizes, initial velocities, as well as emission directions.
The random movement of the particles is described by the
channel model. In [35], a biosensor is assumed at the receiver
side. The focus is on outdoor environments. In the followup work [36], a complete system model is presented and an
end-to-end mathematical model is derived for the transmission
channel under certain constraints and boundary conditions.
Additionally, the system response for both continuous sources
such as breathing and jet or impulsive sources such as coughing and sneezing is studied. In addition to transmitter and
channel, a receiver architecture composed of air sampler and
silicon nanowire field-effect transistor is assumed. A detection
problem to maximize the decision likelihood is formulated and
the corresponding missed detection probability is minimized.
Several numerical results are presented to observe the impact
of parameters that affect the performance and justify the
feasibility of the proposed setup in related applications.
Even more recently and independent of the presented work,
the biosensor-based detector is replaced by an absorbing detector in the form of a healthy human located at a certain distance
from the emitter [38]. That way, the spreading mechanism of
infectious diseases by airborne pathogen transmission between
two humans could be modeled for the first time using the
principles of MC. If a certain amount of aerosols is able to
reach the receiver’s detection space, the receiver is expected
to be infected. This corresponds to a successful transmission
of information between the transmitter and the receiver via
a distorted channel in traditional MC. An end-to-end system
model is proposed with emphasis on the indoor environment,
predicting the infection state of a human. The corresponding
infection probability is derived.
Contrary to the classical data transmission approach, epidemiologists aim to reduce the number of successful transmissions. In other words, in data transmission, a maximization
of the mutual information is targeted, whereas in the case of
virus transmission, a minimization of the mutual information is
targeted. Based on the modeling assumptions, rules concerning
“social distancing” are suggested. In the state-of-the-art [35],
[36], [38], the MC concept has been restricted to peer-to-peer
links.
Our novel contributions include the following aspects:
• The transmission of infectious and non-infectious
aerosols is interpreted as a multiuser MC scenario. Transmitters are already infected humans and receivers are
uninfected humans. Newly infected humans become new
transmitters after some time – the root of reproduction.
• In each MC transmitter, the modulator is modeled by
respiratory-event-driven molecular variable-concentration
shift keying inspired by [39], where the type of molecule

is used to distinguish between coronavirus aerosols and
any other particles (like noninfectious saliva). The number of released molecules per time unit depends on the
situation: In the case of coughing, for example, more
molecules are emitted than in the case of breathing.
• Channel modeling is aided by human experiments using a
fluorescent dye in conjunction with optical detection [33]
in a quasi-unbounded environment in contrast to a pipebased testbed environment. That way, it is possible to
investigate the influence of ventilation on the spatialtemporal distribution of the cloud. Furthermore, it is possible to take the influence of obstructions like protection
masks into account. The efficacy of a medical mask is
verified.
• An advanced computer simulation tool, originally developed for efficient simulation of MC in fluid channels [40], is extended. This tool can be used to estimate
transmission of infectious aerosols in different, preferably
indoor environments. Parameters feeding this simulation
tool are partly obtained by self experiments, among other
established sources.
Particle concentrations (“clouds”) are released by respiratory events like breathing, speaking, singing, coughing, and
sneezing. The aerosols are not only received by mouth and
nose, but also by hands, increasing the effective aperture of
the receivers, similar to spatially distributed antennas. The
probability of infection is not only determined by peer-topeer distances (motivating “social distancing”), but also by
ventilation of the environment, movement of the receiver
apertures through the cloud and individual immune responses
of the receiving humans.
Understanding the impact of different channel configurations leads to implications for infection prevention in epidemiology. This helps in developing guidelines for maintaining safe
distances and to take preventive measures in order to reduce
the probability of infection.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section II describes the basic transport of aerosol particles in
an air-based environment, mentioning effects like diffusion,
evaporation, buoyancy, and settlement that define the trajectory
of airborne particles. Section III introduces the MC scenario
under investigation adapted to the domain of infectious aerosol
transmission with regard to the aforementioned channel model
and its generalization to multiuser communication. In Section IV, MC measurements with fluorescent particles are
adapted to the field of infectiology, accompanied by simulations for the given scenario, before closing with the conclusion
and an outlook on future developments and adjustments from
the field of MC in Section V.
II. P RINCIPLES OF A EROSOL T RANSPORT
Aerosols are solid or liquid particles found suspended
in a gaseous environment with sizes ranging from a few
nanometers to several micrometers [18]. In human respiratory
events, these particles are expelled with an air stream into
the surroundings, where they propagate over large distances,
depending on their initial size and velocity. When focusing on

3

y

FB
z
FD

FA

Emission direction

FG
x
Tmin

Tmax

Fig. 1: Forces acting on aerosols in an air-based environment:
bouyancy force FB and air drag force FD act mainly on the
air-stream that is expelled from the mouth or nose, whereas
advection force FA and gravitational force FG act on the
aerosols themselves. The temperature gradient is given through
the minimum temperature Tmin of the air in the environment
and the maximum temperature Tmax of the liquid in the oral
cavity.

the transmission of pathogens in aerosols, sizes in the range
of a few micrometers are of special interest, as they are able
to carry infectious viral RNA and propagate further into the
human respiratory tract, leading to the infection of humans.
The type of respiratory event defines the aerosol size and
velocity distribution, the overall amount of aerosols, emission
angle, and opening angle of the air stream. This multivariate
random process of aerosol generation and distribution in the
environment defines the risk of infection for other healthy
humans.
The transport of aerosols is subject to several effects between the aerosols and the environment, illustrated in Fig. 1.
The main mode of transportation is aided by the release
of an air stream from the mouth or nose, depending on
the type of respiratory event. The air stream supports the
droplet movement in terms of a drift velocity, often called
advection. Through the turbulences generated by the interaction between the released air and the present air in the
environment, mainly influenced by air drag, a diffusion process
called eddy diffusion acts on the aerosols. This additional
diffusion accompanies the mass diffusion already happening at
a molecular level. Given the parameters of respiratory events
and the sizes of aerosols emitted from these events, the effect
of mass diffusion on the movement of the aerosols can be
neglected. This results in the eddy diffusion and the advection
process being the main modes of transportation for infectious
airborne particles.
Due to the temperature difference between the released air
and the environment, a density difference results in a buoyancy
force acting on the air stream, finally resulting in an upwards
movement. On the other hand, gravitation acts on the particles
in the air stream, which results in the settlement of particles.
The combination of the upwardly directed buoyancy force and
the perpendicularly directed gravitational force determines the
flight distance of the aerosols.
Following the same temperature profile as the expelled air

Fig. 2: Sketch of a multiuser scenario with one infected
transmitter (red) emitting infectious aerosols into an air-based
environment with three healthy receivers (blue) at a time
instance t. The lines show possible trajectories.

stream, the aerosols are subject to an evaporation process
resulting in the shrinkage of the droplet diameter [41]. The
outer surface of the aerosol changes into gas phase, as the
heat is exchanged between the liquid and the environmental
air.
Larger and heavier droplets are either fragmented into
smaller droplets [42] or quickly forced to the ground. Without
additional turbulences and ventilation, aerosols are able to stay
suspended in the environment for minutes, resulting in a long
lasting risk of infection even after the respiratory event that
initially emitted the aerosols.
The combination of the forces acting directly on the aerosols
and the forces acting on the air stream, which indirectly
influence the aerosols, ultimately lead to the characteristic
distributions of aerosols in the ambient air and the associated
probabilities of infection.
III. S CENARIO UNDER I NVESTIGATION
The basic scenario in MC represents a molecular emission
device as a transmitter, a propagation channel defined by an
impulse response that depends on various environmental parameters, and a receiver interacting with the emitted molecules.
Parameters like the distance between the transmitter and the
receiver, diffusive behaviour of the molecules in the channel, drift velocities of the environment, and the reception
mechanisms at the receiver mainly influence the quality of
information exchange in this scenario.
This scenario resembles an elementary peer-to-peer communication scheme with two users. To enable the translation to
the field of virology, the scenario must be extended to several
users who can both send and receive aerosols in a three dimensional (3D) environment. A randomly selected proportion of
users are assumed to be infected, emitting infectious particles
during their respiratory events. This extended macroscopic MC
scenario is shown in Fig. 2. All transceivers in the scenario are
mobile. This results in a dynamic situation, where the distances
between the users are varying.
A. Aerosol Emission
Partly following [36], the respiratory events can be separated
into two classes: breathing as a continuously occurring event,
and speaking, coughing, and sneezing as randomly occurring

4

events with specified parameters. With each event, an air
stream containing a cloud of aerosols is emitted, given a size
distribution, emission angle distribution, and initial velocity
distribution. All these parameters can be interpreted as individual random variables that depend on the type of respiratory
event, the infection state of the emitter [43], and other factors
like age and size. Depending on the infection status of the
emitter, a proportion of the aerosols emitted are assumed to
be infectious. The probability that a droplet contains viruses
is closely related to its initial volume [44]. These infectious
aerosols lead to a risk of infection for the other users present
in the environment.
Having pointed out the duality between coronavirus transmission and air-based macroscopic MC, one item has never
been addressed in this concept, namely the modulation scheme
and its analogy with data symbols. In good approximation,
the modulation scheme can be modeled by respiratory-eventdriven higher-order molecular variable-concentration shift keying (MoVCSK) [39], where the type of molecule distinguishes
infectious from non-infectious particles. In this way, an infected person can release both infectious and non-infectious
particles at the same time. The number of released molecules
per unit time depends on the situation. More molecules are
emitted in the case of sneezing and coughing, less molecules
are released in the case of breathing and singing. These
differences in quantity can be modeled by the different concentration levels of MoVCSK. The different events can be
represented by different data symbol patterns. For example,
continuous sources such as breathing leads to a burst of
data symbols with lower concentration levels, while impulsive
sources such as sneezing and coughing lead to individual data
symbols with higher concentration levels.
The possible respiratory events are described and modeled
in the following paragraphs. Each event triggers the emission
of a specific but random distribution of particles into the
environment. These initial parameters ultimately determine the
range of an aerosol emission and thus the risk of infection for
non-infected individuals in the environment.
1) Breathing: The continuous breathing of a human is
influenced by the physical load on the body. The breathing
pattern at rest of 12-16 breaths per minute [45] can increase
with higher physical activities, resulting in a higher aerosol
emission rate and also larger emission volumes following
deeper breaths.
2) Speaking: Human speaking can be modeled as a twostate Markov process [46]. The states represent the talking and
silence periods. This discrete-time model is characterized by
the transition probabilities between the states and the retention
probabilities for staying in the current state. This represents
the fact that a human, currently being in speaking state, might
eventually stay in this state for the next time step with a higher
probability than switching into the silent state. Whenever a
human is speaking, an average aerosol distribution is emitted
into the environment. This simplification takes into account
differences in languages and phonetic characteristics, as the
transition probabilities may be time-varying.
3) Coughing and Sneezing: Coughing and sneezing as
randomly and sparsely occurring events can be modeled for

each time step in terms of a Bernoulli trial, where the user
might eventually emit aerosols in terms of a cough or sneeze,
or stay in normal breathing state. The parameter for the
resulting Poisson process is influenced by the infection state of
the user. The intensity increases for an infected human, which
resembles a higher probability for coughing and sneezing,
whereas a healthy human might cough or sneeze very rarely.
This concept has been introduced in [47].
B. Aerosol Propagation
The principles of aerosol transport are explained in Section II. The environment under investigation is assumed to be a
boundless 3D space filled with air at room temperature with no
additional drift or ventilation, aiding the aerosol transport. All
aerosol propagation processes are depending on the respiratory
event responsible for the emission of the aerosols. This event
defines the aerosol size and initial velocity distributions as well
as the parameters of the expelled air stream.
In future research, other room geometries may be studied
as well. Additionally, air ventilation and additional turbulences
introduced through the movement of the users might be further
investigated.
C. Aerosol Reception
Aerosol reception is modeled by an effective aperture area,
representing the sensitive parts of the body which are mainly
responsible for infection via pathogen-laden aerosols. The
most prominent area consists of the mouth and nose part of the
face. Additional reception can be accomplished by the hands,
accounting for smear infections by touching the face. The
effective aperture of the subject moves dynamically through
the 3D space with the random motion of the human receiver.
When the effective aperture interferes with suspended
aerosols in the air, the detection of aerosols has an impact on
the infection probability of the receiver. The viral load in the
aerosols and the individual immune response of the receiver
defines its infection probability. Each human is equipped with
an individual detection threshold, steering infection probabilities at the receiver. Similar to spatially distributed antennas,
an antenna gain can be specified for the different areas of the
effective aperture, which defines the reception strength of the
infectious aerosols and the resulting probability of infection.
Since the number of infectious particles reaching the recipient
over a certain period of time is relevant for an infection, the
receiving process can be modeled as energy detection. It is
worth mentioning that in contrast to classical MC, intersymbol
interference and multiuser interference do not need to be
cancelled.
IV. M EASUREMENT R ESULTS
The real-world measurements reported in this paper are
performed with a single emitter to gather information about the
propagation behaviour of airborne aerosols from human respiratory events in an air-based environment. This information
can be used in the simulation to perform multiuser scenarios.
Real-world measurements serve as the basis of channel
models and computer simulations if an analysis turns out to

5

TABLE I: Parameters and measures of the experiments.
Parameter

Value

Emission height
Temperature inside mouth
Room temperature
Room length
Room width
Dye concentration
Number of test series
Number of coughs per series

1.64 m
36.0 °C
20.1 °C
2.34 m
1.70 m
1.54 g L−1
5
5

be too challenging. Measurements are necessary to understand the propagation behaviour of different-sized particles
from respiratory events. In experiments, it is also possible to
perform more advanced measurements with different types of
face protection gear or to investigate the influence of a longer
wearing period, to consider air ventilation, and to test arbitrary
room geometries. Taking all these points into consideration,
the inspiration is drawn from the testbed design used in [34]
to conduct experiments using fluorescent dyes. The industrial
sprayer used as a transmitter in [33] is replaced by a test person
emulating an infected person. As an example of the above
mentioned respiratory events, successive coughs are induced.
Key parameters obtained from the experiments like particle
diameters and distance profile are used in the simulation tool.
The tube-like structure forming a bounded channel is scaled
up to an enclosed environment. The optical-based receiver
is treated as an uninfected human, interacting with emitted
aerosols and droplets. The advantage of fluorescent particles
becomes apparent, as they stay visible under longwave ultraviolet (UVA) light even after settlement. Commonly used
techniques like shadowgraph [48] or Schlieren imaging [49]
do not provide this feature.
A. Experiments
The tests are carried out with a test person to obtain sufficient parameters for the simulation environment: About 10 mL
of a saturated aqueous solution containing the fluorescent dye
Uranine (mixing ratio: 1.54 g L−1 ) is taken in through the
mouth and mixed with saliva. Over a period of two minutes
the liquid in the mouth cavity is heated to body temperature.
At the time of an artificially induced cough, the particles are
in the mouth and throat of the test person. As a result of
the cough impulse, the particles are partially expelled and
flung into the ambient air as airborne aerosols and droplets,
following a characteristic diameter distribution. The trajectory
of the aerosols is made visible using a 50 W UVA lamp with
a peak emission wavelength of 396 nm corresponding to the
excitation wavelength of the fluorescent dye. Uranine responds
with an emission wavelength of 520 nm to 530 nm, which is
clearly distinguishable in the visible light spectrum. Recording
is accomplished by a high-speed camera with 240 fps placed
orthogonal to the flight direction of the aerosols.
The test person was an approximately sixty-year-old male.
The cough impulse was expelled at a height of 1.64 m in
horizontal direction. At the time of the measurements, the test
person was completely healthy and had no physical symptoms
of disease. The temperature inside the mouth was 36.0 °C

and the Uranine solution was heated to this temperature for
a sufficiently long time. Experiments were performed in a
fanless dark room. The room had an air temperature of 20.1 °C
and a length of 2.34 m, with 0.85 m of space on each side
orthogonal to the direction of emission up to the adjacent
walls. Four test series were carried out without a protective
mask and one test series with a mask. Each test series consists
of five consecutive, artificially triggered coughs, each about 15
seconds apart. The floor was photographed before each new
cough and after the final cough. Between the test series, a
new portion of Uranine solution was taken into the mouth
and warmed to body temperature, and the floor was cleaned
of the residues of the previous test series. Key parameters of
the experiments are summarized in Table I. The measurement
results reported next have been performed without protection
mask or face shield, unless mentioned specifically. To highlight
the importance of a face-mask as an obstruction device to
reduce the infectious range of airborne aerosols, one test
series was taken with a well-fitting medical filtering-face-piece
(FFP1) face-mask (3M Aura 1861+) according to EN149:2001
FFP1 NR D and Type IIR EN 14683:2019, having a bacterial
filtration efficiency of more than 98 % and an aerosol filtration
percentage of 80 % minimum.
Characteristic frames of the video are presented in Fig. 3.
They show the development of aerosols and droplets directly
after the cough impulse in the ambient air. After approximately
30 ms, a difference between the droplets in a jet-like formation
and the aerosols in a cloud formation is clearly visible. This
distinction continues in the following frames and becomes
even clearer as the droplets sink to the ground due to the
gravitational force, following the trajectory of a horizontal
throw. The aerosols in the cloud formation are carried further
through the room by the ejected air stream, as explained in
Section II. These aerosols are of special interest for infection
prevention techniques, mainly because they are able to stay
in the environment for a longer time and, thus, lead to longer
infection periods. They are also able to travel larger distances
due to the air stream and turbulence, thus, causing infections
by entering the respiratory tract directly via the inhaled air. The
larger particles can be absorbed through the effective aperture
of the receptor and can cause smear infections if the receptor
infects their own airways through improper use.
With the calibrated video recordings, it is possible to
determine the velocity of the aerosol cloud and the droplet
jet. These measurements can be used to determine theoretical
distances of the different modes of aerosol emission and,
thus, leading to implications for prevention techniques with
infectious aerosols. The average initial velocity of the aerosol
cloud is about 8 m s−1 , whereas the droplets are ejected
at about 5 m s−1 . From the recordings, it seems natural to
estimate the maximum travel distance dmax of the droplets by
assuming a horizontal
throw with a maximum flight distance
p
of dmax = v 2h0 /g, where v is the droplet velocity, h0
the emission height and g the gravitational acceleration. This
assumption results in a maximum distance of dmax = 2.90 m
that the droplets are able to reach. This result is in accordance
with the observation that several droplets were hitting the
2.34 m distant wall, up to a considerable height of 1.35 m

6

(a) t = te + 0 s

(b) t = te + 0.029 s

Probability

0.15

0.1

0.05

(c) t = te + 0.058 s

0

(d) t = te + 0.092 s

Fig. 3: Fluorescent aerosols expelled through coughing action
at emission time te . The droplets are visible as luminous dots,
aerosols are visible as clouds and highlighted by the circle.

0

50

100
150
Diameter in µm

200

250

(a) Distribution of droplet diameters.

0.12

Probability

0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

Distance in m
(b) Distribution of droplet flight distances.

Fig. 5: Combined distributions for a test block of five consecutive coughs by the test person.
Fig. 4: Fluorescent droplets on the floor after five artificially
induced coughs from a height of 1.64 m.

given an initial level of 1.64 m.
As an additional instrument to the video capturing of the
cough itself, the floor is photographed after each cough,
while it is also illuminated with the UVA lamp to show
the fluorescent dots from the settlement on the ground. The
resulting photographs are used to determine the trajectories of
the droplets, which help in estimating the infectious range as
well as the diameter of the droplets. An example image of
this process is shown in Fig. 4 with a ruler for the distance
estimation and overall calibration of the image analysis.
To estimate the droplet diameter distribution shown in
Fig. 5a, the photographs are analyzed with an automated
approach employing Matlab. A tape measure laid out on the
floor enables a calculation of the size of the droplets on the
floor given the recorded pixels. A calibration measurement
obtained by an industrial sprayer with a defined droplet radius
of 3.3 µm is then used to relate the radius of circles on the

floor to the actual droplet sizes in the air. This processing
is accompanied by an analysis of distance measurements, as
shown in Fig. 5b.
The diameter distribution shows an observed maximum in
the range of 20 µm to 30 µm with most droplets being under
100 µm in diameter. It is assumed that virus-bearing aerosols
are in the range of 1 µm to 100 µm, so the given results are
relevant for this regime. The distance distribution on the other
hand shows droplets up to a distance greater than 2 m, which
fits the previous calculations for droplets, given additional
effects of air drag and turbulences, reducing the maximum
travel distance. An additional factor for limiting the range of
the aerosols is the emission angle from the respiratory event:
Most of the measurements showed an emission cone pointing
downwards, which already accelerated the heavier particles
towards the ground.
The measurements with an FFP1 mask showed no visible
fluorescence in the area in front of the test person. After
the test interval, the mask was fluorescent, indicating that it
absorbed the aerosols.

7

TABLE II: Parameters of the simulation.
Parameter

Value

Air density
Air viscosity
Particle mass density
Emission height
Emission opening angle
Number of particles

1.2041 kg m−3
18.13 × 10−6 N s m−2
997 kg m−3
1.64 m
N (0, 6.25°)
5000

accumulates on the floor between a distance of 0.5 m and
2 m. In the simulation environment, this region gets extended
to a distance of at least 5 m. Possible reasons for this may
include not simulating the effects of evaporation, simplified
assumptions about the initial velocities of particles, or the
challenge of coughing in a direction horizontal to the ground in
the experiment. At the same time, it is observed that individual
simulated particles travel significantly farther than 5 m, which
is in line with the observation above that droplets can be found
at a height of over 1 m on the wall at the other side of the
room.

0.75
0.006

0.25
0.00

0.004

−0.25

0.002

Density

X in m

0.50

−0.50
−0.75

0.000
0

2

4
Y in m

6

8

Fig. 6: Spatial distribution of simulated particles falling on
the floor. The emitter is placed in the origin, facing in positive
Y-direction.

B. Simulations
For simulating the transmission of particles, the Pogona
simulator1 was used, which was previously developed by the
authors for macroscopic MC [40]. In [33], this simulator
was extended for the propagation of water droplets through
air, based on an initial velocity vector, without taking into
consideration any other forces acting on the particles. This
tool has now been extended to take different forces explained
in Section II into account.
Simulations are performed in a similar 3D environment
as the real-world measurements. The room has a boundless
structure and is filled with air at a temperature of 20 °C.
The aerosols are emitted from a source at an initial height of
1.64 m with an initial emission vector parallel to the ground.
The initial velocity of each particle is sampled randomly
according to the empirical cumulative distribution function
of velocities derived from the experimentally observed travel
distances as explained in Section IV-A, assuming a frictionless
horizontal throw. Similarly, the droplet radii are distributed
according to the measured droplet sizes. In order to speed
up computations for this proof of concept, however, particle
diameters below 50 µm are omitted. This is due to the fact
that adaptively chosen time steps become extremely small in
order to accurately update the velocity of very light-weight
particles. For each particle traveling through the air, the forces
are simulated which are detailed in Section II, i.e., gravity,
drag, and buoyancy.
In Fig. 6, the distribution shows the accumulation of simulated particles on the floor. In comparison with Fig. 5b,
it is seen in both cases that a large portion of particles
1 https://www2.tkn.tu-berlin.de/software/pogona/

C. Relation to Communication Theory and Networking
The duality elaborated in Section III makes it possible to
relate selected results and conclusions of the experiments and
simulations to traditional performance metrics in communication theory and networking:
1) The spatially distributed received power (or the signalto-noise ratio, respectively) relates to the heat map in
Fig. 6.
2) The communication range corresponds to the range of
infection. The distribution of droplet flight distances is
depicted in Fig. 5b. The maximum range, dmax , has been
confirmed analytically.
3) The shapes of the emitted aerosol clouds depend on the
type of respiratory event and are analogous to beamforming, i.e., to directional transmission of information.
These shapes are considered in the simulation tool.
4) Signal blocking/shadowing is linked to masks, protective
screens, and other obstacles.
5) Retransmission is related to consecutive respiratory
events.
These and additional performance metrics that are not
further evaluated in this contribution (such as probability of
infection, chain of infection, viral load, incubation time) are
depicted in Table III.
V. C ONCLUSION
This paper exploits the duality between a viral infection
process and macroscopic air-based molecular communication.
It connects an engineering perspective with the medical domain of virus-laden airborne particles as disease spreading
mechanism. Novel contributions include the following aspects:
• The transmission of infectious and non-infectious
aerosols and droplets from human airways expelled
through respiratory events is interpreted as a multiuser
MC scenario. Infection chains are the root of reproduction.
• Respiratory events like breathing, speaking, coughing, or
sneezing are modeled by respiratory-event-driven molecular concentration shift keying.
• Channel modeling is aided by human experiments employing a fluorescent dye. The efficacy of a medical mask
is verified.
• The advanced MC Pogona simulation tool is extended to
emulate aerosol transmission in different environments.

8

TABLE III: Relationship between conventional performance metrics and infectious particle transmission.
Traditional performance metric

Infectious particle transmission

Received power (signal-to-noise ratio)
Communication range
Beamforming
Signal blocking / shadowing
Retransmission

Heat map
Infection range
Shapes of aerosol clouds
Masks, protective screens, and other obstacles
Consecutive respiratory events

Outage, bit/frame error rate
Connectivity
Throughput, data rate
Latency (jitter)
Number of communication channels

Probability of infection
Chain of infection, reproduction number
Viral load
Incubation time
Number of contacts

Parameters feeding this tool are partly obtained by own
experimental results.
The contribution paves the way to new opportunities and tools
for analysis and prevention of infectious diseases caused by
airborne pathogen transmission.
An optical particle detection technique previously employed
in the area of air-based macroscopic MC is used as a basis
to model the different respiratory events. Video recordings
and existing knowledge about channel modeling from MC
are combined to make more accurate predictions about the
dispersion of aerosols in the ambient air using an advanced
simulation environment. Possibly infectious particles are made
visible using a fluorescent dye.
Real-world experimental measurements have shown that a
bimodal distribution of particles is emitted when coughing,
caused by aerosols and droplets, respectively. Aerosols are
transported by the expelled air and reach an average initial
velocity of about 8 m s−1 . As a result, these small particles can
travel significant distances and cause infections even outside
the previously assumed safe distances. Moreover, aerosols do
not follow a parabolic path and may remain in the ambient
air for a notable period of time, as they are transported
with the expelled air. This results in a long time of risk of
infection. On the other side, droplets are either fragmented
into smaller particles, or they follow a parabolic path towards
the ground. Their ejection speed of around 5 m s−1 is also
relatively high, which leads to long flight distances of 2 m and
beyond. These experiments are reproduced using the Pogona
simulator, where a spatial distribution of simulated particles
emitted via coughing is generated. It is seen that the results
are very much in tune with the real-world measurements as a
significant number of particles settle on the floor between a
distance of 0.5 m and 2 m from the source, with a good portion
of particles reaching distances even beyond. Due to the fact
that droplets (earlier) and aerosols (later) concentrate on the
floor, increased attention should be paid to shoe cleaning.
Measurements with a medical face mask have shown that
this preventive technique is able to reduce the amount of
aerosols and droplets emitted from respiratory events considerably. This suggests that the remaining particle concentration
outside the mask is below the resolution of the used measuring
devices.
In future research, the concept introduced in Section III may
be investigated more deeply, featuring dynamic multiuser situations. Stochastic techniques may also be used to define safe

areas in dynamic environments to stop a pandemic infection.
Other preventive techniques like ventilation, humidifiers, cloth
face masks, or other obstacles may be investigated in terms of
leakage after a longer wearing period, to better suit real-world
problems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Reported research was supported in part by the project
MAMOKO funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) under grant numbers 16KIS0915
and 16KIS0917.
R EFERENCES
[1] L. Bourouiba, E. Dehandschoewercker, and J. W. Bush, “Violent expiratory events: On coughing and sneezing,” J. Fluid Mech., vol. 745, pp.
537–563, Apr. 2014.
[2] A. J. Cann, Principles of Molecular Virology (Standard Edition). Elsevier Science & Technology, 2005.
[3] B. G. Madas, P. Füri, Á. Farkas, A. Nagy, A. Czitrovszky, I. Balásházy,
G. G. Schay, and A. Horváth, “Deposition distribution of the new
coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) in the human airways upon exposure to
cough-generated aerosol,” medRxiv, May 2020.
[4] M. Jayaweera, H. Perera, B. Gunawardana, and J. Manatunge, “Transmission of COVID-19 virus by droplets and aerosols: A critical review
on the unresolved dichotomy,” Environmental Research, vol. 188, Sep.
2020.
[5] S. Asadi, A. S. Wexler, C. D. Cappa, S. Barreda, N. M. Bouvier, and
W. D. Ristenpart, “Aerosol emission and superemission during human
speech increase with voice loudness,” Scientific Reports, vol. 9, no. 2348,
pp. 1–10, Feb. 2019.
[6] P. Anfinrud, V. Stadnytskyi, C. E. Bax, and A. Bax, “Visualizing speechgenerated oral fluid droplets with laser light scattering,” New England
Journal of Medicine, vol. 382, no. 21, pp. 2061–2063, May 2020.
[7] H. Nishimura, S. Sakata, and A. Kaga, “A new methodology for studying
dynamics of aerosol particles in sneeze and cough using a digital highvision, high-speed video system and vector analyses,” PLoS ONE, vol. 8,
no. 11, pp. 1–7, Nov. 2013.
[8] Z. Y. Han, W. G. Weng, and Q. Y. Huang, “Characterizations of particle
size distribution of the droplets exhaled by sneeze,” Journal of the Royal
Society Interface, vol. 10, no. 88, pp. 1–11, Nov. 2013.
[9] J. W. Tang, A. D. Nicolle, C. A. Klettner, J. Pantelic, L. Wang, A. B.
Suhaimi, A. Y. Tan, G. W. Ong, R. Su, C. Sekhar, D. D. Cheong, and
K. W. Tham, “Airflow dynamics of human jets: Sneezing and breathing
- potential sources of infectious aerosols,” PLoS ONE, vol. 8, no. 4, pp.
1–7, Apr. 2013.
[10] S. B. Kwon, J. Park, J. Jang, Y. Cho, D. S. Park, C. Kim, G. N. Bae, and
A. Jang, “Study on the initial velocity distribution of exhaled air from
coughing and speaking,” Chemosphere, vol. 87, no. 11, pp. 1260–1264,
Jun. 2012.
[11] X. Xie, Y. Li, A. T. Y. Chwang, P. L. Ho, and W. H. Seto, “How far
droplets can move in indoor environments,” Indoor Air, vol. 17, no. 3,
pp. 211–225, Jun. 2007.

9

[12] N. van Doremalen, T. Bushmaker, D. H. Morris, M. G. Holbrook,
A. Gamble, B. N. Williamson, A. Tamin, J. L. Harcourt, N. J. Thornburg,
S. I. Gerber, J. O. Lloyd-Smith, E. de Wit, and V. J. Munster, “Aerosol
and surface stability of SARS-CoV-2 as compared with SARS-CoV-1,”
New England Journal of Medicine, vol. 382, no. 16, pp. 1564–1567,
Apr. 2020.
[13] Z.-D. Guo, Z.-Y. Wang, S.-F. Zhang, X. Li, L. Li, C. Li, Y. Cui, R.-B. Fu,
Y.-Z. Dong, X.-Y. Chi, M.-Y. Zhang, K. Liu, C. Cao, B. Liu, K. Zhang,
Y.-W. Gao, B. Lu, and W. Chen, “Aerosol and surface distribution
of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 in hospital wards,
Wuhan, China, 2020,” Emerging Infectious Diseases, vol. 26, no. 7, pp.
1586–1591, Jul. 2020.
[14] Y. Pan, D. Zhang, P. Yang, L. L. Poon, and Q. Wang, “Viral load
of SARS-CoV-2 in clinical samples,” The Lancet Infectious Diseases,
vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 411–412, Apr. 2020.
[15] C. Rothe, M. Schunk, P. Sothmann, G. Bretzel, G. Froeschl, C. Wallrauch, T. Zimmer, V. Thiel, C. Janke, W. Guggemos, M. Seilmaier,
C. Drosten, P. Vollmar, K. Zwirglmaier, S. Zange, R. Wölfel, and
M. Hoelscher, “Transmission of 2019-NCOV infection from an asymptomatic contact in Germany,” New England Journal of Medicine, vol.
382, no. 10, pp. 970–971, Mar. 2020.
[16] K. K. W. To, O. T. Y. Tsang, W. S. Leung, A. R. Tam, T. C. Wu, D. C.
Lung, C. C. Y. Yip, J. P. Cai, J. M. C. Chan, T. S. H. Chik, D. P. L.
Lau, C. Y. C. Choi, L. L. Chen, W. M. Chan, K. H. Chan, J. D. Ip,
A. C. K. Ng, R. W. S. Poon, C. T. Luo, V. C. C. Cheng, J. F. W. Chan,
I. F. N. Hung, Z. Chen, H. Chen, and K. Y. Yuen, “Temporal profiles of
viral load in posterior oropharyngeal saliva samples and serum antibody
responses during infection by SARS-CoV-2: An observational cohort
study,” The Lancet Infectious Diseases, vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 565–574,
May 2020.
[17] G. Buonanno, L. Stabile, and L. Morawska, “Estimation of airborne
viral emission: Quanta emission rate of SARS-CoV-2 for infection risk
assessment,” Environment International, vol. 141, no. 105794, pp. 1–8,
Aug. 2020.
[18] W. C. Hinds, Aerosol Technology: Properties, Behaviour, and Measurement of Airborne Particles. John Wiley & Sons, 1999.
[19] N. Farsad, H. B. Yilmaz, A. Eckford, C.-B. Chae, and W. Guo, “A
comprehensive survey of recent advancements in molecular communication,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 1887–1919,
thirdquarter 2016.
[20] W. Haselmayr, A. Springer, G. Fischer, C. Alexiou, H. Boche, P. A.
Hoeher, F. Dressler, and R. Schober, “Integration of molecular communications into future generation wireless networks,” in Proc. 6G Wireless
Summit, Mar. 2019.
[21] B. L. Bassler, “Small talk: Cell-to-cell communication in bacteria,” Cell,
vol. 109, no. 4, pp. 421–424, May 2002.
[22] B. L. Bassler and R. Losick, “Bacterially speaking,” Cell, vol. 125, no. 2,
pp. 237–246, Apr. 2006.
[23] I. F. Akyildiz, J. M. Jornet, and M. Pierobon, “Nanonetworks: A new
frontier in communications,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 54,
no. 11, pp. 84–89, Nov. 2011.
[24] T. Nakano, A. W. Eckford, and T. Haraguchi, Molecular Communication. Cambrigde: Cambridge University Press, 2013.
[25] I. F. Akyildiz, M. Pierobon, and S. Balasubramaniam, “Moving forward
with molecular communication: From theory to human health applications,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 107, no. 5, pp. 858–865, May 2019.
[26] T. Nakano, T. Suda, M. Moore, R. Egashira, A. Enomoto, and K. Arima,
“Molecular communication for nanomachines using intercellular calcium
signaling,” in Proc. IEEE Nanotechnology Conf. (NANO), vol. 2, Jul.
2005, pp. 478–481.
[27] F. Dressler and S. Fischer, “Connecting in-body nano communication
with body area networks: Challenges and opportunities of the internet
of nano things,” Nano Communication Networks, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 29–
38, Jun. 2015.
[28] V. Jamali, A. Ahmadzadeh, C. Jardin, H. Sticht, and R. Schober,
“Channel Estimation for Diffusive Molecular Communications,” IEEE
Transactions on Communications, vol. 64, no. 10, pp. 4238–4252, 2016.
[29] V. Jamali, A. Ahmadzadeh, W. Wicke, A. Noel, and R. Schober,
“Channel modeling for diffusive molecular communication — A tutorial
review,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 107, no. 7, pp. 1256–1301, Jul. 2019.
[30] H. Unterweger, J. Kirchner, W. Wicke, A. Ahmadzadeh, D. Ahmed,
V. Jamali, C. Alexiou, G. Fischer, and R. Schober, “Experimental
molecular communication testbed based on magnetic nanoparticles in
duct flow,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop on Signal Processing Advances
in Wireless Communications (SPAWC), Jun. 2018, pp. 1–5.

[31] N. Farsad, W. Guo, and A. W. Eckford, “Tabletop molecular communication: Text messages through chemical signals,” PLoS ONE, vol. 8,
no. 12, pp. 1–13, Dec. 2013.
[32] I. Atthanayake, S. Esfahani, P. Denissenko, I. Guymer, P. J. Thomas,
and W. Guo, “Experimental molecular communications in obstacle
rich fluids,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. on Nanoscale Computing and
Communication (NANOCOM), Sep. 2018, pp. 1–2.
[33] S. Bhattacharjee, M. Damrath, F. Bronner, L. Stratmann, J. P. Drees,
F. Dressler, and P. A. Hoeher, “A testbed and simulation framework
for air-based molecular communication testbed using fluorescein,” in
Proc. ACM Int. Conf. on Nanoscale Computing and Communication
(NANOCOM), Sep. 2020, pp. 1–6.
[34] S. Bhattacharjee, M. Damrath, and P. A. Hoeher, “Design of macroscopic air-based molecular communication concept using fluorescein,”
in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. on Nanoscale Computing and Communication
(NANOCOM), Sep. 2020, pp. 1–2.
[35] M. Khalid, O. Amin, S. Ahmed, B. Shihada, and M.-S. Alouini,
“Communication through breath: Aerosol transmission,” IEEE Commun.
Mag., vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 33–39, Feb. 2019.
[36] ——, “Modeling of viral aerosol transmission and detection,” IEEE
Trans. Commun., vol. 68, no. 8, pp. 4859–4873, Aug. 2020.
[37] C. E. Shannon, “A mathematical theory of communication,” Bell Syst.
Technical J., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 379–423, Jul. 1948.
[38] F. Gulec and B. Atakan, “A molecular communication perspective on
airborne pathogen transmission and reception via droplets generated by
coughing and sneezing,” Jul. 2020, arXiv:2007.07598.
[39] S. Bhattacharjee, M. Damrath, and P. A. Hoeher, “EXIT chart analysis
of higher order modulation schemes in molecular communications,” in
Proc. ACM Int. Conf. on Nanoscale Computing and Communication
(NANOCOM), Sep. 2019, pp. 1–6.
[40] J. P. Drees, L. Stratmann, F. Bronner, M. Bartunik, J. Kirchner, H. Unterweger, and F. Dressler, “Efficient Simulation of Macroscopic Molecular
Communication: The Pogona Simulator,” in 7th ACM International
Conference on Nanoscale Computing and Communication (NANOCOM
2020).
Virtual Conference: Association for Computing Machinery
(ACM), 9 2020.
[41] W. Ranz, W. R. Marshall et al., “Evaporation from drops,” Chem. eng.
prog, vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 141–146, 1952.
[42] L. Bourouiba, “Turbulent gas clouds and respiratory pathogen emissions:
potential implications for reducing transmission of covid-19,” Jama, vol.
323, no. 18, pp. 1837–1838, 2020.
[43] R. Dhand and J. Li, “Coughs and sneezes: their role in transmission
of respiratory viral infections, including sars-cov-2,” American journal
of respiratory and critical care medicine, vol. 202, no. 5, pp. 651–659,
2020.
[44] V. Stadnytskyi, C. E. Bax, A. Bax, and P. Anfinrud, “The airborne
lifetime of small speech droplets and their potential importance in sarscov-2 transmission,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
vol. 117, no. 22, pp. 11 875–11 877, 2020.
[45] K. E. Barrett, S. M. Barman, S. Boitano, H. L. Brooks et al., Ganong’s
Review of Medical Physiology. McGraw-Hill Education New York,
2016.
[46] J. Jaffe, L. Cassotta, and S. Feldstein, “Markovian model of time patterns
of speech,” Science, vol. 144, no. 3620, pp. 884–886, 1964.
[47] M. Penrose, “The threshold contact process: a continuum limit,” Probability theory and related fields, vol. 104, no. 1, pp. 77–95, 1996.
[48] J. W. Tang, A. Nicolle, J. Pantelic, G. C. Koh, L. De Wang, M. Amin,
C. A. Klettner, D. K. Cheong, C. Sekhar, and K. W. Tham, “Airflow
dynamics of coughing in healthy human volunteers by shadowgraph
imaging: an aid to aerosol infection control,” PLoS One, vol. 7, no. 4,
p. e34818, 2012.
[49] J. W. Tang, T. J. Liebner, B. A. Craven, and G. S. Settles, “A schlieren
optical study of the human cough with and without wearing masks for
aerosol infection control,” Journal of the Royal Society Interface, vol. 6
(Suppl. 6), pp. S727–S736, 2009.

