Anatomy of a Rumour: Social media and the suicide of Sushant Singh Rajput
SYEDA ZAINAB AKBAR, Microsoft Research∗ , India
ANKUR SHARMA, Microsoft Research, India
HIMANI NEGI, Microsoft Research, India
ANMOL PANDA+ , Microsoft Research, India
JOYOJEET PAL, Microsoft Research, India
The suicide of Indian actor Sushant Singh Rajput in the midst of the COVID-19 lockdown triggered a media frenzy of prime time coverage that
lasted several months and became a political hot button issue. Using data from Twitter, YouTube, and an archive of debunked misinformation

arXiv:2009.11744v2 [cs.SI] 8 Oct 2020

stories, we found two important patterns. First, that retweet rates on Twitter clearly suggest that commentators benefited from talking about
the case, which got higher engagement than other topics. Second, that politicians, in particular, were instrumental in changing the course of
the discourse by referring to the case as ‘murder’, rather than ‘suicide’. In conclusion, we consider the effects of Rajput’s outsider status as a
small-town implant in the film industry within the broader narrative of systemic injustice, as well as the gendered aspects of mob justice that have
taken aim at his former partner in the months since.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Sushant Singh Rajput, SSR, Rhea Chakraborty, CBI, Suicide, Depression, Social Media, Misinformation,
Bollywood, Twitter, YouTube, India

1

Introduction & Background

On June 14, 2020, Hindi cinema and television actor Sushant Singh Rajput took his own life in his apartment in Mumbai. The
34-year old actor had featured in several successful and critically acclaimed films and television sitcoms in the past decade, and
was among the top-billed stars in the industry at the time of his death.
His death happened during the COVID-19 lockdown in India, and triggered active discussion on social media – grief, mental
and emotional health during the lockdown, and the film industry in general. In the weeks to follow, the story and several threads
emanating from it continued to grab a significant mindshare, on both social media, and mainstream news.
In this study, we map the timeline of the coverage related to the case, both through mainstream channels and on social media
feeds of media houses, journalists, and politicians in India. The story and its evolution online is instructive in understanding how
the affective contours of a tragedy can be turned into a media event, and in turn, how that can develop a life and trajectory of its
own. The case offers an insight into the ability of media influencers to steer the trajectory of a story, but also a warning about the
after-lives of pseudo events.
2

Data and Methodology

We analyzed the data from three sources - the YouTube pages of mainstream television news channels, Twitter trending hashtags,
and Tweets from politicians, influencers, journalists, and media houses in India, and an archive of debunked misinformation stories
compiled from factcheckers operational in India.
We analyzed these, in addition to which we created a visualization of all the key events and dates, the news coverage on those
dates, and the misinformation about the case or its key related persons that was debunked on those dates by factcheckers.1 . Due to
the size of the visualization, it is not included in this document.
YouTube pages of Television News: We studied the YouTube pages of the 5 most viewed English (India Today, CNN-News18,
Republic World, Times Now, DD News) and Hindi (Aaj Tak, ABP News, Republic Bharat, News 18 India, Zee news) television news
channels in India.
1 http://joyojeet.people.si.umich.edu/ssr/

∗ The
+ At

views contained in this research paper are those of the authors’ and do not reflect the views and opinions of Microsoft.
the time of publication, Anmol Panda was associated with the University of Michigan. Some of the work intersects with his time as a student there.

We used the YouTube data API v3 to extract 7171 videos from the news channels’ YouTube handle. Each of these channels had
dedicated playlists for Sushant Singh Rajput’s suicide except for Zee News and DD news for which we viewed all publicly uploaded
videos between 14th June and 12th September and manually annotated them for those relevant to the case based on their content.
Since these videos are hosted online, their comparative appeal may not be representative of these media houses’ viewership.
Nonetheless, they serve as a proxy, especially to examine the engagement these media channels get, as against other programming
content.
We used the tags used by the news channels on their videos to do a temporal topical analysis. Since the purpose of these tags is
to improve search engine optimization, these terms may be skewed towards getting more hits than to reflect the full extent of the
linked story. We removed all the redundant words (channel names, times, etc.) to create word clouds of topics.
Twitter Trending Topics: We maintained a repository of hourly trending hashtags on Twitter in India since June 14, 2020, which
can be obtained using the Twitter Public API. These topics were manually annotated by two researchers for a simple binary of
whether a topic is related to Sushant Singh Rajput for the period of June 14th and September 12th, 2020. The inter-coder reliability
score using Cohen’s Kappa gave a score of 0.876. The rest of the hashtags were arbitrated and re-annotated for disagreements.
For Twitter Media Influencer Data: On Twitter, we extracted tweets from a list of over 2000 journalists and media houses and
1200 politicians in two states where the issue has featured significantly on the news - Maharashtra, where Rajput lived and worked,
and Bihar, his place of origin. We used the dataset from Nivaduck [1], an open source state-party annotated dataset of more than
36000 politicians in India at various levels of different regional and national parties. We have made the lists of accounts available.1 .
For media houses and journalists, we used the annotated list of media houses from our dataset of influencers in India. Using
these datasets, we pulled 103125 tweets of 7818 politicians- specifically, 4172 tweets of 274 Bihar politicians and 17328 tweets
from 980 Maharashtra politicians, 45969 tweets of 239 media houses and 41056 tweets from 1930 journalists who actively tweeted
between June 14th and September 12th on Sushant Singh Rajput related topics.
The determination of whether a topic is related to Sushant Singh Rajput was done by human annotators familiar with the news
cycle. For analyzing the tweet text, we used standard natural language processing data preparation techniques including lower
casing, removing stop words, tokenizing, etc. We also removed terms such as ‘breaking’, ‘latest’, ‘primetime’ etc. which do not
have contextual value.
We maintained a sliding dictionary of hashtags, with a window size of 3 days, to create temporal graphs, and only considered
the new hashtags that were not present in the dictionary then. We did this to weigh in favour of new terms or hashtags that
trended, reducing the impact of repetitive threads that had been around for a while. The window size was chosen after observing
multiple rounds of many event stories around Bihar, Maharashtra, Media Houses, etc and had been kept same for all.
This paper is not hypothesis driven. Our goal is to offer a preliminary survey of the lay of the land for more empirically-driven
results in the future.
3

Findings

We found that the various actors - politicians, media houses, and journalists framed their own narratives in relation to the incident.
These topical preferences reflect individual biases, perceptions, motivations and gains.
3.1

Descriptive term and handle-frequency analysis of various actors in social media

In this section, we examine the content of key actors’ tweets, the temporal patterns around when and how often they discuss
specific subjects, and how their audiences react to these.
3.1.1 Twitter Actors: Politicians, Media Houses and Journalists: To set the tone of what comprises and what differentiates the key
actors on the Sushant Singh Rajput’s discussion, we take a look at basic word clouds of what their tweets talk about.
All politicians
In the figure 1, we see what politicians have been talking about in wordclouds during the study period. 7818 politicians from
across various parties, mentioned text or used hashtags in a total of 103125 tweets during the study period. The left, and center
1 http://joyojeet.people.si.umich.edu/ssr/

Fig. 1. Wordclouds of all Tweets, Hashtags and Mentions from all the politicians in India

wordclouds show the spread of words in tweets and hashtags respectively, while the wordcloud on the right is a list of the most
used handles, either through retweets or direct mentions. Here are a few key patterns:
• Words in Tweet text: The extensive use of ‘Rhea Chakraborty’, the former partner of the deceased, the references to the
‘Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI)’ and two commentators, ‘Arnab Goswami’ and ‘Kangana Ranaut’, who have made
incendiary remarks on the case show politicians’ engagement in speculation.
• Top hashtags: The use of hashtags by politicians shows a systematic targeting of the Shiv Sena (#UddhavResignOrCBI4SSR,
#ShameOnMahaGovt, #BabyPenguin), the last being a disparaging reference aimed at Aditya Thackeray. This shows that
the hashtag usage by politicians is dominated by those inimical to the present Maharashtra government, largely the BJP.
While key people involved in the discourse such as Goswami and Ranaut feature here as well, we also see a number of
self-styled justice hashtags including #Warriors4SSR and #IAmSushant. The hashtags are also used to highlight a lack of
faith in local law enforcement’s ability to manage the case.
• Top mentions: The most featured individuals include politicians across parties. While Narendra Modi (@narendramodi)
and Amit Shah’s handles (@AmitShah) are mentioned, they are largely callouts by other politicians with requests to
intervene. Likewise, Subramanian Swamy’s account (@Swamy39) is called out, since he has wide reach, and given that he
has engaged with incendiary misinformation in the past (figure 2). The accounts engaging with the subject are from across
parties - for instance YB Srivatsa (@srivatsayb) is from the INC, while Ravi Tiwari (@iRaviTiwari) is with the BJP. The key
engagement with the subjects is through callouts to or tweets from handles like @KanganaTeam, @ishkarnBhandari, and
@IPPatel, all of which have been known to put forth provocative, unverified information.

Fig. 2. An example of a tweet with unverified innuendo from Subramanian Swamy on Sept 12th, 2020

Journalists and Media Houses
In figure 3 below, we see what journalists have been talking about in wordclouds during the study period. 1930 journalists were
sampled 2 . To the left, we see the hashtags, the center figure shows the mentions of individual accounts, and the figure to the right
is a wordcloud of the most used terms in the Tweets. In figure 4, we see the wordclouds for media houses.
• Words in Tweet text: The emphasis of journalists on the ‘Mumbai police’ and ‘Bollywood’ digresses from the individual
narratives that focus on Sushant Singh Rajput’s reasons for committing suicide.
• Hashtags: Journalists and media houses seem to be equally complicit in pushing an agenda against Rhea Chakraborty
(#RheaChakraborty), whose name was the most used hashtag by both individual journalists and the mainstream media.
2 http://joyojeet.people.si.umich.edu/ssr/

Fig. 3. Tweets, Hashtags and Mentions from Journalists in India

Fig. 4. Tweets, Hashtags and Mentions from Media Houses in India

Both also pushed for the CBI inquiry (#CBIMustForSushant and #CBIForSSR). We also see that media craft themselves as
vigilantes (#TimesNowForCBIForSSR and #Warrior4SSR) and present the argument that there is a cause for doubt in the
minds of audiences (#ArrestCulpritsofSSR and #SushantDeathMystery). We also see hashtags that seek to target key figures
in the Hindi film industry including Karan Johar, and the film, Sadak 2.
• Top mentions: The most mentioned individual Twitter handles show an intersection with the more retweeted figures by
politicians - including @KanganaTeam @swamy39 who have made public statements or presented innuendo on the case, as
well as lesser known individuals including @ishkarnBhandari and @MeenaDasNarayan who came to public prominence as
a result of their claims on the case. News channels such as @TimesNow @CNNnews18 and @republic channel prominently
featured in the messaging related to the story, while few specific shows including @thenewshour trended due to their
significant coverage.
3.1.2 YouTube: Television Channels We examined the content and meta data of the content from 10 television news channels
posted on YouTube, and found that a number of tactics are employed to keep the story newsworthy. Some of the trends we see are
as follows:
• The term suicide was used the highest in the first week after his death and was also strongly visible in the first month, but
the term started to get less common in the second month and continued to decrease as a dominant subject.
• The discussion on Bollywood nepotism began early on, positioning Rajput as an outsider. By July, conversations on specific
persons and professional rivalries started to become more common - director Sanjay Leela Bhansali and Reshma Shetty
made the news.
• The filing of a First Information Report (FIR) in Bihar drew news coverage since a police team from Bihar arrived in Mumbai
and had a run in with the Mumbai police. The angles vilifying the Mumbai police, specifically presenting Rajput as an
outsider to the industry, and to a hostile city with a cabalish industry coalesced.
• As the Bihar police investigation dead-ended, calls for a CBI investigation intensified across channels. By mid-July, Rhea
Chakraborty became the main topic of discussion on television channels’ YouTube content.
• Periodically, new characters were introduced, including close friends Ankita Lokhande and Siddharth Pitani. His former cook
and longtime friend Sandip Singh emerged in the second month. New characters brought their own threads to conversations,
consequently generating new interest.

• The third month of television coverage focused on the angle of drugs, both following Rhea Chakraborty’s arrest and a series
of new stories which again have developed their own trajectories independent of the inital story around Rajput.
3.2

Temporal analysis of political and media actors on social media

Fig. 5. Normalised tweet counts for all politicians, media houses and journalists

3.2.1 Discourse drivers on Twitter Figure 5 has a timeline of the volume and peaks of major events on Twitter. While we don’t
have a sense of what is happening on largely closed or encrypted platforms like Facebook or WhatsApp, the timeline of peaks
offers an indicator of when the story became newsworthy and how its purchase grew. Some key patterns seen are as follows:
• At different points, politicians or media houses and journalists have caused spikes in the amount of Twitter traffic on the
Sushant Singh Rajput case. As the figure shows, there is an overlap in the peaks between when politicians talked about the
subject, and when media persons did.
• There was one point when politicians were more active in pushing the Twitter traffic. This happened during mid-July, when
politicians started a coordinated effort to ask for a CBI enquiry. The majority of accounts active there belonged to BJP
politicians. Interestingly, journalists also pushed a strong anti-Maharashtra government narrative in early August 2020.
• The first point when journalists drove the Twitter discourse was a large volume of tweets targeting Karan Johar, which
circulated two weeks after the suicide.
• New dramatis personae have trended roughly every two weeks, starting with Sonu Nigam and Yash Raj Films, followed by
Shekhar Suman, Alia Bhatt, Karan Johar, Rhea Chakraborty, Anupama Pathak, Mahesh Bhatt, Ankita Lokhande, Kangana
Ranaut, Disha Salian, Aditya Pancholi etc. Usually the pattern is for one name to emerge and then disappear over time.
• The media houses replaced individual journalists as the key drivers of the discourse by late July. A significant point when
individual media houses, specifically prime time news, managed to corner the narrative was around demands for Rhea
Chakraborty’s arrest in early August.
• News channels also drove the idea of murder around early August, following which the Twitter traffic increased dramatically,
peaking at the handover of the case to the CBI in mid-August.
3.2.2 Content posted on TV channels with view counts Figure 6 has a timeline of the volume and peaks of major events on YouTube.
We see an important difference between what happened on Twitter and what happened on YouTube. While on Twitter, there was
a fairly consistent amount of activity in late June and early July, the YouTube activity took off much more aggressively in the last
week of July following the anti-Maharashtra government activity on Twitter and the filing of an FIR against Rhea Chakraborty.

Fig. 6. Normalised view count and video count posted on television

• TV channels took a much more aggressive stance towards finding characters, possibly because the medium relies on visual
contact. Unlike on Twitter, where the focus was on highly speculative conversations about celebrities, TV channels focused
on those they could find and interview.
• Viewers’ count rose sharply with key interviews with various people who had been in contact with Rajput, including his
trainer, cook, key maker etc.
• Speculative material, including the linking of the case with Disha Salian’s death found high viewership online.
• There was a peak in viewership around the interview of Kangana Ranaut.
• There was a second peak during the arrest of Rhea Chakraborty, but a fall immediately after. The traffic then segued into
stories about drug use among celebrities.
3.2.3 Frequency of tweeting/posting by various actors In Table 1, we see the overall traffic and the source of tweets and videos
from various actors over time. Overall, we see that the amount of online traffic has increased significantly across Twitter and
YouTube after the first month since the actor’s death.
Table 1. Frequency table depicting monthly number of tweets/videos for various actors from 14th June 2020 to 13th September 2020

Source

Actors
Bihar
Maharashtra
All
Journalists
Media Houses
TV Channels

Politicians
Twitter

YouTube

14th June - 13th July

14th July - 13th Aug

14th Aug - 13th Sept

809
3564
26183
11217
12118
307

1836
5508
30460
13637
14374
1965

1527
8256
46482
16202
19477
4899

• In terms of the overall volume of social media traffic, we see that there was an initial peak of interest in Bihar in July, first
around the wrangling of the case between Maharashtra and Bihar police, and then on the overall question of how people
from Bihar are treated in Mumbai.
• Initially, it seemed as though Sushant Singh Rajput would become a major case for the Bihar elections, however, after
peaking in July, the number of politicians in Bihar talking about the case fell.
• On the other hand, the case has continued to be very significant among Maharashtra politicians, and has grown in importance
among politicians around the country.

• The media houses and journalists have seen a consistent increase in the amount of social media discussion on the subject.
• The most significant media output growth has been on YouTube, where television channels have increased their uploads
tenfold from the time of the suicide. This suggests a corresponding increase in the time devoted to the case on live television
news programming as well.
3.2.4 Party-wise Comparison: BJP vs INC We see a few differences in the ways that the national ruling and opposition parties
respectively discuss and frame the issue. In Maharashtra, however, the BJP is in the opposition, and the politicians can take a more
aggressive anti-government, anti-police stance.

Fig. 7. Weekly comparison of number of tweets related to SSR from different parties.

• First, we find that although both parties have roughly the same number of known politicians talking about the subject (3037
INC politicians versus 3478 BJP politicians), we find that the BJP is almost twice as voluminous in its tweeting (61196 tweets
compared to INC’s 32406)
• INC uses the term ‘suicide’ much more than the BJP. BJP uses ‘Bollywood’ a lot more than the INC. BJP’s general approach
is to use the case to discuss Bollywood in negative light.
• Television anchor ‘Arnab Goswami’ is the second most used term besides ‘Sushant Singh’ and ‘suicide’, as well as the most
used hashtag by INC. In contrast, BJP very sparsely discusses Arnab Goswami. Mostly, INC leaders refer to Arnab Goswami
in a negative context using hashtags like #ArnabTheNewsProstitute.
• ‘Kangana Ranaut’ is a frequently used hashtag by both parties, but the messaging is generally pro-Kangana on the BJP side
with hashtags like #NationStandsWithKangana, but negative on the INC side, which uses hashtags like #CastesistKangana
to refer to her.
• The top hashtags of BJP are around invoking the CBI such as #CBIForSSR, but also a significant number are direct attacks at
the Maharashtra government such as #BabyPenguin and #MahaGovtExposed
• The top mentions on the BJP side are for Twitter accounts with major online social media following including Subramanian
Swamy, Kangana Ranaut and Republic TV. The Congress on the other hand mainly refers to individuals from its own
outreach team including YB Srivatsa. The Congress’ approach gets less attention online.
Frequency comparison between BJP and INC. (Refer to figure 7)

• BJP dominated the overall trends on Twitter in terms of the total number of tweets for most of the period up until the end
of August.
• The CBI case declaration has been a major push for the BJP’s Twitter footprint.
• Towards the end of the study period, around early September 2020, the INC started to approach the same volume of social
media engagement as the BJP, partly driven by the #JusticeForRhea campaign, because by this point Sushant Singh Rajput’s
partner Rhea Chakraborty had been arrested and lodged in jail without bail.
3.3

Comparison of topical choices

3.3.1 Suicide, Murder, or Mystery? We mapped the usage of the terms ‘suicide’, ‘murder’, and ‘mystery’ to examine the ways in
which the discourse has evolved over time. We also find some descriptive patterns in how some actors prefer one term to another.

(a) BJP

(b) INC

Fig. 8. Comparison of the tweets containing ‘Suicide’/‘Murder’/‘Mystery’ amongst politicians

Politicians (figure 8)
• The ruling BJP shows a strong discernible pattern of preferring ‘murder’ over ‘suicide’. We find that the usage of ‘suicide’
keyword dropped sharply right after one week following the actor’s death.
• Over the weeks that followed, there was an increased usage of ‘murder’ keyword repeatedly in tweets by BJP politicians,
while the opposition INC consistently used the term ‘suicide’ more than ‘murder’, despite a small rise in the use of ‘murder’
in mid-August.
• Overall, the data strongly suggest that the BJP drove the insinuation of ‘murder’ since it was used more than ‘suicide’ in
most weeks since July.
• Politicians in Bihar were on average much more likely to refer to the case in terms of ‘murder’ than ‘suicide’, in comparison
to politicians in Maharashtra.
Journalists and Media Houses
• For journalists and media houses, there is a sharp dip in the usage of ‘suicide’ narrative after the first week. In absolute
numbers, the usage of the ‘suicide’ keyword dropped from 1400 to 350 for journalists, and from 680 to 280 for media houses.
• The frequency of ‘murder’ to refer to the death steadily increased over the months that followed for both media houses and
journalists.
We see in the frequency of terms around ‘depression’ and ‘mental health’ as compared to conspiracy related terms above that
while ‘depression’ and ‘mental health’ were part of the initial discourse, the conversation has been aggressively captured by
discussions on conspiracies and murder (Refer figure 9).

Fig. 9. Comparison of the usage of two different narratives on Twitter by politicians, media houses and journalists

3.4

Politicians, Police, and Warring States

The Sushant Singh Rajput case exposed a number of faultlines in the ways Indians from various groups and classes perceive
tensions in their relations with other groups. While the story on Rajput’s outsider status quickly fed into stories about cabals in the
entertainment industry, the angle of him being a migrant to the westernized metropolis of Mumbai from the Gangetic heartland
became highlighted.
The situation escalated when a police complaint was lodged in a station in Bihar, as a result of which an officer needed to
be sent to Mumbai to investigate. The head of the police in Bihar went on a widely covered television interview, on which he
spoke disparagingly of Rajput’s partner. He had more media coverage when the officer sent to Mumbai was unable to do his
investigations due to COVID quarantine rule. The officer became a public figure as a result of his appearances and would go on to
leave the police to become a politician within a short period of time.

(a) 14th June to 29th July

(b) 30th July to 13th September

Fig. 10. Comparison of the number of tweets containing Mumbai/Bihar police in the two halves

3.4.1

The Police
• As we see in figures 10a and 10b, Mumbai police has been at the receiving end of several thousand tweets by various
stakeholders throughout the entire period, though particularly after late July 2020.
• The BJP has been the most active in attacking the city police of Mumbai.
• Pro-Maharashtra politicians came out with tweets including #WeTrustMumbaiPolice, #WeStandWithMumbaiPolice, while
those opposed to the government (including Bihar politicians) used tags including #ResignParambirSingh (referring to the
police commissioner) and, #ShameOnMumbaiPolice. The attack on the police was used as a bridge into attacking the state
cabinet, beginning with #AnilDeshmukhSavingSSRKillers (the home minister), #MahaGovtExposed, and eventually the
Aditya Thackeray, who is already one of the most trolled politicians in India.

• The Bihar police did not receive much antagonistic attention from Maharashtra, despite their abortive attempt to play a role
in the case.

Fig. 11. Tweet counts with labelled peaks for all politicians in Bihar and Maharashtra

3.4.2

Bihar and Maharashtra political Twitter timeline
• Of the four key parties in Maharashtra - BJP, INC, Shiv Sena and NCP, primarily the BJP politicians were active on messaging
about the case. The peaks in red that we see on figure 11 are comprised mainly of BJP politicians.
• The key parties in Bihar - BJP, INC and RJD each had to address the issue briefly, especially by late-July when it appeared
that this would turn into an issue in the upcoming elections.
• The peak from Bihar politicians came around the third week of July, timed alongside the trending hashtag #NationStandsWithKangana when the narrative was spun around outsiders to Mumbai and the Mumbai film industry, including
Rajput and Ranaut, being treated poorly and driven to extreme steps. Hashtags like #CBIForSonOfBihar and #BiharsPride,
which trended during this period show how ethnonationalism became part of the meta narrative around the issue.

3.5

Retweet analysis and media effect

We conducted a retweet analysis to examine if tweeting about Sushant Singh Rajput or the case has an impact on the retweet rates
of the individuals sending out those messages. The overwhelming share of key journalists and media houses who tweeted about
the case got far higher retweets than they got on average when this was not the subject of their messaging. In this, we see the
important element of public engagement, in that the press is rewarded for engaging in this story by eyeballs.
3.5.1 Median retweets of highly followed journalists and media houses In figure 12, entities above the yellow line (y>0) are termed
to receive more retweets about SSR than about any other issue. The size of the bubble is proportional to the number of followers
an account has.
• More than 90% of the most followed journalists and media houses receive higher median retweets on their tweets related to
Sushant Singh Rajput than the tweets in which they discuss other subjects.
• Republic TV is the clear outlier in terms of the retweet rates it gets to its typical tweets about Sushant Singh Rajput. The
channel gets a massive boost online from its followers on Twitter when it engages with the subject, several times that of
most other channels.
• All four major English language news channels – Republic, TimesNow, CNNNews18, and IndiaToday have a large volume
of tweets about Sushant Singh Rajput, showing that across channels there is recognition of, and tapping into the value of
the story.

Fig. 12. Median Retweet Response of most followed Journalists and Media Houses

• TimesNow tweets the most about this topic.
• Sudhir Chaudhary and Barkha Dutt get significantly higher retweets than other journalists when they discuss this subject.
• Journalists like Nikhil Wagle, Rajdeep Sardesai, Shekhar Gupta, and Rahul Kanwal were among the most prolific from this
set. There are, however, other less followed journalists who tweeted significantly about the topic, but are not featured in
this graph which focuses on the major influencers.
3.5.2 Television content trend analysis We looked closely at the content of two specific TV channels (Republic Media Network and
India Today) that are outliers in the figure 12 for deeper analysis of their topical choices.
Both of these TV channels have tweeted a lot about case and its related issues from their official twitter accounts, but there is a
significant disparity in the kind of response and viewership they received on their social media platforms. Republic has been far
more successful with the kind of content it has put out, as compared with India Today. Here are some general trends we found in
the material put out by both:
• Phase 1 (14th June - 13th July): India Today’s content focused generally on suicide and depression strongly, whereas
Republic’s content had more terms and subjects around nepotism in Bollywood. Republic gave early spotlight to the points
made by Kangana Ranaut, and pushed insinuations on the finances of Rhea Chakraborty’s parents.
• Phase 2 (14th July - 13th Aug): Republic started with an interview of Kangana Ranaut which put forth much innuendo
and later focused on personalities (including Ankita Lokhande, Siddharth Pithani, Shruti Modi, Mahesh Bhatt etc). It also
conducted its own investigation, live on air, bringing spotlight to people around Rajput (including his cook’s, gym trainer’s,
and key maker’s interviews). India Today did not involve new entities/names so frequently into the picture, nor did it
happen to conduct such investigations.
• Phase 3 (14th Aug - 13th Sept): India Today interviewed Rhea Chakraborty. Republic used a strategy of naming people,
brought in new entities like Samuel Miranda, Gaurav Arya, Shruti Modi, etc. India Today by this point also went after
naming individuals, including lesser characters who had fleeting contact with either of the key characters. Separate threads

emerged out of the case - India Today created a thread for Sandalwood and Bollywood drug use angles, and the tussle
between Kangana Ranaut and the BrihanMumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC).
3.6

Misinformation

Misinformation in India does not exist in vacuum but runs with the current news cycle. It has a cause and effect relationship with
the information flow in the media ecosystem [2]. Misinformation can broadly be classified into three types: disinformation which
is intentionally false and designed to cause harm; misinformation which is false content but the person sharing doesn’t realise that
it is false or misleading; and malinformation which is technically true information that is shared with an intent to cause harm [3].

(a) Fake claim linking Sushant Singh Rajput’s suicide to Dawood Ibrahim(b) Fake claim suggesting link between Sushant Sing’s Ex manager Disha
(source: India Today)
Salian and late actress Jiah Khan’s then boyfriend Sooraj Pancholi
Fig. 13. Some examples of misinformation stories spread on social media

The misinformation cycle in this case is difficult to study, since there is so much innuendo and deliberate biasing of information
that the lines between one kind of misleading is hard to differentiate from others. A defining feature of the news coverage, across
channels, for instance is the use of provocative titles for clips on YouTube, and calling out names of the individuals in the story,
which are intended to shock and clickbait. Key persons including Rhea Chakraborty, Aditya Thackeray, Disha Salian, Vinay Tiwari
and Salman Khan have been targeted by misinformation, and the news cycle surrounding them makes readers more prone to click
on them.
We gathered and mapped a full list of debunked misinformation collected from the Tattle archive of fake news (www.tattle.co.in)
and mapped it on a dashboard that has all the stories, which is publicly available. 2 We see discernible patterns of the misinformation
with the news cycle. The first is misinformation about the regular targets who are frequently trolled on social media. The earliest
debunked misinformation was claims that Rahul Gandhi referred to Rajput as a cricketer. Misinformation and jokes about Gandhi
have long been successful at garnering eyeballs on WhatsApp and other platforms. Later, misinformation was about Aditya
Thackeray, another frequent target of derision by trolls. The mainstream news engagement with disinformation also started early
with both Aaj Tak and India.com reporting doctored tweets as Sushant Singh Rajput’s last words.
2 http://joyojeet.people.si.umich.edu/ssr/

One pattern we observe is of the temporal connections of fake news to the news cycle. For instance, misinformation around the
CBI, proposing that Modi authorized a probe, came about in July 2020. Later, as officers from Bihar came to probe the case, there
were a series of false news circulated about them.
Another pattern is that of fake news building off innuendo proposed by the news cycle. Here, we see the impact of Subramanian
Swamy or Kangana Ranaut referring to the notion of a Bollywood mafia or need for clean ups. A particular topic that started
trending that began in relation to this, was the ‘Bollywood-Pakistan link’ (figure 13a). Through our mapping, we can see that this
topic first trended on Twitter by Mumbai politicians and then spread across to Bihar politicians and media houses in late July. A
month later in late August, a fake image of Bollywood celebrities dining with a gangster emerged.
We also see a pattern of viral trolling that goes from one subject to another. For instance, Deepika Padukone was trolled for her
post on mental health, and then included in false news about her having connections to underworld fugitive Dawood Ibrahim
(figure 13a). More recently, Padukone has also been targeted for an investigation, based on information that came out of this case,
suggesting that there are real second-order consequences of trending stories for someone sufficiently in the public eye.
The priming of an argument by celebrities is an important element of what makes misinformation believable. One piece of false
news that came from an account claiming to be Kangana Ranaut pushing false news connecting Sooraj Pancholi (in the past, a
target of a probe for the suicide death of his ex-partner) with Disha Salian, Rajput’s associate who died a week before him (figure
13b). While the image is fake, the already vilified Pancholi made for an easy, viral story.
4

Discussion and Conclusion

The trajectories of news coverage and misinformation around the death of Sushant Singh Rajput offer insight into the media
environment in India, but also into the fractured nature of what the audience cares to consume. In a recent television interview,
journalist P. Sainath rued that scores of suicides of farmers, driven to desperation by poverty and state failure, had failed to garner
even a small percentage of the attention that this case had received. That the audience has consistently rewarded news channels for
following this story, for instance, through meteoric ratings for the Republic news network which has offered the most aggressive
coverage, are testament to the citizenry’s complicity.
Undoubtedly, the specifics of the story, particularly Rajput’s journey as an outsider, breaking into the difficult world of show
business with its well-known nepotism is an important part of why it had such affective value. The notion of Rajput as an outsider
is not unlike past, successful narratives of other outsiders who have taken on a system - most prominently that of Narendra Modi
taking on the entrenched Congress institutions. Empathizing with Rajput is rooting for the underdog.
The data show an important role played by politicians, especially the BJP, in proposing a ’murder’ alternative to the ’suicide’
narrative. There was a real opportunity to address mental health and depression early in news cycle, but the stories quickly
devolved to allusive concoctions. The move towards conspiracies was accompanied by multiple supporting actors - the local police
was proposed as incompetent, or in cahoots with the cabal, the state government itself was presented as nepotistic and inimical to
the interests of poor outsiders. As research into online groups claiming to seek justice for Sushant Singh Rajput have shown, a
heady mix of ultranationalism, casteism, distrust of Muslims, and misogyny come are drivers of some of the online action that we
have seen in recent months.3 And as much recent work into political speech has also shown, an ecosystem of outrage exists in
place in India, and it may be far from coincidental that a lot of the celebrities being trolled in the aftermath of the suicide were
among those who were critical of the government in the past.
The array of stakeholders, each with their own interests in moving the story forward, are an important part of what has driven
this to the point of being perhaps the top national story, despite being in the middle of the worst pandemic and economic crisis
India has known. The timing of the suicide, in the midst of the COVID-19 crisis and lockdown with many urban middle-class
Indians stuck at home, probably had a role in driving up purchase for the story. The Sushant Singh Rajput case came at a point
when the prime time for a while had been saturated simply with news of the virus. The story offered a diversion. While the massive
win for the actor’s posthumously released film offered a silver lining, the creation of villains gave people an object for vengeance.
Several public figures, long outside the spotlight in the midst of the COVID-19 crisis found their way back into the news. The
media channels that amplified these stories - particularly the Republic and Times of India groups, have a financial incentive to get
3 https://www.newslaundry.com/inside-the-online-cult-of-justice-for-SSR

more viewers. The political parties that engaged in the story arguably benefited from being in the spotlight and used it as a means
to attack their opponents. Perhaps the most interesting case is that of sitting parliamentarian Subramanian Swamy, once a central
player in the policy circles, now wilfully mongering deceit, and also the most popular Twitter handle in wordclouds of trolls.
Finally, there is also an unmistakable gendered aspect to this. Several high profile female stars have taken their own lives over
the years, and many of these stories have ended with victim blaming or stayed in the news cycle for very short periods of time.
The victims of this case have mostly been women – Rhea Chakraborty was slandered and hounded, eventually ending up in jail
without bail. As the scandal devolved into allegations about drugs - the Indian Narcotics Control Bureau (NCB) summoned four
movie actors - Deepika Padukone, Sara Ali Khan, Shraddha Kapoor, and Rakul Preet Singh, all women, and at the time of this
writing, all intensely targeted by trolling and mainstream media speculation online.
The Sushant Singh Rajput case is a story of one man’s personal journey that ends in tragedy. The events that followed may
tempt us to think that this offers a window into the ways that online culture has changed society and media in India. But the
truth may be more chilling than that. While social media may have facilitated certain kinds of virality and speed with which the
narratives have changed, the case and its victims are a reminder of ways the patriarchy is alive and well, and always readying its
blades for the next execution.
References
[1] Anmol Panda, A’ndre Gonawela, Sreangsu Acharyya, Dibyendu Mishra, Mugdha Mohapatra, Ramgopal Chandrasekaran, and Joyojeet Pal. 2020. NivaDuck - A
Scalable Pipeline to Build a Database of Political Twitter Handles for India and the United States. In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Social Media
and Society (Chicago, IL, USA) (SMSociety ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 15.
[2] Anmol Panda, Ramaravind Kommiya Mothilal, Monojit Choudhury, Kalika Bali, and Joyojeet Pal. 2020. Topical Focus of Political Campaigns and its Impact:
Findings from Politicians’ Hashtag Use during the 2019 Indian Elections. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 4, CSCW1 (2020), 1–14.
[3] Claire Wardle. 2019. First draft’s essential guide to understanding information disorder. First draft (2019).

