arXiv:2009.01894v1 [q-bio.PE] 3 Sep 2020

PolSIRD: Modeling Epidemic Spread under
Intervention Policies and an Application to the
Spread of COVID-19

Nitin Kamra∗, Yizhou Zhang, Sirisha Rambhatla, Chuizheng Meng, and Yan Liu
Department of Computer Science
University of Southern California
{nkamra,zhangyiz,sirishar,chuizhem,yanliu.cs}@usc.edu

Abstract
Epidemic spread in a population is traditionally modeled via compartmentalized
models which represent the free evolution of disease in absence of any intervention
policies. In addition, these models assume full observability and do not account
for under-reporting of cases. We present a mathematical model, namely PolSIRD,
which accounts for the under-reporting by introducing an observation mechanism.
It also captures the effects of intervention policies on the disease spread parameters by leveraging intervention policy data along with the reported disease cases.
Furthermore, we allow our recurrent model to learn the initial hidden state of all
compartments end-to-end along with other parameters via gradient-based training.
We apply our model to spread of the recent global outbreak of COVID-19 where
our model outperforms the current methods employed by the CDC in most of the
metrics. We also provide actionable guidance on the lifting of intervention policies
via counterfactual simulations from our model.

1

Introduction

Accurate modeling of spatiotemporal spread is critical when faced with an epidemic at a global
scale such as the recent outbreak of COVID-19. The disease is caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus,
whose outbreak was first witnessed in the city of Wuhan in the Hubei province of China in December
2019. Since then the virus has spread rapidly to other parts of the world over a span of just a few
months, thereby causing all countries to respond by imposing strict gathering restrictions, travel bans,
stay-at-home orders and occasionally even curfews to counteract the virus spread. Given the fast
spread and limited data collection, it has become necessary to advance our responding capabilities in
various fields like contact tracing, medicine, healthcare, genome tracking and spread modeling.
Epidemic spread has been traditionally modeled via compartmentalized models, e.g., the SIR
model [14]. However these models do not account for under-reporting of confirmed cases or
deviations from natural evolution of the disease caused by various intervention policies imposed by
humans to counteract the spread. Estimating the model parameters is generally done via statistical
analysis which assumes free evolution of the disease in the absence of any human intervention and
requires guessing the initial hidden states of all compartments [13]. In this work, we present our
PolSIRD model which leverages intervention and disease spread data to model the disease spread.
We account for under-reporting of cases via an observation mechanism and allow the model to
learn the initial hidden states of all compartments along with other parameters via gradient-based
training. Lastly, PolSIRD accepts intervention policy inputs and learns their effects on disease spread
∗

Corresponding author

Preprint. Under review.

parameters. We apply our model to the spread of COVID-19 and also provide actionable guidance on
intervention policies via counterfactual simulations from our model.

2

Related work

Modeling the spatiotemporal spread of diseases has been studied in epidemiology with the longest
standing models being variants of the compartmentalized SIR model proposed by Kermack and
McKendrick [14]. The SIR model is a continuous-time markov model useful for studying the
evolution of a disease in a single homogeneously mixing population. Over time, variants of the SIR
model have been proposed and analyzed to account for discrete time, latent stages of the disease
(SEIR) and lack of immunity after recovering (SIS) [1]. More advances resulting from modeling the
global spread of Influenza have additionally accounted for the spread of disease via transportation
between multiple heterogeneously mixing populations [23, 20, 12]. While the parameters of these
models were acquired by statistical analysis of the disease spread, we learn all parameters of PolSIRD
end-to-end via gradient-based training on observed data.
Other approaches use stochastic modeling approaches based on point processes (e.g. Hawkes
processes) to model disease spread in multiple populations spread across geographic locations [16],
however these require availability of event-level data which is often not be available due to underreporting of cases. Other point process based approaches use aggregated event data but do not model
all compartments, nor the effects of finite population sizes [19]. While modifications to Hawkes
processes have been proposed to have a Hawkes-SIR model [22], these only roughly approximate the
desired compartments over a finite population and have essentially been used to estimate the diameter
of disease spread on the underlying graph of geographic locations. The more recently proposed
GLEaM model uses a Multinomial distribution to exactly model a finite population, however, unlike
PolSIRD, GLEaM does not account for under-reporting and uses statistical estimates of spread
parameters instead of learning them end-to-end from data. We refer the interested reader to recent
epidemiological reviews [24, 8, 27] which survey the advances in this field in more detail.
More recently, the outbreak of COVID-19 has caused numerous works to appear focusing on
statistically estimating the spread and death rates from Wuhan data [26] and on using the SEIR
model (SIR augmented with latent stage of disease) to estimate the spread in Wuhan and the
rest of China [28, 6]. Other works have used point process based models to estimate the spread
locally [21]. However, the latent stage of COVID-19 is not easily observable since a latent individual
is asymptomatic and yet infectious within local populations or between populations via travel. Hence,
COVID-19 is plagued by under-reporting of confirmed cases which can be as high as 86%, as
was the case in Wuhan [18]. This along with the non-availability of enough testing equipment has
made COVID-19 spread across the whole world in a matter of three months. While the recent
SuEIR model [29] has modified the SEIR model to account for under-reporting of cases, it cannot
simultaneously learn about intervention policies.
Many works focus exclusively on studying effects of a particular intervention policy like restrictions
on human mobility and foreign travel [5, 7] and quarantine [9] in various countries. While the recent
DELPHI model [17] also accounts for an intervention policy, it does not provide any model for
combining multiple intervention policies. Our work differs from these works in that it assumes
the presence of multiple intervention policies and expects only a fraction of cases to be reported.
PolSIRD learns the spread, policy and reporting parameters end-to-end directly from observed data.
Hence, after learning our model we can estimate the contribution of individual intervention policies
towards curbing the COVID-19 spread in the United States. We are also able to run counterfactual
simulations and make predictions on the effects of lifting certain intervention policies in the near
future as is planned for many US states.

3
3.1

PolSIRD model
The basic discrete-time SIR model

The SIR compartmental model [14] models the evolution of a disease in a fixed-size population
in continuous time using ordinary differential equations. We describe here a discrete-time variant
proposed later [20, 1]. Assuming a population size N , the SIR model maintains three population
compartments at all times: (a) S: Number of people susceptible to the disease, (b) I: Number of
2

people infected by the disease and actively spreading it further, and (c) R: Number of people who
have been removed either due to death or due to a full recovery leading to immunization. The state
transition for individuals follows from S → I → R, hence the name SIR. At any time t, an individual
can be in exactly one compartment and the total population is always conserved,
S(t) + I(t) + R(t) = N,

∀t.

(1)

The Markov evolution equations of the SIR model with time step ∆t are:
S(t)
I(t)∆t
N
S(t)
I(t)∆t − γI(t)∆t
I(t + ∆t) = I(t) + λ
N
R(t + ∆t) = R(t) + γI(t)∆t
S(t + ∆t) = S(t) − λ

(2)
(3)
(4)

where the first equation assumes uniform infectious contact between individuals in compartments S
and I and the last equation assumes uniform removal (via recovery or death). The parameter λ ≥ 0
governs the infection rate and the parameter γ ∈ [0, 1] is the removal rate. Since epidemic reported
cases are generally recorded on a day-to-day basis, we will use ∆t = 1 without loss of generality.
Under the SIR model, the average length of a person’s infection is given by 1/γ. Another important
quantity is the basic reproduction number of the disease given by r0 = λ/γ, i.e. the average number
of people a single infectious person will infect over the course of their infection. The number r0
decides if the disease will persist in the population or die out. In general, r0 < 1 implies the disease
automatically getting extinct, r0 = 1 makes the disease endemic thereby stably persisting in the
population and r0 > 1 makes the disease grow exponentially and become an epidemic.
3.2

The PolSIRD model

Our PolSIRD2 model augments the
standard SIR model in two keys
ways: (a) Designing an observation mechanism to account for underreporting and adding two new compartments to support it, and (b) Modeling effects of intervention policies.

{λ, λ̃}

S

γ

I

R

w, b

γ
βI
Observation mechanism:
EpiP ol
demic spread data is generally
plagued by under-reporting due to
γ(1 − γC )βD
C̃
I˜
D̃
lack of reliable testing technology
and/or due to availability of sufficient testing kits. While traditional
SIR models do not account for
Figure 1: Visualization of the PolSIRD model
under-reporting, we assume that the
confirmed counts are only a fraction
of the true total cases. We keep the
susceptible (S), unreported but actively infectious (I) and the removed (R) compartments. Apart
from these, we add two new compartments to account, namely the reported infectious cases I˜ and
the reported deaths D̃. However, while infected individuals can recover or die and leave the I˜
compartment, the actual reported numbers do not track the active infectious people but rather the total
number of individuals ever confirmed to be infectious till date. Hence, we also add an observable C̃
to keep track of the total number of confirmed cases. Note that we call C̃ an observable and not a
˜ D̃ and R compartments and it double counts them
compartment since individuals in it belong to I,
for observation purposes.

Temporal evolution: The population conservation can now be written as:
˜ + R(t) + D̃(t) = N,
S(t) + I(t) + I(t)
2

“Pol” stands for Policies

3

∀t.

(5)

Note that the confirmed cases observable (C̃) is not part of the population conservation equation
since it logs individuals already present in other compartments. The Markov evolution equations of
˜ R, D̃, C̃) for time step = 1 day are given as:
the system with state (S, I, I,
S(t)
˜
S(t + 1) = S(t) − (λI(t) + λ̃I(t))
(6)
N
S(t)
˜
I(t + 1) = I(t) + (λI(t) + λ̃I(t))
− γI(t) − βI I(t)
(7)
N
˜ + 1) = I(t)
˜ − γ I(t)
˜ + βI I(t)
I(t
(8)
˜
˜
R(t + 1) = R(t) + γ(I(t) + I(t))
− γ(1 − γC )βD I(t)
(9)
˜
D̃(t + 1) = D̃(t) + γ(1 − γC )βD I(t)

(10)

C̃(t + 1) = C̃(t) + βI I(t)
(11)
which are also described graphically in figure 1. As eq 6 shows, we now model infections to
susceptible people from both I and I˜ compartments with their individual infection rates λ, λ̃ ≥ 0
respectively. While susceptible people go first into the unreported infectious compartment I, they
can eventually get tested and go to the reported infectious compartment I˜ with a testing fraction
βI ∈ [0, 1] (eqs 7,8). Note that the I compartment also contains people who have been exposed and
are infectious but not yet symptomatic, e.g., as found for the latent stage of COVID-19. Individuals in
the infected compartments I and I˜ are removed (by recovery or death) into the R compartment with
a rate γ ∈ [0, 1] (eqs 9). However, a fraction of the deaths from confirmed infected cases I˜ are also
reported in the D̃ compartment. Assuming a cure rate of γC ∈ [0, 1] and a death reporting rate of
˜ (eq 10). Note that
βD ∈ [0, 1], the number of reported deaths per day are given as γ(1 − γC )βD I(t)
while we have both γC and βD as learnable parameters, one needs to observe infections, recoveries
and deaths to be able to learn the parameters separately. However, since only the confirmed infections
C̃ and confirmed deaths D̃ are being reported reliably for COVID-19, one cannot disambiguate the
effects of γC and βD and our model learns the product (1 − γC )βD jointly as a parameter.
Influence of intervention policies: While most existing models simulate free evolution of a disease,
the data collected generally comes from an initial freely evolving disease followed by a subsequent
period of controlled spread due to execution of intervention policies by humans. This requires us
to model the influence of intervention policies, e.g. executing stay-at-home orders or closing gyms
and movie theaters. Since the most rapid spread is caused by community spread, most policies are
targeted towards curbing the infection rates λ and λ̃ within a population. Denoting the set of all
policies under consideration by P, we represent the time at which policy p ∈ P was enacted as τp . A
single policy p is represented by four learnable parameters: wp , w̃p , bp , b̃p where wp (w̃p ) represents
the decay rate and bp (b̃p ) represents the steady-state reduction for λ(λ̃) due to the policy p. While
different policies can interact with each other in complex ways, we approximate the effect of multiple
policies with a first-order approximation which assumes that all policies independently reduce the
spread rates and multiplies the reduction to λ (or λ̃) from all the enacted policies. Given that all
policies under consideration are generally enacted within a short time frame, as has been the case
with COVID-19 in the US, it is hard to disentangle the individual effects of policies under any model
which considers combining multiple policies. This becomes even harder if more complex forms of
interactions are modeled between policies, hence we leave the modeling of more complex policy
interactions for future work and stick to our simple and more interpretable model in this work. With
multiple policies being enacted at a node, both λ and λ̃ become decaying functions of time, given by:

Y
1 − bp
λ(t) = λ
bp +
(12)
1 + esgn(p)wp (t−τp )
p∈P
!
Y
1 − b̃p
λ̃(t) = λ̃
b̃p +
,
(13)
1 + esgn(p)w̃p (t−τp )
p∈P
where sgn(p) is +1 if the policy p is being enacted and −1 if a pre-enacted policy p is being lifted.
Note that the above form ensures that enacting any policy always reduces the value of λ and λ̃
vice-versa when lifting policies, but more importantly in a specific way. We describe the effect of
eq 12 for a single policy on λ and the generalization with multiple policies automatically follows:
4

• On being enacted, an intervention policy generally causes some immediate spread reduction due to
a fraction of the population adopting the policy immediately. In our model, the coefficient of λ at
time t = −∞ is 1, thereby causing no reduction to the natural rate. Since the decision to enact
a policy is generally rapidly taken in a few days, τp is not known much ahead of time before the
policy is about to be enacted. Hence, we keep t at −∞ till τp . When the policy is enacted at time
1+b
τp , plugging in t = τp immediately drops the coefficient of λ to 2 p .
• However, a policy continues to further reduce the spread slowly over time as the remaining
population adopts the policy. Our model causes such a slow decay after time τp and asymptotically
decays the coefficient of λ to its steady state value of bp with an exponential rate given by wp .
• Lastly, one can perform counterfactual simulation by lifting policy p after λ has settled to its
steady state value after p being enacted. This follows a similar trend of a certain fraction of people
adopting the lifting immediately while other more cautious people slowly adopt it after observing
the effects of lifting. On lifting policy p, our model increases the coefficient of λ suddenly from bp
1+b
to 2 p and then asymptotically increases it back to 1 as time passes.
We use λ(t) and λ̃(t) from eqs 12,13 in the temporal evolution eqs 6–11 while unrolling over time.
Initialization of PolSIRD: Before unrolling the recurrent PolSIRD model over time, one needs
to guess an initial estimate for the number of people in each compartment. This is a particularly
challenging task since the true total number of people in any compartment are never observed at any
time. While existing approaches [3, 29] have chosen suitable initializations via approximate searches
and hyperparameter tuning, we take a different route and take the initial values in each compartment
at t = 0 as learnable parameters, i.e., our model learns the fractions s0 , i0 , ĩ0 , r0 and d˜0 such that
they sum upto 1. While unrolling the model from t = 0, we set the initial state of the model with
total population N as:
(
!)
d˜0
˜
˜
,
(14)
{S, I, I, R, D̃, C̃}(0) = N s0 , N i0 , N ĩ0 , N r0 , N d0 , N ĩ0 +
(1 − γC )βD
where the initialization for C̃(0) is given by adding all reported active infections (N ĩ0 ) to all the
reported cases which left the compartment I˜ to go to D̃ or to R. Since we know that people leave
from I˜ at a rate γ, a fraction of which enters D̃ with rate γ(1 − γC )βD , having the total reported
N d˜0
deaths at time t = 0 as N d˜0 implies that the total number of people who ever left I˜ = (1−γ
.
C )βD
3.3

Training

The PolSIRD model takes as input the time-steps at which each policy was enacted and unrolls the
temporal evolution model defined by eqns 6–13 for T time steps. The model is trained to learn all
its parameters θ = {λ, λ̃, γ, βI , βD , γC } ∪ {wp , bp , w̃p , b̃p }p∈P ∪ {s0 , i0 , ĩ0 , r0 , d˜0 } by minimizing
the Mean Absolute Error Ratio (MAER) on the number of confirmed cases C̃(t) and the number of
reported deaths D̃(t) at all time steps:
!
T
X
|Ĉ(t) − C̃(t)| |D̂(t) − D̃(t)|
min
+
,
(15)
θ
max(Ĉ(t), 1)
max(D̂(t), 1)
t=1
where the max(·) term in the denominator serves to handle nodes with 0 reported cases and a hat(ˆ)
on the top denotes the observed ground truth value. While one can train the model independently
at any location, in practice we train models jointly across multiple locations (e.g. on all US states).
While each location maintains its own copy of the temporal evolution parameters and the initial
state parameters for compartments since these can vary significantly across locations, we enforce
that policies have similar effects at all locations and leverage additional data for learning about
policy effects by sharing the same copy of policy decay rates and steady-state reductions amongst all
locations for each policy3 .
3

Note that all policies still have their own unique decay rates and steady-state reductions. We do not share
those parameters amongst different policies.

5

4
4.1

Experiments
Datasets

We apply our PolSIRD model to predicting the spread of COVID-19 and the corresponding spread
parameters for all states in the United States. We use the following datasets for training our model:
1. COVID-19 confirmed cases: We use confirmed case counts and death counts for the United
States maintained by the CSSE at John Hopkins University [10].
2. US Population data: We use the latest estimates from the United States Census Bureau [4].
3. US Intervention policy data: We use data aggregated from various sources by researchers at
John Hopkins University [15]. The policies we consider are: (a) stay-at-home, (b) ban > 50
gatherings, (c) ban > 500 gatherings, (d) public school closure, (e) restaurant dine-in closure, and
(f) entertainment/gym closure.
4.2

Training results

Implementation details: We trained our PolSIRD model as described in the previous section to learn
the spread, reporting and policy parameters for COVID-19. Since reporting in the US states before
mid of March 2020 was very inaccurate and sparse, we extracted the COVID-19 confirmed cases
from March 22nd to May 20th and split them as follows: Train (March 22–May 1) and Test (May
2–May 20). Further, preliminary training runs showed a considerable variance in learnt parameters
when using very long sequences from the reported COVID-19 data indicating high non-stationarity in
the underlying temporal process. Hence, for reporting final results we trained our model on a recent
sub-sequence extracted from April 22 onwards from the train split. We minimized the MAER as
defined in eq 15 to learn all trainable parameters in an end-to-end fashion for 16, 000 epochs with
the Adam optimizer having a learning rate of 0.003. We obtained a small final test MAER of 0.0825
(i.e. an 8% relative prediction error) jointly on the confirmed and death cases, thereby showing that
PolSIRD is a suitable model for predicting epidemic spread.
Comparing with baselines: We compare our model specifically against several baselines generated
by other institutes and being used to inform the decisions made by the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (CDC): (a) SuEIR model proposed by Zou et al. [29], (b) GLEaM model proposed
by Balcan et al. [2] and, (c) DELPHI model proposed by Li [17]. Since the CDC only maintains
predictions of future deaths, we directly use the predicted death cases from all the baselines being
used by the CDC (taken from [11]) and compare them to our model’s predictions. For this we only
use the predictions made from May 2nd onwards and ensure that we use versions of all models which
have only been trained on the time-series uptil May 1st. We show the MAER and the Root Mean
Square Error (RMSE) for all models in Table 1 averaged across all the US states. We also additionally
show both metrics averaged across the best 40 states for each model. This removes certain states
which have abnormalties in reporting or very few reported deaths causing the models to have a high
error on those states. Our PolSIRD model clearly outperforms all the other state-of-the-art baselines
in terms of both metrics on all 51 states (counting the District of Columbia as a state) and also on the
top-40 states. We show the death predictions from all models on several states in figure 2.
Table 1: The MAER and RMSE metrics of PolSIRD compared to other state-of-the-art baselines
being used by the CDC to inform their decisions.
Method
MAER (all states) RMSE (all states) MAER (top-40) RMSE (top-40)
PolSIRD (ours)
0.076
184.147
0.046
36.393
SuEIR
0.081
653.304
0.059
35.273
GLEaM
0.223
1400.22
0.144
88.231
DELPHI
0.142
242.815
0.092
53.41
4.3

Parameter estimation

We report the parameter values learnt by our model averaged over the US states in Table 2. Our
estimated mean disease lifetime given by 1/γ = 17.86 days is a lies in the statistical range of 17.8
to 24.7 days estimated by [26]. Based on βI , our model estimates about 61% reported confirmed
6

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 2: Death predictions from all models on: (a) California, (b) Florida, and (c) Texas
cases in the US, which is fortunately a significant fraction of the true confirmed cases. Further,
we calculate the natural reproductive number (r0 ) of COVID-19 in the US. While this quantity
representing the total number of secondary infections by a single infected individual is given by λ/γ
βI
λ
for the standard SIR model, for the PolSIRD model this quantity is given by: γ+β
+ λ̃γ γ+β
. Our
I
I
estimated value averaged across all states: r0 = 5.899, is about double the 2.9 value reported for
Wuhan [13] indicating a higher spread rate in the absence of any intervention. Since both βI and
r0 values vary considerably across states, we visualize them across all US states in figures 3a and
3b respectively. The high values of r0 in New York, New Jersey, Texas, Atlanta and Wisconsin are
consistent with the known high spread rates in these states. While the reporting fractions are high in
Washington, Louisiana, Illinois and New York, many other states suffer from heavy under-reporting.
A first actionable measure for such states would be to provision more resources for testing and
reporting cases in order to gauge the spread of COVID-19 more accurately.
Table 2: Learnt parameter values from PolSIRD averaged over the US states.
Parameter
λ̃
λ
γ
γC
βI
βD
r0
Mean across states
0.177
0.178
0.056
0.899
0.61
0.628
5.899
Stddev across states ±0.094 ±0.13 ±0.047 ±0.057 ±0.209 ±0.134 ±4.798

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 3: Intensity maps visualizing the estimated values of: (a) the reported fraction of confirmed
cases βI , (b) the natural reproductive number r0 , and (c) the reproductive number r0 after intervention
policies reach a near steady-state across all the US states.
4.4

Intervention policy analysis

Effects of policies: We next analyze the effects of intervention policies on the infection rates and
the reproduction number. Table 3 summarizes the steady-state decays to λ, λ̃ from each policy. We
observed from our experiments disambiguating the contribution of various policies is hard since they
were enacted between 6–20 March with very short durations between them to observe their individual
effects. Hence, we focus on the overall steady-state decay due to all policies combined together in
Table 4. Overall, the policies have been quite effective leading to a reduction in spread of about 79%
from reported cases and 93% from unreported cases. This is expected because people with confirmed
infection tend to isolate themselves while asymptomatic unreported cases unknowingly spread the
disease. This unreported spread gets curbed to a larger extent by intervention policies. The new
7

reproduction number r0 has dropped down to 1.159 averaged across the US states, which while much
smaller than its natural value is still > 1, indicating that the disease continues to progress, albeit at a
slower rate. However several states now have an r0 value less than 1 (see figure 3c) and this has led
many state governments to begin formulating plans to lift the policies and re-open the states.
Counterfactual re-opening of states: Most re-opening plans are multi-stage and remove intervention
policies sequentially. At the time of writing this manuscript many states are already in stages 1 or 2
of re-opening which prep workplaces to follow social distancing guidelines and allow opening small
low-risk workplaces and businesses respectively [25]. To understand the effect of eventually moving
into stages 3 (opening restaurants for dine-in, gyms and entertainment venues) and 4 (lifting stay-athome order, bans on large gatherings and public school closures), we now perform counterfactual
simulations from our trained model to lift the intervention policies. We execute three counterfactual
stage 3 and 4 plans as follows (all stage plans are in reference to May 1, 2020): Plan 1: Enter stage 3
in 60 days and stage 4 in 120 days, Plan 2: Enter stage 3 in 90 days and stage 4 in 120 days, and Plan
3: Enter stage 3 in 90 days and stage 4 in 150 days. The results of our counterfactual simulations
when all policies are in place and when the above plans are followed are shown on several states
in figure 4. While the disease progression is slowed under policy intervention, we observe that the
number of infected cases begins to rise exponentially if the policies are removed following any of the
above three plans; the key takeaway being that it could be detrimental to remove the intervention
policies any time in the near future. To be cautious and not cause a second wave of COVID-19
infections, we recommend deferring the stages 3 and 4 of re-opening to more than 150 days (from
May 1, 2020) in at least the states which have a current r0 ≥ 1 (figure 3c).

Policy p
bp
b̃p

stay-at
-home
0.559
0.815

Table 3: Steady state policy coefficients for λ and λ̃.
ban > 50 ban > 500 public school
restaurant
gatherings gatherings
closure
dine-in closure
0.738
0.708
0.52
0.667
0.812
0.817
0.71
0.737

entertainment
/gym closure
0.685
0.738

Table 4: Overall reduction in spread rate and reproduction number.
λ̃
λ
r0
Before policies 0.177 ± 0.094 0.178 ± 0.13 5.899 ± 4.798
After policies
0.037 ± 0.019 0.012 ± 0.009 1.159 ± 1.016

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 4: Predictions on (a) California, (b) Florida and (c) Texas showing the disease progression
under intervention and the ensuing exponential growth under various re-opening plans.

5

Conclusion

We have presented a mathematical model, PolSIRD, which models the spread of epidemics within a
population. Our approach accounts for reporting mechanisms, consequent under-reporting and the
effects of enacting intervention policies. We successfully outperform the methods currently used
by the Center for Disease Control and Prevention for making spread predictions on COVID-19 and
provide actionable guidance based on counterfactual simulations on lifting of intervention policies.
8

Broader Impact
Our work broadly aims at studying the spread of COVID-19 in the United States. We model the spread
of the disease under intervention policies and under-reporting while trying to provide actionable
guidance on the recent plans being formulated to re-open the US states in the next 3–4 months. We
believe that both the state governments and the decision making authorities (e.g., Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention) will potentially benefit from our work. While we cannot guarantee that all
the parameters we have estimated from our model can be deemed exactly accurate, we have made
a significant effort to verify that they are in agreement with parameters being estimated from other
statistical studies. However, they may still be affected by: (a) biases in data reporting procedures, (b)
large variations in availability of testing equipment across the US states, and (c) the short time-window
within which all policies were enacted in all the US states.

References
[1] Linda JS Allen. Some discrete-time si, sir, and sis epidemic models. Mathematical biosciences,
124(1):83–105, 1994.
[2] Duygu Balcan, Bruno Gonçalves, Hao Hu, José J Ramasco, Vittoria Colizza, and Alessandro
Vespignani. Modeling the spatial spread of infectious diseases: The global epidemic and
mobility computational model. Journal of computational science, 1(3):132–145, 2010.
[3] Andrea L Bertozzi, Elisa Franco, George Mohler, Martin B Short, and Daniel Sledge. The
challenges of modeling and forecasting the spread of covid-19. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.04741,
2020.
[4] United States Census Bureau. Population, population change, and estimated components of
population change: April 1, 2010 to july 1, 2019 (nst-est2019-alldata). http://www.census.gov,
2020.
[5] Meng-Chun Chang, Rebecca Kahn, Yu-An Li, Cheng-Sheng Lee, Caroline O Buckee, and
Hsiao-Han Chang. Modeling the impact of human mobility and travel restrictions on the
potential spread of sars-cov-2 in taiwan. medRxiv, 2020.
[6] Yu Chen, Jin Cheng, Yu Jiang, and Keji Liu. A time delay dynamical model for outbreak
of 2019-ncov and the parameter identification. Journal of Inverse and Ill-posed Problems,
28(2):243–250, 2020.
[7] Matteo Chinazzi, Jessica T Davis, Marco Ajelli, Corrado Gioannini, Maria Litvinova, Stefano
Merler, Ana Pastore y Piontti, Kunpeng Mu, Luca Rossi, Kaiyuan Sun, et al. The effect of
travel restrictions on the spread of the 2019 novel coronavirus (covid-19) outbreak. Science,
368(6489):395–400, 2020.
[8] Gerardo Chowell, Lisa Sattenspiel, Shweta Bansal, and Cécile Viboud. Mathematical models to
characterize early epidemic growth: A review. Physics of life reviews, 18:66–97, 2016.
[9] Raj Dandekar and George Barbastathis. Quantifying the effect of quarantine control in covid-19
infectious spread using machine learning. medRxiv, 2020.
[10] Ensheng Dong, Hongru Du, and Lauren Gardner. An interactive web-based dashboard to track
covid-19 in real time. The Lancet infectious diseases, 2020.
[11] Nicholas Reich et al. COVID-19 Forecast Hub, 2020.
[12] Antoine Flahault, Séverine Deguen, and Alain-Jacques Valleron. A mathematical model for the
european spread of influenza. European journal of epidemiology, 10(4):471–474, 1994.
[13] Natsuko Imai, Anne Cori, Ilaria Dorigatti, Marc Baguelin, Christl A. Donnelly, Steven Riley,
and Neil M. Ferguson. Report 3 - transmissibility of 2019-ncov. MRC Centre for Global
Infectious Disease Analysis, COVID-19, 2020.
[14] William Ogilvy Kermack and Anderson G McKendrick. A contribution to the mathematical
theory of epidemics. Proceedings of the royal society of london. Series A, Containing papers of
a mathematical and physical character, 115(772):700–721, 1927.
[15] Benjamin D. Killeen, Jie Ying Wu, Kinjal Shah, Anna Zapaishchykova, Philipp Nikutta,
Aniruddha Tamhane, Shreya Chakraborty, Jinchi Wei, Tiger Gao, Mareike Thies, and Mathias
Unberath. A county-level dataset for informing the united states’ response to covid-19, 2020.
9

[16] Minkyoung Kim, Dean Paini, and Raja Jurdak. Modeling stochastic processes in disease
spread across a heterogeneous social system. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
116(2):401–406, 2019.
[17] Michael Linghzi Li. Overview of DELPHI Model V2.0. Technical report, MIT Operations
Research Center, April 2020.
[18] Ruiyun Li, Sen Pei, Bin Chen, Yimeng Song, Tao Zhang, Wan Yang, and Jeffrey Shaman.
Substantial undocumented infection facilitates the rapid dissemination of novel coronavirus
(sars-cov-2). Science, 368(6490):489–493, 2020.
[19] Scott W Linderman and Ryan P Adams. Scalable bayesian inference for excitatory point process
networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1507.03228, 2015.
[20] Ira M Longini Jr. The generalized discrete-time epidemic model with immunity: a synthesis.
Mathematical biosciences, 82(1):19–41, 1986.
[21] Lars Lorch, William Trouleau, Stratis Tsirtsis, Aron Szanto, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Manuel
Gomez-Rodriguez. A spatiotemporal epidemic model to quantify the effects of contact tracing,
testing, and containment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.07641, 2020.
[22] Marian-Andrei Rizoiu, Swapnil Mishra, Quyu Kong, Mark Carman, and Lexing Xie. Sir-hawkes:
linking epidemic models and hawkes processes to model diffusions in finite populations. In
Proceedings of the 2018 World Wide Web Conference, pages 419–428, 2018.
[23] Leonid A Rvachev and Ira M Longini Jr. A mathematical model for the global spread of
influenza. Mathematical biosciences, 75(1):3–22, 1985.
[24] Constantinos I Siettos and Lucia Russo. Mathematical modeling of infectious disease dynamics.
Virulence, 4(4):295–306, 2013.
[25] Carl Smith, Ben Miller, and Paul W. Taylor. Reopening the economy under covid-19: States
plot a way back, 2020.
[26] Robert Verity, Lucy C Okell, Ilaria Dorigatti, Peter Winskill, Charles Whittaker, Natsuko Imai,
Gina Cuomo-Dannenburg, Hayley Thompson, Patrick GT Walker, Han Fu, et al. Estimates
of the severity of coronavirus disease 2019: a model-based analysis. The Lancet Infectious
Diseases, 2020.
[27] Caroline E Walters, Margaux MI Meslé, and Ian M Hall. Modelling the global spread of
diseases: A review of current practice and capability. Epidemics, 25:1–8, 2018.
[28] Hao Xiong and Huili Yan. Simulating the infected population and spread trend of 2019-ncov
under different policy by eir model. medRxiv, 2020.
[29] Difan Zou, Lingxiao Wang, Pan Xu, Jinghui Chen, Weitong Zhang, and Quanquan Gu. Epidemic
model guided machine learning for covid-19 forecasts in the united states. medRxiv, 2020.

10

