Do economic effects of the anti-COVID-19 lockdowns in different regions
interact through supply chains?
Hiroyasu Inoue∗ Yohsuke Murase† Yasuyuki Todo‡
Abstract
To prevent the spread of COVID-19, many cities, states, and countries have ‘locked down’, restricting economic activities in non-essential sectors. Such lockdowns have substantially shrunk production
in most countries. This study examines how the economic effects of lockdowns in different regions interact through supply chains, a network of firms for production, simulating an agent-based model of
production on supply-chain data for 1.6 million firms in Japan. We further investigate how the complex

arXiv:2009.06894v2 [cs.SI] 7 Jan 2021

network structure affects the interactions of lockdowns, emphasising the role of upstreamness and loops
by decomposing supply-chain flows into potential and circular flow components. We find that a region’s
upstreamness, intensity of loops, and supplier substitutability in supply chains with other regions largely
determine the economic effect of the lockdown in the region. In particular, when a region lifts its lockdown, its economic recovery substantially varies depending on whether it lifts lockdown alone or together
with another region closely linked through supply chains. These results propose the need for inter-region
policy coordination to reduce the economic loss from lockdowns.
Keywords: COVID-19; lockdown; supply chains; simulation; propagation; interactions; network intervention.

∗ Graduate

School of Simulation Studies, University of Hyogo, inoue@sim.u-hyogo.ac.jp.
Center for Computational Science, yohsuke.murase@gmail.com
‡ Graduate School of Economics, Waseda University, yastodo@waseda.jp.
† RIKEN

1

1

Introduction

COVID-19, a novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) disease, has been spreading worldwide. To prevent its
spread, many cities, regions, and countries were or have been ‘locked down’, suppressing economic activities. On 18 April 2020, 158 countries out of 181 required closing temporarily or working from home for
some sectors in some or all cities. Although some countries later lifted their lockdowns, the number of
countries in a lockdown remained 95 on 30 July 2020 [1].
Closing workplaces shrinks the economic output of locked down regions. The negative economic effect
of a lockdown in one region may diffuse through supply chains, i.e., supplier-client relationships of firms,
to other regions that are not necessarily locked down. When a firm is closed by a lockdown strategy,
its client firms located anywhere should suffer decreased production because of the lack of supply of
intermediate goods and services. Suppliers of the closed firm should also see reduced production because
of a shortage of demand.
Many studies have empirically confirmed the propagation of economic shocks through supply chains,
particularly shocks originating from natural disasters [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. Some examine the diffusion of the
effect of lockdowns because of COVID-19 on production across regions and countries and estimate the
total effect using input–output (IO) linkages at the country-sector level [8, 9, 10, 11] and supply chains
at the firm level [12].
Several works focusing on natural disasters [5, 6] pay attention to how the network structure of
supply chains affects the propagation of shocks, finding that the scale-free property, non-substitutability
of suppliers, and loops are major drivers of such propagation. However, the role of the network structure
has not been fully examined in the context of the propagation of the lockdown effect. However, this issue
should be of great interest from the perspective of network science for the following two reasons.
First, the literature on network interventions has investigated what types of individuals or groups in
a network, such as those with high centrality, should be targeted to promote (prevent) the diffusion of
positive (negative) behaviours and outcomes [13, 14]. Similarly, we are interested in how the economic
effect of imposing and lifting a lockdown in one region, an example of a network intervention, diffuses
to other regions. Compared with existing works, this study is novel in many respects. For example, we
consider interventions in a network of firms and their economic outcomes, while previous studies focus on
the health behaviours and outcomes in human networks [15], with a few exceptions that examine economic
outcomes in human networks [16]. In addition, because a lockdown is usually imposed in a city, state, or
country, the scale of interventions is large. Those firms targeted by such interventions are exogenously
determined by geography, and thus we should assess the network characteristics of exogenously grouped
nodes rather than the endogenously connected ones identified by network centrality [13, 17] or community
detection algorithms [18].
Second, at any point amid the spread of COVID-19, some regions have imposed a lockdown, while others have remained open. Therefore, when we evaluate the lockdown strategy of a region, the interactions
between the strategies of different regions need to be taken into account. In other words, the economic
effect of a lockdown in a region depends on whether other regions connected through supply chains are
similarly locked down. For example, Sweden did not impose a strict lockdown, unlike other European
countries. However, it still expects a 4.5% reduction in gross domestic product (GDP) in 2020, a decline
comparable to those in neighbouring countries that did lock down, possibly because of its close economic
ties with its neighbours [19]. Motivated by the Swedish experience, this study examines the network
structure between regions that is usually ignored in the literature on network interventions and discusses
the need for policy coordination among regions depending on their network characteristics. Some studies call for inter-regional and international policy coordination in the presence of spillover effects in the
context of health, environment, and macroeconomics [20, 21], but they do not explicitly incorporate the
network structure.
We conduct a simulation analysis applying actual supply-chain data of 1.6 million firms and experiences of lockdowns in Japan to an agent-based model of production. Specifically, we analyse the network
characteristics of a prefecture in Japan that led to greater economic recovery by lifting its lockdown when
all other prefectures remained locked down. In addition, to further highlight the interactions between
regions, our simulation investigates how the characteristics of the supply-chain links between two prefectures affect their economic recovery when they simultaneously lift their lockdowns. One novelty of our
study is to decompose supply-chain flows into potential and loop flow components and test the role of
upstreamness (potential) in supply chains and intra- and inter-prefectural loops in diffusion.
2

2

Data

The data used in this study are taken from the Company Information Database and Company Linkage
Database collected by Tokyo Shoko Research (TSR), one of the largest credit research companies in Japan.
The former includes information about the attributes of each firm, including the location, industry, sales,
and number of employees, whereas the latter includes the major customers and suppliers of each firm.
Because of data availability, we use the data on firm attributes and supply chains in 2016. The number of
firms in the data is 1,668,567 and the number of supply-chain links is 5,943,073. Hence, our data identify
the major supply chains of most firms in Japan, although they lack information about supply-chain links
with foreign entities. Because the transaction value of each supply-chain tie is not available in the data,
we estimate sales from a supplier to each of its customers and consumers using the total sales of the
supplier and its customers and 2015 Input-Output Tables for Japan [22]. In this estimation process, we
must drop firms without any sales information. Accordingly, the number of firms in our final analysis
is 966,627 and the number of links is 3,544,343. Although firms in the TSR data are classified into
1,460 industries according to the Japan Standard Industrial Classification [23], we simplify them into the
187 industries classified in the IO tables. Supplementary Information A provides the details of the data
construction process.
In the supply-chain data described above, the degree, or the number of links, of firms follows a powerlaw distribution [5], as often found in the literature [24]. The average path length between firms, or the
number of steps between them through supply chains, is 4.8, indicating a small-world network. Using
the same dataset, previous studies [5, 25] find that 46–48% of firms are included in the giant strongly
connected component (GSCC), in which all firms are indirectly connected to each other through supply
chains. The large size of the GSCC clearly shows that the network has a significant number of cycles
unlike the common image of a layered or tree-like supply-chain structure.

3
3.1

Methods
Model

Agent-based models that incorporate the interactions of agents through networks have been widely used
in social science recently [26, 27, 28]. Following the literature, we employ the dynamic agent-based model
of Inoue and Todo [5, 6], an extension of the model of Hallegatte [29] that assumes supply chains at the
firm level. In the model, each firm utilises the inputs purchased from other firms to produce an output
and sells it to other firms and consumers. Firms in the same industry are assumed to produce the same
output. Supply chains are predetermined and do not change over time in the following two respects.
First, each firm utilises a firm-specific set of input varieties and does not change the input set over time.
Second, each firm is linked with fixed suppliers and customers and cannot be linked with any new firm
over time, even after a supply-chain disruption. Accordingly, our analysis should viewed as that focusing
on short-term changes in production. Furthermore, we assume that each firm keeps inventories of each
input at a level randomly determined from the Poisson distribution. Following Inoue and Todo [5], in
which parameter values are calibrated from the case of the Great East Japan earthquake, we assume that
firms aim to keep inventories for 10 days of production on average (see Supplementary Information B.1
for the details).
When a restriction is imposed on the production of a firm, both the upstream and the downstream
of the firm is affected. On the one hand, the demand of the firm for the parts and components of its
suppliers immediately declines, and thus suppliers have to shrink their production. Because demand for
the products of suppliers’ suppliers also declines, the negative effect of the restriction propagates upstream.
On the other hand, the supply of products from the directly restricted firm to its customer firms declines.
Then, one way for customer firms to maintain the current level of production is to use their inventories
of inputs. Alternatively, customers can procure inputs from other suppliers in the same industry already
connected before the restriction if these suppliers have additional production capacity. If the inventories
and inputs from substitute suppliers are insufficient, customers have to shrink their production because
of a shortage of inputs. Accordingly, the effect of the restriction propagates downstream through supply
chains. Such downstream propagation is likely to be slower than upstream propagation because of the
inventory buffer and input substitution.

3

3.2

Lockdowns in Japan

In Japan, lockdown strategies were implemented at the prefecture level under the state of emergency [30]
first declared on 7 April 2020 in seven prefectures with a large number of confirmed COVID-19 cases.
Because populated regions tended to be affected more and earlier, these seven prefectures were industrial
clusters in Japan, including Tokyo, Osaka, Fukuoka and their neighbouring prefectures. The target of
the state of emergency was expanded to all 47 prefectures on 16 April. The state of emergency was lifted
for 39 prefectures on 14 May and for an additional three on 21 May; it was lifted for the remaining five
prefectures on 25 May. Supplementary Information Figure A.3 summarises the timeline of the lockdowns
in different prefectures.
Although the national government declared a state of emergency, the extent to which the restrictions
were imposed was determined by each prefecture government. Therefore, the level of the lockdown in
each prefecture may have varied. Although all prefectures were in the state of emergency from April 16
to May 14, prefectures with a large number of confirmed COVID-19 cases, such as the seven prefectures
in which the state of emergency was first declared, requested more stringent restrictions than others.
The national or prefecture government can only request closing workplaces, staying at home, and social
distancing rather than require these actions through legal enforcement or punishment; however, strong
social pressure in Japan led people and businesses to voluntarily restrict their activities to a large extent.
As a result, production activities including those in sectors not officially restricted shrunk substantially
(Mainichi Newspaper, 27 May 2020).

3.3

Simulation procedure

Replication of the actual effect In our simulation analysis, we first confirm whether our model and
data can replicate the actual reduction in production caused by the lockdown of Japan during the state
of emergency. Because we cannot observe the extent to which each firm reduces its production capacity
by obeying governmental requests, the rate of reduction in production capacity for each sector assumed
in our simulation analysis depends on its characteristics. Because the reduction rate particularly during
the lockdowns in Japan is not available, we follow the literature that defines the reduction rate in general
settings. Specifically, the rate of reduction in a sector is the product of the level of reduction determined
by the degree of exposure to the virus given by [9] and the share of workers who cannot work at home
given by [8]. For example, in lifeline/essential sectors such as the utilities, health, and transport sectors,
the rate of reduction is assumed to be zero; in other words, the production capacity in these sectors does
not change on lockdown. In sectors in which it is assumed that exposure to the virus is low (10%) and
47.5% of workers can work at home, such as the wholesale and retail sectors, the rate of reduction is
5.25% (= 0.1 × (1 − 0.475)). Sectors with medium exposure (50%) and a lower share of workers working
at home (26.8%), such as the iron and other metal product sectors, reduce production capacity by 35.2%
(= 0.5 × (1 − 0.268)). See Supplementary Information Table B.1 for the rate of reduction of each sector.
After the lockdown in a prefecture is lifted, all the firms in that prefecture immediately return to
their pre-lockdown production capacity. Moreover, we assume that inventories do not decay over time:
inventories stocked before the lockdown can be fully utilised after the lockdown is lifted. The following
results are averaged over 30 Monte Carlo runs.
Interactions among regions After checking the accuracy of our simulation model, we examine how
changing the restriction level of the lockdown in a region affects production in another region. For this
purpose, we experiment with different sets of sector-specific rates of reduction in production capacity
by multiplying the benchmark rates of reduction defined above by a multiplier such as 0.4 or 0.8. For
example, when the benchmark rate of reduction in a sector is 35.2%, as in the case of the iron and other
metal product sectors, and the multiplier is 0.4, we alternatively assume a rate of reduction of 14.1%.
Moreover, we assume that the rates of reduction can vary among prefectures because each prefecture
can determine its own level of restrictions under the state of emergency (Section 3.2). In practice, the
restrictions requested by the prefecture government were tougher and people were more obedient to the
requests in the seven prefectures in which the state of emergency was first declared because of their large
number of confirmed COVID-19 cases (Figure A.3(b)) than in other prefectures. Accordingly, we run the
same simulation assuming different rates of reduction for the two types of prefectures, defined as more

4

Figure 1: Visualisation of supply chains for top 1,000 firms in terms of sales. Each dot indicates a firm.
Firms with a higher HH potential are located more upward in both panels. In the left panel, the grey
lines illustrate the potential flows computed from the HHD. The red and blue node colours respectively
represent higher and lower HH potentials. The right panel shows loop flows computed from HHD, while
the different colours represent different cycles.
and less restricted groups, to investigate how different rates of reduction in one group affect production
in the other.
Lifting lockdown in only one region In practice, some prefectures lifted their lockdowns earlier
than others (Section 3.2). Although this may have led to the recovery of value added production, or gross
regional product (GRP), the extent of such a recovery should have been affected by the links between
firms in the prefecture and others still locked down. To highlight this network effect, we simulate what
would happen to the GRP of a prefecture if it lifted its lockdown while all others were still imposing
lockdowns. Then, we investigate what network characteristics of each prefecture determine the recovery
from lockdown, measured by the ratio of the increase in the GRP of the prefecture by lifting its lockdown
to the reduction in its GRP because of the lockdown of all prefectures.
In particular, we focus on four types of network characteristics. First, when a prefecture is more
isolated from others in the supply-chain network, the effect of others’ lockdowns should be smaller. We
measure the level of isolation using the number of links within the prefecture relative to the total degree
of firms (total number of links from and to firms) in the prefecture.
Second, an alternative and more interesting measure of isolation is the intensity of loops in supply
chains. Although supply chains usually flow from suppliers of materials to those of parts and components
and to assemblers, some suppliers use final products such as machinery and computers as inputs. This
results in many complex loops in supply chains [31], in which negative shocks circulate and can become
aggravated [5]. Such loops in a network are found to generate instability in the system dynamics literature [32] and more recently in the context of supply chains [33]. In the case of lifting the lockdown in
only one prefecture, the loops within that prefecture may magnify its recovery because of the circulation
of positive effects in the loops.
To measure the intensity of the loops in the supply chains within a prefecture, we apply the Helmholtz–
Hodge decomposition (HHD) to all the flows in the network and decompose each directed link from firm i
(p)
to firm j, Fij , into a potential (or gradient) flow component, Fij , and a loop (or circular) flow component,
(c)

Fij [34]. Supplementary Information B.3 explains the details of the HHD. Figure 1 illustrates potential
and loop flows of top 1,000 firms in terms of sales. In particular, the right panel identifies a number of
loops in supply chains. Then, our measure
intensity of the loops for prefecture a is the ratio of
P of the(c)
the total loop flows within the prefecture i,j∈a Fij to the total degree of all the firms in the prefecture
denoted by Fa .
Third, we pay attention to the upstreamness of firms in supply chains. Theoretically, upstream firms
are affected by supply-chain disruptions through a lack of demand, whereas downstream firms are affected
through a lack of supply. However, the effect of upstream and downstream links can differ in size. A recent

5

sectoral analysis [35] finds that the profits of more upstream sectors in global value chains are substantially
lower than those of more downstream sectors, implying that negative economic shocks propagate upstream
more than downstream. To clarify the possible effect of upstreamness, we define the upstream position of
each firm i in supply chains by its Helmholtz–Hodge potential, φi computed from the HHD. In other words,
the hierarchical position of a firm can be consistently defined by focusing on gradient flows, or all flows less
loop flows. The HH potential is higher when the firm is located in a more upstream position. In practice,
it is generally higher for firms in the mining, manufacturing, and information and communication sectors,
while lower for those in the wholesale, retail, finance, healthcare, and accommodation and food service
sectors [31]. We average the HH potential over the firms in each prefecture to measure the upstreamness
of the prefecture in supply chains (see Supplementary Information Figure B.2 for this measure for each
prefecture).
Our measure of upstreamness based on the HH potential is conceptually similar to the upstreamness
measures developed and widely used in the literature on international trade [36, 37, 38, 39, 40] in that
both ours and theirs measure the hierarchical position in supply chains. A stark difference between the
two types of measures is that ours is based on firm-level data while others are based on sector-level
input-output (IO) tables. Therefore, our measure can incorporate firm-level heterogeneity within the
same sector that is ignored in others. In addition, our measure is defined by gradient flows in supply
chains that are constructed by eliminating loop flows from all flows. Although many loops at the firm
level are found in supply chains, even within the industry [31], upstream measures based on IO tables
do not incorporate such loops. For these reasons, we will rely on our upstreamness measures at the firm
level, not existing measures at the sector level.
Finally, even when the supplies of parts and components from other prefectures are shut down because
of their lockdowns, the negative effect can be mitigated if suppliers can be replaced by those in the
prefecture lifting its lockdown. Existing studies [2, 5] have found that input substitutability can largely
mitigate the propagation of negative economic shocks through supply chains. By assumption, suppliers of
firms in prefecture a that are in other prefectures on lockdown can be replaced by suppliers in prefecture
a that are in the same industry and already connected. To measure the degree of supplier substitutability
for prefecture a, we divide the number of the latter suppliers by the number of the former.
Lifting lockdowns in two regions simultaneously In practice, each prefecture government determined its restriction level of lockdown after observing the spread of COVID-19 in its prefecture and
typically ignored the economic interactions with other prefectures through supply chains. This may have
led to the misevaluation of the economic effect of lockdown. To emphasise the role of the interactions
between prefectures in the economic effect of lockdown, our simulations analyse the economic effect of
lifting the lockdown in a prefecture on its GRP when another prefecture lifts its lockdown simultaneously.
We define a relative measure of recovery using the ratio of the increase in the GRP of prefecture a when
it lifts its lockdown together with prefecture b (∆GRPaab ) to its increase when it lifts its lockdown alone
(∆GRPaa ).
Presumably, the characteristics of the links between the two prefectures largely affect their recovery.
Expanding the case of lifting the lockdown in only one prefecture described just above, we are particularly
interested in the following variables. First, we define the intensity of the directional links from prefectures
a to b and from b to a by
X
Linkab ≡
Fij /Fa
(1)
i∈a,j∈b

and
Linkba ≡

X

Fji /Fa ,

(2)

i∈a,j∈b

respectively, where Fa is the total degree of firms in prefecture a, as defined before. Second, we focus on
potential flows using the HHD as above and define the intensity of potential flows from prefectures a to
b and from b to a by
X
(p)
P otab ≡
Fij /Fa
(3)
i∈a,j∈b

and
P otba ≡

X
i∈a,j∈b

6

(p)

Fji /Fa ,

(4)

respectively. Third, the intensity of the loops between prefectures a and b is given by
Loopab ≡

X

(c)

Fij /Fa .

(5)

i∈a,j∈b

Supplementary Information B.3 describes how to calculate P otab , P otba , and Loopab using a simple
example.
Finally, when suppliers of firms in prefecture a are located outside prefectures a and b and thus
are locked down, they can be replaced by suppliers in the same industry in prefecture b that are already
connected with firms in prefecture a. To measure the degree of this supplier substitutability, we divide the
total number of the latter suppliers by the total number of the former. See Supplementary Information B.4
for the details.

4
4.1

Results
Simulation of the effect of the actual lockdown

In Figure 2, the blue lines show the results of the 30 Monte Carlo runs conducted to estimate the effect of
the actual lockdown in Japan given the sector-specific rates of reduction in production capacity assumed
in the literature [35, 9] and shown in Supplementary Information B.1. The horizontal axis indicates the
number of days since the declaration of the state of emergency (April 7) and the vertical axis represents
the total value added production, or GDP, of Japan on each day. See Section 3.2 for the sequence of
the state of emergency across the country. Averaged over the 30 runs, the estimated loss in GDP is 13.1
trillion yen (124 billion U.S. dollars), or 2.5% of yearly GDP.

Figure 2: Simulations of value added (GDP) during the actual lockdown. The blue and green lines show
the simulation results given the sector-specific rates of reduction in production capacity assumed in the
literature [35, 9] and shown in Supplementary Information B.1 and 32.3% of those rates to calibrate the
actual production dynamics, respectively. Each line represents the daily GDP from one Monte Carlo run.
The red segments indicate the daily GDP estimated from pre-lockdown GDP and the post-lockdown
monthly Indices of All Industry Activity (IAIA) for April and May.
Without relying on our model and simulation, we also estimate the changes in daily GDP from prelockdown GDP and the post-lockdown monthly Indices of All Industry Activity (IAIA) [41]. The average
daily GDP in April and May estimated from the IAIA is illustrated by the red lines in Figure 2 (see

7

Figure 3: Geographical visualisation of the effect of lockdowns. In the left panel, locked-down prefectures
in the first stage of the state of emergency (day 0-8) are shown in red, while the right panel presents the
rate of reduction in production averaged over firms in each municipality on day 5, using different colours
for different rates of reduction.
Supplementary Information C.1 for the detailed procedures). The total loss of GDP estimated by the
IAIA, or the pink area in Figure 2, is 35.0 trillion yen (1.44% of GDP), 21.5% of the estimate from our
simulations. Our simulation thus overestimates the loss of GDP from the lockdown, possibly because the
assumed rates of reduction in production capacity due to the lockdown taken from the literature [8, 9]
are larger than the actual rates in Japan. Therefore, we experiment with different rates of reduction in
production capacity by multiplying the benchmark rates by a weight to calibrate changes in production.
We find that a weight of 32.3% results in a close fit between our estimates and those from the IAIA and
show the results using green lines in Figure 2.
In either case (blue or green lines), the production loss rises during the lockdown. For example, value
added declined monotonically from days 9 to 37 when all prefectures were in the state of emergency,
assuming a fixed rate of reduction in production capacity throughout the period. This is because the
economic contraction in different regions interacted with each other through supply chains and thus
worsened over time. This worsening trend in GDP is consistent with GDP estimated using the IAIA.
Another notable finding from the simulation is that prefectures that were not locked down were heavily
affected by those in lockdowns. To highlight this, the left panel of Figure 3 shows locked-down prefectures
in the first stage of the state of emergency (day 0-8) in red, while the lower-right panel presents the rate
of reduction in production averaged over firms in each municipality on day 5. From these figures, it is
clear that the economic effect of lockdowns in some prefectures diffuse to others that are not locked down.
A video is available for the temporal and geographical visualisation. See Appendix C.1.
In addition, because of the network effect, the earlier lifting of the lockdown in some prefectures does
not result in a full recovery of production in these prefectures. Notably, when the lockdown was lifted
in 39 prefectures on day 37 (14 May), the simulated GDP showed a sharp recovery but dropped again
substantially a few days after the recovery. This drop occurred because the lockdown remained active in
eight prefectures including the top two industrial clusters in Japan, namely, greater Tokyo and greater
Osaka. Although economic activities returned to normal in these 39 prefectures, their production did not
recover monotonically but rather declined again because the major industrial clusters linked with them
were still locked down. This finding points to the interactions of the economic effect of lockdown between
regions through firm-level supply chains.

4.2

Interactions between lockdowns in different regions

Next, we experiment with simulations assuming different restriction levels of lockdown, or different sets of
multipliers for the sector-specific benchmark rates of reduction in production capacity, between the more
and less restricted groups (Section 3.3). The more restricted group comprises the seven prefectures with a
large number of COVID-19 cases (pink ones in panel (b) of Figure A.3), whereas the less restricted group
8

includes the other 40 prefectures. The left, middle, and right panels of Figure 4 indicate the loss in GDP
for different multipliers for the more restricted group when fixing the multiplier for the less restricted
group at 0%, 50%, and 100%, respectively. Here, 100% corresponds to the rates of reduction shown in
Supplementary Information Table B.1 and used in the previous subsection and 0% means no restriction.
In each bar, the blue and red parts show the loss of value added in the more and less restricted groups,
respectively.

Figure 4: Loss in value added as a percentage of total value added (GDP) assuming different restriction
levels of lockdown for 60 days between the more and less restricted groups. A restriction level is defined
by a multiplier for the sector-specific benchmark rates of reduction in production capacity. For example,
the left bar presents the result assuming a multiplier of 0% (i.e., no restriction) for the less restricted
group and 20% for the more restricted group. The red and blue parts of each bar show the loss of value
added in the less and more restricted groups, respectively, as a percentage of GDP.
As shown, the total loss of GDP increases in the restriction level of lockdown in both groups. For
example, the total production loss is 1.57% of GDP when the multiplier is 50% for both groups (the
left bar in the middle panel), while it is larger, or 3.89%, when the multiplier is 100% for both (the
right panel). More interestingly, the left panel shows that while the less restricted group imposes no
restrictions, its value added decreases more (i.e. the red part in Figure 4 increases) as the more restricted
group imposes more restrictions. When the level of restrictions in the more restricted group is the highest
(i.e. the multiplier is 100%), the loss in value added in the less restricted group without any lockdown
is large: 3.93 trillion yen, or 2.12% of its pre-lockdown value added. These results clearly indicate that
even when prefectures are not locked down, their economies can be damaged because of the propagation
of the effect of the lockdowns in other prefectures through supply chains.

4.3

Effect of lifting the lockdown in one region

We further examine, when only one prefecture lifts its lockdown, while all the other prefectures remain
locked down, how the recovery of that prefecture from lifting its lockdown is determined by its network
characteristics. Figure 5 illustrates the recovery rate of each prefecture defined as the ratio of the total
gain of its value added, or gross regional production (GRP), from lifting the lockdown to its total loss
from the lockdown of all the prefectures for two weeks. Red prefectures recover the most, yellow ones
recover moderately, and white ones recover slightly. See Supplementary Information Figure C.4 for the
recovery rate of each prefecture.
One notable finding from this figure is that the prefectures that recover the most, or the red prefectures
in Figure 5, include Hokkaido, Shimane, and Okinawa, which are remote from industrial hubs in terms of
both geography and supply chains, suggesting the effect of network characteristics on economic recovery
by lifting a lockdown (see Supplementary Information Figure A.1 for inter-prefecture supply chains and
Supplementary Information Figure A.2 for the name and location of each prefecture).
We further examine the correlation between the recovery rate and network measures explained in Section 3.3 (i.e. those for isolation, loops, upstreamness, and supplier substitution) and test the significance
9

Figure 5: Choropleth map of the recovery rate for each prefecture. The recovery rate is defined as the
ratio of the total gain of a prefecture’s GRP from lifting its own lockdown to its total loss from the
lockdown of all the prefectures for two weeks.
of the correlation using ordinary least squares (OLS) estimations. Figure 6 illustrates the correlation
between the recovery rate and network measures. To control for the effect of the prefecture’s economic
size on its recovery (Figure 6(f)), we include GRP in logs in all the OLS estimations and exclude the
effect of GRP from the recovery rate in Figure 6. The number of links of each prefecture could also be
controlled for; however, because its correlation coefficient with GRP is 0.965 (Supplementary Information Table C.1), we do not use the total links in our regressions to avoid multicollinearity. Supplementary
Information Table C.2 presents the OLS results.
In panels (a) and (b) of Figure 6, the supply-chain links and loops within the prefecture are found
to be positively correlated with the recovery rate. These results suggest that when a prefecture is more
isolated in the network and has more loops within it, the positive effect of lifting a lockdown circulates in
the loops, which can mitigate the propagation of the negative effects of other prefectures’ lockdowns. By
contrast, the outward links to other prefectures and the HH potential of the prefecture are negatively and
significantly correlated with the recovery rate (panels (d) and (e)). These findings imply that prefectures
with more upstream firms in supply chains tend to recover less from lifting their own lockdowns. Panel
(f) indicates that the recovery rate is higher when more suppliers in other prefectures under lockdown
can be replaced by those in the prefecture lifting its lockdown.

4.4

Effect of lifting the lockdowns in two regions simultaneously

Finally, we simulate the effect on the production of prefecture a if it lifted its lockdown together with
prefecture b. We compare the recovery in prefecture a’s GRP by lifting its lockdown together with
prefecture b and that by lifting its lockdown alone and compute the relative recovery measure, as shown
in Supplementary Information Figure C.5. Using a regression framework as above, we investigate how
the relative recovery measure of prefecture a is affected by the network relationships between prefectures
a and b. Figure 7 illustrates the correlation between selected key variables and the relative recovery.
In the regression analysis, we always control for the GRP of prefecture b, its squares, and the number
of links between and prefectures a and b that may affect the relative recovery (Figure 7 (e) and (f)).
Then, we exclude these effects from the relative recovery in panels (a)–(d) in the figure. Supplementary
Information Table C.4 presents the results of the OLS estimations.
Panels (a) and (b) of Figure 7 show that even after controlling for the effect of economic size and
number of links between the two prefectures, the ratio of potential flows from prefecture a to b and
from b to a to the total flows of a is positively correlated with the relative recovery. Supplementary
Information Figure C.6 shows similarly positive correlation between for the number of links between the
10

Figure 6: Correlation between the recovery rate and selected network measures. The vertical axis indicates
the recovery rate defined as the ratio of the increase in the GRP of a prefecture by lifting its own lockdown
to its decrease because of the lockdown of all the prefectures. Except for panel (f), the effect of GRP is
excluded from the recovery rate. The horizontal axis indicates the share of the links within the prefecture
to its all links in (a), the share of the loop flows within the prefecture to its total flows in (b), the share
of the links to other prefectures to all links in (c), the standardised potential flows in (d), the share of
substitutable suppliers to all suppliers outside the prefecture in (e), and GRP in logs in panel (f), The
orange line in each panel specifies the fitted value from a linear regression that controls for the effect of
GRP. The blue, black, and red dots show prefectures whose GRP is among the top 10, bottom 10, and
others, respectively.
two, rather than potential flows, and the recovery. These results suggest that the recovery from lifting
a lockdown is greater when two prefectures closely linked through their supply chains, regardless of the
direction, lift their lockdowns together. Further, we find that prefecture a recovers more when prefectures
a and b are linked through more circular flows (panel (c)), confirming that the positive impacts of lifting
a lockdown can circulate and be strengthened in inter-regional supply-chain loops. Panel (d) indicates
that if prefecture a’s suppliers in other prefectures are locked down but can be replaced by suppliers
in prefecture b easily, prefecture a’s recovery is higher when the two prefectures lift their lockdowns
together. Although the correlation between the relative recovery measure and network variables seems to
be largely driven by the observations for which the GRP of prefecture b is large (depicted by the blue dots
in Figure 7), we find that the positive correlation still exists without these observations (Supplementary
Information Figure C.7).

5

Discussion and Conclusion

Our simulation analysis reveals that the economic effects of lockdowns in different regions interact with
each other through supply chains. Our results and their implications can be summarised as follows.
First, when a firm is locked down, its suppliers and customer firms are affected because of a lack of
demand and supply, respectively. Therefore, the production of regions can recover more by lifting their
lockdowns together when they are closely linked through supply chains in either direction (Figure 7(a)–
(b)). Besides the total number of links between the two regions, the intensity of such links compared
with those with others is also important.
Second, when the firms in a region are in more upstream positions in the whole network or they are

11

Figure 7: Correlation between the relative recovery and selected network measures. The vertical axis
indicates the relative recovery of prefecture a, defined as the ratio of the increase in the GRP of prefecture
a by lifting its lockdown together with prefecture b to its increase by lifting its lockdown alone. The effect
of the GRP of b and total links between the two are excluded from the relative recovery measure. The
variable in the horizontal axis is given by Equations 3 and 4 in panels (a) and (b), respectively, Equation
5 in (c), the share of substitutable suppliers in b for those in a among a’s locked-down suppliers in (d),
the number of links between prefectures a and b in (e) and the GRP of b in logs in (f). The orange line
in each panel signifies the fitted value from a linear regression that controls for the effect of the GRP of
b and total number of links between a and b in (a)–(d). The blue, black, and red dots show the pairs of
prefectures a and b for which the GRP of b is among the top 10, bottom 10, and others, respectively.
mostly suppliers of simple parts, the production of the region does not recover substantially by lifting
its lockdown alone (Figure 6(d)). Although the negative economic effect of lockdown can propagate
downstream and upstream, firms can mitigate downstream propagation easily using inventory or replacing
locked-down suppliers. The difference between the downstream and upstream effects of lockdown is
aggravated as the effect propagates further through supply chains. This finding is in line with the
literature [35, 42] that also finds the upstream accumulation of negative effects on profits and assets. In
practice, our result implies that a region with many small- and medium-sized suppliers of simple materials
and parts should be cautious about whether it lifts its lockdown, which may not result in a large economic
benefit but still promote the spread of COVID-19.
Third, the production of a region can recover more by lifting its lockdown when it is more isolated
in the network or embodies more supply-chain loops within the region (Figures 6(a) and (b)). Similarly,
the production of the two regions can recover more by lifting their lockdowns together when their interregional links have more loops (Figure 7(c)). These results imply that the positive economic effect of
lifting a lockdown circulates and is intensified in loops, consistent with those in [5]. Supply-chain loops
exist between two regions when the final goods produced are used as inputs by suppliers, while suppliers
provide parts and components to final-good producers and the loop stretches across two regions. The
importance of loops in the diffusion of the economic effects in networks is not fully recognised either in
the academic literature or in policymaking.
Finally, the recovery of a region from its lockdown is greater when suppliers still locked down can
12

be replaced by those within the region or in other regions without a lockdown in place (Figures 6(e)
and 7(f)). The role of the substitutability of suppliers in mitigating the propagation effect through
supply chains has been empirically found in the literature [2, 7, 5, 6]. In practice, this finding suggests
two management strategies for regional governments and firms. To minimise the economic loss from
lockdown, a region should develop a full set of industries to allow the substitution of any industry to be
possible. Alternatively, the firms in the region should be linked with geographically diverse suppliers so
that suppliers in a locked-down region can be replaced by those in other regions without a lockdown.
All these results point to the need for policy coordination among regions when regional governments
impose or lift a lockdown. Although this study uses the inter-firm supply chains within a country and
considers the economic effect of prefecture-level lockdowns, our results can be applied to the effect of
country-level lockdowns propagating through international supply chains. For example, many suppliers
of German firms are located in Eastern Europe and many suppliers of US firms are in Mexico. Our results
thus suggest that the economic gains of Eastern Europe and Mexico from lifting their lockdowns is minimal
if Germany and the United States, respectively, remain locked down. In addition, our framework can be
applied to the case of other infectious diseases, and it is likely to suggest a need for the inter-regional and
international coordination of lockdown strategies to prevent the spread of infection.

Acknowledgement
This research used the computational resources of the supercomputer Fugaku (the evaluation environment in the trial phase) provided by the RIKEN Center for Computational Science. OACIS [43] and
CARAVAN [44] were used for the simulations in this study. This research was conducted as part of
a project entitled ‘Research on relationships between economic and social networks and globalization’
undertaken at the Research Institute of Economy, Trade, and Industry (RIETI). The authors are grateful
for the financial support of JSPS Kakenhi Grant Nos. JP18K04615 and JP18H03642. We thank Yoshi
Fujiwara for advising how to calculate the HHD.

6

Data Availability

The data that support the findings of this study are available from Tokyo Shoko Research (TSR), but
restrictions apply to the availability of these data, which were used under license for the current study,
and so are not publicly available. Data are however available with permission of Tokyo Shoko Research
(TSR).

References
[1] Thomas Hale, Sam Webster, Anna Petherick, Toby Phillips, and Beatriz Kira. Oxford COVID19 government response tracker. https://www.bsg.ox.ac.uk/research/research-projects/
coronavirus-government-response-tracker, 2020.
[2] Jean-Noël Barrot and Julien Sauvagnat. Input specificity and the propagation of idiosyncratic shocks
in production networks. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(3):1543–1592, 2016.
[3] Christoph E Boehm, Aaron Flaaen, and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar. Input linkages and the transmission of
shocks: Firm-level evidence from the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake. Review of Economics and Statistics,
101(1):60–75, 2019.
[4] Vasco M Carvalho, Makoto Nirei, Yukiko U Saito, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi. Supply chain disruptions: Evidence from the Great East Japan earthquake. Technical Report No. 17-5, Columbia
Business School Research Paper, 2016.
[5] Hiroyasu Inoue and Yasuyuki Todo. Firm-level propagation of shocks through supply-chain networks.
Nature Sustainability, 2:841–847, 2019.
[6] Hiroyasu Inoue and Yasuyuki Todo. Propagation of negative shocks through firm networks: Evidence
from simulation on comprehensive supply-chain data. PLoS ONE, 14(3), 2019.
13

[7] Yuzuka Kashiwagi, Yasuyuki Todo, and Petr Matous. International propagation of economic shocks
through global supply chains. Technical Report E1810, WINPEC Working Paper, 2018.
[8] Barthélémy Bonadio, Zhen Huo, Andrei A Levchenko, and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar. Global supply
chains in the pandemic. NBER Working Paper Series No. 27224, National Bureau of Economic
Research, 2020.
[9] Dabo Guan, Daoping Wang, Stephane Hallegatte, Jingwen Huo, Shuping Li, Yangchun Bai, Tianyang
Lei, Qianyu Xue, Steven J Davis, D’Maris Coffman, et al. Global economic footprint of the covid-19
pandemic. Nature Human Behavior, 4:577–587, 2020.
[10] Fergal McCann and Samantha Myers. Covid-19 and the transmission of shocks through domestic
supply chains. Financial Stability Notes No. 2020-3, Central Bank of Ireland, 2020.
[11] Warwick J McKibbin and Roshen Fernando. The global macroeconomic impacts of COVID-19:
Seven scenarios. Technical Report 19/2020, CAMA Working Paper, 2020.
[12] Hiroyasu Inoue and Yasuyuki Todo. The propagation of the economic impact through supply chains:
The case of a mega-city lockdown against the spread of covid-19. Covid Economics, Vetted and RealTime Papers, 2:43–59, 2020.
[13] Thomas W Valente. Network interventions. Science, 337(6090):49–53, 2012.
[14] Thomas W Valente. Putting the network in network interventions. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 114(36):9500–9501, 2017.
[15] Ruth F Hunter, Kayla de la Haye, Jennifer M Murray, Jennifer Badham, Thomas W Valente,
Mike Clarke, and Frank Kee. Social network interventions for health behaviours and outcomes: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS medicine, 16(9):e1002890, 2019.
[16] Valerio Leone Sciabolazza, Raffaele Vacca, and Christopher McCarty. Connecting the dots: implementing and evaluating a network intervention to foster scientific collaboration and productivity.
Social Networks, 61:181–195, 2020.
[17] Garry Robins and Philippa Pattison. Interdependencies and social processes: Dependence graphs
and generalized dependence structures. In Peter J Carrington, John Scott, and Stanley Wasserman,
editors, Models and methods in social network analysis, volume 28, book section 10, pages 192–214.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2005.
[18] Mark EJ Newman and Michelle Girvan. Finding and evaluating community structure in networks.
Physical review E, 69(2):026113, 2004.
[19] Peter S. Goodman. Sweden has become the world’s cautionary tale, July 2020.
[20] Michael Kremer and Edward Miguel. The illusion of sustainability. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
112(3):1007–1065, 2007.
[21] John B Taylor. International monetary coordination and the great deviation. Journal of Policy
Modeling, 35(3):463–472, 2013.
[22] Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications, the Cabinet Office, the Financial Services Agency,
the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, the
Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare, the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, the
Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and
Tourism, and the Ministry of Environment, Japan. 2015 Input-Output tables for Japan. https:
//www.soumu.go.jp/english/dgpp_ss/data/io/index.htm, 2015.
[23] Ministry of International Affairs and Communications. Japan Standard Industrial Classification
(Revision 13), 2013 (accessed June 1, 2020).
[24] Albert-László Barabási. Network science. Cambridge University Press, 2016.

14

[25] Yoshi Fujiwara and Hideaki Aoyama. Large-scale structure of a nation-wide production network.
The European Physical Journal B, 77(4):565–580, 2010.
[26] Robert Axtell, Bruce Blair, Samuel Bowles, Art DeVany, Malcolm DeBevoise, Steven Durlauf,
Samuel David Epstein, Herbert Gintis, Alvin Goldman, and Scott Page. Generative Social Science:
Studies in Agent-based Computational Modeling. Princeton University Press, Princeton, 2006.
[27] Blake LeBaron and Leigh Tesfatsion. Modeling macroeconomies as open-ended dynamic systems of
interacting agents. American Economic Review, 98(2):246–50, 2008.
[28] Charles J Gomez and David MJ Lazer. Clustering knowledge and dispersing abilities enhances
collective problem solving in a network. Nature communications, 10(1):1–11, 2019.
[29] Stéphane Hallegatte. An adaptive regional input-output model and its application to the assessment
of the economic cost of Katrina. Risk analysis, 28(3):779–799, 2008.
[30] The Prime Minister of Japan and His Cabinet. Government responses on the coronavirus disease
2019. http://japan.kantei.go.jp/ongoingtopics/_00013.html, 2020.
[31] Yuichi Kichikawa, Hiroshi Iyetomi, Takashi Iino, and Hiroyasu Inoue. Community structure based
on circular flow in a large-scale transaction network. Applied Network Science, 4(1):92, 2019.
[32] Peter M Senge and Jay W Forrester. Tests for building confidence in system dynamics models.
System dynamics, TIMS studies in management sciences, 14:209–228, 1980.
[33] Güven Demirel, Bart L MacCarthy, Daniel Ritterskamp, Alan R Champneys, and Thilo Gross. Identifying dynamical instabilities in supply networks using generalized modeling. Journal of Operations
Management, 65(2):136–159, 2019.
[34] X. Jiang, L.-H. Lim, Y. Yao, and Y. Ye. Statistical ranking and combinatorial hodge theory. Mathematical Programming, 127(1):203–244, 2011.
[35] Nicole Branger, René Marian Flacke, and Steffen Windmueller. Industry returns in global value
chains: The role of upstreamness and downstreamness. SSRN 3476690, Social Science Research
Network, 2019.
[36] Laura Alfaro, Davin Chor, Pol Antras, and Paola Conconi. Internalizing global value chains: A
firm-level analysis. Journal of Political Economy, 127(2):508–559, 2019.
[37] Pol Antràs, Davin Chor, Thibault Fally, and Russell Hillberry. Measuring the upstreamness of
production and trade flows. The American Economic Review, 102(3):412–416, 2012.
[38] Pol Antràs and Davin Chor. Organizing the global value chain. Econometrica, 81(6):2127–2204,
2013.
[39] Thibault Fally. Production staging: measurement and facts, 2012.
[40] Thibault Fally and Russell Hillberry. A coasian model of international production chains, 2017.
[41] Ministry of Economy, Trade, and Industry. Indices of all industry production. https://www.meti.
go.jp/english/statistics/tyo/zenkatu/index.html, 2020.
[42] Jiangtao Fu, Petr Matous, and Yasuyuki Todo. Trade credit in global supply chains. RIETI Discussion Paper Series 18-E-049, Research Institute of Economy, Trade and Industry, 2018.
[43] Yohsuke Murase, Takeshi Uchitane, and Nobuyasu Ito. An open-source job management framework
for parameter-space exploration: Oacis. In Journal of Physics: Conference Series, volume 921, page
012001, 2017.
[44] Yohsuke Murase, Hiroyasu Matsushima, Itsuki Noda, and Tomio Kamada. Caravan: a framework for
comprehensive simulations on massive parallel machines. In International Workshop on Massively
Multiagent Systems, pages 130–143. Springer, 2018.

15

[45] C. Otto, S.N. Willner, L. Wenz, K. Frieler, and A. Levermann. Modeling loss-propagation in the
global supply network: The dynamic agent-based model acclimate. Journal of Economic Dynamics
and Control, 83:232–269, 2017.
[46] Celian Colon, Stephane Hallegatte, and Julie Rozenberg. Transportation and Supply Chain Resilience
in the United Republic of Tanzania: Assessing the Supply-Chain Impacts of Disaster-Induced Transportation Disruptions. World Bank, 2019.
[47] H. Iyetomi, H. Aoyama, Y. Fujiwara, W. Souma, I. Vodenska, and H. Yoshikawa. Relationship between macroeconomic indicators and economic cycles in u.s. Sci. Rep., 10:8420, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-65002-3.
[48] RS MacKay, S Johnson, and B Sansom. How directed is a directed network?
arXiv:2001.05173, 2020.

arXiv preprint

[49] Y. Fujiwara, H. Inoue, T. Yamaguchi, H. Aoyama, and T. Tanaka. Money flow network among firms’
accounts in a regional bank of japan. https://ssrn.com/abstract=3662893, July 2020.

16

Supplementary Information
A
A.1

Data
Supply chains

In the TSR data, the maximum number of suppliers and customers reported by each firm is 24. However, we can capture more than 24 by looking at supplier–customer relations from the opposite direction.
Because the TSR data include the address of the headquarters of each firm, we can identify the longitude and latitude of each headquarters using the geocoding service provided by the Center for Spatial
Information Science at the University of Tokyo.
Because the TSR data do not include the value of each transaction between two firms, we estimate it in
two steps. First, we divide each supplier’s sales into its customers in proportion to the sales of customers
to obtain a tentative sales value. Second, we employ 2015 IO Tables for Japan [22] to transform these
tentative values into more realistic ones. Specifically, we aggregate the tentative values at the firm-pair
level to obtain the total sales for each pair of sectors. We then divide the total sales for each sector pair
by the transaction values for the corresponding pair in the IO tables. The ratio is then used to estimate
the transaction values between firms. The final consumption of each sector is allocated to all the firms
in the sector using their sales as weights.
Although the supply chains used in our simulations are at the firm level, this study often uses features
of the supply chains at the prefecture level because different prefectures imposed lockdowns to different
degrees. Therefore, Figure A.1 illustrates the inter-prefecture supply chains. The red and blue lines
show the inter-prefectural links between Tokyo and other prefectures and between other prefectures than
Tokyo, respectively. We observe that Tokyo is the centre of supply chains in Japan, while several smaller
hubs such as Aichi, Osaka, and Fukuoka also exist.

Figure A.1: Inter-prefectural links. Inter-firm links are aggregated into inter-prefectural links, ignoring
the directions of the links. The inter-prefectural links between two prefectures are not shown here if the
number of inter-firm links is less than 3,000. The links within each prefecture are also ignored. The red
and blue lines show the inter-prefectural links between Tokyo and other prefectures and between two of
other prefectures, respectively.

17

A.2

Prefectures in Japan

Because this study uses prefectures as the unit of regions, it is important to provide information on the
prefectures in Japan. Figure A.2 shows the locations, Japan Industrial Standard (JIS) codes, and names
of the 47 prefectures. In Figures C.3 and the JIS codes are shown on the horizontal axis.

Figure A.2: Prefecture locations and their codes. The number on the map is the JIS code of each
prefecture shown in the right table.

18

A.3

Geographic presentation of the timeline of lockdowns

Supplementary Information Figure A.3 shows where and when the lockdowns were imposed to prefectures.

B
B.1

Methods
Model

We rely on the model of Inoue and Todo [5, 6], an extension of the existing agent-based models used
to examine the propagation of shocks by natural disasters through supply chains, including Hallegatte’s
model [29]. Each firm uses a variety of intermediates as inputs and delivers a sector-specific product to
other firms and final consumers. Firms have an inventory of intermediates to address possible supply
shortages.
In the initial stage before an economic shock, the daily trade volume from supplier j to customer i is
denoted by Ai,j , whereas the daily trade volume from firm i to final consumers is denoted by Ci . Then,
the initial production of firm i in a day is given by
Pinii = Σj Aj,i + Ci .

(6)

On day t after the initial stage, the previous day’s demand for firm i’s product is Di∗ (t − 1). The firm thus
makes orders to each supplier j so that the amount of its product of supplier j can meet this demand,
Ai,j Di∗ (t − 1)/Pinii . We assume that firm i has an inventory of the intermediate goods produced by firm
j on day t, Si,j (t), and aims to restore this inventory to a level equal to a given number of days ni of the
utilisation of the product of supplier j. The constant ni is assumed to be Poisson distributed, where its
mean is n, which is a parameter. In addition, ni does not take a number smaller than 4, although the
model in the previous literature sets this number to 2. Since the small minimum inventory size causes a
bullwhip effect (fluctuation of production level), we set the number to 4 in this work and recalibrate the
parameters. When the actual inventory is smaller than its target, firm i increases its inventory gradually
by 1/τ of the gap, so that it reaches the target in τ days, where τ is assumed to be 6 to follow the original

Figure A.3: Changes in locked down prefectures. The pink prefectures in each panel show those that
were locked down during the period.

19

model [29]. Therefore, the order from firm i to its supplier j on day t, denoted by Oi,j (t), is given by
Oi,j (t) = Ai,j

Di∗ (t − 1) 1
+ [ni Ai,j − Si,j (t)] ,
Pinii
τ

(7)

where the inventory gap is in brackets. Accordingly, total demand for the product of supplier i on day t,
Di (t), is given by the sum of final demand from final consumers and total orders from customers:
Di (t) = Σj Oj,i (t) + Ci .

(8)

Now, suppose that an economic shock hits the economy on day 0 and that firm i is directly affected.
Subsequently, the proportion δi (t) of the production capital of firm i is malfunctioning. In this study,
δi is determined by the sector and prefecture to which firm i belongs, and a term for which a lockdown
is imposed. Hence, the production capacity of firm i, defined as its maximum production assuming no
supply shortages, Pcapi (t), is given by
Pcapi (t) = Pinii (1 − δi (t)).

(9)

The production of firm i might also be limited by the shortage of supplies. Because we assume that firms
in the same sector produce the same product, the shortage of supplies suffered by firm j in sector s can
be compensated for by supplies from firm k in the same sector s. Firms cannot substitute new suppliers
for affected suppliers after the disaster, as we assume fixed supply chains. Thus, the total inventory of
the products delivered by firms in sector s in firm i on day t is
Stoti,s (t) = Σj∈s Si,j (t).

(10)

The initial consumption of products in sector s of firm i before the disaster is also defined for convenience:
Atoti,s = Σj∈s Ai,j .

(11)

The maximum possible production of firm i limited by the inventory of product of sector s on day t,
Pproi,s (t), is given by
Stoti,s (t)
Pproi,s (t) =
P .
(12)
Atoti,s inii
Then, we can determine the maximum production of firm i on day t, considering its production capacity,
Pcapi (t), and its production constraints due to the shortage of supplies, Pproi,s (t):

Pmaxi (t) = Min Pcapi (t), Mins (Pproi,s (t)) .

(13)

Therefore, the actual production of firm i on day t is given by
Pacti (t) = Min (Pmaxi (t), Di (t)) .

(14)

When demand for a firm is greater than its production capacity, the firm cannot completely satisfy its
demand, as denoted by Equation (9). In this case, firms should ration their production to their customers.
We propose a rationing policy in which customers and final consumers are prioritised if they have small
amount of order to their initial order, instead of being treated equally, as in the previous work [29].
Suppose that firm i has customers j and a final consumer. Then, the ratios of the order from customers
rel
j and the final consumer after the shock to the one before the shock denoted by Oj,i
and Ocrel , respectively
sub
sub
are determined by the following steps, where Oj,i and Oc are temporal variables used to calculate the
realised order and are set to be zero initially.
1. Obtain the remaining production r of firm i
rel
rel
2. Calculate Omin
= Min(Oj,i
, Ocrel )
P rel
rel
3. If r ≤ ( j Omin
Oj,i + Omin
Ci ) then proceed to 8

20

rel
sub
4. Add Omin
to Oj,i
and Ocsub
P rel
rel
5. Subtract ( j Omin
Oj,i + Omin
Ci ) from r
rel
6. Remove the customer or the final consumer that indicated Omin
from the calculation

7. Return to Step 2
P
8. Calculate Orea that satisfies r = ( j Orea Oj,i + Orea Ci )
∗
sub
9. Obtain Oj,i
= Orea Oj,i + Oj,i
Oj,i and Ci∗ = Orea Ci + Ocsub Ci , where the realised order from firm
∗
j to supplier i is denoted by Oj,i
(t), and the realised order from a final consumer is Ci∗

10. Finalise the calculation
Under this rationing policy, total realised demand for firm i, Di∗ (t), is given by
∗
Di∗ (t) = Σj Oi,j
(t) + Ci∗ ,

(15)

∗
where the realised order from firm i to supplier j is denoted by Oi,j
(t) and that from the final consumers
is Ci∗ . According to firms’ production and procurement activities on day t, the inventory of firm j’s
product in firm i on day t + 1 is updated to

P
(t − 1)
∗
.
Si,j (t + 1) = Si,j (t) + Oi,j
(t) − Ai,j acti
Pinii

(16)

Several caveats of this model and data should be mentioned. First, we assume that firms cannot find
any new supplier when facing a shortage of supplies from their current suppliers. Second, for simplicity,
our model assumes that inputs from the service sector can be stored as inventory, just like inputs from
manufacturing. Third, our model ignores changes in the prices of products and wages of labour incorporated in [45, 46] and focuses on the dynamics of production because of supply-chain disruptions. Fourth,
the TSR data report only the location of the headquarters of each firm, not the location of its branches.
Because the headquarters of firms are concentrated in Tokyo, production activities in Tokyo are most
likely to be overvalued in our analysis. Fifth, because of data limitations, we ignore the international
supply-chain links in our simulations. Finally, this study ignores the impacts of COVID-19 on human
and firm behaviours in the post-COVID era. These behavioural changes may influence consumption and
production that are assumed to remain the same in this era.

B.2

Sectoral differences in production capacity after lockdowns

No data for production capacity (i.e. P cap in the model) during the lockdown of Japan at the firm
or sector level are available. Although the Indices of All Industry Activities (IAIA) provides data for
post-lockdown production at the sector level (Section 3.3), or P act in our model averaged within a sector,
we need information about production capacity, P cap. Therefore, we assume that the rate of reduction
in production capacity for each sector is given by the degree of the reduction because of exposure to
the virus [8] multiplied by the share of workers who cannot work at home [9] (Section 3.3). The rate
of reduction because of exposure to the virus is determined by how the workers in the sector have to
reduce their activities to avoid contact with others for infection prevention. Because [9] define the rate of
reduction uniformly worldwide, we modify the rate for some sectors that clearly differ from the practice
in Japan. Table B.1 shows the rates of reduction for each sector assumed in our simulations.
Table B.1: Sector-specific rates of reduction in production capacity. Sectors are classified by the JSIC [23]
at the two-digit level, except for industries 560, 561, and 569 for which we use three-digit codes to reflect
the actual circumstances. The sector names are abbreviated. Table B.2 lists the sector descriptions and
abbreviations.
Code

Sector
(abbreviated)

Reduction rate

Work-at
-home rate

21

Exposure
level

Rationale

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
560
561
569

AGR.
FRS.
FIS.
AQA.
MIN.
CNS.GEN.
CNS.SPC.
EQP.
MAN.FOD.
MAN.BEV.
MAN.TEX
MAN.LUM.
MAN.FUR.
MAN.PUL.
PRT.
MAN.CHM.
MAN.PET.
MAN.PLA.
MAN.RUB.
MAN.LET.
MAN.CER.
MAN.IRN.
MAN.NFM.
MAN.FBM.
MAN.GNM.
MAN.PRM.
MAN.BSM.
EPT.
MAN.ELM.
MAN.INF.
MAN.TRN.
MAN.MSC.
ELE.
GAS.
HET.
WTR.
COM.
BRD.
INF.SVC.
INT.
INF.DST.
RLW.TRP.
PAS.TRP.
FRE.TRP.
WTR.TRP.
AIR.TRP.
WRH.
SVC.TRP.
PST.SVC.
WHL.GEN.
WHL.TEX.
WHL.FOD.
WHL.MAT.
WHL.MCN.
WHL.MSC.
RTL.ADM.
RTL.DPT.
RTL.GNM.

0.433
0.433
0.433
0.433
0.637
0.758
0.758
0.758
0.76
0.76
0.668
0.768
0.768
0.676
0.676
0.529
0.651
0.704
0.704
0.668
0.709
0.732
0.732
0.695
0.604
0.604
0.604
0.333
0.58
0.333
0.504
0.705
0.0623
0.0623
0.0623
0.0623
0.0401
0.0192
0.097
0.0401
0.192
0.0701
0.0701
0.0701
0.0701
0.0701
0.0701
0.0701
0.0701
0.525
0.525
0.525
0.525
0.525
0.525
0.525
0.525
0.0525

0.134
0.134
0.134
0.134
0.363
0.242
0.242
0.242
0.240
0.240
0.332
0.232
0.232
0.324
0.324
0.471
0.349
0.296
0.296
0.332
0.291
0.268
0.268
0.305
0.396
0.396
0.396
0.667
0.420
0.667
0.496
0.295
0.377
0.377
0.377
0.377
0.599
0.808
0.903
0.599
0.808
0.299
0.299
0.299
0.299
0.299
0.299
0.299
0.299
0.475
0.475
0.475
0.475
0.475
0.475
0.475
0.475
0.475

22

0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
1
0.1
1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0.1

Low exposure
Low exposure
Low exposure
Low exposure
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Lifeline
Lifeline
Lifeline
Lifeline
Lifeline
Lifeline
Ordinary
Lifeline
Ordinary
Lifeline
Lifeline
Lifeline
Lifeline
Lifeline
Lifeline
Lifeline
Lifeline
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Closed
Lifeline

57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99

RTL.GEN.
RTL.FOD.
RTL.MCN.
RTL.MSC.
RTL.NST.
FIN.BNK.
FIN.ORG.
FIN.LON.
FIN.TRN.
FIN.AUX.
INS.
RST.AGN.
RTS.LES.
RNT.
SCI.
SVC.PRF.
ADV.
SVC.TEC.
ACM.
EAT.
DEL.
LND.
SVC.PSN.
SVC.AMS.
SCH.
EDC.
MED.
HLT.
WEL.
PST.OFC.
CAS.
WAS.
SVC.AUT.
SVC.MCN.
SVC.EMP.
SVC.BUS.
PLT.
REL.
SVC.MSC.
GOV.INT.
NA
GOV.LOC.
NEC

0.525
0.525
0.525
0.525
0.525
0.214
0.214
0.214
0.214
0.214
0.214
0.423
0.423
0.362
0.172
0.362
0.362
0.362
0.889
0.889
0.0521
0.521
0.521
0.521
0.086
0.086
0.0753
0
0
0.0362
0.181
0.181
0.181
0.181
0.181
0.181
0.181
0.181
0.181
0.0515
0.0515
0.0515
0.362

0.475
0.475
0.475
0.475
0.475
0.786
0.786
0.786
0.786
0.786
0.786
0.577
0.577
0.638
0.828
0.638
0.638
0.638
0.111
0.111
0.479
0.479
0.479
0.479
0.828
0.828
0.247
0.247
0.247
0.638
0.638
0.638
0.638
0.638
0.638
0.638
0.638
0.638
0.638
0.485
0.485
0.485
0.638

23

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0.1
1
1
1
0.5
0.5
0.1
0
0
0.1
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.1
0.1
0.1
1

Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Closed
Ordinary
Lifeline
Ordinary
Ordinary
Closed
Low exposure
Low exposure
Lifeline
Sustantial
Sustantial
Lifeline
Low exposure
Low exposure
Low exposure
Low exposure
Low exposure
Low exposure
Low exposure
Low exposure
Low exposure
Lifeline
Lifeline
Lifeline
Ordinary

24

Description

AGRICULTURE
FORESTRY
FISHERIES, EXCEPT AQUACULTURE
AQUACULTURE
MINING AND QUARRYING OF STONE AND GRAVEL
CONSTRUCTION WORK, GENERAL INCLUDING PUBLIC AND PRIVATE CONSTRUCTION WORK
CONSTRUCTION WORK BY SPECIALIST CONTRACTOR, EXCEPT EQUIPMENT INSTALLATION WORK
EQUIPMENT INSTALLATION WORK
MANUFACTURE OF FOOD
MANUFACTURE OF BEVERAGES, TOBACCO AND FEED
MANUFACTURE OF TEXTILE PRODUCTS
MANUFACTURE OF LUMBER AND WOOD PRODUCTS, EXCEPT FURNITURE
MANUFACTURE OF FURNITURE AND FIXTURES
MANUFACTURE OF PULP, PAPER AND PAPER PRODUCTS
PRINTING AND ALLIED INDUSTRIES
MANUFACTURE OF CHEMICAL AND ALLIED PRODUCTS
MANUFACTURE OF PETROLEUM AND COAL PRODUCTS
MANUFACTURE OF PLASTIC PRODUCTS, EXCEPT OTHERWISE CLASSIFIED
MANUFACTURE OF RUBBER PRODUCTS
MANUFACTURE OF LEATHER TANNING, LEATHER PRODUCTS AND FUR SKINS
MANUFACTURE OF CERAMIC, STONE AND CLAY PRODUCTS
MANUFACTURE OF IRON AND STEEL
MANUFACTURE OF NON-FERROUS METALS AND PRODUCTS
MANUFACTURE OF FABRICATED METAL PRODUCTS
MANUFACTURE OF GENERAL-PURPOSE MACHINERY
MANUFACTURE OF PRODUCTION MACHINERY
MANUFACTURE OF BUSINESS ORIENTED MACHINERY
ELECTRONIC PARTS, DEVICES AND ELECTRONIC CIRCUITS
MANUFACTURE OF ELECTRICAL MACHINERY, EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES
MANUFACTURE OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION ELECTRONICS EQUIPMENT
MANUFACTURE OF TRANSPORTATION EQUIPMENT
MISCELLANEOUS MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES
PRODUCTION, TRANSMISSION AND DISTRIBUTION OF ELECTRICITY
PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION OF GAS
HEAT SUPPLY

Code

01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35

Table B.2: Sector classifications and abbreviations.

AGR.
FRS.
FIS.
AQA.
MIN.
CNS.GEN.
CNS.SPC.
EQP.
MAN.FOD.
MAN.BEV.
MAN.TEX
MAN.LUM.
MAN.FUR.
MAN.PUL.
PRT.
MAN.CHM.
MAN.PET.
MAN.PLA.
MAN.RUB.
MAN.LET.
MAN.CER.
MAN.IRN.
MAN.NFM.
MAN.FBM.
MAN.GNM.
MAN.PRM.
MAN.BSM.
EPT.
MAN.ELM.
MAN.INF.
MAN.TRN.
MAN.MSC.
ELE.
GAS.
HET.

Abbreviation

25

36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
560
561
569
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71

COLLECTION, PURIFICATION AND DISTRIBUTION OF WATER, AND SEWAGE COLLECTION, PROCESSING
COMMUNICATIONS
BROADCASTING
INFORMATION SERVICES
SERVICES INCIDENTAL TO INTERNET
VIDEO PICTURE INFORMATION, SOUND INFORMATION, CHARACTER INFORMATION PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION
RAILWAY TRANSPORT
ROAD PASSENGER TRANSPORT
ROAD FREIGHT TRANSPORT
WATER TRANSPORT
AIR TRANSPORT
WAREHOUSING
SERVICES INCIDENTAL TO TRANSPORT
POSTAL SERVICES, INCLUDING MAIL DELIVERY
WHOLESALE TRADE, GENERAL MERCHANDISE
WHOLESALE TRADE (TEXTILE AND APPAREL)
WHOLESALE TRADE (FOOD AND BEVERAGES)
WHOLESALE TRADE (BUILDING MATERIALS, MINERALS AND METALS, ETC)
WHOLESALE TRADE (MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT)
MISCELLANEOUS WHOLESALE TRADE
ESTABLISHMENTS ENGAGED IN ADMINISTRATIVE OR ANCILLARY ECONOMIC ACTIVITIES
DEPARTMENT STORES AND GENERAL MERCHANDISE SUPERMARKET
MISCELLANEOUS RETAIL TRADE, GENERAL MERCHANDISE
RETAIL TRADE, GENERAL MERCHANDISE
RETAIL TRADE (FOOD AND BEVERAGE)
RETAIL TRADE (MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT)
MISCELLANEOUS RETAIL TRADE
NONSTORE RETAILERS
BANKING
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS FOR COOPERATIVE ORGANIZATIONS
NON-DEPOSIT MONEY CORPORATIONS, INCLUDING LENDING AND CREDIT CARD BUSINESS
FINANCIAL PRODUCTS TRANSACTION DEALERS AND FUTURES COMMODITY TRANSACTION DEALERS
FINANCIAL AUXILIARIES
INSURANCE INSTITUTIONS, INCLUDING INSURANCE AGENTS, BROKERS AND SERVICES
REAL ESTATE AGENCIES
REAL ESTATE LESSORS AND MANAGERS
GOODS RENTAL AND LEASING
SCIENTIFIC AND DEVELOPMENT RESEARCH INSTITUTES

WTR.
COM.
BRD.
INF.SVC.
INT.
INF.DST.
RLW.TRP.
PAS.TRP.
FRE.TRP.
WTR.TRP.
AIR.TRP.
WRH.
SVC.TRP.
PST.SVC.
WHL.GEN.
WHL.TEX.
WHL.FOD.
WHL.MAT.
WHL.MCN.
WHL.MSC.
RTL.ADM.
RTL.DPT.
RTL.GNM.
RTL.GEN.
RTL.FOD.
RTL.MCN.
RTL.MSC.
RTL.NST.
FIN.BNK.
FIN.ORG.
FIN.LON.
FIN.TRN.
FIN.AUX.
INS.
RST.AGN.
RTS.LES.
RNT.
SCI.

26

72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99

PROFESSIONAL SERVICES, N.E.C.
ADVERTISING
TECHNICAL SERVICES, N.E.C.
ACCOMMODATION
EATING AND DRINKING PLACES
FOOD TAKE OUT AND DELIVERY SERVICES
LAUNDRY, BEAUTY AND BATH SERVICES
MISCELLANEOUS LIVING-RELATED AND PERSONAL SERVICES
SERVICES FOR AMUSEMENT AND RECREATION
SCHOOL EDUCATION
MISCELLANEOUS EDUCATION, LEARNING SUPPORT
MEDICAL AND OTHER HEALTH SERVICE
PUBLIC HEALTH AND HYGIENE
SOCIAL INSURANCE, SOCIAL WELFARE AND CARE SERVICES
POSTAL OFFICE
COOPERATIVE ASSOCIATIONS, N.E.C.
WASTE DISPOSAL BUSINESS
AUTOMOBILE MAINTENANCE SERVICES
MACHINE, ETC. REPAIR SERVICES, EXCEPT OTHERWISE CLASSIFIED
EMPLOYMENT AND WORKER DISPATCHING SERVICES
MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS SERVICES
POLITICAL, BUSINESS AND CULTURAL ORGANIZATIONS
RELIGION
MISCELLANEOUS SERVICES
FOREIGN GOVERNMENTS AND INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES IN JAPAN
NATIONAL GOVERNMENT SERVICES
LOCAL GOVERNMENT SERVICES
INDUSTRIES UNABLE TO CLASSIFY

SVC.PRF.
ADV.
SVC.TEC.
ACM.
EAT.
DEL.
LND.
SVC.PSN.
SVC.AMS.
SCH.
EDC.
MED.
HLT.
WEL.
PST.OFC.
CAS.
WAS.
SVC.AUT.
SVC.MCN.
SVC.EMP.
SVC.BUS.
PLT.
REL.
SVC.MSC.
GOV.INT.
GOV.NAT.
GOV.LOC.
NEC

B.3

Helmholtz-Hodge decomposition

The Helmholtz-Hodge decomposition (HHD) decomposes a flow from a node to another in a network into
a potential flow component and a loop flow component. A potential flow component is determined by
the upstream/downstream location of the node in a network [34], whereas a loop flow component is given
by a constraint such that the summation of the incoming and outgoing loop flows of all the nodes equals
zero. This method has been used to find the structure of potential and loop flows in complex networks.
See, for example, [31, 47, 48, 49].
Suppose we have a flow of a matrix denoted by Bij such that a flow from node i to node j is represented
by Bij . For simplicity, we assume ∀i, j Bij ≥ 0. Aij is a binary adjacency matrix generated from Bij :
Aij =

1

if Bij > 0,

0

otherwise.

(17)

We define a ‘net flow’ Fij by
Fij = Bij − Bji ,

(18)

wij = Aij + Aji .

(19)

and a ‘net weight’ wij by
Note that wij is symmetric, wij = wji , and non-negative, wij ≥ 0, for any pair of i and j.
Then, the HHD is given by
(c)
(p)
Fij = Fij + Fij ,

(20)

(c)

where the loop flow Fij satisfies
X

(c)

Fij = 0,

(21)

j
(p)

meaning that loop flows are divergence-free. The potential flow, Fij , can be expressed as
(p)

Fij = wij (φi − φj ),

(22)

where φi is the Helmholtz-Hodge potential of node i that identifies its upstream/downstream position
in the network. More precisely, φi is larger when node i is located in a more upstream position in the
(p)
network and vice versa. Equation (22) indicates that the potential flow Fij is the difference in the HH
potential between two nodes when the two are linked and zero when they are not linked. We further
assume
X
φi = 0
(23)
i
(c)

(p)

for normalisation purposes. Then, equations (20)–(23) can be uniquely solved for Fij , Fij , and φi for
all i and j in the whole network.
Figure B.1 shows a simple example to explain the intuition behind the potential and loop flows,
potential obtained from the HHD, and potential and loop flow measures between two prefectures (i.e.
P otab , P otba , and Loopab defined in Section 4.4). The left panel shows a supply chain with six firms
in prefectures a and b. The right top and bottom panels indicate the potential flows and loop flows,
respectively decomposed by the HHD. The numbers in red in the right top panel represent the HH
potential, or the upstreamness in supply chains, for each firm. Although there is no ‘loop’ in a standard
sense among the firms in this example, the HHD identifies loop flows in the sense that the nodes in the
loop are affected by each other. Hence, shocks circulate in the loop and work differently from those in
the non-loop potential flows.
Specifically, P otab is the sum of the total potential flows from the firms in prefecture a to those in
prefecture b (there is only a potential flow from prefectures a to b in this example) divided by the total
flows of firms in prefecture a. Therefore, P otab = (2/3)/4 = 1/6. P otba is the opposite direction and
P otba = 1/6. Because Loopab is the sum of the total loop flows between the firms in prefectures a and
b (there are two loop flows between a and b in this example), Loopab = (2/3)/4 = 1/6 and, similarly,
Loopba = 1/6.
27

Figure B.1: An example of the HHD and loop and potential flow measures of prefectures. The left panel
shows the supply chains of the six firms in the two prefectures. The right top and bottom panels present
the potential flows and loop flows, respectively obtained from the HHD.
Figure B.2 shows the average of the HH potential φi of the firms in the supply-chain network, which
is normalised so that its overall average is zero, for each prefecture. This figure illustrates the large
variation in the upstreamness of the firms at the prefecture level.

Figure B.2: Choropleth map of the potential calculated by the Helmholtz-Hodge decomposition. The
average HH potential over all the firms in each prefecture is presented.

28

B.4

Substitutability for two regions

Since the definition of the substitutability measure for two regions is not as simple as the definition for
one region, we provide a further explanation. Figure B.3 is an example for the suppliers of a firm in
prefecture a. The substitutability of prefecture a by prefecture b is a fraction. The denominator is the
total number of suppliers that delivers goods to the firms in prefecture a except suppliers in prefecture a
or b. (Here, we call this Ai in the figure.) Hereafter, a supplier means a supplier of a firm in prefecture
a. The numerator is the total number of substitutable suppliers in Ai . A supplier in Ai is substitutable
if a supplier in prefecture b belongs to the same industry as the focal supplier.

Figure B.3: An example of the substitutability measure for two regions. The bottom shows the equation.
Ai is the total number of suppliers outside prefectures a and b. The bottom two suppliers are applicable.
A supplier in prefecture b belongs to the same industry as the upper firm of the outside suppliers, whereas
the lower firm of the outside suppliers is not substitutable. Hence, Ai = 2 and Bi = 1.

C
C.1

Results
Simulation of the effect of the actual lockdown

A video is available for the temporal and geographical visualisation of the lockdown simulation at https:
//youtu.be/q029a_e1akU. The map if the video indicates the rate of reduction in firm production
averaged within each municipality. The red areas indicate that the production in the area is less than
or equal to 20% of firms’ capacity on average, whereas the light red and orange areas show firms with
a more moderate decline in production. The inset in the video indicates Figure 2 and the number of
days from the first lockdown. The visualisation clearly shows the areas that are not locked down are also
affected by lockdowns of other areas. For example, from day 0 to day 8, only seven prefectures are locked
down but most of the areas in Japan are affected (see Section 3.2 and Figure A.3). This reduction of
the production happens because the demand reduction propagates to the suppliers without any buffer.
On the other hand, the supply reduction can be mitigated because each client holds inventories for the
intermediate goods.

C.2

Estimation of daily GDP from IAIA

The IAIA indicates the changes in production in all industries in Japan compared with that in the
previous month and in the same month in the previous year, based on firm surveys [41]. We assume that

29

daily production on 7 April (day 0) is the same as that in March and thus can be calculated from the
IAIA in March. Then, we estimate the daily GDP in April (or May) by (yearly GDP)/365×(IAIA in
April (May))/(IAIA in March) and illustrate it by the left (right) red line in Figure 2.

C.3

Interconnected effect of the different strictness of regional lockdowns

In Section 4.2, we showed that the different lockdown strictness between the more and less restricted
groups affects the economic losses of the two groups, particularly assuming that the lockdown continues
for 60 days. We also experiment with different lockdown durations (i.e. 14 and 30 days) and show the
results in Figures C.1 and C.2. The main result that the strictness of the lockdown in the more restricted
group that includes the major industrial clusters substantially affects the economic loss of the other group
by propagation through supply chains still holds.

Figure C.1: Loss in value added as a percentage of total GDP assuming different restriction levels for
a lockdown of 14 days between the more and less restricted groups. A restriction level is defined by a
multiplier for the sector-specific benchmark rates of reduction in production capacity. The red and blue
parts of each bar show the loss of value added in the less and more restricted groups, respectively as a
percentage of GDP.

Figure C.2: Loss in value added as a percentage of total GDP assuming different restriction levels for
a lockdown of 30 days between the more and less restricted groups. A restriction level is defined by a
multiplier for the sector-specific benchmark rates of reduction in production capacity. The red and blue
parts of each bar show the loss of value added in the less and more restricted groups, respectively as a
percentage of GDP.

30

C.4

Effect of lifting the lockdown in one region

Section 4.3 presents the effect of lifting the lockdown in a prefecture on its
all the other prefectures are still locked down. Figure C.3 shows the ratio
GDP from each prefecture lifting its lockdown to the decrease in GDP by
The prefectures are horizontally aligned in order of JIS cods. The top three
recovery rate are Tokyo, Osaka, and Fukuoka.

production, assuming that
of the increase in national
all prefectures’ lockdowns.
prefectures in terms of the

Figure C.3: Ratio of the improvement in GDP by lifting the lockdown in each prefecture. The improvement is defined as the ratio of the increase in national GDP by each prefecture lifting its lockdown to the
decrease in GDP by all prefectures’ lockdowns. The horizontal axis indicates the JIS codes of the prefectures. The yellow, dark green, and light green bars show the ratio of the improvement when lockdowns
persist for 14, 30, and 60 days, respectively.
Figure C.4 illustrates the ratio of the increase in the value added production, or gross regional product
(GRP), of each prefecture by lifting its lockdown to the decrease in its GRP by all prefectures’ lockdowns,
which is shown in Figure 5.

Figure C.4: Recovery rate in GRP by lifting the lockdown in each prefecture. The recovery rate is defined
as the ratio of the increase in the GRP of each prefecture by lifting its lockdown to the decrease in its
GRP by all prefectures’ lockdowns. The horizontal axis indicates the JIS codes of the prefectures. The
yellow, dark green, and light green bars show the recovery rate when lockdowns persist for 14, 30, and
60 days, respectively.

31

C.5

Regression analyses

In Section 4.3, we conducted regression analyses to examine what attributes of prefectures cause a larger
economic recovery by lifting the lockdown in only one prefecture, using Ordinary Least Squares (OLS)
models. Table C.1 shows the correlation coefficients between all the variables used in the regression
analysis and Table C.2 presents the detailed regression results.
Table C.1: Correlation matrix of the variables used in Section 4.3. The definitions of the variables are as
follows. RecRatio: the recovery rate defined as the ratio of the increase in the GRP of each prefecture
by lifting its lockdown to the decrease in its GRP by all prefectures’ lockdowns. GRP: gross regional
product (log). Links: the degree (log). InLink: the share of links within the prefecture to its all links.
InLoop: the share of loop flows within the prefecture to its all flows. OutLink: the share of outward
inter-prefectural links to all the links of the prefecture. Potential: the average HH potential of the firms in
the prefecture. Sub: the share of substitutable suppliers to all suppliers of the prefecture located outside
the prefecture.
Variable
RecRatio
GRP
Degree
InLink
InLoop
OutLink
Potential
Sub

RecRatio
1.000
0.311
0.370
0.218
0.432
-0.046
-0.321
0.449

GRP

Degree

InLink

InLoop

OutLink

Potential

Sub

1.000
0.965
-0.467
0.072
0.676
0.104
0.803

1.000
-0.374
0.151
0.661
0.090
0.829

1.000
0.720
-0.688
-0.046
-0.246

1.000
-0.351
-0.076
0.307

1.000
0.193
0.573

1.000
0.096

1.000

32

33

Observations
R-squared

Constant

GRP

Sub

Potential

OutLink

InLoop

InLink

47
0.097

0.0261**
(0.0119)
0.572***
(0.0225)

(1)

47
0.267

0.0443***
(0.0122)
0.285***
(0.0924)

0.426***
(0.133)

(2)

47
0.265

0.0236**
(0.0109)
0.424***
(0.0512)

0.686***
(0.216)

(3)

47
0.218

0.0528***
(0.0152)
0.816***
(0.0957)

-0.639**
(0.245)

(4)

47
0.223

0.0292**
(0.0112)
0.565***
(0.0213)

-0.540**
(0.202)

(5)

47
0.208

0.684**
(0.275)
-0.0115
(0.0189)
0.507***
(0.0338)

(6)

47
0.481

0.401
(0.242)
-0.345
(0.425)
-0.375
(0.278)
-0.527***
(0.179)
0.709**
(0.283)
0.0242
(0.0191)
0.445**
(0.182)

(7)

Table C.2: Regression results for Section 4.3. The dependent variable is the recovery rate. See the caption of Table C.1 for the definitions of the independent
variables. Standard errors are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

In Section 4.4, we conducted regression analyses to examine what attributes of prefectures cause a
larger economic recovery by lifting the lockdown in two prefectures simultaneously, using OLS models.
The relative recovery measure defined as the ratio of the increase in the GRP of prefecture a when it
lifts its lockdown together with prefecture b to its increase when prefecture a lifts its lockdown alone.
Table C.3 shows the correlation coefficients between all the variables used in the regression analysis and
Table C.4 presents the detailed regression results.

Figure C.5: Relative recovery from lifting the lockdown together to the recovery from lifting the lockdown
alone. The relative recovery measure is defined as the ratio of the increase in the GRP of prefecture a
when it lifts its lockdown together with prefecture b to its increase when prefecture a lifts its lockdown
alone. The horizontal axis shows the JIS code of prefecture a. The colour of each dot indicates whether
the GRP of prefecture b is among the top 10 (blue), the bottom 10 (black), or others (red).

Table C.3: Correlation matrix of the variables used in Section 4.4. The definitions of the variables are
as follows. Recova : the relative recovery of prefecture a defined as the ratio of the increase in the GRP
of prefecture a by lifting its lockdown together with prefecture b to its increase by lifting its lockdown
alone. Linkab : the share of links from a to b to all links from a. Linkba : the share of links from b to
a to all links from a. P otab : the share of potential flows from b to a to the total links of a. P otba : the
share of potential flows from a to b to the total links of a. Subab : the share of suppliers substitutable by
those in b to a’s suppliers outside a and b. Subba : the share of suppliers substitutable by those in a to
b’s suppliers outside a and b. Loopab : the share of loop flows between a and b to the total flows between
the two. Biab : the number of inter-prefecture links between a and b in logs. GRPj : GRP of b in logs.
Variable
Recova
Linkab
Linkba
P otab
P otba
Subab
Subba
Loopab
Biab
GRPb

Recova
1.000
0.820
0.818
0.870
0.808
0.071
0.813
0.879
0.392
0.563

Linkab

Linkba

P otab

P otba

Subab

Subba

Loopab

Biab

GRPb

1.000
0.966
0.927
0.915
0.185
0.961
0.911
0.543
0.610

1.000
0.961
0.955
0.238
0.966
0.952
0.564
0.597

1.000
0.968
0.182
0.946
0.986
0.499
0.602

1.000
0.243
0.948
0.979
0.528
0.582

1.000
0.237
0.206
0.572
0.056

1.000
0.940
0.572
0.643

1.000
0.504
0.596

1.000
0.576

1.000

34

35

Observations
R-squared

Constant

GRPb2

GRPb

Biab

Subba

Loopab

P otba

P otab

Linkba

Linkab

2,162
0.713

-0.00211***
(0.000413)
-0.0186***
(0.00210)
0.00652***
(0.000490)
1.019***
(0.00236)

0.519***
(0.0175)

(1)

2,162
0.721

-0.00288***
(0.000415)
-0.0186***
(0.00205)
0.00676***
(0.000471)
1.023***
(0.00233)

0.619***
(0.0199)

(2)

2,162
0.778

-0.00182***
(0.000352)
-0.0135***
(0.00181)
0.00467***
(0.000422)
1.016***
(0.00208)

8.333***
(0.198)

(3)

2,162
0.714

-0.00174***
(0.000407)
-0.0232***
(0.00202)
0.00795***
(0.000458)
1.021***
(0.00236)

8.076***
(0.271)

(4)

2,162
0.794

-0.00225***
(0.000341)
-0.0120***
(0.00175)
0.00431***
(0.000405)
1.017***
(0.00200)

3.841***
(0.0844)

(5)

2,162
0.706

1.564***
(0.0550)
-0.00235***
(0.000423)
-0.0220***
(0.00208)
0.00712***
(0.000489)
1.024***
(0.00239)

(6)

2,162
0.865

0.440***
(0.0306)
-0.375***
(0.0460)
0.277
(0.624)
-17.82***
(0.644)
10.06***
(0.309)
-0.248**
(0.0989)
-0.000602**
(0.000298)
-0.00540***
(0.00146)
0.00192***
(0.000350)
1.006***
(0.00168)

(7)

Table C.4: Regression results for Section 4.4. The dependent variable is the relative recovery measure. See the caption of Table C.3 for the definitions of the
independent variables. Standard errors are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Figure C.6: Correlation between the relative recovery and selected network measures. The vertical axis
indicates the relative recovery of prefecture a, defined as the ratio of the increase in the GRP of prefecture
a by lifting its lockdown together with prefecture b to its increase by lifting its lockdown alone. The effect
of the GRP of b and total links between the two are excluded from the relative recovery measure. The
variable in the horizontal axis is given by Equations 1 and 2 in panels (a) and (b), respectively. The
orange line in each panel signifies the fitted value from a linear regression that controls for the effect of
the GRP of b and total number of links between a and b. The blue, black, and red dots show the pairs
of prefectures a and b for which the GRP of b is among the top 10, bottom 10, and others, respectively.
To check the robustness of our main results, we experimented with different rates of reduction in
production capacity, where we assume the share of working from home is zero for all the sectors in
Supplementary Information Table C.3. In other words, in this alternative simulation analysis, we assume
a stricter level of lockdown. Supplementary Information Figures C.8 and C.9 present the results, which
are essentially the same as our benchmark results in Figures 6 and 7.

36

Figure C.7: Correlation between the relative recovery and selected network measures. See the caption of
Figures 7 and C.6 for the definitions of the variables used here. The green line in each panel signifies the
fitted value from a linear regression that controls for the effect of the GRP of b and total number of links
between a and b in (a)–(g). The black and red dots show the pairs of prefectures a and b for which the
GRP of b is among the bottom 10 and between 11 and 37, respectively.

37

Figure C.8: Correlation between the recovery rate and selected network measures. See the caption of
Figure 6 for the definitions of the variables used here. The orange line in each panel specifies the fitted
value from a linear regression that controls for the effect of GRP in (b)–(f). The blue, black, and red
dots show the prefectures whose GRP is among the top 10, the bottom 10, or others, respectively.

38

Figure C.9: Correlation between the relative recovery and selected network measures. See the caption of
Figures 7 7 for the definitions of the variables used here. The red line in each panel signifies the fitted
value from a linear regression that controls for the effect of the GRP of b and total number of links
between a and b in (a)–(g). The blue, black, and red dots show the pairs of prefectures a and b for which
the GRP of b is among the top 10, the bottom 10, or others, respectively.

39

