IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH 2020

1

Safe and Reliable Public Transportation Systems
(SALUTARY) in the COVID-19 pandemic

arXiv:2009.12619v1 [cs.CY] 26 Sep 2020

Donatella Darsena, Senior Member, IEEE, Giacinto Gelli, Senior Member, IEEE, Ivan Iudice,
and Francesco Verde, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—The aim of the SALUTARY (Safe and Reliable
Public Transportation Systems) system is to employ modern Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) to proactively
tackle crowding situations in public transportation (PT) systems,
as a consequence of the limitations due to COVID-19 pandemic.
In particular, it is proposed to adopt in the various segments of
the PT system (buses/trams/trains, railway/subway stations, and
bus stops) suitable crowd detection techniques based on Internet
of Things (IoT) technologies, which measure in real-time the
number of users, in order to: (i) monitor and predict crowding
events; (ii) adapt in real-time PT system operations, i.e., modifying service frequency, timetables, routes, and so on; (iii) inform
the users by electronic displays installed in correspondence of
the bus stops/stations and/or by mobile transport applications.
The SALUTARY system can be implemented incrementally, as
an add-on to the Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) solution
already in use by major PT companies operating in urban
areas. The system is designed as a flexible platform, which
can be used to deliver, in addition to the innovative crowd
detection/management functionalities, also additional services,
such as on-line ticketing, vehicle access control and reservation
in severely crowded situations, and evolved crowd-aware route
planning.
Index Terms—COVID-19 pandemic, crowd detection, intelligent transportation system (ITS), public transportation (PT)
system, Internet of Things (IoT), smart cities.

I. I NTRODUCTION
NE of the most significant repercussions of coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic will regard the transport
sector and mobility, in particular public transportation (PT)
systems in urban areas. A recent survey carried out in China
[1] estimated that, as a consequence of the outbreak, the use
of private cars will be roughly doubled, increasing from 34%
to 66%, whereas the use of public transports (buses/metros)
will be more than halved, dropping down from 56% to 24%.
Furthermore, due to the lack of trust in PT systems, more than

O

Manuscript received September xx, 2020; revised xxx yy, 2020; accepted
zzzz 2020. Date of publication xxx 2020; date of current version yyy 2020.
This work was supported in part by..... The associate editor coordinating the
review of this manuscript and approving it for publication was Dr. X.
D. Darsena is with the Department of Engineering, Parthenope University,
Naples I-80143, Italy (e-mail: darsena@uniparthenope.it).
I. Iudice is with Italian Aerospace Research Centre (CIRA), Capua I-81043,
Italy (e-mail: i.iudice@cira.it).
G. Gelli and F. Verde are with the Department of Electrical Engineering
and Information Technology, University Federico II, Naples I-80125, Italy
[e-mail: (gelli,f.verde)@unina.it].
D. Darsena, G. Gelli, and F. Verde are also with the National InterUniversity Consortium for Telecommunications (CNIT), 80125 Naples, Italy.
Digital Object Identifier xxxx/yyyyyyyy

70% of the surveyed people not owing a car declared their
intention to buy a new one, with negative consequences on
the environment (landscape and air pollution) in urban areas.
In Italy, both national and regional authorities issued a number of rules aimed at limiting PT usage as well as avoiding bus
and metro overcrowding, which severely limit their capacity
to about 60% of the nominal capacity before the outbreak.
The effects of such limitations are still not fully perceived,
due to the breakthrough of mobility patterns associated to the
widespread use of smart working and e-learning practices in
education. However, it is expected that they will severely affect
the fruition of PT in the recovery phase, when the transport
demand will start to increase. Moreover, since new outbreaks
might be coming in the next months/years, it is likely that
some features of PT systems must be adapted to structurally
cope with these limitations.
In many countries, to counteract the shift to private car usage, governments are favoring the use of individual sustainable
mobility and micromobility means, such as bikes, electrical
scooters, and segways, and they are planning and deploying
the related infrastructures (emergency bike lanes) or powering
vehicle sharing services, which can shift to this transport mode
a certain percentage of short and medium-distance trips.
However, owing to the large number of passengers carried
by PT systems in urban areas, it is of utmost importance to
adopt measures aimed at assuring safe and reliable PT usage.
To this aim, the first adopted measures (during the lockdown)
were devoted to minimizing the contagion risk, such as backdoor boarding, cashless operation, frequent sanitization of
vehicles and stations, enforcing social distances, requiring
the passengers to wear personal protection equipment (e.g.,
face masks and/or gloves). Other medium-term measures are
focused on intervening on PT system operations, such as
modifying timetables, frequencies, paths, leveraging modal
integration, and so on. Some of these measures, like increasing PT service frequency to compensate for reduced vehicle
capacity, are seen by PT companies as effective [2], but not
sustainable in the long term, due to the limited number of
drivers and vehicles.
Thus, in the re-opening phase, when a capacity-limited
PT system must cope with increasing volumes of passengers
(especially with the reprise of school and university activities),
it will be mandatory to dispose in real-time of reliable and
capillary information about the crowding of PT vehicles (e.g.,
bus, tram, and trains) and of the related access infrastructures

0000–0000/00$00.00 c 2020 IEEE

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH 2020

(e.g., bus stops and railway stations). Such a knowledge
will allow one to implement the necessary social distancing
measures, while at the same time assuring an adequate level
of service. Real-time knowledge of crowding data can be
used for fast or even proactive adaptation of PT operations
(e.g., increasing the service frequency, reallocating vehicles
from one line to another, planning alternative routes), in order
to cope with spatially and/or temporally localized crowding
situations, which cannot be tackled by conventional (statistical)
tools used in transportation system design, such as, e.g.,
analysis of origin-destination flows.
A significant performance improvement in crowd avoidance
approaches can be ensured by exploiting information gathered
by intelligent transportation systems (ITSs). In a modern
ITS, commonly available data are automated vehicle location
(AVL) – via global positioning system (GPS) – and automatic
passenger count (APC) or automatic fare collection (AFC).
In [3], optimization and planning strategies based on such
data are surveyed, at four different levels: strategic, tactical,
operational, and real-time. In particular, it is mentioned that
the lack of passenger arrival information, especially in realtime, is a limiting factor for accurate studies. It is also stated
[4] that “the availability of real-time passenger demand data
can significantly improve the performance of control models
in case of overcrowding”.
To overcome such limitations, and cope with COVID-19related issues, a fundamental role can be played by Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) and Internet
of Things (IoT) technologies, some of which are already
employed in state-of-the-art ITS. In particular, the fifth generation (5G) of cellular networks is potentially able to support
massive IoT connections, where billions of smart devices can
be connected to the Internet.
In [5], the use of new technologies, such as IoT, unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs), artificial intelligence (AI), blockchain
and 5G, for managing the impact of COVID-19 in health
applications has been considered. In [6], [7] a review of
technologies for social distancing has been provided, with
emphasis on wireless technologies for positioning, including
crowd detection and people density estimation.
To the best of our knowledge, the application of ICT and
IoT, particularly crowd-detection techniques, to cope with
COVID-19 effects in a PT system has not been considered yet.
In this paper, we propose a new system concept, called SALUTARY (Safe and Reliable Public Transportation System),
aimed at integrating the legacy ITS, which is already available
in many PT systems in urban areas, for fleet management
and travel information purposes. Specifically, the SALUTARY
system is built upon a distributed IoT subsystem, composed
by a network of capillary active/passive sensor, aimed at
measuring passenger crowding in the different segments of the
PT system (buses, trams, trains, bus stops, and railway/metro
stations). The acquired measures are transmitted in real-time
by a communication infrastructure to a control subsystem,
which performs optimized and proactive management of the
PT system. The crowding data can also be reported (in aggregated form, for privacy concerns) to the PT users, by means
of ad hoc mobile applications (apps) or by integrating it in

2

the existing mobile transport apps (e.g., Moovit or proprietary
operator applications). Since crowding on PT systems has a
big impact on travel satisfaction [8], we are confident that the
added features will be of interest for improving the quality of
service also when the COVID-19 limitations will be finally
removed.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, related
work on crowd analysis, detection, and prediction is discussed.
An overview of the SALUTARY system concept and its
architecture is given in Section III. Various sensing solutions
are presented in Section IV for different indoor and outdoor
scenarios of interest. Section V is devoted to highlight innovations and advantages provided by the SALUTARY system.
Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section VI.
II. R ELATED WORK ON CROWD ANALYSIS , DETECTION ,
AND PREDICTION

Estimating and predicting some features of a “crowd” in
indoor and outdoor locations is an active research topic,
with many applications, including surveillance and security,
situation awareness, emergencies, and crowd management.
In our application, the feature of interest is the number of
components of the crowd and/or its density.
A. Crowd analysis and detection
A review of crowd analysis techniques for urban applications, including transportation systems, is provided in [9],
where different data sources are compared and discussed, including information fusion approaches. When dedicated crowd
detection infrastructures are not available, crowdsourcing or
participatory sensing1 applications have been developed to
acquire such information [10], [11].
Applications of crowd analysis to PT systems is described
in [12] and [13]. In [12], in particular, it is described a lowcost hardware/software solution to estimate the current number
of passengers in a vehicle, by counting the number of probe
requests, i.e., medium access control (MAC) addresses, sent
by WiFi-equipped (IEEE 802.11) devices in the vehicle. In
[13], such a passenger counting technique is incorporated
in a bus navigation system capable of giving crowd-aware
route recommendations: such a system has been tested in the
municipal bus infrastructure of Madrid, Spain.
One of the problem inherent to the use of techniques based
on radio frequency (RF) for crowd sensing is the ability
to distinguish between people outside the bus and actual
passengers. This issue was tackled in [12], [13] by filtering
the probes by a sliding window, aimed at removing MAC
addresses that were not detected over a longer period of
time. The system was able to detect only around 20% of
the passengers, since several users may have turned off the
WiFi interface. Moreover, the system is only tailored at crowd
analysis in buses, and do not take into account other scenarios
(trains, bus stops, and railway stations).
1 The concept of crowdsourcing, mobile and participatory sensing is further
discussed in Section IV.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH 2020

In [14], a crowdsensing-based PT information service is
described, called TrafficInfo, which exploits mobile or participatory sensing to enrich the static travel information without
requiring deployment of a vehicle tracking infrastructure. A
solution to count the people in a queue, based on Bluetooth
low-energy (BLE) devices, is described in [15]. The system
is completely passive and estimates the number of persons in
the queue by analyzing the mean and variance of the received
signal strength indicator (RSSI) values between a BLE beacon
and a receiver covering a certain area. In general, RSSIbased approaches for crowd analysis exhibit good performance
only for small monitored environments, where the propagation
channel variation is mainly dominated by the attenuation
caused by the present people. On the other hand, in a rich
scattering environment, crowd analysis based on channel state
information (CSI) provides a more reliable people counting.
In this respect, the received WiFi and Long Term Evolution
(LTE) downlink control signals are processed in [16] and [17],
respectively, to extract the changes of the propagation channel
induced by the presence of different number of people.
B. Crowd prediction
Crowd prediction algorithms can be classified on the basis
of the prediction horizon into short-term (less than 60 minutes)
and long-term ones. They usually rely on three different types
of information: (i) real-time load station data, (ii) real-time
train load data, and (iii) historical data. The latter data aim to
improve prediction by exploiting possible cyclic daily, weekly,
or seasonal variations in passenger loads.
Prediction approaches can be further classified, on the basis
of the prediction methodology, into model-based methods or
data-driven ones. Model-based methods include time-series
analysis, regression modeling or Kalman filtering models. In
[18], e.g., a traffic flow prediction algorithm based on timeseries is employed, and many variants have been subsequently
proposed to improve the prediction accuracy. Due to the
highly nonlinear and random nature of traffic flow, datadriven approaches have recently gained significant attention,
including k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) methods and artificial
neural networks techniques (see, e.g., [19], [20] and references
therein).
In some cases, simulation approaches, which employ traffic
simulation tools to predict traffic flow, have been considered
as well. Most of these techniques are mainly devoted to congestion management in urban transportation and can exploit
information from a multitude of sensor sources, including
inductive loops, radars, cameras, GPS, social media, etc.
Passenger load prediction for PT systems, instead, is less
common: recent studies are [21], [22], [23].
III. T HE SALUTARY SYSTEM CONCEPT
The aim of the SALUTARY system is to integrate/augment
the ITS system already available in a PT urban system
with innovative functionalities, aimed at smart and proactive
control and reduction of passenger crowding. It is based on
the integration of heterogenous sensing and communication
technologies, depending on the operation scenario and the ICT

3

Figure 1. The SALUTARY system concept.

infrastructure available in the urban area where the system
must be implemented. Detailed system design involves strong
interdisciplinary skills, including transportation engineering,
telecommunications, computer science, electronics, data analyis, artificial intelligence and machine learning (ML).
The SALUTARY system is composed (Fig. 1) by three
subsystems:
1) the sensing and actuator subsystem (SASS);
2) the communication subsystem (CSS);
3) the monitoring, prediction and control subsystem
(MPCSS).
The proposed system introduces new data flows (marked in
blue in Fig. 1) compared to existing data exchanges (in violet)
found in state-of-the-art ITS systems for PT services. The core
and main innovative part of the system is the SASS, with
particular reference to the IoT sensing technologies, whereas
the actuator part mainly encompasses the flow of information
toward the users, such as audio speakers, variable-message
panels or displays, which are typically already present in the
PT system, or can be readily installed at the bus stops or
in the railway station (and even inside the vehicles). Due to
its centrality in our concept, we focus attention on such a
subsystem in Section IV.
The characteristics of the CSS are strongly dependent on
the communications infrastructure available in the urban area
of interest, or the communication network owned by the PT
service operator. In general, they encompass public wireless
networks (such as cellular networks) and/or private wired
and/or wireless networks owned by the operator, such as
e.g. Global System for Mobile Railway (GSM-R) or LTE
for Railway (LTE-R). To cope with this heterogeneity, it is
envisioned that, at the protocol level stack, the CSS can be
readily interfaced with the other subsystems by using standard
interfaces and/or by means of simple adaptation layers.
The MPCSS performs data collection and real-time crowding prediction, also by means of AI and ML techniques. Based
on such predictions, modifications to the transport services
can be implemented in real-time, the related control data are
sent to service operators (drivers, supervisors, etc.), whereas
service information is sent to the passengers by means of
displays and/or mobile transport apps. This information could
be notified by the same applications to all the users of the

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH 2020

4

Non-visual based

Visual-based

Table I
C OMPARISON OF AVAILABLE SENSING TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE SALUTARY SYSTEM .
Technology

Frequency

Maximum
range

Power
consumption

User
cooperation

Scenario

Optical

Visible

100 m

Low

No

Railway/metro station,
bus stop

Thermal

Infrared

500 m

Low

No

Railway/metro station,
bus stop

Laser

Ultraviolet,
Visible,
Near infrared

1 km

Low-high

No

Railway/metro station,
bus stop

NFC

13.56 MHz

10 cm

Very low

Yes

Train and bus/train,
Railway/metro station

PIR

Infrared

10 m

Very low

No

Train and bus/train

BLE

2.4 GHz

100 m

Very low

Yes/No

Railway/metro station,
bus stop

WiFi

2.4/5 GHz

50 m

Low-high

Yes/No

Railway/metro station,
bus stop

LTE

800/1800/2600 MHz

10 km

High

Yes/No

Railway/metro station,
bus stop

5G

Sub-6 GHz

10 km

High

Yes/No

Railway/metro station,
bus stop

5G

MMW band

< 1 km

High

Yes/No

Railway/metro station,
bus stop

SAR

Ku/Ka band

< 10 m

Very high

No

Bus stop

PT, so as to discourage the access to overcrowded stations
and/or bus stops, and propose alternative travel solutions. In
our concept, the MPCSS is strongly integrated (and typically
colocated with) the ITS control system of the PT service
operator.
IV. T HE SENSING AND ACTUATOR SUBSYSTEM (SASS)
The transportation scenarios to be considered for the SASS
are essentially of three types:
1) train and bus/tram (indoor scenario);
2) railway/metro station (indoor/outdoor scenario);
3) bus station (mainly outdoor scenario).
In general, the sensing solutions to be adopted belong to
the crowd detection family introduced in Sec. II-A. They
can be classified [24] as visual-based (VB) solutions, based
on still or moving images acquired by optical, thermal, or
laser cameras, and non-visual based (NVB), which utilize
techniques not based on optical sensors (mainly RF devices).
The main characteristics of the available sensing solutions for
the different scenarios are summarized in Table I and will be
discussed in the forthcoming subsections.
Thanks to recent advances in AI, traditional optical, thermal
and laser VB sensors are becoming “smart” and can detect,
recognize, and identify persons. Optical cameras are widely
used in private and public spaces for surveillance and security.
Thermal cameras can detect people in low-light environments,
complete darkness, or other challenging conditions, such as
smoke-filled and dusty environments. Another option to detect
and track persons is represented by laser imaging detection and
ranging (LIDAR) sensors, especially in environments where
there are several interacting people. However, these systems

do not allow to estimate the number of present people with
sufficient accuracy, due to possible obstructions, clutter, and
poor light/weather conditions, and involve high deployment
costs in complex environments. Moreover, they require electrical power supply and may involve privacy problems. The
main advantage of VB technologies is that they do not require
cooperation/participation of the users.
Among NVB technologies, sensing systems based on mobile devices (also called crowdsensing or mobile sensing [25],
[26]) represent an interesting solution, due to the diffusion
of smartphones and other portable/wearable devices, such as
pedometers, smart watches, or biometrical sensors. On one
hand, compared to VB solutions, data collected by means of
device-aided NVB systems can be used not only to count
persons, but also to gather additional information, e.g., planned
routes, passengers using off-peak hours group ticket, and
so on. On the other hand, a problem inherent to deviceaided systems is that they usually require the cooperation
of the people who must agree to share their data (so called
participatory or collaborative sensing).
To motivate participation, it is sometimes needed to introduce incentive or reward mechanisms, or introduce radical
modifications in the procedures to access the PT service, such
as an authentication phase to use the transportation service.
Although this issue could raise significant privacy concerns, it
could also be useful as a means to increase the overall safety
of the PT systems, by reducing the risk that infected people
can access the system or the execution of possible crimes from
people already known to the police.
When device-aided NVB techniques cannot be used for
crowd characterization, due to, e.g., lack of user cooperation
and/or security issues, RF non-device aided approaches can

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH 2020

be pursued, by analyzing the propagation channel variations
of wireless signals (e.g. WiFi or LTE), which are induced by
the people present in a given spatial area. The impact of the
monitored people on the RF signal can be assessed either
using traditional radar methodologies (range and Doppler
analysis) or by analyzing features extracted by channel quality
measurements, such as RSSI and CSI.
A. Train and bus/tram
For vehicular scenarios, straightforward NVB solutions for
passenger counting are passive infrared sensors (IR). In this
case, a couple of IR emitter and receiver are mounted in
correspondence of each gate of the vehicle. A passive IR (PIR)
sensor can detect variations of the IR signal, depending on the
temperature and the characteristics of the surface interrupting
the beam. More generally, many technologies are available to
solve such a “crowd counting” problem in scenarios characterized by a well delimited space with a limited number of
accesses.
In the transportation community, APC systems [27] for rail
and road vehicles are widespread and mainly based on simple
technologies, such as counting from the number of AFC
or by using independent sensors, typically infrared (active)
or pyroelectric (passive) sensors, or combinations thereof,
aimed at detecting the passage of people at the gates. Other
techniques can be based on load sensors placed on the ground
or on the suspensions, or pressure-sensitive switches (“treadle
mats”) placed on the steps, or weigh-in-motion (WIM) systems, which estimate the number of passengers by the ground
loading of the vehicles detected before and after the stops.
More sophisticated techniques can also be employed, such as
camera-based systems or combined sensing (such as IR plus
RF or IR plus ultrasound).
As indicated in Table I, even though more sophisticated
NVB technologies may be used as well, their usage is not
expected to lead to significant innovations in this scenario,
compared to the aforementioned simpler solutions and systems
(i.e., PIR, APC, AFC, and WIM).
B. Railway/metro station
For this scenario, both VB and NVB technologies can be
applied, as reported in Table I. Among the latter ones, Near
Field Communication (NFC) represents a viable solution that
does not need to deploy special hardware [28]. Nowadays,
Android and iOS phones/tablets support this technology, by
allowing mobile devices to act as a NFC reader/scanner.
When a device with NFC functionality appears in the reader’s
working range, which can be placed at the gates or at any other
fixed access point, it “wakes up” and sends a signal containing
encoded data. The reader receives and decodes such data, and
sends them to a management entity.
Another interesting solution for such a scenario can be to
install 802.11 (WiFi) access points in the stations, and the
number of persons entering the stations can be estimated on
the basis of the number of connections established by the
user devices with the access points. In this case, the uplink
signals transmitted by the user devices are sniffed to capture

5

their network accesses and, thus, it can be categorized as a
device-aided solution. In contrast, without requiring aid to
the monitored devices, the number of users served by a WiFi
access point can be estimated by sniffing the downlink control
information transmitted by the access point and relying on the
fact that, as expected, there is a strong correlation between the
number of people in the considered area and the variations of
some features (e.g., RSSI and CSI) of the signal received by
a dedicated device designed as a people counter.
Similarly to WiFi networks, LTE signals can be used for
device-aided and non-device aided crowd counting, thanks to
their ubiquitous availability and good penetration in indoor
environments. For instance, they could be available in areas
where the WiFi coverage is not present, such as remote and
small railways/metro stations.
C. Bus stop
This scenario is by far the most difficult to manage, since
bus stops are usually located in outdoor space not well
delimited by fixed gates. Also in this case, both VB and
NVB systems can be used, but it is imperative to adopt costeffective, rugged and low-power solutions, in order to reduce
the maintenance cost, as well as solutions that do not require
significant infrastructures, since in many cases the bus stops
are not equipped with shelters and are indicated by simple
poles. Bluetooth can represent an efficient solution: recently,
a low-energy consumption version of the standard, called BLE,
has been introduced, which assures better communication
performances with a limited power consumption. So-called
Bluetooth beacons, namely, small transmitting devices that
transmit BLE signals to compatible devices, can be easily
installed at the bus stations, since they can be battery-powered
and are characterized by simpler flexibility and simplified
installation compared to WiFi. This solution relies on the same
technology introduced by Google and Apple in recent versions
of smartphone operating systems, and is used by many national
contact-tracing apps (e.g., Immuni for Italy [29]).
LTE and 5G signals can also be exploited for counting
people in bus stop environments. In particular, the deployment
of 5G wireless technology over the coming decade is expected
to rely on the introdution of many small cells working in
the millimeter-wave (MMW) band. From the viewpoint of
crowd analysis, the placement of small cells allows one to
more precisely monitor spatially limited areas, like bus stops,
with and without the aid of user devices. In addition, at
bus stops, microwave SAR tomography techniques [30], [31]
could provide specific images from which more detailed crowd
information can be extracted, by using complex image classification algorithms (i.e., count, distribution, mobility, etc.);
model issues induced by the intrinsic near-field scenario (e.g.,
typical for bus stops) could be overcome by using specialized
algorithms [32].
V. I NNOVATIONS AND ADVANTAGES PROVIDED BY THE
SALUTARY SYSTEM
The SALUTARY system can provide original and innovative functionalities that are not present in the legacy ITS:

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH 2020

6

Table II
M AIN ADVANTAGES OF THE ADOPTION OF SALUTARY SYSTEM .
Actor

Advantages

PT service operator (manager)

Having real-time crowding data of the different segments of the PT system
allows one to plan services more efficiently and to quickly readapt them to
tackle critical situations, localized in space and time

PT operators (drivers, inspectors, etc.)

The possibility to know in advance crowding situations at the bus stops or
stations allows one to tackle critical situations (planning for examples possible
holding, stop-skipping, or alternative routes)

Users

Knowing crowding situations allows one to use alternative means or to make
the trip in another hours, if not strictly necessary; by the reservation system,
if available, the users can access vehicles without unnecessary crowding at the
bus stops or stations

Police forces

Knowing in real-time and/or predicting possible crowds - potentially dangerous
for public health and/or for public order - allows one a more timely and targeted
intervention

Sanitary system

Smart reduction of crowding resulting from an agile management of the PT
system allows one to reduce the diffusion of infection and prevent further
outbreaks

General population

Reduction of private car usage, less pollution

Proactive control of station access: In railway/subway
applications, on the basis of the knowledge of the number
of passengers aboard the arriving trains and the prediction of
those getting off at the station, it will be possible to program
the number of station accesses with a low error margin and
in real-time. This number can be displayed at the users (by
displays at the station gates or by the mobile transport apps)
and can be used by the security operators to filter passengers
at the turnstiles. Priority policies can be envisioned, such
as taking into account the time already spent in queue, or
the trip motivations (e.g., a priority could be assured to
health workers, disabled or elder users, law enforcement, and
teachers/students).
Vehicle access reservation: In bus/tram trips, a vehicle
access reservation system can be implemented, wherein a
sensor at the bus stop detects the user presence and exchanges
information with its device (i.e, the smartphone), so as to
grant him/her the access to board the first arriving bus (a
virtual queuing system) or putting him/her in an overbooking
list (with priority) to allow him/her to board the next one.
The application can generate an e-ticket with the access grant
(e.g., a QR-code) that can be validated on board at the ticket
machine.
Crowding information dissemination: Users receive information related to capacity (in terms of number of seats or in
percentage) of the bus/trains in arrival and/or the crowding
at the bus stops/stations by means of displays installed in
correspondence of the bus stops or at the entrance of the
stations, or by alerts issued by mobile transport apps, so
as to avoid unnecessary waiting and crowding and possibly
reschedule their movements.
Crowd-aware route planning: Users can plan their trips
on the mobile transport app, by taking into account not only
geographical information and traveling times (static data), but
also traffic and crowding information about vehicles and bus
stops/stations during the trip (dynamic data). The app can

suggest not necessarily the shortest route, but the least crowded
one, taking into account also crowding levels measured during
the trip. Such a feature not only help reduce crowds and the
consequent infection risk, but also distribute more efficiently
the load on the transportation network.
At first sight, the SALUTARY system can be seen as a technique aimed at enforcing social distancing measures. However,
its scope is wider, since at the same time it tries to optimize
the performance of the PT system. In practice, the aim of
SALUTARY is to increase the flexibility and adaptability
of the PT system, to partially recover the drawbacks and
inefficiencies due to the adoption of rigid social distancing
measures, and to avoid the use of private cars with the obvious
negative impact on the air quality in urban areas. The main
advantages of SALUTARY system are summarized in Tab. II.
In addition, the SALUTARY system can also be used at the
end of the pandemic, allowing for more efficient planning and
real-time control of the operation of the PT system, compared
to static methods, like traditional survey-based compilation of
origin-destination matrix flows. The large amount of generated data can be used by AI and ML algorithms to better
understand and plan a series of aspects generally associated
with improvements of the quality of life in urban areas and
smart cities. The SALUTARY system can also be useful to
allow schools and universities to open as safely and quickly as
possible for in-person learning. Indeed, to enable schools and
universities to open and remain open, it is important to adopt
and implement actions to slow down the spread of COVID19, not only inside the school, but also in the PT system, by
optimally and dynamically adjusting transport timetables.
VI. C ONCLUSIONS
We presented in this paper the main functionalities and
some potential applications of the SALUTARY system concept. In particular, system-level considerations were reported
to corroborate the feasibility of integrating state-of-the-art
wireless IoT technologies into the different segments of the

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH 2020

PT infrastructure. The proposed system is based on some basic
components and subsystems, to be used as building blocks to
implement an evolved ITS, capable of real-time monitoring
and predicting crowd situations, as well as disseminating
useful information to users at the bus stops/stations and/or
through mobile transport apps.
Some features of the SALUTARY system are similar to
those of a contact tracing system, which can be implemented
more easily if based on user cooperation. In this sense, the
crowd detection functionalities can be incorporated in a more
complex system, which can implement, besides the typical
mobile transport app functionalities (like Moovit) also the
possibility to buy tickets, to reserve the access to the vehicles,
in conditions of particular crowding. This could represent a
decisive incentive to the use of the system. However, the more
appropriate crowd sensing solution must be singled out caseby-case, in dependence on the ICT infrastructure owned by
the PT operator, of the socio-economic context, and the costbenefits ratio.
The potentials of the SALUTARY system go beyond the
scope of dealing with typical social distancing problems, by
potentially allowing real-time optimization and management
of the PT system. For instance, the success in preventing
the introduction and subsequent transmission of COVID-19 in
schools and universities is strongly dependent on preventing
disease transmission in the PT system used by students,
families, teachers, school staff, and all community members.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the IEEE ComSoc/VTS
Italian Chapter for supporting this work by awarding the first
prize to the SALUTARY proposal within the call for ideas in
response to COVID-19 outbreak in Italy.
R EFERENCES
[1] Ipsos, “Impact of coronavirus to new car purchase in
China,” Mar. 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.ipsos.com/en/
impact-coronavirus-new-car-purchase-china
[2] P. Coppola and F. De Fabiis, “Evolution of mobility sector during and
beyond Covid-19 emergency: a viewpoint of industry consultancies
and public transport companies,” TeMA - Journal of Land Use,
Mobility and Environment, pp. 81–90, Jun. 2020. [Online]. Available:
http://www.serena.unina.it/index.php/tema/article/view/6900
[3] C. Iliopoulou and K. Kepaptsoglou, “Combining ITS and optimization
in public transportation planning: state of the art and future research
paths,” European Transport Research Review, vol. 11, no. 1, p. 27, May
2019. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12544-019-0365-5
[4] G. E. Sánchez-Martínez, H. N. Koutsopoulos, and N. H. M. Wilson,
“Real-time holding control for high-frequency transit with dynamics,”
Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, vol. 83, pp. 1–19,
2016. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S019126151500257X
[5] V. Chamola, V. Hassija, V. Gupta, and M. Guizani, “A comprehensive
review of the COVID-19 pandemic and the role of IoT, drones, AI,
blockchain, and 5G in managing its impact,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp.
90 225–90 265, 2020.
[6] C. T. Nguyen, Y. M. Saputra, N. V. Huynh, N. Nguyen, T. V. Khoa,
B. M. Tuan, D. N. Nguyen, D. T. Hoang, T. X. Vu, E. Dutkiewicz,
S. Chatzinotas, and B. Ottersten, “A comprehensive survey of enabling
and emerging technologies for social distancingâĂŤPart I: Fundamentals
and enabling technologies,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 153 479–153 507,
2020.

7

[7] C. T. Nguyen, Y. M. Saputra, N. Van Huynh, N. Nguyen, T. V. Khoa,
B. M. Tuan, D. N. Nguyen, D. T. Hoang, T. X. Vu, E. Dutkiewicz,
S. Chatzinotas, and B. Ottersten, “A comprehensive survey of enabling
and emerging technologies for social distancing âĂŤ Part II: Emerging
technologies and open issues,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 154 209–
154 236, 2020.
[8] M. Cantwell, B. Caulfield, and M. O’Mahony, “Examining the factors
that impact upon public transport commuting stress,” Journal of Public
Transportation, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 1–21, 2009.
[9] M. S. Kaiser, K. T. Lwin, M. Mahmud, D. Hajializadeh, T. Chaipimonplin, A. Sarhan, and M. A. Hossain, “Advances in crowd analysis for
urban applications through urban event detection,” IEEE Transactions
on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 19, no. 10, pp. 3092–3112,
2018.
[10] A. Thiagarajan, J. Biagioni, T. Gerlich, and J. Eriksson, “Cooperative
transit tracking using smart-phones,” in Proceedings of the 8th ACM
Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems, ser. SenSys ’10.
New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2010, pp.
85–98. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/1869983.1869993
[11] P. Zhou, Y. Zheng, and M. Li, “How long to wait? predicting bus arrival
time with mobile phone based participatory sensing,” IEEE Transactions
on Mobile Computing, vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 1228–1241, 2014.
[12] M. Handte, M. U. Iqbal, S. Wagner, W. Apolinarski, P. J. Marrón,
E. M. Muñoz Navarro, S. Martinez, S. Izquierdo Barthelemy, and
M. González Fernández, “Crowd density estimation for public transport
vehicles,” in Proceedings of the Workshops of the EDBT/ICDT
2014 Joint Conference (EDBT/ICDT 2014), Athens, Greece, March
28, 2014, vol. 1133, 2014, pp. 315–322. [Online]. Available:
http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1133/paper-51.pdf
[13] M. Handte, S. Foell, S. Wagner, G. Kortuem, and P. J. Marrón, “An
Internet-of-Things enabled connected navigation system for urban bus
riders,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 3, no. 5, pp. 735–744,
Oct. 2016.
[14] K. Farkas, G. Feher, A. Benczur, and C. Sidlo, “Crowdsending based
public transport information service in smart cities,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 53, pp. 158–165, Aug. 2015.
[15] F. Brockmann, M. Handte, and P. J. MarrÃşn, “CutiQueue: people
counting in waiting lines using Bluetooth low energy based passive
presence detection,” in 2018 14th International Conference on Intelligent
Environments (IE), 2018, pp. 1–8.
[16] I. Sobron, J. Del Ser, I. Eizmendi, and M. VÃl’lez, “Device-free
people counting in IoT environments: New insights, results, and open
challenges,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 4396–
4408, 2018.
[17] M. De Sanctis, T. Rossi, S. Di Domenico, E. Cianca, G. Ligresti, and
M. Ruggieri, “LTE signals for device-free crowd density estimation
through CSI secant set and SVD,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 159 943–
159 951, 2019.
[18] M. M. Hamed, H. R. Al-Masaeid, and Z. M. B. Said, “Short-term
prediction of traffic volume in urban arterials,” Journal of Transportation
Engineering, vol. 121, no. 3, pp. 249–254, 1995.
[19] H. Chang, Y. Lee, B. Yoon, and S. Baek, “Dynamic near-term traffic
flow prediction: system-oriented approach based on past experiences,”
IET Intelligent Transport Systems, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 292–305, 2012.
[20] Y. Jeong, Y. Byon, M. M. Castro-Neto, and S. M. Easa, “Supervised
weighting-online learning algorithm for short-term traffic flow prediction,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 14,
no. 4, pp. 1700–1707, 2013.
[21] A. Nuzzolo, U. Crisalli, A. Comi, and L. Rosati, “A mesoscopic
transit assignment model including real-time predictive information on
crowding,” Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 20, no. 4,
pp. 316–333, 2016.
[22] J. Zhang, D. Shen, L. Tu, F. Zhang, C. Xu, Y. Wang, C. Tian, X. Li,
B. Huang, and Z. Li, “A real-time passenger flow estimation and
prediction method for urban bus transit systems,” IEEE Transactions
on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 18, no. 11, pp. 3168–3178,
2017.
[23] E. Jenelius, “Data-driven metro train crowding prediction based on
real-time load data,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 2254–2265, 2020.
[24] M. Irfan, L. Marcenaro, and L. Tokarchuk, “Crowd analysis using visual
and non-visual sensors, a survey,” in 2016 IEEE Global Conference on
Signal and Information Processing (GlobalSIP). IEEE, 2016, pp. 1249–
1254.
[25] A. Capponi, C. Fiandrino, B. Kantarci, L. Foschini, D. Kliazovich, and
P. Bouvry, “A survey on mobile crowdsensing systems: Challenges, so-

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH 2020

[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]
[30]

[31]

[32]

lutions, and opportunities,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2419–2465, 2019.
J. Phuttharak and S. W. Loke, “A review of mobile crowdsourcing
architectures and challenges: Toward crowd-empowered Internet-ofThings,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 304–324, 2019.
I. Pinna, B. Dalla Chiara, and F. P. Deflorio, “Automatic passenger
counting and vehicle load monitoring,” Ingegneria Ferroviaria, vol. 65,
no. 2, pp. 101–138, 2010.
R. Want, “Near field communication,” IEEE Pervasive Computing,
vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 4–7, 2011.
“Immuni documentation,” Tech. Rep. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.immuni.italia.it/
A. Reigber, E. Alivizatos, A. Potsis, and A. Moreira, “Extended
wavenumber-domain synthetic aperture radar focusing with integrated
motion compensation,” IEE Proceedings - Radar, Sonar and Navigation,
vol. 153, no. 3, pp. 301–310, 2006.
A. Capozzoli, G. D’Elia, A. Liseno, P. Vinetti, M. Nannini, A. Reigber,
R. Scheiber, and V. Severino, “SAR tomography with optimized constellation and its application to forested scenes,” Fondazione Giorgio
Ronchi, vol. LXV, no. 3, pp. 367–375, 2010.
A. Capozzoli, C. Curcio, I. Iudice, A. Liseno, and S. Savarese, “Fast
imaging of vegetation on GPUs based on Non-Uniform FFTs,” in 2011
International Conference on Electromagnetics in Advanced Applications,
2011, pp. 1205–1208.

8

