Not sure? Handling hesitancy of COVID-19 vaccines
N.F. Johnson1,*, N. Velásquez2, R. Leahy2,3, N. Johnson Restrepo2,3, O. Jha1, Y. Lupu4
1Physics Department, George Washington University, Washington D.C. 20052
2Institute for Data, Democracy and Politics, George Washington University, Washington D.C. 20052
3ClustrX LLC, Washington D.C.
4Department of Political Science, George Washington University, Washington D.C. 20052
* neiljohnson@gwu.edu
From the moment the first COVID-19 vaccines are rolled out, there will need to be a large fraction
of the global population ready in line. It is therefore crucial to start managing the growing global
hesitancy to any such COVID-19 vaccine. The current approach of trying to convince the "no"s
cannot work quickly enough, nor can the current policy of trying to find, remove and/or rebut all
the individual pieces of COVID and vaccine misinformation. Instead, we show how this can be done
in a simpler way by moving away from chasing misinformation content and focusing instead on
managing the "yes--no--not-sure" hesitancy ecosystem.
Only 42 percent of Americans in the September YouGov poll1 said "yes" to receiving a future COVID
vaccine, down from May across all political sides. That means that even in a best-case scenario where a
future high performing vaccine is 80% effective in an individual, it would only impact 42x80=34% of the
population which is way below predicted thresholds for herd immunity. Worse, current narratives within
online social media communities and media interviews2 suggest that many of these "yes" respondents
would say "no" to being first in line.

Fig. 1: Hesitancy ecosystem. A: Evolution of pro (Blue), anti (Red) and "not sure" (Green) vaccine views within
communities (nodes) on Facebook during COVID. Methodology and layout same as Ref. 6. Each node is a Facebook Page
with 10-1,000,000+ members. Black circles show nodes that changed color, i.e. changed their vaccine view. There are
currently many additional nodes which are Green but for clarity are not shown. B: Our empirically grounded ecosystem
model. Each subpopulation comprises nodes of a given color from A. C: The model's four predicted futures depend on
the policy choice being made, i.e. they depend on the messaging activity coupling values (𝒈𝑩 , 𝒈𝑹 , 𝒓𝑩 ). For illustration, the
couplings here are (𝟏. 𝟎, 𝟒. 𝟎, 𝟏. 𝟎), (−𝟐. 𝟑, 𝟎. 𝟓, 𝟏. 𝟎), (−𝟐. 𝟎, −𝟎. 𝟓, −𝟏. 𝟎), (−𝟎. 𝟓, 𝟎. 𝟓, −𝟐. 𝟓). Each type of outcome is an exact
solution of the model in B (see Supporting Online Material SOM) and is robust in the parameter space.

1

Such a high level of hesitancy risks everyone's health3,4,5 and hopes of a 'return to normal'. It risks the
diversity of volunteers for Phase III trials, and the billions of dollars allocated to vaccine development. It
risks the likelihood of people accepting future COVID booster shots. And it undermines trust in existing
vaccines for other diseases, as well as more general public health advice.
Trying to change the minds of hardcore "no"s1 will be too slow and too hard. Not only has anti-vaccination
sentiment been around since vaccines were first created, our study of the social media ecosystem shows
that anti-vaccination communities actually grew6 in size and resilience during 2019 -- despite the fact that
measles outbreaks were proliferating throughout 2019 and despite the fact that the measles vaccine
already exists and has a strong safety record. Worse, their opposition to a future COVID vaccine has now
gone into overdrive (Fig. 1A, red nodes). They won't be changing their minds any time soon.
A better approach is to focus on the "not sures": and we don't just mean the 31% who specifically
responded "not sure" in the latest poll1, but also the large number of "yes" respondents who say they will
delay receiving the vaccine until others have had it. Our analysis of the online Facebook ecosystem -- of
which the poll appears crudely representative -- reveals well in excess of 100 million such "concerned"
individuals. Each is a member of a community comprising 10-1,000,000 like-minded fans of a particular
topic that is typically unrelated to vaccines, e.g. pet lovers, parent school groups, yoga fans, foodies or
alternative health followers (green nodes, Fig. 1A). Since members of the same community tend to trust
each other on this one topic or lifestyle choice (e.g. pet care, best choice of kindergarten, wine or organic
blueberries), they also tend to listen when their community starts talking or posting about COVID and
vaccines. And their growing collective concern has led their community to form links with antivaccination communities (red nodes, Fig. 1A).
But how to reduce the hesitancy of these "concerned" communities?
Misinformation minefield
Given the vicious circle of hesitancy and misinformation, one might try ramping up the current contentfocused policy approach of labeling, removing or debunking specific stories. But this is not practical given
the escalating number and nature of such stories and the need to act now before vaccine rollout. It may
also backfire. Take the often cited story that Bill Gates is planning to put semiconductor markers into
COVID vaccines, so that medical records can be scanned from our families' foreheads at school or work
like a can of supermarket soup. Both elements are indeed true: semiconductor quantum dots7 can be
excellent biomarkers, and The Gates Foundation has been involved in funding related research as well as
COVID vaccine development. So while there is zero likelihood this story will play out, it is in principle
possible scientifically. So classifying it as 'misinformation' and removing it could spark claims of stifling
free speech, while saying it is 'wrong science' amplifies the debate of what is 'right science'. Both fuel the
misinformation fire and both are now rampant within the "concerned" communities (green nodes).
Worse, Facebook itself cannot find all misinformation within its own platform. Leaving pieces untouched
can wrongly suggest to users that they are true. Moreover, misinformation also flows freely within and
between other platforms such as 4Chan which are beyond Facebook's control8. So to do all this well,
public health agencies and vaccine manufacturers would have to become more expert in social media
than Facebook -- which is again impossible.
Then come the content flavors. The entire establishment health enterprise ("Blue", Fig. 1B) can do little
more than put out statements that are scientifically correct, which means almost by definition that they
are quite standard and plain: vanilla. By contrast, the anti-establishment health subpopulation ("Red", Fig.
1B) collectively offers the concerned-and-engaged subpopulation ("Green", Fig. 1B) all sorts of tempting
flavors of narrative. These range from the lack of any long-term safety record for a COVID vaccine, which
2

is of course technically true; to claims that the human immune system offers a superior form of resistance,
which is also hard to disprove given the lack of understanding COVID biology; to claims of hidden agendas
of governments and big pharma, which again is hard to disprove given the highly political nature of the
COVID vaccine race and the billions being invested to secure future batches; to the fact that science is still
struggling to give precise answers to seemingly straightforward (but actually highly complex) questions
such as best-choices for school opening hours, numbers in a class, and mask design.
Blue cannot hope to win such a content-chasing war quickly enough for vaccine rollout. It would get
bogged down in virtual whack-a-mole across the ever-expanding multiverse of interconnected social
media platforms, with an ever-expanding set of stories to tackle as different vaccine candidates from
different countries come online and different political decisions loom.
More when and less what
Here we suggest a more immediate and less resource-intensive approach that leverages what proestablishment messaging (Blue) already has at its disposal, i.e. when to engage in messaging and at what
level in terms of volume. Red and Green feed off of Blue's activity, and Green also feeds off of Red (Fig.
1B). Figure 1C shows how powerful the approach of managing the ecosystem could be using a simple,
undergraduate level model (Fig. 1B) that combines Newman's gossip model9 and Strogatz's relationship
dynamics model10, and which is backed up by empirical findings and theory from studies of online
opinion formation11 and conflicts12 as well as Ref. 6. There are very few parameters (Fig. 1B) and each is
physically meaningful. Most importantly, this simple model reproduces the main features of the evolution
of the Reds, Blues and Greens from the start of COVID until now (see SOM).
The advantages of this type of ecosystem analysis for policymakers are that the predictions are available
as precise, plug-and-play formulae (see SOM) that can be evaluated by hand or using a simple calculator
app on a phone. No computer simulations or coding required. Interestingly, it predicts 4 distinct classes of
outcomes and hence 4 classes of policy (Fig. 1C), each of which could be implemented immediately as
discussed below.
Policy predictions
As with any other issue such as climate change, framing policy discussions in terms of calculated
behaviors with quantifiable and testable predictions, is far more powerful than vaguer verbal arguments
about what might work. Immediate action is essential: if left to carry on as is, Fig. 1A predicts Red's
stronghold will not only continue growing, it will draw in and likely tip an increasing fraction of Greens
which will seriously undermine all future COVID vaccine rollouts and renewals.
Policies 1-4 show the trade-offs for Blue: on the one hand, Blue must get communities such as pet lovers
and yoga fans away from concern about COVID and vaccines, and back to back to their real interests, i.e.
reduce the green curve in Fig. 1C. At the same time, it must keep the red curve under control (Red). And it
must do all this using the blunt instrument of its own messaging activity and without feeding the
infodemic frenzy, i.e. Blue's average output must remain steady (blue curve).
Policy 1 shows what happens if Blue mirrors Red and Green's messaging activity, in the scenario that Red
and Green are also doing the same to each other, i.e. the couplings in Fig. 1B are all positive (𝑔! , 𝑔" , 𝑟! >
0). This is like becoming louder when the other is loud, and quieter when the other is quiet. The
"concerned"s green curve initially increases and hence gets worse, but then settles to a stable value. Red
activity drops to a lower steady value. While not a dramatic improvement in overall hesitancy, it is in
principle possible to choose the positive coupling values such that total support is above the estimated
herd immunity threshold. Policymakers would however have to warn the public that things will initially
feel slightly worse before improving.

3

Policy 2 differs from Policy 1 in that it shows what happens if Blue has high messaging activity levels
when Green is low and vice versa (𝑔! < 0). This is like becoming louder when the other is quiet, and
quieter when the other is loud. Though Red activity drops which is desirable, Green escalates dramatically
which is undesirable.
Policy 3 is the opposite of Policy 1 in that Blue, Red and Green all have negative feedback (𝑔! , 𝑔" , 𝑟! < 0).
So they become louder when the others are quiet and vice versa. The outcome is good all round: not only
does Red activity drop to a steady state, Green drops dramatically and keeps decreasing over time.
Policy 4 differs from Policy 3 in that Red and Green now have positive feedback (𝑔" > 0), so Red and
Green become louder when the other is loud, and quieter when the other is quiet. This policy has the
advantage over Policy 3 in that both Red and Green eventually both keep decreasing over time. However
Green initially gets worse, before then showing a turning point which can be calculated and hence
predicted exactly.
Which of these 4 policies is most suitable will depend on the current value of the couplings in Fig. 1B. But
the key is that they can each be analyzed and compared ahead of implementation on a case-by-case basis
depending on Blue's level of control of the various parameters in Fig. 1B, using the plug-and-play
formulae in the SOM. Hence the system can be nudged toward the estimates required for herd immunity.
Beyond vaccines
These policies also apply to other situations where there is competition between establishment
messaging (Blue), anti-establishment messaging (Red) and a background population (Green) whose
'hearts and minds' can tip the balance13,14. For example, it could help with the contentious climate-change
narratives that are circulating concerning the September 2020 wildfires in California -- and it could kickstart the needed public engagement before quantum information technologies are unleashed15. Also the
analysis doesn't just apply to hesitancy online. Working with epidemiologists, more detail can be added to
Fig. 1B by incorporating details of how communities are interconnected within each subpopulation and
how the messaging spreads, hence yielding a fuller theory of infodemic spreading within a heterogeneous
population16,17. Moreover, the role of specific content could be included using machine learning18, with
different types of misinformation having different coupling values in Fig. 1B, while cleverer use of human
psychology could enhance the model's realism19,20,21.

4

References
https://today.yougov.com/topics/politics/articles-reports/2020/09/03/fast-tracking-vaccine
Crow, D. et al. Why the anti-vaxxer movement is gaining ground amid a pandemic. The Straits Times. Aug 28, 2020.
https://qoshe.com/the-straits-times-sg/david-crow-and-kiran-stacey/why-the-anti-vaxxer-movement-is-gainingground-amid-a-pandemic/83352202
3 Larson, H. A lack of information can become misinformation. Nature, 580, 306 (2020)
4 DiResta, R. Of virality and viruses: the anti-vaccine movement and social media. NAPSNet Special Reports
https://nautilus.org/napsnet/napsnet-special-reports/of-virality-and- viruses-the-anti-vaccine-movement-andsocial-media/ (8 November 2018)
5 Starbird, K. et al. Misinformation, Crisis, and Public Health—Reviewing the Literature V1.0. Social Science Research
Council. MediaWell June 25, 2020. https://mediawell.ssrc.org/literature-reviews/misinformation-crisis-and-publichealth. http://doi.org/10.35650/MD.2063.d.2020
6 Johnson, N.F. et al. The online competition between pro- and anti-vaccination views. Nature 582, 230 (2020)
7 Johnson, N.F. Quantum dots; few-body, low-dimensional systems. J. Phys.: Condens. Matt. 7, 965 (1995)
8 Velasquez, N. et al. Hate multiverse spreads malicious COVID-19 content online beyond individual platform control
(2020). Available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.00673
9 Newman, M. Networks. Oxford University Press (2018). ISBN 978-0198805090
10 Strogatz, S. Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos. CRC Press (2015). ISBN 978-0813349107
11 Johnson, N.F. et al. Emergent dynamics of extremes in a population driven by common information sources and
new social media algorithms. Sci Rep 9, 11895 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-48412-w
12 Zhao, Z. et al. Anomalously slow attrition times for asymmetric populations with internal group dynamics. Physical
Review Letters 103, 148701 (2009)
13 Brown, R. et al. Counteracting Dangerous Narratives in the Time of COVID-19. Over Zero (2020).
https://projectoverzero.org/newsandpublications
14 Onnela, J.P. et al. Structure and tie strengths in mobile communication networks. PNAS 104, 7332-7336 (2007).
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0610245104
15 Saddiqi, I. et al. Quantum for All. Physics 13, 143 (2020). Available at
https://physics.aps.org/articles/v13/143?utm_campaign=weekly&utm_medium=email&utm_source=emailalert
16 Johnson, N.F. et al. Covid-19 infodemic reveals new tipping point epidemiology and a revised R formula. Available
at https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.08513
17 Bessi, A. et al. Science vs conspiracy: Collective narratives in the age of misinformation. PLoS One, 10(2) e0118093
(2015). https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article%3Fid%3D10.1371/journal.pone.0118093
18 Sear, R.F. et al. Quantifying COVID-19 Content in the Online Health Opinion War Using Machine Learning. IEEE
Access 8, 91886-91893 (2020). doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2993967
19 Gelfand M.J. et al. The Strength of Social Norms Across Human Groups. Perspectives On Psychological Science. 12,
800-809 (2017). DOI: 10.1177/1745691617708631
20 Fowler, J.H. et al. Dynamic spread of happiness in a large social network: longitudinal analysis over 20 years in
the Framingham Heart Study. BMJ 337 (2008). doi: https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.a2338
21 Lazer, D.M.J. et al. The science of fake news. Science 359, 1094–1096 (2018).
1
2

5

Supporting Online Material (SOM)

1. Overview of the equations used for the example outputs in Fig. 1C

To predict policy impacts (Fig. 1C) we then simply run the model forward using realistic parameters for the current
instant in time. For simplicity here, let's suppose that Blue will continue to put out scientific messaging and advice as
the COVID vaccine research develops. This output does not depend on the gossip going on within Red and Green,
hence the direction of the arrow and coupling in the model. Green absorbs this (see SI) and to some extent so does
Red, but Red also has its own activity toward Blue and Green. So the couplings 𝑔! and 𝑟" (Fig. 1B) are largely in
Red's control, not in Blue's. Hence Fig. 1C focuses on Blue only being able to control its activity level with respect to
Green, 𝑔" , and then only in some limited way. A positive coupling between two populations means they will tend to
synchronize their activity, while negative means they will tend to become out of sync.

2. Proof that the model reproduces the features in the empirical data during 2020, despite have very few
parameters.
Shown here is the actual data (left panels) and model predictions (right panels) for the number of communities (i.e.
clusters, each of which is a node in Fig. 1A) for (top) the number of clusters that are subscribers to other clusters
that are broadcasting COVID narratives and hence 'listening to COVID narratives', and (bottom) the number of
clusters that are broadcasting COVID narratives to other clusters and hence 'talking COVID narratives'.

6

3. More details about the predicted policy result in Fig. 1C

7

4. The exact formulae that produce the predicted policy results in Fig. 1C

8

9

