1

5G Technologies Based Remote E-Health:
Architecture, Applications, and Solutions

arXiv:2009.02131v1 [cs.NI] 4 Sep 2020

Wei Duan† , Yancheng Ji† , Yan Zhang§ , Guoan Zhang† , Valerio Frascolla‡ and Xin Li♭

†

School of Information Science and Technology,
Nantong University, Nantong 226000, China

§

Maternity and Child Care Hospital, Edong Medical Group, Huangshi 435000, China
‡

Division of Research and Innovation, Intel Corporation
♭

Department of Physical Education,

Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450000, China
Email: sinder@ntu.edu.cn, jiyancheng@ntu.edu.cn, yzhang edong@hotmail.com,
gzhang@ntu.edu.cn, valerio.frascolla@intel.com, xinlibox@zzu.edu.cn

Abstract
Currently, many countries are facing the problems of aging population, serious imbalance of medical
resources supply and demand, as well as uneven geographical distribution, resulting in a huge demand for
remote e-health. Particularly, with invasions of COVID-19, the health of people and even social stability
have been challenged unprecedentedly. To contribute to these urgent problems, this article proposes a
general architecture of the remote e-health, where the city hospital provides the technical supports
and services for remote hospitals. Meanwhile, 5G technologies supported telemedicine is introduced
to satisfy the high-speed transmission of massive multimedia medical data, and further realize the
sharing of medical resources. Moreover, to turn passivity into initiative to prevent COVID-19, a broad
area epidemic prevention and control scheme is also investigated, especially for the remote areas. We
discuss their principles and key features, and foresee the challenges, opportunities, and future research
trends. Finally, a node value and content popularity based caching strategy is introduced to provide a
preliminary solution of the massive data storage and low-latency transmission.

2

I. I NTRODUCTION
With the extreme unbalanced distribution of medical resources, there is a big gap between the
developed areas and economically backward areas in terms of the equipment, technology service
quality of medical, resulting in rapid demands for telemedicine [1]. The original intention of
telemedicine is to improve the popularity of medical and health services via telecommunication
for medics [2]. With the strong support of market policy and progress of wireless technology,
telemedicine has been developed significantly [3]. Currently, relying on the advanced communication and computer technologies to transmit the data, voice, image, video and other information,
telemedicine can realize the treatment, diagnosis, health care and consultation in real-time for
the remote patients, as well as provide the education and training for remote medics, which
breaks the space and time limitations [3], [4]. Moreover, the telemedicine not only changes
the medical experience for patients, but also improves the medic-patient relationship. When the
patients seek medical treatment, the medic will take their emotions into account to strive for
positive treatment evaluations. It is easy to see that, telemedicine will break the barriers among
different industries, optimize the medical service process, improve the overall service efficiency,
and constantly resolve the problems provided by complicated medical procedures.
As the core support of telemedicine, with decades of development and continuous consumption
upgrading, the wireless communication technology has completed the evolutions from 1G to 5G
[5]–[7]. It realizes the high-quality transmission of three dimensional images to provide highquality video servicesdata acquisition, positioning, remote diagnosis and treatment and other
fusion functions in real-time. Compared with other generations of wireless communications,
5G has advantages in terms of the low latency, high reliability and mobility, providing great
opportunity for the development of telemedicine [8]. On the basis of traditional medicine, 5G
technologies based telemedicine integrates mobile communication, Internet, Internet of things
(IoT) [7], cloud computing, big data, artificial intelligence (AI) [9] and other advanced information and communication technologies, applying to the remote surgery, remote consultation,
remote health monitoring and emergency command. In particular, telemedicine will provide more
choices and ways for rescue, especially in the fast moving state of vehicle and harsh environment.
It worth noting that, since that the 5G technology, business model and industrial ecology are
still evolving and exploring, the architecture, system design and landing mode of telemedicine
are not completed. These arise the following problems problems: The imperfect overall planning,

3

and the problem of cross departmental coordination; lack of technical verification and feasibility
study; inconsistent medical standards; privacy security [6], [10]. On the other hand, with the
spread of COVID-19 [11], [12], physical and mental health of people has been greatly impacted,
leading to that the concern of people has gradually transferred from the disease treatment to
disease prevention and health management. Moreover, in order to realize remote sharing of
medical resources, the massive data storage and data redundancy will bring great load to the
server. With these observations, the goal of this article is to provide a potential solution to realize
5G technologies-based remote e-health, spanning from the general architecture and framework
of telemedicine, to satisfy the high-speed transmission of massive multimedia medical data and
realize the sharing of medical resources. In order to track and control the spread of the COVID19, the broad area epidemic prevention and control (BAEPC) design for COVID-19 is proposed,
as well as the node value and content popularity (NVCP) based caching strategy is investigated
to overcome the massive data storage and low-latency transmission issues.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. First, we provide a general architecture of the
remote e-health. Then the 5G technologies based telemedicine framework is introduced for the
remote hospital. Moreover, a broad area epidemic prevention and control scheme is investigated
to prevent COVID-19, as well as the node value and content popularity based caching strategy
is studied. Finally, we draw the main conclusions and interesting future research.
II. T HE

PROPOSED

R EMOTE E-H EALTH A RCHITECTURE

Relying on computer technology and remote sensing, telemetry, remote control technologies,
telemedicine gives play to advantages of medical technologies and equipments in city hospital
to conduct remote diagnosis, treatment and consultation for patients in remote areasi.e., remote
imaging, remote nursing and other medical activities. The proposed remote e-health architecture
based on cloud network is shown in Fig. 1, which consists of the city hospital and many
corresponding remote hospitals. The concepts of the proposed architecture is that, with the
internet as link, grading diagnosis and treatment as the core and the substance hospital as the
support, the remote hospitals and advanced city hospitals will be connected to this platform. By
this way, the remote hospitals can also enjoy the remote outpatient service, expert appointment,
electronic prescription, online payment and other fast services through the internet. As the brain,
the city hospital provides the technical supports and services for these remote hospitals, in the
meanwhile that the remote hospitals share information and data for each other according to the

4

Medic

School, Factory,
Private Clinic

Patient

Intelligent Device

Remote Hospital

Remote Hospital

Intelligent Ambulance

City Hospital
Remote Hospital
Remote Hospital

Remote
Cooperative
Diagnostics

Consultation

Remote
Consultation

Medical
Record

Emergency
Situation

Fig. 1. Illustration of the remote e-health architecture.

networks, to improve the utilization of medical resources. For the city hospital, the details of
the processing strategies can be summarized as follows:
•

When a request for medical help from a remote hospital is received, according to the
received contents, i.e., the images, voices and videos for the patients, the city hospital
rapidly makes decisions and corresponding measures to cooperatively help remote hospital
curing the patients, through the existing advanced technologies and equipments.

•

For the difficult miscellaneous diseases, the city hospital convenes experts and relevant
medics to hold the consultation. Moreover, for very special and difficult cases, the remote
consultation with other advanced city hospitals will be adopted. When the specific treatment
plan is formulated, the city hospital will promptly contact and assist the remote hospital to
take corresponding measures. In the meanwhile, the electronic medical record is established.

•

According to the progress of conditions of the patients, the electronic medical record will
be updated in real-time, until the patient is fully recovered. The electronic medical records

5

are also shared with the remote hospitals for follow-up actions and future study. Moreover,
for emergencies, the city hospital will dispatch the intelligent ambulance and medics to the
remote hospitals.
All the city and remote hospitals will share and update the information through the cloud network.
Clearly, the use of telemedicine not only significantly reduce the time and cost of the diagnosis
and treatment, but also can well manage and distribute emergency medical services in remote
areas. Specifically, it can make medics break through the limitation of geographical scope and
share the case and diagnosis photos of patients, which is conducive to the development of clinical
research. In addition, it can provide a better medical education for medics in remote areas.
Since that the telemedicine technology is in its development stage, the design of its architecture
and corresponding strategies are different from the traditional medical system. The key issues
and challenges for telemedicine are generally summarized as follows:
•

Privacy security: Any breakthrough in science and technology has to face the problem of
security, the telemedicine technology is no exception. If the medics or medical equipments
do not consider the security of electronic data of patients, once these data are transmitted
and leaked through the Internet, it will cause irreparable security risks. Therefore, it is
necessary that, adopting 5G technology and network security methods to authenticate,
encrypt and protect the intelligent medical equipment for privacy preservations. Only by
taking precautions in advance, remote medical can realize the transformation from the
passive defense to active response.

•

Medical data and resource sharing: Medical data and resource sharing can not only help
the rapid development of the telemedicine technology, but also significantly alleviate the
shortage of medics. However, when telemedicine is performed, it has to connect to Internet,
and in this docking process, the systems of hospitals are relatively closed; the electronic
systems of different hospitals are built by different enterprises; and there exists barriers
between these systems among enterprises, resulting in a difficult integration for the data
from different hospitals. Therefore, how to reasonably and legally realize the sharing of
massive medical data to the Internet is still an open problem and challenge.

•

Massive connectivity and data cache: With the commercial application of 5G, the realtime data transmission problem for telemedicine technology has been solved in some degree,
eliminating the barriers and distance for medical communication. However, the massive

6

E-Health
Education

E-Health Care

Remote
Consultation

Wearable
Medical
Devices

City Hospital

Remote Hospital

5G Network
Mobile Doctor

Remote Hospital

5G Based GPS

Remote Hospital

Remote Operation

Remote Assistance
(Operation)

Intelligent Ambulance

Fig. 2. 5G technologies based telemedicine framework.

connectivity from the medical devices, intelligent devices and remote hospitals, as well
as the cache of the massive medical data challenges the existing spectrum resources and
network structure. Therefore, it is necessary to adopt the technologies with the excellent
spectrum efficiency and effective cache capacity.
III. 5G T ECHNOLOGIES BASED T ELEMEDICINE F RAMEWORK
On the basis of traditional medicine, 5G technologies based telemedicine integrates wireless
communication technology of smart equipment and high-speed mobile communication technology in various modes, which can realize the operation of remote surgery, remote consultation,
patient monitoring, command and decision-making for emergency rescue events. Moreover, 5Gbased telemedicine can also support the high-speed transmission of massive multimedia medical
data, and further realize the sharing of medical resources. With this prospect, as shown in Fig.
2, the remote hospital is readily allowed the patients, local medics, schools, factories, personal
devices and local intelligent ambulances access to its server to apply the medical resources and
share the medical data.

7

Nowadays, medical service has changed from the disease treatment to health care, meanwhile,
the disease prevention and health management are becoming increasingly important. With the
wearable medical devices and mobile private doctor, people can know their personal physical
signs, i.e., blood pressure, heart rate and temperature, at any time and any where to enjoy
high quality health services and e-health education. In addition, through the monitoring of these
devices, medical institutions and medics can take the initiative to find individuals and groups
with abnormal health status, and give health risk tips, health improvement or medical measures
suggestions in advance. In this manner, the hospitals can improve diagnosis efficiency, and
residents can reduce the cost of health consultation. In addition, based on internet of medical
things (IoMT) and AI, for any emergency, the patients can be timely and tentatively cured in the
ambulance to realize the vision of “In ambulance, in hospital”. According to the 5G HD video
feedback from the ambulance, the hospital can conduct real-time follow up and analyze the signs
and conditions of patients in advance, to effectively reduce the risk of death. On the other hand,
with the development of 5G-based global positioning system (5G-GPS), it can provide more
accurate positioning, more intelligent navigation and more information services in real time for
the patients and ambulance, especially for remote areas. Predictably, telemedicine can improve
the medical experience of the patients, and constantly resolve the problems of “complicated
treatment process”. Moreover, it also provides more possibilities to make up for the insufficient
and unbalanced distribution of medical resources and solve the problem of social aging.
IV. B ROAD A REA E PIDEMIC P REVENTION

AND

C ONTROL

FOR

COVID-19

With invasions of COVID-19, due to the continuous person-to-person transmission, the coronavirus rapidly spreads leading to cross infection for many patients. Since that there is no effective
cure method and vaccine, and it is hard to detect millions of people on a large scale, the strict
segregation and control measures have to be adopted. Unavoidably, the economic development
and quality of life of the people have been greatly impacted, even resulting in a social panic.
Without radical cure, effective and rapid detection to prevent the spread of the coronavirus has
become the primary task. Currently, the common detection method is that, at the entrance and
exit with large flow of people, the thermal cameras or temperature guns are used to locally detect
the temperature of people in turn. Clearly, such detections have the following defects:
•

Omissions in personnel inspection: The tested personnel are passively restricted, not all
of them will be detected. For example, some people do not take the initiative or cooperate

8

Wearable
Medical
Devices

Intelligent Ambulance

Trajectory 1

Trajectory 1

Trajectory 2

Remote
Re
emote Hospital

Prohibition

Trajectory 3

Fig. 3. The broad area epidemic prevention and control scheme.

with the measurement, especially that the people in remote areas have weak awareness of
protection;
•

Real-time issue: This kind of epidemic prevention and control is not real-time due to the
rapidly spreading of coronavirus. It is inevitable to cross infection in the detection process,
especially in remote areas;

•

Locality issue: Due to that COVID-19 is a global problem, it is difficult to make personnel
information open and personnel information transparent among different regions, which
makes it necessary to provide a lot of manpower and material resources when people flow
between regions;

•

Security issue: On one hand, patient information is presented by the text registration; on the
other hand, most of the body temperature and pathological features are shown in the form
of pictures. It is easy to see that this intuitive way will inevitably be used by eavesdroppers
providing troubles to patients.

In order to turn passivity into initiative, a BAEPC for COVID-19 is proposed as shown in Fig. 3.
With the development of the high-definition cameras and video surveillance, currently, ultra long

9

distance thermal camera (ULDTC) can monitor a circumference of 15 Km. The basic idea of this
scheme is that distribute these rotatable ULDTC in different areas for independent monitoring,
and centralize the collected information to the control center (remote hospital) via the 5G-network
for centralized processing. In addition, the people should carry wearable medical devices, by this
way, the trajectories of people will be collected by the remote hospital to determine coordinates of
people during their outdoor activities. In this manner, the people can receive personal information
and surrounding conditions from the remote hospital at any time, to avoid cross infection when
abnormal body temperature occurs. Accordingly, when people themselves or close contacts have
abnormal body temperature, they will receive warning messages in time and make self isolation
until temperature normal or 14 days. Due to huge amount of data, it is considered that the
people staying at home or in their vehicles are isolated, the remote hospital will not collect their
coordinates until they go out for activities or take the initiative to contact remote hospital. When
the fever have stayed high, after receiving the request for help, the patient will be sent to the
remote hospital for a further observation and treatment by the ambulance.
V. N ODE VALUE

AND

C ONTENT P OPULARITY BASED C ACHING S TRATEGY

Even that, the proposed BAEPC scheme can effectively and promptly confine and eliminate
the coronavirus, however, the massive data storage and data redundancy will bring great load
to the server. Moreover, due to that the key of telemedicine technology lies in long-distance
and low-latency connections, TCP/IP networking approach is hard to satisfy these requirements.
In this section, a NVCP based caching strategy for content-centric networking (CCN) will be
introduced to provide a preliminary solution. In what following, after defining the cache content,
the proposed NVCP caching strategy will be discussed within two algorithms.
A. Cache locality
In this subsection, three node attributes are defined to evaluate the value of node, which are
based on the graph theory and described. Moreover, we further considered that the Named-data
Link State Routing Protocol (NLSR) is adopted to query the shortest path information. Given an
undirected graph G = (V, E) with n vertexes and m edges, where V = {v1 , v2 , ..., vn } represents
a set of content routers, and E = {e1 , e2 , ..., em } denotes the links between the content routers.
Moreover, A = (aij )n×n is the adjacency matrix of G, for vi directly connect with vj and aij = 1,
otherwise aij = 0.

10

1) Connectivity: Different forwarding strategies result in different routing paths for the requested content, cache nodes will play different roles in these strategies. And hence, we
regard the number of paths that the requested content pass through the cache node as the
connectivity of the node. Therefore, with the increasing paths, the request content becomes
more important. Defining the number of routing paths, which is requested content k passes
through vi , as cs (vi ), and the maximum number of routing paths passing through vi as
cmax
(vi ), the connectivity can be obtained as the ratio of cs (vi ) to cs (vi )max defended as
s
Cs (vi ).
2) Betweenness centrality: If a content router is on the shortest paths between the corresponding content routers, the content router is considered to be in a significant position. It is
reasonable, due to that the content router in this position can affect the overall network by
controlling or misinterpreting the transmission of information. The ability to characterize
content router control information transfer is betweenness centrality (also known as node
median) [13]. Defending σst as the number of shortest paths between vs and vt , σst (vi )
as the number of shortest paths from vs to vt through vi , the betweenness centrality of vi
can be presented as
CB (vi ) =



(n − 1)(n − 2)
2

−1 X
σst (vi )
,
σ
st
s6=t6=i∈v

where n represents the number of content routers.
3) Eigenvector centrality: In fact, the influence of a content router is not only related to its
own locality, but also to the influence of its neighbors [14]. If the content router is chosen
by a very popular actor, the corresponding influence will also be increased. On the other
hand, there is an influence on an influential node, it is clear that the influence will be even
greater, where the eigenvector centrality is used to characterize the influence. We define
CE (vi ) as the eigenvector centrality of a node, indicating the influence of the neighbors
of nodes. It is also defended that CE (vi ) not only reflects the relative centrality of the
network, but also reflects the long-term influence of the node.
The connectivity and betweenness centrality consider the value of nodes from routing paths of
the requested contents, meanwhile that the eigenvector centrality takes the influence of neighbors
into account. When select the cache locality, the NVCP considers the above three attributes

11

simultaneously. Defining M(vi ) as the comprehensive attribute, we have:
M(vi ) = αCS (vi ) + βCB (vi ) + γCE (vi ),
where α, β, γ represent the weight of connectivity, betweenness centrality and eigenvector centrality, and the sum of them is 1. It is worth noting that, in our proposed scheme, three mentioned
attributes have difference influences on the chosen of the cache locality. Based on which,
when different attributes are used to evaluate the importance of nodes in a same network, the
corresponding different results will be obtained. Therefore, the coefficients in the comprehensive
attribute M(vi ) are determined by the related requirements of CCN.
B. Cache content
Since that whether caching every content which pass through the content router is another
problem for the CCN, the popularity is a factor to draw the content. The popularity of content
can be estimated by the content request count during a measurement, which means that the
more content request counts, the greater the popularity and probability of the content will be
requested. Assuming that the count requesting for the content k at vi is fvi ,k , and the max count
of vi is fvmax
, finally, we have the popularity of content k can be presented as Pvi (k) =
i

fvi ,k
.
fvmax
i

C. The NVCP cache strategy
For the proposed NVCP, the core idea is based on the node value and content popularity, a
table is considered to be added at each content node including the content name, the number of
routing path and count of content request to store the information of content and cache node. It is
remarkable that, in CCN/NDN, PIT records the requests that have not been satisfied, including
the content name and corresponding arrival interface, to ensure the returned response packet
to the content requester along the reverse path. Therefore, the source of a request is identified
through PIT. By this way, when a consumer requests a content, the betweenness centrality
and eigenvector centrality of the nodes on the delivery path will be calculated and normalized.
Once the request is satisfied, the data packet is returned on the inverse delivery path. At this
time, the content popularity will be calculated according to the count of content request. In our
proposed scheme, we design a variable ϕ to match the content popularity and node value given
as ϕ =

Pvi ,k
,
M (vi )

where Pvi (k) is the popularity of content k at vi , and the values of Pvi ,k and

M(vi ) are fixed and less than 1. In general, there are two cases: (1) Pvi ,k ≥ M(vi ), it means

12

TABLE I
O BTAIN THE BETWEENNESS CENTRALITY AND EIGENVECTOR CENTRALITY

Algorithm 1:

Set the forward path

G: The network topology
Initialize cS (vi ), CB (vi ), CE (vi ), fvi ,k
for node on the delivery path from consumer to sever
do
if content in cache
then send content back to the consumer
discard interest packet
else
get the adjacency matrix of the nodes according G
σst : record the number of shortest paths between
vs and vt
σst (vi ): record number of shortest paths from vs
to vt through vi
calculate CB (vi ), CE (vi )
cS (vi ) ← cS (vi ) + 1
fvi ,k ← fvi ,k + 1
forward the interest packet to the next hop towards
server
end if
end for
that the popularity of content is more important than the value of node. Therefore, caching the
content in the content router can obtain a higher cache hit rate. (2) Pvi ,k < M(vi ), it means that
the value of the node is high, but the corresponding popularity of the content is low. If caching
content with a lower popularity will result in a waste of the cache space.
The main idea of the proposed NVCP is presented in Algorithms 1 and 2. In our proposed
scheme, considering that the location of content router does not change, we have a fixed
network topology. Therefore, the network can be seen as an undirected graph, the corresponding
algorithms (such as Brande algorithm and Power Iteration) will be used to obtain CB (vi ) and
CE (vi ) in advance, resulting in a computational complexity as O(V E) for these two algorithm.
Algorithm 1 is the process to obtain the betweenness centrality and eigenvector centrality. It
is clear that, when the interest packet arrives at a content router, if the CS has the content,
sends the content back to the consumer, otherwise calculates CB (vi ) and CE (vi ) according to
the network topology. In the meanwhile, the values of CS (vi ) and fvi ,k increase by 1. On the
other hand, algorithm 2 illustrates the process to select the appropriate cache locality and cache

13

TABLE II
S ELECT THE APPROPRIATE CACHE LOCALITY AND CACHE CONTENT

Algorithm 2:

Select cache locality and cache content

G: The network topology
Input cS (vi ), CB (vi ), CE (vi ), fvi ,k
for node on the delivery path from server to consumer do
if the content is provided by server
then send the data packet back directly
else
calculate CS (vi ), Pvi ,k
get CB (vi ), CE (vi )
Mvi ← αCS (vi ) + βCB (vi ) + γCE (vi )
end if
P
if ϕ = Mv(vi ,ki ) ≥ 1
then cache the contents
else
forward the data packet to the next hop to the
consumer
end if
end for
content. According to the results given in Algorithm 1, calculate ϕ. If ϕ > 1, cache the content,
otherwise forward the data packet to the next hop. In addition, considering the fixed locations of
content routers, the values of CB (Vi ) and CE (Vi ) only need to be calculated once. By this way,
when be requested, the popularity of content increases by 1, which is easy to realize. Clearly,
compared with the existing works, our proposed algorithm significantly improve the efficiency
for calculating the value of ϕ. Clearly, the computational complexities of Algorithms 1 and 2
are not extremely high, which are practical and acceptable.
D. Simulation Results
The simulation uses a network topology generated randomly, which consists of 50 nodes and
150 links. There is a source server in the network, which is connected to a node randomly,
and the edge nodes are connected to the consumers. Content requests are generated following
the Zipf-Mandelbrot distribution with a = 0.7. The total number of different contents will be
requested in the network as 10, 000. Further assume that the interests of each consumer are
generated following the Poisson distribution with λ = 100/s. Comprehensive consideration of
the various attributes of the node, for simplicity and fairness, in this article, the specific weight

14

0.7

0.16

0.6

0.4

0.3

0.2
Prob(0.5)
LCE
MPC
NVCP

0.1

0
0

500

1000
Cache size

1500

Prob(0.5)
LCE
MPC
NVCP

2.1
2

0.14

Average hop count

Average transmission delay/ms

0.15

0.5
Cache hit ratio

2.2
Prob(0.5)
LCE
MPC
NVCP

0.13

0.12

1.9
1.8
1.7
1.6

0.11
1.5

2000

0.1
0

500

1000
Cache size

1500

2000

1.4
0

500

1000
Cache size

1500

2000

Fig. 4. The impact of cache size on the system performance for the proposed and existing caching schemes versus the cache
size.

values of α (connectivity), β (betweenness centrality), and γ (eigenvector centrality) in the
presented simulation results are equivalently given as 1/3. The Least Recently Used (LRU)
[15] is employed as the cache replacement strategy and the total simulation time is 100s. More
specially, the simulations results have been evaluated for various values of the cache size. The
main simulation parameters are listed in Table III.
TABLE III
S IMULATION PARAMETERS

Parameter
Nodes
Links
Delay/ms
Bandwidth/Mbps
Contents
Consumers
Cache size
zipf(a)
Simulation time/s

Default value Variation range
50
150
10
10
10,000
18
1,000
0.7
100

100 ∼ 2, 000
0.1 ∼ 1.0
-

The proposed NVCP strategy is compared with the LCE, Prob(0.5) and MPC in terms of
the cache hit ratio, average hop count and average transmission latency as show in Fig. 4. It
is easy to see that the cache hit ratios of the four cache strategies are gradually increased,
and the cache hit ratio of the NVCP is significantly better than the others. It is resealable,
because the LCE requires all nodes on the delivery path cache contents without difference,
which results in a large amount of content redundancy and replace frequently. In addition, the
Prob(0.5) caches contents passing through the cache nodes with a fixed probability. Even taht the

15

cache space is reduced, it still causes the content redundancy and low content diversity. Instead
of storing all the content at each node on the path, MPC caches only the popular contents. On
the contrary, the NVCP considers node value and content popularity comprehensively, where the
content with higher popularity is cached in nodes with higher value, in the meanwhile that the
content with lower popularity is cached in nodes with lower value, which significantly reduces
the replacement frequency, improves the content diversity, and reduces the content redundancy.
Compared to the LCE, Prob(0.5) and MPC schemes, the proposed NVCP cache hit rate has a
11% to 15% improvement. The second and third subfigures show that as the cache capacity of
the node increases, the average hop count and the average transmission delay decrease gradually.
Moreover, the performance of NVCP is better than the other schemes. This is due to that the
LCE caches content indiscriminately, Prob(0.5) takes the probability caching, and the MPC
only caches the most popular content without any requirements for the nodes. On the contrary,
the NVCP comprehensively evaluates node value from the connectivity, betweenness centrality
and eigenvector centrality, assigns different weights according to different requirements, which
improves the response speed to the content request, as well as, reduce the network overhead.
Compared with the traditional cache strategies, the proposed NVCP has a great improvement
of the average hop count and average transmission latency. Compared with LCE, prob(0.5)
and MPC, the average hop count of NVCP is reduced by 0.08 ∼ 0.17 hops and the average
transmission latency is reduced by 8 ∼ 15ms.
VI. C ONCLUDING R EMARKS
By seamlessly converging 5G technologies and telemedicine to realize the remote surgery,
remote consultation and patient monitoring, people in remote areas can receive high quality
services from developed areas, improving the utilization efficiency of medical resources and
reducing the time and cost of the diagnosis. In this article, we first characterized the general
architecture of the remote e-health, and then introduced 5G technologies supported telemedicine
to satisfy the high-speed transmission of massive multimedia medical data, and further realize
the sharing of medical resources. In addition, the BAEPC scheme was proposed to track and
control the spread of the COVID-19. The challenges, opportunities, and future research trends, as
well as the open issues for the remote e-health are provided. Finally, the NVCP based caching
strategy was investigated to overcome the massive data storage and low-latency transmission
issues. The interesting future research avenues would be that introduce the “Big Data + AI”

16

into telemedicine, to construct the application of AI assisted diagnosis and treatment; modeling
and analyzing the imaging medical data to provide decision support for medics and improve the
medical efficiency and quality; with the blockchain technology, encrypt the underlying data to
realize the secure and reliable transmission of medical privacy data.
R EFERENCES
[1] D. A. Perednia, and A. Allen, “Telemedicine technology and clinical applications,” JAMA, vol. 273, no. 6, pp. 483-488,
Feb. 1995.
[2] S. Akselsen, A.K. Eidsvik, and T. Folkow, “Telemedicine and ISDN,” IEEE Commun. Magazine, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 46-51,
Jan. 1993.
[3] J. Fortney et al., “Telemedicine-based collaborative care for posttraumatic stress disorder: a randomized clinical trial,”
JAMA Psychiatry, vol. 72, no. 1, pp. 58-67, 2015.
[4] C.-F. Lin, “Mobile telemedicine: A survey study,” J. Medical Systems, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 511-520, 2012.
[5] L. Dai et al., “Non-orthogonal multiple access for 5G: solutions, challenges, opportunities, and future research trends,”
IEEE Commun. Magazine, vol. 53, no. 9, pp. 74-81, Sept. 2015.
[6] X. Li et al., “Enabling 5G on the ocean: a hybrid satellite-UAV-terrestrial network solution,” IEEE Wireless Commun., to
appear 2020.
[7] W. Feng, J. Wang, Y. Chen, X. Wang, N. Ge, and J. Lu, “UAV-aided MIMO communications for 5G Internet of Things,”
IEEE Internet of Things J., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 1731-1740, Apr. 2019.
[8] J. G. Andrews, S. Buzzi, W. Choi, S. V. Hanly, A. Lozano, A. C. K. Soong, and J. Zhang, “What Will 5G Be?,” IEEE J.
Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 1065-1082, Apr. 2014.
[9] D. M. Gutierrez-Estevez et al., “Artificial intelligence for elastic management and orchestration of 5G networks,” IEEE
Wireless Commun., vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 134-141, Oct. 2019.
[10] J. Lloret et al., “ An architecture and protocol for smart continuous eHealth monitoring using 5G,” Computer Networks,
vol. 129, no. 2, pp. 340-351, Dec. 2017.
[11] Md. A. Rahman, M.S. Hossain, N. A. Alrajeh, and N. Guizani, “B5G and explainable deep learning assisted healthcare
vertical at the edge: COVID-I9 perspective,” IEEE Network, vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 98-105, Jul. 2020.
[12] J. Li and X. Guo, “COVID-19 contact-tracing apps: A survey on the global deployment and challenges,” 2020,
arXiv:2005.03599. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.03599
[13] M. Riondato, and E. M. Kornaropoulos, “Fast approximation of betweenness centrality through sampling,” Data Min.
Knowl. Disc., vol. 30, pp. 438-475, Mar. 2016.
[14] V. Dixon et al., “Leveraging social network analysis for characterizing cohesion of human-managed animals,” IEEE Trans.
Computational Social Systems, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 323-337, Mar. 2019.
[15] D. Lee, J. Choi, J. Kim, et al, “LRFU: A spectrum of policies that subsumes the least recently used and least frequently
used policies,” IEEE Trans. Computers, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 1325-1361, Dec. 2001.

