SEPTEMBER 2020

MAKING SENSE OF THE

ROBOTIZED
PANDEMIC RESPONSE
A Comparison of Global and Canadian
Robot Deployments and Success Factors
University of Toronto Robotics Institute

(alphabetical) T Barfoot, J Burgner-Kahrs, E Diller,
A Garg, A Goldenberg, J Kelly, X Liu, HE Naguib, G Nejat,
AP Schoellig, F Shkurti, H Siegel*, Y Sun, SL Waslander
*Corresponding Author (robotics@utoronto.ca)

Cite as: "Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response: A Comparison of Global and Canadian Robot Deployments and Success Factors"
University of Toronto Robotics Institute, 2020. https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.08577

Executive Summary
From disinfection and remote triage, to logistics and delivery, countries
around the world are making use of robots to address the unique
challenges presented by the COVID-19 pandemic. Robots are being
used to manage the pandemic here in Canada too, but relative to other
regions, we have been more cautious in our adoption — this despite
the important role that robots of Canadian origin are now playing on
the global stage. This whitepaper discusses why this is the case,
and argues that strategic investment and support for the Canadian
robotics industry are urgently needed to bring the benefits of robotics
home, where we have greater control in shaping the future of this
game-changing technology. Such investments will not only serve to
support Canada’s current pandemic response and post-pandemic
recovery, but will also prepare this country to weather future crises.
Without such support, Canada risks falling behind other developed
nations that are investing heavily in hardware automation at this time.

Countries around the
world are actively
adopting robots to
improve frontline
safety and efficiency
during the pandemic,
for everything
from disinfection
to logistics.

II

Robots have been playing an ever-expanding role in contemporary
society, enabling the automation of dangerous and repetitive tasks in
a wide range of applications. Now the COVID-19 pandemic is putting
robots to the test. Written in plain language and free of technical jargon,
this paper aims to provide decision-makers with a primer on the use of
robots and their potential in the fight against COVID. We survey how
other countries around the world are making use of robots, describe the
current state of affairs in Canada, and provide recommendations on how
we can better leverage our robotics capabilities to benefit Canadians
in this challenging time. To understand how to best make an impact
with robots here in Canada, we conducted interviews with robotics
industry professionals and stakeholders in areas as diverse as hospitals,
public health, public transportation, manufacturing/retail industries,
education, and government labs. We used these dialogues, along with
our collective 130 years of experience working across the spectrum
of the field to identify Canada’s biggest strengths, weaknesses, and
opportunities for robotics innovation.
It is clear from our study that countries around the world are actively
adopting robots to improve frontline safety and efficiency during the
pandemic. And yet we caution against approaches that put too much
stock into demonstration systems and the ability to convert them
to deployable robot systems in the short term. Disinfection robots

Executive Summary | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

in particular are being deployed extensively to service hospitals and
medical facilities where COVID is an issue, and show great promise in
reducing exposure risk and augmenting cleaning capacity when workers
fall ill or cannot come into work. Yet details regarding their effectiveness
are still unknown, in particular regarding their ability to adequately
disinfect soft surfaces like bedding, seating, and personal protective
equipment (PPE) . Disinfection robots require continued validation and
testing before they are broadly deployed, and more pilot studies in a
variety of settings are urgently needed to determine proper disinfectant
dosages, techniques, and protocols.
1

While Canada has
significant core
technical strengths
in robotics, it is
not exploiting its
robotics assets as
heavily as it could.
More international
experience is needed
here if our robotics
industry is to
overcome Canada’s
“small market”
disadvantage.

Beyond disinfection, the aggressive adoption of cleaning, triage, and
diagnostics robots around the globe has led to increased demand and
new large scale investments. Moreover, hospitals are not the only places
where robots are being deployed; we also identified increased growth in
robot applications that reduce the need for physical human interaction,
including public safety drones and security monitoring robots, social
interaction and companion bots, autonomous delivery and transport,
and, especially, behind-the-scenes manufacturing and logistics
automation. Across the board, it is those robots that were already widely
deployed before the pandemic that appear to be expanding market
share most rapidly, followed by existing robot platforms that can be most
readily adapted to meet the most pressing current needs. New robot
systems are also being developed to automate and standardize high-risk
tasks such as swabbing and sample collection. While such platforms are
unlikely to be ready in time for use in the current pandemic, investments
made now will no doubt result in systems that are ready for future crises.
Meanwhile, we observe that teleoperation can be used as an effective
intermediate measure to keep front line workers safe while remotely
performing tasks that are not yet fully automated.
The Canadian robotic industry is also responding to this global
pandemic. While many new COVID-related robot deployments in
Canada center around laboratory testing automation, with small scale
trials in disinfection, tele-medicine and floor cleaning ongoing in the
healthcare sector, behind the scenes it appears that logistics is where
the appetite for robotics is growing most quickly here. Two Canadian
robotics companies in particular stand out in their adaptation to the
needs of the pandemic: OTTO Motors and Avidbots. These companies
have seen dramatic growth in demand for their fully autonomous

1

For a layperson’s explanation of current issues in UV effectiveness, see: T. Irving, “Can UV light help
hospitals disinfect masks and gowns? U of T researcher explains,” University of Toronto News, Apr.
06, 2020. https://www.utoronto.ca/news/can-uv-light-help-hospitals-disinfect-masks-and-gowns-u-tresearcher-explains

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Executive Summary

III

warehouse transport and industrial cleaning robots, respectively. Both
companies are expanding their product lines to include disinfection
robots with significantly improved autonomous capabilities as compared
to existing products, but large investments are needed to bring
hardware solutions to market here in a short timeframe. The NGEN
supercluster, which is focused on accelerating advanced manufacturing
practices, is funding multiple COVID-19 related projects with an
emphasis on disinfection, but more is needed.

The pandemic
has become an
inflection point
for accelerating
investment in
robotics.

The story of robots and COVID-19 is not just about which countries are
using robots to help manage their pandemic response; it is also about
how the pandemic has become an inflection point for accelerating
investment in robotics more broadly. Both at the macro/country level
and at the micro/organizational level, those who were already invested in
robotics technology before the pandemic have been better able to make
use of robots during the pandemic. They are also more likely to benefit
from the sudden demand for these technologies in this moment, and,
we believe, for the foreseeable future. Further, we expect much of this
growth in robot adoption to persist as the pandemic subsides, due to
the strong gains in safety, efficiency, and convenience that they afford.
Our bottom-line conclusion is that while Canada has significant core
technical strengths in robotics, it is not exploiting its robotics assets as
heavily as it could. As a result, Canada risks falling behind other nations
in leveraging robotics technologies to navigate the pandemic, postpandemic recovery, and the future beyond.
The reasons for this are complex, but generally point to 1) Canada’s
lack of infrastructure and pathways to bring robotics R&D to market,
and 2) this country’s relatively small market economy, which has tended
to make Canada a place for robot sales offices rather than a centre for
international industry-focused robotics R&D and investment. Ultimately
these conditions have made it a challenge for Canadian robotics
startups to scale and grow, as they must quickly prove themselves
capable of exporting internationally. This need to internationalize requires
access to technical talent and financing, but also — and perhaps more
importantly — access to executive talent with in-depth knowledge of
global markets, as well as product management, organizational design,

IV

Executive Summary | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

operational finance, and marketing skills . With only a handful of
Canadian robotics companies operating at scale on the global market,
and with few global corporations with R&D headquarters in Canada,
such executive-level robotics talent has been hard to come by in this
country. More mentorship and international business experience is
needed here if we are to overcome our “small market” disadvantage.
23

Momentum for
robotics was already
building in Canada
before the pandemic.

Despite these challenges, several promising efforts to bridge the gaps
in Canada’s innovation pipeline were already underway before the
pandemic struck. These include the creation of the Government of
Canada’s Innovation and Skills Plan and Economic Strategy Tables ,
and the launch of the Pan-Canadian Artificial Intelligence Strategy
in 2017 and the $950M Supercluster Initiative in 2019. While these
activities are not focused on robots per se, they do call out robotics
as among the key advanced technologies that will enable many
aspects of Canada’s future economy. Beyond providing funding from
government and Canadian firms, such flagship efforts have garnered
Canada international attention and investment: since 2017, global
corporations such as Google , Uber , NVIDIA , Samsung , LG , and
others have all opened corporate R&D centres in this country seeking
our AI & robotics talent. A number of Canadian robotics firms have also
4

5

6

7

8

2

3

4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

9

10

11 12

13

Competing in a Global Innovation Economy: The Current State of R&D in Canada. Council of
Canadian Academies Expert Panel on the State of Science and Technology and Industrial Research
and Development in Canada, 2018. Available: https://cca-reports.ca/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/
Competing_in_a_Global_Innovation_Economy_FullReport_EN.pdf
“Scaling Success: Tackling the Management Gap in Canada’s Technology Sector,” Lazaridis Institute
for the Management of Technology Enterprises, Wilfrid Laurier University, Mar. 2016. Accessed:
Sep. 06, 2020. [Online]. Available: http://deepcentre.com/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/
Scaling-Success-Lazaridis-Institute-Whitepaper-March-2016.pdf.
“Tracking progress and results: The Innovation and Skills Plan,” Innovation, Science and Economic
Development Canada. https://www.ic.gc.ca/eic/site/062.nsf/eng/h_00083.html (accessed Sep.
06, 2020)
“Economic Strategy Tables,” Government of Canada. https://www.ic.gc.ca/eic/site/098.nsf/eng/home
(accessed Sep. 06, 2020)
“Pan-Canadian Artificial Intelligence Strategy,” CIFAR. https://www.cifar.ca/ai/pan-canadian-artificialintelligence-strategy (accessed Sep. 01, 2020).
“Canada’s new superclusters,” Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada, Jan. 27,
2020. https://www.ic.gc.ca/eic/site/093.nsf/eng/00008.html (accessed Sep. 01, 2020).
S. Franca, “Google acquires U of T neural networks company,” University of Toronto News, Mar. 12, 2013.
https://www.utoronto.ca/news/google-acquires-u-t-neural-networks-company (accessed Sep. 01, 2020).
P. Sehgal, “Uber officially opens its new engineering hub in Toronto,” IT World Canada News, Nov. 05,
2019. https://www.itworldcanada.com/article/uber-officially-opens-its-new-engineering-hub-in-toronto
(accessed Sep. 01, 2020).
C. Sorensen, “U of T computer vision expert to lead new Nvidia research lab in Toronto,” University of
Toronto News, Jun. 13, 2018. https://www.utoronto.ca/news/u-t-computer-vision-expert-lead-newnvidia-research-lab-toronto (accessed Sep. 01, 2020).
B. Bennett, “Samsung opens AI research centre in Toronto,” BetaKit, May 23, 2018. https://betakit.
com/samsung-opens-ai-research-centre-in-toronto/ (accessed Sep. 01, 2020).
“Samsung Electronics Opens another AI Center in Montreal and Expands AI Research Presence in
North America,” Samsung US Newsroom, Oct. 18, 2018. https://news.samsung.com/us/samsung-aicentre-montreal-canada-ai-research-north-america/ (accessed Sep. 01, 2020).
A. Zubairi, “LG partners with the University of Toronto to establish AI research lab,” BetaKit, Aug.
07, 2018. https://betakit.com/lg-partners-with-the-university-of-toronto-to-establish-ai-research-lab/
(accessed Sep. 01, 2020).

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Executive Summary

V

received significant VC fundings or been acquired since the launch of
these efforts as well . In short: pre-COVID, momentum for robotics was
already building in Canada.
14

A chief concern
among Canadian
robotics startups
is the generation
of new revenue
streams.

But what of now? The COVID-19 crisis has undoubtedly challenged
Canadian robotics firms. Like all businesses worldwide, they have
had to cope with temporary workplace closures, physical distancing
measures, and global economic uncertainty. Despite these immediate
concerns, however, the robotics companies we interviewed generally
reported a positive outlook, with one key caveat. The good news is
that existing customers are leaning more heavily on automation to help
meet productivity demands while at the same time managing worker
shortages and more restricted operational environments. And there
appears to be interest from new customers too, both in Canada and
globally. Given the longer term economic uncertainties, however, it
remains to be seen how many of these potential new customers will
survive long enough and will have the access to the capital needed
to invest in automation in the long run. In other words, our interviews
suggest that a chief concern among Canadian robotics startups is the
generation of new revenue streams — not surprising given that scaling
up is what most Canadian robotics businesses must do to survive.
Despite this challenge, the current crisis has created an unprecedented
need for government coordination to ensure access to essential medical
supplies and goods to keep the economy moving. With this comes the
opportunity for Canada to leverage its single-payer healthcare system
to fund pilot programs that put robotics to the test, and eventually,
into broader use. Likewise, business incentives could be created to
enable Canadian manufacturers of key goods to upskill their workforce
and modernize their warehouses with current-generation collaborative
robots, making them more competitive on the global stage. If designed
appropriately, such measures could help solve urgent pandemic needs,
while also creating long term gains in innovation, productivity, demand
for skilled jobs, and greater capacity to compete internationally.
15

14

15

VI

The number of Canadian robotics companies that have received VC funding since 2017 is too long
to list here, however significant fundings (over $10M) since 2017 include: Titan Medical, Synaptive
Medical, ATTAbotics, Avidbots, Kindred AI, OTTO Motors, Robotiq, Resson Aerospace, Kinova,
and Drone Delivery Canada. Recent acquisitions include Aeryon Labs (acquired by FLIR Systems
for $266M in 2019), and MDA (bought out by Northern Private Capital for CA$1B in 2019). Source:
Crunchbase https://www.crunchbase.com/
These findings are echoed in a more general study on the impact of the pandemic on Canadian
technology companies. See: ]S. Denney and V. Vu, “The COVID-19 Crisis and Policy Preferences of
Canadian Technology Scale-ups,” Innovation Policy Lab at the Munk School of Global Affairs, p. 13,
Mar. 2020. https://munkschool.utoronto.ca/ipl/files/2020/04/IPL-report-2020-02_COVID19-PolicyPreferences-Scale-ups-FINAL.pdf (accessed Sep. 01, 2020)

Executive Summary | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

Canada’s early and significant investments in space robotics helped
put this country ahead of the curve in terms of robotics R&D knowhow, and our current robotics research centres and startups — though
relatively small in number — are known internationally. Recent data
from Statistics Canada show that our high tech industry is weathering
the pandemic better than other sectors, and is the fastest growing
part of the Canadian economy (currently representing about 5% of
GDP) . Moreover, according to the Economist, Canada ranks fifth
globally for “Automation Readiness” (behind robotics powerhouses
South Korea, Germany, Singapore and Japan) due in large part to our
strong public education system and progressive workplace policies .
And yet Canada lacks the focused robotics R&D funding and strategic
stakeholder coordination of other nations such as China, Japan, the
US, the EU, South Korea and Singapore, all which have significant
multi-annual robotics programs that are typically linked to a larger
digital innovation agenda.
16

When it comes to
robotics, Canada
lacks the strategic
coordination of
other nations. The
time to act is now.

17

Ultimately, it is our view that Canada needs a unified robotics roadmap,
tying industry, government and academia together with a clear mandate
for specialization and persistent investment in the robotics industry.
With the right strategic investment focus going forward, Canada could
reignite its robotics innovation pipeline as an important growth engine
for the post-pandemic economic recovery. Given the urgent need, the
exceptionally competitive global robotics landscape, and the volatility of
the current economic climate, the time to act is now.

16 P. Evans, “How COVID-19 has changed Canada’s economy for the worse — but also for the better,”
CBC News, Jun. 23, 2020. https://www.cbc.ca/news/business/covid-economy-changes-1.5618734
17 “The automation readiness index: Who is ready for the coming wave of automation?,” The Economist
Intelligence Unit, 2018. Accessed: Sep. 01, 2020. Available: https://www.automationreadiness.eiu.
com/static/download/PDF.pdf.

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Executive Summary

VII

TABLE
OF CONTENTS
1 INTRODUCTION

01

1.1 About the Authors

02

1.2 Acknowledgements

03

1.3 Motivation

04

1.4 Related Work

05

1.5 Scope

09

1.6 How this Document is Organized

10

2 ESSENTIAL BACKGROUND

11

2.1 Primer on Robotics

12

2.2 Technology Readiness Levels

15

2.3 How Robots are Developed

17

2.4 Brief Overview of Canadian Robotics

18

3 DEPLOYMENTS AND USE CASES OF ROBOTS FOR COVID-19
3.1 What Robots Can Do
3.1.1 Disinfection & Cleaning
3.1.2 Medical Triage & Assistance
3.1.3 Sampling & Diagnostics
3.1.4 Public Safety & Security
3.1.5 Social Interaction, Companionship & Healthy Living
3.1.6 Manufacturing & Logistics
3.1.7 Delivery & Transportation
3.1.8 Summary of Robot Deployments and Use Cases

23
24
25
27
29
31
33
35
37
39

3.2 How is Canada Putting Robots to Use During COVID-19?
3.2.1 Robots Used in Canada for Pandemic Management
3.2.2 Made-in-Canada Robots
3.2.3 Observations in Canadian Deployments and Use Cases

42
45
48
50

3.3 Potential Pathways to a Robotized Pandemic Response

53

4 DEPLOYMENT SUCCESS FACTORS & HOW CANADA COMPARES

58

4.1 Teleoperation

59

4.2 Open APIs

63

4.3 Robot-Friendly Environments

66

4.4 In-House Expertise and Buy-In From Senior Leadership

68

4.5 Access to Robot Supply Chains

71

4.6 Sustained Robotics R&D Funding

73

4.7 Coordination of Stakeholders And Efforts

79

4.8 Addressable Gaps: A Summary of Canada’s Strengths and Weaknesses

84

5 CONCLUSION

86

APPENDIX

94

A. Canadian Robotics Landscape
A.1. Robotics Companies
A.2. Legal & Regulatory Landscape

95
95
101

01
INTRODUCTION

1

Introduction | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

1.1

ABOUT THE AUTHORS
This white paper has been written
collectively by faculty members and
staff of the University of Toronto
Robotics Institute, which represents
the largest cluster of academic robotics
researchers in Canada. Together we
have domain expertise that spans
from healthcare, to manufacturing, to
the future of mobility, and technical
expertise covering everything from
dynamics and control, to machine
learning, to robot vision and more.
The University of Toronto’s rich history
in robotics began in the early 1980s
with several large robotics groups in
the Department of Mechanical and
Industrial Engineering (MIE) and the
Institute for Aerospace Studies (UTIAS),
many with close ties to Canadarm,
Canada’s internationally-known space

robotics legacy. Subsequent decades
saw UofT’s expansion into the fields
of medical robotics and advanced
manufacturing. Reflecting the growing
interdisciplinarity of the field, the UofT
Robotics Institute was launched in 2019
to unite the many robotics research
groups that have since emerged across
the university’s various Departments
and Faculties, from Engineering, to
Computer Science, to Architecture.
With the help of our international partners,
our research network extends around
the globe. Our extensive connections
to Canada’s largest health network and
to academic, industry and government
robotics partners from across the
country contribute to our uniquely rich
understanding of Canadian robotics in the
global pandemic context and beyond.

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Introduction

2

1.2

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to extend thanks to the following organizations that
provided critical background and advice in the preparation of this
document:
ANVIV
Avidbots
Canadian Space Agency (CSA)
Clearpath Robotics / OTTO Motors
Defence R&D Canada (DRDC)
Drone Delivery Canada
ESI
FIRST Robotics Canada
Gatik
Hospital For Sick Children
Innovation Policy Lab, Munk School of Global Affairs,
University of Toronto
Kinova
Loblaws
MDA Robotics
Metrolinx
Mount Sinai Hospital
National Research Council (NRC)
Responsible Autonomy & Intelligent System Ethics (RAISE) Lab,
MGill University
RoboEye.ai
Robotiq
Savioke
Silicon Valley Robotics
Synaptive Medical
Toronto District School Board
Toronto Transit Commission
We also wish to acknowledge our many international robotics colleagues
for their expert knowledge and thought leadership on the future of
robotics and its application to the COVID pandemic. Robotics, like many
sciences, is an international discipline and knows no borders. Research
and opinion from these experts are cited throughout this document.

3

Introduction | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

1.3

MOTIVATION
Non-experts must be
able to distinguish
between early stage
robotics experiments
and robots that
are ready for realworld deployment.

With its many overlapping technical, social, economic
and political drivers, the field of robotics was complex
and dynamic before the COVID-19 pandemic. Before the
pandemic, robotics media hype was also the norm. Now,
the pandemic appears to be accelerating investment and
innovation in robotics, while at the same time exacerbating
perennial robotics issues such as global competition,
privacy, ethics, embedded bias, and job loss due to
automation. Meanwhile COVID-19 misinformation and
disinformation abounds.
It is our view that there has never been a greater need to
help non-experts distinguish between early stage robotics
experiments and robots that are ready for real-world
deployment. Expert views are needed to counterbalance
the plethora of news and social media accounts of robots
being used (or pitched for use) in the pandemic, many of
which obscure or overstate the actual capabilities of the
machines in question. And it’s not only the media that are
guilty of using robots as “click-bait”. Researchers have also
been known to overstate the capabilities of their systems
or underestimate research and development timelines,
particularly when applying for grants. While sightings of novel
use cases or innovative approaches can be an important
signal of potential technologies to come, they are typically a
better indicator of humankind’s fascination with robots than
of current technological capability. Unfortunately, when such
stories receive attention that is disproportionate relative to
the robot’s actual capabilities, readers may be left with a
distorted understanding of the technology, the timeline for its
development, and thus its potential for impact.

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Introduction

4

Nor has there been a greater need for experts
and non-experts alike to understand the larger
economic, technical and social trends that are
shaping this field as it responds to the coronavirus
pandemic and the ensuing economic crisis. As
one of the first countries in the world to have run
a successful national robotics research program
— the Canadarm Space Robotics program
— Canada has a rich history in robotics and is
recognized globally for its robotics expertise.
And yet we have deployed relatively few robots

1.4

in the COVID-19 pandemic. Why is this? Both
internationally and here in Canada, there are
tremendous opportunities for robotics to help
navigate and recover from the pandemic.
Our aim with this whitepaper is to leverage expert
robotics knowledge from research and industry to
uncover useful boots-on-the-ground opportunities
for Canadian robotics within the evolving context
of the global pandemic and post-pandemic
economic recovery.

RELATED WORK

Because the COVID-19 pandemic is new and we are still learning about the virus’ transmission and its
impacts, research on the actual application of robotics to COVID-specific contexts is only just now emerging . In response to this information gap, calls for topics involving robots and COVID-19 are being issued
by granting agencies and research publications alike
. We can therefore expect more science about
robots and COVID-19 to emerge over the coming months and years.
18

19 20 21 22

Yet despite the current lack of COVID-specific robotics research, and though we are only a few months into the
COVID-19 pandemic as we write this paper, a number of prominent robotics experts from both academia and
industry have already published essays, opinion pieces, and surveys about robots and COVID-19. These works
can be generally described as 1) documenting how and where robots are being used in the current pandemic,
2) exploring how the pandemic is accelerating the pace of robotics innovation and adoption, 3) explaining
why robots are not being more widely used in the current crisis, and/or 4) making recommendations for future
deployments. The paragraphs below describe such work by robotics experts in more detail.

18
19
20
21
22

5

See for example: A. A. Malik, T. Masood, and R. Kousar, “Repurposing factories with robotics in the face of COVID-19,” Science Robotics, vol. 5, no.
43, Jun. 2020, doi: 10.1126/scirobotics.abc2782.
“Join the AI-ROBOTICS vs COVID-19 initiative of the European AI Alliance,” Shaping Europe’s digital future - European Commission, Mar. 25, 2020.
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/join-ai-robotics-vs-covid-19-initiative-european-ai-alliance (accessed Sep. 01, 2020).
“Call for funding: robotic tech and solutions immediately deployable in hospitals,” Shaping Europe’s digital future - European Commission, Apr. 10,
2020. https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/call-funding-robotic-tech-and-solutions-immediately-deployable-hospitals (accessed Sep.
01, 2020).
“RAM Special Issue on Robotics Response for the COVID-19 Outbreak,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Society. https://www.ieee-ras.org/aboutras/latest-news/1639-ram-special-issue-on-robotics-response-for-the-covid-19-outbreak (accessed Sep. 01, 2020).
“Robotics, Autonomous Systems and AI for Nonurgent/Nonemergent Healthcare Delivery During and After the COVID-19 Pandemic,” Frontiers
Research Topic. https://www.frontiersin.org/research-topics/14462/robotics-autonomous-systems-and-ai-for-nonurgentnonemergent-healthcaredelivery-during-and-after-the (accessed Sep. 01, 2020).

Introduction | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

In the early days of the pandemic, a prominent group of international
robotics academics, Yang et al., published an editorial in Science
Robotics that briefly summarizes many of the applications and
opportunities for robotics in the COVID-19 pandemic context . Tavakoli
et al. subsequently published an essay in Advanced Intelligent Systems
that provides examples of how autonomous robots and smart wearables
can complement and support healthcare during the pandemic and
beyond . euRobotics lists active European robotics projects where
robots are already helping, including disinfection, delivering medicine,
and monitoring vital signs . Articles such as these posit that robots can
and will be a key aspect of dealing both with the current healthcare crisis
and future pandemics.
23

“Robots used during
an emergency are
usually already
in common use
before the disaster.
Technologists
often rush out
well-intentioned
prototypes, but
during an emergency,
responders [...]
are too busy and
stressed to learn
to use something
new and unfamiliar.
They typically
can’t absorb the
unanticipated tasks
and procedures, like
having to frequently
reboot or change
batteries, that
usually accompany
new technology.”
– Murphy et al.
30

24

25

Other expert articles discuss some of the critical challenges around
implementing current robots during the pandemic. For example,
Robohub, an online robotics research forum, highlighted a number of
the COVID-19 robotics activities taking place around the world and
discussed why we do not see more robots on active duty . A group
led by Prof. Robin Murphy (Texas A&M University), who is lauded for
her research on robotics for disaster applications, has interviewed
experts in public health, public safety, and emergency management
and documented over 100 press and social media reports from
more than twenty countries about how robots are being used during
the coronavirus pandemic . Her group analyzed these findings and
categorized reported robot use cases according to their frequency
of deployment. Results from this analysis confirm a key finding from
Murphy’s prior research in disaster robotics: namely that the robots
which are most likely to be deployed during a disaster are the robots
that were already in common use before the disaster. This is because
first responders and front line workers do not have the time during
an emergency to experiment with and adapt their procedures to
26

27

28

29

23
24

25
26
27
28
29

Yang, G.-Z. et al. (2020) ‘Combating COVID-19—The role of robotics in managing public health and
infectious diseases’, Science Robotics, 5(40). doi: 10.1126/scirobotics.abb5589.
M. Tavakoli, J. Carriere, and A. Torabi, “Robotics, Smart Wearable Technologies, and Autonomous
Intelligent Systems for Healthcare During the COVID-19 Pandemic: An Analysis of the State of the
Art and Future Vision,” Advanced Intelligent Systems, vol. 2, no. 7, p. 2000071, 2020, doi: 10.1002/
aisy.202000071.
“10 ways robots fight against the COVID-19 pandemic,” euRobotics, Apr. 30, 2020. https://www.eurobotics.net/eurobotics/newsroom/press/robots-against-covid-19.html (accessed Sep. 01, 2020).
Silicon Valley Robotics, “Where are the robots when you need them!,” Robohub, Apr. 27, 2020.
https://robohub.org/where-are-the-robots-when-you-need-them/ (accessed Sep. 01, 2020).
“R41D Interview Series,” Robotics for Infectious Diseases. http://roboticsforinfectiousdiseases.org/
interview-series.html (accessed Sep. 01, 2020).
R. Murphy, J. Adams, and V. Gandudi, “How Robots Are Being Used for COVID-19,” Robotics for
Infectious Diseases, Jul. 04, 2020. http://roboticsforinfectiousdiseases.org/how-robots-are-beingused.html (accessed Sep. 01, 2020).
R. Murphy, Disaster Robotics. MIT Press, 2014. ISBN: 9780262027359

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Introduction

6

new technologies . Despite this, Murphy’s team observed that some
COVID-19 responders are beginning to test robotics technologies that
have already been proven in other application areas. For example, there
have been reports of pesticide-spraying drones designed for agriculture
being adapted into drones that spray disinfectant in public spaces .
30

31

Other groups have published reports and commentary exploring how
the pandemic is accelerating the use of robotics more broadly, and
what the economic, social or technical implications of this accelerated
adoption might be. For example, researchers at Northwestern
University’s Retail Analytics Council recently published an article that
documents how COVID-19 is accelerating demand for robots in
grocery retail . The authors observed that while retail sales generally
declined in the early months of COVID-19, grocery sales remained
strong. Given that grocery retailers already represented the largest
retail segment invested in robotics technology before the pandemic,
the authors concluded that the outbreak will drive grocery retailers
to invest even more in robotics going forward. Another exploration of
how COVID-19 may be accelerating the adoption of robotics is the
COVID-19, Robots and Us video series, co-produced by Silicon Valley
Robotics and the CITRIS People and Robots Initiative headquartered
at UC Berkeley. In this series, well-known robotics researcher Prof.
Ken Goldberg suggests that our fear of the coronavirus is accelerating
us towards a “low touch future” where autonomous robots help limit
our physical interactions with people by performing tasks such as
preparing our fast food and take-out coffee . Another team exploring
how pandemic psychology is accelerating robot adoption is Georgia
Tech robotics expert Ayanna Howard and her ethics colleague Jason
Borenstein. In their MIT Sloan Management Review article , they warn
that in our rush to adopt robots in the emergency response, robots
32

33

34

35

30

31
32

33

34
35

7

J. Adams, R. Murphy, and V. Gandudi, “Robots are playing many roles in the coronavirus crisis –
and offering lessons for future disasters,” The Conversation, Apr. 22, 2020. http://theconversation.
com/robots-are-playing-many-roles-in-the-coronavirus-crisis-and-offering-lessons-for-futuredisasters-135527 (accessed Sep. 01, 2020).
J. Antunes, “Drones on the Front Lines of the COVID-19 Pandemic,” Commercial UAV News, Mar.
26, 2020. https://www.commercialuavnews.com/public-safety/drones-on-the-front-lines-of-thecovid-19-pandemic (accessed Sep. 01, 2020).
“Emerging Trends in Retail Robotics,” Retail Analytics Council, Northwestern University, May 2020.
https://s3.amazonaws.com/medill.wordpress.offload/WP%20Media%20Folder%20-%20imc-retailanalytics-council/wp-content/uploads/sites/3/2020/05/RAC-Research-Art.-Emerging-Trends-inRetail-Robotics.pdf (accessed Sep. 01, 2020).
“COVID-19, Robots and Us: Weekly Online Discussions with Experts,” Silicon
Valley Robotics | CITRIS, People and Robots, 2020. https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=zsbmK5N5WTs&list=PLtjElujxzII5CJrgnm108SZ6itJcYPt5q&index=2&t=0s (accessed Sep.
01, 2020).
“COVID-19, Robots and Us: Weekly Online Discussions with Experts | April 7th 2020 Episode,”
Silicon Valley Robotics | CITRIS, People and Robots, 2020. https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=C6e5jQWdVY4 (accessed Sep. 01, 2020).
A. Howard and J. Borenstein, “AI, Robots, and Ethics in the Age of COVID-19,” MIT Sloan
Management Review, May 12, 2020. https://sloanreview.mit.edu/article/ai-robots-and-ethics-in-theage-of-covid-19/ (accessed Sep. 01, 2020).

Introduction | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

Accelerated demand
has exposed robots’
technical limitations
while at the same
time making it
difficult to see the
real progress the
field has made in
recent years.

will be positioned as a technology that is necessary to protect our
health, and we will be more likely to overlook concerns such as privacy
or embedded bias as a result. As such, they advise that proactive
planning and protections are required before robots are widely
deployed for the pandemic.
Others still have argued that the accelerated demand has exposed
robots’ technical limitations while at the same time making it difficult to
see the real progress the field has made in recent years. For example,
The Robot Report, a prominent robotics industry news publication,
released a special COVID-19 issue declaring that fully autonomous
robot solutions are still many years away, but that robot developers need
not give up: they can rely on humans to help with tricky “edge cases”
that robots can’t handle on their own. To do so, they advise the robotics
industry to develop better metrics for measuring system reliability and
more transparent error-handling to make it easier to hand off control
between humans and machines.
36

We expect that more expert works such as these will be published in
the coming months as unforeseen use cases and challenges emerge,
and as new research on the application of robotics to the coronavirus
pandemic appears.
This whitepaper attempts to build off the works described above,
leveraging our extensive Canadian and international robotics research
networks, as well as interviews with end users from Canadian hospitals,
long-term care homes, public transportation services and schools to
bring a uniquely Canadian lens to the discussion.

36

B. Huang, “COVID-19: A wake-up call for robotics developers,” The Robot Report, Apr. 2020.
https://issuu.com/wtwhmedia/docs/design_world_april_2020/88 (accessed Sep. 01, 2020).

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Introduction

8

1.5

SCOPE
We use this section to make clear what this whitepaper covers and what
it does not.
The term “robot” means different things to different people. Our primary
focus will be on systems that are physically embodied and have not
only computing elements but also sensors to perceive the surrounding
environment and, importantly, actuators (e.g., motors) to affect change
in the environment. As such, while dis-embodied artificial intelligence
algorithms (“software or sensing-only robots”) will no doubt prove helpful
in this pandemic, we will not cover them in this paper.
This definition of robotics is still general enough that it will be too
difficult to cover all the ways robots can help us through the COVID-19
pandemic. Accordingly, we prioritize applications that are closer to the
frontline such as in hospitals, long-term care facilities, and public health
applications that are aimed to keep the general population safe. We also
include essential services that are needed to keep the economy going,
such as groceries and public transportation.
Finally, we also consider it in scope to discuss not only the technologies
required to help but also the logistics of scaling solutions up. This
requires that we analyze the capacity of industry to provide robots
at scale, the operators and job skills needed to absorb and maintain
technology solutions, the funding mechanisms needed to pay for these
solutions, and the regulatory frameworks within which the technology
must work. Given the relatively high cost and long timelines for robotics
development (as compared to software solutions), it also requires us
to consider the potential for post-pandemic demand, otherwise the
investments in robotics technology that we make now risk becoming
irrelevant after the pandemic.
To summarize, our three guiding principles in scoping this whitepaper are:

9

•

Physically embodied robots

•

Frontline and essential services applications

•

Capacity to scale and longer term demand

Introduction | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

1.6

HOW THIS
DOCUMENT
IS ORGANIZED
This document aims to provide decision-makers with
information on the use of robots in the Canadian
fight against the COVID-19 pandemic, including an
assessment of the robotics industry (Canadian and
international) and its capacity to deliver reliable and
robust solutions that meet the needs of Canadian
businesses and institutions. Thus far, the Introduction
provided readers with information about the authors
and our motivation for writing this paper. We also provided background information on how robot experts
are thinking about the current pandemic situation.
We then defined what we consider to be in scope
and out of scope for this paper. The remainder of this
whitepaper is organized as follows:
Section 2 provides essential background on robotics
for non-experts, including a primer on robotics and
an overview of the standard levels used to describe
robot autonomy. This section also describes the
Government of Canada’s Technology Readiness
Levels in the context of how robotics are developed
from lab experiments through to deployment in
real world applications. We end this section with a
brief overview of the Canadian robotics landscape,
giving a brief history of Canadian robotics, and an
overview of the major robotics research centres and
companies operating in this country. Readers who
are already knowledgeable about robotics and the
Canadian robotics landscape should feel free to skip
this section.

Section 3 describes the main areas where robots
are already being used to fight COVID-19 both
globally and in Canada, and describes the various
patterns of robot development during the crisis.
Section 3.1 describes these use cases and
includes specific examples of robots that have
been deployed or are being developed, what
function they are serving, who has produced
them, and how much they cost (if available).
Based on our knowledge and expertise developing
robotics systems, we evaluate the maturity of
these systems by grouping them according to the
Technology Readiness Levels (TRLs) described
in Section 2. In Section 3.2 we share our
observations on how Canada is putting robots to
use during the pandemic, covering both Canadianbased deployments, as well the deployments of
made-in-Canada solutions. We finish with Section
3.3, which models the main pathways for robot
development we have observed in the course of
our research, including specific examples of each
strategy in action.
Section 4 describes the various technological,
social and systemic factors that are determining
robot deployment success. Since most of these
factors are common to any country developing
robotics, we first describe them from a general
perspective. We then follow up with a brief
explanation of how the factors play out in a
Canadian context, to highlight Canada’s relative
strengths and weaknesses.
Section 5 summarizes the main observations we
made in the course of our research and evaluates
Canada’s overall ability to leverage robotics
towards the pandemic response and future crises.
We finish by proposing several steps Canada can
take to better exploit its robotics assets.
Additional details on the Canadian robotics
landscape are provided in the Appendix.

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Introduction

10

02

ESSENTIAL BACKGROUND

This section provides background
information on robotics, technology readiness levels, the usual
robotics development approach,
and a brief inventory of robotics
assets in Canada. Those readers
already familiar with this information can safely skip to Section 3.

11

Background | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

2.1

PRIMER ON ROBOTICS
We use this section to provide a basic summary of robotic concepts, and to
explain (from a technological development standpoint) what is easy and what is
challenging for robots to do.
Robots can have different types of “bodies”. The three most common robot
body types are the “manipulator”, the “mobile robot”, and the “drone”, as
depicted in Figure 1.

Figure 1: Different robot body types, all developed in Canada: (left) Clearpath Robotics Jackal “mobile robot”, (centre) FLIR
Systems R80D SkyRaider “drone”; (right) Kinova Jaco for Gen3 robot “manipulator”.

Manipulators can be mounted on top of mobile robots to create “mobile
manipulators”. There are also many variations of robot bodies. For example,
instead of wheels, mobile robots can have legs or tracks. Drones, which are

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Background

12

also known as “unmanned aerial vehicles” (UAV) or “unmanned aerial
systems” (UAS), are a form of mobile robot that can fly. Manipulators
can also be specifically designed for high-performance tasks, such
as robotic surgery. Researchers continue to experiment with different
robot body types, such as soft robots, continuum (snake-like) robots,
exoskeletons, and microrobots.
Robots can have different types of sensors mounted on them to
perceive the surrounding environment. Some common sensors are
optical cameras (similar to the camera on a phone), depth cameras
(these can passively measure the distance between the camera and
another object), laser rangefinders (these can actively measure distance
to objects using laser light), and radar (these can actively measure
distance to objects using radio-frequency radiation). Outdoor robots
often use the Global Positioning System (GPS) to determine their
position. Manipulators sometimes have sensors that help them measure
how much force they are applying to objects. Individual motors usually
have sensors to measure how fast and how far they have turned.
Robots can have different “control” approaches to make them behave
as desired. The simplest method of control is “remote control” where
an operator observes the robot from afar and provides low-level motion
commands. An example of remote control can be found in the typical
radio-controlled toy car, where the operator uses a joystick to tell the robots’
motors to turn in a certain direction. If an operator cannot be physically
close enough to see a robot directly, “teleoperation” can be used, where
cameras mounted on the robot provide feedback to a remote display;
the operator still provides low-level motion commands. In the case of
manipulators (e.g., for surgery), other sensor information (such as force
feedback) may also be provided to help the operator understand how hard
the robot is pushing on something. Sometimes it is difficult to teleoperate
a robot using video feedback due to time delays or the environment being
cluttered; such situations may call for “assisted teleoperation” or “supervised
autonomy”, where the robot is given some basic ability to detect and avoid
obstacles, or to drive on its own for a short distance for example. Finally, “full
autonomy” usually refers to a robot that is able to operate without human
supervision for long periods of time. Figure 2 shows these different levels of
autonomy mapped against the industry-standard levels used to categorize
self-driving cars. A similar system is used to describe autonomy levels in
medical applications such as surgical robotics .
37

37

13

T. Haidegger, “Scaling the Autonomy of Surgical Robots,” presented at the 2017 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), Vancouver, 2017, Accessed: Sep.
01, 2020. Available: http://real.mtak.hu/86408/

Background | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

“remote control”
“radio control”
“teleoperation”

0

“assisted teleoperation”

1

NO AUTOMATION

DRIVER ASSISTANCE

Zero autonomy; the
driver performs all
driving tasks.

Vehicle is controlled
by the driver, but
some driving assist
features may be
included in the vehicle
design.

2

“supervised autonomy”

3

“full autonomy”

4

5

PARTIAL
AUTOMATION

CONDITIONAL
AUTOMATION

HIGH
AUTOMATION

FULL
AUTOMATION

Vehicle has
combined functions,
like acceleration and
steering, but the
driver must remain
engaged with the
driving task and
monitor the
environment at
all times.

Driver is a necessity,
but is not required to
monitor the environment. The driver must
be ready to take
control of the vehicle
at all times with
notice.

The vehicle is capable
of performing all
driving functions
under certain
conditions. The driver
may have the option
to control the vehicle.

The vehicle is capable
of performing all
driving functions
under all conditions.
The driver may have
the option to control
the vehicle.

Figure 2: Industry-standard autonomy levels for self-driving cars developed by the Society for Automotive Engineers (SAE) and mapped to our autonomy
terminology. Image credit: Adapted from SAE..38

There are two reasons to make a robot autonomous. The first reason is because the task that must
be performed cannot be accomplished any other way. An example of this is a Mars rover, where
the long communications time delay rules out teleoperation and so some operations must be
autonomous in order to advance the mission in a timely manner. Another example is the quadrotor
drone, where the dynamics are too complex for a human to control without assistance. The second
reason to make a robot autonomous is to achieve some kind of productivity or safety improvement
by reducing the human involvement required for operations. An example of this is the automotive
assembly line, where many robots are able to carry out repetitive tasks, helping prevent repetitive
stress injuries and freeing workers to focus on higher level operations. Full autonomy for highly
unstructured environments (e.g., self-driving cars or a homecare robot) has not yet been achieved.
Progress is being made, but generally speaking there is an inverse relationship between the
structure of the task and the current state of the art in autonomy: the more unstructured the task,
the less reliable are the current autonomous solutions.
At the risk of generalizing, mobile robots are fairly good at light-weight, low-speed applications where
they move around and avoid static or slow-moving obstacles; current vacuum robots are an example
of this. Scaling up to high-speed, heavy vehicles (i.e., self-driving cars) is still challenging unless the
environment can be simplified, such as in warehouse and mining applications where human access to
the environment is purposely restricted. Manipulator robots follow a similar trend. Tasks carried out in
highly structured environments with humans removed are commonplace (e.g., assembly lines). Robots
that can work alongside humans (known as collaborative robots or “cobots”) are becoming more
39

38
39

SAE International. https://www.sae.org/
Rather than replacing humans, these collaborative robots are designed to assist human operators with difficult or repetitive tasks.

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Background

14

common. Picking up objects of known shape from a predetermined
location using specialized tools is easy; picking up flexible or oddly
shaped objects from unknown or cluttered locations using a generic
“hand” is hard (e.g., getting an item from the back of the fridge).
In this whitepaper we provide an honest and realistic assessment of where
robots are likely to be helpful in fighting COVID-19. The challenge is to find
those applications where current technology can actually make a difference.

2.2
Technology
readiness levels
(TRLs) are used
to help assess
and compare
the maturity of
technologies across
different stages
of development.

TECHNOLOGY
READINESS LEVELS
Technology Readiness Levels (TRLs) are a scale developed in
the 1970s and 1980s by the US National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA) for assessing and comparing the maturity of
technologies across different stages of development, and fostering
mutual understanding among stakeholders from government, industry,
and research. Variations of NASA’s original TRLs have since been
developed by government entities around the world, including the
European Space Agency and the US Department of Defense (DoD) .
In the sections that follow, we will be assessing the maturity of different
robotics technologies and their use in applications related to COVID-19
using the Government of Canada’s Technology Readiness Levels
(TRL) , summarized in Figure 3.
40

41

42

Naturally, a single TRL level is an oversimplification of the state of a
given technology and it must be taken as an approximate assessment
at best. Moreover, it is critical to understand the details of each
specific application when making decisions about whether robots
will actually be useful given the current state of the art. For example,
“Telepresence” refers to teleoperating a mobile robot while also having
a video conference with people at the remote location; this could be

40

41
42

15

A. Olechowski, S. D. Eppinger, and N. Joglekar, “Technology Readiness Levels at 40: A Study
of State-of-the-Art Use, Challenges, and Opportunities,” 2015 Proceedings of PICMET ’15:
Management of the Technology Age, p. 11, 2015. Available: http://web.mit.edu/eppinger/www/pdf/
Eppinger_PICMET2015.pdf
M. Héder, “From NASA to EU: the evolution of the TRL scale in Public Sector Innovation,” The
Innovation Journal, vol. 22, p. 23, 2017. Available: https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/94310086.pdf
“Technology readiness levels,” Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada, Jan. 23,
2018. https://www.ic.gc.ca/eic/site/080.nsf/eng/00002.html (accessed Sep. 01, 2020).

Background | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

very useful for patient care and is quite reliable in certain situations, but
also has its challenges such as handling the opening of doors, using
elevators, and requiring a highly reliable communication connection. In
this example, the TRL would be quite different depending on whether
the robot must be able to open doors and operate elevators as part of
its job. For this reason, a TRL level can only capture the true status of
technology if the use case is very clearly defined.
We also note that the language used in the TRL definitions of Figure 3
is not universal in its meaning. For example, in the robotics community
“simulation” implies something quite different than it does in the
medical community. In the context of the TRL definitions described
below, we take simulation to mean something between a test in the
lab and operation in the real world; it could be a pilot program in a
mock physical environment, or field test of the component, subsystem,
or system. Additionally, “qualified” must be taken to mean that the
technology not only functions as planned but also adheres to any
relevant regulatory framework for the particular application (e.g., from
Health Canada, Transport Canada, etc.).

Basic
principles of
concept are
observed and
reported

Technology
concept
and/or
application
formulated

1

BASIC
RESEARCH

2

Analytical and
experimental
critical
function
and/or proof
of concept

3

RESEARCH TO
FEASIBILITY

Component
and/or
validation in
a laboratory
environment

4

TECHNOLOGY
DEVELOPMENT

Component
and/or
validation in a
simulated
environment

System/
subsystem
model or
prototype
demonstration in a
simulated
environment

5

TECHNOLOGY
DEMONSTRATION

6

Prototype
ready for
demonstration
in an appropriate operational
environment

7

SYSTEM/
SUBSYSTEM
DEVELOPMENT

Actual
technology
completed
and qualified
through tests
and demonstrations

8

Actual
technology
proven
through
successful
deployment in
an operational
setting

9

SYSTEM TEST, LAUNCH
AND OPERATIONS

Figure 3: Government of Canada Technology Readiness Levels (TRL) with typical development phases indicated below. Note that because Technology Readiness
Levels stop short of considering market factors such as customer readiness, investment, or supply chains, TRLs alone cannot be used to measure capacity to
scale or potential impact. Image credit: Adapted from Gamechangers43.

43

“Technology Readiness Levels,” Game Changers Innovation. https://www.gamechangers.technology/technology-readiness-levels/ (accessed Sep.
01, 2020).

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Background

16

Technology
Readiness Levels
stop short of
considering market
factors such as
customer readiness,
investment, or
supply chains.

2.3

Though we will show some examples of emerging technology in this
paper to help readers understand the breadth of robotics technologies
being developed for the pandemic, we are specifically interested
in robots that have been demonstrated or deployed in application
environments, because these are the robots with the most realistic
impact potential in the short to mid term. This means that our
real interest is in robots with TRL7 or higher, as only these involve
demonstrations or deployments in actual operational environments
(TRL5 and TRL6 involve demonstrations of robots only in simulated
environments). Because Technology Readiness Levels stop short of
considering market factors such as customer readiness, investment
or supply chains, TRLs alone cannot be used to measure capacity
to scale or to assess potential impact. For this reason, while we use
TRL levels to assess robot development, they alone are insufficient for
determining whether a solution is ready for widespread deployment.

HOW ROBOTS ARE 			
DEVELOPED
Below the TRL levels in Figure 3, we see typical labels applied to the
development phases for technology. These labels map a progression
from basic research, to proofs of concept (feasibility), to development
(turning prototypes into robust products), to demonstrations (verification)
and pilot deployments (validation), to product launch and operations.
Real robotic systems are usually developed in this traditional way; the
technology must climb the TRL ladder step by step. University research
labs are typically involved in the low-TRL range (1-3), but may be
involved in TRL4 when working with industry sponsors. University-based
innovation labs and incubators may develop up to TRL6. Industrial
robot developers then mature the technology (TRL3-7) whereupon the
end users or ‘systems integrators’ build applications (TRL7-9) . It is
usually a multi-year process to design a new robot product from scratch
due to the many hardware and software components that must be
brought together in a functioning system that must be both safe and
adhere to the relevant regulatory frameworks. See Appendix A.2 for
more information on Canada’s legal and regulatory landscape.
44

44

17

Note that due to the relative immaturity of the robot market, most robot developers also play the role
of application developers.

Background | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

Developing robotics
takes longer and
is more expensive
than developing
than software
solutions. Hardware
must be prototyped,
safety tested, and
regulation-compliant
before it is feasibly
scaled up for
manufacturing.

2.4
Canada’s early
investments through
the 1970-80s
helped establish
our reputation as
a key international
player in robotics.

The development process for robotics is longer and costlier than a
pure software product (such as an artificial intelligence algorithm or
app) because hardware must not compromise safety, and yet it must
be prototyped, tested, and regulation-compliant before it is feasibly
scaled up for manufacturing. At the same time, robot development
involves not only hardware (i.e. the robot’s body and sensors) but
also software, which must do everything from reasoning from the
robots’ sensor data and planning its motions, to controlling the robot’s
hardware and providing an interface for human control. The implication
of this for COVID-19 is that if robots are to have an impact in the short
term, only products that are well on their way to real applications (e.g.,
TRL7 and higher) can be ready in time.

BRIEF OVERVIEW OF
CANADIAN ROBOTICS
Canada has a rich history in robotics. Perhaps the most wellknown accomplishments are the Canadarm and Canadarm2 space
manipulators used on the Space Shuttles and International Space
Station, respectively. Early and sustained investments in the Canada
Space Arm (1975-2011) and CIFAR’s Artificial Intelligence, Robotics,
and Society program (launched in 1983) established Canada’s
reputation as a key international player in robotics. More recently,
those early investments were renewed via a number of complementary
initiatives. One of these is the $125 million Pan-Canadian Artificial
Intelligence Strategy , launched in 2017, which established three
national AI institutes: the Amii Institute in Alberta, the Mila Institute
in Montreal, and the Vector Institute in Toronto. The $950 million
45

46

47

45
46
47

“Canadian space milestones,” Canadian Space Agency, Dec. 04, 2007. https://www.asc-csa.gc.ca/
eng/about/milestones.asp (accessed Sep. 01, 2020).
K. Kleiner, “History Note: Canadarm,” Reach Magazine (CIFAR), Apr. 04, 2014. Available: https://
www.cifar.ca/cifarnews/2014/04/01/history-note-canadarm
“Pan-Canadian Artificial Intelligence Strategy,” CIFAR. https://www.cifar.ca/ai/pan-canadian-artificialintelligence-strategy (accessed Sep. 01, 2020).

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Background

18

Supercluster Initiative launched its Scale.ai (artificial intelligence) and
NGen (advanced manufacturing) programs in 2018. Most recently,
Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada (ISED)
launched its new Canadian Space Strategy (2019), which promises
to invest $1.9 billion specifically to develop AI-enabled deep-space
robotics systems .
48

49

Owing in part to this rich history, Canada has an excellent ecosystem
of robotics experts distributed across the country in academia,
industry, and government, and there are too many to cover in this
paper. The Robot Report Global Map, which tracks robotics around
the world, lists over 280 Canadian robotics organizations in Canada .
We briefly use this section to highlight some of Canada’s key assets,
depicted in Figure 4. More detail is provided in Appendix A.
50

Figure 4: Map of Canada’s key robotics assets: (left) Distribution of select companies working directly in robotics
in Canada; (right) Canada’s largest academic and government robotics centers.

Academically speaking, Canada’s universities excel in fundamental and
applied robotics research. For example, at the 2019 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation, the University of Toronto
ranked #6 in university conference contributions, but jumped to #1

48
49
50

19

“Canada’s new superclusters,” Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada, Jan. 27,
2020. https://www.ic.gc.ca/eic/site/093.nsf/eng/00008.html (accessed Sep. 01, 2020).
“Exploration, Imagination, Innovation: A New Space Strategy for Canada,” Canadian Space Agency,
2019. Accessed: Sep. 01, 2020. Available: https://www.asc-csa.gc.ca/pdf/eng/publications/spacestrategy-for-canada.pdf
“Global Robotics Map,” The Robot Report. https://www.therobotreport.com/map/

Background | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

when it came to award nominations . Since 2012, a Canada-wide
network has existed called the NSERC Canadian (Field) Robotics
Network (NCRN) , led by McGill University. NCRN used to focus on
field robotics, but more recently broadened its mandate. It now brings
together many of the universities currently actively working on robotics,
including McGill University, Queen’s University, University of Alberta,
University of Sherbrooke, University of Toronto, University of Waterloo,
York University, University of Laval, University of Montreal, and Simon
Fraser University. NCRN’s mission is “to create the resilient and
interacting robots of the future”, making it a logical starting point for
COVID-related robotics research contacts. Beyond NCRN, there are
many robotics faculty and laboratories located in universities across
the country. Some have significant expertise in areas that are relevant
to the pandemic, such as medical robotics, for example the Canadian
Surgical Technologies and Advanced Robotics (CSTAR) Engineering
Group at the University of Western Ontario and the NSERC HeRo
CREATE on healthcare robotics at the University of Toronto. Also
relevant to a robotized pandemic response are our diverse research
capabilities in the field of human-robot interaction (HRI), with expertise
in everything from affective and social robots , to human-robot
interfaces , collaborative industrial systems
, HRI ethics , and
rehabilitation . Canadian universities are on the whole following a
global trend towards growing larger robotics centres involving multiple
faculty from a variety of disciplines. Examples of this trend include
51

52

53

Canadian
universities are on
the whole following a
global trend towards
growing larger
robotics centres
involving multiple
faculty from a variety
of disciplines.

54

55

56 57

58 59

60 61 62

63

64 65

51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65

“ICRA 2019 Data Visualization,” GVU Center at Georgia Tech, 2019. Accessed: Sep. 01, 2020.
Available: https://public.tableau.com/views/ICRA2019_2/Dashboard1?:showVizHome=no
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council, one of Canada’s three research granting
councils
“NSERC Canadian Robotics Network / Réseau canadien de robotique du CRSNG,” NSERC
Canadian Robotics Network. https://ncrn-rcrc.mcgill.ca/ (accessed Sep. 01, 2020).
“Canadian Surgical Technologies and Advanced Robotics (CSTAR) - Engineering Research Group,”
Western University. https://www.eng.uwo.ca/cstar/
“Healthcare Robotics (HeRo) NSERC CREATE Graduate Training,” University of Toronto Robotics
Institute. https://robotics.utoronto.ca/healthcare-robotics-hero-nserc-create-graduate-training/
E.g. “ROSIE Lab,” Simon Fraser University. https://www.rosielab.ca/
“Autonomous Systems and Biomechatronics Lab,” University of Toronto. http://asblab.mie.utoronto.
ca/ (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).
“Telerobotic and Biorobotic Systems Group,” University of Alberta. http://www.ece.ualberta.ca/~tbs/
pmwiki/index.php?n=Main.HomePage (accessed Sep. 04, 2020).
“Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) Lab,” University of Manitoba. http://hci.cs.umanitoba.ca/
(accessed Sep. 04, 2020).
“Laboratoire de commande et de robotique (CoRo),” École de technologie supérieure (ÉTS) de
Montréal. https://www.etsmtl.ca/Unites-de-recherche/CoRo (accessed Sep. 04, 2020).
“Adaptive Systems Lab,” University of Waterloo, Oct. 24, 2017. https://uwaterloo.ca/adaptivesystems/home (accessed Sep. 04, 2020).
“Collaborative Advanced Robotics and Intelligent Systems Laboratory (CARIS),” University of British
Columbia. https://caris.mech.ubc.ca/ (accessed Sep. 04, 2020).
“RAISE Lab,” McGill University. http://raiselab.ca/ (accessed Sep. 04, 2020).
“Intelligent Assistive Technology and Systems (IATSL) Lab,” University of Toronto. https://www.iatsl.
org/ (accessed Sep. 04, 2020).
“Robotics for Rehabilitation Exercise and Assessment in Collaborative Healthcare (RREACH) Lab,”
University of British Columbia. http://rreach.mech.ubc.ca/ (accessed Sep. 04, 2020).

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Background

20

the University of Toronto Robotics Institute (the authors of this white
paper), and other large academic robotics hubs such as the Robohub
at Waterloo, the Ingenuity Center at Queen’s, and the Centre for
Intelligent Machines at McGill.
66

67

68

69

On the industry side, Canada is also very strong. MDA Robotics
(formerly MD Robotics, formerly SPAR Aerospace) supplied the 1st
Canadarm (called Space Shuttle Remote Manipulator System) in
1980 and subsequent versions of 2nd Canadarm manipulators, and
continues to be an important original equipment manufacturer (OEM)
supplier of both space and terrestrial robots for high-performance
applications, including surgery. Clearpath Robotics has grown rapidly
over the last decade to become a key global supplier of indoor and
outdoor mobile robots for research and warehouse operations.
Robotiq is a Quebec-based provider of tools and software for the
collaborative robotics market, helping manufacturers start production
faster. Also in Quebec is Kinova, a manufacturer of lightweight robot
arms for testing, maintenance and inspection across a wide range
of application industries. ESI is a leading provider of tactical robots
for law enforcement, robot arms for industrial automation, medical
robots for robot-assisted medical surgery, and personal robots for
a range of applications. In terms of aerial robotics, FLIR (formerly
Aeryon Labs) builds surveillance drones, and Drone Delivery Canada
has quickly become a leader in aerial delivery, particularly to remote
communities. Avidbots is a growing company providing autonomous
floor-cleaning robots, and is currently developing a disinfection sprayer
add-on. There are also many Canadian companies building roboticsrelated sensors including cameras (Lucid and FLIR, formerly Point
Grey Research), laser rangefinders (Optech, LeddarTech, Neptec,
Quanergy), and GPS positioning (Applanix, Novatel).
There are multiple Canadian government and industry groups with
robotics expertise. Defence R&D Canada has been working in the
robotics space for several decades at their various Centres, with
expertise in teleoperation and autonomous operations of ground
robots and drones. The Canadian Space Agency in Longueuil,
Quebec has a strong in-house team of roboticists to help with
operations of the Canadarms and to research future space

66

“University of Toronto Robotics Institute,” University of Toronto. https://robotics.utoronto.ca/
(accessed Sep. 01, 2020).
67 “Waterloo Robohub,” University of Waterloo. https://uwaterloo.ca/robohub/home (accessed Sep.
01, 2020).
68 “Ingenuity Labs Research Institute,” Queen’s University. https://www.queensu.ca/research/centresinstitutes/ingenuity-labs-research-institute (accessed Sep. 01, 2020).
69 “Centre for Intelligent Machines,” McGill University. https://www.cim.mcgill.ca/ (accessed Sep. 01, 2020).

21

Background | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

exploration concepts including teleperation and autonomous
operations of rovers. Hydro Quebec, Quebec’s public hydro
utility, has a research institute (IREQ) that has been developing
robotics for hydro asset management for over twenty years . The
National Research Council also has in-house experts in robotics in
their various centres. Unmanned Systems Canada is an industry
association group focussed on autonomous vehicles, and the
Regroupment des Enterprises en Automatisation Industrielle (REAI)
is an industry association of Quebec-based companies focused on
industrial automation. Further details on the academic/government
robotics landscape in Canada is given in the Appendix.
70

71

We begin the next section by looking at where robots can be useful in
this pandemic, and note that, despite the many robotics experts and
assets across the country, at the time of writing, our research revealed
only a handful of COVID-specific deployments of robots in Canada.
Much of this paper is dedicated to analyzing why this is the case.

70
71

“Advanced Robotics for Optimizing Asset Management,” Hydro-Québec Research Institute (IREQ).
http://www.hydroquebec.com/robotics/ (accessed Sep. 01, 2020).
“World-class automation expertise serving the Canadian eastern market,” Regroupment des
Enterprises en Automatisation Industrielle (REAI). https://reai.ca/en/ (accessed Sep. 01, 2020).

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Background

22

03

Deployments and Use Cases
of Robots for COVID-19

This section describes the main areas where robots are already
being used to address COVID-19 both globally and in Canada,
and describes some novel use cases still in development.
This is not intended to be an exhaustive list of all robots being
experimented with in the COVID-19 pandemic; for a more
comprehensive view of known use cases, please refer to the
ongoing work of Robin Murphy and her team, described in
Section 1.4. Instead, we focus on representing the breadth of
robots being used to manage the pandemic crisis in order to
describe general patterns in robot deployments. Our analysis
is determined from our own experience deploying hardware
systems, from media reports, as well as our own and others’
interviews with experts from hospitals, public health, public
transportation, manufacturing/retail industries, education, and
government labs.

23

Use Cases | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

3.1

WHAT ROBOTS CAN DO
This subsection describes the main use
cases for robots during the pandemic,
and includes examples. Each section
begins with a brief summary of the
need and how robots are being used
to address it. The examples given are
not intended to be an exhaustive list,
but are instead meant to represent the
range of jobs robots are doing in each
use case category.

efficacy for this particular use case
has yet to be studied (for example the
Agras MG-1 agricultural spraying drone,
which has been repurposed to spray
disinfectants instead of pesticides) .
Robots that “need development” are
generally TRL2-6 robots that require
significant development but nonetheless
offer a unique or potentially
transformative capability.

The examples are organized by
Technology Readiness Levels (TRLs;
see Section 2.2) so that the reader can
understand each robot’s relative maturity.
Robots that are “ready to scale” are TRL9
robots that are tested and commercially
available; here we indicate the robot cost
where available. Robots that are “ready
to pilot” are generally TRL7-8, though
we include in this list the occasional
TRL9 robot that has been repurposed
from another application area but whose

Our goal with this section is to provide
readers with an understanding of the
relative maturity and capabilities of the
technologies in question, such that
readers can easily compare products
and use cases.

72

72 “Spain Is The First European Country To Use
Agricultural Drones To Fight COVID-19,” Quadcopter
News, Apr. 04, 2020. https://www.quadcopternews.
it/emergency/spain-is-the-first-european-country-touse-agricultural-drones-to-fight-covid-19/ (accessed
Sep. 01, 2020).

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Use Cases

24

3.1.1 Disinfection & Cleaning
NEED
The need for disinfection and cleaning in hospitals and other patient care facilities during the pandemic
is obvious. However, as economies reopen, public gathering hotspots such as airports, event venues,
and public transportation vehicles, and transit stations, schools, malls and workplaces also play a
vital role in preventing virus spread, as frequently-touched surfaces such as doorknobs, handrails,
elevator buttons, faucet handles, seats, and tables, etc., are most likely to be contaminated. Surface
and air contamination must be similarly managed in large workspaces such warehouses, retail
stores, and factories — all without loss of productivity. Most countries have protocols and procedures
in place for cleaning open access spaces and industrial facilities. Under pandemic conditions,
however, cleaning capacity quickly reaches its limit and frequent cleaning cannot be ensured.
HOW ROBOTS CAN HELP
•

Cleaning and disinfecting floors, large surfaces, personal protective
equipment, and cluttered environments, and purifying air

•

Identifying and targeting frequently-touched surfaces

•

Reducing exposure risk and saving time by providing a coarse “first pass”
of disinfection, even when manual cleaning is still needed

•

Augmenting cleaning and capacity and frequency by supplementing cleaning staff

•

Addressing labour shortages when cleaning staff fall ill or cannot come into work

•

Assisting managers with oversight and planning by tracking, scheduling
and reporting on cleaning routes and completion schedules

•

Providing quality assurance for disinfection procedures by analysing (e.g. air)
samples and alerting cleaning staff / managers when virus is present

•

Reassuring customers, employees, and the public that hygiene measures are being taken

EXAMPLES
The robots described in this section use a range of disinfection modes, from UV-C light, to
hydrogen peroxide fog, to electrostatic spray, and are designed to operate in a variety of
locations, from hospitals to public spaces and even on airplanes. Some robots use multiple
disinfection modes at once, and/or are designed to identify and target high-touch areas. UV-C
is known to be effective for viral and bacterial disinfection in specific contexts, but is harmful
to humans and may be ineffective if there is no direct line of sight. Disinfection may be less
effective on certain surfaces (e.g. fabrics), and so correct dosage and technique are essential,
and vary from context to context. For these reasons, further validation and testing of robotic
disinfection devices is needed in a variety of pilot settings before they are widely deployed.

25

Use Cases | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

TABLE 1: DISINFECTION & CLEANING ROBOTS
UV-C room cleaning

READY TO
SCALE
(TRL9+)

E.g. UVD Robot,
Blue Ocean Robotics
Unit cost: ~$80K USD73
Image: Blue Ocean Robotics

UV-C PPE disinfection
Disinfect PPE for reuse 77

READY TO
PILOT
(TRL7-8)

Compact UV-C
cleaning for aircraft

E.g. UV Cabin System,
Honeywell
Unit cost: $10/use74
Image: Honeywell

Targetted, multimodal
disinfection

Floor cleaning retail, office, hospital

E.g. Whiz, Softbank Robotics
Unit cost: ~$500/mo USD75
Image: Softbank Robotics

Ultra low cost UV-C

E.g. Violet UV Robot, Akara
Robotics
Image: Akara Robotics
E.g. ISR, TMiROB
Image: Time Medical Systems

Distributes disinfectant over large
areas and hidden surfaces

For operating in dynamic
environments with many
moving obstacles

E.g. Neo, Avidbots
Unit cost: ~$50K76 USD
Image: Avidbots

Aerial disinfectant spraying

UV/Dry-Fog/Air purification
systems that can identify &
target high-touch areas

E.g. Tru-D Robot, Tru-D
SmartUVC
Image: University of Virginia

Electrostatic spraying
robots

Floor cleaning warehouse, factories

All terrain disinfection
robots

Long-duration, high-speed,
all-terrain UV + chemical
disinfection

UV-C Drones

E.g. Agras MG-1 , DJI
Unit cost: ~$6K78
Image: DJI
(repurposed agricultural drone)

UV-C Mobile Manipulator

For disinfecting large indoor
spaces

Open drawers/ manipulate objects

E.g. Aertos 120-UVC,
Digital Aerolus
Image: Digital Aerolus

E.g. ADAMMS-UV,
University of Southern California
Image: University of
Southern California

NEEDS
DEVELOPING
(TRL2-6)
E.g. XDBot, Transforma Robotics
& Nanyang Tech University
Image: Transforma Robotics &
Nanyang Tech University

E.g. CIMATIC project,
SENAI CIMATEC
Image: SENAI CIMATEC

Note: The examples listed on this page are meant to demonstrate the breadth of use cases and relative maturity of robotics for this application area, and are
not meant to be exhaustive. Inclusion in this paper does not constitute endorsement on the part of the Authors.

73 E. Ackerman, “Autonomous Robots Are Helping Kill Coronavirus in Hospitals,” IEEE Spectrum: Technology, Engineering, and Science News, Mar. 11,
2020. https://spectrum.ieee.org/automaton/robotics/medical-robots/autonomous-robots-are-helping-kill-coronavirus-in-hospitals (accessed Sep.
01, 2020)
74 “Honeywell To Unveil UV Cleaning System For Airplane Cabins; Partners With Dimer,” Nasdaq RTT News, Jun. 10, 2020.
https://www.nasdaq.com/articles/honeywell-to-unveil-uv-cleaning-system-for-airplane-cabins-partners-with-dimer-2020-06-10 (accessed Sep. 01, 2020)
75 M. Meisenzahl, “SoftBank is selling a robot vacuum called Whiz for $500 a month,” Business Insider, Nov. 20, 2019.
https://www.businessinsider.com/softbank-robot-vacuum-whiz-self-driving-tech-photos-2019-11 (accessed Sep. 01, 2020)
76 A. Feldman, “Dirty Work For Robots: How Two Young Immigrant Entrepreneurs Created Oven-Sized Roombas To Chase A $5B Opportunity,” Forbes,
Mar. 21, 2019. https://www.forbes.com/sites/amyfeldman/2019/03/21/dirty-work-for-robots (accessed Sep. 01, 2020)
77 E. Swensen, “This Robot Allows UVA Health to Reuse Thousands of Masks in the COVID-19 Fight,” UVA Today | University of Virginia, Apr. 10, 2020.
https://news.virginia.edu/content/robot-allows-uva-health-reuse-thousands-masks-covid-19-fight (accessed Sep. 01, 2020)
78 “DJI Agras MG-1 Agriculture Spraying Drone with Battery Charger: Industrial & Scientific,” Amazon.com. https://www.amazon.com/MG-1Agriculture-Spraying-Battery-Charger/dp/B079VXJB4Z (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Use Cases

26

3.1.2 Medical Triage & Assistance
NEED
Under pandemic conditions, the number of people needing medical attention can rise rapidly. Patients
in intensive care and elderly people locked down in nursing homes require regular monitoring, however
every contact with a potential or confirmed infected patient requires a change of personal protective
equipment (PPE), which takes time and creates significant waste. Additional PPE and safety protocols
are necessary but can be exhausting for healthcare workers and may leave them with little time for their
regular duties. The use of face coverings such as masks and shields can obstruct the view of healthcare
workers’ faces and make it difficult to communicate with patients. Healthcare workers are at added risk
and may themselves become sick, be quarantined, and put their own families at risk.
HOW ROBOTS CAN HELP
•

Preventing healthcare workers from getting sick by minimizing
unnecessary physical contact with infected patients

•

Enabling medical professionals to interview patients remotely
or work from home while in quarantine

•

Enabling remote symptom-checking, prescription, and referral in understaffed hospitals and long-term care homes (tele-medicine)

•

Enabling “face to face” communication without the need for masks

•

Autonomously performing touchless temperature checks
and conducting simple patient interviews

•

Monitoring vital signs at the patients’ bedside (e.g., temperature,
blood oxygen level, respiration, and movement)

•

Reducing the need for multiple changes of PPE, and therefore saving time and preventing waste

•

Delivering medical supplies, food, medicine, linens, and lab samples

•

Mobilizing coma-induced patients for improved recovery times

EXAMPLES
Telepresence — the ability to facilitate two-way communication between medical staff and patients — is
a key feature of many medical deployments as it helps to keep frontline workers safe. While the robots
described in this section are meant to perform a variety of tasks, those that perform simpler and more
predictable tasks (e.g. Promobot Medical Assessor) tend to have higher TRL levels, and the multipurpose
robots (e.g. the TRINA Nursing Assistant depicted in the table below) tend to be earlier in development.
While a multipurpose nursing assistant like TRINA is unlikely to be ready in time for the COVID pandemic, it

27

Use Cases | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

is being developed in response to the emergence of highly infectious diseases like Ebola and Zika , where robotics
could perform essential tasks as part of a pandemic containment strategy.
79

TABLE 2: MEDICAL TRIAGE & ASSISTANCE ROBOTS
Telepresence

To enable medical professionals to
interview patients remotely or work
from home while in quarantine

Vital sign assessment
& patient intake

To interview incoming patients, measure
temperature, lung capacity measurement,
blood sugar and oxygen saturation
levels, and other health signs.

In-hospital delivery

For secure delivery of medical supplies,
food, medicine, linens, and lab samples

READY TO
SCALE
(TRL9+)

E.g. Ava 500, Ava Robotics
Unit cost: $1K/mo80
Image: Ava Robotics

ICU Assistance

E.g. Medical Assessor, Promobot
Image: Promobot

E.g. Tug, Aethon
Unit cost: $1500-2K/mo USD81
Image: Aethon

To monitor heart rate and other vital signs;
to enable doctors and nurses to
communicate remotely with patients in
isolation using two way communication

To enable medical staff to triage patients
outdoors before they enter the hospital

Outdoor triage

Physiotherapy assistance

E.g. Elf, Sanbot
Unit cost: ~$16K USD82
Image: Sanbot

E.g. Spot with iPad, Boston Dynamics
Unit cost: >$74.5K USD83
Image: Boston Dynamics

E.g. Robert Mobilization Assistant, Life
Science Robotics
Image: Life Science Robotics

To help mobilize coma-induced
patients and patients in recover

READY TO
PILOT
(TRL7-8)

Multipurpose nursing assistance
Mobile manipulator that can open
drawers, doors, perform cleaning
tasks, in quarantined areas etc.

NEEDS
DEVELOPING
(TRL2-6)
E.g. TRINA Nursing Assistant,
University of Illinois UrbanaChampaign and Duke University
Image: Intelligent Motion Lab (Duke)
Note: The examples listed on this page are meant to demonstrate the breadth of use cases and relative maturity of robotics for this application area, and
are not meant to be exhaustive. Inclusion in this paper does not constitute endorsement on the part of the Authors.

79 “Tele-Robotic Intelligent Nursing Assistant (TRINA),” Human-Inspired Robotics Lab, Worcester Polytechnic Institute. http://labs.wpi.edu/hiro/project-portfolio/telerobotic-intelligent-nursing-assistant-trina/ (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).
80 J. Vincent, “iRobot spinoff Ava Robotics launches autonomous telepresence bot,” The Verge, Mar. 13, 2018. https://www.theverge.com/
circuitbreaker/2018/3/13/17113494/telepresence-robot-ava-robotics-irobot (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).
81 “Blue-Collar Delivery Robots Making Gains in U.S. Hospitals,” Robotics Business Review, Nov. 12, 2013. https://www.roboticsbusinessreview.com/healthmedical/blue_collar_delivery_robots_making_gains_in_u-s-_hospitals (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).
82 “Sanbot Elf,” Tribotix. https://tribotix.com/product/sanbot-elf/ (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).
83 E. Ackerman, “Boston Dynamics’ Spot Robot Dog Now Available for $74,500,” IEEE Spectrum: Technology, Engineering, and Science News, Jun. 16, 2020.
https://spectrum.ieee.org/automaton/robotics/industrial-robots/boston-dynamics-spot-robot-dog-now-available (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Use Cases

28

3.1.3 Sampling & Diagnostics
NEED
In order to efficiently trace new infection cases and implement necessary measures against the spread
of COVID-19, massive clinical testing needs to be performed on a daily basis. Manual sampling poses
a transmission risk to frontline workers as they come in close contact with potentially infected people
while swabbing nasal cavities or throats. Healthcare workers must also be trained in the proper sampling
techniques because inconsistent manual sampling leads to viral load variations of the swab samples and thus
low testing sensitivity and specificity. Incorrect swabbing procedures can also be painful or uncomfortable for
patients. An added concern has been the shortage of swabs for collecting sample specimens.
Due to the multi-step nature and sophisticated reagent mixing procedures involved in COVID testing,
streamlined and fully automated COVID-19 diagnostics have not been widely adopted in major hospitals .
84

HOW ROBOTS CAN HELP
•

Enabling consistent, high throughput diagnostic testing

•

Improving the consistency and accuracy of sample collection

•

Enabling unskilled medical staff to perform swabbing procedures

•

Reducing the risk of infection to healthcare workers

•

Improving comfort to patients when swabbing

•

Enabling population-level testing

•

Enabling on-demand printing of swabs

EXAMPLES
The mature robots in this category are for lab automation, whereas swabbing robots still require significant
development. Steerable robotic endoscopes and surgical tools could be adapted to nasal or throat swab
sampling with improved operation consistency. However, less resource intensive and less invasive methods
such as saliva sampling and sample pooling, if proven effective, may reduce the need to automate nasal and
throat swabbing in the long run. Existing easy-to-use and cost-efficient sewage water sampling robots show
promise for identifying hotspots of COVID-19 infection in the population without requiring individual testing .
In the post-pandemic era, demands for serological antibody testing may also surge significantly, which could
bring new market opportunities for blood-sampling robots. The robots for both swab and blood sampling
could be further integrated with mobile diagnostic platforms for streamlined and automated COVID-19
diagnostics with minimal human intervention, enabling more accurate decentralized testing.
85

86

84
85
86

29

Based on interviews with clinicians from Toronto SickKids and UHN, May 2020.
K. Springer, “Meet Luigi: MIT’s sewer-scouring robot,” CNN Business, Sep. 30, 2016. https://money.cnn.com/2016/09/30/technology/mit-robotssewers/index.html (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).
L. Osman, “Testing wastewater could give early warning of second wave of COVID-19,” CTV News, May 22, 2020. https://www.ctvnews.ca/health/
coronavirus/testing-wastewater-could-give-early-warning-of-second-wave-of-covid-19-1.4949874 (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).

Use Cases | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

TABLE 3: SAMPLING & DIAGNOSTICS ROBOTS
For high throughput laboratory diagnostics

Liquid-handling

Opensource,
low-cost liquid handling

E.g. easyBlood STARlet for COVID-19,
Hamilton
Unit cost: ~$100K
Image: Hamilton

E.g. OpenTrons OT-2 , OpenTrons
Unit cost: $5,000 USD
Image: OpenTrons

For large scale, high speed
laboratory diagnostics

READY TO
SCALE
(TRL9+)

3d printing of nasal swabs87

Wastewater sampling

Installed under manhole covers in target
areas (e.g. nursing homes, hospitals,
campuses, suspected hotspots) to enable
population level testing

Blood sampling

For serological (antibody) testing

READY TO
PILOT
(TRL7-8)
Markforged 3D printer
Image: Markforged
E.g. Biobot, Biobot Analytics
(MIT Spinoff)
Image: Biobot Analytics

Autonomous throat swabbing

NEEDS
DEVELOPING
(TRL2-6)

E.g. Automatic Swab Robot,
Lifeline Robotics
Image: Lifeline Robotics
(Spin-off of Maersk Mc-Kinney
Moller Institute, University of
Southern Denmark (SDU)

Assisted throat swabbing

Teleoperated throat swabbing to improve
accuracy & comfort

E.g. Blood drawing robot,
Rutgers University
Image: Rutgers University

Nasal swabbing

E.g. Throat Swabbing Assistant,
E.g. Low-cost Miniature Robot to Assist
Chinese Academy of Sciences
COVID-19 Nasopharyngeal Swab Sampling,
Image: Shenyang Institute of Automation of
Chinese Academy of Sciences Beihang
the Chinese Academy of Science and First
University, and King’s College London
Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical
Image: Chinese Academy of Sciences
University
Beihang University, and King’s College
London

Note: The examples listed on this page are meant to demonstrate the breadth of use cases and relative maturity of robotics for this application area, and
are not meant to be exhaustive. Inclusion in this paper does not constitute endorsement on the part of the Authors.

87 J. Camillo, “Manufacturers Shift to PPE Production to Fight COVID-19 Pandemic,” Assembly Magazine, Jun. 17, 2020. https://www.assemblymag.com/
articles/95741-manufacturers-shift-to-ppe-production-to-fight-covid-19-pandemic (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Use Cases

30

3.1.4 Public Safety & Security
NEED
To prevent the spread of this highly transmissible virus, most countries have adopted physical distancing
policies and/or measures to restrict movement. Common restrictions include quarantining of (potentially)
infected, physical distancing, limiting access to public spaces and workplaces, hand washing and mask
wearing. There is a need to enforce these measures and guarantee a continued awareness of the infection
risk in the population over long periods of time. However, enforcement capacity of a municipality or region
can quickly reach their limits. Ensuring appropriate physical distancing and continued awareness of the
infection risk in the population is a major challenge, as illustrated by recent examples of people crowding
in city parks . Moreover, similar enforcement measures are also required for individual healthcare facilities,
workplaces, airports, public transportation, and shopping centers. Given the increased demand of
enforcement personnel during a pandemic, physical distancing may not be consistently enforced.
88

HOW ROBOTS CAN HELP
•

Alerting the public of safety policies

•

Monitoring crowds in public spaces including airports, public transportation and shopping centers

•

Performing temperature checks and identifying potentially infected individuals

•

Alerting public health and/or law enforcement personnel to areas where physical distancing
violations (including not wearing masks) or infection risks are detected

•

Monitoring and/or controlling traffic and access to buildings, rooms, elevators etc, where
restrictions are in place

•

Enforcing quarantine rules, e.g. through reminders

•

Securing vacant or poorly staffed facilities

EXAMPLES
Existing mobile robot platforms (driving, flying and walking vehicles) have been repurposed to be “mobile
speakers” reminding people of important physical distancing guidelines both outdoors and indoors. Robots
have also been used to monitor crowds in public spaces including airports, public transportation and shopping
centers, and direct law enforcement personnel to areas where physical distancing violations (including not
wearing masks) have been detected. Further, existing robots have been repurposed with relative ease to
monitor traffic flow in areas where restrictions are in place (e.g., access to supermarkets or the subway). Privacy
concerns must be appropriately addressed for the technology to obtain acceptance within a given context.

88

31

C. Wilson, “Several tickets issued at crowded Toronto park after people spotted urinating, defecating in driveways, backyards,” CTV News, Toronto,
May 24, 2020. https://toronto.ctvnews.ca/several-tickets-issued-at-crowded-toronto-park-after-people-spotted-urinating-defecating-in-drivewaysbackyards-1.4952195 (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).

Use Cases | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

TABLE 4: PUBLIC SAFETY & SECURITY ROBOTS
Public health & mask/
PPE detection

For non-contact temperature
check, mask/PPE detection,
alerts, etc

Security patrol

For patrolling and monitoring
vacant or poorly-staffed
premises

READY TO
SCALE
(TRL9+)

E.g. Cruzr, UBTech Robotics
Unit cost: $35K USD89
Image: RobotLAB

E.g. Cobalt, Cobalt Robotics
Unit cost $6k/mo USD90
Image: Cobalt Robotics

Employee health screening

Aerial crowd
monitoring/enforcement

For tracking employees/visitors
as they enter & conducting
temperature and health
questionnaire screening

For detecting crowds,
analyzing temperature &
issuing physical distancing
reminders from the air

Parkland patrol &
enforcement

For detecting groups and
issuing reminders to physically
distance in outdoor areas such
as parks

Personal disinfection

Detect mask wearing, check
temperature, sanitize personal
items etc

READY TO
PILOT
(TRL7-8)
E.g. Misty II Temp Screening
Assistant, Misty Robotics
Unit cost: $3,000 + monthly fee
Image: Misty Robotics

E.g. Mavic 2 with
Loudspeaker, DJI
Unit cost: ~$2K USD91
Image: DJI

E.g. Spot, Boston Dynamics
Unit cost: $75K USD92
Image: Boston Dynamics

E.g. COVID-19 Quarantine Robot,
Omron with SKT
Image: SKT

Cloud-based multirobot
monitoring systems

For integrating robots and smart
devices, including security,
temperature measurement, patient
monitoring & more
NEEDS
DEVELOPING
(TRL2-6)

E.g. HARIX Cloud Brain,
Cloudminds
Image: Cloudminds
Note: The examples listed on this page are meant to demonstrate the breadth of use cases and relative maturity of robotics for this application area, and are
not meant to be exhaustive. Inclusion in this paper does not constitute endorsement on the part of the Authors.

89 “Cruzr Robot ACADEMIC EDITION,” RobotLAB. https://www.robotlab.com/store/cruzr-academic-edition (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).
90 S. Ghaffary, “Is this robot really going to replace a security guard?,” Vox, Oct. 08, 2018. https://www.vox.com/2018/10/8/17913420/security-robot-cobaltrobotics-knightscope-slack-yelp (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).
91 F. Corrigan, “Top Mavic 2 Enterprise Review, Including Mounts And FAQs,” DroneZon, Jun. 12, 2020. https://www.dronezon.com/drone-reviews/mavic-2enterprise-review-with-spotlights-loudspeaker-beacon-faqs/ (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).
92 E. Ackerman, “Boston Dynamics’ Spot Robot Dog Now Available for $74,500,” IEEE Spectrum: Technology, Engineering, and Science News, Jun. 16, 2020.
https://spectrum.ieee.org/automaton/robotics/industrial-robots/boston-dynamics-spot-robot-dog-now-available (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Use Cases

32

3.1.5 Social Interaction, Companionship & Healthy Living
NEED
Seniors have been particularly hard hit by the coronavirus, both because they are at higher risk of severe
complications, and because they rely significantly on care staff and family members for assistance and
encouragement with numerous activities of daily living. Seniors living at home alone find themselves
isolated. Long-term care homes are the hardest hit facilities in this country, resulting in lockdowns and
a large number of deaths. Long-term care homes in Canada have continuously had staff shortages and
high turnover rates, so they were already hard-pressed before the pandemic hit. Some have required
military personnel assistance during the COVID-19 outbreak, which is only a temporary solution.
Children have also been adversely impacted by the pandemic, with many forced to stay home and
isolate at a time when social interaction is essential to their cognitive development. Some of the
technologies described below may be equally useful to other vulnerable populations, such as those
impacted by mental illness or who face mobility issues.
HOW ROBOTS CAN HELP
•

Minimizing physical contact between patients/ nursing home residents, and caregivers and
family members

•

Coaching seniors through daily activities such as eating, drinking, dressing, getting out of bed,
bathing, exercising, communication with others, companionship, and numerous recreational activities

•

Providing a promising alternative to physical interaction when PPE is not available or in low
supply, and transmission rates are high

•

Connecting residents in locked down nursing homes and retirement homes with their family
members and friends

•

Supporting children’s social and cognitive learning when physical interaction isn’t possible

EXAMPLES
Robots that must navigate human-centred environments that contain frail and cognitively impaired individuals
provide an interesting challenge to roboticists. As an emerging technology, the research and development of
these robots has mainly been in research labs around the world, including at the University of Toronto . The
UofT team is developing intelligent and autonomous socially assistive robots to assist older adults including
those living with dementia with activities of daily living, and cognitive and social interventions.
93

More recently a handful of international companies have developed relatively simple robotic platforms
that can be used in applications ranging from senior care to supporting children with autism and other
cognitive development concerns.

93

33

“Autonomous Systems and Biomechatronics Lab,” University of Toronto. http://asblab.mie.utoronto.ca/ (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).

Use Cases | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

TABLE 5: ROBOTS FOR SOCIAL INTERACTION, COMPANIONSHIP & HEALTHY LIVING
Greeting patients/visitors94

Friendly welcome to hospital, airport or
quarantine facility, to ease stress

Telepresence

Pet therapy

Enable quarantined patients or senior
in lockdown to communicate with
family and friends

To help deal with social isolation and
depression, by aiming to improve overall
moods and quality of life

E.g. Temi, Robotemi
Unit cost: $4K USD
Image: Connected Living + Temi

Golden Pup, Ageless Innovation
Unit cost: $130 USD96
Image: Ageless Innovation

Medication reminders

Play-based learning & social
interaction

READY TO
SCALE
(TRL9+)

E.g. Pepper, Softbank Robotics
Unit cost: $1600 plus $360/mo95
Image: Cloudminds

Verbal coaching to assist
independent living

Cognitive stimulation, daily routine
reminders, messaging and photo sharing
with family & friends97

For medication/treatment compliance,
chronic illness management

For supporting the cognitive development
needs of isolated children

READY TO
PILOT
(TRL7-8)

E.g. Elli-Q, Intuition Robotics
Image: Intuition Robotics

E.g. Mabu, Catalia Health
Image: Catalia Health

E.g. Moxie, Embodied
Image: Embodied

Socially assistive robots for
everyday living

Providing multisensory cues (verbal,
physical, written) to provide assistance with
a variety of daily activities such as eating,
drinking, dressing, getting out of bed,
bathing, exercising, etc.

NEEDS
DEVELOPING
(TRL2-6)

E.g. Casper Socially Assistive
Robot, Autonomous Systems and
Biomechatronics Lab, University of Toronto
Image: Autonomous Systems and
Biomechatronics Lab, University of Toronto
Note: The examples listed on this page are meant to demonstrate the breadth of use cases and relative maturity of robotics for this application area, and
are not meant to be exhaustive. Inclusion in this paper does not constitute endorsement on the part of the Authors.

94 “temi FAQ - The Personal Robot,” temi USA. https://www.robotemi.com/faq/ (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).
95 F. Tobe, “How is Pepper, SoftBank’s emotional robot, doing?,” The Robot Report, May 27, 2016.https://www.therobotreport.com/how-is-pepper-softbanksemotional-robot-doing (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).
96 “Golden Pup with Red Bandanna,” Amazon.com. https://www.amazon.com/Ageless-Innovation-Companion-Lifelike-Realistic/dp/B01L9B5JYU/ (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).
97 “ElliQ,” Intuition Robotics. https://elliq.com/pages/features (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Use Cases

34

3.1.6 Manufacturing & Logistics
NEED
The pandemic has generated unprecedented demand for certain goods, in particular personal protective
equipment (PPE), medical and grocery supplies. Demand for PPE is expected to rise as economies
emerge from lockdown and PPE use becomes a requirement outside medical settings. Global supply
chains have not always been able to deliver and so there is increasing demand for locally produced
goods to ensure adequate supply and quality: we note that as of the writing of this paper, the Canadian
government has received only a small fraction of the PPE it has ordered . Flexible, modular and scalable
fabrication processes that can be easily altered to accommodate change are desperately needed while
the dynamics of supply and demand remain volatile. This applies not only to PPE production, but the
production of other goods upon which Canada’s economy depends. For example, food producers
— who faced labour shortages even before the pandemic — are struggling to maintain production
when employees on assembly lines fall sick, fewer migrant workers show up to harvest, and physical
distancing rules mean fewer workers can be onsite at once. Meanwhile, retail grocery chains now face
the logistical challenge of minimizing exposure to their employees and customers, while at the same time
rapidly training new staff to replace sick and exhausted workers, and dealing with an increased demand
for goods that has left some shelves empty. Grocery retailers are also going through a massive logistics
shift as demand for online ordering and home delivery skyrocket.
98

HOW ROBOTS CAN HELP
•

Scalable, localized production of critical supplies, including food

•

Addressing labour shortages

•

Touchless technology to reduce sick days and keep customers safe

EXAMPLES
Early on in the pandemic when PPE was in short supply, 3D printers were put to use manufacturing
face shields and nasal swabs using open source designs; however this approach may become less
cost-effective as assembly line production ramps up. Grocery and retail chains are beginning to make
use of full-scale automated logistics systems, though most of these deployments were initiated before
the pandemic. Farm automation was also an area for investment before the pandemic. One Danish
slaughterhouse that had already heavily invested in automation before the pandemic reports that COVID
has not slowed production, and that fewer than 10 of its 8000 employees have been infected . Given the
major outbreaks and stoppages at other slaughterhouse factories, some Canadian slaughterhouses are
now looking to automate .
99

100

98

“Supplying Canada’s response to COVID-19,” Public Services and Procurement Canada. https://www.tpsgc-pwgsc.gc.ca/comm/aic-scr/provisionssupplies-eng.html (accessed Jun. 24, 2020).
99 M. Molteni, “Covid-19 Makes the Case for More Meatpacking Robots,” WIRED, May 25, 2020. https://www.wired.com/story/covid-19-makes-thecase-for-more-meatpacking-robots/ (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).
100 H. Yourex-West, “Canadian meat-packing industry looks to make big changes following COVID-19,” Global News, Jun. 17, 2020. https://
globalnews.ca/news/7054288/meat-processing-changes-coronavirus/ (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).

35

Use Cases | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

TABLE 6: MANUFACTURING & LOGISTICS ROBOTS
Automated PPE
assembly lines

Large-scale PPE production

READY TO
SCALE
(TRL9+)

Mask Production Line, PIA
Automation
Image: PIA Automation

Grocery fulfillment &
logistics

End-to-end grocery delivery
solutions reduces workers’
contact with food

E.g. Ocado Smart Platform &
Customer Fulfillment Centre,
Ocado Group
Image: Ocado Group

Retail shelf audit

Automated food processing

Tally, Simbe Robotics
Cost: Monthly based on store
area/SKUs
Image: Simbe Robotics

E.g. Beef Rib Cutter, Scott
Image: Scott Automation

Anticipate inventory flow, support For maintaining throughput despite
tired/untrained stockists
labour shortages; to reduce injury

3D printed medical supplies Retail food preparation
On-demand nasal swabs, face
& service
shields101

Help guests to physical
distance & reduce workers’
contact with food

READY TO
PILOT
(TRL7-8)
E.g. Markforged 3D printer
Image: Markforged
Storant Robot Cafe,
Vision Semicon
Image: Storant

Fruit picking

For harvesting soft and hard fruits
despite farm labour shortages102

NEEDS
DEVELOPING
(TRL2-6)

E.g. Rubion Strawberry Picker,
Octinion
Image: Octinion
Note: The examples listed on this page are meant to demonstrate the breadth of use cases and relative maturity of robotics for this application area, and are
not meant to be exhaustive. Inclusion in this paper does not constitute endorsement on the part of the Authors.

101 J. Camillo, “Manufacturers Shift to PPE Production to Fight COVID-19 Pandemic,” Assembly Magazine, Jun. 17, 2020. https://www.assemblymag.com/
articles/95741-manufacturers-shift-to-ppe-production-to-fight-covid-19-pandemic (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).
102 A. Peters, “This Strawberry-Picking Robot Gently Picks The Ripest Berries With Its,” FastCompany, Sep. 09, 2017. https://www.fastcompany.com/40473583/
this-strawberry-picking-robot-gently-picks-the-ripest-berries-with-its-robo-hand (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Use Cases

36

3.1.7 Delivery & Transportation
NEED
Delivery of supplies, both in the hospital setting and locally can help significantly in the reduction of social
interaction and exposure of front-line workers to COVID-positive patients. In hospitals, deliveries of food,
medicine and other supplies are often performed by different staff members, leading to significant mixing
throughout the hospital setting. In urban environments, a large percentage of trips involve the pickup of
prepared foods and pre-arranged purchases, and yet shoppers are still frequently entering stores and
engaging in close interactions with staff. Last mile, local neighborhood, and indoor delivery can often
become vectors for spreading the virus.
HOW ROBOTS CAN HELP
•

Provide a valuable buffer between frontline workers and patients in hospitals, by reducing the number
of daily interactions and the range of people that must come in contact with COVID patients

•

Reduce the number of trips to grocery stores and restaurants for order pickup, ameliorating
social distancing compliance and avoiding additional indoor interactions

•

Reduce the amount of contact between people and food or other supplies

•

Help prevent the spread of the virus to remote communities, and transport lab samples and
medical supplies

EXAMPLES
Hospital-specific applications such as the secure delivery of medical supplies, food, medicine, linens,
and lab samples are already deployed in numerous medical centers around the world, and save hospital
staff thousands of kilometers of walking per year.
There is also a growing market for concierge robots that operate in the predictable hallways and
elevators of hotels and highrise apartments. Such robots have been put to use during COVID as hotels
become quarantine centres and high rise dwellers seek to limit their use of common elevators and
hallways. Drone delivery may seem at first more challenging because it involves flying; however, in the
air there are fewer obstacles for drones to contend with, which explains the relatively high TRL levels for
aerial delivery.
Both on-road and sidewalk autonomous delivery solutions are now operational at low speeds, although
this technology is still at the proof-of-concept phase as full safety certification remains a challenging open
question. Regulatory issues aside, outdoor delivery robots have only become available in the last few
years, and continue to mature and expand to new markets.

37

Use Cases | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

TABLE 7: DELIVERY & TRANSPORTATION ROBOTS
In-hospital delivery

For secure delivery of medical
supplies, food, medicine, linens,
and lab samples

Concierge delivery in
highrises, hotels, &
quarantine facilities

For contactless delivery of
food, mail & personal supplies

READY TO
SCALE
(TRL9+)
E.g. Tug, Aethon
Unit cost: $1500-2K/mo USD103
Image: Aethon

Drone delivery

For delivery of goods, medical
supplies, mail, and lab samples
to and from remote communities

E.g. Relay, Savioke
Unit cost: ~$2K/mo104
Image: Savioke

Last-mile
grocery delivery
For local goods
transportation on
low-speed roads

Takeout food delivery
Short range sidewalk
delivery for take-out food
and small items

Follow-me retail
grocery carts

For touchless shopping

READY TO
PILOT
(TRL7-8)
E.g. Sparrow, Drone Delivery
Canada. Delivery Cost: NA
Image: Drone Delivery Canada

E.g. Nuro Self Driving
Vehicle, Nuro
Image: Nuro

E.g. 7Fresh Robot Grocery
Cart, JD105
Image: JD
E.g. Self-Driving Delivery
Robot, Starship Technologies
Image: Starship Technologies

Warehouse to store delivery
To transport goods between
warehouse and retail facilities

NEEDS
DEVELOPING
(TRL2-6)
E.g. Waymo Self Driving Van,
Waymo
Current pilot deployments have
test drivers on board106
Image: Waymo
Note: The examples listed on this page are meant to demonstrate the breadth of use cases and relative maturity of robotics for this application area, and are
not meant to be exhaustive. Inclusion in this paper does not constitute endorsement on the part of the Authors.

103 “Blue-Collar Delivery Robots Making Gains in U.S. Hospitals,” Robotics Business Review, Nov. 12, 2013. Available: https://www.roboticsbusinessreview.com/
health-medical/blue_collar_delivery_robots_making_gains_in_u-s-_hospitals
104 M. Petrova, “These butler bots are building resumes at companies like FedEx and Residence Inn,” CNBC, Aug. 25, 2017. Available: https://www.cnbc.
com/2017/08/24/fedex-and-hotels-and-hire-autonomous-delivery-robots.html
105 K. Matthews, “5 robots now in grocery stores provide a preview of retail automation,” Robotics Business Review, Apr. 10, 2020. https://www.
roboticsbusinessreview.com/retail-hospitality/5-robots-grocery-stores-now/ (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).
106 M. McFarland, “UPS teams up with Waymo to test self-driving delivery vans,” CNN Business, Jan. 29, 2020. Available: https://www.cnn.com/2020/01/29/
tech/ups-waymo-self-driving-package-delivery/index.html

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Use Cases

38

3.1.8 Summary of Robot
Deployments & Use Cases
In the course of this research, we reviewed over 60 robot platforms that
are being used around the world to help organizations, businesses, and
individuals cope with the COVID-19 pandemic. A number of these are
described and categorized by their Technology Readiness Level in Section 3.
We found that some of these robots are still early-stage prototypes,
many are ready for pilot tests, and still others have a high Technology
Readiness Levels and are ready to be more widely deployed.
We describe some key observations below:

1.

COVID-19 is driving the proliferation of new disinfection
robots, but not all are made equal, and further testing and
validation is needed:
A quick web search for “COVID and robot” makes it obvious that
disinfection is an important use case for robotics during the pandemic.
A review of available disinfection robots reveals that these devices
vary greatly in their level of autonomy, however, ranging from the
fully autonomous UVD robot, to remotely controlled or teleoperated
examples. Some, such as the XENEX Lightstrike Robot , are in
fact stationary carts and are not “robotic” in the traditional sense.
What may be less obvious to the non-expert is that prior to the
pandemic there were relatively few disinfection robots available on the
commercial market as compared to today. One notable exception is
Blue Ocean Robotics’ UVD robot. Blue Ocean was one of the early
pioneers of UV disinfection technology, has taken their products
through independent clinical testing , and has spent considerable
time developing user-friendly interfaces and efficient workflows. Once
the pandemic hit, demand for UV disinfection surged and many
untested and lower-cost alternatives appeared in countries around the
globe. It’s important to note that while UV and other modes of robotic
disinfection are promising, specific details regarding their effectiveness
(including dosage and technique across a range of surface types)
is still unknown . Disinfection robots require further validation and
107

108

109

107

“LightStrikeTM Germ-ZappingTM Robots,” XENEX Disinfection Systems. https://www.xenex.com/
our-solution/lightstrike/ (accessed Sep. 04, 2020).
108 UVD Robots. http://www.uvd-robots.com/home/ (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).
109 For a layperson’s explanation of current issues in UV effectiveness, see: T. Irving, “Can UV light help
hospitals disinfect masks and gowns? U of T researcher explains,” University of Toronto News, Apr.
06, 2020. https://www.utoronto.ca/news/can-uv-light-help-hospitals-disinfect-masks-and-gowns-ut-researcher-explains

39

Use Cases | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

testing before they are broadly deployed, and more pilot studies in a
variety of settings are needed.

2.

The majority of new COVID-focused robots use pre-existing
platforms that have been adapted for the pandemic:
We observed that many of the deployments saw the same mobile
bases being adapted for different COVID-19 use cases by upgrading
them with new features or behaviours such as temperature monitoring,
mask detection, or physical distancing reminders. This can also help
explain the fast development of so many new UV disinfections robots.
These tend to be produced by either robotics startups that have
significant investor funding, or by established companies.

3.

Sample collection is the use case driving development of new
platform types and robot designs:
This is not surprising since the most recent widespread pandemic
— the Spanish Flu — occurred between 1918 and 1920 before the
first robots were invented. While most other use cases make use
of existing platforms, several novel and unique robot platforms are
being explored for collecting nasal, throat, blood, and wastewater
samples. Given the long timelines involved in developing medical
devices, swabbing robots are unlikely to be of use for this current
pandemic. However blood sampling robots have already been
trialed, and though they are still relatively early-stage, they may be
pressed into service if serological testing becomes an important
means of tracking the virus. Robotic wastewater sampling may
have broader post-pandemic value if it can prove itself effective for
population-level surveillance.

4.

Robot-as-a-Service models may reduce the cost risk for
customers trialing robots during the pandemic:
Many of the robotics solutions that are “ready to scale” are offered to
customers for a fixed monthly fee. For example, refer to Softbanks’
Whiz (floor cleaning) and Pepper (retail service), Ava Robotics’ Ava
500 (telepresence), Aethon’s Tug and Savioke’s Relay (delivery)
described earlier in this Section. In addition to not having to pay
a large sum up front and having a predictable monthly expense,
Robot-as-a-Service business models free customers from having to
maintain and service their own robots, reducing the cost risk of trialing
a robot during pandemic times. This can be particularly beneficial
for undercapitalized businesses that wish to increase their use of
automation. This business model also enables robot developers to
improve their products over time, adapt to new customer needs, and

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Use Cases

40

push updates to their customers’ fleets. Some robot developers have
reported significant increased fleet use among existing customers
since the start of the pandemic . We discuss fee-for-service models
in more detail in Section 4.4 under the heading “Long term outlook”.
110

5.

Teleoperation is beginning to fill the autonomy gap in less
structured environments:
For mobile robotics operating in less structured environments, mature
deployments tend to have relatively low autonomy levels and may
rely on teleoperators. In some cases the low autonomy levels may
be obscured when Robot-as-a-Service models include teleoperators
that take over when robots encounter troublesome edge cases, often
without the end-user or customer being aware. Despite this promising
trend, validation is still needed. We refer readers to Section 4.1 for a
more detailed explanation of teleoperation, its present-day challenges,
and its longer-term outlook.

6.

Some demonstrators are being pushed prematurely into service:
The pandemic may have accelerated the deployment of some “ready
to pilot” demonstrator robots, but it remains to be seen whether
these prove effective, useful, and safe enough to stimulate long
term demand. Further testing and quality assurance are needed.

7.

Robots for security, manufacturing, and logistics, which were
in common use before COVID-19, are seeing a pandemicrelated surge:
While hospital disinfection robots and robot doctors are getting
most of the media attention, robots working behind the scenes in
manufacturing, warehouse and logistics are experiencing significant
increased demand as the global shipping and logistics industry is
faced with processing more orders with fewer staff on hand. Likewise,
robots designed for security and patrol are also being put to greater
use as organizations are challenged to keep track of the whereabouts
and health of their employees for contact tracing purposes, and to
monitor poorly staffed facilities while employees self-isolate.

110

41

For example Cobalt Robotics has launched COVID upgrades and reports a 50% increase in hours
of coverage since COVID. See “Complete return to work solutions,” Cobalt Robotics. https://
cobaltrobotics.com/return-to-work/ (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).

Use Cases | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

3.2

HOW IS CANADA PUTTING
ROBOTS TO USE DURING
COVID-19?
Canada lags somewhat behind other industrialized nations in
its robot usage and most Canadians will not encounter a robot
in their day-to-day activities. Nonetheless, Canada installs a
significant number of robots across the country each year, mostly
in factories and warehouses. As described briefly in Section 2.4,
it is also home to numerous homegrown robotics companies.
The following figures provide a general overview of how Canada
compares to other countries in its robot usage, as well as an
overview of robot manufacturing in Canada.

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Use Cases

42

774

World Average:

99

338 327

CZECH REP.

CHINA

FINLAND

SWITZERLAND

FRANCE

SLOVAKIA

SPAIN

CANADA

SLOVENIA

AUSTRIA

NETHERLANDS

BELGIUM

ITALY

UNITED STATES

CHINESE TAIPEI

DENMARK

SWEDEN

JAPAN

GERMANY

REP. OF KOREA

247 240 221 217
200 188 182 175 174 172
168 165 154 146 140 140 135

SINGAPORE

ROBOTS INSTALLED PER 10,000 EMPLOYEES

831

Figure 5: Robot density in the manufacturing industry by country (2018).
Source:Federation
World Robotics
2019111
Source: International
of Robotics

250
Start Ups

200

Established

100

50

DENMARK

AUSTRALIA

AUSTRIA

ISRAEL

NETHERLANDS

SWEDEN

RUSSIA

SPAIN

ITALY

CANADA

UK

SWITZERLAND

KOREA

CHINA

JAPAN

GERMANY

FRANCE

0
US

NUMBER OF COMPANIES

150

Source: World Robotics 2017
Figure 6: Number of service robot manufacturers by country of origin (2017).
Source: International Federation of Robotics112

111
112

“World Robotics 2018,” International Federation of Robotics, 2018.
“World Robotics 2017,” International Federation of Robotics, 2017.

43

Use Cases | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

4,500
4,057

4,000

3,582

3,474

3,500

UNITS

3,000
2,500
2,000

1,848

2,250

2,333

2013

2014

2,334

1,749

1,500
1,000
500
0
2011

2012

2015

2016

2017

2018

Figure 7: Annual installations of industrial robots in Canada (2011-2018)
Source: International Federation of Robotics113

AUTOMOTIVE PARTS

MOTOR VEHICLES

FOOD

METAL AND MACHINERY

PLASTIC AND CHEMICAL PRODUCTS

ELECTRICAL/ELECTRONICS

2018
2017
2016

ALL OTHERS/UNSPECIFIED
0

500

1,000

1500

2,000

2500

UNITS

Figure 8: Annual installations of industrial robots in Canada by industry (2011-2018)
Source: International Federation of Robotics114

113
114

“World Robotics 2019,” International Federation of Robotics, 2019.
“World Robotics 2019,” International Federation of Robotics, 2019.

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Use Cases

44

Canada’s robot usage may seem small compared to power
users like Singapore and South Korea, and its number of
homegrown robotics companies may seem small compared
to the US. However its “robot density” (the number of robots
installed per 10,000 employees) is middle of the pack
compared to many developed countries, and its number
of homegrown companies puts it in the Top Ten of robotproducing nations. No doubt the numerous automotive,
food, and machinery producers across Canada that have
already installed robots are making good use of them to
manage any labour shortages and increased demand due to
the pandemic.
However, it is not our intention to focus on Canada’s
pre-existing base of robots in this paper. Rather, we are
interested in understanding which new use cases Canada
is finding for robots, and which traditional areas are
seeing accelerated usage or new deployments due to the
pandemic. In this section we give a (July 2020) snapshot
that shows: 1) how robots (regardless of origin) are being
used specifically in the COVID-19 response here in Canada,
and 2) how made-in-Canada robots are being put to use
during the pandemic globally.

3.2.1 Robots Used in Canada
for Pandemic Management

Below we describe a variety of robots that Canadian
organizations have deployed specifically for frontline
pandemic management.

45

Use Cases | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

TABLE 8: ROBOTS USED IN CANADA FOR PANDEMIC MANAGEMENT
ROBOT

TRL

DESCRIPTION

HIGH THROUGHPUT LIQUID HANDLING
Hamilton robot liquid handling
system (US origin) testing
coronavirus samples at St.
Joe’s Hamilton.
Image: The Research Institute
of St. Joe’s Hamilton

9+

High throughput testing is critical if the Canadian economy is to reopen before
a vaccine is found.115 Canada’s main COVID testing facilities are making use of
commercial robotic liquid handling platforms to ramp up testing capacity.
For example, researchers at McMaster University and St. Joseph’s
Healthcare Research Institute116 in Hamilton are using a robotic liquid
handling system developed by the US-based Hamilton Company117 to speed
up COVID-19 tests and enhance biosafety.

Robot liquid handling system
for processing serological tests
at Mount Sinai Hospital.
Image: Sinai Health

Researchers at UofT and Mount Sinai Hospital in Toronto are also using a
robotic system to process serological tests to measure immunity in recovered
COVID patients.118
Decentralized testing is also important for Canada because it can reduce
backlogs at central testing facilities while also serving the needs of this country’s
remote and Indigenous communities. Sixteen diagnostics-related research
projects were funded under CIHR’s COVID Rapid Research program, many
of which are focused on developing portable biosensor kits for viral and/or
serological testing.119 Liquid handling robots are used in the development of
such kits to help standardize lab tests and benchmark assays, for example the
OpenTrons (costing about $5K USD) used at the Microfluidics and BioMEMS
Lab at the University of Toronto.120

OpenTrons OT-2 liquid
handling robot (US origin) used
to develop portable test kits at
the University of Toronto.
Image: BioMEMS Lab

FLOORCLEANING - AIRPORT
Nilfisk Liberty SC50 robot
(Danish origin) at the Toronto
International Airport.
Image: Greater Toronto
Airports Authority

9+

For the travel industry, cleanliness (both real and perceived) are essential
to their continued survival. The Toronto Pearson International Airport
recently announced that it is installing six robotic floor cleaners as part of a
comprehensive COVID safety response.121 Pearson is using the Liberty SC50
autonomous floor cleaning robot from Nilfisk, a supplier of professional
cleaning equipment headquartered in Denmark.

Blue Ocean UVD Robot
(Danish origin) being piloted
at the McGill University Health
Centre.
Image: McGill University Health
Centre

9+

The McGill University Health Centre was the first in Canada to import a Blue
Ocean Robotics UVD Disinfection Robot from Denmark.122 The university
is testing the safety and effectiveness of the robot against existing disinfection
technologies currently used in Canadian hospitals, including its effectiveness
in disinfecting stretchers and N-95 masks. Given the relatively high cost of the
device ($120K CDN) the robot will also be tested at the Centre hospitalier de
l’Université de Montreal and in long-term care homes before a decision is made
on whether to purchase more.

UV-C DISINFECTION

115 E. Tubb and K. Wallace, “Ontario may have missed a third or more COVID-19 cases as testing backlog has grown, Star analysis finds” The Toronto Star, Mar. 27,
2020. https://www.thestar.com/news/canada/2020/03/27/ontario-has-missed-a-third-or-more-covid-19-cases-as-testing-backlog-has-grown-star-analysis-finds.
html (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).
116 D. Mitchell, “Hamilton researchers hope ‘robot colleagues’ will help step up coronavirus testing,” Global News, Apr. 21, 2020. https://globalnews.ca/
news/6845693/hamilton-robots-coronavirus-testing-covid-19/ (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).
117 “Automated Liquid Handling Equipment To Help Fight Novel Coronavirus,” Hamilton Company. https://www.hamiltoncompany.com/automated-liquid-handling/
hamilton-is-here-to-help (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).
118 A. Ferguson, “Researchers at U of T, Sinai Health working on blood test to screen thousands for COVID-19 immunity,” University of Toronto News, Apr. 07, 2020.
https://www.utoronto.ca/news/researchers-u-t-sinai-health-working-blood-test-screen-thousands-covid-19-immunity (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).
119 “COVID-19 May 2020 Rapid Research Funding Opportunity Results,” Canadian Institutes of Health Research, Mar. 13, 2020. https://cihr-irsc.gc.ca/e/52013.html
(accessed Sep. 02, 2020).
120 “Microfluidics and BioMEMS Lab,” University of Toronto. https://sites.google.com/site/biomedmicrolab/home (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).
121 “Microfluidics and BioMEMS Lab,” University of Toronto. https://sites.google.com/site/biomedmicrolab/home (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).
122 “The Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre brings and tests the first UV-Disinfection robot in Canada,” McGill University Med e-News, Apr. 30,
2020. https://publications.mcgill.ca/medenews/2020/04/30/the-research-institute-of-the-mcgill-university-health-centre-brings-and-tests-the-first-uv-disinfectionrobot-in-canada/ (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Use Cases

46

ROBOT

TRL

DESCRIPTION

MANUFACTURE OF BOTTLED DISINFECTANTS
Omron TM Collaborative
Robot (Japanese origin) with
a Robotiq Hand-E Adaptive
Gripper (Canadian origin)
manufacturing disinfectant in
Quebec. Image: Robotiq

9+

A Canadian company dedicated to the contract manufacturing of colour cosmetics
is using Omron TM collaborative robots combined with the Robotiq Hand-E
Adaptive Gripper to manufacture bottled disinfectants. The Omron arm and Robotiq
gripper are both mature TRL9 products, allowing the company to quickly set up and
test the automated manufacturing workflow. The project is funded by the Quebec
Government and they are looking at replicating the prototype in the upcoming weeks.

9

Pediatric critical care specialists at the University of Saskatchewan College
of Medicine123 are deploying 15 telepresence robots to various rural regions of
the province in order to deliver remote healthcare. The team had already been
experimenting with using these robots to deliver remote healthcare for five years
prior to the pandemic. The team is using the Vita robot, developed by the USbased telemedicine provider InTouch Health. Each robot costs ~$80K USD or
~$6K USD / month.124

TELEMEDICINE
Fleet of InTouch Health Vita
Robots (US origin) at the
University of Saskatchewan
College of Medicine.
Image: University of
Saskatchewan College of
Medicine

In addition to these examples, we note the following major Canadian-based robot installations that have seen
accelerated uptake as a result of the pandemic:
ROBOT

TRL

DESCRIPTION

GROCERY LOGISTICS
Deployment at Sobeys Voilà
Distribution Centre in Vaughan
Image: Sobeys

9+

In June 2020 Sobeys, a major Canadian grocery retailer, launched an online
grocery delivery platform in Vaughan, Ontario to serve the greater Toronto
area125. The delivery platform, called “Voilà”, is powered by an automated
warehouse developed by the UK-based Ocado Group. Ocado, which
specializes in end-to-end grocery technology solutions, reports that its grid
system and swarms of proprietary robots are able to pick a 50-item grocery
order in minutes126. Though plans for this warehouse began in 2019, Sobeys
reports exponential growth in their online sales in the first three months of
Canada’s pandemic lockdown and report that Ocado’s ability to quickly deliver
from a massive selection of both fresh and packaged goods with minimal
handling are important features to customers in the pandemic. A second
Ocado facility is currently being built in Montreal and is set to open in 2021.

9+

Amazon installed its first Canadian robotics fulfillment centre in Brampton, Ontario
in 2016127. Early in the pandemic, Amazon announced it would temporarily stop
processing orders for non-essential items in order to prioritize delivery of medical
supplies and household staples.128 Despite these measures, employees in the
Brampton facility report they are regularly working more than 50 hours a week
in crowded conditions in order to meet the drastic increase in online orders.129
Amazon claims to have hired an additional 100,000 workers since the start of the
pandemic. While it’s unclear how many of these have been hired in Canada, the
company has increased the hourly pay for Canadian employees by $2, up from
the previous median hourly wage of $18.39. Amazon plans to install a second
robotic fulfillment centre in Scarborough but no date has been announced130.

Ocado Customer Fulfilment
Centre (CFC),
Ocado Group (UK)
Image: Ocado Group

RETAIL LOGISTICS
Deployment at Amazon
warehouse facility in Brampton
Amazon Robotics (US)
Image: Amazon Robotics

123 A. Hill, “Sask. ready to deploy medical robots to help fight against COVID-19,” The Star Phoenix, Saskatoon, Apr. 10, 2020. https://thestarphoenix.com/news/
local-news/sask-ready-to-deploy-medical-robots-to-help-fight-against-covid-19/ (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).
124 “Intouch Vita Telepresence Robot,” Telepresence Robots. https://telepresencerobots.com/robots/intouch-health-rp-vita (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).
125 R. Redman, “Sobeys begins Voilà online grocery delivery in Toronto,” Supermarket News, Jun. 22, 2020. https://www.supermarketnews.com/online-retail/sobeysbegins-voil-online-grocery-delivery-toronto (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).
126 “Fulfilment,” Ocado Group. https://www.ocadogroup.com/our-solutions/fulfilment (accessed Sep. 02, 2020).
127 A. Gagnon, “Prime Minister Justin Trudeau opens first robotics fulfillment center in Canada,” Day One: The Amazon Blog, Oct. 20, 2016. https://blog.
aboutamazon.com/operations/canadian-prime-minister-justin-trudeau-gives-all-hands-at-amazon-fulfillment-center (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).
128 M. Nickelsburg, “Amazon warehouses will stop accepting non-essential items amid COVID-19 outbreak,” GeekWire, Mar. 17, 2020. https://www.geekwire.
com/2020/amazon-warehouses-will-stop-accepting-non-essential-items-company-triages-amid-covid-19 (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).
129 S. Mojtehedzadeh, “As online orders surge, what about the Amazon workers?,” The Star, Mar. 19, 2020. https://www.thestar.com/news/canada/2020/03/19/asonline-orders-surge-what-about-the-amazon-workers.html (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).
130 “Amazon Expands in Ontario with New Fulfillment Centre in Scarborough,” Business Wire, Seattle, Sep. 23, 2019. https://www.businesswire.com/news/
home/20190923005639/en/Amazon-Expands-Ontario-New-Fulfillment-Centre-Scarborough (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).

47

Use Cases | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

3.2.2 Made-in-Canada Robots
Several Canadian robotics developers with ready-to-scale or ready-to-pilot products are being used and
tested for various aspects of pandemic management. These include:
TABLE 9: MADE-IN-CANADA ROBOTS USED FOR PANDEMIC MANAGEMENT
ROBOT

TRL

DESCRIPTION

LOGISTICS
OTTO AMR,
OTTO Motors
Image: OTTO
Motors

9+

OTTO Motors131, the industrial division of Clearpath Robotics, has seen a
surge in demand for its autonomous mobile material-handling robot as
their customers (which include some of the world’s largest manufacturing
and warehouse facilities) face increased operational challenges during the
pandemic. In June 2020, OTTO Motors announced they had raised $29M USD
in Series C funding to meet this increased demand.132

DHL Floorcleaner,
Avidbots
Image: Avidbots

9+

Avidbots133, a Kitchener-based company, is partnering up with the Germanybased global shipping provider DHL to deploy their floor cleaning robots in
DHL-run warehouses in more than 200 countries, including Canada134. Demand
for the Neo has grown dramatically in the public sector, due to the increased
need for cleaning of public spaces, counteracting increased caution on the retail
and manufacturing fronts during the pandemic. In Q1 2021, Avidbots is planning
to release a disinfection add-on to its robots that will allow them to chemically
disinfect high touch points such as doors and slight switches.

9+

A Robotiq CNC Machine Tending Kit is being used in combination with a
UR 10E arm by a US manufacturer in Louisiana to mass-produce oxygen
compressors and ventilator equipment. The manufacturer provides the
healthcare industry with a number of vacuum and blower solutions that are
used both as components within medical equipment and for the supply of
suction from a centralized vacuum system.

7-8

Drone Delivery Canada135, a Toronto-based drone delivery company, has
announced a partnership with GlobalMedic and Air Canada to transport
COVID-related cargo such as PPE, test kids and swabs to the Beausoleil First
Nation Community in Ontario136. The hope is that drone delivery will reduce
the likelihood of the virus being transmitted to this community. Drone Delivery
Canada has plans to expand internationally and recently began the process
for commercial entry into the US market.137 The Beausoleil pilot program is
expected to launch in the third quarter of this year.

FLOOR CLEANING

MANUFACTURE OF MEDICAL EQUIPMENT
CNC Machine
Tending Kit,
Robotiq
Image: Robotiq

DELIVERY TO REMOTE COMMUNITIES
Drone Delivery
Canada
Image: Drone
Delivery Canada

131
132
133
134
135
136
137

OTTO Motors. https://www.ottomotors.com/ (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).
G. Adams, “OTTO Motors Raises $29 Million to take its Autonomous Mobile Robots Global,” Clearpath Robotics, Jun. 01, 2020. https://
clearpathrobotics.com/blog/2020/06/otto-motors-raises-29-million-to-take-its-autonomous-mobile-robots-global/ (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).
Avidbots. https://www.avidbots.com/ (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).
“Avidbots Expands Partnership With DHL to Install Neo Robots in Warehouses Worldwide,” DHL, Bonn, Apr. 27, 2020. Available: https://www.dhl.
com/global-en/home/press/press-archive/2020/avidbots-expands-partnership-with-dhl-to-install-neo-robots-in-warehouses-worldwide.html
Drone Delivery Canada. https://dronedeliverycanada.com/ (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).
J. Reagan, “COVID-related Drone Delivery Soars Into Canadian First Nation,” DroneLife, Jun. 10, 2020. https://dronelife.com/2020/06/10/ddcdrone-covid-drone-delivery/ (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).
“Drone Delivery Canada Commences Process for Commercial Entry Into United States Market,” Drone Delivery Canada, Jul. 09, 2020. https://
dronedeliverycanada.com/resources/drone-delivery-canada-commences-process-for-commercial-entry-into-united-states-market/ (accessed Sep.
03, 2020).

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Use Cases

48

In addition, five disinfection robot projects were recently funded under the NGen Advanced Manufacturing
Supercluster COVID-19 response program, with a total of $10M CDN ($5M from industry and $5 from NGen).
These products are at various stages of development, and not all are in use at the time of this writing:
138

TABLE 10: DISINFECTION ROBOTS FUNDED BY NGEN COVID-19 RESPONSE PROGRAM
ROBOT

TRL

DESCRIPTION

8.5

Prescientx139 — a Cambridge, Ontario manufacturer of UV-C disinfection
technology — is partnering with OTTO Motors (described in the table above) to
develop an autonomous UV disinfection robot. Prescientx already has a number
of mature UV-C disinfection solutions, including a portable, tethered UV-C base.
The robot will be built on OTTO’s TRL9 autonomous mobile robot base and will
use the OTTO Fleet Manager140 to coordinate the movement of the robots and
track sanitization, and for this reason gets a high TRL.

UV-C Disinfection
Service Robot
(DSR), Global
DWS. Image:
Global DWS

8

GlobalDWS141 — a Toronto-based systems integrator — is developing a multimodal, voice-enabled UV/spray disinfection robot, which is currently being tested
in various Toronto-area eldercare facilities142 including the Mon Sheong Home
for the Aged.143

Bishop Cleanbot
UV-C Disinfecting
Robot,
CrossWing
Image:
CrossWing

6-7

CrossWing144 — an Aurora, Ontario robotics OEM — is developing two
disinfection robots, one that uses UV-C and a second that uses misting
technology. The UV-C robot will be built on their existing Bishop platform145, and
will feature a telescoping payload and articulating UV-C LED panels to enable
disinfection coverage in hard to reach places.

6-7

Advanced Intelligence Systems (AIS)146 — a Burnaby, BC robotics company
— will develop a UV-C disinfection robot capable of mapping large scale
environments. This company currently serves the agricultural and greenhouse
market.

6-7

A&K Robotics147 — a Vancouver-based robotics company — will create a
disinfection robot for large floor areas and high-touch surfaces.

UV-C DISINFECTION
“Violet” UV-C
Robot, Prescientx
(with OTTO
Motors AMR
base)
Image: OTTO
Motors
MULTIMODAL DISINFECTION

UV-C DISINFECTION

[no image available]

[no image available]

138

146
147

NGen Supports Manufacturing of Disinfection Robots,” GlobeNewswire, Jun. 07, 2020. https://www.globenewswire.com/newsrelease/2020/07/06/2058078/0/en/NGen-Supports-Manufacturing-of-Disinfection-Robots.html
https://prescientx.com/ (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).
R. Gariepy, “Canada Enlists Robots in the Fight Against COVID-19,” OTTO Motors, Sep. 03, 2020. https://www.ottomotors.com/blog/canadaenlists-robots-in-fight-against-covid (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).
Global DWS. https://www.globaldws.com/ (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).
D. Edwards, “IPsoft and GlobalDWS launch service robot powered by Amelia,” Robotics & Automation News, May 28, 2020. https://
roboticsandautomationnews.com/2020/05/28/ipsoft-joins-forces-with-globaldws-to-launch-service-robots-powered-by-amelia/32554/ (accessed
Sep. 03, 2020).
“York professor leads project on first AI-powered disinfecting robot in Canadian healthcare facility,” Research & Innovation, Jun. 08, 2020. https://
www.yorku.ca/research/category/news/2020/06/york-professor-leads-project-on-first-ai-powered-disinfecting-robot-in-canadian-healthcare-facility/
(accessed Sep. 03, 2020).
CrossWing Inc. https://crosswing.com/ (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).
“Automated Disinfection for Public and Private Spaces,” CrossWing Inc., 2020. Accessed: Sep. 03, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://crosswing.
com/content/CleanBotWhitePaper-March212020.pdf.
Advanced Intelligent Systems (AIS). https://www.ai-systems.ca/ (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).
A&K Robotics. https://www.aandkrobotics.com/ (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).

49

Use Cases | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

139
140
141
142
143
144
145

3.2.3 Observations in Canadian
Deployments & Use Cases

We summarize our observations on Canadian deployments and use
cases below:
1. Without much prior experience with robots, and lacking proof
of their cost-effectiveness, Canadian organizations have been
cautious in adopting them during the pandemic.
In her book on disaster robotics , Robin Murphy argues that most
people do not have the capacity to experiment with new technologies
when facing a crisis, and therefore the robots which are most likely
to be deployed during a disaster are the robots that were already in
common use before the disaster. Our examination of robot use in
Canada during the COVID-19 pandemic confirms this premise.
148

Based on our research, the majority of Canada’s COVID-specific
robot deployments appear to involve robots that were already in use
or planned before the pandemic. The liquid handling robots being
used to scale testing in Canadian hospitals were familiar devices
in clinical facilities around the country prior to the pandemic. The
15 telepresence robots being used to triage patients in remote
communities in Saskatchewan had been tested by doctors in clinical
settings for five years. Also, the many mobile robots in Amazon,
Ocado and DHL warehouses were either fully installed or planned
long prior to the pandemic start.
New deployments in Canada are being (correctly) treated as pilot
projects. Drone Delivery Canada’s Beausoleil deployment is a pilot
program that is meant to validate previous demonstration trials.
McGill University purchased a single UVD Disinfection Robot to study
its effectiveness in hospitals and long term care facilities; given the
robots’ high cost and Canada’s publicly-funded health system, these
robots are being evaluated not just for their functionality and safety,
but also for their cost-effectiveness as compared to manual cleaning.
It appears that most Canadian organizations are taking a “wait and
see” approach to robots. Few are eager to spend funds on unproven
technology in uncertain economic conditions.

148

Murphy, R. (2014) Disaster Robotics. MIT Press. ISBN: 9780262027359

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Use Cases

50

Early adopters are trialing robots across many applications and use
cases during the pandemic. Provided these deployments continue to
prove their use, effectiveness, and return on investment (ROI), both in
other countries and within the Canadian context, we anticipate more
Canadian organizations will begin to adopt robots in the near future.
2. The majority of robots being deployed in Canada during
COVID-19 are operating behind the scenes and out of the
public’s view.
Unlike the attention-grabbing robots being deployed in parks,
shopping malls, on public transit, and in hospital waiting areas in
Japan, China, US and the EU, most of Canada’s robots are being
more quietly deployed behind the scenes: Canada’s liquid handling
robots are tucked away in clinical testing facilities; for safety reasons,
McGill’s UVD robot is being tested behind closed doors at hospitals
and long term care homes in quarantine; and the Canadian-based
Ocado, Amazon and DHL warehouse deployments are not open to
the public — only warehouse workers will see these in action.
And yet this is changing. Drone Delivery Canada’s pilot Beausoleil
program, though not yet formally launched, will see airtime in public
skies starting this fall. Once the program starts, Beausoleil community
members will be catching glimpses of the drones on a regular basis.
And at various health centres in northern Saskatchewan, community
members are being triaged by one of 15 Vita telepresence robots that
have been deployed to rural communities throughout the province.
Finally, at Pearson Airport in Toronto, travellers are being reassured
that hygiene measures are being kept up by the six Nilfisk floor
cleaning robots that are roaming the hallways and waiting areas.
Public-facing robot deployments in Canada are few in number,
and occur in rural areas or in places where, at present, few people
are there to see them in action. If robot deployments become an
increasingly common sight in Canada, Canadians’ attitudes towards
them are likely to shift.
3. Two established Canadian robotics companies are seeing
significant increased exports as a result of the pandemic, and
both serve customers in warehouse logistics.
While the robots that most readily come to mind as serving
pandemic needs are doing frontline jobs like disinfecting, taking
temperatures, and monitoring crowds, it’s the behind-the-scenes

51

Use Cases | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

robots working in the warehouse and logistics space that seem to
have seen the largest increase in uptake.
In Canada, since the pandemic took hold, Avidbots started
deploying its floor cleaning robots to 200 DHL warehouses
worldwide, and OTTO Motors has seen increased demand for its
autonomous material handling robot both domestically and abroad,
and has attracted significant investment.
From a home-grown industry perspective, logistics and
manufacturing is one of Canada’s core robotics strengths. Increased
global investment in warehouse automation is likely to benefit
established Canadian robotics companies operating in this space.
4. OTTO Motors is well positioned to produce and export
Canada’s first homegrown disinfection robot to its warehouse
logistics customers.
Prior to COVID-19, Canada had no homegrown disinfection robot.
Yet demand for these devices has surged since the pandemic. Highquality imported devices are expensive and many other countries
have begun to develop their own home-grown solutions. Through
NGen’s COVID-19 response program, Canada is funding the
development of several home-grown UV-C disinfection robots.
OTTO Motors’ new partnership with established Canadian UV
disinfection supplier Prescientx, combined with its established
customer base, puts the company in a strong position to meet the
new disinfection demands of its warehouse and logistics customers,
while also providing a local supply of disinfection robots for Canada.
In conclusion, Canada has some key homegrown robotics companies
that are scaling up due to pandemic demand, but these are focused
on logistics rather than frontline work. Canada also has comparatively
few robots deployed in-country. We will use the rest of the document to
discuss why this is the case, and how this situation might be ameliorated.

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Use Cases

52

3.3

POTENTIAL
PATHWAYS TO
A ROBOTIZED
PANDEMIC
RESPONSE

Thus far, we have made some sense of the numerous
COVID-related robot sightings in the media, and have
arrived at the conclusion that the robots we are seeing
represent a wide range of technology development
stages. Our research also suggests that a variety of
strategies are being employed to bring robots to the
COVID-19 response, some of which are seemingly
more effective than others. In the final part of Section
3, we attempt to model these strategies in order to
describe the potential pathways for success.
Though no model can capture the complex reality of
bringing a robot to market — especially in a crisis —
we nonetheless find it useful to generalize the basic
approaches, and the timelines and conditions of
success for each. While the Technology Readiness
Levels (TRLs) described in Section 2.2 are useful
for understanding the technical feasibility of a
robot, the TRL schema falls short of considering

53

market factors such as customer desirability and
readiness, investment, or supply chains. For this
reason, we conclude that TRLs alone cannot be
used to measure capacity to scale or give a realistic
assessment of potential impact. Instead we propose
the Venn diagram in Figure 9, which is based on
a standard Desirability/Feasibility/Viability model,
and provides a convenient visualization of the four
potential pathways for robot deployment during
COVID-19, their timelines, and how they relate:
1. Deploy proven robotics solutions in real
pandemic use cases at a scale that is
impactful within a very short time frame
(immediate)
2. Transfer pre-existing commercially
scaled robotics applications to pandemic
applications (short term)
3. Roboticize by automating existing
pandemic solutions that are already
commonplace in frontline/essential service
use cases with (short term)
4. Develop current prototypes into
applications that can operate at scale (midlong term)

Use Cases | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

“DEVELOP”
Early stage experimental
robots and demonstrators
MID-LONG TERM

“DEPLOY”

IBILITY
AS
E
F
AL

DE
SI

Y
LIT
BI
RA

TEC
HN
IC

How high is the Technology
Readiness Level?

FRONTLINE AND
ESSENTIAL SERVICES
APPLICATIONS

PHYSICALLY
EMBODIED ROBOTS

What are the pressing
unmet needs during the
COVID-19 pandemic?

Ready to deply
market solutions
IMMEDIATE

“TRANSFER”
Transfer existing
commercial-ready
robotics solutions
into pandemic
applications with
proven need
SHORT TERM

CAPACITY TO SCALE

“ROBOTICIZE”
Augment existing
solutions with
proven/robust
physical interfaces
SHORT TERM

V I A B I L IT Y
Can industry produce, scale,
deliver and maintain?
Do end-users have the capacity
to absorb the technology?

Figure 9: Venn diagram depicting the four pathways to deployment-ready robots for COVID-related use cases and their relative timelines. The centre of the diagram
where the three circles overlap represents robots that are ready to “deploy”. There are three “paths” to get robots to the center where they are ready to deploy:
“Roboticize”, “Transfer” and “Develop”.

The Develop path has a mid to long term time horizon, and covers everything from promising
prototypes to radically new and pioneering solutions. The Roboticize and Transfer paths are has a
shorter time line, and are very similar to each other, with their chief difference being one of perspective:
•

If you are a robotics developer and have a commercial-ready platform that you think can be
helpful in the pandemic, then you are taking the transfer path, and need to find a partner with
frontline expertise who has the capacity to co-develop a pandemic solution with you.

•

If you are not a robotics developer but are looking to automate another product or process
that you know already works, then you are taking the roboticize path, and need a reliable
robotics provider who can help you integrate your solution into their hardware.

We provide some examples to illustrate these concepts below.
University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Use Cases

54

DEPLOY (IMMEDIATE)
The deploy path is characterized by existing commercially-available robotics technology that can
realistically be deployed to address pandemic needs right away. It assumes that:
•

The robot is at the top of the Technology Readiness scale (TRL9)

•

The solution is addressing a pressing unmet need

•

End-users have the previous experience, or learning capacity and training support needed to
adopt the technology

•

The robot provider is able to consult, install, deliver, train and/or maintain the system as required

•

The system has been validated and tested

EXAMPLE

Putting a tested telepresence fleet into
remote triage service
A ready-to-deploy example here in Canada is the small fleet of 15 telepresence robots at the
University of Saskatchewan (described in Section 3.2.1). The team is using a commercially available
Vita Robot from US-based telemedicine provider InTouch Health in order to triage patients in remote
areas of the province. Because the team had already been field testing the robots for several years
prior to the pandemic, they were not overwhelmed at the prospect of putting their fleet to use
once the pandemic arrived. Vita uses a Robot-as-a-Service cost model; the monthly fee makes it
easy to predict and manage costs. Should the need arise, the health team could easily scale this
deployment up by ordering additional robots.

● High Technology Readiness Level: 9
● Unmet need: Triaging remote patients
● Capacity to Absorb: Staff already trained
● Scalability: Monthly fee; can order more
● Efficacy: 5 years of trials

55

Use Cases | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

TRANSFER / ROBOTICIZE (SHORT TERM)
The transfer and roboticize paths explore opportunities to partner, merge, and adapt existing robotics
solutions to pre-existing pandemic technology solutions with well-defined use cases. On the transfer side
of the equation, robotics hardware may require some level of re-engineering, interface adaption, software
development and testing of newly integrated components. On the roboticize side, operational processes
are likely to require testing to validate user needs, evaluate efficacy, and build the business case. The more
“commercial-ready” the robotics and underlying technology components are (ie. the higher the TRL levels)
and the more well-defined the use case is at the start of the partnership, the shorter the development
timeline. A fast development timeline (ie. one that will be ready in time for this pandemic) assumes that:
•

The robot is at the top of the Technology Readiness scale (TRL 9) in an adjacent application,
even if it requires minor adaptations for this particular use case

•

The solution is addressing a pressing unmet need

•

End-users have the learning capacity, training and support to adopt the technology

•

The robot provider is able to consult, install, deliver, train and/or maintain the system as required

EXAMPLE

Augmenting a pre-existing mobile platform with
UV disinfection capabilities
An example of a ready-to-transfer/roboticize system that is in development here in Canada is the
newly announced partnership between mobile platform OEM OTTO Motors and UV-disinfection
provider Prescientx. Funded by the NGen COVID response program, the new partnership aims
to rapidly develop an autonomous UV disinfection robot that can serve OTTO Motor’s existing
global client base of warehouse & logistics customers (see Section 3.2.2). Prescientx already has a
number of mature UV-C disinfection solutions, including the portable, tethered UV-C base pictured
here. The robot will be built on OTTO’s existing mobile robot base and will use the OTTO Fleet
Manager to coordinate the movement of the robots and track warehouse sanitation. Testing will be
required to ensure efficacy and usability.

● High TRL in adjacent application: 9
● Unmet need: Around-the-clock warehouse disinfection
● Capacity to Absorb: Warehouse employees are already
familiar with the mobile robot platform
● Scalability: Large pre-existing customer base that can
serve as early adopters
● Efficacy: Requires validation & testing
(mock up for illustration purposes only)

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Use Cases

56

DEVELOP (MID-LONG TERM)
The develop path is the typical technology maturation process where an existing robot technology at
an early TRL could eventually be scaled up to have a real impact in a future pandemic or other disaster
scenario. Taking those early stage prototypes and proof-of-concept robots through all TRL involves the
entire technology transfer pipeline and substantial investments. As such the Develop Path has a long
term time horizon. At the same time radically new and pioneering solutions can be innovated to help us
prepare for a world of uncertain futures. The develop path assumes:
•

The robot is at the low-mid range of the Technology Readiness scale (TRL2-7)

•

The robot offers a potentially transformational innovation with EITHER an order of magnitude
efficiency improvement over existing solutions, AND/OR meets a critical need of many people
that is currently unmet

•

Champions, regulators, and potential early adopters have validated the concept and are involved
in the development process

EXAMPLE

Validating & testing socially assistive elder
care robots for independent living
Long-term care homes in Canada have continuously had staff shortages and high turnover rates, so they
were already hard-pressed before the pandemic hit. Some have required military personnel assistance
during the COVID-19 outbreak which is only a temporary solution. Long-term care homes are the hardest
hit facilities in this country, resulting in a large number of deaths. Assistive robots can complement care staff
and address safety and workload issues. The robots need to interact with people and navigate humancentred environments that contain frail and cognitively impaired individuals. As an emerging technology, the
research and development of these robots has mainly been in research labs around the world, for example
the Casper Socially Assistive Robot designed by the ASBLab at the University of Toronto.

● Low-Mid Technology Readiness Level
● Unmet need: Age-in place solutions for independent
senior living; companionship and support in eldercare
home
● Capacity to Absorb: Ability to regulate and gain social
acceptance has yet to be proven
● Scalability: Global aging population
● Efficacy: Requires further testing & validation to determine
whether these approaches will be effective

57

Use Cases | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

04
Deployment Success Factors
& How Canada Compares

Why have some countries so successfully deployed
robots in response to the pandemic, and why has
Canada deployed so few? Robotics is a complex
discipline with many success factors and knowledge
gaps that are ripe for investigation. We do not attempt
to address all these issues here, but instead use this
section to identify the key trends that appear to be most
relevant to the successful deployment of robots during
the pandemic crisis. For each factor discussed, we
describe why it matters during the COVID pandemic,
we provide examples, and we give insight into how this
factor plays out in the Canadian context.

4.1

TELEOPERATION
Why it matters during COVID

COVID-related demand has pushed robots into new operating
environments on short notice, leaving developers little time to
address the exceptional “edge cases’’ that make full autonomy
a challenge. This does not mean that robots can’t be rapidly
deployed and immediately useful during the current pandemic
however. One solution is to use teleoperation to bridge the
autonomy gap, i.e., to use a remote human operator to
help guide the robot through unstructured environments or
unexpected problems that the robot might encounter. In many
settings where robots can make a difference, the technical
challenges that remain for teleoperation or semi-autonomous
operation can be addressed fairly quickly, making it feasible to
deploy such technologies in time for the current pandemic. As

59

Success Factors | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

autonomy improves slowly over time, teleoperated systems can evolve
to become more autonomous and less dependent on human operators,
all while remaining largely invisible to end users of the service. This
model of semi-autonomous operation requires less development time to
bring to market, and allows industry to validate their product concepts
and business models before investing in fully autonomous solutions.
It also creates new jobs (ie. AV pilots) that can be done remotely
(sometimes even from home), helping to protect workers from exposure
during the pandemic.
Starship Technologies is a San Francisco-based startup that offers
a contactless food delivery service using a fleet of semi-autonomous
delivery robots that are small enough to drive on sidewalks. Starship
reports seeing significant increased demand for its contactless food
delivery service as a result of the pandemic and is now expanding
autonomous delivery into five countries . One factor that is enabling
Starship to expand so quickly is that their fleet is remotely monitored by
a team of operators who are ready to take control in the event that the
robot encounters a situation that its autonomy software cannot handle.
This approach has also allowed them to validate interest in their service
without having to invest in developing full autonomy.
149

150

Fetch Robotics is another California-based robotics company that
has made significant use of teleoperation during the pandemic.
Fetch provides cloud-based autonomous mobile robot solutions to
customers in manufacturing and logistics. In a recent interview , Fetch
CEO Melonee Wise describes how, a few years ago, Fetch took a risk
and decided to focus on servicing customers with internet-enabled
warehouses. During the pandemic they were able to use the cloud
to remotely reconfigure their robots to take on new tasks, rather than
having to reprogram them on premises. This provided the flexibility their
customers needed to respond to rapidly changing shift and cleaning
schedules, while keeping Fetch’s own employees safe from exposure.
151

152

149
150

Starship Technologies. https://www.starship.xyz/ (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).
K. Korosec, “Starship Technologies is sending its autonomous robots to more cities as demand for
contactless delivery rises,” TechCrunch, Apr. 09, 2020. https://social.techcrunch.com/2020/04/09/
starship-technologies-is-sending-its-autonomous-robots-to-more-cities-as-demand-for-contactlessdelivery-rises/ (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).
151 Fetch Robotics. https://fetchrobotics.com/ (accessed Sep. 08, 2020).
152 COVID-19, Robots and Us | April 21 2020. Silicon Valley Robotics | CITRIS, People and Robots,
2015. Interview with Andra Keay (Silicon Valley Robotics) and Melonee Wise (Fetch Robotics).
Available: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NG3W1oJbY4k

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Success Factors

60

Long term outlook
•

Growth in cloud-based robotics services: COVID has created a need
for remote work and the cloud services that support it. The cloud services
market was growing before COVID and analysts expect the pandemic to
accelerate this growth . Such services have given rise to a number of new
startups specializing in cloud robotics, online operations, and dashboard
systems for fleet management.
153

•

Demand for teleoperation services: Demand for services that make
use of teleoperation, such as autonomous delivery, was on the rise before
the pandemic and COVID has only further accelerated this trend. Several
companies that supply or whose business models depend on the use of
robotic teleoperation have launched in recent years. Many of these are
clustered in the Silicon Valley area, creating a concentration of both supply
and demand for robotic teleoperation in this region that is also driving
venture capital to invest. For example, Starship Technologies launched in
2015 and has received $82.2M USD in funding to date , Phantom Auto
launched in 2017 and has received $13.5M in funding , and Postmates
launched in 2011, has received a total of $903M in funding to date, and
was acquired in July 2020 by Uber for $2.65B in stock .
154

155

156

•

Viability: Though many tout teleoperation as the solution to the current
reliability gap in certain industries, factors such as interface design and
latency mean that teleoperation is likely to be most useful for slowspeed manipulation and driving scenarios in the short term. The ability to
teleoperate higher-speed robotic systems will arrive as better interfaces are
developed and network speeds improve.

•

Research challenges: Many fundamental research challenges remain
as we move up the autonomy scale from teleoperation to supervised
autonomy to full autonomy. One critical research challenge relates to
the hand-off of control between the human operator and the robot, an
activity that is especially important in teleoperated or semi-supervised
driving scenarios where many moving objects add complexity and speed
requires fast decision-making. Advances in areas as diverse as sensing,
system reliability, failsafe mechanisms, and interface design are needed to
address this issue. There is also much interest in having robots learn how

153

E. Sayegh, “A New Cloud Race Looms Amid The Covid-19 Industry Boom,” Forbes, Jul. 14, 2020. https://
www.forbes.com/sites/emilsayegh/2020/07/14/a-new-cloud-race-looms-amid-the-covid-19-industryboom/#1ed48c5176cb (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).
154 “Starship Technologies Company Profile & Funding,” Crunchbase. https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/
starship-technologies (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).
155 “Phantom Auto Company Profile & Funding,” Crunchbase. https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/phantomauto (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).
156 “Postmates Company Profile & Funding,” Crunchbase. https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/postmates
(accessed Sep. 03, 2020).

61

Success Factors | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

to perform a task by watching a human perform the task first, or by having
humans teach a manipulation task to a robot by guiding its arm or hand
rather than programming. Systems that can learn from humans are an ideal
way to bridge the autonomy gap, but advances in machine vision, image
recognition, compliance, and deep learning are required to advance the
state of the art.
•

Structural challenges: Given the applied nature of teleoperation, much of
the current development in this field is coming from industry, whereas the
robotics R&D that takes place in universities is focused on achieving full
autonomy because research on full autonomy is more likely to be published
and receive funding. As a result, university robotics curricula are set up in
ways that largely ignore issues of teleoperation. More research and training
programs are needed to support the next generation of robot teleoperators,
developers, and designers.

•

Jobs: While the path to full autonomy comes with the hypothetical risk of
job loss, there will be a need to keep humans in the loop for the foreseeable
future. As a result, we expect that demand for human teleoperators/
pilots, supervisors, developers, user experience (UX) and user interface (UI)
designers will continue to grow.

FOCUS ON CANADA
Despite COVID-related demand for grocery delivery, at present Canada
lacks the supply-and-demand activity and regulatory frameworks to support
autonomous sidewalk delivery services such as the Starship Technologies
example described above.
Yet teleoperation and telepresence are particularly relevant to Canada given its
large and sparsely populated country, its long stretches of unsecured borders,
and its publicly funded healthcare system. The vast majority of Canada’s
population and services are located in the southern part of the country near the
Canada-US border, and yet northern and remote communities need access to
goods and services like healthcare, and remote infrastructure requires monitoring.
Teleoperated or semi-autonomous robots can have a measurable impact in
remote communities, in applications from telemedicine to delivery of essential
supplies to monitoring and surveillance. However Canada’s long distances makes
the development and maintenance of autonomous robotics solutions in remote
communities a challenging proposition for most organizations.

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Success Factors

62

4.2

OPEN APIs
Why it matters during COVID
A major challenge limiting rapid development and large scale
deployment of robots is the lack of standardized or “off the
shelf” robotics software and hardware components on the
market. Even the seemingly simple act of adding a new
sensor (for example a new thermal camera for touchless
temperature taking) or non-moving hardware component
(for example a power-hungry UV light bulb) has significant
implications in terms of electrical and software integration.
The major engineering companies typically need months of
lead time to effectively and reliably integrate a nonstandard
sensor into an existing robot system. One way that
developers are speeding up robot development during COVID
is through the use of an open Application Programming
Interface (API), which makes it easy for users to build several
products on top of a base robot technology.

63

Success Factors | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

One example of how open APIs are being used during the pandemic
is France’s Kompai Robotics (see Figure 10), which uses a single
robot platform to provide multiple solutions to common healthcare use
cases. The robot is designed to be quickly and easily reconfigured for
new uses, making it adaptable during a pandemic. Boston Dynamics
is another example of a company providing an open API, which they
call the Open-Source Healthcare Robotics Toolkit . The toolkit offers
documentation and CAD files to support development across four use
cases: telemedicine, remote vitals inspection, disinfection, and delivery.
157

158

Figure 10: KOMPAÏ R&D modular robot system. KOMPAÏ Robotics is using an Open API to make it easy
for end users to address several different healthcare use cases with their base technology. Image credit:
KOMPAÏ Robotics.159

157 KOMPAÏ robotics. https://kompairobotics.com/ (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).
158 “Boston Dynamics COVID-19 Response: Using Mobile Robots to Protect Healthcare Workers,” Boston
Dynamics, Apr. 23, 2020. https://www.bostondynamics.com/COVID-19 (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).
159 “Develop your own healthcare robotic assistant,” KOMPAÏ robotics. https://kompairobotics.com/
the-robot-kompai/ (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Success Factors

64

Long term outlook
•

Demand: Because they facilitate interoperability between
different manufacturers, open APIs and other open source
approaches are expected by many to be an important driver
of development in the robotics industry for the foreseeable
future. The Robot Operating System (ROS) is an example of an
open source project that has gained significant traction in the
community.
160

•

Structural challenges: Recognized standards, specifications and
protocols for modularity, interoperability, and safety must continue
to be developed and formalized.

FOCUS ON CANADA
In Canada we have (at least) two companies that provide their base robot
technologies with an open API that encourages others to build solutions on
top. Clearpath Robotics’ and Kinova’s open API robots were shown previously
in Figure 1. Both these companies have seen great success in the international
robotics market, in part because their open API allows them to be more easily
integrated into their customers’ existing hardware, processes, and workflows.
To the best of our knowledge, there are few (if any) other countries that are
producing both a manipulator and a mobile base with an open API. This
presents a major strategic advantage that can be leveraged within Canada (and
beyond) to rapidly develop new COVID-related robot products and get these to
the top of the TRL ladder.

160

65

https://www.ros.org/ (accessed Sep. 04, 2020)

Success Factors | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

4.3

ROBOT-FRIENDLY
ENVIRONMENTS
Building a fully autonomous robot that can function in an
environment designed for humans can be time consuming
and costly, especially if the robot must be able to open
doors or navigate across more than one level of a building.
During COVID, retrofitting the environment (e.g. with sensors,
markers, and other types of aids) can be a relatively quick
and cost effective way to give a simple robot more autonomy.
For example, wifi-equipped elevators could enable robots
to call the elevator and set the target floor without using the
same button interface as humans.

Long term outlook
•

Accessibility laws: Wheelchair-friendly environments —
which feature ramps, wider spaces to allow movement,
and automatic door sensors — are also conducive
to robot mobility and are increasingly required under
current accessibility laws.

•

Human-centered environments: Human environments
must above all else serve the needs of humans, and
should not be compromised by the presence of robots.
Smart environments may come at the expense of other
liveability factors if privacy and safety concerns are not
taken seriously.

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Success Factors

66

FOCUS ON CANADA
While cities like Seoul and San Diego are investing in smart city infrastructure,
Canada’s cities have been more cautious. Toronto was slated to be home to
Quayside, Google Sidewalk Lab’s first experimental smart city equipped with
features like intelligent traffic lights, smart garbage collection, robotic street
furniture, and more. However the project was cancelled by Sidewalk Labs this
year, citing concerns over economic uncertainty due to COVID-19. Over the
two-and-a-half years between when the project was first announced and when
it was cancelled, Quayside faced significant controversy over privacy and data
protection issues, including questions over data ownership, a legal action over
citizen rights, and the resignation of Sidewalk’s Privacy Advisor.
161

162

163

While Quayside’s cancellation generated a mix of disappointment and relief, it
also made clear the significant work yet to be done in Canada (and elsewhere)
to clarify expectations and set standards for the governance of publiclygenerated data. Canada has a lot of learning to do before technology-enhanced
environments become acceptable.
Just weeks after Sidewalk announced the cancellation, the City of Kelowna in
BC announced it was claiming the title of “Canada’s first real-world 5G smart
city”. A partnership between the city, Rogers and UBC, the Kelowna project will
take on the significantly more modest goal of using the city’s new 5G network
and wireless sensors and software to collect anonymous traffic pattern data in
order to improve road safety.
164

161

S. Weekes, “Seoul bolsters its smart city infrastructure with IoT network,” Smart Cities World, Dec. 20, 2019.
https://www.smartcitiesworld.net/news/news/seoul-bolsters-its-smart-city-infrastructure-with-iot-network-4878
(accessed Sep. 03, 2020).
162 S. Descant, “San Diego Makes Strong Bet on IoT, Telematics and Apps,” Government Technology, May 22, 2019.
https://www.govtech.com/fs/infrastructure/San-Diego-Makes-Strong-Bet-on-IoT-Telematics-and-Apps.html
(accessed Sep. 03, 2020).
163 “Sidewalk Labs shuts down Toronto smart city project,” Smart Cities World, May 11, 2020. https://www.
smartcitiesworld.net/news/sidewalk-labs-shuts-down-toronto-smart-city-project-5262 (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).
164 M. Trudeau, “City of Kelowna launching Canada’s first ‘real-world 5G smart city’ solution,” Kelowna Now, May 28,
2020. https://www.kelownanow.com/watercooler/news/news/Kelowna/City_of_Kelowna_launching_Canada_s_
first_real_world_5G_smart_city_solution/ (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).

67

Success Factors | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

4.4

IN-HOUSE EXPERTISE
AND BUY-IN FROM
SENIOR LEADERSHIP
Why it matters during COVID

As Murphy et al. have argued, most organizations aren’t willing
or able to experiment with complicated new technologies in a
crisis. Therefore organizations that had a headstart in robotics
before the crisis have been better able to adapt and scale
existing solutions. Typically, organizations with significant in-house
expertise have a dedicated Chief Technology Officer whose role
is to provide strategic direction regarding technology policy and
implementation. Small scale pilot projects are typically used to
test and validate new solutions before they are scaled.
One example of the importance of expertise lies in how the first
COVID patient in the US came to be treated with the assistance
of a robot. In January 2020, healthcare staff at Providence St.
Joseph Health in Washington used a Vici Robot by Intouch
Health to remotely communicate and measure the patient’s
vital signs, saving on PPE and reducing risk of exposure in the
early days of the pandemic when little was known about the
virus. Providence began experimenting with telemedicine in
2012, and expects that 10-20% of all its visits will be conducted
using telemedicine technologies within 3-5 years. Providence’s
telemedicine program is overseen by Chief Medical Technology
Officer, Dr. Todd Czartosk, a neurologist who first began
experimenting with telemedicine as a means to provide timely
urgent diagnostic care to stroke patients.
165

165

E. Rosenbaum, “Robotic medicine may be the weapon the world needs to combat
the coronavirus,” CNBC, Feb. 26, 2020. https://www.cnbc.com/2020/02/26/roboticmedicine-may-be-the-weapon-needed-to-combat-the-coronavirus.html (accessed Sep.
03, 2020).

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Success Factors

68

Long term outlook

69

•

Fee-for-service models: Buy-in from leadership is easier to achieve when
the cost benefit is clear and the cost of switching from manual processes
is low. Robot suppliers have been experimenting with new fee-for-service
business models that reduce upfront costs, and free customers from the
burden of directly managing ongoing maintenance and repair in exchange
for predictable monthly fees. Beyond the business case to customers,
managed service models have some upsides for developers as well: the
ability to push updates, collect validation data, and call back and replace
older robot models makes it easier to test and continue to develop a
product while it is live in the field. While managed service models are
increasingly common (not only in robotics but in general), robot developers
should be cautioned that for fee-for-service to work as a long term business
strategy requires a strong economic rationale on the part of the customer,
and for robotics this isn’t always the case. The robotics market is still young
and fluid, and business models for robotics are still evolving and highly
dependent on the sector that’s being served.

•

Knowledge transfer: Even if a company does not have its own internal
robotics group, it must at least have some qualified, future-thinking, techsavvy leadership who follow the state of the art and are capable of working
with technology or research consultants. Commercially-focused robotics
R&D centres such as the 72 Fraunhofer Institutes in Germany, the German
Aerospace Centre, or SRI International in the US, offer significant incentive
for researchers to collaborate closely with industry and help transfer
robotics know-how into new industries and application areas.

•

Workplace acceptance: Workplace acceptance of robots varies greatly
depending on the field of application, the design and function of the
robot, and the culture in which the deployment is taking place. Robotic
solutions that focus on augmenting the capabilities of human workers and
performing dangerous tasks, rather than replacing workers, will no doubt
have broader support.

•

Training of end users: A large number of robotic systems are meant
to be deployed in environments that are dominated by users who are
not expert roboticists, for instance, in homes, hospitals, factories, and
roads. In turn, end-users of robots must be trained to properly and
safely operate these machines.

Success Factors | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

FOCUS ON CANADA
Most Canadian organizations lack the experience to understand how
advanced technologies such as robotics could improve their processes, as
well as the qualified personnel to implement such solutions.
Canada is home to numerous university- and college-level robotics training
programs (See Section 2.4), and graduates of these programs are in high
demand. However robotics end-user training programs in downstream
application areas are less common. In Canada, end user training has focused
mainly on operating flying vehicles. To operate drones or Remotely Piloted
Aircraft Systems (RPAS) in Canada, one needs a drone pilot licence and
vehicle registration for take-off weights of 250 grams (g) up to and including
25 kilograms (kg), via a Special Flights Operations Certificate (SFOC). More
specialized end user training exists in surgical robotics, for example at
Western University’s Canadian Surgical Technologies and Advanced Robotics
(CSTAR) facility at the London Health Sciences Centre University Hospital.
In Ontario, training for safety drivers for autonomous vehicles is relegated to
the company, and the safety protocols have to be reported to the Ministry of
Transportation through the Autonomous Vehicle Pilot Program.
More training and knowledge transfer activities are needed in downstream
industries with potential for short-term economic impact in Canada during
the pandemic. For example, training programs for industrial autonomous
mobile robots (AMRs) as well as for new generation manipulators could help
our manufacturing and logistics industries keep up with increased operational
demands and worker shortages while improving competitiveness over the
longer term.

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Success Factors

70

4.5

ACCESS TO ROBOT
SUPPLY CHAINS
Why it matters during COVID

The COVID-19 pandemic has brought many economies to
a near standstill as workers are sent home to self-isolate.
Supply and demand have stopped simultaneously. As a result,
procurement is a challenge for everyone, but smaller nations
have found themselves lacking in domestic production of
medical equipment and other critical supplies, leaving their
healthcare systems and economies reliant on imports. As a
result many are looking to reinvest in local supply chains and
manufacturing, at least for essential goods. The same holds for
procuring robots.
Our research shows that the vast majority of ready-to-use
robot systems are offered by companies located in a handful
of countries. During a pandemic, adapting existing automation
solutions to a new challenge is feasible only if the technology is
already in the country. Therefore, regions that are home to robot
companies with products that can satisfy pandemic needs have
been at an advantage when it comes to the variety and scale of
their pandemic deployments.

71

Success Factors | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

Long term outlook
•

Reliance on international supply chains for component
parts: While software development for robotics applications
is typically completed within the country and not outsourced,
scaling up production of robot hardware is critically reliant on
manufacturing hubs and well-established international supply
chains for electronics and sensors, semiconductors, mechanical
components, and batteries.

FOCUS ON CANADA
UV disinfection and social robots for hospital assistance have turned out
to be important front line use cases for the pandemic. However prior to the
pandemic, no Canadian robotics OEM was making a UV disinfection robot,
and only one was making a social robot (Crosswing). We suspect that this
is a major reason for the lack of frontline COVID-related deployments in
this country. Nevertheless, with the OEMs Clearpath Robotics and Kinova,
Canada has both a homegrown mobile robot platform and manipulator robot.
Both companies provide their base robot technologies with an open API to
encourage others to build solutions on top. This is a major advantage that can
be leveraged within Canada (and beyond) to rapidly develop new COVID-bot
prototypes and get these into the maturation process. Indeed, as described
in Section 3.2.2, Clearpath is partnering with an established Canadian UV
disinfection device maker to develop a mobile disinfection robot built on
Clearpath’s OTTO Motors’ mobile robot platform.
Shenzhen, China, which is currently seen as the electronics capital of the
world, is not a critical bottleneck for Canadian manufacturing of intelligent
machines. However, it was noted in our interviews that, if faced with
an unforeseen need to switch distributors and suppliers or re-engineer
subsystems, the majority of Canadian robotics companies would need up to
12 months to adjust.

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Success Factors

72

4.6

SUSTAINED ROBOTICS
R&D FUNDING
Why it matters during COVID

While only relatively mature robotic technology is fit for service
during a pandemic, mature robotics products would not exist
today were it not for investments in early stage research made
years or even decades earlier. Robotics R&D funding lays the
foundation for an industry ecosystem and supply chain that
countries can draw on during a crisis.
According to the International Federation of Robotics Global
R&D spending report , China launched its Robot Industry
Development plan in 2016, and in 2019 alone had allocated
$577M USD specifically for robotics R&D; Japan launched its
New Robot Strategy in 2016 as well, and in 2019 allocated
$351M for this program; South Korea is now on its 3rd five-year
Intelligent Robot Basic Plan, having allocated $126M in funding
for robotics in 2020 and an additional $150M US towards an
Implementation Plan for Intelligent Robotics; the EU launched
their Horizon 2020 euRobotics Multi-Annual Roadmap in 2014,
with a $780 USD budget for the 6 years of the project.
166

166

73

“World Robotics R&D Program,” International Federation of Robotics (IFR). https://ifr.
org/r-and-d#download (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).

Success Factors | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

These numbers demonstrate both a long term commitment to funding robotics
R&D as well as significant current budgets, some of which will no doubt be
allocated towards a robotized pandemic response. In our view it is therefore not
surprising that these countries would be some of the biggest users of robotics
during the pandemic.

Long term outlook
•

Growth in private investment: Governments rarely have the appetite to
fund research indefinitely without contributions from industry. It’s important
to note that private investment in robotics has been on the rise ever since
the arrival of the smartphone brought down the cost of sensors and
electronics. Also, private investment in robotics remains relatively strong
despite the economic downturn. The Table below shows a dip in robotics
investment in April 2020 at the height of the overall global economic
downturn caused by the pandemic lockdown. Unlike many other sectors,
however, robotics rebounded to 2019 levels in subsequent months.

TABLE 11: Q2 GLOBAL VENTURE INVESTMENT IN
ROBOTICS (2019 VS 2020)
Source: The Robot Report

•

2019

2020

April

30 transactions
$6.5 Billion USD

26 transactions
$0.6 Billion USD

May

27 transactions
$1.5 Billion

20 transactions
$1.5 Billion USD

June

50 transactions
$1.1 Billion USD

48 transactions
$1.9 Billion USD

July

49 transactions
$1.1 Billion USD

47 transactions
$1.9 Billion USD

Overall R&D funding: A country’s overall R&D funding landscape plays
a crucial role in its ability to leverage its expertise in robotics. Data from
UNESCO shows that many of the top countries in robotics are spending
significant portions of their GDP on R&D (see Appendix for details).

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Success Factors

74

FOCUS ON CANADA
Robotics funding during COVID
Many calls for short-term R&D have been created in Canada since the start of
the pandemic, and multiple existing programs such as IRAP and NextGEN
have been adapted to the current need. However our interviews with Canadian
robotics industry members reveal that the business case for pandemic-focused
robotics here is weak because demand is expected to subside as soon as a
vaccine is released. Many of the most innovative Canadian robotics companies
are small in size and are therefore not capable of making large high-risk
investments that do not align closely with their existing business. Furthermore, a
crisis is the hardest time for small companies to take on new high-risk projects.
By focusing funding on TRL7+ technologies, and especially modest adaptations
of existing TRL9 robotic platforms with proven in-field operational capabilities,
strategic investments could ensure Canadian robotic solutions make it to market
in time to support this pressing need.
167

168

Programs for translational robotics research
Canada has several federal and provincial programs that support the
establishment of joint research projects between universities and companies,
for instance NSERC Alliance, Mitacs, and others. Many of these programs
leverage industrial funding and match it 1:1 or 2:1. We note that while these
programs are generally useful for established companies, it is unlikely that
startup companies in need of academic expertise would be able to set aside
research funding of $50K or $100K/year — an amount that, when matched,
would incentivize academics to consider the collaboration. Small startup
companies must have lower cash requirements and unfettered access to these
programs, especially in the first two to three years.
History of robotics funding in Canada
Canada became an early and important investor in robotics technology when it
launched the Canada Space Arm (Canadarm) program in 1975. By the time the
Canadarm was decommissioned in 2011, the program had invested $1.4B.
169

167

“The Industrial Research Assistance Program-Innovative Solutions Canada COVID-19 Challenge Program,” National
Research Council Canada, May 05, 2020. https://nrc.canada.ca/en/support-technology-innovation/industrialresearch-assistance-program-innovative-solutions-canada-covid-19-challenge-program (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).
168 “COVID-19 Response,” Next Generation Manufacturing Canada (NGen). https://www.ngen.ca/covid-19-response
(accessed Sep. 03, 2020).
169 “Canadian space milestones,” Canadian Space Agency | Government of Canada, Dec. 04, 2007. https://www.asccsa.gc.ca/eng/about/milestones.asp (accessed Sep. 01, 2020).

75

Success Factors | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

$1.4B

Canada Space Arm
(CSA) 1975 - 2011

$260M

IRIS/PRECARN 1987 - 2011

Canadian Field Robotics Network 2012 - 2022

$15.5M

$1.9B

AI-enabled Space Robotics (CSA) 2019 - 2043

$125M

CIFAR Pan-Canadian AI Strategy 2017-2022

1970

1980

Scale AI Supercluster 2018

$230M

NGen Manufacturing Supercluster 2018

$230M

1990

2000

2010

2020

2030

2040
ROBOTICS
AI

ADVANCED MANUFACTURING

Figure 11: Canada’s national funding programs in robotics & key complementary initiatives
Sources: Canadian Space Agency, PRECARN, NSERC Canadian Robotics Network, CIFAR, Scale AI, NGen

From 1987-2011, Canada contributed an additional $260M over 24 years to
PRECARN , an industry-led consortium set in motion by the Canadian Institute for
Advanced Research (CIFAR), and co-funded by the federal government. PRECARN
subsequently launched and led the Institute for Robotics and Intelligent Systems
(IRIS), one of Canada’s early NSERC Networked Centres of Excellence .
After PRECARN/IRIS wound down operations at the end of their respective
mandates, Canada’s subsequent strategic robotics investments grew
significantly smaller. NSERC allocated the Canadian Field Robotics Network
with a total of $15.5M in funding for 2012-2022 . The organization has since
broadened its mandate and renamed itself the NSERC Canadian Robotics
170

171

172

173 174

170
171

Reference: interview with Paul Johnston, CEO of PRECARN.
“Research and Development Funding: Pre-Competitive Advanced Research Network (PRECARN),” Mentor Works
Ltd., Feb. 13, 2013. https://www.mentorworks.ca/blog/government-funding/research-and-development-fundingpre-competitive-advanced-research-network/ (accessed Sep. 07, 2020).
172 P. Warrian, “PRECARN Incorporated History,” Innovation Policy Lab at the Munk School of Global Affairs, University
of Toronto. (unpublished).
173 “NCFRN Fact Sheet.” NSERC Canadian Field Robotics Network, 2013, Accessed: Sep. 03, 2020. [Online].
Available: http://ncfrn.mcgill.ca/press-kit/ncfrn-fact-sheet/at_download/file.
174 http://ncfrn.mcgill.ca/press-kit/press-release/view

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Success Factors

76

Network (NCRN), however with limited resources and participants, it falls short
of the significant funded strategies of prior years.
Despite this, Canada has invested in some key complementary initiatives.
One of these is the $125 million Pan-Canadian Artificial Intelligence Strategy ,
launched in 2017, which established three national AI institutes: the Amii
Institute in Alberta, the Mila Institute in Montreal, and the Vector Institute in
Toronto. Another is the $950 million Supercluster Initiative, which launched its
Scale.ai (artificial intelligence) and NGen (advanced manufacturing) programs
in 2018. Most recently, Innovation, Science and Economic Development
Canada (ISED) has renewed its space robotics interest with the launch of its
new Canadian Space Strategy (2019), which promises to invest
175

176

40
SSHRC
CIHR
NSERC

30

20

10

2019

2018

2017

2016

2015

2014

2013

2012

2011

2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

0

Figure 12: Robotics funding from Canada’s Tri-Council Agencies ($Million CDN/year 1992-2019)
Sources: NSERC, CIHR, and SHHRC Awards databases177

175

“Pan-Canadian Artificial Intelligence Strategy,” CIFAR. https://www.cifar.ca/ai/pan-canadian-artificial-intelligencestrategy (accessed Sep. 01, 2020).
176 “Canada’s new superclusters,” Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada, Jan. 27, 2020. https://
www.ic.gc.ca/eic/site/093.nsf/eng/00008.html (accessed Sep. 01, 2020).
177 Source: Awards databases from Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), Canadian
Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), and the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council (SSHRC); search
term “robot”

77

Success Factors | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

$1.9 billion specifically to develop AI-enabled deep-space robotics systems .
In addition, Canada continues to fund robotics research through regular
Tri-Council competitive funding mechanisms, and this is steadily growing
(see Figure 12). Though Canada now has no formal R&D research program
for robotics, a total of $34M CDN was funded for robotics research under
Canada’s federal research granting agencies in 2019.
178

Canada’s overall R&D funding
Canada is known globally for the quality of its R&D. However a recent report
on the state of research and development in Canada from the Canadian
Council of Academies reports a sustained erosion of Canada’s private and
public R&D expenditures in recent years. While Canada’s R&D expenditures
have remained relatively flat when adjusted for inflation, other OECD countries
have significantly increased their R&D investments.
179

7,999
Denmark

7,111

Korea,
Rep.

Sweden

Singapore

6,222
5,333

Japan
CANADA

4,444

France

United
Kingdom

3,555

Germany Switzerland

United States

2,666
Italy

1,777

China

888
0

0

1
Researchers per million inhabitants

2

3

4

5

R&D expenditure as % of GDP

Figure 13: Global R&D spending as % of GDP. The circles show the amounts countries are spending on total R&D in PPP$.
Countries farther to the right are spending relatively more in terms of their GDP. Those closer to the top have higher numbers of
researchers per capita. Image credit: Adapted from UNESCO Institute for Statistics.180

178

“Exploration, Imagination, Innovation: A New Space Strategy for Canada,” Canadian Space Agency, 2019.
Accessed: Sep. 01, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.asc-csa.gc.ca/pdf/eng/publications/space-strategy-forcanada.pdf.
179 Competing in a Global Innovation Economy: The Current State of R&D in Canada. Council of Canadian Academies
Expert Panel on the State of Science and Technology and Industrial Research and Development in Canada, 2018.
Available: https://cca-reports.ca/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/Competing_in_a_Global_Innovation_Economy_
FullReport_EN.pdf
180 “How much does your country invest in R&D?,” UNESCO Institute for Statistics. http://www.uis.unesco.org/_
LAYOUTS/UNESCO/research-and-development-spending/index-en.html (accessed Jul. 17, 2020).

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Success Factors

78

4.7

COORDINATION OF
STAKEHOLDERS
AND EFFORTS

A national pandemic response requires coordination
across multiple stakeholders to manage everything
from procurement, regulatory fast-tracking,
funding and more. To include robotics as part
of this response requires additional domainspecific expertise and coordination. Many of the
countries where we have seen significant robotics
deployments during the COVID crisis have national
robotics strategies that have paved the way for
significant funding and coordination of efforts prior
to the pandemic. A key premise of this paper is that
these strategies resulted in relatively mature robotics
ecosystems that were better poised than those in
other countries to respond with offers of assistance
when the pandemic struck.
For example, the EU, which has had a coordinated
robotics strategy since 2014, is one of the few
regions that has created dedicated funding for
the development of COVID-related robotics.

Recognizing the specific challenges of bringing
robotics to market, the Digital Innovation Hubs in
Healthcare Robotics (DIH-HERO) fund will provide
EUR 5M for robotic solutions that can be rapidly
deployed in the healthcare sector .
181

Another important example is China, which
launched its Robot Industry Development plan
in 2016 and has long included automation as an
integral part of its economic development strategy.
China was able to launch and pilot a robotequipped Smart Field Hospital within weeks after
going into lockdown. This massive coordination
effort included liaising with medical staff to
determine needs, coordinating robot suppliers and
local authorities to procure and ship equipment
during lockdown, and telecommunications
providers to ensure that the mobile robots would
have constant contact with the cloud where
technical engineers could provide support .
182

181 “Call for funding: robotic tech and solutions immediately
deployable in hospitals,” Shaping Europe’s digital future - European
Commission, Apr. 10, 2020. https://ec.europa.eu/digital-singlemarket/en/news/call-funding-robotic-tech-and-solutionsimmediately-deployable-hospitals (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).
182 S. O’Meara, “Meet the engineer behind China’s first robot-run
coronavirus ward,” Nature, vol. 582, no. 7813, Art. no. 7813, Jun.
2020, doi: 10.1038/d41586-020-01794-8.

79

Success Factors | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

Long term outlook
•

Multiple coordination models: Nations have taken different
approaches to coordinating robotics development, with some
efforts initiated and sustained by government, and others
primarily by industry. Still others involve close partnerships
between government, industry and academia alike. National
R&D programmes (China), robot strategies (Japan, Germany,
USA, Australia), and framework programmes (EU) are the most
common tools used to develop leadership in robotics innovation
and promote coordination between the various stakeholders.

•

Digital Innovation networks: It is noteworthy that many of
these regions’ robotics strategies, though comprehensive
in and of themselves, are but one component of a broader
digital innovation strategy that involves complementary
initiatives in artificial intelligence, wireless infrastructure, sensing
technologies, and sometimes even regulatory and ethics
frameworks. Such large scale innovation programs are years in
the making and involve sustained investment of funding, human
resources, and infrastructure.
183

•

Regulatory fast-tracking: If robotic devices are to be of benefit
during the current pandemic, fast tracking may be needed
to bring them more quickly through testing and approvals
processes. And yet health and safety standards must in no
way be compromised during the fast-tracking process. Several
regions have created special programs to fast track approval
of medical devices for use during the COVID-19 pandemic,
including the US , China , and Canada, however it remains
unclear whether devices that were fast tracked during the
pandemic will continue to be approved when the crisis is over.
Because robots have many application areas, a “one-size fits
all approach” is insufficient; application- and domain-specific
regulatory needs must be considered by the appropriate
regulatory body.
184

185

183

D. A. Wolfe, “A Digital Strategy for Canada: The Current Challenge,” Institute for Research on
Public Policy, vol. No. 25, p. 20, Feb. 2019, [Online]. Available: https://irpp.org/wp-content/
uploads/2019/01/A-Digital-Strategy-for-Canada.pdf.
184 “Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Emergency Use Authorizations for Medical Devices,” U.S.
Food & Drug Administration, Mar. 08, 2020. https://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/emergency-useauthorizations-medical-devices/coronavirus-disease-2019-covid-19-emergency-use-authorizationsmedical-devices (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).
185 W. Pan, R. Miao, and F. Yip, “Racing against COVID-19: An Introduction to China’s Regulatory FastTrack Processes | Lexology,” Lexocology | Goodwin Proctor LLP, Mar. 06, 2020. https://www.lexology.
com/library/detail.aspx?g=6e48d6a3-bb02-407d-b3db-450f52df3bbe (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Success Factors

80

Regulatory environment
Due to Canada’s relatively small market, a key regulatory issue here is the
need to harmonize with international safety standards and the standards of
large robotics markets such as the EU. Such an approach helps in three key
ways. First, it ensures that Canadian robotics are developed in such a way as
to make them suitable for export to international markets. Secondly, it paves
the way for robots developed in other countries to more quickly gain approvals
for Canadian health and safety standards, making it easier to import robots
here when needed. Finally, the participation of Canadian firms and agencies
in international standards working groups provides international visibility and
experience to Canadian developers.
We describe Canada’s regulatory expertise and enumerate some of the
relevant Canadian regulations pertaining to robotics in the Appendix, including
successes and challenges.
Coordination of stakeholders
Canada was one of the early countries to invest in robotics through its
Canadarm space robotics program, starting in 1975 . According to the
Canadian Space Agency, these early contributions helped to generate a
Canadian space industry that supports 8,000 skilled jobs and is worth $3.33B
each year. In 1984, the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research (CIFAR)
launched its first research program in Artificial Intelligence and Robotics,
and issued a report that recommended that Canada establish a mechanism
to support technology transfer in robotics . Ultimately this report led to the
creation in 1987 of a 39-company consortium called the Pre-Competitive
Applied Research Network (PRECARN) . Soon after, PRECARN formed a
Network Centre of Excellence called the Institute for Robotics and Intelligent
Systems to provide basic research to the consortium. In 2010, when IRIS/
PRECARN wound down their operations at the end of their respective
mandates, Canada became one of the few developed countries to not have
a national robotics innovation network. Canada also has no national robotics
industry association.
186

187

188

189

186

“Canadian space milestones,” Canadian Space Agency | Government of Canada, Dec. 04, 2007. https://www.asccsa.gc.ca/eng/about/milestones.asp (accessed Sep. 01, 2020).
187 “Canada’s Space Policy Framework,” Canadian Space Agency, Feb. 2014, Accessed: Sep. 03, 2020. [Online].
Available: https://www.asc-csa.gc.ca/pdf/eng/publications/space-policy/canadas-space-policy-framework.pdf.
188 P. Warrian, “PRECARN Incorporated History,” Innovation Policy Lab at the Munk School of Global Affairs,
unpublished research note.
189 “Research and Development Funding: Pre-Competitive Advanced Research Network (PRECARN),” Mentor Works
Ltd., Feb. 13, 2013. https://www.mentorworks.ca/blog/government-funding/research-and-development-fundingpre-competitive-advanced-research-network/ (accessed Sep. 07, 2020).

81

Success Factors | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

The idea for a renewed national robotics strategy for Canada was discussed
at a workshop held at the 2017 IEEE Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS)
conference in Vancouver that brought together Canadian stakeholders from
across academia, government, and industry. Many of these stakeholders
generously provided useful input to this whitepaper. The group identified a
number of key opportunities for the Canadian robotics ecosystem, including:

Building visibility for Canadian robotics. As global demand for robotics
expertise rises, there is fierce competition to attract and retain top talent
and industry funding.

•

Strengthening Canada’s digital innovation portfolio. Canada already has
core strengths in AI, ICT, quantum computing, photonics and sensing.
Together with robotics, these form a suite of core digital competencies
that are capable of fueling multiple application areas, from healthcare, to
mobility, to manufacturing.

photonics/sensing

•

quantum computing

Clarifying our understanding of the evolving robotics ecosystem in
Canada. Many other countries have Robotics Industry Associations and/
or national robotics conferences to track growth, impact, and expertise.
Canada does not.

AI

•

ICT

Aligning stakeholders on a uniquely Canadian vision for robotics that
accounts for our robotics strengths, our culture, our economy, and
geography. Simply “copying” a robotics roadmap or strategy from
another region or country is unlikely to work.

robotics

•

core digital
competencies

ALIGN KEY
ROBOTICS STAKEHOLDERS
on a pan-Canadian vision

SUPPORT THE
ROBOTICS ECOSYSTEM
by tracking growth
and impact

BUILD VISIBILITY
FOR CANADIAN ROBOTICS
& compete globally to
attract $ and talent

STRENGTHEN CANADA’S
DIGITAL INNOVATION
PORTFOLIO
by complementing existing
digital competencies

Figure 14: Opportunities for a coordinated Canadian robotics ecosystem

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Success Factors

82

Though Canada has no formal digital innovation strategy, the idea is not
new. In 2014, the Innovation Policy Lab at the Munk School of Global Affairs
and Public Policy at the University of Toronto launched the Creating Digital
Opportunity (CDO) research partnership involving 16 universities and 11 partner
organizations . CDO has published several recommendations
for a
national digital innovation strategy for Canada.
190

191 192 193

The Canadian government also appears to be moving in this direction. In 2018,
Innovation, Science and Economic Development (ISED) Canada launched
a series of national Digital and Data Consultations to invite stakeholders
from across the country to share their perspectives on the challenges and
opportunities for Canadian digital innovation. Some of the Authors and
contributors of this white paper were among those invited to the consultations,
which resulted in the publication of Canada’s Digital Charter in 2019.
194

195

While digital innovation overtures such as these are timely, in Canada they
have tended to focus on the virtual and software aspects of digital innovation,
and have not given hardware aspects such as robotics and sensing as much
attention. Given the unique challenges and opportunities presented by
hardware R&D as compared to software (see Section 2.3 for more details),
we argue that robotics should not be an afterthought to a digital innovation
strategy, but rather a dedicated focus area with its own strategic approach
and timeline for development.

190
191
192
193
194
195

83

“Creating Digital Opportunity,” Innovation Policy Lab at the Munk School of Global Affairs & Policy, University of
Toronto. https://munkschool.utoronto.ca/ipl/research/creating-digital-opportunity/ (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).
D. A. Wolfe, “Creating Digital Opportunity for Canada,” Innovation Policy Lab at the Munk School of Global Affairs,
University of Toronto | Brookfield Institute, Apr. 2018. [Online]. Available: https://munkschool.utoronto.ca/ipl/
files/2018/04/UTMK028-Digital-Opps_V6-1.pdf.
D. A. Wolfe, “A Digital Strategy for Canada: The Current Challenge,” Institute for Research on Public Policy, vol.
No. 25, p. 20, Feb. 2019, [Online]. Available: https://irpp.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/A-Digital-Strategy-forCanada.pdf.
D. A. Wolfe, “A Policy Agenda for the Digital Economy (Working Paper),” Innovation Policy Lab at the Munk School
of Global Affairs, vol. No. 2016-02, 2016, doi: 10.13140/RG.2.1.1220.0723.
“National Digital and Data Consultations,” Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada, 2018. https://
www.ic.gc.ca/eic/site/084.nsf/eng/home (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).
Canada’s digital charter in action: A plan by Canadians, for Canadians. Innovation, Science and Economic
Development Canada, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.ic.gc.ca/eic/site/062.nsf/vwapj/Digitalcharter_Report_
EN.pdf/$file/Digitalcharter_Report_EN.pdf

Success Factors | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

4.8

ADDRESSABLE GAPS: A
SUMMARY OF CANADA’S
STRENGTHS AND
WEAKNESSES
Thus far in Section 4 we have explored the key factors
(technical, social and systemic) that are limiting the use of
robots during the pandemic, both in general and here in
Canada. In this section we summarize Canada’s relative
strengths and weaknesses.

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Success Factors

84

TABLE 12: STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES IN CANADIAN ROBOTICS
SUCCESS FACTOR

CANADA’S STRENGTHS

CANADA’S WEAKNESSES

4.1
Teleoperation

Strong research capabilities in autonomy and
supervised autonomy

Lack of incentives for teleoperation-focused
research to fill the autonomy gap

Highly relevant to Canada given the vast
distances here; high potential for impact

Lack of training programs for teleoperators

4.2
Open APIs

Lack of both supply and demand for teleoperation
services

Two companies (1 mobile, 1 manipulator) with
Open API
Strong research expertise integrating hardware
and software systems. We build real robots here.

4.3
Robot-friendly
environments

Introduced barrier-free legislation in 2019 as part
of the Accessible Canada Act

Slow to create smart city infrastructure
Regulatory uncertainty over data ownership and
privacy
Lack of large scale, outdoor robotics test sites

4.4
In-house industry
expertise

Multiple centres of graduate training excellence
across the country (e.g. Toronto, Montreal,
Vancouver, Waterloo)

Lack of robotics experience and knowhow among
downstream industry leaders

Strong college-level programs (Ontario)

Lack of robotics end-user training programs in
downstream application areas

Dedicated training and certification programs for
drone pilots and robotic surgery

Lack of product-focused, applied research centres
to support translational robotics research
Canadian robotics startups challenged by
marketing and selling on a global level due to lack
of available, experienced, and relevant talent

4.5
Access to robot
supply chains

4.6
Sustained robotics
funding

Critical electronic components must be imported
internationally
No UV disinfection robot and only one homegrown
OEM making social robots
prior to COVID
Large, early investments in robotics set the stage
Several new complementary funding mechanisms
Several new corporate research centres have
opened offices recently

4.7
Coordination of
stakeholders

NSERC Canadian Robotics Network
Annual Canadian Computer and Robot Vision
Conference since 2004
Pan Canadian AI Strategy
New Canadian Space Robotics Strategy

No comprehensive and dedicated robotics funding
mechanism
Not currently tracking robotics funding
Eroding industry R&D investment in Canada as a
whole
No national robotics strategy or comprehensive
digital innovation strategy that connects
researchers to end users
No Canadian-centred robotics industry association
Too few policymakers and regulators with
expertise in robotics

Supercluster programs in Advanced
Manufacturing and AI

85

Success Factors | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

05
CONCLUSION

We started this whitepaper with the question:
Where are all the robots fighting COVID-19 in
Canada? We interviewed numerous potential and
actual end-users — from hospitals to public transit,
grocery stores and schools — to understand
the most pressing needs where robots can and
do play a role, and we conducted a media scan
to understand more generally how robots are
being put to use in the global pandemic. We
also surveyed Canadian robotics companies
to understand how the pandemic is impacting
their businesses. We then used our experience
developing and building robotics systems to
evaluate the readiness, robustness, and autonomy
of the various robots we were seeing. Ultimately
our goal was to gain a general understanding
of where robots are working effectively in the
pandemic, and what are the factors for successful
deployments, both in Canada and more broadly.
We use the remainder of this paper to discuss the
implications of our findings in the context of five
key questions:

1. Is Canada capable of a robotized future?
2. Does Canada want a robotized future?
3. Does Canada need a robotized future?
4. Is Canada ready for a robotized future?
5. What next steps can Canada take to better
exploit its robotics assets?

87

Is Canada capable of a robotized future? This
paper has shown that countries and organizations
that were invested in robotics before the pandemic
are the ones that have most benefited from
pandemic demand. It has also shown that Canadian
robotics are making some key contributions
towards helping the logistics and manufacturing
industries navigate staff shortages and increased
demand due to COVID-19. And yet Canada has
not taken advantage of robotics to the same degree
as other nations in its pandemic response, despite
its long history of investment, its high academic
standing in the field, and the international success
of a number of its homegrown robotics companies.
Having examined various factors that influence
robotics across a variety of technological, societal
and systemic domains, we conclude that Canadian
robotics stakeholders do indeed possess the
technical know-how to succeed in making
impactful contributions to the field of robotics. So
what is holding us back?
Does Canada want a roboticized future? The
news and entertainment media has long presented
us with many contradictory views of what a
roboticized future might look like, from the inspiring
to the downright worrisome. Now the COVID-19
pandemic has accelerated robots’ use in the real
world, and the pace of change has become mindboggling. In this context, caution and skepticism
are reasonable, as are anticipation and hope.
And yet whatever our feelings, we seem to find
ourselves at a critical junction: jump in or be left
behind. All signs seem to show that global forces
are inevitably pulling us towards more automation.
In some parts of the world, at least, the roboticized
future is already here.
While there is scant data available on Canadians’
attitudes towards robots specifically, various studies
paint a picture of how Canadians feel about new
technologies and disruptive innovation in general.
Results from these studies show that Canadians
are somewhat more skeptical about technological

Conclusion | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

135.0%

127.5%

advances than other nations, but they hold a nuanced view. An HSBC
study showed that Canadians are less positive about technology
advances than the global average, but are also less overwhelmed by it.
And an Ipsos study of Canadians showed that while Canadians tend to
recognize the value of new technologies and are generally hopeful that
they will bring benefits to society, they are also concerned that the benefits
of innovation will not be distributed evenly. Perhaps the reason it’s hard
GDP GROWTH
OTHER SECTORS
to understand whether Canadians
actually FROM
want ALL
a roboticized
future is
because it’s still unclear what in fact this future might look like. As roboticists
who are the makers of such technology, we prefer to turn the question
around and ask: What is the roboticized future that Canadians want?
196

120.0%

197

112.5%

105.0%

97.5%

CBC News

Armed with a clear vision of our goals, a mutual understanding of Canadian
to
of equity,
2009 10stakeholders’
11
12 needs,
13 and
14 a commitment
15
16
17principles
18
19
20 diversity
2021
and inclusion to ensure that our most vulnerable stakeholders are neither
Sources: BMO, Statistics Canada, Harver Analytics
adversely impacted nor left behind, Canada
has the opportunity to create a
roboticized future that reflects the unique cultural, geographic, and economic
needs of its citizens. Rather than fear that robots will one day take over our
jobs, our freedom, and our privacy, we can engineer and design the robots
that we want to ensure a bright future for this country and its residents.

142.5%
GDP GROWTH FROM HIGH TECH SECTOR

135.0%

127.5%

120.0%

112.5%
GDP GROWTH FROM ALL OTHER SECTORS

105.0%

97.5%
2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

Figure 15: GDP growth in Canada’s high tech sector versus other sectors
Sources: BMO, Statistics Canada, Haver Analytics. Image credit: Adapted from CBC News.195

196

Trust in technology,” HSBC, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.hsbc.com/-/files/hsbc/media/
media-release/2017/170609-updated-trust-in-technology-final-report.pdf.
197 “Tech for Good: A Canadian Perspective,” Ipsos Canada, 2018. Accessed: Sep. 08, 2020. [Online].
Available: https://www.ipsos.com/sites/default/files/ct/publication/documents/2018-06/publicperspectives-tech-for-good-canadanext.pdf.

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Conclusion

88

Does Canada need a roboticized future? When both lives and
livelihoods are at risk — as is the case in the current pandemic — it is
wise to question whether technology is the right solution. Economies
around the world, including Canada’s, have taken a beating and will
continue to do so for the foreseeable future … is new technology where
we should be investing our limited resources right now?
Venture capital seems to think so. In Section 4.6 we saw that despite overall
economic slowdowns, the global robotics market continues to attract new
investment. Looking at Canada’s high tech sector, we see a similar trend.
Canada’s technology sector is growing faster than any other part of the
economy, and now represents about 5% of the total (see Figure 15).
198

While it’s virtually certain that we are headed for some years of economic
uncertainty, investment in robotics may prove to be one of the key growth
engines for restarting Canada’s post-pandemic economy, and ensuring
its resilience beyond: even when the pandemic ends, issues like climate
change will no doubt drive increased investment in robotics too.
Is Canada ready for a roboticized future? Even though on some
fronts Canada may appear to be lagging, much of the groundwork is
already present for Canada to pull ahead from the middle of the robotics
pack. Our robotics research base and startups are strong. We have
made significant complementary investments in artificial intelligence,
and advanced manufacturing through the CIFAR Pan Canadian Artificial
Intelligence Strategy, the SuperCluster initiative, and the new Canadian
Space Strategy. And as a politically stable nation with strong public
education and healthcare systems, on the whole Canadians will be more
immune to the negative effects of automation than many other nations.
But let’s look more objectively.
The Economists’ Automation Readiness Index is specifically geared
toward evaluating whether countries are prepared for a future of
automation. The index measures not just technological investment
and infrastructure, but also the development of policies (innovation,
education, and labour market) designed to prepare for and manage the
transition to greater autonomy. Overall, Canada ranks 5th in the world,
behind other robotics-forward nations such as South Korea, Germany,
Singapore and Japan (See Figure 16).
199

198

P. Evans, “How COVID-19 has changed Canada’s economy for the worse — but also for the better,”
CBC, Jun. 23, 2020. https://www.cbc.ca/news/business/covid-economy-changes-1.5618734
(accessed Sep. 03, 2020).
199 “The Automation Readiness Index 2018,” The Economist Intelligence Unit. http://
automationreadiness.eiu.com (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).

89

Conclusion | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

1 SOUTH KOREA

2 GERMANY

5 CANADA

3 SINGAPORE
7 FRANCE
9 US

4 JAPAN
6 ESTONIA

8 UK

10 AUSTRALIA
11 ITALY

12 CHINA
13 UEA

21 SAUDI ARABIA
18 INDIA

23 MEXICO

15 TURKEY
20 COLOMBIA

14 MALASYA
16 RUSSIA

19 BRAZIL
22 SOUTH AFRICA
17 ARGENTINA

25 INDONESIA
24 VIETNAM

Figure 16: Automation readiness rankings by country
Source: The Economist Intelligence Unit Automation Readiness Index200

A deeper look at the specific factors that were used to assess
our automation readiness reveals where Canada is doing well and
where more effort is needed. The table 13 summarizes our biggest
strengths and weaknesses. It’s notable that whereas Canada is a
clear frontrunner in most categories, it ranks only 23rd out of the 25
countries examined for its Innovation Policies & Regulations, and 15th
for Knowledge Transfer.
In other words, with the right targeted policies in place, Canada can
pull ahead.

200

“The automation readiness index: Who is ready for the coming wave of automation?,” The
Economist Intelligence Unit, 2018. Accessed: Sep. 01, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.
automationreadiness.eiu.com/static/download/PDF.pdf.

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Conclusion

90

TABLE 13: CANADA’S AUTOMATION READINESS: STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES
Source: The Economist Intelligence Unit Automation Readiness Index
INNOVATION CATEGORY
Biggest Strengths (Top 3 by ranking)

Biggest weaknesses (bottom half by ranking)

1st in Startup Support

23rd in Innovation Policies & Regulations

1st in Data Protection

15th in Knowledge Transfer

1st in Broadband (strategy, usage & speed)
1st in Citizens Use (data safety awareness)
3rd in Clusters

EDUCATION CATEGORY
Biggest Strengths (by ranking)

Biggest weaknesses (bottom half by ranking)

1st in Early Childhood Policies

none

1st in 21st Century Skills and Knowledge
1st in Career Guidance
1st in Access to Post Secondary Education
1st in Continuous Education
1st for Teacher Training
1st for Use of Technology and Data
1st for Social Dialogue

LABOUR MARKET
Biggest Strengths (by ranking)

Biggest weaknesses (bottom half by ranking)

Biggest Strengths (by ranking)

none

1st in Labour Market Research and Policy
1st in Vocational Training
1st in Transition from University
1st in Targeted Retraining
1st in Public Employment Services

What next steps can Canada take to exploit its robotics assets? Our research points
to a number of systemic issues that are holding Canada back from fully exploiting its
considerable robotics assets. Below are some suggestions to help address these
issues and get us moving in the right direction for the future:

91

Conclusion | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

Coordination
•

Establish networking mechanism(s) to rapidly share ideas around robotics
and COVID-19 in Canada that includes stakeholders from industry,
healthcare, robotics and hardware providers (e.g., website, Slack, Canadian
Robotics Conference or workshop).

•

Develop guidelines for how to pilot robotics solutions in key front-line use
cases.

Training
•

Investigate additional vocational workforce training, certification, and
regulation for robot operators and technicians to prepare for the growing
need for scaled-up robot solutions.

Funding Schemes
•

Develop a funding mechanism to incentivize industry to work on transferring
technology to use cases with a 2-3 year runway to circumvent reliance
on nascent sales revenue and provide end users with complementary
incentives to adopt the technologies.

•

Establish sustained and coordinated funding that fosters a healthy robotics
ecosystem in Canada across academia, startups, industry, and government
labs to ensure a pipeline of technology that is ready for future crises.

Canadian Robotics Strategy
•

Inventory - Create an inventory of Canadian robotics assets (research and
test facilities, people, and organizations across the key application areas).
Identify existing economies of scale on both the technological and the latent
demand fronts, as well as regional areas of application-based expertise.

•

Stakeholder consultation - Identify multiple scenarios for Canada’s
innovation future based on current trends; and create a vision of the future
for Canadian robotics that addresses this country’s unique geographic,
cultural, and economic realities; this should have a clear mandate for
specialization that plays to Canada’s technological and economic strengths.

•

Strategy - Develop a Canadian robotics roadmap on this vision, and
establish clear government priorities for the next pandemic and other crises
that may lie ahead. Market Canada’s strengths and forge international
partnerships where ‘made in Canada’ solutions are not yet viable.

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Conclusion

92

Digital Innovation Strategy
•

Coordinate with digital innovation stakeholders in complementary
underlying technologies such as artificial intelligence, photonics
and sensing, quantum computing, and ICT, to ensure a
comprehensive digital innovation portfolio for Canada.

As a parting message, we urge readers to consider the notion that
robotics is the critical (and mostly still missing) link between the
information age and “high-touch” sectors of the Canadian economy,
from health, to manufacturing, to agriculture and food production.
Bringing our physical world into the information age is what is meant by
the Fourth Industrial Revolution.

93

Conclusion | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

APPENDIX

A.

CANADIAN
ROBOTICS LANDSCAPE
Canada has an expanding robotics ecosystem. In this Appendix, we
build on the expertise mentioned in Section 1 to showcase the most
relevant expertise and assets across government, and industry.

A.1 Robotics Companies
Robotics technology is widely used in Canada, primarily for industrial
applications. Industrial robots increase capacity and efficiency of
Canadian manufacturing, indirectly addressing the needs highlighted
above. Over 3,500 industrial robots were installed in Canada in
2018 , for example in handling parts for assembly, welding, and
packaging in factories.
201

More relevant to this paper are the number of Canadian government
organizations and companies that are developing the next generation
of robots for potential use in pandemic response. We list a handful of
representative examples across six key application areas where robotics
can be expected to play a significant role.
A.1.1 MATERIAL HANDLING
Material handling (MH) involves the simple transport of objects from
place to place. By fitting a robot with an appropriate end-of-arm tool
(e.g., a gripper), the robot can efficiently and accurately move items
from one location to another. Many of these systems are primarily
designed for industrial automation (e.g., pick and place of parts in a
warehouse) but could also be adapted for manipulating medical supplies
and samples, for example. In both cases, the important pandemic
response aspect is the elimination of human involvement in transport
and laboratory testing, improving our ability to maintain physical distance
in production operations.

201

95

“Executive Summary World Robotics 2018 Industrial Robots,” International Federation of Robotics,
2018. Accessed: Sep. 03, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://ifr.org/downloads/press2018/Executive_
Summary_WR_2018_Industrial_Robots.pdf.

Appendix | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

Material handling is one of the areas with heightened private capital
interest due to its application in e-commerce. There are a number of
enterprises that operate in this technology vertical:
•

Kinova: Apart from assistive technologies, Kinova is primarily a
manufacturer of lightweight robot arms for testing, maintenance
and inspection (TRL9), with a wide range of application industries.

•

Kindred Systems: Kindred focuses on piece picking in
warehouse settings with product offerings that include
autonomous bin picking and sorting (TRL7 to TRL9). This
technology has been validated for soft item handling such as
packaged clothing.

•

Robotiq: Robotiq is a provider of tools and software for cobots.
Robotiq’s Plug and Play components and end-of-arm tooling
(TRL9) come with multiple automation software solutions.
Manufacturers choose Robotiq’s collaborative robot solutions
for applications such as machine tending and pick and place to
start production faster.

A.1.2 MEDICAL ROBOTICS
Canadian robotics government organizations and companies stand to make
significant strides in the medical domain, as they enable physical distancing
requirements to be maintained in a variety of high-risk scenarios. Canadian
robotic developers are pioneering advanced systems for use in generic
medical environments such as operating rooms and doctor’s offices.
•

Canadian Space Agency and National Research Council:
The CSA and the NRC have partnered to develop an
advanced, semi-automated microfluidic biological analysis
system. Although designed originally for rapid sample analysis
on board the International Space Station, the system (which
is effectively already robotic) could also be deployed in
terrestrial settings. The current design is at TRL5, and further
development would be needed to enable fully automated
robotic sample collection and processing.

•

Defence Research Development Canada: Although not
classified as a ‘typical’ medical robotic system, DRDC is actively
developing a drone-mounted chemical-biological-radiological
(CBR) detector (TRL4). This system is based on vacuum filtration
of airborne particles and requires substantial air volumes for
accurate detection (which is achievable on an aerial platform).
Although the CBR system is designed for aerial deployment,
it could be repurposed for in situ robotic sampling in enclosed

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Appendix

96

spaces (hospitals, care homes, restaurants, etc.). The sampling rate
would be relatively low, requiring on the order of 24 hours to confirm
detection of viral particles, but this would still provide an ability to identify
‘hot spots’ where the virus had been present, potentially enabling
mitigation or contact tracing.

Figure 17:
Bishop robot by Crosswing Inc.
Image credit: Crosswing Inc.

Figure 18:
Modus V robotic digital microscope
system by Synaptive Medical
Image credit: Synaptive Medical

97

•

CrossWing: CrossWing is an Ontario company that develops robots
for telepresence and for the medical and hospitality industries. They are
currently building the Bishop™ Cleanbot™ UV-C Disinfecting Robot
(TRL5) specifically for use to fight the COVID-19 pandemic; the robot
has an omnidirectional mobile base and an upright ‘body’ that supports
several UV-C LED light panels. Bishop is designed to be capable of
autonomously disinfecting public and private space.

•

Synaptive Medical: Synaptive Medical in Toronto develops advanced
surgical imaging systems, including a robotic surgical microscope called
Modus, which is TRL9 and deployed in operating rooms in the US. The
company specializes in incorporating imaging with surgical planning and
visualization to provide detailed information to surgeons. Robot-assisted
surgery increases the physical distance between the clinician and the
patient and, in certain cases such as neurosurgery, removes the need for
surgical apparatus that would otherwise prevent the surgeon from wearing
a ventilator or other essential PPE.

•

Titan Medical: Titan Medical in Toronto is developing a single-port
robotic surgical system called SPORT. The system is mounted
on a cart and uses disposable tools, leading to lower-cost
inclusion into operating rooms than other robotic surgical
systems. SPORT also incorporates a high-quality imaging
systems for gynecological procedures. Tests have been
conducted on live animals and human cadavers, although
further results from live-animal testing is needed to secure
approval to operate on humans so the system is currently TRL7.
The use of robotics in surgery will help with distancing in the
operating room.

•

ANVIV Mechatronics in Collaboration with ESI: ANVIV has developed
various robotic systems for inspection, maintenance, and laboratory
automation. ANVIV is developing AI-embedded robotic systems for
COVID-19 response, including for remote measurement of fever,
remote examination of suspected or confirmed carriers of the virus, and
disinfection and sterilization of areas in hospitals and public spaces.

Appendix | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

•

MDA Robotics: MDA is well-known internationally for
developing the Canadarm for the International Space Station and
currently has a division developing image-guided medical robots.
As MDA works on a contract basis, they do not produce robots
in large quantities. MDA is not developing any robots specifically
for response to COVID-19.

A.1.3 INDOOR MOBILITY
Indoor mobility includes a range of robotics systems capable of
navigating through indoor human environments unaided while
constructing maps and avoiding obstacles. These automated robots are
the precursors to autonomous driving vehicles and experience unique
challenges in each application domain, requiring specialization and
customization of their underlying autonomy systems.
•

Avidbots: Avidbots has deployed fleets of the Neo autonomous
floor cleaning robot (TRL9), capable of navigating over flat
surfaces scrubbing the floor beneath them. Current operations
involve defining a map of the cleaning environment from a
human-guided tour, and then executing an autonomous cleaning
plan, stopping when dynamic objects appear in the path and
navigating around static objects that are new to the mapped
area. The robots are restricted to operate in open areas, as they
cannot open doors or navigate elevators autonomously. CTO
Pablo Molina states that they have seen significantly increased
interest from the public sector since the start of the pandemic,
due to increased needs to keep employees safe and keep
public indoor spaces clean. The company is actively pursuing
disinfectant spray adaptations to Neo (TRL8), aiming to avoid
some of the pitfalls of UV-based disinfection, and expects to
release 3D spraying attachments by Q1 2021.

•

OTTO Motors: The Clearpath Robotics subsidiary OTTO
Motors provides fully autonomous warehouse robotics
systems for goods transport in manufacturing and storage
operations. The OTTO line of robots (100, 750 and 1500, all
TRL9) can transport a wide range of goods over flat surfaces
without any human involvement, creating their own maps and
navigating seamlessly with human traffic and human-operated
vehicles. The vehicles automatically dock at goods loading
platforms, enabling end-to-end transport of goods throughout
the warehouse. The more recently developed autonomous
forklift, OMEGA, can not only navigate and transport goods
autonomously, but it can also identify and load pallets on its

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Appendix

98

forklift without human intervention. These capabilities put
it at the forefront globally of warehouse automation, and
will play an essential role in maintaining physical distancing
in logistics hub operations. Clearpath has seen significant
acceleration of timelines for robotic deployments across its
industrial segments, as the pandemic highlights some of the
hidden reliability and safety costs of keeping human operators
on the shop and warehouse floor. Although Clearpath is not
specifically targeting COVID-related products, its position as
a robotic platform company has allowed it to pursue multiple
partnerships with UV and spray disinfectant providers for
enhanced robotic solutions to the sterilization challenge.
A.1.4 OUTDOOR MOBILITY
Numerous ground-based robot platforms are being designed and
deployed for outdoor use in human environments. The pressure to
maintain social distancing, and the challenge of keeping public transit
safe during the pandemic have led to a major acceleration of lowspeed and dedicated route operations. The most visible example
is autonomous driving, but local delivery and outdoor disinfection
applications are also emerging.

99

•

Gatik: Point-to-point autonomous driving startup Gatik (HQ
in US, research and operations centre in Toronto) is already
servicing B2B routes for Walmart in the US, and has seen a
major surge in demand to remove reliance on human drivers
for regularly repeated routes from warehouses to stores since
the start of the pandemic. The ability to limit operations to
fixed, established routes has jump-started its deployments and
commercialization efforts, eliminating many of the challenges
around unlimited edge cases through operational domain
constraints. The company is actively integrating disinfection
technology for its vehicles, garages and depots, and expects to
have a major impact on middle-mile deliveries allowing distinct
logistics facilities to better maintain physical separation during
goods distribution.

•

Tinymile: Tinymile are developing user-friendly last-mile
delivery robots, which are currently teleoperated and capable
of transporting small goods or a modest grocery purchase on
pedestrian routes (TRL5). This robotic technology could alleviate
some of the challenge around short-range good delivery,
particularly in dense urban settings, but needs significant
investment to elevate to autonomous operation.

Appendix | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

•

Uber ATG, GM Canada, and Huawei: Autonomous driving
fleet development is maturing rapidly around the globe, with
strong R&D efforts occurring in Canada at Uber, GM Canada
and Huawei (TRL5-7). The pandemic has led to worldwide
softening of vehicle demand, but accelerated timelines for
autonomous driving fleet deployment due to the pressures of
increased delivery traffic and desire for reduced human contact
of delivered goods.

•

Clearpath Robotics: Clearpath Robotics is a Canadian owned
and operated firm that is the largest developer of field robotics
research products and solutions in the world. Though they do
not sell outside of the research and development market, their
TRL8-9 offerings have been integral in speeding up various
relevant autonomous systems product development efforts
around the world.

A.1.5 AERIAL TRANSPORTATION
Unmanned aerial vehicles, or drones, are now an established technology
for aerial inspection, monitoring and tracking, and continue to improve
in their ability to transport small goods efficiently and deploy sprays for
agriculture. Within Canada, drone manufacturers are pushing to make
their robotic platforms more autonomous, with benefits to delivery of
emergency supplies on dedicated routes. This section includes robot
platforms designed for outdoor non-built environments (field and air).
•

Drone Delivery Canada: DDC has recently demonstrated the
viability of drone based delivery of goods for point-to-point
routes in remote areas, providing timely delivery of medicine,
defibrillators and small-sized goods delivery. Point-to-consumer
models are under development, which would allow delivery of
a large range of goods without the need for human contact.
The pandemic has accelerated demand for such solutions, but
regulatory hurdles and safety considerations limit the path to
large urban markets.

•

FLIR: Having acquired Waterloo-area startup Aeryon Labs in
2018, FLIR develops long-endurance highly-capable surveillance
and reconnaissance drones for military and civilian/industrial
markets. The Skyranger series include gimballed IR cameras
which could be deployed for mobile crowd temperature
monitoring, as well as a Sky Hook package delivery system
capable of delivery of goods up to 5 lbs.

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Appendix

100

A.1.6 SOCIAL ROBOTICS
Social robotics is a nascent field focused on the design and deployment
of robots that are able to interact directly with people. There are myriad
applications for social robots in pandemic response, including as
interactive information ‘kiosks’ in hospitals, automated guides in care
homes, greeters in banks and even as ‘companions’ for children and
the elderly. Given that the field is just beginning to come into its own,
industry activity in Canada at present is limited, but this is likely to
change in the near term as there is R&D occurring in several labs.
•

CrossWing: In addition to the Bishop disinfection robot,
CrossWing also sells the VirtualME™ telepresence and guide
robot (TRL7), which could enable virtual ‘face-to-face’ doctor’s
visits or direct patients in a hospital. The robot is intended as a
virtual assistant.

A.2 Legal & Regulatory Landscape
Canada has been an important international contributor to research
on robot law, ethics, and regulation. For example, the pioneering
efforts of University of Ottawa Professor Ian Kerr contributed to the
development of the standard reference textbook on Robot Law and
the establishment of We Robot , the leading international conference
on robotics law. Other important Canadian contributors to robot law
and ethics scholarship include University of Ottawa Professor Jason
Millar (Canada Research Chair in the Ethical Engineering of Robotics
and Artificial Intelligence), McGill Professor AJung Moon (Founder of the
Open Roboethics Institute), and Law Professor Kristen Thomasen from
the University of Windsor.
202

203

In addition to this scholarly work, Canadian robotics firms and
government research agencies have been active contributors to both
Canadian and global safety standards for robotics in the application
areas that are most relevant to Canadian organizations. For example,
Clearpath is contributing to the development of RIA 15.08 a safety
standard being developed by the Robotics Industries Association for
industrial mobile robots. Another example is Avidbots, which is actively
204,

202
203

R. Calo, A. M. Froomkin, and I. Kerr, Robot Law. Edward Elgar Publishing Limited, 2016.
“WeRobot 2020,” Centre for Law, Technology and Society, University of Ottawa. https://techlaw.
uottawa.ca/werobot (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).
204 “Robot Safety Standards for Industrial Mobile Robots,” Robotics Industries Association, 2017.
https://www.robotics.org/blog-article.cfm/Robot-Safety-Standards-for-Industrial-Mobile-Robots/63
(accessed Sep. 08, 2020).

101

Appendix | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

involved in developing IEC 63327 , the International Electrotechnical
Commission’s safety standard for the use of motorized cleaning
appliances for commercial use. While IEC 63327 is a standard
specifically written for cleaning robots, it will be one of the first
standards to address the use of robots in everyday environments. The
Canadian Space Agency is an active supporter of the development
of robotics standards, often representing Canada at international
standards associations.
205

Despite this scholarship and development work, the pace of change in
digital technologies has made it difficult for policymakers and regulators
to keep up. In this section we enumerate some of the relevant Canadian
regulations pertaining to robotics more generally, including successes
and challenges:
UNMANNED AERIAL VEHICLES (UAVS)
Transport Canada’s early regulatory clarity on the use of unmanned
drones gave its consumer drone sector a multi-year head start206 over
their US counterparts, enabling investment and development in a rich
assortment of drone-related businesses in this country. In 2016, the
US Federal Aviation Authority (FAA) introduced new rules that provided
the clarity needed for the American drone industry to catch up.
Commercial drone operations, for crop monitoring in the agricultural
sector for example, are now common in both countries, so long as the
pilot is certified to fly, the drone is registered, and the drone remains
within line of sight of the operator. Drone operations that occur
beyond visual line of sight (BVLOS) or over urban areas still require
exemptions in both countries and are generally restricted to research
and demonstration purposes. Regulatory advances in BVLOS drone
flight would open up the commercial drone delivery sector.
207

208

205

“IEC - SC 61J Electrical motor-operatied cleaning appliances for commercial use,” International
Electrotechnical Commission. https://www.iec.ch/dyn/www/f?p=103:23:3876878771458::::FSP_
ORG_ID,FSP_LANG_ID:1357,25 (accessed Sep. 08, 2020).
206 O. El Akkad and K. Cryderman, “Canadian technology and the flight of the drones,” The Globe and
Mail, Calgary, Apr. 06, 2014. https://www.theglobeandmail.com/technology/tech-news/canadiantechnology-and-the-flight-of-the-drones/article17849259/ (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).
207 M. Kwong, “How new FAA rules for commercial drones could leave Canada’s drone industry on the
runway,” CBC, Aug. 30, 2016. https://www.cbc.ca/news/technology/drone-commercial-faa-uavregulations-canada-flying-rules-1.3740651 (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).
208 Regulations Amending the Canadian Aviation Regulations (Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems):
SOR/2019-11, Canada Gazette, Part 2, Volume 153, Number 1. Dec. 2018. http://www.gazette.
gc.ca/rp-pr/p2/2019/2019-01-09/html/sor-dors11-eng.html (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Appendix

102

AUTONOMOUS VEHICLES
Autonomous vehicles driving on the road are regulated by Transport
Canada , which does not specifically regulate fully autonomous
vehicles but does require permission for testing. A ranking by the KPMG
Autonomous Vehicles Readiness Index places Canada seventh out of
20 countries based on policy, public perception, research activity and
industry activity. There remains significant regulatory variation between
the provinces in terms of autonomous driving testing and deployment.
Further legislation to unify provincial approaches will encourage
autonomous vehicle research and industry development in Canada.
209

210

AUTOMATED DECISION-MAKING
In 2019, the Government of Canada’s Directive on Automated DecisionMaking (ADM) took effect, which sets out minimum requirements for
federal government departments that wish to use ADM technology.
ASSISTIVE ROBOTICS
Assistive robots are subject to regulation by a variety of guidelines, but
present unique challenges in safety, privacy and even ethics due to
their close interactions with people. However, unlike mobile or medical
robots, there is not a specific regulatory framework for these devices.
While there are international efforts to establish regulatory frameworks
for assistive robots , Canada’s lack of a specific framework in this
area creates uncertainty for researchers and industry, and may stifle
innovation in this important application area for robotics.
211

MEDICAL ROBOTICS
New medical devices must be approved by Health Canada for clinical
use in Canada. These regulations are designed to ensure the safety of
patients and protect them from harmful devices and treatments. The
approval process typically requires significant animal and human trial
data to demonstrate the safety of the device or treatment. The approval
process is highly dependent on the class of device or treatment, and can

209

Canada’s safety framework for automated and connected vehicles. Transport Canada, 2019.
https://www.tc.gc.ca/en/services/road/documents/tc_safety_framework_for_acv-s.pdf
210 “2019 Autonomous Vehicles Readiness Index,” KPMG International, 2019. https://assets.kpmg/
content/dam/kpmg/xx/pdf/2019/02/2019-autonomous-vehicles-readiness-index.pdf
211 R. Leenes, E. Palmerini, B.-J. Koops, A. Bertolini, P. Salvini, and F. Lucivero, “Regulatory challenges
of robotics: some guidelines for addressing legal and ethical issues,” Law, Innovation and
Technology, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1–44, Jan. 2017, doi: 10.1080/17579961.2017.1304921.

103

Appendix | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | University of Toronto Robotics Institute

take years to complete. As such it is a major barrier to rapid deployment
of new technologies in a crisis. For this reason, Canada must ensure the
continual development and approval of new technologies if it wants to
have new innovations ready for future crises.
MEDICAL DEVICES
In March 2020 Health Canada approved an Interim Order (IO) to
speed the review of medical devices used to diagnose, treat or prevent
COVID-19. In addition, access to COVID-19 related medical devices not
yet licensed in Canada can be requested by healthcare professionals
through Health Canada’s Special Access Program (SAP). Health
Canada established a new Digital Health Division in 2018 with the
express goals of developing regulatory pathways that improve access
to health data, facilitating more timely diagnosis, and improving access
to care for patients in care centres, at home, and in rural and remote
communities. As part of this initiative, Health Canada created a division
within the Therapeutic Products Directorate’s Medical Devices Bureau
to improve regulatory pathways to allow for targeted pre-market review
of some of the many digital health technologies that play a role in
healthcare robotics, including Wireless Medical Devices, Mobile Medical
Apps, Telemedicine, Software as a Medical Device (SaMD), Artificial
Intelligence, and Cybersecurity, and Medical Device Interoperability.
212

213

214

215

212

“Interim order respecting the importation and sale of medical devices for use in relation to
COVID-19,” Health Canada, Jun. 19, 2020. https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/
drugs-health-products/drug-products/announcements/interim-order-importation-sale-medicaldevices-covid-19.html (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).
213 “Medical Devices - Special Access Programme,” Health Canada, Jun. 08, 2020. https://www.
canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/drugs-health-products/special-access/medical-devices.html
(accessed Sep. 03, 2020).
214 T. Dumouchel, “Regulatory challenges of AI products A pre-market perspective | Health Canada,”
Apr. 15, 2019, [Online]. Available: https://cadth.ca/sites/default/files/symp-2019/presentations/
april15-2019/A3-presentation-tdumouchel.pdf.
215 “Notice: Health Canada’s Approach to Digital Health Technologies,” Health Canada, Apr. 10,
2018. https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/drugs-health-products/medical-devices/
activities/announcements/notice-digital-health-technologies.html (accessed Sep. 03, 2020).

University of Toronto Robotics Institute | Making Sense of the Robotized Pandemic Response | Appendix

104

robotics.utoronto.ca | @UofTRobotics

