arXiv:2009.07057v4 [cs.CY] 4 Jan 2021

WNTRAC: AI Assisted Tracking of
Non-pharmaceutical Interventions Implemented
Worldwide for COVID-19
Parthasarathy Suryanarayanan1,* , Ching-Huei Tsou1 , Ananya Poddar1 , Diwakar
Mahajan1 , Bharath Dandala1 , Piyush Madan2 , Anshul Agrawal1 , Charles Wachira3 ,
Osebe Mogaka Samuel3 , Osnat Bar-Shira4 , Clifton Kipchirchir3 , Sharon Okwako3 ,
William Ogallo3 , Fred Otieno3 , Timothy Nyota3 , Fiona Matu3 , Vesna Resende Barros4 ,
Daniel Shats4 , Oren Kagan4 , Sekou Remy3 , Oliver Bent3 , Pooja Guhan3 , Shilpa
Mahatma1 , Aisha Walcott-Bryant3 , Divya Pathak1 , and Michal Rosen-Zvi4
1 IBM

Research, Yorktown Heights, USA
Research, Cambridge, USA
3 IBM Research, Nairobi, Kenya
4 IBM Research, Mount Carmel Haifa, Israel
* corresponding author(s): Parthasarathy Suryanarayanan (psuryan@us.ibm.com)
2 IBM

ABSTRACT
The Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) global pandemic has transformed almost every facet of human society throughout
the world. Against an emerging, highly transmissible disease with no definitive treatment or vaccine, governments worldwide
have implemented non-pharmaceutical intervention (NPI) to slow the spread of the virus. Examples of such interventions
include community actions (e.g. school closures, restrictions on mass gatherings), individual actions (e.g. mask wearing,
self-quarantine), and environmental actions (e.g. public facility cleaning). We present the Worldwide Non-pharmaceutical
Interventions Tracker for COVID-19 (WNTRAC), a comprehensive dataset consisting of over 6,000 NPIs implemented worldwide
since the start of the pandemic. WNTRAC covers NPIs implemented across 261 countries and territories, and classifies NPI
measures into a taxonomy of sixteen NPI types. NPI measures are automatically extracted daily from Wikipedia articles using
natural language processing techniques and manually validated to ensure accuracy and veracity. We hope that the dataset is
valuable for policymakers, public health leaders, and researchers in modeling and analysis efforts for controlling the spread of
COVID-19.

Background & Summary
The Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has made an unprecedented impact on almost every facet of human
civilization from healthcare systems, to economies and governments worldwide. As of August 2020, every country in the world
has been affected, with more than 24M confirmed cases of infection and death toll approaching a million cases worldwide1–3 .
The pandemic has triggered a wide range of non-pharmaceutical intervention (NPI) responses across the world. With therapeutic
and preventive interventions still in early stages of development, every country has resorted to NPI as a primary strategy4, 5
for disease control. Examples of such interventions include community actions (e.g. school closures, restrictions on mass
gatherings), individual actions (e.g. mask wearing, self-quarantine), and environmental actions (e.g. public facility cleaning).
Such NPIs vary significantly in their implementation based on the maturity of the health infrastructure, robustness of the
economy and cultural values unique to the region.
Public health policy makers worldwide are striving to introduce successful intervention plans to manage the spread of
disease while balancing the socio-economic impacts6, 7 . These initiatives will benefit from modeling the efficacy of different
intervention strategies. The pandemic has sparked an ongoing surge of discovery and information sharing resulting in an
unprecedented amount of data being published online8 . This includes information about NPI measures, which are available in a
wide variety of unstructured data sources, including official government websites9, 10 , press releases, social media, and news
articles. However such modeling requires the information about the NPIs to be available in a structured form.
To address this urgent need, several data collection initiatives have emerged in the recent months resulting in several
publicly available datasets with varying degrees of coverage, data freshness, and sparsity. For example, the CoronaNet dataset11
contains the monadic and dyadic data on policy actions taken by governments across the world, manually curated by over 500

researchers covering sixteen NPI types and is kept fairly up-to-date. The Complexity Science Hub, Vienna enlisted researchers,
students and volunteers to curate the Complexity Science Hub COVID-19 Control Strategies List12 dataset, of eight different
NPI types but covering only 57 countries. Similarly, the Oxford COVID-19 Government Response Tracker13 dataset, takes a
crowd-sourcing approach and covers 17 NPI types, 186 regions, 52 US states and territories. Because all these datasets are
assembled manually, each of them is constrained in one or more respects: geographical scope, taxonomic richness, frequency
of updates or granularity of details, and evidential sources. An AI-assisted, semi-automated data collection approach, driven by
a rich, extensible taxonomy, can help overcome these issues and may result in a larger, frequently updated dataset with less
manual labor.

Figure 1. Artificial intelligence assisted approach to build the Worldwide Non-pharmaceutical Interventions Tracker for COVID-19
(WNTRAC) dataset.

Wikipedia is one of the main sources of accessible information on the Internet. Since the start of COVID-19, a dedicated
global network of volunteers has been creating, updating, and translating Wikipedia articles with vital information about the
pandemic14 . Over 5,000 new Wikipedia pages on COVID-19 have been written by more than 71,000 volunteers since the onset
of the pandemic accumulating more than 440M page views by June 2020. Wikipedia articles, even though crowd-sourced,
through the process of collective validation15 and by citations of credible sources such as government websites, scientific
literature, and news articles can serve as a reliable source of NPI data. Further, these Wikipedia articles are constantly updated;
have been edited more than 793,000 times as of August 2020 making it both a rich and up-to-date source. Based on this, we
postulated that an approach based on automated information extraction from Wikipedia, followed by human validation to ensure
accuracy and veracity, would result in a frequently updated dataset with a wider coverage compared to any of the existing
datasets. We present the result of our work, WNTRAC, a comprehensive dataset consisting of over 6,000 NPIs implemented
worldwide since the start of the pandemic. WNTRAC covers NPIs implemented across 261 countries and territories, and
classifies NPI measures into a taxonomy of sixteen NPI categories. NPI measures are automatically extracted daily from
Wikipedia articles using natural language processing (NLP) techniques and manually validated to ensure accuracy and veracity.
In what follows, we explain the methods used to create the dataset, outline the challenges and key design choices, describe
the format, provide an assessment of its quality and lay out our vision of how this dataset can be used by policy makers, public
health leaders, and data scientists and researchers to support modeling and analysis efforts.

Methods
We built a semi-automated system to construct the dataset and keep it current. The NPI measures are modeled as events and
evidences for information extraction purposes. This is illustrated by a motivating example shown in the Figure 2. Each event
corresponds to an imposition or lifting of a particular NPI. An event is defined to be a 5-tuple (what, value, where, when,
restriction), where
1. What: the type of NPI that was imposed or lifted. NPIs are grouped into sixteen major types. In the example, the type is
school closure.
2. Value: sub-category or attribute that further qualifies the NPI type more specifically. In the example, the associated value
is all schools closed. A detailed description of each type and the corresponding possible values is shown in Table 1.
3. Where: the region (country, territory, province, or state) in which the NPI measure has been implemented or withdrawn.
In this example, there are three distinct regions, namely, Punjab, Chhattisgarh, Manipur that are identified and three
separate events will be extracted.
2/15

4. When: The date from which the NPI was imposed or lifted. In the example, the date will be 13 March, corresponding to
the implementation of the NPI, even if a likely date for the cancellation of the NPI, 31 March, is indicated.
5. Restriction: a flag indicating that the event corresponds to the introduction or withdrawal of the NPI. It should be noted
that the lifting of the NPI is treated as a separate event. In the example, the restriction type is imposed.

Figure 2. An example of the NPI measure mentioned in the Wikipedia article of 15th May 2020.

In addition to the mandatory fields described above, event contains one or more evidences. An evidence is a span of text
extracted from Wikipedia that discusses a particular event. In the example, On 13 March, the Punjab, Chhattisgarh, and
Manipur governments declared holidays in all schools and colleges till 31 March. is the evidence. An evidence may support
more than one event. Each evidence is accompanied by a source type indicating the type of source of Wikipedia citation. More
details about such additional attributes can be found in the data records section.

Figure 3. The WNTRAC automated NPI curation system. It consists of a processing pipeline, WNTRAC Curator validation tool, and NPI
data browser.

The system, shown in the Figure 3, is designed to be scalable for continuous gathering, extraction and validation of NPI
events. It consists of three subsystems: a data processing pipeline for capturing and extracting potential NPI events from
Wikipedia articles, a tool called WNTRAC Curator for human validation of NPI events automatically extracted using the
aforementioned pipeline and a data browser for visualizing the data. In the next section, we describe the system and its
components at a high level, focusing on key design choices that have a bearing on the quality of the dataset, starting with a brief
description of the data collection.
NPI

Example

Value

Value description

changes in
prison-related policies

On March 30, the GNA announced the release of 466 detainees in Tripoli, as part of an effort to stop the spread of
the virus in prisons.

Integer

Number of prisoners that were released

confinement

On 19 March, President Alberto Fernández announced a
mandatory lockdown to curb the spread of coronavirus.

Category

1. Mandatory/advised for all the population
2. Mandatory/advised for people at risk

3/15

contact tracing

On 2 March, a case in Nimes was traced to the mid-February
Mulhouse Megachurch event.

domestic flight restriction On 1 April, the Government of Afghanistan suspended flights
between Kabul and Herat.

1. Tracing back 14 days of contacts of a confirmed
patient through electronic information
Category 2. Tracing contacts of a person who needs to be isolated as was in contact with a confirmed patient
through electronic information
String

Name of the state where the passenger is arriving from

economic impact

Up until 14 March, the Afghan government had spent $25
million to tackle the outbreak, which included $7 million of
aid packages.

1. Stock market
Category 2. Unemployment rate
3. Industrial production

entertainment /
cultural sector closure

On April 7, Rockland and Sullivan counties closed their
parks.

1.
2.
Category 3.
4.
5.

freedom of movement
(nationality dependent)

Iran was added to the list of countries whose nationals were
suspended entry to Cambodia, making a total of six.

String

Name of the country the citizen is from

international
flight restrictions

With effect from midnight on 1 April, Cuba suspended the
arrival of all international flights.

String

Name of the country or state where the passenger is
arriving from

introduction of
Israeli nationals returning from Egypt were required to enter
travel quarantine policies an immediate 14-day quarantine.

String

Name of the country or state where the passenger travelled from

Bars, restaurants, night clubs
Museums, theaters, cinema, libraries, festivities
Parks and public gardens
Gyms and pools
Churches

mask wearing

On April 15, Cuomo signed an executive order requiring all
New York State residents to wear face masks or coverings in
public places.

1. Mandatory
Category 2. Mandatory in some public spaces
3. Recommended

mass gatherings

On 13 March, it was announced at an official press conference
that a four-week ban on public gatherings of more than 100
persons would be put into effect as of Monday 16 March.

Integer

Maximum number of people in social gatherings allowed by the government

public services closure

On 19 March, Election Commissioner Mahinda Deshapriya
revealed that the 2020 Sri Lankan parliamentary election will
be postponed indefinitely until further notice due to the coronavirus pandemic.

Category

1. Government/parliament system closed
2. Legal system closed

public transportation

On March 20, Regina Transit and Saskatoon Transit suspended fares for all bus service, but with reduced service.

Category

1. Partial cancellation of routes/stops during the
week/weekend
2. Total cancellation of transport (special case for
some states in China)

school closure

On 13 March, the Punjab and Chhattisgarh governments declared holidays in all schools and colleges till 31 March.

Category

1.
2.
3.
4.

state of emergency
(legal impact)

Governor Charlie Baker declared a state of emergency for the
state of Massachusetts on March 10.

Category

1. National guard joins the law enforcement
2. Army joins the law enforcement

work restrictions

On 10 April, Koike announced closure requests for six categories of businesses in Tokyo.

Category

1. Suggestion to work from home for non-essential
workers
2. Mandatory work from home enforcement for nonessential workers

All schools (general) closed
Only kindergartens/daycare closed
Only schools (primary/secondary) closed
Universities closed

Table 1. Taxonomy of the Worldwide Non-pharmaceutical Interventions Tracker for COVID-19 dataset.

Data Collection

As stated earlier, Wikipedia includes a broad range of articles on COVID-19 covering a variety of topics, including the cause,
transmission, diagnosis, prevention, management, economic impact, and national responses. Categories are used in Wikipedia
to link articles under a common topic and are found at the bottom of the article page. This dataset was collected by automatically
crawling Wikipedia articles discussing COVID-19 in different regions belonging to the category16 COVID-19 pandemic by
4/15

country 1 .

There are 156 subcategories and 198 articles directly under COVID-19 pandemic by country, and when retrieved
recursively, there are 384 articles under this top-level category as of July 2020. Considering the limited availability of volunteers,
and the volume of NPI measures that had to be validated initially, we restricted the number of articles to a manageable size,
covering 261 regions (i.e. countries and territories) as listed in the tables at the end of the paper.
Processing Pipeline

The first step in the data processing is to retrieve the aforementioned list of Wikipedia articles on a periodic basis. The crawler
module implements this functionality. It uses the MediaWiki API17 for downloading the articles. As part of this step, we extract
the text content of each article, while at the same time preserving all the associated citations. This process produces a document
for each article. Each sentence in a document is a candidate for NPI extraction. As of August 2020, the aggregate crawled
data contains over 55,000 sentences, with an average of 213 sentences per document. The second step in the pipeline is the
extraction of the NPI events from a document. It is broken into a sequence of steps described below.
• Pre-processing: As the first step in processing a document, we use sentence boundary detection algorithms from libraries
such as spaCy18 , to identify where sentences begin and end. Although the sentences are used as logical units to extract
NPI events, we preserved the order in which they appear in the source document for reasons detailed below. Also, at this
step, we extract and retain the citation URL, if available for each sentence.
• Sentence classification: Next, we classify the sentence into one of the NPI types such as school closure to identify
potential NPI events. If no NPI is discussed in the sentence, we classify it as discarded. We use multiple learning
algorithms, including logistic regression, Support Vector Machines, and Bidirectional Encoder Representations from
Transformers (BERT)19 , and employ an ensemble method to obtain better overall predictive performance. A small subset
of the data (1490 sentences), was manually annotated to train the models. Independently, we also categorize the sentence
as implying either the introduction or the withdrawal of an NPI (restriction).
• Named entity recognition and named entity disambiguation: After we identify the potential events in the previous
step, we extract specific constituent entities for each candidate event from the sentence. We used state-of-the-art namedentity recognizers (such as spaCy18 ) and normalizers to detect and normalize locations (Where : [Punjab, Chattisgarh,
Manipal ]) and time expressions (When : March 13). In addition, we also link the location entities of type ‘GPE’ in the
Wikipedia article title to the corresponding ISO codes20, 21 . Even though we use the sentence as a logical unit for the
extraction of an NPI event, the sentence itself may not include all the relevant information. For example, date or location
may be available in sentences in the vicinity or in the header of the paragraph to which the sentence belongs. To address
this key challenge, we developed a heuristic-based relation detection algorithm to associate one of the extracted dates or
locations from the current document to each sentence.
• Value extraction: The last step in NPI event extraction, is determining the associated value. We use multiple rule-based
algorithms that either operate independently or depend on information extracted by the previous steps. For example,
given the sentence "On 13 March, it was announced at an official press conference that a four-week ban
on public gatherings of more than 100.”, the event type is mass gathering and the associated value is maximum
number of people in social-gathering allowed by the government. The value extraction is performed using parse-based rule
engines18 . It is worth noting that the value extraction components should know the actual type mass gatherings before
extracting the correct value "100". Similarly, given a sentence “On 1 April, the Government of USA suspended
flights from New York to Texas”, the event type is domestic flight restriction and the associated value is name of the
state where the passenger is arriving from. To correctly extract the value, the value extraction needs to know the correct
type and normalized locations ("New York") respectively.
Thus, using the above procedure, we extract the unique 5-tuples that are the candidate NPI events. Once extracted, they are
presented to the volunteers for validation to ensure data quality. This process is repeated every day. In order to minimize manual
labor, considering the small number of volunteers, we attempt to detect changes since the last time we crawled Wikipedia. We
use a combination of syntactic similarity metrics such as Levenshtein Norm, and semantic similarity metrics such as event
attribute matching to perform this daily change detection for each extracted document.
WNTRAC Curator

The events automatically extracted from the pipeline are vetted by volunteers using the WNTRAC Curator validation tool.
The tool is a simple web-application backed by a database as shown in Figure 3. The tool is shown in Figure 4. At the top, it
1 For

mask wearing NPI type, Wikipedia articles were observed to be incomplete for some regions, so we augmented the dataset with hand-curated list of
NPI measures from web sources.

5/15

Figure 4. WNTRAC Curator tool used for ongoing validation of the dataset.

displays the complete Wikipedia document extracted by the processing pipeline. Below the document, each candidate event is
shown to the volunteer in separate cards. The volunteer can adjudge the candidate event to be a brand new NPI event or an
evidence to an existing event or discard the candidate. They can also correct any of the attributes associated with the event
extracted by the pipeline.

Figure 5. Data browser for visualizing the Worldwide Non-pharmaceutical Interventions Tracker for COVID-19 dataset.

Data Browser

Figure 5 presents an interactive data browser22 that uses a chart, map, and histogram to provide a descriptive analyses of NPIs
and COVID-19 outcomes such as confirmed cases and deaths. The browser has a control panel used to filter the data being
visualized (e.g cases vs deaths), as well as how it is visualized (e.g. linear vs log scale). A play slider can be used to view
the temporal evolution of NPIs and COVID-19 outcomes in a given region. The chart illustrates the time points in which a
geographical region imposes or lifts an NPI along with the temporal trends of COVID-19 outcomes. The different types of
NPIs are illustrated using specific icons that are described in a legend. Groups of interventions are noted with the star icon. The
number of countries/territories and the number of NPIs shown in the chart can be adjusted in the settings. The user can select a
specific line on the chart referring to a territory to focus on the NPIs imposed and lifted in that location. The histogram below
6/15

the chart shows the number of territories that have imposed the different types of NPIs and can be selected to see the territories
on the map that have imposed the selected subset of NPIs. The map illustrates the proportion of NPI categories (out of the 16
NPI categories in the dataset) implemented in each region using a gray-colored bar. Furthermore, when a region is selected,
the gray-colored bar in any other region illustrates the proportion of NPI categories in the other region as a proportion of NPI
categories implemented in the selected region. The map is also used to visualize the geographic distribution of the selected
COVID-19 outcome using choropleth, spikes, or bubbles. The user can interact with the territories on the map to focus on a
location and view the data on the chart. Note that for some countries such as the United States, the map can be zoomed to
reveal finer-grained data for sub-regions such as states.

Data Records
In addition to the key fields discussed earlier, the dataset also contains a few additional attributes for each event. A complete
listing of all fields across event and evidence is shown in Table 2, along with an example for each field. Each version of the
dataset consists of two CSV files named ibm-wntrac-yyyy-mm-dd-events.csv and ibm-wntrac-yyyy-mm-dd-evidences.csv,
corresponding to events and evidences respectively. A live version of dataset is available in our GitHub repository https:
//github.com/IBM/wntrac/tree/master/data for download. The dataset is regularly updated. At the time of the submission,
the dataset is updated as of October 13th , 2020. Historical versions of the dataset are made available in the same GitHub
repository. Further, a static copy of the dataset containing NPIs recorded as of 8th July 2020, used for the technical validation in
the paper has been archived in figshare23 . In the next section, we include some high-level dataset statistics to provide a sense of
the distribution of the data.
Field name

Description

Example

even_id
type
country
state/province
date
epoch
value
restriction
sent_id
doc_url

Globally unique identifier24 for the particular NPI
Type of the NPI
Country where the NPI was implemented. Name in ISO 3166-1 coding20
State or province where the NPI was implemented. Name in ISO 3166-2 coding21
Date when the NPI comes to effect. It is not the date of announcement
Unix epoch time25 corresponding to the date
Value associated with the NPI.
Ordinal values representing imposition (1) or lifting (0) of an NPI
Globally unique identifier24 for the evidence sentence
Document URL

7db34fd1-d121-479f-9713-af7596a45aa1
School closure
USA
Vermont
2020-03-26
1589749200000.0
Refer to Table for details
0
d68ea644-24d5-4abf-93b0-dabc1cd3c2eb

crawl_id

Globally unique identifier24 for the particular crawl in which this evidence sentence was
fetched
Date of the crawl that fetched this evidence sentence
Evidence sentence in the document where the NPI is discussed

2020-05-06_d0cba9ae-8fda-11ea-b351069b8ffc8dc8
20200506
On March 26, Governor Scott ordered all schools in
Vermont to remain closed for in-person classes for the
rest of the academic year

crawl_date
text

citation_url
URL cited for the evidence sentence in the source document
anno_provided_url Additional citation URL provided by the human volunteer who performed the validation.
fine_grained_location Geographic locations mentioned in the evidence sentence separated by pipeline.
source_type
Wikipedia citation source type indicating government (G) or other sources (O)

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/COVID-19_
pandemic_in_Vermont

Vermont
G

Table 2. Data record for the Worldwide Non-pharmaceutical Interventions Tracker for COVID-19 dataset.

Dataset Statistics
Figure 6 shows the distribution of the NPI measures imposed worldwide. Entertainment / cultural sector closure, confinement
and school closure are the predominant NPIs taken by governments2 . Figure 7 summarizes the overall total number of regions
that implemented NPIs of each type. As shown in the graph confinement, school closure and freedom of movement are the most
common NPIs imposed worldwide, as expected from Figure 6. Figure 8 shows the breakdown of the NPIs within each region,
for the top twenty regions that have implemented the highest number of NPIs measures.

Technical Validation
The validation team consisted of a mix of experts who participated in the design of the taxonomy and/or the pipeline and
IBM volunteers who completed a brief training session about the annotation schema and tool. Validation was done in two
stages. In the first phase, because the WNTRAC tool was still being developed, we used simple CSV files to distribute the data
for validation. Each annotator was given a complete document corresponding to a Wikipedia article for a particular region,
2 Figures

in Dataset Statistics, Usage Notes sections were generated from the latest version of dataset, dated 13th October 2020, available at the time of
manuscript submission. A copy of this version of the dataset is also available in figshare.23

7/15

Figure 6. Distribution of NPIs in the Worldwide Non-pharmaceutical Interventions Tracker for COVID-19 dataset.

a

b

Figure 7. Number of regions implementing each NPI globally (left) and within US (right).

a

b

Figure 8. Distribution of NPI measures implemented in different geographies globally (left) and within US (right).

8/15

retrieved as on June 6, 2020, pre-annotated with the output of the pipeline. Each sentence was displayed in a separate line with
sentences corresponding to candidate events highlighted with a different background color. The attributes extracted by the
pipeline were listed next to each sentence. Annotators were asked to verify and correct each of these attributes. If a sentence
does not discuss any of the valid event types, they were asked to mark the type as discarded. If a sentence was incorrectly
discarded by the pipeline, they were asked to correct the type and fill in the attributes when possible. This was, however, not
uniformly enforced. In the second phase, we made WNTRAC Curator tool available to the annotators. The tool randomly
assigns a single document to be validated to each annotator. Each document, consists of incremental changes to the underlying
Wikipedia article since the last validation of the document. The validation process for the second phase is similar to the first
phase except that only candidate events, as determined by the pipeline were shown to the annotators. This time-saving move
was based on the observation during the first phase, when all sentences were presented, human annotators generally agreed with
the automated pipeline on discarded sentences. The NLP model used a recall-oriented threshold and only discarded sentences
with low scores on all valid NPI types.
All NPI event types
Type
Type + Value
Date
Region
Restriction
Type + Date
Type + Value + Date
Type + Value + Date + Region
Type + Value + Date + Region + Restriction

Top 5 NPI event types

A vs E1

A vs E2

E1 vs E2

A vs E1

A vs E2

E1 vs E2

0.63
0.41
0.50
0.99
0.36
0.44
0.31
0.30
0.26

0.69
0.42
0.61
1.00
0.43
0.53
0.34
0.33
0.29

0.80
0.69
0.73
0.99
0.74
0.70
0.62
0.62
0.61

0.81
0.51
0.60
0.98
0.74
0.51
0.35
0.35
0.34

0.77
0.47
0.69
1.00
0.58
0.59
0.36
0.36
0.35

0.85
0.70
0.76
0.98
0.69
0.72
0.59
0.59
0.59

Table 3. Inter-annotator agreement between average volunteers (A) and two groups of experienced volunteers (E1 and E2 ). Region includes
both country and state/territories as applicable.

To determine the quality of the dataset post validation, inter-annotator agreement (IAA) was calculated on a subset,
randomly sampled (2%), from the full set that was validated by IBM volunteers. Each instance in the subset was further double
annotated by two experts (randomly selected from a pool of six experts) independently, resulting in three sets of annotations per
instance. The IAA was evaluated on all five fields of the 5-tuple that uniquely defines an event. Furthermore, the evaluation was
performed at a field level for all fields except the value, which is technically a sub-field of type and it does not make sense to be
analyzed on its own. The IAA results are shown in Table 3. Note that the IAA between experts were consistently high in all
categories, indicating that the annotation schema is not ambiguous and most sentences can be consistently assigned to one
of the NPI type defined in the taxonomy. The IAA between the volunteers and experts were also good (0.58) at the NPI type
level and the agreement is high (0.81) in the five most frequent NPI types. We plan to expand the taxonomy over time to cover
more NPI types. We also plan to improve the accuracy of the pipeline by using end-to-end entity linking techniques for entity
normalization and state-of-the-art methods for better temporal alignment. We plan to expand to other data sources to improve
coverage.

Usage Notes
One of the primary objectives in creating the WNTRAC dataset was to understand what types of NPIs are being implemented
worldwide and to facilitate analysis of the efficacy of the different types of NPIs. Specifically, the dataset supports a variety
of studies, such as correlation and analysis to understand the associations between NPIs and outcomes, causal inference
between NPIs and specific outcome variables, as well as impact analysis to understand the impact on socio-economic factors.
Furthermore, this dataset offers an opportunity to perform local contextualized What-if scenarios and optimal intervention
planning, by incorporating NPIs into epidemiological models. Such capabilities are critical for target decision-making to
control the spread of the disease and minimize impact on society.
There are a number of questions, ranging in complexity, that the dataset can be used to answer. For example, consider the
question: How many NPIs were imposed and lifted globally as the pandemic continues?. Figure 9 sums the number of NPIs
imposed and lifted in all geographies per month. As expected the vast amount of NPIs were imposed during the first outbreak
of COVID-19 in March, and lifted mainly in April and May. This figure also reveals the imbalance between imposed and lifted
NPIs that exists in the data. For example, while more than three thousand NPIs were imposed at March, less than five hundred
9/15

were lifted between April and September. The imbalance can be the outcome of many factors, such as, how and when lifting of
NPIs is announced over time. Such factors should be taken into account performing analysis using this dataset.

a Imposed

b Lifted

Figure 9. Number of imposed and lifted NPIs measures per month.

A second example use of the dataset is to explore which NPIs were imposed by different countries early in the pandemic, to
contain the spread of COVID-19?. One approach is to break the set of NPIs into two sets: travel-related and community related.
Travel-related NPIs include domestic flight restrictions, international flight restrictions, freedom of movement (nationality
dependent), and introduction of travel quarantine policies. Figure 10a visualizes the elapsed time between the implementation
of a travel-related NPIs and the recording of at least 50 cases, and time to the first reported death. The visualization shows 9
selected regions each of which had at least one travel-related NPI among the first set of NPIs imposed in the country, and was
generated by combining WNTRAC dataset with COVID-19 outcomes dataset from the World Health Organization (WHO)2 .
For each region, the blue bar plot illustrates the number of days before 50 cumulative cases, and the red points shows the
number of days before the first death. From the graph, it can be observed that Singapore first imposed a travel-related NPI
more than 50 days before their first death, showing an earlier response than Brazil and New York State where the first travel
related NPI were imposed about 10 days after the first death. Similarly, Figure 10b visualizes the elapsed time between the
implementation of community-related NPIs and the recording of at least 50 cases and at least one death for 9 selected regions.
The community-related NPIs include entertainment/cultural sector closure, confinement, school closure, mass gatherings, mask
wearing, public services closure, public transportation, work restrictions, and state of emergency. It can be noted that at least
one community-related NPI was imposed for each of the selected regions prior to their first recorded death due to COVID-19.

a Travel-related NPIs

b Community-related NPIs

Figure 10. Elapsed time (in days) between the introduction of NPIs and recording of first death (red) or 50 cases (blue) in countries that
implemented travel-related vs community-related NPIs first.

As a third example, we demonstrate how the WNTRAC dataset can be used to generate an index, a summary statistic
between [0, 1] that represents the NPIs imposed and, if available, the adherence. This index can be used to study the relationship
between NPIs and COVID-19 outcomes over time and to compare response strategies across jurisdictions. Figure 11 illustrates
this using data from representative states in the United States (Florida, Georgia, New York, and Texas). In the figure, the bar
10/15

graph shows the trend for the exponentially weighted moving average of new cases per 100,000 population. The red continuous
line is the proportion of the NPI (out of thirteen NPI types in the WNTRAC dataset) that a region has imposed at a given time.
The blue continuous line is the WNTRAC NPI Index, a composite index that captures both the stringency levels of the NPIs
and community mobility data as a proxy measure of adherence to NPIs strategies. The WNTRAC NPI Index, denoted η(t), is
presented in Eq. 1, and the code for the WNTRAC NPI Index is available in the repository.

η(t) = ω0 SI(t) + ω1

eA(t)
,
1 + eA(t)

(1)

ω0 , ω1 > 0 are weights applied to each term and ω0 + ω1 = 1. Specifically, the first term, SI, is derived from mapping
and scoring the WNTRAC NPI similarly as presented in the Oxford COVID-19 Government Response Tracker (OxCGRT)
stringency index13 . The second term represents adherence at a specific point in time, A(t), by using mobility data as a proxy.
Specifically, we define A(t) in Eq. 2 as a function of the "anticipated mobility", mant , and the "observed mobility," mobs . The
anticipated mobility at a specific point in time is the mobility score that would potentially be associated with the NPIs at that
time. The observed mobility is the mobility value observed in that region at a specific time point and ideally should be close the
value of anticipated mobility. In our work, we assume a negative relations between stringency and mobility, and anticipated
mobility is derived from this linear relationship with noise.

A(t) =

mant − mobs
.
mant

(2)

As illustrated, the WNTRAC NPI metrics can be compared to existing metrics such as the OxCGRT stringency index13 . Of
note is the detailed interpretation of the relationships illustrated in this example is subject to addressing limitations such as
missing data and will be pursued as part of our future work.

Figure 11. Trends in COVID-19 cases per 100,1000 population and the NPI-based indices in representative US states.

Finally, another important application of the WNTRAC dataset is to support What-if analysis and decision-making for
optimal intervention planning. This is especially important to provide critical, time-sensitive decision support to various leaders,
and decision-making teams such as COVID-19 task force teams as they determine which NPIs to impose or lift over time.
Efficiency in this decision-making process is important, as the space of all potential combinations and variations of NPIs is
large and complex. The options for a particular region have varying degrees of impact on outcomes for that region. Tools 26
11/15

that enable what-if analysis and intervention planning, at both national and sub-national levels, that incorporate the WNTRAC
dataset can be leveraged to meet this need. For decision-makers, these tools enable easy navigation through the complex
intervention space in a timely manner to generate the most optimal and context-relevant COVID-19 intervention programs. A
key requirement for such tools are epidemiological models that are calibrated in such a way that the resulting forecasts can be
trusted as accurate projections. To calibrate these models, it is critical to consider the NPI that have been imposed so that the
drivers of disease spread can be contextualized for a region. By incorporating NPI into the models improved projections of
outcomes of the disease can be generated, yielding more accurate scenarios for decision-makers to explore.
In addition to the above examples, the WNTRAC dataset can be used to support other objectives, including estimating the
relationships between NPIs and
• consumers behavior by, for example, correlating between retail data and NPIs.
• environmental changes such as pollution levels.
• actual compliance by the population. Naturally, not all the interventions recorded in the dataset are an accurate
representation of reality as some of the interventions capture a governmental request that might not be followed by the
entire population. Thus, it might be useful to integrate the WNTRAC dataset with other publicly available data sources
that can provide information regarding the level of compliance with an intervention, such as mobility information27, 28 ,
where we provided an example with the NPI-Index above, and social media.
Lastly, one other interesting use case is to estimate the economic impact of NPIs by, for example, relating unemployment rates
and jurisdictional debt with NPIs. Estimation of the effect of NPIs on non-COVID-19 health problems, such as late cancer
detection due to missed screening tests, will also be useful.

Code Availability
The source code for the WNTRAC automated NPI curation system, including the data processing pipeline, WNTRAC Curator
tool and NPI data browser is available in a public GitHub repository at https://github.com/IBM/wntrac/tree/master/code
along side the up-to-date version of the dataset https://github.com/IBM/wntrac/tree/master/data. Please refer to the
README file in repository for further instructions on using the code.

References
1. Center for Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE) at Johns Hopkins University (JHU). COVID-19 Dashboard.
https://coronavirus.jhu.edu (2020).
2. World Health Organization. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) Weekly Epidemiological Update and Weekly Operational
Update. https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/situation-reports (2020).
3. Worldometer. COVID-19 Coronavirus Pandemic. https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus (2020).
4. COVID-19 Healthcare Coalition. Real-time tracking of statewide NPI implementations. https://c19hcc.org/resources/
npi-dashboard/ (2020).
5. Ferguson, N. et al. Report 9: Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (npis) to reduce covid19 mortality and healthcare
demand. Imp. Coll. Lond. 10, 77482 (2020).
6. Coibion, O., Gorodnichenko, Y. & Weber, M. The cost of the covid-19 crisis: Lockdowns, macroeconomic expectations,
and consumer spending. Tech. Rep., National Bureau of Economic Research (2020).
7. The Lancet. India under covid-19 lockdown. Lancet (London, England) 395, 1315 (2020).
8. Wang, L. L. et al. Cord-19: The covid-19 open research dataset. ArXiv (2020).
9. U.S. Chamber of Commerce. Global Dashboard on COVID-19 Government Policies. https://www.uschamber.com/
international-affairs-division/covid-dashboard (2020).
10. Council of State Governments. COVID-19 Resources for State Leaders. https://web.csg.org/covid19 (2020).
11. Cheng, C., Barceló, J., Hartnett, A. S., Kubinec, R. & Messerschmidt, L. Covid-19 government response event dataset
(coronanet v.1.0). Nat. Hum. Behav. 4, 756–768 (2020).
12. Desvars-Larrive, A. et al. A structured open dataset of government interventions in response to COVID-19. Sci. Data 7,
285, 10.1038/s41597-020-00609-9 (2020).
13. Hale, T., Webster, S., Petherick, A., Phillips, T. & Kira, B. Oxford covid-19 government response tracker. Blavatnik Sch.
Gov. 25 (2020).
14. Wikimedia Foundation. Wikipedia and COVID-19. https://wikimediafoundation.org/covid19/data (2020).
12/15

15. Jessen, J. & Jørgensen, A. H. Aggregated trustworthiness: Redefining online credibility through social validation. First
Monday (2012).
16. Wikipedia contributors. Help:Category. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:Category (2020).
17. Wikipedia. MediaWiki API. https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/ (2020).
18. Honnibal, M. & Johnson, M. An improved non-monotonic transition system for dependency parsing. In Proceedings of the
2015 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing, 1373–1378 (2015).
19. Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K. & Toutanova, K. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language
understanding. arXiv:1810.04805 [cs] (2018). ArXiv: 1810.04805.
20. Wikipedia contributors. ISO 3166-1. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_3166-1 (2020).
21. Wikipedia contributors. ISO 3166-2. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_3166-2 (2020).
22. IBM. WNTRAC data browser. https://covidresponse.res.ibm.com/ (2020).
23. IBM. Worldwide non-pharmaceutical interventions tracker for covid-19 (wntrac). https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.
12937463.v1, https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.12937463.v1 (2020).
24. Wikipedia contributors. UUID. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universally_unique_identifier (2020).
25. Wikipedia contributors. Epoch. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Epoch (2020).
26. Wachira, C. et al. A platform for disease intervention planning. In 2020 IEEE International Conference on Healthcare
Informatics (ICHI) - to appear (IEEE, 2020).
27. Apple. Mobility trends reports. https://www.apple.com/covid19/mobility (2020).
28. Google. Covid-19 community mobility reports. https://www.google.com/covid19/mobility (2020).

Acknowledgements
We thank IBM Research volunteers for validation and maintenance of the WNTRAC dataset.

Author Contributions Statement
IBM Research Haifa team identified the need for the dataset, defined the taxonomy of NPIs based on requirements for
epidemiological modeling and developed the validation guidelines for volunteers. IBM Research Yorktown Heights team
developed NLP for NPI extraction, developed the semi-automated system to construct the dataset and keep it current and built
the WNTRAC Curator tool. IBM Research Nairobi team designed and implemented graphical user interface for the NPI data
browser for end users to browse, query and visualize the dataset and the associated descriptive statistics. Senior authors Michal
Rosen-Zvi, Divya Pathak and Aisha Walcott-Bryant lead the respective teams.

Competing Interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

13/15

Region

Code

Abkhazia
Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Andorra
Angola
Anguilla
Antarctica
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belarus
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Costa Rica
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Democratic Republic of Congo
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia
Eswatini
Ethiopia
Faroe Islands
Fiji
Finland
France
French Guiana
French Polynesia
French Saint Martin
Gabon
Gambia
Georgia (country)

GEO-AB
AFG
ALB
DZA
AND
AGO
AIA
ATA
ATG
ARG
ARM
AUS
AUT
AZE
BHS
BHR
BGD
BRB
BLR
BEL
BLZ
BEN
BTN
BOL
BIH
BWA
BRA
BRN
BGR
BFA
BDI
KHM
CMR
CAN
CPV
CAF
TCD
CHL
CHN-TB
COL
COM
CRI
HRV
CUB
CYP
CZE
COD
DNK
DJI
DMA
DOM
ECU
EGY
SLV
GNQ
ERI
EST
SWZ
ETH
DEN-FI
FJI
FIN
FRA
GUF
PYF
MAF
GAB
GMB
GEO

Germany
Ghana
Greece
Greenland
Grenada
Guadeloupe
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hong Kong
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Italy
Ivory Coast
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kosovo
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luhansk People’s Republic
Luxembourg
Madagascar
Mainland China
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Martinique
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mayotte
Mexico
Moldova
Monaco
Mongolia
Montenegro
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Namibia
Nepal
Netherlands
New Caledonia
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
North Korea
North Macedonia
Northern Cyprus

DEU
GHA
GRC
DEN-GR
GRD
FRA-GU
GTM
GIN
GNB
GUY
HTI
HND
CHN-HK
HUN
ISL
IND
IDN
IRN
IRQ
ISR
ITA
CIV
JAM
JPN
JOR
KAZ
KEN
KOS
KWT
KGZ
LAO
LVA
LBN
LSO
LBR
LBY
LIE
LTU
UKR-09
LUX
MDG
CHN
MWI
MYS
MDV
MLI
MLT
FRA-MA
MRT
MUS
FRA-MA
MEX
MDA
MCO
MNG
MNE
MAR
MOZ
MMR
NAM
NPL
NLD
FRA-NC
NZL
NIC
NER
NGA
PRK
MKD
CYP

Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Qatar
Republic of Artsakh
Republic of Congo
Republic of Ireland
Romania
Russia
Rwanda
Saint Helena
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
Saint Vincent and Grenadines
San Marino
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovakia
Slovenia
Somalia
Somalia
South Africa
South Korea
South Sudan
Spain
Sri Lanka
State of Palestine
Sudan
Suriname
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria
Taiwan
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Togo
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Uganda
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Vatican City
Venezuela
Vietnam
Western Sahara
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe

NOR
OMN
PAK
PAN
PNG
PRY
PER
PHL
POL
PRT
QAT
ARM
COG
IRL
ROU
RUS
RWA
SHN
KNA
LCA
SPM
VCT
SMR
SAU
SEN
SRB
SYC
SLE
SGP
SVK
SVN
SOM
SOM
ZAF
KOR
SSD
ESP
LKA
PSE
SDN
SUR
SWE
CHE
SYR
TWN
TJK
TZA
THA
TLS
TGO
TTO
TUN
TUR
TKM
UGA
ARE
GBR
USA
URY
UZB
VAT
VEN
VNM
ESH
YEM
ZMB
ZWE

Table 4. List of regions currently supported by the WNTRAC dataset.

14/15

Region

Code

Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida
Georgia (U.S. state)
Guam
Guantanamo Bay Naval Base
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana

USA-AL
USA-AK
USA-AZ
USA-AR
USA-CA
USA-CO
USA-CT
USA-DE
USA-FL
USA-GA
USA-GU
USA-Guantanamo_Bay_Naval_Base
USA-HI
USA-ID
USA-IL
USA-IN
USA-IA
USA-KS
USA-KY
USA-LA
USA-ME
USA-MD
USA-MA
USA-MI
USA-MN
USA-MS
USA-MO
USA-MT

Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York (state)
North Carolina
North Dakota
Northern Mariana Islands
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Puerto Rico
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
United States Virgin Islands
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington (state)
Washington D.C.
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming

USA-NV
USA-NH
USA-NJ
USA-NM
USA-NY
USA-NC
USA-ND
USA-Northern_Mariana_Islands
USA-OH
USA-OK
USA-OR
USA-PA
USA-PR
USA-RI
USA-SC
USA-SD
USA-TN
USA-TX
USA-Virgin_Islands
USA-UT
USA-VT
USA-VA
USA-WA
USA-DC
USA-WV
USA-WI
USA-WY

Table 5. List of US states and territories currently supported by the WNTRAC dataset.

15/15

