A modified age-structured SIR model for COVID-19 type viruses
Vishaal Rama , Laura P. Schaposnik?,b
(?) Corresponding author: schapos@uic.edu
Abstract: We present a modified age-structured SIR model based on known patterns of social contact and
distancing measures within Washington, USA. We find that population age-distribution has a significant effect
on disease spread and mortality rate, and contribute to the efficacy of age-specific contact and treatment
measures. We consider the effect of relaxing restrictions across less vulnerable age-brackets, comparing
results across selected groups of varying population parameters. Moreover, we analyze the mitigating effects
of vaccinations and examine the effectiveness of age-targeted distributions. Lastly, we explore how our model
can applied to other states to reflect social-distancing policy based on different parameters and metrics.

arXiv:2009.12219v1 [q-bio.PE] 23 Sep 2020

Keywords: COVID-19, SIR Model, age-targeted disease control.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The study of the spread of diseases and rumours within
networks (social and biological) in order to trace factors
that are responsible for or contribute to their occurrence
has been done from many different perspectives. Moreover, only recently have graph theory, number theory,
and computer science taken researchers to several breakthroughs. Back in the early 1900s, Ronald Ross produced the first mathematical model of mosquito-borne
pathogen transmission using mosquito spatial movement
in order to reduce malaria from an area [13]. Some
decades later, William O. Kermack and Anderson G.
McKendrick [12] created the SIR model, which categorized people into the 3 states Susceptible, Infectious and
Removed – the model which we shall focus on.
More recently, contact networks were introduced to
better represent a community [11]: these are adapted
to reflect certain particular characteristics of society, and
they have been of much use when doing mathematical
modeling of epidemics. In this setting, a social network is
modelled as a graph where vertices represent individuals,
and edges encode the interactions amongst people: two
people are connected by an edge in the graph whenever
they are related (and thus an interaction could exist).
Given the recent outbreak of COVID-19, and with
views towards applications to future viral outbreaks and
marketing strategies, this paper is dedicated to the study
of contention strategies with social networks by targeting different clusters within the network in different ways.
As highlighted in [16], the importance of local clustering
in networks has been widely recognised, and not much
study has been done in this direction until very recently.
Since evidence shows very large differences in hospitalization and fatality rates between age groups and gender groups, our interest is on obtaining a modified agestructured SIR model. Very recently, a first step in analyzing the role of optimal targeted lockdowns in a multigroup extension of the standard SIR model was done
[1, 4], where it was found that among strategies which end
with population immunity, strict age-targeted mitigation
ones have the potential to greatly reduce mortalities and
ICU utilization for natural parameter choices [4]. Moreover, the trade-offs facing policy-makers between saving
lives and improving economic outcomes were analized in
[1], where it is shown that better social outcomes are

possible with targeted policies: “Differential lockdowns
on groups with differential risks can significantly improve
policy trade-offs, enabling large reductions in economic
damages or excess deaths or both” [1].
In the present work we take different path from [1, 4]
and consider an age-compartment model with a rescaling
function completely based on the policy that Washington
implements, where the intensity of the social distancing
policy is proportional to the ICU occupancy. It should be
noted that a modified rescaling could be applied to other
states, hence making our model adaptable to other settings, e.g. New York uses metrics including rate of change
of total infections in their policy. Moreover, we consider
age-specific relaxation policy (e.g. opening schools/work)
and vaccine distribution. By applying our model to populations of varied age-distribution, we see the following:
• Following our rescaling function, population agedistribution is directly correlated with increasing
peak ICU occupancy and decreasing peak infection
count. However, herd immunity threshold is unaffected by the change in population parameters
with the same proportion of the population being
infected through the course of the epidemic.
• Across all age-distributions, relaxing school and
work restrictions has the effect of infecting the same
proportion of the population across a smaller time
frame, increasing peak ICU occupancy by over to
18% and 51% respectively. However, such effects
are not observed when relaxing restrictions after
the initial peak in infections.
• Administering vaccines at a constant rate lowered
the herd immunity threshold, especially among
high median age counties, while also reducing mortality rate by 28%. Moreover, strictly prioritizing
vaccines to older age-brackets seems extremely effective, lowering ICU occupancy and further reducing mortality rate by 20% while also completely
preventing the spread of the virus in the short term.
To illustrate our perspective, we study the available
data from the state of Washington, USA, and apply our
modified model to this dataset. Our paper is organized
as follows: we shall begin by introducing the SIR model
in Section II A, and an age structured version following
the work in [4] in Section II B.

2
II.

THE (AGE-STRUCTURED) SIR MODEL

As mentioned previously, the SIR model is a simple
model for infectious disease in which the population is
divided into three compartments: those susceptible to
the disease, those infected with the disease, and those
removed from the disease either through death or recovery. Across this paper, we shall assume that those in the
removed group are unable to be infected again.
A.

The SIR model

The number of individuals in each group is given by
certain functions of time S(t), I(t), R(t) respectively.
Moreover, the dynamics of the model are given by the
set of ordinary differential equations:
S
dS
= −β · I · ;
dt
N
dI
S
= β·I ·
− γ · I;
dt
N
dR
= γ · I,
dt

(1)

B.

An Age-Structured SIR Model

For many diseases such as COVID-19, the effect on different age-groups varies drastically. Therefore, we consider an age structured model in which we compute the
age distribution of each compartment in each of the agebrackets 0-9, 10-19, . . . , 70-79, and 80+. This separation,
in particular, is much more specific than the one used in
[1] and thus allows us to have our results in a more refined
way.
For an age-structured model, we must incorporate an
age-contact matrix M describing the rate of contact between each pair of age-brackets. In the present paper,
we shall use the same matrix used in [4] based on data
collected by [17] for the United States, shown in Figure
1 below. In this setting, the values in M are proportional to the total number of contacts per time between
age-brackets, divided by the product of their population
sizes. In particular, M would be a constant matrix if individuals were equally likely to contact each other across
all age-brackets.

(2)
(3)

which depend on the following parameters:
• the total population N ;
• the transmission rate β, measured as the average
number of contacts per person per time, multiplied
by the probability of transmission between a infected and susceptible person;
• and the removal rate γ, also given by 1/D where
D is the length of the period for which a person is
infectious.
During the early stages in an epidemic, transmissions
between individuals are statistically independent, meaning that the probability that an infectious individual encounters someone no longer susceptible is probabilistically low. Within the model, the basic reproduction number R0 is he number of people an individual is expected
to infect, and can be computed given the parameters of
the SIR model as R0 = βγ .
One should note that the R0 value is not a biological
constant as its value depends on factors such as individual
contact patterns. However, the number R0 of a disease is
generally consistent among newly susceptible populations
and can be used to predict the trajectory of an epidemic
or calibrate the initial conditions of a model. In particular, a value of R0 > 1 indicates a disease will begin to
spread in a population if no contention is installed, where
a greater R0 value indicates faster exponential growth.
For example, measles is known to be one of the most
contagious diseases, with 12 ≤ R0 ≤ 18, which means
that each measles-infected person may spread the virus
to 12 to 18 other individuals in a susceptible population
[10]. For comparison, the CDC estimates that COVID19 has an R0 value of about 5.7 in the United States [18],
close to that of Polio and Rubella.

FIG. 1: Age-Contact Matrix M.

Following [4], in our age-structured SIR model we define vector valued functions S(t), I(t), and R(t) representing the age-distribution of the total individuals susceptible, infectious, and removed respectively by letting
the ith coordinate indicate the number of individuals in
the ith age-bracket for 1 ≤ i ≤ 9. Then, from [4], the
dynamics of the model are given by the following equations:
n
dSi
Si X
= −β ·
·
Mij · Ij
dt
N j=1

(4)

n
dIi
Si X
= β·
·
Mij · Ij − γ · Ii
dt
N j=1

(5)

dRi
= γ · Ii
dt

(6)

3
Let vector p denote the proportion of the population in
each age-group, and let λ and v be the dominant eigenvalue and corresponding eigenvector of M · diag(p). In
the initial state of the epidemic, the growth rate of transmissions follows a steady state, i.e. I ∝ dI
dt . It is shown
in [4] that in this state, the value of R0 can be computed
as β·λ
γ , with the initial infected distributed according to
v. Therefore to emulate the R0 value of COVID-19, we
1
, indicating a 14-day
can assign β = R0λ·γ where γ = 14
infectious period.
Consider the vectors h = {h1 , . . . , h9 }, c =
{c1 , . . . , c9 }, and m = {m1 , . . . , m9 } to be the hospitalization rate, ICU rate among hospitalizations, and mortality rates, respectively for each age-bracket labeled by
i. Then, one can compute the vector valued functions
H(t), C(t), and M (t) representing the age-distribution
of the total individuals hospitalized, in critical care, and
deceased respectively through the following differential
equations:
dHi
= γ · hi · Ii
dt
dCi
= γ · hi · ci · Ii
dt
dMi
= γ · mi · Ii
dt

(7)
(8)
(9)

In what follows we shall use the COVID-19 estimates
for these values from [6] shown in Figure 2 to understand
the above functions.

issued the first stay-at-home order which lasted until the
end of May [15].
On May 29th, Inslee announced a Safe Start: a four
phased county-by-county reopening plan. The plan allows counties to gradually relax social-distancing measures based on their assessments of health care system
readiness, testing capacity and availability, case and contact investigations, and ability to protect high-risk populations. One of the main factors determining a county’s
reopening procedure is the percentage of ICU beds available in hospitals. Therefore to model the effect of socialdistancing policy it is useful to scale the contact matrix
M by a value proportional to this percentage:
M→

1
M
λ · |C|/Cmax

(10)

where |C| is the total number of individuals in critical
care while Cmax is the ICU capacity which we set to the
US average of 34.7 per 100,000 residents. As we mentioned before, this leads to our age-compartment model,
utilizing a rescaling function completely based on the policy that Washington implements where the intensity of
the social distancing policy is proportional to the ICU oc1
as the mitigation factor.
cupancy. We refer to λ·|C|/C
max
The constant λ determines the “strictness” of the socialdistancing measures. Such reactive mitigation measures
have been done before in SIR models (e.g., see [2] with
respect to total infected count).
In order to understand the implications of the constant
λ, we should note that a larger λ value has the effect of
“flattening the curve”, decreasing total case count while
also slowing the rate of decline in cases. Moreover, one
can see in Figure 3 the effect of λ on the proportion of
the population (with Washington state demographic parameters) infected and in the ICU (I and C respectively).
For consistency, we use a λ value of 0.1 in our modeling.

FIG. 2: COVID-19 Age Statistics

III.

SOCIAL DISTANCING IN WASHINGTON
STATE, USA.

In what remains of the manuscript, we shall pay special
attention to the COVID-19 outbreak that took place in
Washington State, USA since January 2020, and use the
data available to model different Social Distancing strategies. The first confirmed case of the COVID-19 pandemic
in the United States was announced in Washington State
on January 21, 2020. Five weeks later, on February 29th,
Washington also announced the first COVID-19 related
death in the country. On March 23, Governor Jay Inslee

FIG. 3: Effect of λ in SIR-model.

A.

Demographic Parameters

The main objective of our model is to investigate the
effect of a population’s age distribution on the transmission and spread of a virus like COVID-19, which is both
highly contagious and largely age-specific in its effect on
the population. To aid in our comparison of populations, we select four sample counties of Washington state

4
with varying age-distribution: Jefferson, King, Ferry and
Adams (outlined in red in Figures 4, 5, 6) and apply our
model to their demographic parameters.
For each county, we use the same parameters specific
to COVID-19, but adjust the initial state of the function
S(t) based on the age-distribution of the county, which
can be seen in Figure 4, obtained via the official government’s data in [14].

FIG. 6: Percent of population over 80.

IV.

FIG. 4: Median Age.

As shown in Figure 4, there is significant variation in
the age distribution of each county with counties along
the west coast such as Jefferson and Clallam with a median age of over 50 years, while counties in central and
eastern Washington such as Adams and Whitman with
a median age of under 30 years. Due to this variation,
we expect an epidemic such as that of COVID-19 to have
similar variation in its effect on the population, from rate
of spread to mortality rate, and thus warrant different,
age-targeted mitigation measures.
In order to understand the the relevance of the mortality rate within our study, there are two other important
data points to consider, which are the proportion of the
population in each county over the age of 60 and 80,
shown in Figures 5 and 6 respectively. These two population groups represent the age-brackets most vulnerable
and are generally a better indicator of the overall population mortality rate.

MODEL APPLICATION

As mentioned previously, the four counties of Washington we selected for our model comparison are Adams,
King, Ferry, and Jefferson. These counties have median
ages of 28.3, 36.8, 49.2, and 57.9 respectively. The complete age distribution of the selected counties are shown
in Figure 7, and in this section we shall apply our SIR
model on each of the four selected counties.

FIG. 7: Age Distribution of Selected Counties.

FIG. 5: Percent of population over 60.

In order to understand the relation between the proportion of the population infected and the median age of
a county, we consider Figure 8 which displays the current proportion of the population infected and in intensive care over time for the four selected counties. Mitigation measures are the same as shown in 3, applied
with λ = 0.1 across all age-brackets homogeneously. In
particular, we can see that the proportion of the population infected decreases with increasing median age.
This is likely due to a larger mitigation factor (stricter
social-distancing policy) associated with the greater ICU
population as well as a larger number of total contacts
among the younger population from Figure 1.

5

FIG. 8: Homogeneous Mitigation Comparison, where the model was run until the proportion of the population infected fell
below 10−6 .

The Herd Immunity Threshold (HIT) is the critical
proportion of the population that must become immune
for an epidemic to longer persist. In an SIR model, the
HIT value is given by 1− R10 ≈ 82% for R0 = 5.7. In order
to understand the HIT for our model, we first consider
the peak and total proportion infected and in intensive
care for each of the four counties, as seen in Figure 9.

fected given their age-bracket. Through our study, we
find that for the less vulnerable population (< 60 years),
the probability of infection is roughly the same regardless
of age-bracket and population age-distribution, as can be
seen in in Figure 10.

FIG. 9: County Infected/ICU Statistics

Note that in all four counties, around the same proportion of the population became infected while a significant
proportion (about 20%) never became infected throughout the course of the epidemic. Therefore a state of herd
immunity was achieved in which a large enough proportion of the population achieved immunity though previous infections, thereby reducing the probability of new
infections, eventually halting the spread of the disease.
Since we are interested in understanding effects of mitigation strategies for the less vulnerable population (< 60
years), we consider in Figure 10 the proportion of each
individual age-bracket infected in the epidemic for each
county, i.e. the probability that an individual will be in-

FIG. 10: Proportion of Age-Bracket Infected

On the other hand, for the more vulnerable population (≥ 60 years), the probability of infection increases
significantly with the median age of the population. As a
result, counties such as Ferry and Jefferson not only have
a larger vulnerable population, but also have a larger
proportion of their vulnerable population infected, which
greatly contributes to their mortality rate.

6
A.

Effects of Age-Specific Policy

By shifting the distribution of the infected population
away from the vulnerable population, the mortality rate
of an epidemic can be reduced significantly. In what follows we shall examine the effect of age-specific policy
including partial opening of schools and workplaces that
prioritizes and targets the more vulnerable over less vulnerable populations.
We first examine the effects of relaxing school and
work restrictions. For each scenario, we choose a relaxed
bracket: the part of the population unaffected by the social distancing policy (that scales the contact-matrix by
the mitigation-factor).

restrictions given by the mitigation-factor. For relaxing
work restrictions, a similar group is relaxed, targeting all
individuals < 70 years. Note that relaxing work restrictions is applied on top of relaxing school restrictions as
the school age-bracket is a subset of the work age-bracket.
Comparing the statistics from the table in Figure 12
below, to that from the table in Figure 9 presented before, we find that, on average, peak infections increased
by 58% when relaxing schools and increased 160% when
relaxing work. In both cases, total infections increased
slightly, continuing to remain around the herd immunity
threshold of 82% as expected.

FIG. 12: Age-Specific Policy Statistics

FIG. 11: Population affected in relaxing school restrictions

For example, when relaxing school restrictions, the targeted population is all individuals < 30 years, meaning
all contacts amongst this group (the blue group in Figure
11) will not be subject to restrictions, while the remaining contacts (the red group) will be subject to normal

The current proportion of the population infected and
in intensive care over time with fully relaxed school
and work restrictions respectively can be seen in Figures 13 (a) and 13 (b). As infections among the relaxed bracket increased drastically in proportion to the
restricted bracket, the mean of the age-distribution of
the infected population shifted towards the younger, less
vulnerable, bracket by the time the HIT was achieved.
As a result, we saw that the mortality rate, on average, decreased by 6.0% when relaxing schools and 12.1%
when relaxing work, with this being less pronounced in
the greatest median age Jefferson county with a 2.7% and
8.1% reduction respectively.

FIG. 13: (a) School bracket relaxed (< 30 years); (b) Work bracket relaxed (< 60 years).

7

FIG. 14: (a) School bracket relaxed (< 30 years) at 90 days; (b) Work bracket relaxed (< 60 years) at 90 days.

In contrast to the above, it should also be noted that,
on average, peak ICU occupancy increased by 18.9%
when relaxing schools and 51.2% when relaxing work,
significantly more than the increase in peak infections.
Reducing transmissions across the younger age-brackets
has the effect of “flattening the curve”: reducing peak infections and ICU occupancy while infecting roughly the
same proportion of the population over a larger span of
time. Although relaxing school and work restrictions reduced the calculated mortality rate, in practice, increasing peak ICU occupancy by up to 50% can put excessive
strain on hospitals that are at full capacity, leading to
additional moralities from a lack of resources needed to
treat everyone requiring intensive care.
We also examine the effect of relaxing school and work
restrictions after 90 days, roughly a month after the initial peak in infections. Figures 14 (a) and 14 (b) display
the current proportion of the population infected and in
intensive care over time with school and work restrictions
relaxed at 90 days respectively. The vertical blue line indicates when the restrictions are relaxed for the targeted
age-bracket. We find that relaxing school restrictions at
90 days (a) has little effect on the subsequent trajectory of the epidemic for all counties, with no change in
peak infections and ICU, and mortality rate increasing
by an average of 3.5% compared to constant restrictions
in Figure 9. When relaxing work after 90 days (b), we
see a notable change in the trajectory of the epidemic in
counties with a higher median age. In Jefferson county,
infections reached reached a new peak of 1.05·10−1 , identical to the peak before the relaxation. ICU occupancy in
the county also increased for a period of 30 days following the relaxation. Among all counties, the total infected
increased by an average of 3.7%, exceeding the HIT for
all counties, though the mortality rate remained mostly
unaffected, decreasing by an average of 0.5%.

B.

Effects of Age-Targeted Vaccination

Vaccinations play a critical role in mitigating the effects of an epidemic. By directly preventing the susceptible population from contracting the disease, it is possible
to achieve herd immunity in less time and significantly
reduce peak infections and mortality rate. An important
aspect of vaccines is the strategy considered by a government or society in order to achieve the desired proportion
of vaccinated population – and much research has been
done in this direction for long time know infections (e.g.,
for Zika and Hepatitis B, as discussed in [3, 7]) as well
as for recent viral outbreaks such as COVID-19 (e.g, see
for example [19]).
In what follows, through our modified age-structured
SIR model, we shall examine the effect of prioritizing
certain age-groups in vaccine distribution versus a homogeneous distribution across all age-groups. We model
vaccinations by directly transferring individuals from the
susceptible and removed groups. In particular, if vector µ
represents the number of individuals in each age-bracket
vaccinated at each day, then we have the following:

n
dSi
Si X
= −β ·
·
Mij · Ij − µi ;
dt
N j=1

(11)

n
dIi
Si X
= β·
·
Mij · Ij − γ · Ii ;
dt
N j=1

(12)

dRi
= γ · Ii + µi .
dt

(13)

To select the distribution of vaccines, we define a
weight vector ω that represents the priority of each agebracket in our distribution.

8

FIG. 15: (a) Relative weights of vaccine distribution; (b) ge-Targeted Vaccine Distribution Statistics

Using the weight vector, we define
µi = T ·

ωi · Si
,
|ω S|

where T is the total number of vaccines administered at
each day and |ω S| is the sum of the elements of vector
ω S. Note that when ω is constant, each member of
the susceptible population is equally likely to receive a
vaccine. The United States produces enough flu vaccines
yearly for approximately half of its population [8], and
thus for our model we shall set T = N/720 where N is
the population size.
For our age-targeted distributions we provide the
higher age-brackets moderate priority with vector ωM
and strict priority with vector ωS . We let ωC denote
the constant weight vector for the homogeneous (control)
distribution. The weight values selected are summarized
in the table of Figure 15 (a), and the model statistics for
each distribution are given in Figure 15 (b).
We shall first consider the case of a homogeneous vaccine distribution (ω = ωC ). In this case, the infected

count and ICU occupancy is shown in Figure 16 (a). One
can see, in particular, that the administration of vaccines
had a significant mitigating effect on the epidemic, on average reducing:
• the peak infections by 5.9%, and
• the peak ICU occupancy by 7.2%,
with the reduction being more prominent on higher median age counties. Additionally,
• the mortality rate was reduced by an average of
28.2%;
• the HIT was reduced, especially among high median age counties, with 69.2% of Ferry county and
59.2% of Jefferson county infected in total.
This should be compared to the same analysis done
for the moderate vaccine distribution (ω = ωM ) shown
in Figures 16 (b).

FIG. 16: (a) Homogeneous vaccine distribution (ω = ωC ); (b) Moderate priority distribution (ω = ωM )

9

One may also consider a strict priority vaccine distribution (ω = ωS ), for which the analysis is shown in Figures
17 below.

Moreover, by reducing the proportion of the older population susceptible, we also reduce their infections and
ICU occupancy, subsequently lowering the mitigation
factor. Furthermore, the age-targeted distributions were
highly effective in further reducing mortality rate, with
an average 8.5% reduction for ωM and 15.7% reduction
for ωS . In particular, Adams, the low median age county,
responded most effectively with a 9.4% and 19.5% reduction in mortality rate for ωM and ωS respectively.
To better understand how vaccinations limit the
spread of the epidemic, we consider the proportion of
the population susceptible to the virus over time in
Figure 19, where the vertical lines indicate when each
proportion susceptible in each corresponding county falls
below (1 minus) the calculated HIT or 1/R0 = 0.175,
summarized in Figure 18 below.

FIG. 17: Strict priority distribution (ω = ωS )

By increasing the relative weight of higher agebrackets, we present a model where we administer more
vaccines towards the older and more vulnerable populations. As for general trends, we find that, compared
to the ωC distribution, increasing the priority of older
age-brackets one has:
FIG. 18: Number of days until herd immunity is achieved

• an increases peak and and number of total infections,
• while a decreasing peak and total number of ICU
occupancy.
This trend is expected as prioritizing older age-brackets
results in a greater proportion of the younger population
susceptible to infection who are more likely to become
infected and spread the virus, increasing total infections.

This is the point at which the spread of the virus no
longer persists due to herd immunity, with the remainder of the susceptible population being immune through
continued vaccinations. Although it results in greater total infections, we find that age-targeted vaccinations are
effective in reducing the time required to achieve herd
immunity, with an average 7.3% and 11.6% reduction in
days for ωM and ωS respectively.

FIG. 19: Susceptible Proportion for: (a) the homogeneous priority distribution (ω = ωC ); (b) the moderate priority distribution
(ω = ωM ); (c) the strict priority distribution (ω = ωS )

10
V.

CONCLUSION AND SUMMARY OF OUR
WORK

In the present paper, we have introduced a modified
age-structured compartmental SIR model using a function that scales contacts by a factor proportional to the
current ICU occupancy in Washington State, USA, which
serves to emulate the phased social distancing policy implemented Washington State.
Our modeled epidemic utilizes the same disease parameters of the current COVID-19 pandemic with an R0
value of 5.7 and corresponding hospitalization, intensivecare, and mortality rates for each age-bracket, shown in
Figure 2. To understand the importance of age-targeted
analysis of epidemic’s contention, we apply our model
across four populations: counties Adams, King, Ferry,
and Jefferson of Washington State which possess varying population age distributions shown in Figure 7 with
medians 28.3, 36.8, 49.2, 57.2 respectively.
For our study, we first apply our unaltered model to
each of the four counties, plotting the proportion of the
population infected and in critical care over time in Figure 8. Through this, we find that
(i) as the median age increases, peak infections decrease while peak ICU occupancy and mortality
rate increases.
This is due to younger age-brackets producing more contacts and infections over time, as seen in Figure 1, while
the more vulnerable older age-brackets increasing ICU
occupancy and placing heavier restrictions according to
the rescaling factor. However, the total proportion of the
population infected remain near the calculated herd immunity threshold (1 − R10 ≈ 82%) for all counties. As the
herd immunity threshold is determined by disease rather
than the population (assuming no external influences on
the susceptible population such as through vaccination),
we find that the calculated mortality rate is mostly dependant on the age-distribution of the infected population.
We then analyze the effect of age-specific policy such
as fully relaxing restrictions on the school bracket (029 years) and the work bracket (0-69 years) both at the
start of the epidemic (shown in Figure 13) and after the
initial peak in infections at day 90 (shown in Figure 14).
Through our analysis, we found that
(ii) when relaxing school and work bracket at 0 days,
peak infections increased on average by 58% and
160% respectively;
(iii) while the proportion of the population infected remained around the HIT as expected.
As a result, relaxing restrictions across younger agebrackets lowered the median age of the infected population, leading to a decrease in mortality rate, with the
reduction less pronounced in higher median age counties.
However, we also saw that
(iv) peak ICU occupancy increased by an average of
18.9% when relaxing schools and 51.2% when re-

laxing work, significantly more than the increase in
peak infections.
Although the calculated mortality rate decreased, increasing peak ICU occupancy by up to 50% can overload
the healthcare capacity in practice leading to additional,
preventable deaths. Moreover, we saw that
(v) relaxing the school bracket after 90 days had little
effect on the subsequent trajectory of the epidemic
in all counties, with no change in peak infections
and ICU occupancy;
(vi) relaxing the work bracket at the same time had
notable effects on high median age counties.
In the particular case of Jefferson, infections reached a
new peak, identical to that before the relaxation and ICU
occupancy also increased for a period of 30 days. However, for all counties, the mortality rate remained mostly
unaffected.
Finally, we analyze the effect of age-targeted vaccine
distribution. We model vaccinations by transferring a
constant number of individuals from the susceptible to
removed groups at each day. Under a normal homogeneous distribution (ωC ), the number of individuals vaccinated in each age-bracket is proportional to the size of
its susceptible population. In contrast, in age-targeted
distributions, we apply a set of weights as shown in Figure 15 (a), so that individuals in certain age-brackets are
more likely to become vaccinated, allowing us to target
vaccinations towards more vulnerable age-brackets with
moderate priority (ωM ) and strict priority (ωS ).
On its own, administrating vaccinations homogeneously as shown in Figure 16 had a significant mitigating
effect on the epidemic with
(vii) an average 28.2% reduction in mortality rate compared to without vaccinations.
(viii) the proportion of the population infected falling below the expected HIT, especially among Jefferson
with the epidemic infecting only 59.2% of the population.
When applying age-targeted vaccinations as shown in
Figure 16 (b) and Figure 17, we found that
(iix) peak infections slightly increased while peak ICU
occupancy decreased.
(ix) a reducing mortality rate with an average 8.5%
reduction for ωM and 15.7% reduction for ωS
compared to the homogeneous distribution, with
Adams responding most effectively.
This being due to a larger population of susceptible individuals in the younger age-brackets who are more likely
to spread the infection while remaining less at risk for
hospitalization. Finally, when plotting the proportion of
the population susceptible, as shown in Figure 19, we
found that age-targeted vaccinations also
(x) reduce the time required for the epidemic to achieve
the herd immunity threshold by an average 7.3% for
ωM and 11.6% for ωS .

11
Final Remarks. To conclude our work, we shall present
here different ways in which our model might be expanded, as well as possible directions for future work.
To provide better context for the extent of our result’s
implications, we list a series of key assumptions we have
made, and which could be modified in order to make to
expand on our model;:

d
• The infection rate ( dt
I) is another metric used to
dictate policy in states such as New York and California, which could be considered. Percentage positive tests, measured as the proportion of the population infected (|I|/N ), is another factor in states
such as North Carolina and Georgia used to indicate the extent of disease spread.

• Our mitigation coefficient to model social distancing policy is based strictly on a single parameter
(ICU Occupancy). A more complex or modified
mitigation coefficient may produce different results
(e.g., one could consider economic factors, such as
those studied in [5]).

• Instead of gradual/proportional restrictions, isolated populations such as those of New Zealand,
implemented strict lockdowns within the first cases
with the goal of eradicating the disease before any
possibility of herd immunity. Stricter policy can
be modelled by increasing the λ factor or scaling
contacts by a factor of |I| or |I|2 within our model.

• In our SIR model, we do not consider asymptotic individuals and the possibility for re-infection
(which in the case of COVID-19, one may want to
consider [9]). We have assumed that all individuals
within an age-bracket are equally likely to become
infected and transmit the disease.
Within our work we assume independence in the policy
between different counties and do not consider the movement of individuals between populations, which is something that would be interesting to incorporate. Moreover, one should note that relaxing restrictions immediately affects all targeted age-brackets and has no affect
on any contacts including individuals outside of these
age-brackets. Finally, we have assume that vaccine production is constant throughout the course of the entire
epidemic and we do not consider possible changes in supply and demand: it will be most interesting to incorporate the economic factors involved in vaccine production
within an age-targeted study such as ours.
When considering other mitigation coefficients which
could be used, we see the following alternatives as potential paths for expanding our work further:

[1] Daron Acemoglu, Victor Chernozhukov, Iván Werning,
and Michael D Whinston. Optimal targeted lockdowns
in a multi-group sir model. NBER Working Paper, 27102,
2020.
[2] Rose Baker. Reactive social distancing in a sir model of
epidemics such as covid-19. 2020.
[3] Bernard S Bloom, Alan L Hillman, A Mark Fendrick,
and J Sanford Schwartz. A reappraisal of hepatitis b
virus vaccination strategies using cost-effectiveness analysis. Annals of Internal Medicine, 118(4):298–306, 1993.
[4] Maria Chikina and Wesley Pegden. Modeling strict agetargeted mitigation strategies for covid-19. 2020.
[5] Yunseo Choi and James Unwin. Racial impact on infections and deaths due to covid-19 in new york city. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2007.04743, 2020.
[6] Neil Ferguson et al.
Report 9: Impact of nonpharmaceutical interventions (npis) to reduce covid-19
mortality and healthcare demand. 2020.
[7] Estefania Fernandez and Michael S Diamond. Vaccination strategies against zika virus. Current opinion in virology, 23:59–67, 2017.

Disclaimer. As with all mathematical models that
are applied to real world systems, our results are valid
only under the model’s assumptions. As such, the goal
of our research is not to convey specific public health
information and risks, but rather be a tool for health
strategists for better planning and awareness with
respect to policy.
Acknowledgments. The authors are thankful to MIT
PRIMES-USA for the opportunity to conduct this research together, and to James Unwin for inspiring conversations. The work of Laura P. Schaposnik is partially supported through the NSF grants CAREER DMS
1749013, and she is thankful for the flexibility that the
University of Illinois at Chicago, and the Mathematics,
Statistics and Computer Science department in particular, has given her during these difficult childcare-free
months of the pandemic.
Affiliations.
(a) Milton High School, Milton, GA 30004, USA.
(b) University of Illinois, Chicago, IL 60607, USA.

[8] Center
for
Disease
Control
and
Prevention.
https://www.cdc.gov/flu/fluvaxview/coverage1718estimates.htm. 2020.
[9] Marie Gousseff, Pauline Penot, Laure Gallay, Dominique
Batisse, Nicolas Benech, Kevin Bouiller, Rocco Collarino, Anne Conrad, Dorsaf Slama, Cédric Joseph, et al.
Clinical recurrences of covid-19 symptoms after recovery: viral relapse, reinfection or inflammatory rebound?
Journal of Infection, 2020.
[10] Fiona M Guerra, Shelly Bolotin, Gillian Lim, Jane Heffernan, Shelley L Deeks, Ye Li, and Natasha S Crowcroft.
The basic reproduction number (r0) of measles: a systematic review. The Lancet Infectious Diseases, 17(12):e420–
e428, 2017.
[11] Matt J Keeling and Ken TD Eames. Networks and epidemic models. Journal of the Royal Society Interface,
2(4):295–307, 2005.
[12] William Ogilvy Kermack and Anderson G McKendrick.
A contribution to the mathematical theory of epidemics.
Proceedings of the royal society of london. Series A, Containing papers of a mathematical and physical character,

12
115(772):700–721, 1927.
[13] Sandip Mandal, Ram Rup Sarkar, and Somdatta Sinha.
Mathematical models of malaria-a review. Malaria journal, 10(1):1–19, 2011.
[14] Office
of
Financial
Managment.
https://www.ofm.wa.gov/washington-dataresearch/statewide-data/washington-trends/populationchanges/population-age-mapped-county. 2020.
[15] Washington
State
Department
of
Health.
https://www.doh.wa.gov/emergencies/coronavirus.
2020.
[16] Romualdo Pastor-Satorras and Alessandro Vespignani.
Epidemic dynamics and endemic states in complex net-

works. Physical Review E, 63(6):066117, 2001.
[17] Kiesha Prem and Alex R. Cook. Projecting social contact matrices in 152 countries using contact surveys and
demographic data. PLoS Comput Biol, 13, 2017.
[18] Steven Sanche and Yen Ting Lin. High contagiousness
and rapid spread of severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus. EID Journal, 26(7), 2020.
[19] Praveen Mathews Varghese, Anthony G Tsolaki, Hadida
Yasmin, Abhishek Shastri, Janez Ferluga, Manu Vatish,
Taruna Madan, and Uday Kishore. Host-pathogen interaction in covid-19: Pathogenesis, potential therapeutics
and vaccination strategies. Immunobiology, page 152008,
2020.

