arXiv:2009.02673v1 [cs.CY] 6 Sep 2020

IVACS: Intelligent Voice Assistant for Coronavirus
Disease (COVID-19) Self-Assessment
Parashar Dhakal

Praveen Damacharla

Ahmad Y. Javaid

Electrical Controls Engineer
Grote Industries
Madison, IN, USA
Parashar.Dhakal@grote.com

CTO and Research Scientist
KineticAI Inc.,
Crown Point, IN, USA
Praveen@KineticAI.com

EECS Department
The University of Toledo
Toledo, OH, USA
Ahmad.Javaid@Utoledo.edu

Hari K. Vege

Vijay K. Devabhaktuni

CSE Department
Koneru Lakshmaiah University
Vaddeswaram, AP, India
Hari.Vege@kluniversity.in

ECE Department
Purdue University Northwest
Hammond, IN, USA
Vjdev@pnw.edu

Abstract—At the time of writing this paper, the world has
around eleven million cases of COVID-19, scientifically known as
severe acute respiratory syndrome corona-virus 2 (SARS-COV2). One of the popular critical steps various health organizations
are advocating to prevent the spread of this contagious disease is
self-assessment of symptoms. Multiple organizations have already
pioneered mobile and web-based applications for self-assessment
of COVID-19 to reduce the spread of this global pandemic.
We propose an intelligent voice-based assistant for COVID19 self-assessment (IVACS). This interactive assistant has been
built to diagnose the symptoms related to COVID-19 using the
guidelines provided by the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) and the World Health Organization (WHO).
The empirical testing of the application has been performed
with 22 human subjects, all volunteers, using the NASA Task
Load Index (TLX), and subjects performance accuracy has been
measured. The results indicate that the IVACS is beneficial to
users. However, it still needs additional research and development
to promote its widespread application.
Index Terms—COVID-19, intelligent assistant, self-diagnosis,
viral disease, voice assistant

I. I NTRODUCTION
The novel coronavirus (COVID-19) was first observed in
late 2019 in Wuhan, China, and the patients suffered from a
form of pneumonia [1]. The virus was identified as genus betacoronavirus, placing it in the same category as the previously
discovered deadly viruses such as Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome (SARS) and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome
(MERS). The virus has now spread across more than 200
countries. The WHO declared this virus a global health
emergency in early 2020. National emergency was declared
in the US in March 2020. More than 540,000 people have
died from this virus across the globe, with more than 130,000
deaths in the US alone as of July 5, 2020 [2].
Hospitals and clinics around the world have been overwhelmed with the cases of COVID-19. With a lot of panic
and rumors, people are visiting clinics and hospitals for other

non-related symptoms. These visits are causing increased
healthcare costs and spread of infection, while overloading the
healthcare system. Self-assessment is therefore being studied
as one of the solutions to this problem. This technique, i.e.
self-assessment, has been used in the field of healthcare for a
long time as it helps in learning, functioning more effectively,
and fostering self-agency and authority [3], [4].
Some recent examples of applications that have been built
to self- assess the COVID-19 are [5], [6]. Though these
applications are beneficial, they might not be accessible to
all. Moreover, such apps are not useful for someone who
does not know how to read, use a computer, or is visually
impaired. Therefore, in this paper, we propose a novel idea
to use the IVACS for self-assessment of the COVID-19. This
interactive application, based on medical condition, helps in
more precise clinical decision making about seeking medical
care or taking rest at home; without burdening the hospitals at
these challenging times. It also educates people with critical
information. Primary contributions of this proposed work are
below:
• A new IVACS architecture for the self-assessment of
COVID-19,
• A detailed study on the performance of the proposed
IVACS,
• A study on the performance of the user in cohesion
with IVACS, and
• A measurement of the perceived mental overload in
user due to IVACS.
II. R ELATED W ORK
Long before COVID-19 pandemic, a wearable healthcare
assistant was developed to record contextual and physiological information [7]. This prototype named LifeMinder was
used in sensing pulse waves, users actions/postures, capturing
contextual photos, and continuous voices. Collected data was

Fig. 1. Proposed Generalized Architecture of the IVACS along with the Cloud Based Model

sent to a healthcare PC and was retrieved on a web page
for user accessibility. Some researchers, introduced HealthPal,
an intelligent dialogue-based personal medical assistant, for
self-monitoring of health [8]. This software was designed
to help older citizens in monitoring their health without
assistance. Researchers also developed an interactive robotic
assistant for interacting with patients, measuring vital signs,
and recording data [9]. The robot was interfaced with a blood
pressure monitor and had a 3D face capable of displaying
different emotions. Their initial study on interaction of patients
with the proposed robotic assistant showed the performance
improvement of the assistant because of interactivity involved
in the task completion when they worked as a team.
During early 2000s, most healthcare assistants were focused
on the use of wearable devices and computer-based software
applications. With the recent advancement of the artificial
assistant, researchers have started to explore use of voice technology capable of decision making as a healthcare assistant.
Some researchers developed patient-focused voice and web
services using amazon Alexa and google assistant to solve the
problem that the patients face using wearable health sensors
[10]. The developed assistant was also capable of making
suggestions, scheduling doctor appointments, and reminding
the patient before therapy and appointments. Other researchers
worked on the development of a voice-based assistant using
amazon Alexa to help medical first responders in the treatment
process [11]. They analyzed the developed assistant performance for a selected emergency treatment scenario where their
result showed that the performance of care providers increases
with the use of such assistant. All these past assistants were
task-specific. In line with the previous works, our IVACS that
uses amazon Alexa as a voice-based assistant for the selfassessment of COVID-19 based on CDC and WHO guidelines.

III. P ROPOSED A RCHITECTURE
Fig. 1 shows the overview of proposed IVACS architecture.
The architecture is composed of 3 essential layers, namely user
interface, communication, and analytical. The user interface
layer consists of different hardware devices and components
to interact with users such as smartphones, smart speakers,
laptops, tablets, smart TVs, and Echo, where the input can
be in any form such as text input or spoken language.
Communication layers consist of network and protocols such
as smart internet, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, broadband, and cellular
that can be used in connecting the hardware devices from user
interface layers to the cloud platform in analytical layers. And
the analytical layer consists of two blocks, namely Natural
Language Processing (NLP) and decision logic block. The
combination of NLP to the decision logic block in the cloud
is one of the novel features of our architecture.
The process starts with the user requesting the hardware
devices in the user interface layer through voice utterance.
The request then passes on to the communication layer, and a
voice-based input is received by a language processor in the
analytical layer. Inside the language processor, speech recognition translates the utterance to text. This process is also called
speech-to-text (STT) conversion that provides the text output
to help the computer in processing the speech command.
Similarly, semantics processor and context generator blocks
help in further processing the text to interpret and understand
user commands. Afterward, the command is passed to the
backend block that contains the developed decision logic.
Backend also communicates with the database repository to
exchange stored information. After processing in the backend, the response is sent to the language processor block again
where the text-to-speech (TTS) conversion occurs, and the
response in the form of speech is sent back to the user.

Fig. 2. Guidelines followed for the self-assessment protocol

Our proposed IVACS was built into Amazon Web Services
(AWS) and the primary block for our decision logic was
developed inside the AWS lambda function using node.js. The
user can access the proposed IVACS using amazon echo or
the Amazon Alexa application. The information flow for our
design in AWS has been depicted on the right side of Fig. 1.
The process starts by calling the wake word ”ask Coronavirus,”
which signals the amazon echo to record the command to
Alexa Voice Services (AVS). Next, Alexa Skills Kit (ASK)
translates the voice command to text, and if the text matches
a predefined utterance then, it calls the corresponding mapped
function for that utterance in the lambda function using an
intent request. After the execution of the intent, the response
is returned to the ASK and then to the user. The lambda also
communicates with the API gateway that lets us create and
access an API. Besides, API gateway helps one to interact
with the databases and messaging services through a secure
gateway [12], [13].
IV. M ETHODOLOGY
Our experiment’s main objective was to study the performance of the proposed IVACS and the participants individually
and as a team for the self-assessment of COVID-19. During
the experiment, the IVACS will interact with participants
and guide them through the process upon knowing their
health status. To make the interaction more effective and
user-friendly, IVACS has been programmed in a way that it
even gives an option of what to answer for each question it
asks. In the process of experiment, different parameters such
as errors committed by participants and IVACS, the number
of interaction between IVACS and participants, the effect of
IVACS on participant’s performance, and total testing time
were measured. In this section, we also presented the CDC and
WHO recommended protocol to follow in the self-assessment
of COVID-19 based on which the IVACS decision logic was
built. Additionally, we discussed the participants’ poll and
different data collection methods employed to collect various
parameters required for performance evaluation.

A. COVID-19 Self Assessment Protocol
In this section, we discuss the different cases considered
in our application and subsequent recommendations made to
the users based on their input to the IVACS. As per the CDC
and WHO recommendations, the structure of guidelines that
we followed in our application has been depicted in Fig. 2
[14], [15]. To provide better recommendations to the user, we
divided the different conditions identified till date into three
categories: red alert, mild yellow, and safe green. Users facing
any of the symptoms falling under the red alert category were
recommended to call 911 and visit the emergency immediately.
Similarly, any users facing symptoms listed in the mild yellow
were urged not to rush to the hospital and stay home, get
in touch with the medical personnel through phone or online
applications, and take over-the-counter medication. Besides,
if the users had recently visited an area heavily impacted
with COVID-19, a large gathering of people, or had been in
contact with anyone diagnosed with COVID-19, they were
recommended to stay in quarantine and get in touch with
medical personnel through phone or online applications for
possible suggestions. Finally, if the user does not fall under
any of the two categories mentioned above, then they were
declared safe and recommended to maintain social distance.
B. Participants
The participants for the experiment were the general population with no medical background at all. A total of 22 participants participated in the experiment belonging from different
countries such as Nepal, the USA, India, and Bangladesh. The
participants’ age involved in this investigation ranged from 20
to 65 years and had an educational background ranging from
high school to Ph.D. Among 22 participants, 15 were male
and seven female.
C. Experimental Setup
For the experiment, we followed the guideline from our
previous research publication, where we used the virtual assistant to help medical first responders in the treatment process
[11]. Amazon Echo, or an Alexa application, was used in our

experiment for interaction with participants after a comparison
of various virtual assistants [16]. The experiment was carried
out by sending the application to each participant. Participants
were instructed to perform the test in a quiet environment in
their homes, where they were monitored over a video call.
As part of the experiment, a general 2-minute briefing of the
experiment, testing, and survey was done before starting the
experiment. However, none of the participants had any idea
about the experiment before actually performing it and were
only provided with the word ”ask Coronavirus” to trigger the
IVACS. Besides, any chance of the interaction between two
fellow participants was forbidden during all stages to avoid
human factor bias.
The experiment consisted of 18 execution steps with various
conditions; however, the total number of execution steps
followed by each participant varied on a case by case basis.
Similarly, testing time could last anywhere between 25 seconds
to 140 seconds based on user response to questions asked by
IVACS. As depicted in Fig. 2, the process begins with asking
about red alert cases and would immediately stop and make a
corresponding recommendation if any of the cases are seen. If
a participant experiences none of the cases from the red alert
zone, then it will move to the mild yellow zone and check for
various conditions. Finally, if nothing is seen, then the IVACS
will enter the safe green zone declaring the patient as safe.
During the testing phase, participants got no assistance and
were expected to perform alone with IVACS. After the testing
process, participants were asked to complete a survey, and the
TLX form was used for the procedure.
D. Data Collection
The experimental data such as error committed by participants and IVACS during the testing process, the interaction
between IVACS and participants, the effect of IVACS on
participant’s performance, and average testing time were measured and collected visually through a video call. Similarly,
parameters such as participant’s frustration level, effort, Mental Demand (MD), Physical Demand (PD), Temporal Demand
(TD) as part of the TLX survey, and IVACS’s performance
such as response time, errors in operation, were collected.
These were received using messages and emails from the
participants for analysis of cognitive overload of IVACS during
task performance. A separate timer was implemented to report
the average time taken by participants during the testing
process.
V. R ESULT AND D ISCUSSION
As mentioned above, the main purpose of this investigation
was to assess the performance of the proposed IVACS, along
with measuring the effects of human factors on the IVACS.
This was achieved through different parameters recorded during the experimental testing process, as mentioned in the
data collection sub-section above. To assess the participant’s
workload during the experiment, we used six parameters of
the TLX scale, namely MD, PD, TD, performance, effort,
and frustration. Each of these parameters had an exclusive

Fig. 3. The NASA task load index (NASA-TLX) ranking presentation

self-rating index ranging from 1 to 21 points at a 1 point
per division rate. To assign self-rating points, the post-testing
questionnaire was adopted as a user validation process. The
overall workload was determined using equation (1) that
provided a normalization.
N ASA T LX Score (Overall workload score)
= 21 − (M D + P D + T D + P erf ormance + Ef f ort
+ F rustration )
(1)
Fig. 3 shows the TLX ranking presentation where each
parameter varied on a scale of 1 to 21 during the user survey.
It shows the overall performance of participants using the
TLX score, which has a range of -25 to 15 where 15 is the
best performance, and any negative value was considered as
a failed performance with the number of errors encountered
during testing. We observed that many participants didn’t feel
any mental workload, or were overwhelmed by TD. However,
some participants clearly showed frustration as they had to
repeat some of the voice commands because of their diverse
background and the accents of English they possessed. Our
IVACS’s NLP system also had a limitation in understating
various dialects which we believe is one of the main reasons
for some participants facing errors/ repetition in steps during
self-diagnosis. To evaluate the performance of both IVACS and
TABLE I
AVERAGE T IME , E RROR ( S ), AND S TEPS E XECUTED
Parameters
Mean
Median
Mode

Time(s)
130
120
112

Error(s)
1
0
0

Steps Executed
17
18
18

participants as a team, we also computed the mean, median,
and mode of time taken, error rate, and execution step for
all the 22 experiments. The mean values for time, error, and
action executed were found to be 130, 1, and 17, respectively,

lines. Besides, we also performed the empirical testing of the
proposed architecture with 22 volunteers where we studied the
performance accuracy of a proposed IVACS, the performance
of the user in cohesion with IVACS, and the perceived mental
overload in the user due to IVACS. The study of the perceived
mental overload in users due to IVACS was done through the
survey using the TLX form. As future work, we would like
to include more volunteers for the experiment and study the
response time of the proposed IVACS. Besides, we would also
like to work on the performance improvement of IVACS and
bring down the mean error value even for non-native speakers.
R EFERENCES
Fig. 4. Item Characteristic Curve for User Performance

as shown in Table I. To elaborate more, a mean execution
step value of 17 and mode and median as 18, implies most of
the participants for our experiment belonged to the safe green
zone. In contrast, some belonged to the mild yellow zone.
Similarly, a mean of 130 seconds and mode and median of
120 seconds indicates that some of the participants struggled in
communication with IVACS and had to repeat speech utterance
a couple of times to move to the next step. Besides, the mean
error value was found to be 1. And the median and mode error
values were zero, which signifies that there was some anomaly
during the experiment, where for most of the participants, the
IVACS worked well. However, some faced errors during the
experiment, which increased the mean value. This error was
noticed mostly seen among the non-native English speakers.
In essence, IVACS showed different results for some of the
participants while it was uniform for most of them.
Besides, Item Characteristic Curve (ICC) was also used on
a probabilistic scale to understand the relation between the
expected performance versus the participant’s actual performance for the given task (θ). Fig. 4 depicts the performance
of participants during the experiment as compared to their
expected performance based on the ability to perform on a
probabilistic scale. It was observed for some participants’
that the performance was slightly lower than the expected
performance based on their ability (θ). Various parameters
might have caused this since, no formal training was required
for this experimental testing and all the participants who
took part in the experiment possessed the necessary skills
to complete the given task. Our analysis of results and tests
indicates the primary reason for some of the participants’
lower performance during the experiment was due to different
pronunciations and accents they possessed, which made it
hard for the NLP system to recognize their speech utterance,
resulting in an error/repetition during the experiment.
VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
In this paper, we presented a novel real-time IVACS architecture for the self-assessment of COVID-19. The architecture
was built inside AWS following the CDC and WHO guide-

[1] J. Bryner, “1st known case of coronavirus traced back to november
in china,” 2020, Accessed 29 May 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.livescience.com/first-case-coronavirus-found.html
[2] Worldometer.info, “Countries where coronavirus has spread,” 2020,
Accessed 29 May 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.worldometers.
info/coronavirus/countries-where-coronavirus-has-spread/
[3] S. Nishiguchi, H. Ito, M. Yamada, H. Yoshitomi, M. Furu, T. Aoyama,
T. Tsuboyama, T. Ito, A. Shinohara, T. Ura et al., “Daily assessment
of rheumatoid arthritis disease activity using a smartphone application:
Development and 3-month feasibility study,” in Proceedings of the
8th International Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for
Healthcare, 2014, pp. 414–417.
[4] N. Myers-Wright, B. Cheng, S. N. Tafreshi, and I. B. Lamster, “A simple
self-report health assessment questionnaire to identify oral diseases,”
International dental journal, vol. 68, no. 6, pp. 428–432, 2018.
[5] Covidassessment.org., “Coronavirus self-assessment.” 2020, Accessed
29 May 2020. [Online]. Available: https://covidassessment.org/
[6] Covid-19.ontario.ca., “Coronavirus (covid-19) self-assessment.” 2020,
Accessed 29 May 2020. [Online]. Available: https://covid-19.ontario.
ca/self-assessment/
[7] T. Suzuki and M. Doi, “Lifeminder: an evidence-based wearable healthcare assistant,” in CHI’01 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, 2001, pp. 127–128.
[8] A. Komninos and S. Stamou, “Healthpal: an intelligent personal medical
assistant for supporting the self-monitoring of healthcare in the ageing
society,” in Proceedings of UbiHealth. Citeseer, 2006.
[9] I.-H. Kuo, E. Broadbent, and B. MacDonald, “Designing a robotic
assistant for healthcare applications,” in the 7th conference of Health
Informatics New Zealand, Rotorua, 2008.
[10] D. Dojchinovski, A. Ilievski, and M. Gusev, “Interactive home healthcare
system with integrated voice assistant,” in 2019 42nd International
Convention on Information and Communication Technology, Electronics
and Microelectronics (MIPRO). IEEE, 2019, pp. 284–288.
[11] P. Damacharla, P. Dhakal, S. Stumbo, A. Y. Javaid, S. Ganapathy,
D. A. Malek, D. C. Hodge, and V. Devabhaktuni, “Effects of voicebased synthetic assistant on performance of emergency care provider in
training,” International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education,
vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 122–143, 2019.
[12] J. C.-s. Tsiao, D. Y. Chao, and P. P. Tong, “Natural-language voiceactivated personal assistant,” May 8 2007, US Patent 7,216,080.
[13] I. Lopatovska, K. Rink, I. Knight, K. Raines, K. Cosenza, H. Williams,
P. Sorsche, D. Hirsch, Q. Li, and A. Martinez, “Talk to me: Exploring
user interactions with the amazon alexa,” Journal of Librarianship and
Information Science, vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 984–997, 2019.
[14] C. for Disease Control and Prevention, “Coronavirus disease
2019 (covid-19)
symptoms.” 2020, Accessed 29 May
2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/
symptomstesting/symptoms.html
[15] WHO,
“Coronavirus
Disease
(COVID-19)
Situation
Report-33,”
2020,
Accessed
29
May
2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/
situation-reports/20200222-sitrep-33-covid-19.pdf
[16] P. Dhakal, “Novel architectures for human voice and environmental
sound recognition using machine learning algorithms,” 2018.

