Understanding Global Reaction to the Recent Outbreaks of COVID-19:
Insights from Instagram Data Analysis

arXiv:2009.06862v1 [cs.SI] 15 Sep 2020

Abdul Muntakim Rafi1 , Shivang Rana2 , Rajwinder Kaur3 , Q.M. Jonathan Wu4 , and Pooya Moradian Zadeh5
1,2,4 Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering,
3,5 School of Computer Science
University of Windsor, Ontario, Canada
{rafi11, rana11r, kaur19s, jwu, pooya}@uwindsor.ca

Abstract— The coronavirus disease, also known as the
COVID-19, is an ongoing pandemic of a severe acute respiratory
syndrome. The pandemic has led to the cancellation of many
religious, political, and cultural events around the world. A
huge number of people have been stuck within their homes
because of unprecedented lockdown measures taken globally.
This paper examines the reaction of individuals to the virus
outbreak-through the analytical lens of specific hashtags on the
Instagram platform. The Instagram posts are analyzed in an
attempt to surface commonalities in the way that individuals use
visual social media when reacting to this crisis. After collecting
the data, the posts containing the location data are selected. A
portion of these data are chosen randomly and are categorized
into five different categories. We perform several manual
analyses to get insights into our collected dataset. Afterward, we
use the ResNet-50 convolutional neural network for classifying
the images associated with the posts, and attention-based LSTM
networks for performing the caption classification. This paper
discovers a range of emerging norms on social media in global
crisis moments. The obtained results indicate that our proposed
methodology can be used to automate the sentiment analysis of
mass people using Instagram data.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Advent of social media presents a promising opportunity for emotion analysis of the mass people. Different
approaches have successfully analyzed social media data
to detect several conditions [1]. There is a vast wealth of
psychological data encoded in visual social media data, such
as photographs posted to Instagram. In this paper, we explore
the possibility of analyzing visual data from Instagram to
understand the global reaction to the recent outbreak of the
coronavirus.
It is reasonable to prioritize research into Instagram analysis for this problem. Instagram members currently contribute
almost 100 million new posts per day [2], and Instagram’s
rate of new users joining has recently outpaced Twitter,
YouTube, LinkedIn, and even Facebook [3]. Users give more
importance to the visual content while sharing posts on
Instagram. The posts are accompanied by captions as well.
Instagram, among all social media, is more of personal space
for the users. People tend to be less formal in their reactions.
The data shared here can often have hidden complex meanings, which makes the Instagram posts most suitable for our
*The first 3 authors had equal contribution to the paper. The dataset
is available at www.kaggle.com/muntakimrafi/global-reaction-to-covid19instagram-data-analysis

task. Instagram data has proved to be a useful source for
emotion analysis of the mass people. Instagram tends to be
a place where people share personal emotions [4].
According to [5], the origin of the outbreak has been identified as Wuhan. The virus rapidly spread all over the globe.
As of May 2020, more than 4 million cases of COVID-19
is confirmed worldwide [6], [7]. World Health Organisation
(WHO) has declared a Global Health emergency, as the
number of this novel virus keeps ascending globally [8].
Worldwide 212 countries or territories have confirmed cases
of this novel virus [6]. A lot of everyday activities around
the world have been restricted except for necessity and health
circumstances. Acknowledging the rapid spread of the novel
virus, there is a considerable impact of this epidemic on
social networks and media as well.
Understanding public reactions to a crisis is the first step
to solving the situation. The initial assessment includes how
the crisis is affecting people’s lives. A concern that disrupts
the everyday lives of more people is a more severe problem.
Therefore, successfully identifying human reactions to a situation can lead to a successful estimation of the seriousness
of the problem. Also, the mental health of individuals may
deteriorate during crisis moments. As Instagram is a platform
where people share their emotions, it is one of the best places
to analyze the mental health of mass groups of people. On
average, 100 million photos are uploaded daily on Instagram
[9]. Manual analysis of all the information shared on a social
media platform is almost impossible. Recently, deep learning algorithms have performed magnificently at extracting
features from visual data. Therefore, we try to explore the
feasibility of deep learning algorithms in analyzing Instagram
data in this paper.
The major contributions of our paper are as follows:
1) We collect a dataset consisting of 11973 Instagram
posts with location.
2) We manually annotate 2534 posts for getting insight
into our collected Instagram data.
3) We explore the performance of deep learning algorithms in performing the analysis without human intervention.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
describes the related researches conducted on the literature.
Section III explains the deep learning terminologies used

throughout the paper. Sections IV explains our proposed
methodology in details, and section V contains all of our
experiments and and results. Finally, we present our conclusion at Section VI.
II. L ITERATURE R EVIEW
Researchers have found that mental health is strongly
associated with social activities [10]. Photographs posted
to Instagram contain different dimensions that might be
analyzed for psychological insight. The photographs can
be analyzed to determine different characteristics, such as
the presence of people in the photographs or videos, the
setting in nature or indoors, the time of the day, etc. Some
research have been conducted in extracting statistical properties from images for performing various types of analysis
[11]. Instagram metadata offers additional information like
how many comments or likes the post received. Finally,
platform activity measures of different areas can yield clues
to Instagram user’s mental state. These dynamics were briefly
discussed in [12]. In particular, Lup et al. [13] and Andalibi
et al. [14] proposed to use Instagram data for mental health
analysis. Recently, some works in the literature started using
multi-modal analysis. In [15], the authors showed that using
both textual and visual analysis allowed them to distinguish
between different types of users and their interests.
Instagram posts have been used to find out the emerging
norms in social network dynamics. In [4], researchers have
used specific hashtags to pull off data from Instagram and
discovered the nature of the reaction of general people to
birth and death. They have raised a crucial privacy concern
by showing that people create the first digital footprint of
their children even before they are born. They also showed
that people share their emotions on Instagram. In [16],
the authors showed that Instagram plays a vital role in
body dissatisfaction and women’s drive for thinness. In their
research, it has been shown how people’s lives are affected
by the posts they see on social media.
Previously, the manual or statistical feature-based analysis
was used to infer decisions about social media data. The
advancement of deep learning has made it possible to learn
from images and associated text in a self-supervised way.
The idea originated from the works in [17], where the
researchers proposed that instead of predicting the ImageNet
classes of the image, deep learning models can be used to
infer the Word2Vec representations of their corresponding
labels. Researchers used the idea to analyze social media
data. In [18], the authors proposed a method to mine
data from different social media platforms and modalities
related to New York City and examined the behavior of
the citizens. In [19], the authors used geo-located social
media photographs to identify the most visited places by
tourists in major European cities. In [20], the authors used
popular hashtags on Instagram to find out cultural differences
between different cities and neighborhoods. In [21], the
authors proposed a joint embedding of pictures of food and
recipes. They were able to achieve interesting results on an
image-recipe retrieval task. In [22], the authors analyzed

Instagram posts to study how the different neighborhoods,
events, and cultures of the city are presented on Instagram.
Researchers detected race, age, and gender of people from
New York City Instagram images in [23]. They have also
analyzed the social diversity of different neighborhoods and
compare them to census-based metrics.
III. P RELIMINARIES
A. Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
CNNs are a class of deep learning networks that can infer
intricate visual patterns and symmetries from a set of images.
It learns filters of specific kernel size and understands these
patterns after passing the images through the filters [24]. The
CNN network that is used in this project is ResNet-50 [25].
Mathematically, an image is convolved at every layer in a
CNN and features are made more accessible for dense layer
at the final classification task. Suppose xlm is the mth input
feature in the lth layer then the nth output feature in that ynl
is calculated as:
ynl =

l−1
M
X

l
wn,m
∗ xlm + bln

m

Here, where M l−1 is the number of input maps, * denotes
convolution operation, and bln is the bias of the nth output
map in the lth layer.
B. Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)
RNNs are a class of deep learning networks that consists
of a series of memory cells, which allows input from the
previous memory cells and can infer the context from timeseries data, then subsequently generate output [26].
For defining how RNN computes mathematically it’s output, following equation is described:
ot = f (ht ; θ)
ht = g ht−1 , xt ; θ



where ot is the output of the RNN at time t, xt is the
input to the RNN at time t, and ht is the state of the hidden
layer(s) at time t.
C. Attention based LSTM networks
Aspect based sentiment analysis requires a sort of mechanism which can have a weighted focus on variegated
words in a particular set of sentences. This mechanism is
called attention, which gives different weights to words in
a sentence while considering various types of aspects of the
sentence [27].
Taking H be a matrix comprising of hidden vectors
[h1 , . . . , hN ] that the LSTM has yielded, where d is the
dimensionality of hidden layers & N is the length of the
particular input sentence. Let va represents the embedding of
aspect and eN be a identity vector. The attention mechanism
will produce an attention weight vector α and a weighted
hidden representation r. Thereby, it allows the attention

mechanism to focus on a particular segment of the sentence
while considering one specific type of aspect[27].


Wh H
M = tanh
Wv va ⊗ eN
α = softmax wT M



IV. P ROPOSED M ETHODOLOGY
Our proposed methodology can be defined by dividing
the whole procedure into four tasks. We scrape data from
Instagram, clean the data, annotate the data, and apply deep
learning models on the collected data. We obtain results for
understanding the sentiment from images and text captions
both.

r = HαT
where, M, α, r, Wh , Wv and w are projection parameters.
The final sentence representation is given by:
h∗ = tanh (Wp r + Wx hN )
where, h∗ , Wp and Wx are projection parameters to be
learned during training. h∗ is defined as the feature representation of a sentence with given an input aspect. Then
linear layer to convert sentence vector to e, followed by
softmax layer to transform e into a conditional probability is
implemented.
y = softmax (Ws h∗ + bs )
where Ws and bs are the parameters for softmax layer. For
aspect-based sentiment analysis, the input aspect embedding
is appended with each word input vector.

A. Data collection
We use igramscrapper, a python API [28] to collect
data from Instagram using hashtags #wuhan, #corona, and
#coronavirus. We scrap the data from February 16 to March
20. We save the metadata related to each post in excel files
and the corresponding media data (for videos we save the
first frame). The metadata we store for each post are the
post identifier, Instagram short code (i.e., B8o8MQHJbMc),
created time, data type (image or video), source link to the
post, low resolution image source link, high resolution image
source link, post caption, owner id, number of likes received,
number of comments received, and location name. All the
posts we scrap from Instagram are public posts and visible
to everyone.
B. Data Cleaning

D. Transfer Learning
Learning from a pre-trained neural network can be applied to a different application. Usually, the initial layers of
networks are kept frozen, and the final layers are trained
again on the new data. This method enables transferring
the learning from one application to another similar type of
application without requiring much data.

After gathering the data, we perform data cleaning. The
data cleaning process is divided into several sub-tasks as
following:
•
•

•

Fig. 1: Different categories of data.

Data deduplication: In this step, we remove the data
which are repeated.
Data completeness: The part of data that is captured
incompletely during the scraping process, can either
be deleted or imputed to fill in meaning. In our case,
missing data imputation may provide us wrong impressions about sentiments. For this reason, we delete the
incomplete data points.
Corrupted Data: The corrupted data points are also
removed.

Fig. 2: Class distribution of image annotations.

Fig. 3: Class distribution of caption annotations.

C. Data Annotation
We categorize our annotated data into five categories,
as shown in Fig. 1. Humor, funny, and memes posts are
classified as the first class. News articles, awareness posts,
and information about cloud-19 and lockdown are marked
as the second class. Happy, supportive, appreciable, positive,
and nostalgic posts are put together in class 3. Negative
posts regarding China, xenophobic, racist behavior, blaming,
and protest against isolation are regarded as category 4. The
class distribution of the image and caption annotations are
illustrated in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3. As depicted in the graphs,
it can be inferred that the occurrence of "Positive" type and
"Neutral/News" type annotations are the maximum , while
"Negative" type annotation is observed the least.
During the annotation process, we use Google Lens for
translating the media content to help us with the annotation
process. Google translate Chrome extension is used for
translating the caption. Further discussion about which type
of content is segregated in which kind of annotation is given
below (see Fig. 4).
1) Memes/Humor Type: This category comprises of any
sort of meme or humor content, which mostly included
people sharing memes surrounding toilet papers, corona beer,
along with hilarious alternatives to sanitizers, and social
distancing.
2) News/Neutral Type: This class covers posts, which
were shared just to spread awareness about healthy habits
like washing hands, wearing masks, and social distancing
to be practiced during the pandemic. It also covers news
information shared by a news channel on Instagram, along
with advertisement about sanitizers, closure announcement of
stores, info about toilet papers, masks, sanitizers available in
a particular store. It also includes news reports about lower
pollution and emptier streets.
3) Positive Type: This category includes any Instagram
post, which is targeted to spread not only physical but also
mental positivity among the users. It covers posts regarding
how people are spending their leisure time while quarantining themselves, which includes reading novels, dancing,
exercising, playing video games, having movie watch parties,

and singing. It also includes Instagrammers posting about
the appreciation of the front-line workers, medical teams
working during the pandemic, and wearing unique masks.
This type of annotation also includes people posting their
nostalgic past travel pictures and sharing pictures of how
they are spending more time with their adorable pet dogs
and cats. Medical doctors and nurses posting their selfies
are also included in this category.
4) Negative Type: The negatively annotated data includes
posts criticizing the political systems, xenophobic posts
against China, anger posts against imposed lockdown, fearmongering users by sharing content with people dying, ranting about loss of freedom, conducting public protests against
the government. People blaming government and media for
hiding factual data and spreading conspiracy theories also
fall into this class.
5) Random Type: This class is used to separate Instagram
influencers’ posts and advertisements, which targets the
promotion of unessential products by using the hashtags
#wuhan and #coronavirus. It shows that the hashtags were
misused to promote irrelevant agendas.
D. Algorithm
We process the video data by taking the first frame of the
video and save it as a single image which is stored along with
the scraped image dataset. We extract audio from the video
and run a subtitle generator on it. Thus, subtitles that are upto 2 minutes are generated for the video and merged on top
of stored caption data for the related post. Pytesseract API is
used to extract text written on the image and saved along with
the caption data stored for that post. Before deploying the
deep learning models, first pre-processing steps are applied to
caption text data and is translated into English using python
API and trimmed up to word length of 300 words. Our
proposed algorithms look at a single frame (image or the
first frame of the video) for each post and the corresponding
caption data.
The text data is used for training attention-based LSTM
network for textual sentiment analysis. The image data
is used for image classification using CNNs. We choose
ResNet-50 for the image classification task. The proposed
algorithm is illustrated in Fig. 5.
V. E XPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
We perform several analyses to get insights into our
collected dataset. We also explore the performance of deep
learning algorithms for checking the feasibility of automatic
analysis. We use the Tensorflow library for implementing
deep learning algorithms. All of the experiments regarding
training and implementation of the models are performed in a
hardware environment, which includes Intel Xeon, 2.60 GHz
CPU and Nvidia Quadro M4000 (8 GB Memory) GPU.
A. Location based analysis:
We collect longitude and latitude for the location of the
posts to perform several location-based analyses on our collected data. It enables us to see which regions have been most

Fig. 4: Samples from different classes.

Fig. 5: Proposed algorithm flowchart.

active and learn the degree of attention posts from different
regions received from Instagram users. We use the number of

likes and comments as indications for measuring attention.
The data is visualized based on its longitude and latitude

Fig. 6, we can see that Indonesia, China, United States,
Turkey, United Kingdom, Germany, Malaysia, and Italy have
been most active concerning the number of posts posted on
Instagram. It is also visible that Russia was quite inactive,
given its 46M users [9]. We see somewhat similar trends in
Fig. 7 and Fig. 8.
B. Country based analysis

Fig. 6: Geographic representation of Instagram activity for
collected data based on number of posts.

To understand the demographic viewpoint further, we extract the country name based on the location of the Instagram
posts using the pycountry library. The top 15 countries with
the maximum number of posts are illustrated with respect
to to the count of the different class of annotations in Fig.
9. Mostly, News/neutral, memes, and positive content are
observed among the countries. The United States deviates
from this trend as more negative posts are observed than
positive posts.
C. Further insights into the data

Fig. 7: Geographic representation of Instagram activity for
collected data based on the number of likes received.

For getting further insights into our collected dataset, we
plot several graphs by taking combinations of the following
parameters:
• class of images in the Instagram posts (denoted by
Img_ANN),
• class of captions of the posts (denoted by Cap_ANN),
• number of likes (denoted by likes_count),
• number of comments (denoted by comments_count).
The following Fig. 10 shows the class-overlap between the
images and captions for the posts. It is visible that there are
not many mismatches between the image annotation and the
caption annotation for the Instagram posts.
To understand the pattern between the number of likes
received and the number of comments received, a scatterpoint graph between these two parameters is plotted (see
Fig. 11). From the chart, we can infer two things. Firstly,
negative posts tend to receive more comments than likes,
as people provide their own opinion on that post without
liking it. Secondly, positive posts receive more likes than
comments.
A scatter-plot is shown with the following variables: the
number of likes received, class of the image and the class
of the and caption for each post (see 12). We can see that
posts with negative images but positive captions receive a
high number of likes. It indicates that positive caption can
change the class of the overall post and make it positive,
despite containing a negative image.

Fig. 8: Geographic representation of Instagram activity
for collected data based on the number of comments received.
D. Performance of deep learning algorithms:
using Tableau. The geographic representation of data shows
the intensity of global discussion worldwide on the Instagram
platform. We illustrate the Instagram activity based on the
number of posts, the number of likes received, and the
number of comments received in Fig. 6-8, respectively. In

The results we obtained from our experiments on the
collected data are shown in Table I. We perform sentiment
analysis on images and captions separately. For textual
sentiment analysis; we use attention-LSTM [27] network
and train it on Stanford’s Movie Review Dataset [29]. We
achieved 87.7% accuracy. Later, we applied transfer learning

Fig. 9: Bar Graph depicting sentiment in different countries (y-axis is capped at 60)
TABLE I: Performance of proposed deep learning algorithms.
#
1
2
3
4

Model
Textual Sentiment
(Attention LSTM) [27]
Textual Sentiment
(Attention LSTM) [27]
Image Sentiment Analysis
(ResNet-50) [30]
Image Sentiment Analysis
(ResNet-50) [30]

Dataset
Movie Review
Dataset [29]
Our dataset

Acc.
87.7%

Reddit Memes
Dataset [31]
Our Dataset

82.1%

73.6%

79.2%

Fig. 10: Class-overlap between the images and the captions
for each post.

Fig. 12: Scatterplot based on number of likes between image
annotations and the corresponding caption annotations [yscale is limited to 5000 likes]
Fig. 11: Number of comments vs. number of likes.

and train the model on our annotated dataset. We achieved
an accuracy of 73.6%.

For conducting sentiment analysis on images, we used
ResNet-50 [25] as suggested in the following paper [30]. We
used Reddit Memes Dataset [31] first to train the network
and obtained 82.1 % accuracy. Afterwards, we fine-tuned

the pre-trained Resnet-50 on our dataset and achieved 79.2
% accuracy. It should be noted that we exclude the ‘random’
class while implementing our algorithms, and the networks
are trained for classifying four classes.

[11] B. Wild, M. Eichler, H.-C. Friederich, M. Hartmann, S. Zipfel, and
W. Herzog, “A graphical vector autoregressive modelling approach
to the analysis of electronic diary data,” BMC medical research
methodology, vol. 10, no. 1, p. 28, 2010.
[12] A. G. Reece and C. M. Danforth, “Instagram photos reveal predictive
markers of depression,” EPJ Data Science, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–12,
2017.
VI. C ONCLUSION
[13] K. Lup, L. Trub, and L. Rosenthal, “Instagram# instasad?: exploring
associations among instagram use, depressive symptoms, negative soIn this paper, we have studied the reaction of Instagram
cial comparison, and strangers followed,” Cyberpsychology, Behavior,
and Social Networking, vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 247–252, 2015.
users, in light of the recent outbreak of the coronavirus. It is
[14] N. Andalibi, P. Ozturk, and A. Forte, “Depression-related imagery on
essential to evaluate the public emotion in times of crisis and
instagram. 2015 feb 28 presented at: The 18th acm conference comsocial media data, particularly Instagram, can be a valuable
panion on computer supported cooperative work & social computing
(pp.),” 2015.
source for conducting such analysis in real-time. Conse[15] R. Gomez, L. Gomez, J. Gibert, and D. Karatzas, “Learning from
quently, we have collected in total, around 100k Instagram
barcelona instagram data what locals and tourists post about its
posts. Among them, around 14% of the posts containing
neighbourhoods,” in Proceedings of the European Conference on
Computer Vision (ECCV), 2018, pp. 0–0.
location data were used for our location-based analysis. We
[16] Sensis, “Sensis social media report 2017,” 2017.
manually annotated around 20% of the posts with location [17] M. Norouzi, T. Mikolov, S. Bengio, Y. Singer, J. Shlens, A. Frome,
to perform our reaction analysis to the virus outbreak. The
G. S. Corrado, and J. Dean, “Zero-shot learning by convex combination of semantic embeddings,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.5650, 2013.
collected images and videos on Instagram reveal a range of
[18] Y.-H. Kuo, Y.-Y. Chen, B.-C. Chen, W.-Y. Lee, C.-C. Wu, C.-H. Lin,
emotions, highlighting social awareness, and mass mayhem.
Y.-L. Hou, W.-F. Cheng, Y.-C. Tsai, C.-Y. Hung et al., “Discovering
We found that users from most countries share positive and
the city by mining diverse and multimodal data streams,” in Proceedings of the 22nd ACM international conference on Multimedia, 2014,
awareness posts. We also used deep learning algorithms to
pp. 201–204.
conduct the classification. Results show that the large-scale [19] J. C. García-Palomares, J. Gutiérrez, and C. Mínguez, “Identification
sentiment analysis can be automated with the help of deep
of tourist hot spots based on social networks: A comparative analysis of european metropolises using photo-sharing services and gis,”
learning algorithms.
Applied Geography, vol. 63, pp. 408–417, 2015.
In our future work, we want to improve the accuracy of [20] S. Chang, “Instagram post data analysis,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1610.02445, 2016.
the deep learning models and perform the emotion analysis
[21] A. Salvador, N. Hynes, Y. Aytar, J. Marin, F. Ofli, I. Weber, and
at a larger scale.
A. Torralba, “Learning cross-modal embeddings for cooking recipes
and food images,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, 2017, pp. 3020–3028.
R EFERENCES
[22] J. D. Boy and J. Uitermark, “Reassembling the city through instagram,” Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers, vol. 42,
[1] M. Moreno, D. Christakis, K. Egan, L. Brockman, and T. Becker,
no. 4, pp. 612–624, 2017.
“Associations between displayed alcohol references on facebook and
[23] V. K. Singh, S. Hegde, and A. Atrey, “Towards measuring fine-grained
problem drinking among college students: 125,” Alcoholism: Clinical
diversity using social media photographs,” in Eleventh International
& Experimental Research, vol. 35, 2011.
AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media, 2017.
[2] S. Alhabash and M. Ma, “A tale of four platforms: Motivations and
[24] J. Gu, Z. Wang, J. Kuen, L. Ma, A. Shahroudy, B. Shuai, T. Liu,
uses of facebook, twitter, instagram, and snapchat among college
X. Wang, G. Wang, J. Cai et al., “Recent advances in convolutional
students?” Social Media+ Society, vol. 3, no. 1, p. 2056305117691544,
neural networks,” Pattern Recognition, vol. 77, pp. 354–377, 2018.
2017.
[25] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image
[3] D. Chaffey, “Global social media research summary 2016,” Smart
recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
Insights: Social Media Marketing, 2016.
vision and pattern recognition, 2016, pp. 770–778.
[4] T. Leaver and T. Highfield, “Visualising the ends of identity: pre-birth
[26] A. Sherstinsky, “Fundamentals of recurrent neural network (rnn)
and post-death on instagram,” Information, Communication & Society,
and long short-term memory (lstm) network,” arXiv preprint
vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 30–45, 2018.
arXiv:1808.03314, 2018.
[5] P. Zhou, X.-L. Yang, X.-G. Wang, B. Hu, L. Zhang, W. Zhang, H.[27] Y. Wang, M. Huang, X. Zhu, and L. Zhao, “Attention-based lstm
R. Si, Y. Zhu, B. Li, C.-L. Huang et al., “A pneumonia outbreak
for aspect-level sentiment classification,” in Proceedings of the 2016
associated with a new coronavirus of probable bat origin,” nature,
conference on empirical methods in natural language processing,
vol. 579, no. 7798, pp. 270–273, 2020.
2016, pp. 606–615.
[6] “2019-ncov global cases study (by johns hopkins csse),” https://
[28] “instagramscraper,” https://pypi.org/project/igramscraper/.
gisanddata.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html, accessed:
[29] A. L. Maas, R. E. Daly, P. T. Pham, D. Huang, A. Y. Ng, and C. Potts,
2020-01-31.
“Learning word vectors for sentiment analysis,” in Proceedings of the
[7] “Coronavirus live updates: Third case of coronavirus confirmed in
49th annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics:
london, ont., bringing canadian cases to four,” https://nationalpost.com/
Human language technologies-volume 1. Association for Computanews/world/coronavirus-live-updates-wuhan-virus-china-2019ncov,
tional Linguistics, 2011, pp. 142–150.
accessed: 2020-01-23.
[30] V. Gajarla and A. Gupta, “Emotion detection and sentiment analysis
[8] “Statement on the second meeting of the international health regulaof images.”
tions (2005) emergency committee regarding the outbreak of novel
[31] “Reddit Memes Dataset,” https://www.kaggle.com/sayangoswami/
coronavirus (2019-ncov),” https://www.who.int/news-room/detail/
reddit-memes-dataset/version/1.
30-01-2020-statement-on-the-second-meeting-of-the-international-health-regulations-(2005)
-emergency-committee-regarding-the-outbreak-of-novel-coronavirus-(2019-ncov),
accessed: 2020-01-31.
[9] “statista,”
https://www.statista.com/statistics/578364/
countries-with-most-instagram-users/.
[10] R. Castillo, D. Carlat, T. Millon, C. Millon, S. Meagher, S. Grossman,
A. P. Association et al., “Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders,” American Psychiatric Association Press, Washington, DC,
2007.

