arXiv:2009.02999v1 [physics.soc-ph] 7 Sep 2020

Airborne infection R-numbers for regularly attended spaces:
COVID-19 a case-study
Henry C. Burridge∗,1 , Catherine J. Noakes2 , and P. F. Linden3
1

Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Imperial College London,
Skempton Building, South Kensington Campus, London SW7 2AZ, UK.
2
3

School of Civil Engineering, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT.

Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, University of

Cambridge, Centre for Mathematical Sciences, Wilberforce Road, Cambridge CB3
0WA, UK.
∗

h.burridge@imperial.ac.uk

September 8, 2020

Abstract
The risk of airborne infection for COVID-19 needs to be better understood and
is especially urgent during the current pandemic. We present a method to determine
the relative risk that can be readily deployed on either modelled or monitored CO2
data and occupancy levels within an indoor space. Moreover, for spaces regularly, or
consistently, occupied by the same group of people, e.g. an open-plan office or a school
classroom, we establish protocols to assess the absolute risk of airborne infection of
this regular attendance at work or school. In so doing, we are able to calculate the

1

expected number of infections arising from a single regular attendee becoming infectious
and remaining pre/asymptomatic, i.e. we present a robust methodology to calculate
the absolute reproductive number of these spaces. We demonstrate our model by
calculating risks for both a modelled open-plan office and by using monitored data
recorded within a small naturally ventilated office. Results suggest that attendance
at work is unlikely to significantly contribute to the pandemic if relatively quiet deskbased work is carried out in the presence of adequate ventilation. However, these spaces
are likely to contribute significantly to the pandemic if ventilation is inadequate and/or
activity levels increase.

1

Introduction

The novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19), which causes respiratory symptoms, was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization (WHO) on the 11th March 2020 —
thereby marking its global impact. Transmission of such respiratory infections occurs via
virus-laden particles (in this case the virus SARS-CoV-2) formed in the respiratory tract
of an infected person and spread to other humans, primarily, via three routes: the droplet
route, the contact route and the airborne route (Mittal et al., 2020). After some initial resistance, and significant pressure from the scientific community (e.g. Morawska et al., 2020;
Morawska & Milton, 2020), the WHO finally acknowledged the possibility of airborne infection for COVID-19 on the 8th July 2020 (The Independent, 2020). In our present article,
we focus on assessing the risk of infection of respiratory diseases via the airborne route,
taking COVID-19 as an example; ultimately, deriving a methodology for calculating a
meaningful R-number for any indoor space that is regularly attended by the same group
of people and any airborne disease for which the duration over which infectors remain
pre/asymptomatic is known (within some bounds).
The pioneering work of Wells (1955) and that which followed by Riley et al. (1978)
established methods, commonly referred to as the Wells-Riley model, for quantifying the
2

risk of airborne infection of respiratory diseases. However, the methodology was restricted
to indoor spaces which were in a steady-state with a known constant rate of ventilation
of outdoor air. Rudnick & Milton (2003) greatly extended the practical application of the
Wells-Riley model; removing the need to assume the indoor space was in steady-steady
and, crucially, negating the need to assess nor assume the rate of ventilation of outdoor
air – a notoriously difficult quantity to measure robustly (see Appendix B for a detailed
discussion). Rudnick & Milton (2003) achieved this via the realisation that the risk of
airborne infection could be directly inferred via measurements of CO2 “if the airspace is
well mixed”. We generalise the model of Rudnick & Milton (2003) relaxing the assumption
of a well-mixed space and to further account for occupation profiles and activity levels which
vary in time.
We note that no single novel step of our analysis is particularly exceptional. We build
directly on the model of Rudnick & Milton (2003) and carry out analysis in the same vein as
others (e.g. Buonanno et al., 2020). For many airborne infections the likelihood of spread
within the vast majority of indoor spaces, even over periods of a few hours, is reasonably
low (as we show for the coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 and the resulting disease COVID-19).
However, our key realisation is that there exists a significant proportion of indoor spaces
which are, for a significant portion of each day, attended by the same/similar group of
people (e.g. open-plan offices and school classrooms), herein ‘regularly attend spaces’. Our
model enables the likelihood of the spread of infection to be calculated (from either easily
obtainable monitored data or modelled data) over multiple day-long durations. Hence, in
the case of COVID-19 (for which infectors are estimated to remain pre-asymptomatic for
5-7 days) our model calculates the likely number of people that become infected during a
period in which a pre/asymptomatic infector regularly attends the space.
We derive an extended airborne risk model in §2, assess the risk of infection in a

3

modelled open-plan office in §3, and use monitored data from naturally ventilated office in
§4 to estimate the infection risk. Finally we draw conclusions in §5.
1.1

The Wells-Riley approach to airborne infection risk

The pioneering work of Riley et al. (1978) defined the infectivity rate as

λ=

I pq
,
Q

(1)

where I is the number of infected people, p is the breathing (pulmonary ventilation) rate,
Q is the ventilation (outdoor air supply) rate, and q is the unit of infection, quantum (see
Riley et al., 1978, for discussion), which varies significantly between disease, with activity
level, and (as with all biologically derived parameters) with individual human beings. For
many diseases and relevant activity levels, appropriate values of q have been determined
and are reported in the literature – however, significant uncertainties are associated with
these values. Moreover, the variability due to individuality is challenging to reflect, see §3
for more discussion. In particular, high values of risk are obtained from quanta generation
rates derived from so called ‘superspreading events’ – we choose not to dwell on such cases
but note that should we have done so then the risks reported herein would be dramatically
increased (see, for example, table 1). For a given demographic and activity level within
the space the breathing rate p can be taken as constant and values are widely reported in
the literature, the number of infected people I is an input to the model usually taken to
be constant.
Riley et al. (1978) was no doubt aware of the significant challenges in measuring, or
even inferring, the outdoor air supply rate to a given indoor space (see Appendix B).
Instead, it was chosen to report the model in a form that can only be applied to indoor
spaces for which the air is relatively well-mixed and the flows within are in steady-state.

4

Under these restrictive assumptions the classical Wells-Riley equation is recovered, namely
that the likelihood, P , that infection spreads within a given indoor space during a time
interval T is


I pq
P = 1 − exp −
T .
Q

2

(2)

A model for airborne infection risk in transient spaces with variable
occupancy and activity levels

As the insightful work of Rudnick & Milton (2003) highlighted, airborne infection can only
occur through the breathing of rebreathed air that is infected. Within most indoor spaces
human breathing is the dominant source CO2 and so the fraction f of rebreathed air can
be inferred from the ratio of the CO2 concentration within the space (above outdoor levels,
C0 ) to the concentration of CO2 added to exhaled breath during breathing, Ca , giving

f=

C − C0
,
Ca

(3)

where C in the measured CO2 within the space. Denoting the total number of people within
the space n gives the fraction of rebreathed air that is infected as f I/n. Rudnick & Milton
(2003) chose to express their result as


I
P = 1 − exp − q
n

Z

T

f dt

0





I
= 1 − exp − q f T
n



.

(4)

As they point this result “has very general applicability; it is valid for both steady-state
and non-steady-state conditions and when the outdoor air supply rate varies with time”.
Furthermore, we highlight that their assumption of a well-mixed space was not entirely
necessary, their result provides the likelihood that a person (at the same location as the CO2
sensor within the space) becomes infected assuming only that the infected and uninfected

5

rebreathed air are relatively well-mixed, and not that the air within the space is well-mixed.
We extend the generality of (4) with greater application in mind by noting that the
likelihood of someone becoming infected within a given space can be determined from
 Z
P = 1 − exp −

T

λ dt

0



 Z
= 1 − exp −

T
0


I
f q dt .
n

(5)

In so doing (5) extends the work of Rudnick & Milton (2003) to allow the airborne infection
risk to be assessed within indoor spaces that also have variable occupancy and activity
levels. For a derivation of (5) from first principals see Appendix A. The applicability of
our extension will be highlighted throughout §4.
2.0.1

Quantifying the relative risk for changes in environmental management

To examine the effects of a particular change in conditions within a given indoor space, e.g.
change in ventilation rate, occupancy level/behaviour, etc..., it is informative to define a
‘base case’ scenario for which the likelihood of infection during a time interval T is P0 and
quantify the airborne infection risk of chosen scenarios relative to the base case. Writing
(5) as a Taylor series expansion, relative risk can be expressed as

q
P
=
RR =
P0
q0 R T
0

RT
0

f nI dt −

f0 nI00 dt −

R
2
3
I
fn
q dt)
( 0T f nI q dt)
+
+ ...
2! q
3! q
2
3
R
I
I
T
f0 n0 q0 dt
f0 n0 q0 dt
0

RT

(

R

T
0

0

0

2! q0

+

0

3! q0

,

(6)

+ ...

where the subscript 0 refers to the values in the base case. For any given disease and any
combination of rebreathed air fraction and occupancy level/activity profiles a time interval
RT
T = Ts can be selected over which the probability of infection is low, i.e. 0 s f nI q dt

is small, such that the relative risk can be accurately assessed by consideration of only
the leading order terms. For a given disease and for scenarios in which human activity
within the space remains broadly unchanged, the quanta generation rate can be considered
6

constant and q = q0 . In such cases, a good approximation for the relative risk is provided
by

R Ts

RRs = R T0s
0

f nI dt

f0 nI00 dt

.

(7)

We note that any evaluation of RRs will result in a conservative overestimate of the infection risk (since the highest order term neglected is negative, see (6)), the scale of any
overestimate can be easily assessed. Crucially, RRs is not dependent on the quanta generation rate – a notoriously difficult quantity to parameterise – and hence for airborne
infection risk assessment RRs can be reported noting the results are valid for all diseases
(note that the duration Ts for which the approximation remains valid does change with
disease). Moreover, these results can be reported with a greater degree of certainty.
2.0.2

Defining absolute risk and the R-number for a given indoor space

An indoor space can be considered as contributing to the spread of a disease if an infected
person attends the space for a duration over which it is more likely than not that they infect
others. In the case that someone is showing symptoms of the disease it is reasonable to
assume that they cease attending the space or that they be required to do so. Individuals
can remain infectious and asymptomatic/presymptomatic for time periods of multiple days
(which we denote as TA ) and this renders (4) unsuitable for quantifying this likelihood for
most indoor spaces. However, for regularly attended spaces e.g. open plan offices and school
classrooms, the probability PA that someone becomes infected via the airborne transmission
route (assuming an infected person attends the space) can be robustly determined via our
formulation (5). To do so, time series data for the rebreathed air fraction (monitored or
modelled), the occupancy level and quanta generation rate are required over the duration
TA . For a given disease, assuming the activity levels (per capita) remain broadly the
same within the space, the quanta generation rate can be assumed constant. For real-

7

world assessment, f and n can be obtained from monitored CO2 and occupancy data,
respectively. Moreover, for model cases this can easily be calculated. We demonstrate
examples of this for model building spaces (§4.1), and using monitored data an existing
open plan office (§4.2) taking COVID-19 as a case study.
As elegantly pointed out by Rudnick & Milton (2003) their formulation (4) can be used
to determine a basic reproductive number for an airborne infectious disease within an indoor
space; this being the number of secondary infections that arise when an infectious individual
is attending the space and everyone else is susceptible. The absolute reproductive number
RA , i.e. the number of people likely to become infected via the airborne route (which is
the probability of someone becoming infected, given by (5), multiplied by the number of
susceptible persons) is for regularly attended spaces


 Z
RA = (N − 1) 1 − exp −

0

TA

1
f q dt
n



,

(8)

where N is the total number of people that regularly attend the space.

To summarise our modelling, we have developed practical statistics to assess airborne
infection via relative risk based scenario testing (RR and RRs ), the absolute probability
of infection (PA ), and the absolute reproductive number of an indoor space (RA ). All
of these can be calculated by obtaining/modelling representative CO2 data. Moreover,
for measured/modelled CO2 distributions within the space, on assuming the infected &
uninfected rebreathed air are mixed, these statistics can be calculated and their variation
within the space investigated.

8

3

Determining appropriate quanta generation rates

As with all Wells-Riley based infection modelling an input parameter for which great
uncertainty abounds is the quanta generation rate, q. Given the uncertainty, we include
results of scenario tests at various feasible levels of q, all values of which are taken from
the data of Buonanno et al. (2020). As a base case, which we deem appropriate for the
regularly attended spaces on which we focus (namely, open-plan offices and class rooms) we
take a value of q = 1 quanta/hr — this is obtained by taking cx = ci cv ≈ 7 × 106 RNA/ml,
where ci = {0.1, 0.01} is the ratio between infectious quantum and the infectious dose
expressed in viral RNA copies, and cv = {7 × 107 , 7 × 108 } RNA/ml is the viral load
measured in sputum. These values obtained by consideration that for most of the time, in
most open-plan offices and classrooms, most of the occupants are sitting breathing with
perhaps a small number vocalising — the data for whispered counting falls between these
two activities and is rather more close to breathing — as such, for our base case, we take
data for whispered counting from Buonanno et al. (2020) and use their results to map
our selected values of cx to values of quanta generation rates q. Moreover, we consider a
scenario in which the occupants within the open-plan office or classroom are (on average) all
vocalising/talking (e.g. a call-centre or noisy classroom), taking again cx ≈ 7×106 RNA/ml
gives q ≈ 5 quanta/hr. In addition, we consider a scenario in which the viral load in sputum
is somewhat reduced, i.e. cv ≈ {2 × 107 , 2 × 108 } RNA/ml, giving q ≈ 0.3 quanta/hr.

4

Results using COVID-19 as an example

We present results for a modelled open-plan office and for data monitoring both CO2
and occupants in a small naturally ventilated office. Regarding the presence of infectors,
given that we assume occupants arrive and leave over realistic periods of time (i.e. they
do not all arrive and leave at once), there exists at least two reasonable choices. One

9

could (conservatively) assume that the infector is always the first to arrive and the last
to leave. Alternatively, one could assume that there is always a constant proportion of
the (current) occupants infected such that when the space is occupied to design capacity
there is a single infector (this results in the number of infectors, I, taking non-integer
values outside design occupancy which is inconsequential). Should one choose the former
option, there is potential that higher risks are reported for more sparsely occupied spaces
(since by enforcing a single infector the rebreathed air is more concentrated with infectious
particles) or equivalently by allowing more occupants one risks perceiving the space as less
risky since infected breath is assumed more dilute — in the absence of knowledge as to who
is infected, this cannot be reasonable for comparison of different occupancy profiles. As
such, we choose to present results for this latter choice and we note that (for the occupancy
profiles examined) the estimated risks would be be approximately 20% higher if the more
conservative choice were made.
4.1

Application to a model open-plan office

By way of example, we first consider a moderately sized open-plan office, of floor area
400 m2 and floor-to-ceiling height 3.5 m, which is designed to be occupied by 40 people (in
accordance with the typical occupancy densities suggested in CIBSE, 2006). We assume
that occupants arrive steadily between 08:00 and 09:00 each morning, each take a one hour
lunch break during which they leave the office, and leave steadily between 17:00 and 18:00
each day. While within the office we assume that (on average) each occupant breathes
at a rate of approximately p = 8 l/min with a CO2 production rate of 0.3 l/min, giving
Ca = 0.038 and we take the outdoor CO2 level to be 400 ppm (Rudnick & Milton, 2003).
Our model run for this open-plan office gives, for the base case, the absolute risk of
infection during a period of pre/asymptomatic COVID-19 infection as PA = 1.1%. If one
had have taken the classical Wells-Riley model (13), and taken T to be the simple sum
10

of occupied hours, the level of risk reported would have been P = 1.3%. Hence, the risks
reported would have again been around 20% higher. We note the key benefit of our model
is the ability to use monitored CO2 and occupancy data as we show in §4.2.
4.1.1

The impact of varied quanta generation rates

We first examine the impact of varied quanta generation levels; namely, q = {1, 0.3, 5}
(see §1 for a full discussion). Figure 1 plots the absolute likelihood that someone becomes infected within the office over the period which an infector is expected to remain
pre/asymptomatic, i.e. 5 working days (since the period of pre/asymptomaitc infectivity
for COVID-19 is estimated as 5–7 days). The plot shows that in the base case the absolute
risk, PA , of infection within this open-plan office is just over 1%, assuming a lower viral
load is appropriate the risk drops to around PA = 0.3%. However, if the open-plan were a
call-centre then this risk that someone becomes infection through attending work increases
to above 5%.
One can, of course, examine the relative risk; however, as expected from (6) the results
are broadly constant in time, taking an initial value of RR = q/q0 (see(6)), and then
remain dominated by the ratio of scenarios quanta. For example, in this office at the end
of a pre/asymptomatic period, examining the scenario that the open-plan office becomes
equivalent to a call-center gives RRA = 4.9, and assuming the appropriate viral load for the
disease is lower gives RRA = 0.3. For the sake of useful approximation, if one includes only
the first order terms in the risk then the relative risks are simply 5.0 and 0.3, respectively
(since we take q/q0 = 5 and q/q0 = 0.3, respectively see (6) cf. (7)).
4.1.2

The importance of ventilation/outdoor air supply rates

The qualitative increase in the absolute risk during a period of pre/asymptomatic infection
with varied outdoor air supply rate, Q, is broadly similar to that shown in figure 1, with the

11

0.05

Base case Q=10l/s/p, q=1/hr
Scenario Q=10l/s/p, q=0.3/hr
Scenario Q=10l/s/p, q=5/hr

0.045
0.04
0.035
0.03
0.025
0.02
0.015
0.01
0.005
0
0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

Figure 1: The variation in the likelihood of infection with time over the five day pre/asymptomatic period.
The different curves highlight the change in risk with assumed quanta generation rate: q = 1 quanta/hr
(red), q = 0.3 quanta/hr (blue), and q = 5 quanta/hr (black).

12

Base case Q=10l/s/p, q=1/hr
Scenario Q=20l/s/p, q=1/hr
Scenario Q=4l/s/p, q=1/hr

1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

Figure 2: The variation in the relative risk, RR, of infection with time over the five day pre/asymptomatic
period. The different curves highlight different scenarios, namely: the base case, Q = 10 l/s/p (red),
increased vent, Q = 20 l/s/p (blue), and decreased vent, Q = 4 l/s/p (black).

13

base case (of course) again being PA = 1.1%. Doubling the ventilation rate to Q = 20 l/s/p
gives PA = 0.6%, and decreasing the outdoor air supply rate to Q = 4 l/s/p results in
PA = 2.2% (see table 1). It is interesting to note that, in the case of examining scenarios of
changing ventilation rates then the relative risk RR takes an initial value of unity and it is
only over time that the ventilation works to alter the accumulation of infected re-breathed
air within the space. In this open-plan office the relative risk reaches an approximately
steady value of RR ≈ 0.55 after around 6 hours in the case that the ventilation is doubled,
and in the case of decreased ventilation (Q/Q0 = 0.4) then RR ≈ 2.0 is reached after
approximately 10 hours. As occupancy alters within the office each time, and the fraction
of infected rebreathed air increases/decreases at different rates, the relative risk deviates
(temporarily) from its steady-state value (these deviations are more pronounced in the case
the ventilation is reduced, black curve in figure 2).
4.1.3

The R-number for an open-plan office

We run our model for the R-number (8) for a period of pre/asymptomatic infectivity (5–
7 days) varying both the quanta generation rate (q = {0.3, 1.0, 5.0} quanta/hr) and the
outdoor air supply rate (Q = {4, 10, 20} l/s/p). The results are presented in table 1 and
confirm that, for this office, in most cases it is unlikely that an employees attendance at work
will significantly contribute to the spread of COVID-19. The said, if the RNA copies/viral
R-numbers, RA
q = 0.3 quanta/hr
q = 1.0 quanta/hr
q = 5.0 quanta/hr

Q = 4 l/s/p
0.25
0.84
4.0

Q = 10 l/s/p
0.13
0.42
2.1

Q = 20 l/s/p
0.07
0.24
1.2

q = 20 quanta/hr
q = 100 quanta/hr

14
35

7.6
26

4.4
18

Table 1: COVID-19 R-numbers, RA , for an open-place office (floor plan of 400 m2 and floor-to-ceiling height
of 3.5 m) occupied by 40 people for 8 hrs each day over the period that a pre/asymptomatic person remains
attending work.

14

load are as expected by Buonanno et al. (2020) and the office is poorly ventilated then
R-number for this office may hover dangerously close to unity. Moreover, if used for
particularly vocal activities, e.g. a call-center or sales office, then these office spaces have
the potential to significantly contribute to the spread of COVID-19 with R-numbers of
nearly 8 being realised for offices with appropriately designed ventilation.
To end this section, we note that Buonanno et al. (2020) report far higher quanta generation rates for ‘superspreaders’ (which maybe some combination of the particular activity
being undertaken, the environment quality, and the biological response of an individual).
In table 1, the last two lines reports the R-numbers for our office appropriate superspreaders the results are worrisome with a single infector resulting in approximately 30 new
infections.
4.2

Airborne infection risk from monitored data in open plan offices

To demonstrate the application of our model to indoor spaces with monitored CO2 and
occupancy data we were provided access to data recorded by the ‘Managing Air for Green
Inner Cities (MAGIC)’ project (http://www.magic-air.uk). The data were recorded in
a small office which had a design capacity of eight people, although during the times for
which we were provided data never more than six people attended the office. The office
is naturally ventilated with openable sash windows on opposite sides of the building. The
floor area is approximately 37.6 m2 and the floor-to-ceiling height is 2.7 m; Song et al.
(2018) provide full details of the monitored space and the monitoring equipment used but
it should be noted the monitored office is not of a modern design and is not well-sealed nor
well-insulated.

15

5

4

3

2

1

0
1400

1200

1000

800

600

400
0.02

0.015

0.01

0.005

0
08:00

10:00

12:00

14:00

16:00

18:00
20:00
Sep 29, 2017

08:00

10:00

12:00

14:00

16:00

18:00
20:00
Oct 05, 2017

Figure 3: The intra-day variation in occupancy (upper panes, a) and b)), monitored CO2 (middle panes,
c) and d)) and the corresponding risk of airborne spread of COVID-19 (lower panes, e) and f)) during 29th
Sep 2017 (left-hand panes, a), c) and e)) and 5th Oct 2017 (the right-hand panes, b), d) and f)). Data are
plotted from six CO2 monitors placed at various locations and heights (between 73 cm and 242 cm from the
floor). On the 29th Sep (left-hand panes) windows on opposite sides of the room were opened (creating an
opened area of around 0.24 m2 ) from 08:00 until 20:00 whilst on the 5th Oct (right-hand panes) the windows
remained closed all day.

16

4.2.1

The role of opening windows in reducing risk

Figure 3 a) and b) show the occupancy profiles during two days in 2017; namely, 29th
Sep and 5th Oct, respectively. During 29th Sep the windows were opened on both sides
of the building (providing an opened area of 0.24 m2 ) at around 09:00 and remained so
until after 20:00; whilst on 5th Oct the windows remained closed all day and we note that
the spike in CO2 at around 16:15 on this day corresponds to a brief visit during which 22
people were in the office. The monitored CO2 profiles (figure 3 c) and d)) were obtained at
six locations of differing heights (between 73 cm and 242 cm from the floor) and positions
within the office. It is most striking that the CO2 levels are markedly higher on 5th Oct
when the windows remained closed. Crucially, these elevated CO2 levels translate into
increased risk of airborne infection for the occupants – in this case the risk of infection
being approximately doubled on the day when the windows remained shut. In addition,
at times (e.g. between about 14:00 and 17:00 on 25th Sep) there is a marked variation
in measured CO2 levels dependent on location. It follows that this variation in CO2 is
reflected in the infection risk levels which shows that the location within the office one was
breathing affected the risk of infection by around 20% on the day the windows were closed
and a much more substantial variation on the day the windows were open.
Figure 4 a) shows the occupancy data for the monitored office over a five day period
in September 2017. During this five day period the office windows were open for some
significant portion of each day. The accompanying monitored CO2 data is shown in figure 4
b) and it should be noted that data are missing between 13:30 and 19:00 on 27th September.
The risk of airborne infection for COVID-19 is shown in the lower-pane with the risk rising
gradually over the period of pre/asymptomatic infectivity reaching an absolute risk 0.059 ≤
PA ≤ 0.064 depending on where within the office the occupant would have been located.
The R-number for the monitored office over this period is 0.3 ≤ RA ≤ 0.32 – reassuringly
17

Figure 4: The variation in a) occupancy, b) monitored CO2 , and c) the corresponding risk of airborne
spread of COVID-19, over a period of pre/asymptomatic occupancy of the monitored office. Data are
plotted from six CO2 monitors placed at various locations and heights (between 73 cm and 242 cm from the
floor).

18

below unity and indicating that this naturally ventilated office was likely to have been
receiving somewhere between 10 l/s/p and 20 l/s/p (see table 1). From examination of
the monitored office during periods when the windows were closed the R-number might
approximately double to RA ≈ 0.6. We note however, that this the R-number is likely to
be considerably higher for more modern well-sealed offices.

5

Conclusion

Taking COVID-19 as an example we have derived a simple model to estimate the likelihood of airborne infection within indoor spaces which allows for occupancy levels and
behaviour which vary in time. Our model requires only monitored or modelled data for
CO2 and occupancy levels and behaviour combined with some estimates of appropriate
quanta generation rates. We demonstrated results taking a modelled office and also using
monitored data. We are able to conclude that for regularly attended indoor spaces that
have ventilation provision in-line with guidance (e.g. CIBSE, 2006) attendance of work or
school is unlikely to significantly contribute to the spread of COVID-19. However, should
these spaces be poorly ventilated (e.g. 4 l/p/s) then the R-number associated with the
space should be expected to be close to unity. For even adequately ventilated spaces if the
occupants are very vocal (e.g. a call-centre or noisy classroom) then one should expect
around two new COVID-19 infections for every single infector. In addition, we note that
we chose not to focus on superspreaders, but instead considered conditions more in-line
with the medium of the population. Should we have chosen to examine superspreaders
then our results would have been more alarming with regularly attended spaces giving rise
to between 5 and 35 new infections from every infector.
We strongly recommend that monitoring of CO2 is carried out for indoor spaces. Where
these spaces can be considered to broadly conform to our definition of a regularly attended
space then we further recommend that occupancy profiles are recorded. In so doing, we
19

provide a simple methodology for those responsible to calculate a meaningful R-number for
airborne infection (for COVID-19) within their indoor space. Irrespective of this, we believe
that consideration of the relative rate of increase in infection risk (13) should be considered
for all indoor spaces; this can be expressed (see appendix A) as λ = (C − C0 ) I q/Ca n. For
a given disease and activity level it is worth noting that λ ∝ (C − C0 )/n. As such, one can
simply infer the rate at which the likelihood of infection is increasing by consideration of
the ratio of excess CO2 and the current number of occupants.
Finally, we conclude that the risk of COVID-19 being spread by the airborne route is
not insignificant and varies widely with activity level and environmental conditions which
are predominantly determined by the bulk supply of outdoor air. We hope that our contribution proves to be illuminating both for assessing the airborne infection risks within
regularly attended spaces and for consideration, and ideally monitoring, of these risks in
more generic indoor spaces.

A

Modelling from first principles

In order to demonstrate the underlying assumptions and highlight the limits of applicability
we revisit the formulation of the Wells-Riley equation (Wells, 1955; Riley et al., 1978). We
wish to determine the likelihood, P , that infection spreads within a given indoor space
during a time interval T . Denoting the probability that no one becomes infected during
this time P (0, T ) gives that
P = 1 − P (0, T ) .

(9)

The number of infected people, I, is discrete (i.e. an integer) and since time is continuous
we can consider a small period of time, δt, during which either no one becomes infected
or one person becomes infected. Defining the infectivity rate λ (see below for a detailed
discussion) gives the likelihood that one person becomes infected during this small time

20

period as
P (1, δt) = λ δt .

(10)

Assuming that each infection occurs independently of the last

P (0, t + δt) = P (0, t)[1 − P (1, δt)] = P (0, t)[1 − λ δt] .

(11)

Rearranging and taking the limit δt → 0 gives
P (0, t + δt) − P (0, t)
dP (0, t)
≡
= −λP (0, t) ,
δt
dt

(12)

integrating and substituting into (9) gives
 Z
P = 1 − exp −

T

0



λ dt .

(13)

Hence the likelihood P can be evaluated for any known functional form of λ, crucially, as
we go on to demonstrate, this can inferred from data measured within indoor spaces which
records occupancy level profiles and CO2 concentrations.

B

The challenges of measuring ventilation rates or inferring ventilation
rates from monitored CO2

The original formulation of the Wells-Riley equation requires parameterisation of not only
the quanta generation rate, q, but also evaluation of the infectivity rate which in the general
case must be evaluated via the integral
Z

T
0

I pq
dt .
Q

21

(14)

Assuming broadly constant activity levels within a space the breathing rate, p, and (for a
given disease) the quanta generation rate can be regarded as time independent. Furthermore it may be reasonable to assume the number of infected people within space remains
unchanged if one is examining the likelihood of spread. Moreover, if the ventilation rate Q
can be assumed constant and if the space is in steady-state then the probability of infection
occurring during the period T can be simply expressed as

P = 1 − exp



I pq
T
Q



.

(15)

However, it is this last assumption that is most troubling since it is only reasonable if the
all connections to the space (windows, doors, vents, etc...) are sealed over a time exceeding
the transient ventilation effects (which typically remain significant for multiple hours),
infiltration rates remain constant or negligible, and the ventilation system supplies outdoor
air at rates which are insensitive to changes in the pressure differences between indoors
and outdoors that arise due to changes in temperature and wind — this makes application
of (15) difficult. As we will discuss, measuring or inferring the ventilation rate within an
operational occupied space is non trivial and hence evaluating (14) is impractical. The
insightful work of Rudnick & Milton (2003) solved many of these challenges in assessing
airborne infection risk and forms the basis for the modelling described in §2.
The magnitude of infection risk changes with the seasons for numerous viral infections
(including influenza) and these may arise for a variety of factors. These might include:
changes in the viability of the virus if typical temperatures and/or humidity of indoor
environments vary with the season, or if changing levels of natural UV light are significant
and effect viability; changes in behaviour, for example, staying indoors more during colder
seasons; changes due to the seasonal variations that occur in immunity (Dopico et al.,
2015); and, crucially for the airborne transmission route changes in ventilation (i.e. outdoor
22

air supply) rates that occur as moderated indoor temperatures are demanded once outdoor
temperatures vary with the season. We assert that this last factor, changing outdoor air
supply rates, is highly significant yet it is poorly evidenced.
Outdoor air may enter an indoor space via a ventilation system, windows, doors, vents,
cracks in the building fabric or, indeed, though the very fabric itself (i.e. many building
materials, e.g. bricks, are porous). As such, there is significant scope for both intentional
and unintended supply of outdoor air. Directly measuring the air flow through all of the
potential pathways for any given indoor space in impractical. Pressure testing can be used
to measure infiltration rates but cannot assess the ventilation rates in operational settings.
Indoors, human activity is typically the major source of CO2 while outdoor CO2 levels
remain broadly constant. Therefore, if the rate of CO2 production from human activity
within a space can be estimated, CO2 provides a suitable proxy from which to attempt
inference of the ventilation/outdoor air supply rate within the space. Consider an indoor
space in which both occupancy levels and CO2 are monitored. If the activity levels of
individuals remains broadly similar and the CO2 monitored, C, (only point measurements
are practically possible) can be regarded as indicative of the CO2 levels throughout the
space, i.e. the CO2 is relatively well-mixed within the indoor air, then since CO2 is inert
so its conservation requires that

V

dC
= n p Ca − Q (C − C0 ) ,
dt

(16)

where n is the number of people in the space and Ca is the volume fraction of CO2 added
to exhaled breath during breathing. As discussed, it is unwise to regard the ventilation
rate as constant for most indoor spaces, i.e. Q = Q(t), and this renders (16) non trivial to

23

integrate analytically. Thus if one wishes to examine the ventilation rate

Q = np

Ca V dC
−
,
C
C dt

(17)

can be evaluated with monitored occupancy and CO2 data. However, as with all realworld data, the CO2 signal is likely to contain some non-negligible level of noise and the
dependence on dC/dt will, in most cases, render evaluation of ventilation/outdoor air
supply rate via (17) unsuitable.
An alternate approach is to examine the monitored occupancy data to determine the
time at which the room becomes unoccupied. Assuming that the ventilation rate remains
unchanged thereafter (which will only be the case if ventilation systems are left operational,
and any changes in the ventilation/outdoor air supply rate due to the effects of wind and
temperature variations are negligible) the CO2 concentration within the space, assuming
the air within remains relatively well-mixed, will decay exponentially. By exponential
fitting to the monitored data during this period a ventilation/outdoor air supply rate can
be inferred. However, curve fitting to real-world data is prone to variability due to choices
of the input parameters (e.g. the period over which exponential decay to determine to be
observed) and subject to influence from noise within the data, thereby rendering the results
unreliable. Moreover, this process is hard to automate and so typically requires significant
manual intervention, making it unsuitable for the analysis of large data sets.

In summary, direct or inferred measurements of ventilation/outdoor air supply rates
are extremely challenging. For this reason, and those described in §2, we council that
to assess airborne infection risks no attempts be made to directly assess outdoor air supply/ventilation rates to indoor spaces. Instead, we suggest widespread monitoring of CO2
within spaces combined with measured/estimated occupancy profiles, which with applica24

tion of our extensions (§2) to the work of Rudnick & Milton (2003) can be used to directly
assess the airborne infection risk within a given space. Where required, simple modelling
can be carried out to inform and assess practical mitigation strategies.

25

References
Buonanno, G., Stabile, L. & Morawska, L. 2020 Estimation of airborne viral emission: quanta emission rate of SARS-CoV-2 for infection risk assessment. Environment
International p. 105794.
CIBSE 2006 Chartered Institution of Building Services Engineers (CIBSE) Guide A: Environmental design.
Dopico, X. C., Evangelou, M., Ferreira, R. C., Guo, H., Pekalski, M. L.,
Smyth, D. J., Cooper, N., Burren, O. S., Fulford, A. J. & Hennig, B. J. i.
2015 Widespread seasonal gene expression reveals annual differences in human immunity
and physiology. Nature communications 6 (1), 1–13.
Mittal, R., Ni, R. & Seo, J.-H. 2020 The flow physics of COVID-19. J. Fluid Mech.
894.
Morawska, L. & Milton, D. K. 2020 It is time to address airborne transmission of
COVID-19. Clinical Infectious Diseases .
Morawska, L., Tang, J. W., Bahnfleth, W., Bluyssen, P. M., Boerstra, A.,
Buonanno, G., Cao, J., Dancer, S., Floto, A., Franchimon, F., Haworth, C.,
Hogeling, J., Isaxon, C., Jimenez, J. L., Kurnitski, J., Li, Y., Loomans, M.,
Marks, G., Marr, L. C., Mazzarella, L., Melikov, A. K., Miller, S., Milton,
D. K., Nazaroff, W., Nielsen, P. V., Noakes, C., Peccia, J., Querol, X.,
Sekhar, C., Seppnen, O., Tanabe, S., Tellier, R., Tham, K. W., Wargocki,
P., Wierzbicka, A. & Yao, M. 2020 How can airborne transmission of COVID-19
indoors be minimised? Environment International 142, 105832.

26

Riley, E. C., Murphy, G. & Riley, R. L. 1978 Airborne spread of measles in a
suburban elementary school. American journal of epidemiology 107 (5), 421–432.
Rudnick, S. N. & Milton, D. K. 2003 Risk of indoor airborne infection transmission
estimated from carbon dioxide concentration. Indoor air 13 (3), 237–245.
Song, J., Fan, S., Lin, W., Mottet, L., Woodward, H., Wykes, M. D., Arcucci,
R., Xiao, D., Debay, J.-E., ApSimon, H., Aristodemou, E., Birch, D., Carpentieri, M., Fang, F., Herzog, M., Hunt, G. R., Jones, R. L., Pain, C., Pavlidis,
D., Robins, A. G., Short, C. A. & Linden, P. F. 2018 Natural ventilation in cities:
the implications of fluid mechanics. Build. Res. Inf. 46 (8), 809–828.
The Independent 2020 Airborne transmission of coronavirus cannot be ruled
out, WHO says. https://www.independent.co.uk/news/health/coronavirus-airbornewho-cases-deaths-a9607206.html.
Wells, W. F. 1955 Airborne Contagion and Air Hygiene. An Ecological Study of Droplet
Infections.. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press.

Author Contributions
We all work hard and produced this article together.
Acknowledgements
This work was undertaken as a contribution to the Rapid Assistance in Modelling the
Pandemic (RAMP) initiative, coordinated by the Royal Society, and was supported by
the UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) Grand Challenge
grant Managing Air for Green Inner Cities’ (MAGIC) grant number EP/N010221/1. HCB
acknowledges insightful conversations with Dr Marco-Felipe King, the data provision and
assistance therewith by Dr Shiwei Fan, and the debugging support of Carolanne Vouriot.
27

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

28

