Student Responses to Changes in Introductory Physics Learning due to COVID-19
Pandemic
Matthew Dew,1 Jonathan Perry,2 Lewis Ford,1 Dawson Nodurft,1 and Tatiana Erukhimova1

arXiv:2009.11393v1 [physics.ed-ph] 23 Sep 2020

1

Department of Physics and Astronomy, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843∗
2
Department of Physics, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712
(Dated: September 25, 2020)

As a result of the spread of COVID-19 during spring
2020, many colleges and universities across the US, and
beyond, were compelled to move entirely to remote, online instruction, or shut down [1]. Due to the rapidity of this transition, instructors had to significantly – if
not completely – change their instructional style on very
short notice [2]. Our purpose with this paper is to report on student experiences and reactions to the switch
to emergency remote learning at two large, land-grant,
research intensive universities. We aimed to explore how
students have received and dealt with the shift to remote learning that began in March 2020, specifically in
introductory physics and astronomy courses. By providing timely student feedback, we hope to help instructors
tune their efforts to build a more effective remote learning environment.
While online courses have been around for several
decades, most major universities do not offer more than a
handful of their classes online [3]. Existing literature on
the principles of design and evaluation of online courses
suggest that high-quality online courses require several
months of preparation as well as infrastructure and support for both students and instructors [2, 4]. Even with
the careful preparation of an online course, studies prior
to the 2020 pandemic have often revealed a deficiency
of collaborative aspects, in both student-student and
student-instructor interactions [5–7]. Literature focused
on online introductory physics, or courses with online
components, show these interactions being linked to student success [8, 9]. While the educational community put
in extraordinary effort in spring 2020 to keep teaching,
the timeline of the shift to emergency remote learning did
not allow for the thoughtful planning of a typical online
course.
Given how fast and total the switch to remote learning has been, we do not fully understand how students
have been affected – both in general and for specific
student populations. This transition can exacerbate inequity and disadvantage students from lower income families [10]. Pandemic-induced isolation and socio-economic
hardships may also affect students mental health [11].
To explore how students responded to the shift to
emergency remote learning, we developed and administered a questionnaire gauging the impacts on students
motivation and interactions with their courses, their

∗

send correspondence to: etanya@tamu.edu

peers, and instructors. We also examined how student responses depend on demographic factors which are listed
below.

METHODS

The questionnaire was distributed to 2,320 students
enrolled in summer 2020 courses, which were delivered remotely, at both participating institutions. At Institution
A, the questionnaire was distributed via email by departmental administration. Additionally, a member of the
research team attended a lecture for each class encouraging students to take the questionnaire. Here, there were
a total of 13 lecture sections from 6 courses taught by 8
instructors – covering both algebra-based and calculusbased introductory physics, an introductory astronomy
course, and a sophomore-level modern physics course. At
Institution B, the questionnaire was distributed by faculty via the Learning Management System. Here, there
were 6 lecture sections from 6 courses taught by 5 instructors – covering three, two semester tracks of algebrabased and calculus-based introductory physics.
The questionnaire was entirely anonymous. Student
participation was voluntary with no positive or negative
inducements. Distribution occurred during the second
half of courses, which were primarily 5-week courses (one
course was 10 weeks). A total of 708 responses were
received, 508 from Institution A (37.5% response rate),
and 200 from Institution B (20.7% response rate).
The questionnaire consisted of 8 demographics questions and 27 questions on student preferences and behaviors. The 8 demographics questions asked for student gender, race, first-generation status, classification,
weekly work hours, internet access, and devices used for
classwork. Questionnaire items were built with three different response types: 5-point Likert scale, multiple answer, and ranking.
Each of the response types mentioned above was examined in a distinct manner. Likert-scale items are represented by the fraction of students who chose each answer, summing to 1. Multiple answer items are represented by the fraction of responses for each individual
choice. Ranking items assigned a point value to each answer, where each response’s score was normalized by the
total number of points distributed. The 95% confidence
intervals were calculated and are included on each figure.

2
RESULTS & DISCUSSION
Demographics: Students responding to the questionnaire were more likely to be female (59.8%) than
male (38.9%). The remaining percentage of respondents
identified as non-binary or preferred not to say. Nearly
three-quarters of responses came from juniors and sophomores. Students primarily identified as white (58.6%),
with Asian and Hispanic/Latinx/Spanish origin identifying students responding in roughly equal numbers (23.7%
and 22.7% respectively). Students were allowed to select
more than one race or ethnicity and were counted in all
categories selected. Around one in five students identified
as a first-generation college student.
Synchronous vs. Asynchronous: The majority
of the opinions expressed on this item are in the strongly
prefer categories, indicating a strong polarization among
respondents. Overall, students at Institution A exhibited a slight preference for synchronous classes over asynchronous classes; more students at Institution B showed
a stronger preference (around 2-to-1), Figure 1. Perhaps
related to the preference for synchronous learning, students had a strong agreement (∼70%) when asked if they
would have benefited more from face-to-face instruction.
From both institutions more than 75% of respondents indicated that they would like to continue to have access
to recorded lectures and review sessions, as well as online
course materials when classes return to a face-to-face format, Figure 2. It would appear then, that students see
a value in live instruction and engagement from faculty
while desiring the convenience of on-demand access to
course information while studying.

FIG. 1. Student responses to “Between synchronous classes
and asynchronous classes, what do you prefer for lecture?”

Remote Learning Capabilities: About 40% of
students do not have their own study space to work undisturbed at least most of the time. Shared spaces may

FIG. 2. “Which part(s) of online classes do you want to keep
when classes return to normal?”

mean that these students do not have privacy to necessarily feel comfortable using a microphone or webcamera
during every component of a course. Though all responding students have access to at least a desktop or laptop
computer, less than half reported access to a printer, and
even fewer reported access to a scanner (22.5%) or a document camera (10.5%). It should be noted that both
institutions made specific efforts to provide technology
(including purchase of laptops) for students during the
spring semester.
Resources such as textbooks, recitations, and
instructor-provided online resources have become more
important to student learning since the pandemic. Students report that they are most likely to ask a friend, or
reference online problem-solving resources (e.g. Chegg)
when stuck on a problem. This behavior is not surprising, and may not be significantly different than student
behavior during a typical semester. However, it is important context when considering study habits, which
are discussed below.
Community & Engagement: On the whole, students did not feel connected or engaged with their classmates during their 2020 summer physics courses. Over
half of the students reported feeling “rarely” or “never”
connected or engaged with classmates during lecture,
Figure 3. These responses are similar for all components
of the course that students were asked about. This likely
strongly contributed to more than 50% of students reporting far fewer social connections being made in this
course compared to their average face-to-face classes.
Student study habits changed drastically in the social
components of their courses. Before the pandemic, about
two thirds of the students met at least once a week to
study. During the pandemic, however, nearly the same
fraction of students reported studying only alone, Figure

3
Stress & Motivation: Students reported quality of
education as the most common cause of stress at both
institutions (63%), Figure 5. This is followed by an expected feeling of stress about personal and family health,
both around 50%. It is surprising that in a time of pandemic more students reported stress relating to their education than their own health.

FIG. 3. Student responses to “I felt engaged/connected with
my classmates during this course’s lecture.”

4. While virtual meetings allow students to communicate
and potentially study together, the ability to collaborate
and share work in real time has become more difficult.

FIG. 5. Student responses to “Which of these issues have
been a cause for stress for you since the pandemic? Mark
all that are applicable.” This is plotted by the fraction of
students reporting this cause of stress.

FIG. 4. Student responses to “On average, for each class,
how many times a week did you meet with classmates to study
before/during the pandemic?” for (a) Institution A and (b)
Institution B.

Despite the decrease in group studying, one fourth of
students never contacted their instructor outside of class.
Many students who attended office hours multiple times
during the course were neutral on the visits usefulness.
About 35% found them helpful.
One method of engaging students during lecture,
in-class demonstrations, received significant agreement
(∼60%) for aiding in student understanding or maintaining interest in class. Responses to these items are muddled as about 20% of students from each course stated
that no demonstrations were used. One pre-pandemic
study suggests that video versions of physics demonstrations can be an effective contribution to student learning
[12].

Perhaps related to student stress over education, reported motivation for being able to work on assignments
changed drastically after shifting to remote learning. Figure 6 shows a striking decline in the ease of students being
able to work on their course assignments from both institutions. One should keep in mind this is not a direct
comparison between two physics courses taken face-toface and remotely. The “before pandemic” question includes students who have never been enrolled in a physics
course.
Both Institution A and Institution B experienced a significant increase in enrollment during summer courses,
more than doubling from prior years. While many responding students stated they would have taken the
courses at these institutions regardless of circumstances
(48%), other students changed their plans; either not enrolling at an alternative institution (19%), or taking the
course because it was offered online (18%).
Differences by Demographics: We examined responses to each questionnaire item separated by student
demographics based on gender, first-generation status,
classification, employment, course enrolled in, and primary motivation. Only one identifier, first-generation
status, led to noteworthy differences from what has been
mentioned earlier.

4
First-generation students reported more frequently
than non-first-generation students every listed cause of
stress except for quality of education, Figure 7. Firstgeneration students are also less likely to have access to
a private study space, 52% compared to 74% of non-first
generation students.

FIG. 6. Student responses to “Before the pandemic/For this
physics class, I was able to get myself to work on assignments
without difficulty.” for (a) Institution A and (b) Institution
B.

Summary: In response to the sudden and singular
changes during spring 2020 necessitated by the pandemic,
we developed and administered a questionnaire with the
goal of finding ways to better serve our students. We collected student feedback from summer 2020 introductory
physics and astronomy courses at two large, land-grant
institutions. Analysis of responses shows that students
are experiencing drastically reduced social interactions
and connections through their courses. Individual motivation to complete coursework has decreased precipitously. Students are also experiencing multiple causes of
stress, with quality of education topping the list. These
reactions are expressed across all demographic categories
in a similar way. Noticeable differences are observed only
for first-generation students who report causes of stress
more often and are less likely to have a private study
space. Post-pandemic, increased availability of course
resources, particularly recorded lectures and online materials, resonates with students.
Although a direct comparison cannot be made between
emergency remote learning and online education, student
responses about interactions within courses mirror prepandemic literature studying online learning [5, 9, 13].
Readers should keep in mind that responses to the questionnaire represent only a snapshot of student preferences
and experiences gathered during condensed versions of
physics and astronomy courses during summer 2020. In
reporting this, we have aimed to provide a slice of timely
information as educators continue to make instructional
choices during remote learning and eventually, for the
return to face-to-face classes.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
FIG. 7. Student responses to “Which of these issues have
been a cause for stress for you since the pandemic?” for (a)
Institution A and (b) Institution B. These responses are separated by student responses to “Are you a first generation
college student?”

We would like to thank the faculty from both institutions who allowed us to distribute the questionnaire to
their students during their summer courses. This study
was supported in part by the Texas A&M University Department of Physics & Astronomy.

[1] UNESCO,
“Covid-19
educational
disruption and response,”
(2020), retrieved from
https://en.unesco.org/covid19/educationresponse.
[2] Charles Hodges, Stephanie Moore, Barb Lockee,
Torrey Trust, and Aaron Bond, (2020), retrieved
from
https://er.educause.edu/articles/2020/3/thedifference-between-emergency-remote-teaching-andonline-learning.

[3] National Center for Education Statistics, “Number and
percentage of students enrolled in degree-granting postsecondary institutions, by distance education participation, location of student, level of enrollment, and control
and level of institution: Fall 2017 and fall 2018,” (2019).
[4] Patricia McGee, Deborah Windes, and Maria Torres,
“Experienced online instructors: beliefs and preferred
supports regarding online teaching,” Journal of Comput-

5
ing in Higher Education 29, 331–352 (2017).
[5] Justin Paulsen and Alexander C. McCormick, “Reassessing disparities in online learner student engagement in
higher education,” Educational Researcher 49, 20–29
(2020).
[6] Patrick Lowenthal and Chareen Snelson, “In search of a
better understanding of social presence: an investigation
into how researchers define social presence,” Distance Education 38, 1–19 (2017).
[7] Barbara Means, Yukie Toyama, Robert Murphy,
Marianne Bakia, Karla Jones,
and Evaluation
Planning, “Evaluation of evidence-based practices
in online learning: A meta-analysis and review of
online learning studies,”
(2010), retrieved from
https://www2.ed.gov/rschstat/eval/tech/evidencebased-practices/finalreport.pdf.
[8] E. K. Faulconer, J. Griffith, B. Wood, S. Acharyya, and
D. Roberts, “A comparison of online, video synchronous,
and traditional learning modes for an introductory undergraduate physics course,” Journal of Science Education
and Technology 27, 404–411 (2018).
[9] Kelly Miller, Sacha Zyto, David Karger, Junehee Yoo,
and Eric Mazur, “Analysis of student engagement in an

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

online annotation system in the context of a flipped introductory physics class,” Phys. Rev. Phys. Educ. Res.
12, 020143 (2016).
Monica Anderson and Madhumitha Kumar, “Digital divide persists even as lower-income americans make gains in tech adoption,”
(2019),
retrieved
from
https://www.pewresearch.org/facttank/2019/05/07/digital-divide-persists-even-as-lowerincome-americans-make-gains-in-tech-adoption/.
Bo Chen, Jinlu Sun, and Yi Feng, “How have COVID-19
isolation policies affected young people’s mental health?
evidence from chinese college students,” Frontiers in Psychology 11, 1529 (2020).
Greg Kestin, Kelly Miller, Logan S McCarty, Kristina
Callaghan, and Louis Deslauriers, “Comparing the effectiveness of online versus live lecture demonstrations,”
Physical Review Physics Education Research 16, 013101
(2020).
Baruch Offir, Yossi Lev, and Rachel Bezalel, “Surface
and deep learning processes in distance education: Synchronous versus asynchronous systems,” Computers &
Education 51, 1172–1183 (2008).

