Characterizing and Comparing COVID-19 Misinformation Across
Languages, Countries and Platforms
Golshan Madraki1, Isabella Grasso, Jacqueline M. Otala, Yu Liu, Jeanna Matthews

Abstract
Misinformation/disinformation about COVID-19 has been
rampant on social media around the world. In this study,
we investigate COVID-19 misinformation/ disinformation
on social media in multiple languages/countries: Chinese
(Mandarin)/China, English/USA, and Farsi (Persian)/Iran;
and on multiple platforms such as Twitter, Facebook,
Instagram, WhatsApp, Weibo, WeChat and TikTok.
Misinformation, especially about a global pandemic, is a
global problem yet it is common for studies of COVID-19
misinformation on social media to focus on a single
language, like English, a single country, like the USA, or a
single platform, like Twitter. We utilized opportunistic
sampling to compile 200 specific items of viral and yet
debunked misinformation across these languages,
countries and platforms emerged between January 1 and
August 31. We then categorized this collection based both
on the topics of the misinformation and the underlying
roots of that misinformation. Our multi-cultural and multilinguistic team observed that the nature of COVID-19
misinformation on social media varied in substantial ways
across different languages/countries depending on the
cultures, beliefs/religions, popularity of social media, types
of platforms, freedom of speech and the power of people
versus governments. We observe that politics is at the root
of most of the collected misinformation across all three
languages in this dataset. We further observe the different
impact of government restrictions on platforms and
platform restrictions on content in China, Iran, and the
USA and their impact on a key question of our age: how do
we control misinformation without silencing the voices we
need to hold governments accountable?
Keywords: COVID-19; Misinformation/Disinformation;
Social Media; Different Languages

1.

Introduction

Along with the COVID-19 pandemic crisis, an infodemic
(World Health Organization, 2020) crisis has affected all
aspects of human lives from elections to public health
response around the world. Social media has played a
critical role in this infodemic crisis. First, social media
offers a free and easy-access platform for users to share
content (both true and false) in the form of posts, videos,
pictures, and memes, all with a wide range of audiences
(Weinberger, 2011). Second, the COVID-19 outbreak has
forced people around the world to be quarantined and
1

consequently interactions have shifted away from face-toface interactions and even more towards online/social
media interactions. This means that more people are
exposed to unreliable content circulating on social media
and many users struggle with distinguishing between facts
and lies/fictions about COVID-19.
Since the beginning of the pandemic, some official efforts
have been implemented to debunk these lies and inaccurate
information circulating on social media, despite substantial
disagreement about which corrective measures for fact
checking are practical and appropriate for massive social
media platforms. Still, these efforts seem not enough and
there is a widespread consensus that an integrated
sustainable global effort is warranted across different
languages and through different platforms as are targeted
in our study (Dizikes, 2020; Pennycook et al., 2020a).
In the literature, the problematic information has been
categorized into misinformation, disinformation, and malinformation, with some debate about definitions (Karduni,
2019; Wardle, 2017). In this paper, we consider the
following definitions:
Misinformation is incorrect information created without
the intention of causing harm (e.g. encouraging people to
wear a face shield without realizing how ineffective it
could be).
Disinformation is incorrect information and intentionally
created to hurt an individual, a group, or a country (e.g. a
drug company spreading out a false rumor that its new
medicine can cure COVID-19 with an intent to increase
profit.)
Mal-information is correct information (based on reality),
but used to cause harm to an individual, a group, or a
country (e.g. justifying the high rate of confirmed cases by
claiming that it is because of increasing the rate of testing.)
(Infodemic Toolkit, 2020; Kujawski, 2019; Wardle, 2019).
Distinguishing between these three categories, particularly
misinformation and disinformation, can be difficult or even
impossible in some cases as can require assessing the intent
of the creator. Thus, more broadly, here in this paper, we
will use the general term ‘misinformation’ to refer to all
three categories. According to a study from Oxford
University, misinformation is also often true information
reconfigured or recontextualize and less commonly
fabricated (Brennen et al., 2020). This reconfigured
information can circulate even faster than fully fabricated

Corresponding Authors: Clarkson University. Email: gmadraki@clarkson.edu.

stories, taking in 87% of the interactions in one study
(Brennen et al., 2020).
In this paper, COVID-19 misinformation, broadly defined
to include disinformation and mal-information as well, will
be investigated within multiple languages (Chinese,
English, and Farsi) about multiple countries (China, Iran,
and the USA) on different social media platforms. The
COVID-19 pandemic broke out first in Wuhan, China in
December 2019. Then, Iran became a hotspot in February
2020. The USA has been a clear hotspot as well with 22%
of confirmed world-wide COVID cases despite only 4.25%
of the world population (Dong et al., 2020). We chose these
three countries as a lens through which to consider major
differences between COVID-19 misinformation around the
world. We show how examining social media
misinformation from the perspective of one country, one
language, or one platform, misses important and more
holistic aspects of the pandemic. Through this research, we
build a more comprehensive picture of how
misinformation has exacerbated the COVID-19 crisis
around the world.
Our research team includes native speakers of Chinese,
English, and Farsi who were born and raised in China, Iran,
and the USA. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first
to examine the multilingual social media landscape by
using the opportunistic sampling method to collect a
dataset of verified and viral COVID-19 misinformation
across 3 languages: Chinese, English, and Farsi. Our
multicultural and multilingual team observed that the
nature of COVID-19 misinformation on social media
varies
in
substantial
ways
across
different
languages/countries depending on the cultures, beliefs,
religions, popularity of social media, types of platforms,
freedom of speech, the power of people versus
governments, etc. Based on these observations, we
proposed a novel and comprehensive categorization of the
COVID-19 misinformation based on their topics and roots
such that these categories are all relevant and extendable in
all three languages.
It is worth noting the difference in government policies for
controlling misinformation in Iran, China, and the USA.
China has strict government control over which platforms
can be used and enforces these controls. Approved
platforms aggressively remove misinformation of some
kinds, but not all. Iran also has laws restricting which
platforms can be used, but does much less to actually
enforce these laws. It makes some platforms more
inconvenient to use, but does less to actually prevent it. The
USA has some new laws restricting the use of social media
platforms, specifically Chinese social media platforms.
Whether these laws will stand remains to be seen. There
are some attempts to control the flow of some types of
misinformation on platforms like Twitter and Facebook

based on self-regulation by the platform and not
government regulation. Throughout our study, we examine
the impact of these different approaches on the types of
misinformation spreading.

2.

Background and Related Work

Misinformation is not a new phenomenon, it has been
around for centuries in the forms of rumors, gossip
conspiracy theories, etc. (Burston et al., 2018). However,
the emergence of the publishing industry in the 15th
century provided an official modern platform for
misinformation. The 21st century has been characterized
by the explosion of information through the Internet. The
technology, particularly social media, has amplified the
spread of misinformation and its adverse impacts by
providing a fast and free channel to share any information
whether true or false (Lazer et al., 2017).
Since the beginning of the pandemic, catastrophic and lifethreatening impacts of tremendous amounts of
misinformation circulating on social media have appeared
(Donovan, 2020). For instance, due to fake news, some
individuals used toxic home remedies resulting in injury
and death (Vigdor, 2020a). Misinformation has provoked
many people to hoard some vital necessary products (e.g.,
N95 mask, sanitizers, toilet papers, etc.) causing a shortage
of supplies for essential workers (Vigdor, 2020b).
Misinterpretations of facts have caused people to not take
quarantine seriously and ignore CDC and WHO’s
recommendations (Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention [CDC], 2020a). Within the USA, the Black and
African American community has had to deal with
misinformation claiming that darker skin may help protect
against COVID-19 (Kertscher, 2020) when in fact, risk
factors are higher (Farmer, 2020). Other minority groups
such as Asian Americans have experienced increased
discrimination since the outbreak of COVID-19 (Ruiz et
al., 2020). Within India, the Twitter hashtag CoronaJihad
exacerbated already present islamophobia as it
accompanied false claims of Muslim people intentionally
infecting Hindu people (Chaudhuri, 2020; Perrigo, 2020).
In some Muslim countries such as Iran and Somalia,
religious figures and hardliners believe that true Muslims
are immune to the new virus. The religious community is
biased against less religious or non-believers and blames
them for the pandemic as a form of God punishments (Al
Arabiya English & Judd, 2020; Lubrano, 2020; Malekian,
2020). Within China, in the early of this pandemic, one
piece of misinformation, widely forwarded through
Chinese social media, stated that COVID-19 only attacked
Asian people because it was a biological weapon designed
to target Chinese people (Steinmetz, 2020; The Storm
Media, 2020).

2

Why is this COVID-19 misinformation so impactful?
Desperation and severe stress caused by fear of death, the
uncertain nature of the pandemic, economic crisis,
unemployment, strict quarantine, and the new routines
(e.g., working from home, sanitizing groceries, etc.) has
frustrated and distracted billions of people around the
world making them even more susceptible to the influence
of misinformation(CDC, 2020b; Palsson et al., 2020).
Many people are willing to grasp any information (true or
false) that might make them feel safe or comfortable or
offer easy-to-understand explanations for the complicated
pandemic situations (Douglas et al., 2017). On the other
hand, some people may boycott receiving information to
circumvent such severe stress. Unfortunately, this practice
is just as dangerous because being uninformed makes
individuals more vulnerable to becoming misinformed
(Lazer et al., 2017) and believing false information.
There are a few studies investigating COVID-19
misinformation on social media and more are in
development. Kouzy et al. (2020) focused on quantifying
the misinformation, but they focused on only English
misinformation posted on Twitter (Kouzy et al., 2020).
Also, Brennen et al. (2020) proposed some classification of
COVID-19 misinformation although their samples are
limited to only English language.
The closest related work to this research is the 2020
Misinfodemic Report developed by Meedan and written by
Alimardini et al (Alimardani & Elswah, 2020). This
qualitative report considers a more global response to
misinformation, showcasing seven countries compared to
several United States-only studies. Meedan divides their
report into the crumbling of public trust, informal leaders
of information, and impact of the infodemic on
governance. Their coverage of countries is extensive, but
our research adds a balance of qualitative and quantitative
analysis comparing countries, languages and platforms
within our sample.
Purely quantitative research that involves misinformation
globally has been done by Pew Research. They surveyed
social media users within several countries about how often
they encounter obviously fake content (Silver, 2020). This
study tries to point researchers toward countries that seem
to be encountering misinformation more frequently. This
type of quantitative research does not dive as deeply into
the content, topics and root of misinformation present
within each country surveyed.

3.

Platforms in Iran, China, and the USA

Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, WhatsApp, Weibo, WeChat
and TikTok are the most popular social media platforms in
China, Iran, and the USA. However, due to the censorship
and political reasons, some strict restrictions have been

imposed on these platforms in some cases (Rachman,
2020). Table 1 summarizes the current landscape.
Platforms

China

Iran

U.S.A.

# of Monthly
Active Users
(as of 2020)

Twitter

✖

✖✓

✓

330 million

Facebook

✖

✖✓

✓

2.7 billion

Instagram

✖

✓

✓

1 billion

WhatsApp

✖

✓

✓

2 billion

Weibo

✓

S

S

550 million

WeChat

✓

S

?

1.2 billion

TikTok

✓

✓

?

800 million

Table 1: Social media Platforms - ✓ for commonly used; ✖ for not
allowed/blocked; ✖✓ for not allowed officially but accessible, S for
seldom used, and ? for the situation to be determined (CIW Statistics,
2020; Clement, 2020a; Clement, 2020b; Lin, Y., 2020; McGarvey, 2020;
Richter, 2020).

Twitter has been blocked in both China and Iran for years
(Jen, the Privacy Freak, 2015). The Chinese government
has very strict technical and legal measures in prohibiting
access to Twitter, though a few government officials have
special permission to use it for foreign affairs (Mamiit,
2016). Thus, almost all tweets in Chinese are posted by
Chinese speakers outside mainland China and are therefore
not a good representation of the social media landscape
within China. Restrictions on Twitter in Iran are not as
severe as in China despite official filtering of Twitter in
Iran.
Facebook has been banned in both China and Iran.
However, Instagram is not blocked in Iran at this moment
and it is actually very popular, especially among youth,
with more than 24 million Iranian active users as of January
2018 (Financial Tribune, 2018). Instagram has been
banned in China and much like with Twitter and Facebook,
this ban is more aggressively enforced.
Weibo (微博) and WeChat (微信) are the most popular
social network platforms in China (DeGennaro, 2019).
They are not only popular inside China but are also used
heavily among Chinese speakers outside of China.
WeChat is beyond a social networking and messaging
platform and its monthly active users have reached about
1.2 billion in the second quarter of 2020 (CIW Team,
2020). In addition to social networking services, WeChat
offers one of the most popular payment methods in China,
called “WeChat Pay” (微信支付). WeChat could be

3

considered as the combination of WhatsApp, Facebook,
and PayPal.
WhatsApp is a cross-platform encrypted messaging
application acquired by Facebook, and its monthly active
users have reached 2 billion as of March 2020 (Clement,
2020b). It has 68.1 million users just in the USA as of 2020
(Andjelic, 2020). WhatsApp is completely banned in
China. WhatsApp is legally allowed to be used in Iran and
has become even more popular in Iran after the Iranian
government blocked Telegram in 2018 which used to be
the most popular messaging application in Iran. The
government claimed that Telegram had endangered
national security (Erdbrink, 2018).

appeared around COVID-19 on Weibo. Figure 1 shows a
sample of super topic webpage on Weibo. The topic host
and the largest contributor to this topic is a state media.
Although English hashtags are allowed on Weibo, almost
all hashtags are in simplified Chinese. Weibo needs the
symbol “#” before and after a term to function as hashtags,
unlike Twitter which only needs “#” before. WeChat
Channels is a popular feature of WeChat and contain public
feeds of content. Hashtag and keywords search can be used
in WeChat Channels.

WhatsApp has become a makeshift social media platform
in Iran as group chats have begun including thousands of
members forwarding and sharing information. Although
the government has blocked many social media platforms
officially, many Iranians still use VPN and Proxy anti-filter
apps/tools to access blocked social media. However, this
access is more limited and requires some technical tools
and skills. This has helped to drive usage towards
WhatsApp which is a private end-to-end encrypted
messaging platform without tracing capabilities. Partly as
a result, WhatsApp has become a major source of
misinformation in Iran and many other countries
(Alimardani & Elswah, 2020). WhatsApp recently limited
the number of times users can forward a message to only
five times, in an attempt to fight against misinformation
(Kastrenakes, 2019).
TikTok was developed by ByteDance (字节跳动), a
Chinese company in Beijing. TikTok has a version used
only in China called Douyin (抖音) to separate the
domestic users from international users. Due to the concern
of cyber security, TikTok operation in the USA will be
transferred to a new company named TikTok Global and
will cooperate with Oracle and Walmart to ensure the data
safety (Lin, L., 2020). TikTok is allowed to be used in Iran.

Figure 1: A Chinese Weibo super topic #多国在早期废水中发现新冠病
毒踪迹#, translation: “COVID-19 is detected in the wastewater sampled
in early times by multiple countries”.

A
3.1. Search Methods in Different Languages
Keywords and hashtags are the major methods to search on
social media and we use both to collect our data set. All
platforms named in this study supports both keywords and
hashtag search. Hashtags on WhatsApp might not be as
popular as other platforms however this function makes the
search process very easy even through a private message
chain (Patkar, 2013).
Unlike hashtags on American platforms, a hashtag on
Weibo is owned by a host. Also, each hashtag has its own
unique webpage, which is called 超级话题 (i.e., topic or
super topic). Since January 2020, many super topics have

B
Figure 2: A Farsi hashtag #‫( واکسن‬Vaccine) on Twitter. A) translation: ”I
prefer to get Coronavirus rather than get a Russian Vaccine”. B)
translation: “Russian vaccine announced officially by Putin is a great
news. Putin’s promises are more reliable than Trump’s or Boris
Johnson’s.”

Iranians use both English and Farsi hashtags across
different platforms. An interesting observation is that the
4

same hashtag can be used for two completely opposite
opinions. For instance, #‫ واکسن‬is a hashtag about the Russian
vaccine used to criticize the vaccine (Figure 2-A) and to
express excitement about it (Figure 2-B).

4.

Our Methodology

Selecting an appropriate sampling methodology is a major
challenge when it comes to social media studies. Nonbiased sampling from social media is often difficult
because the dataset is so highly dynamic, massive in size,
and difficult to filter. The sheer volume of data--Facebook
has over 350 million users and Twitter has a rate of 17,000
tweets per minute--makes the gold standard of data
acquisition, true random sampling, challenging.
This can be even more complicated when sampling for
misinformation since our underlying population is not all
posts, but those posts that contain misinformation that has
been refuted or debunked by recognized fact-checking
organizations. Hashtag and keyword filters do not
necessarily guarantee to find misinformation, and even if a
suspected post is found, we are reliant on the efficiency of
journalists in fact-checking posts and content which is also
biased by the particular needs and intentions of journalists
and respective media outlets (Pingree et al., 2018).
In this study, we utilized an opportunistic sampling
strategy, meaning that our sampling was determined by the
population, or presence of misinformation on social media,
that was available and officially debunked at the time, and
our abilities to find them. We used Chinese, English, and
Farsi hashtag and keyword filters to collect 200 specific
items of debunked misinformation that spread virally
between January 1 and August 31. When we encountered
a particular item in one of our languages, first we used fact
checking organizations to see if that claim had been
debunked using fact-checking sources such as International
Fact Checking Network (IFCN), platform based factchecking tools in Twitter, Facebook and Google, and
organizations using Claim Review (Poynter, n.d.; Schema,
2014). The item is logged only if we could find a verified
debunking source; otherwise, it is discarded. We estimate
that number of logs could be doubled if we did not have the
debunking constraint. Then we watched for posts with the
same claim in our other languages and on other platforms.
We also sought out independent media reports beyond our
own direct experience that the referenced claim was
spreading virally. Thus, each of these 200 items of
misinformation in our study represents thousands of posts
repeating the same debunked claim, often across multiple
languages and platforms.
Out of these 200 collected pieces of misinformation, 54 are
in Chinese, 156 in English, 111 in Farsi. We admit that our
data set may be unintentionally biased considering the

biased nature of social media and the fact that all authors
are currently in the USA, so we might be more exposed to
English misinformation. Furthermore, due to the lack of
copyright laws enforcements in Iran, a single piece of
misinformation might have been repeatedly debunked by
too many sources which prolongs and complicates the
search process for new pieces. Figure 3 represents a clearer
breakdown of our collected data and the overlaps in
misinformation across languages.

Figure 3: Overlaps of collected data across the multiple languages. Ch,
En, and Fa refers to Chinese, English, and Farsi. Total are 200= 29(Fa)+
14(Ch) +64(En) +53(En^Fa)+11(En^Ch)+1(Fa^Ch)+28(Fa^Ch^En).

Strict filtering and censorship policies for Chinese social
media is a major factor in the notably lower totals. This can
be considered as a benefit of the aggressive censoring of
some types of misinformation in China. However, this
could come at the expense of silencing voices that are
needed to counter other kinds of misinformation. This is a
key question being explored in this paper.
There are 14, 64, 29 pieces of misinformation found
exclusively in Chinese, English, and Farsi only,
respectively. Out of overall 200 pieces of misinformation,
53 occurred in only Farsi and English (26%) which is the
largest overlap among possible pairs of languages while
Farsi and Chinese have the least overlap (less than 1%). Of
the 200 collected pieces of misinformation, 14% have been
found in all three languages.

5.

Topics of COVID -19 Misinformation

Given the complicated nature of tracking misinformation
across multiple languages' social media landscapes, a
comprehensive categorization over the topics of COVID19 misinformation was critical to analyze the catastrophic
infodemic occurring during this global pandemic. We
identified 10 top level categories for the topics of COVID19 misinformation. We found that these proposed
categories were inclusive enough to cover the Chinese,
English, and Farsi misinformation in our collection. These
categories are also extendable to also cover the possible
5

future misinformation. The description of these categories
are as follows:
1.

Cures: includes traditional, superstitious, fake, or
ineffective treatment methods, products, remedies and
claims, etc.
2. Origin: includes claims about how the virus
originated in the first place.
3. Testing: includes topics such as availability of testing,
medical testing kits created by different countries,
unconventional and non-medical methods for testing,
testing cost, etc.
4. Vaccines: includes topics such as safety and
effectiveness of vaccines, competition over the first
vaccine, the length of the immunity that vaccine can
generate, mass production, implementation of
vaccination, etc.
5. Prevention methods (public): includes topics
concerning public and macro policies and strategies to
prevent virus transmission.
6. Prevention
methods
(individual):
includes
traditional, superstitious, fake, or ineffective methods
of prevention identified as individual or personal
actions.
7. Number of deaths and confirmed cases (Statistics):
includes rumors, actions, and false claims to
manipulate the official statistics of death and
confirmed cases including exaggerating or
downplaying the numbers.
8. Rumors about other countries (often xenophobic
rumors internal and external to a country):
includes conspiracy theories and rumors spread out
about other countries' roles related to the new virus.
9. Virus transmission: includes topics related to
misleading, superstitious, or fake, methods by which
the virus can transmit, asymptomatic period, basic
reproduction number (R0).
10. Others: includes topics such as contact tracing (pros
and cons of contact tracing, and rumors about the
amount of personal information needed to be collected
for the contact tracing purposes); recovery (the length
of recovery periods, antibody level after the recovery,
immunity of recovered patients, etc.); prediction of the
pandemic; compensations, and more topics; etc.
The topics for each of our collected samples were
inductively examined to be specific to COVID-19
misinformation and accordingly classified within the
proposed 10 categories. Figure 4 represents the proportion
of each topic within our overall collection across
languages.
About a quarter of the total collected misinformation in our
sample fell under the topic of prevention-individual. Also,
the top three topics of the collected misinformation mostly
concern the individual behavior. In a few cases, the same

claim has been reported in more than one category, e.g.,
“drinking bleach” has been circulating on social media as
both a cure and prevention method. In fact, this high
proportion of misinformation within the context of
individual behavior verifies the vulnerability of users to
misinformation to cope with uncertainty and
uncontrollability of pandemic circumstances.

Figure 4: Proportion of sample (n=200) within the proposed topics
categories.

An interesting observation on the topics of
misinformation in these three languages is that the
percentage of categories in English and Farsi are
comparable. Furthermore, the top two categories for both
Farsi and English are “Prevention- Individual” and “Virus
Transmission”. This suggests that the Iranian laws
coupled with weak enforcement still allows
misinformation of a similar kind to flow in Iran as in the
USA with fewer laws and restrictions.
The greatest difference in English and Farsi belongs to the
category of misinformation related to “Other Countries”.
Meanwhile, Chinese and Farsi misinformation within this
category have similar records. Since most of the Chinese
and Farsi rumors about other countries have political roots
and considering the controlling governments in Iran and
China, such similarity is not surprising. It is interesting
that despite tight control of other kinds of misinformation
in China, this category is still specifically allowed to flow.
The top category of the Chinese sample belongs to the
topic of “Origin” of the virus which is actually still a
question mark for the world.
We also observed a larger variety of topics in English
which explains the relatively higher percentage of English
misinformation categorized as “Others”. For instance,
misinformation related to contact tracing could only be
found in the USA. One of the reasons could be the fact
that some laws and rules vary from one state to another in
the USA (e.g., misinformation about federal and state
compensation and financial support from businesses and
individuals) and this confusing landscape of varying laws
opens up space for misinformation to flow.

6

6.

The Roots of Misinformation

In this section, we delve beyond a classification of
misinformation by topic to the roots of misinformation. For
example, Jang et al. reported that most misinformation
stems from a false statement quoted by a public figure; or
is deliberate misinformation used for a particular purpose
(Jang et al, 2018). We found that COVID-19
misinformation also followed this same pattern.

indicating the breadth and diversity of COVID-19
misinformation; these have been categorized as “Others”.
The three countries selected in this paper have their own
unique characteristics and cultural structures and here we
further discuss the roots of misinformation, particularly the
religious and political roots, separately in Iran, China, and
the USA in the following subsections as well as a
discussion of commonalities across these countries.

We identified the following six categories for the roots of
the misinformation. It should be noted that we use the term
“root”, but we could have instead used terms such as
“reason” for or “source” of misinformation.
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

Political-related roots: a false statement quoted by a
political figure; or related to governments and the
relationship between countries; or used for political
purposes, e.g., elections.
Medical/Science-related roots: a false statement
quoted by someone claiming to be a medical expert,
e.g., doctors, nurses, etc.; or a false perception related
to medical research outcomes.
Celebrities & Pop Culture-related roots: a false
statement quoted by a celebrity, influencer, or
popular/public figure in the media field; or, a
misleading/false content such as a video, photo or an
article gets viral through media, e.g., TV, press, etc.
Religious-related roots: a false statement quoted by a
religious figure; related to religious and/or traditional
and superstitious beliefs.
Criminal-related roots: a false statement which has
been claimed by a scammer or hackers for criminal
purposes such as fraud, access to personal information.
Others: any other false statements that cannot be
substantiated to be related to the mentioned categories
including hoaxes, jokes and other undesignated
misinformation.

For each of our 200 pieces of misinformation, we
attempted to track the source that led to this content going
viral. The roots of misinformation collected in our sample
are verified by reliable references and categorized in one
of these six categories by human annotators. If a false
statement has been quoted by multiple sources, then the
source which made the statement goes viral will be
considered as the root of the statement. As Figure 5
represents, more than one third (33.5%) of the
misinformation has been related to political roots which is
alarming and shows the critical role of governments and
political figures in the infomedic. For example, researchers
analyzing 38-million English-language articles about the
pandemic found that USA President Trump was the largest
driver of the infodemic over that sample (Evanega et al.,
2020). We could not verify the roots of 24% of our sample,

Figure 5: Proportion of the collected data (n=200) across the proposed
categories for roots of COVID-19 Misinformation.

6.1. Roots in China
The COVID-19 misinformation circulating on Chinese
social media landscape reflects significant differences in
political systems between China and the western world.
For such reasons, misinformation from the western world
is translated, filtered, and reflected in Chinese social
media. A primary root of misinformation circulation in
China is the presence of fake science-based claims.
When considering Chinese social media, it is important to
consider the systems of aggressive censorship in China that
results in a strict politically filtered internet. Global
misinformation which has been translated and reflected in
Chinese social media environment can be considered
politically biased since the vast majority of social media in
China is tightly controlled by the state.
An interesting trend observed in Chinese social media is
that some already debunked misinformation from the rest
of the world, especially the USA, has been translated and
widely shared in Chinese platforms to criticize the western
world’s attempts to fight COVID-19. This pattern of
disclosing the debunked misinformation is a politically
manipulated misinformation per se. Thus, we can only call
this type of message pseudo “misinformation” (e.g. reports
of President Trump suggested injecting bleach to treat
COVID-19). In this case, it appears that the reason this
misinformation is allowed to flow is more of a criticism of
the USA and the susceptibility of its citizens to
misinformation that appears clearly ridiculous to the
average Chinese citizen. Through translating and sharing
this message, people in China have been shocked to see
such clear misinformation from the USA President and will
further believe in more similar information regarding the
unsuccessful control of COVID-19 in the USA.
7

Much of the true misinformation in China are fake-science
misinformation based on some assumption without
sufficient evidence and scientific work to support it.
Though a post may point to scientific sources to back up
the claim, it is difficult for most people to verify the source
due to the language barrier. Specifically, most people do
not have the capacity of reading research publications in
English or even of translating the name of the journal. This
style of post can be used to give the impression of a
scientific evidence that may not exist. In our Chinese
samples, the largest category of roots of misinformation
belongs to politics (41%) which is aligned with our
analysis for English and Farsi samples (Figure 6-A).
Due to tight controls and censoring in China, collecting
samples of COVID-19 misinformation in Chinese has been
relatively harder than English and Farsi. Also, identifying
the roots of the collected COVID-19 misinformation is
complicated. The roots of 24% of the Chinese
misinformation remain undesignated and categorized as
“Others”. Surprisingly, a large proportion of COVID-19
misinformation in Chinese has been started by celebrities
and/or pop culture (20%) which is larger than the English
and Farsi corresponding category.
Unlike the Iran and USA, most Chinese are irreligious and
atheist (Huff Post & Briggs, 2011; Noack, 2015). However
traditional Chinese beliefs have been identified among
COVID-19 misinformation in Chinese (only 2%) and
categorized as having religious roots.
We could not identify any misinformation in Chinese
associated with the criminal roots (0%). This is a strong
result and could be considered one benefit of tight
government control over social media in China.
Confronted with the impact of misinformation on western
democracies (e.g. advice to drink bleach), Chinese citizens
could be convinced that the aggressive censorship policies
help keep their society safer for criminal elements and viral
misinformation.
6.2. Roots in the USA
Misinformation in the USA is commonly in the form of
counter-expertise, the rejection of mainstream academic
expertise, which dates back to the 19th century (Douglas,
2018). This form of misinformation began with Christian
fundamentalists rejecting evolution as it contradicted the
Bible (Douglas, 2018). Since then, counter-expertise looks
to distrust mainstream scientific media by promoting
alternative thoughts through alternative media. This
alternative media happens to be far more susceptible to
misinformation (Douglas, 2018). Such alternative media
has released misinformation throughout the pandemic,
with Fox News (“Fox’s Dr. Marc Siegel”, 2020) stating

“the virus should be compared to the flu because at worst
case scenario it could be the flu”.
Across the USA, churches have successfully resisted
complying with government-led preventive measures and
health orders. A recent study shows that 71% of
Protestant/Evangelical ministers held in-person worship as
of July 15, 2020 (Vondracek, 2020). The persistence to stay
open and hold in-person worship has led to churches
becoming hot spots for positive cases (Conger et al., 2020).
Father Joseph Illo, leader of the Star of the Sea Church,
sent out misinformation to churchgoers stating that “the
news reports about COVID are largely unreal” (Bisacky,
2020). However, not all churches within the USA are
rejecting mainstream media or health orders.
The current politically polarized atmosphere in the USA is
also a major driver of misinformation. Misinformation
related to politics is often fabricated to create confirmation
bias among readers, subsequently leading to heightened ingroup/party identification and polarization (Douglas,
2018) (e.g. “The political party I identify with fought for
the right thing, as opposed to the other party”).
COVID-19 misinformation spread by political figures in
the USA may be a symptom of deflection and scapegoating
due to inadequate administrative response. USA
government sources have suggested a conspiracy theory
that COVID-19 was created in a Chinese laboratory
(Aljazeera news, 2020). Deflection is apparent as the USA
President Donald Trump suggested “quick fixes” and
“cures”, such as hydroxychloroquine, azithromycin, and
convalescent plasma (Caplan, 2020), that have limited
testing and results as potential cures or “game changers in
the history of medicine”.
It is necessary to acknowledge the severity and seriousness
of the spread of misinformation from the USA public
officials. In our collection of misinformation samples from
the USA about one third (31%) have political roots (Figure
6-B). While the spread of information from public officials
to win elections is not new, the role of the mass media as a
corrective measure on this behavior has changed. The
media is now competing with social media for
advertisements, which has resulted in pressure to cater
content to users, further perpetuating political polarization
(Scheufele & Krause, 2019). From drastically downplaying
the seriousness of the virus to stating that “one day it’s like
a miracle, it will disappear” (The White House, 2020), the
USA Government has contributed heavily to COVID-19
misinformation on all media platforms.
The role of celebrities in driving American culture
(Clemmons, 2018) and the power of American public
figures’ words should not be underestimated. In our
sample, 13% of the collected misinformation in the USA
8

has been directly traced back to a celebrity, influencers or
popular figure. For example, on July 31, 2020 Instagram
removed Madonna’s post “for making false claims about
cures and prevention methods for COVID-19" (Solis,
2020). False statements by self-claimed medical related
crew or wrong and manipulated interpretation from
medical facts are another major root of misinformation in
the USA (22% of our sample represented in Figure 7-B).
6.3. Roots in Iran
COVID-19 misinformation has hit Iran harshly. Two major
reasons have been identified for creating and spreading
misinformation: first, discourse about COVID-19 is
politically manipulated by the government (Alimardani &
Elswah, 2020); second, official religious figures have
interfered with COVID-19 related issues and religion has
been a barrier for ordinary hardliners to be unbiased. In
general, social media reflects that people do not trust the
COVID information released by either government or
religious officials. When the official channels of
communication of information fail, people start clinging to
their own unofficial channels of information gathering
without monitoring the validity of the information which
eventually intensifies the spread of misinformation.

with mixed reactions that included both adherence and
ridicule (The New Arab, 2020).
As it was expected, in our collected Farsi sample, the top
category of roots of misinformation belongs to politics
(27%) (Figure 6-C). The next largest proportion of the
misinformation has medical/science roots including both
western misinformation and local and traditional Persian
remedies. About 11% of our sampled misinformation has
religious roots. Considering the bold role of religion in
Iran, this rate seems relatively low. However, the virality
of this misinformation has been substantial, such that some
of the misinformation is still circulating on social media,
even after it officially got debunked. Some however have
been transformed into sarcasm to be used as a form of
protest against hard-core religious figures.

A

Iran has a controlling and conservative government which
micro-manages all aspects of people’ lives. This
characteristic of the government politicizes every subject
including the pandemic. Thus, it is not surprising that much
of the COVID-19 misinformation found in Farsi has
political roots. An ironic piece of misinformation with
political roots in Iran is that the government believes the
COVID-19 misinformation present in Iran has been started
mainly by “enemies”, referring to the USA government
(“BBC News Persian”, 2020).
Another example of political misinformation is that the
Iran government promoted a fake testing technology called
“coronavirus remote detectors” which can detect infected
individuals from a distance of 109 yards. The unveiling
ceremony on April 15th went viral all-over the Iranian
press and social media.
Religion has also played a critical role in spreading
COVID-19 misinformation in Iran. For instance, some
official religious hardliners falsely believe that sacred
protection from religious shrines would prevent infection
(Malekian, 2020). In Iran, some Shiite Muslim religious
figures often use people’s faith to oppose “westernized”
facts, sometimes including scientific facts. For example, on
February 24, 2020, a religious figure, Ayatollah Abbas
Tabrizian, advised people to rub their anuses with violet oil
to prevent and cure COVID-19. This post on his official
Telegram channel (with more than 200,000 followers) has
been viral on all Farsi social media. Users reshared this post

B

C
Figure 6: Proportion of the Chinese (n=54), English (n=156), and Farsi
(n=111) collected data across the proposed categories for roots of
COVID-19 Misinformation.

6.4. Discussion
A recent study showed that there is an intersection between
fake news and religion in societies with religious
background (Douglas, 2018). Our observation on this
matter in Iran is aligned with this study given the Islamic
background of Iran (11%). However, our sample could not
confirm the same result in the USA and China. Given the
impact of the Christian community in the USA (Bailey,
9

2019), 3% religious roots for the English misinformation
was surprisingly lower than our initial expectation.
When politics and government play a significant role in the
destiny of a society (which is the case in Iran, China, and
the USA), a political polarization phenomenon will emerge
(Facing History and Ourselves, 2020). Political
polarization has been known as an important factor to
spread misinformation in a society and the meaningful
relationship between misinformation and political
polarization has been profoundly investigated in the
literature (Donovan, 2020; Pennycook & Rand, 2019).
Polarization encourages rigid opinions and bias against
opposite groups (Interian & Ribeiro, 2018); Lelkes, 2016).
Consequently, it can cause misinterpretations of facts and
the spread of fake news, misinformation, conspiracy
theories, etc. (Pennycook & Rand, 2019). Our results in
Sections 6 also support that politics and political
polarization are the roots of the majority of Chinese (41%),
English (31%), and Farsi (27%) collected samples of
COVID-19 misinformation.
The absence of misinformation with criminal roots in
Chinese social media is notable. This is an example of a
key difference in how government strategy directly
influences the types of misinformation to which the public
is exposed. As a result, some societies are more vulnerable
to criminal misinformation. Given that politics was the
largest root of misinformation across all three languages in
this dataset, all societies are extremely vulnerable to
government misinformation. However, some have more
potential to counter government misinformation with
information from private sources. In many ways, this is
perhaps the key question for countries and societies around
the world going forward in deciding how they want to
control misinformation and infodemic. For liberal
democracies, a key challenge is determining how to control
misinformation without silencing the voices needed to hold
government misinformation accountable.

7.

Conclusions

Our major goal is to analyze the COVID-19
misinformation on different social media platforms across
different languages to gain a more holistic, global
understanding of the misinformation’s landscape. This
effort is an initial step to diminish the current infodemic
happening along with the pandemic. By increasing public
knowledge of the adverse impacts of misinformation on
public health during the pandemic, many lives could be
saved.
To achieve our goal, the opportunistic sampling approach
was utilized
to compile 200 pieces of verified
misinformation posted virally in Chinese, English, and
Farsi across Twitter, Facebook, Weibo, WeChat,

WhatsApp, Instagram, and TikTok between January 1 and
August 31. Each of these 200 pieces represented thousands
of posts across platforms and often across languages. Then,
a classification approach was proposed to categorize the
collected misinformation based on both their topics and
roots. We identified 10 high level topics being inclusive
and relevant in all three languages. We also identified 6
major categories for the roots of misinformation. Our study
yielded the following important results:
●
●

●

Politics was the largest root of misinformation across
all three languages in this dataset.
Overall, the English and Farsi samples have more in
common in terms of the topic of misinformation than
Chinese specifically regarding individual prevention
methods.
The absence of misinformation with criminal roots and
fewer categories of misinformation overall in Chinese
social media is notable and points out a critically
important tradeoff in the control of misinformation.

We note important differences in how government controls
on social media platforms drive usage onto some platforms
and away from others, with different infrastructure for
tracking and controlling misinformation. Understanding
how different countries utilize social media and their
restrictions gives better insight as to how to regulate
disruptive behavior. A key challenge going forward for all
societies and countries will be in determining how to
control misinformation without silencing the voices needed
to hold governments accountable. Overall, it is clear how
focusing beyond English, beyond the USA, and beyond the
USA-based social media platforms are essential to
providing a clear understanding of the effects of
misinformation and the effectiveness of misinformation
control strategies around the world.

8.

Acknowledgment

The authors would like to kindly acknowledge assistance
from Gillian Kurtic and Yan Chen for contributions to the
paper including help reviewing, organizing, and
formatting. We also thank Dr. Ricardo Baeza-Yates for his
detailed feedback, wise advice and thought-provoking
questions. We gratefully acknowledge funding from
Clarkson University Epidemic and Virus-Related Research
Innovation fund.

9.
1.

2.

References
Al Arabiya English & Judd, E. (2020). Muslims
‘immune to coronavirus’ some imams in Somalia say,
putting public at risk. Al Arabiya English.
Alimardani, M. & Elswah, M. (2020). Trust, Religion,
And Politics: Coronavirus Misinformation In Iran.
Meedan.
10

3.
4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.
10.
11.
12.

13.
14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.
20.

21.
22.

Andjelic, J. (2020). WhatsApp Statistics: Revenue,
Usage, and History. Fortunly.
Bailey, S. (2019). Christianity is declining at a rapid
pace, but Americans still hold positive views about
religion’s role in society. Washington Post.
BBC News Persian (2020). Rouhani: The conspiracy
of our enemies to shut down the country for fear of the
corona. BBC News Persian.
Bisacky, T. (2020). Concerns raised after San
Francisco church shares misinformation on COVID19. Kron4.
Brennen, J. S., Simon, F., Howard, P. N., Nielsen, R.
K., (2020). Types, Sources, And Claims Of COVID-19
Misinformation. Reuters Institute for the Study of
Journalism.
Burston, A., Barrios, C. J., Gomez, D., Sturm, I.,
Uppal, A., Yang, Y. & Walther, B. J. (2018). A Brief
History Of Fake News. UC Santa Barbara.
Caplan, L. A. (2020). Trump Opened The Floodgates
For Convalescent Plasma Too Soon. STAT.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2020a).
Stop the Spread of Rumors. CDC.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2020b).
Coping with Stress. CDC.
Chaudhuri, P. (2020). Coronavirus: Video Of An
Undertrial In Mumbai Falsely Viral As Nizamuddin
Markaz Attendee Spitting At Cop. Alt News.
CIW Statistics. (2020). Statistics: Weibo monthly
active users (MAU) & DAU. China Internet Watch.
CIW Team. (2020). WeChat statistical highlights
2020; miniprogram DAU>300m. China Internet
Watch.
Clement, J. (2020a). Number of monthly active
Facebook users worldwide as of 2nd quarter 2020 (in
millions). Statista.
Clement, J. (2020b). Number of monthly active
WhatsApp users worldwide from April 2013 to March
2020. Statista.
Clemmons, E. (2018). The Psychology of Secular
Saints: Americans Worship Celebrities For Better Or
Worse. The Wellesley News.
Conger, K., Healy, J., & Tompkins, L. (2020).
Churches Were Eager to Reopen. Now They Are
Confronting Coronavirus Cases. NY Times.
DeGennaro, A. (2019). 10 Most Popular Social Media
Sites in China (2019 Updated). Top Digital Agency.
Dizikes, P. (2020). The Catch To Putting Warning
Labels On Fake News. MIT News | Massachusetts
Institute of Technology.
Donovan, J. (2020). Social-media companies must
flatten the curve of misinformation. Nature.
Dong E, Du H, Gardner L. An interactive web-based
dashboard to track COVID-19 in real time. Lancet Inf
Dis. 20(5):533-534.

23. Douglas, C. (2018). Religion And Fake News: FaithBased Alternative Information Ecosystems In The
U.S. And Europe. Cambridge Institute.
24. Douglas, K. M., Sutton, R. M., & Cichocka, A.
(2017). The Psychology of Conspiracy Theories.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 26(6),
538–542.
25. Evanega, S., Lynas, M., Adams, J., & Smolenyak, K.
(2020). Coronavirus misinformation: quantifying
sources and themes in the COVID-19 ‘infodemic’.
The Cornell Alliance for Science.
26. Erdbrink, T. (2018). Iran, Like Russia Before It, Tries
to Block Telegram App. NY Times.
27. Facing History and Ourselves. (n.d.). Explainer:
Political Polarization in the United States.
28. Farmer, B. (2020). The Coronavirus Doesn't
Discriminate, But U.S. Health Care Showing Familiar
Biases. NPR.
29. Financial Tribune. (2018). Iran Ranked World’s 7th
Instagram User. Financial Tribune.
30. Fox’s Dr. Marc Siegel says “worse case scenario” for
coronavirus is “it could be the flu.” (2020). Media
Matters for America.
31. Huff Post, & Briggs, D. (2011). Study: Rising
Religious Tide in China Overwhelms Atheist Doctrine.
Huff Post.
32. Interian, R., & Ribeiro, C. C. (2018). An empirical
investigation of network polarization. Applied
Mathematics and Computation, 339, 651–662.
33. Infodemic
Toolkit.
(2020).
For
fighting
disinformation on COVID-19 Introduction.
34. Jang, S. M., Geng, T., Queenie Li, J.-Y., Xia, R.,
Huang, C.-T., Kim, H., & Tang, J. (2018). A
computational approach for examining the roots and
spreading patterns of fake news: Evolution tree
analysis. Computers in Human Behavior, 84, 103–
113.
35. Jen, the Privacy Freak. (2015). Which countries block
Twitter & which no longer ban Twitter? HideMyAss.
36. Karduni,
A.
(2019).
Human-Misinformation
interaction: Understanding the interdisciplinary
approach needed to computationally combat false
information. 1, 1 (March 2019), 21 pages.
37. Kastrenakes, J. (2019). WhatsApp limits message
forwarding in fight against misinformation. The
Verge.
38. Kertscher, T. (2020). Melanin Doesn't Protect Against
Coronavirus. Politifact.
39. Kouzy, R., Abi Jaoude, J., Kraitem, A., El Alam, M.
B., Karam, B., Adib, E., Zarka, J., Traboulsi, C., Akl,
E., & Baddour, K. (2020). Coronavirus Goes Viral:
11

40.
41.

42.

43.
44.
45.

46.

47.

48.

49.
50.

Quantifying the COVID-19 Misinformation Epidemic
on Twitter. Cureus, 12(3), 1.
Kujawski,
M.
(2019).
Misinformation
Vs.
Disinformation Vs. Mal-Information. Medium.
Lazer, D., Baum, M., Grinberg, N., Friedland, L.,
Joseph, K., Hobbs, W., & Mattsson, C. (2017).
Combating Fake News: An Agenda for Research and
Action. Shorenstein Center.
Lelkes, Y. (2016). Mass Polarization: Manifestations
and Measurements. Public Opinion Quarterly, 80(S1),
392–410.
Lin, L. (2020). TikTok Owner Puts Deal With Oracle,
Walmart in Beijing’s Hands. WSJ.
Lin, Y. (2020). 10 Twitter Statistics Every Marketer
Should Know In 2020. Oberlo.
Lubrano, A. (2020). Could COVID-19 inspire the
faithful? Scholars predict spirituality surge in our
future. Inquirer.
Malekian, S. (2020). Iranian Hardliners Accused Of
Breaking Into Shrines Closed To Prevent Coronavirus
Spread. ABC News.
Mamiit, A. (2016). Twitter Is Banned In China, So
How Does It Have 10 Million Users There? Tech
Times.
McGarvey, K. (2020). Taking Stock With Teens® −
Piper Sandler completes 39th semi-annual Generation
Z survey of 5,200 U.S. teens. Piper Sandler.
Noack, R. (2015). Map: These are the world’s least
religious countries. Washington Post.
Palsson O. S., Ballou, S. & Gray, S. (2020). The U.S.
National Pandemic Emotional Impact Report.
Pandemic Impact Report.

51. Patkar, M. (2013). 3 Secret Ways To Use

Hashtags You've Never Tried Before. Make Use
of.
52. Pennycook, G., Bear, A., Collins, E. T., & Rand, D. G.
(2020a). The Implied Truth Effect: Attaching
Warnings to a Subset of Fake News Headlines
Increases Perceived Accuracy of Headlines Without
Warnings. Management Science, 1.
53. Pennycook, G., & Rand, D. G. (2019). Fighting
misinformation on social media using crowdsourced
judgments of news source quality. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 116(7), 2521–2526.
54. Perrigo, B. (2020). It Was Already Dangerous To Be
Muslim In India. Then Came The Coronavirus. Time.
55. Pingree, R. J., Watson, B., Sui, M., Searles, K.,
Kalmoe, N. P., Darr, J. P., Santia, M., & Bryanov, K.
(2018). Checking facts and fighting back: Why
journalists should defend their profession. PLOS ONE,
13(12), e0208600.
56. Poynter. (n.d.). Verified signatories of the IFCN code
of principles. IFCN Code of Principles.
57. Rachman, G. (2020). Chinese Censorship Is
Spreading Beyond Its Borders. Financial Times.

58. Richter, F. (2020). 6 in 10 American Teens Use
TikTok. Statista.
59. Ruiz, G. N., Menasce Horowitz, J. and Tamir, C.
(2020). Many Black, Asian Americans Say They Have
Experienced Discrimination Amid Coronavirus. Pew
Research Center’s Social & Demographic Trends
Project.
60. Schema. (2014). ClaimReview - schema.org Type.
61. Scheufele, D. A., & Krause, N. M. (2019). Science
audiences, misinformation, and fake news.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
116(16), 7662–7669.
62. Silver, L. (2019). Misinformation and fears about its
impact are pervasive in 11 emerging economies. Pew
Research.
63. Solis, J. (2020). These Celebrities Have Been Flagged
on Social Media for Spreading COVID-19
Misinformation. Newsweek.
64. Steinmetz, J. (2020). Coronavirus risk for Asians,
Africans, Caucasians− revealed Japanese and
Chinese at highest risk for Coronavirus, February 10,
2020. eTurboNews.
65. The New Arab. (2020). Applying Essential Oil To
Anus 'Cures Coronavirus': Iranian Cleric.
66. The Storm Media. (2020). Is the new crown virus a
laboratory biochemical weapon? Only infect Asians?
Why are conspiracy theories soaring? Scholar
analysis: the government deliberately nurturing and
condoning.
67. The White House. (2020). Remarks By President
Trump In Meeting With African American Leaders.
The White House.
68. Vigdor, N. (2020a). Man Fatally Poisons Himself
While Self-Medicating for Coronavirus, Doctor Says.
NY Times.
69. Vigdor, N. (2020b). A Hoarder’s Huge Stockpile of
Masks and Gloves Will Now Go to Doctors and
Nurses, F.B.I. Says. NY Times.
70. Vondracek, C. (2020). 71% Of Churches Meeting For
In-Person Worship, Study Finds. Washington Times.
71. Wardle, C. (2017). INFORMATION DISORDER:
Toward An Interdisciplinary Framework For
Research And Policy Making. Council of Europe.
72. Wardle, C. (2019). Understanding Information
Disorder. First Draft News.
73. Weinberger, D. (2011). Too Big to Know: Rethinking
Knowledge Now That the Facts Aren't the Facts,
Experts Are Everywhere, and the Smartest Person in
the Room Is the Room. Basic Books.
74. World Health Organization. (2020). 1St WHO
Infodemiology Conference. WHO.

12

