Date of publication xxxx 00, 0000, date of current version xxxx 00, 0000.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/ACCESS.2017.Doi Number

Blockchain for Multi-Robot Collaboration to
Combat COVID-19 and Future Pandemics
S. H. Alsamhi, Brian Lee
1

IBB University, Ibb, Yemen

Correspondence: (s.alsamhi.rs.ece@iitbhu.ac.in)

ABSTRACT This conceptual paper overviews how blockchain technology is involving the operation of
multi-robot collaboration for combating COVID-19 and future pandemics. Robots are a promising
technology for providing many tasks such as spraying, disinfection, cleaning, treating, detecting high body
temperature/mask absence, and delivering goods and medical supplies experiencing an epidemic COVID19. For combating COVID-19, many heterogeneous and homogenous robots are required to perform
different tasks for supporting different purposes in the quarantine area. Controlling and decentralizing
multi-robot play a vital role in combating COVID-19 by reducing human interaction, monitoring, delivering
goods. Blockchain technology can manage multi-robot collaboration in a decentralized fashion, improve the
interaction among them to exchange information, share representation, share goals, and trust. We highlight
the challenges and provide the tactical solutions enabled by integrating blockchain and multi-robot
collaboration to combat COVID-19 pandemic. The framework of our conceptual proposed can increase the
intelligence, decentralization, and autonomous operations of connected multi-robot collaboration in the
blockchain network. We overview blockchain potential benefits to defining a framework of multi-robot
collaboration applications to combat COVID-19 epidemics such as monitoring and outdoor and hospital
End to End (E2E) delivery systems. Furthermore, we discuss the challenges and opportunities of integrated
blockchain, multi-robot collaboration, and the Internet of Things (IoT) for combating COVID-19 and future
pandemics.
INDEX TERMS Blockchain; multi-robot collaboration; decentralization; pandemic; quarantine; COVID19; spray disinfection; E2E delivery system, infectious diseases

I. INTRODUCTION

Recently, the World Health Organization (WHO) is
considered coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) as an
international pandemic epidemic. In July 2020, WHO
reported that the number of confirmed COVID-19 cases
reached 14 million people with 540,000 dead rates [1].
COVID-19 has the capability to spread very quickly. The
most efforts to control the spreading COVID-19 have
failed; global monitoring of infected people is highly
demanded. Lock-down can reduce the number of infected
people of COVID-19 due to separating the infected people
from others (avoid interaction). Furthermore, diagnosis and
early detection may lead to less infected people and better
healthcare to infected patients [2]. Advanced technologies
have shown their capabilities in combating COVID-19
outbreak in early diagnosis, monitoring infected patients,
and minimizing the interaction between staff and infected
patients in the hospitals [3]. Several robots have been used
for combating COVID-19 outbreak (autonomous robots,
telemedicine robots, and collaborative robots, mobile
robots) to avoid interaction between humans, monitoring

VOLUME XX, 2017

(social distancing, discover new COVID-19 cases),
delivering goods, spray disinfection, etc.[4]. So, a massive
number of robots are required for performing different tasks
to combat COVID-19 in the quarantine area and hospital
simultaneously.
Network management of multi-robot is tedious due to the
requirement of homogenous and heterogeneous multi-robot
to collaborate effectively efficiently. Managing multi-robot
collaboration requires for improving energy efficiency [5],
enhancing Quality of services (QoS) [6], avoiding
collision[5, 7], delivering services efficiently [8] during
combating COVID-19 outbreak. For instance, homogenous
multi-robot collaboration performs the same tasks (i.e.,
medical/food delivery robots, cleaning robots in hospitals),
while heterogeneous robots are required to perform several
tasks in different environments. Robots can collaborate with
smart devices to perform tasks efficiently, such as
collaboration of robots and the Internet of Things (IoT) in
smart cities applications [8]. However, managing a multirobot network needs protocols to perform their complex

1

tasks efficiently. Furthermore, multi-robot needs to
collaborate in sharing location, purpose, and tasks.
With the support of IoT, Cloud/Edge computing, and
Artificial Intelligence (AI), multi-robot has become
adaptive, collaborative, and connected, thereby enabling
complex interactions amongst robots. Multi-robot
collaboration interacts with each other to exchange
information, share representation, goals, independent
subtasks, and mutual learning adaption and trust. Multirobot collaboration may face the disconnectivity issue
because of communication challenges or navigational
during task performance. For instance, malfunctioning in
centralized multi-robot collaboration stops updating all
robots to collaborate based on sharing information and
goals. Managing tolerance network partitioning requires for
decentralized robot collaboration. So, if robot
malfunctioning occurs, other robots in the swarm will
continue sharing and update their actions in order to
perform tasks efficiently. However, many challenges still
exist to impede the widespread adoption of multiple largescale robots (e.g., swarm robotics [9] including robots
network architecture, supervision of robots, scalability,
controlling, network partitioning, malfunctioning, and time
and energy efficiency. Many techniques are used to solve
existing challenges such as learning, distributed decision
making, blockchain, etc.
Distributed decision-making algorithms (DDM) have been
applied in the development of robotics applications such as
collection mapping [10], dynamic task allocation [11],
avoiding obstacle [12]. However, DDM algorithms are an
open problem in deploying massive numbers of robots [13].
Furthermore, the flexible and autonomous multi-robot
decision making by using DDM algorithms are needed to
tackle the new wave of challenges facing the industry.
However, blockchain is ensuring that all robots in a
decentralized network are sharing an identical state. For
example, blockchain creates a distributed voting among
multi-robot, that is required to reach an agreement.
Moreover, blockchain technology achieves collaboration
models between heterogenous robots in a multi-robot
system [14]. Further, blockchain technology adoption in
distributed decision making can provide operators and
maintainers to multi-robot collaboration. Furthermore,
blockchain is used widely over AI due to unique advantages
in surveillance [15]. Blockchain advantages are including
decentralized, immutable, deterministic, data integrity [16].
Because of all transactions and agreements store in
blockchain, there is no requirement for investing time in
training and learning phases in joining new robots to multirobot collaboration [14]. Then, new robots can synchronize
automatically with multi-robot via downloading the
historical events of all previously stored from the
blockchain.
Various works have proposed using blockchain to facilitate
robot collaboration [14, 17, 18]. With blockchain,
independent robots can reach consensus without a central
controller. Smart contracts provide great potential to enable

VOLUME XX, 2017

more secure [17], autonomous, flexible, and even profitable
[19] robotic operations [20]. Combating COVID-19
outbreak requires automatic robots to collaborate with each
other in a decentralized fashion without human intervention
during task performance. Task performance needs a
dynamic data collection from the quarantine area.
Therefore, the collaboration of multi-robot automation is
required for decentralized networks to increase the
efficiency to combat COVID-19. Here, blockchain can store
data efficiently, enhance security, and share automation
transactions between autonomous multi-robot collaboration
[21]. Furthermore, blockchain helps robots to participate in
performing actions, making decisions, planning activities
collaboratively. Therefore, the combination of blockchain
and automated multi-robot collaboration is essentially
required for combating COVID-19.
Figure.1 illustrates the advantages of blockchain technology
for solving multi-robot collaboration issues to combat
COVID-19 outbreak. There are several ways for robots to
avoid COVID-19 outbreak by monitoring and guiding
people in the quarantine area, avoiding interaction in the
hospital, and avoiding interaction in the quarantine area. In
case of monitoring and guiding people, robots are used to
produce an alarm to sperate people gathering, detect people
with the absent mask, spray disinfection, detect high
temperatures of the infected person of COVID-19 disease.
To avoid interaction, robots are used in hospitals to spray
disinfection, cleaning, testing, and End to End (E2E)
system for delivering food/medical. While avoiding
interaction in the quarantine area, robots are used for End to
End (E2E) delivery (i.e., medicine, foods, and sample tests,
etc.), disinfection. In the above cases, blockchain is used to
turn alert, share information, decentralization, update robot
and load status, share location during robot navigation, etc.
Consensus algorithms and sharding techniques are required
to improve the performance of blockchain in the transaction
speed, scalability, network partitioning, and malfunctioning
robots. Therefore, multi-robot can collaborate to combat
COVID-19 effectively and efficiently indoor (hospital) and
outdoor (quarantine area).
The current research is still at an early stage. The focus is
mainly to verify how to apply blockchain technology in
managing multi-robot that can perform different tasks for
different purposes in combating COVID-19 outbreak.
While the results so far are positive, many open challenges
address here. Most solutions require each robot to process
transactions and store the world state equally, just as what
the normal blockchain systems do. This makes the research
on blockchain for improving multi-robot collaboration as a
very relevant and strategical topic for combating COVID19 outbreak.

A. MOTIVATION
Practicing social distance, avoiding interaction, and staying
at home are ways to reduce infected people of COVID-19
and spread COVID-19 outbreak. To apply them in realworld (in a quarantine area and hospital), quarantined
4

people needs for emerging technologies to participating in
(i) E2E delivery system, (ii) monitoring gathering people
and detecting absence mask (iii) detecting infected people
from long distance, (iv) spray disinfection, etc. Robots are
used for different purposes (spraying, disinfection,
monitoring, cleaning, detecting, medical test, delivery
goods) in order to combat COVID-19 outbreak. In the
hospital, there are several robots used, such as cleaning
robots, testing robots, spray disinfection robots, delivering
medicine, and food robots. To perform tasks collaboratively
and efficiently in real-time, multi-robot needs to be
managed and controlled to success their tasks without
collision or delay.
Furthermore, a multi-robot collaboration network,
centralized control suffers from a single point of failure,
whereas decentralized control suffers from lacking global
knowledge. Therefore, decision making in the centralization
robots network takes a long time for controlling multi-robot
Outbreak

action

Robot function

Broadcasting alarm

Monitoring

People
gathering

Detecting mask
absence

during task performance, and the collision between robots
may occur due to delay in the time response. Decentralized
improves the performance of the robots and reduces the
time spent on doing tasks. Furthermore, sharing information
is essential to support multi-robot collaboration for
operation in environmental exchange, uncertain conditions,
and external disturbances. A successful solution for multirobot interaction issues to perform tasks and record event
history by blockchain can improve the efficiency of multirobot interaction during combating COVID-19 outbreak in
the hospital and the quarantine area. Therefore,
implementing blockchain in multi-robot is required to
increase interaction between robots via supporting
information exchange with high trust, detecting
malfunctioning, helping robot detecting performance issues,
reaching a consensus, deploying distributed solutions,
allocating plans and tasks, and joint missions.

Blockchain advantages

Techniques and algorithms

Robots

Medical supplies

Turn on alert

Spray disinfection

Sharing information

Speaking to people

Detecting high body
temperature

COVID-19
Outbreak

Avoid
Interaction

Spray disinfection

Robot status

Replacing

Cleaning

Sharing information

Testing patient body

Decentralization

Delivering goods

Update location

Indoor
interaction

Consensus
algorithms

Transaction
speed

Sharding
techniques

Scalability

Delivering

Medicine

Load status

Consensus
algorithms

Medical delivery
Spray disinfection

Cleaning

Decentralization

Testing

Outdoor
Interaction

Navigation
control

Network
partition
Malfunction

Testing
Food delivery

Combat
COVID-19
outbreak

Door IoT device

Sharing location

Medical delivery

Robot status

Spray disinfection

Update location in
real-time

Testing drone

Decentralization

Food delivery

Update location to
IoT device

Window IoT

Goods
Shopping

E2E

Foods
Test
sample

Figure.1 Blockchain solutions for improving multi-robot collaboration to combat COVID-19
This conceptual research proposes to focus on the
B. CONTRIBUTION AND SCOPE
avoidance network partitioning, improving the scalability of
CoVID-19 outbreak is rapidly and becomes very dangerous
multi-robot, controlling the performance, which can
due to killing so many people in the world. The
contribute in a clear and more effective in combating
convergence of several advanced digital technologies plays
COVID-19 tasks in the quarantine area. As the difference
a critical role in combating and controlling the outbreak of
of previous researches on the same topic, this research
COVID-19. Therefore, using robots for combating COVIDmainly focuses on blockchain for managing a multi-robot
19 makes the research on blockchain for improving multicollaboration in order to combat COVID -19 outbreak in
robot collaboration as a very relevant and strategical topic.
the quarantine areas. Blockchain makes data public for all
For combating COVID-19 outbreak efficiently and
robots in a network, enables robots to log information, and
effectively, managing homogenous and heterogenous
delivers robot relation to all neighbors’ robots. We focus
robots, collaboration is necessary to avoid a collision,
mainly on discussing challenges in multi-robot
reduce response time, speed transaction, aid scientists to
collaboration and how to develop a decentralized ledger
detect and identify infected cases earlier. Furthermore, due
platform with corresponding algorithms to enable multito increasing the number of robots for combating COVIDrobot collaboration with a tolerance of network partition
19 in different ways in need, robots are suffering from
and malfunctioning robots as follow:
global information, collision, malfunction, controlling
• Multi-robot
collaboration
management
and
collaboration, and so on.
controlling: We discuss the proposed blockchain
VOLUME XX, 2017

4

technology as a critical solution framework for managing
and controlling multi-robot collaboration to combat
COVID-19 outbreak. Blockchain is proposed to control
homogenous and heterogeneous robots to avoid collision
during operation in uncertain conditions and environment
exchanges. Each robot is sharing information with others
via a smart contract. Then, robot action and behavior can
be changed accordingly, until performing a specific task
(combating COVID-19) effectively and efficiently.
Robotchain is decentralized, which can handle a large
number of transactions that are produced from multirobot per second. Therefore, it notes that the interaction
among multi-robot collaboration can increase efficiency
to combat COVID-19.
• Decentralized
of
multi-robot
collaboration:
Blockchain is a decentralization network in which multirobot collaboration suffers. Moreover, blockchain helps
the robots to process the transaction and store the world
state equally. In the case of a malfunctioning robot,
multi-robot collaboration can perform their task
efficiently. Furthermore, joining a new robot is more
accessible by copying the smart contract and starting
sharing events in the blockchain. Due to the
decentralization feature which offers by blockchain, both
joining a new robot and malfunctioning robot cannot
affect the performance of multi-robot collaboration to
combat COVID-19. Here, we discuss the characteristics
of realistic multi-robot collaboration for combating
COVID-19 and how to develop the consensus algorithms
with considering consistency based on the current status.
Further, we discuss the consensus algorithms with
dynamic sharding technique to increase blockchain
scalability, so that the transaction processing and world
state is limited in the sharing range.
• Monitoring quarantine area: We explore the proposed
framework of multi-robot collaboration application for
detecting high body temperature, spraying disinfection,
and detecting mask absence during monitoring quarantine
area. In this framework scenario, blockchain is used for
sharing information to support the interaction of
heterogeneous multi-robot collaboration. For detecting
high body temperature and mask absence, detection
protocol can be prepared by deep learning and stored in a
smart contract. In the case of mask absence detection, the
robot will update location and register in the blockchain,
while the blockchain turn on alert of guiding the person
to follow the restrictions of quarantine. In the case of
high body temperature detection, the robot location will
be updated to the blockchain. The spray infection robot
will come and perform spraying disinfection, announce
robot will speak the guideline, while the self-driver robot
will take an infected case to the hospital for ensuring
infected cases by using a testing robot.
• Quarantine E2E delivery system: We address the
proposed framework solution for delivering medical
supplies and foods/goods to the quarantine area using
blockchain and multi-robot collaboration. Furthermore,
VOLUME XX, 2017

the proposed framework architecture consists of the
donate layer (market, pharmacy), blockchain layer, and
received layer/customer layer (order goods and
medicine). The transport robot carries order to customers
based on blockchain encrypt data (path, receiver, robot
ID, and location). A smart contract verifies and executes
robot status between denoting and customer/receiver. The
robot performs the transport task and keeps updating
location to the smart contract in blockchain for notifying
denote and customer/receiver. As soon as the transport
robot delivers an order, it will update the status “delivery
reaches successfully” to the blockchain.
• Hospital E2E delivery system: We address blockchain
and multi-robot collaboration as proposed framework
solutions for the E2E delivery system inside the hospital.
The proposed framework solution can serve quarantined
people in the hospital without hospital staff interaction.
To avoid collision and decrease interaction between
hospital staff and patients, all robots must be connected
to the blockchain network. A medicine delivery or food
delivery robot updates its location to the blockchain,
while a smart contract shares it with all robots in the
blockchain network until the robot reaches the goal. In
smart hospitals, smart IoT devices at the door must be the
node of the blockchain network and get updates of the
specific robot from a smart contract. Smart IoT devices
can help if a patient can not open the room door due to
the critical case of COVID-19. It notes that the
combining of blockchain, multi-robot collaboration, and
smart IoT technologies can satisfy the patient quality of
experience and combat COVID-19 by reducing human
interaction in the hospital.
The rest of the paper is organized, as shown in Figure.2.
Multi-robot collaboration and COVID-19 and blockchain
for multi-robot collaboration are discussed deeply in
sections II and III. Section IV and V are introduced to the
proposed framework solutions and application domains,
while discussion and conclusion are presented in sections
VI and VII, respectively.
Related work

Introduction

Motivation
Contribution
Multi-robot categories

Multi Robot collaboration
and COVID-19

Formalization
Research objectives complexity
Blockchain

Blockchain for Multi
Robot collaboration

Robotchain

Smart contracts
Paper structure

Proposed framework
solution

Controlling multi robot collaboration
Decentralized multi robot collaboration

Monitoring Qaurantine area
Application domains

Outdoor E2E delivey sytem
Hospital E2E delivey sytem
Challenges

Discussion
Opportunities
Conclusion

Figure.2 Paper structure

4

II. RELATED WORK
Digital technologies play a vital role in fighting COVID in
the early beginning, monitoring during COVID-19 outbreak
and recovery. Advanced digital technologies include IoT,
robots, AI, big data, drone, 5G, cloud computing, and
blockchain. The above-mentioned technologies are used for
surveillance, monitoring, prevention, and detection of
COVID-19 [4, 22-26]. IoT technology is considered for
combating the COVID-19 outbreak [27]. The authors of
[28] applied blockchain for multi-robot to reach consensus
even if Byzantine robots exist. Moreover, the authors of
[29] discussed how the combination of blockchain and IoT
are helping infected people of COVID-19 disease. IoT
devices are allocated in the infected person body for remote
monitoring, while blockchain is used to secure gathered
information and regulate the medical distribution network.
The authors of [30] introduced robotics and smart wearable
to facilitate containment, prevention, and mitigation
COVID-19. The combination of robotics, smart wearable,
AI, and autonomy can meet the potential system, safer and
more efficient for care delivery. Furthermore, the authors of
[31] described robotics role in the healthcare domain to
control the spreading COVID-19. Also, the authors of [32]
addressed the decision making for public safety
management, which is suitable for controlling COVID-19
outbreak.
The communication among multi-robot is required for data
collection, while AI is considered for processing data
efficiently [33]. The authors of [34] introduced game theory
for wireless communication based on gathered data from
different environments. For gathering data from the robot
environment, adaptive blockchain technology is required
for power consumption and used for improving the battery
life of robots during fighting COVID-19 outbreak [35]. The
authors of [36] introduced a multi-group SEIRA model for
spreading COVID-19 among heterogeneous features of
populations. In [37], studied the dynamics spreading of
COVID-19 in Brazil (Rio de Ja Neiro state) using a
susceptible-infectious-quarantine-recovered model.
The
results showed that social distancing rules led to a decrease
in the rate of growing COVID-19 cases. For modeling
COVID-19, the authors of [38] applied a non-singular
fractional-order derivative to investigate the model for
calculating the transmissibility of COVID-19 disease. In
[39], the authors discussed the forecasting and modeling of
epidemic COVID-19 and beyond. For tracking COVID-19,
blockchain plays a vital role in ensuring the transparency of
the epidemic information, the epidemic materials
traceability [40]. The authors of [41] highlighted the
challenges which have been raised during COVID-19
outbreak. Furthermore, they addressed blockchain as a key
technology for solving highlighted challenges (i.e., contact
tracing, patient information sharing, disaster relief,
automated surveillance, etc.).
Blockchain adapted to support interacting and changing the
behavior of multi-robot in the network to perform many
events quickly [42]. The authors of [43] proposed

VOLUME XX, 2017

blockchain-based decentralized and secure connected
autonomous vehicles architecture. For robot supervision
and control, it is difficult to collect data from a large
number of robots. Consequently, robot supervision using
partial knowledge extracted from the data may be errorprone. However, blockchain uses to improve the global data
of the multi-robot system, which leads to easier
maintenance and higher productivity. Multi-robot systems
have wide application scenarios, especially in dangerous,
unknown, unreached, or hazardous environments, e.g.,
humanitarian demining, search and rescue, public safety
management [32], surveillance [17], and quarantine area
[44]. The consensus problem is fundamental in multi-robot
coordination to achieve a common view on the world or to
converge to a single decision [45]. In many scenarios,
centralized control is not practical, and robots have to
communicate with each other in a peer-to-peer manner.
Managing multi-robot collaboration for different purposes
by using blockchain is essential to perform specific tasks
effectively and efficiently in real-time [46].
In [14], the authors presented the benefits of integrating
blockchain into a multi-robot system, including security,
distributed
decision
making,
robots,
behavior
differentiation, and new business models. Furthermore,
blockchain technology makes robots able to work in
dynamic environments without change to the behavior, and
control robots for legal responsibility, and ensure safety in
each robot in aswarm robots. The authors of [18] presented
a blockchain framework as a communication scheme for
securing a ride-sharing service between passenger and
autonomous vehicles trustworthy and dependable. In [17],
the authors proposed an Ethereum based collective
decision-making approach for swarm robotics systems
(with byzantine robots) in searching for a best-of-2
problem. The approach is compared with a classical
approach, i.e., Probabilistic Finite State Machine (PFSM)
[47]. The results showed that the classic algorithm breaks
down even when the number of byzantine robots is small,
whereas the blockchain-based approach provides a robust
solution. Strobel [17] introduced a Proof-of-Concept (PoC)
that improve the security and stability of the swarm robots
coordination and identify byzantine robots from the swarm
by using a smart contract of blockchain technology. Also,
the decision making of the robots collaboration
performance was discussed in the absent and present of
byzantine robots.
Blockchain can provide a transparent and immutable robot
network that can efficiently mitigate attacks and threats.
Blockchain plays a vital role in multi-robot applications to
improve interaction efficiency between robots via
supporting information exchange with high trusted, reach
consensus, change robot behavior and tasks, and deploy
joint missions and distributed solutions [48]. Blockchain
applications, challenges, and opportunities are discussed
with details in [49-51]. A blockchain can also serve as a
shared knowledge base and audit log [52] that can be
analyzed to improve the system performance. Furthermore,

4

Table.1 Multi-robot collaboration and COVID-19 challenges with blockchain efforted solutions
Ref.
[4]

Issues
COVID-19
outbreak

(2020)
[23]
(2020)
[56]
(2020)
[22]

COVID-19
outbreak
Heterogenous
robots
COVID-19

(2020)

Highlighted
Blockchain Robot Multi-robot IoT COVID-19
√
√ √
Managing the impacts
of √
COVID-19 and the role of
advanced technologies
√
AI and blockchain to combat √
COVID-19
√
√
Blockchain
for
managing √
heterogeneous
multi-robot
collaboration
√ √
Digital
technologies
for √
surveillance,
monitoring,
prevention,
and
detection
COVID-19
IoT technologies in combating
√
√
COVID-19
IoT
and
blockchain
for √
√ √
combating COVID-19 disease

[27]
(2020)
[29]
(2020)

COVID-19

[61]

Transaction
speed and
control

Tezos technology is used for
enhancing security, while AI in
a smart contract to improve
robots quality and performance

√

√

Data storage
and resources
computing
Low-speed
transaction

Multi-robot and decentralized
blockchain to improve CyberPhysical systems
Consensus algorithms improve
transaction speed such as
DPBFT
Blockchain is managing security
in multi-robot, while the
developing of decentralized
technique is based on smart
contracts

√

√

√

√

√

√

Consensus algorithms in multirobot are to achieve a fully
decentralized fashion.
SwarmDAG for managing a
distributed ledger
Blockchain applicability as
enabling technology for solving
the challenges that have arisen
during COVID-19 pandemic

√

√

√

√

Combination of blockchain and
multi-robot
for
data
confidentiality
and
entity
validation; efficiently designed
and implemented, and change
robots behavior

√

(2018)

Collision
Latency
Transaction
speed

[30]

COVID-19

Robotics and smart wearable to
facilitate the Containment,
prevention,
and
mitigation
COVID-19 outbreak
Managing
COVID-19
by
exploring healthcare innovation
based on robotics utilization
Blockchain for managing multirobot collaboration to combat
COVID-19, while consensus
and sharding are designed in a
smart contract to develop and
improve blockchain technology.

(2019)
[55]
(2019)
[57]

COVID-19

(2020)
[17]
(2018)

[52]

Security
Control

Malfunction
Control

(2018)
[58]
(2019)
[41]
(2020)

[14]

Network
partitions
COVID-19

(2020)
[31]

COVID-19

(2020)
Work

COVID-19
Delivery goods
Collision
Centralization
Supervision
Scalability
Navigation
Detection

VOLUME XX, 2017

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

√

Importance of blockchain
Share information

Offer solutions for outbreak tracking, safe
operations, user privacy protection, etc.
• Share heterogeneous data robots with
different computing resources and
sensing capabilities
• Deliver infected person medication to his
doorsteps
• Ensure the time of medication delivery
along with tracking accuracy.

•
•
•
•

Secure transfer infected person data
Regulate medical distribution network
Improved security by Tezos
Prevent unwanted behavior changes in
robot actions
• Improving robot automation
• Decentralization, scalability, consensus,
trust,
immutability,
transparency,
autonomous, accessible, and consistent.
• DPBFT consensus algorithm improves
real-time transactions in the blockchain
• Secure multi-robot coordination with
identifying and eliminate the Byzantine
robot
• Managing Byzantine robot
• Collective decision-making
• Shared knowledge, computing, and
reputation management in the multi-robot
system
• Tolerating network partitions
• Distributed ledger maintenance
• Support
contact
tracing,
patient
information sharing, disaster relief,
automated surveillance, manufacturing
management, contact-less delivery etc.
• Robots reach consensus on a particular
state of affairs
• Make robots operations autonomous,
more secure, profitable, and flexible.
• Increase robots flexibility and decreasing
complexity

• Avoid collision by managing multi-robot
• Detecting high body temperature or
absence mask
• E2E delivery system indoor and outdoor
• Improving blockchain decentralized
feature-based smart contracts, consensus
algorithms, and sharding techniques.

4

In [53], it focused on access control of decentralized robotic
networks to create a trusted management model with
enhancing reputation for each node. RobotChain [54] a
decentralized ledger for recording robot events; the smart
contract was managing multi-robot with processing data by
Oracle. The advantages of blockchain for managing a
multi-robot system should fulfill decentralization,
scalability, consensus, trust, immutability, transparency,
autonomous, accessible, and consistent [55].
The authors of [56] explored the need for blockchain
technology for managing the collaboration in heterogenous
multi-robots. Furthermore, consensus algorithms were
discussed with disadvantages for each algorithm, while
sharding techniques were explained to improve the
scalability of the blockchain network. The authors of [57]
introduced consensus algorithms in order to improve
transaction speed applications. They found that the
dynamic-reputation Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance
(DPBFT) algorithm was efficient for real-time transactions
of consensus algorithms in the energy domain. In [9], the
authors implement a distributed ledger system for swarm
robotics using BigchainDB to demonstrate the feasibility.
The system includes Parrot AR Drone 2.0 and Parrot
Jumping Night ground drones. In [58], the authors propose
a partition tolerant distributed ledger protocol for swarm
robotics named SwarmDAG. SwarmDAG uses a Directed
Acyclic Graph (DAG) structured distributed ledger to
enable robot swarms to achieve eventual consistency. It
employs memberships in different partitions to achieve
consensus within each partition. Furthermore, BigchainDB
[59] provides higher transaction speed to solve scalability
than Bitcoin blockchain [60]. However, machine learning
(ML) processes transactions for a long time to run, and
therefore, transaction speed by using blockchain becomes
negligible. Table.1 shows multi-robot collaboration and
COVID-19 issues and blockchain efforts the best solutions.
No work has been done based on blockchain for multi-robot
collaboration to combat COVID-19 outbreak.
Robotchain [61] proposes a robot action recording system
by using a private Tezos blockchain. The recorded events
can be deciding robot actions in conflicting situations,
monitoring, and tuning robot performance. DezCom [62]
proposes a decentralized message broker for industry 4.0
scenarios focusing on robot collaborations. The system is
implemented on top of robots running the Robot Operating
System (ROS) using the Tendermint consensus protocol. In
[63], the authors described the mapping protocol of
blockchain for distributed multiple robot systems. The
protocol developed based on designing an embedded
system with considering options and trade-off for
implementing blockchain. Furthermore, blockchain was
integrated with swarm robotics communication to avoid
network partitions due to communication channels or robot
navigation in an experiential environment to perform tasks
efficiently [58]. SwarmDAG enabled to the management of
network partitions and maintained a distributed ledger. The
benefits of using blockchain in swarm robotics were

VOLUME XX, 2017

discussed in [17], which are byzantine agents and data
robustness structure to wrong data. In [61] introduces
blockchain technology as a suitable solution to prevent
unwanted behavior changes in robot actions. The
blockchain ledger improved the productivity of the factory.
The experimental work was in the platform of Tezos
blockchain for robot automation and capability. Blockchain
is an efficient securing transaction, which allows the
decentralization of information in homogenous and
heterogenous registries among all homogenous and
heterogeneous robots.
The existing works need homogenous and heterogenous
robots with different processing and storage capabilities in
the blockchain network to perform different tasks to combat
COVID-19.
However,
multi-robot
requires
the
collaboration concept to void the challenges and perform
the tasks in real-time effectively and efficiently. The
challenges of multi-robot collaboration include global
knowledge, network partitioning, scalability, and
controlling. This conceptual framework addresses multirobot collaboration by using blockchain.
III. MULTI-ROBOT COLLABORATION AND COVID-19

Robots could reduce the cases of infection, and mortality
among health care staff, hoping to provide efficient medical
assistance. Robots are being deployed to combat COVID19 via enforcing quarantine restrictions by delivering
medical and food, cut the disease risk of interaction
between people, and remotely disinfect hospitals [64]. In
China, robots are deployed in private and public places,
including Guangzhou, Shanghai, and Guiyang, to detect
absent masks and high body temperature [65]. For example,
a robot carries a loudspeaker to guide individuals remotely
in the quarantine area [66]; a high-resolution camera to
detect absence mask [67]; a thermal camera to detect body
temperature and identifying infected of COVID-19 [68,
69]; and delivering goods and medical supplies (i.e., foods,
medicine, and transport patient samples from hospital to
disease center, transport medical supplies, and test samples)
[70]. Previously, it has been used to prevent diseases
outbreak such as Malaria (detect, catch, and take blood
samples of mosquitos) [71].
Collaboration is a new concept in which every robot in
group robots share its idea about the environment and
event, as shown in figure.3. It illustrates the collaboration
between robots based on exchange information, sharing
representation, share the task, independent sub-tasks, and
adaptation, and trust. Interaction among robots relies on
information exchanged. Each robot operates in separate
sub-tasks independently. The action performance is
independent of each robot agreement. Collaboration occurs
when every robot depends on other robots to succeed and
reach the goal effectively and efficiently. Autonomous
multi-robot collaboration can perform tasks, build plans
without interventions of humans, which represent can apply
with unlimited applications. Therefore, autonomous multirobot collaboration is required to combat COVID-19 due to
their operations without humans intervention. The
9

advantages of autonomous multi-robot collaboration
include easily scalable, failure of robot would not result in
the group and performing task, better adaptability to the
environment, less memory, less processing power, better
options for exception controlling, and less capability for
individual robots. The authors of [72] applied a

collaborative control approach for robot collaboration to
perform a common task and achieve a common goal
without centralization control. Furthermore, activities and
tasks for more than one robot are recognized effectively and
efficiently [73].

Robot

1. Exchange Information
2.Sharing representation
3. Share task
4.Independent subtasks
5.Adaptation and trust
Combating COVID-19

Figure.3 Multi-robot collaboration concept
to deliver food to all rooms by avoiding collisions and
Regarding COVID-19 pandemic, robots are categorized into
reduce energy consumption. They need to maintain the
autonomous robots[74, 75], collaborative robots [76], mobile
robustness at a required level, especially with hacked
robots, and Telerobots [30], while the function of each
robots, noisy communication channels. Furthermore,
category is shown in the figure. 4.
multi-robot needs to complete the specified tasks within
a. Autonomous robots - have been worked without human
time and avoid human interaction.
interactions at the time of quarantine. Therefore,
autonomous robots can be done without any contact
between an infected person and hospital staff.
b. Collaborative robots - are known as Cobots, which can
decrease healthcare staff and track healthcare staff
interactions with an infected person.
c. Telerobot - operates remotely and can be used for remote
diagnosis, treat an infected person without human
interaction. For instance, doctors and nurses can measure
the temperature of the infected person of COVID-19
remotely.
d. Mobile robots- they work in a hospital and quarantined
area to perform autonomous tasks efficiently.
In this article, we focus on Multi-robot collaboration to
combat COVID-19, which is presented by more than two
robots in the same scene. According to combating COVID19, multi-robot collaboration can be divided into two
categories:
• Homogenous multi-robot collaboration: multi-robot
Figure.4 Robots categories for combating COVID-19
has to perform common tasks (delivering, cleaning,
spraying disinfection, etc.), which is from the same
• Heterogeneous multi-robot collaboration: multi-robot
family for the same purpose. For combating COVID-19
has to perform common tasks (delivering, cleaning, and
in the hospital, delivery robots are delivering food from
spraying disinfection, etc.), from different families,
the kitchen to rooms. Delivery robots should collaborate
1) MULTI-ROBOT CATEGORIES

VOLUME XX, 2017

9

shape, and size for a different purpose in the same space.
For combating COVID-19 in hospital, heterogeneous
multi-robot collaborates with each other in the same
space according to their independent subtasks (i.e.,
cleaning robots and testing robots, spraying disinfection
robots, delivery robots, cleaning robots, etc.). Hence,
heterogeneous multi-robot can combat COVID-19 in the
hospital or quarantine area within time and avoid human
interaction.
2) FORMALIZATION

We have defined multi-robot collaboration categories in the
previous subsection; here, we address more formal models
for classification.
Definition1. Homogenous Multi-robot collaboration is
defined as a group of robots from the same family to
combat COVID-19 in the quarantine area. HMi is a subtask provided by robot i and presenting as:
 HM 
(1)


1

 HM 2
 ......


 HM i

 ( HM
1





HM 1

.......

HM i =)

Definition2. Multi-robot collaboration for multiple subtasks to combat COVID-19 in time predefine as set MHMi,
where MHMi is the sub-task provided by robots i and
present as:
 MHM 
(2)


1

 MHM 2
 ......

 MHM
i








Definition3. Heterogeneous multi-robot collaboration is
defined as HHMj for performing many tasks in the same
space to combat COVID-19 in time with energy efficiency,
where HHMi is the tasks provide by multi-robot jth, and
HMi the sub-task provided by Robot ith. It represents in the
following form:

 HHM 1

 HHM 2
 ......

 HHM j
 HM
1

 HM 2

 ......
 HM
i
















(3)

The delivery robot is DR, and smart IoT devices is SIoTD a
monitoring robot is MR, speaking robot is SR, cleaning
robot CR, spray disinfection robot SDR, a cooking robot
COR, a high body temperature robot HBTR, absent mask
robot AMR . Furthermore, R refers to reducing, Mmh refers
to the management, and CollabRiH refers to a collaboration
in the hospital, while CollabRiQ refers to a collaboration in
the quarantine area. While ConR and DecR refer to control
and decentralized, respectively. Therefore, several robots
are required for different tasks, as shown in table.2. Every
robot is created for performing the task, while many robots
are required to combat COVID-19. These robots need
management and decentralized to collaborate for combat
COVID-19, as shown functions below.
COVID − 19 = avoidint eraction + socialdis tan ce + stayhom e

(4)

Stayhome = DR + SIoTD

(5)

Socialdis tan ce = DR + M R

(6)

Avoid int eraction = RiH + RiQ

(7)

RiH = CR + M R + SDR + COR + MDR + FDR + TR

(8)

RiQ = E 2 EDR + M R + S R + HBTR + AM R + SDR

(9)

CollabRiH = CR + M R + SDR + COR + MDR + FDR + TR + ConR + DecR

(10)

CollabRiQ = E 2 EDR + M R + S R + HBTR + AM R + SDR + ConR + DecR

(11)

Table.2 Robot function for combating COVID-19
Robot
Thermal image
Disinfection
Delivery goods
Monitoring
Announcement
Telerobot

Combating COVID-19
Interaction between people
Prevent workers interaction
Reducing hospital visit delivery
Absent mask, gathering people
Guiding and delivering information
diagnosis, treat an infected person

Function
Temperature capturing
Sterilizing contaminated area
Enhancing treatment accessibility
Crowd practicing social distance
Broadcasting COVID-19 information
Sterilize and disinfection

3) RESEARCH OBJECTIVES

In this article, we are focused on using a multi-robot for
combating COVID-19, which is much more complicated
than using only one robot. As multi-robot working together
in the same area, the complexity level increases according
to the task and area of performing the task. Therefore,
multi-robot is sharing the combating COVID-19 and
performing different sub-tasks (cleaning, spray disinfection,
delivering food and medicine, detecting and tracking
specific activity, etc.) collaboratively and efficiently.

VOLUME XX, 2017

Early diagnosis
√

Phases
Quarantine time
√
√
√
√

√

Recovery

√
√
√

√

IV. BLOCKCHAIN FOR MULTI-ROBOT
COLLABORATION

Blockchain technology is growing exponentially in the
robotics field due to allowing robots to conduct a
transaction without a central authority. Therefore, it
provides data decentralized, accessibility, immutability,
irreversibility, and non-repudiation features. Above features
make blockchain probably one of the promising and
breakthrough technologies [77]. In most cases of robotic
swarms, the robot has information about itself or its

9

neighbor robots; however, using blockchain for robotic
swarms can provide global information to all robots in the
blockchain technology network. Therefore, blockchain can
be helpful for robotics applications in the current world.
The importance of global information in robotic swarms
can lead to appreciating decision making, efficient task
performance, easier maintenance. The authors of [21]
introduced a blockchain-based protocol for coordinating
and controlling of multi-agent in the context of drones.
Therefore, blockchain technology enables the drones
monitors to log information concerning time, location,
resources, and delivers date among swarm robots to avoid
collisions, makes data public for all robots.
A swarm of robots serves and monitors a vast number of
people in the quarantine area for several purposes in need.
Swarm robots need for collaboration in order to share their
locations, purpose, and tasks. The authors of [78] explained
the development of intelligent multi-robot priority to
perform various tasks autonomously. The collaboration of
heterogenous robots shares sensitive information among
them of the same environment [79]. Furthermore, the tasks
of swarm robots need to a collective decision, in which
decision-making issues are divided into task allocation and
consensus achievement [80]. In the following subsection,
we discuss blockchain, robotchain, smart contract,
blockchain for homogenous, and heterogeneous multi-robot
collaboration.

proposing actions and formulating the tasks in bytecode.
Then, multi-robot can collaborate with each other to vote
for efficient and adaptive action based on both voting and
formulating tasks in bytecode. For action validation, robots
can check each other such as locations, states, and actions.
In the case of robots send incorrect data, the sharding
technique can be used to solve the performance of the
validator issue and avoid consensus to perform the wrong
action. Therefore, the information process is reduced due to
the validator coordinate for the shard. For the automated
task, the distributed consensus in the blockchain is useful
for dispatching, assigning, and executing tasks between
multi-robot collaboration. A smart contract can improve the
authentication of multi-robot collaboration.
High efficiency
Short transaction

Private

High transparency

High scalability
Consensus, PBFT,RAFT

Low efficiency
10 minutes transaction
Permissionless Read/Write

Blockchain

Public

A. BLOCKCHAIN

Currently, blockchain technology has been disruptive in
academic and industrial domains. The main reason behind
using blockchain in the robotic field is to find an optimal
model, which is capable of reaching consensus over a
reliable multi-robot network. Digital ledger represents
blockchain and is designed in a decentralized fashion. It
stores information that represents transactions. A smart
contract is implemented over blockchain due to it
decentralizes data with security. Therefore, accepted
transaction into blockchain becomes secure and valid. The
authors of [81] summarized the most crucial consensus
algorithms characteristics and used. The consensus
algorithms include Proof of Work (PoW), Delegated Proof
of Stake (DPoS), Proof of Stake (PoS), Practical Byzantine
Fault Tolerance (PBFT), PoC, Proof of Burn (PoB), etc.
Blockchain classification with features is shown in figure.5.
The combination of blockchain and multi-robot makes
multi-robot ease of scaling, robustness against failure,
operation more secure, autonomous, flexible, and even
profitable. To avoid collisions of multi-robot collaboration,
blockchain can manage the robots traffic efficiently.
Figure.6 illustrates the combination of blockchain and
multi-robot to improve the formulating the tasks,
distributing decision making, authentication, automating
tasks, and action validation. Distributed decision making by
voting is challenged by multi-robot collaboration.
Blockchain is an efficient solution for distributed decision
making. Simultaneously, developed smart contracts in
blockchain for multi-robot collaboration can be built for
VOLUME XX, 2017

PermissionedRead/Write

Low Transparency
High scalability
Consensus, PoW,PoS,DPoS
High efficiency
Short transaction

Consortium

PermissionedRead/Write
High transparency
Low scalability
Consensus, PBFT

Figure.5 Blockchain types and features
a. Blockchain for homogenous multi-robot collaboration
Blockchain plays a vital role in managing robot traffic
efficiently with high accuracy. Furthermore, it helps to
secure the operations of robots, ensure robots stay on track
(no crash, no harm, no injuring), have not diverged private
information. The authors of [21] introduced the blockchain
technology-based efficient protocol for the coordination of
multi-robot in the context of robots. The importance of
using blockchain technology was to update the real-time
location of robots while delivering goods and medical
supplies. For combating COVID-19, avoid a collision is
required. Due to public data in the blockchain, each robot
can access other robots status, as shown in figure.7. Multirobot can update location, status, environment, and event in
blockchain as well as share decision making collaboratively
in real-time with energy efficiency.

9

Blockchain

Blockchain for
Multi robots
multi robots
collaboration
collaboration

Formulated the tasks

Distributed decision making

Automated tasks

Authentication

Action validation

Figure.6 Blockchain for multi-robot collaboration
b. Blockchain for heterogeneous multi-robot collaboration
Many robots are used for combating COVID-19 in
hospitals, including autonomous spray disinfectant robots,
medical tests robots, hospital robots, ultraviolet disinfection
(UVD) robots, etc. Hospital robots are developed to detect
body temperature and maintain access control [82]. An
autonomous spray disinfection robot is used in multiple
forms to perform tasks in every corner of the quarantine
area. UVD robot can move indoor (i.e., around patient
rooms) and outdoor (i.e., school and hospital campus)
autonomously, shining the right amount of UV-C light
needed to kill specific bacteria viruses in the patient room
[83]. Furthermore, robots deployed in order to deliver food
inside the hotel in Hangzhou, China, in order to avoid stuff
service dangerous [84]. Robots are delivering items to
people who are quarantined at home.

Robot manufacturers join fighting COVID-19 by creating
autonomous models during navigation and assisting human
cleaning surfaces where virus particles can spread among
an infected population. Robots can deploy for disinfection,
delivering
medications/food,
autonomous
spray
disinfectant, and cleaning the floors [85], detect body
temperature in public areas. Developed disinfected robots
help to detect high risk, high touch areas, and clean
continuously. Measuring robots is used to measure the size
of an obstacle and then relay information about the obstacle
to manipulating robots to make a decision accordingly.
Here, blockchain stores all historical information about
proposed robots for performing the task. Furthermore,
blockchain-enables multi-robot to provide security in the
presence of malicious robots, exclude and detect byzantine
robots from contributing to consensus in historical action in
the distributed ledger [17].
B. ROBOTCHAIN

Robotchain system is proposed based on the blockchain to
register the events of robots in a secure and trustworthy
manner [86]. The architecture of blockchain-based
Robotchain is shown in Figure.8. Robotchain includes
robots, a control unit, and a decentralized blockchain
network. The control unit includes a monitoring robot,
blockchain clients, and a control robot. Multi-robot can
form a robot cluster in order to perform combating Covid19 either in the hospital or outdoor. The robot body consists
of many sensors to gather biological data.

Medical
Delivery

Disinfection

Transfer
transaction

Blockchain

Blockchain

Blockchain
Blockchain
Blockchain

COVID
Blockchain

Blockchain

Blockchain

COVID

COVID
Food

Figure.7 Robot access all robots state in blockchain

VOLUME XX, 2017

9

Furthermore, multi-robot requires connecting with the
control unit to send gathered data, robot event status, and
receiving commands. The controlling unit can interact with
a multi-robot for gathering data. It is responsible for
receiving gathered data, sending commands, and
controlling the robot's behavior. It works to send both
hashed data and original data to the blockchain network. A
decentralized blockchain network can be used for resilience
and data validation. It is used for a few purposed, i.e., data
gathered from robots, commands from the control unit, and
integrity protection. Therefore, blockchain helps multirobot collaboration in the quarantine area to collect data
from robots, respond from the control system, store data in
a distributed fashion to ensure stability, share data and
decentralize to perform decision-making real-time.
Robotchain main characteristics are including easy
verification, self-amending, consensus algorithms. It is the
support of easy verification of smart contracts.
Simultaneously, self-amending allows the changes to be
performed by voting the chain on the blockchain.
Furthermore, the process self-amended is helpful when the
change in protocol is required for minor changes.
Consensus algorithms are essential to deal with big data,
where time and energy are required to validate transactions
efficiently. RobotChain is an approach in which
applications can be created on the top using Oracles or by
inserting smart contracts with different actions on the
blockchain.
C. SMART CONTRACTS

A smart contract is a digital and automatic transaction
protocol (rules of contract) placed in a specific address in
blockchain to perform processes accordingly. The protocol

is deployed in blockchain [87] and can self-execute as the
agreement met. A smart contract can perform calculations,
storage information, transfer, etc., automatically [88].
Furthermore, it can support polymorphism and inheritance
[89]. Data authorization rules, functions, and processes are
embedded in smart contracts. Therefore, decentralized can
be managed via smart contracts, which can reduce the
managing cost processes significantly. Evaluation and
development are types of smart contracts. Evaluation is
including code analysis and performance, while the
performance of development can be under development.
Ethereum addressed Solidity [90] as a language (including
code instructions and event state (data) like the initial,
intermediate, and also final) in order to implement smart
contracts. Furthermore, the authors of [90] introduced smart
contracts as part of the Ethereum virtual machine. Ethereum
virtual machine is an isolated environment while accessing
data among smart contracts is limited. The transactions
contain outputs of smart contract code. Transactions code
execute within the Ethereum virtual machine.
A smart contract is capable of actions, including data
collection, processing, and adopting specific solutions. A
smart contract on the blockchain; the contract is formulated
in the programming language. Then, the smart contract
transfers to a blockchain, which will be automatically selfexecuted as the agreement are reached. Once the specific
event takes place, and the transaction reaches the smart
contract, the blockchain distributed virtual machine
executes the code of the program. A new party can join a
smart contract and initiate automatic execution via meeting
specific historical conditions.

Blockchain clients
Record/ ID

Command

Registration key

Encryption key

Robot
Monitoring
BLOCK
CHAIN

COVID
COVID
COVID

Figure.8 Robotchain communication architecture and operation
VOLUME XX, 2017

9

V. PROPOSED FRAMEWORK SOLUTIONS

Regarding combat COVID-19, we focus on identifying the
challenges in multi-robot collaboration. Then, we discuss
the tactical solutions offered by using blockchain
technology for identified challenges. Thus, we address
proposed framework solutions by using blockchain for
multi-robot collaboration challenges in combating COVID19. We mainly focus on controlling and decentralized
multi-robot collaboration. Then, we address applications of
multi-robot collaboration in the monitoring quarantine
areas, outdoor E2E delivery system, E2E delivery system in
hospitals.
1) CONTROLLING MULTI-ROBOT TO COMBAT COVID
The proposed network architecture is by developing novel
techniques for controlling robots in multi-robot
collaboration. Blockchain technology, as the decentralized
ledger, is used in the development of proposed network
architecture for multi-robot collaboration in the quarantine
area. Blockchain is used to store information about the
robot sensing environment (sensors, cameras). Smart
contracts are used to define the robot state and store
information in order to control robots (i.e., action, behavior,
navigation, resources, etc.) of multi-robot collaboration.
The information received from robot shares with other

robots via a smart contract. Smart contracts sent
information to edge intelligent computing in order to
change the required robot action and behavior locally for
performing specific tasks effectively and efficiently. Edge
intelligent computing unit handles the interaction between
multi-robot intelligently, while the monitoring unit can
access the blockchain and follow robots until performing a
specific task according to adopting efficient analysis
methods. Figure 9 illustrates the possibility to control
robots in the team with the help of smart contracts. It shows
the composition of the proposed architecture, such as robots
and ledgers. Robotchain represents the ledger, which
contains a smart contract.
In figure 9, robot 1 detects something valuable/essential
data, AI in edge computing analysis data. Then, robot 1
sends important information (block, hash, and ID) to
robotchain. Robot 2 to Robot N can access the information
sent by robot 1 via smart contract as log and information.
The monitoring unit can access smart contracts and
analysis. The monitoring unit can add block (hash and ID).
Finally, smart contracts in robotchain send comments for
controlling all robots in multi-robot collaboration and
change robot behavior according to smart contracts
comments.

Intelligent edge
computing

Robot 1

BLOCK
CHAIN

Block, Hash, ID

Devices Sensing
environment

Intelligent edge
computing

Log, Information

Robotchain

Smart
contract

Analytics

Control
Hash, ID

Robot 2

Devices Sensing
environment

Intelligent edge
computing

Robot N

Control

Devices Sensing
environment

Figure.9. Multi-robot control for combating COVID-19
VOLUME XX, 2017

9

Blockchain network technology helps to update the
locations of each robot on the distributed ledger in realtime. Each robot can access the real-time location of all
robots in the blockchain network to avoid collisions. For
instance, all robots are used for a different purpose in the
quarantine area (i.e., delivering the medical supplies and
goods, monitoring and detecting the people who are
breaking the rules, automating spray disinfectants, and
identifying the infected person of COVID-19). All robots
update (speed, location, resources, delivery time and date,
and ID) to blockchain network technology in the real-time
and authenticated manner.
The proposed framework solution of combining blockchain
and multi-robot can control homogenous or heterogeneous
multi-robot with avoiding collisions while performing tasks
in the quarantine area. Therefore, each robot has several
sensors for different needs. For instance, the robot has a
stop sensor in order to stop robots. Robotchain is a
decentralized ledger that is used to store robot history
events, status in high securing. Furthermore, the robotchain
is capable of handling a large number of transactions that
are produced from multi-robot per second. Moreover,
controlling robots in multi-robot collaboration does not
need human intervention. The reason behind this is that
smart contract availability can select suitable action
automatically based on gathered data from the quarantine
area. It notes that there is no human interaction in the
operation area of multi-robot collaboration. Moreover, it
observes that controlling multi-robot collaboration by
blockchain can be applicable for real applications such as
fighting COVID-19 and future pandemics. Furthermore,
controlling robots becomes easy to adapt and maintain the
new robot task/ action since a new smart contract handles
the new requirement. Therefore, joining any robot cannot
affect the combating of COVID-19 and future pandemics
system.
2) DECENTRALIZED MULTI-ROBOT COLLABORATION

Multi-robot can assist in many purposes in combating
COVID-19, such as monitoring, spray disinfection,
delivering, detecting, and identifying infected cases of
COVID-19. However, a managing multi-robot network
needs for protocols and efficient techniques to perform their
complex tasks efficiently in real-time. Furthermore, multirobot needs collaboration to share their locations, flying
speed, decision making, battery status, purposes, and tasks.
Multi-robot collaboration needs to reach the common goal
based on joint intention and planning, but decision-making
during action planning is challenged. With the support of
the IoT, Cloud/Edge computing, and AI, multi-robot has
become adaptive, collaborative, and connected, thereby
enabling complex interactions amongst decentralized
robots.
Homogenous and heterogeneous multi-robot collaboration
networks suffer from a single point of failure, whereas a
decentralized robot network suffers from lacking global
knowledge. For instance, robot malfunction is one common
problem in the collaboration of multi-robot. The
VOLUME XX, 2017

malfunctioning robot in a centralized network cause
destroying the robots function network due to the
dependency of robots. The dependency makes the center
are unable to reach to any robot data if there is a
malfunctioning robot happened. Multi-robot collaboration
may be partitioned dynamically, and there are no
communication channels between partitions due to
communication challenges or navigational. Network
partitioning can disturb multi-robot collaboration operation
and decrease the effectiveness of combating COVID-19
outbreak. Different network portioning in heterogeneous
multi-robot collaboration may be in different actions, states,
and needs, leading to conflicting. Here, managing
portioning tolerance and adapting network partitions
become an essential requirement for multi-robot
collaboration functionality to combat COVID-19.
Therefore, we introduced a decentralized ledger platform
with corresponding protocols and algorithms to enable
heterogeneous multi-robot collaboration with a tolerance of
network partition and malfunctioning or byzantine robots in
the hospital or in the quarantine area.
Many works have proposed to use blockchain technology to
facilitate multi-robot collaboration and management in
literature. Blockchain adapted to support many events
quickly to deal with many interacting robots in the network.
Furthermore, blockchain can improve transaction speed and
how a multi-robot change behavior to combat COVID-19.
Blockchain is an essential technology for improving the
decentralization issue, in which swarm robots are suffering.
It is of paramount importance to use blockchain technology
for sharing data between robots at a high level of
authentication with energy efficiency and high accuracy.
Sharing smart contracts in the blockchain network between
robots allows each robot to read other robot's data.
Therefore, multi-robot can reach to consensus
collaboratively to combat COVID-19 effectively in realtime.
Planning actions and agreements are related to transactions
stored in the blockchain, and therefore, no need for training
and learning in case of new robot joined or failed. A new
robot can download the ledger from a smart contract and
then start planning action accordingly. However, a
malfunctioning robot can be replaced by another one
quickly. Furthermore, the robot can borrow missing
information from neighbors one due to a malfunctioning
device. Blockchain technology becomes more critical due
to support the decentralized and share data in real-time
among multi-robot collaboration. With blockchain, robots
play a crucial role in controlling public health emergencies
such as combating COVID-19 outbreak.
The
consensus
algorithm
improves
multi-robot
collaboration, with a focus on network partitioning and
byzantine members. Fault-tolerant consensus algorithms are
forced to make trade-offs within a triangle formed by the
number of robots. Therefore, multi-robot reaches the
consensus, the communication overhead of the consensus
protocol, and the latency required to reach the finality.

9

Furthermore, sharding is a scheme to increase blockchain
scalability, so that the transaction processing and world
state are limited in the sharing range, as shown in figure.10.
As the sharding architecture matches well with the
community feature of robots, the existing sharding scheme
can be improved to accommodate fault tolerance. The
consensus algorithms with dynamic sharding techniques
based on location, task types, community (membership),
flight speed, population, etc., are used to support network
partitioning with malfunctioning robots. Consensus
algorithms enable robots collaboration with a tolerance of
network partition and malfunctioning robots with
improving the decentralization of multi-robot at low cost.

Furthermore, blockchain technology has not been used until
now for developing the decentralized ledger platform with a
consensus algorithm to improve multi-robot collaboration.
Secondly, scalability is also a problem in joining a new
robot to blockchain network technology due to limit sharing
rang. Therefore, the integrated dynamic sharding
techniques and consensus algorithms in the blockchain is
supporting the scalability of robot collaboration. Flexible
and more autonomous solutions to robot decision-making in
distributed systems must tackle the new wave of challenges.
For example, in performing every sub-task, each robot
needs an agreement from other robots, as shown in figure
10. With the help of blockchain, decision-making stores in
the block, and shares for public robots in the group.

Consensus smart contract
Consensus Smart Contracts
Voting

Block Signer
Deployment
RobotChain

Shard Chain 1

Shard Chain 2

1

3

1

Shard Chain 3

2

5

7

2

4

8

6

3

9

Incoming
Transactions

Control

Quarantine area

Figure.10. Consensus algorithm with sharding technique in blockchain for multi drone
Briefly, taking advantage of both the sharding technique
and consensus algorithms can improve network
partitioning, robot malfunctioning, and scalability of the
blockchain network. Therefore, it is expected to develop
multi-robot collaboration, more realistically, and
VOLUME XX, 2017

dynamically. Consequently, the response time for taking
action and decision making with the help of blockchain
technology for multi-robot collaboration can be reduced
with better performance and energy efficiency.

9

a) Consensus algorithm
Consensus algorithms in a decentralized blockchain
network allow robots to reach an agreement and
transactions whenever it is required. Figure.11 shows
suitable consensus algorithms for the development of
blockchain types. Consensus algorithms allow robots in the
blockchain network to trust with all robots. The consensus
algorithm plays a vital role in managing the collaboration in
multi-robot [91]. In [81], the consensus algorithms are
discussed with details. Consensus algorithms in blockchain
can provide solutions for decentralized, secure, and scalable
in multi-robot collaboration [92]. Fault-tolerant consensus
algorithms are forced to make trade-off within a triangle
formed by the number of robots. Figure 11 illustrates the
consensus algorithms (i.e., PoW, PoS, and PBFT) benefits
and limitations.
Decentralization
Benefits
Secure

PoW

High resource consumption
Limitations
High latency
Low resource consumption

Benefits
Secure

PoS
Consensus
Algorithms

Limitations

Low Participation
High throughput

Benefits

PBFT

Low latency
Low scalability

Limitations

Security

High throughput
Benefits

DPoS

Low latency
Secure

Limitations

Producer evil

Figure.11 Consensus algorithms benefit and applications
b) Sharding technique
The enormous computational resources are the reason
behind the challenges of PoW salability [93]. Furthermore,
PBFT is suffering from scalability due to communication
costs and broadcasting messages [94]. The authors of [95]
addressed scalability limitations of blockchain and
introduced the technique in which the network is
partitioned into small subnetworks. The implementation of
the sharding protocol was for permissionless blockchain.
Sharding can tolerate byzantine robots predefined fraction
in the network. Then authors of [96] proposed sharding in
the blockchains, in which Merkle Patricia trees or Merklix
trees [97] were used to different shards state to global state.
Currently, the most significant effort is being given to
decentralized development, scalable, and permissionless
secure blockchain, which designs of Ethereum 2.0 [98].
Therefore, considerable computational resources are not
required for mining [99]. Ethereum 2.0 has embraced PoS
as a consensus algorithm, while PoW uses to secure the
network and sharding for scalability. In order to deploy

VOLUME XX, 2017

smart contracts in the blockchain network with shards, two
techniques can be applied. First, the shard synchronization
technique can allow data flow between shards. Second, the
contract is executed within every single shard. The Directed
Acyclic Graph (DAG) [100, 101] and membership [58]
based approaches will be considered to integrate with
different sharding scheme. It notes that the proposed
framework solution for combating COVID-19 can be
established a much more realistic collaboration that could
avoid failure tolerance and network partitioning.
VI. APPLICATION DOMAINS
1) MONITORING QUARANTINE AREA

The robot body contains many smart devices for different
needs and purposes. Smart devices are used to capture
environmental data. For instance, for combating COVID19, robots are equipped high-resolution camera to capture
images of absence mask, speak announce for social distance
and sperate people gathering, thermal camera for detecting
infected persons of COVID-19 earlier. With the help of AI,
robots can recognize the activities according to the use
purpose (detecting infected person, detecting absence mask,
detecting gathering people, recognizing social distance
between people). The blockchain serves as a ledger to store
information in different communication protocols, share
stored information to all robots in a decentralized
blockchain network, as shown in figure.12.
Smart contracts are used to interact between heterogeneous
robots and control robots in the quarantine area. Edge
intelligent computing unit handles the interaction between
robots in the blockchain. An intelligent algorithm is
prepared for activity recognition (absence mask, high body
temperature, social distance), which can extract and classify
the unique features of a person. Then, a smart contract will
identify the needs actions to be taken by the monitoring
units (absence mask, high body temperature, social
distance). Smart contracts send information to edge
intelligent computing in order to change robot actions and
behavior for performing specific tasks effectively and
efficiently. In this context, the information about how many
infected people is stored in the blockchain. If the number of
infected people changes, the smart contract automatically
determines and updates infected people. Furthermore,
robots are coupled with a computing unit that can handle
the interaction with robots in the blockchain, as shown in
figure.12.
In detecting absence mask, the robot detects absence mask
person and social distance from long distance. Then, the
robot produces an alarm immediately and registers the
event automatically in the blockchain. The mask detection
unit should be prepared to take action against the detected
person in the case alarm still updates and registers in the
blockchain (robot ID, detected person location, movement,
direction, etc.).

9

Thermal
Camera

ID
Image i, Hash i

BLOCK
CHAIN

Block, Hash, ID

Detection high
body temperature

Log, Information

Robotchain
Smart
contract

High
resolution
Camera

Analytics

Mask
detection
Hash, ID

Mask absence
detection

Temperature
identification

Sensors

Control

Guiding COVID

Figure.12. The architecture of multi-drone collaboration for high body temperature and mask absence
In figure 12, the high-temperature robot detects an infected
person of COVID-19 from a long distance by using a
thermal camera. Robot analysis the gathered data about the
capture thermal image intelligently. A high body
temperature robot sends important information that extracts
from the captured image (block, hash, and ID) to
robotchain. High body temperature robot registers the
infected person registers in the blockchain (robot ID,
infected person location, movement, direction, etc.). All
robots in the blockchain network will be informed via a
smart contract. These robots can access the information sent
by high-temperature robots via smart contracts as log and
information.
Therefore, the guide/ announced robot produces an alert
immediately (detecting infected person) and guides the
infected person and people nearby. Furthermore, spray
disinfection comes closer to the infected person for

VOLUME XX, 2017

autonomous spray disinfectant, while the delivery robot
provides the required medicine and mask in case an
infected person is an absent mask. A self-driving robot
takes the infected person to the nearest hospital to ensure
that the detected person is infected with COVID-19. Also,
the monitoring unit can access smart contracts and analysis
intelligently the information sent by high-temperature
robots. The monitoring unit can add block (hash and ID).
Finally, smart contracts in robotchain send comments for
controlling all robots in multi-robot collaboration and
change robot behavior according to smart contracts
comments.
The procedure of monitoring multi-robot collaboration to
combat COVID-19 is shown in figure.13. It also shows how
blockchain helps to control and decentralized multi-robot
collaboration.

9

Start
Monitoring robots are deployed
Announcement robots, Absence mask
detection robots, High temperature robot

Scanning quarantine area
No
High body
temperature detected

No

No

Absent mask detected

Yes
Capture image of suspected face

Yes
Capture image of suspected face

Registered in blockchain

Registered in blockchain

Update location to blockchain

Update location to blockchain

group people detected

Yes
Blockchain Turn alert for guiding

Practicing social
distancing

Yes

No
Smart contract send
notification to Health officer

Vehicle robot Disinfection robot

Update location to blockchain
Same person
detected

No
Smart contract send
notification to police

Yes
Smart contract send
notification to police

Police apply rules

Quarantined in Hospital
Police apply rules

End

Figure.13 Algorithm of monitoring multi-robot collaboration to combat COVID-19
2) QUARANTINE E2E DELIVERY SYSTEM

Delivery robots can serve people in the quarantine area
because robots can transport medicines and goods. In this
case, we focus on delivery robots for medicine and food to
the quarantine area. In order to implement the use cases,
reliable and fast robots, network connectivity is required,
such as 5G. Furthermore, mobile network connectivity is
preferable to provide high quality, secure connectivity to
improve the security and safety network of robot
communications. Moreover, a security attack on robot
communication networks is needed in order to control steal
or spoof attack vectors. Attack vectors are including
monitoring (i.e., monitoring data from the center unit),
control (i.e., getting data from and to the center unit), and
data acquisition (i.e., location, speed, and sensing
environment). To avoid attack vectors, a combination of
blockchain and delivery robots is a suitable solution over
5G. Therefore, 5G is offering various benefits to the
combination of delivery robots and blockchain. The
benefits include high data reliability in goods delivery,
VOLUME XX, 2017

faster access to data due to decentralized characteristic,
high availability of data due to a distributed ledger, network
fault-tolerant due to each robot has a copy of the ledger, the
resistance from data modification attack, and the new robot
can join blockchain after all robots verification.
Figure 14 illustrates the proposed framework solution for
delivery robots in the quarantine area. The proposed
framework network architecture consists of three layers,
including the donate layer, blockchain layer, received layer.
The received layer requests medicine and food from the
donating layer through the blockchain network by
Ethereum. Donated prepared the order with encrypted data
from donated (path, receiver, and robot ID and location).
Smart contact in blockchain verifies and executes the status
condition between donated and receiver, then stores the
verification in the blockchain network. Therefore, the data
in the blockchain is secure, reliable, and traceable. In such a
delivery system, a quarantined person makes an order for
delivery (online).

9

Mall

Location
Destination ID
Source ID
Path
Speed

Supplies

Request

BLOC
K
CHAIN

Figure.14. Delivery of food and medicine in blockchain envisioned robots networks
Start
Register food delivery robots, medical delivery robot in blockchain
Request food/medicine
Registered order in blockchain
Donate prepare order (Path, receiver location, robot ID, donate location)
Smart contract verify status
No

Robot accept to
perform task

Another robot

Yes
Smart contract inform receiver (robot ID and reaching time)
Robot update status
No

Robot reach to
customer

Yes
Robot update delivery successfully delivered to smart contract
End

Figure.15 Algorithm of multi-robot collaboration for
quarantine E2E delivery system
The smart contract will be generated automatically with
sufficient data about (the order purpose, person location,
donated location, trajectory, etc.) and transfer the smart
contract to the blockchain. Here, the required delivery robot
will accept to perform this contract. Then, a person is
VOLUME XX, 2017

quarantined to inform about assigned robots, the required
time for delivery, and registered trajectory. As soon as the
donated made order ready, the assigned robot starts
performing the missing and updated
location
simultaneously to the smart contracts. Finally, the robot
notified both people and denoted that order has been
delivered successfully via updating dispatching and
returning to the source station information in the
blockchain. Figure 15 illustrates the procedure of the
outdoor E2E delivery system and blockchain function
during multi-robot collaboration to deliver goods during
COVID-19.
3) HOSPITAL E2E DELIVERY SYSTEM

In the hospital, E2E delivery system is critical to avoid
interaction between hospital staff and infected persons of
COVID-19. A delivery robot can deliver goods or foods to
the patients inside the hospital, as shown in figure.16.
Figure.16 shows many robots are working together in the
same space in order to combat COVID-19. Several infected
patients are admitted to rooms. Disinfection cleaning,
nurse, delivering food, and medicine, and monitoring robots
are used to serve the infected patients of COVID-19. In this
scenario, blockchain technology helps in collaborating with
heterogenous multi-robots in order to combat COVID-19
collaboratively, intelligently, and efficiently in a
decentralized fashion without collusion.
In E2E delivery system, delivery robots update location,
speed etc. into the blockchain, while the blockchain shares
the updated information with all robots, infected persons,
9

etc. via smart contract. A specific robot to deliver particular
tasks, reaches the infected location, package registers in
blockchain, and status updated (package has delivered
successfully). Previously, robots in the hospital, Wuhan,
China, are used for delivering food to the patient room via
speaking at the room door.
For instance, testing robot/ nurse robots can update infected
person status to the blockchain, doctors access smart
contracts and suggest suitable medicine for current status to
the smart contracts. Pharmacia checks the smart contracts
and prepared essential medicine according to doctor
suggestions. Then, the delivery robot comes to deliver
suggested medicine from Pharmacy to an infected person,
including an explanation of how to use the suggested
medicine. An infected person opens the door and takes
medicine.
Therefore, the interaction between doctor, nurse, and
hospital staff is not required. Therefore, it notes that
delivery robots collaborate with other robots in hospital
plays a critical role in combating COVID-19 outbreak
effectively and efficiently in a high-security. In smart

hospitals, smart IoT devices placed at the door can join as
new nodes in the blockchain. Then, the infected person's
room door can open automatically as soon as the delivery
robot reached the door. Blockchain is used to store robot
updated data to ensure the door opens for a specific robot.
As the robot reached near to the patient's door, the
blockchain updates the location, speed and shares it with
the door. Therefore, IoT devices in the door of the supposed
room enable the door to identify and verify the blockchainbased automatic share of the updated location of robots in
smart contracts to open the door and let the robot enter the
room and close the door when robots go out. Here, the
blockchain technology network enables the interaction
between smart IoT devices placed at the door and robots
collaboratively to deliver things to a patient bed. Therefore,
the collaboration of robots and IoT devices can help robots
to reach to an infected person in a critical situation due to
COVID-19. For E2E delivery system in the hospital, figure
17 shows the procedures and functions of several robots to
combat COVID-19 with the helped of blockchain
technology.

Nurse

2

8

6

4

Medical

Delivery

1

Disinfection

3

Food

5

7

Monitoring

Figure.16 Multi-robot collaboration to combat COVID-19 in hospital
Briefly, the summary of study cases and the proposed
navigation, joining a new robot to the team, malfunctioning,
framework is shown in table.3. It describes the uses of
and E2E delivery system. Blockchain technology network
robots for combating COVID-19 outbreak either in
represents the critical technology in offering an appreciated
hospitals or in the quarantine area. The primary purpose of
solution for robot collaboration issues for combating
robots for combating COVID-19 is reducing people's
COVID-19 outbreak. Algorithms and techniques are also
interaction by monitoring, broadcasting, replacing the
discussed in order to improve blockchain technology in
human, spray disinfection, cleaning, delivering goods, and
robot collaboration, such as consensus algorithms and
medical supplies. However, several problems may occur
sharding techniques.
during robot task performance, such as collusion,
VOLUME XX, 2017

9

Start
Register food delivery robots, medical delivery robot
in blockchain, Pharmacy, doctor, nurse Patient
Request food, Update required medicine by doctor, request test by nurse

Registered order in blockchain
Pharmacy prepare order (Path, room No., robot ID, pharmacy location, details )
Smart contract verify status

Nurse check status

Test robot

Doctor suggest medicine

No

Medical delivery
robot

No

Food delivery robot

Yes
Pharmacy prepare order

Yes
Cooking robot prepare order

Medical delivery robot

Ready food delivery robot

Smart contract inform patient about robot ID and time required to reach
Robot update status

No

Robot reach to
patient
Yes

Robot update delivery successfully delivered to smart contract
End

Figure.17 Algorithm of multi-robot collaboration for hospital E2E delivery system
Table.3 Proposed framework solution summary for combating COVID-19 outbreak
Problem

Proposed solution

Interaction
between
staff and
patients in
the
hospital.

Heterogenous
and • Avoiding stuff and
homogenous
multipatient interaction by:
robot collaboration to • Delivering goods and
combat
COVID-19
medical supplies
outbreak.
• Spray disinfection
• Replacing stuff in
some jobs, such as
cleaning and test
patient
body
temperature.
Heterogenous
and • Detecting high body
homogenous
multitemperature and the
robot collaboration to
absence of a mask.
combat
COVID-19 • Delivering goods and
outbreak
in
the
medical supplies.
quarantine area.
• Spray disinfection.
• Broadcasting

Delivering
services.
Interaction
between
people in
the
quarantine
area.
Monitoring
people
Delivering
services

VOLUME XX, 2017

Activities required

Issues may be faced
o
o
o
o
o
o

Malfunctioning
Centralization
Supervision
Scalability
Navigation
Collision

o Navigation

o
o
o
o
o

Malfunctioning
Centralization
Supervision
Collision
Navigation

o Collision
o Navigation
o Trajectory planning
o A robot cannot reach
inside the customer room

Blockchain for issues solutions
Blockchain decentralized characteristic solves network
partitioning, malfunctioning, and improves the
scalability in multi-robot collaboration.
Blockchain shares information of each robot,
controlling multi-robot collaboration becomes easier
while performing several tasks.
Blockchain keeps updating the location and speed of
each robot, so multi-robot collaboration delivers
goods, foods, medical supplies.
Blockchain
decentralized
solves
multi-robot
collaboration
to
improve
supervising
and
malfunctioning robots.
Blockchain shares robot location in real-time to control
navigation and avoid collision during task performance
of multi-robot collaboration.
Blockchain shares each robot information with others
for delivering goods, foods, medical supplies.
Blockchain shares robot information with IoT devices
in the smart hospital, so robots can automatically
deliver the patient bed or desks.
9

VII. DISCUSSION

Currently, robots are a promising solution for avoiding
interaction between people during COVID-19 outbreak by
delivering goods and medical supplies, spray disinfection,
cleaning, monitoring, detecting high body temperature, or
mask absence, broadcasting information, etc. In this
section, we discuss how blockchain can provide numerous
uses in multi-robot collaboration for combating COVID-19.

1.CHALLENGES
The objectives of this paper are to define the proposed
framework solutions for multi-robot by blockchain to
combat COVID-19 and future pandemics. Some of the
challenges of the proposed framework solutions are
including (i) management blockchain lifecycles, (ii)
ensuring that joining new robots into the blockchain
network is to show the real quality of their data.
Furthermore, the complexity is that it is challenging to
evaluate robot sensing capabilities and data quality. The
complexity may significantly impact robot resources and
inaccurate data gathered by IoT devices.
2. OPPORTUNITIES

We observe some opportunities regarding combat COVID19 in outdoor and hospital delivery systems such as smart
homes and smart hospitals. Smart cities represent the key
technology for combating COVID-19. As part of smart
cities and smart hospitals, blockchain can be developed by
deploying smart infrastructure of the environment
(supported by smart IoT devices), where trust between
multi-robot collaboration and smart infrastructure improves
robot action in the same environment. Therefore,
integration between smart IoT devices and multi-robot
collaboration in a smart environment (smart hospital, smart
city) can provide efficient data to multi-robot collaboration
and validate the data stamps from multi-robot collaboration
in the same environment.

discuss multi-robot collaboration in the blockchain network
for controlling and improve decentralized to combat
COVID-19. Applications of multi-robot collaboration for
combating COVID-19 are discussed deeply in this paper
with the proposed framework solution such as monitoring
COVID-19, Outdoor E2E delivery system, and hospital
E2E delivery system. Based on our proposed framework
solutions, we provide potential research experimental future
directions that can help develop blockchain-based multirobot collaboration to combat COVID-19. Moreover, we
motivate academic and industrial researchers to give more
effort into the blockchain, multi-robot collaboration, and
smart IoT technologies to combat COVID-19 and future
pandemics.
REFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

VIII. CONCLUSION

[9]

The combination of robots and blockchain plays a vital role
in improving the healthcare domain in early diagnosis,
quarantine time, and recovery of a disease outbreak. The
number of infected cases of COVID-19 is reduced due to
the increasing robot distributed functions for different
purposes.
Blockchain
enables
homogenous
and
heterogenous robots to combat COVID-19 collaboratively
and efficiently by sharing information autonomously and
accessing information of each other. Due to blockchain
features enable multi-robot to log information (i.e., world
states, time, location, resources, etc.) and deliver data and
robot relation to all neighbors’ robots. Therefore,
blockchain empowers robots to operate safely, collaborate
efficiently, act accurately and fast, and exchange behavior
quickly. Multi-robot collaboration in blockchain network
needs protocols (consensus algorithms) and techniques
(sharding) to keep connectivity, avoid the collision,
improve network partitioning, the response in real-time, and
exchange behavior according to the environment. We

[10]

VOLUME XX, 2017

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

WHO, "Coronavirus disease (covid-19),", 2020, [online] available
in:https://bit:ly/2ZU5x08, access on 15 Septemper, 2020.
K. K.-W. To et al., "Consistent detection of 2019 novel coronavirus
in saliva," Clinical Infectious Diseases, 2020.
E. Demaitre, "Coronavirus response growing from robotics
companies,",2020,
[online]
availbale
in:
https://www.therobotreport.com/coronavirus-response-growingrobotics-companies/, access on 03 March, 2020.
V. Chamola, V. Hassija, V. Gupta, and M. Guizani, "A
Comprehensive Review of the COVID-19 Pandemic and the Role
of IoT, Drones, AI, Blockchain, and 5G in Managing its Impact,"
IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 90225-90265, 2020.
S. Alsamhi, O. Ma, and M. S. Ansari, "Convergence of Machine
Learning and Robotics Communication in Collaborative Assembly:
Mobility, Connectivity and Future Perspectives," Journal of
Intelligent & Robotic Systems, pp. 1-26, 2019.
S. H. Alsamhi, O. Ma, M. S. Ansari, and S. K. Gupta,
"Collaboration of drone and internet of public safety things in smart
cities: An overview of qos and network performance optimization,"
Drones, vol. 3, no. 1, p. 13, 2019.
S. H. Alsamhi, O. Ma, and M. S. Ansari, "Survey on artificial
intelligence
based
techniques
for
emerging
robotic
communication," Telecommunication Systems, vol. 72, no. 3, pp.
483-503, 2019.
S. H. Alsamhi, O. Ma, M. S. Ansari, and F. A. Almalki, "Survey on
collaborative smart drones and internet of things for improving
smartness of smart cities," Ieee Access, vol. 7, pp. 128125-128152,
2019.
A. Khawalid, D. Acristinii, H. van Toor, and E. C. Ferrer, "Grex: A
decentralized hive mind," Ledger, vol. 4, 2019.
R. Aragues, J. Cortes, and C. Sagues, "Distributed consensus on
robot networks for dynamically merging feature-based maps," IEEE
Transactions on Robotics, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 840-854, 2012.
G. P. Das, T. M. McGinnity, S. A. Coleman, and L. Behera, "A fast
distributed auction and consensus process using parallel task
allocation and execution," in 2011 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2011, pp. 47164721: IEEE.
I. Navarro and F. Matía, "A framework for the collective movement
of mobile robots based on distributed decisions," Robotics and
Autonomous Systems, vol. 59, no. 10, pp. 685-697, 2011.
S. Pourmehr, V. M. Monajjemi, R. Vaughan, and G. Mori, "“You
two! Take off!”: Creating, modifying and commanding groups of
robots using face engagement and indirect speech in voice
commands," in 2013 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2013, pp. 137-142: IEEE.
E. C. Ferrer, "The blockchain: a new framework for robotic swarm
systems," in Proceedings of the future technologies conference,
2018, pp. 1037-1058: Springer.
V. K. Chattu, A. Nanda, S. K. Chattu, S. M. Kadri, and A. W.
Knight, "The emerging role of blockchain technology applications
in routine disease surveillance systems to strengthen global health

9

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]
[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]
[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

security," Big Data and Cognitive Computing, vol. 3, no. 2, p. 25,
2019.
K. Salah, M. H. U. Rehman, N. Nizamuddin, and A. Al-Fuqaha,
"Blockchain for AI: Review and open research challenges," IEEE
Access, vol. 7, pp. 10127-10149, 2019.
V. Strobel, E. Castelló Ferrer, and M. Dorigo, "Managing byzantine
robots via blockchain technology in a swarm robotics collective
decision making scenario," in Proceedings of the 17th International
Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, 2018,
pp. 541-549: International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and
Multiagent Systems.
M. G. M. M. Hasan, A. Datta, M. A. Rahman, and H. Shahriar,
"Chained of things: A secure and dependable design of autonomous
vehicle services," in 2018 IEEE 42nd Annual Computer Software
and Applications Conference (COMPSAC), 2018, vol. 2, pp. 498503: IEEE.
A. Kapitonov et al., "Robotic Services for New Paradigm Smart
Cities Based on Decentralized Technologies," Ledger, vol. 4, 2019.
E. C. Ferrer, T. Hardjono, and A. Pentland, "Proceedings of the
First Symposium on Blockchain and Robotics, MIT Media Lab, 5
December 2018," Ledger, vol. 4, 2019.
A. Kapitonov, S. Lonshakov, A. Krupenkin, and I. Berman,
"Blockchain-based protocol of autonomous business activity for
multi-agent systems consisting of UAVs," in 2017 Workshop on
Research, Education and Development of Unmanned Aerial
Systems (RED-UAS), 2017, pp. 84-89: IEEE.
D. S. W. Ting, L. Carin, V. Dzau, and T. Y. Wong, "Digital
technology and COVID-19," Nature medicine, vol. 26, no. 4, pp.
459-461, 2020.
D. Nguyen, M. Ding, P. N. Pathirana, and A. Seneviratne,
"Blockchain and AI-based Solutions to Combat Coronavirus
(COVID-19)-like
Epidemics:
A
Survey,"
10.36227/techrxiv.12121962.v1, 2020.
S. Agarwal, N. S. Punn, S. K. Sonbhadra, P. Nagabhushan, K. K.
Pandian, and P. Saxena, "Unleashing the power of disruptive and
emerging technologies amid COVID 2019: A detailed review,"
arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.11507, 2020.
N. Saeed, A. Bader, T. Y. Al-Naffouri, and M.-S. Alouini, "When
Wireless Communication Faces COVID-19: Combating the
Pandemic and Saving the Economy," arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.06637, 2020.
N. Melluso et al., "Lights and shadows of COVID-19, Technology
and Industry 4.0," arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.13457, 2020.
M. Nasajpour, S. Pouriyeh, R. M. Parizi, M. Dorodchi, M. Valero,
and H. R. Arabnia, "Internet of Things for Current COVID-19 and
Future Pandemics: An Exploratory Study," arXiv preprint
arXiv:2007.11147, 2020.
V. Strobel, E. Castelló Ferrer, and M. Dorigo, "Blockchain
technology secures robot swarms: A comparison of consensus
protocols and their resilience to Byzantine robots," Frontiers in
Robotics and AI, vol. 7, p. 54, 2020.
T. Alam, "Internet of Things and Blockchain-based framework for
Coronavirus (Covid-19) Disease," Available at SSRN 3660503,
2020.
M. Tavakoli, J. Carriere, and A. Torabi, "Robotics, smart wearable
technologies, and autonomous intelligent systems for healthcare
during the COVID‐19 pandemic: An analysis of the state of the art
and future vision," Advanced Intelligent Systems, p. 2000071, 2020.
Z. H. Khan, A. Siddique, and C. W. Lee, "Robotics Utilization for
Healthcare Digitization in Global COVID-19 Management,"
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public
Health, vol. 17, no. 11, p. 3819, 2020.
G. Fragkos, E. E. Tsiropoulou, and S. Papavassiliou, "Disaster
management and information transmission decision-making in
public safety systems," in 2019 IEEE Global Communications
Conference (GLOBECOM), 2019, pp. 1-6: IEEE.
X.-L. Huang, X. Ma, and F. Hu, "Machine learning and intelligent
communications," Mobile Networks and Applications, vol. 23, no.
1, pp. 68-70, 2018.
C. Singhal and S. De, Resource allocation in next-generation
broadband wireless access networks. IGI Global, 2017.

VOLUME XX, 2017

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46]

[47]

[48]

[49]

[50]

[51]

[52]

[53]

[54]

P. Vamvakas, E. E. Tsiropoulou, M. Vomvas, and S. Papavassiliou,
"Adaptive power management in wireless powered communication
networks: A user-centric approach," in 2017 IEEE 38th Sarnoff
Symposium, 2017, pp. 1-6: IEEE.
S. Contreras, H. A. Villavicencio, D. Medina-Ortiz, J. P. BironLattes, and Á. Olivera-Nappa, "A multi-group SEIRA model for the
spread of COVID-19 among heterogeneous populations," Chaos,
Solitons & Fractals, p. 109925, 2020.
N. Crokidakis, "COVID-19 spreading in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil: do
the policies of social isolation really work?," Chaos, Solitons &
Fractals, p. 109930, 2020.
M. S. Abdo, K. Shah, H. A. Wahash, and S. K. Panchal, "On a
comprehensive model of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) under
Mittag-Leffler derivative," Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, p. 109867,
2020.
S. Boccaletti, W. Ditto, G. Mindlin, and A. Atangana, "Modeling
and forecasting of epidemic spreading: The case of Covid-19 and
beyond," Chaos, Solitons, and Fractals, vol. 135, p. 109794, 2020.
Q. Xiaoxia, "How next-generation information technologies tackled
COVID-19 in China," in "weforum.org/agenda/2020/04/how-nextgeneration-information-technologies-tackled-covid-19-in-china/,"
2020.
A. Kalla, T. Hewa, R. Mishra, M. Ylianttila, and M. Liyanage, "The
Role of Blockchain to Fight Against COVID-19," IEEE
Engineering Management Review, vol. PP, 08/01 2020.
V. Lopes and L. A. Alexandre, "An overview of blockchain
integration with robotics and artificial intelligence," arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.00329, 2018.
R. Gupta, A. Kumari, and S. Tanwar, "A taxonomy of blockchain
envisioned
edge‐as‐a‐connected
autonomous
vehicles,"
Transactions on Emerging Telecommunications Technologies, p.
e4009.
E. Otiede et al., "Delivering Medical Products to Quarantined
Regions Using Unmanned Aerial Vehicles," Journal of Applied
Mechanics Engineering, vol. 6, no. 1, p. 244, 2017.
Y. Zheng, Y. Zhu, and L. Wang, "Consensus of heterogeneous
multi-agent systems," IET Control Theory & Applications, vol. 5,
no. 16, pp. 1881-1888, 2011.
J. P. Queralta and T. Westerlund, "Managing Collaboration in
Heterogeneous Swarms of Robots with Blockchains," arXiv
preprint arXiv:1912.01711, 2019.
G. Valentini, D. Brambilla, H. Hamann, and M. Dorigo, "Collective
perception of environmental features in a robot swarm," in
International Conference on Swarm Intelligence, 2016, pp. 65-76:
Springer.
I. Afanasyev et al., "Towards blockchain-based multi-agent robotic
systems: Analysis, classification and applications," arXiv preprint
arXiv:1907.07433, 2019.
M. U. Javed, M. Rehman, N. Javaid, A. Aldegheishem, N. Alrajeh,
and M. Tahir, "Blockchain-Based Secure Data Storage for
Distributed Vehicular Networks," Applied Sciences, vol. 10, no. 6,
p. 2011, 2020.
A. A. Monrat, O. Schelén, and K. Andersson, "A survey of
blockchain from the perspectives of applications, challenges, and
opportunities," IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 117134-117151, 2019.
Z. Zheng, S. Xie, H.-N. Dai, X. Chen, and H. Wang, "Blockchain
challenges and opportunities: A survey," International Journal of
Web and Grid Services, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 352-375, 2018.
M. Dorigo, "Blockchain Technology for Robot Swarms: A Shared
Knowledge and Reputation Management System for Collective
Estimation," in Swarm Intelligence: 11th International Conference,
ANTS 2018, Rome, Italy, October 29–31, 2018, Proceedings, 2018,
vol. 11172, p. 425: Springer.
I. Zikratov, O. Maslennikov, I. Lebedev, A. Ometov, and S.
Andreev, "Dynamic trust management framework for robotic multiagent systems," in Internet of Things, Smart Spaces, and Next
Generation Networks and Systems: Springer, 2016, pp. 339-348.
E. C. Ferrer, O. Rudovic, T. Hardjono, and A. Pentland,
"Robochain: A secure data-sharing framework for human-robot
interaction," arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.04480, 2018.

9

[55]

[56]

[57]

[58]

[59]
[60]

[61]
[62]

[63]

[64]

[65]

[66]

[67]

[68]

[69]

[70]

[71]

[72]

[73]

[74]
[75]

R. Skowroński, "The open blockchain-aided multi-agent symbiotic
cyber–physical systems," Future Generation Computer Systems,
vol. 94, pp. 430-443, 2019.
J. P. Queralta and T. Westerlund, "Blockchain-powered
collaboration in heterogeneous swarms of robots," Frontiers in
Robotics and AI, 2020.
W. Cai, W. Jiang, K. Xie, Y. Zhu, Y. Liu, and T. Shen, "Dynamic
reputation–based consensus mechanism: Real-time transactions for
energy blockchain," International Journal of Distributed Sensor
Networks, vol. 16, no. 3, p. 1550147720907335, 2020.
J. A. Tran, G. S. Ramachandran, P. M. Shah, C. B. Danilov, R. A.
Santiago, and B. Krishnamachari, "SwarmDAG: A Partition
Tolerant Distributed Ledger Protocol for Swarm Robotics," Ledger,
vol. 4, 2019.
T. McConaghy et al., "Bigchaindb: a scalable blockchain database,"
white paper, BigChainDB, 2016.
A. Kiayias and G. Panagiotakos, "Speed-Security Tradeoffs in
Blockchain Protocols," IACR Cryptology ePrint Archive, vol. 2015,
p. 1019, 2015.
M. Fernandes and L. A. Alexandre, "Robotchain: Using tezos
technology for robot event management," Ledger, vol. 4, 2019.
A. K. R. Venkatapathy and M. ten Hompel, "A Decentralized
Context Broker Using Byzantine Fault Tolerant Consensus,"
Ledger, vol. 4, 2019.
S. Falcone, J. Zhang, A. Cameron, and A. Abdel-Rahman,
"Blockchain Design for an Embedded System," Ledger, vol. 4,
2019.
Dezeen, "Drones and self-driving robots used to fight coronavirus
in
China,"2020,
[online]
available
in:
https://www.dezeen.com/2020/02/20/drones-robots-coronaviruschina-technology/, access on 21 February, 2020.
J. Happich, "5G edge patrol robots deployed in China to detect
Covid-19
cases,"
2020,
[online]
available
in:
https://www.eenewseurope.com/news/5g-edge-patrol-robotsdeployed-china-detect-covid-19-cases/page/0/1, accessed on 29
March, 2020.
Z. Doffman, "This New Coronavirus Spy Drone Will Make Sure
You
Stay
Home,"
2020,
[online],
available
in:
https://www.forbes.com/sites/zakdoffman/2020/03/05/meet-thecoronavirus-spy-drones-that-make-sure-you-stayhome/#43a7c9e51669, access on 23 March, 2020.
W. Robotics, "Drones and the Coronavirus: Do These Applications
Make
Sense,",2020,
[online]
available
in:
https://blog.werobotics.org/2020/04/09/drones-coronavirus-nosense/, access on 12 Septemper, 2020.
P. Singh, "Thermal scan: Drones check people for fever in Delhi,"
,2020,
[online]
available
in:
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/delhi/thermal-scan-dronescheck-people-for-fever/articleshow/75088774.cms, access on 13
April, 2020.
M. Griffin, "Thermal imaging enabled drones help Chinese identify
people with Covid-19,", 2020, [online] available in:
https://www.fanaticalfuturist.com/2020/03/thermal-imagingenabled-drones-help-chinese-identify-people-with-covid-19/, access
on 13 March, 2020.
E. D. Otiede et al., "Delivering Medical Products to Quarantined
Regions Using Unmanned Aerial Vehicles," Journal of Applied
Mechanics Engineering, vol. 6, no. 1, p. 244, 2017.
A. Hardy, M. Makame, D. Cross, S. Majambere, and M. Msellem,
"Using low-cost drones to map malaria vector habitats," Parasites
& vectors, vol. 10, no. 1, p. 29, 2017.
A. Sathyan and O. Ma, "Collaborative Control of Multiple Robots
Using Genetic Fuzzy Systems," Robotica, vol. 37, no. 11, pp. 19221936, 2019.
Q. Li, R. Gravina, Y. Li, S. H. Alsamhi, F. Sun, and G. Fortino,
"Multi-user Activity Recognition: Challenges and Opportunities,"
Information Fusion, 2020.
E. Ackerman, "Autonomous Robots Are Helping Kill Coronavirus
in Hospitals," IEEE Spectrum, 2020.
M. Editors. (2020). Automated robot takes swabs for safe covid-19
testing.

VOLUME XX, 2017

[76]
[77]

[78]

[79]

[80]

[81]

[82]

[83]

[84]

[85]

[86]
[87]
[88]
[89]

[90]
[91]

[92]

[93]

[94]

[95]

[96]
[97]

[98]

M. Tao. (2020). Cobots v covid: How universal robots and others
are helping in the fight against coronavirus.
D. Calvaresi, A. Dubovitskaya, J. P. Calbimonte, K. Taveter, and
M. Schumacher, "Multi-agent systems and blockchain: Results
from a systematic literature review," in International Conference on
Practical Applications of Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, 2018,
pp. 110-126: Springer.
I. Afanasyev, A. Kolotov, R. Rezin, K. Danilov, A. Kashevnik, and
V. Jotsov, "Blockchain solutions for multi-agent robotic systems:
Related work and open questions," in Proceedings of the 24th
Conference of Open Innovations Association FRUCT, 2019, p. 76:
FRUCT Oy.
J. Peña Queralta and T. Westerlund, "Blockchain-Powered
Collaboration in Heterogeneous Swarms of Robots," arXiv, p.
arXiv: 1912.01711, 2019.
G. Valentini, E. Ferrante, and M. Dorigo, "The best-of-n problem in
robot swarms: Formalization, state of the art, and novel
perspectives," Frontiers in Robotics and AI, vol. 4, p. 9, 2017.
M. Andoni et al., "Blockchain technology in the energy sector: A
systematic review of challenges and opportunities," Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 100, pp. 143-174, 2019.
X. Chuanjiao, "Robots and drones join the battle against
virus,",2020,
[online]
available
in:
https://www.chinadaily.com.cn/a/202002/14/WS5e46af05a3101282
17277b28.html, access on 29 Febraury, 2020.
A. Hand, "COVID-19 Provides Use Cases for Mobile Robotics,",
2020,
[online]
available
in:
https://www.healthcarepackaging.com/covid19/article/21126536/covid19-provides-use-cases-for-mobilerobotics, access on 02 April, 2020.
A. Naidoo, "The Heat: Containing coronavirus – China and world’s
response,",2020,
[online]
available
in:
https://www.chinadaily.com.cn/a/202002/14/WS5e46af05a3101282
17277b28.html, access on 12 June 2020.
B. AMES, "Robot manufacturers join Covid-19 fight with
disinfectant-bots,",2020,
[online]
available
in:
https://www.dcvelocity.com/articles/45599-robot-manufacturersjoin-covid-19-fight-with-disinfectant-bots,"access on 9April, 2020.
L. M. Goodman, "Tezos: A self-amending crypto-ledger position
paper," Aug, vol. 3, p. 2014, 2014.
N. Szabo, "Micropayments and mental transaction costs," in 2nd
Berlin Internet Economics Workshop, 1999.
D. Yaga, P. Mell, N. Roby, and K. Scarfone, "Blockchain
technology overview," arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.11078, 2019.
B. Hill, S. Chopra, P. Valencourt, and N. Prusty, Blockchain
Developer's Guide: Develop smart applications with Blockchain
technologies-Ethereum, JavaScript, Hyperledger Fabric, and
Corda. Packt Publishing Ltd, 2018.
C. Dannen, Introducing Ethereum and solidity. Springer, 2017.
J. Qin, Q. Ma, Y. Shi, and L. Wang, "Recent advances in consensus
of multi-agent systems: A brief survey," IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Electronics, vol. 64, no. 6, pp. 4972-4983, 2016.
W. Wang et al., "A survey on consensus mechanisms and mining
strategy management in blockchain networks," IEEE Access, vol. 7,
pp. 22328-22370, 2019.
D. Vujičić, D. Jagodić, and S. Ranđić, "Blockchain technology,
bitcoin, and Ethereum: A brief overview," in 2018 17th
international symposium infoteh-jahorina (infoteh), 2018, pp. 1-6:
IEEE.
M. Vukolić, "The quest for scalable blockchain fabric: Proof-ofwork vs. BFT replication," in International workshop on open
problems in network security, 2015, pp. 112-125: Springer.
L. Luu, V. Narayanan, C. Zheng, K. Baweja, S. Gilbert, and P.
Saxena, "A secure sharding protocol for open blockchains," in
Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer
and Communications Security, 2016, pp. 17-30.
D. s. den. (2016). Using Merklix tree to shard block validation.
B. Qin, J. Huang, Q. Wang, X. Luo, B. Liang, and W. Shi, "Cecoin:
A decentralized PKI mitigating MitM attacks," Future Generation
Computer Systems, vol. 107, pp. 805-815, 2020.
V. Buterin, "A next-generation smart contract and decentralized
application platform," white paper, vol. 3, no. 37, 2014.
9

[99] S. E. F. e. al. (2018). Ethereum 2.0 Specifications.
[100] P.
S,
"The
tangle," 2018, [online]
available in:
https://www.iota.org/research/academic-papers, access on 25 April,
2020.
[101] L. Baird, "The swirlds hashgraph consensus algorithm: Fair, fast,
byzantine fault tolerance," Swirlds, Inc. Technical Report
SWIRLDS-TR-2016, vol. 1, 2016.

VOLUME XX, 2017

9

