Studying physics during the COVID-19 pandemic: Student assessments of learning
achievement, perceived effectiveness of online recitations, and online laboratories
P. Klein,1, ∗ L. Ivanjek,2 M.N. Dahlkemper,1 K. Jeličić,3 M.-A. Geyer,2 S. Küchemann,4 and A. Susac5

arXiv:2010.05622v1 [physics.ed-ph] 12 Oct 2020

1

Faculty of Physics, Physics Education Research,
University of Göttingen, Friedrich-Hund-Platz, 37077 Göttingen, Germany
2
Faculty of Physics, Physics Education Research,
Technische Universität Dresden, Haeckelstraße 3, 01069, Dresden, Germany
3
Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, University of Zagreb, Bijenička cesta 32, 10000, Zagreb, Croatia
4
Department of Physics, Physics Education Research Group,
Technische Universität Kaiserslautern, Erwin-Schrödinger-Str. 46, 67663 Kaiserslautern, Germany
5
Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computing,
University of Zagreb, Unska 3, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia
(Dated: October 13, 2020)
The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly affected the education system worldwide that was
responding with a sudden shift to distance learning. While successful distance teaching requires
careful thinking, planning and development of technological and human resources, there was no
time for preparation in the current situation caused by COVID-19. Various physics courses such as
lectures, tutorials, and the laboratories had to be transferred into online formats rapidly, resulting in
a variety of simultaneous, asynchronous, and mixed activities. To investigate how physics students
perceived the sudden shift to online learning, we developed a questionnaire and gathered data from
N = 578 physics students from five universities in Germany, Austria, and Croatia. In this article, we
report how the problem-solving sessions (recitations) and laboratories were adapted, how students’
judge different formats of the courses and how useful and effective they perceive them. The results
are correlated to the students’ self-efficacy ratings and other behavioral measures (such as selfregulated learning skills) and demographics (such as the availability of quite learning spaces). In a
related article, we focus on the online physics lectures and compare simultaneous vs. asynchronous
teaching and learning methods [reference to be put in after acceptance]. This study is descriptive in
nature and a survey study design was implemented to examine the relationships among variables. We
find that good communication abilities (r = 0.50, p < 0.001) and self-organization skills (r = 0.63,
p < 0.001) are positively correlated for perceived learning achievement. Furthermore, the previous
duration of studies had a significant impact on the students’ perceived overall learning achievement
[F (5, 567) = 13.1, p < 0.001], on the students’ acquisition of experimental skills during the physics
laboratories [F (3, 204) = 4.41, p < 0.01], and on their assessment of the recitations’ effectiveness
[F (4, 389) = 5.04, p = 0.001]. That is, students in their first academic year show consistently lower
scores than more progressed students. For the physics laboratories, it was found that gathering
real data was crucial to the acquisition of experimental skills F (2, 198) = 14.2, p < 0.001] and the
reinforcement of content [F (2, 216) = 3.50, p = 0.03]. For the physics recitations, handing in own
solutions for feedback was correlated with perceived effectiveness [F (1, 393) = 6.74, p = 0.01]. We
draw conclusions and implications for future online classes in which online activities will definitely
take part since no return to exclusive presence teaching can be expected.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly affected the
education system worldwide that was responding with a
sudden shift to distance learning. Although some forms
of online teaching and learning existed in the system,
the whole education community was suddenly forced in
spring 2020 into an unplanned and unwanted remote
teaching. Distance teaching requires careful thinking,
planning, and development of technological and human
resources for the successful accomplishment of expected
learning outcomes. However, in the current situation
caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, there was very little
time for preparation; the instructors had to act quickly

∗

pascal.klein@uni-goettingen.de

and to adapt to remote teaching. In the process, they had
support from their organizations (schools and universities) in providing e-learning platforms and other digital
learning management systems and communication tools.
Nevertheless, the main burden was on the instructors to
adjust their teaching methods and materials to an online format. The question rises whether their teaching
approach is still efficient when taken from the physical
classroom and transferred to technological devices. The
aim of this study was to evaluate teaching and learning
processes during the COVID-19 pandemic in the context
of physics courses at the university level. This article focuses on the physics problem-solving sessions (so-called
recitations) and the physics laboratories. It is structured
as follows: First, a short overview about online teaching
and learning in the context of physics is provided, particularly focusing on recitations (I A), laboratories (I B),
and influencing factors (I C) that were considered impor-

2
tant for the study. In Sect. II, we describe the methods
of data collection, questionnaire development and participating universities (samples), followed by the results,
their discussion and conclusion.

Many students were taking part in online courses before the COVID-19 pandemic and in some countries,
like the United States, distance education enrollments
steadily increased in the last two decades [1]. New learning platforms, such as the massive open online courses
(MOOCs), offer a new model for instruction and initial
analysis has shown that student improvement is similar
to the traditional face-to-face courses but significantly
lower than interactive face-to-face courses [2]. Online education transforms all components of teaching and learning, and numerous educational researchers are trying to
evaluate the results of these changes (e.g., [3–5]). Online
education processes differ from traditional face-to-face
teaching in some features, so specific evaluation elements
have to be introduced such as evaluation of the technology [6] or different types of interaction treatments [7].
Previous physics education research (PER) studies have
shown that some online teaching materials can be beneficial for students and could probably successfully substitute some aspects of face-to-face instruction. For example, multimedia learning modules using text, narration,
flash animations, etc. had a positive effect on student
performance on conceptual tests and classroom discussions [8, 9]. Further, Kestin et al. (2020) [10] have shown
that online lecture demonstrations helped students to
learn more than traditional live demonstrations because
they were more likely to make correct observations from
the video. Positive experience with flipped classrooms in
which content is delivered before the lecture, including
online discussion, might also be informative and indicate
a possible direction for online teaching during the current COVID-19 pandemic situation [11, 12]. Recently,
Morphew et al. (2020) [13] found that students benefited from problem solution videos and this positive effect
did not depend on the style of solution video. However,
not all online resources were proved to be helpful for
students. For example, a study on online instructional
videos in an introductory mechanics course found that
students used laboratory videos which helped them complete the laboratories more often than lecture videos, and
there was little correlation between student engagement
with the videos and their performance in the course [14].
Videos were supplemental course material in this study,
so additional studies are needed to evaluate the benefit
of instructional videos in online physics courses. These
research results can provide guidance to instructors on
how to produce effective online teaching materials but
the question of how to engage students in the learning
process remains.

A.

Recitations and homework problems

Probably the most widespread forms of online tools
in on-campus physics courses before the COVID-19 pandemic were Web-based homework systems, such as LONCAPA, Mastering Physics, Expert TA, WebAssign, etc.
which are usually incorporated in typical introductory
physics courses, especially in the United States (they are
not so common in Europe). They usually contain a large
number of textbook problems with hints for students and
provide automatic grading. In early studies, the online
homework systems were evaluated and compared to ungraded homework and standard methods of collecting
and grading homework [15, 16]. Most studies have shown
that online homework systems are beneficial [17–20] but
usually more iterations and evolution of the homework
system are needed to achieve the required efficiency [21].
A recent review on the benefits of online versus traditional homework on students’ performance showed that
in half of the studies there were no differences in student
performance for two homework formats whereas, in less
than a third of the studies, the students’ performance
was higher in the online compared with the traditional
homework format [22]. The online homework systems
described above cover only one part of physics courses
and could not be used as a replacement for face-to-face
teaching or recitations during the COVID-19 pandemic.
A major part of the university physics studies in Germany and most European countries consists of problemsolving sessions, so-called recitations. They provide
an opportunity for students to work together in a
small group on challenging problems that were designed to build conceptual understanding and problemsolving skills. Students apply critical-thinking skills and
problem-solving methods rather than repeating the material covered in the textbooks or lectures. Two forms of
recitations can be distinguished; (1) live sessions where
students work together on the problems under the supervision of an instructor/lecturer or (2) working on the
problems in spare time on a weekly basis (typically also
in groups), submitting the solutions and receiving grading and feedback. In both cases, guided discussions take
place after students engaged with the material.

B.

Physics laboratories

Physics laboratories are an important part of many
physics courses or are special independent courses. Besides traditional physics labs, several types of online
physics labs can be described: video analysis of instructor
supplied videos of experimental procedures, virtual labs,
hands-on student experimentation performed off-site, or
remote labs [23]. In the last decade, we are witnessing
a growing use of novel physics lab learning environments
that are designed by using platforms, such as Arduino
[24–26] and Raspberry Pi [27]. With the proliferation of
smartphones, the use of smartphone sensors in perform-

3
ing physics school experiments has also increased [28–
30]. Remote laboratories allow conducting real (laboratory) experiments remotely [31] whereas virtual laboratories are based on computer simulations, such as PhET
[32], which enable essential functions of laboratory experiments. Comparisons of physical and virtual laboratories in physics education showed advantages for each
type of laboratory, so some researchers suggest combining the two to strengthen the learning process [33–35].
A recent review found overall positive effects of remote
labs on cognitive, behavioral, and affective learning outcomes although the authors concluded that evaluation
approaches of the learning outcomes in the reviewed studies were quite superficial [36]. An eye-tracking study has
shown learning differences in virtual (simulation-based)
and physical (microcomputer-based) laboratories. The
results indicated that in simulation-based laboratories
students tend to start experimenting, and then think
about the questions on the worksheets, whereas for physical laboratories, they tend to think before doing [37].
Since the current situation with online courses was not
anticipated, new virtual and remote labs could not be
established. The online labs during the pandemic can be
described as a continued instruction of courses that were
originally considered as lab courses prior to the transition
to online teaching. In many cases, students were supported with (artificial or real) data sheets and a video
of the experiment. Within this study, we paid particular attention to the evaluation of physics laboratories
conducted online or on campus during the COVID-19
semester and we pay attention to the types of data that
students engaged with.

C.

Influencing factors of online teaching and
learning

Since many instructors did not have experience with
organizing computer-based teaching, different practices
of engaging students in online learning can be informative. For example, intelligent tutoring systems (i.e., systems to provide immediate and customized instruction
or feedback to learners without human teachers) have
been used in physics education for more than two decades
[38, 39], and an early review has shown that intelligent
tutoring systems can be nearly as effective as human tutoring [40]. Early intelligent tutoring systems were often
developed for only a few topics, such as Newton’s laws
[38] or problems in the context of pulleys [41], and were
not in wide use. Recent advances in the design of web
applications have enabled the development of new generations of tutoring systems [42–47] for helping students
in developing physics problem-solving skills.
Recent studies have reported the challenges of engaging all students in self-paced interactive electronic learning tutorials [48, 49]. The authors concluded that ”many
students in need of out-of-class remediation via self-paced
learning tools may have difficulty motivating themselves

and may lack the self-regulation and time management
skills to engage effectively with tools specially designed
to help them learn at their own pace.” [48] and they
showed that students who worked in a supervised manner
performed significantly better than students working on
their own [49]. Self-regulatory, motivational, and social
characteristics of students play an important role in their
engagement with peers in online forums [50] and online
physics courses in general [51]. This might be an important issue for learning processes during the pandemic,
so we decided to evaluate several behavioral measures of
students’ learning.
First, students’ self-organization abilities in general
and during the COVID-19 semester was taken into account. We measured the degree to which students are
metacognitively, motivationally, and behaviorally active
participants in their own learning process, i.e. to which
extend students can take a proactive role in monitoring
their learning, maintaining motivation, and engaging in
behaviors (e.g. study strategies) that lead to academic
success.
Second, we also aimed at evaluating students’ communication (with their peers and instructors). Certainly,
the influence of interactions on knowledge construction
is so ubiquitous that a proper understanding of learning
cannot be achieved without taking into account its social dimension. However, it can be assumed that it was
easiest in the rapid transition to remote learning to have
students work individually. Since learning at universities
is done within a social context, it therefore becomes important to understand how communication between the
lecturer and students, and among students, is perceived
in an (almost exclusively) online learning environment.
Third, the technical conditions, e.g. the accessibility
to a computer and stable internet connection as well as
their environment were considered, e.g. whether students
had access to a quiet learning place for attending video
conferences.
Fourth, students’attitudes towards online learning
were in the scope of our research to identify their general
attitude towards online learning.
Last, we asked for students’ perceived learning achievement and expected learning outcomes. Students’ beliefs
about their capabilities or likelihood of success reveal
important information about different course structures,
might vary between different groups of students, and presumably is correlated to the factors listed above.

D.

Research questions

Since the physics courses evaluated in this study were
not planned as online courses, standard procedures to assess the learning process in distance teaching could not
be simply applied to the current remote teaching during
the COVID-19 pandemic. So, the first step in the study
was to develop a questionnaire for the assessment of different elements of the physics courses (lectures, labora-

4
tories, problem-solving sessions/recitations). This was
done through discussions of university physics instructors who are also PER researchers and based on previous
research findings and analysis of 20 semi-structured interviews with students on their experience with physics
courses during the pandemic. The questionnaire was administered to 578 physics students from five universities
in Germany, Austria, and Croatia. In this article, we
will report the results on the effect of various behavioral aspects on perceived learning effectiveness during
the COVID-19 term in spring/summer 2020 and the evaluation of online problem-solving sessions and physics laboratories. Other results will be reported in a related article (ref). Since the questionnaire was administered only
once, reconsidering item formulations, adding/removing
items based on an iterative process will follow. This
study is descriptive in nature. A survey study design was
implemented to examine the relationships among variables. However, we believe that priority is to report the
initial data now since the planning for future terms affected by the COVID-19 pandemic is ongoing. We hope
that the analysis of the collected data will provide an
insight into the effects of the pandemic on the teaching
and learning processes within university physics courses
and will help instructors to improve their online courses
during the current COVID-19 pandemics and for future
online courses in general.
In this paper, the following four research questions are
addressed:
RQ1 What is the relationship between perceived learning effectiveness during the COVID-19 summer
term and the various behavioral aspects that are
important in digital teaching?
RQ2 What are the differences between students of different levels of study progress concerning the behavioral aspects and learning effectiveness?
RQ3 What formats were used to establish online
problem-solving sessions and how have they been
rated by the students in terms of effectiveness?
RQ4 What formats were used to establish online physics
laboratories and how have they been rated by the
students in terms of effectiveness?
While the first and second research questions address
all physics students that participated in the study, the
third and fourth question are specific to the students who
participated in the corresponding courses, i.e., problemsolving sessions and physics laboratories, respectively.
The effectiveness was assessed in terms of students selfreports and not by performance tests or examinations
due to the design of the study as a large-scale anonymous mid-end-term assessment.

II.
A.

METHODS

Questionnaire development

Based on common literature for evaluating online
teaching and learning, the authors identified several aspects that were considered relevant for physics students’
learning in the current situation of the compulsory and
involuntary change to online teaching. The aspects included evaluation of simultaneous and asynchronous activities, students’ attitudes towards online learning, communication abilities, technical and social aspects, and
self-organization abilities. Furthermore, course structures that were typical for physics studies were also in
the scope of interest, viz. the recitations, the physics
laboratories and the physics labs for prospective teachers.
Semi-structured interviews were then conducted with 20
students, and the transcripts were used to formulate the
items of the questionnaire in an iterative process during close exchange between all researchers included in
the study. The final questionnaire included 246 technical data fields and is available in English, German, and
Croatian. The English versions of the questionnaire is
presented in the appendix. While a rigorous analysis and
validation process of the instrument is not in the scope
of this paper, we restrict the presentation of instrument
characteristics to the measures presented in Sect. 4.1.
In the work presented here, we focus on the students’
attitudes towards online learning, communication abilities, technical and social aspects, and self-organization
abilities as well as the recitations and physics laboratories. For the latter two, the organization of the courses
has also been assessed, e.g. whether students gathered
data on their own (labs) or were provided, or whether
the exercise sheets were solved live in online meetings or
as homework followed by online discussions. Evaluation
of the physics lectures and seminars in simultaneous and
asynchronous formats are part of another work (reference)

B.

Participating universities

University of Göttingen. The University of Göttingen
is a public research university located in Göttingen, Germany. It is the oldest university in the state of Lower Saxony and the largest in student enrollment, which stands
at around 31,600. For studying physics, the faculty offers
several degree programs, i.e., the Bachelor of Science in
Physics, the Master of Science in Physics (Course language: English), the two subjects Bachelor with Physics
(usually taken by teacher students), and the Master of
Education with Physics.
TU Dresden. The Technische Universit”at Dresden is a
public research university, the largest university in Saxony and one of the 10 largest universities in Germany
with 32,000 students. It is one of the oldest colleges of
technology in Germany, and one of the country’s oldest

5
TABLE I. Information about the sample
Total sample Male (%)

Duration of studying physics (Years of physics studied)
< 1 yr
1–2.5 yrs
3–4.5 yrs
5–6 yrs
> 6 yrs

Dresden
Göttingen
Kaiserslautern
Wien
Zagreb

114
232
9
138
85

73 (64.0)
144 (62.1)
5 (55.6)
85 (61.6)
45 (52.9)

39 (34.2)
83 (35.8)
4 (44.4)
30 (21.7)
25 (29.4)

30 (26.3)
62 (26.7)
2 (22.2)
65 (47.1)
27 (31.8)

30 (26.3)
62 (26.7)
...
24 (17.4)
23 (27.1)

12(10.5)
19 (8.2)
2 (22.2)
11 (8.0)
6 (7.1)

1 (0.9)
6 (2.6)
1 (11.1)
7 (5.1)
4 (4.7)

total

578

352 (60.9) 181 (31.3) 186 (32.2)

139 (24.2)

50 (8.7)

19 (3.3)

universities. For studying physics, the faculty offers several degree programs, the Bachelor of Science in Physics,
the Master of Science in physics, and Teaching Studies.
University of Vienna. The University of Vienna is the
oldest university in the German-speaking world, located
in Vienna, Austria, with an enrollment of more than
90,000 students. The faculty of physics offers B. Sc., M.
Sc., and teacher student programs.
University of Zagreb. The University of Zagreb is
the oldest and the largest public university in Croatia.
Typically, more than 65 000 students are enrolled. For
studying physics, the Faculty of Science offers six programs of the integral undergraduate and graduate study
of physics (Master of Science in Physics, Master of Education in Physics, Master of Education in Mathematics
and Physics, Master of Education in Physics and Computer Science, Master of Education in Physics and Chemistry, and Master of Education in Physics and Technology).
TU Kaiserslautern.
The Technische Universität
Kaiserslautern is a research university in Kaiserslautern,
Germany. Approximately 15,000 students are enrolled
at the moment. The physics department offers several
degree programs, e.g. Bachelor of Science in Physics,
biophysics, physical engineering, and Master of Science.

C.

Data collection and sample

The questionnaire was imported into Questback and
distributed to physics students via mailing lists in midJune and late July. This is therefore a mid-end term
evaluation for all participating universities. If certain
course formats were not taken (e.g. the physics labs or
the recitations), no questions were asked. The distribution of the questionnaire was done either centrally by the
faculties’ deans of studies or by faculty members.
In total, 578 physics students (352 male) completed
the questionnaire. The average time for answering the
questionnaire was 24 min 37 sec. Table I shows the distribution of the locations. Most students who participated in the study were in early semesters (63.5% of the
sample studied for less than 2.5 years) and only a few students exceeded the standard period of the physics study
(3.3%). The students attended 5.2 courses on average,
3.4 of which were physics courses (66%). The non-physics

courses consisted of mathematical courses, educational
courses, soft skills, and other. More than one third of the
students reported spending more than 40 hours studying
per week, and about one out of five students reported
investing less 20 hours (Figure 1). Half of the students
claim that they invested more time for studying during
the COVID-19 summer term 2020 than in the previous
semester.
Concerning the technical resources, almost all students
reported to have permanent access to a PC (95%) and to
a fast and stable internet connection (81% agreement).
However, only about half of the students had access to a
printer (54%).

FIG. 1. Time per week spent studying

D.
1.

Data analysis

Construction of variables

In order to reduce and condense the amount of data
(max. 246 entries per student), common factors (variables) have been defined; the variables are a combination of items that aim at measuring the same construct.
To check whether items actually belong together as intended, i.e., whether they form a common factor, correlations between the items are used. This results in a small
number of artificial variables that account for the most
covariance in the observed variables, facilitating data interpretation. The single responses to individual items are

6
then aggregated within the variables per student, yielding a distribution of scores for the population (e.g., see
Fig. 5).
The a priori construction of items that fit together may
not always hold empirically, that is, items may turn out
to be inappropriate (measuring something different) or a
scale might split into more than one component. This
construction process uses factor analysis (principal component analysis) and content-interpretation. This process and results are not reported here; all items that belong to the scales and all excluded items are listed in the
appendix.
Scale reliability. The internal consistency of a component is measured by the reliability coefficient Cronbach’s
α. The measure indicates how well the items “fit together”, that is, it examines whether or not a test is
constructed of parallel items that address the same construct. Cronbach’s α ranges from 0–1 and values above
0.7 are considered reliable for group measurement.

2.

Correlation analysis and between-groups comparisons

For determining the relationships between different
variables, Pearson’s correlation coefficient is used. It
measures the linear correlation between two variables X
and Y and ranges from -1 to 1. A value of +1 means total positive linear correlation, 0 is no linear correlation,
and -1 is total negative linear correlation. To analyze the
differences among group means in a sample, analysis of
variance (ANOVA) is used. ANOVA provides a statistical test of whether two or more means of a dependent
variable (as defined by the components) are equal among
different groups, and therefore generalizes the t-test beyond two means.

III.
A.

RESULTS

Scale descriptives and reliabilities

As described in the method section, we constructed
a multi-scale questionnaire to assess several aspects of
online teaching and learning. Table II shows the characteristics of the scales. All items were assessed with
a 4 point Likert-type scale, thus the means range between 1 and 4 points, where high values correspond to
high abilities / preferences. For better interpretation,
the means were also linearly transformed into percentages. Note that all scales were positively checked to be
one-dimensional using explorative factor analysis. According to the histogram plots (Fig. 5 in the appendix),
we can also assume normal distributions for most of the
scales.
In terms of absolute values, the ability to establish
communication with peers and lecturers received the lowest scores, followed by the self-organization abilities of the
students in this specific situation. The assessment of the

learning achievement in this semester was normally distributed with a mean score of about 52%. The personal
environment of the students, which was assessed in terms
of the ability to work without noise or distributions, received high scores.

B.

Correlation analysis and group comparisons
(RQ1 and RQ2)

To investigate the relationships between the scores,
a correlation analysis was performed. Tab. III shows
the correlation coefficients for each pair of variables. To
account for multiple testing, Bonferroni-correction was
used to determine the level of significance (p = 0.05/15 =
0.003). We observe that students’ perceived learning success is positively correlated with high abilities of selforganization in general and in this specific situation, with
the access to a study-friendly environment and to the
ability to communicate with peers and lecturers. It is
negatively correlated with students’ attitudes towards
online learning. In other words, students who have a
positive attitude towards online learning also expect a
higher learning achievement. The strongest relationships
are displayed in Figure 2. Furthermore, it can be observed that the preference for face to face teaching is
negatively correlated with all other scales (expect selforganization abilities in general), and all other scales are
positively related to each other.
To investigate how different groups of students responded to the different types of questions, a multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) with the duration of
studies (DoS, cf. Table I) as independent (group) variable was performed. MANOVA examines differences on
several dependent variables simultaneously and is used
in this case because the dependent variables are intercorrelated. The results show that DoS had a significant multivariate influence across all variables, Wilks
λ = 0.87, F (30, 2250) = 2.76, p < 10−6 . Given the significant multivariate effect, ANOVAs are then performed
for each dependent variable using Bonferroni-correction
to determine significance levels. Duration of studies had
a significant impact on perceived learning achievement
[F (5, 567) = 13.1, p < 10−4 ], see Fig. 2 (right), but on
no other variable. In the next step, a post hoc analysis
determines which levels of the dependent variable (DoS)
differ from the others in terms of perceived learning success. Pairwise comparisons revealed that students who
study physics for less than 1 year obtain significant lower
scores than all other groups of students (p = 0.01 to
p = 0.001). There is no statistical significant difference
between any other student groups regarding this variable.

7
TABLE II. Description and psychometric characteristics of the scales that were used for all students
Scale

# items

Sample item

α

Mean ± standard deviation (%)

self-organization
abilities in general

5

In my studies, I am self-disciplined
and I find it easy to set aside reading and homework time.

0.76

2.97 ± 0.57 (65.6 ± 25.5)%

self-organization
abilities
during
COVID-19 semester

6

Not being at university hinders me
from studying∗ .

0.77

2.41 ± 0.67 (47.1 ± 22.4)%

Environment

2

I have a quiet space where I
can participate in video conferences
unhindered.

0.90

3.11 ± 0.76 (70.4 ± 19.1)%

Attitudes
towards
online learning

6

On-campus instruction helps me
to understand the physics concepts
better than in online courses.

0.75

2.84 ± 0.80 (61.5 ± 26.5)%

Communication

8

It is easy for me to establish contact
with other students during Covid19 pandemic.

0.88

2.19 ± 0.57 (39.5 ± 18.9)%

Learning
achievement

7

I am certain that I will complete the
online physics courses with good
grades.
∗
Negative statements were reversed for the analysis.

0.82

2.56 ± 0.66 (51.9 ± 22.6)%

FIG. 2. Scatter plots of learning achievement vs. self-organization abilities during COVID-19 pandemic (left) and student
attitudes towards online learning (center), including a smoothed fit curve with confidence region. A small jitter was added to
the data points to avoid overlapping. High values represent high success / abilities / preferences. Right: Learning achievement
(perceived by the students) vs. duration of study. The error bar represents the standard error of the mean.

C.

TABLE III. Correlation analysis. Only significant correlations (Pearson’s r; p < 0.003) are presented.

(6)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

Learning achievement
self-organization general
self-organization COVID-19
Environment
Attitudes towards onl. learn.
Communication

1

2

0.33
1
...
...
...
...

0.63
0.37
1
...
...
...

Scales
3
4
0.32
0.17
0.33
1
...
...

-0.58
n.s.
-0.62
-0.19
1
...

1.

Recitations (RQ 3)

General information and recitation organization

5
0.50
0.15
0.55
0.29
-0.53
1

There are 401 data sets from students who attended
recitations, 287 of which were related to introductory
physics courses with large audience (>30 students), 91
of which were related to special courses with few students (e.g. special lectures in physics master studies),
and 42 others (mathematical physics or special courses
for prospective physics teachers). Note that some students took part in more than one course. In almost all
cases (97%), exercise sheets were provided and discussed

8
in weekly online meetings with a lecturer (89%). The exercise sheets were compulsory in 76% of the cases. Students reported high engagement when solving the problem sheets; 82% of the students attempted to solve more
than 60% of the tasks and 58% dealt with more than 80%
of the tasks. The students worked on the tasks in groups
in 50% of the cases; due to the pandemic lockdown, they
did not meet in person (only 4% did) but rather organized their meetings mostly via web conference or used
messengers for communication.

2.

Recitation formats: What was used and what would be
optimal?

Based on the student interviews, different online formats of the recitations were identified which could be
assessed in terms of the following aspects (true or false):
• (submission) The students’ solutions were submitted, corrected by the tutor and discussed in an online meeting
• (reconstruction) The solutions were reconstructed
during a live online session in real time
• (live) Exercise sheets were solved online live and
discussed in groups
• (handouts) The solutions to the exercise sheets
were handed out to the students as text or as a
video (worked-out solutions)
• (forum) Forums were used to discuss exercise sheets
without time constraints.
Students marked what formats they actually experienced
(more than 1 option could be chosen) and what format
they consider optimal for future online recitations (single choice). Figure 3 shows the fraction of total answers
for each category. Due to the different assessment types
(multiple choice vs. single choice), statistical comparisons are inappropriate. However, comparing the relative
counts within each data series, it can be observed that
students are less interested in handouts of solutions, but
wish to work together live on exercise sheets. In line with
that result, we observe that forums are perceived to be
ineffective for the recitations.

3.

FIG. 3. Formats of the online recitations that students actually experienced during the COVID-19 summer term and
judgments about optimal recitation

It is worth noting that the perceived effectiveness of the
recitations is highly correlated with the perceived overall
learning achievement (r = 0.66, p < 0.01).
To investigate whether different groups of students
or different course formats had an impact on the students’ perceived effectiveness of the online recitations,
ANOVAs were performed. First, a significant betweensubjects effect was found for the duration of studies
[F (4, 389) = 5.04, p = 0.001] and Bonferroni-corrected
post-hoc comparisons revealed that students who spent
more than 6 years studying physics perceived the recitations as more effective than every other group of students
(mean score: 2.95, corresponding to 65%; p < 0.01). Second, groups of students were defined based on their experienced format of the recitations (see Sect. III C 2). It
was observed that students who sent their own solution
to be rated (N = 168) assessed the effectiveness of the
recitations significantly higher than students who did not
(N = 227), F (1, 393) = 6.74, p = 0.01. There were no
significant differences concerning other group splits.

Perceived effectiveness of recitations
D.

For evaluating the perceived effectiveness of the online
recitations, we assessed the student’s agreement concerning seven questions on a 4 point Likert-type scale, e.g.
whether they felt well supervised concerning their questions during e-learning or whether the recitations were
helpful to foster their understanding. The scores are normally distributed (mean = 2.20, corresponding to 40.2%,
see Fig. 5 left) and the reliability of this scale is α = 0.82.

1.

The physics laboratories (RQ4)

General information and lab organization

220 physics students were enrolled in physics laboratories that was adapted to an online lab in most cases
(82%). In few cases (10%), students could visit the laboratories of the university or a mixture of live and online labs were used (8%). For the online laboratories,

9
the experimental work was enabled either (a) using simulations and evaluating simulated data / gathering data
from the simulation, (b) using videos of real experiments
and extracting data from the video or (c) working with
data gathered by someone else. There were some single
statements (less than 5%) about other formats, e.g. replacing the labs by student talks or using smartphones
for data collection at home that were not further considered. Hence, three different student groups according to
the data source can be defined (simulated data, real data
gathered by students themselves, real data gathered by
someone else).

2.

Effectiveness of the physics laboratories

To evaluate the perceived effectiveness of the physics
laboratories, eight questions were included into the questionnaire. One set of questions deals with the experimental skills that were acquired during the lab course (5 questions, α = 0.75, sample item “I gained less experimental
skills due to the modified course format”) and another
set of questions asked about reinforcing content (3 questions, α = 0.63, sample item “The modified physics lab
helped me to better understand the physics concepts behind the experiments”). The distribution of both scales
is depicted in Fig. 5.
In order to find out whether different groups of students perceived the two aspects of the physics laboratories differently, ANOVAs were conducted. First,
the duration of the study had a significant impact on
students’ perceived acquisition of experimental skills,
F (3, 204) = 4.41, p < 0.01. Students in their first academic year perceived the labs as less effective concerning experimental skills compared to students in their
second year. There was no such difference concerning
the reinforcement of content. Second, the type of data
that was analyzed by the students had a significant impact on both scales, the acquisition of experimental skills
[F (2, 198) = 14.2, p < 0.001)] and the reinforcement
of content [F (2, 216) = 3.50, p = 0.03]. Bonferronicorrected post-hoc comparisons revealed that students
assessed significant higher scores when they gathered the
data by themselves (e.g. from a video) as compared to
simulated data or data that was handed out, see Fig. 4.

IV.

DISCUSSION

A. Factors that are correlated with subjective
learning achievement during COVID-19 pandemic

From the measurement perspective, all questionnaires
that have been used show a good reliability, and the students’ scores were reasonably normally distributed. The
perceived learning achievement was positively correlated
with students’ self-organization abilities (r = 0.33), particularly in the COVID-19 pandemic (r = 0.63). While

FIG. 4. Evaluation of the physics lab with respect to different
types of data

researchers have pointed out the benefits of metacognitive strategies such as self-regulation of learning on
problem-solving skills before [52, 53], the correlation between self-organization skills during the COVID-19 pandemic and learning achievement (r = 0.63) was surprisingly strong. Even though no causal relationship was
proven, we encourage physics faculties to offer special
courses for promoting self-regulated learning skills, e.g.
including time management training, encouraging notetaking, setting pace, etc. The need for that is demonstrated by the rather low mean value of the scale (47.1%,
cf. Fig. 5 and Tab. II). During the interviews that
have been conducted beforehand, many students found
it difficult to structure their daily routines and keep up
with their usual learning pace. Supporting students with
strategies how to improve their self-organization might
presumably also improve students’ learning achievement.
Moreover, we also found a high correlation between
communication and learning achievement. One explanation might be that high-performing students are better
socialized and therefore find communication opportunities more easily than lower-performing students. Or vice
versa, good communication is a prerequisite for successful study, especially in physics, where complex phenomena and problems are studied and solved in pairs and
groups. Interactions with lecturers and peers can help to
create an atmosphere of commitment to understanding
[54]. When engagement with lecturers and other interested learners is hindered due to the distance, weaker
students are potentially left behind. A constructivistic
perspective advocates active learning formats, where students are engaged in writing, talking, describing, explaining, and reflecting—these processes that require careful

10
thinking and planning when switching from the lecture
hall to online lectures. To promote communication between the lecturer and the students, the instructor not
only presents material but also asks questions, uses interactive quizzes, and stops periodically to encourage
group discussions; just what makes a good face-to-face
lecture as well [55–57]. To establish communication between the students, networking services can be installed
where peers can meet and form learning groups. During
the online classes, break-out rooms can create an atmosphere in which a small group of students can exchange
ideas without permanent (online) presence of an instructor. Keeping the groups small can foster collaborations.
For the attitudes towards online learning, we found a
negative correlation to the perceived learning achievement. A positive attitude towards distance learning
was found to be positively correlated to subjective and
objective academic learning achievement in other work
[58], and we also found that this attitude is correlated
with self-organization skills and communication. Besides
improving communication and self-organization skills as
suggested above, we further recommend that instructors
make the students aware of the positive aspects of distance learning, i.e. permanent access to video-taped lectures, easier implementation of simulations and videos,
saving traveling time, etc.

B.

First-year students rate learning achievement
the lowest

The analysis of different student groups based on their
duration of studies revealed that the first-year students
reported significant lower subjective learning achievement than all other groups of students. Possible explanations for this may be that (1) the first-year students
have had the least contact with other students at university so far and therefore communication suffers, (2)
self-organization skills of experienced students are more
pronounced, (3) the first-year students have had less contact with online teaching so far and therefore their attitude is also worse, or (4) that they are more cautious
in their performance assessment, regardless of the online
teaching situation, because they have had less experience of success than older students (who are still studying). There was no difference concerning communication,
self-organization skills, and students attitudes towards
online teaching between the different age-group of students, hence (1)–(3) cannot be supported by the data.
However, our data set contained no students who started
their study in spring 2020, so all students in the lowest
duration group were in their second academic semester.
Extrapolating the trend given in Fig. 2 (c), we can assume an even larger gap to the freshmen that start in
the next terms. When faculties start to offer on campus teaching again with limited capacities, we therefore
suggest focusing on freshmen students.
In line with this result, we found that students who

spent 6 years or more studying physics rate the effectiveness of the recitations higher than the younger students
and the first-year students rated the perceived acquisition
of experimental skills the lowest. Note that the sample
size is different for each comparison (since not every student took part in recitations or laboratories).

C. Recitations and tutors’ feedback on solutions
are important for subjective learning achievement

For the recitations, a high correlation between perceived effectiveness of the recitations and subjective
learning achievement was found. The exercise sheets
(tasks) to be worked on in self-study form a link between
reception of the course contents during lecture and active work on the associated problems. Given the high
degree of self-activity of the students, the recitations are
often regarded as the decisive basis for actual learning,
contributing significantly to the knowledge construction
of the students and are essential for the understanding
of physics [59, 60]. Students were asked how the recitations were designed during the COVID-19 pandemic and
what format they would prefer. A major discrepancy
between actual and optimal format is present for the
handout of solutions. Students prefer live discussions
and reconstructions of problem solutions over the distribution of solutions. Furthermore, the students who received graded feedback on their own solutions perceived
the recitations as more effective than students who received no feedback. Both results are plausible from an
educational perspective; first, group discussions, corporate problem-solving activities and active exchange are
crucial parts of face-to-face recitations and cannot be replaced by the handout of solutions that requires retracing the solution on their own. Second, it is known that
receiving cognitive feedback can be associated with increased performance [61], and especially weaker students
benefit from feedback comments—regardless of the actual quality of the feedback [62]. Feedback on own solutions make errors visible, can evoke new ideas how to
approach problems, and help to identify weaknesses that
otherwise remain undetected.

D.

The physics laboratories were considered most
successful when own data was collected

220 students took part in an online physics lab course
that was mandatory for the participants. We did not
evaluate the intended learning goals of the physics laboratories but decided to ask about the reinforcement of content and building of experimental skills. These two goals
are present in the research literature around lab courses
and most often, the courses focus on skills or on both aspects [63]. The items asked, for example, about conceptual mastery of the subject matter (reinforcing content)
or assessment of students’ ability to make measurements

11
and collect accurate data (experimental skills), respectively.
The students most often reported performing measurements through videos of experiments (both videos
recorded by the instructor or publicly available), to use
simulations to generate data or just to analyze given
data sets with no engagement to experimental equipment. Some students reported watching an instructor
doing the experiment, having a description and a picture of the experiment, or controlling physical equipment remotely. Based on the variety of responses, we
identified three categories to characterize the data students analyzed: (1) students were supported with real
data taken from someone else, (2) students used simulated data taken by themselves, and (3) students gathered data by themselves from a real experiment (that
was videographed, remotely controlled or actually performed). Earlier studies suggested that it was possible to
use secondhand data for the purpose of evaluation and
interpretation without significant distortions of epistemic
learning processes [64].
In contrast, our results show that students perceive
higher learning success when students gathered data on
their own, regarding both, reinforcing the physics content
and acquisition of experimental skills. While Priemer et
al. (2020) paid attention that students got enough information on how the data were generated, we did not
ask for this information. In cases where using secondhand data is preferred, we therefore encourage lecturers
to provide this information. Furthermore, in the study
by Priemer et al., students engagement with the experiment was controlled among the students (working with
firsthand or secondhand data). In our case, working with
secondhand data might have been connected with lower
engagement since data evaluation does not necessarily require dealing with the apparatus. In contrast, gathering
own data does.

V.

CONCLUSION

In this descriptive study, more than 500 students from
five European universities were assessed to obtain information how studying physics during the COVID-19 pandemic was experienced in Spring 2020. For this purpose, a multidimensional questionnaire was developed
that turned out to have satisfactory psychometric properties, nevertheless revisions during future iterations will
follow. Here, we reported results about online problemsolving sessions, the online physics laboratories, and the
factors influencing subjective learning outcomes. Even
though being descriptive in nature (and therefore lacking
controlled experimental manipulations), we derived several suggestions from the study for future physics courses
in which online learning will certainly play an important role. We summarize our main findings: First, since
self-organization skills are strongly correlated with subjective learning outcomes, physics faculties may offer (or

import) special courses (or workshops) to foster these
skills among students. Second, since there was also a
strong correlation between subjective learning achievement and communication, we recommend installing networking services, using break-out rooms and keeping the
groups small to foster communication between peers; to
promote communication between the lecturer and the
students, the instructor can make use of interactive learning tools that might even be easier to implement in an online setting compared to the physical lecture hall. Third,
first-year students rated the lowest learning achievement
during the Spring term 2020. We conclude that all these
interventions are especially important for the younger
students who just started their academic career. When
capacities for face-to-face teaching can be used to a limited extent, focusing on the freshmen cohort is recommended [65].
For the problem-solving sessions (recitations), graded
feedback followed by online discussions turned out to be
more effective (in the students’ perspective) than handed
solutions. Making the solution process visible (reconstruction) requires technical resources, e.g. tablet computer with pen input. For the physics laboratories, students value the possibility of gathering own data. This
can be accomplished from the distance via remote controlled labs, or (more easily) with videos or simulations
from experiments. When secondhand data is used, we
advice to clarify their origin, e.g. with a detailed description of the measurement including photographs of
the experimental setup.
This study has some limitations. From the methodological perspective, we relied purely on self-assessments
and subjective estimations of learning and attitudes.
Even though the results are consistent with educational
notions, future work could also investigate exam results
or other hard indicators of learning for a more objective data basis. Furthermore, the sample represents a
selection of universities that were accessible to the researchers. A huger distribution of the questionnaire, involving more countries and different institutions would
increase the generality of the results. Last, the questionnaire was administered only once as a mid- to end-term
evaluation during the Spring 2020. When students get
more accustomed to online learning or hybrid models of
learning, some variables (self-organization or communication) might improve incidentally.
The result presented here might be helpful for other
faculties for planning online teaching and learning in general, and during the next terms. The close cooperation
with colleagues from the physics departments has proven
to be very successful, especially in the implementation of
the questions, distribution and reporting of results during faculty meetings. On a meta-perspective, the article
therefore also shows how education research can bridge
the (sometimes existent) gap between physics education
and the faculty of physics. It would be desirable if similar work has more space in the future and also at other
institutions.

12
APPENDIX

• The same instructor encourages more discussion in
standard classes than in online classes.

The distributions of the students’ scores are depicted
in Fig. 5.

• Based on my experience this semester, I look forward to have more online physics courses even when
the standard courses at university will be available.

Questionnaire items:

e) communication
a) self-organization abilities in general
• In my studies, I am self-disciplined and I find it
easy to set aside reading and homework time.
• I am able to manage my study time effectively and
complete assignments on time.
• In my studies, I set goals and have high degree of
initiative.
• When it comes to learning and studying, I am an
self-directed (independent) person.
• I plan out my week’s work in advance, either on
paper or in my head.
b) self-organization during COVID-19 semester:
• Not being at university hinders me from studying.
• I am not able to organize my time in the during
e-learning effectively.
• I lack the daily routine due to absence of classes at
university.
• I find it difficult to get up in the morning without
having a scheduled class.
• I manage to complete the assignments for the online
courses.
• I am more systematic and organized during Covid19 pandemic than usual.
c) environment
• I have a quiet space where I can participate in video
conferences unhindered.
• I am disturbed by others during times when I need
to study for my courses.
d) attitudes towards online learning
• In general, I prefer the online physics courses over
classroom physics courses.
• For the same type of course, my classroom learning experience in physics is better than my online
learning experience
• On-campus instruction helps me to understand the
physics concepts better than in online courses.
• I feel more passive in online physics courses than in
the standard classroom courses on campus.

• I miss having contact with other students due to
Covid-19 pandemic.
• The communication with the instructors works fine
during COVID-19 pandemic.
• The communication with peers works fine during
Covid-19 pandemic.
• At the moment, I miss discussions about physics
topics with other students at university.
• I hesitate to ask my peers for help in e-learning
environment.
• I meet online or on telephone with other students
to learn together.
• It is easy for me to establish contact with other
students during Covid-19 pandemic.
• It is hard for me to discuss with other students
when I don’t see their faces.
f ) overall learning achievement
• I believe I can perform well in an online self-paced
class.
• I am confident that I can learn without the permanent presence of an instructor to assist me.
• I am confident that I can manage all the activities
that the online physics classes require.
• I look anxiously at the upcoming exams in physics.
• I am certain that I will complete the online physics
classes courses with good grades.
• I am afraid that I will not be able to perform as I
am used to given the unfamiliar situation.
• Studying during the COVID-19 pandemic has positive impact on my study success.
Lab courses
General:
• Did you attend a physics lab course this semester?
• How was the lab work conducted?For example: I
conducted experiments by myself (real interactions
with experimental equipment), I performed simulations or virtual experiments, I performed remote experiments, I received video records of experiments or other.

13
• Which type of data did you analyze?
Reinforcing content:
• Despite major changes in the course structure, the
lab course improved my knowledge.
• The online physics lab helped me to better understand the physics concepts behind the experiments.
• Online discussions about the labs with the experiment supervisor or with peers reinforced my physics
knowledge.
Experimental skills:

• How was the problem-solving course structured?
Click all that apply and/or describe the structure
yourself.
– The students’ solutions were submitted, corrected by the tutor and discussed in an online
meeting
– The solutions were reconstructed during a live
online session in real time
– Exercise sheets were solved online live and discussed in groups

• The limited hands-on activities had negative impact on my learning

– The solutions to the exercise sheets were
handed out to the students as text or as a
video (worked-out solutions)

• The online lab course in this semester had a similar
effect on my experimental skills as the standard lab
course.

– Forums were used to discuss exercise sheets
without time constraints.

• Not having gathered the measurement data myself
complicates data analysis and discussion
• Missing the hands-on experience, I am concerned
that I cannot handle experimental equipment in the
next lab/in the future.
• I feel that I gained less experimental skills due to
the modified course format.
Problem-solving sessions / recitations
General
• Did you attend online problem-solving sessions during the semester?
• To which type of course did the sessions belong to?
E.g. Introductory physics lecture with a relatively
large audience, special course in physics with few
students or other?
• Were exercise sheets provided?
sheets compulsory?

Perceived effectiveness of the problem-solving sessions

• The online problem-solving sessions in this
semester had a similar effect on understanding
physical concepts as the regular exercises.
• The online format led to less discussion about the
individual solution steps.
• In regular recitations a better exchange between
students and teachers is achieved.

Were exercise

• What fraction of the exercise sheets did you complete?
• Did you work alone or with peers on the tasks?
• If you solved the homework problems in a study
group, how did you organize the study groups?
• Did you meet online to discuss the solutions to the
tasks?
• If online discussions of the problem sheets existed,
what fraction did you attend?
Structure

• Which format (one of the above) would you consider best in terms of fostering your learning
achievement? Think about what format you would
like to see in the future.

• When presenting solutions online, it is easier for me
to understand the individual steps and approaches.
• During the online sessions I felt well supervised concerning my questions
• Lacking handwriting opportunities in online sessions makes discussions about the tasks less effective
• Working on exercise sheets in a study group was
more difficult than in normal semesters.

14
REFERENCES

[1] J. Seaman, I. E. Allen, and J. Seaman, Grade increase:
Tracking distance education in the United States, Babson
Surv. Res. Gr. 1 (2018).
[2] J. Colvin, Kimberly F. Champaign, A. Liu, Q. Zhou, C.
Fredericks, and D. Pritchard, Learning in an Introductory Physics MOOC: All Cohorts Learn Equally, Including an On-Campus Class, Int. Rev. Res. Open Distance
Learn. 15, 263 (2014).
[3] M. Kebritchi, A. Lipschuetz, and L. Santiague, Issues
and Challenges for Teaching Successful Online Courses in
Higher Education, J. Educ. Technol. Syst. 46, 4 (2017).
[4] H. B. Shapiro, C. H. Lee, N. E. Wyman Roth, K. Li,
M. Çetinkaya-Rundel, and D. A. Canelas, Understanding the massive open online course (MOOC) student experience: An examination of attitudes, motivations, and
barriers, Comput. Educ. 110, 35 (2017).
[5] D. Davis, G. Chen, C. Hauff, and G. J. Houben, Activating learning at scale: A review of innovations in online
learning strategies, Comput. Educ. 125, 327 (2018).
[6] V. Benigno and G. Trentin, The evaluation of online
courses, J. Comput. Assist. Learn. 16, 259 (2000).
[7] R. M. Bernard, P. C. Abrami, E. Borokhovski, C. A.
Wade, R. M. Tamim, M. A. Surkes, and E. C. Bethel, A
meta-analysis of three types of interaction treatments in
distance education, Rev. Educ. Res. 79, 1243 (2009).
[8] H. R. Sadaghiani, Online Prelectures: An Alternative
to Textbook Reading Assignments, Phys. Teach. 50, 301
(2012).
[9] H. R. Sadaghiani, Using multimedia learning modules
in a hybrid-online course in electricity and magnetism,
Phys. Rev. Spec. Top. - Phys. Educ. Res. 7, 1 (2011).
[10] G. Kestin, K. Miller, L. S. McCarty, K. Callaghan, and L.
Deslauriers, Comparing the effectiveness of online versus
live lecture demonstrations, Phys. Rev. Phys. Educ. Res.
16, 13101 (2020).
[11] A. K. Wood, R. K. Galloway, R. Donnelly, and J.
Hardy, Characterizing interactive engagement activities
in a flipped introductory physics class, Phys. Rev. Phys.
Educ. Res. 12, 1 (2016).
[12] K. Miller, S. Zyto, D. Karger, J. Yoo, and E. Mazur,
Analysis of student engagement in an online annotation
system in the context of a flipped introductory physics
class, Phys. Rev. Phys. Educ. Res. 12, 1 (2016).
[13] J. W. Morphew, G. E. Gladding, and J. P. Mestre, Effect
of presentation style and problem-solving attempts on
metacognition and learning from solution videos, Phys.
Rev. Phys. Educ. Res. 16, 10104 (2020).
[14] S. Y. Lin, J. M. Aiken, D. T. Seaton, S. S. Douglas, E.
F. Greco, B. D. Thoms, and M. F. Schatz, Exploring
physics students’ engagement with online instructional
videos in an introductory mechanics course, Phys. Rev.
Phys. Educ. Res. 13, 1 (2017).
[15] S. Bonham, R. Beichner, and D. Deardorff, Online homework: Does it make a difference?, Phys. Teach. 39, 293
(2001).
[16] K. K. Cheng, B. A. Thacker, R. L. Cardenas, and C.
Crouch, Using an online homework system enhances stu-

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]
[24]
[25]

[26]
[27]

[28]
[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

dents’ learning of physics concepts in an introductory
physics course, Am. J. Phys. 72, 1447 (2004).
M. Thoennessen and M. J. Harrison, Computer-assisted
assignments in a large physics class, Comput. Educ. 27,
141 (1996).
N. Demirci, of Web-based vs . Paper-based Homework in
a General Physics, Eurasia J. Math. Sci. Technol. Educ.
3, 29 (2007).
G. Kortemeyer, E. Kashy, W. Benenson, and W. Bauer,
Experiences using the open-source learning content management and assessment system LON-CAPA in introductory physics courses, Am. J. Phys. 76, 438 (2008).
W. R. Evans and M. A. Selen, Investigating the use of
mastery-style online homework exercises in introductory
algebra-based mechanics in a controlled clinical study,
Phys. Rev. Phys. Educ. Res. 13, 1 (2017).
B. Gutmann, G. Gladding, M. Lundsgaard, and T.
Stelzer, Mastery-style homework exercises in introductory physics courses: Implementation matters, Phys.
Rev. Phys. Educ. Res. 14, 10128 (2018).
P. Magalhães, D. Ferreira, J. Cunha, and P. Rosário,
Online vs traditional homework: A systematic review on
the benefits to students’ performance, Comput. Educ.
152, 103869 (2020).
A. Reagan, Online introductory physics labs: Status and
methods, Washingt. Acad. Sci. 98, 31 (2012).
Š. Kubı́nová and J. Šlégr, Physics demonstrations with
the Arduino board, Phys. Educ. 50, 472 (2015).
W. H. Kuan, C. H. Tseng, S. Chen, and C. C. Wong, Development of a Computer-Assisted Instrumentation Curriculum for Physics Students: Using LabVIEW and Arduino Platform, J. Sci. Educ. Technol. 25, 427 (2016).
P. La Rocca, F. Riggi, and C. Pinto, Remotely teaching
Arduino by means of an, (2020).
A. Mandanici and G. Mandaglio, Experiments and data
analysis on one-dimensional motion with Raspberry Pi
and Python, Phys. Educ. 55, (2020).
P. Vogt and J. Kuhn, Analyzing free fall with a smartphone acceleration sensor, Phys. Teach. 50, 182 (2012).
L. Sukariasih, Erniwati, L. Sahara, L. Hariroh, and S.
Fayanto, Studies the use of smartphone sensor for physics
learning, Int. J. Sci. Technol. Res. 8, 862 (2019).
S. Staacks, S.Hütz, H. Heinke, and C. Stampfer, Advanced tools for smartphone-based experiments: phyphox, Phys. Educ. 53(4), 045009 (2018).
S. Gröber, M. Vetter, B. Eckert, and H. J. Jodl, Experimenting from a distance - Remotely controlled laboratory
(RCL), Eur. J. Phys. 28, (2007).
N. D. Finkelstein, W. K. Adams, C. J. Keller, P. B. Kohl,
K. K. Perkins, N. S. Podolefsky, S. Reid, and R. Lemaster, When learning about the real world is better done
virtually: A study of substituting computer simulations
for laboratory equipment, Phys. Rev. Spec. Top. - Phys.
Educ. Res. 1, 1 (2005).
Z. C. de Jong, Ton; Linn, Marcia C.; Zacharia, Physical and Virtual Laboratories in Science and Engineering
Education, Science (80-. ). 340, 305 (2013).

15
[34] J. R. Brinson, Learning outcome achievement in nontraditional (virtual and remote) versus traditional
(hands-on) laboratories: A review of the empirical research, Comput. Educ. 87, 218 (2015).
[35] S. J. Husnaini and S. Chen, Effects of guided inquiry virtual and physical laboratories on conceptual understanding, inquiry performance, scientific inquiry self-efficacy,
and enjoyment, Phys. Rev. Phys. Educ. Res. 15, 10119
(2019).
[36] L. S. Post, P. Guo, N. Saab, and W. Admiraal, Effects of
remote labs on cognitive, behavioral, and affective learning outcomes in higher education, Comput. Educ. 140,
(2019).
[37] K. P. Chien, C. Y. Tsai, H. L. Chen, W. H. Chang, and
S. Chen, Learning differences and eye fixation patterns in
virtual and physical science laboratories, Comput. Educ.
82, 191 (2015).
[38] F. Reif and L. A. Scott, Teaching scientific thinking skills:
Students and computers coaching each other, Am. J.
Phys. 67, 819 (1999).
[39] K. VanLehn, C. Lynch, K. Schulze, J. A. Shapiro, R.
Shelby, L. Taylor, D. Treacy, A. Weinstein, and M.
Wintersgill, The andes physics tutoring system: Lessons
learned, Int. J. Artif. Intell. Educ. 15, 147 (2005).
[40] K. vanLehn, The relative effectiveness of human tutoring,
intelligent tutoring systems, and other tutoring systems,
Educ. Psychol. 46, 197 (2011).
[41] L. S. Myneni, N. H. Narayanan, S. Rebello, A. Rouinfar, and S. Pumtambekar, An interactive and intelligent learning system for physics education, IEEE Trans.
Learn. Technol. 6, 228 (2013).
[42] N. Schroeder, G. Gladding, B. Gutmann, and T. Stelzer,
Narrated animated solution videos in a mastery setting,
Phys. Rev. Spec. Top. - Phys. Educ. Res. 11, 1 (2015).
[43] G. Gladding, B. Gutmann, N. Schroeder, and T. Stelzer,
Clinical study of student learning using mastery style
versus immediate feedback online activities, Phys. Rev.
Spec. Top. - Phys. Educ. Res. 11, 1 (2015).
[44] C. M. Nakamura, S. K. Murphy, M. G. Christel, S. M.
Stevens, and D. A. Zollman, Automated analysis of short
responses in an interactive synthetic tutoring system for
introductory physics, Phys. Rev. Phys. Educ. Res. 12, 1
(2016).
[45] Q. X. Ryan, E. Frodermann, K. Heller, L. Hsu, and A.
Mason, Computer problem-solving coaches for introductory physics: Design and usability studies, Phys. Rev.
Phys. Educ. Res. 12, 1 (2016).
[46] A. F. Heckler and B. D. Mikula, Factors affecting learning
of vector math from computer-based practice: Feedback
complexity and prior knowledge, Phys. Rev. Phys. Educ.
Res. 12, 1 (2016).
[47] B. D. Mikula and A. F. Heckler, Framework and implementation for improving physics essential skills via
computer-based practice: Vector math, Phys. Rev. Phys.
Educ. Res. 13, 1 (2017).
[48] S. Devore, E. Marshman, and C. Singh, Challenge of engaging all students via self-paced interactive electronic
learning tutorials for introductory physics, Phys. Rev.
Phys. Educ. Res. 13, 1 (2017).
[49] E. Marshman, S. DeVore, and C. Singh, Holistic frame-

[50]

[51]

[52]
[53]

[54]

[55]

[56]

[57]
[58]

[59]

[60]

[61]

[62]

[63]

[64]

[65]

work to help students learn effectively from researchvalidated self-paced learning tools, Phys. Rev. Phys.
Educ. Res. 16, 20108 (2020).
A. Traxler, A. Gavrin, and R. Lindell, Networks identify
productive forum discussions, Phys. Rev. Phys. Educ.
Res. 14, 20107 (2018).
J. W. T. Pond and J. J. Chini, Exploring student learning profiles in algebra-based studio physics: A personcentered approach, Phys. Rev. Phys. Educ. Res. 13, 1
(2017).
D. Rickey & A. M. Stacy, The role of metacognition in
learning chemistry, J. Chem. Educ. 77, 7, 915 (2000).
G. Schraw, K. Crippen, and K. Hartley, K, Promoting
self-regulation in science education: Metacognition as
part of a broader perspective on learning, Res. Sci. Educ.,
36, 111–139 (2006).
R. J. Dufresne, W. J. Gerace, W. J. Leonard, W. J., J. P.
Mestre, and L. Wenk, Classtalk: A classroom communication system for active learning, J. Comp. High. Educ.
7, 2, 3–47 (1996).
E. Mazur, Peer instruction: A user’s manual. Unpublished manuscript, Department of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA (1993).
D. R. Sokoloff & R. K. Thornton, Using interactive lecture demonstrations to create an active learning environment, Phys. Teach. 35, 6, 340–347 (1997).
A. Van Heuvelen, Overview, case study physics. Am J.
Phys. 59, 898-907 (1991).
A. M. Uzun, E. Unal, and A. Yamac, Service Teachers’
Academic Achievements in Online Distance Education:
The Roles of Online Self-Regulation and Attitudes, Turk.
Online J. Dist. Educ. 14, 2, 131–140 (2013).
N. D. Finkelstein & S. J. Pollock, Replicating and understanding successful innovations: Implementing tutorials
in introductory physics, Phys. Rev. ST. Phys. Educ. Res.,
1(1), 010101 (2005).
B. T. Spike & N. D. Finkelstein, Preparing tutorial and
recitation instructors: A pedagogical approach to focusing attention on content and student reasoning, Am. J.
Phys. 80, 11, 1020–1026 (2012).
N. Duncan, Feed-forward: improving students’ use of tutors’ comments, Assessment and evaluation in higher education 32, 271 (2007).
S. Gielen, E. Peeters, F. Dochy, P. Onghena, and K.
Struyven, Improving the effectiveness of peer feedback
for learning, Learn. Instr. 20, 304 (2010).
B.R. Wilcox & H. J. Lewandowski, Developing skills versus reinforcing concepts in physics labs: Insight from a
survey of students’ beliefs about experimental physics,
Phys. Rev. Phys. Educ. Res. 13, 1), 010108 (2017).
B. Priemer, S. Pfeiler, and T. Ludwig, Firsthand or secondhand data in school labs: It does not make a difference, Phys. Rev. Phys. Educ. Res. 16, 1, 013102 (2020).
Indeed, the Faculty of Physics of the University of Goettingen prioritizes the first-year students and live problemsolving sessions: In the following winter term, the large
lecture halls will be used for problem-solving sessions (instead of giving lectures) for the first-year courses. The
occupancy rate will be 20% to prevent the spread of the
Corona-virus.

16

FIG. 5. Distribution of student’s self-assessments of the six scales described in Tab. II and of the special physics courses
(recitations in terms of effectiveness and the labs in terms of achieving experiment skills and conceptual understanding)

