WHITE PAPER ISSUE 2

The Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Transportation
Systems in New York City and Seattle, USA
Jingqin Gao, Jingxing Wang, Zilin Bian, Suzana Duran Bernardes,
Yanyan Chen, Abhinav Bhattacharyya, Siva Soorya Muruga Thambiran,
Kaan Ozbay, Shri Iyer, Xuegang Jeff Ban

Executive Summary

Key findings from Seattle

This paper, following up the white paper released on April 3,
2020, continues to highlight trends in mobility and sociability
in New York City (NYC), and supplements them with similar
data from Seattle, WA, two of the cities most affected by
COVID-19 in the U.S. Seattle may be further along in its
recovery from the pandemic and ensuing lockdown than NYC,
and may offer some insights into how travel patterns change.
Finally, some preliminary findings from cities in China are
discussed, two months following the lifting of their lockdowns,
to offer a glimpse further into the future of recovery.

•

Key findings from NYC

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

NYC continues to see a consistent low volume in transit
ridership and motor vehicle trips. Subway ridership
remains down 91% and vehicular traffic via MTA bridges
and tunnels was down 68% in April 2020 vs. 2019.
An increase in traffic speed was observed with some city
streets operating at or near free-flow speed. A 108%
average increase in speeds on Midtown Avenues between
8AM-6PM was observed in April as compared with
February. Concurrently, a 72% average daily increase in
the number of school zone speeding tickets was observed
during before and after stay-at-home orders.
Crashes remain low as a result of the low vehicular
volumes, but the severity of crashes measured by fatalities
is up. This may possibly be due to higher vehicular speeds,
but more data is needed.
Weigh-in-motion (WIM) from the Brooklyn-Queens
Expressway (BQE) showed reduced volumes and higher
speeds as well as that the number of very heavy trucks
(GVW > 100 kips) was reduced 30% for Queens bound and
44% for Staten Island bound traffic.
Bikeshare ridership remains down with the exception of the
first 12 days of March. Ridership patterns did change, with
15% fewer Friday and Saturday trips. Average trip duration
in March 2020 also increased to 13.9 minutes, a 20%
increase compared to the same month last year.
An increase in social distancing complaints has made the
Non-emergency police matter category the 2nd most
common complaint among NYC311 reports.

Contact: c2smart@nyu.edu
c2smart.engineering.nyu.edu

Public transit demand is still at a comparatively low level.
Transit demand in Seattle continuously decreased until
March 26 with a 79% drop compared to a typical weekday.
Traffic volumes have begun to recover from previous lows.
Data collected from downtown Seattle on I-5 show a 6.6%,
11.9%, and 14.8% increase in the weeks of April 6, 13, and
20, respectively, compared with March 30-April 5.
Data showing that traffic volumes are starting to increase
while public transit demand remains low indicates a
potential shift in mode choice and increased preference for
non-public modes of travel, at least in the near future.
Bicycle volume counts near Fremont Bridge grew to a
relatively high level (around 2,100) in April compared to
March 2020, however, fewer day-of-week variations were
observed compared to January and February 2020. Seattle
opened 9 miles of Stay Healthy Streets from its bike
facilities and trails to allow for safe social distancing,
which may have contributed to the increase of bike usage
in April.

New York City
Corridor Travel Time
The closing of essential businesses and stay-at-home policies
have had a significant impact on average travel times in both
NYC and Seattle from early March through the end of April.
Travel time on Route 495 that connects Long Island and New
Jersey via Queens and Manhattan in NYC was analyzed in
Figure 1. A flatter travel time pattern of near free-flow speeds
was observed through the data following the stay-at-home
orders, instead of typical spikes of commuter peaks (Figure
1(b)). Most recently, there is some evidence of increasing travel
times. For example, Westbound average travel time for the
week of April 20th slightly increased to 30.0 minutes, compared
to 27.6 minutes for the week of April 6th (the second week after
the stay-at-home order), an increase of 8.5%. No significant
increase was overserved for the eastbound traffic, therefore it is
not yet clear if this data illustrates a trend.

1

May 3, 2020

speed on major crosstown streets, including 14th, 23rd, 34th, 42nd,
and 57th Street, saw a 2-6 mph increase in the third week of
April 2020 compared to the same week in February 2020.

(a) Hourly travel time on the 495 corridor (March-April)

(a) Citywide average speeds February 17-21, 8AM to 6PM

(b) Average hourly travel time on the 495 corridor
Figure 1 Hourly travel time on 495 corridor (Flushing
Meadows Corona Park to NJ Turnpike Exit 16E)
(b) Citywide average speeds April 20-24, 8AM to 6PM

Citywide Traffic Speeds

Figure 2 NYC Citywide average speeds, 8AM to 6PM

The speed maps in Figure 2 display the median travel speeds on
major arterials/expressways of NYC as well as the Midtown
Manhattan street network. With less traffic in the city, most
roads and highways had higher speeds in the third week of
April, compared to the same week in February. For example, on
April 15, during the traditional morning peak hour, 8.3% of the
145 local road segments in Manhattan where data is available,
had an average traffic speed over the city speed limit of 25 mph.
28% of them were over 20mph, while only 3.4% had an average
traffic speed over 20mph in February, before the pandemic.
Average traffic speeds from 8AM to 6PM on north-south
avenues between 34th and 57th Streets in Midtown Manhattan
are shown in Figure 3. The average traffic speeds on avenues
were up 108% in the third week of April, with a range from
22% to 253% on different avenues, compared to average traffic
speed in the third week of February 2020. The average traffic

Figure 3 Midtown Avenue speeds, 8AM to 6PM
2

May 3, 2020

School Zone Speeding Tickets and Crash Data

April compared to the same period last year. The increase in
speeding and crashes should be monitored closely.

As traffic speeds are up citywide, violations issued by the city’s
school zone cameras also increased by 72% during March 13 to
April 19 as compared to January 1 to March 12 in 2020.

Figure 6 Reported vehicle collisions in NYC by week

Figure 4 Number of school zone speeding tickets from
weekdays January 1 to April 19 in 2020.

Traffic Volume and Transit Ridership

Figure 4 shows the number of weekday school zone speeding
tickets from January 1 to April 19 in 2020. There has been a
sharp escalation in the number of the tickets, especially for
passenger vehicles - a steep 75% increase after March 13
compared to the violations before March 13 - which indicates
that drivers are taking advantage of fewer vehicles on streets to
increase travel speeds. Figure 5 illustrates breakdown of school
zone speeding tickets by borough. From March 23 to April 19,
the number of tickets issued in Manhattan increased to almost
four times the tickets issued in February 2020 (11,936 tickets in
February and 46,691 tickets from March 23 to April 19).

In NYC, since the implementation of the stay-at-home order on
March 22, both subway ridership and vehicular traffic on MTA
facilities continues to be low. In the first three weeks of April,
the subway ridership was down 91% and vehicular traffic via
MTA bridges and tunnels was down 68%, compared to the
same weeks in 2019. Recent data shows a smaller drop from
2019 levels, though there is yet to be an increase in absolute
volumes.

Figure 7 Weekly changes in subway turnstile entries and
traffic on MTA bridges and tunnelsii
Figure 5 School zone speeding tickets by borough
Weigh-in-Motion (WIM) Data from the BQE
i

Some states have also seen an uptick in traffic fatalities . Based
on NYPD reported motor vehicle collisions, the number of
reported crashes seen a continue decrease of 17%, 24%, and 8%
in the first three weeks of April, 2020, compared to the same
weeks in 2019 (Figure 6). Although there is a decrease in
traffic-related fatalities due to lower traffic volumes, the fatality
rate in crashes (fatalities/number of total crashes) increased
from 1.4 fatalities/1000 crashes to 1.9 fatalities/1000 crashes in
the first three weeks of April compared to the same period of
February 2020, which could indicate crashes are more severe.
Motorist and cyclist injuries in terms of the total injuries were
up by 3% and 1% respectively, though the percentage of
pedestrian injuries was down 4% in the first three weeks of

WIM data from the urban roadway testbed on the BrooklynQueens Expressway (BQE) between Manhattan Bridge and
Brooklyn Bridge show the following for February 3 to March
13 and March 13 to April 12, 2020:
• Volume: The annual daily traffic (ADT) for FHWA Class 1
through Class 3 was down by 39% and 37% for Queens
bound (QB) and Staten Island bound (SIB), respectively,
while the annual daily truck traffic (ADTT) was also down
by 25% for QB and 30% for SIB.
• Speed: The average speed increased by 15% for QB (27
mph to 31 mph) and by 40% for SIB (20 mph to 28 mph).

3

May 3, 2020

• GVW: The average GVW for FHWA Class 6 and FHWA
Class 9 was down by 3~8% for QB and SIB. The number of
very heavy trucks (GVW > 100 kips) was down 30% for QB
and 44% for SIB traffic.

emergency police matter” category shoot up to the second spot
among all complaint types reported to 311 (Table 1). There
were a total of 17,470 such complaints made in under a month
(March 28 to April 22), with 16,925 of them being about social
distancing, reported from all five boroughs of New York City.

Citi Bike Ridership
Citi Bike is the largest bikeshare program in NYC. In the month
of March, Citi Bike ridership increased more than 50% for the
first 12 days of the month but then decreased significantly after
March 16, when the “Stay at Home” order was issued, reaching
a 62% drop in the total number of rides for the rest of the month
when compared to 2019. The average ride duration in March
2019 was 11.6 minutes, while for March 2020, it was 13.9
minutes (+20%). After March 16, 2020, this increase was
greater than 30%. The distribution of the duration of rides is
also more widely dispersed in 2020, with a higher frequency of
trips of more than 20 minutes. While the total number of rides
tended to increase towards the end of the week in March 2019,
it tended to decrease towards the end of the week in March 2020
(Figure 8). The fact that weekdays registered a higher total
number of rides in March 2020 might indicate more rides being
made for commuting or fewer recreational trips are being taken.
These changes may indicate a mode choice change, with
bicycle tris replacing transit, private vehicles, taxi, or TNC rides.

Table 1 The top 10 complaint types in NYC311 before and after
stay-at-home order
Feb 22 - Mar 21, 2020

Mar 21 - Apr 22, 2020

Rank

Complaint Type

Complaint Type

1

Noise- Residential

Noise- Residential

2

Heat/Hot Water

Non-Emergency Police Matter

3

Illegal Parking

Heat/Hot Water

4

Blocked Driveway

Consumer Complaint

5

Street Condition

Illegal Parking

6

Street Light Condition

Noise- Street/Sidewalk

7

Noise- Street/Sidewalk

Street Light Condition

8

General construction

Blocked Driveway

9

Consumer Complaint

Noise

10

Noise

Noise- Vehicle

Seattle
Seattle was the first major U.S. city to experience the drastic
effects of the COVID-19 crisis. However, health concerns have
abated quicker as compared to NYC, and data suggests that
Seattle may have begun returning to normal transportation
conditions. Observing Seattle data may help to indicate what is
to come in NYC.
Corridor Travel Time
Travel time on Interstate-5 (I-5) that goes through downtown
Seattle area were analyzed in Figure 9. Similar to NYC, Seattle
observed a flatter travel time pattern of near free-flow speeds
through the data, instead of typical spikes of commuter peaks.
Figure 8 Citi Bike trips per weekday
NYC311 Service Requests
The 311 service line provides a way for NYC residents to find
information about services, make complaints, and report
problems. Not following social distancing guidelines currently
carries a penalty of $1,000. On March 28, a new category called
“Social Distancing” was added as a subtype under the “NonEmergency Police Matter” complaint in NYC311. A complaint
could be made for violation of social distancing rules to report
a business or location that is required to be closed, an essential
business that is open but is not complying with necessary
restrictions or overcrowding at a business or location.
The number of reports to 311 surged starting from the first day
of stay-at-home, with most of the complaints being directed at
stores or commercial buildings, followed by residential
buildings, streets/sidewalks, and playgrounds. A steady
increase of complaints in the following weeks made the “non-

(a) Hourly travel time in March and April

4

May 3, 2020

Figure 11 Traffic volume change on I-5 (downtown Seattle)
Transit Ridership
(b) Average hourly travel time on critical dates (I-5 SB)

According to Transit app data, public transit demand of Seattle
began to decline on February 29, 2020, the same day when
Washington state reported the first COVID-19 death. The
demand continuously decreased until March 26 (a 79% drop
compared to a normal day), and demand has remained low
since. The increase in traffic volumes while public transit
ridership remains low indicates a potential shift in mode choice
attitudes and preference for non-public modes of travel.

Figure 9 Hourly travel time on I-5 in Seattle
Traffic Volume
Traffic volumes at three freeways locations (I-5 downtown
Seattle, I-5 NE of Green Lake Park, and SR-520 toll bridge)
showed a consistent drop in traffic volume in March, followed
by a gradual increase in April. Figure 10 presents an example
of the daily traffic volume trends on I-5 in downtown Seattle.

Bicycling Volume
Bicycling, already an important mode of travel in Seattle, is
increasing. Figure 12 shows the total bike counts near Fremont
Bridge between mid-February and late-April. From midFebruary to early-March, higher counts (+3,500) are observed
on weekdays while fewer counts (~1,000) on weekends. During
the first two weeks of March, the number of bikes gradually
decreased, corresponding to work-from-home recommendation
made on March 5. Counts reached the lowest level at the end of
March, which is consistent with the pattern change in travel
time and traffic volume. In April, bike counts grew to nearly
2,100, without a clear weekday/weekend pattern, possibly due
to an increase in the use of bikes for recreational purposes and
as a result of the “Stay Healthy Streets closures” program.

Figure 10 Traffic volume on I-5 (downtown Seattle)

Seattle opened 6 miles of Stay Healthy Streets on April 24,
2020, creating a total of 9 miles to allow for safe social
distancing building off of the 196 miles of Seattle’s bike
facilities and trails. Initial observations indicate bike travel was
up 299% from 2017iii along Stay Healthy Streets in the Central
District, which may contributed to the observed bike trend in
Figure 12. SDOT is aiming to convert approximately 15 miles
to Stay Healthy Streets in the coming weeks.

Using the week of March 30 to April 5 as a baseline (as it
observed the lowest traffic volume), traffic volume at the I-5
Downtown Seattle station recorded a 6.6%, 11.9%, and 14.8%
increase in the weeks of April 6, 13, and 20, respectively.
Similar trends have been observed for the other two stations.
The continuous increasing trend of traffic volume indicates that
the impact of traffic in Seattle is slowly returning to normal
levels despite stay-at-home restrictions remaining in place.

Figure 12 Seattle bike counts near Fremont Bridge (Figure
source: Seattle DOT bike counters)
5

May 3, 2020

A Glance at Multiple Cities in China

Summary of Findings

As a way to better understand what recovery might look like,
subway ridership and mode shift in multiple cities in China
were investigated. As shown in Figure 13, subway ridership in
major cities in China has been gradually increasing as cities
reopen, but still remain well below normal. Most cities in China
reopened around February 10, except Wuhan, the Chinese
epicenter of the COVID-19 outbreak, which reopened its
subway system in three phases from March 28-April 22.

NYC is still grappling with the COVID-19 pandemic but a
reopening of the city may soon occur. Data from Seattle, which
is potentially further along in the recovery shows that while
vehicular traffic volume and bicycling are starting to increase,
transit usage remains low. Moreover, transit ridership and mode
shift in multiple cities in China, several months ahead in
recovery, show that the recovery of transit ridership will be
slow.

In Shanghai and Guangzhou, an average rate of 40% and 63%
of ridership (compared to the days before the outbreak) were
restored after 1-month and 2-month of reopening, respectively.
Beijing experienced a stricter strategy on reopening including a
mandate to maintain subway car occupancy below 50% of its
maximum capacity. This led to a slower recovery with a 20%
and 40% restoration of subway ridership one and two months
after reopening. Similarly, Wuhan has only restored 17% of its
typical ridership one month after reopening. Other social
distancing enforcement strategies such as limiting the amount
of people entering subway stations during peak hours, are likely
also contributing to the slow recovery.

March marked the first time protracted period of congestion
disappeared across many U.S roadways. The data now shows
what “light” traffic condition looks like for the typical
congested cities and can be used as a reference baseline for
future studies of the resilience of the system.
This paper reflects the Center’s perspective as of May 3, 2020
based on data collected in April 2020. As the world continues
to adjust to the new reality of COVID-19, C2SMART
researchers are continuing to collect data, including perishable
mobility, safety, and behavior data, and will continue to
monitor these trends and regularly update findings as some
states are moving to reopen.

A mode shift towards walking and cycling was also observed
after the city reopened. According to a survey conducted by the
Institute for Transportation and Development Policy (ITDP) in
early March in Guangzhou, 40% of previous transit commuters
had shifted to private cars, taxis, and ride-hailing, with more to
walking and biking. Beijing’s bike share systems saw an
increase in usage by 150% from February 10 to March 4, 2020,
one month after reopening. Continued monitoring of the mode
shift and repositioning of transit services with new health
standards can provide insight during the anticipated upcoming
recovery period in the US.

Data Sources
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Figure 13 Subway ridership changes in Guangzhou, Beijing,
Shanghai and Wuhan, China

NYC Department of Transportation (DOT), Real-Time
Traffic Speed Data and Traffic Speeds Map
INRIX, Traffic Speed Data
Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA), Turnstile
Data and hourly traffic on MTA bridges and tunnels
Citi Bike, Citi Bike System Data
New York Police Department (NYPD), Motor Vehicle
Collisions - Crashes
Google, travel time information (extracted from Google
Directions API)
Washington State DOT, Traffic volume counts
Transit App, Subway ridership demand
Seattle Department of Transportation (SDOT), Street
closure information and bike counts
Shanghai, Beijing, Guangzhou and Wuhan Metro official
Weibo account, Metro Ridership
Institute for Transportation and Development Policy,
Travel mode choice survey in Guangzhou, China

Note: all data is preliminary and subject to change.
For more information please contact c2smart@nyu.edu
For more data visualization, please visit our COVID-19
Dashboard: c2smart.engineering.nyu.edu/covid-19-dashboard/

i

iii

The Wall Street Journal, The Roads Are Quieter Due to Coronavirus, but There
Are More Fatal Car Crashes
ii
Subway ridership data is for 3/02- 4/17/2020.

SDOT, Stay Healthy Streets continue this week and will add 3 new
neighborhoods this weekend, https://sdotblog.seattle.gov/2020/04/23/stayhealthy-streets-continue-this-week-and-will-add-3-new-neighborhoods-thisweekend/

6

May 3, 2020

