Tele-operative Robotic Lung Ultrasound Scanning Platform
for Triage of COVID-19 Patients
Ryosuke Tsumura†, IEEE Member, John W. Hardin†, Keshav Bimbraw, Olushola S. Odusanya, Yihao
Zheng, Jeffrey C. Hill, Beatrice Hoffmann, Winston Soboyejo, Haichong K. Zhang, IEEE Member
Abstract— Novel severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has become a pandemic of epic
proportions and a global response to prepare health systems
worldwide is of utmost importance. In addition to its cost
effectiveness in a resources-limited setting, lung ultrasound
(LUS) has emerged as a rapid noninvasive imaging tool for the
diagnosis of COVID-19 infected patients. Concerns surrounding
LUS include the disparity of infected patients and healthcare
providers, relatively small number of physicians and
sonographers capable of performing LUS, and most importantly,
the requirement for substantial physical contact between the
patient and operator, increasing the risk of transmission.
Mitigation of the spread of the virus is of paramount importance.
A 2-dimensional (2D) tele-operative robotic platform capable of
performing LUS in for COVID-19 infected patients may be of
significant benefit. The authors address the aforementioned
issues surrounding the use of LUS in the application of COVID19 infected patients. In addition, first time application, feasibility
and safety were validated in three healthy subjects, along with
2D image optimization and comparison for overall accuracy.
Preliminary results demonstrate that the proposed platform
allows for successful acquisition and application of LUS in
humans.

I. INTRODUCTION
Novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2) has already become a pandemic of epic
proportions, affecting over 36 million humans worldwide as of
October 2020 [1]. Respiratory symptoms are the primary
manifestation of COVID-19. The disease caused by SARSCoV-2 can range from mild illness to severe, acute and
fulminant respiratory distress. This varying severity in the face
of a worldwide pandemic necessitates rapid diagnosis to
provide the proper triage and disposition of patients.
Diagnostic testing such as plain-film radiography (x-ray) and
chest computed tomography (CT) are considered the goldstandard of diagnostic imaging in the detection of lung-related
† Equal contribution
Research supported by the National Institute of Health (DP5
OD028162).
R. Tsumura, K. Bimbraw and H. Zhang are with the Department of
Biomedical Engineering, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, Worcester,
MA 01609 USA (e-mail: hzhang10@wpi.edu).
J.C. Hill is with the Department of Diagnostic Medical Sonography,
School of Medical Imaging and Therapeutics, MCPHS University,
Worcester, MA 01608 USA
W. Soboyejo and Y. Zheng are with the Department of Mechanical
Engineering, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, Worcester, MA 01609
USA
J. Hardin and B. Hoffmann are with the Department of Emergency
Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA 02215
USA

disease [2], [3]. However, in resource-limited areas, low-and
middle-income countries, these imaging modalities are costprohibitive and not available at most of healthcare facilities [4].
Lung ultrasound (LUS) has emerged as an alternative for
the rapid point-of-case diagnosis of pulmonary manifestations
of COVID-19 with its advantage of low cost, safety, absence
of radiation, and portability [3], [5], [6]. It has been widely
adopted to image COVID-19 and clinical guidelines have been
established. [7]–[9]. However, the diagnostic accuracy of LUS
is highly operator-dependent and can be limited by patient
habitus. In resource-limited areas, the accessibility of LUS is
further restricted by the small number of emergency
physicians and sonographers capable of performing LUS to
accurately diagnose and triage COVID-19 patients.
Additionally, conventional 2D ultrasound (US) exams require
substantial physical contact between the operator and patient,
increasing the risk of COVID-19 transmission.
A. Related Works
We believe that robot-assisted US can play a critical role
in addressing the aforementioned issues and potential
limitations, because the robotic assistance enables teleoperative control of the US probe, making the procedure
repeatable, and decreasing the interaction and contact between
the user and patient [10], [11]. Since the late 1990s, the robotic
US scan system has been investigated in various ways
including tele-operative control [12]–[14], operator-robot
corporative control [15], [16], and autonomous control [17]–
[21]. Although most of this research proposed the robotic
systems for general clinical applications, several studies
investigated the system optimized for specific clinical
applications such as fetal ultrasonography [22]–[26], focused
assessment with sonography for trauma (FAST) [27], thyroid
disease assessment [18], [28], [29], and echocardiography [30].
One recent study reported the successful cardiopulmonary
assessment of patients with COVID-19 using a robot-assisted
remote US system [31]. Meanwhile, to the best of our
knowledge, there is no study to date that has developed a
robotic US platform optimized for the application of LUS.
The robotic scan system for LUS is required to cover a
large area of the thorax including the anterior, lateral, and
posterior chests, and several standardized approaches have
been developed for point-of-care LUS. For instance, the
bedside LUS in emergency (BLUE)-protocol [5] is a widely
disseminated and validated protocol as an adjunctive imaging
approach for the immediate diagnosis of acute respiratory
failure. Physicians using this protocol usually acquire US
images to identify hallmark signs (e.g. pleural line, A-line, B-

Figure 1. Standardized scan regions in the modified BLUE protocol.
(anterior region: #1 and #2, lateral region: #3 and #4, posterior region:
#5). Note that this illustration is cited as originally from [40].

line, and lung sliding) at ten standardized regions on the
anterior, lateral, and posterior chest as shown in Figure 1. In
addition, to acquire the diagnostic US images at each region,
the probe positioning needs to be adjusted perpendicular with
respect to the body surface.
To perform LUS under this protocol with conventional
robotic approaches, multi-link kinematics is necessary and the
patient safety, such as the avoidance of excessive contact force
during the scan, relies on high precision sensors, a robust
control algorithm, and computational performance. The
acceptable contact force between the US probe and body may
be less than approximately 20 N according to previous studies
[23], [31]–[35], and needs to be maintained during the scan
procedure regardless of the scan position. Additionally, it is
unclear if the multi-link robot arm can cover all the scan
regions required in the BLUE protocol that is timely and cost
effective. One study noted that the robot US system could not
reach some scan regions due to the robot configuration
restriction [31]. In order to reach both sides of the chest with
the robot arm while avoiding collisions between the robotic
joints and the patient’s body, an arm reach of at least 1200 mm
is required considering the statistical data of the human body
(see Section II-B). These requirements could be satisfied by a
multi-link robotic configuration, which is cost prohibitive in a
resource-limited setting.
B. Contribution
Our goal is to develop a tele-operative robotic LUS
platform for COVID-19 diagnosis with a minimized risk of
transmission between patients and healthcare workers in a
resource-limited environment by significantly reducing
physical contact during the procedure. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first robot designed for LUS. The
limitations of prior studies suggest that the system
configuration is not optimized for LUS in terms of the
operational safety and probe reachability to all required chest
areas. This manuscript reports an innovative approach that
builds on a simple configuration with low-cost components,
high usability with optimized kinematics, and safety features
without relying on high precision sensors. We designed a firstof-its-kind prototype of a robotic LUS scan platform based on
previous concepts and demonstrated its application in a pilot
human subject study.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. System Overview
Figure 2 (a) presents our proposed robotic LUS scan
platform. This system allows the operator to tele-operatively
manipulate the US probe based on the visual information
captured by the cameras. Thus, the operator is not required to
be present with the patient during the US procedure. The
robotic platform is mainly composed of a gantry-style
positioning unit and a passive-actuated end-effector. The

Figure 2. (a) Overview of robotic LUS scan platform comprised with a
gantry-style positioning unit and passive-actuated end-effector (units:
mm) (b) Scan on the side of chest by combining x- and z-axis translations
and orientation of the end-effector.

Figure 3. Workspace of the gantry-style positioning unit. Solid red line
includes the mean of chest region size; dotted red line includes the
standard deviation of chest region size and frame oblique lines
demonstrates the reachable area of the US probe.

positioning unit has an optimized number of joints and links,
enabled to perform LUS based on current clinical guidelines:
including the standardized 10-area LUS using the modified
BLUE protocol [5]. Compared with a multi-link robotic arm,
the proposed gantry-style kinematics provides the reachability
and maneuverability to scan both hemithoraces with minimal
risk of joint collision to the patient body. The gantry-style
system is structurally simple and less costly to fabricate
compared to the commercially available robotic arm and easy
to implement in the resource-limited environment. In addition,
the end-effector equips an electronics-free spring-based safety
mechanism that maintains a constant contact force and a
normal orientation with respect to the patient’s skin surface.
The position and posture of the US probe can be adjusted
adaptively corresponding to the chest surface during the
scanning procedure without any sophisticated control and
computation. The electronics-free passive mechanical
configuration can prevent the probe from applying excessive
force and ensure patient safety. The robotic platform has a total
of 8 axes: 4 axes at the gantry-style positioning unit and 4 axes
at the passive-actuated end-effector. With the configuration of
the robotic platform, we implemented an active-passive hybrid
control to couple translation and orientation motions for a
simple and intuitive manipulation interface. The manipulation
of US probe is performed via a joy-stick operation. Also, three
cameras covering top and two side views providing visual
feedback for tele-operation. Importantly, the operator can
communicate with the patient via a two-way microphone in
real-time.
B. Gantry-Style Positioning Unit Design
The requirement of the gantry-style positioning unit is to
satisfy the reachability and maneuverability to scan the whole
chest with minimal risk of joint collision to the patient body.

Figure 5. Passive mechanism to adjust the US probe position along (a)
the craniocaudal direction and (b) the horizontal direction.

Figure 4. (a) Overview of the passive-actuated end-effector (red dot
arrow: passive translation or rotation axis, red solid arrow: active rotation
axis) (b) Passive mechanism of z-axis translation comprised with
constant spring and counterweight.

The proposed positioning unit is comprised of 3 axes
translation and 1 axis orientation. Referencing a human-body
database created by the National Institute of Advanced
Industrial Science and Technology [36], the representative
chest lengths are as follows: depth 315.5 ± 16.5 mm; width
311.4 ± 17.1 mm; height 209.7 ± 19.9 mm; the required scan
range can be defined approximately as an elliptical column
with those lengths. To scan the lateral chest regions while
maintaining the probe position perpendicularly to the surface,
the orientation angle of end-effector needs to be rotated
corresponding to the translation motion as shown in Figure 2
(b). Based on the required scan range and the size of endeffector (see Sec. II-C), the linear actuators for 3-axis
translations and the stepper motor for orientation are selected
as shown in Table I. The workspace of the proposed
configuration is shown in Figure 3, which satisfies the US
probe reachability enough to scan the whole chest.
TABLE I.

SPECIFICATION OF ACTUATORS

Axis

Motion range (mm)

Product

x (transverse)

1000

BD07, Yamaha motor,
Japan

y (longitudinal)

500

SG07, Yamaha motor,
Japan

z (depth)

350

SG07, Yamaha motor,
Japan

Rotation for endeffector

-

PKP564N28A2-TS30,
Oriental motor, Japan

Rotation for probe

-

PKP214D06A,
Oriental motor, Japan

C. Passive-Actuated End-Effector Design
The requirement of the end-effector is to hold the US probe
while applying a certain force to the body surface. To acquire
a diagnostic US image, an optimal tissue-probe contact force
is required [23], [31]–[35]. In our previous work focusing on
a robotic fetal ultrasonography [23], we proposed a passive
mechanism to maintain the contact force via a constant spring
and validated its feasibility through clinical studies. The
advantage of the mechanical-based approach is to minimize

the risk of electrical and computational failures (e.g. sensor
failure and control error), and to absorb uncertain body
motions and individual differences of the body shape. We
extend optimized this concept for the LUS application. An
overview of the proposed end-effector is shown in Figure 4
(a). The key feature of the proposed end-effector is 1) to
generate a constant force not dependent on the body size via a
constant spring, 2) to maintain the US probe posture
perpendicularly against the body surface with two passive
rotational axes, and 3) to rotate the US probe angle for
selecting the diagnostic view.
The configuration for maintaining the contact force within
a certain range is shown in Figure 4 (b). The force applied on
the patient F is formulated as:
F = FC + (MCW – MUS) g

(1)

where FC is the force generated by the constant force spring.
MCW and MUS are weights of the counterweight and US probe
holding unit, respectively. We are able to maintain the force
applied on the patient F to be the same as the force generated
by the constant force spring when MCW = MUS. In the proposed
system, we will initially use a constant force spring of 0.8 kgf,
generating sufficient contact force while not providing subject
discomfort according to the preliminary study [23].
During the LUS procedure, the US probe is required to
maintain the normal direction with respect to the contact point
on body surface. We designed a mechanism that permits
adjustment of the US probe position passively along the
craniocaudal direction (y-axis) and the horizontal direction (xaxis) (Figure 5). Along the craniocaudal direction, the passive
mechanism that adjusts the US probe tip angle is realized by
supporting the ring-shaped guide with a rotational shaft
attached to a torsion spring. By implementing the torsion
spring, the moment around the shaft due to the weight of the
US probe is reduced and the position of the US probe is evenly
perpendicular. To set the motion around the shaft to be zero,
the following equation must be met:
𝑚𝑝𝑔𝑙𝑝 sinq − 𝑘𝑝𝜃 = 0

(2)

where mp is the weight of the US probe, lp is the distance
between the center of rotation and center of gravity of the US
probe. The θ is the position angle of the US probe along the
craniocaudal direction, and kp is the torsion spring constant.
Similarly, another passive mechanism is installed using a ring
rail to enable the passive rotation along the horizontal direction.

Figure 8. Workflow of the robot-assisted LUS scan.
Figure 6. System architecture overview.

Figure 7. (a) Operational console overview and (b) web camera view to
monitor the robot and interact with the patient.

The moment around the US probe tip can be expressed as
follows:
𝑚𝑟𝑔𝑙𝑟 sinq − 𝑘𝑟𝐿! sin(𝜑⁄2)𝜃√2 − 2 cos 𝜃 = 0

(3)

where mr, lr, kr, and L represent the weight of the component
including the passive mechanism and the US probe, the
distance between the center rotation and center of gravity of
the component, the linear spring constant, and the radius of the
ring rail, respectively. The φ is the angle of the US probe along
the horizontal direction.
In addition to the 3 axes passive mechanism, 1 translation
axis and 2 rotational axes were integrated as an active control
to the remaining rotational axis along the z-axis; the axial
direction with respect to the US image with a stepper motor
(PKP214D06A, Oriental motor, Japan), permitting fine-tuning
of the US image visualization based on the US probe angle and
slice selection. For diagnosing lung disease, physicians often
observe two orthogonal views (parallel and perpendicular to
intercostal spaces) at each standardized scan region.
D. Robot Control and System Architecture
The system architecture is summarized in Figure 6. The
three linear actuators for translational motion in the
positioning unit are controlled with a positioned type
controller (TS-S2, Yamaha motor, Japan), which can generate
pre-programable motions to the actuators. This occurs by
receiving corresponding commands via serial communication,
and the stepper motors for both orientations of end-effector
and probe are controlled with an associated motor driver
(CVD528B, Oriental motor, Japan) via a sequential pulse
generated by an universal micro controller (Arduino Mega,
Arduino, Italy). As for the interface for the robot operation, a
joy-stick gaming controller (PXN-2113-SE, PXN, Japan)
equipped with four-axis control and twelve programable
buttons was utilized in terms of the simple and intuitive
operation for physicians. We implemented two modes for the
robot operation. First mode, called each axis control mode, is
to control x-, y-, z-axis translations and end-effector and probe

orientations individually. Tilting the joy-stick controller rightand-left, and back-and-forward are assigned to the x- and yaxis motions, respectively. Other axes motions are assigned to
the programable buttons. Second mode, called arc motion
mode, is to generate the arc motion around the body axis for
moving the US probe from the anterior to side region
effectively. In this mode, the y- and z-axis translations and the
end-effector orientation are performed simultaneously when
tilting the joy-stick controller only right-and-left. In short, each
axis control mode is utilized when searching the diagnosable
US images in each anterior, side, and posterior region, while
the arc motion mode is utilized when shifting the scan region.
The platform to integrate the interface and controllers was
created in Matlab (Matlab, Mathworks, USA). An overview of
the control console is shown in Figure 7. In addition, we used
a wireless portable convex US probe (UProbe-C5, Sonostar,
China). The US image visualization and acquisition control
with the US probe can be conducted via an attached software
remotely.
E. Workflow
The workflow of the robotic LUS operation is summarized
in Figure 8. Initially, the robotic platform is transported to the
location of the patient. The US probe is sterilized and covered
with a plastic cover and is connected to the workstation. The
operator sets the sterilized US probe at the end-effector and
locates the end-effector to an initial position where it does not
interfere with transporting the patient to the bed. These
operations are completed while the patient is being prepared
for the procedure outside the US imaging station. After the
preparation, the patient is moved to the imaging station and
placed on the bed in the supine position. The patient applies
US gel on the chest as directed. During the scan phase, the
operator moves the US probe to each standardized region as
indicated in the modified BLUE protocol, collecting sequential
US images until completion of the protocol. Figure 1 shows
the ten (5 x 2 planes) regions examined using the modified
BLUE protocol. First, the end-effector holding the US probe
is moved to region #1 of right side without contact with the
patient. The US probe is placed on the chest and then moved
downward until the passive mechanism along z-axis direction
is activated. The operator searches for the diagnostic US image
that are characteristic of normal or abnormal LUS features
such as pleural line, A-lines, B-lines or lung sliding, by
adjusting the end-effector position. The angle of the US probe
was fixed parallel to the y-axis during the scan. Once the LUS
features are observed, the operator adjusts the angle of the
probe to acquire images perpendicular and parallel to the
intercostal space and records each of the views for a period of
5 seconds. Next, the procedure is repeated in region #2. After
scanning regions #1 and #2, the operator changes the control
mode from each axis control mode to the arc motion mode and

Figure 9. (a) Overview of the assembled LUS platform (b)
Experimental setup overview.

operational safety quantitively, the contact force applied from
the US probe during scanning each of the regions was
measured with a 6-axis force/torque sensor (Nano 17, ATI
Industrial, USA). The perpendicular force to the US probe tip
was measured for 5 seconds in each of the 10 scan regions
under the two subject’s condition for evaluating the effects of
respiration during the scan: allowing subjects to be imaged
during normal respiration, and during breath hold. As the
reference ground truth, the contact force during the manual
operation was measured under the condition to allow subjects
normal respiration. Two-tailed t-test with 90% confidence
intervals were used to test the non-inferiority of the force data
taken from the robot-assisted operation to that of the manual
operation. We selected the non-inferiority margin of 2 N which
is 10% of the acceptable contact force. Also, a sequential
contact force that occurs during sliding the end-effector on the
surface of chest was measured; the US probe was moved from
region #1 to #2. For safety, a Visual Analog Scale (VAS) was
used to monitor pain, feedback from the subjects. The level of
discomfort experienced by the subjects was measured based
on an established 11-point VAS, from 0 to 10. Due to the
importance of comfort and safety of the subjects, a VAS > 4
(i.e., “hurts a little”) was used as the point of termination.
To quantify the acquired image quality, the acquired
images were scored by 2 experts in the field of LUS on
COVID-19 patients and collaborators on this project (J.H.,
B.H.). The score of the image quality ranged from 0 to 10, with
0 indicating non-diagnostic quality and 10 for diagnostic
superiority. The minimum score for diagnosis quality was set
at 3. Criterion of the image acquisition is to observe the pleural
line, A-line, and lung sliding. Figure 10 shows the
representative US image scored by the expert physicians.
Additionally, the contrast-to-noise ratio (CNR) of pleural line
to its surrounding area was calculated. The CNR is defined as:
𝐶𝑁𝑅 =

9𝜇" − 𝜇# 9
;𝜎"! + 𝜎#!

Figure 10. Examples of acquired images with the robot-assisted US and
manual operator. Note the expected US reflectors were clearly identified
by both methods.

moves the US probe to the side of the chest following the arc
path. The US probe position and posture are adjusted by
changing the control mode to each axis control mode. Then,
the image acquisition in regions #3 and #4 are repeated. Once
the scans in regions #1 through #4 are completed for the right
lung, an identical protocol is repeated for the left lung. Once
the supine images are completed, the patient is placed in the
prone position and region #5 imaging of both right and left
lungs are scanned as described in Figure 8. Finally, the endeffector is removed from the body, and the plastic cover
sterilizing the US probe is disassembled and discarded.
F. Experimental Setup in Humans
Figure 9 (a) shows the overview of the assembled robotic
LUS platform. For validating the feasibility of the proposed
robotic LUS platform for further human subject studies and
clinical trials, 1) the operational safety and 2) acquired image
quality were quantitively assessed. For evaluating the

(4)

where μi and μo are the means of the pixel value of the region
of pleural line and background, respectively, and σi and σo
represent the standard deviation of them. Figure 9 (b) shows
the experimental setup overview. The bed size and its
configurations are based on those commonly used in the
hospital setting (height: 75 cm). The procedure followed the
workflow outlined in Sec. II-E. As the ground truth, those
images were acquired by the conventional manual operator
following the same workflow and scored with the same
criterion. In addition, the total durations of the procedure time
were compared. To eliminate the bias of score depending on
the physician’s knowledge and perconception, the US images
acquired by both robot and manual operations were assigned
randomly and blindly to the readers. The non-inferiorities of
the CNR, expert’s score and total duration with the robotassisted operation compared to those with the manual
operation were tested by a two-tailed t-test with 90%
confidence intervals. In the non-inferiority test of the CNR,
expert’s score and total duration, we selected those noninferiority margins of 0.5, 2 point and 5 min, respectively,
which were considered to be clinically significant.

Figure 14. Mean CNR of pleural line captured in the US image acquired
by the robot-assisted and manual operations. The definition of region is
shown in Figure 8.

007), and written informed consent was given by the subjects
prior to all test sessions. Three subjects were enrolled in the
study (see Table II below).
TABLE II. SUBJECT INFORMATION

Figure 11. Mean contact force during the scan on each of the ten regions
(a) comparing the robot-assisted and manual operations under the normal
respiration and (b) in the robot-assisted operation comparing under the
normal respiration and breath hold. The definition of region is shown in
Figure 8.

Subject 1

Subject 2

Subject 3

Age (yr)

30

25

58

Sex (M/F)

M

M

M

Height (cm)

168

162

164

Weight (kg)

67

55

63

Chest depth (cm)

318

305

315

Chest width (cm)

315

298

308

Chest height (cm)

205

195

203

III. RESULT

Figure 12. Time-series sequential contact force during the scan on the
chest surface from region #1 to #2.

Figure 13. Mean expert reader scores of the US image quality acquired
by the robot-assisted and manual operations. The definition of region is
shown in Figure 8.

G. Human Subjects and IRB Approval
The study was approved by the institutional research ethics
committee at the Worcester Polytechnic Institute (No. IRB-21-

A. Operational Safety
The aim of this experiment is to validate the operational
safety by evaluating the contact force between the US probe
and body surface. We assumed that the contact force of 20 N
was acceptable according to the previous studies [23], [31]–
[35]. Figure 11 shows the mean contact force during the scan
on each of the region. The mean contact force in all regions
measured by the manual and robot-assisted operations under
allowing the subjects to breath normally was 9.52 ± 1.02 N and
10.48 ± 2.72 N, respectively. These results suggest there was
no significant contact force difference in robot-assisted and
manual operations (p = 0.003). Also, the mean contact force in
all regions measured by the robot-assisted operation during
breath hold was 10.13 ± 0.38 N. While there was no significant
difference between each of those conditions, the standard
deviation in the condition of robot-assisted operation under
allowing the subjects to breath was large compared to other
conditions. Figure 12 show the sequential contact force during
the scan on the chest surface from region #1 to #2. While the
contact force during the sequential scan was fluctuated
corresponding to the scan position compared to that during the
statical scan, that was maintained within a certain range. Note
that there was no report of greater than 4 points on the VAS in
all patients.
B. Image Quality
The aim of this experiment was to compare and validate
the image quality acquired by the robot-assisted and manual

operations by scoring the acquired image by physicians and
measuring CNR of the pleural line that is the primary feature
of LUS. Figure 13 shows the mean scores of the acquired
image quality with robot-assisted and manual operations. The
mean expert’s score of all scan regions in the robot-assisted
and manual operations were 7.85 ± 1.54 and 8.21 ± 1.04,
respectively. Those results suggest the non-inferiority of the
robot-assisted operation compared to the manual operation in
terms of the visibility of lung features (p = 0.004). The
acquired images with the robot-assisted operation successfully
captured the pleural line and A-line which are representative
signs for healthy lung as shown in Figure 10 (a). Also, Figure
14 shows the result of CNR of the pleural line captured in the
acquired images. The mean CNR in the robot-assisted and
manual operations were 4.38 ± 0.95 and 4.48 ± 0.70,
respectively, showing no inferiority of the robot-assisted
operation compared to the manual operation (p = 0.005). As
expected, there was a statistical inferiority of the total
procedure time of the robot-assisted operation compared to the
manual operation (27.5 ± 5.4 min vs. 18.2 ± 3.2 min; (p = 1)).
C. Discussion
The results of this feasibility study demonstrated the safety,
efficacy, and cost effectiveness of our tele-operative robotic
LUS scan platform. The proposed platform enables a
successful acquisition of LUS diagnostic images with an
acceptable contact force in all the scan regions suggested in the
BLUE protocol. The proposed robotic platform is capable of
scanning all anterior, lateral, and posterior regions while
maintaining the contact force within a safety range. The
contact force was around 10 N (mean) and never exceeded 15
N, which ensures patient safety considering the safety limit of
contact force reported in literature [23], [32]–[35] ranged from
20 to 24 N. No pain or discomfort was reported from the
subjects during the scan in this study despite the small number
of subjects. The applied contact force, on the other hand, is
sufficient to maintain proper probe-skin contact for quality
imaging of the diagnostic features of LUS. Both experts’ score
and CNR of all scan regions in the robot-assisted operation
were not inferior to those of manual operation.
Regarding the remote operation, the number, location and
angle of the camera may need further optimization, we located
three cameras to fully cover the top and both side of chest and
successfully captured US images at all scan regions required
in the modified BLUE protocol. Without investigating the
mental/cognitive workload for the remote operation with
respect to the configuration of cameras, the procedure duration
in the robot-assisted operation was significantly longer than in
the manual operation. The limited visibility due to the current
configuration of cameras may cause increased procedure time.
However, we believe the additional time required by the
robotic platform is a reasonable trade-off for the safety and
mitigation in the spread of disease in those patients who are
potentially highly infectious. It is necessary to optimize
camera configuration and user-interface to reduce the
procedure duration in this robot-assisted operation. The userinterface can also be improved for remote US diagnosis. While
we utilized a general joystick as the interface, previous teleoperative US robot systems utilized several types of userinterface such as graphic user interface (GUI) [27], master
manipulator [14] and joystick-like interface incorporating
haptic feedback [37], [38]. Also, for assisting remote

operations effectively, incorporating an augmented reality
(AR)-based navigation system such as [39] into the teleoperative US scan may contribute to reduce the procedure time.
A major limitation of the proposed platform is that we
cannot perform fine adjustment of US probe alignment and
contact force actively. The proposed end-effector orients the
US probe normal to the body surface independent from the
scan positions. While the pleural line was captured by the
robot-assisted operation in all scan regions, some features such
as A-line were not always visible due to the lack of rotation
adjustment. Given the manual operator needs to adjust the US
probe orientation finely to obtain such the feature clearly,
additional actuators for rotation may be implemented into the
end-effector. Furthermore, when acquiring the US images in
patients with excessive subcutaneous tissue, the manual
operator often applies addition force to the US probe.
Consequently, the contact force applied by the end-effector
need adjustments based on the patient’s body habitus.
Another significant limitation of this study is the lack of
validation and/or cross-validation of other imaging modalities
in COVID-19 patients. Several pathological features including
the disappearance of lung sliding, B-line increase, and lung
consolidation cannot be evaluated in the healthy subjects.
Before implementing the proposed platform for COVID-19, it
is necessary to further evaluate the platform on a larger number
subjects including those with non-COVID-19 related lung
disease. Additional improvements in the hardware design must
be taken into account. Because the procedure to apply US gel
to the thorax is still manual, this confers a potential risk of
transmission of infection. To perform fully tele-operative LUS,
an additional autonomous gel-dispenser should be
incorporated with the end-effector.
IV. CONCLUSION
This manuscript presents a feasibility study of applying a
tele-operative low-cost robotic platform on human subjects
for the application of LUS. Our results demonstrate that the
proposed platform enables successful acquisition of
diagnostic images for LUS with a safe contact force at all
standardized scan regions using the modified BLUE protocol
on healthy subjects. There were no significant differences
between the measured contact force, the CNR of pleural line,
and image quality scored by physicians between the two
methods. While the total procedure duration in the robotassisted operation is longer than that in the manual operation,
we believe the additional time required by the robotic
platform is a reasonable trade-off for the safety and mitigation
in the spread of disease in those patients who are potentially
highly infectious. We are optimistic that the total procedure
duration can be reduced by optimizing the camera
configuration and incorporating a navigation system within
the proposed platform. The robotic LUS platform presented
in this study has the potential to be applied to COVID-19 and
other highly infectious diseases. The use of this technology
may minimize risk of disease transmission among patients
and healthcare workers in a resource-limited environment by
minimizing the physical contact during the US procedure.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Financial support was provided in part by the National
Institute of Health (DP5 OD028162). The authors would like
to thank Yamaha Motor, co. ltd., Ono-denki, co., Sonostar,
co., Dr. Y. Uchida, and Mr. JT. Kaminski for assisting this
project.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]
[3]

[4]
[5]
[6]

[7]

[8]
[9]

[10]
[11]

[12]
[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]
[17]

[18]

World Health Organization, "Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19):
Weekly Epidemiological Update 11 October,"
https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-cor (15 Oct., 2020
access), 2020
Y. Fang et al., “Sensitivity of Chest CT for COVID-19: Comparison
to RT-PCR,” Radiology, vol. 296, no. 2, pp. E115–E117, 2020.
Y. Xia, Y. Ying, S. Wang, W. Li, and H. Shen, “Effectiveness of
lung ultrasonography for diagnosis of pneumonia in adults: A
systematic review and meta-analysis,” J. Thorac. Dis., vol. 8, no. 10,
pp. 2822–2831, 2016.
R. R. Ayebare, R. Flick, S. Okware, B. Bodo, and M. Lamorde,
“Adoption of COVID-19 triage strategies for low-income settings,”
Lancet Respir. Med., vol. 8, no. 4, p. e22, 2020.
D. A. Lichtenstein, “BLUE-Protocol and FALLS-Protocol: Two
applications of lung ultrasound in the critically ill,” Chest, vol. 147,
no. 6, pp. 1659–1670, 2015.
Q. Y. Peng, X. T. Wang, and L. N. Zhang, “Findings of lung
ultrasonography of novel corona virus pneumonia during the 2019–
2020 epidemic,” Intensive Care Med., vol. 46, no. 5, pp. 849–850,
2020.
V. Manivel, A. Lesnewski, S. Shamim, G. Carbonatto, and T.
Govindan, “CLUE: COVID-19 lung ultrasound in emergency
department,” EMA - Emerg. Med. Australas., vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 694–
696, 2020.
S. Moore and E. Gardiner, “Point of care and intensive care lung
ultrasound: A reference guide for practitioners during COVID-19,”
Radiography, no. xxxx, 2020.
G. Soldati et al., “Proposal for International Standardization of the
Use of Lung Ultrasound for Patients With COVID-19: A Simple,
Quantitative, Reproducible Method,” J. Ultrasound Med., pp. 1413–
1419, 2020.
A. M. Priester, S. Natarajan, and M. O. Culjat, “Robotic Ultrasound
Systems in Medicine,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq.
Control, vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 507–523, 2013.
D. R. Swerdlow, K. Cleary, E. Wilson, B. Azizi-Koutenaei, and R.
Monfaredi, “Robotic arm-assisted sonography: Review of technical
developments and potential clinical applications,” Am. J.
Roentgenol., vol. 208, no. 4, pp. 733–738, 2017.
L. A. Bassit et al., “A tele-operated mobile ultrasound scanner using
a light-weight robot,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 9, no.
1, pp. 50–58, 2005.
J. Seo, J. H. Cho, J. Cha, C. Kim, and O. Kwon, “Design and
Experimental Evaluations of Robot-assisted Tele-echography System
for Remote Ultrasound Imaging,” Proc. Int. Conf. Ubiquitous Robot.
Ambient Intell., pp. 592–594, 2017.
N. Koizumi, S. Warisawa, Mitsuru Nagoshi, H. Hashizume, and M.
Mitsuishi, “Construction Methodology for a Remote Ultrasound
Diagnostic System,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 522–538,
2009.
T. Y. Fang, H. K. Zhang, R. Finocchi, R. H. Taylor, and E. M.
Boctor, “Force-assisted ultrasound imaging system through dual
force sensing and admittance robot control,” Int. J. Comput. Assist.
Radiol. Surg., vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 983–991, 2017.
R. Finocchi, F. Aalamifar, T. Y. Fang, R. H. Taylor, and E. M.
Boctor, “Co-robotic ultrasound imaging: a cooperative force control
approach,” Proc. SPIE Med. Imaging, vol. 10135, p. 1013510, 2017.
P. Abolmaesumi, S. E. Salcudean, W.-H. Zhu, M. R. Sirouspour, and
S. P. DiMaio, “Image-guided control of a robot for medical
ultrasound,” IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 11–23,
2002.
Q. Huang, J. Lan, and X. Li, “Robotic Arm Based Automatic
Ultrasound Scanning for Three-Dimensional Imaging,” IEEE Trans.
Ind. Informatics, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 1173–1182, 2018.

[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]

[25]

[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]

[30]
[31]
[32]

[33]
[34]
[35]
[36]
[37]
[38]
[39]
[40]

P. Chatelain, A. Krupa, and N. Navab, “Optimization of ultrasound
image quality via visual servoing,” Proc. - IEEE Int. Conf. Robot.
Autom., pp. 5997–6002, 2015.
J. Carriere et al., “An Admittance-Controlled Robotic Assistant for
Semi-Autonomous Breast Ultrasound Scanning,” 2019.
A. S. Bin Mustafa et al., “Development of robotic system for
autonomous liver screening using ultrasound scanning device,” IEEE
Int. Conf. Robot. Biomimetics, pp. 804–809, 2013.
S. Wang et al., “Analysis of a customized clutch joint designed for
the safety management of an ultrasound robot,” Appl. Sci., vol. 9, no.
9, pp. 1–16, 2019.
R. Tsumura and H. Iwata, “Robotic fetal ultrasonography platform
with a passive scan mechanism,” Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol.
Surg., vol. 15, no. 8, pp. 1323–1333, 2020.
P. Arbeille, J. Ruiz, P. Herve, M. Chevillot, G. Poisson, and F.
Perrotin, “Fetal tele-echography using a robotic arm and a satellite
link,” Ultrasound Obstet. Gynecol., vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 221–226,
2005.
L. Lindenroth, R. J. Housden, S. Wang, J. Back, K. Rhode, and H.
Liu, “Design and Integration of a Parallel, Soft Robotic End-Effector
for Extracorporeal Ultrasound,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 67,
no. 8, pp. 2215–2229, 2020.
R. Tsumura and H. Iwata, “Development of ultrasonography
assistance robot for prenatal care,” Proc. SPIE Med. Imaging, vol.
11315, p. 113152O, 2020.
K. Ito, S. Sugano, and H. Iwata, “Portable and attachable teleechography robot system: FASTele,” 2010 Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE
Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. EMBC’10, pp. 487–490, 2010.
R. Kojcev et al., “On the reproducibility of expert-operated and
robotic ultrasound acquisitions,” Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg.,
vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 1003–1011, 2017.
J. T. Kaminski, K. Rafatzand, and H. Zhang, “Feasibility of robotassisted ultrasound imaging with force feedback for assessment of
thyroid diseases,” Proc. SPIE Med. Imaging, vol. 11315, p.
113151D, 2020.
M. Giuliani et al., “User-centred design and evaluation of a teleoperated echocardiography robot,” Health Technol. (Berl)., vol. 10,
pp. 649–665, 2020.
R. Ye et al., “Feasibility of a 5G-Based Robot-Assisted Remote
Ultrasound System for Cardiopulmonary Assessment of Patients
With COVID-19,” Chest, vol. in press, 2020.
M. R. Burcher, J. A. Noble, L. Han, and M. Gooding, “A system for
simultaneously measuring contact force, ultrasound, and position
information for use in force-based correction of freehand scanning,”
IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, vol. 52, no. 8, pp.
1330–1342, 2005.
M. Dhyani et al., “A pilot study to precisely quantify forces applied
by sonographers while scanning: A step toward reducing ergonomic
injury,” Work, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 241–247, 2017.
M. W. Gilbertson and B. W. Anthony, “Force and Position Control
System for Freehand Ultrasound,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 31, no. 4,
pp. 835–849, 2015.
C. Delgorge et al., “A tele-operated mobile ultrasound scanner using
a light-weight robot,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 9, no.
1, pp. 50–58, 2005.
M. Kouchi and M. Mochimaru, “Japanese 3-D body shape and
dimensions data 2003,” Natl. Inst. Adv. Ind. Sci., pp. H18PRO-503,
2003.
F. Najafi and N. Sepehri, “A novel hand-controller for remote
ultrasound imaging,” Mechatronics, vol. 18, no. 10, pp. 578–590,
2008.
A. Krupa, D. Folio, C. Novales, P. Vieyres, and T. Li, “Robotized
Tele-Echography: An Assisting Visibility Tool to Support Expert
Diagnostic,” IEEE Syst. J., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 974–983, 2016.
H. C. Fang, S. K. Ong, and A. Y. C. Nee, “Interactive robot
trajectory planning and simulation using augmented reality,” Robot.
Comput. Integr. Manuf., vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 227–237, 2012.
J. Gullett, J. P. Dennelly, R. Sinert, B. Hosek, D. Fuller, H. Hill, I.
Feldman, G. Galetto, M. AAuster, and B. Hoffmann, “Interobserver
agreement in the evaluation of B-lines using bedside ultrasound,” J.
Crit. Care., vol. 30, no. 6, pp. 1395-1399, 2015.

