2020
arXiv.2010.01746

Data-driven Operation of the Resilient Electric Grid:
A Case of COVID-19

arXiv:2010.01746v3 [cs.LG] 27 Dec 2020

H. Noorazar1 , A. Srivastava1 *, S. Pannala1 , K. S. Sajan1
Abstract
Electrical energy is a vital part of modern life, and expectations for grid resilience to allow a continuous and
reliable energy supply has tremendously increased even during adverse events (e.g., Ukraine cyberattack,
Hurricane Maria). The global pandemic COVID-19 has raised the electric energy reliability risk due to potential
workforce disruptions, supply chain interruptions, and increased possible cybersecurity threats. Additionally,
the pandemic introduces a significant degree of uncertainty to the grid operation in the presence of other
challenges including aging power grids, high proliferation of distributed generation, market mechanism, and
active distribution network. This situation increases the need for measures for the resiliency of power grids to
mitigate the impact of the pandemic as well as simultaneous extreme events including cyberattacks and adverse
weather events. Solutions to manage such an adverse scenario will be multi-fold: a) emergency planning and
organizational support, b) following safety protocol, c) utilizing enhanced automation and sensing for situational
awareness, and d) integration of advanced technologies and data points for ML-driven enhanced decision
support. Enhanced digitalization and automation resulted in better network visibility at various levels, including
generation, transmission, and distribution. These data or information can be employed to take advantage of
advanced machine learning techniques for automation and increased power grid resilience. In this paper, we
explore the resilience of power grids in the face of pandemics and discuss various machine learning tools that
can be helpful to augment human operators by: a) reviewing the impact of COVID-19 on power grid operations
and actions taken by operators/organizations to minimize the impact of COVID-19, and b) presenting recently
developed tools and concepts of machine learning and artificial intelligence that can be applied to increase the
resiliency of power systems in normal and extreme scenarios such as the COVID-19 pandemic.
Keywords
Electric grid resilience, COVID-19, extreme events, power grid operation, machine learning, data analytics
1 School of Electrical Engineering and and Computer Science, Washington State University, Pullman, WA 99164, USA
*Corresponding author: anurag.k.srivastava@wsu.edu
*Acknowledgement: This work was partially supported by the U.S. Department of Energy UI-ASSIST Grant DE-IA0000025 and the National
Science Foundation award #1840192. The views and opinions of authors expressed herein do not necessarily state or reflect those of the
United States Government or any agency thereof. Technical support from Anshuman, Gowtham Kandaperumaland Jonah Davis is
acknowledged

1. Introduction
Electricity is essential for daily life, and the electric power
industry is the backbone of the country’s economy. Interruption in the flow of energy will lead to catastrophic impacts on
other critical infrastructure, like the inability to manufacture
essential needs and the hindrance of healthcare systems. The
consequences are far-reaching and impactful. Consistent supply of electricity is a matter of national security: during the
COVID-19 pandemic, “the Department of Homeland Security
listed power plants, dams, nuclear reactors, communications,
and transportation systems as critical infrastructure.” [1, 2].
Power grids are actively generating and are continuously
being monitored and maintained to provide reliable energy
for each customer. The transmission ecosystem is under constant monitoring to assess the condition of the system and
to execute appropriate actions if needed. Figure 1 shows the

operation and control layout of existing power grids. Distribution control room operators must monitor grid load and
coordinate with field crews during routine maintenance and
unexpected events [3] to restore power whenever abnormal
circumstances cause outages.
1.1 Background
Having robust contingency plans in the case of emergencies is
vital. The energy and utility sector in the U.S. is well planned
and designed to withstand disasters and emergencies. Still,
“since 1980, there have been 246 weather and climate disasters
exceeding $1.6 trillion in remediation” [4]. Contingency planning has also improved and has been reshaped by pandemics
of the past [5]. Examples of such experiences are the Black
Death, the 1918 Spanish Flu, the influenza pandemics of 1957
and 1968, the SARS outbreak in the mid-2000s, and the 2009
H1N1 influenza. Nevertheless, the novel situations caused

Data-driven Operation of the Resilient Electric Grid: A Case of COVID-19 — 2/21

Figure 1. Overview of the Power system operation and control

by COVID-19, with its fast spread and high transmissibility
rate, have significantly affected the utility industry. Most of
the contingency and backup plans are designed for physical
assets and do not consider the health of employees [6]. We
emphasize the fact that most, if not all, of the literature studying the resilience of power grid systems focuses its analysis
on extreme weather conditions or cyberattacks that threaten
the physical components of a power grid. To date, extant
literature on the human aspects of power grid resiliency is
very poor. For example, Jufri et al. [7] explore definitions
of resiliency, grid exposure, and grid vulnerability in their
review paper. All of the resources explored by [7] focus
on extreme weather events as low-probability high-impact
events. Building barriers and walls to protect physical assets
against flood is discussed in the literature and technical reports [8, 9]. However, the human side of power systems is
taken for granted. COVID-19 has impacted operators, forcing
them to work remotely or be quarantined, and consequently,
utility operations have been affected. Simmons and Stiles [10]
and Terry [11] compare characteristics of COVID-19 and the
1918 Flu and the potential problems that can occur today due
to coupled infrastructure, and authors from [12] recounts
painful lessons and what can be learned from the 1918 Flu
pandemic. In addition to the pandemics mentioned in previous
paragraphs, electrical disturbances caused by weather have
increased over the past several decades [13]. It is estimated
that power outages have cost the United States economy $18$33 billion between 2003 and 2012 [14]. The average cost
for each weather event totals roughly $150,000, and 50 events
could happen every year, resulting in losses of $3 million
annually [15]. On a smaller scale, EPB Electric Power in
Chattanooga, TN, estimated that the annual cost of power
outages to the community is approximately $100 million. By
deploying automated switching and smart meters, they saved
about $1.5 million in operational savings during the July 2012
wind storm [16]. According to EPRI, “severe droughts in
recent years have sharply reduced hydropower capacity in the
West and Southeast (U.S.) by 50%” [17]. According to the

survey by IBM, proactive data-driven solutions can save a
significant amount each year. Natural disasters are local (both
in time and space); however, the COVID-19 pandemic spreads
with people at high rates. Furthermore, it is not yet known
whether a person can get infected multiple times [18, 19]. Preliminary studies suggest antibodies may last only a few weeks
or months [20, 21]. If one can get infected more than once,
then the severity of the problem would be magnified. System
operators are highly skilled, and the expertise of an experienced grid operator is significant. Hence, the replacement of
the workforce is challenging in case of any loss.
1.2 Motivation
Due to the novelty of the pandemic and the lack of identifying the symptoms prematurely, operators of a control center
became affected, and consequently, a power generation unit
was shutdown [22]. Subsequently, all members of the electric
power industry are actively updating their plans/guidelines
in response to the ever-changing impacts of COVID-19. The
Electricity Subsector Coordinating Council (ESCC) is releasing and updating its resource guides, including recommendations for decision-makers of industry [23], and the North
American Reliability Corporation (NERC) is providing (and
updating) its planning recommendations [24]. To cope with
unforeseen events such as pandemics and/or other natural disasters, we need to utilize all the available tools. Eliminating
or reducing manual interventions will ensure resilient and
reliable grid operations during normal situations, in extreme
natural events, and under scenarios such as the COVID-19 pandemic. The reduction of manual interventions will help utility
field crew reduce their exposure to people who could be either
symptomatic or asymptomatic carriers of the virus. These
tools not only help in pandemic situations but also are helpful in general and under normal conditions. The power grid
management has evolved with the invention and advances in
computer technologies [25] but is still behind and has not fully
integrated newly developed research methods. Data analytics
and machine learning (ML) tools can play a significant role

Data-driven Operation of the Resilient Electric Grid: A Case of COVID-19 — 3/21

in formulating effective solutions and strategies for managing natural events [26]. Moreover, as power systems become
more complex, human operators must work in various situations and may encounter different types of emergencies [27].
More than two decades ago, in 1998, Bilke stated, “trends in
the electric utility industry have increased the chances and
costs of errors by power system operators” [28]. Using more
sensors leads to the collection of more data. Consequently, the
analysis of such vast data is beyond the cognitive capabilities
of humans [29], and more tools for assisting the operators
are needed [30, 29, 31]. Innovative technologies can improve
operator knowledge of the state of the power system and thus
make more efficient and reliable operation possible [32]. Decentralization of power systems, shifting towards smart grids
and consequently more complicated systems, and a scarcity
of expert operators all mean new technologies and automation
must assist human operators in their larger roles. Not only will
machine learning be essential on the micro-level to perform
some of the system operators’ tasks but, on the macro level,
new technologies are needed for decision-makers to make
better informed decisions in the case of disasters [4].
1.3 Contributions
Most of the recent COVID-19-related papers and reports have
focused on statistics in the reduction of power usage and
change of demand patterns [33, 34]. Some of these papers
rushed to analyze the change of pattern of power consumption.
Barooah and Duzgun. [34] claims COVID-19 does not solely
cause the change in demand pattern. While these COVID-19related papers report on impacts on load-demand, economy,
and implement strategies to deal with difficulties of the pandemic [35], the main goal of this paper is to recommend
technical strategies that are not integrated into the industry to
date, and these techniques will have a far-reaching impact if
the industry adopts them. Increasing the resiliency of power
grids helps utility companies to deal with situations such as
COVID-19 along with other natural events. Resiliency usually
is defined under high-impact low-probability weather events
that impact physical assets of power grids. The COVID-19
pandemic has affected power grids indirectly by impacting operators. It is shown [36] that early restrictions on travel are effective, and late restrictions (when the outbreak is widespread)
are less effective. Thus, implementing statistical learning approaches enhances the resiliency of microgrids by reducing
the number of onsite operators.
Winter began in the Northern Hemisphere, and the importance of power systems’ resiliency cannot be overstated. In
2020, We have already seen a flood on May 19th and 20th,
in Midland County, Michigan [37], as well as a Cyclone hurricane in India and Bangladesh, on May 20, present adverse
impacts on the power transmission system [38]. The scope
of our paper does not consider an analysis of natural disasters. While planning, operating, and restoring strategies in
response to natural disasters are discussed in a typical review paper (first three rows of Table 1), we only discuss the

methods relevant to pandemic scenarios (last two rows of Table 1).These models increase the resiliency of the power grid
by decreasing the dependency on operators and increasing the
automation. These methods significantly improve the nonphysical problems that have mostly been ignored in the past.
Reference [39] reviews some of the ideas related to human
resource resilience.
Table 1. High impact, low probability events

Classification of Events
Physical, manmade
Physical, natural
Cyber
Non-physical, natural

Examples
Riots, vandalism, war
[40, 41, 42, 43]
Hurricane, earthquake, storms
[44, 45, 46]
Phishing, data injection
[47, 48, 49, 50]
COVID-19, Spanish flu

The originality and motivation for our paper compared to
other review papers lies in the fact that we focus on reviewing
challenges of power grids under pandemics and offer potential
approaches to counteract them. Thus, comparing different
ML-based models (e.g. performance of the models) against
each other is beyond scope of this paper. In this paper we
provide an overview of data-driven methods that leads to the
augmentation of human roles in operating power grids, which
consequently will be beneficial in cases such as the COVID-19
pandemic. Contributions of this paper include:
1. Analyzed impact of COVID-19 on power grid operations and actions being taken by operators/organizations
to minimize the impact of COVID-19.
2. Analyzed concept of resiliency and key differences with
other existing concepts for the power grid
3. Reviewed some of the recent ML-based methodologies
developed for increasing power systems’ resiliency that
are relevant under the pandemic scenario and in general.
4. Suggested integrating some of the recently developed
tools or concepts in ML and AI with industry practices.
These approaches can increase the resiliency of power
systems in general and in extreme scenarios such as the
COVID-19 pandemic.
5. Presented an example case study for COVID-19 with
the real-time resiliency management tool (RT-RMT)
developed by our team that uses real-time data for optimal crew routing and restoration process after a power
outage during the COVID-19 pandemic.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 2, a
quick review of existing power grid operations is presented.
Next, in Sec. 3 impact of COVID-19 pandemic on power grid
operations is analyzed. Afterward, Sec. 4 investigates possible
and employed practices to manage and combat the pandemic

Data-driven Operation of the Resilient Electric Grid: A Case of COVID-19 — 4/21

effects in normal operations, followed by ML applications for
increasing resiliency of power systems in the future. In Sec. 5,
we discuss some research directions that can be explored
further in the future. Finally, we present our conclusions in
Sec. 6.

2. Existing power grid operational
practice
Power systems require a level of centralized planning and
operation to ensure system reliability.
2.1 Normal operation
The electric power system is built to handle periodic equipment failures, primarily by isolating faulty zones whenever
any problems occur. The control room is the brain of a power
grid, responsible for the reliablity and security of the network.
These operations in the power system are a combination of
automated control and actions that require direct human intervention. System operators at control centers carry out many
of these centralized tasks, including short-term monitoring,
analysis, and control.
2.1.1 SCADA: data acquisition and control

Supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) helps in
achieving situational awareness and effective decision making. SCADA is a system of software and hardware elements
responsible for gathering, monitoring, and processing realtime data. SCADA acquires measurement information related
to voltage, current, and frequency, circuit breakers status,
monitoring active and reactive power flow, etc. Collecting,
processing, and displaying real-time data allows operators to
analyze the data via human-machine interface and enables
them to take proper actions remotely from the control center.
Currently, the presence of operators in control centers is necessary 24 hours a day. Operators utilize the energy management
system and distribution management system to monitor the
state of the system such as the balance between generation
and demand, fault signals, thermal loading of feeders, etc.
2.1.2 Control center: situational awareness and decision
making

Situational awareness means being constantly aware of the
state of power station or grid conditions. It is a significant
contributor to successful control room operations. Observing
the early signs of the system approaching a vulnerable state
requires a wide-area view and analytics to recognize conditions. Situational awareness is vital to ensuring coordinated responses among operators within large organizations [51]. Situational awareness gained through SCADA and utilizing sensors such as a smart meter, phasor measurement unit (PMU),
and data acquired through the communication system provides an opportunity to develop continuous monitoring of the
system[50].
Table 2 presents current challenges faced by electrical
power systems where ML approaches can alleviate these prob-

lems and help operators in different tasks with decision support tools. Research methodologies have been developed to
battle these challenges but are not yet integrated into the systems. Primarily, these approaches will reduce dependency on
human operators, which is helpful in situations such as the
COVID-19 pandemic.
2.2 Contingent operation: power outage and restoration
Power outage, restoration, and assessment management plan
vary between expected contingency and emergency operations.
The following section will discuss the preparation for events
and restoration efforts during these two modes of operations.
2.2.1 Planning and training for normal expected contingency

In normal expected contingency operation, utilities prepare
for all sorts of circumstances ranging from small storms, winter snow and ice storms, cyclones, insufficient resources of
generation, shortage of fuel reserves, accidents, cyberattacks,
etc. There are several activities that utilities perform during
regular operation to prepare for events in advance:
• Operators and field crews perform exercises and drills
to prepare for various incidents.
• Modernizing physical infrastructure to make it less vulnerable to physical or cyber events.
• Utilities complete contingency planning to ensure they
can maintain supply even if one or more system components go offline.
• Utilities perform regular vegetation management, which
includes the cutting or trimming of plants, bushes, and
other foliage that could be too near electric infrastructure, preventing potential damage to equipment during
storms.
• Utilities regularly examine resources, noting deterioration and required repairs or replacements.
2.2.2 Planning and Resilient Operation for Emergency

During emergency operation mode, utilities coordinate with
control room operators and crews to re-establish power supplies as fast as possible. If the event is known beforehand,
then utility planning will be in two phases, pre-event and postevent.
Pre-event process:
• Utilities create different leads for different functions
(e.g., damage, restoration, vegetation management, overall communications).
• Utilities review critical infrastructure in the area.
• Utilities identify resources, including crews, backup
generators, and other equipment, as well as mutual
assistance available to respond to emergencies.

Data-driven Operation of the Resilient Electric Grid: A Case of COVID-19 — 5/21

Table 2. Challenges for the power grid operation and control in extreme events.

Field

Challenge
Fault detection due to incomplete and
conflicting alarms.

Opportunity (Developed Methods)
Data-driven based on mixed integer
linear programming.

Refs.

Increasing number of measurement
devices increases the number of
alarms causing analysis and
situational awareness more
challengiing.

Real-time event detection using
synchrophasor data, and ensemble
methodology that includes maximum
likelihood estimation, DBSCAN, and
decision trees.

[53]

Fault section estimation.

Neural networks

Classifying the observed anomalies of
instrument transformers into different
types of malfunctions, failures, or
degradation.

A pipeline consisting of three steps;
maximum likelihood estimation,
DBSCAN and a decision logic
diagram.

[58]

Office Staff

Classifying the customer ticket
texts/calls.

Natural language processing, text
analytics, recurrent neural networks.

[59]

Transmission
protection
systems

Detecting root cause of failures in
transmission protection systems.
Failure to do so causes propagation of
faults, consequently resulting in
multiple conflicting alarms.

Anomaly detection using an ensemble
of ML approaches.

[60]

System
Protection Cyber Security

Monitoring and detecting malicious
activity in transmission protection
systems.

Anomaly detection pipeline that
includes LSTM networks,
semi-supervised deep learning
algorithms, and ridge regression.
Several ML algorithms such as
random forests and support vector
machine.

[50]

Control Center

Classifying malicious data and
possible cyberattacks.

[52]

[54, 55,
56, 57]

[48]

Detecting anomalies and false data
injection.

Gaussian mixture model is used to
solve the problem.

[61]

Detecting intrusions in smart grids.

Support vector machine and artificial
immune system.

[49]

• Utilities employ advanced tools to anticipate extreme
events and to prepare the system to have minimal impact.
Post-event process:
• Utilities perform a destruction estimation of lines and
substations.
• Utilities eliminate all hazardous situations, such as
downed live wires or other potentially life-threatening
situations.
• Utilities restore power plant and transmission lines that

carry maximum power to the distribution system whenever damaged.
• Utilities prioritize restoring power to critical infrastructure such as hospitals, police, and fire stations before
individual homes and small businesses.
• Utilities employ advanced resiliency tools to optimize
and recover after extreme events.

Data-driven Operation of the Resilient Electric Grid: A Case of COVID-19 — 6/21

3. Impact of COVID-19 on the power grid
operation
Edison Electric Institute in their 2020 report [62], states that
“it is predicted that a large percentage of a company’s employees (up to 40%) could be out sick, quarantined, or might stay
home to care for sick family members.” Moreover, certain
nuclear facilities have operated marginally at low capacity due
to remote operations and the challenges presented by delayed
maintenance work, all of which impacts the timely operation
of such facilities. Furthermore, COVID-19 is expected to delay project developments and impact renewable auctions due
to supply chain delays. The pandemic has forced the NERC to
delay implementation of several reliability standards [63, 64],
some of which are cybersecurity measures. The pandemic
has forced utilities to operate with skeleton crews, providing
more opportunities for cyberattackers [23]. Three infected IT
security engineers at a nuclear power plant were quarantined
for 14 days [22], increasing the threat to normal operations.
State of the art technologies in AI and ML can aid in reducing
humans’ direct involvement with oversight, maintenance, and
failure detection [60]. Protection systems are always of the
highest priority in the energy industry.
For increased security against cyberattacks, extra measurements must be taken (see [50]).
COVID-19 impacted power demand, mostly when lockdown periods went into effect. Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI) reported the change of pattern of load in Italy,
Spain, and the U.S. [65]. Load impacts in the U.S. were also
reported in [66, 67, 10].
Figure 2 compares the power consumption in 2020 and
2019 in various regions of the U.S. and Italy when the pandemic became widespread, and lockdowns began. The data
for the U.S. is obtained from Energy Information. The data
for Italy is obtained from ENTSO-E Transparency [68]. The
lockdown started on March 19 [69] in the state of California.
The demand in California was higher before the lockdown
began in 2020 compared to 2019. However, after the lockdown, it dropped below that of 2019 by a small amount. The
Northwest region includes several states; therefore, there was
no uniform date for the beginning of lockdowns in the region,
and no clear change of pattern is seen in the Northwest. In the
state of New York, lockdown started on March 22 [70]. Here,
demand in 2020 was less than demand in 2019, even before
the lockdown period began. This difference might indicate
that other factors (beyond COVID-19) might be involved in
the difference between consumption loads of 2020 and 2019.
Neural networks can be used for short-term load forecasting. Badri et al. [71] compare neural networks against fuzzy
logic in the context of short-term load forecasting and reports
on superiority of neural networks. Additionally, Dudek [72]
compares different neural networks against each other for the
same goal. The authors have to admit a rapid change in behavior of power consumption as a result of lockdowns. Thus, a
lack of sufficient data for ML-approaches will be a challenge.

Ruan et al. [73] have made an ensemble model to predict
electricity consumption in NYISO in 2020 if COVID-19 were
absent. They trained 800 neural network models, selecting
the top 25% models with the lowest error. For certain selected
days in April, they showed that electricity consumption was
much lower than predicted by the model. Table 3 presents
reduction of power consumption in different countries in 2020
compared to 2019. The reduction of electricity usage translates into a reduction of the system’s resilience. Furthermore,
most of the reduction of demand results from a reduction
of electricity usage by large segments such as industrial and
commercial organizations. These customers form a large segment of normal electricity demand, and their lack of stability
translates into a reduction of stability in power grid operations.
In the U.K., The consumption of the transmission system
kept falling week after week; “compared to the week of March
9th, total electricity demand fell by 13% in the week of March
23rd, by 14% in the week of March 30th, and by 24% in
the week starting April 6th.” [74]. Europe went through a
significant reduction (27%) during lockdowns. Even after the
easing of lockdowns in June, the demand was still 10% less
than that of 2019 [75].
Some interesting results, such as the impact of social
distancing on electricity consumption can be found in [73].
To prevent the spread of the virus, operators and technicians have had to change their normal operations. Different
solutions have been proposed by experts. The followings
are some examples of the pandemic’s impacts and potential
mitigations to consider.
• Minimizing the number of onsite staff and working
remotely if possible.
• Using main and backup control rooms at different times
and/or with separate operators.
• Regularly sterilizing control center facilities during the
day.
• Changing shift duration and cycles.
• Limiting common equipment usage.
• Cancelling face-to-face meetings and direct interactions.
• Limiting the number of field technicians in each vehicle and ensuring technicians carry personal protective
equipment.
• Closing all non-critical common areas, such as exercise
rooms or even cafeterias.

4. Solutions for minimizing impact of
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic has changed usual operations at
different levels. Recently, the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission (FERC) and NERC produced industry guidelines

Data-driven Operation of the Resilient Electric Grid: A Case of COVID-19 — 7/21

(a) New York’s demand pattern.

(b) California’s demand pattern.

(c) Northwest region’s demand pattern.

(d) Northern Italy’s load pattern.

Figure 2. COVID-19 impact on demand behavior in three regions in the US and in Northern Italy.
Table 3. Comparison of demand in different regions and time periods.

Country

Demand reduction

USA

5.4%

Time Window
Refs.
Week of April 6, 2020 compared to [76]
the same time in 2019

NYISO (USA)

9% reduction in peak
demand

March 2020 compared to 5-year
average values

CAISO (USA)

5%-8% load reduction in Since statewide shutdown on
weekdays
March 20 compared to 2019.

Europe

27%

France, Germany,
Italy, Spain, and
Netherlands.

10%

India

30%

to reduce the impact of COVID-19 [80], and a comprehensive
guide is given by [81].
4.1 Actions Being Taken by Grid Operators
Operators are taking different actions to minimize the spread
and impact of SARS-CoV-2 while attending their jobs and
maintaining the power stations. Below is a list of some of
these strategies.
• Back-up control centers are activated, key workers are
isolated, and deep cleaning has become routine [82].
• Food and other supplies are stored at the generating
station (Utah’s Intermountain Power Plant) [83].
• Operators are preparing for the worst-case scenario;
“we could operate the plant with a skeleton crew for an

[35]

[77]

[78]
The first week in February to the
end of March in 2020 compared to
2019.
[78]
The first week in February to the
end of March in 2020 compared to
2019.
Since full national lockdown on
[79]
March 24.

extended period of time” (Utah’s Intermountain Power
Plant). An example is shown in Fig. 3 provided by [84],
demonstrating New York’s power grid control operation
working with only essential operators.
• Employees are telecommuting. (Southern California
Edison, NYPA)
• Rotating personnel between power line repair teams is
kept to a minimum (Southern California Edison) [83].
• Non-critical planned maintenance is being postponed
(Southern California Edison).
• Critical workers are isolated (American Gas Assn.). In
fact, “some sequestration is underway in certain areas,
with employees and contractors living on-site at power

Data-driven Operation of the Resilient Electric Grid: A Case of COVID-19 — 8/21

plants and other facilities. It is critical that sequestered
employees who are in close quarters be tested before
and during sequestration” [22].
• Regular health screenings are being performed, as well
as deep cleanings of control rooms to keep the coronavirus out (NYPA) [85].
• Splitting control center operators between the main and
backup control center to limit contact (PJM) [85].
4.2 Enabling grid resiliency
Other than the usual operational paradigm to focus on reliability, security, restoration, and emergency planning, energy
suppliers need to invest in resiliency to bounce back from
extreme events. Resiliency is a multidimensional concept.
Jufri et al. [7] state that resiliency “involves multidisciplinary
knowledge, such as power system, civil and structure, geography, computer science, probability, and meteorology and
climatology.” Consequently, several definitions are available.
Even for one aspect of resiliency, several definitions have been
put forward, and there is no consensus in a given community.
Definitions for a given aspect are not mutually exclusive and
may overlap [86]. Table 4 provides some of the definitions
of resiliency from different perspectives and/or in different
domains, as well as for some closely related topics. For more
details please see [87, 86]. As mentioned before, most of
the effort on resiliency is focused on physical assets. In this
paper, however, we are dealing with disease, which adds a
different dimension to the problem: health. Consequently, the
organizational domain becomes relevant, and a definition of
resiliency for this aspect is presented in Table 4. By implementing ML approaches, the resiliency of a power system–as
a group/society/organization–is increased as organizational
responsiveness is shifted from humans to machines.
In general, the resiliency of a power grid is defined as “the
ability to withstand and fast recovery from deliberate attacks,
accidents, or naturally occurring threats or incidents” [91].
For a system to be resilient, it needs to have a robust damage
prevention plan in place, and a system designed for adaptation and fast recovery in case of any damage. Temporally
there are 3 stages to make, keep, and improve the system’s
resiliency (Fig. 4) pre-, during, and post-event actions are
needed. Extreme events cause a limited or complete blackout
in the power grid. A complete blackout occurs with a low
probability as a result of multiple interrelated contingencies;
operators rarely anticipate that. If pandemics such as COVID19 coincide with extreme weather events, then the problem
escalates to a whole other level where the consequences are
extremely high for at least two reasons. The first reason is
that the COVID-19 regulations and limitations themselves
increase difficulties on power grid operators. For example,
fewer technicians are available to fix failures, while there are
more opportunities for cyberattackers. The second reason is
that hospitals (a very specific example is ventilators) depend
on electricity [92]: “... electric power is not just important for

the overall functioning of the facility, it is critical for direct
patient care.” Automation and ML can aid in different ways
to increase the resiliency of networks. For example, ML can
help evaluate the risk of failure and consequently with the
scheduling of timely maintenance [93]. Resiliency has to be
implemented at multiple levels, though, as different incidents
threaten the system, e.g., a blizzard vs. human error.
Different approaches that can enhance the resiliency of
power grid are discussed here.
4.2.1 Challenges and Opportunities with Integration of
Microgrids and DERs

Although rigorous efforts and suitable solutions to strengthen
the resiliency of the power grid are continuously evolving,
the operator still needs to deal with challenging conditions
due to unprecedented or adverse events. With the increased
deployment of DERs and microgrids, the reliability and resiliency of the power grid can significantly be enhanced [94].
By reconfiguration of the network, DERs can be used to serve
critical loads when the utility grid or a centralized generation unit is not available [95]. Similar to DERs, microgrids
could operate independently or in connection with the distribution network [96, 97]. Furthermore, a microgrid can be
used to pick up critical loads outside its boundary to increase
the resiliency of power grids in case of extreme events [98].
Consequently, smart grids and distributed renewable energy
systems can be a solution in the future [99] to alleviate problems imposed by pandemics.
Despite the fact that microgrids increase the resiliency
of power systems, they face their own challenges. Machine
learning provides solutions in the microgrid ecosystem as well.
For example, Lin et al. [100] combine neural networks and
support vector machine for state recognition in microgrids.
Their algorithm is used to increase reliability of operation
by changing the protective settings and the network topology based on the system’s state. To learn more about these
challenges (e.g. physical or cyber threats) please see Mishra
et al. [101]. Table 5 provides a summary of some of these
challenges and some of the methodologies developed by researchers to overcome the difficulties.
4.2.2 Operational practice for human operators

Operational practice guidelines and decision-making tools
help the operator to apply the best plan to minimize the impact
of an event, but mainly for known and analyzed events. Effective proactive strategies with quantified measures in terms
of resiliency metric can lead to substantial improvement in
resilient power distribution grids [106, 107, 108], [109, 110].
Training for extreme events will be important. Further, any
advancement in automatic decision-making tools based on
data processing and analysis will ease the operator in handling
these events [111]. An automatic emergency control action
plan can be developed based on previous incidents and can
be suggested to operators or used as an emergency automated
operation. Distancing employees and scheduling operating
cycles for minimal interactions with others during health haz-

Data-driven Operation of the Resilient Electric Grid: A Case of COVID-19 — 9/21

Figure 3. Control center normal operations are impacted by COVID-19. Power systems are operating with minimal number of

staff onsite.
customer or human interaction can ensure continuous power
supply. Moreover, optimal placement of inventory and crew
by organization greatly diminishes power delivery interruptions. Further, mutual coordination and personnel exchange
between organizations operating in the same region could
establish a more resilient and robust grid.
Figure 4. Multi-temporal resilience framework

ards like COVID-19 stops escalation of impact to employees,
specifically to critical personnel of utility companies, such as
control center operators and field crews.
4.2.3 Organizational support

Organizational support plays a major role in a resilient grid
operation, especially given that multiple organizations and
interests impact grid operations–federal, state, and city governmental bodies, FERC, NERC, public utility commissions,
vendors, service providers, technical committees, standard
development organizations, researchers, and, of course, consumers. With proper support and guidelines from regulation
authorities and federal energy agencies, utility companies
could accelerate the deployment of advanced grid technologies to perform remote operations and increase the level of
automation with sufficient personnel involvement. Organizations need to develop policy, proactive or corrective action
plans against extreme weather (Tsunamis, Hurricanes, Tornadoes, etc.) and outbreaks (COVID-19, Ebola, etc.). As
the grid is highly susceptible to cyber threats during these
kinds of events, robust communication infrastructures and
adaptive action plans must be implemented. During outbreak
events, automated alarm and text messaging of outages, faults,
equipment failures, and malfunctioning to crew engineers and
field inspectors should be deployed to reduce the spread of
infection and loss of crew. Automated routing of field personnel to equipment maintenance and replacement with minimal

4.2.4 Redundancy and automation

Restoration is a key functionality of an advanced distribution
management system (ADMS) for keeping the lights on after
an outage. Redundancy plays a vital role in the restoration
process, and spare inventory and parallel lines act as major
attributes thereof. Outage management systems (OMS) can
identify faulted sections using information received from trouble calls or field inspectors and dispatch crews to mend damaged equipment [13]. An increased number of multiple power
flow paths in the network permits the load to be supplied
through alternate pathways [32]. Modern grid technologies–
automatic metering infrastructure (AMI), micro-phasor measurement units (microPMU), intelligent electronic devices
(IED), fault indicators, remote terminal units (RTUs), digital relays and circuit breakers, data analytical tools– provide
enhanced observability and controllability of distribution networks [13, 112]. Field devices can be used to automate the
power grid through ML techniques. For example, predicting
the probability of failure of a feeder switch can help prevention of outages. In the case of COVID-19, redundancy of
spare devices and automation will help in faster restoration.
4.3 Future ML-based tools and resiliency
The need for increasing system resiliency has been heightened
by several recent natural events and their dramatic impacts.
But natural disasters are just one major cause of high-impact
outages [113]. An example of this kind is human-caused
outages applicable in the COVID-19 case. Making operators
work longer hours or sequestering them to live on-site at power
plants will increase the rate of human error. With increasing

Data-driven Operation of the Resilient Electric Grid: A Case of COVID-19 — 10/21

Table 4. Definitions of resilience and other coupled/interrelated concepts.

Concept

Definition
Ability to harden the power system against—and quickly
recover from high-impact, low-frequency events. Resiliency
consists of damage prevention, system recovery, and
survivability.

Refs.

Damage prevention
(as a part of resiliency)

Damage prevention is self-explanatory. It is related to
predicting and hardening the power systems against
high-impact, low-frequency events.

[88]

System recovery
(as a part of resiliency)

Going back to normal operations after occurrence of
high-impact, low-frequency events.

[88]

Survivability
(as a part of
resiliency)

Ability to maintain some basic level of power to consumers
when complete access to their normal power sources is not
possible.

[88]

Resiliency

“measure of a system’s ability to absorb continuous and
unpredictable change and still maintain its vital functions.”

[86]

Resiliency in
organizational domains

“ability of an organization to absorb strain and improve
functioning despite the presence of adversity.”

[86]

Reliability

“the degree to which the performance of the elements of [the
electrical] system results in power being delivered to
consumers within accepted standards and in the amount
desired.”
“the inherent capability to modify a current direction to
accommodate and successfully adapt to changes in the
environment.”

[89]

Resiliency

Flexibility

complexity, the tasks of human operators become even more
challenging. Unlike a self-driving car, a fully automated
scenario without human intervention is not possible due to
complexity of the power grid. ML-based tools could help
to minimize strain on over-burdened operators and hence
minimize the chance of human error. We review the potential
of statistical learning and recently developed techniques to
mitigate potential power grid challenges as outlined here.
ML and natural disasters. Gupta et al. [114] employ a
probabilistic framework and support vector machine to predict cascading failure and provide early warning in case of
any future events to increase resiliency. Eskandarpour and
Khodaei [115] develop an ML-based prediction method to
determine the potential outage of power grid components in
response to an imminent hurricane. The decision boundary of
the classifier is obtained via logistic regression to predict the
number of failed components and failure duration. Predicting
the state of a system after a hurricane is investigated in [116]
using a support vector machine-based model to categorize
power grid components into two classes–damaged and operational. Guikema [117] uses regression and data mining

[88]

[90]

techniques to estimate the number of poles that need to be
replaced after a hurricane event. Glavic et al. [118] and Huang
et al. [119] explore the application of reinforcement learning
in power system emergency control dynamics to alleviate current practices. In one interesting article, Maharjan et al. [120]
combine DERs and support vector machines to improve the resiliency of power grids during natural disasters. They consider
a scenario in which different load needs are categorized to prioritize life threatening cases (e.g., a kidney dialysis machine
is more important than a fridge) and ensure power availability
for the most necessary items during outages.
ML and cyber attacks. Hink et al. [48] explore several ML algorithms–such as random forests and support vector machine–to classify “malicious data and possible cyberattacks” to help operators in normal and emergency situations. Foroutan and Salmasi [61] investigate a Gaussian mixture model for detecting anomalies and compare their model
against some other models for false data injection. Zhang
et al. [49] examine a distributed intrusion detection system
embedded at each level of the smart grid—the home area
networks, neighborhood area networks, and wide area net-

Data-driven Operation of the Resilient Electric Grid: A Case of COVID-19 — 11/21

Table 5. Examples of Challenges and Opportunities with Integration of Microgrids

Component
System
Protection Cyber Security

Challenge
Detect and stop cyber attacks
in wireless sensor networks
in microgrids with different
ownership.

Opportunity (Developed Methods)
Refs.
Detecting anomaly based on the lower and
[102]
upper bound estimation method to predict
optimal intervals over the smart meter readings
at electric consumers. They make use of the
combinatorial concept of prediction intervals to
solve the instability issues arising from the NNs.

Utility grid
connected
microgrids

Microgrids with distributed
generation increase resiliency of
power systems in case of any faults.
Microgrids and using
ML in their routine operations
gives time and space to operators
to fix the damaged components.

A NN is developed to provide cooperative
voltage regulation for a microgrid that can be
applied locally in a privacy preserving way.

[103]

A NN and support vector machine is used for
state recognition and state diagnosis.

[104]

Modified ensemble of bagged decision trees
with an added boosting method

[105]

Enhancing protection for
modernization of distribution
system against faults.
Fault detection Detecting events in each of the
distributed stations.

works using the support vector machine and artificial immune
system.
Protection systems are an essential part of the system,
yet, they are prone to external influences. Multiple alarms
reported in the control center could be a result of the faults
or failures in the protection system (unexpected operation).
Ahmed et al. [50] develop a ML technique to monitor transmission protection systems and detect malicious activity using
long short-term memory (LSTM). These data are also utilized
for failure diagnosis. Finally, a model to find the root causes
of the observed events assisted by the cyber log data from
the protection devices are developed. Anomaly detection in
PMUs is further discussed in [60] to detect the root cause
of the failure in the transmission protection system, and it
is shown that ensemble models are superior to stand-alone
methods.
ML-based tools to supplement operators. ML can help
the operators in a variety of ways. For example, it can be
used to classify the customer ticket texts into different categories [59] such as serious or non-serious events. Natural
language processing and/or recurrent neural networks can be
used to analyze customers’ trouble calls to pinpoint the location of the faulty equipment as opposed to operators taking the
calls. By automating this process, interaction among operators
will be minimized as needed in the case of COVID-19.
For dispatchers and operators to manage a power grid correctly and efficiently, they need to understand the dynamics
and the current state of the grid. Using alarms generated by
SCADA is one of their tools. The rate of alarm generation can
be reduced significantly (98%) by using an intelligent alarm

processing system, which is a tremendous improvement for
operators and dispatchers [121]. Interventions like these are
critical, especially in emergencies, since the long work shifts
and high levels of stress that occur over times of emergency
(such as COVID-19) make operators even more prone to mistakes [122]. Furthermore, ML can be utilized to classify the
alarms and hence reduce the workload of operators. Employing ML can help to identify multiple events associated with a
set of reported alarms, consequently reducing the operators’
cognitive burden.
4.4 A case study for Resiliency Management Tool
with NLP
A real-time resiliency management tool (RT-RMT) is a unique
tool developed by the authors’ team. It provides the resiliency score of any power system network by considering
the various factors such as power generation, critical and noncritical loads, threat type, and impact model including available backup resources, inventory, field crew, and inspection
team, and weather information [123]. This tool also encompasses geospatial information of the power grid, and assesses
an infrastructure condition to compute resilience scores during the propagation stages of natural threats. Three stages of
events, pre-, during, and post-event, are considered to provide
resiliency scores for each stage by taking relevant influencing factors into account. The real-time resiliency score is
computed every 15 minutes using the information acquired
through communication channels from different devices (e.g.,
SCADA, PLC, RTUs) in the distribution system. It can be
deployed along with a commercial distribution management

Data-driven Operation of the Resilient Electric Grid: A Case of COVID-19 — 12/21

system software. RT-RMT provides real-time operational
topology or configuration on a live tracking map shown in
Fig. 5. Further, it displays the connection between different
nodes of the network and routing over the GIS layer. It can be
adapted to analyze the impact of health hazards (e.g., COVID19) and can effectively minimize its influence on the electrical
distribution system operations. RT-RMT tool has four main
windows; system information, resilience monitoring, decision
support, and planning analysis. System information portrays
physical assets ( number of buses, transformers, fault indicators, protection devices, other equipment), and their ratings
along with deployed location and current operating status. Resilience monitoring captures real-time resiliency score for the
provided distribution system. This value will change subject
to operating conditions (i.e. with variations in the generation,
loads connected, etc.). The decision support on RT-RMT helps
the operator take appropriate actions suggested by the tool to
boost the system’s resiliency, including pre-, during, and postevent requirements as the event progresses through different
stages. Planning and analysis of tool emphasizes enhancing
the resilience of system operation with system upgrades like
adding distributed energy resources, increased energy reserve,
fast communication technologies, sensors, etc.
Two use cases are developed to evaluate the performance
of the RT-RMT tool. The first use case focuses on the normal operation of the distribution system without any event.
The evaluated resiliency score for a given operating condition is near to 0.9 as shown in Fig. 5. The second use case
includes the COVID-19 pandemic. It shows how RT-RMT
will be adapted to help the operators address the problems
with minimal impact on the electrical power supply and all the
consumers. The data used in this scenario are obtained from
John Hopkins’ Coronavirus dataset [124] and are anonymized
to avoid data privacy issues. Different regions with different
intensities of COVID-19 cases are shown in different colors
in Fig. 6 over the distribution system in a live tracking map.
This tool informs the operators (visually) about areas with
high cases of COVID-19. Consequently, they can decide to
change any scheduled maintenance plan or repair a failed
equipment plan as needed. The operator may address the
issues in regions with a low number of COVID cases, first
with precautions. For example, by sending limited crew per
vehicle. RT-RMT also optimizes the route to avoid the paths
going through regions with a high number of cases to protect
crew members against infection. The operator could also plan
to send crew members at once in a day along with PPE kits
to ensure minimal contact of humans. Further, effective reconfiguration of the network can also be performed in regions
with high positive cases to restore the power after an outage
or equipment failure so that electrical supply is still maintained without field crew inspection and replacement of faulty
equipment. Detailed explanation is provided in the section
4.4.1.
Digital query assistant is developed using natural language processing and plugged into the RT-RMT tool with

the name “Ask Virtual Assistant” as shown in Fig. 5. This
can be used to dig the required information from the database
where high data volumes from the power system network
are stored. A virtual assistant will ease operator searches for
necessary information during normal operating scenarios as
well as emergency situations (such as outages, weather-related
events, pandemics). The virtual assistant also lessens the cognitive burden on operators, reducing human errors in control
decisions. A typical demonstration is showcased here by asking the query: “what node has the lowest voltage”? Results
appear within a small window over the main screen as shown
in Fig. 7. This can be further enhanced with a virtual voice
assistant–similar to Google and Apple applications–which
helps the operator to locate necessary information.
4.4.1 Use case of RT-RMT for optimal crew routing during
COVID-19 pandemic

The distribution test system is a 45-node simplified distribution network that is remote and with a large DERs supporting
most of the operation, as shown in Fig. 5. The dataset for the
COVID-19 is derived from the CORD-19 (COVID-19 Open
Research Dataset) presented by Wang et al. [125]. In normal
operating conditions, the RT-RMT only supports operator actions while tracking the resilience performance of the system.
In the case of the COVID-19 pandemic, the authors developed
a safe crew-routing algorithm, presented in Fig. 8 that solves
the crew routing problem for system repairs. It then filters
the solution set for the crew route and schedules a path with
the least risk of contracting COVID-19. The filtered solution
set is then subject to a comparative analysis through the resilience metrics to identify the most resilient crew route and
is visualized in the RT-RMT live map for operator sign-off.
The resilience metric that captures the resilience performance
of the system after the extreme event has ended gathers the
resilience indicators that inform the rapidity of recovery for
each restoration plan that is proposed by the operator.
A vector of recover resilience indicators is formed (R =
[Tr , Cr , τ, CLr , SO]) for each path. The indicator Tr represents the total repair time, Cr represents the cost of repairs, τ
represents the topological resilience coefficient that is based
on graph-theoretical spectral metrics [106], CLr represents
the number of critical loads restored in the process, and SO is
the number of switching operations. For each path, the vector
R is computed, and the analytical hierarchical process [109]
is applied to find the composite resilience score. Resilience is
maximally enabled when the operator selects a path with the
highest resilience metric score.
A simple eight-node repair scenario is analyzed in the test
system from Fig. 6. Once the RT-RMT obtains the damage
assessment scenario, the resilience computation engine applies the routing algorithm to get the lowest weight route with
the GIS, COVID-19 data, repair information, and scheduling
requirements so that exposure of field crew to COVID-19
hotspots is avoided. Figure 6 shows the main operator screen
with the resilience metrics calculations. The position of each
node and relative proximity with COVID-19 hotspots are dis-

Data-driven Operation of the Resilient Electric Grid: A Case of COVID-19 — 13/21

Figure 5. RT-RMT tool view: Normal operating condition.

Figure 6. RT-RMT tool view: Spread of COVID-19 cases across Washington state with blue being lowest and red being the

highest number of cases.
played on the tool UI (Fig. 9). Three routes are analyzed using
the resilience metrics analysis, and the most resilient option
that is also the safest is chosen. The safest route with avoided
zones is shown in Fig. 9.

5. Future Work and Path Forward
The data needed for statistical learning can be divided into two
parts: environmental data and power system data [126]. The
ecological situation (e.g., precipitation, soil moisture, wind
speed, etc.) is not affected by the pandemic. Some parts of
power systems data, such as component failures or the nature
of cyberattacks, are not also affected by COVID-19. Hence,
the rarity of COVID-19 affects neither the power system data
nor the environmental data. Consequently, ML-approaches
can be beneficial in pandemic situations. One challenge that
needs to be addressed is finding efficient approaches to deal
with sudden behavior changes in energy consumption patterns
in terms of short-term forecasting.
As reported by many resources such as [35], many control
center experts had to work long hours, which leads to fatigue
(as well as other problems), potentially resulting in human

error. Implementing ML approaches can reduce the cognitive
workload of humans in such cases.
Statistical learning techniques, e.g., natural language processing, can be employed to analyze incoming calls of customers to pinpoint the location of failures in the power grid.
Investing in the implementation of ML approaches is worthwhile to help customer operations and office staff by automatically detecting failed devices/locations, even without taking
calls.
The IT staff were forced to work remotely which created opportunities for cyberattackers. Implementing ML approaches to detect suspicious changes in the power grid to
protect against cyberattacks is beneficial to IT experts. Opinion dynamics have been studied for about 50 years; however,
they have attracted a lot of attention recently [127, 128]. In
the past few years, opinion dynamics are being used to thwart
attacks on networks [129, 130, 131]. Therefore, combining
ML and opinion dynamics is a potential future technique that
could be applied to power grids to combat cyberattacks.
Utilizing topological data analytics in anomaly detection
in power grid studies are limited. Two examples of topologi-

Data-driven Operation of the Resilient Electric Grid: A Case of COVID-19 — 14/21

Figure 7. Virtual assistant demonstration on RT-RMT.

Figure 8. Safe crew-dispatch algorithm.

cal data analytics are [132, 133]. Topological data analytics
in [133] is used to identify the divergent subpopulation in phenomics data throughout the growth period of plants. Such an
approach might potentially detect the root cause of failures and
early warning when equipment starts to behave abnormally.
Moreover, Chen et al. [134] have designed an algorithm that
reveals ML-algorithms’ (such as Recurrent Neural Networks)
vulnerability to disturbance of input data. Attackers might
manipulate the input data in order to affect the output of MLalgorithms. Chen et al. argue that current algorithms cannot
detect such disturbances. Therefore, it would be worthwhile to
investigate the approach of [133] to detect such disturbances.
Furthermore, ML is also being explored for cyber situational
awareness [135] and needs more development in the future.
The existence of large amounts of data (e.g., collected
by PMUs) is both a gift and a curse. From a hardware point
of view, there is a need to either build an infrastructure that
can handle that amount of data or long-term collaborations
with Micorosft’s Azure or Amazon’s AWS need to be established. From a software point of view, there are packages that
implement some ML techniques to enable dealing with data
at scale. However, there are some challenges: some of the
implemented techniques are very costly in terms of storage
and computations (e.g., iterative methods such as neural networks), or not all ML techniques are implemented in a given
software/library. Zheng and Degnino [136] provide a detailed
survey of available resources and challenges in this regard.
Finally, we remind the reader of a lack of contingency
plans for human aspect of power systems. COVID-19 revealed the vulnerability of power systems being implicitly

affected as a result of human operators’ vulnerability. Thus,
there is an important gap in our knowledge that needs to be
addressed. Filling this gap will need financial and organizational support but will be beneficial long term. Regardless of
the dearth of data on operator vulnerability, resiliency, and/or
contingency plans for human assets, the implementation of
data-driven approaches discussed in this paper will increase
the resiliency of the power grids so that normal operations can
continue smoothly under circumstances such as COVID-19.
The presence of data-driven techniques can be considered a
prevention strategy for any interruption–e.g., the decrease in
working hours of operators or the reduction in the number of
human operators on site.
Similar to protection plans for physical assets (e.g., water
barriers for substations), there is a need to build similar protection plans for human assets. Similar concepts can be carried
out for humans–e.g., building onsite amenities for humans to
stay for long shifts.

6. Conclusions
As observed over the last several years, the frequency and
intensity of natural disasters and extreme events and their
associated impact on the power grid have been increasing.
Pandemics such as COVID-19 add to these challenges and
push organizations to their limits. Driven by smart grid investment, the power grid is moving towards massive sensor
deployment and automation. Enhanced digitalization has resulted in the collection of so much data that it is beyond the
capacity of human operators to analyze, use, and factor it into

Data-driven Operation of the Resilient Electric Grid: A Case of COVID-19 — 15/21

Figure 9. Screen capture of RT-RMT showing the asset information with repair instructions, scheduling with no-go zones, and

the routing on the map with crew-routing algorithm.
timely decisions when responding to extreme events.
In this paper, the impact of COVID-19 on power grid
operations has been analyzed. Actions being taken by operators/organizations to minimize the effects of COVID-19
has been discussed in detail. Solutions have been suggested
for deploying recently developed tools and concepts in ML
and AI that will increase the resiliency of power systems in
general and in extreme scenarios such as the COVID-19 pandemic. Suggested tools can assist operators in taking control
actions, allowing collaborative machine-human interactions
while using increased data integration from diverse sources in
an intelligent manner. Data-driven ML and AI could benefit
operators by helping with the systems’ resiliency, decision
making, and disaster management in smarter ways. For example, predicting disaster impact, anomaly detection, and
overlapping the COVID-19 hotspots with electricity service
maps helps control room operators restore the grid fast and
effectively by considering all safety measures. A sample case
study of data-driven RT-RMT tool is presented to demonstrate
the usefulness of advanced tools to system operator in case of
pandemic and for enhanced resiliency.

References
[1] “A Guide to Critical Infrastructure Security and Resilience,” https : / / www.cisa.gov / sites / default / files /
publications/Guide-Critical-Infrastructure-SecurityResilience-110819-508v2.pdf, [Online; accessed 30Apr.-2020].
[2] “Utility readiness during pandemic: Keeping the
lights on despite covid-19,” https://www.tdworld.com/
disaster-response/article/21126119/utility-readinessduring - pandemic - keeping - the - lights - on - despite covid19, [Online; accessed 30-Apr.-2020].
[3] S. Stevens-Adams, K. Cole, M. Haass, C. Warrender,
R. Jeffers, L. Burnham, and C. Forsythe, “Situation
awareness and automation in the electric grid control room,” Procedia Manufacturing, vol. 3, pp. 5277 –

5284, 2015, 6th International Conference on Applied
Human Factors and Ergonomics (AHFE 2015) and the
Affiliated Conferences, AHFE 2015.
[4] J. W. Talley, “Disaster management in the digital age,”
IBM Journal of Research and Development, vol. 64,
no. 1/2, pp. 1:1–1:5, 2020.
[5] https://www.eenews.net/stories/1062615349, [Online;
accessed 30-Apr.-2020].
[6] “The microbiological threat to the national power grid,
advanced pandemic planning for utilities executives.”
https : / / www.mcguirewoods.com / news - resources /
publications/Roche-Energy-White-Paper.pdf, [Online;
accessed 30-Apr.-2020].
[7] F. H. Jufri, V. Widiputra, and J. Jung, “State-ofthe-art review on power grid resilience to extreme
weather events: Definitions, frameworks, quantitative
assessment methodologies, and enhancement strategies,” Applied Energy, vol. 239, pp. 1049 – 1065, 2019.
[8] P. Hoffman, W. Bryan, M. Farber-DeAnda, M. Cleaver,
C. Lewandowski, and K. Young, “Hardening and
resiliency: Us energy industry response to recent
hurricane seasons,” Office of Electricity Delivery
and Energy Reliability, US Department of Energy,
OE/ISER Final Report, 2010.
[9] J. M. Boggess, G. W. Becker, and M. K. Mitchell,
“Storm flood hardening of electrical substations,” in
2014 IEEE PES T D Conference and Exposition, 2014,
pp. 1–5.
[10] M. Simmons and C. Stiles, “1918 flu sheds light on how
covid-19 could affect critical infrastructure,” https://
www.hstoday.us/subject-matter-areas/infrastructuresecurity/1918- flu- sheds- light- on- how- COVID- 19could-affect-critical-infrastructure/, [Online; accessed
30-Apr.-2020].
[11] M. Terry, “Compare: 1918 spanish influenza pandemic
versus covid-19,” https://www.biospace.com/article/

Data-driven Operation of the Resilient Electric Grid: A Case of COVID-19 — 16/21

compare-1918-spanish-influenza-pandemic-versuscovid-19/, [Online; accessed 30-Apr.-2020].
[12] J. Zeitz, “Rampant lies, fake cures and not enough beds:
What the spanish flu debacle can teach us about coronavirus,” https://www.politico.com/news/magazine/
2020/03/17/spanish-flu-lessons-coronavirus-133888,
[Online; accessed 30-Apr.-2020].
[13] J. W. C. Chen and D. Ton, “Modernizing distribution system restoration to achieve grid resiliency
against extreme weather events: An integrated solution,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 105, no. 7, pp.
1267–1288, July 2017.
[14] “Economic benefits of increasing electric grid resilience to weather outages,” https://www.energy.gov/
sites / prod / files / 2013 / 08 / f2 / Grid % 20Resiliency %
20Report FINAL.pdf, [Online; accessed 30-Apr.2020].
[15] “Rapid response: How outage prediction models help
utilities get power back on quickly and save money
after a storm,” https://www.ibm.com/downloads/cas/
P80BZ0XX, [Online; accessed 30-Apr.-2020].
[16] “Electric grid security and resilience establishing a baseline for adversarial threats,”
https : / / www.energy.gov / sites / prod / files / 2017 /
01 / f34 / Electric % 20Grid % 20Security % 20and %
20Resilience - -Establishing % 20a % 20Baseline %
20for % 20Adversarial % 20Threats.pdf, [Online;
accessed 30-Apr.-2020].
[17] “Electric power system resiliency, challenges and
opportunities,” https://www.naseo.org/Data/Sites/1/
resiliency-white-paper.pdf, [Online; accessed 30-Apr.2020].
[18] “Coronavirus: Can you get covid-19 twice or does
it cause immunity?” https://www.independent.co.uk/
life-style/health-and-families/coronavirus-immunityreinfection-get-covid-19-twice-sick-spread-relapsea9400691.html, [Online; accessed 07-Jul.-2020].
[19] “Can you get the covid-19 coronavirus twice?” https:
//theconversation.com/can- you- get- the- covid- 19coronavirus-twice-137309, [Online; accessed 07-Jul.2020].
[20] A. Heidt, “Studies report rapid loss of covid-19 antibodies,” https://www.the-scientist.com/news-opinion/
studies- report- rapid- loss- of- covid- 19- antibodies67650, [Online; accessed 29-Jul.-2020].
[21] T. Liu, S. Wu, H. Tao, G. Zeng, F. Zhou, F. Guo,
and X. Wang, “Prevalence of igg antibodies to sarscov-2 in wuhan-implications for the ability to produce
long-lasting protective antibodies against sars-cov-2,”
medRxiv, 2020.
[22] “Ensuring energy reliability throughout the covid-19
pandemic: Testing and protecting mission-essential

control center and generation facility personnel is
fundamental,” https://www.electricitysubsector.org/
- / media / Files / ESCC / Documents / ESCC Mission
Essential Workforce 2020.ashx?la = en&hash =
7618009ED20A06A987105A0817A180202406AFDF,
[Online; accessed 30-Apr.-2020].
[23] “Special
report.
pandemic
preparedness
and operational assessment:
Spring 2020,”
https://www.nerc.com/pa/rrm/bpsa/Alerts%20DL/
NERC Pandemic Preparedness and Op Assessment
Spring 2020.pdf, [Online; accessed 30-Apr.-2020].
[24] M. S. Shaker, J. Oppenheimer, M. Grayson, D. Stukus,
N. Hartog, E. W. Hsieh, N. Rider, C. M. Dutmer,
T. K. V. Leek], H. Kim, E. S. Chan, D. Mack, A. K. Ellis, D. Lang, J. Lieberman, D. Fleischer, D. B. Golden,
D. Wallace, J. Portnoy, G. Mosnaim, and M. Greenhawt, “Covid-19: Pandemic contingency planning for
the allergy and immunology clinic,” The Journal of
Allergy and Clinical Immunology: In Practice, vol. 8,
no. 5, pp. 1477 – 1488.e5, Mar. 2020.
[25] K. M. F. F. Wu and A. Bose, “Power system control
centers: Past, present, and future,” Proceedings of the
IEEE, vol. 93, no. 11, pp. 1890–1908, Nov. 2005.
[26] “Utility outage prediction 2.0: Embracing advanced
analytics & machine learning solutions,” https : / /
www.ibm.com/downloads/cas/VO6DNBR3, [Online;
accessed 30-Apr.-2020].
[27] Y. Bao, C. Guo, J. Zhang, J. Wu, S. Pang, and Z. Zhang,
“Impact analysis of human factors on power system operation reliability,” Journal of Modern Power Systems
and Clean Energy, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 27–39, 2018.
[28] T. A. Bilke and I. Midwest, “Cause and prevention of
human error in electric utility operations,” Master’s
thesis, Colorado State University, 1998.
[29] A. M. Prostejovsky, C. Brosinsky, K. Heussen, D. Westermann, J. Kreusel, and M. Marinelli, “The future role
of human operators in highly automated electric power
systems,” Electric Power Systems Research, vol. 175,
p. 105883, 2019.
[30] R. Guttromson, F. Greitzer, M. Paget, and A. Schur,
“Human factors for situation assessment in power grid
operations,” Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
Report–PNNL16780, 2007.
[31] I. Czarnowski, Y. Guo, Z. Yang, S. Feng, and J. Hu,
“Complex power system status monitoring and evaluation using big data platform and machine learning
algorithms: A review and a case study,” Complexity, p.
8496187, 2018.
[32] “The future of electric grid,” https://energy.mit.edu/wpcontent/uploads/2011/12/MITEI-The-Future-of-theElectric-Grid.pdf, [Online; accessed 30-Apr.-2020].

Data-driven Operation of the Resilient Electric Grid: A Case of COVID-19 — 17/21

[33] “Covid-19 pandemic; challenges and opportunities in
power systems,” https://smartgrid.ieee.org/newsletters/
may - 2020 / covid - 19 - pandemic - challenges - and opportunities-in-power-systems, [Online; accessed 30Apr.-2020].
[34] P. Barooah and D. Agdas, “The covid-19 pandemic’s
impact on electricity demand and supply,” https://
eprints.qut.edu.au/200965/, [Online; accessed 30-Apr.2020].
[35] A. Paaso, S. Bahramirad, J. Beerten, E. Bernabeu,
B. Chiu, B. Hederman, L. Jonesv, Y. Jun, H. Koch, J. C.
Montero, N. Nair, D. Novosel, T. Pierpoint, F. Rahmatian, J. R. Aguero, C. Root, D. Sharafi, E. Tejera, and
V. Vittal, “Ieee power & energy society industry technical support leadership committee sharing knowledge
on electrical energy industry’s first response to covid19,” Sharing knowledge on electrical energy industry’s
first response to COVID-19, 2020.
[36] M. U. Kraemer, C.-H. Yang, B. Gutierrez, C.-H. Wu,
B. Klein, D. M. Pigott, L. Du Plessis, N. R. Faria, R. Li,
W. P. Hanage et al., “The effect of human mobility and
control measures on the covid-19 epidemic in china,”
Science, vol. 368, no. 6490, pp. 493–497, 2020.
[37] “Michigan puts $175m price tag on flooding damage in
midland county,” https://www.freep.com/story/news/
local/michigan/2020/06/08/midland-flood-damagemajor- disaster- whitmer/5321673002/, [Online; accessed 07-Jul.-2020].

sessing microgrid resilience against windstorms,”
International Journal of Electrical Power & Energy
Systems, vol. 104, pp. 716 – 723, 2019.
[45] Y. Wang, C. Chen, J. Wang, and R. Baldick, “Research
on resilience of power systems under natural disasters—a review,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems,
vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 1604–1613, 2016.
[46] M. A. Mohamed, T. Chen, W. Su, and T. Jin, “Proactive
resilience of power systems against natural disasters:
A literature review,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 163 778–
163 795, 2019.
[47] E. Hossain, I. Khan, F. Un-Noor, S. S. Sikander, and
M. S. H. Sunny, “Application of big data and machine
learning in smart grid, and associated security concerns:
A review,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 13 960–13 988,
2019.
[48] R. C. Borges Hink, J. M. Beaver, M. A. Buckner,
T. Morris, U. Adhikari, and S. Pan, “Machine learning for power system disturbance and cyber-attack discrimination,” in 2014 7th International Symposium on
Resilient Control Systems (ISRCS), 2014, pp. 1–8.
[49] Y. Zhang, L. Wang, W. Sun, R. C. Green II, and
M. Alam, “Distributed intrusion detection system in a
multi-layer network architecture of smart grids,” IEEE
Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 796–808,
Dec. 2011.

[38] “After cyclone hits india and bangladesh, the waiting
begins,” https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/20/world/
asia / cyclone - amphan - india - bangladesh - map.html,
2020, [Online; accessed 07-Jul.-2020].

[50] A. Ahmed, V. V. G. Krishnan, S. A. Foroutan,
M. Touhiduzzaman, A. Srivastava, Y. Wu, A. Hahn,
and S. Sindhu, “Cyber physical security analytics for
anomalies in transmission protection systems,” in 2018
IEEE Industry Applications Society Annual Meeting
(IAS), 2018, pp. 1–8.

[39] G. Kandaperumal and A. K. Srivastava, “Resilience of
the electric distribution systems: concepts, classification, assessment, challenges, and research needs,” IET
Smart Grid, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 133–143, 2020.

[51] J. Giri, M. Parashar, J. Trehern, and V. Madani,
“The situation room: Control center analytics for
enhanced situational awareness,” IEEE Power and
Energy Magazine, vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 24–39, 2012.

[40] A. Arab, A. Khodaei, S. K. Khator, and Z. Han, “Electric power grid restoration considering disaster economics,” IEEE Access, vol. 4, pp. 639–649, 2016.

[52] Y. Jiang and A. K. Srivastava, “Data-driven event diagnosis in transmission systems with incomplete and
conflicting alarms given sensor malfunctions,” IEEE
Transactions on Power Delivery, vol. 35, no. 1, pp.
214–225, 2020.

[41] V. Krishnamurthy and A. Kwasinski, “Comparison
of communication networks power resilience during man-made and natural disasters,” in 2018 IEEE
International Telecommunications Energy Conference
(INTELEC), 2018, pp. 1–8.
[42] A. Kwasinski and P. T. Krein, “Telecom power planning for natural and man-made disasters,” in INTELEC
07 - 29th International Telecommunications Energy
Conference, 2007, pp. 216–222.
[43] N. R. Council et al., Terrorism and the electric power
delivery system. National Academies Press, 2012.
[44] M. Amirioun, F. Aminifar, H. Lesani, and M. Shahidehpour, “Metrics and quantitative framework for as-

[53] S. Pandey, A. Srivastava, and B. Amidan, “A real
time event detection, classification and localization using synchrophasor data,” IEEE Transactions on Power
Systems, pp. 1–1, 2020.
[54] G. Cardoso, J. G. Rolim, and H. H. Zurn, “Application
of neural-network modules to electric power system
fault section estimation,” IEEE Transactions on Power
Delivery, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 1034–1041, 2004.
[55] H. Wang and K. L. Butler, “Neural network modeling
of distribution transformers with internal short circuit
winding faults,” in PICA 2001. Innovative Computing

Data-driven Operation of the Resilient Electric Grid: A Case of COVID-19 — 18/21

for Power - Electric Energy Meets the Market.
22nd IEEE Power Engineering Society. International
Conference on Power Industry Computer Applications
(Cat. No.01CH37195), 2001, pp. 122–127.

[65] A. Tuohy, A. Kelly, B. Deaver, E. Lannoye,
and D. Brooks, “Covid-19 bulk system impacts,”
http : / / mydocs.epri.com / docs / public / covid19 /
3002018602R2.pdf, [Online; accessed 30-Apr.-2020].

[56] A. S. Reddy and M. Vijaykumar, “Neural network modeling of distribution transformer with internal winding faults using double fourier series,” International
Journal of Computer Science and Applications, vol. 1,
no. 3, pp. 160–163, 2008.

[66] “Covid-19-related load impacts are being reported by
several us grid operators,” https://www.spglobal.com/
platts/en/market-insights/latest-news/electric-power/
032320-COVID-19-related-load-impacts-are-beingreported-by-several-us-grid-operators, [Online; accessed 30-Apr.-2020].

[57] A. J. Ghanizadeh and G. B. Gharehpetian, “Ann and
cross-correlation based features for discrimination between electrical and mechanical defects and their localization in transformer winding,” IEEE Transactions on
Dielectrics and Electrical Insulation, vol. 21, no. 5, pp.
2374–2382, 2014.
[58] B. Cui, A. K. Srivastava, and P. Banerjee,
“Synchrophasor-based condition monitoring of instrument transformers using clustering approach,” IEEE
Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 2688–
2698, 2020.
[59] C. Rudin, Ş. Ertekin, R. Passonneau, A. Radeva,
A. Tomar, B. Xie, S. Lewis, M. Riddle, D. Pangsrivinij,
and T. McCormick, “Analytics for power grid distribution reliability in new york city,” Interfaces, vol. 44,
no. 4, pp. 364–383, 2014.
[60] A. Gholami, A. K. Srivastava, and S. Pandey, “Datadriven failure diagnosis in transmission protection system with multiple events and data anomalies,” Journal
of Modern Power Systems and Clean Energy, vol. 7,
no. 4, pp. 767–778, 2019.
[61] S. A. Foroutan and F. R. Salmasi, “Detection of false
data injection attacks against state estimation in smart
grids based on a mixture gaussian distribution learning method,” IET Cyber-Physical Systems: Theory &
Applications, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 161–171, 2017.
[62] “Electric companies & pandemic planning what you
should know,” https://www.eei.org/issuesandpolicy/
Documents / Electric % 20Companies % 20and %
20Pandemics%20- %20What%20You%20Should%
20Know.pdf, [Online; accessed 30-Apr.-2020].
[63] “Ferc approves nerc’s motion to defer implementation of seven reliability standards due to covid19,” https : / / www.nerc.com / news / Pages / NERC Files- Motion- to- Defer- Implementation- of- SevenReliability-Standards-Due-to-COVID-19.aspx, [Online; accessed 30-Apr.-2020].
[64] “Order granting deferred implementation of certain
nerc reliability standard,” https : / / www.nerc.com /
FilingsOrders / us / FERCOrdersRules / order %
20granting % 20motion % 20to % 20defer % 20the %
20implementation%20dates.pdf, [Online; accessed
30-Apr.-2020].

[67] “Utilities beginning to see the load impacts of
covid-19 as economic shutdown widens,” https://
www.utilitydive.com/news/utilities-are-beginning-tosee-the-load-impacts-of-COVID-19-as-economic-sh/
574632, [Online; accessed 30-Apr.-2020].
[68] “Entso-e transparency,” https://transparency.entsoe.eu/,
2020, [Online; accessed 29-Jul.-2020].
[69] Executive department of California, “Executive order n33-20,” https://www.gov.ca.gov/wp-content/uploads/
2020/03/3.19.20-attested-EO-N-33-20-COVID-19HEALTH- ORDER.pdf, [Online; accessed 07-Jul.2020].
[70] https://www.governor.ny.gov/news/governor-cuomosigns-new-york-state-pause-executive-order, [Online;
accessed 07-Jul.-2020].
[71] A. Badri, Z. Ameli, and A. Birjandi, “Application of
artificial neural networks and fuzzy logic methods for
short term load forecasting,” Energy Procedia, vol. 14,
pp. 1883 – 1888, 2012, 2011 2nd International Conference on Advances in Energy Engineering (ICAEE).
[Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1876610211046030
[72] G. Dudek, “Neural networks for pattern-based
short-term load forecasting: A comparative study,”
Neurocomputing, vol. 205, pp. 64 – 74, 2016.
[Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0925231216302764
[73] G. Ruan, D. Wu, X. Zheng, S. Sivaranjani, L. Xie,
H. Zhong, and C. Kang, “A cross-domain approach to
analyzing the short-run impact of covid-19 on the U.S.
electricity sector,” Joule, 2020.
[74] H. Abbas and J. Wen, “How is covid 19 impacting
the UK electricity system?” https://www.frontiereconomics.com / uk / en / news - and - articles / articles /
article- i7214- how- is- covid- 19- impacting- the- ukelectricity-system/, [Online; accessed 13-Sept.-2020].
[75] “Covid-19 impact on electricity,” https://www.iea.org/
reports/covid-19-impact-on-electricity/, [Online; accessed 13-Sept.-2020].
[76] “Covid-19: America hasn’t used this little energy in
16 years,” https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2020/04/

Data-driven Operation of the Resilient Electric Grid: A Case of COVID-19 — 19/21

united-states-eneregy-electricity-power-coronaviruscovid19/, [Online; accessed 13-Sept.-2020].
[77] “California
renewables
curtailments
surge
as coronavirus cuts energy demand,” https :
//www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/californiarenewable - curtailments - spike - as - coronavirus reduces-demand/, [Online; accessed 13-Sept.-2020].
[78] “Renewables achieve clean energy record
as
covid-19
hits
demand,”
https : / /
www.renewableenergyworld.com / 2020 / 04 / 06 /
renewables- achieve- clean- energy- record- as- covid19-hits-demand/, 2020, [Online; accessed 13-Sept.2020].
[79] “5 things to know about how coronavirus has hit global
energy,” https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2020/05/
covid19-energy-use-drop-crisis/, [Online; accessed
13-Sept.-2020].
[80] “FERC, NERC provide industry guidance to ensure grid reliability amid potential coronavirus impacts,” https://www.nerc.com/news/Headlines%20DL/
FERC%20NERC%20031820%20final.pdf, [Online;
accessed 30-Apr.-2020].

[88] “Electric power system resiliency, challenges and
opportunities,” https://www.naseo.org/Data/Sites/1/
resiliency-white-paper.pdf, [Online; accessed 07-Jul.2020].
[89] E. Hirst and B. Kirby, “Bulk-power basics: reliability and commerce,” Consulting in Electric-Industry
Restructuring, Oak Ridge, Tennessee, vol. 37830,
2000.
[90] “Robustness,
flexibility
and
resilience,”
http : / / www.husdal.com / 2008 / 04 / 28 / robustness flexibility - and - resilience - in - the - supply - chain / # :
∼ : text = Flexibility % 20is % 20the % 20inherent %
20capability,these % 20changes % 20despite %
20severe % 20impact, [Online; accessed 17-Jul.2020].
[91] “Presidential policy directive (ppd) 21: Critical infrastructure security and resilience,” https://www.cisa.gov/
sites / default / files / publications / PPD - 21 - Critical Infrastructure- and- Resilience- 508.pdf, [Online; accessed 30-Apr.-2020].
[92] R. H. Michael Lewis, “Resilience and pandemics,”
https : / / smartgrid.ieee.org / newsletters / may - 2020 /
resilience- and- pandemics?utm source=sg- monthlymay2020&utm medium = email&utm campaign =
2020- enewsletter, 2020, [Online; accessed 7-Jul.2020].

[81] “Assessing and mitigating the novel coronavirus
(covid-19), a resource guide - version 6: Updated
april 20, 2020,” https://www.electricitysubsector.org/
- / media / Files / ESCC / Documents / ESCC COVID
Resource Guide v2 - 03242020.ashx?la = en&hash =
[93] C. Rudin, D. Waltz, R. N. Anderson, A. Boulanger,
D3732CBFB46827AA0331277E8D5CBE0CC4DFC3BF,
A. Salleb-Aouissi, M. Chow, H. Dutta, P. N. Gross,
[Online; accessed 30-Apr.-2020].
B. Huang, S. Ierome, D. F. Isaac, A. Kressner, R. J.
[82] “Announcement grid operators well prepared for covidPassonneau, A. Radeva, and L. Wu, “Machine learning
19, alert responses find,” https://www.nerc.com/news/
for the new york city power grid,” IEEE Transactions
Headlines%20DL/Alert%2027MAR20.pdf, [Online;
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 34,
accessed 30-Apr.-2020].
no. 2, pp. 328–345, Feb 2012.
[83] “How power companies are keeping your lights on during the pandemic,” https : / / www.latimes.com /
environment / story / 2020 - 03 - 19 / how - power companies - are - keeping - your - lights - on - during the-pandemic, [Online; accessed 30-Apr.-2020].
[84] “Entso-e transparency,” https : / / www.eenews.net /
stories/1062737239, [Online; accessed 30-Apr.-2020].
[85] “America’s electricity is safe from the coronavirus—for now,” https : / / www.wired.com / story /
americas- electricity- is- safe- from- the- coronavirusfor-now/, 2020, [Online; accessed 30-Apr.-2020].
[86] S. Hosseini, K. Barker, and J. E. Ramirez-Marquez, “A
review of definitions and measures of system resilience,”
Reliability Engineering and System Safety, vol. 145,
no. C, pp. 47–61, 2016.
[87] Z. Bie, Y. Lin, G. Li, and F. Li, “Battling the extreme:
A study on the power system resilience,” Proceedings
of the IEEE, vol. 105, no. 7, pp. 1253–1266, 2017.

[94] R. Wu and G. Sansavini, “Integrating reliability and
resilience to support the transition from passive distribution grids to islanding microgrids,” Applied Energy,
vol. 272, p. 115254, 2020.
[95] “Improving electric grid reliability and resilience:
Lessons learned from superstorm sandy and other
extreme events,” https://www.gridwise.org/documents/
ImprovingElectricGridReliabilityandResilience 6 6
13webFINAL.pdf, [Online; accessed 30-Apr.-2020].
[96] S. Mirsaeidi, D. M. Said, M. W. Mustafa, M. H.
Habibuddin, and K. Ghaffari, “An analytical literature
review of the available techniques for the protection of
micro-grids,” International Journal of Electrical Power
& Energy Systems, vol. 58, pp. 300 – 306, 2014.
[97] Z. Li, M. Shahidehpour, F. Aminifar, A. Alabdulwahab,
and Y. Al-Turki, “Networked microgrids for enhancing
the power system resilience,” Proceedings of the IEEE,
vol. 105, no. 7, pp. 1289–1310, Jul. 2017.

Data-driven Operation of the Resilient Electric Grid: A Case of COVID-19 — 20/21

[98] X. Liu, M. Shahidehpour, Z. Li, X. Liu, Y. Cao, and
Z. Bie, “Microgrids for enhancing the power grid resilience in extreme conditions,” IEEE Transactions on
Smart Grid, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 589–597, 2017.
[99] R. Madurai Elavarasan, G. Shafiullah, K. Raju, V. Mudgal, M. Arif, T. Jamal, S. Subramanian, V. Sriraja Balaguru, K. Reddy, and U. Subramaniam, “Covid-19:
Impact analysis and recommendations for power sector
operation,” Applied Energy, vol. 279, p. 115739, 2020.
[100] H. Lin, K. Sun, Z. Tan, C. Liu, J. M. Guerrero, and
J. C. Vasquez, “Adaptive protection combined with
machine learning for microgrids,” IET Generation,
Transmission Distribution, vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 770–779,
2019.
[101] S. Mishra, K. Anderson, B. Miller, K. Boyer, and
A. Warren, “Microgrid resilience: A holistic approach
for assessing threats, identifying vulnerabilities, and designing corresponding mitigation strategies,” Applied
Energy, vol. 264, p. 114726, 2020.
[102] K. Abdollah, W. Su, and T. Jin, “A machine learning based cyber attack detection model for wireless
sensor networks in microgrids,” IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Informatics, pp. 1–1, 2020.

[109] I. Diahovchenko, G. Kandaperumal, and A. Srivastava,
“Distribution power system resiliency improvement using distributed generation and automated switching,”
in 2019 IEEE 6th International Conference on Energy
Smart Systems (ESS), 2019, pp. 126–131.
[110] S. Pandey, S. Chanda, A. K. Srivastava, and R. O. Hovsapian, “Resiliency-driven proactive distribution system reconfiguration with synchrophasor data,” IEEE
Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 35, no. 4, pp.
2748–2758, 2020.
[111] V. Madani, D. Novosel, S. Horowitz, M. Adamiak,
J. Amantegui, D. Karlsson, S. Imai, and A. Apostolov, “Ieee psrc report on global industry experiences
with system integrity protection schemes (sips),” IEEE
Transactions on Power Delivery, vol. 25, no. 4, pp.
2143–2155, Oct. 2010.
[112] “Smart grid investments improve grid reliability, resilience, and storm responses,” https : / /
www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2014/12/f19/SGImprovesRestoration-Nov2014.pdf, [Online; accessed
30-Apr.-2020].
[113] V. Madani and D. Novosel, “Getting a grip on the grid,”
IEEE Spectrum, vol. 42, no. 12, pp. 42–47, 2005.

[103] R. R. Kolluri and J. de Hoog, “Adaptive control using
machine learning for distributed storage in microgrids,”
in Proceedings of the Eleventh ACM International
Conference on Future Energy Systems, 2020, pp. 509–
515.

[114] S. Gupta, R. Kambli, S. Wagh, and F. Kazi, “Supportvector-machine-based proactive cascade prediction
in smart grid using probabilistic framework,” IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 62, no. 4,
pp. 2478–2486, Apr. 2015.

[104] H. Lin, K. Sun, Z.-H. Tan, C. Liu, J. M. Guerrero,
and J. C. Vasquez, “Adaptive protection combined
with machine learning for microgrids,” IET Generation,
Transmission & Distribution, vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 770–
779, 2019.

[115] R. Eskandarpour and A. Khodaei, “Machine learning
based power grid outage prediction in response to extreme events,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems,
vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 3315–3316, Jul. 2017.

[105] M. Al Karim, J. Currie, and T. Lie, “Dynamic event
detection using a distributed feature selection based
machine learning approach in a self-healing microgrid,”
IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 33, no. 5,
pp. 4706–4718, 2018.
[106] S. Chanda and A. K. Srivastava, “Defining and enabling
resiliency of electric distribution systems with multiple
microgrids,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 7,
no. 6, pp. 2859–2868, Nov. 2016.
[107] V. Venkataramanan, A. Hahn, and A. Srivastava, “Cyphyr: a cyber-physical analysis tool for measuring and
enabling resiliency in microgrids,” IET Cyber-Physical
Systems: Theory Applications, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 313–
321, Dec. 2019.
[108] V.Venkataramanan, A. Hahn, and A. Srivastava, “Cpsam: Cyber-physical security assessment metric for
monitoring microgrid resiliency,” IEEE Transactions
on Smart Grid, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 1055–1065, Mar.
2020.

[116] R. Eskandarpour, A. Khodaei, and A. Arab, “Improving power grid resilience through predictive outage estimation,” in 2017 North American Power Symposium
(NAPS), 2017, pp. 1–5.
[117] S. D. Guikema, S. M. Quiring, and S.-R. Han,
“Prestorm estimation of hurricane damage to electric power distribution systems,” Risk Analysis: An
International Journal, vol. 30, no. 12, pp. 1744–1752,
2010.
[118] M. Glavic, R. Fonteneau, and D. Ernst, “Reinforcement learning for electric power system decision
and control: Past considerations and perspectives,”
IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 6918 – 6927,
2017, 20th IFAC World Congress.
[119] Q. Huang, R. Huang, W. Hao, J. Tan, R. Fan, and
Z. Huang, “Adaptive power system emergency control
using deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Transactions
on Smart Grid, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 1171–1182, 2020.
[120] L. Maharjan, M. Ditsworth, M. Niraula, C. Caicedo
Narvaez, and B. Fahimi, “Machine learning based en-

Data-driven Operation of the Resilient Electric Grid: A Case of COVID-19 — 21/21

ergy management system for grid disaster mitigation,”
IET Smart Grid, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 172–182, 2019.
[121] N. Baranovic, P. Andersson, I. Ivankovic, K. ZubrinicKostovic, D. Peharda, and J. E. Larsson, “Experiences
from intelligent alarm processing and decision support
tools in smart grid transmission control centers,” in
Cigre Session, vol. 46, 2016, pp. 21–26.
[122] S. Pandey, N. Patari, and A. K. Srivastava, “Cognitive
flexibility of power grid operator and decision making in extreme events,” in 2019 IEEE Power Energy
Society General Meeting (PESGM), 2019, pp. 1–5.
[123] G. Kandaperumal and A. K. Srivastava, “Resilience of
the electric distribution systems: concepts, classification, assessment, challenges, and research needs,” IET
Smart Grid, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 133–143, 2020.
[124] https : / / www.knowi.com / coronavirus - dashboards /
covid-19-api/, [Online; accessed 07-Jul.-2020].
[125] L. L. Wang, K. Lo, Y. Chandrasekhar, R. Reas, J. Yang,
D. Eide, K. Funk, R. Kinney, Z. Liu, W. Merrill et al.,
“Cord-19: The covid-19 open research dataset,” ArXiv,
2020.
[126] Y. Wang, C. Chen, J. Wang, and R. Baldick, “Research
on resilience of power systems under natural disasters—a review,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems,
vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 1604–1613, 2016.
[127] H. Noorazar, “Recent advances in opinion propagation dynamics: a 2020 survey,” The European Physical
Journal Plus, vol. 135, 2020.
[128] H. Noorazar, K. R. Vixie, A. Talebanpour, and
Y. Hu, “From classical to modern opinion dynamics,”
International Journal of Modern Physics C, vol. 31,
no. 07, p. 2050101, 2020.
[129] Y. Shang, “Consensus and clustering of expressed and
private opinions in dynamical networks against attacks,”
IEEE Systems Journal, 2019.
[130] J. E. Rubio, M. Manulis, C. Alcaraz, and J. Lopez,
“Enhancing security and dependability of industrial networks with opinion dynamics,” in European
Symposium on Research in Computer Security.
Springer, 2019, pp. 263–280.
[131] C. Alcaraz, “Cloud-assisted dynamic resilience for
cyber-physical control systems,” IEEE Wireless
Communications, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 76–82, 2018.
[132] F. Chazal and B. Michel, “An introduction to topological data analysis: fundamental and practical aspects for
data scientists,” arXiv:1710.04019, 2017.
[133] M. Kamruzzaman, A. Kalyanaraman, and B. Krishnamoorthy, “Detecting divergent subpopulations in phenomics data using interesting flares,” in Proceedings
of the 2018 ACM International Conference on
Bioinformatics, Computational Biology, and Health
Informatics, 2018, pp. 155–164.

[134] Y. Chen, Y. Tan, and D. Deka, “Is machine
learning in power systems vulnerable?” in 2018
IEEE International Conference on Communications,
Control, and Computing Technologies for Smart Grids
(SmartGridComm), 2018, pp. 1–6.
[135] U. Franke and J. Brynielsson, “Cyber situational awareness–a systematic review of the literature,” Computers
& security, vol. 46, pp. 18–31, 2014.
[136] J. Zheng and A. Dagnino, “An initial study of predictive machine learning analytics on large volumes
of historical data for power system applications,” in
2014 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big
Data), 2014, pp. 952–959.

