Learning from Home: A Mixed-Methods Analysis of Live
Streaming Based Remote Education Experience in Chinese
Colleges during the COVID-19 Pandemic
Zhilong Chen1+ , Hancheng Cao2+ , Yuting Deng3 , Xuan Gao1 , Jinghua Piao1 , Fengli Xu1 , Yu
Zhang4 , Yong Li1∗

arXiv:2010.01662v2 [cs.CY] 23 Jan 2021

1

Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist),
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
2 Department of Computer Science, Stanford University 3 The College, The University of Chicago
4 Institute of Education, Tsinghua University
liyong07@tsinghua.edu.cn

ABSTRACT
The COVID-19 global pandemic and resulted lockdown policies
have forced education in nearly every country to switch from a
traditional co-located paradigm to a pure online “distance learning
from home” paradigm. Lying in the center of this learning paradigm
shift is the emergence and wide adoption of distance communication tools and live streaming platforms for education. Here, we
present a mixed-methods study on live streaming based education
experience during the COVID-19 pandemic. We focus our analysis
on Chinese higher education, carried out semi-structured interviews on 30 students, and 7 instructors from diverse colleges and
disciplines, meanwhile launched a large-scale survey covering 6291
students and 1160 instructors in one leading Chinese university.
Our study not only reveals important design guidelines and insights
to better support current remote learning experience during the
pandemic, but also provides valuable implications towards constructing future collaborative education supporting systems and
experience after pandemic.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing → Empirical studies in HCI;
Empirical studies in collaborative and social computing; •
Applied computing → Distance learning; E-learning.

KEYWORDS
LS learning, live streaming, distance learning, COVID-19
ACM Reference Format:
Zhilong Chen1+ , Hancheng Cao2+ , Yuting Deng3 , Xuan Gao1 , Jinghua Piao1 ,
Fengli Xu1 , Yu Zhang4 , Yong Li1 . 2021. Learning from Home: A MixedMethods Analysis of Live Streaming Based Remote Education Experience
in Chinese Colleges during the COVID-19 Pandemic. In Proceedings of
ACM Conference (Conference’17). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 16 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
∗ Corresponding
∗∗ Equal

author.
contribution.

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
2021. ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

Figure 1: Various education formats characterized by temporal and spatial dimensions.

1

INTRODUCTION

The COVID-19 global pandemic and resulted lockdown/social distancing policies have vastly transformed education, bringing the
traditional co-located paradigm to a pure online distance learning
paradigm, which generates new education models [71]. As billions
of students leave their school and proceed with their studies from
home, instructors turn to various technologies to ensure the sustainability of learning [42]. Lying in the center of this learning paradigm shift is the wide adoption of live streaming based learning
(LS learning) mode, where teachers connect with students through
distance communication tool (e.g. Zoom, live streaming platforms),
give lectures, hold sessions and interact with students via software
interfaces in real-time. Meanwhile, students rely on these platforms
to collaborate and group learn with peers.
As demonstrated in Figure 1, live streaming based education deviates from traditional learning experiences in many important ways:
traditional classroom corresponds to a co-located synchronous interaction mode where all teacher-student and student-student interaction takes place live at the same location [61]. The typical massive
online open course (MOOC) [73] belongs to a distant asynchronous
interaction mode, where prerecorded videos are distributed online
and learners asynchronously interact with instructors and could

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

access the content any time they want. In contrast, LS learning
belongs to a distant synchronous mode, where interaction happens
in real-time yet physically far apart. Even though similar experiences as LS learning have emerged before the pandemic, e.g. [6],
they are limited in coverage and restricted to very specific learning
purposes. In comparison, current LS learning is distinct in that it
is 1) large-scale in coverage, 2) ubiquitous and widely used across
disciplines, and 3) primarily aimed for long-term formal learning
process rather than informal experience, e.g., informal language
learning [6]. We seek to uncover how LS learning experiences differ
from more traditional educational formats.
Given the importance of LS learning under the ongoing COVID19 pandemic, as well as its expected significant roles in the upcoming hybrid educational era, it is important to study how better
LS learning experiences can be supported. We present this paper
to fill in this research gap. Specifically, we ask: how has LS learning support student learning from home experience during the
pandemic? What are the issues and challenges under the current
setups and how may we address them through future design? Perhaps most interestingly, are there any human-computer interaction
(HCI) lessons we can take away from this unprecedented natural
COVID-19 “learning from home” experiment that can guide us in
designing future education tools after the pandemic?
To shed light on these questions, we present a mixed-methods
study on LS learning experiences during the COVID-19 pandemic.
With a special focus on Chinese higher education, we conducted
semi-structured interviews on 30 students, and 7 instructors from
diverse disciplines across different universities, meanwhile administered a large-scale survey covering 6291 students and 1160 instructors in one of the leading Chinese universities. We focus our
analysis on 1) individual learning experience, and 2) interaction
experience between instructor-student and student-student. Our
findings suggest live streaming based education do help students
and teachers achieve their education goal to a great extent, yet there
are several key challenges emerging under the current paradigm,
including students’ difficulties in paying continuous attention, decreased learning efficacy, and lack of engagement/collaboration
experiences. We further demonstrate how various interaction formats, including audio, video, text box, danmaku, quiz, vote, in the
LS learning platforms enable novel learning experiences, which
contributes to variations in instructor-student and student-student
relationships. Based on our analysis, we further propose and discuss several teaching and learning practices for courses of different
characteristics. Finally, we propose important design guidelines
and insights to better support LS learning experiences during the
pandemic, and offer valuable implications towards constructing
future collaborative education supporting systems and experiences
post-pandemic.
Contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows:

• We present a large-scale systematic analysis of LS learning
experiences through mixed methods in Chinese colleges.
• We reveal challenges and possibilities with regard to LS
learning, and provide concrete guidelines on how to enable
better LS learning experience given the current technology.

Chen and Cao, et al.

• Our study points to several important design implications on
future educational tools to support LS learning, e.g., balance
of anonymity and real-name systems.

2

RELATED WORK AND BACKGROUND

We first position our work in the rich literature from the following aspects: formats of education (the activity we study), remote
collaboration tools/live streaming platforms (the technology our
study focuses on), and the adoption of such technology in activity
(agency), where we present an overview of popular LS learning
platforms used by Chinese colleges during the COVID-19 pandemic.

2.1

Education Formats

Past human-computer interaction (HCI) and computer-supported
cooperative work (CSCW) researches have shown that spatial distance [56] and temporal synchronization [29] would exert immense
distinctions in experiences in the education domain. With these two
dimensions as classification criteria, education can be divided into
4 categories: co-located and synchronous, distant and synchronous,
co-located and asynchronous (rarely implemented), and distant and
asynchronous (see Figure 1).
Traditional classes typically belong to the co-located and synchronous format. Past researchers attempted to develop tools for
digitizing and supplementing face-to-face learning, helping provide peer feedback [61], support reflection, communication and
planning [35], deliver quizzes [57], and reflect on teachers’ performances [1], etc. In terms of the distant and asynchronous education
format, a representative exemplification is the typical Massive Open
Online Courses (MOOCs) format: interactions between instructors
and students are largely asynchronous and distant, i.e., most MOOC
education uses prerecorded lecture videos, while recent studies have
taken steps to introduce synchronicity to MOOCs such as MOOC
chatrooms [9, 39]. Research efforts on MOOCs have been dedicated
to not only investigating students’ [73] and instructors’ [74] overall motivations and perceptions towards MOOC usages, but also
understanding and modeling specific MOOC features, including
forum use [10], virtual team formation [67], geographic diversity
in MOOC discussions [39], divided attention [70], and MOOCs’
support on employability [15]. Some other research on distance education focused on paid degree programs. For instance, Sun, Rosson,
and Carroll [62] investigated community among online learners
in remote learning programs. Sun, Wang, and Rosson [63] uncovered how distance learners connect with a special focus on shared
identity, focused work, and future possibilities.
However, very limited attention has been paid to the distant
and synchronous learning format. Work on telepresence, such as
Newhart and Olson’s [55], has taken the preliminary steps into understanding remote learning engagement, but only from instructors’
perspectives. Chen, Freeman, and Balakrishnan [6] revealed how different modalities shape language-learning live streaming. However,
existing work on synchronous distant learning is constrained to
voluntary/informal learning, the context and motivations of which
is far different from formal education, e.g., colleges. Different from
them, in this work we examine the live streaming based remote

Learning from Home: A Mixed-Methods Analysis of Live Streaming Based Remote Education Experience
in Chinese Colleges during the COVID-19 Pandemic

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

education experience – the form of distant and synchronous learning enabled and forced by COVID-19 at scale in Chinese colleges,
where studies are carried out under formal education settings.

student experience under recent emerging live streaming enabled
formal education (LS learning) during the pandemic - an important
yet not well-studied application instance of live streaming.

2.2

2.4

Remote Collaboration Tools and
Experience

Remote collaboration has long been a central topic in CSCW literature. Much work has been done in this space to understand and
support better remote collaboration tools and experience [36, 56].
Two important lines of studies that closely relate to our work are
performance and peer to peer relationship research under remote
collaborations. With regard to performance, Gumienny et al. found
that idea generation and feedback collection can be facilitated if a
remote collaboration system offers real-time synchronous editing
as well as asynchronous inputs [22]. A series of research has been
done to understand the role of spatial audio and video in supporting
more engaging remote collaboration experiences [27, 52]. Junuzovic
et al. [34] studied the layout guideline for designing more effective
multi-party, gaze-aware desktop videoconferencing tools. Cao et al.
[4] launched a large scale analysis of remote meeting multitasking
behavior and studied its impact on productivity and worker well
being under remote collaboration. In terms of social relationships
under remote collaboration, research has been done to investigate
remote team viability [5, 68]. Macaranas et al. [49] studied how
watching video programs together at a distance affects team cohesion. Other works investigated the role of novel technology in
shaping unique remote collaboration experience [2, 3, 7]. Building
on top of these works, here we investigate how LS learning as an
emerging instance of remote collaboration between student and
teacher, impacts learning experience from both individual learning outcome and group collaboration effectiveness/inclusiveness
perspectives.

2.3

Live Streaming in HCI and CSCW

As an increasingly popular medium, live streaming has attracted the
attention of numerous researchers in the HCI community. One line
of work focused on the general usage of live streaming and highlighted its similarities and differences compared to other mediums.
For instance, Juhlin, Engström, and Reponen [33] demonstrated
what contents are shared on these platforms and how people manage these contents. Dougherty [16] evaluated live streaming from
the civic engagement angle. Tang, Venolia, and Inkpen [65] characterized motivations behind live streaming, and Lu et al. [46] focused
on Chinese practices as a case study. Haimson and Tang [23] identified immersion, immediacy, interaction, and sociality as drivers
of engaging live streaming experiences. Other studies focused on
the use of live streaming in specific domains, for example, video
games [25, 41], visual art [72], intangible cultural heritage [43],
knowledge sharing [45] and outdoor activities [44]. Some recent
studies have taken the first steps to leverage live streaming for
education. Faas et al. [17] examined how live streaming enables
programming mentoring. Chen, Freeman, and Balakrishnan [6]
investigated how diverse modalities can be used for live streaming to support language learning. Sun et al. [64] revealed how live
streaming can be adopted for online lectures with audience flow
prediction. Extending these studies, we focus on understanding

Live Streaming based Remote Learning
Platforms in China

In China, several platforms have been adopted for live streaming
based learning 1 during the pandemic. These platforms share the
functions of enabling synchronous and live sharing of visual and
audio contents. Table 1 we introduce and summarize characteristics
of three major categories of LS learning platforms in China.
E-classroom. A few platforms are specifically designed for distance education, which are also known as e-classrooms. These
platforms support synchronized visual and audio interactions and
thus enable LS learning. One widely-adopted instance is Rain Classroom, which has been utilized by a wide range of universities. In
Rain Classroom, instructors can not only broadcast live video and
audio and share their screens, but also launch quizzes and votes
to students in the e-classroom. However, at the time we collect
our data, students are not able to turn on their own cameras or
microphones to share their own visual or audio information. Thus
most of the time the interaction is one-way, i.e., from instructors to
students. Nevertheless, students could interact with the instructors
through textual danmaku [44], which the instructors could choose
to have it turned on or off (see Figure 2(a)).
Video conference. As shown in Figure 2(b), online video conferencing platforms have also been adopted by a great many instructors [28, 30, 40] to fulfill LS learning, among which Zoom and
Tencent Meeting are two most frequently used software. On these
platforms, should the instructors/administrators permit, anyone in
the class can turn on his or her microphone or camera to share audio
or video contents. Text boxes are integrated into video conferencing
tools and enable textual interactions.
Traditional live streaming. Some instructors implement LS
learning through live streaming platforms such as Bilibili and
Kuaishou. On these platforms, instructors usually take the role
of streamers and share audios, images, and screens in real-time. Students act as viewers of the live streams and interact with instructors
through text boxes. Some platforms such as Bilibili also support
danmaku, where textual comments in the text box are shown upon
videos in a danmaku manner.
In later analysis, we refer to all of the aforementioned instances
as LS learning platforms. We focus on deriving conclusions that
generalize to all LS learning experiences, rather than those specific
to a single platform.

3

METHOD

Based on related work and background on education (activity) and
remote collaboration tools/live streaming platforms (technology), in
this study, we seek to gain a better understanding of user experience
when live streaming are adopted at large scale in education (agency).
Specifically, we ask the following research questions:
RQ1: What features do instructors use under LS learning and
how are they used?
1 We

refer to live streaming based learning as LS learning platforms for short in later
analysis.

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

Chen and Cao, et al.

Table 1: Major categories of LS learning platforms and their characteristics.
Platform
E-Classroom
Video Conference
Traditional Live streaming

Example
Rain Classroom
Zoom, Tencent Meeting
Bilibili, Kuaishou

Video
✓(1)*
✓(2)
✓(1)

Audio
✓(1)
✓(2)
✓(1)

Textbox
#
✓
✓

Danmaku [44]
✓
#
✓

Quiz
✓
#
#

Vote
✓
#
#

*The number in the bracket indicates the interaction directions available (one-way/mutual interactions).

(a) LS Learning through E-classroom: danmakus are (b) LS Learning through Video Conference: the instructors’ video (c) Quiz/Vote function integrated in PPT: the quiz
marked in red circles, instructors’ video in blue rect- is marked in red rectangle and instructors’ screen sharing shown function records who answers what and has a correct
angles and instructors’ screen sharing shown as back- as background.
answer set in advance, while the vote function only
ground.
presents the overall voting distribution.

Figure 2: Demonstration of LS Learning Platforms.
RQ2: How does LS education influence individual learning experience?
RQ3: How does LS education shape collaborative learning experience and influence social relationships?
To answer them, we adopt a mixed-methods methodology combining in-depth interviews and a large-scale survey.

3.1

Semi-structured Interview Study

We interviewed 30 students and 7 instructors from various Chinese
universities who engaged in LS learning in Spring 2020 semester,
where we tried to diversify the disciplines of the instructors and
majors of students as much as possible to attain variation [12].
Table 2 and Table 3 demonstrate the detailed information of the
students and instructors participated, respectively. Interviewees
starting with S (S1-S30) represent students, and participants starting
with T (T1-T7) are instructors. The interviews were completed either in person or through remote audio calls and took the form of a
semi-structured manner. In the interviews, we penetrated into how
courses were taken through LS learning during the COVID-19 crisis,
how the teaching/learning experiences were and how they differed
from traditional face to face learning and MOOC learning, how the
learning outcomes were, how instructors and students collaborated,
and how they felt their relationships. The interviews were all conducted in Mandarin, each of which lasted around 30-45 minutes
and compensated with an honorarium of 50 CHN. After receiving
the oral consent of the participants, we audio-taped the interviews
and transcribed them leveraging transcription service and manual
modifications, where we removed the identifiable information to
guarantee better protection of interviewees’ privacy.
To analyze the interviews, we first open-coded [12] the transcriptions. Two Mandarin-speaking authors separately coded 5
interview transactions and appointed a discussion on the codes
until reaching consensus. Then, one of these authors coded the

remaining transcriptions and periodically discussed with the other
author to guarantee agreements on the codes. One other native
Chinese author was responsible for the translation of the codes and
corresponding quotes into English and the aforementioned two
authors were responsible for validating and refining the translations. Upon finishing these procedures, the whole research team
thoroughly discussed the contents that had been extracted. With
sub-categorization and constant comparison, we developed and
continually amended the emerging themes.

3.2

Survey Study

To ensure the generalizability of our findings, we further launched
a large-scale survey study in a leading Chinese university where
several live streaming platforms and distance communication tools
are officially provided for teachers to enable LS learning. The survey
was distributed through a college-level administrative approach
online towards (1) instructors who have taught at least one course
in both Fall 2019 semester and Spring 2020 semester, and (2) students who have taken coursework in both Fall 2019 semester and
Spring 2020 semester. We compared the learning experience in Fall
2019 semester (all education in traditional co-located classrooms)
vs. Spring 2020 semester (all education through LS learning). We
focused on the differences between the two consequent semesters
so as to measure the changes brought by LS learning. Questions
include learning/teaching experience, quality, outcomes, practices,
and effectiveness, with a special focus on education experiences
and learning and teaching behaviors. A total of 1160 instructors and
6291 students participated in and validly responded to the survey.
The instruments utilized in the survey are adapted from previous research [54, 58]. A four-point rating scale was used with
descriptions such as [‘not at all’, ‘very little’, ‘quite a bit’, ‘very
much’] or [‘never’, ‘rarely’, ‘sometimes’, ‘often’]. It is worth noting
that due to the large-scale nature of the survey study, statistical

Learning from Home: A Mixed-Methods Analysis of Live Streaming Based Remote Education Experience
in Chinese Colleges during the COVID-19 Pandemic

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

Table 2: Summary of the basic information of interviewed students.
ID
S1
S4
S7
S10
S13
S16
S19
S22
S25
S28

Gender
F
M
M
F
F
F
F
M
F
M

Major
Human Resources
Electronic Engineering
Math
Medicine
Public Policy
Geophysics
Automation
Computer Science
Information Science
Mechanical Engineering

ID
S2
S5
S8
S11
S14
S17
S20
S23
S26
S29

Gender
F
F
M
M
F
F
F
M
M
F

Major
Calligraphy
Materials Science
Humanity
Information Science
Marine Technology
Electronic Engineering
Building Environment
Oral Interpretation
Information Science
Art

ID
S3
S6
S9
S12
S15
S18
S21
S24
S27
S30

Gender
M
M
F
M
M
F
M
F
F
F

Major
Chemistry
Electronic Engineering
Law
Information Science
Information Science
Law
Information Science
Economics
Information Science
Foreign Language

Table 3: Summary of the basic information of interviewed instructors.
ID
T1
T3
T5
T7

Gender
F
M
F
M

Discipline
Foreign Languages and Literature
Data Science
Physical Electronics Experiment
Foreign Languages and Literature

significance testing is not appropriate as large scale data tend to signify most differences as significant. Therefore, we adopt an ‘effect
size’ perspective instead, where a difference no less than 1/3 of a
standard deviation in the mean score is considered as a meaningful
effect [11].

4

FINDINGS

In this section, we report the findings on LS learning experience.
The major themes emerging from our mixed-methods study can be
characterized into: 1) interaction format experience with specific
platform features, 2) overall individual learning experience, and 3)
interactive learning experience between instructor-student, studentstudent, and community perception.

4.1

Interaction Formats in LS Learning

LS learning supports a wide range of interaction formats, ranging
from audio, videos, text box messages, danmakus, quizzes to votes.
Each of these formats was recognized as contributing to the overall functionality of live streaming-based remote education by our
participants, in which participants illustrated how these features
shape live streaming-based remote education.
Audio. Audio was the most used modality by instructors. In most
LS classes, only the instructor leaves the microphone on throughout
the class, and students only turn it on when answering questions –
or else the class would be too noisy (T2, T3 & T4). There were also
some classes that required every student to leave their microphones
on, especially small classes. This allowed students to interrupt the
class at any time if they had questions (T5). It also allowed for
classes that required a substantial amount of interactions between
the instructor and the students. One example was during a Russian
class the instructor asked everyone to turn on their microphones
since “the class needed synchronous Russian practice between students, or between students and me [the instructor]” (T1). T1 also
emphasized that only small classes could allow students to leave
their microphones on throughout the class: “if this was a big class,

ID
T2
T4
T6

Gender
F
M
M

Discipline
Education
Telecommunication
Nuclear Science and Technology

we could not do it since there would be too much background noise
which would interrupt the class”.
Most instructors would set up separate question and answer
(Q&A) sessions to answer students’ questions after class, and in
this case students would be allowed to leave their microphones on
throughout the session. “Audio makes communication more convenient and accurate”, according to S25, “thus I am more willing to ask
my questions by speaking up instead of typing up”.
There were also some complaints about using audio. S5 raised
the concern that the interaction between the instructor and the
students through microphones might interrupt the pace of the class.
For example, during one of his fast-paced classes, “occasionally there
would be some students asking trivial questions that would slow down
the pace of the whole class” (S5). S5 also mentioned that he felt “the
quality of communication online through microphones is worse than
the quality of face-to-face office hours sessions in offices, due to the
absence of boards and pens: it would make much more sense if the
instructor could draw some graphs to explain how things work instead
of pure talking” (S5). Furthermore, S27 reported a technical issue in
that one time her microphone was automatically turned on in one
of her classes, and it made her feel “very awkward” since she had
been singing.
Video. Apart from audio, video was the second most frequently
used modality by instructors. There were mainly two kinds of video
displays combined in LS classes: 1) turning on video and displaying
one’s face through the front camera and, 2) sharing one’s screen. For
the majority of the classes, only the instructor turned on the camera
to let students see his/her face throughout the sessions. In most live
streaming sessions, the instructor would also share his/her screen
so students could see lecture slides or any other materials related to
the class. While sharing their screen with students, most instructors
insisted on showing their faces to students. As commented by T2,
“No matter how advanced the technology is, we think humanity plays
an irreplaceable role in education ... it is very important to let students
see us, so that they feel like they are in a real classroom” (T2).

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

In most LS classes, students would not keep their video on
throughout the entire session. If everyone turned on his/her camera throughout the session, this could destabilize the Internet connection and the platform, thus diminishing class quality. Due to
technical issues, T1, T3, T4, and T5 chose to turn off students’ cameras. However, many teachers emphasized the importance of seeing
students’ faces in the interviews. For example, T1 would sometimes
ask students to turn on their cameras for several minutes during
the class to have a better sense of “students’ states”, and T2 felt it
was necessary to see every student’s face to “promote emotional
interactions”.
From students’ perspectives, according to the interview, the
majority of the students agreed that turning on their cameras “made
them feel more motivated and concentrated” during the class (e.g.,
S21, S23, S27 & S29). S9 and S29 also mentioned that they liked to see
everyone’s face since “it just feels like a normal class: we are sitting in
a classroom and listening to the teacher” (S9). Some students reported
that a benefit of the video modality is that students could “see the
instructor’s face and blackboard clearer and listen to the instructor’s
voice clearer”, while pre-pandemic only the first several rows of
students in a classroom could see and hear the instructor clearly
(S1 & S12).
However, some other students, e.g., S23 & S25, disliked video
when having to show their faces to everyone: “it’s so awkward
turning on the camera and I really don’t like others seeing me wearing
pajamas in my bedroom” (S23). Another concern was raised by
S2, who complained about the inconvenience of using the video
modality when she was practicing calligraphy in class: “previously,
since the instructor would be in the classroom, the instructor could
provide immediate feedback to each student if he/she found something
wrong; now we have to show our calligraphy with the front camera
after we are finished. Thus, we cannot receive feedback in time” (S2).
Text box. Text box was used frequently throughout the live
stream sessions by students. Students would use the text box for
various purposes such as greetings (S12 & S20), asking questions
(S5, S20 & S23), discussing problems (S6, S25 & S27), providing
feedback to instructors (S10 & S21), etc. “Because the comments were
not anonymous, we were cautious when sending comments”, said S25.
The majority of the interviewees made similar observations to S25’s.
Many of them also reported that “discussing problems in the text box
made us closer” (S12), pointing out that thinking about other peers’
questions was inspirational, and assisted with their own learning.
On the other hand, teachers attended to the text box less frequently than students according to the interview. For example, both
T1 and T4 admitted that they rarely checked the text box since they
“forgot to check it while teaching” (T4). Other instructor interviewees
said they primarily used the text box to post simple quizzes (T2),
collect feedback from students (T2), and answer students’ questions (T3 & T5). In addition, the text box does not appear on the
screen unless a user clicks on it. During a live streaming class, the
instructor would check the text box at a specific time – normally toward the end of the class, since “checking the text box too frequently
would interrupt the pace of the class” (S10). Thus, according to S6,
“instructors rarely answer questions immediately, creating some gaps
between students’ discussion and the instructor”.
Danmaku. Besides the text box, danmaku was another modality
used frequently by the students throughout the LS classes. Danmaku

Chen and Cao, et al.

refers to a form of user comments that are displayed over videos [47].
In the scenario of live streaming, danmakus are real-time user
comments that are displayed over the live video [44]. During LS
classes, students can send danmaku at any time, and it is displayed
in real-time at the top of the screen, visible to everyone in the
class, including the instructor. Danmaku would appear at the top
right of the screen, and move from right to left, and eventually
disappear. Unlike the text box, danmaku was anonymous, which
made the comments “less formal and much more casual” (S12), and
thus “encouraging more students, especially those who were too shy
to speak up in front of people and to participate in the class” and
“building a stronger tie between the instructor and the students” (S8).
The majority of the students from the interview provided comments
similar to S8’s, including S4, S6, S12, S16, S18, S20, S27, etc.
Some students, e.g., S6, S12 & S27, expressed their concerns
towards danmaku in that sometimes sending danmaku could be
contagious, and lots of irrelevant and useless danmakus might “interrupt the class and distract people’s attention” (S6). This issue could
be prevented if users clicked the "disable danmaku" button. For example, S29 chose to disable danmaku during one of her classes
when “the instructor said something very funny, and everyone started
to send ‘haha’ or amusing emojis” to avoid distraction. Another concern is that danmaku cannot be saved, but sometimes “the danmaku
content can be essential to learning and worthy of being saved” (S18).
Similar perspectives were also expressed by S6 and S8.
Unlike students who were enthusiastic about danmaku, teachers
rarely used it. As T2 commented, “danmaku is more of a communication tool between students than between us and students”, and T1,
T2, and T3 each reflected that they rarely checked danmaku or did
not check it at all. Moreover, although T4 always paid attention to
danmaku during class since there were some “valuable questions”,
he mentioned a drawback of danmaku that “sometimes students
send long and complicated danmaku, but those danmakus just slipped
away so quickly that I cannot catch them”.
Quiz. Quizzes were occasionally assigned to students during LS
classes (see Figure 2(c) as a demonstration). Most instructors used
the quiz to test “whether students paid attention in class” and to
“get some feedback from students” so that they could adjust their
teaching schedules accordingly (T2). T4 also mentioned that quizzes
could remind students to focus on the class if they got distracted.
Correspondingly, from students’ point of view, e.g. S6 & S16, solving
quizzes was indeed “helpful in maintaining concentration in class”
(S6). Moreover, some student interviewees, including S18 & S20,
also agreed with the instructors that “quizzes were an efficient way
to reflect on our [the students’] understanding of the materials so that
the instructor can adjust the pace and materials based on quiz results”
(S20).
A quiz consisted primarily of simple multiple-choice questions.
Some instructors mentioned in the interview that they would have
liked to try some short-answer questions, but this would have
caused technical issues, including inaccurate “character recognition”
(T2). T4 also reflected that most quizzes could not “reflect students’
understanding comprehensively” due to their limited length and
form.
Technical instability was reported by students while taking
quizzes. Since in most cases there would be a grade for the quiz

Learning from Home: A Mixed-Methods Analysis of Live Streaming Based Remote Education Experience
in Chinese Colleges during the COVID-19 Pandemic

which might affect one’s grade point average (GPA), technical issues could significantly affect students’ grades. According to S7
and S8, some of their classmates encountered technical issues with
the quizzes: “there was one time when my friend could not submit
the quiz due to a technical software issue and got a zero on it” (S7).
Furthermore, many students reported that taking classes remotely
made them lose focus on class, which consequently affected their
performances on quizzes: S5 mentioned that sometimes he “made
many mistakes on simple questions when I [he] felt distracted and
asleep”.
Vote. During live streaming sessions, the instructor would sometimes use votes (as shown in Figure 2(c)) to better understand students. Unlike taking quizzes, votes would not generate scores or
affect students’ grades. For instance, S25 mentioned that his teacher
had initiated a vote to choose “submitting an electronic version of
homework or taking pictures and then uploading them” (S25), and
S29 reported that in one of their art history classes, the instructor
had initiated a vote on students’ preferences on works of art. Based
on the vote, the instructor would focus on the most favored ones
during the class, which “makes the materials of the class more fascinating and humanized” (S29). Moreover, some interviewees, e.g.
S6 and S8, reflected that votes “encouraged more participation in
the class, inspired more discussions, and thus made us [students] feel
more focused and energetic”.

4.2

Individual Learning Experience Under LS
Learning

Besides specific interaction features, students and instructors also
illustrated how students’ overall learning experiences were shaped
by live streaming-based remote education under the COVID-19 pandemic. Here three major aspects of individual learning experience
arise: study time, focus and engagement, and learning outcomes.
Similar or longer study time. Some students, including S5, S9,
S10, S16, S21 & S25, reported that they spent approximately the
same amount of time on studies compared to the pre-pandemic
traditional learning. As reported by S21, “we just followed the same
schedule before the pandemic outbreak, so there were not many differences: same classes, same workload, same people” (S21). However,
many other students in our interview study reported that they were
studying longer time under LS learning. Many of these interviewees
attributed this to decreased study efficiency (e.g., S2, S3, S6, S14,
S20). As reported by student participants, their study efficiency
was lowered due to the decrease in concentration (S2, S3, S6, S18,
etc.). We would talk about the reasons for students’ decreasing
concentration during LS learning in more detail in Section 4.2.2.
Some interviewees also reflected that they had spent more time
searching for extra-resources (S29), reviewing class recordings (S2,
S6), and doing homework, since peer collaborations and discussions, which benefit a lot for course understanding and homework
completion, were hard to organize online (S11 & S29). This increase
in study time per course was further corroborated by our survey:
37% of students reported an increase in time on average for each
course; in comparison, 22% of students reported a decrease.
Besides self-study time, it is also noted that non-study issues
took up much time that should have been dedicated to studies
during live streaming sessions from the interview. Several students,

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

including S3, S18, S20, S23, and S27, reported that they had spent less
time on actual studying in lectures because of technical difficulties.
According to S23 and S27, there was lots of in-class time wasted on
adjusting equipment and questions such as asking whether others
could hear them. This cut into the amount of actual learning time
during the lecture.
Decreased focus and engagement. Almost all interview participants reported low study efficiency at home. They found it difficult
to focus on live streaming videos, and this reduced their studying
productivity. As commented by S10, “I kept telling myself that I
should be productive and focus on the instructor, but I always got
distracted by some trivial stuff while staring at the screen and when
I realized I was not paying attention to the class, I was already far
behind ... so I just gave up on this class and did my own stuff”. Many
student interviewees, including S1, S3, S4, S7, S14, S18, and S25,
expressed experiences similar to those of S10’s. Our survey also
supported this conclusion: 43% of students reported a decrease in
concentration, but only 27% of students reported an increase.
Much of this phenomenon has been attributed to the change in
the environment as indicated by our interviews: from campus, a
community-based public area consisting of various facilities such
as libraries, dormitories, and classrooms, to home, an individual
private area with limited resources. The absence of peers physically
around and the lack of a community-based learning environment
were mentioned as two leading factors in the decreased focus, engagement, and productivity. “At my own home, I was just not in
the mood to study”, said S29, “and I really missed libraries since
looking at peers studying in libraries would motivate me to study”.
S7 also conveyed the same feelings, “in libraries there are a lot of
students studying, but now there is only me, which makes me feel
very lonely”. Moreover, according to S25, “since there were no people
around me, I did not feel any pressure to study”, and thus she felt
she could “do whatever I [she] want[s] and allow[s] myself [herself]
to get distracted”. The survey also reflected similar results that the
mean score of whether remote learning created a good intellectual
environment decreased from 3.14 in Fall 2019 to 3.07 in Spring 2020.
A drop of 0.07 supported the finding that a less satisfactory learning
environment during remote learning. However, this drop did not
reach 1/3 of the standard deviation and we concluded that not a
meaningful educational effect was spotted through our survey.
Multitasking [4, 14] was a leading consequence of the changes in
the study environment. Without the instructor’s supervision, many
students from the interview reported that they spent most of their
time playing on their phones. Conversely, in a traditional classroom,
students admitted that they would not have used their phones as
frequently since “obviously the instructor could see me [them]” (S2).
In addition, S9 described another common multitasking situation:
“I used to listen to peers carefully when they would ask or answer
questions; however, now I always browse websites while other students
are talking”, and situations such as eating (S11) or even sleeping
(S15) while taking LS courses are also mentioned.
Apart from multitasking, interruption was another consequence
of the changes in the study environment. Many interviewees said
that there was always trivial stuff happening at home which would
interrupt the ongoing lecture. For example, “sometimes there were
people knocking at the door so I need to open the door” (S27) or “my

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

mom suddenly asked me to help her move the table” (S21). Consequently, those domestic interruptions strongly distracted students’
attention from the class.
In addition, fatigue was also a common problem with learning
from home. The majority of the interviewees, including S5, S6, and
S8, reflected that after staring at the screen for a long time, they
felt dizzy, exhausted, and heavy-eyed. As S5 described, “on Tuesday,
I have classes from 8 am to 12:15 pm, then have lunch, and then take
classes from 1:30 pm to 3:05 pm. During this process, I just feel so dizzy
staring at the screen in my room. (I) could not concentrate. However,
when I looked at the blackboard in a real classroom, I do not feel this
tired ... I am supposed to do homework in the evening, but I just don’t
feel like studying or doing any work. And days just pass like this. Very
inefficient and wasted. I also don’t get the chance to talk to people
(in real person), to go out for a walk, or to do sports, which should
ameliorate fatigue.” (S5)
Learning outcomes. In terms of learning outcomes, not only
grades but also knowledge mastery through theory and practice
and social skills are investigated so as to better understand students’
overall learning performances. From the perspective of grading,
most interviewees reported that their grades had been affected little
by the switch to LS class (e.g., S2, S4, S5, S6, S7, S11 & S12). As S21
explained: “The instructor teaches the same materials as before, and
the only difference is that now we take virtual classes”. The result of
the survey was also parallel to S21’s comment. According to the
survey, students gave relatively similar scores on whether instructors had a clear and helpful course structure (AVE(Fall 2019)=3.21
vs. AVE(Spring 2020)=3.17) and whether the course developed
critical thinking during remote learning (AVE(Fall 2019)=3.21 vs.
AVE(Spring 2020)=3.20) on average.
Several interviewees, e.g., S8, S14 & S16, shared that their grades
had been higher than before because they felt “the instructors were
less harsh on grades and gave relatively higher GPA” (S16). When we
interviewed teachers about the grading policies, some instructors,
including T2, T3 & T5, did acknowledge that they had given openbook exams and were more generous in grading due to online
learning. Some other students attributed higher grades to the more
effective virtual teaching environment. According to S1 and S8,
they got higher grades since they felt live streaming classes made
them “listen to the instructor more clearly” (S8) and “there would not
be any noises or chatting by students during a live streaming class”
(S1). A few interviewees reported lower grades because of remote
education due to the change in environment, as was explained in
detail in Section 4.2.2. “I just did not have a feeling of studying”,
S3 commented, “since there was no peer pressure to motivate me to
study”.
From the theoretical perspective of knowledge mastery, there
seems to be little difference between traditional learning and LS
learning. The survey suggested similar scores on how well students
had mastered field-specific knowledge and skills: a drop from 3.31
in Fall 2019 to 3.27 in Spring 2020 was spotted, creating a small
difference that did not reach 1/3 of the standard deviation and thus
not showing a meaningful effect. Similar perspectives were also
expressed in the interviews. The majority of interviewed students
reported that they did not think they had mastered more or less
material than they had in traditional learning (e.g., S1, S8, S18, S23

Chen and Cao, et al.

& S27) since “the materials that were required to understand did not
change” (S27).
Besides theories, practice was also essential to the mastery of
course materials. Many students complained about their laboratory
courses or courses that involved real-world practices. As the survey
indicated, the average score of whether remote learning promotes
research experiences dropped from 2.31 in Fall 2019 to 2.15 in Spring
2020. With a drop of 0.16 that exceeds 1/3 of the standard deviation,
a meaningful education effect was observed. This is corroborated by
the interview study as well. For example, S4, S5, S6, S16, and S27 all
studied engineering-related majors. All of them mentioned they had
struggled while conducting experiments remotely. S5 complained
that since it was impossible to conduct experiments remotely, “the
teacher sent us [students] a photograph of the apparatus and asked
us [students] to draw pictures based on the photograph ... the photo
was too vague to reflect the 3D structure in detail ... we could only use
imagination to draw”. S20 also pointed out that in one of her classes,
students were supposed to provide legal aid to people, but this
real-world practice of law was canceled and changed to online case
reviews. “The whole class just became pointless”, S20 commented.
Some students reported good online practice. For example, S29
reflected: “Live streaming sessions actually brought new forms and
inspired students. For example, in one of my modern art history classes,
there was a presentation session. Normally in a traditional class,
we would just make a PPT for the presentation. However, in a live
streaming presentation session, many students were inspired to use
more innovative forms, such as animation and mindmap.”
Other than academic aptitude, socializing was also important to
college students to maintain mental health [54]. Many interviewees,
including S21 & S27, expressed that they were afraid of the gradual
loss of in-person communication ability, if remote classes were
instituted as a long-term policy. As reported by S21, “although we
could chat through audio or some chatting software, that kind of daily
casual interaction kind of disappears” (S21). S29 agreed with S21
and added that he felt due to the loss of daily casual interaction
with peers, “it was kind of ‘cheaper’ to communicate online, and I
felt I was getting lazy and gradually losing the ability to make real
in-person conversations with people”. The results of the interviews
were parallel with those of the survey. From the perspective of
students, the mean score of social skills dropped from 3.19 for Fall
2019 semester to 3.03 for Spring 2020 semester, which makes a
decrease of 0.16 that surpasses 1/3 of the standard deviation and
thus suggests a meaningful educational effect.

4.3

Collaborative Learning Experience Under
LS Learning

In terms of collaborative learning experiences under LS learning,
three kinds of experiences emerge: 1) the instructor-student interaction experience, 2) the student-student interaction experience,
and 3) the sense of community.
Instructor-student interaction: most experience closer relationships. According to the survey, the average interaction score
between teachers and students, from the students’ perspectives,
increased from 3.19 in Fall 2019 to 3.22 in Spring 2020, where the
increase does not reach 1/3 of the standard deviation and thus does
not demonstrate a meaningful education effect. However, in our

Learning from Home: A Mixed-Methods Analysis of Live Streaming Based Remote Education Experience
in Chinese Colleges during the COVID-19 Pandemic

interview study, many students did report that they had developed
a closer relationship with their instructors. S7, S8, S16, S18, S20,
S25, S27, and S29 each mentioned that live streaming-based classes,
especially the text box and the danmaku, had made them feel “more
relaxed, less awkward, and more motivated to respond to teachers”
(S29). “I really like the text box”, S7 said, “since we can comment
or ask questions whenever we want without interrupting the class”.
Similarly, S25 commented about the danmaku modality that “we
don’t need to raise our hands and wait to be called anymore ... we can
always send a danmaku whenever we want to say something”. Many
students, including S8, S27 & S29, also reflected that the anonymity
of danmaku encouraged more students to participate in class, and
thus “shorten[ed] the distance between teachers and us [students]”
(S20). Furthermore, S29 not only reported more frequent conversations with the instructor in class, but also after class: “due to live
streaming classes, I found some of my teachers were actually very
friendly and interesting, and I had not felt this way before. Sometimes
we would send funny danmaku during the class, and the way our
instructor responded was as if he was our friend. After class, I would
directly send messages to the instructor if I had questions.” (S29)
A few student interviewees reported an equal or a more distant
relationship between themselves and their teachers. S9 and S21 felt
that their relationships with teachers had become neither closer
nor more distant since “we [students] were having classes just as
before and we [students] never felt close to teachers ever” (S21). For
some students, their perceptions of instructor-student relationships
may have changed over time. For example, S10 emphasized that in
the beginning of the live streaming remote education, he had not
been used to having conversations with teachers through online
chatting, so he “felt distant with the teachers in the beginning” (S10);
but soon he acclimated to the new learning mode and no longer felt
the same way anymore. Moreover, S8 mentioned that although he
felt “psychologically closer to the instructor”, he also felt “physically
distant from the instructor” (S8).
Contrary to the closer student-instructor relationship reported
by most students, some teachers felt that interaction with students
was less efficient and that they had a more distant relationship with
students because they could not see students’ faces during a livestreaming session. As we explained in Section 4.1.2, in most cases
students would turn off their videos due to network instability.
Many instructors mentioned in our interview that the inability
to see students’ faces during LS classes would impede “some of
the emotional attachment” and “instantaneous feedback” between
teachers and students (T4). As T4 reflected: “As a teacher, I can see
whether students understand the materials through their eyes and
their stares. If many students look really confused, I can immediately
receive this feedback from their faces and explain the material again.
In addition, recognizing students’ faces is significant to me since it
makes me feel close to students emotionally”. (T4) However, this was
relatively hard to maintain when courses are turned online.
Furthermore, according to most interviewed instructors, this loss
of instantaneous instructor-student feedback decreased teaching
efficiency. For example, T1 described: “I could not see students, and I
did not know what they were doing. They might have been playing
computer games or chatting with friends while I was teaching. They
could have been doing whatever they wanted ... This is definitely a

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

disadvantage of remote learning: significantly decreased teaching efficiency. A traditional class feels like a group discussion: both students
and I contribute to the class; a remote class feels like me talking to
myself. I don’t know how well students understood the materials or
what the teaching pace should be.” (T1)
Instructors tried various means to cope with this loss of real-time
feedback: calling on students to answer questions (T1), using the
chat box to answer students’ questions (T7), asking students to
turn on their cameras occasionally (T1), and staying after classes or
providing additional office hours sessions to talk to students (T6). In
addition, some instructors did mention that some modalities of LS
learning had indeed increased teaching efficiency. For example, T2
mentioned that giving quizzes during the class increased teaching
efficiency since she could receive students’ grades immediately for
a sense of their performance. These means did allow teachers to
build closer relationships with students on average. According to
the survey, the average score of interaction between teachers and
students from the perspectives of teachers increased from 3.47 in
Fall 2019 semester to 3.52 in Spring 2020 semester. However, the
increase did not prove to hold a meaningful education effect since
it did not reach 1/3 of the standard deviation.
Student-student interaction: most experience more distant
relationships. In terms of interactions between students, our survey result suggested a decrease in student-student interaction. Students’ average score on student-student interaction decreased from
2.88 for Fall 2019 to 2.74 for Spring 2020, where a drop of 0.14
exceeds 1/3 of the standard deviation and indicates a meaningful
education effect. Although student-student experience involved
various scenarios, participants in our interviews discussed this subject mainly through two lenses: studying and leisure interaction.
In terms of students’ interactions during their study time, what
was frequently mentioned is student-student interactions during
peer collaborations. For the latter part, special attention was paid
to activities unrelated to academics and social interaction between
students during their leisure time.
Many students reported less frequent interaction with other
students and decreased work efficiency during online group work
according to the survey: the mean score of students to report working effectively with each other decreased from 3.18 in Fall 2019 to
2.95 in Spring 2020, creating a meaningful education effect where
the 0.23 drop exceeded 1/3 of the standard deviation. This is in
line with what was reported in our interview study. S7 and S14
reflected that rather than actually collaborating, they simply split
the work by assigning work to each group member, and during the
process of group collaboration, there was no other communication.
What’s more, our interview indicated that some students may lack
the motivation to attend online meetings and cooperate (S10 & S14).
For example, according to S10, there were always “some members
who never showed up to the meeting and did not reply to any messages in the group chat”. Although sometimes this is also the case
for the offline settings, with a layer of screen mediated, cases like
this are more likely to happen (S10 & S14). Moreover, in a traditional meeting, students often booked a room so that all members
could work together, where “each group member would know other
members’ progress and give feedback immediately if something is
going wrong” (S10) and “a sense of collaboration was sensed” (S15).
However, when collaborations were turned online and peers were

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

segregated physically, “not a sense that we are working together”
(S15) was felt. Students felt rather isolated and collaborations sometimes turned to the mere “assigning tasks to each individual and
checking the progress of each other one by one” (S10). In addition,
since setting up a remote meeting for every group member was hard
due to students’ different schedules, the chat box was frequently
used to discuss ideas. In this way, group members would communicate asynchronously. S10 and S20 both disliked the deficiency of
this asynchronicity, reporting that sometimes it was “hard to use
text to convey the exact information” (S20) and kind of “a waste of
time while waiting for others’ responses” (S20).
On the other hand, some student interviewees reported an increase in student-student interaction, as well as increased study
efficiency. As discussed in Sections 4.1.3 and 4.1.4, the chat box and
danmaku stimulated a significant increase in communication between students, and some student interviewees reported “a deeper
understanding of the materials” (S12) and higher study efficiency
since “teachers did not have time to answer every question immediately” (S12) while other students can provide the expected answers
in real-time. Furthermore, contrary to students who complained
about the asynchronous communication of the chat box, S7 argued
that this asynchronicity indeed “motivate[d] me to think more and
think deeper before typing”, thus “creating more accurate, useful, and
efficient conversations” (S7).
In terms of students’ interactions during leisure time, as revealed
by our interview, the majority of the students felt more distant
in their relationships with peers due to the absence of in-person
interactions. As S3 reflected on his feelings about taking a new class
with no acquaintances: “I just don’t know how to start a conversation
online. In a normal class, when I walk into the classroom and take
a look at everyone, I will develop some senses of the peers: who they
are, what are their majors, etc. But now, everyone is just a ‘name’
appearing on the screen. Before the remote learning, it was natural to
get to know people and initiate some conversation: I would say ‘hi’ to
people who were sitting near me or have natural conversations about
the class. Later we would add each other on social media and maybe
study together. This process went smoothly. However, remote classes
make this process very weird and awkward.” (S3) Many participants
agreed with S3, e.g., S2, S8, S9, S10, etc., that they had made fewer
friends during live streaming classes than in the traditional faceto-face settings. Furthermore, as discussed in Section 4.2.3, some
participants reported a decline of in-person social skills, which
could be a serious problem in the long run.
Weaker sense of community. Sense of community [50, 51] also
stands out in terms of collaborative learning experiences, which
pointed out that interaction is a critical factor of a community
structure. Given that most students reported weaker relationships
with their peers, as stated in Section 4.3.2, it is no surprise that the
majority of students reported a lower perceived class-based sense
of community. As mentioned before, the lack of visual impressions
and face-to-face interactions both contributed to weaker social ties
between students. In our interview, S7, S9, and S10 all made similar
comments: students “did not know what other peers or the instructor
looked like” (S7) and nor did they “talk a lot after class” (S9). As S10
concluded, “although we had classes together, classmates seemed to be
very far away, and I did not feel like I knew them, not to mention being
close to them”. A few student interviewees felt the opposite way. For

Chen and Cao, et al.

instance, S16 reported a stronger class-based sense of community.
According to S16, in a traditional class, “people just come to listen to
the lecture and go”, but in a live streaming class, “everyone’s name is
displayed on the screen”. In line with what has been manifested by
Sun, Wang, and Carroll [63], this visibility of recognizable names
kind of “reinforce(s) a feeling of connection between us”.
To better understand the overall experiences of students, we
turn to the result of our large-scale survey study. Comparing the
experience of participation in class activities in Spring 2020 semester (AVE(Spring 2020)=3.60) with Fall 2019 semester (AVE(Fall
2019)=3.76), a decrease by 0.14 was spotted, which was around 1/3
of the standard deviation and thus could be considered as a meaningful educational effect. Therefore, we concluded that a weaker
sense of community was experienced on average on the class level.
At the level of school-based sense of community, weaker schoolbased feelings of connection were reported by most student interviewees. The absence of an environment – campus – was the most
primary reason. The interviews showed that physical presence on
campus was essential to students’ feelings of connection to the university. For example, according to S6, “when I was on campus, every
day I would go to the dining hall, the teaching building, the dorm,
and the library. However, now the only space I can move between is
from one room to another room at home” (S6). Since the physical
presence of campus strengthens students’ shared identity as part
of a school-based community, its absence weakens this feeling of
connection (S6). S12 and S23 both expressed similar feelings.
Another important factor that contributed to the weaker schoolbased feelings of connection was the lack of campus activities. There
was some evidence that connections with school-based communities “may arise as a feeling of organization commitment, which
relates to people’s affinity to a group as a whole” [63]. According
to the interview, most extracurricular activities were canceled due
to the closed campus. Even if some activities could happen online,
according to S27, “many club members felt less motivated to organize
online activities since they were normally not that attractive.” Without those activities, many participants, such as S6, S7, S21 & S27,
reported a weaker or even zero sense of connection to the school.
The survey also reflected that the lack of campus activities had a
significant educational effect, since the score on participation in
public activities decreased from 2.92 in Fall 2019 to 2.54 in Spring
2020, resulting in a decrease of 0.38 which was much higher than
1/3 of the standard deviation.
A few students in our interview reported no difference in schoolbased feelings of connection between taking traditional classes and
having remote education. This happened especially when students
had acknowledged that members allowed to participate in the LS
classes had been limited to students from the same university. As
S25 suggested, “although we did not know what they [other students]
looked like during live streaming classes, we did know that they
were from [university name]. Thus, I don’t think that live streaming
classes lowered my sense of connection to [university name]”. This
corresponds with Sun, Rosson, and Carroll’s work [62], where the
common identity, in this case being a student at a certain university,
is a core driver of connections among students.

Learning from Home: A Mixed-Methods Analysis of Live Streaming Based Remote Education Experience
in Chinese Colleges during the COVID-19 Pandemic

5 DISCUSSIONS
5.1 Instructors versus Students
As indicated by Stakeholder Theory [19, 53], maintaining the balance between stakeholders’ interests is essential for cooperation.
When the scenario is specified to education, teachers and students
act as the two main stakeholders, where past research has demonstrated that both consistencies and disparities can be identified between the two stakeholders [73, 74]. Our study echos these works,
illustrating how experiences and perceptions of instructors and
students can resemble and differ from the other.
In terms of similarities, it can be derived from the interview
study that teachers could understand students’ dilemmas during
online learning and would try their best to improve the existing
issues of remote learning to further create a more ideal learning experience for students. Attention and performance were two leading
examples. To prevent students’ attention from being distracted, instructors tried to maintain students’ attention by interacting more
with students through various means: calling out students to answer
questions, giving online quizzes or voting, etc. To provide better
LS learning experiences, instructors learned to use the modalities
introduced in Section 4.1 especially for senior professors who were
not familiar with the emerging platforms. From Section 4.2.3, we
also noticed that the majority of instructors endeavored to accommodate students’ needs during remote learning. For example, many
teachers uploaded more supplementary resources to students and
made virtual experiments possible or mailed the materials required
for experiments to students to ensure that students get a good
understanding as the traditional learning scenario.
However, discrepancies between instructors and students are
shown, too. From the survey, we observed an obvious mismatch
regarding the experience and quality of remote education reported
by teachers and students. Specifically, although teachers had some
sense of the difficulties that students might encounter learning
at home, they were too optimistic about the extent of influence
brought by the change of the environment. For example, students
in the survey study reported a decrease from 3.22 in Fall 2019 to 3.00
in Spring 2020 on average regarding the entire online education
experience, where the drop of 0.22 surpasses 1/3 of the standard
deviation and thus creates a meaningful educational effect. However, teachers only reported a little drop from 3.41 to 3.40 from Fall
2019 to Spring 2020, the effect of which is far from being regarded
as meaningful. The leading examples of teachers being overly optimistic about the impacts brought by remote learning on students
included the importance of an effective learning environment, the
experience of conducting researches or practices remotely, the interactions between students, etc.
Another major gap between instructors and students related
to instructor-student interaction in LS learning. According to the
interview, almost all instructors expressed their concerns about not
seeing students’ faces during live streaming sessions. As Section
4.3.1 concluded, many instructors reported less effective interactions and more distant relationships with students because of the
loss of non-verbal expressions. However, from the perspective of
students, non-verbal expressions were not mentioned at all. As
reported by students, not showing faces to instructors did not influence their perceptions of relationships with instructors, and turning

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

on their front cameras would only help them concentrate on class
better.

5.2

Blur of Study and Life

The experiences of learning from home through LS learning has
caused the blur of the boundary between studies and lives, which
echos prior works demonstrating the impact of work from home on
work-life boundaries [31]. Specifically, as we show in Section 4.2,
most students’ actions of learning are taken at home, sometimes
even on the bed, and their only connection towards the school
settings is the screen through which LS learning takes place. Therefore, they find it relatively hard to tell whether they are in a state of
ease at home or they are in a tight mode at studies. In most cases,
a blur and blend of the two is reported. What’s more, under such
a situation, it is also rather easy to switch between the status of
studies and daily routines. In the absence of instructors’ timely
monitoring, some students have a higher tendency of multitasking while taking courses – having breakfast, playing with their
cell phones, etc., as demonstrated in Section 4.2.2, which coincides
with remote meeting multitasking behavior [4]. In line with similar
scenarios for MOOCs [70], this has led the learning process to be
more casual and lowered their learning efficiency. Their learning
processes are also more likely to be interrupted by daily necessities
at home, where their parents may have them do housework, greet
guests to their houses, etc. This may turn learning to be somehow
intermittent and lead students to miss some parts of the courses,
which is detrimental to the efficiency and effectiveness of studies.

5.3

Decoupling Learning from Home and
Learning Enabled by Live Streaming

Taken at home and enabled by live streaming, the LS learning
experience under the COVID-19 pandemic share the features of
learning from home plus learning enabled by live streaming. Here
we set out to decouple how these two features shape LS learning
experience during the COVID-19 pandemic, respectively.
Learning from home saved time for commuting. However, as
shown in Section 4.2.1, the total time for studies may not be reduced
and sometimes may even increase. This is in part because learning
from home also determines the context for learning, where the context of home calls for self-regulation and learning autonomy [66].
For rather self-disciplined students, their learning outcomes are intact or even improved because they can better manage the paces of
their studies. However, for students who are less autonomous, this
change of context can be detrimental to learning efficiency. Firstly,
when the circumstance of classrooms at school is replaced by the
comfortable home settings, as reported in Section 4.2.1, students
become more relaxed and their study status is turned more casual.
This can in turn lead students to be more likely to be distracted and
reduce the efficiency of learning. Secondly, the context of home
reduces the distance between one’s desk for learning and bed and
kitchen, which provides prerequisites for students’ multitasking
such as sleeping or eating while course taking. When students are
in lack of self-discipline, the effectiveness of education would be
impaired. Thirdly, the aforementioned interruptions mentioned in
Section 4.2.2 are also somewhat home-specific, where forces to

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

greet guests and disturbances by other family members are seldom
the case for other scenarios.
Live streaming enables features that facilitate efficient and engaging learning. Firstly, the support of multiple modalities enriches
the channels for interactions. Past researches have shown how the
incorporation of different interaction formats would benefit learning (e.g., [6, 26, 57]). Extending these works, we discover that the
various modalities enabled by LS can encourage students to more
willingly participate in the course and promote better instructorstudent communications and interactions in formal education settings. As reported by our interviewees in Section 4.3, this can in turn
bring the relationships and perceived distances between instructors
and students closer regardless of the physical segregation, which
contributes to better study experiences. Secondly, LS learning is
praised for its synchronous nature by LS learning practitioners.
The incorporation of live streaming not only makes it possible for
timely Q&A and feedbacks as mentioned in Section 4.1, but also
creates an atmosphere that the class is specially for the students
(especially when compared with MOOCs), which, as articulated by
LS learning students, increases their enthusiasm for participation
and engagement. This provides further evidence for the engaging [25, 46], immediate [23, 41], and interacting [23, 43, 44] nature
of live streaming emphasized by previous literature.

6

IMPLEMENTATIONS, IMPLICATIONS AND
FUTURE TAKEAWAYS

In this section, we present the practical implications of our research,
including guidelines for lectures under LS learning, design implications to better support LS learning, and future takeaways from LS
learning in hybrid education experiences.

6.1

LS Learning Implementations for Different
Courses and Disciplines

As revealed in Section 4, the adaptability of face-to-face education
to LS learning may vary across courses and disciplines. Here we
aim to identify the feasible implementations of live streaming based
remote education from the angle of course characteristics. In terms
of implementations for different courses, based upon instructionism
and constructionism [59], we here discuss the concrete implementations where 1) the transmission-and-acquisition style lecture of
instructionism hold: large-scale and small-scale lecture courses; 2)
the interactive constructionism pedagogy is essential: interactive
courses; and 3) hands-on practices are underlined: practice courses
and labs.
Large-scale lecture courses. Numerous courses, especially general foundation courses and engineering courses, take the form
of large-scale lectures, where the top priority is the transfer and
acquisition of knowledge as emphasized by instructionism [59]. In
these courses, not much difference between face-to-face learning
and LS learning is perceived in terms of outcomes (T4). Sometimes
when the scale of the lecture classes is sufficiently large, the learning experiences may be even better without disturbance and with
better sights of course contents (S1, S8 & S13). In most cases of this
scenario, the mere sharing of the instructors/lecturers’ audio, video,
and screen would be sufficient to enable quality studies. Students’
basic interactions such as Q&A and greetings with the instructors

Chen and Cao, et al.

can be satisfactorily accomplished by text box messages and danmakus, and learning status and effectiveness can be timely checked
through quizzes. However, if group presentations are integrated, the
sharing of students’ audio, video, and screen would be necessary.
Small-scale lecture courses. Similar to large-scale lecture courses,
the combination of textual messages, instructors’ audio, video, and
screen sharing would support the basic delivery of course contents
of small-scale lecture classes, where text box messages and danmakus support in-time interactions. One way for small-scale classes
to motivate engagement is to enable direct verbal Q&A where instructors are convenient to ask anyone and to directly check how
someone learns. However, if this function is to be supported, LS
learning platforms should allow two-way mutual audio interactions,
where students should be allowed to turn on their microphones to
voice their opinions and answers.
Interactive courses. Some courses call for the recurrent instructorstudent and student-student interactions highlighted by constructionism [59], for example, oral interpretation, case study, and group
discussion classes. If the instructor needs to frequently check students’ speakings, mutual verbal interactions between instructors
and students are indispensable. If frequent group discussions are a
must, it is anticipated that LS learning platforms should pay special attention to improving their backing on grouping. Therefore,
diversified forms of interactions including exchanges of audio and
video information between multiple people are in demand. What’s
more, to guarantee better experiences and effectiveness of peer
discussions, one possible solution would be to support the sharing
of everyone’s images and turn on everyone’s camera (at least in the
group) so as to avoid awkwardness and unfamiliarity.
Practice courses. Practice courses such as dancing, painting, and
physical education classes [18] call for frequent visual monitoring
and timely guidance and corrections. Therefore, support for both
instructors’ and students’ videos is crucial, and sometimes clarity
and smoothness is highly required in terms of the video quality (S2
& S29). Delay may be detrimental because if the timeliness for information to be passed through the instructor-student-instructor cycle
is not guaranteed, the instructions given by the instructors may
run behind what the students are actually operating, which would
reduce the virtue of the instructions. Therefore, timely feedbacks
and strong synchronization are vital.
Labs. Labs are relatively the hardest to implement through LS
learning. However, some solutions may also be provided for this
form of courses to be conducted remotely through a live streaming
format [20]. When the materials are convenient for mailing, sending the objects directly to students and letting students remotely
follow the instructors at home would be preferable (S19). When
the equipment is large and expensive but can be directly connected
to computers, changing the experiments to a computer-mediated
version would be an option (T5). Through remote control on the
computers that instruments are connected to, the experiments can
be accomplished remotely, which also allows the successful progression of labs.
Implementations of LS learning also vary across different disciplines. For example, for science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) subjects, the vast majority of professional
courses take the form of lectures (S15), where instuctionism-style
implementations would be sufficient to meet the primary needs of

Learning from Home: A Mixed-Methods Analysis of Live Streaming Based Remote Education Experience
in Chinese Colleges during the COVID-19 Pandemic

knowledge transfer and acquisition. Meanwhile, experiments and
practices are required for concrete mastery of the knowledge (T5),
where the aforementioned implementations for hands-on practices
should be taken into consideration. For art and humanity subjects,
reflections, discussions, and group seminars are indispensable for
most courses and the interactive constructionism-style implementations would be strongly preferred (S9, S18, T1 & T7).

6.2

Design Implications

Our work provides novel design implications for the HCI and CSCW
community. We demonstrate users’ usages and perceptions on different interaction features in LS learning, which can indicate the
design of future platforms to support live streaming based education of the kind. Specifically, to improve the user experiences in
LS learning and to improve the applicability of LS learning platforms, we delineate the typical features of promising LS learning
platforms.
Diverse interaction formats. It is recommended that LS learning platforms should support diverse forms of interactions, including but not limited to audio, video, text box messages, danmakus,
quizzes, and votes. In line with prior works [6, 26], we discover
that it would be plausible to enable two-way audio, video, and
screen sharing to address the demands of different courses. However, our study showcases that beyond these formats, the inclusion
of emerging modalities such as danmakus and education-specific
modalities such as quizzes and votes would also be beneficial. Text
box messages and danmakus provide two ways of textual engagements where the former is more formal while the latter is perceived
to be more relaxing and casual. Quizzes grant prompt feedbacks
of students’ learning, while votes simplify thought collection and
encourage engagement.
Balance of anonymity and real-name system. While the realname system of text box messages is appreciated, the anonymity
of danmaku is also welcomed. Therefore, for interface designers, it
is worth carefully considering whether real-name systems are integrated and to what extent and for which functions real-name systems and anonymity may be used to balance engagement, content
quality, and social relationships [5, 48, 69]. For example, a combination of real-name systems and anonymity may be a feasible choice.
With different systems integrated into different modalities, one can
find a channel suits better for him/her and for his/her words.
Activation and deactivation. To avoid disturbance, we advocate that instructors should have the right to decide if features
such as danmuku and students’ sharing of their voices and visuals
would be activated through the courses, and students should be
allowed to show or hide the messages and danmakus. From the
instructor’s perspective, it is up to him/her to decide how the course
progresses and if an interaction format is allowed; from the student
side, it would be better if he/she is allowed to adopt a learning
circumstance that suits him/her best.
Focus mode. Existing work showcases that enabling viewpoint
sharing, which act as a sort of visual focus mode, would benefit
participation [26]. Extending the past literature, we discover that
not only visual but also audio focus mode would be appreciated by
LS learners. Specifically, as mentioned by interviewees in Section
4.1.1, if someone else keeps his/her microphone on during lectures,

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

the fluency of the instructors’ speeches received by students would
deteriorate, where the students’ voices would be very bothering.
Supporting a focus mode would solve the problem to a certain
degree. It would be intriguing if users can decide their priorities
for accepting whose audio and video information. If one is allowed
to prioritize the acceptance of the instructors’ voices and visuals,
other students’ unintended vocal disturbance would not hinder
his/her studies.
Hierarchical role system. LS learning instructors and students
also appreciate the support of hierarchical role systems, which
echos the case of previous work such as Hamilton et al.’s [26].
Instructors should maintain control of the whole course, while
mediators (maybe teaching assistants and group leaders) can be
assigned some of the instructors’ rights so as to better regulate the
course. What’s more, with some of the rights only attributed to
certain roles such as group leaders, less bandwidth would be needed
for allocation and the robustness for disturbance is enhanced.
Peer work and collaboration. Support for peer work and group
collaboration is warmly welcomed. This corroborates the necessities of the explorations on peer learning and remote collaboration
in the education settings (e.g., [8, 37]). We find that instructors and
students speak highly of the ‘group discussion’ function, where
both random grouping and assigned grouping have their own merits. What’s more, instructors such as T1 call for the simultaneous
monitor of different groups so as to better control the progression
of the whole class.
Recordings and playbacks. Course recordings and playbacks
have been highly praised by most interviewed students. This is
perceived to contribute to a better understanding of the course
contents and benefit the review of lessons. For example, students are
likely to be distracted due to factors like interruptions. If recordings
and playbacks are allowed, LS learning can absorb the convenience
of pausing, rewinding, and reviewing [38, 73], where students can
replay the parts they miss or fail to understand and thus achieve
better comprehension. However, concerns on course recordings
are raised by instructors. Not only are they afraid of copyright
infringement and vicious dissemination of certain contents (T1) as
indicated by previous studies on video privacy [13, 60], but they
also express concern that too much reliance on playbacks would
lead to laziness: not keeping up with the class and only watching
all the playbacks before exams, which would cause a significant
drop in the effectiveness of learning (T7).

6.3

Future Takeaways

Discussions are also made on what can be derived from the experiences of live streaming based remote education during the specific
period of the COVID-19 pandemic. Here we demonstrate the future
takeaways that can be extracted for post-pandemic education.
Firstly, experiences from LS learning shed light on the promising
future of hybrid learning, where the advantages of online and offline
learning may be integrated in a similar way as ‘hybrid work’ [24].
Specifically, there is the possibility that certain interaction features
of LS learning may be kept for utilization in post-pandemic periods.
For example, the allowance of chatbox and danmaku may enhance
instructor-student interactions and benefit the sharing of different

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

perspectives which may contribute to a more active class atmosphere. The usage of quizzes and votes would enable instructors to
have first-hand knowledge of students’ current knowledge mastery,
which helps instructors to accordingly adjust their teaching in time.
With related areas demonstrating the effectiveness of real-time text
chat [25, 32], live stream [23] and in-course quizzes [38, 57], it is
reasonable to anticipate improved learning experience of traditional
classes through the incorporation of diverse modalities. Hamilton
et al.’s work [26] would be a representative attempt, where there is
still room for further improvements for the incorporation of further
features such as quizzes.
Secondly, LS learning demonstrates the possibilities of effective
distant education. Although platforms such as MOOCs have been
available for distance learning for years, the outcomes of the learning on those platforms can be far from satisfactory (S15), where
"courses are seldom treated seriously" (S21). However, with engaging [25, 46], immediate [23, 41], and interacting [23, 43, 44] live
streaming, LS learning provides a means with real-time interactions with the instructor, where students feel that "a live person is
teaching for you" (S14) rather than "I feel I am not taking a course at
all" (S11). Therefore, for future design targeting at improving the
effectiveness of distance learning, we advocate following the line of
works utilizing live streaming [6, 25, 41, 43–45, 72] and considering
LS learning.
Thirdly, some defects still lie within LS learning which future HCI
and CSCW researchers may take into consideration. For example,
students feel it easy to be distracted because of a lack of formal study
context. One possible direction for addressing the problem may be
to set up a ‘real’ virtual classroom space for interactions, possibly
through technologies such as virtual reality (VR). Existing works
have already taken the first steps to enable virtual environments for
education and the simulation of gestures and facial expressions for
learning [21]. We call on future efforts to compensate for the defects
reported by our participants while maintaining and even improving
the advantages of LS learning through emerging technologies.

Chen and Cao, et al.

8

CONCLUSION

In this paper, we study live streaming based education experiences
during the COVID-19 pandemic through mixed methods. With a
focus on Chinese higher education, we carried out semi-structured
interviews on 30 students and 7 instructors from diverse disciplines,
meanwhile launched a large-scale survey covering 6291 students
and 1160 instructors, and analyzed user experiences on LS education. Our findings suggest LS learning do help student and teachers
achieve their education goal to a great extent under remote setting,
yet there are several key challenges emerging under the current
paradigm, including students’ difficulties in paying continuous attention, decreased learning efficacy, and lack of engagement and
collaboration. We further demonstrate how various interaction formats enable several novel learning experiences under LS learning,
which contribute to variations in instructor-student and studentstudent relationships in both positive and negative ways. Based
on our findings, we propose important design guidelines and insights to better support current remote learning experiences during
the pandemic, and systematically discuss design implications to
construct future collaborative education supporting systems and
experiences post-pandemic.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by The National Key Research
and Development Program of China under grant 2020AAA0106000,
the National Natural Science Foundation of China under U1936217,
61971267, 61972223, 61941117, 61861136003, Beijing Natural Science Foundation under L182038, Beijing National Research Center
for Information Science and Technology under 20031887521, and
research fund of Tsinghua University - Tencent Joint Laboratory for
Internet Innovation Technology. Yu Zhang was supported by "Dual
High" Project of Tsinghua Humanity Development titled "Tsinghua
University Online Education Policy Evaluation during Epidemic
Control".

REFERENCES

7

LIMITATIONS, GENERALIZABILITY, AND
FUTURE WORK

Our research inevitably suffers from limitations. First of all, our
data were collected in mainland China, so likely not all conclusions
will apply to different cultures. For instance, aside from Zoom, other
LS learning platforms, e.g., Tencent Meeting and Rain Classroom,
are not widely used outside mainland China. Some modes of interaction, e.g., danmaku, are more East Asian specific. Therefore,
one could expect different experiences on other platforms. Beyond
that, culturally the instructor-student relationship in East Asia is
more distant than in Western culture, so the implications of relationship may not naturally extend. Nevertheless, our study is based
on large-scale interview and survey studies where we carefully
sample participants from diverse backgrounds, which we argue
ensures the generalizability of findings in China. In the future, we
plan to extend our research to different cultures and disciplines,
and carefully tease out the cultural effect on user experiences.

[1] Pengcheng An, Saskia Bakker, Sara Ordanovski, Ruurd Taconis, Chris LE Paffen,
and Berry Eggen. 2019. Unobtrusively enhancing reflection-in-action of teachers
through spatially distributed ambient information. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–14.
[2] Hancheng Cao, Zhilong Chen, Mengjie Cheng, Shuling Zhao, Tao Wang, and
Yong Li. 2020. You Recommend, I Buy: How and Why People Engage in Instant
Messaging Based Social Commerce. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.00191 (2020).
[3] Hancheng Cao, Zhilong Chen, Fengli Xu, Tao Wang, Yujian Xu, Lianglun Zhang,
and Yong Li. 2020. When Your Friends Become Sellers: An Empirical Study of
Social Commerce Site Beidian. In Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference
on Web and Social Media, Vol. 14. 83–94.
[4] Hancheng Cao, Chia-Jung Lee, Shamsi Iqbal, Mary Czerwinski, Priscilla Wong,
Sean Rintel, Brent Hecht, Jaime Teevan, and Longqi Yang. 2021. Large Scale
Analysis of Multitasking Behavior During Remote Meetings. In the 2021 CHI
conference on human factors in computing systems. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3411764.3445243
[5] Hancheng Cao, Vivian Yang, Victor Chen, Yu Jin Lee, Lydia Stone, N’godjigui Junior Diarrassouba, Mark E. Whiting, and Michael S. Bernstein. 2020. My Team
Will Go On: Differentiating High and Low Viability Teams through Team Interaction. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 4, CSCW3, Article 230 (2020), 27 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3432929
[6] Di Chen, Dustin Freeman, and Ravin Balakrishnan. 2019. Integrating Multimedia Tools to Enrich Interactions in Live Streaming for Language Learning. In
Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
1–14.
[7] Zhilong Chen, Hancheng Cao, Fengli Xu, Mengjie Cheng, Tao Wang, and Yong
Li. 2020. Understanding the Role of Intermediaries in Online Social E-commerce:

Learning from Home: A Mixed-Methods Analysis of Live Streaming Based Remote Education Experience
in Chinese Colleges during the COVID-19 Pandemic

[8]

[9]
[10]

[11]
[12]
[13]

[14]
[15]

[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]
[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]
[29]
[30]
[31]
[32]

An Exploratory Study of Beidian. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer
Interaction 4, CSCW2 (2020), 1–24.
Hao-Fei Cheng, Bowen Yu, Siwei Fu, Jian Zhao, Brent Hecht, Joseph Konstan,
Loren Terveen, Svetlana Yarosh, and Haiyi Zhu. 2019. Teaching UI design at
global scales: A case study of the design of collaborative capstone projects for
MOOCs. In Proceedings of the Sixth (2019) ACM Conference on Learning@ Scale.
1–11.
Derrick Coetzee, Armando Fox, Marti A Hearst, and Bjoern Hartmann. 2014.
Chatrooms in MOOCs: all talk and no action. In Proceedings of the first ACM
conference on Learning@ scale conference. 127–136.
Derrick Coetzee, Armando Fox, Marti A Hearst, and Björn Hartmann. 2014.
Should your MOOC forum use a reputation system?. In Proceedings of the 17th
ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work & social computing.
1176–1187.
Jacob Cohen. 2013. Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences. Academic
press.
Juliet Corbin and Anselm Strauss. 2014. Basics of qualitative research: Techniques
and procedures for developing grounded theory. Sage publications.
Matthew S Crow, Jamie A Snyder, Vaughn J Crichlow, and John Ortiz Smykla.
2017. Community perceptions of police body-worn cameras: The impact of views
on fairness, fear, performance, and privacy. Criminal Justice and Behavior 44, 4
(2017), 589–610.
Mary Czerwinski, Eric Horvitz, and Susan Wilhite. 2004. A diary study of task
switching and interruptions. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human
factors in computing systems. 175–182.
Tawanna R Dillahunt, Sandy Ng, Michelle Fiesta, and Zengguang Wang. 2016.
Do massive open online course platforms support employability?. In Proceedings
of the 19th ACM conference on computer-supported cooperative work & social
computing. 233–244.
Audubon Dougherty. 2011. Live-streaming mobile video: production as civic
engagement. In Proceedings of the 13th international conference on human computer
interaction with mobile devices and services. 425–434.
Travis Faas, Lynn Dombrowski, Alyson Young, and Andrew D Miller. 2018. Watch
me code: Programming mentorship communities on twitch. tv. Proceedings of
the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 2, CSCW (2018), 1–18.
Jia Fang. 2020. BBC Enters Tsinghua PE class. https://mp.weixin.qq.com/s/8JJP5n6E6gYUXj_02Jx8w.
R Edward Freeman and David L Reed. 1983. Stockholders and stakeholders: A
new perspective on corporate governance. California management review 25, 3
(1983), 88–106.
Peiyue Fu. 2020. Cloud experiments at home: No limits to learning at Tsinghua!
https://mp.weixin.qq.com/s/rlAuhTpVLsEvx3FKiyK5MA.
S Greenwald, Alexander Kulik, André Kunert, Stephan Beck, B Frohlich, Sue
Cobb, Sarah Parsons, and Nigel Newbutt. 2017. Technology and applications for
collaborative learning in virtual reality. (2017).
Raja Gumienny, Lutz Gericke, Matthias Wenzel, and Christoph Meinel. 2013. Supporting creative collaboration in globally distributed companies. In Proceedings
of the 2013 conference on Computer supported cooperative work. 995–1007.
Oliver L Haimson and John C Tang. 2017. What makes live events engaging on
Facebook Live, Periscope, and Snapchat. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI conference
on human factors in computing systems. 48–60.
Susan Halford. 2005. Hybrid workspace: Re-spatialisations of work, organisation
and management. New Technology, Work and Employment 20, 1 (2005), 19–33.
William A Hamilton, Oliver Garretson, and Andruid Kerne. 2014. Streaming
on twitch: fostering participatory communities of play within live mixed media.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems.
1315–1324.
William A Hamilton, Nic Lupfer, Nicolas Botello, Tyler Tesch, Alex Stacy, Jeremy
Merrill, Blake Williford, Frank R Bentley, and Andruid Kerne. 2018. Collaborative live media curation: Shared context for participation in online learning. In
Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
1–14.
Jörg Hauber, Holger Regenbrecht, Mark Billinghurst, and Andy Cockburn. 2006.
Spatiality in videoconferencing: trade-offs between efficiency and social presence.
In Proceedings of the 2006 20th anniversary conference on Computer supported
cooperative work. 413–422.
Susan B Hopper. 2014. Bringing the world to the classroom through videoconferencing and project-based learning. TechTrends 58, 3 (2014), 78–89.
Stefan Hrastinski. 2008. Asynchronous and synchronous e-learning. Educause
quarterly 31, 4 (2008), 51–55.
Jukka Hussa. 1996. Distance education in the school environment: Integrating
remote classrooms by video conferencing. Journal of Open, Flexible, and Distance
Learning 2, 1 (1996), 34–44.
Fiona Jones, Ronald J Burke, and Mina Westman. 2013. Work-life balance: A
psychological perspective. Psychology Press.
Quentin Jones, Mihai Moldovan, Daphne Raban, and Brian Butler. 2008. Empirical evidence of information overload constraining chat channel community
interactions. In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM conference on Computer supported

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

cooperative work. 323–332.
[33] Oskar Juhlin, Arvid Engström, and Erika Reponen. 2010. Mobile broadcasting:
the whats and hows of live video as a social medium. In Proceedings of the 12th
international conference on Human computer interaction with mobile devices and
services. 35–44.
[34] Sasa Junuzovic, Kori Inkpen, Rajesh Hegde, and Zhengyou Zhang. 2011. Towards
ideal window layouts for multi-party, gaze-aware desktop videoconferencing.
(2011).
[35] Ahmed Kharrufa, Sally Rix, Timur Osadchiy, Anne Preston, and Patrick Olivier.
2017. Group Spinner: recognizing and visualizing learning in the classroom
for reflection, communication, and planning. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 5556–5567.
[36] Benjamin Koehne, Patrick C Shih, and Judith S Olson. 2012. Remote and alone:
coping with being the remote member on the team. In Proceedings of the ACM
2012 conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work. 1257–1266.
[37] Yasmine Kotturi, Chinmay E Kulkarni, Michael S Bernstein, and Scott Klemmer.
2015. Structure and messaging techniques for online peer learning systems
that increase stickiness. In Proceedings of the Second (2015) ACM Conference on
Learning@ Scale. 31–38.
[38] Geza Kovacs. 2016. Effects of in-video quizzes on MOOC lecture viewing. In
Proceedings of the third (2016) ACM conference on Learning@ Scale. 31–40.
[39] Chinmay Kulkarni, Julia Cambre, Yasmine Kotturi, Michael S Bernstein, and
Scott R Klemmer. 2015. Talkabout: Making distance matter with small groups in
massive classes. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work & Social Computing. 1116–1128.
[40] Tony Lawson, Chris Comber, Jenny Gage, and Adrian Cullum-Hanshaw. 2010.
Images of the future for education? Videoconferencing: A literature review.
Technology, pedagogy and education 19, 3 (2010), 295–314.
[41] Pascal Lessel, Alexander Vielhauer, and Antonio Krüger. 2017. Expanding video
game live-streams with enhanced communication channels: A case study. In
Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
1571–1576.
[42] Yang Liu, Yu Zhang, Weifeng Qiao, Lu Zhou, and Hamish Coates. 2020. Ensuring the sustainability of university learning: Case study of a leading Chinese
University. Sustainability 12, 17 (2020), 6929.
[43] Zhicong Lu, Michelle Annett, Mingming Fan, and Daniel Wigdor. 2019. " I feel it
is my responsibility to stream" Streaming and Engaging with Intangible Cultural
Heritage through Livestreaming. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–14.
[44] Zhicong Lu, Michelle Annett, and Daniel Wigdor. 2019. Vicariously experiencing it all without going outside: A study of outdoor livestreaming in China.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 3, CSCW (2019), 1–28.
[45] Zhicong Lu, Seongkook Heo, and Daniel J Wigdor. 2018. Streamwiki: Enabling
viewers of knowledge sharing live streams to collaboratively generate archival
documentation for effective in-stream and post hoc learning. Proceedings of the
ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 2, CSCW (2018), 1–26.
[46] Zhicong Lu, Haijun Xia, Seongkook Heo, and Daniel Wigdor. 2018. You watch,
you give, and you engage: a study of live streaming practices in China. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems. 1–13.
[47] Xiaojuan Ma and Nan Cao. 2017. Video-based evanescent, anonymous, asynchronous social interaction: Motivation and adaption to medium. In Proceedings
of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social
Computing. 770–782.
[48] Xiao Ma, Jeff Hancock, and Mor Naaman. 2016. Anonymity, intimacy and selfdisclosure in social media. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI conference on human
factors in computing systems. 3857–3869.
[49] Anna Macaranas, Gina Venolia, Kori Inkpen, and John Tang. 2013. Sharing
Experiences over Video: watching video programs together at a distance. In IFIP
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction. Springer, 73–90.
[50] David W McMillan. 1996. Sense of community. Journal of community psychology
24, 4 (1996), 315–325.
[51] David W McMillan and David M Chavis. 1986. Sense of community: A definition
and theory. Journal of community psychology 14, 1 (1986), 6–23.
[52] Sanjeev Mehrotra, Wei-ge Chen, Zhengyou Zhang, and Philip A Chou. 2011. Realistic audio in immersive video conferencing. In 2011 IEEE International Conference
on Multimedia and Expo. IEEE, 1–4.
[53] Ronald K Mitchell, Bradley R Agle, and Donna J Wood. 1997. Toward a theory of
stakeholder identification and salience: Defining the principle of who and what
really counts. Academy of management review 22, 4 (1997), 853–886.
[54] Robert W Moeller and Martin Seehuus. 2019. Loneliness as a mediator for college
students’ social skills and experiences of depression and anxiety. Journal of
adolescence 73 (2019), 1–13.
[55] Veronica Ahumada Newhart and Judith S Olson. 2017. My student is a robot:
How schools manage telepresence experiences for students. In Proceedings of the
2017 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems. 342–347.
[56] Gary M Olson and Judith S Olson. 2000. Distance matters. Human–computer
interaction 15, 2-3 (2000), 139–178.

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

[57] Anthony Poon, Sarah Giroux, Parfait Eloundou-Enyegue, François Guimbretière,
and Nicola Dell. 2019. Engaging high school students in cameroon with exam
practice quizzes via sms and whatsapp. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–13.
[58] Ronald E Riggio, Kristin P Watring, and Barbara Throckmorton. 1993. Social
skills, social support, and psychosocial adjustment. Personality and Individual
Differences 15, 3 (1993), 275–280.
[59] R Keith Sawyer. 2005. The Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences. Cambridge
University Press.
[60] Andrew Senior, Sharath Pankanti, Arun Hampapur, Lisa Brown, Ying-Li Tian,
Ahmet Ekin, Jonathan Connell, Chiao Fe Shu, and Max Lu. 2005. Enabling video
privacy through computer vision. IEEE Security & Privacy 3, 3 (2005), 50–57.
[61] Amy Shannon, Alex Sciuto, Danielle Hu, Steven P Dow, and Jessica Hammer.
2017. Better Organization or a Source of Distraction? Introducing Digital Peer
Feedback to a Paper-Based Classroom. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 5545–5555.
[62] Na Sun, Mary Beth Rosson, and John M Carroll. 2018. Where is community
among online learners? Identity, efficacy and personal ties. In Proceedings of the
2018 chi conference on human factors in computing systems. 1–13.
[63] Na Sun, Xiying Wang, and Mary Beth Rosson. 2019. How Do Distance Learners Connect?. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. 1–12.
[64] Wei Sun, Yunzhi Li, Feng Tian, Xiangmin Fan, and Hongan Wang. 2019. How
Presenters Perceive and React to Audience Flow Prediction In-situ: An Explorative
Study of Live Online Lectures. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer
Interaction 3, CSCW (2019), 1–19.
[65] John C Tang, Gina Venolia, and Kori M Inkpen. 2016. Meerkat and periscope: I
stream, you stream, apps stream for live streams. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 4770–4780.
[66] Claire E Weinstein. 1987. Fostering learning autonomy through the use of
learning strategies. Journal of reading 30, 7 (1987), 590–595.

Chen and Cao, et al.

[67] Miaomiao Wen, Keith Maki, Steven Dow, James D Herbsleb, and Carolyn Rose.
2017. Supporting virtual team formation through community-wide deliberation.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 1, CSCW (2017), 1–19.
[68] Mark E Whiting, Allie Blaising, Chloe Barreau, Laura Fiuza, Nik Marda, Melissa
Valentine, and Michael S Bernstein. 2019. Did It Have To End This Way? Understanding the Consistency of Team Fracture. Proceedings of the ACM on HumanComputer Interaction 3, CSCW (2019), 1–23.
[69] Mark E Whiting, Irena Gao, Michelle Xing, N’godjigui Junior Diarrassouba, Tonya
Nguyen, and Michael S Bernstein. 2020. Parallel Worlds: Repeated Initializations
of the Same Team To Improve Team Viability. Proceedings of the ACM on HumanComputer Interaction 4, CSCW1 (2020), 1–22.
[70] Xiang Xiao and Jingtao Wang. 2017. Undertanding and detecting divided attention
in mobile mooc learning. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. 2411–2415.
[71] Bin Yang and Cheng Huang. 2020. Turn crisis into opportunity in response to
COVID-19: experience from a Chinese University and future prospects. Studies
in Higher Education (2020), 1–12.
[72] Saelyne Yang, Changyoon Lee, Hijung Valentina Shin, and Juho Kim. 2020. Snapstream: Snapshot-based Interaction in Live Streaming for Visual Art. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
1–12.
[73] Saijing Zheng, Mary Beth Rosson, Patrick C Shih, and John M Carroll. 2015.
Understanding student motivation, behaviors and perceptions in MOOCs. In
Proceedings of the 18th ACM conference on computer supported cooperative work &
social computing. 1882–1895.
[74] Saijing Zheng, Pamela Wisniewski, Mary Beth Rosson, and John M Carroll.
2016. Ask the instructors: Motivations and challenges of teaching massive open
online courses. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer-Supported
Cooperative Work & Social Computing. 206–221.

