Possibility to create a coronavirus sensor using an optically
excited electrical signal
Ognyan Ivanov,1, ∗ Peter Todorov,1 and Zhivko Stoyanov1

arXiv:2010.01965v1 [physics.app-ph] 30 Aug 2020

1

Georgi Nadjakov Institute of Solid State Physics, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences,
72 Tzarigradsco Chaussee Blvd., Sofia, 1784, Bulgaria

Abstract
The research of our team has led to a series of new experimental results, revealing the so-called
electromagnetic echo effect (EMEE). The EMEE signal is highly sensitive even to small changes
in the composition and properties of the object under study - gas, liquid, or solid. The method
is fast and contactless, provides real-time analysis, and can be considered universal. We have an
idea to create a sensor to detect COVID-19 in three cases - in the air, on hard surfaces, and in
fluids from the human body. The approach involves detecting specific reactions to the virus, even
if they are invisible without specialized equipment. Our experience shows that the EMEE signal
is very sensitive to weak or practically imperceptible reactions. Therefore, we believe that it is
quite possible to register the presence of COVID-19. We have many experimental results in this
regard that support this idea. We have experience in creating sensors to monitor the processes,
composition, and properties of fluids (including biological ones), as well as to detect pollution and
contamination in the atmosphere.

∗

ogi124@yahoo.com, tel: +359 89 99 77 880

1

INTRODUCTION

In recent years, researchers from the Institute of Solid State Physics (ISSP), Bulgarian
Academy of Sciences, discovered and developed the so-called Electromagnetic Echo Effect
(EMEE) [1], previously known as surface photo charge effect [2, 3]. The effect is based
on the interaction of any solid body with an electromagnetic field, which generates in the
body an alternating, electric signal with the same frequency as the frequency of the incident
field [4].
As EMEE voltage can be generated for every type of matter, the method offers convenient,
fast and accurate measurements, and might be applied to virtually any substance. Last but
not least, EMEE-based devices are rather cost-effective, as compared with the conventional
ones, in terms of both investment and running costs, being thereby capable of low-cost
sensing tests.
The need for finding suitable sensors for detection of coronaviruses has become more
pressing, as the number of patients with severe respiratory syndromes has increased over
the last 10 years, with viruses such as SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV and, more recently, SARSCoV2 or better known as COVID-19 [5] responsible for most of them.
The ISSP research team elaborates a work plan to create and implement sensors for
coronaviruses.

SENSORS BASED ON ELECTROMAGNETIC ECHO EFFECT

According to the experimental results, EMEE is induced by electromagnetic field irradiation with frequency in not only the visible and the adjacent regions of the spectrum, but
also with frequencies ranging from 1 Hz up to 1 GHz. The effect is expected to occur in the
entire electromagnetic spectral range. No studies have been done in the area between 1 GHz
and infrared and for frequencies higher than the ultraviolet range. In these cases, expensive
specialised equipment is needed. At low electromagnetic field frequencies, the measurements
can be performed at the emission frequency. In the visible and adjacent spectral range, an
additional amplitude modulation of the applied radiation is used. It is needed because it
is still not possible to perform direct measurement of signals with frequencies in the higher
GHz and THz ranges.
2

When a constant electric field is applied, EMEE is not observed. This peculiarity can be
used for a simple and prompt verification whether the measured signal is due to EMEE or to
other similar effects, such as external and internal photoelectric effects, thermal electricity,
etc. There are other ways to prove the case of EMEE. Signals generated by EMEE or by the
external photoelectric effect can be distinguished by using, for example, spectral studies.
The differentiation is possible because a limit exists for the wavelength of the incident
radiation in the case of the external photoelectric effect, after which it cannot occur. Beyond
this limit, only EMEE can be observed [6].
Physical models regarding the mechanism of EMEE in various types of solids were created
in order to explain the experimental results. For example, in conductors, the effect manifests
as the occurrence of voltage in the solid sample under irradiation, which is presumed to be
caused by the redistribution of near-surface charges induced by the electromagnetic field.
The voltage originates from changes induced in the electrostatic potential of the double layer
at the conductor surface. Overall, currently there is still no comprehensive theoretical model
describing the effect in all solids dielectrics, semiconductors, and metals [3, 7].
An important property that has been established is that each solid generates a specific
signal, which is determined by inherent properties of the object. For example, generally
speaking, each body can be characterized by its weight, determined by the interaction between the body and the gravitational field of the Earth. In a similar way, it can be characterized by EMEE, which is determined by the interaction of the body with an electromagnetic
field.
An experimental setup for EMEE investigation in the visible range of the spectrum is
shown in figure 1. The source (L) of incident radiation generates in a wide spectral range
(white light) or a monochromatic one (laser). The most convenient way is to work with a
laser. The incident light beam is chopped into periodic pulses using a modulator (M). A
pulsed laser, a pulsed LED or another modulated light source could also be used instead of
such a modulator. The studied sample (S) is placed in the measuring arrangement. The
latter is specifically developed for the conducted research. It must ensure reliable fastening
of the sample providing maximum strength and protection to the signal against interfering
electromagnetic fields. The preamplifier (A) amplifies the obtained signal. The detected
signal has a very low amplitude, thus a special nanovoltmeter (N), for example a lock-in
nanovoltmeter, capable of extracting the signal from the background noise, is used. The
3

FIG. 1. Experimental setup for EMEE observation: L - light source; M - modulator; S - measuring
structure; E electrode; A - amplifier; N - lock-in nanovoltmeter.

modulator (M) supplies the reference signal to the nanovoltmeter. With the help of the
reference signal, by using a phase-sensitive detection, interferences can be eliminated so
that only the useful signal is measured.
Numerous practical applications of EMEE have been experimentally proven. Some of
them are: contactless characterization of semiconductors [7]; monitoring processes taking
place in fluids [4, 8–10] including biological ones [11]; retrieving information about an irradiated surface in terms of defects, irregularities and impurities [4]; monitoring of gasoline
octane-number [10]; express contactless determination of the chemical composition of test
samples (for example, false coins, various types of absorbing filters for gases and liquids can
be monitored to determine when they need to be replaced, testing of drinking water from the
public water distribution system [4], etc.); control of phase transitions in liquid crystals [12];
monitoring the quality of raw materials [4]; control of fog parameters, including the presence
of impurities in them [13]; etc.

POSSIBILITY TO CREATE SENSORS DETECTING CORONAVIRUSES BASED
ON THE EMEE

During our research, it became apparent that gas, liquid or vapour sensors, based on the
electromagnetic echo effect, present a very attractive possibility for practical applications.
The concept of the set-up is the same for all types of fluids: the surface of the irradiated
4

solid should be in contact with the fluid under investigation. Moreover, between them
there will be a boundary surface an interface (the boundary between the solid and the
fluid). Any variations in the fluid characteristics will induce a corresponding change in
the boundary surface especially in the area irradiated by the incident radiation. The
measured signal is generated in this exact area. As a result, a change in the EMEE signal
corresponding to changes in the fluid can be registered. It has been proven that even
small changes in the controlled fluid can induce measurable variations in the EMEE signal,
since the electron properties of the surface are substantially influenced by the solid-fluid
interface. Therefore, changes in fluid properties can be detected, provided that all other
conditions remain constant. The idea is illustrated in figure 2, where (S) is the irradiated
solid (generally, it should be a substrate generating a strong EMEE signal, and this signal
should be strongly dependent on changes in the fluid under study), (F) is the studied fluid
that forms an interface (I) with the solid in the spot of irradiation.
The EMEE signal is measured by an electrode (E) and using the appropriate apparatus.
In the case of gas or vapour sensors, it is advisable to use as a substrate a solid that has
maximal adsorption capacity to the respective fluid.

FIG. 2. Possible arrangement of a EMEE - based sensor for fluids: S - solid; I - solid liquid
interface, generating the signal; F - fluid under study; E electrode.

Provided that a suitable measuring structure is selected, minimal amounts of liquid (even
a small drop), are sufficient for the analysis. Such a structure is described in [10]. In this
case, the interface that generates the signal is formed by that part of the drop that interacts
with the solid.
5

The experiments carried out with various liquids, gases and vapours have provided proof
for the feasibility of the above considerations. The experimental data has shown that the
EMEE signal is highly sensitive to variations in the composition and the properties of the
investigated fluid [4, 8–13]. The proposed method can be used to study various fluids under
different conditions and can be considered universal. The measurements are rapid and
contactless, and offer real-time analysis. For example, in liquids, a characteristic feature of
EMEE is that the AC signal, due to the effect, has a unique value for each liquid. Any
minor change in the liquid (concentration, contamination, pre-treatment, etc.) influences
the EMEE signal, indicating that the processes taking place at the interface depend strongly
on the liquid characteristics [8].
Together with the already existing methods for control, EMEE can also be prospectively
used for a complementary, rapid analysis. The main advantage of such an analytical method
is its universal nature since the EMEE voltage can be generated for every type of fluid, the
method can be applied for characterization of any fluid. The combination of optical probing
of the sample and electrical detection of the generated signal is also of great importance, as it
provides convenient, fast and precise measurements. In addition, the implementation of the
method can be easily realised from technical point of view and does not involve significant
financial investments.
The work in creating a sensor for coronaviruses could proceed in three directions at the
same time: detection of the virus in the air, on surfaces and in a fluid from the human body.
A possible approach is the following: finding a surface (liquid or solid) that is sensitive to the
emergence of the virus, i.e. when the virus comes into contact with the surface, a reaction will
occur, even if this reaction is imperceptible without specialized equipment. Our experience
has shown that the EMEE signal is very sensitive to weak or practically imperceptible
reactions occurring at the interface. Therefore, we believe that it is completely feasible to
register the presence of the controlled component (in this case - COVID-19).
While we are presenting some examples of possible reactions, our investigations will not
be limited only to them. Studied samples (e.g. human body liquids) might be treated
by a reagent to catalyse a specific virus-sensitive reaction. Thus, the first objective is to
detect animal viruses of the coronavirus type. Furthermore, COVID-19 will specifically be
addressed by developing a reliable coronavirus detection biosensor whose response is strictly
specific to this virus type. For that purpose, the research team intends to firstly produce
6

a sensor for detecting well-studied antigen-antibody responses. Antibodies that specifically
interact with the coronavirus spike protein are thus vital [14].

Unlike immunologically mediated methods, the anticipated biosensor will not necessarily
chase antibodies in humans, but will control for the presence of viral particles in the airways secretions. Coronavirus antibodies are commercially available today and can also be
insulated from the blood plasma or serum of individuals recovered from the SARS-CoV-2
infection. Alternatively, monoclonal antibodies can be employed, which may be a safe way
of highly specific detection of various coronavirus family members [5]. It is also possible to
try detecting the agglutination reaction, which accompanies the antigen-antibody reaction,
as an aggregation of insoluble antigen and IgM and/or IgG antibodies, subject to availability
of electrolytes and a suitable temperature. When the antigen and antibody concentrations
are equalised, visible aggregates are formed, which makes it much easier to detect such
agglutination complexes [15]. The thermodynamic changes during agglutination can also
be efficiently detected to expose the existence of coronaviruses. Other possible reagents,
capable of stimulating a response, will actively be sought as well.

The new experimental system that will be developed will generally include: an optical
part, a source of the studied samples and reagents, a sensory structure and a registration
block. In the sensor structure, a contact between the irradiated solid surface and the investigated samples will be implemented. This structure will generate the measured signals. It
will be possible to attach to it additional elements such as temperature scanning system,
backlight with different wavelengths, source of additional electrical signals, etc. In addition,
an important element of the experimental system will be the registering block that needs to
be adequately equipped with instruments for measuring and recording alternating electrical
signals with amplitudes of the order of microvolts and nanovolts. These signals must be
measured even in the presence of a significantly strong electrical interference. The most
likely approach is to use phase sensitive technique. Reference signal for it will be provided
by the optical block. It may be necessary for the optical block to provide scanning across
the wavelength range.
7

CONCLUSION

The development of a sensor based on the electromagnetic echo effect, for fast detection
of viruses (COVID-19 or others depending on the settings) without the need for expensive
consumables will strongly support any actions against diseases that constitute public health
risk. The new technique is expected to provide a completely new and robust way to prevent
strong negative influences on society when viral outbreaks occur.
The measured EMEE signal for fluids is formed by the fluid solid interface. The essence
of the idea is to put the irradiated solid surface in contact with the fluid in which a virus
might be present. A reagent that can generate a response specific to the controlled virus
type can also be added. Since the electron properties of the solid surface are influenced by
the adjacent fluid layer, one can expect that optically excited changes in such a system will
induce measurable EMEE signals generated due to the presence of a specific virus. When all
other conditions are constant, changes caused by the presence of this virus can be detected.
The presence of the virus will significantly affect the properties of the illuminated solid fluid
interface and, thus, the signal from the sensory structure. Therefore, EMEE can be used
for development of new techniques for virus presence control. The approach is valid for
detecting viruses in the human body, in the air, and on solid surfaces.
The idea outlined above presents great possibilities because it combines optical probing of
the sample with electrical detection of the generated signal. Some of the advantages will be
instantaneous results and little to no expensive consumables. Such devices will be cheap to
produce and small enough to be used in field work. The possible use of a laser (if necessary
to work with such a radiation source) as a light source will not increase the size and weight
of the device, since currently there are very small and compact laser modules with internal
intensity modulation.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work has been funded by FP7-SEC-2012-1 program of the EU Commission under
grant number 312804 and partially supported by the Bulgarian Ministry of Education and
Science under the National Research Programme ”Young scientists and postdoctoral students” approved by DCM ] 577 / 17.08.2018. The authors will like to thank Kostadin Fikiin,
8

Stoyan Shishkov, Venelin Tsvetkov and Betina Hristova for the fruitful discussions.

[1] O. Ivanov, P. Todorov, and I. Gultepe, Atmosphere 11, 225 (2020).
[2] M. Borissov, O. Ivanov, V. Kovachev, and V. Lovchinov, Acoustics Letters 11, 229232 (1988).
[3] V. Pustovoit, M. Borisov, and O. Ivanov, Solid State Communications 72, 613 (1989).
[4] O. Ivanov and M. Kuneva, in Applications and Experiences of Quality Control , edited by
O. Ivanov (IntechOpen, Rijeka, 2011) Chap. 26.
[5] J. ter Meulen, E. N. van den Brink, L. L. M. Poon, W. E. Marissen, C. S. W. Leung, F. Cox,
C. Y. Cheung, A. Q. Bakker, J. A. Bogaards, E. van Deventer, W. Preiser, H. W. Doerr, V. T.
Chow, J. de Kruif, J. S. M. Peiris, and J. Goudsmit, PLOS Medicine 3, 1071 (2006).
[6] O. Ivanov, V. Mihailov,

and R. Djulgerova, Spectroscopy Letters 33, 393 (2000),

https://doi.org/10.1080/00387010009350085.
[7] P. Das, V. Mihailov, O. Ivanov, V. Gueorgiev, S. Andreev, and V. I. Pustovoit, IEEE Electron
Device Letters 13, 291 (1992).
[8] O. Ivanov, Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical 75, 210 (2001).
[9] O.

Ivanov

and

L.

Konstantinov,

Surface

Review

and

Letters

07,

211

(2000),

https://doi.org/10.1142/S0218625X00000300.
[10] O. D. Ivanov and L. L. Konstantinov, Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical 86, 287 (2002).
[11] O.

Ivanov

and

S.

Radanski,

Journal

of

Food

Science

74,

R79

(2009),

https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.1750-3841.2009.01286.x.
[12] O. Ivanov, M. Petrov, H. Naradikian, and J. L. Perez-Diaz, Phase Transitions 91, 449 (2018),
https://doi.org/10.1080/01411594.2018.1431644.
[13] O. Ivanov, S. Karatodorov, and J. L. P. Diaz, in 2017 IEEE SENSORS (2017) pp. 1–3.
[14] A. C. Walls, Y.-J. Park, M. A. Tortorici, A. Wall, A. T. McGuire, and D. Veesler, Cell 181,
281 (2020).
[15] R. Lancefield, The Journal of experimental medicine 47, 91103 (1928).

9

